---
Volume: 20
Document_Title: "1. K. Marx. Inaugural Address of the Working Men's International Association "
Page_Range: "38-47"
---

# 1. K. Marx. Inaugural Address of the Working Men's International Association 



**[p. 5]**

Karl Marx

INAUGURAL ADDRESS OF THE WORKING MEN'S INTERNATIONAL ASSOCIATION

ESTABLISHED SEPTEMBER 28, 1864

AT A PUBLIC MEETING HELD AT ST. MARTIN'S HALL, LONG ACRE, LONDON >

Working Men,a

It is a great fact that the misery of the working masses has not diminished ivom 1848 to 1864, and yet this period is unrivalled for the development of its industry and the growth of its commerce. In 1850, a moderate organ of the British middle class, of more than average information, predicted that if the exports and imports of England were to rise 50 per cent, English pauperism would sink to zero.2 Alas! on April 7th, 1864, the Chancellor of the Exchequerb delighted his Parliamentary audi- ence by the statement that the total import and export trade of England had grown in 1863

With all that, he was eloquent upon "poverty".

He did not speak of the people of Ireland, gradually replaced by machinery in the north, and by sheep-walks in the south, though even the sheep in that unhappy country are decreasing, it is true, not at so rapid a rate as the men. He did not repeat what then had been just betrayed by the highest representatives of the upper ten thousand in a sudden fit of terror. When the garotte3

[^1]: "to £443,955,000! that astonishing sum [] about three times the trade of the [] comparatively recent epoch of 1843!"

[^2]: "Think," he exclaimed, "of those who are on the border of that region", upon "wages not increased"; upon "human life in nine cases out of ten but a struggle for existence!"

[^3]: a The pamphlet published in London in 1866 has "Fellow Working Men".— Ed. b William Gladstone's speech in the House of Commons on April 7, 1864, The Times, No. 24841, April 8, 1864.— Ed.





**[p. 6]**



[^1]: "Moreover," we quote from the report, "as regards the examined families of the agricultural population, it appeared that more than a fifth were with less than the

[^2]: * We need hardly remind the reader that, apart from the elements of water and certain inorganic substances, carbon and nitrogen form the raw materials of human food. However, to nourish the human system, those simple chemical constituents must be supplied in the form of vegetable or animal substances. Potatoes, for instance, contain mainly carbon, while wheaten bread contains carbonaceous and nitrogenous substances in a due proportion.

[^3]: a The reference is to the Report of the Commissioners appointed to inquire into the operation of the acts (16 8c 17 Vict. c. 99 and 20 & 21 Vict. c. 3) relating to transportation and penal servitude, vols. I-II, London, 1863.— Ed.

[^4]: b Public Health. Sixth Report of the Medical Officer of the Privy Council with Appendix. 1863, London, 1864.— Below Marx quotes this report, pp. 13-15.— Ed.

[^5]: c In the German text the words "year after year" have been added.— Ed.





**[p. 7]**

The report brings out the strange, and rather unexpected fact, "That of the divisions of the United Kingdom", England, Wales, Scotland, and Ireland, "the agricultural population of England", the richest division, "is considerably the worst fed"; but that even the agricultural labourers of Berkshire, Oxfordshire, and So- mersetshire, fare better than great numbers of skilled indoor operatives of the East of London.

Such are the official statements published by order of Parlia- ment in 1864, during the millennium of free trade, at a time when the Chancellor of the Exchequer told the House of Commons that:

Upon these official congratulations jars the dry remark of the official Public Health Report:

Dazzled by the "Progress of the Nation" statistics dancing before his eyes, the Chancellor of the Exchequer exclaims in wild ecstasy:

If you want to know under what conditions of broken health, tainted morals, and mental ruin, that "intoxicating augmentation of wealth and power entirely confined to classes of property" was,

[^1]: "The average condition of the British labourer has [] improved [] in a degree [] we know to be extraordinary and [] unexampled [] in the history of any country or any age." a

[^2]: "The public health of a country means the health of its masses, and the masses will scarcely be healthy unless, to their very base, they be at least moderately prosperous."

[^3]: "From 1842 to 1852 the taxable income of the country [] increased by 6 per cent; [.'..] in the eight years from 1853 to 1861, it has increased from the basis taken in 1853 20 per cent! the fact is so astonishing to be almost incredible! This intoxicating augmentation of wealth and power," adds Mr. Gladstone, "is entirely confined to classes of property!"6

[^4]: a Here and below Marx quotes Gladstone's speech in the House of Commons on April 16, 1863.— Ed.





**[p. 8]**

"The potters as a class, both men and women, [] represent a much degenerated population, both physically and mentally", that "the unhealthy child is an unhealthy parent in his turn", that "a progressive deterioration of the race must go on", and that "the dégénérescence of the population of Staffordshire would be even greater were it not for the constant recruiting from the adjacent country, and the intermarriages with more healthy races. " b

Glance at Mr. Tremenheere's Blue Book on the "Grievances complained of by the Journeymen Bakers"c! And who has not shuddered at the paradoxical statement made by the inspectors of factories, and illustrated by the Registrar General, that the Lancashire operatives, while put upon the distress pittance of food, were actually improving in health, because of their temporary exclusion by the cotton famine from the cotton factory, and that the mortality of the children was decreasing, because their mothers were now at last allowed to give them, instead of Godfrey's cordial, their own breasts.

Again reverse the medal! The Income and Property Tax Returns laid before the House of Commons on July 20, 1864, teach us that the persons with yearly incomes, valued by the tax-gatherer at £50,000 and upwards, had, from April 5th, 1862, to April 5ih, 1863, been joined by a dozen and one, their number having increased in that single year from 67 to 80. The same returns disclose the fact that about 3,000 persons divide amongst themselves a yearly income of about £25,000,000 sterling, rather more than the total revenue doled out annually to the whole mass of the agricultural labourers of England and Wales. Open the census of 1861, and you will find that the number of the male landed proprietors of England and Wales had decreased from 16,934 in 1851, to 15,066 in 1861, so that the concentration of land had grown in 10 years 11 per cent. If the concentration of the soil of the country in a few hands proceeds at the same rate, the land question will become singularly simplified, as it has

[^1]: a The reference is to the above quoted Sixth Report, pp. 25-27.— Ed. b Children's Employment Commission (1862). First Report of the Commissioners, London, 1863, p. 24.— Ed.

[^2]: c Report addressed to Her Majesty's Principal Secretary of State for the Home Department, relative to the Grievances complained of by the Journeymen Bakers, London, 1862.— Ed.





**[p. 9]**

We have dwelt so long upon these "facts so astonishing to be almost incredible", because England heads the Europe of com- merce and industry.3 It will be remembered that some months ago one of the refugee sons of Louis Philippe publicly congratulated the English agricultural labourer on the superiority of his lot over that of his less florid comrade on the other side of the Channel. Indeed, with local colours changed, and on a scale somewhat contracted, the English facts reproduce themselves in all the industrious and progressive countries of the Continent. In all of them there has taken place, since 1848, an unheard-of develop- ment of industry, and an undreamed-of expansion of imports and exports. In all of them "the augmentation of wealth and power entirely confined to classes of property" was truly "intoxicating". In all of them, as in England, a minority of the working classes got their real wagesb somewhat advanced; while in most cases the monetary rise of wages denoted no more a real access of comforts than the inmate of the metropolitan poor-house or orphan asylum, for instance, was in the least benefited by his first necessaries costing £9 15s. 8d. in 1861 against £7 7s. 4d. in 1852. Everywhere the great mass of the working classes were sinking down to a lower depth, at the same rate, at least, that those above them were rising in the social scale. In all countries of Europe it has now become a truth demonstrable to every unprejudiced mind, and only denied by those, whose interest it is to hedge other people in a fool's paradise, that no improvement of machinery,c

no appliance of science to production, no contrivances of communication, no new colonies, no emigration, no opening of markets, no free trade, nor all these things put together, will do away with the miseries of the industrious masses; but that, on the present false base, every fresh development of the productive powers of labour must tend to deepen social contrasts and point social antagonisms. Death of starvation rose almost to the rank of an institution, during this "intoxicating" epoch of economical progress, in the metropolis of the British Empire. That epoch is

[^1]: a In the German text the following words have been added: "and in fact represents it on the world market".— Ed.

[^2]: b In the German text the following words been added: "i.e. the foodstuffs bought with money wages".— Ed.

[^3]: c In the German text the following words have been added: "no chemical discoveries".— Ed.





**[p. 10]**

After the failure of the revolutions of 1848, all party organisa- tions and party journals of the working classes were, on the Continent, crushed by the iron hand of force, the most advanced sons of labour fled in despair to the Transatlantic Republic, and the short-lived dreams of emancipation vanished before an epoch of industrial fever, moral marasme, and political reaction. The defeat of the continental working classes, partly owed to the diplomacy of the English Government, acting then as now in fraternal solidarity with the Cabinet of St. Petersburg, soon spread its contagious effects on this side of the Channel. While the rout of their continental brethren unmanned the English working classes, and broke their faith in their own cause, it restored to the landlord and the money-lord their somewhat shaken confidence. They insolently- withdrew concessions already advertised. The discoveries of new goldlands led to an immense exodus, leaving an, irreparable void in the ranks of the British proletariat. Others of its formerly active members were caught by the temporary bribe of greater work and wages, and turned into "political blacks". All the efforts made at keeping up, or remodelling, the Chartist Movement, failed signally; the press organs of the working class died one by one of the apathy of the masses, and, in point of fact, never before seemed the English working class so thoroughly reconciled to a state of political nullity. If, then, there had been no solidarity of action between the British and the continental working classes, there was, at all events, a solidarity of defeat.

And yet the period passed since the revolutions of 1848 has not been without its compensating features. We shall here only point to two great facts.

After a thirty years' struggle, fought with most admirable perseverance, the English working classes, improving a momen- taneous split between the landlords and money-lords, succeeded in carrying the Ten Hours' Bill.7 The immense physical, moral, and intellectual benefits hence accruing to the factory operatives, half-yearly chronicled in the reports of the inspectors of factories, are now acknowledged on all sides. Most of the continental governments had to accept the English Factory Act in more or less modified forms, and the English Parliament itself is every year compelled to enlarge its sphere of action. But besides its practical import, there was something else to exalt the marvellous success of this working men's measure. Through their most notorious organs



**[p. 11]**

But there was in store a still greater victory of the political economy of labour over the political economy of property.3 We speak of the co-operative movement, especially the co-operative factories raised by the unassisted efforts of a few bold "hands". The value of these great social experiments cannot be over-rated. By deed, instead of by argument, they have shown that production on a large scale, and in accord with the behests of modern science, may be carried on without the existence of a class of masters employing a class of hands; that to bear fruit, the means of labour need not be monopolised as a means of dominion over, and of extortion against, the labouring man himself; and that, like slave labour, like serf labour, hired labour is but a transitory and inferior1' form, destined to disappear before associated labour plying its toil with a willing hand, a ready mind, and a joyous heart. In England, the seeds of the co-operative system were sown by Robert Owen; the working men's experiments, tried on the Continent, were, in fact, the practical upshot of the theories, not invented, but loudly proclaimed, in 1848.

At the same time, the experience of the period from 1848 to 1864 has proved0 beyond doubt that, however excellent in

[^1]: a The German text reads: "the political economy of capital".— Ed. b In the German text the word "social" has been added.— Ed. c In the German text the following has been added: "what the most intelligent leaders of the working class asserted about the co-operative movement in England already in 1851 and 1852".8— Ed.





**[p. 12]**

To conquer political power has therefore become the great duty of the working classes. They seem to have comprehended this, for in England, Germany, Italy, and France there have taken place simultaneous revivals, and simultaneous efforts are being made at the political reorganisation of the working men's party.

One element of success they possess—numbers; but numbers weigh only in the balance, if united by combination and led by knowledge. Past experience has shown how disregard of that bond of brotherhood which ought to exist between the workmen of different countries, and incite them to stand firmly by each other in all their struggles for emancipation, will be chastised by the common discomfiture of their incoherent efforts. This thought prompted the working men of different countries assembled on September 28, 1864, in public meeting at St. Martin's Hall, to found the International Association.

Another conviction swayed that meeting.

If the emancipation of the working classes requires their fraternal concurrence,6 how are they to fulfil that great mission with a foreign policy in pursuit of criminal designs, playing upon

[^1]: a John Palmerston's speech in the House of Commons on June 23, 1863, The Times, No. 24593, June 24, 1863.— Ed.

[^2]: b The German text reads: "requires fraternal concurrence of different nations".— Ed.





**[p. 13]**

The fight for such a foreign policy forms part of the general struggle for the emancipation of the working classes.

Proletarians of all countries, Unite!

[^1]: Written between October 21 and 27, Reproduced from the text of the 1864 pamphlet checked with that in Der

[^2]: First published in The Bee-Hive News- paper, No. 160, November 5, 1864 and in the pamphlet Address and Provisional Rules of the Working Men's International Associa- tion, London, November 1864. Author's translation into German was published in

[^3]: Der Social-Demokrat, Nos. 2 and 3, De- cember 21 and 30, 1864

[^4]: Social-Demokrat



