---
Volume: 20
Document_Title: "5. K. Marx. To Abraham Lincoln, President of the United States of America "
Page_Range: "52-55"
---

# 5. K. Marx. To Abraham Lincoln, President of the United States of America 

Karl Marx

TO ABRAHAM LINCOLN, PRESIDENT OF THE UNITED STATES

OF AMERICA16

Sir, We congratulate the American people upon your re-election by a large majority.

If resistance to the Slave Power was the reserved watchword of your first election, the triumphant warcry of your re-election is, Death to Slavery.

From the commencement of the Titanic-American strife the working men of Europe felt instinctively that the star-spangled banner carried the destiny of their class. The contest for the territories which opened the dire epopee, was it not to decide whether the virgin soil of immense tracts should be wedded to the labour of the emigrant, or prostituted by the tramp of the slave-driver?

When an oligarchy of 300,000 slave-holders dared to inscribe, • for the first time in the annals of the world, "slavery" on the banner of Armed Revolt; when on the very spots where hardly a century ago the idea of one great Democratic Republic had first sprung up, whence the first Declaration of the Rights of Man 17

was issued, and the first impulse given to the European revolution of the 18th century; when on those very spots counter-revolution, with systematic thoroughness, gloried in rescinding "the [] ideas entertained [] at the time of the formation of the old Constitution", and maintained "slavery to be a beneficent institu- tion", indeed the only solution of the great problem of "the relation of labour to capital", and cynically proclaimed property in man "the cornerstone of the new edifice",3 then the working

[^1]: a From the speech of A. Stephens, a leading Southern slave-holder, made in Savannah on March 21, 1861. See report in the New-York Daily Tribune, No. 6215, March 27, 1861.— Ed.





**[p. 20]**

While the working men, the true political power of the North, allowed slavery to defile their own republic; while before the Negro, mastered and sold without his concurrence, they boasted it the highest prerogative of the white-skinned labourer to sell himself and choose his own master; they were unable to attain the true freedom of labour or to support their European brethren in their struggle for emancipation, but this barrier to progress has been swept off by the red sea of civil war.

The working men of Europe feel sure that, as the American War of Independence initiated a new era of ascendancy for the middle class, so the American Anti-Slavery War will do for the working classes. They consider it an earnest of the epoch to come that it fell to the lot of Abraham Lincoln, the single-minded son of the working class, to lead his country through the matchless struggle for the rescue of an enchained race and the reconstruc- tion of a social world.

Signed on behalf of the International Working Men's Association

The Central Council Le Lubez, Corresponding Secretary for France, F. Rybczinsky (Pole), Emile Holtorp (Pole), /. B. Bocquet, H. Jung, Corres- ponding Secretary for Switzerland; Morisot, Georgy W. Wheeler, J. Dénouai, P. Bordage, Leroux, Talandier, Jourdain, Dupont, R. Gray, D. Lama, Setacci, F. Solustri, P. Aldovrandi, D. G. Bagnagatti, G. P. Fontana, Corresponding Secretary for Italy; G. Lake, J. Buckley, G. Howell, J. Osborne, J. D. Stainsby, J. Grossmith, G. Eccarius, Friedrich Lessner, L. Wolff, K. Kaub, Henry Bolleter, Ludwig Otto, N. P. Hansen (Dane), Karl Pfänder, Georg Lochner, Peter Petersen, Karl Marx, Correspond- ing Secretary for Germany, A. Dick, J. Wolff, J. Whitlock, J. Carter, W. Morgan, William Dell, John Weston, Peter Fox,



**[p. 21]**

G. Odger, President of Council,

William R. Cremer, Honorary General Secretaryb

Written between November 22 and 29, Reproduced from the manuscript 1864 checked with the newspaper's text

First published in The Daily News, No. 5813, December 23, 1864

[^1]: a The Bee-Hive Newspaper and The Miner and Workman's Advocate have here "Nusperli, Schantzenbach, Smales, Cornelius".— Ed.

[^2]: b The Bee-Hive Newspaper has here: "18, Greek Street, Soho".— Ed.



