---
Volume: 20
Document_Title: "7. K. Marx. To the Editor of the Stuttgart Beobachter "
Page_Range: "56-59"
---

# 7. K. Marx. To the Editor of the Stuttgart Beobachter 



**[p. 23]**

Karl Marx

TO THE EDITOR OF THE STUTTGART BEOBACHTER

Sir,

Through his man-of-straw in Bradford, Dr. Bronner, Herr Karl Blind has sent you a long epistle by, for, and about Herr Blind, into which, among other curiosities, the following passage slips:

" / do not wish in this connection to return to that old dispute" in respect of the leaflet "Zur Warnung" against Vogt "which was settled by statements from all concerned, and which the editorial office has brought up anew."3

He "does not wish to return"! What magnanimity! As evidence that the pompous vanity of Herr Karl Blind occasionally propels Herr Karl Blind beyond the bounds of pure comedy, you make mention of my work against Vogt. From Blind's reply you and your readers must draw the conclusion that the accusations made in that work against Herr Karl Blind have been settled by "statements from all concerned". In actual fact since the appearance of my work, that is for four years, the otherwise so prolific Herr Karl Blind has never once dared to "return to the old dispute" with so much as a word, much less with "statements from all concerned".

On the contrary, Herr Karl Blind has been content to remain branded an "infamous liar" (see pp. 66, 67 of .my workb). Herr Karl Blind has repeatedly declared in public that he did not know by whom the leaflet against Vogt had been cast into the world, that "he had absolutely no part in the affair", etc. In addition, Herr Karl Blind published a statement by the printer F.idelio Hollinger, flanked by another statement by the compositor Wiehe, to the effect that the leaflet had neither been printed in Hollinger's printing-shop nor had it emanated from Herr Karl Blind. In my

[^1]: a "Bradford, 25. Oct.", Der Beobachter, No. 268, November 17, 1864. Marx's italics.— Ed.

[^2]: b See present edition, Vol. 17, pp. 128-29.— Ed.





**[p. 24]**

Thus publicly pilloried, Herr Karl Blind kept silent. Why? Because (see p. 69 of my workb) he could only refute the affidavits by me by means of counter-affidavits, but he found himself "under the grave jurisdiction of England", where "felony is no joking matter".

In the aforementioned letter to your newspaper there are also some strange statements about Herr Karl Blind's American industriousness. In order to clear up this point allow me to cite an extract from a letter from /. Weydemeyer that arrived here a few days ago. You will recall that /. Weydemeyer used to edit the Neue

Deutsche Zeitung in Frankfurt along with O. Lüning, and was always one of the most stalwart champions of the German workers' party. Shortly after the outbreak of the American Civil War he entered the ranks of the Federals. Summoned by Fremont to St. Louis, he served initially as a captain in the Engineer Corps there, then as lieutenant-colonel in an artillery regiment, and when Missouri was again recently threatened with enemy invasion, he was suddenly given the task of organising the 41st Missouri Volunteer Regiment, which he now commands with the rank of colonel. Weydemeyer writes from St. Louis, the capital of Missouri, where his regiment is stationed, as follows0:

[^1]: "You will find enclosed a cutting from a newspaper here, the Westliche Post, in which the literary pirate Karl Blind is again strutting and swaggering with all his might at the expense of the 'German republicans'. Of course here it is rather irrelevant how he distorts Lassalle's aspirations and agitations; anyone who has read the works of the latter knows what to think of Blind's harlequinades; anyone who has not taken the trouble of becoming somewhat better acquainted with that

[^2]: a This refers to Blind's Allgemeine Zeitung statements published in the Allgemeine Zeitung, Nos. 313 and 345. November 9 and December 11, 1859.— Ed.

[^3]: b See present edition, Vol. 17, pp. 130-31.— Ed. c Joseph Weydemeyer to Engels, October 1864.— Edt





**[p. 25]**

The cutting from the Westliche Post sent by J. Weydemeyer is headed: "A Republican Protest, London, September 17, 1864", and is the American edition of the "Republican Protest" which the same unavoidable Herr Karl Blind simultaneously sent under the same title to the Neue Frankfurter Zeitung? and then with his customary, assiduous ant-like industriousness forwarded to the London Hermann0 as a reproduction from the Neue Frankfurter Zeitung.

A comparison of the two versions of Blind's clumsy handiwork would show how the same Herr Karl Blind, while protesting in Frankfurt and London with a respectable, republican, Cato-like woeful countenance, simultaneously gives free rein in far-off St. Louis to the most malicious idiocy and the vilest impudence. A comparison of the two versions of the "Protest", for which there is no space here, would also result in a new amusing contribution to the method of fabricating letters, circulars, leaflets, protests, provisos, defences, proclamations, appeals, and other similar headshakingly solemn Blindian political recipes, from which there is as little chance of escaping as from Mr. Holloway's pills or Mr. Hoff's malt extract.

Nothing could be further from my mind than to seek to explain a man such as Lassalle and the real tendency of his agitation to a grotesque Mazzini-Scapinc with nothing behind him but his own shadow. On the contrary, I am convinced that Herr Karl Blind is only fulfilling the calling imposed on him by nature and by Aesop in stepping behind the dead lion.d

Karl Marx London, November 28, 1864 1, Modena Villas, Maitland Park

[^1]: First published in the Nordstern, No. 287, Published in English for the first December 10, 1864 time

[^2]: Printed according to the copy in Mrs. Marx's hand, corrected by the author and collated with the newspaper

[^3]: a Published in the Neue Frankfurter Zeitung, No. 270, September 29, 1864.— Ed.

[^4]: b Published in the Hermann, No. 2407, October 8, 1864.— Ed. c The Nordstern has "a grotesque buffoon".— Ed. d An allusion to an ass in Aesop's fable "Leo senio confectus".— Ed.



