---
Volume: 20
Document_Title: "8. K. Marx. On Proudhon [ Letter to J. B. Schweitzer] "
Page_Range: "59-67"
---

# 8. K. Marx. On Proudhon [ Letter to J. B. Schweitzer] 



**[p. 26]**

Karl Marx

ON PROUDHON

[LETTER TO J. B. SCHWEITZER]21

[Der Social-Demokrat, No. 16, February l, 1865]

London, January 24, 1865

Dear Sir,

Yesterday I received a letter in which you demand from me a detailed judgment of Proudhon. Lack of time prevents me from fulfilling your desire. Added to which I have none of his works to hand. However, in order to assure you of my good will I will quickly jot down a brief outline. You can then complete it, add to it or cut it—in short do anything you like with it.a

Proudhon's earliest efforts I no longer remember. His school work about the Langue universelle*3 shows how unceremoniously he tackled problems for the solution of which he still lacked the first elements of knowledge.

His first work, Qu'est-ce que la propriété?, is undoubtedly his best. It is epoch-making, if not because of the novelty of its content, at least because of the new and audacious way of expressing old ideas. In the works of the French socialists and communists he knew "propriété" had, of course, been not only criticised in various ways but also "abolished" in an Utopian manner. In this book Proudhon stands in approximately the same relation to Saint- Simon and Fourier as Feuerbach stands to Hegel. Compared with Hegel, Feuerbach is certainly poor. Nevertheless he was epoch- making after Hegel because he laid stress on certain points which were disagreeable to the Christian consciousness but important for the progress of criticism, points which Hegel had left in mystic clair-obscur.c

In this book of Proudhon's there still prevails, if I may be

[^1]: a The editors of Der Social-Demokrat supplied a footnote here: "We found it better to print the letter .without any changes."—Ed.

[^2]: b The reference is to Proudhon's Essai de grammaire générale.—Ed. c Semi-obscurity.— Ed.





**[p. 27]**

propriété? and provided a strong stimulus on its first appearance. In a strictly scientific history of political economy the book would hardly be worth mentioning. But sensational works of this kind have their role to play in the sciences just as much as in the history of the novel. Take, for instance, Malthus's book on Population? Its first edition was nothing but a SENSATIONAL PAMPHLET- and plagiarism from beginning to end into the bargain. And yet what a stimulus was produced by this lampoon on the human race]

If I had Proudhon's book before me I could easily give a few examples to illustrate his early style. In the passages which he himself regarded as the most important he imitates Kant's treatment of the antinomies—Kant was at that time the only German philosopher whose works he had read, in translations— and he leaves one with a strong impression that to him, as to Kant, the resolution of the antinomies is something "beyond" human understanding, i.e., something that remains obscure to him himself.

But in spite of all his apparent iconoclasm one already finds in Qu'est-ce que la propriété? the contradiction that Proudhon is criticising society, on the one hand, from the standpoint and with the eyes of a French small-holding peasant (later petit bourgeois) and, on the other, that he measures it with the standards he inherited from the socialists.

The deficiency of the book is indicated by its very- title. The question is so badly formulated that it cannot be answered correctly. Ancient "property relations" were superseded by feudal property relations and these by "bourgeois" property relations. Thus history itself had expressed its criticism upon past property relations. What Proudhon was actually dealing with was modern bourgeois property as it exists today. The question of what this is

[^1]: T. R. Malthus, An Essay on the Principle of Population.—Ed.





**[p. 28]**

The upshot is at best that the bourgeois legal conceptions of "theft" apply equally well to the "honest" gains of the bourgeois himself. On the other hand, since "theft" as a forcible violation of property presupposes the existence of property, Proudhon entangled himself in all sorts of fantasies, obscure even to himself, about true bourgeois property.

During my stay in Paris in 1844 I came into personal contact with Proudhon. I mention this here because to a certain extent I am also to blame for his SOPHISTICATION", as the English call the adulteration of commercial goods. In the course of lengthy debates often lasting all night, I infected him very much to his detriment with Hegelianism, which, owing to his lack of German, he could not study properly. After my expulsion from Paris Herr Karl Grün continued what I had begun. As a teacher of German philosophy he also had the advantage over me that he himself understood nothing about it.

Shortly before the appearance of Proudhon's second important work, the Philosophie de la misère, etc.,c he himself announced this to me in a very detailed letter in which he said, among other things:

"J'attends votre férule critique."d This criticism, however, soon dropped on him (in my Misère de la philosophie, etc., Paris, 1847), in a way which ended our friendship for ever.

\ Der Social-Demokrat, No. 17, February 3, 1865] From what I have said here you can see that Proudhon's Philosophie de la misère ou Système des contradictions économiques first contained the real answer to the question Qu'est-ce que la propriété? In fact it was only after the publication of this work that he had begun his economic studies; he had discovered that the question

[^1]: a J. P. Brissot de Warville, Recherches philosophiques sur le droit de propriété et sur le vol, considérés dans la nature et dans la société.—Ed.

[^2]: b "Property is theft."—Ed. c P. J. Proudhon, Système des contradictions économiques, ou philosophie de la misère.—Ed.

[^3]: d "I await your severe criticism."—Ed.





**[p. 29]**

For an estimate of his book, which is in two fat volumes, I must refer you to the refutation I wrote. There I have shown, among other things, how little he had penetrated into the secret of scientific dialectics and how, on the contrary, he shares the illusions of speculative philosophy, for instead of regarding economic categories as the theoretical expression of historical relations of production, corresponding to a particular stage of development in material production, he garbles them into pre-existing eternal ideas, and how in this roundabout way he arrives once more at the standpoint of bourgeois economy.*

I show furthermore how extremely deficient and at times even schoolboyish is his knowledge of "political economy" which he undertook to criticise, and that he and the Utopians are hunting for a so-called "science" by means of which a formula for the "solution of the social question" is to be devised a priori, instead of deriving science from a critical knowledge of the historical movement, a movement which itself produces the material conditions of emancipation. My refutation shows in particular that Proudhon's view of exchange-value, the basis of the whole theory, remains confused, incorrect and superficial, and that he even mistakes the Utopian interpretation of Ricardo'?, theory of value for the basis of a new science. With regard to his general point of view I have summarised my conclusions thus:

"Every economic relation has a good and a bad side; it is the one point on which M. Proudhon does not give himself the lie. He sees the good side expounded by the economists; the bad side he sees denounced by the socialists. He borrows from the economists the necessity of eternal relations; he borrows from the socialists the illusion of seeing in poverty nothing but poverty (instead of seeing in it the revolutionary, destructive aspect which will

[^1]: * "When the economists say that present-day relations—the relations of bourgeois production—are natural, they imply that these are the relations in which wealth is created and productive forces developed in conformity with the laws of nature. These relations therefore are themselves natural laws independent of the influence of time. They are eternal laws which must always govern society. Thus there has been history, but there is no longer any" (p. 113 of my work).3

[^2]: a See present edition, Vol. 6, p. 174.— Ed.





**[p. 30]**

"He wants to soar as the man of science above the bourgeois and the proletarians; he is merely the petty bourgeois, continually tossed back and forth between capital and labour, political economy and communism."*

Severe though the above judgment may sound I must even now endorse every word of it. At the same time, however, one has to bear in mind that when I declared his book to be the code of socialism of the petit bourgeois and proved this theoretically, Proudhon was still being decried as an ultra-arch-revolutionary both by political economists and by socialists. That is why later on I never joined in the outcry about his "treachery" to the revolution. It was not his fault that, originally misunderstood by others as well as by himself, he failed to fulfil unjustified hopes.

In the Philosophie de la misère all the defects of Proudhon's method of presentation stand out very unfavourably in compari- son with Qu'est-ce que la propriété? The style is often what the French call ampoule.' High-sounding speculative jargon, purport- ing to be German-philosophical, appears regularly on the scene when his Gallic astuteness fails him. A noisy, self-glorifying, boastful tone and especially the twaddle about "science" and sham display of it, which are always so unedifying, are continually jarring on one's ears. Instead of the genuine warmth which permeates his first work, he here systematically works himself up into a sudden flush of rhetoric in certain passages. There is in addition the clumsy repugnant show of erudition of the self- taught, whose natural pride in his original reasoning has already

[^1]: [Der Social-Demokrat, No. 18, February 5, 1865]

[^2]: * 1. c, pp. 119, 120.''

[^3]: 11 The phrase in brackets was added by Marx in this article.— Ed. b See present edition, Vol. 6, p. 178.— Ed. ' Bombastic.— Ed.





**[p. 31]**

The February Revolution certainly came at a very inconvenient moment for Proudhon, who had irrefutably proved only a few weeks before that "the era of revolutions" was past for ever. His speech in the National Assembly, however little insight it showed into existing conditions, was worthy of every praise. After the June insurrection it was an act of great courage.23 In addition it had the fortunate consequence that M. Thiers, by his reply opposing Proudhon's proposals, which was then issued as a special booklet,b

proved to the whole of Europe what infantile catechism served this intellectual pillar of the French bourgeoisie as a pedestal.24

Compared with M. Thiers, Proudhon indeed swelled to the size of an antediluvian colossus.

Proudhon's discovery of "crédit gratuit"0 and the "people's bank" (banque du peuple), based upon it, were his last economic "deeds". My book A Contribution to the Critique of Political Economy, Part I, Berlin, 1859 (pp. 59-64) contains the proof that the theoretical basis of his idea arises from a misunderstanding of the basic elements of bourgeois "political economy", namely of the relation between commodities and money, while the practical superstructure was simply a reproduction of much older and far better developed schemes. That under certain economic and political conditions the credit system can be used to accelerate the emancipation of the working class, just as, for instance, at the beginning of the eighteenth, and again later, at the beginning of the nineteenth century in England, it facilitated the transfer of

[^1]: a Ch. Dunoyer, De la liberté du travail ou simple exposé des conditions dans lesquelles les forces humaines s'exercent avec le plus de puissance, t. I-III, Paris, 1845.— Ed.

[^2]: h Rapport du citoyen Thiers, précédé de la proposition du citoyen Proudhon relative a l'impôt sur le revenu, et suivi de son discours prononcé à l'Assemblée nationale,le 31 juillet

[^3]: 1848.—Ed.

[^4]: c Free credit.— Ed.

[^5]: 3—137





**[p. 32]**

Philosophie de la misère. He succeeds in getting himself beaten even by Bastiat and breaks into burlesque bluster when his opponent drives his blows home.

A few years ago Proudhon wrote a prize essay on Taxation? the competition was sponsored, I believe, by the government of Lausanne. Here the last flicker of genius is extinguished. Nothing remains but the petit bourgeois tout pur.c

So far as Proudhon's political and philosophical writings are concerned they all show the same contradictory, dual character as his economic works. Moreover their value is purely local, confined to France. Nevertheless his attacks on religion, the church, etc., were of great merit locally at a time when the French socialists thought it desirable to show by their religiosity how superior they were to the bourgeois Voltairianism of the eighteenth century and the German godlessness of the nineteenth. Just as Peter the Great defeated Russian barbarism by barbarity, Proudhon did his best to defeat French phrase-mongering by phrases.

His work on the Coup d'état? in which he flirts with Louis Bonaparte and, in fact, strives to make him palatable to the French workers, and his last work, written against Poland? in which for the greater glory of the tsar he expresses moronic cynicism, must be described as works not merely bad but base, a baseness, however, which corresponds to the petty-bourgeois point of view.25

Proudhon has often been compared to Rousseau. Nothing could be more erroneous. He is more like Nicolas Linguet, whose Théorie des loix civiles, by the way, is a very brilliant book.

[^1]: a Gratuité du crédit. Discussion entre M. Fr. Bastiat et M. Proudhon, Paris, 1850.— Ed.

[^2]: b P. J. Proudhon, Théorie de l'impôt, Brussels and Paris, 1861.— Ed. c Petty bourgeois pure and simple.— Ed. d P. J. Proudhon, La Révolution sociale démontrée par le coup d'état du 2 décembre, Paris, 1852.— Ed.

[^3]: e P. J. Proudhon, Si les traités de 1815 ont cessé d'exister? Actes du futur congrès, Paris, 1863.— Ed





**[p. 33]**

Posterity will perhaps sum up the latest phase of French development by saying that Louis Bonaparte was its Napoleon and Proudhon its Rousseau-Voltaire.

You yourself have now to accept responsibility for having imposed upon me the role of a judge of the dead so soon after this man's death.

Yours very respectfully,

Karl Marx

[^1]: Written on January 24, 1865 Printed according to the news- paper text checked with the rough First published in Der Social-Demokrat, manuscript which has survived in Nos. 16, 17 and 18, February 1, 3 and 5, D a r t 1865

[^2]: 3*



