---
Volume: 20
Document_Title: "10. K. Marx and F. Engels. To the Editor of the Social- Demokrat "
Page_Range: "69-70"
---

# 10. K. Marx and F. Engels. To the Editor of the Social- Demokrat 



**[p. 36]**

Karl Marx and Frederick Engels

TO THE EDITOR OF THE SOCIAL-DEMOKRAT

STATEMENT27

In No. 16 of your newspaper Herr M. Hess from Paris casts suspicion on the French members, with whom he is entirely unacquainted, of the London Central Committee of the International Working Men's Association with the words:

"There is really no knowing whether it would matter if some friends of the Palais-Royala also belonged to the London Association, since it is a public one, etc."

In an earlier issue,b while prattling about the newspaper LAssociation, the same Herr M. H. made similar insinuations about the Paris friends of the London Committee. We declare his insinuations to be preposterous slander.

For the rest, we are glad to find in this incident confirmation of our conviction that the Paris proletariat is as irreconcilably opposed as ever to Bonapartism in both its forms, the Tuileries formc and the form of the Palais-Royal, and never for a moment considered the plan of selling its historical honour (or should we, instead of "its historical honour", say "its historical birthright as bearer of revolution"?) for a mess of pottage. We recommend this example to the German workers.

London and Manchester

[^1]: Written on February 6, 1865

[^2]: First published in Der Briefwechsel zwis chen F. Engels und K. Marx, Bd. 3, Stutt gart, 1913

[^3]: a An allusion to Joseph Bonaparte, Napoleon Ill's cousin nicknamed Plon-Plon. Palais-Royal was his residence.— Ed.

[^4]: b Der Social-Demokrat, No. 8, January 13, 1865.— Ed. c An allusion to Napoleon III whose residence was the Tuileries.— Ed.

[^5]: Printed according to the rough manuscript



