---
Volume: 20
Document_Title: "18. K. Marx. To the Editor of the Berliner Reform "
Page_Range: "124-125"
---

# 18. K. Marx. To the Editor of the Berliner Reform 



**[p. 91]**

Karl Marx

TO THE EDITOR OF THE BERLINER REFORM74

From No. 68 of the Reform and No. 37 of the Social-Demokrat* forwarded to me here, I see that Herr v. Schweitzer is making embarrassed and mendacious attempts to extricate himself from the "fair impediments" b he has prepared for himself. Habeat sibi!c

However, I will not permit him to distort my statement of March 15,d in which I simply let him describe himself, into a statement on Lassalle. The correspondence between myself and Lassalle in my possession, spanning about fifteen years, totally deprives the Schweitzers and company of the power to misrepresent our personal relationship or to cast suspicion on the motives for my neutral attitude to Lassalle's agitation. The relationship of Lassalle's theoretical works to mine, on the other hand, is a matter for scientific criticism. An occasion may perhaps arise later for discussing individual points. But under any circumstances, rever- ence prohibits me from making such matters the object of a polemic in the press with sycophants.

Zalt-Bommel, March 28, 1865

[^1]: First published in the Berliner Reform, Printed according to the news- No. 78, April 1, 1865 paper text checked against the original

[^2]: Published in English for the first time

[^3]: a J. B. Schweitzer, "Der Rédacteur des Social-Demokraten übersendet uns nachfolgende", Berliner Reform, No. 68, March 21, 1865 and "In Betreff der oekannten", Der Social-Demokrat, No. 37, March 22, 1865.— Ed.

[^4]: b H. Heine, Neuer Frühling, Prolog.— Ed. c I don't care! — Ed. d See this volume, pp. 87-90.— Ed.



