---
Volume: 20
Document_Title: "19. K. Marx. The ' President of Mankind' "
Page_Range: "125-130"
---

# 19. K. Marx. The " President of Mankind" 



**[p. 92]**

Karl Marx

THE "PRESIDENT OF MANKIND"75

On my return from Holland to London No. 39 of the Social-Demokrat presents me with an asafoetida cake baked by the hand of Herr Bernhard Becker/ mainly consisting of Vogtian crumbs of slander. The legally documented refutation of Vogt's lying fairy-tales may be found in my work Herr Vogt, London, 1860.b But this time, quite contrary to his custom, Herr Bernhard Becker, the "President of Mankind", does not merely content himself with plagiarism. For the first time in his life he attempts to come up with something of his own as well.

And three times during the course of- his personal presidential address our Bernhard Becker returns to this "fact" with ever increasing merriment.

On page 124 of my Herr Vogt I state in a footnote0: "I myself had made the acquaintance of Bangya in London in 1850, together with his friend at the time, the present General Türr. His underhand dealings with parties of every complexion, Orleanists, Bonapartists, etc., and his association with policemen of every 'nationality' made me suspect him, but he dispelled my suspicions quite simply by showing me a document in Kossuth's

[^1]: "In fact," says the "President of Mankind", "through Dronke Marx pawned for 1,000 Tir. a manuscript which was redeemed by the Prussian police inspector, Stieber, who was in London spying among the refugees."

[^2]: a "Rede des Vereins-Präsidenten Bernhard Becker, gehalten in der Versam- mlung der Hamburger Mitglieder des Allgemeinen deutschen Arbeiter-Vereins am 22. März 1865", Der Social-Demokrat, No. 39, supplement, March 26, 1865.— Ed.

[^3]: b See present edition. Vol. 17.— Ed. c ibid., p. 219.— Ed.





**[p. 93]**

The "President of Mankind" has obviously not read the detailed denunciation of Bangya (at that time still resident in London) published by me 13 years ago in the New-Yorker Criminal-Zeitung. Otherwise he would probably have made his fiction fit the facts somewhat better. So he surrenders himself entirely to the play of his fair fantasy, and what was closer to it than the pleasant association of ideas between London and pawning? But I vouch for the fact that Bernhard Becker has never pawned his manuscripts.

The "President of Mankind" deigns to add:

Herr Bernhard Becker, who at that time was not yet "President of Mankind", was also possessed by the unfailing habit of scribbling "quite colourless articles" in the London Hermann, surprised me one fine evening (I had previously chanced to see him once or twice only) with a visit in person to my house, shortly before quietly sneaking away — for good reasons—from London. He pitiably bemoaned his ill-fortune to me and asked if I could

[^1]: "that on the foundation of the Vienna Botschafter, the semi-official organ of the Austrian government, Marx sought to win me" (just the same Bernhard Becker) "over as a correspondent for the same by concealing the semi-official character of the nascent journal, which, he said, had been sent to him, emphasising on the contrary that I should deliver out and out red articles."

[^2]: a The phrase in partibus infidelium (literally: in the land of infidels) was added to the title of Catholic bishops appointed to purely nominal dioceses in non-Christian countries. Here it means "in exile".— Ed.

[^3]: b K. Marx and F. Engels, The Great Men of the Exile (see present edition, Vol. 11).— Ed.

[^4]: c The reference is to K. Marx's article "Hirsch's Confessions" (see present edition, Vol. 12).— Ed.





**[p. 94]**

"Liebknecht," continues Bernhard Becker, "is now systematically working on Countess Hatzfeldt, to whom Marx, too, sends telegrams and letters in order to turn her against the Association."

Herr Bernhard Becker imagines that I take the importance he acquired by bequest77 quite as "systematically" seriously as he does himself! My letters to Countess Hatzfeldt after the death of Lassallea consisted of a message of condolence, of answers to various questions put to me on account of the planned Lassalle brochure and of discussions on a refutation against a libeller of Lassalle that 1 had been requested to, and subsequently did, undertake.b So as to avoid misunderstandings, however, I thought it very much to the point to remind the Countess in a letter of December 22, 1864 that I did not agree with Lassalle's politics. That concluded our correspondence, in which not a syllable was uttered about the Association. The Countess had requested me among other things to let her know by return whether the release of certain portraits for the planned brochure seemed appropriate to me. I replied by telegraph: No! This single telegram is put into the plural by Herr Bernhard Becker, who is no less eminent a grammarian than he is poet and thinker.

He relates that I also took part in a campaign directed against him at a later date. The sole step on my part in this all-important affair was this: I had heard from Berlin that Bernhard Becker was being persecuted from a certain quarter because he was not willing to allow the Social-Demokrat and the Association to be misused in

[^1]: a Marx's letters to Sophie Hatzfeldt of September 12, October 16, November 26 and 28 and December 22, 1864.— Ed.

[^2]: b See this volume, pp. 23-25.— Ed.





**[p. 95]**

The "President of Mankind" is, however, not only an eminent writer, thinker, grammarian and dialectician. He is a pathologist of the first water, to boot. My eighteen-month-old carbuncle complaint, which happened to last six months after Lassalle's death, this blood-red disease he explains as due to "pale envy at Lassalle's greatness".

"But," he emphatically adds, "he did not dare to oppose Lassalle in public because he knew full well that Lassalle would have struck him stone dead, like he did Bastiat-Schulze, with his giant's club."

Now precisely in this his last work on "Bastiat-Schulze" b Lassalle praises my Critique of Political Economy, Berlin, 1859, to the skies, calling it "epoch-making", a "masterpiece", and placing it in line with the works of A. Smith and Ricardo. From this, Herr Bernhard Becker, with that capacity for thought, peculiar to himself, concludes that Lassalle might strike me dead, as he did Bastiat-Schulze. Incidentally Lassalle had quite different ideas of what I "dare". When I wrote to him on an occasion which this is not the place to discuss, saying that Engels and I would, for reasons which I enumerated, be forced to make a public attack on him,79 he replied at length in a letter lying here before me at this moment, first setting out his objections and then concluding in these terms:

[^1]: "Consider all this before you speak out loud and publicly. Dissension and breach between us would be a deplorable event for our particular party, which is not a big one as it is!"c

[^2]: a Karl Siebel.— Ed. h F. Lassalle, Herr Bastiat-Schulze von Delitzsch, der ökonomische Julian, oder: Capital und Arbeit, Berlin, 1864.— Ed.

[^3]: ' Lassalle's letter to Marx written in mid-June 1859.— Ed.

[^4]: T.-1952





**[p. 96]**

Herr Bernhard Becker's gift for discrimination obviously provides support for his power of reasoning. His association, he boasts, comprised all of "400 men" in its heyday, while our Association shows so little modesty that it already numbers 10,000 members in England alone. It is, in fact, impermissible that anything of this sort should take place behind the back as it were of the "President of Mankind".

All in all, and with particular respect to Herr Bernhard Becker's abundance of abilities only briefly suggested by me, one finds that he is hardly justified in his complaints that people have sought to impose too much at once on a man like him; that people have not only forced on him the job of exercising autocratic power as his main field, but also the lesser office of "buying eggs and butter for the house",81 "on the side". It would seem, however, that a better domestic order could be achieved by re-arranging his dual functions. May his main task in future be the "buying of eggs and butter for the house", and, conversely, let him preside over mankind solely "on the side".

London, April 8, 1865

[^1]: First published in the Rheinische Zeitung, No. 102, second supplement, April 12, 1865 and the Berliner Reform, No. 88, supplement, April 13, 1865

[^2]: Printed according to the news- papers

[^3]: Published in English for the first time



