---
Volume: 20
Document_Title: "20. K. Marx. A Correction "
Page_Range: "130-132"
---

# 20. K. Marx. A Correction 



**[p. 97]**

Karl Marx

A CORRECTION82

After the two motions of Messrs. Beales and Leverson, mentioned in No. 30 of your newspaper, had been carried by the Polish meeting in London on March 1, Mr. Peter Fox (an Englishman), on behalf of the International Working Men's Associa- tion, proposed

"that an integral and independent Poland is an indispensable condition ol democratic Europe, and that so long as this condition is unfulfilled, revolutionary triumphs on the Continent are short-lived [J preludes to prolonged periods of counter-revolutionary rule. "

After briefly outlining the history of the evils which had befallen Europe as a result of the loss of liberty by Poland, and of Russia's policy of conquest, Mr. P. Fox said that the stand of the Liberal party on this question did not coincide with that of the democratic society for which he was speaking. The motto of conservative Europe was: an enslaved Europe with an enslaved Poland as a basis. The motto of the International Working Men's Association was, on the contrary: a free Europe based upon a free and independent Poland.

Mr. Eccarius (a German worker, Vice-President of the Interna- tional Working Men's Association) seconded the motion, referring in detail to the share Prussia had taken in the various partitions of Poland. In conclusion he said:

Mr. Le Lubez, a French member of the International Working Men's Association, likewise spoke in support of the motion, which was carried unanimously, amid the continuous cheering of the meeting.

[^1]: "The downfall of the Prussian monarchy is the conditio sine qua non for the establishment of Germany and the re-establishment of Poland."

[^2]: 5*



London, etc.

H. Jung, Corresponding Secretary of the International Working Men's Association for Switzerland

Written on April 13, 1865

First published in Der weiße Adler, No. 48, April 22, 1865

Printed according to the manu- script checked against the news- paper

[^1]: a "The Late Polish Insurrection", The Daily News, March 2, 1865.— Ed.

[^2]: b The newspaper editors placed this request at the beginning of the article.— Ed.



