---
Volume: 20
Document_Title: "1. - Organisation of the International Association "
Page_Range: "218-219"
---

# 1. - Organisation of the International Association 



**[p. 185]**

E N G L I S H P A R T Published every Wednesday.

No. 6 4 7. Vol. IV n , p n i i . M . . u « * > i | LONDON, FEBRUARY SO, 1867. ONE PESNÏ

Karl Marx

INSTRUCTIONS FOR THE DELEGATES OF THE PROVISIONAL GENERAL COUNCIL.

THE DIFFERENT QUESTIONS138

1.—ORGANISATION OF THE INTERNATIONAL ASSOCIATION

Upon the whole, the Provisional Central Council recommend the plan of Organisation as traced in the Provisional Statutes. Its soundness and facilities of adaptation to different countries without prejudice to unity of action have been proved by two years' experience. For the next year we recommend London as the seat of the Central Council, the Continental situation looking unfavourable for change.

The members of the Central Council will of course be elected by Congress (5 of the Provisional Statutes) with power to add to their number.

The General Secretary to be chosen by Congress for one year and to be the only paid officer of the Association. We propose £2 for his weekly salary.3

The uniform annual contribution of each individual member of the Association to be one half penny (perhaps one penny). The cost price of cards of membership (carnets) to be charged extra.

While calling upon the members of the Association to form benefit societies and connect them by an international link, we leave the initiation of this question (établissement des sociétés de secours mutuels. Appui moral et matériel accordé aux orphelins de l'association15) to the Swiss who originally proposed it at the conference of September last.

[^1]: a In the French text the following paragraph has been added: "The Standing Committee, which is in fact an executive of the Central Council, to be chosen by Congress, the function of any of its member to be defined by the Central Council." The same paragraph is given in the German text.— Ed.

[^2]: b foundation of benefit societies; moral and material assistance to the Association's orphans.— Ed.



