---
Volume: 20
Document_Title: "7.- Direct and Indirect Taxation "
Page_Range: "225-226"
---

# 7.- Direct and Indirect Taxation 



**[p. 192]**

(c) Their future. Apart from their original purposes, they must now learn to act deliberately as organising centres of the working class in the broad interest of its complete emancipation. They must aid every social and political movement tending in that direction. Considering them- selves and acting as the champions and representatives of the whole working class, they cannot fail to enlist the non-society men into their ranks. They must look carefully after the interests of the worst paid trades, such as the agricultural labourers, rendered powerless3 by exceptional circumstances. They must convince the world at largeb that their efforts, far from being narrow and selfish, aim at the emancipation of the downtrodden millions.

7. DIRECT AND INDIRECT TAXATION

(a) No modification of the form of taxation can produce any important change in the relations of labour and capital.

(b) Nevertheless, having to choose between two systems of taxation, we recommend the total abolition of indirect taxes, and the general substitution of direct taxes.0

Because indirect taxes enhance the prices of commodities, the tradesmen adding to those prices not only the amount of the indirect taxes, but the interest and profit upon the capital advanced in their payment;

Because indirect taxes conceal from an individual what he is paying to the state, whereas a direct tax is undisguised, unsophisti- cated, and not to be misunderstood by the meanest capacity. Direct taxation prompts therefore every individual to control the governing powers while indirect taxation destroys all tendency to self-government.

[^1]: a The French text here reads: "incapable of organised resistance".— Ed. b The French and German texts read: "convince the broad masses of workers".— Ed.

[^2]: c In Marx's rough manuscript, the French and German texts here follows: "because direct taxes are cheaper to collect and do not interfere with produc- tion".— Ed.



