---
Volume: 20
Document_Title: "31. K. Marx. Speech at the Polish Meeting in London. January 22, 1867 "
Page_Range: "229-235"
---

# 31. K. Marx. Speech at the Polish Meeting in London. January 22, 1867 



**[p. 196]**

Karl Marx

SPEECH AT THE POLISH MEETING IN LONDON

JANUARY 22, 1867 146

Ladies and Gentlemen,3

Some 30 years ago, a Revolution broke out in France.6 It was an event not foreseen by the St. Petersburg providence which had just concluded a secret treaty with Charles X for the better administration and geographical arrangement of Europe. On the arrival of the awkward news, the Czar Nicholas summoned the officers of his horseguard and addressed them a short, warlike speech, culminating in the words: à cheval, Messieurs!147 This was no empty threat. Paskiewitch. was despatched to Berlin there to settle the invasion of France. A few months later, all was ready. The Prussians were to concentrate on the Rhine, the Polish army to march into Prussia, and the Muscovites0 to follow in the rear. But then, as Lafayette said in the French Chamber of Deputies— "l'avant garde tournait contre' le gros de l'armée" (the advanced guard turned round upon the main body).d The insurrection of Warsaw saved Europe from a second Anti-Jacobin war.

Eighteen years later, there was another eruption of the revolutionary volcano, or rather an earthquake shaking the whole

[^1]: a The Gtos Wolny prefaces Marx's speech with the words: "At the beginning Dr. Marx, a German, presented a short, hut extremely significant resolution: 'That liberty cannot be established in Europe without the independence of Poland.'" — Ed.

[^2]: b Revolution of July 1830.— Ed. c Here and below this word is used in the sense of "champions of the reactionary policy of Csarist autocracy".— Ed.

[^3]: d From Lafayette's speech made in the French Chamber of Deputies on January 16, 1831 on the occasion of the Polish insurrection of November 1830 (Le Moniteur universel, January 17, 1831).— Ed.





**[p. 197]**

"With us is God! Know that, ye heathens, and submit to us, for God is with us!

Very soon after, through the hands of his trusted servant Nesselrode, he sent another bull to the Germans, but quite overflowing with tenderness for that heathenish people.0 Whence this change?

Why, the Berliners had not only made a Revolution, they had proclaimed the restoration of Poland, and the Prussian Poles deceived by the popular enthusiasm were forming military camps in Posnania. Hence the courtesies of the Czar. It was again Poland, the immortal Knight of Europe, that had warned off the Mongol! Only after the betrayal of the Poles by the Germans, especially the German National Assembly at Frankfurt,148 Russia recovered her forces and waxed strong enough to stab the Revolution of 1848 in its last asylum, Hungary. And even here, the last man who bestrode the battlefield against her, was a Pole, General Bern.

Now there are many people silly enough to believe that all this has changed, that Poland has ceased to be "une nation néces- saire", as a French writer calls it, and dwindled to a sentimental souvenir, and you know that sentiments and souvenirs are not quoted at the Stock Exchanges. When the last Russian ukases for

[^1]: a A reference to the war of 1813-14 against Napol Corfic rule.— Ed. b Severnaya Pchela, No. 59, March 15, 1848.— Ed.

[^2]: c Nesselrode's circular to all Russian Embassies in "St. Petersburg, 6. Juli. Die russische Note", Frankfurter Oberpostamts-Zeitung, No. 210 (second supplement), July 28, 1848. See also "The Russian Note", present edition, Vol. 7 pp. 307-13.— Ed.





**[p. 198]**

Why should they not, if it were only to give further security for the six mill. 1. st. just lent to the Czar by the English capitalists? 150

A mere Tim^s-reading Englishman may tell me that, let the worst arrive to the worst, and Russia seize Constantinople, England will then appropriate Egypt and thus secure the road to her great Indian market.13 Lastly, as to The Times saying that Russia may seize Constantinople, if she does not prevent England from seizing upon Egypt, what does it all mean? That England will surrender Constantinople to Russia, if Russia allows England to have a fight with France over Egypt. This is the comfortable vista opened to you by The Times. As to Russian love for England, fond as she is of British £.s.d., it suffices to quote the words of the Gazette de

Moscou, d.d. Dec. 1831:

"Non, il faut que le tour de perfide Albion vienne, et dans quelque temps nous ne devons plus faire de traite avec ce peuple qu'à Calcutta." (No, it is necessary that the turn of perfidious Albion come, and soon we shall conclude no more treaty with that people, save at Calcutta.)0

But I ask you, what has changed? Has the danger grown less? No. Only the judicial blindness of the governing classes of Europe has reached its climax.

In the first instance, the policy of Russia is unchangeable, as averred by her official historian, the Muscovite Karamzin.d Her methods, her tactics, her manoeuvring may change, but the leading star of her policy is a fixed star—the empire of the world. Only a civilised government6 swaying barbarian masses can nowadays

[^1]: a Here and below the reference ii to the leading article in The Times, No. 25701, January 7, 1867. In Marx's rough manuscript this and the next phrase are at the beginning of the speech and crossed with a vertical line.— Ed.

[^2]: b In the rough manuscript this phrase is at the end of the paragraph beginning "A continental European" and crossed with a vertical line. In the Glos Wolny the beginning of the phrase reads: "If the worst comes to the worst, The Times wrote, let Russia take Constantinople after all, England"—Ed.

[^3]: c Marx quotes from Polonia, No. IV, November 1832. In the rough manuscript the text from the words "Lastly, as to The Times saying " makes up the last paragraph but one and is crossed with a vertical line. The Glos Wolny reads: "In other words, let England hand Constantinople over to Russia, if Russia kindly allows England to dispute France's right to Egypt. The Muscovite, The Times writes, likes to raise loan in England, and is a good payer. He loves English money. He really does love it. But the extent to which he loves the English themselves you may best gauge from the Gazette de Moscou of December 1831:" — Ed.

[^4]: d H. M. Kapa M3HHi>, Hcmopin Tocydapcmea . Pocciücnazo, T. XI, Cn6., 1835, CTP. 23.— Ed.

[^5]: e The Glos Wolny has "cunning government".— Ed.





**[p. 199]**

Now, apart from the dispositions of the Polish people, has anything happened to thwart the plans of Russia or paralyse her action?

I need not tell you that in Asia, her progress of conquest is continuous. I need not tell you that the so-called Anglo-French war against Russia3 handed over to her the mountain fortresses of Caucasus, the domination of the Black Sea, and the maritime rights which Catherine II, Paul and Alexander I had vainly tried to wrest from England. Railways are connecting and concentrating her vastly disseminated bonds. Her material resources in Congress Poland,152 which forms her entrenched camp in Europe, have enormously increased. The fortifications of Warsaw, Modlin, Ivangorod—points singled out by the first Napoleon—domineer the whole course of the Vistula and constitute a formidable basis of attack to the North, West and South. The Panslavonian propaganda has kept pace with the enfeeblement of Austria and Turkey, and what that Panslavonian propaganda means, you had some foretaste in 1848-49, when Hungary was overrun, Vienna laid waste, Italy countered by the Slavs, fighting under the banners of Jellachich, Windischgrätz and Radetzky! And besides all this, England's wrongs against Ireland have raised a new powerful ally of Russia on the other side of the Atlantic.

The plan of Russian policy remains unchangeable, her means of action have wonderfully increased even since 1848, but as yet there is one thing out of reach, and Peter the First hit the weak point when he exclaimed that to conquer the world, the Muscovites wanted nothing but souls. Well, this living spirit, which Russia lacks, will be infused into her carcass the moment the Poles turn into Russian subjects. What then will you have to throw into the opposite balance? b

A continental European will, perhaps, answer that Russia, by the emancipation of the serfs, has entered the family of civilised

[^1]: a The Crimean war of 1853-56.— Ed. b In the rough manuscript this paragraph is crossed with a vertical line. In the Glos Wolny the first sentence reads: "Peter I once said that in order to conquer the world the Muscovites lacked nothing but souls."—Ed.





**[p. 200]**

In the first instance, the emancipation of the serfs has emancipated the supreme government from the impediments the nobles were able to oppose to its centralised action. It has created a vast recruiting place for its army, broken up the common property of the Russian peasants, insulated them, and, above all, strength- ened their faith in their pope-autocrat. It has not deodorised their Asiatic barbarism, the slow growth of centuries.15 Any attempt at rais- ing their moral standard is punished as a crime. I remind you only of the official provocations against the temperance societies which had undertaken to wean the Muscovite from what Feuerbach calls the practical substance of his religion, namely brandy. However it may work in the future, for the present the serf emancipation has increased the disposable forces of the Czar.

Now, as to Prussia. Once a vassal of Poland, she has but grown into a first rate power under the auspices of Russia, and by the partition of Poland. If she lose to-morrow her Polish booty, she would merge into Germany instead of absorbing it. To maintain herself as a power distinct from Germany, she must fall back upon the Muscovite. Her recent access of domain, instead of loosening these ties, has rendered them indissoluble, because it has heightened her antagonism to France and Austria. At the same time Russia is the prop upon which the arbitrary rule of the Hohenzollern dynasty and its feudal retainers rest. This is their safeguard against popular disaffection. Prussia is, therefore, not a bulwark against the Muscovite but his predestined tool for the invasion of France and the enslavement of Germany.

As to social revolution, what does it mean if not a struggle of classes? It is possible that the struggle between the workmen and the capitalist will be less fierce and bloody than the struggles between the feudal lord and the capitalist proved in England and in France.

[^1]: a In the rough manuscript this paragraph is crossed with a vertical line. The Gtos Wolny here reads: "People reply to this question from different points of view. Some say that after the emancipation of the serfs, Russia has entered the family of civilised nations. German power, recently concentrated in the hands of the Prussians, could, claim others, defy all Asiatic attacks. Still others, more radical, place their hope in the internal social transformation in Western Europe".— Ed.

[^2]: b The Gtos Wolny has "for civilisation is created over centuries".— Ed.



There is only one alternative left for Europe. Asiatic barbarism under Muscovite leadership will burst over her head like a lawine,d

or she must restore Poland, thus placing between herself and Asia 20 millions of heroes, and gaining breathing time for the accomplishment of her social regeneration.

First published in Polish in the Glos Reproduced from the rough man- Wolny, No. 130, February 10, 1867 uscript; arranged according to the text in the Glos Wolny

[^1]: a An allusion to Victor Hugo's speech made in the French Legislative Assembly on July 17, 1851 and published in Le Moniteur officiel, July 18, 1851.— Ed.

[^2]: b Supreme sovereign.— Ed. c In the Glos Wolny the words "over the Magyars" are omitted.— Ed. d An avalanche.— Ed.



