---
Volume: 20
Document_Title: "37. F. Engels. Review of Volume One of Capital for the Elberfelder Zeitung "
Page_Range: "247-249"
---

# 37. F. Engels. Review of Volume One of Capital for the Elberfelder Zeitung 



**[p. 214]**

Frederick Engels

[REVIEW OF VOLUME ONE OF CAPITAL FOR THE ELBERFELDER ZEITUNG160]

Karl Marx on Capital (Hamburg, Otto Meissner, Volume I, 1867)

Fifty sheets of learned treatise to prove to us that the entire capital of our bankers, merchants, manufacturers and large landowners is nothing but the accumulated and unpaid labour of the working class! We recall that in 1849 the Neue Rheinische Zeitung raised the demand for a "Silesian milliard" in the name of the Silesian peasants.3 A thousand million talers, it was claimed, were illegally withdrawn from the Silesian peasants alone, to flow into the pockets of the large landowners when serfdom and feudal services were abolished, and this amount was demanded back. But the gentlemen of the Neue Rheinische Zeitung of old are like the late Sibyl with her books: the less they are offered, the more they ask. What are a thousand million talers compared with the colossal amount now demanded back in the name of the working class as a whole—for that is, surely, how we must understand it! If the entire accumulated capital of the propertied classes is nothing but "unpaid labour", it would appear to follow directly that this labour is to be paid later, that is, the entire capital in question is to be transferred to labour. That would indeed raise the question who in particular would be entitled to receive it. But joking apart! However radically socialist the present book is in its approach, however blunt and unsparing on all hands its treatment of people who as a rule are regarded as authorities, we must confess that it is a most scholarly work which has a claim to be regarded as most

[^1]: a A reference to the series of articles Die schlesische Milliarde written by Wilhelm Wolff, an associate of Marx and Engels, and published in the Neue Rheinische Zeitung, Nos. 252, 255, 256, 258, 264, 270-72 and 281, from March 22 to April 25, 1849.— Ed.





**[p. 215]**

not accumulated unpaid labour. Lassalle was a practical agitator, and it could suffice to oppose him in practical agitation, in the daily press and at meetings. But here we have a systematic scientific theory, and here the daily press cannot help to decide, here only science can speak the last word. It is to be hoped that people like Roscher, Rau, Max Wirth, etc., will seize the opportunity to defend the up till now generally recognised political economy against this new and certainly not contemptible attack. The social-democratic seed has sprouted among the younger genera- tion and the working population of many a place—through this book it will in any case find plenty of new nourishment.

[^1]: Written on October 22, 1867 Printed according to the news- paper First published in the Elberfelder Zeitung, No. 302, November 2, 1867 Published in English for the first time

[^2]: a A reference to Marx's A Contribution to the Critique of Political Economy.—Ed.



