---
Volume: 20
Document_Title: "39. K. Marx. Plagiarism "
Page_Range: "252-257"
---

# 39. K. Marx. Plagiarism 



**[p. 219]**

Karl Marx

PLAGIARISM !

Social-Demokrat of November 29. General Meeting of the General Association of German Workers

Debate on the Working Day

Speaker: v. Hofstetten (Owner of the Social-Demokrat):

Karl Marx: Capital. Critique of Political Economy, 1867. Section: "The Working Day"

1) "We started with the sup- position that labour-power is bought and sold at its value. Its value, like that of all other commodities, is determined by the working-time necessary to its production. If the produc- tion of the average daily means of subsistence of the labourer takes up six hours, he must work, on the average, six hours every day, to produce his daily labour-power, or to reproduce the value received as the result of its sale. The necessary part of his working day amounts to six hours, and is, therefore, caeteris paribus, a given quantity. But with this, the extent of the work-

[^1]: 1) "Labour-power is today a com- modity. [] The purchase price" (read: the value) "of a thing" (read: commodi- ty) "is determined by the working-time necessary to its production. The worker must work a certain number of hours to reproduce the value he has received for his labour-power: that is tne neces- sary part of the working day, but by no means, the working day i<self. To repro- duce this, an indetermmed part must" (why?) "be added; although it is indeter- mined, it has its necessary limits."





**[p. 220]**

2) "One of these" (limits), "the maximum limit, rests in the physical possibility" (how can a limit rest in a possibility!) "of how long a man is able at all to work, as in order to keep alive he must also sleep, rest, dress and wash himself. The minimum limit is given by the demands of the prevailing level of culture of an epoch. The duration of the working day and of the surplus-labour also differ in accordance with this level and with the existing legislation. Ac- cordingly, there are eight, twelve, six- teen, yes even 18-hour working days."

2) "The minimum limit" (of the working day) "is, however, not determinable; of course, if We make the surplus- labour=0, we have a minimum limit, i. e., the part of the day which the labourer must neces- sarily work for his own mainte- nance. On the basis of the capita- list mode of production, how- ever, this necessary labour can form a part only of his working day; the working day itself can never be reduced, to this minimum. On the other hand, the working day has a maximum limit. It cannot be prolonged beyond a certain point. This maximum limit is determined by two things. First, by the physical bounds of labour-power. Within the 24 hours of the natural day a man can expend only a definite quantity of his vital force and the extent of this expenditure of force is a measure for his physically pos- sible working-time. A horse, in



**[p. 18]**

Herr v. Hofstetten makes nonsense of the passage he plagia- rises. Thus, for example, he lets the maximum limit of the working day be determined by purely physical, and the minimum limit by moral limitations, although he himself has earlier mechanically repeated that the necessary part of the working day, i.e., its absolute minimum limit, is determined by the working-time necessary to maintain the labour-power!

[^1]: 3) "Experience in England has 3) On the intensification of shown that with a shorter working day l a b o u r a n d t h e a c h i e v e m e n t o f the same surplus-labour is achieved, as , . ., , in that case labour is greatly inten- e q u a l o r g r e a t e r SUrplus- sified." labour" by the enforced legal restriction of the working day in England see pp. 401-09 [407-17]. 4) "The endeavour of the capitalists 4) " T h e capitalist m a i n t a i n s therefore is to aim at the longest h i s r i g h t S as a p u r c h a s e r w h e n possible working day." (What nonsense! ^ ^ m a k e ^ w o r k i The endeavour to aim!) But the , ° worker possesses as sole commodity d a y a s l°ng a s possible, a n d t o only his labour-power, and if in that a m a k e , w h e n e v e r possible, t w o





**[p. 222]**

5) "The Factory Act of 1850 now in force" (not in England, but in specific industries of the United Kingdom named by Marx) "allows for the average working day of 10 hours Cer- tain guardians of the law are appointed, Factory Inspectors, di- rectly under the Home Secre- tary, whose reports are pub- lished half-yearly by order of Parliament" (p. 207 [223]).

Limitations of the working day for minors exist in certain States of North America in reality, not just in preparation (p. 244 [256]), limitation of the working day in general in France (p. 251 [262]), for chil- dren in some cantons of Swit- zerland (p. 251 [262-63]), in

[^1]: 5) "In England this measure" (for the working day) "is fixed by law at 10 hours(!) and there are factory inspec- tors who report on the observance of this law to the Home Secretary. In many countries there are also laws limiting the labour of children: in Austria, in Switzerland, in America and in Belgium (!) similar laws are in preparation (!). In Prussia there are also the same laws, but there they exist only on paper and have never been put into practice. In America, since the end of the Civil War which led to the emancipa- tion of the slaves, an eight-hour day has even been demanded. The 'Inter- national Working Men's Congress' also proposed an eight-hour day, in 1866."



"In the United States of North America, every independent movement of the workers was paralysed so long as slavery disfigured a part of the Repub- lic But out of the death of slavery a new young life at once arose. The- first fruit of the Civil War was the eight hours agitation. At the same time the "The International Working Men's Congress", made the following resolution: "We propose eight hours work as the legal limit of the working day"163 (pp. 279, 280 [287]).

In the same manner as Herr v. Hofstetten, the speaker who followed him, Herr Geib of Hamburg, bowdlerised the history of the English factory legislation given by Marx. Both gentlemen take the same care not to divulge the source of their wisdom.

[^1]: Written on December 6, 1867 Printed according to the news- paper First published in the supplement to Die Zukunft, No. 291, December 12, 1867 Published in English for the first time

[^2]: 10—137



