---
Volume: 20
Document_Title: "42. F. Engels. Review of Volume One of Capital for the Neue Badische Landeszeitung "
Page_Range: "262-264"
---

# 42. F. Engels. Review of Volume One of Capital for the Neue Badische Landeszeitung 



**[p. 229]**

Frederick Engels

[REVIEW OF VOLUME ONE OF CAPITAL FOR THE NEUE BADISCHE LANDESZEITUNG168]

Karl Marx. Capital. Critique of Political Economy. Volume One. Hamburg, Meissner, 1867

We must leave it to others to deal with the theoretical and strictly scientific part of this work and criticise the new view the author gives of the origin of capital. But we cannot fail to draw attention to the great mass of most valuable historical and statistical material with which the author at the same time presents us and which almost without exception is taken from the official Commission Reports which have been put before the English Parliament. He is quite right to emphasise the importance of such commissions of inquiry for the study of the internal social conditions of a country. Provided the right people are found for them, they are the best means for a nation to learn to know itself; and Herr Marx is surely not wrong in saying that similar investigations conducted in Germany would lead to results which would definitely horrify us. Before they were introduced, there was not an Englishman either who knew how the poorer classes of his country lived!

It stands to reason, moreover, that without such investigations all social legislation will be made with only half the knowledge of facts available and often quite in the dark, as they now say in Ba- varia. The so-called "inquiries" and "investigations" of German au- thorities have not remotely the same value. We know the bureaucratic routine only too well: forms are sent round, one is glad if they are returned filled in some way or another; the information thus supplied is all too often sought precisely among those who are interested in hushing up the truth. Compare with that the investigations of English commissions on working conditions in individual industries, for example. Not only the manufacturers and masters, but also the workers down to the little girls are interviewed, and not only these, but doctors, Justices of the Peace, clergymen, teachers, and moreover anyone



**[p. 230]**

Space does not permit us to enter into other valuable materials from the history of industry and agriculture, but we are of the opinion that no one interested in political economy, industry, workers' condition, the history of culture and, social legislation, whatever standpoint he may hold, should leave this book unread.

[^1]: Printed according to the news- paper Published in English for the first time

[^2]: Written in the first half of January 1868

[^3]: First published in the Neue Badische Landeszeitung, No. 20, January 21, 1868



