---
Volume: 20
Document_Title: "1. Commodities as Such "
Page_Range: "298-300"
---

# 1. Commodities as Such 



**[p. 265]**

CAPITAL BY KARL MARX, VOL. I. BOOK ONE—THE PROCESS OF CAPITALIST PRODUCTION 181

C h a p t e r I

COMMODITIES AND MONEY3

1. COMMODITIES AS SUCH

The wealth of societies in which capitalist production prevails consists of commodities. A commodity is a thing that has use-value; the latter exists in all forms of society, but in capitalist society, use-value is, in addition, the material depository of exchange-value.

Exchange-value presupposes a tertium comparationisb by which it is measured: labour, the common social substance of exchange-. values, to be precise, the socially necessary labour-time embodied in it.

Just as a commodity is something twofold: use-value and exchange-value, so the labour contained in it is twofold determined: on the one hand, as definite productive activity, weaving labour, tailoring labour, etc.— useful labour; on the other, as the simple expenditure of human labour-power, precipitated abstract labour. The former produces use-value, the latter exchange-value; only the latter is quantitatively comparable (the differences between SKILLED and UNSKILLED, complex and simple labour confirm this).

Hence the substance of exchange-value is abstract labour and its magnitude is the measure of time of abstract labour. Now to consider the form of exchange-value.

(1) x commodity a = y commodity b; value of a commodity expressed in the use-value of another is its relative value. The expression of the equivalence of two commodities is the simple form of relative value. In the above equation y commodity b is the

[^1]: a This chapter corresponds to Part I of the 1887 English edition (Chap- ter I.—Commodities, Chapter II. —Exchange, Chapter III.— Money, or the Circulation of Commodities).— Ed.

[^2]: h Literally: a third something for comparison; here a standard.— Ed.





**[p. 266]**

The equation x commodity a = y commodity b necessarily implies that x commodity a can also be expressed in other commodities, thus:

(2) x commodity a = y commodity b = z commodity c=v com- modity d=u commodity e = , etc., etc. This is the expanded relative form of value. Here x commodity a no longer refers to one, but to all commodities as the mere forms of manifestation of the labour represented in it. But through simple reversal it leads to

(3) the converse second form of relative value:

y commodity b — x commodity a v commodity c=x commodity a u commodity d = x commodity a t commodity e — x commodity a

etc., etc.

Here the commodities are given the general relative form of value, in which all of them are abstracted from their use-values and equated to x commodity a as the materialisation of abstract labour; x commodity a is the generic form of the equivalent for all other commodities; it is their universal equivalent; the labour materialised in it at once represents in itself the realisation of abstract labour, general labour. Now, however,

(4) every commodity of the series can take over the role of universal equivalent, but only one of them can do so at a time, since if all commodities were universal equivalents, each of them would in turn exclude the others from that role. Form 3 is not obtained by x commodity a, but by the other commodities, objectively. Hence a definite commodity must take over the role—for a time, it can change—and only in this way does a commodity become a commodity completely. This special com-

