---
Volume: 20
Document_Title: "1. The General Formula for Capital "
Page_Range: "308-310"
---

# 1. The General Formula for Capital 



**[p. 275]**

C h a p t e r II

THE TRANSFORMATION OF MONEY INTO CAPITAL3

1. THE GENERAL FORMULA FOR CAPITAL

Commodity circulation is the starting point of capital. Hence commodity production, commodity circulation and the latter's developed form, commerce, are always the historical groundwork from which capital arises. The modern history.of capital dates from the creation of modern world trade and the world market in the sixteenth century. (P. 106.)

If we consider only the economic forms produced by commodity circulation, we find that its final product is money, and the latter is the first form in which capital appears. Historically, capital invariably confronts landed property at first as moneyed wealth, merchant capital or usurer's capital, and even today all new capital first comes on the stage in the shape of money that by definite processes has to be transformed into capital.

Money as money and money as capital differ, to begin with, only in their form of circulation. Alongside C—M—C, the form M—C—M, buying in order to sell, also occurs. Money that describes this form of circulation in its movement becomes capital, is already capital in itself (i.e., by its destination).

The result of M—C—M is M—M, the indirect exchange of money for money. I buy cotton for £100 and sell it for £110; ultimately I have exchanged £100 for £110, money for money.

If this process yielded at its outcome the same money-value that was originally put into it, £100 out of £100, it would be absurd. Yet whether the merchant realises £100, £110, or merely £50 for

[^1]: a This chapter corresponds to Part II of the 1887 English edition (Chap- ter IV.—The General Formula for Capital, Chapter V.—Contradictions in the General Formula of Capital, Chapter VI.—The Buying and Selling of Labour- Power).— Ed.





**[p. 276]**

The two phases of the process taken separately are the same as in C—M—C. But there is a great difference in the process as a whole. In C—M—C money constitutes the intermediary, the commodity the starting point and the finish; in this case the commodity is the intermediary, with money the starting point and the finish. In C—M—C the money is spent once for all; in M—C—M it is merely advanced, it is to be got back again. It flows back to its starting point. Here, therefore, is already a palpable difference between the circulation of money as money and money as capital.

In C—M—C money can return to its starting point only through the repetition of the whole process, through the sale of fresh commodities. Hence the reflux is independent of the process itself. In M—C—M, on the other hand, it is conditioned from the outset by the structure of the process itself, which is incomplete if the reflux fails. (P. 110.)

The ultimate object of C—M—C is use-value, that of M—C—M exchange-value itself.

In C—M—C both extremes possess the same definiteness of economic form. Both are commodities, and of equal value. But at the same time they are qualitatively different use-values, and the process has social interchange of matter as its content. In M— C—M the operation, at first glance, seems tautological, meaning- less. To exchange £100 for £100, and in a roundabout way to boot, seems absurd. One sum of money is distinguishable from another only by its size; M—C—M acquires its meaning, there- fore, only through the quantitative difference in the extremes. More money is withdrawn from circulation than has been thrown into it. The cotton bought for £100 is sold, say, for £100+£10; the process thus follows the formula M—C—M', where M' = M+AM. This AM, this increment is surplus-value. The value originally advanced not only remains intact in circulation, but adds to itself a surplus-value, expands itself—and this movement converts money into capital.

In C—M—C there may also be a difference in the value of the extremes, but it is purely accidental in this form of circulation, and C—M—C does not become absurd when the extremes are equivalent—on the contrary, this is rather the necessary condition for the normal process.

