---
Volume: 20
Document_Title: "2. Contradictions in the General Formula "
Page_Range: "310-313"
---

# 2. Contradictions in the General Formula 



**[p. 277]**

M—C—M, on the other hand, the beginning and the end are the same, money, and that already makes the movement endless. Granted, M+AM differs quantitatively from M, but it too is merely a limited sum of money; if it were spent, it would no longer be capital; if it were withdrawn from circulation, it would remain stationary as a hoard. Once the need for expansion of value is given, it exists for M' as well as for M, and the movement of capital is boundless, because its goal is as much unattained at the end of the process as at the beginning. (Pp. 111-13.) As the representative of this process, the owner of money becomes a capitalist.

If in commodity circulation the exchange-value attains at most a form independent of the use-value of a commodity, it suddenly manifests itself here as a substance in process, endowed with motion of its own, for which commodity and money are mere forms. More than that, as original value it is differentiated from itself as surplus-value. It becomes money in process, and as such, capital. (P. 116.)

M—C—M' appears indeed to be a form peculiar to merchant capital alone. But industrial capital, too, is money which is converted into commodities, and by the latter's sale reconverted into more money. Acts that take place between purchase and sale, outside the sphere of circulation, effect no change in this. Lastly, in interest-bearing capital, the process appears directly as M—M' value that is, as it were, greater than itself. (P. 117.)

The form of circulation by which money becomes capital contradicts all previous laws bearing on the nature of commodities, of value, of money and of circulation itself. Can the purely formal difference of inverted sequence cause this?

What is more, this inversion exists only for one of the three transacting persons. As a capitalist I buy commodities from A and sell them in turn to B. A and B appear merely as simple buyer and seller of commodities. In each of the two cases I confront them merely as a simple owner of money or owner of commodities, confronting one as buyer or money, the other as seller or commodity, but neither of them as a capitalist or a representative of something that is more than money or commodi- ty. For A the transaction began with a sale; for B it ended with a

[^1]: 2. CONTRADICTIONS IN THE GENERAL FORMULA



Assume that A and B buy commodities from each other directly. As far as use-value is concerned, both may profit; A may even produce more of his commodity than B could produce in the same time, and vice versa, whereby both would profit again. But otherwise with exchange-value. Here equal values are exchanged for each other, even if money, as the medium of circulation, intervenes. (P. 119.)

Abstractly considered, only a change in form of the commodity takes place in simple commodity circulation, if we except the substitution of one use-value for another. So far as it involves only a change in form of its exchange-value, it involves the exchange of equivalents, if the phenomenon proceeds in a pure form. Com- modities can, indeed, be sold at prices differing from their values, but only when the law of commodity exchange is violated. In its pure form it is an exchange of equivalents, hence no medium for enriching oneself. (P. 120.)

Hence the error of all endeavours to derive surplus-value from commodity circulation. Condillac1 (p. 121), Newmanb (p. 122).

But let us assume that the exchange does not take place in a pure form, that non-equivalents are exchanged. Let us assume that each seller sells his commodity at 10 per cent above its value. Everything remains the same; what each one gains as a seller, he loses in turn as a buyer. Just as if the value of money had changed by 10 per cent. Likewise if the buyers bought everything at 10 per cent below value. (P. 123, Torrens/)

The assumption that surplus-value arises from a rise in prices presupposes that a class exists which buys and does not sell, i.e., consumes and does not produce, which constantly receives money gratis. To sell commodities above their value to this class means merely to get back, by cheating, part of the money given away gratis (Asia Minor and Rome). Yet the seller always remains the cheated one and cannot grow richer, cannot form surplus-value thereby.

[^1]: a E. B. Condillac, "Le commerce et le gouvernement" (1776) in Mélanges d'économie politique, Paris, 1847, pp. 267 and 290-91.— Ed.

[^2]: b S. P. Newman, Elements of Political Economy, Andover and New York, 1835, p. 175.— Ed.

[^3]: c R. Torrens, An Essay on the Production of Wealth, London, 1821, p. 349.— Ed.





**[p. 279]**

Hence: if equivalents are exchanged, no surplus-value results; and if non-equivalents are exchanged, still no surplus-value results. Commodity circulation creates no new value.

That is why the oldest and most popular forms of capital, merchant capital and usurers' capital, are not considered here. If the expansion of merchant capital is not to be explained by mere cheating, many intermediate factors, lacking here as yet, are required. Even more so for usurers' and interest-bearing capital. It will later be seen that both are derived forms, and why they occur historically before modern capital.

Hence surplus-value cannot originate in circulation. But outside it? Outside it the commodity owner is the simple producer of his commodity, the value of which depends upon the quantity of his own labour contained in it, measured according to a definite social law; this value is expressed in money of account, e.g., in a price of £10. But this value is not at the same time a value of £11; his labour creates values, but not self-expanding values. It can add more value to existing value, but this occurs only through the addition of more labour. Thus the commodity producer cannot produce surplus-value outside the sphere of circulation without coming in contact with other commodity owners.

Hence capital must originate in commodity circulation and yet not in it. (P. 128.)

Thus: the transformation of money into capital has to be explained on the basis of the laws inherent in the exchange of commodities, the exchange of equivalents forming the starting point. Our owner of money as yet the mere chrysalis of a capitalist, has to buy his commodities at their value, to sell them at their value, and yet at the end of this process to extract more value than he put into it. His development into a butterfly must take place in the sphere of circulation and yet not in it. These are the conditions of the problem. Hie Rhodus, hie salta!a (P. 129.)

[^1]: a "Here is Rhodes, leap here!" (figuratively meaning: here is the main point, now show us what you can do!)—words addressed to a Swaggerer in a fable by Aesop, "The Boasting Traveller" who claimed that he had made tremendous leaps in Rhodes.— Ed.



