---
Volume: 20
Document_Title: "3. The Buying and Selling of Labour- Power "
Page_Range: "313-315"
---

# 3. The Buying and Selling of Labour- Power 



**[p. 280]**

The change in value of money that is to be converted into capital cannot take place in money itself, for in buying, it merely realises the price of the commodity, and on the other hand, as long as it remains money, it does not change the magnitude of its value; and in selling, too, it merely converts the commodity from its natural form into its money-form. The change must, therefore, take place in the commodity of M—C—M; but not in its exchange-value, since equivalents are exchanged; it can only arise from its use-value as such, that is, from its consumption. For that purpose a commodity is required whose use-value possesses the property of being the source of exchange-value—and this does exist—labour-power. (P. 130.)

But for the owner of money to find labour-power in the market as a commodity, it must be sold by its own possessor, that is, it must be free labour-power. Since buyer and seller as contracting parties are both juridically equal persons, labour-power must be sold only temporarily, since in a sale en bloc the seller no longer remains the seller, but becomes a commodity himself. But then the owner, instead of being able to sell commodities in which his labour is embodied, must rather be in a position where he has to sell his labour-power itself as a commodity. (P. 131.)

For the conversion of his money into capital, therefore, the owner of money must find in the commodity market the free labourer, free in the double sense that as a free man he can dispose of his labour-power as his commodity and that, on the other hand, he has no other commodities to sell, has got rid of, is free of all things necessary for the realisation of his labour-power. (P. 132.)

Parenthetically, the relation between money owner and labour- power owner is not a natural one, or a social one common to all ages, but a historical one, the product of many economic revolutions. So, too, do the economic categories considered up to now bear their historical stamp. To become a commodity, a product must no longer be produced as the immediate means of subsistence. The mass of products can assume commodity-form only within a specific mode of production, the capitalist mode, although commodity production and circulation can take place even where the mass of products never become commodities. Likewise, money can exist in all periods that have attained a certain level of commodity circulation; the specific money-forms, from mere equivalent to world money, presuppose various stages of develop-



**[p. 281]**

Labour-power has an exchange-value which is determined, like that of all other commodities, by the labour-time required for its production, and hence for its reproduction as well. The value of labour-power is the value of the means of subsistence necessary for the maintenance of its owner, that is, his maintenance in a state of normal capacity for work. This depends upon climate, natural conditions, etc., and also on the given historical STANDARD OF LIFE in each country. These vary, but they are given for each particular country and for each particular epoch. Moreover, his maintenance includes the means of subsistence for his substitutes, i.e., his children, in order that the race of these peculiar commodity owners may perpetuate itself. Furthermore, for skilled labour, the cost of education. (P. 135.)

The minimum limit of the value of labour-power is the value of the physically indispensable means of subsistence. If the price of labour-power falls to this minimum, it falls below its value, since the latter presupposes normal, not stunted, quality of labour- power. (P. 136.)

The nature of labour implies that labour-power is consumed only after conclusion of the contract, and, as money is usually the means of payment for such commodities in all countries with the capitalist mode of production, the labour-power is paid for only after it is consumed. Everywhere, therefore, the labourer gives credit to the capitalist. (Pp. 137, 138.)

The process of consuming labour-power is at the same time the process of producing commodities and surplus-value and this consump- tion takes place outside the sphere of circulation. (P. 140.)

