---
Volume: 20
Document_Title: "1. The Labour Process and the Process of Producing Surplus- Value "
Page_Range: "315-317"
---

# 1. The Labour Process and the Process of Producing Surplus- Value 



**[p. 282]**

C h a p t e r III

THE PRODUCTION OF ABSOLUTE SURPLUS-VALUE

1. THE LABOUR PROCESS AND THE PROCESS OF PRODUCING SURPLUS-VALUE

The purchaser of labour-power consumes it by setting its seller to work. This labour to produce commodities at first turns out use-values, and in this property it is independent of the specific relation between capitalist and labourer Description of the labour process as such. (Pp. 141-49.)

The-.labour process, on a capitalist basis, has two peculiarities. L The labourer works under the capitalist's control. 2. The product is the capitalist's property, since the labour process is now only a process between two things purchased by the capitalist: labour-power and means of production. (P. 150.)

But the capitalist does not want the use-value produced for its own sake, but only as the depository of exchange-value and especially of surplus-value. Labour under this condition—where the commodity was a unity of use-value and exchange-value—becomes

[^1]: a This chapter corresponds to Part III of the 1887 English edition (Chapter VII.—The Labour-Process and the Process of Producing Surplus-Value, Chapter VIII.— Constant Capital and Variable Capital, Chapter IX.—The Rate of Surplus-Value, Chapter X.—The Working-Day, Chapter XI.—Rate and Mass of Surplus-Value).— Ed.





**[p. 283]**

Thus the quantity of labour objectified in the product is to be investigated.

Yarn, for example. Let 10 lbs. of cotton be necessary for making it, say 10 shillings, and instruments of labour, whose wear and tear are inevitable in the spinning—here denoted in brief as spindle share—say 2 shillings. Thus, there are 12 shillings' worth of means of production in the product, i.e., inasmuch as 1) the product has become an actual use-value, in this case yarn; and 2) only the socially necessary labour-time was represented in these instruments of labour. How much is added to it by the labour of spinning?

Thus, the labour process is here viewed from an altogether different angle. In the value of the product the labours of the cotton-planter, of the spindle-maker, etc., and of the spinner, are commensurable, qualitatively equal parts of general, human, necessary value-creating labour, and therefore distinguishable only quantitatively, and for that very reason quantitatively comparable by the length of time, presupposing that it is socially necessary labour-time, for only the latter is value-creating.

Assumed the value of a day's labour-power is 3 shillings, and that it represents 6 hours of labour, that 12/3 lbs. of yarn are made per hour, hence in 6 hours: 10 lbs. of yarn from 10 lbs. of cotton (as above); then 3 shillings of value have been added in 6 hours, and the value of the product is 15 shillings (10 + 2 + 3 shillings) or a shilling and a half per pound of yarn.

But in this case there is no surplus-value. This is of no use to the capitalist. (Vulgar-economic humbug,183 p. 157.)

We assumed that the value of a day's labour-power was 3 shillings, because V2 working-day, or 6 hours, is incorporated in it. But the fact that only '/2 working-day is required to maintain the worker for 24 hours does not in any way prevent him from working a whole day. The value of labour-power and the value it creates are two different quantities. Its useful property was only a conditio sine qua non; but what was decisive was the specific use-value of labour-power in being the source of more exchange-value than it has itself. (P. 159.)

Hence, the labourer works 12 hours, spins 20 lbs. of cotton worth 20 shillings and 4 shillings' worth of spindles, and his labour costs 3 shillings: total—27 shillings. But in the product there are embodied: four days' labour in the shape of spindles and cotton, and one day's labour of the spinner, in all five days at 6 shillings

