---
Volume: 20
Document_Title: "2. Constant and Variable Capital "
Page_Range: "317-319"
---

# 2. Constant and Variable Capital 



**[p. 284]**

As a value-creating process, the labour process becomes a process of producing surplus-value the moment it is prolonged beyond the point where it delivers a simple equivalent for the paid-for value of labour-power.

The value-creating process differs from the simple labour process in that the latter is considered qualitatively, the former quantitatively, and only to the extent that it comprises socially necessary labour-time. (P. 161, details p. 162.)

As the unity of labour process and value-creating process, the production process is the production of commodities; as the unity of labour process and the process of producing surplus-value it is the process of capitalist production of commodities. (P. 163.)

Reduction of complex labour to simple labour. (Pp. 163-65.)

2. CONSTANT AND VARIABLE CAPITAL

The labour process adds new value to the object of labour, but at the same time it transfers the value of the object of labour to the product, thus preserving it by merely adding new value. This double result is attained in this manner: the specifically useful qualitative character of labour converts one use-value into another use-value and thus preserves value; the value-creating, abstractly general, quantitative character of labour, however, adds value. (P. 166.)

E.g., let the productivity of spinning labour multiply sixfold. As useful (qualitative) labour it preserves in the same period of time six times as many instruments of labour. But it adds only the same new value as before, i.e., in each pound of yarn there is only 1/6 of the new value previously added. As value-creating labour it accomplishes no more than before. (P. 167.) Conversely, if the productivity of spinning labour remains the same, but the value of the instruments of labour rises. (P. 168.)

The instruments of labour transfer to the product only that > value which they lose themselves. (P. 169.) This is the case in differing degree. Coal, LUBRICANTS, etc., are consumed completely, raw materials take on a new form. Instruments, machinery, etc., transmit value only slowly and by parts, and the wear and tear are calculated by experience. (Pp. 169-70.) But the instrument remains



**[p. 285]**

But in no case can an instrument of labour transfer more exchange-value than it possessed itself—in the labour process it acts only as a use-value and hence can give only the exchange- value that it possessed previously. (P. 172.)

This preserving of value is very advantageous to the capitalist but costs him nothing. (Pp. 173, 174.)

Yet the preserved value only reappears, it was already present, and only the labour process adds new value. That is, in capitalist production, surplus-value, the excess of the product's value over the value of the consumed elements of the product (means of production and labour-power). (Pp. 175, 176.)

Herewith have been described the forms of existence which the original capital value takes on in dropping its money-form, in being converted into factors of the labour process: (1) in the purchase of instruments of labour; (2) in the purchase of labour-power.

The capital invested in instruments of labour does not therefore alter the magnitude of its value in the production process. We call it constant capital.

The portion invested in labour-power does change its value; it produces: 1) its own value, and 2) surplus-value—it is variable capital. (P. 176.)

(Capital is constant only in relation to the production process specifically given, in which it does not change; it can consist sometimes of more, sometimes of fewer instruments of labour, and the purchased instruments of labour may rise or fall in value, but that does not affect their relationship to the production process. P. 177. Likewise, the percentage in which a given capital is subdivided into constant and variable capital may change, but in any given case the c remains constant and the v variable. P. 178.)'

