---
Volume: 20
Document_Title: "4. The Working Day "
Page_Range: "319-322"
---

# 4. The Working Day 



**[p. V]**

C=£500=410 + 90. At the end of the labour process in which v

C V S is turned into labour-power we get 410 + 90 + 90 = 590. Let us assume c consists of 312 raw material, 44 auxiliary material, and 54 wear and tear of machinery, in all 410. Let the value of all the machinery be 1,054. If this were entered as a whole, we would get 1,410 for c on both sides of our calculation; the surplus-value would remain 90 as before. (P. 179.)

Since the value of c merely re-appears in the product, the value of the product we get differs from the value created in the process; the latter, therefore, equals not c + v + s, but v + s. Hence the magnitude of c is immaterial to the process of producing surplus-value, i.e., c=o. (P. 180.) This also takes place in practice in commercial accounting, e.g., in calculating a country's profit from its industry, imported raw material is deducted. (P. 181.) Cf. Vol. Ill 1 8 4 for the ratio of surplus-value to total capital.

Hence: the rate of surplus-value is s:v, in the above case 90:90=100%.

The labour-time during which the labourer reproduces the value of his labour-power—under capitalist or other conditions—is the necessary labour;what goes beyond that,producing surplus-value for the capitalist, surplus-labour. (Pp. 183, 184.) Surplus-value is congealed surplus-labour, and only the form of extorting it differentiates the various social formations.

Examples of the incorrectness of including c, pp. 185-96. (Senior.)"1

The sum of the necessary labour and the surplus-labour equals the working day.

The necessary labour-time is given. The surplus-labour is variable, but within certain limits. It can never be reduced to nil, since then capitalist production ceases. It can never go as high as 24 hours for physical reasons, and, moreover, the maximum limit is always affected by moral grounds as well. But these limits are very elastic. The economic demand is that the working-day should be no

[^1]: 4. THE WORKING DAY

[^2]: a N. W. Senior, Letters on the Factory Act, London, 1837, pp. 12 and 13.—Ed.





**[p. 287]**

Surplus-labour in earlier social epochs. As long as the exchange- value is not more important than the use-value, surplus-labour is milder, e.g., among the ancients; only where direct exchange- value—gold and silver—was produced, surplus-labour was terri- ble. (P. 203.) Likewise in the slave states of America until the mass production of cotton for export. Likewise corvée labour, e.g., in Romania.

Corvée labour is the best means of comparison with capitalist exploitation, because the former fixes and shows the surplus- labour as a specific labour-time to be performed — Règlement organique185 of Wallachia. (Pp. 204-06.)

The English FACTORY ACTS are negative expression of the greed for surplus-labour, just as the foregoing was its positive expres- sion.

The FACTORY ACTS. That of 1850—(p. 207). 10 v

2 hours and 7 72 on Saturdays=60 hours per week. Millowners' profit through evasion. (Pp. 208-11.)

Exploitation in unrestricted or only later restricted branches: lace industry (p. 212), POTTERIES (p. 213), lucifer matches (p. 215), wall-paper (pp. 215-17), baking (pp. 217-22), railway employees (p. 223), seamstresses (pp. 223-25), blacksmiths (p. 226), day and night workers IN SHIFTS: (a) metallurgy and the metal industry (pp. 227-36).

These facts prove that capital regards the labourer as nothing else than labour-power, all of whose time is labour-time as far as this is at all possible at a given moment, and that the length of life of labour-power is immaterial to the capitalist. (Pp. 236-38.) But is this not against the interests of the capitalist? What about the replacement of what is rapidly worn out? The organised slave trade in the interior of the United States has raised the rapid wearing out of slaves to an economic principle, exactly like the supply of labourers from the rural districts in Europe, etc. (P. 239.) POORHOUSE SUPPLY. (P. 240.) The capitalist sees only the continuously available surplus-population and wears it out. Whether the race perishes—après moi le déluge.a Capital is reckless of the health and length of life of the labourer, unless it is forced by society to

[^1]: a After me the deluge—the words attributed to Louis XV of France and Mme. de Pompadour.— Ed.

[^2]: 12—137





**[p. 288]**

At the beginning laws were made to raise working-time; now to lower it. (P. 244.) T h e first STATUTE OF LABOURERS, 23rd Edward III, 1349, was passed under the pretext that the plague had so decimated the population that everyone had to do more work. Hence maximum wages and limit of the working day were fixed by law. In 1496, under Henry VII, the working day of agricultural labourers and all ARTIFICERS continued from 5 a.m. to between 7 and 8 p.m. in summer—March to September, with 1 hour, 1 1/2 hours and ll2 hour, in all 3 hours' break. In winter it was from 5 a.m. to dark. This statute was never strictly enforced. In the 18th century the whole week's labour was not yet available to capital (with the exception of agricultural labour). Cf. controversies of that time. (Pp. 248-51.) Only with modern large-scale industry was this, and more, achieved; it broke down all bounds and exploited the workers most shamelessly. T h e proletariat resisted as soon as it recovered consciousness. T h e five acts of 1802-33 were only nominal, since there were no inspectors. Only the Act of 1833 created a normal working day in the four textile industries: from 5.30 a.m. to 8.30 p.m., during which time YOUNG PERSONS from 13 to 18 years of age could be employed only 12 hours with 1 7 2 hours' pause, children from 9 to 13 years of age only 8 hours, while night work of children and YOUNG PERSONS was prohibited. (Pp. 253-55.) T h e relay system and its abuse for purposes of evasion. (P. 256.) Finally, the Act of 1844 which put women of all ages on the same basis as YOUNG PERSONS. Children limited to 61/2 hours; the relay system curbed. O n the other hand, children permitted from 8 years on. At last in 1847 the ten-hour bill forced through for women and YOUNG PERSONS. (P. 259.) T h e capitalists' efforts against it. (Pp. 260-68.) A FLAW in the Act of 1847 led to the compromise Act of 1850 (p. 269), which fixed the working day for YOUNG PERSONS and WOMEN—5 days of 10 l/2, 1 day of 7 V2 — 60 hours per week, and that between 6 a.m. and 6 p.m. Otherwise the Act of 1847 in force for children. T h e exception for the silk industry. (P. 270.) In 1853 the working-time for children also limited to between 6 a.m. and 6 p.m. (P. 272.)

PRINTWORKS ACT in 1845 limits almost nothing—children and women can work 16 hours!

