---
Volume: 20
Document_Title: "5. Rate and Mass of Surplus- Value "
Page_Range: "322-325"
---

# 5. Rate and Mass of Surplus- Value 



**[p. 289]**

Large-scale industry thus at first creates the need for limiting working-time, but it is later found that the same overwork has gradually taken possession of all other branches as well. (P. 277.)

History further shows that the individual "free" labourer is defenceless against the capitalist and succumbs, especially with the introduction of women's and children's labour, so that it is here that the class struggle develops between the workers and the capitalists. (P. 277.)

In France, the twelve-hour day law for all ages and branches of work was passed only in 1848. (Cf., however, p. 253, footnote on the French child labour law of 1841, which was really enforced only in 1853, and then only in the Département du Nord.) Complete "freedom of labour" in Belgium. The eight-hour movement in America. (P. 279.)

Thus, the labourer comes out of the production process quite different than he entered. The labour contract was not the act of a free agent; the time for which he is free to sell his labour[-power] is the time for which he is forced to sell it, and only the mass opposition of the workers wins for them the passing of a law that shall prevent the workers from selling, by voluntary contract with capital, themselves and their generation into slavery and death. In place of the pompous catalogue of the inalienable rights of man comes the modest Magna Charta of the Factory Act. (Pp. 280, 281.)

With the rate, the mass is also given. If the daily value of one labour-power is 3 shillings, and the rate of surplus-value is 100 per cent, its daily mass=3 shillings for one labourer.

I. Since the variable capital is the money expression of the value of all the labour-powers simultaneously employed by one capital- ist, the mass of the surplus-value produced by them is equal to the variable capital multiplied by the rate of surplus-value. Both factors can vary, different combinations thus arising. The mass of surplus-value can grow, even with decreasing variable capital, if the rate rises, that is, if the working day is lengthened. (P. 282.)

[^1]: 5. RATE AND MASS OF SURPLUS-VALUE

[^2]: 12*





**[p. 290]**

III. The masses of value and surplus-value produced by different capitals, with the given value and equally high degree of exploitation of labour-power, are related directly as the magnitudes of the variable components of these capitals. (P. 285.) This seems to contradict all facts.

For a given society and a given working day, surplus-value can be increased only by increasing the number of workers, i.e., the population; with a given number of workers, only by lengthening the working day. This is important, however, only for absolute surplus-value.

It now turns out that not every sum of money can be transformed into capital—that a minimum exists: the cost price of a single labour-power and of the necessary instruments of labour. In order to be able to live himself like a worker, the capitalist would have to have two workers, with a rate of surplus-value of 50 per cent, and yet save nothing. Even with eight he is still a small master. Hence, in the Middle Ages people were forcibly hampered in transformation from craftsmen into capitalists by limitation of the number of journeymen to be employed by one master. The minimum of wealth required to form a real capitalist varies in different periods and branches of business. (P. 288.)

Capital has evolved into command over labour, and sees to it that work is done regularly and intensively. Moreover, it compels the workers to do more work than is necessary for their sustenance; and in pumping out surplus-value it surpasses all earlier produc- tion systems based upon direct compulsory labour.

Capital took over labour with the given technical conditions, and at first does not change them. Hence, with the production process considered as a labour process, the worker stands in relation to the means of production not as to capital, but as to the means of his own appropriate activity. But, considered as a process of creating surplus-value, otherwise. The means of production become means



**[p. 291]**



