---
Volume: 20
Document_Title: "1. The Concept of Relative Surplus- Value "
Page_Range: "325-326"
---

# 1. The Concept of Relative Surplus- Value 



**[p. 292]**

C h a p t e r IV

PRODUCTION OF RELATIVE SURPLUS-VALUE3

1. THE CONCEPT OF RELATIVE SURPLUS-VALUE

For a given working day, surplus-labour can be increased only by reducing the necessary labour; this can in turn be obtained— apart from lowering wages below value—only by reducing the value of labour[-power], that is, by reducing the price of the necessary means of subsistence. (Pp. 291-93.) This, in turn, is to be attained only by increasing the productive power of labour, by revolutionising the mode of production itself

The surplus-value produced by lengthening the working day is absolute, that produced by shortening the necessary labour-time is relative surplus-value. (P. 295.)

In order to lower the value of labour [-power], the increase in productive power must seize upon those branches of industry whose products determine the value of labour-power—ordinary means of subsistence, substitutes for the same, and their raw materials, etc. Proof of how competition makes the increased productive power manifest in a lower commodity price. (Pp. 296-99.)

The value of commodities is in inverse ratio to the productive power of labour, as is also the value of labour-power, because it is determined by the value of commodities. Relative surplus-value, on the contrary, is directly proportional to the productive power of labour. (P. 299.)

The capitalist is not interested in the absolute value of commodities, but only in the surplus-value incorporated in them.

[^1]: a This chapter corresponds to Part IV of the 1887 English edition (Chapter XII.—The Concept of Relative Surplus-Value, Chapter XIII.—Co-operation, Chapter XIV.— Division of Labour and Manufacture, Chapter XV.— Machinery and Modern Industry).— Ed.



