---
Volume: 20
Document_Title: "4. Machinery and Large- Scale Industry "
Page_Range: "333-344"
---

# 4. Machinery and Large- Scale Industry 



**[p. 300]**

4. MACHINERY AND LARGE-SCALE INDUSTRY

a. Machinery as Such

The revolution in the mode of production, starting in manufac- ture with labour-power, here starts with the instruments of labour.

All fully-developed machinery consists of 1) the motor mechan- ism; 2) the transmitting mechanism; 3) the machine tool. (P. 357.) The industrial revolution of the eighteenth century started with the machine tool. What characterises it is that the tool—in a more or less modified form—is transferred from man to the machine, and is worked by the machine under the operation of man. At the outset it is immaterial whether the motive power is human or a natural one. The specific difference is that man uses only his own organs while the machine can, within certain limits, employ as many tools as demanded. (Spinning-wheel, 1 spindle; jenny, 12 to 18 spindles.)

So far, in the spinning-wheel it is not the treadle, the power, but the spindle that is affected by the [industrial] revolution—at the beginning man is still motive power and tender at the same time everywhere. The revolution of the machine tool, on the contrary, first made the perfecting of the steam-engine a necessity, and then also carried it out. (Pp. 359-60; also pp. 361-62.)

Two kinds of machinery in large-scale industry: either (1) co-operation of similar machines (POWER-LOOM, ENVELOPE-MACHINE, which combines the work of a number of detail workers through the combination of various tools), in this case technological unity already, through the transmission and the motive power; or 2) machine system, combination of different detail machines (spin- ning-mill). The natural basis for this is the division of labour in manufacture. But at once an essential difference. In manufacture every detail process had to be adapted to the labourer; this is no longer necessary here—the labour process can be objectively dissected into its component parts, which are then left to science, or to experience based upon it, to be mastered by machines.— Here the quantitative ratio of the several groups of workers is repeated as the ratio of the several groups of machines. (Pp. 363-66.)

In both cases the factory constitutes a huge automaton (moreover perfected to that stage only recently) and this is its adequate form.



**[p. 301]**

Connection between the revolutionising of the various branches up to the means of communication. (P. 370.)

In manufacture the combination of workers is subjective. Here there is an objective mechanical production organism, which the worker finds ready at hand, and which can function only through collective labour; the co-operative character of the labour process is now a technological necessity. (P. 372.)

The productive forces arising from co-operation and the division of labour cost capital nothing; the natural forces: steam, water, also cost nothing. Neither do the forces discovered by science. But the latter can be realised only with suitable apparatus, which can be constructed only at great expense; likewise the machine tools cost much more than the old tools. But these machines have a much longer life and a much greater field of production than the tool; they therefore transfer a much smaller portion of value, comparatively, to the product than a tool, and hence the gratuitous service performed by the machine (which does not re-appear in the value of the product) is much greater than in the case of the tool. (Pp. 374, 375, 376.)

Reduction in cost through concentration of production is much greater in large-scale industry than in manufacture. (P. 375.)

The prices of finished goods prove how much the machine has cheapened production, and that the portion of value due to the instruments of labour grows relatively but declines absolutely. The productivity of the machine is measured by the extent to which it replaces human labour-power. Examples. (Pp. 377-79.)

Assumed a steam plough takes the place of 150 workers getting an annual wage of £3,000, this annual wage does not represent all the labour performed by them, but only the necessary labour— however, they also perform surplus-labour in addition. If the steam plough costs £3,000, however, that is the expression in money of all labour embodied in it. Thus, if the machine costs as much as the labour-power it replaces, the human labour embodied in it is always much less than that which it replaces. (P. 380.)

As a means of cheapening production, the machine must cost less labour than it replaces. But for capital its value must be less than that of the labour-power supplanted by it. Therefore, machines that do not pay in England may pay in America (e.g., for stonebreaking). Hence, as a result of certain legal restrictions, machines that



**[p. 302]**

b. A p p r o p r i a t i o n of L a b o u r - P o w e r T h r o u g h M a c h i n e r y

Since machinery itself contains the power driving it, muscular power drops in value.— Labour of women and children; immediate increase in the number of wage-labourers through the enrolling of members of the family who had not previously worked for wages. Thus the value of the man's labour-power is spread over the labour-power of the whole family, i.e., depreciated.—Now four persons must perform not only labour, but also surplus-labour for capital that one family may live, where only one did previously. Thus the degree of exploitation is increased together with the material of exploitation. (P. 383.)

Formerly the sale and purchase of labour-power was a relation between free persons ; now minors or children are bought; the worker now sells wife and child—he becomes a slave-dealer. Examples (pp. 384-85).

Physical deterioration — mortality of workers' children (p. 386), in industrialised agriculture as well, (GANG SYSTEM.3) (P. 387.)

Moral degradation. (P. 389.) Educational clauses and manufac- turers' resistance to them. (P. 390.)

The entrance of women and children into the factory finally breaks down the male worker's resistance to the despotism of capital. (P. 391.)

If machinery shortens the labour-time necessary to produce an object, in the hands of capital it becomes the most powerful weapon for lengthening the working day far beyond its normal bounds. It creates, on the one hand, new conditions that enable capital to do so, and on the other, new motives for so doing.

Machinery is capable of perpetual motion, and limited only by the weakness and limitations of the assisting human labour-power. The machine that is worn out in seven and a half years, working twenty hours daily, absorbs just as much surplus-labour for the capitalist, but in half the time, as another that is worn out in fifteen years working ten hours daily. (P. 393.)

The moral depreciation of the machine—BY SUPERSEDING—is in this way risked still less. (P. 394.)

[^1]: a Here means women and adolescents working in a group for wages.— Ed.



During the first period of machinery, when it possesses a monopoly character, profits are enormous, and hence the thirst for more, for boundless lengthening of the working day. With the general introduction of machinery this monopoly profit vanishes, and the law asserts itself that surplus-value arises, not from the labour supplanted by the machine, but from the labour employed by it, that is, from the variable capital. But under machine production the latter is necessarily reduced by the large outlays. Thus there is an inherent contradiction in the capitalist employment of machin- ery: for a given mass of capital it increases one factor of surplus-value, its rate, by reducing the other, the number of workers. As soon as the value of a machine-made commodity becomes the regulating social value of that commodity, this contradiction comes to light, and again drives towards lengthening the working day. (P. 397.)

But at the same time machinery, by setting free supplanted workers, as well as by enrolling women and children, produces a surplus working population, which must let capital dictate the law to it. Hence machinery overthrows all the moral and natural bounds of the working day. Hence the paradox that the most powerful means of shortening labour-time is the most infallible means of converting the whole lifetime of the worker and of his family into available labour-time for expanding the value of capital. (P. 398.)

We have already seen how the social reaction occurs here through the fixing of the normal working day; on this basis there now develops the intensification of labour. (P. 399.)

At the beginning, with the speeding-up of the machine, the intensity of labour increases simultaneously with the lengthening of labour-time. But soon the point is reached where the two exclude each other. It is different, however, when labour-time is restricted. Intensity can now grow; in 10 hours as much work can be done as ordinarily in 12 or more, and now the more intensive working-day counts as raised to a higher power, and labour is measured not merely by its length of time, but by its intensity. (P. 400.) Thus, in 5 hours of necessary and 5 hours of surplus-labour, the same surplus-value can be attained as in 6



**[p. 304]**

How is labour intensified? In manufacture it has been proved (note 159, p. 401), pottery, for instance, etc., that mere shortening of the working day is sufficient to raise productivity enormously. In machine labour this was far more doubtful. But R. Gardner's proof. (Pp. 401-02.)188

As soon as the shortened working day becomes law, the machine becomes a means of squeezing more intensive labour out of the worker, either by GREATER SPEED OR LESS HANDS IN RELATION TO MACHINE. Examples. (Pp. 403-07.) Evidence that enrichment and expansion of the factory grew simultaneously therewith. (Pp. 407-09.)

c. T h e W h o l e F a c t o r y in I t s C l a s s i c a l F o r m

In the factory the machine takes care of the proper manipula- tion of the tool; thus the qualitative differences of labour developed in manufacture are here abolished; labour is levelled out more and more; at most, difference in age and sex. The division of labour is here a distribution of workers among the specialised machines. Here division is only between principal workers, who are really employed at the tool, and FEEDERS (this is true only for the self-acting mule, scarcely so for the THROSTLE, and still less for the CORRECTED POWER LOOM), in addition, supervisors, ENGINEERS and STOCKERS, MECHANICS, JOINERS, etc., a class only outwardly aggregated to the factory. (Pp. 411-12.)

The necessity for adapting the worker to the continuous motion of an automaton requires training from childhood, but by no means that a worker be any longer chained to one detail function all his life, as in manufacture. Change of personnel can take place at the same machine (RELAY SYSTEM), and because pi the slight effort required to learn, the workers can be shifted from one kind of machine to another. The work of the attendants is either very simple or is taken over more and more by the machine. None the less, at the beginning, the division of labour dictated by manufacture persists traditionally, and itself becomes a greater weapon for exploitation by capital. The worker becomes a lifelong part of a detail machine. (P. 413.)

All capitalist production, in so far as it is not only a labour process but also a process for expanding the value of capital, has this in common that it is not the worker who makes use of the



**[p. 305]**

c^ or d. The Workers' Struggle Against the Factory System and Machinery

This struggle, existing since the origin of the capitalist relation- ship, first occurs here as a revolt against the machine as the material basis of the capitalist mode of production. Ribbon looms. (P. 419.) Luddites.189 (P. 420.) Only later do the workers distinguish between the material means of production and the social form of their exploitation.

In manufacture the improved division of labour was rather a means of virtually replacing the labourers. (P. 421.) (Digression on agriculture, displacement p. 422.) But in machinery the worker is actually displaced; the machine competes with him directly. HAND-LOOM WEAVERS. (P. 423.) Likewise India. (P. 424.) This effect is permanent, since machinery continually seizes upon new fields of production. The self-dependent and estranged form that capitalist production gives the instrument of labour as against the labourer is developed by machinery into a thorough antagonism—hence now the labourer's revolt first against the instrument of labour. (P. 424.)

Details of the displacement of workers by machines. (Pp. 425, 426.) The machine as a means of breaking the workers' resistance to capital by displacing them. (Pp. 427, 428.)

Liberal political economy maintains that the machine, displacing workers, at the same time releases capital that can employ these workers. On the contrary, however, every introduction of machines ties up capital, diminishes its variable and increases its constant components; it can, therefore, merely restrict capital's



**[p. 306]**

This further developed (very good for "Fortnightly"191) (pp. 431-32): the antagonisms inseparable from the capitalist employment of machinery do not exist for the apologists, because they do not arise out of machinery as such, but out of its capitalist employment. (P. 432.)

Expansion of production by machines directly and indirectly, and thus possible increase in number of workers hitherto employed: miners, slaves IN COTTON STATES, etc. On the other hand, displacement of Scotch and Irish by sheep to suit the requirements of the woollen factories. (Pp. 433, 434.)

Machine production carries the social division of labour much further than manufacture did. (P. 435.)

c" or e. M a c h i n e r y a n d S u r p l u s - V a l u e

The first result of machinery: increasing surplus-value together with the mass of products in which it is embodied and on which the capitalist class and its hangers-on live, thus increasing the number of capitalists; new luxury wants together with the means of satisfying them. Luxury production grows. Likewise means of communication (which, however, absorb only little labour-power in the more developed countries) (evidence p. 436)—finally, the servant class grows, the modern domestic slaves, whose material is supplied by the releasing [of workers]. (P. 437.) Statistics.

Economic contradictions. (P. 437.) Possibility of absolute increase in the mass of labour in one branch of business owing to machines, and the modalities of this process. (Pp. 439-40.)

Enormous elasticity, capacity for sudden extension by leaps of large-scale industry at a high degree of development. (P. 441.) Reaction upon the countries producing raw materials. Emigration owing to release of workers. International division of labour of the industrial and agricultural countries—periodicity of crises and prosperity. (P. 442.) Workers thrown back and forth in this process of expansion. (P. 444.)



**[p. 307]**

Sanitary clauses of the Factory Acts. (P. 473.) Educational clauses. (P. 476.)

Discharge of workers merely because of age, as soon as they are grown up and are no longer fitted for the work, and can no longer live on a child's wages, while at the same time they have learned no new trade. (P. 477.)

Dissolution of the MYSTERIES and of the traditional ossification of manufacture and handicraft, by large-scale industry, which con- verts the production process into a conscious application of natural forces. Hence it alone is revolutionary, as against all earlier forms. (P. 479.) But as a capitalist form it lets the ossified division of labour persist for the worker, and since it daily revolutionises the former's basis, it ruins the worker. On the other hand, in this very thing, in this necessary change of activities of one and the same worker lies the requirement of his being as versatile as possible and the possibilities of the social revolution. (Pp. 480Need for extending factory legislation to all branches not operated on factory lines. (P. 482 ff.) Act of 1867. (P. 485.) Mines (note, p. 486 ff.).

Concentrating effect of the Factory Acts; generalisation of factory production and thus of the classical form of capitalist production; accentuation of its inherent contradictions, maturing

[^1]: 81->





**[p. 308]**

Agriculture. Here release of workers by machines is even more acute. Replacement of the peasant by the wage-labourer. Destruc- tion of rural domestic manufacture. Accentuation of the antithesis between town and country. Dispersion and weakening of the rural labourers, whereas the urban workers become concentrated; hence wages of agricultural workers are reduced down to a minimum. At the same time robbing of the soil: the acme of the capitalist mode of production is the undermining of the sources of all wealth : the soil and the labourer. (Pp. 493-96.)a

[^1]: a Here follows the title of the next chapter: Chapter V.—Further Investigations of the Production of Surplus-Value, and the manuscript breaks off.— Ed.



FROM THE PREPARATORY MATERIALS



