---
Volume: 20
Document_Title: "1. The So- called Polish Succession War "
Page_Range: "345-346"
---

# 1. The So- called Polish Succession War 



**[p. 312]**

Modern Russia dates only from the 18th century, and it is therefore from that time alone that resistance to Russia could have entered into the policy of France or any other European state.

I proceed at once to the time of Louis XV which Mr. Fox has justly pointed out as the epoch when the French foreign policy was most favourable to Poland and most hostile to Russia.

Now there happened three great events under the regime of Louis XV—in regard to Russia and Poland, 1) the so-called Polish succession war, 2) the Seven Years' War, and 3) the first partition of Poland. I shall consider the attitude taken by the French government in regard to these events.

1. The So-called Polish Succession War

After the death of Augustus II (king of Poland and elector of Saxony), in September 1733, one party of the Polish aristocracy wanted to elect his son3 as king. He was supported by Russia and Austria, because he had promised to the Czarinab not to reclaim Courland,196 formerly a fief of Poland, and because he had promised to the Emperor0 the guarantee of the pragmatic sanction.197 The other party, instigated by France, elected Stanis- laus Leszczinski, who had formerly been made Polish king by Charles XII of Sweden and who was at that time the father-in-law of Louis XV. There broke consequently a war out between France on the one hand, Russia and Austria on the other. This is the only war which France has ever professedly carried on behalf of Poland. France made war in Germany and Italy, but as far as her Polish protégé was concerned, limited herself to sending 1,500 men to Dantzick, then a Polish town.198 The war having lasted two years, what was its upshot? A treaty of peace (Peace of Vienna, October 1735),199 by which the duchy of Lorraine, a German fief, was incorporated into France, and the Bourbon dynasty planted in Naples and Sicily, the same dynasty of which king Bombad was the last lively representative. In all other respects this "war about the throne of Poland" ended in acknowledging the Russian candidate, Augustus III, as king of Poland, but securing to Louis XV's

[^1]: a Frederick Augustus II (later King Augustus III of Poland).— Ed.

[^2]: b Anna Ivanovna.— Ed. c Charles VI.— Ed. d Ferdinand II (nicknamed "Bomba" for the bombardment of Messina in September 1848).— Ed.



