---
Volume: 20
Document_Title: "5. Consulate "
Page_Range: "355-356"
---

# 5. Consulate 

In 1799 at last Suvorov, the effect of the disappearance of Poland made itself felt to the French republic. Russian armies appeared in Holland and in Italy. Suvorov penetrates to the very frontiers of France.

When on 27 July3 1799 the French surrendered Mantua to the Russian general Vielhorski,218 there was a secret article in the capitulation by which the Austrians got back their deserters, viz. the Austrian Poles who had entered the legions. After the surrender of Mantua, the 2nd legion fell into the hands of the enemy; the first legion, under Dombrowski, joined the Great Army,219 and was almost entirely annihilated in the great battles against the Russo-Austrian armies.

[5.] Consulate 9 November 1799 (18 Brumaire) Consulate. Bonaparte authorizes the formation of new Polish legions, one at Marseilles under Dombrowski, one on the Danube under general Kniaziewicz. These legions assist at Marengo and Hohenlinden.220 See order of the day of general Moreau, where he renders justice

Treaty of Lunéville with Austria, 9 February0 1801.221 No article relating to Poland.

Treaty of Paris, October 1801, with Paul I of Russia.222 In this treaty Paul I and Bonaparte promised each other

This article related to the Poles on the [one] hand, to the Bourbons and their partisans on the other.

In 1801 there appeared in the Moniteur a series of articles written by Bonaparte himself and justifying the ambition of France, because her conquests were hardly an equivalent for the acquisitions which Russia, Austria and Prussia had made by the partition of Poland. {Thiers, Histoire du Consulat et de l'Empire, t. III, p. 153.)

[^1]: "to the stern constancy of general Kniaziewicz and his Polish soldiers".b

[^2]: "not to allow that any of their subjects should be allowed to entertain any correspondence, whether direct or indirect, with the internal enemies of the actual governments of the two states, there to propagate principles contrary to their respective constitutions, or to foment troubles".A

[^3]: a Inaccuracy in the manuscript: April 28.— Ed.

[^4]: b Quoted from Sawaszkiewicz, op. cit., p. 57, note.— Ed. c Inaccuracy in the manuscript: January 26.— Ed. d Quoted from Sawaszkiewicz, op. cit., p. 58.— Ed.



