---
Volume: 20
Document_Title: "6. Empire "
Page_Range: "356-361"
---

# 6. Empire 

Treaty of Amiens. 27 March 1802.223 The first consul made embark, by force, for St. Domingo part of the Polish legions and made present of the other part to the new king of Naples.h

Threatened by the fire of artillery, they were embarked at Genoa and Livorno to find their graves in St. Domingo.224

[6.] Empire

May 1804 (crowned 2 December 1804) until 1815. 1806-1807. During his war with Prussia, supported by Russia, Napoleon sent the remainders of the Polish legions under Dombrowski into Prussian Poland, where they conquered Dantzick for him, and insurged the country.

18 December 1806. Napoleon himself in Warsaw, then Prussian. Great enthusiasm of the Poles. In his autobiography Thomas Ostrowski (Paris 1836), president of the Senate, narrates that Napoleon, at the first audience he gave to the members of the administration, received them with the words:

"Gentlemen, I want to-day 200,000 bottles of wine, and as many portions of rice, meat and vegetables. No excuses; if not, I leave you to the Russian knout I want proofs of your devotion; / stand in need of your blood" ("j'ai besoin de votre sang").c

He enrolled a Polish army. The campaign lasted until 6 May 1807.

25 and 26 June 1807. Fraternisation between Napoleon and Alexander on the Niémen.

Art. V of that treaty proclaimed the foundation of the duchy of Warsaw which Napoleon cedes

This duchy was cut out of Prussian Poland.

[^1]: Treaty of Tilsit, signed 7 July 1807 (9 July with Prussia).225

[^2]: "in all property and sovereignty to the king of Saxony,d to be ruled by constitutions, which, while securing the liberties and privileges of the duchy, were compatible with the tranquillity of the neighbouring states".

[^3]: a Marie-Louise-Joséphine, wife of Duke Louis Bourbon of Parma.— Ed- b Joseph Bonaparte.— Ed. c Tomasz Ostrowski's account of Napoleon's speech was rendered by Antoni Ostrowski in Zywot Tomasza Ostrowskiego, Paris, 1836. Marx quotes from Sawasz- kiewicz, op. cit., p. 66.— Ed.

[^4]: d Frederick August I.— Ed.





**[p. 324]**

"shall be united in perpetuity to the Russian empire, in order to establish the natural limits between Russia and tlie duchy of Warsaw".a

Dantzic, on the pretext of being made a free town, was made a French maritime fortress.

Many large estates in the new duchy were made a present of by Napoleon to the French generals.

Lelewel calls this justly the Fourth Division of Poland}1

Having beaten the Prussians and the Russians by the assistance of the Poles, Napoleon disposed of Poland, as if she was a conquered country and his private property, and he disposed of her to the advantage of Russia.

The duchy of Warsaw was small, without position in Europe. A large civil list; civil government by Saxony, military by Napoleon. Davout ruled like a Pasha at Warsaw. He made in fact of the duchy a recruiting place for France, a military depot.

(Sawaszkiewicz, Tableau de l'influence de la Pologne sur les destinées de la Révolution française. Paris, 1848, 3e""' édit.)

The duchy of Warsaw was for Napoleon not only an advanced post against Russia. Napoleon had possessed himself of those very points which would serve him as a basis of offensive operations against Prussia and Austria. Nicholas acted in his spirit when he fortified those points by a chain of fortresses.

(By inserting at the head of the treaty of Tilsit the declaration that only out of courtesy for Alexander he restored to the king of Prussia' half of his old territories, Napoleon proclaimed that king, and Prussia, a mere appendage to Russia.)

By the secret articles of the treaty of Tilsit the public ones were partly revoked. Thus f. i. only to deceive Austria, the public treaty contained articles for the integrity of Turkey. By the secret articles Napoleon sacrificed Turkey and Sweden to the Czar who surren- dered to him Portugal, Spain, Malta, and the North African coast; promised his accession to the continental system, and the surrender of the Ionian islands to France.226 The partition of Turkey was only prevented by the opposition of Austria. All the arrangements for a partition of Turkey were beginning after the conclusion of the Tilsit treaty. In August 1808 Alexander handed

[^1]: a Articles of the Treaty of Tilsit are quoted from Sawaszkiewicz, op. cit., p. 68.— Ed.

[^2]: h J. Lelevel, Histoire de Pologne.—Ed. 1 Frederick William III.— Ed.



"Putting aside every diplomatical form, they transacted their business in the impudent and reckless way of robber-chiefs dividing their booty".3

According to the negotiations between Napoleon and Alexander at Tilsit, Sweden and Denmark were to be forced to join the continental system. Napoleon ceded to Alexander Finland (which the Russians occupied in 1808, and have ever kept since), and besides Denmark was interested in the robbery of Sweden by making Norway over to her. Thus Napoleon succeeded in completely breaking down this old antagonist of Russia.

27 September 1808. Napoleon and Alexander at the Erfurt Congress. Never before had any man done so much to exalt the Russian power as Napoleon did from 1807-1812. From 1808 to 1811 the Poles were consumed by Napoleon in Spain. For the first time in their history they were prostituted as the mercenaries of despotism. Of the army of 90,000, formed in the duchy, so many were despatched to Spain, that the duchy was denuded of troops when the Austrian archduke Ferdinand invaded it in 1809.

1809, April. While Napoleon marched upon Vienna, the archduke Ferdinand upon Warsaw. The Poles invade Galicia, force the archduke to withdraw from Warsaw (1 June); the Russians, Napoleon's allies, enter Galicia to assist in fact the Austrians against the Poles.

14 October 1809: The Polish provinces called by the Austrians "New Galicia", together with the district of Zamojsk, was reunited to the duchy of Warsaw. Napoleon left to Austria old Galicia, after having separated from it, in order to make it over to Russia, the district of Tarnopol, part of old Podolia P7 What we have to think of this Fifth Partition (Lelewel) may be seen from a satirical letter of Czar Alexander I to prince Kourakin, published at the time in

[^1]: a A. C. Thibaudeau, Le Consulat et l'Empire, ou Histoire de la France et de Napoléon Bonaparte de 1799 à 1815, t. 6 (Empire—t. 3), p. 222, Paris, 1835.— Ed.





**[p. 326]**

"The treaty is being ratified between France and Austria, and consequently our hostile movements against the latter cease simultaneously. According to the principles of that peace, Austria remains, as before, our neighbour by her possession of Galicia, and the Polish provinces, instead of being united into one single body, are divided for ever between the three crowns. Thus the dreams of a political revolution in Poland have vanished. The present order of things fixes the limits between Poland and Russia who has not only not suffered any loss in this affair, but on the contrary extends her dominion" (au sein de la Pologne) "in the very heart of Poland."0

The Poles now demanded the restoration of the name of Poland for the duchy. The Czar opposed. On October 20, 1809, Champagny, minister of foreign affairs, addressed a note, by order of Napoleon, to the Russian government, in which it was stated that he approved the effacing [of] the name of Pole and Poland, not only from every public act, but even from history. This was to prepare his proposal—after his divorce with Joséphine—for the hand of the Czar's sister/

4 January 1810: Secret convention between Napoleon's ambas- sador Caulaincourt and count Rumjanzev, to this effect:

"Art. 1. The kingdom of Poland shall never be re-established. Art. 2. The name of Poland and Pole shall never be applied to any of the parties that previously constituted that kingdom, and they shall disappear from every public or official act." Besides "the Grand duchy shall never be aggrandised by the annexation of any of the old Polish provinces; the orders of Polish chivalry shall be abolished; and, finally, all these engagements shall be binding on the king of Saxony, Grand Duke of Warsaw, as on Napoleon himself." (Thiers, Consulat et l'Empire, XI, [357, 358].)

It was after the negotiations for that convention that Napoleon proposed for the hand of Alexander's sister.228 Napoleon's irritation and wounded self-love at the hesitation of the Czar (who delayed declaring himself from middle of December to middle of January, under various pretexts), and the repugnance of the Czar's mother,d made Napoleon look elsewhere for a wife, and break off negotiations.

[^1]: "The Emperor Napoleon," says Crétineau-Joly: "Histoire de l'église Romaine en face de la Révolution", "did not allow his policy to lose itself in a phraseology sentimentally revolutionary. With one stroke of the pen his minister effaced, even

[^2]: a Sankt-Peterburgskiye vedomosti, November 9, 1809 and Moskovskiye vedomosti, November 17, 1809.— Ed.

[^3]: b Quoted from Sawaszkiewicz, op. cit., pp. 82-83.— Ed. c Anna Pavlovna.— Ed. d Maria Fedorovna.-—Ed.



After his marriage with the daughter of the Austrian Emperor* Napoleon had a new opportunity for the restoration of Poland. I quote from a French author, whose history is an apotheosis of Napoleon. Norvins says:

"Napoleon was enabled, in 1810, to realise, at last, that noble project", viz. the restoration of Poland, "because Austria offered him both the Galicias, but he refused, in order not to have a war with Russia who prepared war against him the very day after the conclusion >f the treaty of Tilsit."b

After what has preceded, it is almost superfluous to say that Napoleon made his war of 1812 against Russia not out of any regard for Poland. He was forced into it by Russia who on 19/31 December 1810 allowed the import of colonial commodities in neutral ships, prohibited some French commodities, hardly taxed others, and made not the least concession despite all the diplomatic efforts of Napoleon at preventing the war. He must either resign his continental system, or make war against Russia.

28 June 1812. Day of entry of Napoleon at Vilna. On that day the existence of confederate Poland (that is Poland united to Lithuania) was proclaimed at the diet of Warsaw, and a national war. Napoleon told the deputies of Warsaw, that he did not want a national war. (Charras tellsc us that by his hatred of such a war etc. 100 days.)229

[^1]: Written in December 1864 Reproduced from the manuscript

[^2]: First published in K. Marx, Manuskripte über die polnische Frage, S.-Gravenhage, 1961

[^3]: a Marie Louise, daughter of Francis I.— Ed. b J. M. Norvins' Histoire de Napoléon is quoted from Sawaszkiewicz, op. cit., p. 84.— Ed.

[^4]: c J. B. Charras, Histoire de la campagne de 1815. Waterloo, Londres, 1858.— Ed.



