---
Volume: 20
Document_Title: "5. K. Marx. Memorandum to Hermann Jung About the Conflict in the Paris Section "
Page_Range: "364-370"
---

# 5. K. Marx. Memorandum to Hermann Jung About the Conflict in the Paris Section 



**[p. 331]**

Karl Marx

[MEMORANDUM TO HERMANN JUNG ABOUT THE CONFLICT IN THE PARIS SECTION238]

Sub-Committee Sitting. 4 March. He a wanted already to move his resolution, according to which the Paris Administration was to be composed as follows: Fribourg, Vinçard, Limousin, 3 members to be designated by Lefort, Schily as a sort of umpire.

Sub-Committee Sitting. 6 March. He reproduces that motion. Sitting of the Central Council. 7 March. He allowed the appoint- ment of Schily to pass without division, that is, he accepted it, speaking in a parliamentary sense.

After this had taken place, he writes in hot-haste to Paris, even before he had the Resolutions in his hand. He expected, as he said (14 March), that the Paris Administration would protest against Schily. As by Resolution V (Resolution V. The Administration at Paris having expressed its readiness to acknowledge a direct delegation from the Central Council, the Council accordingly appoints Citizen Schily to be its delegate to the said Administration.0) Schily was only accredited to that Administration, his appointment could only be protested against by^them.

Having failed with them, Lubez conspires with the brothers of his lodge, to declare Schily's appointment the cause of their withdrawal.239

[^1]: a Victor Le Lubez.— Ed. h See this volume, p. 83.— Ed.





**[p. 332]**

On the remark of Mr. Fox (last sitting of Central Council) that this forgetfulness of Schily's nationality on 4 and 6 March, and his vivid recollection of it on March 14 could only be accounted for by his wish to revenge himself because of the slight he thought Mr. Lefort was put to, he accepted this plain explana- tion.

His mean insinuations:

1-stly) As if the introductory words of Resolution V had been inserted as a catch-vote on false pretences. These words rest upon facts, Mr. Schilys open letter, brought over by Lubez, read on March 7 in presence of Tolain, etc.; secondly Mr. Schily's report, communicated to the Sub-Committee; lastly the resolutions passed by the meeting of 24th February at Paris.240 The words were only inserted to avoid even the appearance of dictatorship on the part of the Central Council.

2-ndly) There had on March 7 time been killed by personal altercations in order to hurry the acceptance of the 3 last resolutions; carry them by surprise.

3-rdly) Mr. Schily was no ouvrier. Rejected as principle by Resolution II.a Schily had only to act privately with the Paris Administration; Lefort was to act upon the public stage before the world in the name of the Association. The cases not analo- gous.

As to Lefort. He asks us to appoint him Defender General in the French press. We do so because we suppose him to act in understanding, and in concurrence with Tolain, etc. This nomination so obtained, he turns afterwards against us into a legal title. On Tolain's letter, and before Lubez was sent to Paris, we cancel this appointment, as far as Mr. Lefort's name and public position is concerned. (We reduce it to this: he is allowed to write articles not signed by himself, but by an ouvrier—a thing which he might have done without our consent.) That such is the case, results from an angry letter he then wrote to Lubez, but he yielded. The Paris meeting of February 24th committed only this blunder that it protested

[^1]: a The concluding part of Resolution II reads: the Council "protests that it does not sanction the principle that none but an ouvrier is admissible as an official in our Society".— Ed.



t Ji. ..«**>• s~r^K J ^ M ^ 4k k-** V ^ ~ i ^ ^

k.

[^1]: The last page of Marx's memorandum to Jung about the conflict in the Paris Section







**[p. 335]**

He and his man Lubez say that he is not moved by personal ambition. He only wants a political guarantee. Well. We appoint

Vinçard, a man who represents more guarantees than Lefort et Le Lubez put together. Having been appointed, Mr. Vinçard turns into a nonentity for Lefort and Lubez. The only thing they could say against his proposal by Tolain, etc., afterwards confirmed by us, is this: that it was not at the right time communicated to Lefort. Thus this miserable point of etiquette is their last pretence of opposition, etc.

International character of the Society endangered, and power of the Council to appoint ambassadors.

The class character of this movement. Républicains formalistes.

1) Pas de résolution contre Schily; Marx déclare la nomination de Mons. Schily comme non-avenue et qu'il l'avait seulement acceptée parce qu'elle a passé unanimement?

2) The instructions given to Le Lubez to communicate to the French Administration and Lefort (in the sitting of Council,15 7th March), run thus: "In case no compromise be arrived at, the Council declare that the group Lefort, after having taken out their cards of membership, will have the power, under our Statutes (see §7), to form a local branch society."1

[^1]: a "No resolution against Schily; Marx declares that appointment of M. Schily is cancelled and that he accepted it only because it was passed unanimously." The phrase is written in French in Jung's hand; the words "declares that appointment of M. Schily is cancelled and that" is written by Marx.— Ed.

[^2]: b This part of the phrase is written in Jung's hand; the word "private" at its beginning is crossed out; the rest of the paragraph is in Marx's hand.— Ed.

[^3]: c See this volume, p. 83.— Ed.





**[p. 336]**

(There was the other resolution passed that Lubez had to communicate literally to both sides the whole of the resolution.)

••Written on March 16-18, 1865 Reproduced from the manuscript

First published, in Russian, in Generalny Sovet Pervogo Internatsionala. 1864-1866, Moscow, 1961

