---
Volume: 20
Document_Title: "7. K. Marx. Notes for the Report on Value, Price and Profit "
Page_Range: "371-372"
---

# 7. K. Marx. Notes for the Report on Value, Price and Profit 



**[p. 338]**

Karl Marx

[NOTES FOR THE REPORT ON VALUE, PRICE AND PROFIT243]

1) A general rise in the rate of wages will, broadly speaking, produce a general fall in the rate of profits, leaving the values of commodities unaltered.

2) Under very exceptional circumstances, only a general rise of wages could be realised. If obtained, it could only [be] lost under very exceptional circumstances. The general tendency of produc- tion, upon its present basis, is not to raise, but to lower wages. Even if a general rise in the rate of wages should obtain for any longer period, it would not abolish but only mitigate the slavery of the wages' labourer, that is, of the mass of the people.

3) Trades' Unions work well as far as they counteract, if even temporarily, the tendency to a fall in the general rate of wages, and as far as they tend to shorten and regulate the time of labour, in other words, the extent of the working day. They work well as far as they are a means of organising the working class as a class. They fail accidentally, by an injudicious use of their power, and they fail generally by accepting the present relations of capital and labour as permanent instead of working for their abolition.

[^1]: Written in June 1865 Reproduced from the manuscript

[^2]: First published, in Russian, in Generalny Sovet Pervogo Internatsionala. 1864-1866, Moscow, 1961



