---
Volume: 20
Document_Title: " 1. From the Minute Book of the General Council. Central Council Meetings ( October- November 1864) "
Page_Range: "384-386"
---

#  1. From the Minute Book of the General Council. Central Council Meetings ( October- November 1864) 



**[p. 351]**

FROM THE MINUTE BOOK OF THE GENERAL COUNCIL2

CENTRAL, COUNCIL MEETINGS

(October-November 1864)

October 5, 1864

The first meeting of the Committee, elected by the public meeting held at St. Martin's Hall on the 28th of September 1864, was held at 18, Greek St., Soho, on October 5th, 1864, and on the motion of Mr. Weston, seconded by Mr. Whitlock, Mr. Odger was voted to the chair.

The Chairman said the first business was the appointment of a secretary to the Committee when Dr. Marx proposed and Mr. Whitlock seconded that Mr. Cremer be appointed.

Mr. Cremer would prefer the appointment of M. Le Lubez who was he believed in every way qualified to fill the office.

M. Le Lubez having for various reasons declined the office, Mr. Cremer was unanimously elected. []

A very long and animated discussion then took place with regard to the principles on which the Association should be based, and ultimately on the motion of Mr. Dell, seconded by Mr. Trim- lett, a sub-committee of 9 were appointed to draw up a platform of principles, such principles to be discussed at the next meeting of the General Committee.

The following were then elected as the Sub-Committee: Messrs. Whitlock, Weston, Dr. Marx, M. Le Lubez, Major Wolff, Mr. Hol- torp, and Mr. Pidgeon, the Chairman and Secretary to be members by virtue of their offices.

November 1, 1864

Dr. Marx then read the Preamble, Address and Rules which the Sub-Committee had definitely agreed on and which they recom- mended to the Central Council for adoption.

[^1]: 14—137





**[p. 352]**

Messrs. Carter, Grossmith and others spoke in favour of the Address.

Mr. Whitlock proposed, Mr. Carter seconded: That the Address do pass as read.

As an amendment Mr. Worley proposed and Mr. Wheeler seconded: That the word "profitmongers" be erased.

For amendment—11, for resolution—10. The amendment being carried, the word "profitmongers" was struck out and the Address was unanimously agreed to.

Dr. Marx then read the Preamble, and on the motion of Mr. Wheeler, seconded by Blackmore, it was carried unanimously.

The Rules were then discussed, and on the proposition of Mr. Dell, seconded by Whitlock, the Preamble, Address and Rules were unanimously agreed to.a

Mr. Wheeler then proposed and Mr. Dell seconded that the thanks of the Central Council be given to Dr. Marx, Mr. Weston and M. Le Lubez for their exertions and the production of so admirable an address. Carried unanimously.

[^1]: First published, in Russian, in Osnovaniye Reproduced from the Minute Pervogo Internatsionala, Moscow, 1934 Book

[^2]: a See this volume, pp. 5-16.— Ed.



