---
Volume: 20
Document_Title: "2. From the Minute Book of the General Council. Central Council Meetings ( November- December 1864) "
Page_Range: "386-389"
---

# 2. From the Minute Book of the General Council. Central Council Meetings ( November- December 1864) 



**[p. 353]**

FROM THE MINUTE BOOK OF THE GENERAL COUNCIL

CENTRAL COUNCIL MEETINGS250

(November-December 1864)

November 8, 1864

Dr. Marx proposed, Mr. Jung seconded, that any person not being able to attend the meetings cannot be a member of this Council.3

Dr. Marx called attention to the reports in the Morning Star and Bee-Hiveh of the last meeting and complained that in such reports one of the fundamental principles of the Association, viz., truth, had been violated; he also complained of the Address having been published without the sanction of the Committee.251

The Secretary11 explained that he had nothing to do with the reports, at which he was very much surprised; he believed Mr. Hartwell had supplied the reports in question.

To obviate the recurrence of such erroneous reports Dr. Marx proposed, Mr. Fontana seconded:

That the Secretary purchase a manifold writer and for the future all reports for the press be sent through the Secretary.

Mr. Aldovrandi proposed and Mr. Carter seconded: That Dr. Marx be requested to correct the typographical errors in the Address and that 500 copies of the Address, Programme0

and Rules be printed. Carried unanimously.

[^1]: a This resolution as published in The Bee-Hive Newspaper see on p. 17 of this volume.— Ed.

[^2]: b Reports on the Central Council meeting of November 1, 1864 in The Morning Star, No. 2703, November 2, 1864 and The Bee-Hive Newspaper, No. 160, Novem- ber 5, 1864.— Ed.

[^3]: c W. R. Cremer.— Ed. d A reference to the Preamble of the Provisional Rules of the International.— Ed.

[^4]: 14*





**[p. 354]**

Mr. Cremer then proposed, M. Le Lubez seconded: That 1,000 [copies of the] Address and Rules be printed. Carried unanimous- ly. []

A long discussion then took place with regard to the terms on which organised bodies should be received into the Association, and ultimately on the motion of Dr. Marx, seconded by Mr. Blackmore, the question was adjourned to the next meeting.3

November 29, 1864

Dr. Marx then brought up the report of the Sub-Committee, also a draft of the address which had been drawn up for presentation to the people of America congratulating them on their having re-elected Abraham Lincoln as President. The address is äs follows and was unanimously agreed tob: []

Mr. Wheeler proposed, Le Lubez seconded: That the names of all those who are present be appended to the address, also those who are absent and are willing to endorse the views set forth in the address.0

December 13, 1864

Mr. Fox then read the address which he proposed should be adopted by the British Section of the Association and then transmitted to the National Government of Poland.252

A long discussion took place consequent on certain statements contained in the address and which statements were opposed by Mr. Jung, Le Lubez, Dr. Marx and supported by Mr. Carter.

Mr. Fox replied defending the statement that the traditional foreign policy of France had been favourable to the restoration and independence of Poland.

Mr. Cremer thought it important that the truth of this statement should be ascertained and would propose that the further

[^1]: 11 Resolution on this point proposed by Marx and adopted by the Central Council on November 22, 1864 see on p. 18 of this volume.— Ed.

[^2]: b See this volume, pp. 19-21.— Ed. c The report on this meeting, published in The Bee-Hive Newspaper, No. 164, December 3, 1864, states that the resolution was also supported by Marx.— Ed.



Mr. Morgan seconded the motion. Carried unanimously.

December 20, 1864

Mr. Cremer read a letter from Mr. Adams, the United States Minister, suggesting that the address to President Lincoln be sent to him, Mr. Adams, instead of being brought.

Dr. Marx proposed, Mr. Fontana seconded, that the Secretary send the address to Mr. Adams.

Mr. Worley proposed, Mr. Wheeler seconded, that Mr. Adams be again appealed to receive the deputation.

For amendment—5, for resolution—13. Mr. Fox then resumed his defence of the address to the Polish National Government and in an able address contended for the truth of the assertions therein contained, after some discussion it was agreed to adjourn the question till next meeting.

December 29, 1864

Mr. Fox stated in the absence of Dr. Marx he should defer any discussion on the address to the National Government of Poland.

[^1]: First published, in Russian, in Generalny Reproduced from the Minute Sovet Pervogo Internatsionala. 1864-1866, Book Moscow, 1961

[^2]: a The report about this Central Council meeting, published in The Bee-Hive, No. 166, December 17, 1864, has:

[^3]: "Mr. Fox then brought up the address from the British Section of the Association to the National Government of Poland, when a very long and animated discussion took place, in which the following members took part—Messrs. Le

[^4]: Lubez, Holtorp, Cremer, Marx, Carter, Weston, Jung, the latter opposing a statement set forth in the address, viz., that the traditional foreign policy of France had been favourable to the restoration and independence of Poland. Karl Marx and Mr. Le Lubez also agreeing that while the foreign policy of France had appeared to favour such an object, in reality [itj had not, especially during the time of the first Napoleon, when the Poles had been used for his military ambition, and then cast aside. Mr. Fox defended the address and ably contended for the retention of the passage referring to the traditional foreign policy of France towards Poland, and it was ultimately agreed as the question was an important one that its further consideration be deferred till the next meeting."—Ed.



