---
Volume: 20
Document_Title: "3. From the Minute Book of the General Council. Central Council Meetings ( January- February 1865) "
Page_Range: "389-393"
---

# 3. From the Minute Book of the General Council. Central Council Meetings ( January- February 1865) 



**[p. 356]**

FROM THE MINUTE BOOK OF THE GENERAL COUNCIL

CENTRAL COUNCIL MEETINGS

(January-February 1865)

January 3, 1865

Dr. Marx handed in a German translation of the Address and Rules of the Association and stated that 50,000 copies had been circulated in Germany253; he also stated that a branch of the Association was being formed in Switzerland. []

Dr. Marx resumed the adjourned debate on the Address which it is proposed to send to the National Government of Poland, and in a very able historical resume argued that the traditional foreign policy of France had not been favourable to the restoration and independence of Poland." The Address of Dr. Marx was pregnant with important historical facts which would be very valuable in a published form.

Mr. Fox in reply stated he did not defend the foreign policy of modern France; all he contended for was that the foreign policy of old France had been favourable to the Independence of Poland.

The following was then proposed by Mr. Jung, seconded by Le Lubez and unanimously adopted:

That the views expressed in the address concerning the French foreign policy towards Poland not being borne out by historical facts, that it be amended so as to accord with the truths of history.

January 24, 1865

Correspondence was read [] by Dr. Marx from the Com- positors' Society of Berlin, also from the General German Working Men's Association, both expressing their entire concurrence with the principles of the International Working Men's Association and

[^1]: See this volume, pp. 311-27.— Ed.





**[p. 357]**

Dr. Marx also read a very interesting letter from the military commanderb of St. Louis,254 and a letter from M. Tolain having reference to the position they occupied in Paris in relation to International Working Men's Association.

A discussion then took place concerning certain statements or rumours in regard to M. Tolain, and it was agreed that before any cards of membership were sent to Paris that the truth of such rumours should be investigated.255

January 31, 1865

A discussion then took place regarding the period when the subscriptions of members should begin and end when Citizen Marx proposed and Citizen Whitlock seconded: That subscriptions begin on the First of January and end on the 31st of December.

Citizen Cremer then proposed and Citizen Fontana seconded: That those who have been elected members of the Central Council but have not taken out their cards of membership by the 1st of March next, shall after that date be considered as excluding themselves from the Central Council. []

Citizen Marx then read an extract from the St. Louis Daily Press eulogistic of our Address and Rules and expressing their regret at not being able to publish the whole.c256 []

The Secretary*1 then introduced the question of the suffrage, stating there was an attempt being made to organise a meeting for manhood suffrage and he thought the Council ought to watch the preliminary proceedings and for that purpose would propose that a deputation be appointed to attend the preliminary meeting which will be shortly held.

[^1]: a The author's draft of this report see on p. 328 of this volume.— Ed. b J. Weydemeyer.— Ed. c The Bee-Hive Newspaper, No. 173, February 4, 1865 has: "Dr. Marx also read an extract from the St. Louis Daily Press (America) approving the Address, and rules of the International, and regretting their limited space would not allow the entire publication of the Address, which, however, they printed in part, in proof of the deep interest which the Association has excited. It may be mentioned that hundreds of cards have been sent for from Paris, Belgium, &c; and, although in some places on the Continent working men are prohibited from openly associating together for such principles as the International has in view, yet even in those places they are exerting themselves to find some plan whereby they may affiliate themselves to the Association without coming within the power of the law." — Ed.

[^2]: d W. R. Cremer.— Ed.





**[p. 358]**

February 7, 1865

Citizen Cremer gave the report of the Sub-Committee; they recommended to the Central Council the following:

[1] That separate cards be issued to societies forming the Association, such cards to be of a general character stating that the society whose name it bore had affiliated itself to the International Associationa;

2nd. That all the money subscribed in England for individual cards be sent to the Central Council, but if any branch of the Association shall incur any legitimate expense, the Central Council may, if they deem it judicious, grant a sum for the liquidation of such debt;

3rd. That our Continental brethren be supplied with cards at Is. each, which sums to be sent to the Central Council.

They were proposed by Citizen Cremer, seconded by Citizen Marx and carried unanimously. []

Citizen Marx then proposed and Citizen Wheeler seconded, that Citizen Lefort be appointed as our literary defence in Paris. Carried unanimously.

February 14, 1865

Citizen Marx then stated that a branch of the International Working Men's Association had been formed in Manchester, he also read a letter from Mr. Ernest Jones on the subject of manhood suffrage.2"8

The letter was fully discussed. Citizen Marx also read an extract from the German Starh which stated that the Swiss were interesting themselves on behalf of the Association and that a meeting of the Republican League and French Swiss Society had been held; they had accepted the rules and would form branches throughout Switzerland with a central council in Geneva.

[^1]: a See this volume, pp. 369-70.— Ed. b A reference to J. Ph. Becker's "Muthiges Kämpfen" in Nordstern, No. 296, February 11, 1865.— Ed.





**[p. 359]**

On the motion of Whitlock, seconded by Citizen Marx, Citizen Le Lubez then read some correspondence from Paris which referred to unpleasant proceedings having taken place there, and as it was generally agreed that it would be difficult to settle the differences by correspondence, it was decided on the proposition of Citizen Whitlock, seconded by Fontana, that Le Lubez be sent to Paris to investigate the differences existing between Citizen Lefort and Citizen Fribourg.

Citizen Marx proposed, Citizen Lessner seconded, that Mr. Schily be appointed to co-operate with Citizen Le Lubez in settling the differences.3 Carried unanimously.

It was also agreed that the delegates be invested with power to act as circumstances may determine.

February 28, 1865

Citizen Marx read correspondence from Manchester regarding the suffrage,259 he also stated that he had withdrawn from any connection with the Social-Demokrat!"

[^1]: First published, in Russian, in Generality Reproduced from the Minute Sovet Pervogo Internatsionala. 1864-1866, Book Moscow, 1961

[^2]: a See this volume, p. 329.— Ed. b Ibid., pp. 87-90.— Ed.



