---
Volume: 20
Document_Title: "6. From the Minute Book of the General Council. Central Council Meetings ( March- early July 1865) "
Page_Range: "396-402"
---

# 6. From the Minute Book of the General Council. Central Council Meetings ( March- early July 1865) 



**[p. 363]**

FROM THE MINUTE BOOK OF THE GENERAL COUNCIL

CENTRAL COUNCIL MEETINGS

(March-early July 1865)

March 7, 1865

Citizen Fox then read to the Council the report of the Committee and the resolutions recommended by it in reference to the imbroglio in Paris.263

It was agreed to consider the resolutions seriatim?

March 14, 1865

Citizen Le Lubez read a letter from Citizen Lefort. He also stated it was a mistake to suppose he had been or was now in any way prejudiced in favour of Lefort or Tolain. He also read a letter signed by Citizens Bocquet, Dénouai, and himself, protesting against the former decision of the Central Council in turning out Citizen Lefort, and another letter signed by Citizens Bordage, Leroux, Dénouai, Bocquet, and himself, protesting against the appointment by the Central Council of anyone not a Frenchman as the delegate to the Administration in Paris.

Citizen Marx stated the protest was unnecessary as he, Citizen Marx, was certain that Citizen Schily would not accept the appointment if there was the slightest opposition to him: it was against Citizen Schily's wish that he had been elected.264

The President suggested the re-opening of the whole question. This was opposed by Citizens Howell, Kaub and Cremer.

The following resolution was then proposed by Citizen Weston, seconded by Citizen Morgan and carried unanimously:

[^1]: a Here follows the text of the five resolutions on the conflict in the Paris section drawn up by Marx on behalf of the Standing Committee (see this volume, pp. 82-83) and record of the discussion on each of them.— Ed.





**[p. 364]**

Citizen Weston gave notice of the following propositions for discussion at the earliest opportunity:

1st. Would not an advance of wages of any particular section of industry be secured at the cost of the other sections.

2nd. Would not the supposed advantages of a general rise in wages be negatived by the corresponding advance in prices.

April 11, 1865

The situations of corresponding secretary for France, also for Belgium, having become vacant consequent on the resignation of Citizen Lubez, Citizen Jung proposed, Morgan seconded, that Citizen Marx be corresponding secretary pro tern for Belgium.265

Carried unanimously.

Citizen Marx proposed, Citizen Cremer seconded, that Citizen Dupont be appointed corresponding secretary for France. Carried unanimously. []

Citizen Marx stated that one of the 32 members who had met recently in Paris had been prosecuted by the French Government for publishing a pamphlet.3266 []

Citizen Longmaid proposed and Citizen Marx seconded: That the Secretary write to those members of the Central Council who have not taken their cards of membership and inform them that unless they do so on or before April 25, that they will be considered as wishing to withdraw and their names will accordingly be struck off the roll of Councilmen. This resolution was considered by the Central Council necessary inasmuch as complaints had been made that a former resolution of a similar character had never been communicated officially to absentee members.

The resolution was carried unanimously. It was then agreed to that the proposition of Citizen Weston on the question of wages b should come on for discussion on May 2nd and that members of the Association were eligible to attend the discussion, also that any member of the Central Council is at liberty to introduce a friend.267

[^1]: a Ch. Longuet, "La Dynastie des la Palice", La Rive Gauche, March 12, 1865.— Ed.

[^2]: b See this page, above.— Ed.





**[p. 365]**

Citizen Wheeler proposed, Citizen Marx seconded,' that Conti- nental corresponding members be ex officio members of the. Central Council. Carried unanimously. []

Citizen Marx read a letter from Ernest Jones on the suffrage,268

he also read a letter from Citizen Fontaine asking for a declaration of principles. Questions in said letter referred to Sub- Committee.269 He also read a letter from the compositors at Leipsic referring to their strike and expressing a hope that the London compositors would assist them.

Citizens Fox, Marx and Cremer were deputed to attend the Compositors' Society.

May 2, 1865

Marx gave a report from Paris stating there were changes about being made there in the Administration which when made would be fully reported to the Central Council.271[]

Cremer referred to the assassination of President Lincoln and proposed that an address should be drawn up and sent to the American people expressing the views of the Central Council on recent events in America, more particularly referring to the murder of Mr. Lincoln.

The resolution was seconded by Lucraft and carried unani- mously.

Weston then read a portion of his paper on the question of wages; the remainder was adjourned to the next sitting.

May 9, 1865

Citizen Fox read a letter from Citizen Vinçard who had been appointed on the Paris Administration, stating that the state of his health would preclude him from accepting the appointment, also expressing his best wishes for the success of the Association and regretting that he could not assist to make it so.

Jung proposed, Marx seconded: That the General Secretary write to Citizen Vinçard thanking him for his past services and hoping that he will, as far as [is] consistent with his health, do his utmost for the interest of the Association. Carried unanimously.

Citizen Marx read the address to President Johnson in reference to the assassination of Abraham Lincoln/1

[^1]: a See this volume, pp. 99-100.— Ed.



Citizen Howell, who had been appointed to attend with Citizen Cremer the Reform Conference in Manchester on the 15th and 16th of May, having been elected by the Reform League as its secretary and being deputed by that body to attend said conference,2'2 his appointment from this Council was therefore on the proposition of Citizen Wheeler, seconded by Citizen Marx, cancelled and Citizen Odger was elected in his stead. []

Citizen Fox proposed, Bolleter seconded: That Weston's question for discussion stand adjourned to Saturday, May 20th, at 8 o'clock, the entire sitting to be devoted to the discussion.2'' Carried unanimously.

May 16, 1865

Cit. Marx stated that he had sent to the New-York Tribune a copy of the Society's address to President Johnson.2'4 He also mentioned that there had been an immense public meeting in Geneva in regard to the assassination of the late lamented President of the United States; that the Society's correspondent, Philipp Becker, had spoken at the same, and remarked upon the international character of the meeting.

Cit. Becker then proceeded to state that the Working Men's International Association was at the head of the new movement for popular rights,3 which statement was received with cheers by the meeting.

May 23, 1865

Citizen Weston resumed the adjourned debate on his proposi- tion regarding wages. He was followed by Citizen Marx who opposed Citizen Weston's views as did Citizen Wheeler, after which Cremer proposed the adjournment of the debate till the 30th.b

Carried unanimously.

[^1]: a The reference is to the electoral reform movement in England.— Ed.

[^2]: b The point was not debated on that date.— Ed.



Citizen Marx recommended that the Council should concentrate its efforts upon promoting the success of the Working Men's Congress to be held in Belgium this year.2"

June 6, 1865

Citizen Marx stated that when Citizen Weston's propositions are again discussed he should read a paper in reply and propose a series of counter-resolutions.

June 20, 1865 Citizen Marx then read a part of his paper in reply to Citizen Weston's propositions on the question of wages:'

Citizen Weston thought that in the part of the paper read by Citizen Marx nothing had been advanced or proved which in any way affected the principles he affirmed.

Citizen Cremer thought Citizen Marx had given two or three practical illustrations or rather facts which completely destroyed the positions affirmed by Citizen Weston.

The question was adjourned till June 27th at 9 o'clock. Citizen Marx will then read the latter part of his paper and propose a series of counter-resolutions.

June 27, 1865 Citizen Marx then, after recapitulating the principal points in the first part of his paper which lie had read at the last sitting, proceeded to read the latter part, at the conclusion of which Citizen Cremer said there were many who would like to have both papers — of Citizen Weston and Citizen Marx's reply — printed, but he hardly knew how the expense was to be met.

Citizen Weston questioned the correctness of the statement contained in Citizen Marx's paper having reference to agricultural labourers.

On the motion of Citizen Eccarius the debate was adjourned to the next sitting to be opened by Citizen Eccarius.

July 4, 1865 Citizen Eccarius resumed the adjourned debate on Citizen Weston's propositions, arguing against Citizen Weston's views.

[^1]: See this volume, pp. 101-49.— F.d.





**[p. 368]**

Citizen Carter altogether ignored the statistics of political economists and preferred to look at and judge man by what we knew of him.

Citizen Kaub proposed the adjournment of the debate till the next sitting. Carried unanimously.276

First published, in Russian, in Generality Reproduced from the Minute Sovet, Pervogo Internatsionala. 1864-1866, Book Moscow, 1961

