---
Volume: 20
Document_Title: "7. A Card Issued to Societies Forming the Association "
Page_Range: "402-408"
---

# 7. A Card Issued to Societies Forming the Association 



**[p. 369]**

[A CARD ISSUED TO SOCIETIES FORMING THE ASSOCIATION277]

INTERNATIONAL WORKING MEN'S ASSOCIATION

FOUNDED ON 28th SEPTEMBER, 1864, AT A PUBLIC MEETING HELD AT ST. MARTIN'S HALL,

LONDON

Central Council, 18 Greek Street, London, W.

The Address and Statutes issued by the Provisional Central Council fully explain the Association's objects and aspirations, which, however, may be summed up in a few words. It aims at the protection, advancement, and complete emancipation, economical and political, of the Working Classes. As a means to this great end it will promote the establishment of solidarity between the manifold divisions of labour in EACH COUNTRY, and the co-operation of the Working Classes of DIFFERENT COUN- TRIES.

Its Organisation, with a Central Medium at London, and numerous affiliated Branches in Europe and America, will assist in uniting the Working Classes of all countries in a perpetual bond of fraternal co-operation. Annual Congresses of Delegates, elected by the affiliated Working Men themselves, will create for the Working Classes a public and powerful European representation.

The Executive Council on behalf of the Operative Bricklayers' Society, assembled at the 25, Hatfield Street, Blackfriars, London,3 having subscribed to the principles, and applied to enter the fraternal bond, are hereby admitted as an affiliated Branch of the Association.

Dated the 21st of February 1865

G. Odger, President of Council G. W. Wheeler, Honorary Treasurer

E. Dupont, Corresponding Secretary for France. K. Marx, do Germany.

[^1]: a Italicised words and "21st of February 1865" are in handwriting.— Ed.





**[p. 370]**

Published as a leaflet in London in the Reproduced from the leaflet summer of 1865



C E N T R A L COUNCIL,

18 GREEK STREET, LONDON, W.

o+o

Trade, Friendly, or any Working Men's Societies are invited to join in their corporate capacity, the only conditions being that the Members subscribe to the principles of the Association, and pay for the declaration of their enrolment (which is varnished and mounted on canvas and roller), the sum of 5s. No contributions are dir- manc Ud from Societies joining, it being left to their means and dis- cretion to contribute or not, or as they may from time to time deem tha efforts of the Association worthy of support.

The Central Council will be pleased to send the Address and Rules, which fully explain the principles and aims of the Associa- tion, to any Society applying for them : and, if within the London district, deputations will gladly attend to afford any further infor- mation that may be required. Societies joining are entitled to send a representative to the Central Council. The amount of contri- bution for individual members is la. per annum, with Id. for Card of Membership ; which may be obtained,- with every information concerning the Association, by applying to the Honorary Secretary, or at the Central Council's Meetings, which are held every Tuesday Evening, at 18 Greek Street, from Eight to Ten o'clock.

[^1]: E. DWOli T, Corresponding Secretary for France. K. MARX, „ „ Germany.

[^2]: E. Ho LTOar, „ „ Poland. H. IONO, „ „ Switzerland. L. LEWIS, „ „ America.

[^3]: 0. ODCER, President of Central Council G. W. WHEELER, Hon. Treasurer. W. R. CREMER, Hon. Gen. See.

[^4]: Central Council's Address to working men's societies



FORM OF APPLICATION

FOR SOCIETIES WISHING TO JOIN THE

itrtmtationl Ifiorkmg Uteir's ^association, s

-o+o+o We, the Members of the

at the.

declare our entire concurrence with the principles and

aim» of the International Working Men's Association, and pledge ourselves to disseminate and reduce

them to practice; and as an earnest of our sincerity we

hereby apply to the Central Council to be admitted

into the fraternal bond as an affiliated Branch of the

Association.

Signed on behalf of the Members, in number. %

Secretary.

President.



