---
Volume: 20
Document_Title: "9. To the Working Men of Great Britain and Ireland "
Page_Range: "411-413"
---

# 9. To the Working Men of Great Britain and Ireland 



**[p. 378]**

TO THE WORKING MEN OF GREAT BRITAIN AND IRELAND

Fellow Working Men! It is a fact that amongst the thousands of daily and weekly newspapers existing at the present day, those that advocate the interests of the working class and defend the cause of labour might be counted at your fingers' ends. Nor is this to be wondered at when you bear in mind that, almost without exception, they are the property of capitalists, established for their own use, either for political party purposes or as commercial speculations. Thus, the publicity of matters concerning our political enfranchisement, our social emancipation, or our material well-being as hired wages labourers depends to a great extent on sufferance, and when now and then an editor, in his superior wisdom, takes it into his head to side with us, it is frequently doubtful whether decided opposition would not be preferable to the favour bestowed. This is a very unsatisfactory state of things for a body of men like the working men of this country with high and well-founded aspirations to raise themselves in the political and social scale.

Benjamin Franklin is reported to have said,

and this is precisely what we must do. If your expected elevation is not to prove a delusion and a mockery—we must take the work of our salvation into our own hands, and this can only be done by acquiring a more prominent position in the press and on the platform than we have hitherto done.

In order that we may guard against deceitful friends, we require a press of our own. To this end we must establish and support as many newspapers and periodicals as we can, wherein we ourselves

[^1]: "If you want a thing done, and well done, do it yourself",



To accomplish this, a number of well-known advocates of working-class interests have established a Limited Liability Associa- tion, entitled "The Industrial Newspaper Company", with a nominal capital of £1,000, divided into snares of £1 each; 2s. 6d. to be paid on application, and 2s. 6d. on allotment per share.

The Company have succeeded in purchasing the copyright, goodwill, &c, of the Miner and Workman's Advocate, which they have resolved to turn into a first-class newspaper, not only for miners, but for all branches of industry—a newspaper in which all political, social, and industrial questions, whether they affect the whole or only a portion of the working class, shall be amply discussed.

We, the undersigned, on behalf of the Company, invite all lovers of freedom who have the welfare of their fellow beings at heart to co-operate in the good and arduous task the Company have undertaken, by taking up shares, helping to increase the circulation, &c, so that the working man's press may soon be able to occupy an honourable position, and—take an active and dignified part in the struggles of the day.

Application for shares may be made immediately, by letter, enclosing 2s. 6d. for each share applied for.

G. Odger, President E. S. Mantz, Secretary pro tern.

G. W. Wheeler, Treasurer

[^1]: Written in the latter half of August 1865 Reproduced from the newspaper

[^2]: First published in The Miner and Work- man's Advocate, No. 130, September 2, 1865



