---
Volume: 20
Document_Title: "12. From the Minutes of the London Conference of the International Working Men's Association "
Page_Range: "418-420"
---

# 12. From the Minutes of the London Conference of the International Working Men's Association 



**[p. 385]**

FROM THE MINUTES OF THE LONDON CONFERENCE

OF THE INTERNATIONAL WORKING MEN'S ASSOCIATION284

MEETING OF STANDING COMMITTEE WITH CONTINENTAL DELEGATES

September 26

The question of a general congress was next discussed.

Marx in the name of the Central Council proposed that the Congress assemble in Geneva.

Dupleix seconded the proposition. Fribourg wished it recorded that the French delegates had received instructions to propose Geneva instead of, as heretofore decided, Belgium as a protest against the law passed in Belgium with regard to foreigners.285 The resolution was carried unani- mously.

De Paepe proposed, Tolain seconded, that the following be submitted to the Conference this evening:

That the Conference transfer the place of meeting of the Congress from Belgium to Geneva as a solemn protest against the law concerning foreigners passed in Belgium. Carqed unani- mously.

The period for the assembling of the Congress was next discussed.

Marx and Cremer in the name of the Central Council proposed that it take place in September or October of next year, unless unforeseen circumstances shall occur to necessitate its further postponement.

The delegates from Paris as an amendment proposed that the Congress assemble on the first Sunday in April next year. They all declared that to longer postpone the Congress would be fatal to the Association in France. []

Marx was impressed by the statements of the French delegates and was inclined to withdraw the resolution. []

[^1]: 15*





**[p. 386]**

Marx having withdrawn his proposition for September, the amendment became the resolution and was unanimously agreed to.286 []

Marx and Fribourg proposed that the following questions be submitted to the Congress: "Co-operative labour", "Reduction of the number of the hours of labour", "Female and child labour".

All present voted for them as questions but Weston.

Marx and Fribourg proposed the following for the Congress: "Direct and indirect taxation". Agreed to.

The following questions marked 3, 4 and 10287 on the programme were also agreed to:

3. Combination of effort by means of the Association in the different national struggles between Capital and Labour.

4. Trades' unions—their past, present and future.

10. Standing armies: their effects upon the interests of the productive classes.

First published, in Russian, in Generalny Sovet Pervogo Internatsionala. 1864-1866, Moscow, 1961

Reproduced from the manuscript

