---
Volume: 20
Document_Title: "13. From the Minute Book of the General Council. Central Council Meetings ( October 1865- January 1866) "
Page_Range: "420-423"
---

# 13. From the Minute Book of the General Council. Central Council Meetings ( October 1865- January 1866) 



**[p. 387]**

FROM THE MINUTE BOOK OF THE GENERAL COUNCIL

CENTRAL COUNCIL MEETINGS

(October 1865-January 1866)

October 3, 1865

The question as to the publication of the doings at the conference was then discussed.

Citizens Carter and Lubez proposed that Citizen Marx be requested to compile the report of the conference proceedings. Carried unanimously.

Tuesday, November 21, 1865

The Secretary for Germany a stated that, in view of the sudden demand for cards that had arisen at Paris, he and the Secretary for Switzerlandb had guaranteed the printer for the cost of preparing 2,000 cards, of which number 1,000 should be sent to Paris, 500 reserved for the French province and 100 reserved for Germany. He desired the sanction of the Council to this arrangement.

It was moved by Citizen Morgan and seconded by Wheeler and carried nem. con.: "That we sanction the arrangement made by Citizens Marx and Jung with the printer of the cards and that the allotment of them be as proposed by Citizen Marx."

GENERAL REPORT

Citizen Marx stated that on his proposition it had been resolved at the conference that a report should be drawn up of the transactions of the Association for the first year of its existence.

[^1]: a Marx.— Ed.

[^2]: b Jung.— Ed.





**[p. 388]**

He had, however, communicated copies of the resolution and programme to our correspondents in Belgium and to Citizen Jung The resolution for drawing up a report was accordingly rescinded.

PROPAGANDA IN GERMANY

The Secretary for Germany said he was glad to be able to report that our Association was at length making headway in Germany, where it had obstacles to overcome greater than those which existed in France.289 Steps were being taken to form branches in Berlin, Mayence and Leipsic by men for whom the speaker could vouch. These societies would probably be represented at the Geneva Congress.

Tuesday, November 28

SWITZERLAND

In the regretted absence of the Secretary for Switzerland, Citizen Marx stated that Citizen J. Ph. Becker had issued a proclamation to the German Swiss, concerning the Association, portions of which he thought should be translated and published in our report.290 In it it was announced that the branch societies in Switzerland were about to issue a paper in German and French which would be the organ of the Association in that country.3

December 26. Boxing night!

Citizen Le Lubez laid on the table the first of a projected series of attacks on the policy of the Central Council published in the Journal de Verviers (Belgium).291

Citizen Marx made some observations in defence of the Council.

[^1]: a A reference to the Journal de l'Association Internationale des Travailleurs and Vorbote.—Ed.





**[p. 389]**

Marx thought that the Constitution published in the Echo de Verviers as emanating from the French branch in London ought to have been laid before the Council before publication. He then alluded to the attack which he said was written by Citizen Vésinier.

Jung denounced the attack as an infamous one and exposed some of its misstatements. Such a manifesto ought to have been signed. He moved that Vésinier retract these falsities or be expelled from the Association.

Le Lubez admitted that Vésinier was the author of the attack. Marx took occasion to defend our Paris correspondents from the aspersions made upon them. They had left with the Council all their accounts and correspondence and had behaved in the most honourable manner. []

Marx objected to the word "retractation". Vésinier should be called upon to substantiate or to make his exit. []

Jung, then withdrew his motion and Marx moved and Jung seconded that Vésinier be called upon to substantiate his accusation or, failing to do so, be expelled.

Le Lubez moved as an amendment that the subject be referred to a committee of three to conduct a correspondence with Vésinier. He objected to the harsh measure of expulsion. This amendment was not seconded.

The motion of Marx was carried with one dissentient and one neutral.

January 23, 1866

Marx read a letter from the Leipsic correspondent Liebknecht. They had formed a small branch there; he also referred to a visit he had recently received from the editor3 of the Social-Demokrat.292

Marx also read letter from De Paepeb explaining his long silence; he was sorry they had not increased in numbers; but they had now confederated with the "People"0 and had made the Tribune of the People their organ293; they wished to exchange with the Workman's Advocate.

[^1]: First published, in Russian, in Generalny Reproduced from the Minute Sovet Pervogo Internatsionala. 1864-1866, Book Moscow, 1961

[^2]: a Hofstetten.— Ed.

[^3]: b of January 14, 1866.— Ed. c La Tribune du Peuple.—Ed.



