---
Volume: 20
Document_Title: "14. From a Letter by Jenny Marx to Johann Philipp Becker. January 29, 1866 "
Page_Range: "423-425"
---

# 14. From a Letter by Jenny Marx to Johann Philipp Becker. January 29, 1866 



**[p. 390]**

FROM A LETTER BY JENNY MARX TO JOHANN PHILIPP BECKER294

The following lines are taken from a letter written in London on January 29:

"With respect to religion, a significant movement is currently developing in stuffy old England. The top men in science, Huxley (Darwin's school) at the head, with Charles Lyell, Bowring, Carpenter, etc., give very enlightened, truly bold, free-thinking lectures for the people in St. Martin's Hall, and, what is more, on Sunday evenings, exactly at the time when the lambs are usually making a pilgrimage to the Lord's pastures; the hall has been full to bursting and the people's enthusiasm so great that, on the first Sunday evening, when I went there with my family, more than 2,000 people could not get into the room, which was crammed full. The clerics let this dreadful thing happen three times.— Yesterday evening, however, the assembly was informed that no more lectures could be held until the court case brought by the spiritual fathers against the SUNDAY EVENINGS FOR THE PEOPLE a was heard. The gathering emphatically expressed its indignation and more than a hundred pounds were then collected for fighting the case. How stupid of the clerics to interfere. To the annoyance of this pious band, the evenings even closed with music. Choruses from Händel, Mozart, Beethoven, Mendelssohn and Gounod were sung and received enthusiastically by the English, who had, until now, only been allowed to bawl out JESUS, JESUS, MEEK AND MILD15 or take themselves off to the GIN palace on Sundays."0

[^1]: a In the original the English words are followed by a German translation in brackets.— Ed.

[^2]: b In the original the first words of a hymn are given in English with a German translation in brackets.— Ed.

[^3]: c The next two paragraphs are from Der Vorbote editors.— Ed.





**[p. 391]**

It is also a sign of the times that the Fenian cause296 arouses deep sympathy among the English working class, both because it opposes the clerics and because it is republican.

Written on January 29, 1866 Printed according to the journal checked with the manuscript First published in Der Vorbote, No. 2, February 1866 Published in English for the first time

