---
Volume: 20
Document_Title: "16. Record of Marx's Speech on Mazzini's Attitude to the International Working Men's Association "
Page_Range: "434-435"
---

# 16. Record of Marx's Speech on Mazzini's Attitude to the International Working Men's Association 



**[p. 401]**

RECORD OF MARX'S SPEECH ON MAZZINI'S ATTITUDE TO THE INTERNATIONAL WORKING MEN'S ASSOCIATION302

FROM THE MINUTES OF THE CENTRAL COUNCIL MEETING

OF MARCH 13, 1866

Citizen Marx made a speech in reference to the proceedings at the previous meeting. He said it was not true, as Major Wolff had stated, that Mazzini had written our Statutes. He, Marx, wrote them after discussion in Committee. Several draughts were discussed, Wolff's draught among the rest.303 On two points they were quite distinguished from each other. Marx spoke of capital oppressing labour. Wolff wanted centralisation and understood by Working Men's Associations only benefit societies. Mazzini's statutes were printed at the time of the conference in Naples.

It could hardly be true that Mazzini had seen Marx's Address before it was printed as it was in Marx's pocket, unless Mazzini saw it after it had been put in Le Lubez's hands and before it had been taken to the Bee-Hive.

Again Mazzini wrote to Brussels, to Fontaine, a letter which was to be communicated to the Belgian societies, in which he warned them against Marx's Socialist views. This was stated by De Paepe at the conference.304

Major Wolff was not a member of the Council. Major Wolff ought to have sent a letter informing the Council that he intended to prefer his complaint. He [Marx] protested against the proceed- ings at the last meeting in the name of himself and the other Continental secretaries. He desired a note of this to be taken as it might be brought before the Congress at Geneva.

[^1]: First published in Marx and Engels, Works, Second Russian Edition, Vol. 16, Moscow, 1960

[^2]: Reproduced from the Minute Book



