---
Volume: 20
Document_Title: "20. From the Minute Book of the General Council. Central ( General) Council Meetings ( June- December 1866) "
Page_Range: "444-448"
---

# 20. From the Minute Book of the General Council. Central ( General) Council Meetings ( June- December 1866) 



**[p. 411]**

FROM THE MINUTE BOOK OF THE GENERAL COUNCIL

CENTRAL (GENERAL) COUNCIL MEETINGS

(June-December 1866)

June 12, 1866

Lafargue read from La Rive Gauche a summary of doings of the Central Council.3

Citizen Marx read a letter from Leipsic which stated that all the Saxon working men's associations had joined the International.310

June 19, 1866

The debate on the war311 attracted a large concourse of members. It was ably opened by Citizen Eccarius, who illustrated his address with a map of Germany, made for the occasion. He was followed by Citizens Le Lubez, Fox, Lafargue, Marx, who made a highly interesting speech, Carter, Dutton and Hales. Speeches were made in French and English.

July 17, 1866

The Discussion on the War was then resumed. Cits. Dutton, Bobczynski and Marx were the principal speakers. Cits. Cremer and Fox withdrew their respective amendments, and the wording of the Bobczynski-Carter resolution was amended and ultimately passed, nem. con., in the following form:

"That the Central Council of the International Working Men's Association consider the present conflict on the Continent to be one between Governments and advise working men to be neutral, and to associate themselves with a view to acquire strength by unity and to use the strength so acquired in working out their social and political emancipation."312

[^1]: a See this volume, pp. 406-10.— Ed.





**[p. 412]**

That the Secretary and any member of the Central Council take whatever steps they may deem advisable to get Italian societies represented at the Congress. Carried unanimously.313 []

The Order of the Day was then discussed, led off by Cremer who proposed as recommendation to Congress that the Central Council should sit in London. Seconded by Marx. Carried unanimously.314

September 18

Citizen Marx stated that the notice of the Manchester tailors' strike313 had been inserted in the democratic journals in the North, South, and Centre of Germany; he gave a list of those journals.

September 25

Lawrence moved that Marx be President for the ensuing twelve months; Carter seconded that nomination.316 Marx proposed Odger: he, Marx, thought himself incapacitated because he was a head worker and not a hand worker. Weston seconded Odger. A ballot was taken and Odger was carried by 15 v. 3. []

Marx proposed to constitute this Committee3 provisionally only, for the present. The Committee to consist of the office-holders and secretaries already appointed. Agreed to by common consent.

October 2

Carter contended that affiliation and membership were two different things and that the Congressional Rules applied only to the latter.

Marx, on the authority of the Minutes, contradicted Carter and said that the Congress refused to recognise any affiliation as distinct from membership.317

October 9

On the motion of Marx the General Secretary0 was ordered to write to the French Ministre de l'Intérieur complaining of the

[^1]: a The Standing Committee.— Ed.

[^2]: b Fox.— Ed.





**[p. 413]**

Citizen Dupont read a letter from Citizen Fribourg of Paris asking for the Minutes of the Congress to enable them to publish a report of the Congress.

Marx protested against the latter step, inasmuch as the duty of publishing an account of the Congress was devolved by that body exclusively on the Central Council. Further, the Parisians had kept their Mémoire319 in violation of the Congressional order, which ordained that this and other documents should be handed over to the Central Council.

The General Secretary was ordered to write to Fribourg in this sense.

November 6

The Secretary then brought up the following resolution from the Standing Committee:

1. "That any member of the Central Council who shall be absent for more than four sittings from Council meetings without giving satisfactory reasons therefor, shall be liable to have his name erased from the list of the Council.

2. "This resolution to be immediately communicated to every member of the Council."

A lively discussion sprang up on this resolution, Carter, Lessner, Hales, and Jung being in favour of it and Eccarius, Fox, and Weston against it.

Weston thought that at least so important a resolution should not be carried in so thin a meeting and until notice had been given in the Commonwealth. He moved that the debate be adjourned until next week; Lessner seconded this, and the adjournment was carried unanimously.

November 20

On the resolution from the Standing Committee being read with regard to absentees, the following amendment was carried:

That a book be provided for the members of the Council to sign their names in; the said book to be presented to [the] Congress for inspection; and, if any delegate from a society should be absent more than four nights without assigning [a] reason for so doing, the Secretary shall write to the society he represents and inform them of the neglect. []



**[p. 414]**

November 27

Fox then proceeded to say that the French Government had, since the close of the Geneva Congress, departed from its policy of neutrality towards them and was levying war upon them. The French Government had allowed us two years' growth and we were now able to defy the Continental blockade which the French and the Prussian governments had declared against us. We could no longer trust the French and Prussian post-offices; we must seek indirect and secret means of communication with our Continental friends.

Marx said that we must force Bonaparte to declare himself, in order that any credit he may have gained for his liberality in letting us flourish unmolested might be lost to him.

December 18

Marx reported that Revue des deux Mondes and Revue contem- poraine had been commenting on the doings of the Association, and, although they did not agree with the objects of the Association entirely, still they acknowledged it to be one of the leading events of the present century. Marx also said that the Fortnightly Review had been commenting on the matter.b

[^1]: First published, in Russian, in Generalny Reproduced from the Minute Sovet Pervogo Internatsionala. 1864-1866 Book and 1866-1868, Moscow, 1961 and 1963

[^2]: a See Marx's speech at the Polish meeting (this volume, pp. 196-201).— Ed. b A reference to Louis Reybaud's "L'Economie politique des ouvriers", Revue des deux Mondes, t. 66, November I, 1866, J. E. Alaux's "Une forme nouvelle du socialisme", Revue contemporaine, t. 53, October 15, 1866 and an editorial in The

[^3]: Fortnightly Review, No. 37, December 1866.— Ed.



