---
Volume: 20
Document_Title: "22. From the Minute Book of the General Council. General Council Meetings ( April 1867) "
Page_Range: "449-450"
---

# 22. From the Minute Book of the General Council. General Council Meetings ( April 1867) 



**[p. 416]**

FROM THE MINUTE BOOK OF THE GENERAL COUNCIL

GENERAL COUNCIL MEETINGS

(April 1867)

April 16

Lafargue (on behalf of Marx) said that the resolution moved by Odger at one of the Reform meetings conferring a vote [of] thanks upon Count Bismarck was calculated to injure the credit of this Association.321 He therefore demanded that a vote of censure should be passed upon Odger.

A discussion ensued which ended in instructing the Secretary3

to write to Odger requesting his attendance at the next meeting.

April 23

After some discussion in which several members took part, the following resolution, proposed by Citizen Lessner and seconded by Citizen Lafargue, was carried unanimously.

Resolved, "That inasmuch as Citizen Odger has proposed a resolution at the Council of the Reform League thanking Mr. Bismarck for what he had done for the democratic cause in Germany; and inasmuch as Citizen Odger is President of the International Working Men's Association,'5 the General Council feels it to be its duty to repudiate any solidarity with the said resolution and with Citizen Odger's speech in support thereof."

[^1]: First published, in Russian, in Generalny Reproduced from the Minute Sovet Pervogo Internatsionala. 1866-1868, Book Moscow, 1963

[^2]: a P. Fox.— Ed.

[^3]: b Inaccuracy in the minutes: at that time Odger was President of the General Council. There was no such post as President of the International Working Men's Association.— Ed.



