---
Volume: 20
Document_Title: "29. From a Letter by Jenny Marx to Johann Philipp Becker. On about October 5, 1867 "
Page_Range: "472-474"
---

# 29. From a Letter by Jenny Marx to Johann Philipp Becker. On about October 5, 1867 



**[p. 439]**

FROM A LETTER BY JENNY MARX TO JOHANN PHILIPP BECKER348

We present here an excerpt from a letter by a friend in London; among other things, it mentions the Working Men's Congress in Lausanne and the Peace Congress in Geneva,340 as well as Marx's latest work:

"You will simply not believe what a tremendous sensation the Lausanne Congress has caused here in all the papers. Once The Times had set the tone, by printing daily reports,3 the other papers no longer considered it beneath their dignity to print not just short notices on the labour question, but even long editorials. There has been comment on the Congress not only in all the dailies, but the weeklies, too. It was, on occasion, quite naturally treated in a condescending and ironical way. After all, everything has a comical side, as well as a more lofty one, so why should our good Working Men's Congress, with its garrulous Frenchmen, be the exception? In spite of everything, however, generally it was treated quite properly and taken au sérieux. Even the Manchester Examiner, the organ of the Manchester school,350 and John Bright himself, in an excellent leader presented it as important and epoch-making. When compared with its stepbrother, the Peace Congress, the advantage was always on the elder brother's side, one seen as a threatening tragedy of fate, while the other as merely farce and burlesque.

"If you have already acquired Karl Marx's book,1' and if, like me, you have not yet managed to work through the dialectical

[^1]: ;l "International Working Men's Congress", The Times, Nos. 25909, 2591 1- 25913, September 6, 9-11, 1867. T h e author of the reports was Ecearius.— F.d.

[^2]: h K. Marx, Das Kapital, Kritik der politischen Oekonomie. Erster Band, H a m b u r g , 1S(Î7.— Ed.





**[p. 440]**

"'Force is the midwife of every old society pregnant with a new one. It is itself an economic power A great deal of capital, which appears today in the United States without any certificate of birth, was yesterday, in England, the capitalised blood of children If money "comes into the world with a congenital blood-stain on one cheek", capital comes dripping from head to foot, from every pore with blood and dirt.' Or the whole passage from: 'The knell of capitalist private property sounds, etc.',a to the end.

"I must admit openly that I was gripped by this simple pathos and that history became as clear as daylight to me."

[^1]: Written on about October 5, 1867 Printed according to the journal

[^2]: First published in Der Vorbote, No. 10, Published in English for the first October 1867 time

[^3]: a See the 1887 English edition of Capital, Vol. I, pp. 776, 781, 785 and 789.— Ed.



