---
Volume: 2
Document_Title: "6. Open Letter to Dr. Runkel "
Page_Range: "50-52"
---

# 6. Open Letter to Dr. Runkel 

[OPEN LETTER TO DR. RUNKEL]

To Herr Dr. Runkel in Elberfeld

Elberfeld, May 6th

You have violently attacked me and my "Letters from Wupper- tal" in your newspaper and accused me of deliberate distortion, ignorance of the conditions, personal abuse and even untruths. It does not matter to me that you call me a Young German, for I neither accept the charges you level against Young Literature nor have the honour of belonging to it. Up to now I have felt nothing but respect for you as a man of letters and journalist; I have even expressed my opinion to this effect in the second article, where I deliberately refrained from mentioning your poems in the Rheinisches Odeon21 since I could not have praised them. Anyone can be accused of deliberate distortion, and this tends to be done wherever an account does not conform to the preconceived notions of the reader. Why do you not give a single example as evidence? As for ignorance of the conditions, I should have expected this reproach least of all did I not know what a meaningless expression this phrase has become, used everywhere for lack of anything better. I have possibly spent twice as much time as you in Wuppertal, have lived in Elberfeld and Barmen and have had the most favourable opportunity to observe closely the life of all social estates.

Herr Runkel, I do not, as you accuse me of doing, make any claim to genius, but it would indeed require an extraordinarily dull intelligence not to acquire a knowledge of the conditions in such circumstances, especially if one makes the effort to do so. As for personal abuse — a preacher or a teacher is just as much a public figure as a writer, and you would surely not call a



**[p. 28]**

The author of the Letters from Wuppertal

[^1]: Written on May 6, 1839 Printed according to the news-

[^2]: First published in the Elberfelder Zeitung " " No. 127, May 9, 1839 Published in English for the first time

[^3]: a See this volume, p. 19.— Ed.

[^4]: Here is the gateway to eternal pain.— Ed. c Through me you pass into eternal pain (Dante, La Divina Commedia).— Ed.



