---
Volume: 2
Document_Title: "13. On the Invention of Printing > "
Page_Range: "78-86"
---

# 13. On the Invention of Printing > 

[ON THE INVENTION OF PRINTING]48

Shall then the Poet's voice sing, only telling Of bloody Ambition, Thrones in all their pride, When Fame's shrill trumpets sound about him, swelling The lips in places where the Gods abide? Have you forgotten shame? And do you waste The precious gift of Praise with its bright light On men to curses and to execration Ever condemned by History outright? Awake, awake! Song, that's become so shy, Soar up above the clouds, With might unmatched to lofty triumph fly! And he who wants the world to find his song Well worthy of the laurels on his brow, Must make his song from now Unfold well worthy of the world, and strong!

They were not prodigal in olden days, But freely at the Altar Of beneficial Spirit, of Invention, They spent the sacrificial smoke of Praise. Saturn came down, and with the mighty plough Divided he the Earth's maternal breast. And then mankind beheld The living seeds grow on the barren ground.

Heaven received Man's gratitude profound: God of the Golden Age is Saturn called. And were you not a God, you who once found



**[p. 56]**

Still self-consuming, sinking, dying, down, Buried forever in oblivion. You came. 'Twas then that Thought Saw the swift widening of the narrow sphere That once enfolded its long infancy. It winged its way into that world so vast, Where mighty dialogue doth fill the air Between Time Future and deed-heavy Past. You've helped the blind to see! Immortal one, enjoy the honours rare, The lofty hymns of praise, That are your due alone, Exalted Spirit! And Nature, just as if the one invention Were of itself enough to prove her power, Rests from that time and, parsimonious, Gives the world no such wonder any more.

But Nature in the end bestirs herself, To give another token: the icy Rhine Sees Gutenberg come forth: "O vain endeavours! What does it help'you, that you can inspire Your thoughts with life by writing, If thought dies, petrified, dumb in the dire Darkness of lethargy and long forgetting? Say, can a single vessel be enough E'er to contain the billowing sea that rages? Much less can Man's gifts of the Spirit be Unfolded in a single volume's pages! What lacks? The art of flight? But when bold Nature Created in one image countless beings, Now, after hers, there comes my own Invention! That, echoing a thousandfold, Truth might Embrace the world with powerful proclamation, Soaring aloft with Clarity's sheer flight!"

He spoke. And there was Print. And lo! all Europe, Astounded, moved, forthwith herself bestirs With thund'rous sound. As if by storm winds fanned, Swift-rushing onward roars

Gpanififc.

j S e r i que siempre la ambition sangrienla,

Ô del solio el poder pronuncie solo,

Caando la trompa de la lama alienla

Vnestro divino labio, injos de Apolo?

i No os da rubor? i EI don de la alabanza,

La hermosa luz de la brillante gloria

Serin tal vez del nombre, â quien daria.

Eterno oprobrio ö maldicion la historia?

l Oh, despertad! el humillado acento

Con mageslad no usada,

Suba a las nubes, penetrando el vicnlo:

SBirfe kenn allein bee 3)id)ttr» Stimme fingen

»Jon tuit'gtm <Sf)rgei| m* »on ftoljm îbrunen,

SBemt Me £rommttcn ganta'« um ibjt Hingen,

î>!t !h»)tn fdmw Uenb, tto Me (Botta nwbnra!

SBarb aid) fo frtmb Me edjam? S)e» Çrtifm« (Babe,

IX« Ruhme« Strahl mit feinem heûen 8ld)te

Scrfdraxnbtt ihr lut SRaïutcm, »chfeen «tig

Slue) fvnuiet nnb Strmünfdnrag bit ®tfd)ia)te?

(Ernad)!, erawdjt! bit SBolten überfliege Sxt Sang, ber fdpngemorb'nc,

[^1]: Y si quereis que el uni Terso os créa

[^2]: Dignos del lauro, en que cefiis la trente,

[^3]: Que Tuestro canto enérgico y valientc

[^4]: Digno tambien del unirerso sea.

[^5]: No los aromas del loor se vieron

[^6]: Vilmenle degradados

[^7]: Asi en la antiguedad: siempre las aras

[^8]: De la invencion sublime, Del genio bienhechor los recibieron.

[^9]: Stit nie gefeb'ntr Äraft in hehrem Siege!

[^10]: Unb »001 ihr, baê Me SBclt cud) wûr Mg r>altt

[^11]: Sx» îerteer«, ber um eure Srime b(ûr>t.

[^12]: S e fergt, bal tuer Sieb

[^13]: SBût Mg ber SBelt unb triftig fid) entfalte!

[^14]: 3n alter 3tit warb nimmermehr »crfdm>enbtt

[^15]: 3>et Onferbuft bee te'M;

[^16]: an bem Wtar wcbtthdtiger (frjinbung,

[^17]: SBohltba Tgen Qtiftee warb er ftet« gcftenbet.

[^18]: P a g e s 2 0 8 a n d 2 0 9 o f t h e Gutenbergs-AUmm c o n t a i n i n g M . J. Q u i n t a n a ' s p o e m A la invencion de la imprenta a n d E n g e l s ' t r a n s l a t i o n





The wrathful fire that has so long lain deep In the dark bowels of the Earth, asleep. O evil Pile, raised up for Ignorance there By base brutality and Tyrants' wrath! Rocks glowing, the Volcano gushes forth, And your foundations tremble in their fear! What is this monster of the evil spirit, This foul abortion, that, all scruples gone, Founds on the old decaying Capitol Its loathsome and abominable Throne, And now bids to destroy, yea, murder all?

It stands, although the structure of its power Is crumbling slowly. But one day that Throne Shall fall and cast its ruins o'er the land. A fastness perching on a crag alone Thus crowns the summit of a mountain high. The Sons of War once took up their abode In its security. Ruling by force of stolen power, they Would sally forth exultant to the fray. Deserted and alone, The Keep stands in the forest, seen by none. It still surveys, though crumbling with neglect, The world all round with menacing aspect. One day it shall fall down, And then the fields shall groan, Covered with ruins. Meanwhile, it shall be Scarecrow and bogey to all folk that lived In fear and terror of it recently.

That, then, was the first wreath of bay to deck The brow of Reason; but Intellect now rises Courageously, athirst for certain knowledge, Encompassing the world in its embraces. Copernicus soars to the starry places Hitherto shrouded in a heavy pall; And then he sees, immeasurably far, Day's bringer, our forever festive star, The brightest luminary of them all. Then Galileo feels beneath his feet The Earth's ball rolling; but blind Italy Rewards him with a prison cell's disgrace.

What does it help you, then, to conquer Heaven, To find the law that moves eternally Air's circle and the seas? To split the ray Of light incorporeal; or to dig down Into the bowels of Earth and snatch the cradle Of gold and crystal? Spirit, return once more To Man!

And so it did, only to pour Its bitterness into lamentations loud: "How is the Intellect with blindness cowed! How rings that chain of iron Forged by the frenzied powers of Tyranny, From pole to pole each with the other vying, And pins Man helpless lying, Upon his death-bed, tired of slavery! This must be ended."

And the Despots heard, And wielded in their vile and villainous hands Two weapons to depend on—Fire and Sword.

"O senseless ones! Those very high-piled faggots That threaten to devour me horribly, That burn to keep me from the Truth away, Are beacons guiding me along Truth's way, Are Torches to light up Truth's victory! Truth fondly I desire; With rapture drunk, my heart to Truth gives prayer, My spirit looks on Truth; I follow her, Not of the sword afraid, nor yet of fire. That being so, then shall I still demur? Can I turn back again, Retrace my steps? The waves of Tagus never Run back towards the source from which they came Once they have flowed into the mighty sea.



**[p. 61]**

And then the great day came On which a mortal man arose outraged, In wrath from all-encompassing disgrace, And, with almighty voice, Called out to all the World: Mankind is free! And narrow boundaries no longer caged The sacred call: it rose up on the wing Of the great echo Gutenberg invented, Soared up, a wondrous thing, And swift, in mighty inspiration, O'erleapt the mountains and the ocean wide And o'er the very winds held domination. It was not shouted down by Tyranny, And loud and lusty rang on every side The joyful cry of Reason: Man is free!

Oh, free, yes, free! Sweetest of words, the breast Swells, beating faster at the sound of you; My spirit, that you imbue, O'erbrimming with your holy inspiration, Soars to serene celestial dominions, Bearing me on its fiery beating pinions. Where are you all that hear My singing, mortal beings? From on high, I see the awesome prison doors of Fate Open, the impenetrable veil of Time Is torn apart—the Future lies before me! I see full clear that Earth never again Shall be the wretched planet where Ambition And War with its fierce countenance can reign.

Now both of them are gone from Earth for ever, As Plague and Storm, those torturers, prepare To leave the zone they've pillaged and laid bare, When Polar ice-winds threaten to blow over. All people felt their true equality; With strength untamed, brave heroes struggled for That right and won it with triumphant glee.



**[p. 62]**

Bremen

Do you not see that column soaring there, Towering in all its splendour to the sky, A-throb with flashing light, eye-dazzling? Less mighty are the pyramids so high, The work of slaves who toiled in abject fear Of one whose glory came from suffering. See there, unwavering, The eternal incense rise, As the whole Earth gives thanks to Gutenberg. For such beneficence, a modest prize! Hail to the one who broke the insensate power Of battering violence; raised the might of Reason, The strength of soul, high o'er the world to fly! Praise him who raised the Truth in triumph high, Making his hands' work fruitful for all time! Sing the Well-Doer's praise in song sublime!

[^1]: Translated in the first half of 1840 Printed according to the album

[^2]: First published in the G Braunschweig, 1840

[^3]: Signed: Friedrich Engels

[^4]: First published in the Gutenbergs-Album, Published in English for the first Braunschweig, 1840 time



