---
Volume: 2
Document_Title: "II. Modern Polemics "
Page_Range: "104-117"
---

# II. Modern Polemics 



**[p. 81]**

II

MODERN POLEMICS67

[Mitternachtzeitung für gebildete Leser No. 83, May 21, 1840]

The Young Literature has a weapon through which it has become invincible and gathers under its banners all young talents. I mean the modern style, which in its concrete vitality, sharpness of expression, and variety of nuances offers to every young writer a bed in which the river or the stream of his genius can comfort- ably roll on without his originality — if he has any — being infect- ed too strongly with alien elements, Heine's carbonic acid or Gutzkow's caustic lime. It is a pleasure to see how every young author seeks to adopt the modern style with its proudly soaring rockets of enthusiasm which at their highest point dissolve in a gai- ly coloured shower of poetical fire or burst in crackling sparks of wit. In this respect the criticisms in the Rheinisches Jahrbuch, which I mentioned earlier in my first article of this series, are of importance; they are the first sign of the effect which a new literary epoch has had on Rhenish soil, fairly alienated from Ger- man poetry. Here is the whole modern style with its light and shade, its original but apt descriptions, and its iridescent poetic spotlight.

In these circumstances we can say of our authors not only: le style c'est l'homme," but also: le style c'est la littérature}1 The modern style bears the stamp of mediation, not only between the celebrities of the past, as L. Wihl recently remarked, but also between production and criticism, poetry and prose. It is Wienbarg in whom these elements interpenetrate most intimately; in Die Dramatiker der Jetztzeit the poet has been absorbed into the critic. The same would apply to the second volume of Kühne's Charak- tere' if there were more coherence in the style.— German style has

[^1]: a "The style makes the man." The expression belongs to G. L. Buffon.— Ed.

[^2]: "The style makes the literature."—Ed. c F. G. Kühne, Weibliche und männliche Charaktere.— Ed.





**[p. 82]**



[^1]: L. Börne, Briefe aus Paris.— Ed.





**[p. 83]**

Forgive me, dear reader, you have probably long ago guessed the aim of this diatribe; but I happen to be a German and cannot rid myself of my German nature which always starts with the egg. Now, however, I will be all the more direct; it is a question of the dissensions in modern literature, the justification of the parties and especially the dispute at the root of all the rest, the dispute between Gutzkow and Mundt, or, as the matter now stands, between Gutzkow and Kühne. This dispute has now been going on for two years in the midst of our literary developments and could not but have upon them an influence partly favourable, partly unfavour- able. Unfavourable because the smooth course of development is always disturbed when literature lets itself become the arena of personal sympathies, antipathies and idiosyncrasies; favourable because, to speak in Hegelian terms, it stepped out from the one-sidedness in which it found itself as a party, and proved its victory through its very destruction; also because, contrary to the expectations of many, the "younger generation" did not take sides, but used the opportunity to free itself from all alien influences and to devote itself to independent development. If then a few have taken sides, they prove thereby how little confidence they have in themselves and of what little consequence they are to literature.

Whether Gutzkow picked up the first stone, whether Mundt was the first to put his hand to his left hip, may be left unexamined; suffice it that stones were thrown and swords drawn. It is only a question of the deeper causes of a war which was bound to break out sooner or later; for nobody who has watched its whole course without bias will believe that on either side there prevailed subjective motives, spiteful envy or frivolous love of fighting. Only in Kühne's case was personal friendship with Mundt a motive, and in itself surely no ignoble one, for accepting Gutzkow's challenge.

Gutzkow's literary work and aspirations bear the stamp of a sharply defined individuality. Only a few of his numerous writings leave a wholly satisfying impression and yet it cannot be denied that they are among the finest products of German literature since 1830. Why is this so? I believe I see in him a dualism that has much in common with the schism in Immermann's mind which

[^1]: [Mitternachtzeitung für gebildete Leser No. 84, May 22, 1840]





**[p. 84]**



[^1]: a High above.— Ed. See this volume, p. 71.— Ed.





**[p. 85]**





**[p. 86]**

[Mitternachtzeitung für gebildete Leser No. 85, May 25, 1840]

Besides these differences, the intellectual development of the two disputants had been wholly opposed. Gutzkow manifested from the start an enthusiasm for Börne, the "modern Moses", which still lives on in his soul as fervent adoration; Mundt sat in the secure shade thrown by the giant tree of Hegel's system and for a time betrayed the conceit of most Hegelians; in the early years of his literary activity the axioms of the philosophical padishah that freedom and necessity are identical and that the aspirations of the South-German liberals are one-sided, prejudiced Mundt's political views. Gutzkow left Berlin with distaste at conditions there and acquired a predilection for South Germany in Stuttgart which never left him; Mundt felt at home in Berlin life, loved to sit at the aestheticising tea-parties and distilled from the intellectual activity of Berlin his Persönlichkeiten und Zustände,10

that literary hothouse product which suffocated all free poetic activity in him and in others. It is saddening to see how Mundt, in the second issue of Freihafen for 1838, reviewing a work by Munch, goes into raptures in his description of such a personality, raptures to which he could never be roused by a work of poetry.'1

Berlin conditions — it is as if this word were invented for Ber- lin— made him forget everything else and he even let himself be misled into a ridiculous contempt for the beauties of nature, such as is revealed in the Madonna.

So Gutzkow and Mundt confronted each other when the ideas of the age suddenly made their paths cross. They would soon have separated, perhaps waved greetings to each other from afar and been happy to recall their meeting, had not the setting up of Young Germany and the Roma locuta est of the most serene Federal Diet compelled them both to unite. The state of affairs was thus radically altered. Their common fate obliged Gutzkow and Mundt to give weight in their judgments of each other to considerations the observation of which was bound in the long run to become unbearable for both of them. Young Germany, or Young Literature, as it called itself after the catastrophe from above so as to sound more harmless and not to exclude others with similar aims, was near to degenerating into a clique, and that against its will. From all sides one found oneself compelled to drop opposing tendencies, to cover up weaknesses, to overstress



**[p. 87]**

Mundt polemicised little and insignificantly, but once he let himself be misled into conducting his polemic in a manner inviting the sharpest censure. At the end of the article "Görres und die katholische Weltanschauung" (Freihafen, 1838, II) he says that if German religiousness will have nothing to do with Young Ger- many, the movement has sufficiently shown that it contains more than enough rotten elements as far as religion is concerned. It is clear that this refers not only to Heine, who does not concern us here, but to Gutzkow. However, even if the accusations were true, Mundt should at least have enough respect for those to whom he is bound by common fate not to champion narrow-mindedness, philistinism and pietism against them! Mundt could hardly behave worse than when he says in pharisaic triumph: God, I thank thee that I am not as Heine, Laube and Gutzkow, and that in the eyes of German religiousness, if not of the German Confederation, I can pass as respectable!

Gutzkow, by contrast, took real pleasure in polemics. He pulled out all the stops and followed the allegro moderato of the Literarische Elfen12 with an allegro furioso of literary notices. He had the advantage over Mundt in that he could expose the latter's literary whims in full focus and place them within range of the perma- nently loaded gun of his wit. Almost every week at least one blow against Mundt could be found in the Telegraph. He knew how to profit by the overwhelming advantage which possession of a weekly journal gives over an opponent limited to a quarterly* and his own works; it is particularly remarkable that Gutzkow inten- sified his polemic, allowing his contempt for Mundt's literary gifts to appear only gradually, while the latter treated Gutzkow as an inferior personality immediately after the declaration of war, without regard for such a descending climax.— The usual artifices of political journals, recommending articles of the same colour in other journals, smuggling in hidden malice under the guise of recognition and praiseworthy objectivity, etc., were car- ried over into the literary sphere in this polemic; whether their

[^1]: a Freihafen.— Ed.





**[p. 88]**

Towards the end of 1838 a third fighter entered the lists, Kühne, whose armoury we must review for the moment. For a long time Mundt's personal friend and without doubt the Gustav to whom Mundt once appeals in the Madonna, his literary character also has much in common with Mundt, although on the other hand a French element is clearly evident in him. He is linked with Mundt particularly by their common development through Hegel and the social life of Berlin, which determined Kühne's taste for per- sonalities and conditions and Varnhagen von Ense, the true inventor of these literary hybrids. Kühne is also one of those who give much praise to Varnhagen's style and overlook the fact that what is good in it is really only an imitation of Goethe.

[Mitternachtzeitung für gebildete Leser No. 86, May 26, 1840]

The chief foundation of Kühne's literary stature is esprit, that French, quickly combining intellect, linked with a lively imagina- tion. Even the extreme of this trend, the cult of the phrase, is so little alien to Kühne that, on the contrary, he has achieved a rare mastery in handling it, and one cannot read reviews such as that of the second volume of Mundt's Spaziergänge (Elegante Zeitung,3

May 1838) without a certain enjoyment. Naturally, it also happens often enough that this play with phrases makes a disagreeable impression and one is reminded of a few apt words of Mephi- stopheles which have become commonplace.b In a journal one may well tolerate passages interwoven with phrases in this fashion; but when in a work like the Charaktere a passage occurs which reads quite well but lacks all real content — and that is more than once the case — this shows too much levity in selection. On the other hand, his French cleverness makes Kühne one of our best journalists, and it would surely be easy for him, with greater activity, to lift the Elegante Zeitung far above its present level. But oddly enough, Kühne is far from displaying the agility of mind

[^1]: a Zeitung für die elegante Welt.— Ed. b Goethe, Faust, Erster Teil, Studierzimmer: "Mit Worten lässt sich trefflich streiten, mit Worten ein System bereiten" — Ed.





**[p. 89]**

In Kühne one must further distinguish two periods; the begin- ning of his literary career was marked by a bias towards the Hegelian doctrine and, so it seems to me, by a devotion to Mundt or a community of views with him in which independence was not always duly respected. The Quarantäne marks his first step towards emancipation from these influences; Kühne's views did not find their full development until the literary troubles after 1836. For a comparison of Kühne's and Gutzkow's poetic aims two works written at the same time are available, the Quarantäne im Irrenhause and Seraphine. Both reflect the whole personality of their authors. Gutzkow portrayed the reasonable and the genial side of his character in Arthur and Edmund; Kühne, as a beginner, revealed himself fully and more artlessly in the hero of the Quarantäne, as he looks for a way out of the labyrinth of the Hegelian system. Gutzkow excels, as always, in the sharpness of his portrayal of the soul, in the psychological motivation; almost the entire novel takes place in the mind. Such an intellectual compounding of the motives from nothing but misunderstandings, however, destroys all quiet enjoyment, even of the interspersed idyllic situations, and no matter how masterly Seraphine is on the one hand, it is a failure on the other. Kühne, by contrast, bubbles over with witty reflec- tions on Hegel, German soul-searching and Mozart's music, with which he fills three-quarters of the book, but in the end succeeds only in boring the readers and spoiling the novel as such. Seraphine does not contain a single well-drawn character; and Gutzkow's aim, which was to show his ability to portray female characters, is realised least of all. The women in all his novels are either trivial, like Celinde in Blasedow, devoid of real womanliness,



**[p. 90]**

You can lay open, like the human brain, The very heart of woman, You can show all a woman's heart is made of; But that which is the spirit of life within it No scalpel can lay bare, nor keen comparison."

The same lack of precise characterisation is displayed in the Quarantäne. The hero is not a complete character but a personifi- cation of the transitional epoch in the present-day consciousness, who therefore lacks all individuality. The remaining characters are almost all made too indeterminate so that one cannot properly say of most of them whether they are successes or failures.

Kühne had long been challenged by Gutzkow but had replied only indirectly by praising Mundt's merits excessively and rarely mentioning Gutzkow's. Eventually Kühne also came out in opposi- tion to him, at first calmly and critically rather than polemically; he called Gutzkow a debater, but would not concede to him any further literary claim; soon afterwards, however, he began his offensive in a manner which perhaps no one had expected, with the article "Gutzkows neueste Romane".74 Here with much wit Gutzkow's dual nature is distorted into caricature and traced in his writings, but there is also such a mass of unworthy expressions, unfounded assertions and ill-concealed innuendoes that the polemic only benefited Gutzkow. He replied with a brief reference to the Jahrbuch der Literatur for 1839 (why has that for 1840 not yet appeared?) which carried his article on the latest literary disputes. The policy of winning minds by impartiality was shrewd enough, and the restraint which this article cost Gutzkow must be recognised; if it was not entirely satisfactory and, in particular, disposed too easily of Kühne, who can surely not be denied an important influence on present-day literature or a sound talent for the historical novel, although not yet very clear in the Klosternovel- len, this can gladly be overlooked until his opponents have done as well or have excelled him.

This Jahrbuch der Literatur, however, bore within itself the seed of a new split, Heine's "Schwabenspiegel".75 Probably only a few of

[^1]: [Mitternachtleitung für gebildete Leser No. 87, May 28, 1840]

[^2]: a K. Gutzkow, König Saul, Act III, Scene 3.— Ed.





**[p. 91]**

Enough, the flames of war were fanned again. Kühne behaved unwisely by accepting the stupid article on Savage and by accom- panying Dr. Wihl's explanation (which it was surely too much to expect the Elegante to accept, rather as if Beck had sent his declaration against Gutzkow to the Telegraph) with a currish parody which the other side likewise rejected with a bark.77 This dog-fight is the most shameful blot on all modern polemics; if our men of letters start treating each other like beasts and applying the principles of natural history in practice, German literature will soon be like a menagerie and the long-awaited Messiah of literature will fraternise with Martin and van Amburgh.

To prevent the once more slackening polemic from going to sleep, an evil spirit stirred up the dispute between Gutzkow and Beck™ I have already given my judgment of Beck elsewhere,3 but, as I willingly admit, not without bias. The retrogressive step which Beck took in Saul and in the Stille Lieder made me suspicious and unfair to the Nächte and the Fahrender Poet. I ought not to have written the article, much less sent it to the journal which printed it. I may therefore be permitted to correct my judgment to the effect that I accord recognition to Beck's past, the Nächte and Fahrender Poet, but that it would go against my conscience as a critic if I did not describe the Stille Lieder and the first act of Saul as retrogressive. The faults of Beck's first two works were inevitable because of his youth, nay, in the press of images and the immature impetuousness of thought one might be inclined to see a superabundance of strength, and in any case here was a talent of which one might have the highest hopes.— Instead of those flaming images, instead of that wildly excited youthful strength, there is a tiredness, a languor in the Stille Lieder, which was least to be expected of Beck, and the first act of Saul is equally feeble. But perhaps this flabbiness is only the natural, momentary consequence of that over-excitement, perhaps the following acts of Saul will make up for all the defects of the first — but Beck is a poet, and even in its most severe and just censure criticism should

[^1]: a See this volume, pp. 41-46.— Ed.





**[p. 92]**

The dispute between Gutzkow and Beck might well have been avoided. It cannot be denied that in the exposition of his Saul Beck followed Gutzkow to some extent, unwittingly, of course, but that does not detract from his honesty, only from his originality. Instead of being indignant about it, Gutzkow should rather have felt flattered. And Beck, instead of laying stress on the originality of his characters, which no one had called in doubt, had indeed to take up the gauntlet once it was thrown down, as he in fact did, but should also have revised the act, which one trusts he will have done.

Gutzkow now adopted a hostile position to all the Leipzig men of letters and has since harried them unremittingly with literary witticisms. He sees them as a regular band of organised ruffians which harasses him and literature in every possible way; but he would truly do better to adopt a different method of attack if he does not want to give up the fight. Personal connections and their reaction on public opinion are inevitable in Leipzig literary circles. And Gutzkow should ask himself whether he has never succumbed to this sometimes unfortunately unavoidable sin; or must I remind him of certain Frankfurt acquaintances? Is it surprising if the

Nordlicht, the Elegante and the Eisenbahn occasionally agree in their judgments? The description clique is quite unfitting for these circumstances.

This is how matters stand at present; Mundt has. withdrawn and no longer bothers about the dispute; Kühne also is rather tired of the interminable warfare; Gutzkow is also sure to see soon that his polemic must eventually become boring to the public. They will gradually begin to challenge each other to novels and plays; they will see that a journal is not to be judged by a biting literary article, that the nation's educated circles will award the prize to the best poet, not the most impetuous polemicist; they will get used to a calm existence side by side, and, perhaps, learn to respect each other again. Let them take Heine's conduct as an example, who in spite of the dispute does not conceal his esteem for Gutzkow. Let them determine their relative value not by their own subjective estimation, but by the conduct of the younger people to whom literature will sooner or later belong. Let them learn from the Hallische Jahrbücher that polemic may only be directed against the



**[p. 93]**

Written in March 1840 Printed according to the news First published in the Mitternachtzeitung P P für gebildete Leser Nos. 51-54, March Published in English for the first 1840, and Nos. 83-87, May 1840 time

Signed: Friedrich Oswald

