---
Volume: 2
Document_Title: "19. Reports from Bremen "
Page_Range: "125-130"
---

# 19. Reports from Bremen 

jïonnrrftag, ÄMI 30. Juli 1840.

?>* fwrt wir am gut: 9BU [i(£*n 6U $ffle(r«, ?>U & 4 t a G(» «wer«, »il fwfm 6U ÏB5«»(, PU Itointrtanfl Mtfen Bin, rel U ^înttv uni.

p. g. ». JBo Iff.

[REPORTS FROM BREMEN]

THEATRE. PUBLISHING FESTIVAL

[Morgenblatt für gebildete Leser No. 181, July 30, 1840]

Bremen, July

As far as I know, no periodical of any note has a permanent correspondent in Bremen, and it could easily be concluded from this consensus gentium" that there is nothing to write about from here. But that is not the case; for have we not a theatre, which only recently had in succession Agnese Schebest, Caroline Bauer, Tichatscheck, and Mme Schröder-Devrient performing as visiting stars, and whose repertory could compete in quality with many other more famous theatres. Have not Gutzkow's Richard Savage and Blum's Schwärmerei nach der Mode already been shown here? The first of these two plays has by now been discussed to excess; I consider that a very recent review of it in the Hallische Jahrbücher,85 if one leaves out the frequent hostile remarks, con- tains very much that is true and, in particular, hits on its basic mistake, namely, that the relationship between mother and child, as an unfree relationship, can never provide the basis for a drama. Perhaps Gutzkow was aware of this mistake beforehand, but he was right in not allowing that to prevent him from carrying out his plan; for if he wanted to break into the theatrical world with a single play he had to make some concessions to established theatrical routine, which he could always withdraw later if his plan

[^1]: a Universal opinion.— Ed.





**[p. 103]**

The Gutenberg festival86 has also been celebrated here, in the ultima Thule* of German culture, and indeed in a more gladdening way than in the other two Hanse towns. For several years past the printers had been putting by something from their wages each week to ensure a worthy celebration of the festival. Already at an early stage, a committee was set up, but here too difficulties were encountered from the state in holding the festival. Small cabals, mostly connected with particular personalities, developed, as is inevitable in such small states. For a while, nothing was heard of

[^1]: a An island lying at the extreme north of the habitable world, mentioned in ancient legends and in Virgil's Georgia.— Ed.





**[p. 104]**

Bremen, July

For the rest, life here is rather monotonous and small-townish; the haute volée, i.e., the families of patricians and monied aristo- crats, are spending the summer on their landed estates; the

[^1]: LITERATURE

[^2]: [Morgenbh U für gebildete Leser No. 182, July 31, 1840]





**[p. 105]**



[^1]: " Bremisches Unterhaltungsblatt.— Ed.

[^2]: 5-384





**[p. 106]**

Unterhaltungsblatt. If a militia officer believes that his rank gives him the right to ride on the foot-path, he can be sure that the next issue of this newspaper will raise the question whether militia officers ought to be allowed to ride on the foot-paths. This excellent sheet could be called the providence of Bremen. Its chief contributor, however, is Crischan Tripsteert, the pseudo- nymous author of poems in Low German. It would be better for this dialect if it were abolished in accordance with Wienbarg's demand rather than that it should have to let itself be misused by Crischan Tripsteert for his poems. The other local newspapers are of too low a level for even their names to be merely mentioned before the general public. Quite apart is the Bremer Kir- chenbote, a pietistic-ascetic newspaper edited by three priests2 to which Krummacher, the well-known writer of parables,b sometimes contributes. This newspaper is so zealous that the censorship is often compelled to intervene, although to be sure this only hap- pens in extreme cases, since its tendency meets with approval in higher circles. It carries on a continual polemic against Hegel, the "father of modern pantheism", and "his disciple, the ice- cold Strauss", as well as against any rationalist who comes within ten miles. Next time I shall say something about Bremerhaven and social conditions in Bremen.

[^1]: Written in July 1840 Printed according to the news- paper First published in the Morgenblatt für , gebildete Leser Nos. 181 and 182, July 30 Published in English for the first and 31, 1840 t , m e

[^2]: Signed: F. O.

[^3]: ' Georg Gottfried Treviranus, Friedrich Ludwig Mallet, and F. A. Toel.— Ed.

[^4]: Friedrich Adolf Krummacher.— Ed.



