---
Volume: 2
Document_Title: "20. An Evening "
Page_Range: "130-135"
---

# 20. An Evening 

AN EVENING

To-morrow comes! Shelley"

1

I sit in the garden. 'Neath the ocean's rim The old day's sun has slowly slipped from sight, And hidden shafts that draw their strength from him Now fill the heavens with scintillating light. But with day's brilliance fading from the sky, The flowers stand and grieve in silent sadness; Meanwhile the birds, safe in the tree-tops high, Carol their love-songs full of joy and gladness. Ships that have traced the oceans with their wake Now lie at anchor in the peaceful bay. From end to end the timbered bridges shake As the tired people trudge their homeward way. The cool wine bubbles in the crystal glass. I leaf through Calderon's great comedies, Drinking my fill to very drunkenness On heady wine and headier tragedies.

2

The radiance in the West is almost gone. Patience! A new day's coming—Freedom's day! The sun shall mount his ever-shining throne And Night's black cares be banished far away. New flowers shall grow, but not in nursery beds We raked ourselves and sowed with chosen seeds: All earth shall be their garden full of light;

[^1]: a Written in English in the original. (Shelley, Queen Mab.) — Ed.



Is like the People's spirit everywhere, As prickly, coarse, and lacking grace as they are, Till, with a crash, there suddenly bursts forth Through every obstacle a blossom bright— The Freedom flame, that glowed concealed from sight; Its scent is far more like to reach the Lord Than all the incense of the pious fraud. Only the Cypress-trees are left alone, Abandoned in the grove, their meaning gone.

3

The birds on their green branches greet the dawn With paeans of tumultuous song, and know That when the drifting cloudlets have withdrawn Their steamy summits to the vales below, Then shall the sun begin to mount his throne — These birds are minstrel singers, every one; Their words fly free as the free winds that blow; And winds and words as one united go. These songsters do not haunt the castle walls (Those stately homes have long since tumbled down),

But, in proud oaks unbent by howling squalls, Boldly they look towards the rising sun, Though they be dazzled when his brilliance falls To ring the earth with radiant light around. I, too, am one of Freedom's minstrel band. 'Twas to the boughs of Börne's great oak-tree I soared, when in the vales the despot's hand Tightened the strangling chains round Germany. Yes, I am of those plucky birds that make Their course through Freedom's bright aethereal sea. Though I be just a sparrow in their wake,



**[p. 109]**

Rather that little sparrow would I be Than the caged nightingale that can't take wing And only to a prince's ear may sing.

4

No longer does the cargo vessel press Across the ocean to enrich the few Or swell the greedy merchant's revenue: It bears the seeds of human happiness. It is a noble stallion prancing high, Whose rider slays all hypocrites and crawlers,

It is the fearless scourge of human dolours, It is a thought that dreams of Liberty. The flag bears not the royal coat of arms For the ship's frightened crew to tremble under; It bears the cloud on which, after the thunder, After the lightning bolts of raging storms, The reconciling Freedom rainbow forms.

5

The bridge of Love shall throw its spans unseen Across from heart to heart; between the piers Runs Passion's wild and ever-rushing stream, The swiftly flowing torrent of the years. The bridge is diamond hard: it will not sag. Across goes Freedom's bravely shining flag. Across goes Man. Where'er his feet may lead him, Wherever he may choose to cast his eye, He sees a friendly roof against the sky And knows that food and drink are there to meet him; A very home from home awaits to greet him, Wherever he may make his bed and lie. A bridge of purer faith shall pierce the clouds. Man shall ascend it, climbing without fear Its heavenward steps to gaze on, humbly proud, The Eternal Archetype of All the Spirits. Out of his bosom issues forth Mankind, And to his bosom Men return again, All conscious links in the great spirit-chain By which Eternal Matter is confined.



**[p. 6]**

New wine shall fill your glasses to the brim, Pure Freedom wine's intoxicating brew: Not the unwary senses to bedim, But jaded senses to exchange for new, That with revived perception you may hear The spheres in heaven singing high and low; That the blood coursing through your veins may clear, Transformed into pure Aether, which flows through

The Infinities; that your eye-beams may spear Primordial Space, like warriors bold that go To storm the starry summits without fear. Between, like Jack-o'-Lanterns in the sky, Images of past woe are gliding by.

7

And there shall rise another Calderön, Pearl-fisher in the tide of poetry, With images like flames ascending from The layered wood of the sweet Cedar-tree. With golden lyre, he shall exalt in song The bloody stamping out of Tyranny.

Mankind shall hear proud Victory's refrain, And Peace shall flourish in the world again. He too shall sing how Mankind made a stand Against the cruel hordes of Tyranny Upon Mantible Bridge***; how that brave band Fought on through levelled spears to victory And so set foot on Freedom's hallowed land; How Doctor of His Honour** came to be Man, like The Constant Prince,*** condemned to languish In chains until deliverance from anguish; How Freedom came, The Daughter of the Air,**** Descending earthwards from aethereal space To sing her magic songs, so wondrous fair;

[^1]: * La puente de Mantible.— Note by Engek. ** El médico de su honra.— Note by Engels. *** El principe constante.— Note by Engels. **** La hija del aire.— Note by Engels.





**[p. 111]**

8

But say, when is the new sun going to rise? When will the bad old times be cracked asunder? We saw the old sun sinking in the skies— How long must night's oppression keep us under? The melancholy moon peers through the cloud,

And white mists, bivouacked in the vales below, Hide all that lives on earth beneath their shroud. Like blind men tapping through the dark we go. Patience! For look, already heavenward bound, The sun would chase the gloomy clouds away. The very mists that crawl along the ground Are Spirits' dawn-breeze-wakened roundelay. The morning star dances his upward way. The mists are pierced by shafts of blood-red fire. Do not the flowers unfold to greet the day? Do you not hear the joyful feathered choir? Now half the heavens are filled with radiance bright. The snow-capped mountains blaze with ruby light. The golden clouds rear up their noble heads Like the sun's fiery chariot-drawing steeds. Look yonder, where the densest light rays run In joyous throng to greet the new-born sun! Written in July 1840 Printed according to the journal First published in the Telegraph für Published in English for the first Deutschland No. 125, August 1840 time Signed: Friedrich Oswald

[^1]: * La vida es sueno.— Not« by Engels. ** Marianas de Abril y Mayo.—Note by Engels.



