---
Volume: 2
Document_Title: "24. Reports from Bremen "
Page_Range: "149-154"
---

# 24. Reports from Bremen 

[REPORTS FROM BREMEN]

RATIONALISM AND PIETISM

[Morgenblatt für gebildete Leser No. 249, October 17, 1840]

Bremen, September

At last once again a topic which extends beyond tea-party gos- sip, which so excites the entire public of our Free State that every- one takes sides either for or against, and which gives food for thought even to the more serious-minded. The thunderstorm in the sky of our age has struck even in Bremen, the fight for a freer or narrower conception of Christianity has been kindled even here, in the capital of North-German fundamentalism; the voices which were recently raised in Hamburg, Kassel and Magde- burg have found an echo in Bremen.— Briefly, the course of events was as follows: Pastor F. W. Krummacher, the Pope of the Wuppertal Calvinists, the St. Michael of the doctrine of pre- destination, visited his parents here and gave two sermons for his father3 in the Church of St. Ansgarius.b The first sermon dealt with his favourite spectacle, the Last Judgment, the second with an anathematising passage in the Epistle to the Galatians; both were written with the burning eloquence, the poetic, if not always well- chosen, splendour of imagery for which this richly talented pulpit speaker is famous; but both, particularly the last, flash with curses against those who think differently, as one might expect from such a harsh mystic. The pulpit became the presidential chair of a court of inquisition whence the eternal curse was hurled against all theological trends which the inquisitor did and did not know. Anyone who did not accept this crass mysticism as absolute Chris- tianity was delivered up to the devil. And with a sophistry which

[^1]: a Friedrich Adolf Krummacher.— Ed. b See this volume, pp. 121-22.— Ed.





**[p. 127]**

emerged as strangely naive, Krummacher always managed to shelter behind the apostle Paul. "It is not I who is cursing, nay! Children, reflect, it is the apostle Paul who condemns you!"—The worst of it was that the apostle wrote in Greek and scholars have not yet been able to agree on the precise meaning of certain of his expressions. Among these dubious words is the anathema used in this passage, to which Krummacher, without more ado, ascribed the most extreme meaning of a sentence of eternal damnation. Pastor Paniel, the chief representative of rationalism in this pulpit,94 had the misfor- tune to interpret this word in its milder sense, and in general to oppose Krummacher's way of thinking; he therefore preached controversial sermons." Whatever you may think of his views, his behaviour is irreproachable. Krummacher cannot deny that in composing his sermons he had in mind not only the rationalistic majority of the congregation, but Paniel in particular; he cannot deny that it is wrong for a guest preacher to try to prejudice a congregation against its appointed pastors; he must admit that a coarse wood needs a coarse wedge. What was the point of all the invective against Voltaire and Rousseau, whom even the worst rationalist in Bremen fears like the devil, or of all the curses against speculative theology, which, with two or three exceptions, his entire audience was as incapable of judging as he himself, what was the point of this except to disguise the very definite, even personal, tendenciousness of the sermons? — Paniel's controversial sermons were certainly preached in the spirit of Paulus' rational- ism and, in spite of the lauded care in their arrangement and their rhetorical pathos, they suffer from all its weaknesses. It is all vague and verbose; where the poetic impulse is set in motion, it is like the working of a spinning-machine, and the treatment of the text like a homoeopathic brew; Krummacher has more originality in three sentences than his opponent in three sermons.— An hour from Bremen lives a pietistic country pastorb who is so superior to his peasants that he has begun to think himself a great theologian and linguist. He issued a tract against Paniel in which he brought into play the entire apparatus of a philological theologian of the last century. The scientific pretensions of the worthy country pastor were punctured most painfully in an anonymous paper. With as much spirit as learning the anonymous author,0 believed

[^1]: * K. F. W. Paniel, Drei Sonntagspredigten, mit Bezug auf eine besondere Veranlas- sung, am 12., 19. und 26. Juli 1840 gehalten.— Ed. Johann Nikolaus Tiele.— Ed. c Wilhelm Ernst Weber.— Ed.





**[p. 128]**

to be a deserving, learned inhabitant of our town who has several times been mentioned in my previous report," has demonstrated to the clever "God's word from the country" all the absurdities which he had extracted with great trouble from long antiquated handbooks. Krummacher issued a Theologische Replik to Paniel's controversial sermons, in which he made an unconcealed attack on his whole personality, and, moreover, in a manner which nullified the charge of slander brought against his adversary. Though the reply takes skilful advantage of the weaknesses of rationalism, particularly those of his adversary, Krummacher acts clumsily in trying to demolish Paniel's. interpretation. The most capable work written from the pietistic standpoint in this controversy was the pamphlet by Pastor Schlichthorst, who lives nearby, in which rationalism, and that of Pastor Paniel in particular, was quietly and dispassionately traced back to its basis, Kantian philosophy, and the question was posed: Why are you not honest enough to admit that the foundation of your faith is not the Bible but its interpretation according to Kantian philosophy as expounded by Paulus?—A new paper by Panielb is expected to come from the press some time soon. Whatever it may prove to contain, he has stirred the old leaven, he has brought the Bremen people, who believed in everything but themselves, to their senses, and pietism, which till now has considered the fact that its adversaries were split among themselves into so many parties to be a gift from God, will now have to learn for once that we all stand united when it is a question of fighting obscurantism.

Bremen, September A plan is under consideration here which, if implemented, would be of the greatest consequence, and not only for Bremen. A respected young local merchant has recently returned from London where he informed himself exactly about the equipment of the steamer Archimedes which, as you know, has a newly invented method of propulsion by an Archimedean screw. He went on the ship's trial run round the whole of Great Britain and Ireland, in which it greatly exceeded the speed of steamboats

[^1]: SHIPPING PROJECT. THEATRE. MANOEUVRES

[^2]: [Morgenblatt für gebildete Leser No. 250, October 19, 1840]

[^3]: a See this volume, pp. 104-05.— Ed. K. F. W. Paniel, Unverholene Beurtheilung.— Ed.





**[p. 129]**

An unprecedented animation prevailed in our theatre recently. Usually our stage is quite outside society; the subscribers pay their contributions and go there now and again when they have nothing better to do. Then Seydelmann came, and actors and public were filled with a fervour to which we are not accustomed in Bremen. One may complain as much as one likes about the decay of the spoken drama through the domination of opera, even Schiller and Goethe may find empty houses, while everybody rushes to hear the tootling of a Donizetti and Mercadante; but as long as the spoken drama can still achieve such triumphs through its most capable representative, our stage can still be cured of its languor. Besides some plays by Kotzebue and Raupach, we have seen Seydelmann as Shylock, Mephistopheles and Philipp (Don Carlos). It would be like pouring water into the sea if I were to enlarge upon his well-known interpretation of these roles.

The recent manoeuvres of the Oldenburg-Hanseatic brigade conducted in the adjoining part of the Oldenburg region give us a picture in miniature of the camp at Heilbronn. During the sham tight for the capture of a village our troops are said to have



**[p. 130]**

Written in September 1840

First published in the Morgenblatt für gebildete Leser Nos. 249 and 250, October 17 and 19, 1840

Printed according to the news- paper

Published in English for the first time

Signed: F. O.

