---
Volume: 2
Document_Title: "28. Night Ride "
Page_Range: "174-176"
---

# 28. Night Ride 

NIGHT RIDE

One night, my carriage bore me all alone Across that well-known German territory Where many a heart, by power beaten down, Rages in impotent and blazing fury.

In fury that the freedom bought so dear With struggle and with ceaseless vigilance Had been cast out, for venal tongues to jeer And cavil at with cruel insolence.

A mist lay on the meadows, deep and calm. At times, a gust of wind would smite amain The poplar-trees and they, in quick alarm Aroused from sleep, soon slumbered on again.

Clear was the air. Sharp hung the sickle moon, A sword of Damocles above the town Towards which I sped. The wrath of kings flies soon From far away to strike its victims down.

Around the carriage wheels run leaping packs Of dogs that bark at me. And do they howl Just like the Capital's paid writer-hacks, Having caught wind of my free-thinking soul?

What do I care? Sunk in my cushions low, I live in dreams of many brave tomorrows. Make no mistake — just before dawn, we know, The nightmare plumbs the deepest of its horrors.



**[p. 152]**

The spirit's tree has coiled its root-limbs round The past, to crush all things outworn and old, And now its branches strew the world around With shining blossoms of eternal gold!

And so I slept, and woke that morning after, And saw the earth all happy, cleansed and bright, And Stiive's city" filled with joy and laughter, City of Freedom, bathed in morning light.

Written at the end of 1840 Printed according to the journal First published in the Deutscher Courier Published in English for the first No. 1, January 3, 1841 time

Signed: Friedrich Oswald

' Osnabrück, whose burgomaster was Johann Karl Bertram Stüve.— Ed.

