---
Volume: 2
Document_Title: "43. The Liberalism of the Spenersche Zeitung "
Page_Range: "323-325"
---

# 43. The Liberalism of the Spenersche Zeitung 

THE LIBERALISM OF THE SPENERSCHE ZEITUNG

Berlin, June 22. The other day, the Spenersche Zeitung' bestowed upon itself, since so far no one else has taken on the job, the praise which it feels it deserves.15S A "review" of its activity over the past six months is sufficient for it to arrive at the important discovery that it is the paper which has pioneered the movement for a free press. It is amusing to see how, with a solemn air of heightened self-confidence, its frock-coat brushed fit for Sunday, it steps before its public, before the foreign newspapers, and places on its head the civic crown of liberalism. The Spenersche Zeitung claims that but for it or rather for the *, which stands for the article in question, but for this * no Prussian newspaper would to this day have attained the present standpoint of liberalism. For as soon as the censorship circular appeared 154 the * proceeded to sound out how tar one might go in the opposition business; it knocked, softly, and lo! it was admitted. And naturally so, for these quiet, bowing, well-intentioned, humble, tame articles would eventually have been passed even before. The* should at least trust its censor to be able to tell a domestic animal from a wild one. But God forbid! This isolated philistinism is so limited that it takes the most trivial idea that crosses its mind for original, inspired by genius, unique of its kind. The censorship circular appears; now every writer must, of course, instantly change his manner of writing, give it freer rein. Our asterisk man, however, considers himself the only person in the world with an intellect capable of reaching this conclusion, and he wants to rub it under

[^1]: a The reference is to the newspaper Berlinische Nachrichten von Staats- und gelehrten Sachen.— Ed.





**[p. 301]**

Written on June 22, 1842 First published in the Rheinische Zeitung No. 177, June 26, 1842

Marked with the sign *x*

Printed according to the news- paper

Published in English for the first time

