---
Volume: 2
Document_Title: "55. The Corn Laws "
Page_Range: "403-408"
---

# 55. The Corn Laws 

THE CORN LAWS

From Lancashire, December 22. The end of the existing Corn Laws is rapidly approaching. The people are in a real fury about the "corn tax", and no matter what the Tories do, they cannot withstand the pressure of the exasperated masses. Sir Robert Peel has prorogued Parliament until February 2 — six weeks for the opposition to fan the anger still more. When the new session opens, Peel will have to state his position on the sliding-scalea at the very outset; it is generally believed that he has at least begun to waver in his attitude towards it. If he decides to drop it, the more extreme Tories will undoubtedly resign from the govern- ment and make room for the moderate Whigs, and then the Peel-Russell coalition will have come into being. In any case, the aristocracy will defend itself stubbornly, and I, for my part, do not think it can be induced to agree voluntarily to the free import of corn. The English nobility allowed the Reform Bill and Catholic emancipation to go through, but the effort that this cost it would be nothing compared with that which abolition of the Corn Laws would entail.186 What is a weakening of the aristocracy's influence at parliamentary elections compared with a 30 per cent reduction in the property of the whole English nobility? And if even the two above-mentioned Bills have evoked such struggles, if the Reform Bill was passed only with the aid of popular risings and stones thrown at the windows of the aristocracy, cannot the nobility be

[^1]: a This term is in English in the original.— Ed.





**[p. 381]**



[^1]: a See this volume, pp. 373-74.— Ed. The name of the League is in English in the original.— Ed.





**[p. 382]**

Written on December 22, 1842 Printed according to the news First published in the Supplement to the P P e r

Rheinische Zeitung No. 361, December 27, Published in English for the first 1842 time

Marked with the sign x

L E T T E R S

August 1838-August 1842



