---
Volume: 2
Document_Title: "3. To Marie Engels, September 11 "
Page_Range: "413-415"
---

# 3. To Marie Engels, September 11 



**[p. 390]**

Your devoted

Your Honour's devoted

F. Engels

First published slightly abridged in the Printed according to the original book: F. Engels, Schriften der Frühzeit, Published in English for the first Berlin, 1920, and in full in: Marx/Ehgels, ^me Gesamtausgabe, Abt. l, Bd. 2, 1930

3

TO MARIE ENGELS

IN BARMEN

[Bremen] Sept. 11 [1838] Dear Marie,

"Hoping to receive another four-page letter from you, I remain, etc." Yes, you little goose, you shall have four pages but they are according to the saying that with the same measure as you measure will it be measured unto you,a and even that is too much for you. For I manage to get as much on a small page like this as you do on a big one, and I forbid such a waste of paper in future; when Fatty writes so spread out, that's a different matter. Do you understand me, little Mamsell? — If you don't go to Xanten this year, you must say:

Console yourself with Job And anoint the monk with syrup. I can't help it, they say here in Bremen. You can imagine to yourselves that you have already been there, and don't you, Marie, know how Hermann b went on when he had a glass of wine? He drank it very slowly so as to have the pleasure of it for a long time. So you should say to yourselves: If we were at Xanten now, we would not be able to be glad that we were still to go there, but now we have a whole hopeful year ahead of us and we can be glad to our fill. See, that's the political way, Socrates and Eulenspiegel would say just the same thing. Remember this for the future. You see, I can lecture you just as well as you me. And when you write

[^1]: a Cf. Matthew 7:2.— Ed. Hermann Engels.— Ed.





**[p. 391]**



[^1]: a Anna Engels.— Ed. b Heinrich Leupold.— Ed.



