---
Volume: 2
Document_Title: "10. To Friedrich Graeber, February 19 "
Page_Range: "437-440"
---

# 10. To Friedrich Graeber, February 19 



**[p. 10]**

[Bremen, February 19, 1839]

Et Tu, Brute? Friderice Graeber, hoc est res quam nunquam de te crediderim! Tu jocas ad cartas? passionaliter? O Tempores o moria! Res dignissima memoria! Unde est tua gloria?3 Where is your honour and your Christianity? Est itum ad Diaboluml Quis est, qui te seduxit?

Nonne verbum meum fruxit (has borne fruit)? O fili mi, verte,b

otherwise I'll beat you with rod and switch, cartas abandona, fac multa bona, et vitam agas integram, partem recuperabis optimam! Vides amorem meum, ut spiritum faulenzendeum egi ad linguam latinam et die obstupatus: quinam fecit Angelum ita tollum, nonsensitatis vollum, plenum et, plus ancora much: hoc fecitc excessive card-playing. Recollect yourself, you evil-doer, think what is the purpose of your existence! Robber, think of how you are sinning against everything sacred and profane! Cards! They are cut from the skin of the devil. O you terrible people. I think of you only with tears or gnashing of teeth. Ha, I am filled with inspiration. On the nineteenth day of the second month of 1839, on the day when midday is at twelve o'clock, a storm seized me and carried me afar and there I saw them playing cards, and then it was time to eat. To be continued.

And behold, there arose from the Orient a dreadful thunder- storm, so that the windows rattled and the hailstones came beating down, but still they went on playing. Thereat a quarrel arose and the King of the Orient marched into battle against the Prince of the Occident and midnight echoed with the cries of the combat- ants. And the Prince of the Sea rose up against the lands in the Orient and a battle took place in front of his town, the like of which was never before seen by men. But they went on playing. And seven spirits came down from heaven. The first wore a long coat and his beard came down to his chest. He was called Faust. And the second spirit had a venerable fringe of grey hair round his bald head and he called out "Woe, woe, woe!" He was called

[^1]: a And you, too, Brutus? Friedrich Graeber, this is a thing I should never have believed of you. You play cards? passionately? O times, O customs! Thing most worthy of being remembered. Where is your honour?—Ed.

[^2]: Gone to the devil! Who is it that has led you astray? Have my words borne no fruit? O my son, turn back.— Ed.

[^3]: c Leave the cards, do much good, and if you live a pure life you will win back the best part. You see my love in that I have driven the spirit of idleness to Latin, and say in stupefaction: who then has made the angel so mad, so full of folly and other things? This has been done by— Ed.



Lear. And the third spirit was of great stature and enormous to behold and his name was Wallenstein. And the fourth spirit was like the children of Anak" and he carried a cudgel like to the cedars of Lebanon. He was called Hercules. And the fifth was made of iron through and through and his name was written on his brow — Siegfried — and by his side strode a mighty warrior whose sword gleamed like lightning. He was the sixth and his name was Roland. And the seventh spirit carried a turban on the point of his sword and swung a banner over his head on which was written — Mio Cid. And the seven spirits knocked on the door of the players, but they paid no heed. And behold, there arose from midnight a great brightness which spread over the whole earth like an eagle, and when it was gone I saw the players no more. But written in black letters on the door was TÏ'"'?! b And I was struck dumb.

If my letter to Wilhelm196 was not sufficient proof of my madness, I hope that it will not occur to any of you now to doubt it. If this is not the case, I am willing to give you even more convincing proof.

I have just seen in the Telegraph a review of the poems of Winkler, the Barmen missionary.1'7 They are trounced terribly and a mass of extracts are given which have a distinct missionary flavour. If the paper comes to Barmen, that will be the end of Gutzkow 's reputation there, which is already low. These extracts are really infinitely revolting—Pol is an angel by comparison. Lord Jesus, heal the issue of blood of my sins (an allusion to the

[^1]: Future of the five card-players

[^2]: a Sons of Anak—aboriginal giants reported in the Old Testament to have inhabited Southern Palestine.— Ed.

[^3]: b Berlin! — Ed.





**[p. 416]**

The Pietist Declares His Love Respected maiden, after struggling hard and long Against all worldly joys, because their lure was strong, I come to Thee to ask if Thou wouldst not wish me In honour bound Thy lawful wedded Spouse to be. Although I love Thee not—that were too much to ask— I love in Thee the Lord, who —

No — it won't do. You can't go making satires on things like this without dragging in the most sacred things behind which these people hide themselves. I should like to see a marriage in which the man does not love his wife but Christ in his wife; and is it not an obvious question there whether he also sleeps with Christ in his wife? Where can you find nonsense like this in the Bible? In the Song of Songs it says—"How fair and how pleasant art thou, O love, for delights!"b But, to be sure, any defence whatever of sensuousness is attacked nowadays in spite of David, Solomon and God knows whom. I can get terribly annoyed over this kind of thing. In addition, these fellows pride themselves on having the true teaching and they damn anybody who does not so much doubt what is in the Bible, as interpret it in a different way from them. It is a pretty business. If anyone should dare to say that this or that verse is an interpolation, then they'll soon go for you. Gustav Schwab is the finest chap in the world, and even orthodox,

[^1]: a Luke 8:43.— Ed. b The Song of Solomon 7:6.— Ed.



