---
Volume: 2
Document_Title: "11. To Hermann Engels, March 11- 12 "
Page_Range: "440-442"
---

# 11. To Hermann Engels, March 11- 12 

Yours,

Friedrich Engels

11

TO HERMANN ENGELS

I request Your Honour not to plague me in future with beginnings of letters such as you learned from Herr Riepe and only permit myself for the moment to remark that it is winter with

[^1]: First published in part in Die neue Printed according to the original Rundschau, 9. Heft Berlin 1913, and in Published in English for the first full in the book: F. Engels, Schriften der t j m e Frühzeit, Berlin, 1920

[^2]: IN BARMEN

[^3]: Bremen, March ll, d 1839 Dear Hermann,

[^4]: In the original letter follow the words: Von Tieck.— Ed. b Platitudes.— Ed. c See this volume, pp. 407-09.— Ed.

[^5]: The original is mistakenly dated February 11.— Ed.





**[p. 418]**

us every morning and summer every midday. For in the morning the temperature is minus five degrees, while it is plus ten degrees at midday. I continue to practise my singing and composing regularly. Here is a sample of the latter:

fhtyi Ji|,jirtnfr|iri|iu.ii.i -MU

You can sing The Blind Man to that melody or you can leave it. March 12.a I'm very glad that you will soon be getting your dog. What is the breed of the mother and what does the animal look ^ v « , 'ike? His Antiquity, Herr Leu- JJet- »JTCnv*»^/ /fitbtttjitl. p0id> is n o w arriving at the of- fice and I will have to strike a more serious tone, as the great Shakespeare says. A new newspaper has just come out called the Bremer Stadtbote,h

edited by Albertus Meyer, who is a very great blockhead. He used to lecture on the hap- piness of peoples, child edu- cation, and other topics, and when he wanted to get his lectures printed the worthy authorities would not agree, saying it would be far too non- sensical. He has the nature of a china merchant and has been in conflict with the Un- terhaltungsblattc ever since his first issue. The way they go for each other would make you die laughing. Continuation in letter to Marie.

Your loving brother

Friedrich Engels

[^1]: Walking in front of the Bremer Stadtbote is a man who looks like

[^2]: this

[^3]: First published in: Marx/Engels, Gesamtausgabe, Abt. 1, Bd. 2, 1930

[^4]: Printed according to the original

[^5]: Published in English for the first

[^6]: a The original is mistakenly dated February 12.— Ed.

[^7]: The Bremen Courier.— Ed. c Bremisches Unterhaltungsblatt.— Ed.



