---
Volume: 2
Document_Title: "14. To Marie Engels, April 10 "
Page_Range: "446-448"
---

# 14. To Marie Engels, April 10 



**[p. 423]**

the Jews, etc.— I will have no truck, for they are already outdated. And I'm telling you, Fritz, when you become a pastor you can be as orthodox as you like, but if ever you become a pietist who rails against Young Germany and regards the Evangelische Kirchen- Zeitung as his oracle, then, truly, I'm telling you you'll have me to deal with. You must become a pastor in Gemarke* and drive out the damned, consumptive, sit-by-the-fire pietism which Krum- macher has brought to such a bloom. Of course they will call you a heretic, but let one of them come and prove by the Bible or by reason that you are wrong. Meanwhile, Blank is a wicked rational- ist and throws the whole of Christianity overboard, what will it lead to? Well, I have never been a pietist. I have been a mystic for a while, but those are tempi passati. I am now an honest, and in comparison with others very liberal, super-naturalist. How long I shall remain such I don't know, but I hope to remain one, even though inclining now more, now less towards rationalism. All this will have to be settled. Adios, Friderice, write more quickly and write a lot. Tuus.b

Do hêst de mî dubbelt.c

Friedrich Engels Friedrich Engels

14

TO MARIE ENGELS

Bremen, April 10, 1839

Dear Marie, Pardon me for not writing to you for so long. Now I'll tell you something nice. On Good Friday, the local Burgomaster, His Magnificence Dr. Groening, died and the election of a new one took place a week ago. The Right Honourable Senator Dr. J. D. Noltenius got the appointment and last Friday there was a big procession for his installation. First came the eight gentlemen

[^1]: First published in Die neue Rundschau, Printed according to the original 9. Heft, Berlin, 1913 Published in English for the first time

[^2]: IN BARMEN

[^3]: a A district in Barmen.— Ed. h Yours.— Ed. c There you have me doubled.— Ed.





**[p. 424]**

servants, two of whom are at the service of every Burgomaster, each wearing short porcelain-white breeches, fine hose and bright red frock-coats, swords at their sides, and tricorns on their heads. Following them came the Burgomasters with His Magnificence Dr. Smidt, the shrewdest of them all and as good as King of Bremen, well to the fore; then Herr Dr. Duntze, who was muffled up to his chin in fur and who always takes a thermometer with him to the meetings of the Senate. Then the senators, preachers and citizens, some 600-800 people, perhaps more, who all went into a house or several houses where they ate," that is, they were all given macaroons, cigars and wine, ate as much as they could hold and crammed their pockets full. Youngsters gathered before the doors and made a din, and when anyone came out they all shouted after him, "hêt îst, hêt îst!"b They also did this to Alderman Hase, who turned round majestically and said: "I am Herr Alderman Hase." Then they shouted: "Ollermann Hase hêt îst, Ollermann Hase hêt îst!" And you can imagine how this strut of the Bremen state set the struts of his own body in motion in order to save himself. Last Saturday a new senator was elected in Dr. Noltenius' place; Dr. Mohr received the honour and his tuck-in took place on Monday. It is the custom on these occasions that one of the new senator's relatives has to drink the pig [das Schwein trinken], i. e., he has to drink himself under the table, which difficult task was carried out by Herr H. A. Heineken, a broker, to the satisfaction of all. For a great poet says:

Marie: "But Friedrich, how can you write such stupid stuff? There's neither rhyme nor reason in it." Friedrich: "I can't help it."d I have to fill the page somehow — aha, I've just remembered something. Last Sunday I went out riding with Neviandt and Roth, and Neviandt brought along a little Englishman, the size of Anna.e We were hardly outside the town before the Englishman got hold of a whip and walloped the horse, so that it lashed out

[^1]: To enjoy the weariness of life. with melancholy Is virtue and conception.0

[^2]: a Wo geist (nicht Geist) wurde. A play on the words Geist, which means "spirit", and geist, a dialectal word meaning "eaten".— Ed.

[^3]: b Has eaten, has eaten! — Ed. Paraphrased lines from Hans Adolf von Thümmel, Hofmarschall of the Hessen Electorate.— Ed.

[^4]: d Written in English in the original.— Ed.

[^5]: e Anna Engels.— Ed.



