---
Volume: 2
Document_Title: "15. To Friedrich Graeber, about April 23- May 1 "
Page_Range: "448-460"
---

# 15. To Friedrich Graeber, about April 23- May 1 

Yours,

Friedrich

15

TO FRIEDRICH GRAEBER

[Bremen, about April 23-May 1, 1839]

Fritz Graeber, I am very busy at present with philosophy and critical theology. When you get to be eighteen years of age and become acquainted with Strauss, the rationalists and the Kirchen-

[^1]: First published in: Marx/Engels, Printed according to the original Gesamtausgabe, Abt. l, Bd. 2, 1930 Published in English for the first time

[^2]: IN BERLIN

[^3]: a At full speed.— Ed. Written in English in the original.— Ed.

[^4]: 15-384





**[p. 426]**

April 24. Ha, ha, ha! Do you know who wrote the article in the Telegraph} The author is the writer of these lines ,d but I advise you not to say anything about it, I could get into a hell of a lot of trouble. I know about Kohl, Ball and Hermann almost exclusively from reviews by W. Blank and Striicker, which I copied almost

[^1]: a Evangelische Kirchen-Zeitung.— Ed. b Mark 14:24; Luke 22:20.— Ed. c Christ's very own words.— Ed. d See this volume, pp. 7-25.— Ed.



tantum abhorrere a Krummachero, ut Tu quidem dixisti.h I am very much obliged to you for the detailed review of Faust. The treatment of this piece certainly bears the stamp of that wretch Raupach.204 This low cur pokes his nose into everything and ruins not only Schiller by using his images and ideas over and over again in his tragedies, but also Goethe by maltreating him. I doubt very much if my poems will have a big sale; more likely they'll have a stinking one, since they are going for waste paper and bumf. I could not read what you wrote in red ink, so shall send you neither 5 silver groschen nor cigars. This time you will get either the canzone or part of the comedy which I have begun but not finished. Now I must go to my singing lesson. Adieu.

[^1]: a In the German there is a pun on the name Kohl and the verb kohlen—to talk nonsense.— Ed.

[^2]: b This is an indication that Ball has not such an aversion for Krummacher as you indeed said.— Ed.

[^3]: 15»





**[p. 428]**

April 27

FRAGMENTS OF A TRAGICOMEDY

HORNED SIEGFRIED

I The Palace of King Sieghard

Council Meeting

Sieghard

So you are gathered here again, Strong members of our wide domain, Around our lofty royal throne, And all are present, save our son. He's in the woods on the rampage; It's time he learned to be his age. He comes not to this cabinet Where morning, noon and night we sweat. Instead of hearing wise men's words, He goes and listens to the birds; Instead of studying state affairs, He's after wrestling bouts with bears. The only thing he wants us for Is to demand we start a war. We would have yielded to his plea

Had God, in His sagacity, Not given us to realise Such rashness would be most unwise. Why let the country go to pot By humouring the silly clot?

Councillor

All that Your Majesty has said Hits it, as usual, on the head. But grant your simple servant leave To speak and say what I believe. The ways of men are manifold; The boy is but eighteen years old. He has the urge to hunt and fight; Wisdom will come with time all right.



**[p. 429]**

Young courage ever seeks to roam, But Wisdom quietly stays at home. Young courage all too soon is tamed, Its pride and strength are quickly lamed. Then it returns to Wisdom's door And there finds happiness once more. So let him, with your royal compliance, Go fight with dragons and with giants. The years will catch him up and get The better of him anyway; And so will life: they'll teach him yet. He will heed Wisdom's words one day.

Siegfried {entering)

And must I bid farewell, O Forest, to your trees? No king's fare can excel Your sylvan luxuries. Where but in wooded valleys

Can wild game run so free? This very golden palace Envies your greenery. You'd scold me, Sire, as I can see For roaming far afield once more. Must I endure such misery Each time I chase the fleeting boar? Since sports and hunting both are banned, Give me a charger and a sword That I may fare to some far land, As I so often have implored.

Sieghard

Do you persist in this obsession? When will you ever show some sense? Clearly, you'll never learn discretion Until you curb your insolence. But since 'tis best to be compliant And let you have your will, it seems — Go: let the cudgel of some giant Awake you from your foolish dreams. Take sword and steed, and get you hence. Don't come back till you've learnt some sense.

Councillor

Sire, be not heavy in your heart That our young hero must depart. The torrent comes to level ground, And trees no longer crash all round. Across the plain it finds its way To fecundate the thirsty land. The torrent's fury turns to play And ends by sinking in the sand.

Siegfried

Must I needs tarry longer These castle walls about? A trusty blade hangs yonder, A charger neighs without. Come, you stone pillar, yield That shining blade so true. I hasten far afield. Father, farewell to you!

(Exit.)

II A Forge in the Forest Enter Siegfried. Enter the Master Smith

Master Smith This is the mighty forge that makes That lovely thing, the Long Short Story. With poems, it fills the Almanacks In all its celebrated glory.

And here we hammer magazines Where verse and criticism unite. The fire-glow of our smithy shines Unceasing, morning, noon and night. But first, take food, and wine, and rest. Apprentice, pray escort our guest.

(Exit Siegfried with Apprentice.)

Master Smith Now, Journeymen, I'm right behind you. To work, and raise a goodly din! Strike on the anvil true, and mind you Beat those novellas long and thinl Heat up those lyrics in the forge; On living fire let them gorge, Then turn them out in one big mess — The public's maw is bottomless. And if there isn't iron enough, A tip from one who knows his stuff; Three heroes of Scott's, three women of Goethe's, A knight from Fouqué with his steely-hard strength, Are more than sufficient for twelve story writers To spin out novellas of suitable length. For lyrics, Uhland's verse affords A treasure-store of flowery words. So hammer with a right good zest: Who turns the most out is the bestl

Siegfried (returning) Master, my thanks! The wine was good. I quaffed twelve measures from the wood.

Master

(Damned scoundrel!) Kind of you to say How much you liked my good Rhine wine. Please be so kind to step this way And meet this gallant team of mine. Now here we have the very best; He churns out tales, at my behest, Both lewd and moral; his praises sang None other than the great Wolfgang Menzel, who in Stuttgart sits; His name, it is Herr von Tromlitz.



**[p. 432]**

In which he hasn't left his tracks. Composing tales at breathless pace He flings them in the public's face. A man of sweated toil is he, He hasn't done a thing for verse, But thanks to him, as most agree, The public's taste was never worse. Taste I regard with trepidation, For taste could mean our ruination. Third, Robert Heller: famous due to A shine as on 1 plate of pewter. The public think it's silver plate; We don't mind if they learn too late. He sets himself a slower pace And strives for characterisation. He's dealt a right smack in the face To mystics—his abomination. You know, the 4 Evangelists Were only silly pietists. He's brought them down a peg or two, And stripped a halo off or two, And made them tea-time fare for us. Just read The Sisters of Lazarus. He also writes with grace and charm, His prickly Roses1 will confirm. Now here is one whose chief attainment Is in scholastic entertainment. Friedrich Nork, hair-splitter, poet, The greatest—thinks the world should know it. He tells his lies in lovely songs And proves, from Oriental tongues, That you're an Ass, Elijah the sun, And East was where all speech began. But don't look for anything sensibly logical, Thoroughly reasoned or etymological. Next is honest Herloßsohn,

[^1]: a An allusion to the journal Rosen. Eine Zeitschrift für die gebildete Welt



Truly deserving of a throne: A novelist and lyric-writer, Piffle's panegyric-writer. His Comet Star* is something rare, And read by nitwits everywhere. Next, under Winkler's guiding hand, The Abend-Zeitung's noble band. Von Grosscreutz, Faber, and Thuringus — What magic thrills those names can bring us! But what more need have I to praise? The public, with its curious ways, Has long since raised them heaven-high To join the stars up in the sky. There are some others, absentees; They're gathering deadwood from the trees. No need to name the apprentice swarm: They're all still rather weak of arm. I hope they will, in time, make good, Given one drop of novelist's blood.

Siegfried Good Master Smith, who may you be?

Master Saxon literature's spirit you see Incarnate in my nothingness. If you would know what I can do, Observe this arm's sinewiness And how I hammer hard and true. You look a likely lad, no shirker. Why don't you join us for a spell?

Siegfried Done, Master! It would suit me well To join you as a common worker.

Master You can be one of Theodor Hell's. Go, try your hand at 2 nouvelles.

Siegfried Ha! With bare fists I brought The oak-trees to the ground;

[^1]: a An allusion to the newspaper Der Komet. Ein Unterhaltungsblatt für die gebildete Lesewelt.— Ed.





**[p. 434]**

Theodor Hell Here, steady! What's the big idea? I'll hit you like that iron, d'you hear!

Siegfried Why make that babbling sound? Why take it all so ill? Stop rolling on the ground. Stand up, man, if you will!

Theodor Hell Oh, help, oh, help!

Master Young journeyman, You strike your fellow hands, I see. Quick march! Get moving—understand? Unless you want your hide well tanned.

Siegfried

You're clearly just the man for me!

Master Ah, woe, woe! etc.

[^1]: (Throws him down.)

[^2]: (Siegfried is sent into the forest, slays the dragon and, on returning, the Master; scatters the journeymen in all directions, and goes away.)





**[p. III]**

In the Forest

Siegfried O'er yonder, where that coppice grows, I hear two men exchanging blows. They're drawing near — such foolish pother; They'll never silence one another! I thought them giants in all their strength With lances of a pine-tree's length, Not two Professors, all skin and bones, Pelting each other with learned tomes.

(Enter Leo and Michelet.)

Leo

Stand up and fight, Hegelian whelp!

Michelet

Not with you, Bigot — you're past all help!

Leo Here, take the Bible — smack on the head!

Michelet

Take Hegel, miserable drip, instead!

Leo Blasphemer, I throw your Hegel back!

Michelet

This Bible will give you a pain in the neck!

Leo

What more do you want, you old corpse in the attic!

Michelet You mean yourself, unbridled fanatic!

Siegfried Pray tell me how this quarrel began.

Michelet Unpolished boor, and liar too, He won't let Hegel have his due!

Siegfried And so you throw at one another The very books that cause the bother?

Leo It's all the same. No Christian he.

Michelet As good and better, believe you me. It's arrant nonsense, what he says.

Siegfried Why don't you go your separate ways? Who started off this quarrel here?

Leo I did. I say so without fear. I fought for God and in God's name.

Siegfried Well, then, the horse you rode was lame. He will never kill Christianity, You won't rescue it from calamity. Let him pursue his chosen bent: You may teach something different. No more the Almighty's name misuse In your blind rage and wild abuse. Now you go this way, you go that, And stop exchanging tit for tat!

Siegfried Although they're peaceful, learned men, I've never seen such fierce defiance;

[^1]: (Exeunt Leo and Michelet in different directions.)



