---
Volume: 2
Document_Title: "16. To Marie Engels, April 28 "
Page_Range: "460-465"
---

# 16. To Marie Engels, April 28 



**[p. 437]**

That is as far as I've got. I have left out the bits of narration and only copied out the introduction and the satires. This is the last piece. Now it is the turn of the King of Bavaria3 to be dealt with — but here it comes to a standstill. The thing lacks complexity and rounding off. Please ask Wurm to see about the poems for the Musenalmanach}1 I must finish now, the post is going.

May 1, 39

Yours,

Friedrich Engels

First published in part in Die neue Printed according to the original Rundschau, 9. Heft, Berlin, 1913 and in Published in English for the first full in the book: F. Engels, Schriften der Frühzeit, Berlin, 1920 Urne

16

TO MARIE ENGELS

[Bremen] April 28, 1839

Dear Marie,

You too are only going to get a little from me today so that I can get on to my comedy which I want to send you.c It is quite true that the gentlemen ate six crates of macaroons. You can believe it or not, just as you like, but there were about 600 people.

Serves you right that you've got nettle-rash. Your fingers are always itching because you want to do something silly. Now you've got something to itch about. You are an old itching machine, and always will be.

[^1]: IN BARMEN

[^2]: a Ludwig I.— Ed. b Deutscher Musenalmanach.— Ed.

[^3]: The comedy given below was written later on separate sheets of paper.— Ed.





**[p. 438]**

Dios* my dear Marie.

<£ 6-, «v A o-S; (y w

Dios, my dear Marie. Your brother

Friedrich

This scrawl is called stenography.

The Dressing-up. Comedy in 1 act, for Marie

Scene 1

(The living-room. Mother is sitting by the table and helping Emil and Hedwig.0

Marie is sitting by the stove reading; Rudolf* is running about annoying

everybody.)

Mother. Marie, stop reading. That's not a book for you. All the stuff you read, it can't be good for you. Marie: Oh Mother. Just this one story, then you can have the book back. Emil: Mother, what does the word Kewatroze mean? Mother: Oh, you mean quatorze—fourteen. You learnt that a long time ago. You mustn't always forget everything again. Hedwig! Really, the child is running up to Marie and fighting with Rudolf. Hedwig, will you do your work? You're all naughty today.

(Enter Anna* and Laura Kampermann.) Anna: There. Mother, we've done our work and now we are going upstairs to dress up. That's what we're going to do. Mother: All right, but don't make too much noise.

[^1]: Farewell.— Ed. Emil Engels.— Ed. Hedwig Engels.— Ed. Rudolf Engels.—Ed. Anna Engels.— Ed.





**[p. 439]**

(Exeunt Anna and Laura with shouts of delight.)

Marie: Here is the book, Mother. I've finished the story. I want to dress up too. Tell me, what shall I put on? Mother: Oh, I've just been telling Anna to be quiet, are you starting now? Rudolf (falls down and shouts): Oh Mother, o-oh Mother. Mother: What's the matter? (Goes to him.) Emit Mother, what does this sentence mean? Hedwig: Mother, here's a very funny figure. Mother. Will you be quiet? All of you going on at once. I can't bear it! Emit Mother, tell me. Won't you help me? Oh Mother, Mother, I must go to the A. B. C.a

Mother: Then go. Marie: Is it true, Mother, that you want to dress up? Mother: Nonsense. Does it still hurt, Rudolf? Hedwig: Yes, Mother. He has a big bruise on his head. What is this figure, Mother? Marie: But you must dress up.

Anna: Mother, Laura is in the A. B. C. and Emil is standing outside brawling and banging on the door. Mother: You too? I've got no time now.

Luise:

Madam, Wendel is going to Gemarke.b Have you got anything for him?

[^1]: (Enter Anna.)

[^2]: (Enter Luise.)

[^3]: Euphemism for W. C.— Ed. A district in Barmen.— Ed.





**[p. 440]**

That's all I needed. Can't we have a moment's peace? All of you shouting at once. (Takes a horsewhip.) There, Emil, one, two, three, Anna, Marie, out with you. Tell Wendel to come himself.

Marie:

Anna: Mother:

All: Mother:

Mother:

(Enter two masked figures, a man and a woman.)

What's this? Here's something else now.

(The man runs to Mother and takes the horsewhip gently away from her. All leap about for joy. The woman stands near Mother and places a pince-nez on her nose.)

Mother: Nonsense! But you can't help laughing at it. ({Enter

Wendel.) Wendel, here's a letter for the post. And this for the Cleners. Here's the money for Hühnerbein the tailor. That's all. (Exit Wendel. Mother sits down wearing the pince-nez.) Emil, you go first and get washed.

Hedwig: Oh Mother, now I see I've done two more sums than I am supposed to. Hurray! Marie: Listen, Mother. Will you dress up now too? Mother: Oh, nonsense! Marie: But listen, Mother, I want to tell you something.

(Says something in Mother's ear.) Mother: No, it's impossible. Marie: No, it's not. You'll see. (Exeunt all.)

[^1]: (The masked figures seize Emil, who is standing there with his mouth open, and chase him out of the room with shouts and blows.)

[^2]: (Two hours later. Hedwig is wearing Rudolf's clothes and Rudolf is wearing Hedwig's, and both are wearing masks which they undo for each other. The others follow one after the other, all

[^3]: very curiously disguised.)



Hermann3: Oh August,b I have surely got the longest nose! Look, boy, I even have a beard like the one our Fritz once had! August: But I have such nice green cheeks and a grey beard, and my nose is also much redder! Marie: Look, Laura, I'm a nice boy, aren't I? You are such a tiny thing under the hat, I am much bigger than you are, and my fancy paper hat is also bigger!

[^1]: (Enter Mother in an old dressing-gown with Father's fur dressing-gown over it, and a peaked nightcap on top of her bonnet, and the pince-nez on her nose.)

[^2]: a Hermann Engels.— Ed. b August Engels.— Ed.



