---
Volume: 2
Document_Title: "17. To Wilhelm Graeber, about April 28- 30 "
Page_Range: "465-470"
---

# 17. To Wilhelm Graeber, about April 28- 30 



**[p. 442]**

(Pause. Enter Father, looks round astonished until at last all take their masks off and the children run about shouting and screaming for joy. Finale: a gigantic feast.)

I could have gone on with it but time will not allow. The post goes in half an hour, so I'll close.

Your brother

Friedrich

First published in: Marx/Engels, Printed according to the original Gesamtausgabe, Abt. l, Bd. 2, 1930 Published in English for the first rime

17

TO WILHELM GRAEBER

IN BERLIN

[Bremen, about April 28-30, 1839]

Guglielmo carissimo! TTJV aoö ènwtéiïjv sop Tjxa sv totg TÔ>V éxépœv, xat -rjôà jisv ^v è)iol TO aù-coû prjjia. Tô &è Jtxaat TQpwv xwv Trévxê UTOupicisury, xal tijv aùt Sv xpiatv où äuvajiat yivoiaxêiv ^ aöftevxix TJv ^ xofi TTStsvtrj V.— 'Eoxtv y^P X^P'S Î>TT' èjioô, sî ôtôoojit

Since you don't wish to criticise St. Hanor, Florida and Sturm, you don't deserve to get any more verses. Your assertion debilitatis ingenii abhörtet ab usata tua veriloquentia. Meam quidem mentem ad juvenilem Germaniam se inclinare, haud nocebit libertati; haec enim classis scriptorum non est, ut schola romantica, demagogia, et cett, societas clausa, sed ideas saeculi nostri, emancipationem judaeorum servorumque, constitutionalismum generalem aliasque bonas ideas in succum et san-

[^1]: not-ijjia Ta èv xaîç eîç ojjiäe èrciaxoiatç.a

[^2]: a My very dear Wilhelm, I found your letter amongst those of the others and its words were sweet to me. But I cannot accept as either authentic or competent the judgment and the sentence passed by the five students.— For it is an act of kindness on my part when I enclose poems in my letters to you.— Ed.



Like to the long, long waves of the sea is the language of

Homer; Aeschylus into the valley hurls one rock after another. Tongue of the Romans — thus mighty Caesar addresses the

legions, Grasping the words that lie in profusion like angular boulders Scattered around; from them there soars a Cyclopean building; Whereas the new Italian tongue is graceful and charming, Setting the poet in the middle of Earth's most beautiful garden; Petrarch filled cornucopias; Ariosto wove his bay-wreath. Language of Spain: oh, hear how aloft in the leaves of the tree-top Reigns the tremendous wind, and tremendous songs of the

ancients Swell and resound in its roar, and the grapes that hang from the

vine-branch Climbing the trunk of the tree, all swing to and fro in the leafage.

[^1]: Of intellectual weakness is in contradiction to your customary veracity. It will do no harm to liberty if my mind inclines towards Young Germany, for this is not a group of writers, like the romantic, demagogic and other schools, not a closed society; what they want and work for, is that the ideas of our century—the emancipation of the Jews and of the slaves, general constitutionalism and other good ideas—shall become part of the flesh and blood of the German people. Since these ideas are not far from the trend of my own mind, why should I hold aloof? For it is not as you say.— Ed.

[^2]: b But.— Ed. c Follows.— Ed.

[^3]: The original (after sequitur) is written in English.— Ed. e But no, my beautiful Italian, lovely and pure as the zephyr, with words like flowers from the loveliest of gardens, and Spanish, a language like the wind in the trees, and Portuguese, like the rustling of the sea on a shore of flowers and meadows, and French, like the quick murmur of a fountain, very amusing, and Dutch, like the smoke from a pipe of tobacco, very cosy.— Ed.





**[p. 444]**

coastline, Where in the reeds may be heard how Syrinx sighs with the

Zephyr. Hark to the tongue of the Franks: it runs, an exuberant streamlet, Merrily taking its course and smoothing the obstinate sandstone Under the rippling flow of its chattering, garrulous wavelets. Language of England, all this time weather-beaten and grass-grown Monument of great giants, that the brambles covered for all that, Round it screams and howls the storm that would topple it over. Ah, but the German tongue, it booms like the surf of the breakers Washing the jagged-edged coral that carries the fairest of islands; Towards it thunder the long, long waves of the music of Homer; There, too, crash the gigantic rocks that Aeschylus tumbled; There you will see the Commander-in-Chief's Cyclopean building; There you will see the fragrant garden of beautiful flowers; Mighty the sounds that swell from the midst of the leaves in the

tree-top; Syrinx is heard in the reeds, and the rivulets polish the sandstone; Many a giant building stands with the wind screaming round it: Such is the German language, eternal and woven with wonders.

I wrote down these hexameters ex tempore, and I hope they'll make the nonsense on the previous page, out of which they came, more bearable to you. But discuss them as something extemporary.

April 29. To proceed with your letter in consistent continuation, the weather is marvellous today so that you, posito caso aequalitatis temporalis," are probably and rightly cutting all your lectures today. I wish I were with you.— I have probably already written to you that I have been venting my wit on the Bremer Stadtboteb under the name of Theodor Hildebrand; I have given it up now with the following letter.

Dear Bremen Courier,

Please don't be offended If I've made you the laughing-stock of town. Remember, friend, that folk have always tended To ridicule what's patently unsound. Your sunshine days have very nearly ended In the three months that you've been trotting round.

[^1]: a Assuming similarity of weather.— Ed. See this volume, p. 5.— Ed.



My poems cost little effort when I did them; The donkey work was almost wholly done. I took your articles and parodied them; The subject-matter came from you alone.

Simply subtract the rhyme-schemes and the rhythm — The image that remains is all your own. Rage, if you like, at your respectful and Obedient servant,

Theodor Hildebrand*

You, too, should begin to write a little, either in verse or in prose, and then send things to the Berliner Conversationsblatt, if it still exists, or to the Gesellschafter. Later, you take it up more seriously, write short stories, which you get printed in magazines, then by themselves, you get a reputation, are acclaimed as a gifted, witty narrator. I see you all again, Heuser a great composer, Wurm writing profound studies on Goethe and the developments of the time, Fritz becoming a famous preacher, Jonghaus compos- ing religious poems, you writing witty short stories and critical essays, and me — becoming the town poet of Barmen to replace Lieutenant Simons of shabbily treated memory (in Cleve).— As a further piece of poetry for you, there is also the song on the sheet for the Musenalmanach? which I don't feel like copying out again. Perhaps I'll write another one besides. Today (April 30), because of the magnificent weather, I sat in the garden from 7 in the morning to half past 8, smoked and read the Lusiadec

until I had to go to the office. There's no better way of reading than in a garden on a clear spring morning, with a pipe in your mouth, and the rays of the sun on your back. This afternoon I'll continue this pursuit with the Old German Tristan, and his sweet reflections on love. Tonight I'm going to the Ratskeller* where our Herr Pastor' is treating us to the Rhine wine which he has

[^1]: a See this volume, p. 26.— Ed. b Deutscher Musenalmanach.— Ed. c Luiz Vaz de Camôes, Os Lusiadas.—Ed. d Beer cellar under the town hall.— Ed.

[^2]: Georg Gottfried Treviranus.— Ed.





**[p. 446]**

that's why you were all so angry about it. The scene is in Barmen and you can imagine what it is.— I have just had a letter from W. Blank in which he says that the article is causing a frantic uproar in Elberfeld. Dr. Runkel attacks it' in the Elberfelder Zeitung, accusing me of falsehood.0 I want to let him be given a hint that he should point out to me just one single falsehood, which he cannot, because everything I wrote was based on proven data which I have from eye-witnesses and ear-witnesses. Blank sent me the paper, which I at once dispatched to Gutzkow with the request to go on keeping my name secret. Krummacher declared recently in a sermon that the earth stands still and the sun rotates around it, and the fellow dares to trumpet this to the world on this April 21, 1839, and then he says that pietism does not lead the world back to the Middle Ages!d It is scandalous. He should be

[^1]: a J. Daniel Noltenius.— Ed. b "Letters from Wuppertal". See this volume, pp. 7-25.— Ed. c See this volume, pp. 27-28.— Ed. d See this volume, p. 29.— Ed.



