---
Volume: 2
Document_Title: "19. To Wilhelm Graeber, May 24- June 15 "
Page_Range: "471-476"
---

# 19. To Wilhelm Graeber, May 24- June 15 



**[p. 448]**

Your brother

Friedrich

First published in the Deutsche Revue, Printed according to the original Stuttgart and Leipzig, Bd. 4, 1920 „ , , , , • ^ ,• , r L *• s r ° Published m English for the first time

19

TO WILHELM GRAEBER

IN BERLIN

[Bremen, May 24-June 15, 1839]

Today is May 24, and still not a line from any of you. You are again qualifying for non-receipt of poems. I don't understand you. Nevertheless, you shall have contributions on present-day litera- ture.

Collected Works of Ludwig Börne. Vols. 1 and 2. Dramaturgische Blätter.— Börne, the great fighter for freedom and justice, is concerned here with questions of aesthetics. And here too he is in his element; what he says is so precise and clear, coming from such a true feeling for beauty and demonstrated so convincingly, that there can be no question of contradiction. It is all flooded in a sea of the most exuberant wit, and here and there, the firm and sharp ideas of freedom rise out of it like rocks. Most of these reviews (for that is what the book is made up of) were written at the time when the plays discussed had just appeared, that is, at a time when critical judgments on them were still blindly and hesitatingly groping about. But Börne's vision penetrated to the innermost threads of the action. The most excellent are his criticisms of Schiller's Tell, an essay which for more than twenty

[^1]: My dear William,3

[^2]: a Written in English in the original.— Ed.





**[p. 449]**

Nächte. Gepanzerte Lieder by Karl Beck

I am a Sultan, driven by storms that blow, My warrior hosts are armoured forms of song, And grief has laid a turban on my brow With many mysteries its folds among.*

If such images are already contained in the second verse of a prologue, what will the book itself be like? If a youngster of twenty has such ideas, what kind of song will the mature man sing?—Karl Beck is a poetic talent without equal since Schiller. I find a remarkable affinity between Schiller's Räuber and Beck's Nächte, the same ardent spirit of freedom, the same unrestrained fantasy, the same youthful exuberance, the same mistakes. Schiller strove for freedom in the Räuber, which was an earnest warning to his servile age. But at that time such a striving could not yet take a definite form. In Young Germany, we now have a definite, systematic trend. Karl Beck comes forward and calls loudly to his age to recognise this trend, and to join it. Benedictus, qui venit in nomine Domini!b

Der fahrende Poet. Poems by Karl Beck. The first work of the young poet has hardly appeared before he presents us with a second, which in power of expression, wealth of ideas, lyrical verve and depth is not a whit inferior to the first, but infinitely surpasses it in excellence of form and in its classicism. What an advance from Schöpfung in the Nächte to the sonnets on Schiller and Goethe in Der fakrende Poet\ Gutzkow thinks that the sonnet

[^1]: a From Karl Beck's poem Der Sultan. See this volume, p. 41.— Ed. b Blessed is he who cometh in the name of the Lord.— Ed.





**[p. 450]**

Blasedow und seine Söhne. A comic novel by Karl Gutzkow. Vol. 1. This novel in 3 volumes is based on the idea of a modern Don Quixote — an idea which has already been frequently used but generally has been badly adaptated, and by no means exhausted. The character of this modern Don Quixote (Blasedow, a country parson), as Gutzkow originally conceived him, was splendid, but something is clearly wanting in the execution. At any rate, this novel by the barely thirty-year-old Gutzkow (and which, moreover, is said to have been finished three years ago) is very inferior to Cervantes' presentation which, of course, is the work of a mature man. On the other hand, the secondary characters — Tobianus seems to correspond to Sancho Panza — the situations and the language are excellent.

So much for my reviews. I shall continue when you have written.— Do you know when your letters arrived? On June 15! And the ones before came on April 15! That makes exactly two months! Is that right? I herewith decree that, on pain of not being sent any more poems, Wurm's influence on the dispatch of letters be totally withdrawn. And if Wurm does not get his letter finished by the proper time, then send yours off without his. Isn't 14 days long enough to write me two quarto-size pages? It is scandalous. You put no date on your letter again, I don't think that's right, either.— The article in the Telegraph3 is my own indisputable property, and pleased W. Blank enormously. It was also ap- plauded very much in Barmen and, in addition, was quoted with praise in the Nuremberg Athenäum.206 There may be individual exaggerations in it, but on the whole it gives a correct picture if seen from a reasonable standpoint. However, if read with the preconceived opinion that it is a jumbled botch, it must ap- pear to be precisely that.— What you say about the comedy is justum.b

[^1]: a "Letters from Wuppertal". See this volume, pp. 7-25.— Ed. b Correct.— Ed.



Justus judex ultionis, Donum fac remissionis."

You have not made the slightest mention of the canzone. This to be rectified.

Candidates of Musenalmanach

With regard to Leo and Michelet, I only know about the matter from Leo's Hegelingen207 and a number of works written against it, and from these I have learned: 1) that, according to his own statements, Leo has abandoned all philosophy for the past 11 years and therefore cannot pass any judgment; 2) that only his extrava- gant and boastful brain made him believe he had a vocation for it; 3) that he attacked conclusions which, by the specific character of the Hegelian dialectic, necessarily follow from generally accepted premises instead of attacking the dialectic itself, and failing which he should have let these conclusions stand; 4) that he resorted only to coarse exclamations and indeed abuse to refute what was written against him; 5) that he regards himself as being far superior to his opponents, puffs himself up, and then on the very next page smirks with an infinite humility; 6) that he only attacks four persons, though by so doing he attacked the whole school, which cannot be separated from them, for although Gans, etc., may indeed have dissociated themselves from them on particular

[^1]: a Upright judge who punishes, grant me indulgence.— Ed.

[^2]: Deutscher Musenalmanach.— Ed.





**[p. 452]**

Your true friend

Friedrich Engels, Young German

Weren't you at Gans' funeral? Why don't you write anything about him?

[^1]: First published considerably abridged in Printed according to the original Die neue Rundschau, 9. Heft, Berlin, 1913, , , . , , . „ , . , r , r- and in full in the book: F. Engels, Schrift- Published m Enghsh for the first en der Frühzeit, Berlin, 1920 t i m e

[^2]: a H. Leo, Sendschreiben an J. Gbrres.— Ed.

[^3]: K. Schubarth, Ueber die Unvereinbarkeit der Hegel'schen Staatslehre— Ed.



