---
Volume: 2
Document_Title: "20. To Friedrich Graeber, June 15 "
Page_Range: "476-480"
---

# 20. To Friedrich Graeber, June 15 



**[p. 20]**

IN BERLIN

[Bremen, June 15, 1839] Fritz Graeber: Gentlemen, here you see modern characters and conditions.3

y«/»j»éu

June 15. Your letters arrived today. I decree that Wurm must never again post the letters. To come to business, I was already aware of the gist of what you say about Joseph's family trees and have the following to say in reply:

1) Where can you find in any genealogi- cal table in the Bible a son-in-law in similar circumstances being called a son? Unless you can mention one I can only regard this as a forced, unnatural expla- nation.

2) Why did Luke, who wrote in Greek for Greeks, who could not know this

[^1]: a Cartoons (left to right): Weltschmerz (World-weariness), Moderne Zerrissenheit (Modern stress and strain), Kölner Wirren (Cologne discord), Der noble, moderne Materialismus (The noble, modern materialism), Frauenemancipation (Emancipation of women), Zeitgeist (Spirit of the times), Emancipation des Fleisches (Emancipation of the flesh).—Ed.





**[p. 454]**

3) What is the point of Joseph's genealogical table at all? It is superfluous since all three synoptic gospels expressly declare that Joseph was not the father of Jesus.

4) Why does a man like Lavater not resort to this explanation, but rather let the contradiction stand? Finally, why does even Neander — who after all is more erudite than Strauss — say that this is an insoluble contradiction, responsibility for which should be laid on the Greek scholar who worked on Matthew's Hebrew manuscripts?

Furthermore, I do not propose to be dismissed so easily with my other points, which you call "miserable hair-splitting". The teach- ing of literal inspiration is carried by the Wuppertalers to such a degree that God is supposed to have invested each word with a particularly deep meaning, as I have heard often enough from the pulpit. I can well believe that Hengstenberg does not share this view, for it is obvious from the Kirchen-Zeitung that he has no clear opinions whatever, but at one moment concedes to one of the orthodox something which the next moment he holds up as a crime when it is said by a rationalist. But how far does the inspiration of the Bible go? Certainly not so far that one Evangelist can make Christ say "This is my blood"a and another "This cup is the new testament in my blood" .b Why then did God who surely foresaw the dispute between Lutherans and Reformers not prevent this wretched conflict by such a very small interven- tion? If there is inspiration, then only two things are possible: either God did it deliberately in order to cause the conflict, something which I should not like to impute to God, or God overlooked it, which is ditto inadmissible. One cannot say that this dispute has brought forth any good, and it would be completely unwarranted and contrary to all probability to suppose that, after having divided the Christian Church for 300 years, it will have a good effect in the future. It is precisely the passage about the Lord's Supper which is important. And if there is a contradiction here, then all faith in the Bible is destroyed.

I want to tell you quite plainly that I have now reached a point where I can only regard as divine a teaching which can stand the test of reason. Who gives us the right to believe blindly the Bible? Only the authority of those who did so before us. Yes, the Koran

[^1]: a Mark 14:24.— Ed. b Luke 22:20.— Ed.





**[p. 455]**

is a more organic product than the Bible, for it demands belief in its entire, continuous content. But the Bible consists of numerous parts written by different authors, many of whom do not even themselves make any claim to godliness. Are we supposed to believe it against our reason, simply because our parents tell us to do so? The Bible teaches that rationalists will be eternally damned. Can you imagine that a man who has striven for union with God all his life (Börne, Spinoza, Kant), indeed that someone like Gutzkow, whose highest aim in life is to find the meeting point between positive Christianity and the culture of our time, that after death people like these should be banished from God for ever and ever and suffer God's wrath physically and mentally without end in the most fearful torments? We must not torment a fly for stealing our sugar, yet God is supposed to torment such men, whose errors are equally unconscious, ten thousand times more cruelly and for all eternity? Further, a rationalist who is sincere — does he sin by his doubting? Not at all. He would then have to suffer the most terrible pangs of conscience all his life; if he strives for truth, Christianity would have to overwhelm him with incontestable truth. Does this happen? Further, how ambiguous is the position of orthodoxy with regard to modern education? It is claimed that Christianity has brought education with it everywhere. And now all of a sudden, orthodoxy orders that education shall be brought to a halt in the middle of its progress. What is the point of all philosophy, for example, if we believe the Bible, which teaches that God cannot be known through reason? Yet, despite this, orthodoxy finds a little philosophy, only not too much of it, quite useful. If geology brings results different from what Mosaic primeval history teaches, then it is decried (see the miserable article in the Evangelische Kirchen-Zeitung entitled "Die Grenzen der Naturbetrachtung"1); if it brings results which seem to be the same as in the Bible, then it is appealed to. For example, it is appealed to if a geologist declares that the earth and the fossilised bones prove that there was once a great flood; but if another geologist finds evidence that these things belong to different ages and proves that these floods took place at different times in different places, then geology is damned. Is that honest? Further- more: here we have the Leben Jesu by Strauss, an irrefutable book; why does not someone write a devastating refutation? Why is this truly honourable man decried? How many have come out against him in the manner of a Christian, like Neander, and he is not one

[^1]: a Evangelische Kirchen-Zeitung, March 20, 23 and 27, 1839.— Ed.





**[p. 456]**

Your true friend

Friedrich Engels Printed according to the original

[^1]: Published in English for the first time

[^2]: a Paul in the original.— Ed. b 1 Peter 2:2.— Ed.

[^3]: First published abridged in Die neue Rundschau, 10. Heft, Berlin, 1913, and in full in the book: F. Engels, Schrif- ten der Frühzeit, Berlin, 1920



