---
Volume: 2
Document_Title: "23. To Wilhelm Graeber, July 30 "
Page_Range: "487-492"
---

# 23. To Wilhelm Graeber, July 30 



**[p. 464]**

fury. Of you I think in my tossing skiff, you German kings and you

princes. How the patient people bore on their heads the gilded throne you

ascended, In triumph carried you through the land and sent the bold

conqueror fleeing.3

Brazenly arrogant then you became, you betrayed all the promises

given. Now a storm blows up out of France, and the people rise up in

their masses, And your throne is rocked like the skiff in the storm and your

hand loses hold of the sceptre. You above all, Ernst August, I challenge with angry defiance. Despotic and reckless, you flouted the law — now hark to the

storm as it rises! The people look up with piercing eyes and the sword barely rests

in the scabbard. Speak! Are you safe on your golden throne, as I in my boat on the

waters?

The business about the high waves on the Weser is quite true, also that I was sailing on it on the great day of the July revolution.

Give my regards to Wurm and tell him that he must write me a lot.

Yours,

TO WILHELM GRAEBER

Bremen, July 30, 1839 My dear Guglielmo,

What foul ideas you have about me! There can be no question either of the buffoon or of the loyal Eckart (or Eckkardt, as you spell it),210 but only of logic, reason, consistency, propositio major et

[^1]: Friedr. Engels First published in full in the book: Printed according to the original F. Engels, Schriften der Frühzeit, Berlin, Published in English for the first 19x20 time 23

[^2]: IN BERLIN

[^3]: a An allusion to Napoleon I.— Ed.





**[p. 465]**





**[p. 466]**



[^1]: a Ch. H. Weisse, Die evangelische Geschichte— Ed.

[^2]: Champion.— Ed.





**[p. 467]**

One hears the thunder's voice proclaim aloud What's written by the lightning on the clouds"

in enormous profusion. Listen to what he says about Börne, whom he adores. He is speaking to Schiller:

Your Posa was no airy fantasy;

For did not Börne perish for us all? He scaled the summits of humanity; A Tell, he sounded Freedom's clarion call. Up there, he calmly whet his arrow-head Took aim and shot. And Freedom's arrow sped

Into the apple, into the round Earth.b

And how he describes the misery of the Jews and student life! It is capital, and now the Fahrende Poetl Man, have some sense and read him. Look, if you refute Börne's essay on Schiller's Tell then you can have all the royalties I am hoping to get for my translation of Shelley.212 I'll forgive you for pulling my Wuppertal article0 to pieces so thoroughly, for I read it again recently and was astonished at the style. I haven't written nearly so well since. Don't forget Leo and Michelet next time. As I have said before, you are very much mistaken in thinking that we Young Germans want to support the spirit of the age. But just think for a moment—when this itvet5jtad blows and blows right for us, would we not be fools if we did not set our sails? It will not be forgotten that you were at Gans' funeral.213 I'll get it mentioned in the Elegante Zeitung' soon. The way you all afterwards beg so nicely for forgiveness for the little bit of rumpus you kicked up strikes me as very funny. You still can't curse and swear, but here they all come: Fritz sends me to hell, accompanies me to the gate and pushes me in with a low bow so that he himself can then fly back to Heaven. You see everything double through your spar spectacles and take my three friends for spirits from the Venus-

[^1]: 2 From the poem Gang urn Leipzig (K. Beck, Nächte. Gepanzerte Lieder. Erstes Märchen. Dritte Nacht).— Ed. b

[^2]: From the poem Schillers Haus in Gohlis (K. Beck, Nächte. Erstes Märchen. Fünfte Nacht).— Ed.

[^3]: c "Letters from Wuppertal". See this volume, pp. 7-25.— Ed. d Wind.— Ed.

[^4]: c Zeitung für die elegante Welt.— Ed.





**[p. 468]**

In our dear Barmen literary feeling is beginning to stir now. Freiligrath started a play-reading society in which, since his departure, Striicker and Neuburg (a clerk at Langewiesche's) are the up6|Aapt b of liberal ideas. Now Herr Ewich has made the following sharp-witted discoveries: (1) that the spirit of Young Germany haunts this society, (2) that the society in pleno composed the "Letters from Wuppertal" in the Telegraph. He has also suddenly discovered that Freiligrath's poems are the dullest stuff in the world and that Freiligrath stands far below de la Motte Fouqué and will be forgotten within three years. Precisely what was once asserted by Beck.

O Schiller, Schiller, ever-vibrant spirit, O greatest heart that beat in warmest breast, Forever young, to us you were the Prophet Who carried Freedom's flag before the rest. When all the world had stolen from the fray,

Who wrote that? — It is from Karl Beck's Der Fahrende Poetc with all his powerful verse and magnificent imagery, but also with his obscurity, his extravagant hyperboles and metaphors. For it is now settled that Schiller is our greatest liberal poet. He sensed the new era which would dawn after the French Revolution, which Goethe did not, even after the July revolution, and when it came too near to him so that he almost had to believe that something new was coming, he retired into his room and shut the door so as to remain comfortable. That detracts from Goethe a great deal; but

[^1]: And the faint-hearted could do nought but pray, Oh, you were truly prodigal of your blood; Your warmest life, your deepest life you threw Before the world in sacrifice from you. Contented, cold, the world misunderstood, All heedless of your heart's deep misery, And only heard the music of the spheres, When to its ears came waves of poetry

[^2]: That you had swelled with your own blood-red tears.

[^3]: a Peter Jonghaus.— Ed. b Champions.— Ed. c Dritter Gesang. Gedicht 52.— Ed.



