---
Volume: 2
Document_Title: "25. To Wilhelm Graeber, October 8 "
Page_Range: "494-497"
---

# 25. To Wilhelm Graeber, October 8 



**[p. 25]**

TO WILHELM GRAEBER

IN BERLIN

[Bremen] October 8, 1839 O Wilhelm, Wilhelm, Wilhelm! So at last we are hearing from you. Now, manikin, now you're going to hear something: I am now an enthusiastic Straussian. Just you come here, I have now got arms, shield and helmet; now I am secure, just you come here and I'll give you such a drubbing, despite all your theologia, that you won't know where to run. Yes, Guillermo, jacta est alea? I am now a Straussian; I, a poor, miserable poet, have crept under the wing of the genius David Friedrich Strauss. Just hear what a fellow he is! There lie the four gospels in a crisp and colourful chaos; mysticism lies in front of them and adores them — and behold, in comes David Strauss like a young god and brings the chaos out into the light of day and — Adios faith! It is as full of holes as a sponge. He sees too much myth here and there, but only in unimportant matters, otherwise he is a man of real genius. If you can refute Strauss—eh bien, I'll become a pietist once again.— I could also have learned from your letter that Mengs was an important artist, if, unfortunately, I had not already known it for a long time. With Die Zauberflöte (music by Mozart) it is exactly the same. The reading-room is splendidly arranged, and among the most recent literary productions I draw your attention to König Saul, a tragedy by Gutzkow; Skizzenbuch by the same author; Dichtungen by Th. Creizenach (a Jew); Deutschland und die Deutschen by Beurmann; Die Dramatiker der Jetztzeit, Vol. 1, by L. Wienbarg, etc. I am very anxious to hear your opinion about Soul. Beurmann quoted extracts from my article in the Telegraph21* in his Deutschland und die Deutschen, in which he speaks about Wuppertal.— On the other hand, I warn you against the Geschichte des polnischen Aufstands (1830-31) by Smitt, Berlin, 1839, which was undoubtedly written on the direct order of the King of Prussia.b

The chapter about the beginning of the revolution is headed with a motto from Thucydides which runs something like this: But we, who were unprepared for anything untoward, were suddenly invaded by them without any cause!'.!!!! Oh, what gigantic non- sense! Splendid, on the other hand, is the history of this glorious uprising by Count Soltyk, which was published in German in

[^1]: a The die is cast.— Ed. b Frederick William III.— Ed.





**[p. 472]**

Stuttgart in 1834215 — in your place, of course, it will have been banned, like everything good. Another important piece of news is that I am writing a short story which will be printed in January, always provided, of course, that it is passed by the censor, which is an annoying dilemma.

I really don't know whether or not I should continue sending you poems, but I think I did send you my Odysseus Redivivus216

lately and I beg you to let me have your criticisms of the last consignment. We have a novice here from your part of the coun- try, someone called Müller, who is going to sail to the South Seas as a ship's preacher. He is staying at our house and has the most extravagant views about Christianity, which you will un- derstand when I tell you that he has spent his time recently under the influence of Gossner. It is not easy to have more ex- alted views about the efficacy of prayer and direct divine inter- vention in life. Instead of saying that one can sharpen one's senses, one's hearing, one's sight, he says that when the Lord gives me a duty to fulfil, He is also bound to provide me with the power to fulfil it; of course there must be fervent prayer and hard work for one's own part too, otherwise there is nothing doing. And so he restricts to believers only this familiar fact that holds for all men. Even a Krummacher would have to grant me that such an outlook is really too childike and childish.— I am very pleased to hear that you have a better opinion of my Telegraph article. It was, of course, written in haste, as a result of which it has a style such as I only hope my short story will have, but also some one- sidednesses and half-truths. Krummacher, as you probably know, got to know Gutzkow in Frankfurt am Main and is said to be making up mirab Ma* about it—proof of the correctness of Strauss' views about myths. I am now taking to the modern style, which is without doubt the ideal of all style. Models for it are Heine's writings, but especially Kühne and Gutzkow, although Wienbarg is its real master. Among earlier elements that have had a particularly favourable influence on it are Lessing, Goethe, Jean Paul and, above all, Börne. Oh, Börne — he writes a style that surpasses everything. Meißel, der Franzosenfresser is stylistically the best piece of work in German and likewise the first one that sets out to annihilate an author completely; and in your place it is also banned to make sure that no better style shall be written than what is turned out in the royal offices. The modern style unites in itself every excellence of style — compact brevity and pregnancy

[^1]: Curious stories.— Ed.



I have forgotten the bars again; get Heuser to put them in for you. The melody is marvellous and through its always harmonious

[^1]: a Engels has copied out the first stanza of Goethe's Bundeslied under the melody of Reichardt's setting for this song. The text is as follows: "In hours of exaltation That Love and Wine both bring, This song with inspiration United we shall sing I God binds us all together, Who come here at His call. Keep our flames burning ever; He lit them for us all."—Ed.



