---
Volume: 2
Document_Title: "26. To Wilhelm Graeber, October 20- 21 "
Page_Range: "497-499"
---

# 26. To Wilhelm Graeber, October 20- 21 



**[p. 474]**

In the next few days I shall send you a good friend, Adolf Torstrick, who is going to study there. He is jolly and liberal and understands Greek very well. The other Bremen people who are coming are not up to much. Torstrick will have letters from me to you. Receive him well, I hope you get to like him. Fritz has not yet written to me, the vermicle" was going to write to me from Elberfeld but didn't do so out of laziness — for which please give him a dressing down. If Heuser — whom I cannot write to in Elberfeld for fear I miss him — should arrive, tell him he may hope for something from me soon.

Yours,

Friedrich Engels

First published in part in Die neue Printed according to the original Rundschau, 10. Heft, Berlin, 1913, and in full in the book: F. Engels, Schriften der Published in English for the first Frühzeit, Berlin, 1920 t l m e

26

TO WILHELM GRAEBER

[Bremen, October 20-21, 1839]

October 20. To Herr Wilhelm Graeber. I am quite sentimental; it is a difficult case. I remain here deprived of all merriness. With Adolf Torstrick, the bearer of this, the last merriness leaves. How I celebrated October the 18th can be read in my last epistle to

[^1]: IN BERLIN b

[^2]: a An allusion to Gustav Wurm.— Ed.

[^3]: The back of the letter bears the inscription: "To Herr Wilhelm Graeber Berlin, Mittelstrasse, 3rd floor." — Ed.





**[p. 475]**

21st. Today has been a dreadfully boring day. Half-dead from slaving in the office. Then choir practice, enormous enjoyment. Now I must see that I write you something more. Verses at the next opportunity, I have no time left to copy them. Didn't even have anything interesting to eat, all boring. And it's so cold you can't bear it in the office. Thank God, tomorrow we have hopes of getting some heating. I should be getting a letter from your brother Hermann soon; he wants to test my theology and massacre my conviction. That comes of being a sceptic; the thousand hooks with which one hung on to the old come loose and hook on to something else, and then there are arguments. The devil take Wurm, don't get a word from the fellow, he is becoming worse and worse every day. I suppose he is taking to drinking brandy. Now give Torstrick a friendly welcome, make him tell you about me if it interests you, and put good beer before him.

Farewell."

Yours, Friedrich Engels

[^1]: First published in the book: F. Engels, Printed according to the original Schriften der Frühzeit, Berlin, 1920 - . , . , _ • _ • • T* I- •_ r ._ r . ' Published in English for the first time

[^2]: a Written in English in the original.— Ed.



