---
Volume: 2
Document_Title: "28. To Wilhelm Graeber, November 13- 20 "
Page_Range: "504-510"
---

# 28. To Wilhelm Graeber, November 13- 20 



**[p. 481]**

First published in the book: F. Engels, Printed according to the original Schriften der Frühzeit, Berlin, 1920 „ ,,. , , . ,. ,. , , , r- Published m English for the first time

28

TO WILHELM GRAEBER

IN BERLIN

[Bremen, November 13-20, 1839]

Nov. 13, 1839. Dearest Guilielme, why don't you write? You all belong to the category of idlers and loungers. But I am a different fellow! Not only do I write to you more than you deserve, not only am I acquiring an exceptional acquaintance with all literatures of the world, I am also quietly making for myself in short stories and poems a memorial of glory which, unless the censor's breath turns the bright gleam of steel to ugly rust, will shine in brilliant, youthful radiance through all German lands, Austria excepted. In my breast it ferments and boils, in my sometimes drunken head it glows quite exceptionally; I long to find a great thought which will clear the ferment and blow the glow into a bright flame. A splendid subject, compared with which all my previous ones are mere childishness, is working upwards in my mind. What I want to do is to reveal in a "fairy story" or something like that those foreshadowings of the modern world that showed themselves in the Middle Ages; I want to uncover those spirits who knocked under the hard crust of the earth for release, buried beneath the foundations of churches and dungeons. I want to try and re- solve at least part of Gutzkow's task: the true second part of Faust—Faust no longer an egoist but sacrificing himself for

[^1]: a The end of the letter is missing.— Ed.





**[p. 482]**

Nov. 15. No letter today either? What shall I do? What shall I think of you? I can't understand you. Nov. 20. And if you don't write today I shall geld you in thoughts and make you wait as long as you do me. An eye for an eye, a tooth for a tooth, a letter for a letter. But you hypocrites say: Not an eye for an eye, not a tooth for a tooth, not a letter for a letter, and fob me off with your damned Christian sophistry. No, better a good pagan than a bad Christian.

Poets of world-weariness

A young Jew has arisen, Theodor Creizenach, who writes most excellent poems and even better verses. He has written a comedy* in which W. Menzel and company are ridiculed in the most priceless fashion. Everybody is now flocking to the modern school

[^1]: a Th. Creizenach, Der schwäbische Apoll.—Ed.





**[p. 483]**

•ftër ot«h»rev> Pt*t U Jlrem e^ K\a)hskellt* wtj friv Uto C ^ ZECHER ^.hun &n S uni J« mij TVn fc Uen^fraoi MCnien, ®t«n»ir/'Vn/

bèjflijù^t&ji Out $.<f^$f~*u*/' T ti Ukidrtjt flot, ^ > A ; &Cj&>y4/)<d+>»Jtai Av~, /ttu*/*^

(*eotlan>u*J- «**I/I«»K Coi*ptb<t*6ock 3*««. jiul diu S+Z* f*UJJ. du,, tfhcÉ? '

In Berlin lives a young poet, Karl Grün, of whom I have these days read a Buch der Wanderungen which is very good. But he is said to be twenty-seven already, and at that age he should be able to write better. Now and again he has very striking thoughts, but often dreadful Hegelian phrases. What does this mean, for

[^1]: a Further comes the following joking text: "We, Friedrich Engels, supreme poet in the Bremen town-hall cellar and privileged boozer, announce and make known to all and sundry, past, present, absent and future, that you are all asses, lazy creatures, who are wasting away from disgust with your own existence, scoundrels who don't write to me, and so on, and so on. Written on our office stool at a time when we had no hangover. Friedrich Engels." — Ed.





**[p. 484]**

The night before last I had a great booze-up in the wine cellar on two bottles of beer and two and a half bottles of 1794 Rü- desheimer. My prospective publisher and diverse philistines were with me. Specimen of an argument with one of these philistines on the Bremen constitution: I: In Bremen the opposition to the government is not of the right kind since it consists of the money aristocracy, the aldermen who oppose the aristocracy of rank, the Senate. He: You cannot really maintain that, can you? I: Why not? He: Prove your assertion. — That sort of thing passes for argu- ment here! Oh, you philistines, go and learn Greek, and come again. Anyone that knows Greek also knows how to argue rite. I can argue six such fellows to death at once, even if I am half-seas over and they are sober. These people cannot follow a thought through to its necessary conclusions for three seconds, but everything goes in spasms; you only need let them speak for half an hour, throw in a few seemingly innocent questions, and they contradict themselves splendidamente. They are dreadfully stolid people, these philistines; I began to sing, but they resolved unanimously against me that they would eat first, and then sing. They stuffed themselves with oysters, while I went on angrily smoking, drinking and shouting without taking any notice of them, until I fell into a blissful slumber. I am now a large-scale importer of banned books into Prussia; Börne's Franzosenfresser in

four copies, the Briefe aus Paris by the same, six volumes, Venedey's Preussen und Preussenthum, most strictly prohibited, in five copies, are lying ready for dispatch to Barmen. The last two volumes of the Briefe aus Paris I had not yet read; they are magnificent. King Otto of Greece is given a terrible going-over; thus he says on one occasion:

Then comes a very fine description of how these Hellenes walk about in Athens, Pericles, Aristotle and others. Then it is announced: King Otto has come. Everybody gets up, Dio-

[^1]: "If I were God I would have great fun: I would let all the great Greeks rise again one night." b

[^2]: a Buch der Wanderungen. Ostsee und Rhein, Cassel und Leipzig, 1839, S. XXV. (Grün's book was published under the pseudonym of Ernst von der Haide.) — Ed. L. Börne, Briefe aus Paris, Brief 89.— Ed.



"Hellenes, look up. The sky has taken on the Bavarian national colour." (This speech is really too good, I must copy it out in full.) "For in the most ancient times Greece belonged to Bavaria. The Pelasgians lived in the Odenwald, and Inachus was born in Landshut. I have come to make you happy. Your dem- agogues, seditionists and journalists have brought your beautiful land to ruin. The fatal freedom of the press has thrown everything into confusion. Just see what the olive-trees look like. I would have come to you long ago, but I could not do so, for I have not yet been long in this world. Now you are a member of the Deutsche Bund; my ministers will inform you of the latest decisions of the Bund. I shall know how to safeguard the rights of my crown and by and by make you happy. For my civil list" (salary of the king in a constitutional state) "you shall annually give me 6 million piastres, and I allow you to pay my debts."a

The Greeks become confused, Diogenes shines his lamp in the king's face, and Hippocrates has ordered six cartloads of hellebore to be fetched, etc., etc. This whole ironical poem is a masterpiece of biting satire and written in a style that is divine. The reason why you like Börne less is because you are reading one of his weakest and earliest works, the Schilderungen aus Paris. The Drama- turgische Blätter, the criticisms, the aphorisms, but above all the Briefe aus Paris and the marvellous Franzosenfresser stand infinitely higher. The description of the collection of paintings is very bor- ing, there you are right. But the grace, the Herculean strength, the depth of feeling, the devastating wit of the Franzosenfresser are unsurpassable. I hope we shall meet at Easter or else in the autumn in Barmen, and then you shall get a better idea of this Börne.— What you write about Torstrick's duel is indeed different from his own version, but in any case he is the one who had the most unpleasantness from it. He is a good fel- low, but he lives in extremes, now drunk, then a little pedantic.

Continuation. If you are of the opinion that German literature has gradually fallen asleep, you are greatly mistaken. Don't think that because you hide your head from it like an ostrich and don't see it, it has ceased to exist. Au contraire, it is developing quite appreciably, as would be clear to you if you paid more attention to it and didn't live in Prussia, where the works of Gutzkow, etc., first require a special and rarely granted permission.— You are equally mistaken in thinking I should return to Christianity. Pro primo, it is ridiculous to me that I no longer count with you as a Christian, and pro secundo, that you think anyone who for the sake of the Idea has stripped off what is fantastical in orthodoxy could

[^1]: a Ibid.— Fd.





**[p. 486]**



[^1]: A. Tholuck, Die Glaubwürdigkeit der evangelischen Geschichte.—Ed.



