---
Volume: 2
Document_Title: "33. To Marie Engels, August 4 "
Page_Range: "524-526"
---

# 33. To Marie Engels, August 4 



**[p. 33]**

TO MARIE ENGELS

IN MANNHEIM"

Dear Marie,

Now I must tell you at once that for the future I shall not stand for any lessons from your pen. You must not think, my dearest little goose, that now you are at a boarding-school you can at once try to be wise and, besides, if I want any, I can get piles of books full of good instructions from the Pastor.b The beer stays in our office until it has been drunk, and since your arguing against it our beer trade has only improved, for we have firstly brown ale and secondly pale ale. That's what comes of saucy little board- ing-school misses interfering in the affairs of their gentlemen brothers.

So I shall not frank my letters. Only address yours: Herr F. E. in Bremen, that is enough. But leave the parson out of the address. Recently, from July 27th to 30th, we celebrated the July revolution which broke out ten years ago in Paris; we spent one evening in the town-hall cellar and the others in Richard Roth's tavern. The fellow is still not back. There we drank the finest Laubenheimer in the world and smoked cigars — if you had seen them you would have learnt to smoke just for their sake. My cigar case has still not turned up again. Also, an acquaintance of mine0

has come back, who has been in Pinselfahnien and Kaltermoria and has seen Mister Sippi (this should read Pennsylvania, Balti- more and Mississippi). This fellow is from Solingen, and the Solingen people are the most unfortunate in the world, for they cannot get rid of their Solingen German. The lad still says: im

Sohmer is es sehr schön Wätter,d and for Karoline he always says Kalinah.

It is sad, I have barely a groat left in my pocket and a mass of debts, both my own and cigar-shop debts. Now I am being pestered by the man from whom I bought plums for you, which I have not yet paid for, and the bookbinder has not been paid yet,

[^1]: a The back of the letter bears the inscription: "Fräulein Marie Engels im grossherzoglichen Institut zu Mannheim."—Ed.

[^2]: b Georg Gottfried Treviranus.— Ed. c Höller.— Ed.

[^3]: Dialectal pronunciation of im Sommer ist es sehr schönes Wetter (in summer the weather is very fine).— Ed.





**[p. 502]**

Recently, a pricelessly funny incident occurred here. In the paper there was an advertisement for a cook. A sturdy girl comes into the editorial office and saysa: "Hört Se mol, do hebb' ick in der Zeitung lesen, dat se 'ne Köksche sökt."b "Jowol,"c says the clerk. "Wat mot de wol können?"d asks the girl. "Jo, de mot Kloveer speelen un danzen un Französch, un singen, un neien un sticken — dat mot se all können."'e "Donnerstag," says the girl, "dat kann eck nit." f But when she sees the whole office laughing, she asks: "Se wêt mek wol torn besten hebben? Donnerslag, ick lote mi nich mokeeren!" g And with that she goes for the clerk and wants to give him a good hiding; of course, she was gently put outside the door. The other day the Old Manh threw a driver out of the door. The fellow wanted Prussian gold and would not take louis d'or at the rate of 55/12 talers. We were having a row with him, when the Old Man came in: "What is going on here, confound it", and took the fellow by the chest and threw him in the gutter. Thereupon the driver came

[^1]: a The following conversation is in Low German.— Ed.

[^2]: "Listen, I have read in the paper that you are looking for a cook." — Ed.

[^3]: c "Yes, indeed."—Ed.

[^4]: "What must she be able to do?"— Ed. "Well, she must play the piano and dance and speak French, and sing, and sew, and embroider — she must be able to do all that."—Ed.

[^5]: 1 "Blast it, I can't do that."—Ed. "Are you trying to make a fool of me? I don't let people make fun of me, blast it!"— Ed.

[^6]: Heinrich Leupold.— Ed.



