---
Volume: 2
Document_Title: "35. To Marie Engels, September 18- 19 "
Page_Range: "530-533"
---

# 35. To Marie Engels, September 18- 19 



**[p. 507]**

Full stop. If you understand it you are educated and can put a word in.

Adios, yours,

Friedrich

Bremen, Aug. 20, 40

Aug. 25. Roth came back the day before yesterday.

First published in the Deutsche Revue, Printed according to the original Stuttgart and Leipzig, Bd. 4, 1920

Published in English for the first time

35

TO MARIE ENGELS

[Bremen] Sept. 18, 1840 My most precious!

At the moment the equinoctial gales are raging frightfully; in our house a window was blown in last night and the trees are creaking most pitiably. Tomorrow and the day after there will be news of shipwrecks coming in! The Old Mana is standing by the window and pulling a wry face because the day before yesterday a ship went to sea in which he has 3,000 talers' worth of linen which is not insured. You don't say anything about the letter to Ida b

which I enclosed in my previous letter; or did I forget to put it in? — I am now really staying here till Easter, which for various reasons is most welcome to me. So Ida has gone now; that will be very awkward for you.

We have quite a good camp here too, almost 3,000 men strong, Oldenburg, Bremen, Lübeck and Hamburg troops. I went there

[^1]: IN MANNHEIM

[^2]: a Heinrich Leupold.— Ed. b Ida Engels.— Ed.





**[p. 508]**

Sept. 19, 1840. You have a more boring life than we do. Yesterday afternoon there was no more work to do, and the Old Man was out, and Wilhelm Leupold did not show up often either. So I lit a cigar, first wrote the above to you, then took Lenau's Faust from my desk and read some of it. Afterwards I drank a bottle of beer and at half past seven went to Roth's; we went off to the Club, I read Raumer's Geschichte der Hohenstaufen and then ate beefsteak and cucumber salad. At half past ten I went home and read Diez's Grammatik der romanischen Sprachen until I felt sleepy. Moreover, tomorrow is Sunday again and Wednesday is a day of penance and prayer in Bremen, and so we carry on gradually into the winter. This winter I shall take dancing lessons with Eberlein so as to accustom my stiff legs to a little graceful movement.

Here you have a scene in the Schlachte, i. e., the street which has the Weser on one side and where the goods are unloaded. The fellow with the whip is the waggoner who is about to drive away the sacks of coffee lying in the background; the fellow with the sack on the right is the Schlachte pirate who is loading them

[^1]: a Matthias Claudius, Rheinweinlied.— Ed. b Wilhelm Leupold.— Ed.





**[p. 509]**

on the cart; by his side a cooper who has just taken a sample and is still holding it in his hand, and next to him is the bargeman from whose barge the sacks were unloaded. You won't be able to deny that these figures are most interesting. When the waggoner drives he mounts the horse without saddle, stirrup or spurs, and keeps digging his heels into its ribs, like this:

Now it is raining again quite improperly for a Saturday evening, it should really rain only during the week, but from midday Saturday it should be fine. Do you know what superfine medium good ordinary Domingo coffee is? That again is one of those profound concepts which occur in the philosophy of the commer-

