---
Volume: 2
Document_Title: "36. To Marie Engels, October 29 "
Page_Range: "533-536"
---

# 36. To Marie Engels, October 29 



**[p. 510]**

Friedrich Bremen, 19.9.40

36

TO MARIE ENGELS

Dear Marie,

Next time don't write to me via Barmen again; Mother leaves the letters lying there until she writes herself, and that is often a long time. But what I wanted to write to you — only you must not write this home, for I want to surprise them with it next

[^1]: First published in the Deutsche Revue, Printed according to the original Stuttgart and Leipzig, Bd. 4, 1920 Published in English for the first time

[^2]: IN MANNHEIM 0

[^3]: a Herr Derkhiem, if you make yourself cheap with the boys you must have a bit more self-respect, otherwise they will walk over you. That Heinrich, he is a bad lad, I have had a lot of trouble with him, you must not play so much with him but immediately give him a smack behind the ears, there is no help for it, and if you go to the Old Man, he won't do anything to the boys but only say— Ed.

[^4]: The back of the letter bears the inscription: "Fräulein Marie Engels im grossherzoglichen Institut zu Mannheim."—Ed.





**[p. 511]**



[^1]: a Heinrich Leupold.— Ed.





**[p. 512]**

Moustaches always were the pride Of gallant gentlemen far and wide. Brave soldiers faced their country's foes In brown or black mustachios. So, in these times of martial glory, Moustaches are obligatory. Philistines shirk the burden of bristle By shaving their faces as clean as a whistle. We are not philistines, so we Can let our mustachios flourish free. Long life to every Christian Who bears his moustaches like a man. And may all philistines be damned For having moustaches banished and banned.

To this doggerel glasses were clinked with great enthusiasm, and then somebody else got up. His principal would not give him a key, and so he had to be home by ten o'clock, or he would not be let in. That is the plight of many a poor devil here. He said:

A plague befall Principals all Who won't hand over the key of the door. May flies and strands of hair infest Their supper plates for evermore And may their nights give them no rest.

Thereupon there was more clinking of glasses. So it continued until ten o'clock, then those without keys had to leave, but we, the fortunate ones with keys, remained seated and ate oysters. I ate eight, but could not manage any more, I still don't enjoy the things.

Since you are so fond of calculations and even want to reward me for them with the Order of the Yellow Envelope, I shall

