---
Volume: 2
Document_Title: "40. To Marie Engels, February 18 "
Page_Range: "546-548"
---

# 40. To Marie Engels, February 18 

184 1

40

TO MARIE ENGELS

IN MANNHEIM*

Dear Marie,

This time you shall get a really heavy letter. At first I even wanted to write to you on cardboard so that you would have to fork out quite a sum for postal charges, but unfortunately I could not get a piece with a smooth surface and so I must write on the heaviest paper to be found in our paper store. I r you don't know what a Paukstunde is.that proves that in culture you have remained shamefully backward, but that you did not see it from the enclosed drawing proves also natural dullness, and one sees that not only the hops of education but even the malt of mother wit are lost on you. In your bad German a Paukstunde is the same as a fencing lesson. I have now also acquired a couple of rapiers and gloves, the only gloves I have, for I don't care for kid-gloves, etc.

Concerning the Stabat mater dolorosa13 et cetera, it occurs to me, please look up whether this thing was composed by Pergolese. If so, please get me if possible a copy of the score; if instruments are included, I don't need them, only the voices. But if it is by Palestrina or somebody else I don't need it.2S8 The day after tomorrow we are going to perform Paulus by Mendelssohn, the best oratorio written since Handel's death. You will know it. I go to the theatre only rarely since the local one is terribly bad; I go occasionally, only when a new play is being shown, or a good opera I don't know yet.

[^1]: The back of the letter bears the inscription: "Fräulein Marie Engels im grossherzoglichen Institut zu Mannheim."—Ed.

[^2]: b See this volume, pp. 405-06.— Ed.

[^3]: 18»





**[p. 524]**



[^1]: a Heinrich Leupold.— Ed. See this volume, p. 511.— Ed. Supreme lady of thoughts, lady loved more than life.— Ed.



