---
Volume: 2
Document_Title: "41. To Friedrich Graeber, February 22 "
Page_Range: "548-551"
---

# 41. To Friedrich Graeber, February 22 



**[p. 525]**

Today I have shaved my moustache off again and buried the youthful corpse with much wailing. I look like a woman; it is shameful; and if I had known that without a moustache I should look such a sight I would not have hacked it off. As I stood before the mirror, scissors in hand, and had shorn off the right side, the Old Man came into the office and had to laugh out loud, when he saw me with half a moustache. But now I shall let it grow again, for I cannot show myself anywhere. In the Academy of Singing I was the only one with a moustache and always used to laugh at the philistines who could not marvel enough that I had the audacity to go so unshaven into decent society. The ladies, incidentally, liked it very much, and so did the Old Man. Only last night at the concert six young dandies stood around me, all in tail-coats and kid-gloves, and I stood among them in an ordinary coat and without gloves. The fellows made remarks all evening about me and my bristling upper lip. The best of it is that three months ago nobody knew me here and now all the world does, just because of the moustache! Oh, the philistines!

Yours,

Friedrich Bremen, Feb. 18, 41

41

TO FRIEDRICH GRAEBER

Reverend Sir in spe,

You have done me the favour, habuerunt gratiam of writing to me mihi scribendi sc. literas. Multum gaudeo, tibi adjuvasse ad gratificationem triginta thalerorum, speroque, te ista gratijicatione usum esse ad bibendum in sanitatem meam. Xa Tps, <I>(i Aa$ TOO Xp'.j TLav.aj Jio^,

[^1]: First published in the Deutsche Revue, Printed according to the original Stuttgart and Leipzig, Bd. 4, 1920 „ , . . , , . _ .. , , , .. ° r ° Published in English for the first time





**[p. V]**

jilmr,;, paatieùi; XTJQ s^y Yioeo)!;!;!;!;

I V T - V * ' - T - • T - ' V orriv K rçni1 hovered over F. Graeber, when he did the impossible and proved that twice two are five. O great hunter of Straussians, I beseech you in the name of all orthodoxy to destroy the whole infa- mous nest of Straussians and to pierce all the half-hatched Straussian eggs with your St. George's lance. Sally forth into the desert of pantheism, brave dragon-slayer, engage Ruge rugiensb Leo, Ruge, who is wandering about looking for someone to devour, destroy the damned Straussian brood and plant the banner of the cross on the Sinai of speculative theology! Be moved by our entreaties, see, the faithful have now been waiting for five years for him who will crush the head of the Straussian snake. They have exhausted themselves, thrown stones and filth, yes, even dung at it, yet its poison-spurting head rises ever higher. Since you find it so easy to refute that all fine buildings collapse of their own accord, arise and refute Das Leben Jesu and the first volume of Dogmatikc for the danger is becoming more and more imminent; Das Leben Jesu has already gone through more editions than all the works of Hengstenberg and Tholuck put together and it is becoming common practice to throw everyone who is not a Straussian out of literature. And the Hallische Jahrbücher is the most widely read journal in North Germany, so widely read that His Prussian Majesty d can no longer ban it, however much he would like to. The banning of the Hallische Jahrbücher, which heaps the grossest insults on him every day, would change a million Prussians who do not yet know what they should think about the King, into a million enemies overnight. And it is high time for you to act, otherwise you will be reduced to eternal silence by us despite the pious views of the King of Prussia. You should screw up a little more courage so that the battle can really begin. But you write in such a calm and detached fashion, as if the Orthodox-Christian shares stood at

[^1]: a Have done me the favour of writing to me a letter. I am very glad that I was able to help you get a gratuity of thirty talers and hope you have used the money to drink my health. Greetings, guardian of Christianity, great hunter of Straussians, star of orthodoxy, comforter of grieving pietists, King of Exegesis!;!;! In the beginning, God created Heaven and Earth, and the spirit of God— Ed.

[^2]: h Censuring.— Ed. c The title of the main section in Strauss' work, Die christliche Glaubenslehre in ihrer geschichtlichen Entwicklung— Ed.

[^3]: d Frederick William IV.— Ed.





**[p. 527]**

not because of the poetry but because of the views and lack of space. First of all, he is not such a liberal, and secondly, they arrived too late. Thirdly, there was so little space that many important poems intended for the last folios had to be left out. However, Das Rheinlied by N. Becker is really a very indifferent piece and has fallen into such bad odour that one can no longer

[^1]: The idea that I have gone to the dogs as a poet is being widely disputed and, in any case, Freiligrath refused to print my verses3

[^2]: a See this volume, p. 497.— Ed.



