---
Volume: 2
Document_Title: "42. To Marie Engels, March 8- 11 "
Page_Range: "551-554"
---

# 42. To Marie Engels, March 8- 11 



**[p. 528]**

I am now fencing furiously and will soon hack you all to pieces. I have had two duels here in the last four weeks. The first fellow has retracted the insulting words of stupid boy which he said to me after I gave him a box on the ear, and the slap is still unexpiated. I fought with the second fellow yesterday and gave him a real beauty above the brow, running right down from the top, a really first-class prime.

Farewell.0

Yours,

F. Engels Bremen, 22.2.41

42 TO MARIE ENGELS

Bremen, March 8, 1841 Dear Marie,

"Your most respectful and obedient", these were the last words I wrote in a business letter as I finished my work at the office

[^1]: First published in Die neue Rundschau, Printed according to the original 10. Heft, Berlin, 1913 ,_,. , J . .„ ,. u r u „ Published in English for the first time

[^2]: IN MANNHEIM

[^3]: a See this volume, pp. 137-50.— Ed. b Ludwig I.— Ed. c This word is in English in the original.— Ed.





**[p. 529]**



[^1]: a Heinrich Leupold.— Ed.

[^2]: b See this volume, p. 532.— Ed. c See this volume, pp. 405-06 and 523.— Ed.





**[p. 530]**

I was very much amused to read your description of your innocent carnival. I should like to have seen you. Nothing very amusing has happened here, apart from a couple of boring fancy-dress balls which I didn't go to. In Berlin, too, the carnival was a terribly flat affair. They're still best at that sort of thing in Cologne.

There is one thing in which you are less fortunate than I. You cannot hear Beethoven's Symphony in C Minor today, Wednesday, March 10, while I can. This and the Eroica are my favourites. Practise Beethoven's sonatas and symphonies well, so that I shan't be ashamed of you later on. I am going to hear them not just in the piano arrangement, but played by the full orchestra.

March 11. What a symphony it was last night! You never heard anything like it in your whole life if you don't know this wonderful work. What despairing discord in the first movement, what elegiac melancholy, what a tender lover's lament in the adagio, what a tremendous, youthful, jubilant celebration of freedom by the trombone in the third and fourth movements! Besides this I also heard a wretched Frenchman sing yesterday and it went some- thing like this:

and so on, no melody or harmony and a pathetic French text and the whole joke was called L'Exilé de France. If all French exiles indulge in such caterwauling then nobody will want to have them anywhere. This boor also sang a song called Le toréador, which

