---
Volume: 2
Document_Title: "48. To Marie Engels, April 14- 16 "
Page_Range: "562-565"
---

# 48. To Marie Engels, April 14- 16 



**[p. 539]**

Your brother

Friedrich

The sealing-wafer isn't one of the best.

First published in the Deutsche Revue, Printed according to the original Stuttgart and Leipzig, Bd. 4, 1920 Published in English for the first

time

48

TO MARIE ENGELS

Dear Marie,

This tender little flowerb which has lain in my portfolio for half a year, and which I take out now and offer to you, will, I hope, compensate for the long time which, I admit it with remorse, I have kept you waiting. Herr Hösterey delivered your little

[^1]: IN MANNHEIM 3

[^2]: a The back of the letter bears the inscription: "Fräulein Marie Engels im grossherzoglichen Institut zu Mannheim."—Ed.

[^3]: b A pressed rose, with buds and leaves, in the top left-hand corner of the notepaper.— Ed.





**[p. 540]**

Today, Friday, April 15, I am going for a drive. The weather has greatly improved. A whole lot of carriages are lined in front of my house where they have taken up their quarters. The cabbies are usually drunk and entertain me vastly. It is very convenient for me if I ever want to take a trip in one of the cabs. I live very agreeably on the first floor, in an elegantly furnished room — the front wall of it is made up of three windows separated only by small pillars, so it is very bright and friendly.

I was interrupted yesterday when I had written this. Today I can tell you the glad news that we are probably not going on parade tomorrow because His Most Supreme Majesty, the King,a

has condescended to leave for Potsdam and Brandenburg. All of which suits me very well, for I have no desire to knock around that cursed palace yard tomorrow. Let us hope we shall have no parade at all. We now also have a most charming exercise on the Grützmacher, so called, which is a very large open space where you sink up to your knees in sand and which has the delightful peculiarity of being electric. When the 12th Guards Artillery Company, to which I belong, and which is also electric, but negative, arrives there, positive and negative electricity collide, causing confusion and chaos in the atmosphere and attracting the

Frederick William IV.— Ed.

You will certainly not have heard yet that Herr Liszt has been here and enchanted all the ladies by his piano playing. The Berlin ladies were so besotted by him that there was a free fight during one of his concerts for possession of a glove which he had dropped, and two sisters are now enemies for life because one of them snatched the glove from the other. Countess Schlippenbach poured the tea which the great Liszt had left in a cup into her Eau-de-Cologne bottle after she had poured the Eau-de-Cologne on to the ground. She has since sealed the bottle and placed it on top of her writing-desk to his eternal memory and feasts her eyes on it every morning, as can be seen in a cartoon which appeared about it. There never was such a scandal. The young ladies fought over him but he snubbed them frightfully, and preferred to go and drink champagne with a couple of students. But there are a couple of pictures of the great, charming, heaven- ly, genial, divine Liszt in every house. I will draw you (a portrait of him. Here is the man with the /^f RüÜüte

Kamchatka hair style. By the way, he must have A—nüSSl SÄ earned at least 10,000 talers here and his hotel f b jnu Voflft bill amounted to 3,000 talers — apart from what T^ M H ^ | he spent in taverns. I tell you, he's a real man. He ^ ^ ^ > < ^ \ drinks twenty cups of coffee a day, two ounces x-^*^ of coffee in every cup, and ten bottles of champagne, from which it can fairly safely be iszt

concluded that he lives in a kind of perpetual drunken haze, which may also be confirmed. He has now gone off to Russia and one wonders whether the ladies there will go as crazy too.

I must go out now, so I will close. Farewell and write soon.

Your brother Berlin 16/4, 42 Friedrich

[^1]: First published in the Deutsche Revue, Stuttgart and Leipzig, Bd. 4, 1920

[^2]: Printed according to the original

[^3]: Published in English for the first time



