---
Volume: 2
Document_Title: "50. To Arnold Ruge, June 15 , "
Page_Range: "566-567"
---

# 50. To Arnold Ruge, June 15 , 



**[p. 50]**

TO ARNOLD RUGE

IN DRESDEN Dear Doctor,

Enclosed please find an article" for the Jahrbücher}' I have put the Dante thing to one side for the time being. I would have sent it sooner if I had had anything like enough time.

I got your letter after it had gone to a number of wrong addresses. Why didn't I send Schelling und die Offenbarung0 to the Jahrbücher? 1) Because what I had in mind was a book of between 5 and 6 folios and this was cut down to 3V2 folios only in the course of my negotiations with the publishers. 2) Because up to then the Jahrbücher had been a little reserved about Schelling. 3) Because people here advised against attacking Schelling in a journal and told me rather to put out a pamphlet against him. Schelling, der Philosoph in Christo0 is also from my pen.

Apart from all this, I am not a Doctor and cannot ever become one. I am only a merchant and a Royal Prussian artillerist, so kindly spare me that title.

I hope to send you another manuscript very soon and in the meantime I remain

Yours sincerely,

F. Engels (Oswald) Berlin, June 15, 42

Dorotheenstr. 56

[^1]: First published in the Archiv Printed according to the original für die Geschichte des Sozialismus und der Arbeiterbewegung, Published in English for the first 11. Jg., 1. Heft, Leipzig, 1925 t l m e

[^2]: a "Alexander Jung, 'Lectures on Modern German Literature'." See this volume, pp. 284-97.—Ed.

[^3]: b Deutsche Jahrbücher.— Ed. c Schelling and Revelation. See this volume, pp. 189-240.— Ed. d Schelling, Philosopher in Christ. See this volume, pp. 241-64.— Ed.



