---
Volume: 2
Document_Title: "52. To Arnold Ruge, July 26 "
Page_Range: "568-569"
---

# 52. To Arnold Ruge, July 26 



**[p. 545]**

It's raining very boringly again. I have been soaked at least four times this week in the service of the Fatherland — twice from rain and twice, to use a delicate expression, from perspiration. I'm now going to the reading-room to look at the newspapers; surely I shall not get wet there for the fifth time, shall I?

Adieu.

Your brother

Friedrich

Berlin, July 2, 42

First published in: Marx/Engels, Printed according to the original Gesamtausgabe, Abt. l, Bd. 2, 1930 Published in English for the first time

52

TO ARNOLD RUGE

Dear Sir,

This time I am writing to inform you that I shall not be sending you anything.

I have decided to abandon all literary work for a while in order to devote more time to studying. The reasons for this are fairly plain. I am young and self-taught in philosophy. I have learnt enough to form my own viewpoint and, when necessary, to defend it, but not enough to be able to work for it with success and in the proper way. All the greater demands will be made on me because I am a "travelling agent" in philosophy and have not earned the right to philosophise by getting a doctor's degree. I hope to be able to satisfy these demands once I start writing again — and under my own name. In addition I must not try to do too many things now, as I shall soon be again more fully occupied with business matters. Regarded subjectively, my literary activities have so far been mere experiments from the outcome of which I was to be able to learn whether my natural capacities were such as to enable me to work fruitfully and effectively for progress and to participate actively in the movement of the century. I can be

[^1]: IN DRESDEN



