---
Volume: 2
Document_Title: "53. To Marie Engels, August 2- 8 "
Page_Range: "569-576"
---

# 53. To Marie Engels, August 2- 8 



**[p. 546]**

When I return home to the Rhineland in October245 I hope to be able to meet you in Dresden and to discuss this with you further. In the meantime my good wishes and think of me now and again.

Yours,

F. Engels

Berlin, 26.7.42

Have you read Jung's reply 246? I think it is the best thing he has written so far. In the meantime, the other Jung," of the Rheinische Zeitung in Cologne, has arrived here and will look you up on his return journey in a few weeks' time.

First published in Die Internationale, Printed according to the original Jg. 2, Heft 26, Berlin, 1920 ^ , , . „ .. , , , r. Published in English tor the tirst time

53

TO MARIE ENGELS

Berlin, August 2, 1842

Dear Marie,

I was very pleased with your long letter but since there were so many pages, all written criss-cross, I read your sermon of disapproval very quickly and do not really know what you are reproaching me about. I can quite understand that Fräulein Jung must have pulled a nasty face when she read the true name given by Hermannb to her beloved Institute—a convent—and that she called him a frivolous fellow. Fortunately, not everybody has such a bad opinion of frivolity as your erstwhile Head Sin Recorder. And this is a good thing. Otherwise what would become of us

[^1]: IN OSTENDE

[^2]: a Georg Jung.— Ed. b Hermann Engels.— Ed.





**[p. 547]**

You seem to have an enormous talent for making acquaintances. The girl is in Bonn for four weeks and already knows the names of half the University and has found herself an interesting lame student whom she encounters six times a day. The interesting lame student with the spectacles and fair beard! He undoubtedly had his legs shot up in a duel. Only why does he still limp when walking? Does he limp in an interesting way or ordinarily, like other lame people? Which foot is lame — the right one or both? Does he wear a hat with a red cock's feather? Could he not be the diable boitew P? I'd like to know a great deal more about this interesting, lame, bearded, bespectacled, sharp-eyed student.

Have you continued to make friends in Ostende? Isn't there an interesting lame Fleming there who meets you on the beach six times a day? Look:

Happily the Convent leaving, Free to move again am I. I can laugh and I can chatter, In the window I can lie!

With Duennas watching round me, Oh, what agony of mind, Sitting at the daily lessons, Cribbed and cabined and confined!

[^1]: a Von Wedell.— Ed. b Limping devil (an allusion to the title character of Le Sage's novel).— Ed.





**[p. 548]**

Now I'm free at last, and want to Taste my new-found liberty. There's a new life waiting after All that grey monotony!

I'll look out my newest clothes and Dress as pretty as I please. I'll be off to see the poshest Of the posh Academies!

Poppelsdorf and Königswinter! Rolandseck and Drachenfels! Goggle at my so sparkling eyes And my sparkling teeth as well!

And I'll bet that though our fellow Students may be quite a host, Getting our address will take them Eight days at the very most.

Landlord Stamm be truly grateful That your lodging-house we chose. Tippling students throng your garden, And the money really flows.

Best of all, when I'm out walking, How I'm crowded round and courted! See the poor Professors' daughters All alone and unescorted!

Bottle-heroes Count d'Alviella, Von Szczepansky come and linger: See me twist those gallant fellows Round and round my little finger!

Herr von Diest, the truly love-lorn, Runs my errands all the while. Chapeau plays his fife for dancing, Bunsen sings to make me smile.



**[p. 549]**

While the others are so busy Doing all that I want done, How am I to meet that handsome Lame and interesting one?

Now I've left my town of Bonn For the North Sea's level shore. No more rousing student ditties, Just the ocean's mighty roar.

With the French and with the Belgians I go strolling by the seas, Just as in the Convent, I must Speak French only, if you please.

Once again, crowds of admirers Follow me along the strip, Follow me into the briny When I take my morning dip.

Otherwise, it's just like Bonn, And I have no cause to grumble. Food and lodgings both are decent, And the landlord's tolerable.

Yet, for all those bathers, someone's Missing, when all's said and done. Woe is me! I just can't find that Lame and interesting one!

This describes you perfectly, don't you think? I want to set it to music for you so you can sing it. But you'll only get the score when I answer your next letter, otherwise I would spoil you by sending such a magnificent gift. I have other things to do than to praise you in song — that can only be permitted as a reward for an especially long letter.



**[p. 550]**

I now have a dog whom I got from August Bredt of Barmen when he left here. It's a handsome young spaniel, much bigger than our dear Mira and quite crazy. He has a great talent for boozing and if I go to a restaurant in the evening, he always sits near me and has his share, or makes himself at home at everybody else's table. He's also remarkable for an invisible collar. He is an excellent swimmer but too crazy to learn any tricks. I have taught him one thing. When I say "Namenloser"' (that's his name) — "there's an aristocrat!" he goes wild with rage and growls hideously at the person I show him.

While everybody has been forecasting that the Rhine wine will be splendid this year, the Grüneberger has turned out to be disgracefully bad. Do you know Grüneberger? Grüneberger is a Lausitz vine which only grows in sand and never produces good grapes except in a very wet year. When the hardness of the grapes turns from stone to wood, i. e., when you can cut into them with a knife, then they are ripe. They are pressed by steam-engine and people reckon that it takes a twelve horse-power machine working for an hour to press a hundred grapes. The best year for Grüneberger was '40. It cannot be put into casks because it splits the wood. When it is good you should eat a dozen pins, then drink a glass of Grüneberger, and if the pins are not dissolved or destroyed in five minutes it means the wine is no good. It is a very long-lasting wine for if you take a swig, your throat is sore for four weeks. It has a very fine bouquet and only a connoisseur can tell the difference between it and vinegar. A mixture of nitric acid and wine-vinegar comes closest in taste to this noble wine. Well, you've had enough now, and I still have to write to Mother. Adieu.

Your brother

Friedrich

Berlin, Aug. 8, 42

[^1]: First published in: Marx/Engels, Printed according to the original Gesamtausgabe, Abt. l, Bd. 2, 1930 Published in English for the first time

[^2]: a Nameless one.— Ed.



EARLY LITERARY EXPERIMENTS

(1833-1837)

'A

\-

The house in Barmen where Engels was born

[^1]: vmàm **ns*n HH*|s



