---
Volume: 2
Document_Title: "4. Friedrich Engels Senior to His Wife Elise, August 27, 1835 "
Page_Range: "604-607"
---

# 4. Friedrich Engels Senior to His Wife Elise, August 27, 1835 



**[p. 581]**

FRIEDRICH ENGELS SENIOR

TO HIS WIFE ELISE

IN HAMM 3

Barmen, August 27, 1835, Thursday evening

Dear Elise,

I have just received the letter you wrote to me yesterday from which I gather that your good father'sb condition is still the same and even seems to show a slight improvement. Let us not delude ourselves about his state, for even if nature appears to be rallying and strength to be increasing, one can very rarely hope for a recovery; the illness drags on, until a new attack occurs. Your good father is in God's hands, and it is well for him and for us that we can entrust him so peacefully to the Heavenly Father.

I posted a letter to you on Sunday the 23rd. You have received it, I trust? You make no mention of it. I wanted to write to you again yesterday but was prevented. Everything is well with us, God be praised; the children are all in good health. I am having my usual trouble with Emil. The boy is somewhat unmanageable, he wants to be out in the street all the time, and this evening there was another complaint that he had jumped out of the window. Rudolph is sweet and good, he sits beside me at lunch and is a dear lad. Hedwig is cleverer than either of them, has now completely recovered and is knitting me a pair of socks which I asked her to do to help her pass the time. Hermann is fairly well-behaved, my sole companion at supper, and is firmly convinced that this week he is going to get top marks as usual. Little Elise is, if possible, even more lively than usual, gets up to her little tricks, loves her father very much and, in short, is a very sweet little puss.

[^1]: a The back of the letter bears the inscription: "Frau Elise Engels, c/o Herr Rektor van Haar Wohlgeb. in Hamm, France."—Ed.

[^2]: b Bernhard van Haar.— Ed.





**[p. 582]**

I received a letter yesterday through Friedrich from Dr. Hantschke, written on August 22, which he prudently gave to the maids so late that it only reached me at half past eight in the evening. So he probably already had it on Sunday. Dr. Hantschke writes that he has been asked to take in two boarders but that he will decline if we prefer to leave Friedrich with him after the autumn. He says that Friedrich continually requires supervision, that the long journey is harmful to his studies, etc. I immediately replied that I was most grateful to him for giving me first choice after receiving such an advantageous request, and that I would ask him to keep Friedrich on, but that I should be obliged if he would inform me of his terms. He himself had indicated that we should have no difficulty in agreeing on them. I am sure that you too will regard this as the best course. When it is a que- stion of our child's welfare we should not consider money, and

Friedrich is such a peculiar and versatile lad that a secluded way of life, which is bound to lead him to a certain degree of independence, is the best thing for him. Once again, may the good Lord have the boy in His care so that his disposition may not be spoiled. So far, for all his pleasing qualities, he has been developing a disturbing thoughtlessness and lack of character.

So much for our children here. I should be glad to hear from you that all is well with Anna and Marie. When are they coming back and is it definite that Ludwig3 will bring them home?

In view of your dear father's present condition I can well imagine that you and your good mother would like to stay there a few days more. Do so in God's name. I had thought that I would come to fetch you about Sunday the 30th inst., but now I will await further news. Everything here is much as usual, so your

[^1]: a Ludwig van Haar.— Ed.





**[p. 583]**

and is expected back on Tuesday.

Your instructions about clothes and linen will be faithfully carried, out—I should not have thought of it. I will bring the wine with me.

Give warmest greetings from me as well as from the Griesheims to your dear mother and to your father when his mind is clear. God be with you all in these difficult days.

Your

Friedrich

First published in: Marx/Engels, Printed according to the original Gesamtausgabe, Abt. l, Bd. 2, 1930

Published in English for the first time

[^1]: a Caspar Engels Jr.— Ed. b Julius Engels.— Ed.



