---
Volume: 11
Document_Title: "XV. The Triumph of Prussia "
Page_Range: "101-107"
---

# XV. The Triumph of Prussia 



**[p. 74]**

contradictory rumors and diplomatic notes completely stunned them, sought their only consolation and support in the everlastingly repeated assurance that they were the best, the greatest, the wisest men of the country, and that they alone could save Ger- many—where, we say, among these poor creatures, whom a single year of parliamentary life had turned into complete idiots, where were the men for a prompt and decisive resolution, much less for energetic and consistent action?

At last the Austrian Government threw off the mask. In its Constitution of the 4th of March it proclaimed Austria an indivisible monarchy, with common finances, system of customs-duties, of military establishments, thereby effacing every barrier and distinc- tion between the German and non-German provinces. This declara- tion was made in the face of resolutions and articles of the intended federal Constitution, which had been already passed by the Frankfort Assembly. It was the gauntlet of war thrown down to it by Austria, and the poor Assembly had no other choice but to take it up. This it did with a deal of blustering, but which Austria, in the consciousness of her power, and of the utter nothingness of the Assembly, could well afford to allow to pass. And this precious representation, as it styled itself, of the German people, in order to revenge itself for this insult on the part of Austria, saw nothing better before it than to throw itself, hands and feet tied, at the feet of the Prussian Government. Incredible as it would seem, it bent its knees before the very ministers whom it had condemned as unconstitutional and anti-popular, and whose dismissal it had in vain insisted upon. The details of this disgraceful transaction, and the tragicomical events that followed, will form the subject of our next.

London, April, 1852

xv

We now come to the last chapter in the history of the German Revolution: the conflict of the National Assembly with the Govern- ments of the different States, especially of Prussia; the insurrection of Southern and Western Germany, and its final overthrow by Prussia.

We have already seen the Frankfort National Assembly at work. We have seen it kicked at by Austria, insulted by Prussia, disobeyed

[^1]: THE TRIUMPH OF PRUSSIA

[^2]: [New-York Daily Tribune, No. 3517, July 27, 1852]





**[p. 75]**

by the lesser States, duped by its own impotent Central "Govern- ment," which again was the dupe of all and every prince in the country. But at last things began to look threatening for this weak, vacillating, insipid legislative body. It was forced to come to the conclusion that "the sublime idea of German Unity was threatened in its realization, "which meant neither more nor less than that the Frankfort Assembly, and all it had done and was about to do, were very likely to end in smoke. Thus it set to work in good earnest in order to bring forth as soon as possible its grand production, the "Imperial Constitution."

There was, however, one difficulty. What Executive Government was there to be? An Executive Council? No; that would have been, they thought in their wisdom, making Germany a Republic. A "President"? That would come to the same. Thus they must revive the old imperial dignity. But—as of course a prince was to be Emperor—who should it be? Certainly none of the DU minorum gentium,3 from Reuss-Schleiz-Greiz-Lobenstein-Ebersdorfb up to Bavariac; neither Austria nor Prussia would have borne that. It could only be Austria or Prussia. But which of the two? There is no doubt that, under otherwise favorable circumstances, this august Assembly would be sitting up to the present day discussing this important dilemma without being able to come to a conclusion, if the Austrian Government had not cut the Gordian knot and saved them the trouble.

Austria knew very well that from the moment in which she could again appear before Europe with all her provinces subdued, as a strong and great European power, the very law of political gravitation would draw the remainder of Germany into her orbit, without the help of any authority which an imperial crown conferred by the Frankfort Assembly could give her. Austria had been far stronger, far freer in her movements, since she shook off the powerless crown of the German Empire—a crown which clogged her own independent policy, while it added not one iota to her strength, either within or without of Germany. And supposing the case that Austria could not maintain her footing in Italy and Hungary—why, then she was dissolved, annihilated in Germany too, and could never pretend to re-seize a crown which had slipped from her hands while she was in the full possession of her strength. Thus Austria at once declared against all imperialist resurrections, and

[^1]: Literally: junior gods; figuratively: second-rate personages.— Ed. b Heinrich LXXII.— Ed. The reference is to the King of Bavaria, Maximilian II.— Ed.





**[p. 76]**

This open declaration of war left, indeed, the Frankfort wiseacres no other choice but to exclude Austria from Germany, and to create out of the remainder of that country a sort of Lower Empire,3 a "Little Germany," the rather shabby imperial mantle of which was to fall on the shoulders of his Majesty of Prussia. This, it will be recollected, was the renewal of an old project fostered already some six or eight years ago by a party of South and Middle German liberal doctrinaires^ who considered as a godsend the degrading cir- cumstances by which their old crotchet was now again brought forward as the latest "new move" for the salvation of the country.

They accordingly finished, in February and March, 1849, the debate on the Imperial Constitution, together with the Declaration of Rights and the Imperial Electoral Law56; not, however, without being obliged to make, in a great many points, the most contradic- tory concessions—now to the Conservative or rather Reactionary party—now to the more advanced fractions of the Assembly. In fact, it was evident that the leadership of the Assembly, which had formerly belonged to the Right and Right Center (the Conservatives and Reactionists), was gradually, although slowly, passing toward the Left or Democratic side of that body. The rather dubious position of the Austrian Deputies in an Assembly which had excluded their country from Germany, and in which yet they were called upon to sit and vote, favored the derangement of its equipoise; and thus, as early as the end of February, the Left Center and the Left found themselves, by the help of the Austrian votes, very generally in a majority, while on other days the Conservative fraction of the Austrians, all of a sudden and for the fun of the thing, voting with the Right, threw the balance again on the other side. They intended by these sudden soubresauts0 to bring the Assembly into contempt, which, however, was quite unnecessary, the massof the people being long since convinced of the utter hollowness and futility of anything coming from Frankfort. What a specimen of a Constitution, in the

[^1]: Eastern Roman Empire.— Ed. See this volume, p. 22.— Ed. Jumps, leaps.— Ed.



NEW-YORK DAILY TRIBÜNE, TUESDAY, JULY 27, 1852.

Christian streets, they were fined if not more se- verely punished. It was under such fool oppres- sions, however, that the fortunes of his house took their rise and began to flourish. At the en- trance of this street is still the bureau, the coun- cil-rooms of their imperial firm, where they re- ceive tributes from the principalities and powers of the world. A poor devil of a Christian clerk sits there alone on Saturdays, to deal out email sums to travelers and others on letters of eredit,

Jews settled in Frankfort under some imperfect, dearly-paid protection of the German Emperors as early as the twelfth century. In 1339 their wretched habitations were set fire to by religious fanatics, called Flagellants. In 1462 they built in the present Judengaue, or New-Egypt, as it is sometimes named. Fire came upon them yet again in 1711. I roughly translate a brief account of the last conflagration, as illustrative of the spirit of that time : " Meanwhile, all the houses were burned up stock and branch, and indeed in such wise that not a single one of so many houses, nay, not so much as a stick of wood of an arm's length remained, which is surely marvelous. It waa remarkable, also, that when one side of the street was burned down, the wind turned about as though it had finished there the business on which it was sent, and would now carry it on fur- ther; so that by this the other and greater part of the street was seized on by the fire and laid in i Khes. The fire broke out almost in the middle of the street, in the house of the Rabbi Naphthali, their most famous Poctor. It is related fora cer- tain truth, that when their Rabbi, who was be- sides a good Cabal Ut, was minded to teach his scholars the Cabala, and had kindled for expéri- menta great heap of wood in his house, he be* came confused in his incantation, and in place of conjuring the water-spirit to extinguish the fire kindled bv him, called up the lire-spirits. Where- fore it wa» altogether in vain to try to save the smallest Jewish huilding. This is also to be con- sidered in this conflagration, that of the many Christian houses near by, not a single une was consumed." Seeing OD one side this account, written about one hundred years, and the perse- cutions and oppressions under which the Jews existed until the close of ttie last century; and seeing on the other side the friendly terms on

tiguiag. Local event« of the day, or some gone- to-seed item of foreign news, are the fcnmt« topics of a low-toned conversation, freely punctuated with long whiffs of tobacco-smoke from the mouths of the interlocutors. As for helping out their Historic by any gesticulation or ruing from their seats to command more attention, such French vivacity is never indulged in- The services of one hand are engaged to hold the pipe, while the other attends t o the glass, and the rest of the body, once seated, never leaves its moorings till bedtime. These gentlemen must bave had pe- riods in their IÎVCB of greater mental activity than they indicate at these meetings, which are very possibly, to their habit, only an anodyne taken after the agitation of the day s business, as a prep- aration to full repose. They answer a question- ing stranger intelligently and politely. May they sleep well! with quiet consciences and good diges- tions. They retire mostly before I0j o'clock. The Frankfort era generally are early to bed. Think of my coming home from Don Pasquale at the theater last night, at a tittle after 9 u clock !

XV. REVOLUTION AND COUNTER-REVOLUTION. We now come to the last chapter in the history of the German Revolution : the conflict of the National Assembly with the Governments of the different States, especially of Prussia ; the insurrection of Southern and Western Germany, and its final overthrow by Prussia.

We have already seen the Frankfort National Assembly at work. W e have seen it kicked at by Austria, insulted by Prussia, disobeyed by the lesser States, duped by its own impotent Central "Government," which again was the dupe of all and every prince in the country. B u t at last things began to look threatening for this weak vacillating, insipid legislative body. It was forced to come to the conclusion that " the Bublime idea of German Unity was threatened in its realization," —which meant neither more nor lest* than that the Frankfort Assembly, and all it had done and was about to do, were very likely to end in smoke. Thus t set to work in good earnest in order to bring forth as soon as possible its grand production, the "Imperial Constitution."

a disorder which penetrates its unfortunate victims with the solemn conviction that the whole world, its history * n d future, are governed and determin- ed by s majority of votes in that particular repre- sentative body which has the honor to countthem among its members, and that all and everything going on outside the walls of their house—wars, revolutions, railway-constructing, colonizing of whole new continents, California gold discoveries, Central American canals, Russian armies, and whatever else may have some little claim to influ- ence upon the destinies of mankind—is nothing compared to the incommensurable events hinging upon the important question, whatever it may be, just at that moment occupying the attention of their honorable House. Thus it was the Demo- cratic party of the Assembly, by effectually smug- gling a few of their nostrums into the " Imperial Constitution," first became bound to support it, although in «very essential point it flatly contra- dicted their own oft-proclaimed principles; and at last, when this mongrel work was abandoned and bequeathed to them by its main authors, accepted the inheritance, and held out for this monarchical Constitution even in opposition to everybody who then proclaimed their own republican principles.

But it must be confessed that in this the contra- diction was merely apparent. The indeterminate, self-contradictory, immature character of the Im- perial Constitution was the very image of the im- mature, confused, conflicting political idea« uf these democratic gentlemen. And if their own sayings and writings—as far as they could write— were not sufficient proof of this, their actions would furnish such proof; for among sensible peo- ple it is a matter of course to judge of a man not by his professions but by his actions; not by what he pretends to be, but by what he doea and what he really is ; and the deeds of these heroes of Ger- man Democracy speak loud enough for themselves, as we shall learn by and by. However, the Impe- rial Constitution with all its appendages and para- phernalia was definitively passed, and on the 28th of March the King of Prussia was, by 390 votes, against 248 who abstained and some 300 who were absent, elected Emperor of Germany, minus Austria. The historical irony wan complete ; the imperial farce executed in the streets of as- tonished Berlin, three days after the Revolution of March 1H, 1848, by Frederick William IV. while in a state which elsewhere would come under the Maine Liquor Law—this disgusting farce, just one year afterward, had been sanctioned by the pre- tender! Kepresentstive Assembly of all Germany. That, then, was the resultof the German Révolu

[^1]: world had made progress. Mure, however, be made. Some additional measure of justice was dealt oui tu the Jews in the Revolution of 1848 ; but they are not yet admitted to a full political equality w.th the Christian citizens uf i'rankfurt. Just at tins time the question of revising the constitution of the city is much discuswd, and Bum» propose, as one of the alterations, tba ad- missibility of Jews to the Senate. With the pre-

[^2]: There was, however, one difficulty. What Kx- ecutivr Government was there to be ? An Execu- tive Council? N o ; that would have been, thev thought in their wisdom, making Germany a Re- public. A "President"? That would come to the same. Thus thev must revive the old impe- rial dignity. But—as of course a prince was tobe Emperor—who should it be ! Certainly none of Hie Dii minorvn gentium, from Reuse-Schlei tz- Greitz-I.obcnstein-Eberedorf up to Bavaria; neither Austria nor Prussia would have borne that,

[^3]: KAU >ndon. Julç, 1R62.

[^4]: Part of a page from the New-York Daily Tribune containing Engels' article from the series Revolution and Counter-Revolution in Germany







**[p. 79]**

meantime, was framed under such jumping and counter-jumping, may easily be imagined.

The Left of the Assembly—this élite and pride of revolutionary Germany, as it believed itself to be—was entirely intoxicated with the few paltry successes it obtained by the good-will, or rather the ill-will, of a set of Austrian politicians acting under the instigation and for the interest of Austrian despotism. Whenever the slightest approxi- mation to their own not-very-well-defined principles had, in a homoeopathically diluted shape, obtained a sort of sanction by the Frankfort Assembly, these Democrats proclaimed that they had saved the country and the people. These poor, weak-minded men, during the course of their generally very obscure lives, had been so little accustomed to anything like success, that they actually believed their paltry amendments, passed with two or three votes' majority, would change the face of Europe. They had from the beginning of their legislative career been more imbued than any other fraction of the Assembly with that incurable malady, parliamentary cretinism, a disorder which penetrates its unfortunate victims with the solemn conviction that the whole world, its history and future, are governed and determined by a majority of votes in that particular representa- tive body which has the honor to count them among its members, and that all and everything going on outside the walls of their house—wars, revolutions, railway-constructing, colonizing of whole new continents, California gold discoveries, Central American canals, Russian armies, and whatever else may have some little claim to influence upon the destinies of mankind—is nothing compared to the incommensurable events hinging upon the important question, whatever it may be, just at that moment occupying the attention of their honorable House. Thus it was the Democratic party of the Assembly, by effectually smuggling a few of their nostrums into the "Imperial Constitution," that first became bound to support it, although in every essential point it flatly contradicted their own oft-proclaimed principles; and at last, when this mongrel work was abandoned and bequeathed to them by its main authors, accepted the inheritance, and held out for this monarchical Constitution even in opposition to everybody who then proclaimed their own republican principles.

But it must be confessed that in this the contradiction was merely apparent. The indeterminate, self-contradictory, immature charac- ter of the Imperial Constitution was the very image of the immature, confused, conflicting political ideas of these democratic gentlemen. And if their own sayings and writings—as far as they could write—were not sufficient proof of this, their actions would furnish

