---
Volume: 11
Document_Title: "V "
Page_Range: "287-301"
---

# V 



**[p. V]**

The first attempt to create such an "organisation" took place as early as the spring of 1850. A magniloquent "Draft Circular to German Democrats, printed in manuscript form" was hawked around London together with a "Covering Letter to the Leaders".3

The Circular and Covering Letter invited the readers to found a united democratic church. The immediate aim was to form a Central Bureau to deal with the affairs of German émigrés,™9 to set up a joint administration for refugee problems, to start a printing press in London, and to unite all patriots against the common enemy, etc. The emigration should then become the centre of the internal movement, the organisation of the emigration was to be the beginning of a comprehensive democratic organisation, those outstanding personalities who were without means should as members of the Central Bureau be paid salaries raised by taxes levied on the German people. This tax proposal seemed all the more appropriate as "the German emigration had gone abroad not merely without a respectable hero but, what is even worse, without common assets". The document does not conceal that the Hungarian, Polish and French committees already in existence provided the model for this "organisation" and the whole of it is redolent of a certain envy of the privileged position of these prominent allies.

The Circular was the joint production of Herr Rudolph Schramm and Herr Gustav Struve, behind whom lay concealed the merry figure of Herr Arnold Ruge, a corresponding member living in Ostend at the time.

Herr Rudolph Schramm—a rowdy, loudmouthed and extremely muddleheaded little man whose life-motto came from Rameau's

Nephew :

When at the height of his power, Herr Camphausen would gladly have given the forward young Crefelder an important post, had it been seemly thus to elevate a mere junior official. Thanks to bureaucratic etiquette Herr Schramm found only the career of a democrat still open to him. And in this profession he really did

[^1]: "I would rather be an impudent windbag than not exist at all."

[^2]: R. Schramm, G. Struve, "Entwurf eines Rundschreibens an deutsche Demokra- ten; als Manuscript gedruckt. Begleitschreiben an die Führer".— Ed.

[^3]: Denis Diderot, Rameau's Neffe. Aus dem Manuscript übersetzt von J. W. Goethe.—Ed.





**[p. 261]**

Gustav Struve is one of the more important figures of the emigration. At the very first glimpse of his leathery appearance, his protuberant eyes with their sly, stupid expression, the mat gleam on his bald pate and his half Slav, half Kalmuck features, one cannot doubt that one is in the presence of an unusual man. And this impression is confirmed by his low, guttural voice, his sentimental and unctuous manner of speaking and the solemn gravity of his deportment. To be just it must be said that faced with the greatly increased difficulties of distinguishing oneself these days, our Gustav tried at least to be different from his fellow citizens; part prophet, part speculator, part bunion healer—he centred his activities on all kinds of odd peripheral matters and made propaganda for the strangest assortment of causes. For example, being a Russian he suddenly took it into his head to enthuse about the cause of German freedom after he had been employed in a supernumerary capacity in the Russian embassy to the Federal Diet m and had written a little pamphlet in defence of the Diet.c Regarding his own skull as the normal human cranium, he vigorously applied himself to phrenology and from then on he refused to trust anyone whose skull he had not yet felt and

[^1]: The Polish name is Strzegom.—Ed.

[^2]: R.Schramm, Der Standpunkt der Demokratie in und zur octroyirten zweiten Kammer.—Ed.

[^3]: c G. Struve, Erster Versuch auf dem Felde des deutschen Bundesrechts.—Ed.

[^4]: 10-2076





**[p. 262]**

In the early forties Gustav had already invented the Deutscher Zuschauer, a little paper that he published in Mannheim, that he patented and that pursued him everywhere as a fixed idea. He also made the discovery at around this time that Rotteck's

Weltgeschichte and the Rotteck-Welcker Staats-Lexikon, the two works that had been his Old and New Testaments, were out of date and in need of a new democratic edition. This revision Gustav undertook without delay and published an extract from it in advance under the title Grundzüge der Staatswissenschaft. Since 1848, moreover, the revision had become "an undeniable necessity, for the late Rotteck had not experienced the events of recent years".

In the meantime there broke out in Baden in quick succession the three "popular uprisings" m that have been depicted by Gustav as the very centre of the whole modern course of world history.3 Driven into exile by the very first of these revolts (Hecker's) and engaged in publishing his Deutscher Zuschauer once again, this time in Basle, he was dealt a hard blow by fate when the publisher in Mannheim continued to print the Deutscher Zuschauer there under a different editor. The battle between the true and the false Deutscher Zuschauer was so bitterly fought that neither paper survived. To compensate for this Gustav devised a constitution for the German Federal Republic5 in which Germany was to be divided into 24 republics, each with a president and two chambers; he appended a neat map on which the whole plan could be clearly seen.

In September 1848 the second insurrection began, in which our Gustav acted as both Caesar and Socrates. He used the time granted him on German soil to issue serious warnings to the Black Forest peasantry about the deleterious effects of smoking tobacco.

[^1]: G. Struve, Geschichte der drei Volkserhebungen in Baden.—Ed. G. Struve, Die Grundrechte des deutschen Volkes.—Ed.





**[p. 263]**

"Article 1 . T h e extra tax of 10 per cent imposed by the aforesaid on goods imported from Switzerland is hereby abolished; Article 2. Christian Müller, the Customs Officer, is given the task of implementing the measure."

He was accompanied in all his trials by his faithful Amalia,who subsequently published a romantic account of them.b She was also active in administering the oath to captured gendarmes; it was her custom to fasten a red band around the arm of every one who swore allegiance to the German free state and to give him a kiss. Unfortunately Gustav and Amalia were taken prisoner and languished in gaol where the imperturbable Gustav at once resumed his republican translation of Rotteck's Weltgeschichte until he was at last liberated by the outbreak of the third insurrection. Gustav now became a member of a real provisional government and the mania for provisional governments was now added to his other fixed ideas. As President of the War Council he hastened to introduce as much muddle as possible into his department and to recommend the "traitor" Mayerhofer for the post of Minister for War (vide Goegg, Rückblick^ Paris, 1851). Later he vainly aspired to the post of Foreign Minister and to have 60,000 florins placed at his disposal. Herr Brentano soon relieved our Gustav of the burdens of government and Gustav now headed the opposition in the "Club of Resolute Progress". He delighted above all in opposing the very measures of Brentano which he himself had supported. Even though the Club was disbanded and Gustav had to flee to the Palatinate, this disaster had its positive side for it enabled him to issue one further number of the inevitable Deutscher Zuschauer in Neustadt an der Haardt—this compensated Gustav for much undeserved suffering. A further satisfaction was that he was successful in a by-election in some remote corner of the uplands and was nominated member of the Baden Constituent Assembly, which meant that he could now return in an official capacity. In this Assembly Gustav only distinguished himself by the following three proposals that he put forward in Freiburg: 1) On June 28: everyone who wants to negotiate with the enemy to be

[^1]: Republikanisches Regierungs-Blatt. It appeared with the subtitle: Deutsche Republik! Wohlstand, Bildung, Freiheit für Alle!—Ed. Amalie Struve, Erinnerungen aus den badischen Freiheitskämpfen.—Ed. A. Goegg, Rückblick auf die Badische Revolution unter Hinweisung auf die gegenwärtige Lage Teutschlands (published anonymously).— Ed.

[^2]: 10*



The third member of the alliance,b the great Arnold Ruge with his air of a sergeant-major still waiting for civilian employment,

[^1]: G. Struve, "Abschiedsbrief Struve's Havre, 7. Oktober 1849", Deutsche Londoner Zeitung, No. 238, October 26, 1849.— Ed.

[^2]: Paraphrase of the last line of Schiller's "Die Bürgschaft".—Ed.





**[p. 265]**

outshines the whole of the emigration. It cannot be said that this noble man commends himself by his notably handsome exterior; Paris acquaintances were wont to sum up his Pomeranian-Slav features with the word "ferret-face" (figure de fouine). Arnold Ruge, the son of peasants of the isle of Rügen, had endured seven years in Prussian prisons for demagogic agitation.175 He threw himself wildly into Hegelian philosophy as soon as he had realised that once he had leafed through Hegel's Encyclopädie he could dispense with the study of all other science. He also developed the principle (which he advanced in a short story and which he attempted to practise on his friends — poor Herwegh can vouch for the truth of this) of profiting from marriage and accordingly he early acquired a "material basis" in this manner.

With the help of his Hegelian phrases and his material basis he merely contrived to become door-keeper to German philosophy. In the Höllische Jahrbücher and the Deutsche Jahrbücher it was his task to announce and to trumpet the names of rising luminaries and he showed that he was not without talent in exploiting them for his own literary purposes. Unfortunately, the period of philosophical anarchy very soon supervened, that period when science no longer had a universally acknowledged king, when Strauss, B. Bauer and Feuerbach fought among themselves and when the most diverse alien elements began to disrupt the simplicity of the classical doctrine. Our Ruge looked on helplessly; he no longer knew which path to take; his Hegelian categories had always operated in a vacuum, now they ran completely amok and he suddenly felt a strong desire for a mighty movement where people were not very particular about thought and writing.

Ruge played the same role in the Hallische Jahrbücher as the late bookseller Nicolai had done in the old Berlinische Monatsschrift. Like the latter his ambition was to print the works of others and. in so doing, to derive material advantage and also to quarry literary sustenance for the effusions of his own brain. The only difference was that in rewriting his collaborators' articles, in this literary digestive process with its inevitable end product, our Ruge went much further than did his model. Moreover, Ruge was not the door-keeper of German Enlightenment, he was the Nicolai of modern German philosophy and was able to conceal the natural banality of his genius behind a thick hedge of speculative jargon. Like Nicolai he fought valiantly against Romanticism because it had long since been demolished philosophically by Hegel in his Aesthetik and by Heine from the point of view of literature in Die

romantische Schule. But unlike Hegel, Ruge agreed with Nicolai in



**[p. 266]**

And in general our Pomeranian thinker did not really feel at ease in Hegelian philosophy. Able as he was in detecting contradictions he was all the more feeble in resolving them and he had a very understandable horror of dialectics. The upshot was that the crudest possible contradictions dwelt peaceably together in his dogmatic brain and that his powers of understanding, never very agile, were nowhere more at home than in such mixed company. It sometimes happened that in his own way he imbibed simultaneously two articles by two different writers and conflated them into a single new product, without noticing that they had been written from two opposing viewpoints. Always getting stuck in his contradictions he sought to extricate himself by asserting in his arguments with theorists that his deficient reasoning was due to his practical sense, and on the other hand telling the practical people that his practical clumsiness and inconsistency was the height of theoretical achievement. He would end by maintaining that it was precisely his own entanglement in insoluble contradic- tions, his chaotically uncritical faith in the purport of all popular slogans that showed him to be a man of "principle'''.

Before we go on to concern ourselves with the further career of our Maurice of Saxony, as he liked to style himself in his intimate circle of friends, we would point to two qualities which made their appearance already in the Jahrbücher. The first is his mania for manifestos. No sooner had anyone hatched any kind of novel opinion that Ruge believed to have a future than he would issue a manifesto. As no one reproaches him with ever having given birth to an original thought, such manifestos were always a suitable opportunity to claim this novel idea as his property in a more or less declamatory fashion. This would be followed by the attempt to form a party, a group, a "mass" which would stand behind him and to whom he could act as sergeant-major. We shall see later to what unbelievable heights of perfection Ruge had developed the art of fabricating manifestos, proclamations and pronuncia- mentos.

The second quality is the particular diligence in which Arnold excels. As he does not care to study overmuch, or as he puts it "to



**[p. 267]**

Contented as Ruge was to be the Swiss guard of German philos- ophy he still had a secret sorrow gnawing at his innermost vitals. He had not written a single large book and had daily to envy the happy Bruno Bauer who had published eighteen fat volumes while still a young man. To remedy this incongruity Ruge had one and the same essay printed three times in one and the same volume under different titles and then brought out the same volume in a number of different formats. In this way Arnold Ruge's Collected Works6 came into being and even today he derives much pleasure from counting them every morning volume by volume as they stand there neatly bound in his library, whereupon he exclaims joyfully: "And anyway. Bruno Bauer is a man without principles!"

Even though Arnold did not manage to comprehend the Hegelian philosophy, he did succeed in representing one Hegelian category in his own person. He was the very incarnation of "the honest consciousness" and was strengthened in this when he made the pleasant discovery in the Phänomenologie—which otherwise remained a sealed book to him — that the honest consciousness "always has pleasure in itself".e Though it wears its integrity on its sleeve the honest consciousness uses it to conceal the petty malice

[^1]: A. Ruge, Unsre letzten zehn Jahre.—Ed.

[^2]: Marx and Engels use the English words "Soyer's relish".—Ed. Marx and Engels say "Warwickshire sauce".—Ed.

[^3]: A. Ruge, Gesammelte Schriften.—Ed. G. W. F. Hegel, Phänomenologie des Geistes. VI. Der Geist.—Ed.





**[p. 268]**

After the Deutsche Jahrbücher were suppressed Ruge transported his family to Paris in a carriage specially built for the purpose. Here, his unlucky star brought him into contact with Heine, who honoured him as the man who "had translated Hegel into Pomeranian". Heine asked him whether Prutz was not a pseudonym of his, which Ruge could deny in good conscience. However, it was not possible to make Heine believe that our Arnold was not the author of Prutz's poems. Incidentally, Heine discovered very soon that even though Ruge had no talent he knew very well how to give the appearance of being a man of character. Thus it came about that friend Arnold gave Heine the idea for his Atta Troll. If Ruge did not immortalise his sojourn in Paris by writing a great work he nevertheless deserves our thanks for the one Heine produced for him. In gratitude the poet wrote for him this well-known epitaph:

[^1]: Atta Troll, reforming bear, Pure and pious; a passionate husband,

[^2]: a Petty.—Ed.





**[p. 269]**

By the Zeitgeist led astray A backwoods sansculotte, Dances badly but ideals Dwell within his shaggy breast Often stinking very strongly— Talent none, but Character!3

In Paris our Arnold experienced the misfortune of becoming involved with the Communists. He published articles by Marx and

Engels in the Deutsch-Französische Jahrbücherb that contained views running directly counter to those he had himself announced in the Preface, an accident to which the Augsburg Allgemeine Zeitungc

drew his attention but which he bore with philosophical resigna- tion.

To overcome an innate social awkwardness our Ruge has collected a small number of curious anecdotes that could be used on any occasion. He calls these anecdotes yarns. His preoccupation with these yarns, sustained over many years, finally led to the transformation of all events, situations and circumstances into a series of pleasant or unpleasant, good or bad, important or trivial, interesting or boring yarns. The Paris bustle, the many new impressions, socialism, politics, the Palais-Royal,176 the cheapness of the oysters—all these things wrought so powerfully on the mind of this unfortunate man that his head began to spin permanently and irremediably and Paris for him became an unlimited storehouse of yarns. He himself hit upon the idea of using wood shavings to make coats for the proletariat and in general he had a foible for industrial yarns for which he could never find any shareholders.

When the politically better known Germans were expelled from France,177 Ruge contrived to avoid this fate by presenting himself to Minister Duchâtel as a savant sérieux.d He evidently had in mind the "scholar" in Paul de Kock's Amant de la lune, who established himself as a savant by means of an original way of making corks pop into the air.e

[^1]: a Heinrich Heine, Atta Troll, Caput XXIV.—Ed. The reference is to Marx's articles "On the Jewish Question" and "Contribution to the Critique of Hegel's Philosophy of Law. Introduction", and to Engels' articles "Outlines of a Critique of Political Economy" and "The Condition of England. Past and Present by Thomas Carlyle"(see present edition, Vol. 3).—Ed.

[^2]: c "Frankreich. Die ersten Proben der deutsch-französischen Jahrbücher" (anon.), Allgemeine Zeitung (Augsburg), No. 70, March 10, 1844.— Ed.

[^3]: A true scholar.—Ed. e This refers to Saucissard, a character in Paul de Kock's novel.—Ed.





**[p. 270]**

Thus equipped, our Ruge could return to Leipzig to obtain definitive recognition of his character. But once arrived all was not a bed of roses. His old friend Wigand, the bookseller, had very

[^1]: M. Stirner, Der Einzige und sein Eigenthum. L. Stein, Der Socialismus und Communismus des heutigen Frankreichs.—Ed. A. Ruge, Unsre letzten zehn Jahre.—Ed.





**[p. 271]**

successfully replaced him in the role of Nicolai and as no other post was vacant Ruge fell into gloomy reflections on the transitoriness of all yarns. This was his situation when the German revolution broke out.

It brought sudden relief to our Arnold too. The mighty movement in which even the clumsiest could easily swim with the current had finally got underway and Ruge went at once to Berlin where he intended to fish in troubled waters. As a revolution had just broken out he felt that it would be appropriate for him to come forward with proposals for reform. So he founded a paper with that name. The pre-revolutionary Réforme of Paris had been the most untalented, ignorant and boring paper in France. The Berlin Reform demon- strated that it was possible to surpass its French model and that one could unhesitatingly offer the German public such an incredible journal even in the "metropolis of intelligence". On the assumption that Ruge's clumsy language was the best guarantee for the profound content lying behind it Arnold was elected to the Frankfurt Parliament as Member for Breslau.3 Here he saw his chance as editor of the democratic Left wing to come forward with an absurd manifesto.*3 Apart from that he distinguished himself only by his passion for issuing manifestos for European peoples' congresses, and hastened to add his voice to the general wish that Prussia should be integrated into Germany. Later, on his return to Berlin, he demanded that Germany should be integrated into Prussia and Frankfurt into Berlin, and when he finally decided to become a peer of Saxony he demanded that Germany and Prussia should both be integrated into Dresden.

His parliamentary activity brought him no laurels other than the fact that his own party despaired at his clumsy ineptitude. At the same time his Reform was going downhill, a situation that could only be remedied, as he thought, by his personal presence in Berlin. As an "honest consciousness" he naturally discovered a strictly political pretext for his resignation and in fact he demanded that the whole of the Left should leave with him. Naturally, they refused and Ruge went to Berlin alone. Once there, he discovered that modern conflicts can best be resolved by the "Dessau method", as he termed the small state, a model of constitutional democracy. Then during the siege of Vienna he again drew up a manifesto in which General

[^1]: The Polish name is Wroclaw.— Ed. A. Ruge, "Motivirtes Manifest der radical-demokratischen Partei in der constituirenden Nationalversammlung zu Frankfurt am Main", Die Reform, No. 66, June 7, 1848.— Ed.





**[p. 272]**

At the time of the May uprising in Dresden Arnold placed himself at the head of the movement in Leipzig together with his friend Otto Wigand and the city council. He and his companions issued a vigorous manifesto to the citizens of Dresden urging them to fight bravely—in Leipzig, it went on, Ruge, Wigand and the city fathers were watching, and whoever did not desert himself would not be deserted by Heaven. Scarcely had the manifesto been published when our brave Arnold took to his heels and fled to Karlsruhe.

In Karlsruhe he felt unsafe even though the Baden troops were standing on the Neckar and hostilities were a long way from breaking out. He asked Brentano to send him to Paris as ambassador. Brentano permitted himself the joke of giving him the post for 12 hours revoking it next morning, just when Ruge was about to depart. Undaunted, Ruge went to Paris together with Schütz and Blind, the official representatives of the Brentano government, and once there made such a spectacle of himself that Oppenheim, his former editor, announced in the official Karlsruher Zeitungb that Herr Ruge was not in Paris in any official capacity but merely "on his own initiative". Having once been taken along by Schütz and Blind to see Ledru-Rollin, Ruge suddenly interrupted the diplomatic negotiations with a terrible diatribe against the Germans in the presence of the Frenchman so that his colleagues finally had to withdraw discomfited and compromised. June 13c

[^1]: A. Ruge, "An das deutsche Volk!"—Ed. b On May 31, 1849.—Ed. On that day a peaceful demonstration was dispersed in Paris, and this signified the defeat of the Montagne Party.—Ed.





**[p. 273]**

In London Ruge first attempted to be introduced as the Baden provisional ambassador. He then tried to gain acceptance in the English press as a great German thinker and writer but was always turned away on the grounds that the English were too materialistic to understand German philosophy. He was also asked about his works—a request which Ruge could answer only with a sigh while the image of Bruno Bauer once again rose up before his eyes. For even his Collected Works, what were they but pamphlets reprinted again and again? And they were not even pamphlets but merely newspaper articles in pamphlet form, and basically they were not even newspaper articles but only the muddled fruits of his reading. Something had to be done and so Ruge wrote two articles for the Leader1' in which under the pretext of an analysis of German democracy he declared that in Germany "humanism" was now the order of the day as represented by Ludwig Feuerbach and Arnold Ruge, the author of the following works: 1) Die Religion unsrer Zeit, 2) Die Demokratie und der Sozialismus, 3) Die Philosophie und die Revolution. These three epoch-making works which have not appeared in the bookshops to this day are, it goes without saying, nothing more than new titles arbitrarily applied to old essays of Ruge's. Simultaneously he resumed his daily stints when for his own edification, for the benefit of the German public and to the horror of Herr Brüggemann he began to retranslate articles into German that had somehow got out of the Kölnische Zeitung and into the Morning Advertiser. Not exactly burdened with laurels he withdrew to Ostend

[^1]: The following paragraph is crossed out in the manuscript: "The question arises here: why in particular is Herr A. Ruge in England? In the year 1849 Herr Ruge began to realise at least one thing: that his position in Germany was very untenable, very compromised, and that he needed to be transferred to distant soil to maintain a sort of pretext for his frequent appearances. There are no external reasons whatever to keep him away from the Continent. When he turned his back on the Berlin state of siege, his editors stayed behind; when he withdrew from Leipzig, Wigand and his other associates stayed there without a hair falling from their heads; he did not take part in any compromising activities in Baden any more than he did in Paris. But precisely because Ruge is no refugee in the usual sense of the word, he considers it so important to hold an official position in the emigration." — Ed.

[^2]: A. Ruge, "The German Democratic Party. 1. The Origin and Elements of the Party. 2. The Revolution and the Present Condition of Parties and of the Nation". The Leader, Nos. 39 and 40, December 21 and 28, 1850.— Ed.



