---
Volume: 11
Document_Title: "VI "
Page_Range: "301-307"
---

# VI 



**[p. 274]**

Just as Gustav represents the vegetable nature and Gottfried the sensibility of German petty-bourgeois philistinism, Arnold represents its reason or rather its unreason. Unlike Arnold Winkelried 181 he does not open up a path to freedom; he is in his own person the gutter of freedomb; Ruge stands in the German revolution like the notices seen at the corners of certain streets: it is permitted to pass water here.

We return at last to our circular with its covering latter. It fell flat and the first attempt to create a united democratic church came to nought. Schramm and Gustav later declared that failure was due solely to the circumstance that Ruge could neither speak French nor write German. But then the great men again set to work.

Chè ciascun oltra moda era possente, Come udirete nel canto seguente.

VI

Rodomonted K. Heimen had arrived in London from Switzerland at the same time as Gustav. Karl Heinzen had for many years made a living from his threat to destroy "tyranny" in Germany. After the outbreak of the February revolution he went so far as to attempt, with unheard-of courage, to inspect German soil from the vantage point of Schuster Island/ He then betook himself to Switzerland where from the safety of Geneva he again thundered against the "tyrants and oppressors of the people" and took the opportunity to declare that "Kossuth is a great man, but Kossuth has forgotten about fulminating silver'.'f Heinzen's horror of bloodshed had tur- ned him into the alchemist of the revolution. He dreamt of an ex- plosive substance that would blast the whole of European reaction into the air in a trice, without its user even getting his fingers burnt. He had a particular aversion to walking amid a shower of bullets and

[^1]: A pun on Confucius.— Ed. In German a play on words: der Freiheit eine Gasse—a path to freedom, and der Freiheit eine Gosse—a gutter of freedom.—Ed.

[^2]: For puissant were they all beyond compare, As in our next canto you shall hear (Boiardo, L'Orlando innamorato, Canto 17).—Ed.

[^3]: A character from Ariosto's Orlando furioso.— Ed. e Near Basle.— Ed.

[^4]: K. Heinzen, "Der Mord", Die Evolution, No. 4, January 26, 1849.—Ed.





**[p. 275]**

In the Italian epics of chivalry we constantly encounter mighty, broad-shouldered giants armed with enormous cudgels who, despite the fact that they lash about them wildly and make a frightening din in battle, never manage to hit their foes but only the trees in the vicinity. Herr Heinzen is such an Ariostian giant in political literature. Endowed by nature with a churlish figure and huge masses of flesh, he interpreted these gifts to mean that he was destined to be a great man. His weighty physical appearance determines his whole literary posture which is physical through and

[^1]: Karlsruher Zeitung.—Ed. K. Heinzen, Einige Blicke auf die badisch-pfälzische Revolution.—Ed.





**[p. 276]**

The natural complement to this great physique, so healthy in every fibre, is the healthy commonsense,which Herr Heinzen ascribes to himself in the highest possible degree. It is inevitable that a man with such commonsense will turn out to be a "natural" genius who has learnt nothing, a barbarian innocent of literature and science. By virtue of his commonsense (which he also calls "his perspicacity" and which allows him to tell Kossuth that he has "advanced to the extreme frontiers of thought"), he learns only from hearsay or the newspapers. He is therefore always behind the times and always wears the coat that literature cast off some years previously, while rejecting as immoral and reprehensi- ble the new modern dress he has as yet been unable to become familiar with. But when he has once assimilated a thing his faith in it is quite unshakable; it transforms itself into something that has grown naturally, that is self-evident, that everyone must appreciate and that only the malicious, the stupid or the sophist will pretend not to grasp. Such a robust body and healthy commonsense must of course have also some honest, solid principles, and he even shows to advantage when he takes the craze for principles to extremes. In this field Heinzen is second to none. He draws attention to his principles at every opportunity, every argument is met by an appeal to principle, everyone who fails to understand him or whom he does not understand is demolished by the argument that he has no principles and that his insincerity and pure ill-will are such that he would deny that day was day and night night. To deal with these base disciples of Ahriman he summons up his muse, indignation; he curses, rages, boasts, preaches, and foaming at the mouth he roars out the most tragicomical tirades. He demonstrates what can be achieved in the

[^1]: Strong-arm man.— Ed.

[^2]: K. Heinzen, "Lehren der Revolution", Deutsche Londoner Zeitung, Nos. 241 and 242, November 9 and 16, 1849.— Ed.





**[p. 277]**

From the earlier history of Herr Heinzen mention should be made of the fact that he was in the Dutch colonies, where he advanced not indeed to the rank of general but to that of non-commissioned officer, a slight for which he later on always treated the Dutch as a nation without principles. Later we find him back in Cologne as a sub-inspector of taxes and in this capacity he wrote a comedy in which his healthy commonsense vainly strove to satirise the philosophy of Hegel.b He was more at home in the gossip columns of the Kölnische Zeitung, in the feuilleton, where he let fall some weighty words about the quarrels in the Cologne Carnival Club, the institute from which all the great men of Cologne have graduated. His own sufferings and those of his father, a forester, in their struggle with superiors assumed the proportions of events of universal significance, as easily happens when the men of healthy commonsense contem- plate their small personal problems. He gives an account of them in his Preussische Biireaukratie, a book much inferior to Venedey V and containing nothing more than the complaints of a petty official against the higher authorities. The book involved him in a trial and although the worst he had to fear was six months in gaol he thought his head was in danger and fled to Brussels. From here he demanded that the Prussian government should not only grant him a safe conduct but also that they should suspend the whole French legal procedure and give him a jury trial for an ordinary offence.184 The Prussian government issued a warrant for his arrest; he replied with a Steckbriefd against the Prussian government in which he preached inter alia moral resistance and

[^1]: a Cf. Grimm's fairy-tale "Tischlein deck dich, Esel streck dich, Knüppel aus dem Sack" ("The Wishing-Table, the Gold Ass, and the Cudgel in the Sack").—Ed. K. Heinzen, Doktor Nebel, oder: Gelehrsamkeit und Leben.—Ed. c J. Venedey, Preussen und Preussenthum.—Ed.

[^2]: Steckbrief, the title of Heinzen's book, means both a description of a person wanted by the police and a warrant of arrest.—Ed.





**[p. 278]**

From Switzerland he went to America. Here, although his Swiss rustic style enabled him to pass as a genuine poet, he nevertheless very quickly managed to ride the New York Schnellposth to death.

Having returned to Europe in the wake of the February revolution, he sent despatches to the Mannheimer Abendzeitung announcing the arrival of the great Heinzen0 and he also published a pamphlet to revenge himself on Lamartine,d who with his whole government had ignored him despite his mandate as official representative of the American Germans. He did not wish to go back to Prussia as he still feared for his head despite the March revolution and the amnesty. He would wait until the nation summoned him. As this did not happen he resolved to

[^1]: K. Heinzen, Teutsche Revolution. Gesammelte Flugschriften.—Ed. Deutsche Schnellpost für Europäische Zustände.—Ed. K. Heinzen, "Vom Rhein, 12. April" and "Meine Erklärung", Mannheimer Abendzeitung, Nos. 105 and 107, April 15 and 17, 1848.—Ed.

[^2]: K. Heinzen, Frankreichs "Brüderlicher Bund mit Deutschland".—Ed.





**[p. 279]**

Having arrived in London after the termination of the Baden uprising, he became indignant with the young people who had forgotten this great man of before the revolution and of after the revolution, and who caused him to sink into oblivion. He had always been nothing more than l'homme de la veille or l'homme du lendemain, he was never l'homme du jour or even de la journée* As the authentic fulminating silver had still not been discovered, new weapons had to be found to combat the reaction. He called for two million heads so that he could be a dictator and wade up to the ankles in blood — shed by others. His real aim was, of course, merely to create a scandal; the reaction had transported him to London at its own expense; by means of an expulsion order from England it would now, so Heinzen hoped, send him gratis to New York. The coup failed and its only consequence was that the radical French papers called him a fool who shouted for two million heads only because he had never risked his own. But to cap it all, he had published his bloodthirsty sanguinary article in the Deutsche Londoner Zeitungh owned by the ex-Duke of Bruns- wick—in return for a cash payment, of course.

Gustav and Heinzen had a high opinion of each other for a considerable time. Heinzen praised Gustav as a sage and Gustav

praised. Heinzen as a fighter. Heinzen hid scarcely been able to wait for the end of the European revolution so that he could put an end to the "ruinous disunity in the democratic German emigration" and to re-open his pre-March business. He put forward "a programme of the Germanic revolutionary party in the shape of a draft proposal for discussion".1 This programme was distinguished by the invention of a special ministry to cater for "the all-important need for public playgrounds, battlegrounds" (minus hail of bullets) "and gardens" and was notable also for the decree "abolishing the privileges of the male sex especially in marriage" (especially also in thrusting manoeuvres'1 in war, see Clausewitz). This programme was actually no more than a

[^1]: He had always been nothing more than yesterday's man or tomorrow's man, he was never the man of today or even the man of the day.— Ed.

[^2]: K. Heinzen, "Lehren der Revolution" (see this volume, p. 276/ —Ed. [K. Heinzen,] "Programm der deutschen Revolutionspartei. Als Entwurf und Vorschlag der Diskussion preisgegeben". Westdeutsche Zeitung, No. 64, March 16, 1850.—Ed.

[^3]: Stosstaktik.—Ed.



