---
Volume: 11
Document_Title: "VII. Gustav and the Colony of Renunciation "
Page_Range: "307-308"
---

# VII. Gustav and the Colony of Renunciation 



**[p. 280]**

VII

GUSTAV AND THE COLONY OF RENUNCIATION

After the indefatigable Gustav had made an unsuccessful attempt to establish a Central Refugee Committee together with Friedrich Bobzin, Habbegg, Oswald, Rosenblum, Cohnheim, Grunich and other "outstanding" men, he made his way towards Yorkshire. For here, so he believed, a magic garden would flower and in it, unlike the garden of Alcine, virtue would rule instead of vice. An old Englishman with a sense of humour, whom our Gustav had bored with his theories, took him at his word and gave him a few acres of moor in Yorkshire on the express condition that he would there found a "Colony of Renunciation", a colony in which the consumption of meat, tobacco and spirits would be strictly prohibited, only a vegetarian diet would be permitted and where every colonist would be obliged to read a chapter from Struve's book on constitutional lawa at his morning prayers. Moreover, the colony was to be self-supporting. Accompanied by his Amalia, by his Swabian wall-flower Schnauffer and by a few other of his faithfuls, Gustav placed his trust in God and went to found the "Colony of Renunciation". Of the colony it must be reported that it contained little "prosperity", much culture and unlimited "freedom" to be bored and to grow thin. One fine morning our Gustav uncovered a dreadful plot. His companions who did not share Gustav's ruminant constitution, and with whom

[^1]: G. Struve, Grundzüge der Staatswissenschaft.—Ed.



