---
Volume: 11
Document_Title: "XII "
Page_Range: "331-337"
---

# XII 



**[p. 304]**

Thus did our Gottfried sway like a reed, now advancing, now retreating, now launching a project, now dissociating himself from it, always tacking to adjust to the wind of popularity. While he officially allowed the aesthetic bourgeoisie to fête and feast him in London as the martyr of the revolution, behind the backs of the same people he indulged in forbidden commerce with the mobb of the emigration as represented by Willich. While living in circumstances that could be described as luxurious in comparison with'his modest situation in Bonn, he wrote to St. Louis that he was living as befitted the "representative of poverty"/ In this way he behaved towards the bourgeoisie as etiquette required, and at the same time he showed due respect to the proletariat. But as a man whose imagination far outweighed his understanding he could not help falling into the bad manners and the arrogant postures of the parvenu and this alienated many a pompous philistine émigré from him. Wholly characteristic of him was the article on the Great Exhibition that he wrote for the Kosmos. He admired nothing so much as the giant mirror that was exhibited in the Crystal Palace. For him, the objective world reduces itself to a mirror, the subjective world to a cliché. Under the pretext of seeing the beautiful side of everything he dallies with everything and this dallying he calls poetry, self-sacrifice or religion, as the occasion demands. Fundamentally, everything is used to gratify himself. It is inevitable that in practice he should bring into prominence the ugly side, since imagination turns into lies and enthusiasm into baseness. It was moreover to be expected that Gottfried would soon cast off his lion's skin when he fell into the hands of old, experienced clowns like Gustav and Arnold.

The Great Exhibition inaugurated a new epoch in the emigra- tion. The great throng of German philistines that flooded into

[^1]: XII

[^2]: Raw virgin.— F.d. Marx and Engels use the English word.— Ed. G.Kinkel, "Der Brief an die Bürger von St. Louis", Bremer Tages-Chronik, No. 507, February 25, 1851.—Ed.





**[p. 305]**

The true organisation of the emigration was in fact this tavern organisation presided over by Silenus-Schärttner in Long Acre which experienced its heyday thanks to the Exhibition. Here the true Central Committee sat in perpetual session. All other committees, organisations, party formations were just trimmings, the patriotic arabesques of this primeval German tavern society of idlers.

In addition the emigration was strengthened at the time by the arrival of Messrs. Meyen, Faucher, Sigel, Goegg, Fickler, etc.

Meyen, a little hedgehog who through an oversight had come into the world without spines, was,under the name Poinsinet, once described by Goethe in this way:

[^1]: "In literature, as in society, one encounters such curious,stout little manikins. Endowed with some small talent they endeavour always to claim the attention of the public and as they can easily be overlooked, they are the source of much

[^2]: a Cf. Matthew 20 : 12.—Ed. b In public—Ed.





**[p. 306]**

On the other hand, writers contemporary with him pass on the following information: Eduard Meyen belonged to the "Resolute" group which represented the Berlin intelligentsia as against the mass stupidity of the rest of Germany. He too had a Meyen- Bug Club in Berlin with his friends Miigge, Klein, Zabel, Buhl, etc. Each of these Meyen bugs sat on his own small leaf.b Eduard Meyen's paper was called the Mannheimer Abendblättchenc and here, every week, after enormous efforts, he deposited a small green turd of correspondence. Our Meyen-bug really did progress to the point in 1845 when he was about to publish a monthly periodical; contributions from various people landed on his desk, the publisher waited but the whole project collapsed because Eduard after eight months in cold sweat declared that he could not finish the prospectus. As Eduard took all his childish activities seriously he was regarded in Berlin after the March revolution as a man who took the movement seriously. In London he worked together with Faucher on a German edition of the Illustrated London News under the editorship and censorship of an old woman who had known some German twenty years before, but he was discarded as useless after he had attempted with great tenacity to insert his profound articles about sculpture that he had published ten years previously in Berlin. But when, later on, the Kinkel emigration made him their secretary he realised that he was a practical homme d'étatd and he announced in a lithographed leaflet that he had arrived at the "tranquillity of a point of view". After his death a whole heap of titles for future projects will be found among his papers.

Conjointly with Meyen we must necessarily consider Oppenheim, his co-editor and co-secretary. It has been claimed that Op- penheim is not so much a man as an allegorical figure: the

[^1]: Goethe, "Anmerkungen über Personen und Gegenstände, deren in dem Dialog Rameau's Neffe erwähnt wird".— Ed.

[^2]: Blättchen—"small leaf" and "small newspaper".—Ed. Mannheimer Abendzeitung.—Ed. Statesman.— Ed.





**[p. 307]**

The third member of the alliance15 is Herr Julius Faucher. He is one of those Berlin Huguenots who know how to exploit their minor talent with great commercial adroitness. He made his public debut as the Ensign Pistol of the Free Trade Party in which capacity he was employed by Hamburg commercial interests to make propaganda. During the revolutionary disturbances they allowed him to preach free trade in the apparently chaotic form of anarchism. When this ceased to be relevant to the times he was dismissed and, with Meyen, became joint editor of the Berlin Abend-Post. Under the pretence of wishing to abolish the state and introduce anarchy he refrained from dangerous opposition towards the existing government and when, later on, the paper failed because it could not afford the deposit, the Neue Preussische Zeitung commiserated with Faucher, the only respectable writer among the democrats.0 This cosy relationship with the Neue Preussische Zeitung soon became so intimate that our Faucher began to act as its correspondent in London. Faucher's activity in émigré politics did not last long; his free trade inclined him towards commerce where he found his true calling, to which he returned with great energy and in which he achieved results never seen before: namely a price list that assesses his goods according to a completely sliding scale. As is well known, the

Breslauer Zeitung was indiscreet enough to inform the general public of this document.

[^1]: a All styles are good except the tiresome kind (Voltaire, L'enfant prodigue, Preface).—Ed.

[^2]: b Cf. Schiller, "Die Bürgschaft" (see this volume, pp. 163 and 264).— Ed. This refers to two items published in the Neue Preussische Zeitung on July 20 and 21, 1850, in the section "Berliner Zuschauer".—Ed.





**[p. 308]**

Franz Sigel, whom his friend Goegg describes as

"a short, beardless man, bearing a strong resemblance to Napoleon", is, again according to Goegg, "a hero", "a man of the future", "above all a genius, intellectually creative and constantly hatching new plans".

Between ourselves, General Sigel is a young Baden lieutenant of principle and ambition. He read in an account of the campaigns of the French Revolution that the step from second lieutenant to supreme commander is mere child's play, and from that moment on this little beardless man firmly believed that Franz Sigel must become supreme commander in a revolutionary army. His wish was granted thanks to the Baden insurrection of 1849 and a popularity with the army arising from a confusion of names.3 The battles he fought on the Neckar and did not fight in the Black Forest are well known; his retreat to Switzerland has been praised even by his enemies as a timely and correct manoeuvre. His military plans here bear witness to his study of the revolutionary wars. In order to remain faithful to the revolutionary tradition hero Sigel, ignoring the enemy and operational and withdrawal lines and similar bagatelles, went conscientiously from one Moreau position to the next. And if he did not manage to parody Moreau's campaigns in every detail, if he crossed the Rhine at Eglisau and not at Paradies, this was the fault of the enemy, who was too ignorant to appreciate such a learned manoeuvre. In his orders of the day and in his instructions Sigel emerges as a preacher and if he has an inferior style to Napoleon, he has more principle. Later, he concerned himself with devising a handbook for revolutionary officers in all branches of the service, from which we are in a position to offer the following important extract:

Joseph Fickler—

[^1]: "An officer of the revolution must carry the following articles according to regulations: 1 head-covering and cap, 1 sabre with belt, 1 black, red and yellow camel-hair sash, 2 pairs of black leather gloves, 2 battle coats, 1 cloak, 1 pair of cloth trousers, 1 tie, 2 pairs of boots or shoes, 1 black leather travelling case—12" wide, 10" high, 4" deep, 6 shirts, 3 pairs of underpants, 8 pairs of socks, 6 handkerchiefs, 2 towels, 1 washing and shaving kit, 1 writing case, 1 writing tablet with letters patent, 1 clothes brush, 1 copy of service regulations."

[^2]: See this volume, p. 324.—Ed. The colours representing German unity.—Ed.





**[p. 309]**

"the model of a decent, resolute, imperturbably tenacious man of the people whom the people of the whole Upper Baden and lake district supported as one man and whose struggles and sufferings over many years had earned him a popularity approaching that of Brentano" (according to the testimony of his friend Goegg).

As befits a decent, resolute, imperturbably tenacious man of the people, Joseph Fickler has a fleshy full-moon face, a fat neck and a paunch to match. The only fact known about his early life is that he earned a livelihood3 with the aid of a carving from the fifteenth century and with relics relating to the Council of Constance.209 He allowed travellers and foreign art-lovers to inspect these curiosities in exchange for money and incidentally sold them "antique" souvenirs of which Fickler, as he loved to relate with great self-satisfaction, would constantly order a new "antique" supply.

His only deeds during the revolution were firstly his arrest by Mathy after the Pre-parliarnent and. second, his arrest by Römer in Stuttgart in June 1849. Thanks to these arrests he managed to avoid compromising himself. The Württemberg democrats later deposited 1,000 guilders as bail for him, whereupon Fickler went to Thurgau incognito, and to the great distress of his guarantors no more was heard of him. It is undeniable that he successfully translated the feelings and opinions of the lakeside peasants into printers' ink in the Seeblätter; incidentally in view of his friend Ruge he is of the opinion that much study makes people stupid and for this reason he warned his friend Goegg not to visit the librarv of the British Museum.

Amandus Goegg, amiable, as his name indicates,

From sheer nobility Goegg became a member of the provisional government in Baden, where, as he admits, he could do nothing against Brentano and in all modesty he assumed the title of Dictator. No one denies that his achievements as Finance Minister were modest. In all modesty he proclaimed the "Social-Democratic Republic" in Donaueschingen the day before the final retreat to Switzerland, a retreat for which the orders had already been given. In all modesty he later declared (see Heinzen's Janus, 1852) that the Paris proletariat had lost on December 2 because it did not possess his own French-Badenese democratic experience nor

[^1]: "is no great orator, but an unassuming citizen whose noble and modest bearing earns him the friendship of people everywhere" (Westamerikanische Blätter).

[^2]: Marx and Engels use the English word.—Ed.



