---
Volume: 11
Document_Title: "41. List of Documents Despatched to Cologne during the Communist Trial "
Page_Range: "617-619"
---

# 41. List of Documents Despatched to Cologne during the Communist Trial 



**[p. 590]**

[LIST OF D O C U M E N T S DESPATCHED T O C O L O G N E DURING T H E C O M M U N I S T T R I A L ] 3

1) Brothers Braubach—Schneider (original) October 27, business friend.

2) J.A.Boecker—Schneider (copy) October 27, Michael Shaw- cross & Co.

3) I.D. Herstadt—Hontheim—to Marx — Fisher Brothers. 4) J.H.Stein—Esser I — to Marx—business friend. 5) Leonhard Sadée — Schneider I I — t o Marx—Smith (Wilson) Dryer & Co.

10) W. in Düsseldorf—Schneider II — Registration certificate on No. 9, October 28.

[^1]: 6) Düsseldorfer Haus—Schneider II — from London, October 25 (Marx on Cherval, theoretical explanation).364

[^2]: 7) Ebner—for von Hontheim — London, October 26 (triplicate of Marx's first letter to Schneider)—letters of Becker b and Daniels to Marx, new samples of Hirsch's handwriting—Cherval's statement in The People's Paper—original letter from Stieber to Marx.365

[^3]: 8) G. Jung—Schneider II. London, October 27? 1. Legally attested handwriting and affidavit. 2. Quadruple of the first letter to Schneider, together with samples of Hirsch's handwriting. 3 6 6 3. Ex- tract from Becker's letter to Marx on Willich. 4. Three letters from Bermbach to Marx. 5. Copy of Stieber's letter. 6. Instruction to Schneider together with information of the despatch of No. 9 and No. 10.

[^4]: 9) Schneider II, registered — Duplicate of the affidavit, October 28.

[^5]: This list was drawn up by Engels.— Ed. Hermann Heinrich Becker.— Ed.





**[p. 591]**

11) d. No. from B. 8c Co. von Hontheim—Extract from Marx's first letter to Schneider—Notification of the non-receipt of Schneider's letter.

12) G. Blank & Son. 13) Hasselmann Schults 8c Co.

Written about October 31, 1852 Printed according to the manu- script

Published in English for the first time

