---
Volume: 19
Document_Title: "3. K. Marx. The British Cotton Trade "
Page_Range: "44-48"
---

# 3. K. Marx. The British Cotton Trade 



**[p. 17]**

Karl Marx

THE BRITISH COTTON TRADE

London, Sept. 21, 1861

The continual rise in the prices of raw cotton begins at last to seriously react upon the cotton factories, their consumption of cotton being now 25 per cent less than the full consumption. This result has been brought about by a daily lessening rate of production, many mills working only four or three days per week, part of the machinery being stopped, both in those establishments where short time has been commenced and in those which are still running full time, and some mills being temporarily altogether closed. In some places, as at Blackburn, for instance, short time has been coupled with a reduction of wages. However, the short-time movement is only in its incipient state, and we may predict with perfect security that some weeks later the trade will have generally resorted to three days working per week, concur- rently with a large stoppage of machinery in most establishments. On the whole, English manufacturers and merchants were extremely slow and reluctant in acknowledging the awkward position of their cotton supplies.

[^1]: "The whole of the last American crop," they said, "has long since been forwarded to Europe. The picking of the new crop has barely commenced. Not a bale of cotton could have reached us more than has reached us, even if the war and the blockade26 had never been heard of. The shipping season does not commence till far in November, and it is usually the end of December before any large exportations take place. Till then, it is of little consequence whether the cotton is retained on the plantations or is forwarded to the ports as fast as it is bagged. If the blockade ceases any time before the end of this year, the probability is that by March or April we shall have received just as full a supply of cotton as if the blockade had never been declared."3

[^2]: a "The Probable Continuance of the American Conflict", The Economist, No. 941, September 7, 1861.— Ed.





**[p. 18]**

From the outbreak of the American war the prices of cotton were steadily rising, but the ruinous disproportion between the prices of the raw material and the prices of yarns and cloth was not declared until the last weeks of August. Till then, any serious decline in the prices of cotton manufactures, which might have been anticipated from the considerable decrease of the American demand, had been balanced by an accumulation of stocks in first hands, and by speculative consignments to China and India. Those Asiatic markets, however, were soon overdone.

Some other circumstances contributed to contract the Indian market. The late famine in the north-western provinces has been

[^1]: "Stocks," says The Calcutta Price Current of Aug. 7, 1861, "are accumulating, the arrivals since our last being no less than 24,000,000 yards of plain cottons. Home advices show a continuation of shipments in excess of our requirements, and so long as this is the case, improvement cannot be looked for The Bombay market, also, has been greatly oversupplied."





**[p. 19]**

Cost of Per lb. Margin. spinning

per lb Sept. 17, 1860.

Cost of cotton 6 A^d. 4d. 3d. 16s warp sold for 10V4d. Profit, Id. per lb.

The consumption of Indian cotton is rapidly growing, and with a further rise in prices, the Indian supply will come forward at increasing ratios; but still it remains impossible to change, at a few months' notice, all the conditions of production and turn the current of commerce. England pays now, in fact, the penalty for her protracted misrule of that vast Indian empire. The two main obstacles she has now to grapple with in her attempts at supplanting American cotton by Indian cotton, is the want of means of communication and transport throughout India, and the miserable state of the Indian peasant, disabling him from improving favorable circumstances. Both these difficulties the English have themselves to thank for. English modern industry, in general, relied upon two pivots equally monstrous. The one was the potato as the only means of feeding Ireland and a great part of

[^1]: Sept. 17, 1861.

[^2]: Cost of cotton 9d. 2d. 3x/2d. 16s warp sold for 11 Loss, 1 Vgd. per lb.





**[p. X]**

Written on September 21, 1861 Reproduced from the newspaper

First published in the New-York Daily Tribune, No. 6405, October 14, 1861

