---
Volume: 19
Document_Title: "13. K. Marx. Monsieur Fould "
Page_Range: "106-109"
---

# 13. K. Marx. Monsieur Fould 



**[p. 79]**

Karl Marx

MONSIEUR FOULD

Paris, November 16

Art experts in the field of high political comedy find a source of the purest pleasure in the French Moniteur of November 14. As in the ancient classical drama, Fate invisibly, irresistibly enmeshes the heroes—Fate in the form of a thousand million-franc deficit. As in ancient drama, the dialogue is only between two persons, Oedipus-Bonaparte and Teiresias-Fould. The tragedy turns into comedy, however, since Teiresias says only what Oedipus has whispered to him in advance.3

One of the most characteristic tricks of Bonapartist comedy is to put its old, worn dramatis personae on stage over and over again as brand-new heroes. Billault comes on in place of Persigny, and then Persigny comes on in place of Billault! And likewise in the Decembrist press!b Grandguillot, Cassagnac, Limayrac are tossed to and fro between the Constitutionnel, the Pays and the Patrie. Monsieur Véron, the "Bourgeois de Paris",0 is replaced by Cesena as director of the Constitutionnel, Cesena by Cucheval, Cucheval by Cassagnac, Cassagnac by Renée, Renée by Grandguillot, and after six years Véron comes on again in his old spot—as a brand-new hero.

Likewise under the constitutional system Thiers became new as soon as Guizot was worn out, and Mole new as soon as Thiers was worn out, and then the round was repeated. However, these

[^1]: a An allusion to Napoleon Ill's message to Fould and the latter's "Mémoire à l'Empereur", both published in Le Moniteur universel, No. 318, November 14, 1861.—Ed.

[^2]: b The press of Louis Bonaparte, who staged a coup d'état on December 2, 1851.— Ed.

[^3]: c An allusion to L. Veron's book Mémoires d'un bourgeois de Paris.—Ed.



The Times, whose weak point is comparisons, compares Louis Bonaparte with Louis XVI and Fould with Turgot.c Fould and Turgot! It is like trying to compare M. Vaillant with Carnot, because both of them were Ministers of War. Turgot was the head of the new economic school of the eighteenth century, the Physiocratic School." He was one of the intellectual heroes who overthrew the old regime, while Louis XVI was the incarnation of that old regime. But who is Fould? Fould, a member of the dynastic opposition 10° under Louis Philippe, was always passed over on principle despite the most obtrusive solicitation, whenever the dynastic opposition was in a position to nominate a Finance Minister. Fould was held to be a "financier dangereux ", a reputation he had earned owing to his various unlucky financial operations. He needed only to defend a proposal, and the Chambers rejected it. Then came the provisional government. It had hardly been proclaimed, when Fould rushed to Ledru-Rollin, offered his services as Finance Minister and—proposed national bankruptcy. The courtship was unsuccessful, and the rejected suitor got his revenge by writing the pamphlet, Pas d'assignats! Finally Fould recognised in Louis Bonaparte the man who was foolhardy enough to hand the French treasury over to Mr. Fould.

Fould was closely involved in the manoeuvres that ensured the "nephew's"d election to the presidency on December 10, 1848. Fould was a very active friend and made the financial preparations for the coup d'état. December 2, 1851 was not only the victory of

[^1]: a The section of the people having the right to vote.— Ed. b Marx uses the English phrase and gives the German translation in brackets.— Ed.

[^2]: c "The hour of reckoning has at length overtaken France", The Times, No. 24091, November 15, 1861, leading article.— Ed.

[^3]: d Louis Bonaparte's.— Ed.





**[p. 81]**

Applaudite, amici!

Written on November 16, 1861 Printed according to the news- paper First published in Die Presse, No. 318, November 19, 1861 Published in English for the first time

[^1]: a Lesser pleasures.— Ed. b High finance.— Ed. c Marx uses the English phrase "a new man" and adds "a brand new man" in German in brackets.— Ed.



