---
Volume: 19
Document_Title: "16. K. Marx. The Trent Case "
Page_Range: "116-119"
---

# 16. K. Marx. The Trent Case 



**[p. 89]**

Karl Marx

THE TRENT CASE1

London, November 28

The conflict of the English mail ship Trent with the North American warship San Jacinto in the narrow passage of the Old Bahama Channel is the lion among the events of the day. In the afternoon of November 27 the mail ship La Plata brought the news of the incident to Southampton, whence the electric telegraph at once flashed it to all parts of Great Britain. The same evening the London Stock Exchange was the stage of stormy scenes similar to those at the time of the announcement of the Italian war. Quotations for government stock sank 3/4 to 1 per cent. The wildest rumours circulated in London. The American Ambassador, Adams, was said to have been given his passports, an embargo to have been imposed on all American ships in the Thames, etc. At the same time a protest meeting of merchants was held at the Stock Exchange in Liverpool, to demand measures from the British Government for the satisfaction of the violated honour of the British flag. Every sound-minded Englishman went to bed with the conviction that he would go to sleep in a state of peace but wake up in a state of war.

Nevertheless, the fact is well-nigh categorically established that the conflict between the Trent and the San Jacinto brings no war in its train. The semi-official press, like The Times and The Morning Post, strikes a peaceful note and pours juridically cool deductions on the flickerings of passion.3 Papers like the Daily Telegraph, which at the faintest mot d'ordreb roar for the British

[^1]: a The reference is to the leading articles "It requires a strong effort", The Times, No. 24102, November 28, 1861 and "The Government of the United States has taken a step", The Morning Post, No. 27440, November 28, 1861.— Ed.

[^2]: b Watchword.— Ed.



It must be added that the event, if not the details of its enactment, was anticipated. On October 12, Messrs. Slidell, Confederacy emissary to France, and Mason, Confederacy emis- sary to England, together with their secretaries Eustis and Mac Farland, had run the blockade of Charleston on the steamship Theodora and sailed for Havana, there to seek the opportunity of a passage to Europe under the British flag. In England their arrival was expected daily. North American warships had set out from Liverpool to intercept the gentlemen, with their dispatches, on this side of the Atlantic Ocean. The British ministry had already submitted the question whether the North Americans were entitled to take such a step to its official jurisconsults for their opinion. Their answer is said to have been in the affirmative.

The legal question turns in a narrow circle. Since the foundation of the United States, North America has adopted British maritime law in all its rigour. A major principle of this maritime law is that all neutral merchantmen are subject to search by the belligerent parties.

The greatest American authority, Kent, states in the same sense:

It was not opposition to the right of search, as is sometimes erroneously suggested, that brought about the Anglo-American War of 1812 to 1814.107 Rather, America declared war because England unlawfully presumed to search even American warships, on the pretext of catching deserters from the British Navy.

The San Jacinto, therefore, had the right to search the Trent and to confiscate any contraband stowed aboard her. That dispatches in the possession of Mason, Slidell and Co. come under

[^1]: "This right," said Lord Stowell in a judgment which has become famous, "offers the sole security that no contraband is carried on neutral ships." b

[^2]: "The right of self-preservation gives belligerent nations this right. The doctrine of the English admiralty on the right of visitation and search has been recognised in its fullest extent by the courts of justice in this country."0

[^3]: a Marx uses the English expression here and below, and gives the German translation in brackets in the first case.— Ed.

[^4]: b Quoted from the leading article "It requires a strong effort", The Times, No. 24102, November 28, 1861.— Ed.

[^5]: c Ibidem; The Times quotes from J. Kent's book Commentaries on American Law—Ed.





**[p. 91]**

The political aspect of the North American procedure was estimated quite correctly by The Times in these words:

And is not the Confederacy already represented in London by Messrs. Yancey and Mann?

We regard this latest operation of Mr. Seward as a characteristic act of tactlessness by self-conscious weakness simulating strength. If the naval incident hastens Seward's removal from the Washing- ton Cabinet, the United States will have no reason to record it as an "untoward event" in the annals of its Civil War.

[^1]: "Even Mr. Seward himself must know that the voices of the Southern commissioners, sounding from their captivity, are a thousand times more eloquent in London and in Paris than they would have been if they had been heard in St. James's and the Tuileries."0

[^2]: Written on November 28, 1861 Printed according to the news- paper First published in Die Presse, No. 331, December 2, 1861

[^3]: a F. Th. Pratt, Law of Contraband of War, London, 1856, pp. LIV-LV.— Ed. b Th. Jefferson, Memoirs, Correspondence, and Private Papers, Vol. Ill, London, 1829, p. 488.— Ed.

[^4]: c "It requires a strong effort".— Ed.



