---
Volume: 19
Document_Title: "19. K. Marx. The Principal Actors in the Trent Drama "
Page_Range: "128-132"
---

# 19. K. Marx. The Principal Actors in the Trent Drama 



**[p. 101]**

Karl Marx

THE PRINCIPAL ACTORS IN THE TRENT DRAMA117

London, December 4

At the present moment it is of interest to get acquainted in some measure with the leading figures in the Trent drama. On one side stands the active hero, Captain Wilkes, the commander of the San Jacinto; on the other, the passive heroes, /. M. Mason and John Slidell. Captain Charles Wilkes is a direct descendant of the brother of the celebrated English demagogue, [John] Wilkes, who threatened for a moment to shake the throne of George III.118

The struggle with the North American colonies saved the Hanoverian dynasty at that time from the outbreak of an English revolution, symptoms of which were alike perceptible in the cry of a Wilkes and the letters of a Junius. Captain Wilkes, born in New York in 1798, forty-three years in the service of the American navy, commanded the squadron that from 1838 to 1842 explored the North and South Pacific Ocean by order of the Union government. He has published a report on this expedition in five volumes.3 He is also the author of a work on Western America, which contains some valuable information on California and the Oregon district.0 It is now certain that Wilkes improvised his coup

de mainc independently and without instructions from Wash- ington.

The two intercepted commissioners of the Southern Confedera- cy— Messrs. Mason and Slidell—form a contrast in every respect. Mason, born in 1798, is descended from one of those old

[^1]: a Ch. Wilkes, Narrative of the United States Exploring Expedition, Vols. I-V, Philadelphia, 1845.— Ed.

[^2]: b Ch. Wilkes, Western America, including California and Oregon, Philadelphia, 1849.— Ed.

[^3]: c An impetuous and unexpected attack.— Ed.

[^4]: 9—1134





**[p. 102]**

Mason inherited influence; Slidell acquired it. The two men found and supplemented each other in the American Senate, the bulwark of the slave oligarchy. In accordance with the American Constitution, the Senate elects a special Committee of Foreign Relations, which plays about the same role as the Privy Council0 12° formerly played in England, before the so-called Cabinet, a quantity theoretically unknown to the English Constitution, usurped the Privy Council's functions. Mason was for a long time chairman of this committee; Slidell, a prominent member of it.

Mason, firmly convinced that every Virginian is a demi-god and every Yankee a plebeian rascal, never sought to conceal his contempt for his Northern colleagues. Haughty, overbearing,

[^1]: a G. Mason.— Ed. b Marx uses the English expression and gives the German translation in parenthesis.— Ed.

[^2]: c Marx uses the English words "tallow-chandlers" and gives the German translation in parenthesis.— Ed.

[^3]: d Marx gives the English name in brackets after its German equivalent.— Ed.





**[p. 103]**

Whilst Mason played the Jupiter Tonans* of the slave oligarchy on the proscenium, Slidell worked behind the scenes. With a rare talent for intrigue, tireless perseverance and an unscrupulous lack of regard, but at the same time wary, covert, never strutting, but always insinuating himself, Slidell was the soul of the Southern conspiratorial conclave. One may judge the man's repute from the fact that when in 1845, shortly before the outbreak of war with Mexico, he was sent there as Ambassador, Mexico refused to treat with such an individual.121 Slidell's intrigues made Polk President. He was one of the most pernicious counsellors of President Pierce and the evil genius of Buchanan's administration. The two, Mason and Slidell, were the chief sponsors of the law on runaway slaves 122; they brought about the bloodbath in Kansas,123 and both were wirepullers for the measures whereby Buchanan's administ- ration smuggled all the means to secession into the hands of the South, whilst it left the North defenceless.124

As early as 1855 Mason declared on a public occasion in South Carolina that "for the South only one way lies open—immediate, absolute and eternal separation".0 In March 1861 he declared in the Senate that "he owed the Union government no allegiance",c

but retained his seat in the Senate and continued to draw his senatorial salary as long as the safety of his person allowed—a spy in the supreme council of the nation and a fraudulent parasite on the public exchequer.

Mason's great-grandmother was a daughter of the celebrated Sir William Temple. He is therefore a distant relative of Palmerston.

[^1]: a Jupiter the thunderer.— Ed. b J. M. Mason [Statement urging the separation of the South], New-York Times, October 14, 1856.— Ed.

[^2]: c J. M. Mason [Speech in the Senate on March 11, 1861], The New-York Daily Tribune, No. 6202, March 12, 1861. In quoting, Marx uses the English word "allegiance" and gives the translation in brackets.— Ed.

[^3]: 9*





**[p. 104]**

Written on December 4, 1861

First published in Die Presse, No. 337, December 8, 1861

Printed according to the news- paper

