---
Volume: 19
Document_Title: "20. K. Marx. Controversy over the Trent Case "
Page_Range: "132-137"
---

# 20. K. Marx. Controversy over the Trent Case 



**[p. 105]**

Karl Marx

[CONTROVERSY OVER THE TRENT CASE]125

London, December 7

The Palmerston press—and on another occasion I will show that in foreign affairs Palmerston's control over nine-tenths of the English press is just as absolute as Louis Bonaparte's over nine-tenths of the French press3—the Palmerston press feels that it works among "pleasing hindrances".15 On the one hand, it admits that the law officers of the Crown0 have reduced the accusation against the United States to a mere mistake in procedure, to a technical error. On the other hand, it boasts that on the basis of such a legal quibble a compelling ultimatum has been presented to the United States, such as can only be justified by a gross violation of law, but not by a formal error in the exercise of a recognised right. Accordingly, the Palmerston press now pleads the question of material right again. The great importance of the case appears to demand a brief examination of the question of material right.

By way of introduction, it may be observed that not a single English paper ventures to reproach the San Jacinto for the visi- tation and search of the Trent. This point, therefore, falls out- side the controversy.

First, we again call to mind the relevant passage in Queen Victoria's proclamation of neutrality of May 13, 1861. The passage reads:

[^1]: "Victoria R. "As we are at peace with the United States we warn all our beloved subjects to abstain from contravening our Proclamation by breaking the legally

[^2]: a See this volume, pp. 127-30.— Ed. b Heinrich Heine, "Neuer Frühling", Prolog.— Ed. c R. Palmer and W. Atherton.— Ed.





**[p. 106]**

This proclamation of Queen Victoria, therefore, in the first place declares dispatches to be contraband and makes the ship that carries such contraband liable to the "penalties of the law of nations". What are these penalties?

Wheaton, an American writer on international law whose authority is recognised on both sides of the Atlantic Ocean alike, says in his Elements of International Law, p. 565b:

"The carrying of dispatches of the enemy subjects the neutral vessel in which they are transported to capture and confiscation. The consequences of such a service are infinitely beyond the effect of conveying ordinary contraband As Sir W. Scott, the English judge, says, the carrying of military stores is necessarily of limited nature, while the carrying of dispatches is an act that may defeat the entire plan of campaign of the other belligerent The confiscation of the noxious article, which constitutes the usual penalty for contraband, would be ridiculous when applied to dispatches. There would be no freight dependent on their transporta- tion. Therefore, their confiscation does not affect the shipowner and hence does not punish the ship carrying them. The vehicle, in which they are carried, must, therefore, be confiscated."

Walker, in his Introduction to American Law, says:

Kent, who is accounted a decisive authority in English courts, states in his Commentaries:

Dr. Robert Phillimore, Advocate of Her Majesty in Her Office of Admiralty,0 says in his latest work on international law, p. 370:

[^1]: "Neutrals may not be concerned in bearing hostile dispatches, under the penalty of confiscation of the vehicle, and of the cargo also."

[^2]: "If, on search of a ship, it is found that she carries enemy dispatches, she incurs the penalty of capture and of confiscation by judgment of a prize court."

[^3]: "Official communications from an official person d on the affairs of a-belligerent Government are such dispatches as impress an hostile character upon the carriers of them. The mischievous consequences of such a service cannot be estimated, and extend far beyond the effect of any Contraband that can be conveyed, for it is manifest that by the carriage of such dispatches the most important plans of a

[^4]: a Here and below Marx quotes from the article "The Capture of Mason and Slidell", New-York Daily Tribune, No. 6435, November 18, 1861.— Ed.

[^5]: b Here and below Marx gives the English titles of the books and the German translation in brackets.— Ed.

[^6]: c Marx gives the English designation and supplies the German translation in brackets.— Ed.

[^7]: d Marx gives the English words "official" and, below, "carriers" in brackets after their German equivalents.— Ed.





**[p. 107]**

Two points are therefore established. Queen Victoria's procla- mation of May 13, 1861, subjects English ships that carry dispatches of the Confederacy to the penalties of international law. International law, according to its English and American interpre- ters, imposes the penalty of capture and confiscation on such ships.

Palmerston's organs consequently lied on orders from above— and we were naive enough to believe their lie—in affirming that the captain of the San Jacinto had neglected to seek for dispatches on the Trent and therefore had of course found none; and that the Trent had consequently become shot-proof through this oversight. The American journals of November 17 to 20, which could not yet have been aware of the English lie, unanimously state, on the contrary, that the dispatches had been seized and were already in print for submission to Congress in Washington. This changes the whole state of affairs. Because of these dispatches, the San Jacinto had the right to take the Trent in tow and every American prize court had the duty to confiscate her and her cargo. With the Trent, her passengers also naturally came within the pale of American jurisdiction.

Messrs. Mason, Slidell and Co., as soon as the Trent had touched at Monroe, came under American jurisdiction as rebels. If, therefore, instead of towing the Trent herself to an American port, the captain of the San Jacinto contented himself with seizing the dispatches and their bearers, he in no way worsened the position of Mason, Slidell and Co., whilst, on the other hand, his error in procedure benefited the Trent, her cargo and her passengers. And it would be indeed unprecedented if Britain wished to declare war on the United States because Captain Wilkes committed an error in procedure harmful to the United States, but profitable to Britain.

The question whether Mason, Slidell and Co. were themselves contraband, was only raised and could only be raised because the Palmerston journals had broadcast the lie that Captain Wilkes had neither searched for dispatches, nor seized dispatches. For in this case Mason, Slidell and Co. in fact constituted the sole objects on the ship Trent that could possibly fall under the category of contraband. Let us, however, disregard this aspect for the moment. Queen Victoria's proclamation designates "officers'^ of a belligerent party as contraband. Are "officers" merely military

[^1]: a R. Phillimore, Commentaries upon International Law.— Ed. b Here and further on Marx uses the English word.— Ed.





**[p. 108]**

According to the usage of the English language, therefore, Mason, Slidell and Co., these emissaries, id est, officials of the Confederacy, come under the category of "officers", whom the royal proclamation declares to be contraband. The Trent captain knew them in this capacity and therefore rendered himself, his ship and his passengers confiscable. If, according to Phillimore and all other authorities, a ship becomes confiscable as the carrier0

of an enemy dispatch because it violates neutrality, in a still higher degree is this true of the person who carries the dispatches. According to Wheaton, even an enemy ambassador, so long as he is in transitu, may be intercepted. In general, however, the basis of all international law is that any member of the belligerent party may be regarded and treated as "belligerent" by the opposing party.

"So long as a man," says Vattel, "continues to be a citizen of his own country, he is the enemy of all those with whom his nation is at war."c

One sees, therefore, that the law officers of the English Crown reduced the point of contention to a mere error in procedure, not an error in re,d but an error in forma,e because, actually, no violation of material right is to hand. The Palmerston organs chatter about the question of material right again because a mere error in procedure, in the interest of the "Trent" at that, gives no plausible pretext for a haughty-toned ultimatum.

Meanwhile, important voices have been raised in this sense from diametrically opposite sides: on the one side, Messrs. Bright and Cobden; on the other, David Urquhart. These men are enemies on grounds of principle and personally: the first two, peaceable cosmopolitans; the third, the "last of the Englishmen"™; the former always ready to sacrifice all international law to international trade; the other hesitating not a moment: "Fiat justitia, pereat mundus",1 and by "justice" he understands "English" justice. The

[^1]: a Marx gives the definition in English.— Ed. b Marx uses the English word and gives the German translation in brackets.— Ed.

[^2]: c E. de Vattel, Le Droit des gens, Tome II, livre III, chapitre V, § 71.— Ed. d In substance.— Ed. e In form.— Ed. f Let justice be done, though the world perish.— Ed.





**[p. 109]**

The usual newspaper sources will communicate Bright's speech in support of the United States and Cobden's letter, which is conceived in the same sense.3 Therefore I will not dwell on them.

Urquhart's organ, The Free Press, states in its latest issue, published on December 4:

"'We must bombard New York!' Such were the frantic sounds which met the ears of every one who traversed the streets of London on the evening of this day week, on the arrival of the intelligence of a trifling warlike incident. The act was one which, in every war, England has committed as a matter of course—namely, the seizure on board of a neutral of the persons and property of her enemies."

The Free Press further argues that, in 1856 at the Congress of Paris, Palmerston, without any authority from the Crown or Parliament, sacrificed English maritime law in the interest of Russia, and then says:

"In order to justify this sacrifice, Palmerston's organs stated at that time that if we maintained the right of visitation and search, we should assuredly be involved in a war with the United States on the occasion of the first war in Europe. And now he calls on us through the same organs of public opinion to bombard New York because the United States act on those laws which are theirs no less than our own."11

With regard to the utterances of the "organs of public opinion", The Free Press remarks:

Then humorously, it places side by side, in "strophe" and "antistrophe", the contradictions by which the English press seeks to convict the United States of a "breach of law".

[^1]: "The bray of Baron Munchausen's thawing post-horn was nothing to the clangour of the British press on the capture of Messrs. Mason and Slidell. " c

[^2]: Written on December 7, 1861 Printed according to the news- paper First published in Die Presse, No. 340, December 11, 1861

[^3]: a J. Bright's speech and R. Cobden's letter were reported in the note, "Mr. Bright on America", The Times, No. 24109, December 6, 1861.— Ed.

[^4]: b Here and above Marx quotes from the article, " 'We must bombard New York!' Such were", The Free Press, No. 12, December 4, 1861.— Ed.

[^5]: ' "'Public Opinion' on the San Jacinto Affair", The Free Press, same issue.— Ed.



