---
Volume: 19
Document_Title: "22. K. Marx. The Crisis over the Slavery Issue 1 "
Page_Range: "42-144"
---

# 22. K. Marx. The Crisis over the Slavery Issue 1 



**[p. 15]**

but even The Examiner ought to know that the present rebellion did not wait upon the passing of the Morrill tariff for breaking out. In point of fact, the Southerners could not have been tired of being robbed of the fruits of their slave labor by the Protective tariff of the North, considering that from 1846-1861 a Free-Trade tariff had obtained.

The Spectator characterizes in its last number the secret thought of some of the Anti-Northern organs in the following striking manner:

"What, then, do the Anti-Northern organs really profess to think desi- rable, under the justification of this plea of deferring to the inexorable logic of facts?" They argue that disunion is desirable, just because, as we have said, it is the only possible step to a conclusion of this "causeless and fratricidal strife;" and next, of course, only as an afterthought, and as an humble apology for Providence and "justification of the ways of God to man," now that the inevitable necessity stands revealed—for further reasons discovered as beautiful adaptations to the moral exigencies of the country, when once the issue is discerned. It is discovered that it will be very much for the advantage of the States to be dissolved into rival groups. They will mutually check each other's ambition; they will neutralize each other's power, and if ever England should get into a dispute with one or more of them, more jealousy will bring the antagonistic groups to our aid. This will be, it is urged, a very wholesome state of things, for it will relieve us from anxiety and it will encourage political 'competition,' that great safeguard of honesty and purity, among the States themselves.

[^1]: "Such is the case—very gravely urged—of the numerous class of Southern sympathizers now springing up among us. Translated into English—and we grieve that an English argument on such a subject should be of a nature that requires translating—it means that we deplore the present great scale of this "fratricidal" war, because it may concentrate in one fearful spasm a series of chronic petty wars and passions and jealousies among groups of rival States in times to come. The real truth is, and this very un-English feeling distinctly discerns this truth, though it cloaks it in decent phrases, that rival groups of American States could not live together in peace or harmony. The chronic condition would be one of malignant hostility rising out of the very causes which have produced the present contest. It is asserted that the different groups of States have different tariff interests. These different tariff interests would be the sources of constant petty wars if the States were once dissolved, and Slavery, the root of all the strife, would be the spring of innumerable animosities, discords and campaigns. No stable equilibrium could ever again be established among the rival States. And yet it is maintained that this long future of incessant strife is the providential solution of the great question now at issue—the only real reason why it is looked upon favorably being this, that whereas the present great-scale conflict may issue in a restored and stronger political unity, the alternative of infinitely multiplied small-scale quarrels will issue in a weak and divided continent, that England cannot fear.

[^2]: "Now we do not deny that the Americans themselves sowed the seeds of this petty and contemptible state of feeling by the unfriendly and bullying attitude they have so often manifested to England, but we do say that the state of feeling on our part is petty and contemptible. We see that in a deferred issue there is no hope of a deep and enduring tranquillity for America, that it means a decline and fall of the American nation into quarrelsome clans and tribes, and yet we hold up our





**[p. 16]**

Written on September 18, 1861

First published in the New-York Daily Tribune, No. 6403, October 11, 1861, reprinted in the New-York Semi-Weekly Tribune, No. 1710, October 15, 1861

Reproduced from the New-York Daily Tribune



**[p. 17]**

Karl Marx

THE BRITISH COTTON TRADE

London, Sept. 21, 1861

The continual rise in the prices of raw cotton begins at last to seriously react upon the cotton factories, their consumption of cotton being now 25 per cent less than the full consumption. This result has been brought about by a daily lessening rate of production, many mills working only four or three days per week, part of the machinery being stopped, both in those establishments where short time has been commenced and in those which are still running full time, and some mills being temporarily altogether closed. In some places, as at Blackburn, for instance, short time has been coupled with a reduction of wages. However, the short-time movement is only in its incipient state, and we may predict with perfect security that some weeks later the trade will have generally resorted to three days working per week, concur- rently with a large stoppage of machinery in most establishments. On the whole, English manufacturers and merchants were extremely slow and reluctant in acknowledging the awkward position of their cotton supplies.

[^1]: "The whole of the last American crop," they said, "has long since been forwarded to Europe. The picking of the new crop has barely commenced. Not a bale of cotton could have reached us more than has reached us, even if the war and the blockade26 had never been heard of. The shipping season does not commence till far in November, and it is usually the end of December before any large exportations take place. Till then, it is of little consequence whether the cotton is retained on the plantations or is forwarded to the ports as fast as it is bagged. If the blockade ceases any time before the end of this year, the probability is that by March or April we shall have received just as full a supply of cotton as if the blockade had never been declared."3

[^2]: a "The Probable Continuance of the American Conflict", The Economist, No. 941, September 7, 1861.— Ed.





**[p. 18]**

From the outbreak of the American war the prices of cotton were steadily rising, but the ruinous disproportion between the prices of the raw material and the prices of yarns and cloth was not declared until the last weeks of August. Till then, any serious decline in the prices of cotton manufactures, which might have been anticipated from the considerable decrease of the American demand, had been balanced by an accumulation of stocks in first hands, and by speculative consignments to China and India. Those Asiatic markets, however, were soon overdone.

Some other circumstances contributed to contract the Indian market. The late famine in the north-western provinces has been

[^1]: "Stocks," says The Calcutta Price Current of Aug. 7, 1861, "are accumulating, the arrivals since our last being no less than 24,000,000 yards of plain cottons. Home advices show a continuation of shipments in excess of our requirements, and so long as this is the case, improvement cannot be looked for The Bombay market, also, has been greatly oversupplied."





**[p. 19]**

Cost of Per lb. Margin. spinning

per lb Sept. 17, 1860.

Cost of cotton 6 A^d. 4d. 3d. 16s warp sold for 10V4d. Profit, Id. per lb.

The consumption of Indian cotton is rapidly growing, and with a further rise in prices, the Indian supply will come forward at increasing ratios; but still it remains impossible to change, at a few months' notice, all the conditions of production and turn the current of commerce. England pays now, in fact, the penalty for her protracted misrule of that vast Indian empire. The two main obstacles she has now to grapple with in her attempts at supplanting American cotton by Indian cotton, is the want of means of communication and transport throughout India, and the miserable state of the Indian peasant, disabling him from improving favorable circumstances. Both these difficulties the English have themselves to thank for. English modern industry, in general, relied upon two pivots equally monstrous. The one was the potato as the only means of feeding Ireland and a great part of

[^1]: Sept. 17, 1861.

[^2]: Cost of cotton 9d. 2d. 3x/2d. 16s warp sold for 11 Loss, 1 Vgd. per lb.





**[p. X]**

Written on September 21, 1861 Reproduced from the newspaper

First published in the New-York Daily Tribune, No. 6405, October 14, 1861



**[p. 21]**

Karl Marx

THE LONDON TIMES AND LORD PALMERSTON

London, Oct. 5, 1861

"English people participate in the government of their own country by reading The Times newspaper." This judgment, passed by an eminent English author* on what is called British self-government, is only true so far as the foreign policy of the Kingdom is concerned. As to measures of domestic reform, they were never carried by the support of The Times, but The Times never ceased attacking and opposing them until after it had become aware of its utter inability to any longer check their progress. Take, for instance, the Catholic Emancipation, the Reform bill, the abolition of the Corn laws, the Stamp Tax, and the Paper Duty.29 When victory had unmistakably declared on the side of the Reformers, The Times wheeled round, deserted the reactionary camp, and managed to find itself, at the decisive moment, on the winning side. In all these instances, The Times gave not the direction to public opinion, but submitted to it, ungraciously, reluctantly, and after protracted, but frustrated, attempts at rolling back the surging waves of popular progress. Its real influence on the public mind is, therefore, confined to the field of foreign policy. In no part of Europe are the mass of the people, and especially of the middle-classes, more utterly ignorant of the foreign policy of their own country than in England, an ignorance springing from two great sources. On the one hand, since the glorious Revolution of 1688,30 the aristocracy has always monopolized the direction of foreign affairs in England. On the

[^1]: a R. Lowe, "The Part of The Times in the Government of the Country", The Free Press, No. 8, August 7, 1861.— Ed.

[^2]: 4—1134





**[p. 22]**



[^1]: a The reference is to the coup d'état in France on December 2, 1851.— Ed.



The slavish drudgery which, in fulfilling this work, it has to undergo, was best exemplified during the last session of Parlia- ment. That session proved anything but favorable to Lord Palmerston. Some independent members of the H. of C., Liberals and Conservatives, rebelled against his usurped dictatorship, and, by an exposure of his past misdeeds, tried to awaken the nation to a sense of the danger of continuing the same uncontrolled power in the same hands. Mr. Dunlop, opening the attack by a motion for a Select Committee on the Afghan Papers,3 which Palmerston had laid on the table of the House in 1839, proved that Palmerston had actually forged these papers.33 The Times, in its Parliamentary report, suppressed all the passages of Mr. Dunlop's speech which it considered most damaging to its master. Later on, Lord Montagu, in a motion for the publication of all papers relating- to the Danish Treaty of 1852, accused Palmerston of having been the principal in the maneuvers intended to alter the Danish succession in the interest of a foreign power,34 and of having misled the House of Commons by deliberate misstate- ments.1' Palmerston, however, had come to a previous understand- ing with Mr. Disraeli to baffle Lord Montagu's motion by a count-out of the House, which in fact put a stop to the whole proceeding. Still, Lord Montagu's speech had lasted one hour and a half before it was cut off by the count-out. The Times having been informed by Palmerston that the count-out was to take place, its editor specially charged with the task of mutilating and cooking the Parliamentary reports had given himself a holiday, and thus

[^1]: a A. M. Dunlop's speech in the House of Commons on March 19, 1861, The Times, No. 23885, March 20, 1861.— Ed.

[^2]: b R. Montagu's speech in the House of Commons on June 18, 1861, The Times, No. 23963, June 19, 1861.— Ed.

[^3]: 4*





**[p. 24]**

If, then, The Times is able by misstatement and suppression thus to falsify public opinion in regard to events that happened but yesterday in the British House of Commons, its power of misstatement and suppression in regard to events occurring on a distant soil, as in the case of the American war, must, of course, be unbounded. If in treating of American affairs it has strained all its forces to exasperate the mutual feelings of the British and Americans, it did not do so from any sympathy with the British Cotton Lords nor out of regard for any real or supposed English interest. It simply executed the orders of its master. From the altered tone of The London Times during the past week, we may, therefore, infer that Lord Palmerston is about to recede from the extremely hostile attitude he had assumed till now against the United States. In one of its to-day leaders, The Times, which for months had exalted the aggressive powers of the Secessionists, and expatiated upon the inability of the United States to cope with them, feels quite sure of the military superiority of the North.c

That this change of tone is dictated by the master, becomes quite

[^1]: a "We are at last enjoying", The Times, No. 23963, June 19, 1861.— Ed. b J. P. Hennessy's speech in the House of Commons on July 2, 1861, The Times, No. 23975, July 3, 1861.— Ed.

[^2]: c "The time is now approaching", The Times, No. 24056, October 5, 1861.— Ed.





**[p. 25]**

evident from the circumstance that other influential papers, known to be connected with Palmerston, have simultaneously veered round. One of them, The Economist, gives rather a broad hint to the public-opinion-mongers that the time has come for "carefully watching" their pretended "feelings toward the United States."3 The passage in The Economist which I allude to, and which I think worth quoting as a proof of the new orders received by Palmerston's pressmen, runs thus:

"On one point we frankly avow that the Northerners have a right to complain, and on one point also we are bound to be more upon our guard than perhaps we have uniformly been. Our leading journals have been too ready to quote and resent as embodying the sentiments and representing the position of the United States, newspapers notorious at all times for their disreputable character and feeble influence, and now more than suspected of being Secessionists at heart, of sailing under false colors, and professing extreme Northern opinions while writing in the interests and probably the pay of the South. Few Englishmen can, for example, with any decent fairness, pretend to regard The N. Y. Herald as representing either the character or views of the Northern section of the Republic. Again: we ought to be very careful lest our just criticism of the Unionists should degenerate by insensible gradation into approval and defense of the Secessionists. The tendency in all ordinary minds to partisanship is very strong. [] Now, however warmly we may resent much of the conduct and the language of the North, [] we must never forget that the Secession of the South was forced on with designs and inaugurated with proceedings which have our heartiest and most rooted disapprobation. We, of course, must condemn the protective tariff of the Union as an oppressive and benighted folly. [] Of course, we reciprocate the wish of the South for low duties and unfettered trade. Of course, we are anxious that the prosperity of States which produce so much raw material and want so many manufactured goods should suffer no interruption or reverse. [] But, at the same time, it is impossible for us to lose sight of the indisputable fact that the real aim and ultimate motive of secession was not to defend their right to hold slaves in their own territory (which the Northerners were just as ready to concede as they to claim), but to extend Slavery over a vast, undefined district, hitherto free from that curse, but into which the planters fancied they might hereafter wish to spread. This object we have always regarded as unwise, unrighteous and abhorrent. The state of society introduced in the Southern States by the institution of domestic servitude appears to English minds more and more detestable and deplorable the more they know of it. And the Southerners should be made aware that no pecuniary or commercial advantage which this country might be supposed to derive from the extended cultivation of the virgin soils of the planting States, and the new Territories which they claim, will ever in the slightest degree modify our views on these points, or interfere with the expression of those views, or warp or hamper our action whenever action shall become obligatory or fitting. []b It is believed that they (the Secessionists) still entertain the extraordinary notion that by starving France and England—by the loss and suffering anticipated as the consequences of

[^1]: a "English Feeling towards America", The Economist, No. 944, September 28, 1861.— Ed.

[^2]: b Thus far from the article. "English Feeling towards America.".— Ed.





**[p. 26]**

an entire privation of the American supply—they will compel those Governments to interfere on their behalf, and force the United States to abandon the blockade There is not the remotest chance that either Power would feel justified for a moment in projecting such an act of decided and unwarrantable hostility against the United States We are less dependent on the South than the South is upon us, as they will ere long begin to discover. []a We, therefore, pray them to believe that Slavery, so long as it exists, must create more or less of a moral barrier between us, and that even tacit approval is as far from our thoughts as the impertinence of an open interference: that Lancashire is not England; and, for the honor and spirit of our manufacturing population be it said also, that even if it were, Cotton would not be King."h

All I intended to show for the present was that Palmerston, and consequently the London press, working to his orders, is abandoning his hostile attitude against the United States. The causes that have led to this revirement? as the French call it, I shall try to explain in a subsequent letter. Before concluding, I may still add that Mr. Forster, M.P. for Bradford, delivered last Tuesday,0 in the theater of Bradford Mechanics' Institute,36 a lecture "On the Civil War in America," in which he traced the true origin and character of that war, and victoriously refuted the misstatements of the Palmerstonian press.e

Written on October 5, 1861 Reproduced from the newspaper

[^1]: First published in the New-York Daily Tribune, No. 6411, October 21, 1861

[^2]: a "The Last Movements of the Northern and the Southern Confederation", The Economist, No. 943, September 21, 1861.—Ed. b "English Feeling towards America".— Ed. c Radical change.— Ed. d October 1, 1861.— Ed. e W. E. Forster's lecture "On the Civil War in America" was reported in The Times, No. 24054, October 3, 1861.— Ed.





**[p. 27]**

Karl Marx

THE LONDON TIMES ON THE ORLEANS PRINCES IN AMERICA

London, Oct. 12, 1861

On the occasion of the King of Prussia's3 visit at Compiegne,37

The London Times published some racy articles, giving great offense on the other side of the Channel.b The Pays, Journal de

l'Empire, in its turn, characterized The Times writers as people whose heads were poisoned by gin, and whose pens were dipped into mud.c Such occasional exchanges of invective are only intended to mislead public opinion as to the intimate relations connecting Printing-House Square to the Tuileries.38 There exists beyond the French frontiers no greater sycophant of the Man of Decemberd than The London Times, and its services are the more invaluable, the more that paper now and then assumes the tone and the air of a Cato censor toward its Caesar. The Times had for months heaped insult upon Prussia. Improving the miserable Macdonald affair,39 it had told Prussia that England would feel glad to see a transfer of the Rhenish Provinces from the barbarous sway of the Hohenzollern to the enlightened despotism of a Bonaparte.e It had not only exasperated the Prussian dynasty, but the Prussian people. It had written down the idea of an Anglo-Prussian alliance in case of a Prussian conflict with France. Jjt had strained all its powers to convince Prussia that she had

[^1]: a William I.— Ed. b Marx refers to the following leading articles: "The popularity of a Government", The Times, No. 24057, October 7, 1861; "The King of Prussia is welcomed to Compiegne", The Times, No. 24058, October 8, 1861; "It is, perhaps, a mistake to attribute", The Times, No. 24059, October 9, 1861.— Ed.

[^2]: c "Paris, Thursday, Oct. 10, 7 A. M.", The Times, No. 24061, October 11, 1861.— Ed.

[^3]: d Napoleon III.— Ed. e "We trust we have now heard", The Times, No. 23928, May 9, 1861, leading article.— Ed.



nothing to hope from England, and that the, next best thing she could do would be to come to some understanding with France.3

When at last the weak and trimming monarch of Prussia resolved upon the visit at Compiegne, The Times could proudly exclaim: "quorum magna pars fui; "b but now the time had also arrived for obliterating from the memory of the British the fact that The Times had been the pathfinder of the Prussian monarch. Hence the roar of its theatrical thunders. Hence the counter roars of the Pays, Journal de l'Empire.

The Times had now recovered its position of the deadly antagonist of Bonapartism, and, therefore, the power of lending its aid to the Man of December. An occasion soon offered. Louis Bonaparte is, of course, most touchy whenever the renown of rival pretenders to the French crown is concerned. He had covered himself with ridicule in the affair of the Duke d'Aumale's pamphlet40 against Pion Plon,c and, by his proceedings, had done more in furtherance of the Orleanist cause than all the Orleanist partisans combined. Again, in these latter days, the French people were called upon to draw a parallel between Pion Pion and the Orleans princes.d When Pion Pion set out for America, there were caricatures circulated in the Faubourg St. Antoine representing him as a fat man in search of a crown, but professing at the same time to be a most inoffensive traveler, with a peculiar aversion to the smell of powder. While Pion Pion is returning to France with no more laurels than he gathered in the Crimea and in Italy, the Princes of Orleans cross the Atlantic to take service in the ranks of the National army. Hence a great stir in the Bonapàrtist camp. It would not do to give vent to Bonapartist anger through the venal press of Paris. The Imperialist fears would thus only be betrayed, the pamphlet scandal renewed, and odious comparisons provoked between exiled Princes who fight under the republican banner against the enslavers of working millions, with another exiled Prince, who had himself sworn in as an English special constable to share in the glory of putting down an English workingmen's movement.41

[^1]: a "The tone in which the outrage on Captain Macdonald", The Times, No. 23926, May 7, 1861, leading article; "We trust we have now heard", The Times, No. 23928, May 9, 1861, leading article.— Ed.

[^2]: b "Much of the credit for this belongs to me", Virgil, Aeneid, II, 6.— Ed. c Joseph Charles Paul Bonaparte, Prince Napoléon.— Ed. d François Ferdinand Philippe Louis Marie d'Orléans, Prince de Joinville; Robert Philippe Louis Eugène Ferdinand d'Orléans, duc de Chartres; Louis Philippe Albert d'Orléans, comte de Paris.— Ed.





**[p. 29]**

Who should extricate the Man of December out of this dilemma? Who but The London Times'? If the same London Times, which, on the 6th, 7th, 8th, and 9th of October, 1861, had roused the furies of the Pays, Journal de l'Empire, by its rather cynical strictures on the visit at Compiegne—if that very same paper should come out on the 12th of October, with a merciless onslaught on the Orleans Princes, because of their enlistment in the ranks of the National Army of the United States,3 would Louis Bonaparte not have proved his case against the Orleans Princes? Would The Times article not be done into French, commented upon by the Paris papers, sent by the Préfet de Police to all the journals of all the departments, and circulated throughout the whole of France, as the impartial sentence passed by The London Times, the personal foe of Louis Bonaparte, upon the last proceedings of the Orleans Princes? Consequently, The Times of to-day has come out with a most scurrilous onslaught on these princes.

Louis Bonaparte is, of course, too much of a business man to share the judicial blindness in regard to the American war of the official public opinion-mongers. He knows that the true people of England, of France, of Germany, of Europe, consider the cause of the United States as their own cause, as the cause of liberty, and that, despite all paid sophistry, they consider the soil of the United States as the free soil of the landless millions of Europe, as their land of promise, now to be defended sword in hand, from the sordid grasp of the slaveholder. Louis Napoleon knows, moreover, that in France the masses connect the fight for the maintenance of the Union with the fight of their forefathers for the foundation of American independence, and that with them every Frenchman drawing his sword for the National Government appears only to execute the bequest of Lafayette.42 Bonaparte, therefore, knows that if anything be able to win the Orleans Princes good opinions from the French people, it will be their enlistment in the ranks of the national army of the United States. He shudders at this very notion, and consequendy The London Times, his censorious sycophant, tells to-day the Orleans princes that "they will derive no increase of popularity with the French nation from stooping to serve on this ignoble field of action." Louis Napoleon knows that all the wars waged in Europe between hostile nations since his coup d'état, have been mock wars, groundless, wanton, and carried on on false pretenses. The Russian war, and

[^1]: a "Perhaps there is no position which an erring mortal", The Times, No. 24062, October 12, 1861, leading article.— Ed.





**[p. 30]**

the Italian war, not to speak of the piratical expeditions against China, Cochin-China,43 and so forth, never enlisted the sympathies of the French people, instinctively aware that both wars were carried on only with the view to strengthening the chains forged by the coup d'état. The first grand war of contemporaneous history is the American war.

The peoples of Europe know that the Southern slaveocracy commenced that war with the declaration that the continuance of slaveocracy was no longer compatible with the continuance of the Union. Consequently, the people of Europe know that a fight for the continuance of the Union is a fight against the continuance of the slaveocracy—that in this contest the highest form of popular self-government till now realized is giving battle to the meanest and most shameless form of man's enslaving recorded in the annals of history.

Louis Bonaparte feels, of course, extremely sorry that the Orleans Princes should embark in just such a war, so distin- guished, by the vastness of its dimensions and the grandeur of its ends, from the groundless, wanton and diminutive wars Europe has passed through since 1849. Consequently, The London Times must needs declare:

The Times is, of course, bound to wind up its onslaught on the Orleans Princes because of their "stooping to serve on such an ignoble field of action." With a deep bow before the victor of Sevastopol and Solferino, "it is unwise," says The London Times, "to challenge a comparison between such actions as Springfield and Manassas,44 and the exploits of Sevastopol and Solferino."

The next mail will testify to the premeditated use made of The Times's article by the Imperialist organs. A friend in times of need is proverbially worth a thousand friends in times of prosperity, and the secret ally of The London Times is just now very badly off.

A dearth of cotton, backed by a dearth of grain; a commercial crisis coupled with an agricultural distress, and both of them combined with a reduction of Custom revenues and a monetary embarrassment compelling the Bank of France to screw its rate of discount to six per cent, to enter into transactions with Rothschilds and Baring for a loan of two millions sterling on the London

[^1]: "To overlook the difference between a war waged by hostile nations, and this most groundless and wanton civil conflict of which history gives us any account, is a species of offense against public morals."3

[^2]: a "Perhaps there is no position"—Ed.



market, to pawn abroad French Government stock, and with all that to show but a reserve of 12,000,000 against liabilities amounting to more than 40,000,000. Such a state of economical affairs prepares just the situation for rival pretenders to stake double. Already there have been bread-riots in the Faubourg St.

t Antoine, and this of all times is therefore the most inappropriate time for allowing Orleans Princes to catch popularity. Hence the fierce forward rush of The London Times.

Written on October 12, 1861 Reproduced from the newspaper

First published in the New-York Daily Tribune, No. 6426, November 7, 1861

. Karl Marx THE NORTH AMERICAN CIVIL WAR45

London, October 20, 1861

For months the leading weekly and daily papers of the London press have been reiterating the same litany on the American Civil War. While they insult the free states of the North, they anxiously defend themselves against the suspicion of sympathising with the slave states of the South. In fact, they continually write two articles: one article, in which they attack the North, and another article, in which they excuse their attacks on the North. Qui s'excuse s'accuse.

In essence the extenuating arguments read: The war between the North and South is a tariff war. The war is, further, not for any principle, does not touch the question of slavery and in fact turns on Northern lust for sovereignty. Finally, even if justice is on the side of the North, does it not remain a vain endeavour to want to subjugate eight million Anglo-Saxons by force! Would not separation of the South release the North from all connection with Negro slavery and ensure for it, with its twenty million inhabitants and its vast territory, a higher, hitherto scarcely dreamt-of, development? Accordingly, must not the North wel- come secession as a happy event, instead of wanting to overrule it by a bloody and futile civil war?

Point by point we will probe the plea of the English press. The war between North and South—so runs the first excuse— is a mere tariff war, a war between a protectionist system and a free trade system, and Britain naturally stands on the side of free trade. Shall the slave-owner enjoy the fruits of slave labour in their entirety or shall he be cheated of a portion of these by the protectionists of the North? That is the question which is at issue in this war. It was reserved for The Times to make this brilliant



**[p. 33]**

tutti quanti* expounded the theme further.0 It is characteristic of this discovery that it was made, not in Charleston, but in London. Naturally, in America everyone knew that from 1846 to 1861 a free trade system prevailed, and that Representative Morrill carried his protectionist tariff through Congress only in 1861,46

after the rebellion had already broken out. Secession, therefore, did not take place because the Morrill tariff had gone through Congress, but, at most, the Morrill tariff went through Congress because secession had taken place. When South Carolina had its first attack of secession in 1831,47 the protectionist tariff of 1828 served it, to be sure, as a pretext, but only as a pretext, as is known from a statement of General Jackson.0 This time, however, the old pretext has in fact not been repeated. In the Secession Congress at Montgomery48 all reference to the tariff question was avoided, because the cultivation of sugar in Louisiana, one of the most influential Southern states, depends entirely on protection.

But, the London press pleads further, the war of the United States is nothing but a war for the forcible maintenance of the Union. The Yankees cannot make up their minds to strike fifteen stars from their standard.49 They want to cut a colossal figure on the world stage. Yes, it would be different if the war was waged for the abolition of slavery! The question of slavery, however, as The Saturday Review categorically declares among other things, has absolutely nothing to do with this war.

It is above all to be remembered that the war did not originate with the North, but with the South. The North finds itself on the defensive. For months it had quietly looked on while the secessionists appropriated the Union's forts, arsenals, shipyards, customs houses, pay offices, ships and supplies of arms, insulted its flag and took prisoner bodies of its troops. Finally the secessionists resolved to force the Union government out of its passive attitude by a blatant act of war, and solely for this reason proceeded to the bombardment of Fort Sumter near Charleston. On April 11 (1861) their General Beauregard had learnt in a

[^1]: a All such.— Ed. b Marx means the articles "Few have pretended to give", The Times, No. 24033, September 9, 1861, leading article; "American Complaints against England", The Economist, No. 942, September 14, 1861; "Mrs. Stowe on the American War", The Examiner, No. 2798, September 14, 1861; "Mrs. Beecher Stowe's Wounded Feelings", The Saturday Review, No. 307, September 14, 1861.— Ed.

[^2]: c President Jackson's proclamation against the Nullification Ordinance of South Carolina, December 11, 1832 (see Note 24).— Ed.





**[p. 34]**

The question of the principle of the American Civil War is answered by the battle slogan with which the South broke the peace. Stephens, the Vice-President of the Southern Confederacy, declared in the Secession Congress that what essentially distin- guished the Constitution newly hatched at Montgomery from the Constitution of the Washingtons and Jeffersons was that now for the first time slavery was recognised as an institution good in itself, and as the foundation of the whole state edifice, whereas the revolutionary fathers, men steeped in the prejudices of the eighteenth century, had treated slavery as an evil imported from England and to be eliminated in the course of time.d Another matador of the South, Mr. Spratt, cried out: "For us it is a question of founding a great slave republic."6 If, therefore, it was

[^1]: a Quoted in the report "How the War News Is Received", New-York Daily Tribune, No. 6231, April 15, 1861.— Ed.

[^2]: b A. Lincoln, A Proclamation [April 15, 1861], New-York Daily Tribune, same issue.— Ed.

[^3]: c A. Lincoln, "The Inaugural Address" [March 4, 1861], New-York Daily Tribune, No. 6196, March 5, 1861.— Ed.

[^4]: d Stephens's speech in Savannah on March 21, 1861.— Ed. e Marx gives the English words "a great slave republic" in brackets after the German equivalent.— Ed.



Just as the bombardment of Fort Sumter gave the signal for the opening of the war, the election victory of the Republican Party of the North, the election of Lincoln as President, gave the signal for secession. On November 6, 1860, Lincoln was elected. On November 8, 1860, a message telegraphed from South Carolina said: "Secession is regarded here as a settled thing"3; on Novem- ber 10 the legislature of Georgia occupied itself with secession plans, and on November 13 a special session of the legislature of Mississippi was convened to consider secession. But Lincoln's election was itself only the result of a split in the Democratic camp. During the election struggle the Democrats of the North concentrated their votes on Douglas, the Democrats of the South concentrated their votes on Breckinridge, and to this splitting of the Democratic votes the Republican Party owed its victory. Whence came, on the one hand, the preponderance of the Republican Party in the North? Whence, on the other, the disunion within the Democratic Party, whose members, North and South, had operated in conjunction for more than half a century?

Under the presidency of Buchanan the sway that the South had gradually usurped over the Union through its alliance with the Northern Democrats attained its zenith. The last Continental Congress of 1787 and the first Constitutional Congress of 1789-90 had legally excluded slavery from all Territories of the republic northwest of the Ohio.b (Territories, as is known, is the name given to the colonies lying within the United States itself which have not yet attained the level of population constitutionally prescribed for the formation of autonomous states.51) The so-called Missouri Compromise (1820), in consequence of which Missouri became one of the States of the Union as a slave state, excluded slavery from every remaining Territory north of 36°30' latitude and west of the Missouri.52 By this compromise the area of slavery was advanced several degrees of longitude, whilst, on the other hand, a geographical boundary-line to its future spread

[^1]: a Quoted in the report "Columbia, S. C. Thursday, Nov. 8, 1860", New-York Daily Tribune, No. 6098, November 9, I860.— Ed.

[^2]: b An Ordinance for the government of the territory of the United States, north-west of the River Ohio, adopted by the 1787 Congress, and An Act to provide for the government of the territory north-west of the River Ohio, adopted by the 1789-90 Congress.— Ed.



However, this convenient method did not prove applicable in other Territories. The South accordingly went a step further and appealed from Congress to the Supreme Court of the United States. This Court, which numbers nine judges, five of whom belong to the South, had long been the most willing tool of the slaveholders. It decided in 1857, in the notorious Dred Scott case,53 that every American citizen possesses the right to take with him into any Territory any property recognised by the Constitu- tion.0 The Constitution, it maintained, recognises slaves as property and obliges the Union government to protect this property. Consequently, on the basis of the Constitution, slaves could be forced to labour in the Territories by their owners, and

[^1]: a Marx uses the English word.— Ed. b Its data were cited in a report date-lined "New York, March 26", The Times, No. 23903, April 10, 1861.— Ed.

[^2]: c The ruling of the US Supreme Court on the Dred Scott case was quoted in the article "The Dred Scott Case Decided", New-York Daily Tribune, No. 4955, March 7, 1857.— Ed.





**[p. 37]**

If the Missouri Compromise of 1820 had extended the geographical boundary-line of slavery in the Territories, if the Kansas-Nebraska Bill of 1854 had erased every geographical boundary-line and set up a political barrier instead, the will of the majority of the settlers, now the Supreme Court of the United States, by its decision of 1857, tore down even this political barrier and transformed all the Territories of the republic, present and future, from nurseries of free states into nurseries of slavery.

At the same time, under Buchanan's government the severer law on the surrendering of fugitive slaves enacted in 1850 was ruthlessly carried out in the states of the North.54 To play the part of slave-catchers for the Southern slaveholders appeared to be the constitutional calling of the North. On the other hand, in order to hinder as far as possible the colonisation of the Territories by free settlers, the slaveholders' party frustrated all the so-called free-soil3

measures, i. e., measures which were to secure for the settlers a definite amount of uncultivated state land free of charge.55

In the foreign, as in the domestic, policy of the United States, the interests of the slaveholders served as the guiding star: Buchanan had in fact obtained the office of President through the issue of the Ostend Manifesto, in which the acquisition of Cuba, whether by purchase or by force of arms, was proclaimed as the great task of national policy.56 Under his government northern Mexico was already divided among American land speculators, who impatiently awaited the signal to fall on Chihuahua, Coahuila and Sonora.57 The unceasing piratical expeditions of the filibusters against the states of Central America were directed no less from the White House at Washington. In the closest connection with this foreign policy, whose manifest purpose was conquest of new territory for the spread of slavery and of the slaveholders' rule, stood the reopening of the slave trade,58 secretly supported by the Union government. St[ephen] A. Douglas himself declared in the American Senate on August 20, 1859: During the last year more Negroes have been imported from Africa than ever before in any single year, even at the time when the slave trade was still legal.

[^1]: a Marx uses the English term.— Ed.

[^2]: 5—1134





**[p. 38]**

Armed spreading of slavery abroad was the avowed aim of national policy; the Union had in fact become the slave of the 300,000 slaveholders who held sway over the South. A series of compromises, which the South owed to its alliance with the Northern Democrats, had led to this result. On this alliance all the attempts, periodically repeated since 1817, to resist the ever increasing encroachments of the slaveholders had hitherto come to grief. At length there came a turning point.

For hardly had the Kansas-Nebraska Bill gone through, which wiped out the geographical boundary-line of slavery and made its introduction into new Territories subject to the will of the majority of the settlers, when armed emissaries of the slavehold- ers, border rabble from Missouri and Arkansas, with bowie-knife in one hand and revolver in the other, fell upon Kansas and sought by the most unheard-of atrocities to dislodge its settlers from the Territory colonised by them. These raids were supported by the central government in Washington. Hence a tremendous reaction. Throughout the North, but particularly in the North- west,59 a relief organisation was formed to support Kansas with men, arms and money.60 Out of this relief organisation arose the Republican Party, which therefore owes its origin to the struggle for Kansas. After the attempt to transform Kansas into a slave Territory by force of arms had failed, the South sought to achieve the same result by political intrigues. Buchanan's government, in particular, exerted its utmost efforts to have Kansas included in the States of the Union as a slave state with a slave constitution imposed on it.b Hence renewed struggle, this time mainly conducted in Congress at Washington. Even St[ephen] A. Douglas, the chief of the Northern Democrats, now (1857-58) entered the lists against the government and his allies of the South, because imposition of a slave constitution could have been contrary to the principle of sovereignty of the settlers passed in the Nebraska Bill of 1854. Douglas, Senator for Illinois, a Northwestern state, would naturally have lost all his influence if he had wanted to concede to the South the right to steal by force of arms or through acts of Congress Territories colonised by the North. As the struggle for

[^1]: a Douglas's statement, made at a reception in Washington on August 19, 1859, was reported in the article "Douglas Sure of the South", New-York Daily Tribune, No. 5720, August 23, 1859.— Ed.

[^2]: b Its basic provisions were set forth in the article "The Great Swindle", New-York Daily Tribune, No. 5171, November 16, 1857.— Ed.





**[p. 39]**

The Republican Party put forward its first platform for the presidential election in 1856. Although its candidate, John Fremont, was not victorious, the huge number of votes cast for him at any rate proved the rapid growth of the Party, particularly in the Northwest. At their second National Convention for the presidential elections (May 17, 1860), the Republicans again put forward their platform of 1856, only enriched by some additions.3

Its principal contents were the following: Not a foot of fresh territory is further conceded to slavery. The filibustering policy abroad must cease. The reopening of the slave trade is stigmat- ised. Finally, free-soilb laws are to be enacted for the furtherance of free colonisation.

The vitally important point in this platform was that not a foot of fresh terrain was conceded to slavery; rather it was to remain once and for all confined within the boundaries of the states where it already legally existed. Slavery was thus to be formally interned; but continual expansion of territory and continual spread of slavery beyond its old limits is a law of life for the slave states of the Union.

The cultivation of the southern export articles, cotton, tobacco, sugar, etc., carried on by slaves, is only remunerative as long as it is conducted with large gangs of slaves, on a mass scale and on wide expanses of a naturally fertile soil, which requires only simple labour. Intensive cultivation, which depends less on fertility of the soil than on investment of capital, intelligence and energy of labour, is contrary to the nature of slavery. Hence the rapid transformation of states like Maryland and Virginia, which formerly employed slaves in the production of export articles, into states which raise slaves to export them into the deep South. Even in South Carolina, where the slaves form four-sevenths of the population, the cultivation of cotton has been almost complete- ly stationary for years due to the exhaustion of the soil. Indeed, by force of circumstances South Carolina has already been trans- formed in part into a slave-raising state, since it already sells slaves to the sum of four million dollars yearly to the states of the extreme South and Southwest. As soon as this point is reached, the acquisition of new Territories becomes necessary, so that one section of the slaveholders with their slaves may occupy new fertile

[^1]: a Both platforms were cited in the article "The Platform", New-York Daily Tribune, No. 5950, May 19, I860.— Ed.

[^2]: b Marx uses the English term.— Ed.

[^3]: 5*





**[p. 40]**

"In fifteen years," said he, "without a great increase in slave territory, either the slaves must be permitted to flee from the whites, or the whites must flee from the slaves."

As is known, the representation of the individual states in the Congress House of Representatives depends on the size of their respective populations. As the populations of the free states grow far more quickly than those of the slave states, the number of Northern Representatives was bound to outstrip that of the Southern very rapidly. The real seat of the political power of the South is accordingly transferred more and more to the American Senate, where every state, whether its population is great or small, is represented by two Senators. In order to assert its influence in the Senate and, through the Senate, its hegemony over the United States, the South therefore required a continual formation of new slave states. This, however, was only possible through conquest of foreign lands, as in the case of Texas, or through the transforma- tion of the Territories belonging to the United States first into slave Territories and later into slave states, as in the case of Missouri, Arkansas, etc. John Calhoun, whom the slaveholders admire as their statesman par excellence, stated as early as February 19, 1847, in the Senate, that the Senate alone placed a balance of power in the hands of the South, that extension of the slave territory was necessary to preserve this equilibrium between South and North in the Senate, and that the attempts of the South at the creation of new slave states by force were accordingly justified.

Finally, the number of actual slaveholders in the South of the Union does not amount to more than 300,000, a narrow oligarchy that is confronted with many millions of so-called poor whites/ whose numbers have been constantly growing through concentra- tion of landed property and whose condition is only to be compared with that of the Roman plebeians in the period of

[^1]: a Marx gives the English words "poor whites" in parenthesis after their German equivalent.— Ed.





**[p. 41]**

A strict confinement of slavery within its old terrain, therefore, was bound according to economic law to lead to its gradual extinction, in the political sphere to annihilate the hegemony that the slave states exercised through the Senate, and finally to expose the slaveholding oligarchy within its own states to threatening perils from the "poor whites". In accordance with the principle that any further extension of slave Territories was to be prohibited by law, the Republicans therefore attacked the rule of the slaveholders at its root. The Republican election victory was accordingly bound to lead to open struggle between North and South. And this election victory, as already mentioned, was itself conditioned by the split in the Democratic camp.

The Kansas struggle had already caused a split between the slaveholders' party and the Democrats of the North allied to it. With the presidential election of 1860, the same strife now broke out again in a more general form. The Democrats of the North, with Douglas as their candidate, made the introduction of slavery into Territories dependent on the will of the majority of the settlers. The slaveholders' party, with Breckinridge as their candidate, maintained that the Constitution of the United States, as the Supreme Court had also declared,3 brought slavery legally in its train; in and of itself slavery was already legal in all Territories and required no special naturalisation. Whilst, there- fore, the Republicans prohibited any extension of slave Ter- ritories, the Southern party laid claim to all Territories of the republic as legally warranted domains. What they had attempted by way of example with regard to Kansas, to force slavery on a Territory through the central government against the will of the settlers themselves, they now set up as law for all the Territories of the Union. Such a concession lay beyond the power of the Democratic leaders and would only have occasioned the desertion of their army to the Republican camp. On the other hand, Douglas's "settlers' sovereignty" could not satisfy the slaveholders' party. What it wanted to effect had to be effected within the next four years under the new President, could only be effected by the

[^1]: a In its ruling on the Dred Scott case.— Ed.



The whole movement was and is based, as one sees, on the slave question. Not in the sense of whether the slaves within the existing slave states should be emancipated outright or not, but whether the 20 million free men of the North should submit any longer to an oligarchy of 300,000 slaveholders; whether the vast Territories of the republic should be nurseries for free states or for slavery; finally, whether the national policy of the Union should take armed spreading of slavery in Mexico, Central and South America as its device.

In another article we will probe the assertion of the London press that the North must sanction secession as the most favourable and only possible solution of the conflict.

[^1]: Written on October 20, 1861

[^2]: First published in Die Presse, No. 293, October 25, 1861

[^3]: Printed according to the news- paper





**[p. 43]**

Karl Marx

THE CIVIL WAR IN THE UNITED STATES61

"Let him go, he is not worth your anger!"3 Again and again English statesmanship cries—recently through the mouth of Lord John Russellb—to the North of the United States this advice of Leporello to Don Juan's deserted love. If the North lets the South go, it then frees itself from any association with slavery, from its historical original sin, and creates the basis of a new and higher development.

In reality, if North and South formed two independent countries, like, for example, England and Hanover, their separa- tion would be no more difficult than was the separation of England and Hanover.62 "The South", however, is neither a territory closely sealed off from the North geographically, nor a moral unity. It is not a country at all, but a battle slogan.

The advice of an amicable separation presupposes that the Southern Confederacy, although it assumed the offensive in the Civil War, at least wages it for defensive purposes. It is believed that the issue for the slaveholders' party is merely one of uniting the territories it has hitherto dominated into an independent group of states and withdrawing them from the supreme authority of the Union. Nothing could be more false. " The South needs its entire territory. It will and must have it." With this battle-cry the secessionists fell upon Kentucky. By their "entire territory" they

[^1]: a From Mozart's opera Don Giovanni.—Ed. b Russell's speech in Newcastle on October 14, 1861. Reported in The Times, No. 24064, October 15, 1861.— Ed.



The chain of mountains that begins in Alabama and stretches northwards to the Hudson River—the spinal column, as it were, of the United States—cuts the so-called South into three parts. The mountainous country formed by the Allegheny Mountains with their two parallel ranges, the Cumberland Range to the west and the Blue Mountains5 to the east, divides wedge-like the lowlands along the western coast of the Atlantic Ocean from the lowlands in the southern valleys of the Mississippi. The two lowlands separated by the mountainous country, with their vast rice swamps and far-flung cotton plantations, are the actual area of slavery. The long wedge of mountainous country driven into the heart of slavery, with its correspondingly clear atmosphere, an invigorating climate and a soil rich in coal, salt, limestone, iron ore, gold, in short, every raw material necessary for a many-sided industrial development, is already for the most part free country. In accordance with its physical constitution, the soil here can only be cultivated with success by free small farmers. Here the slave system vegetates only sporadically and has never struck root. In the larger part of the so-called border states, the dwellers of these highlands comprise the core of the free population, which sides with the North if only for the sake of self-preservation.

Let us consider the contested territory in detail.

[^1]: a Marx gives the English words "border states" in parenthesis after their German equivalent.— Ed.

[^2]: b Marx uses the English names: "Cumberland Range" and "Blue Moun- tains".— Ed.



Nevertheless, Delaware is demanded by the Southern Confederacy and would in fact be militarily untenable for the North as soon as the South possessed itself of Maryland.

In Maryland itself the above-mentioned conflict between high- lands and lowlands takes place. Out of a total population of 687,034 there are here 87,188 slaves. That the overwhelming majority of the population is on the side of the Union has again been strikingly proved by the recent general elections to the Congress in Washington. The army of 30,000 Union troops which holds Maryland at the moment, is intended not only to serve the army on the Potomac as a reserve, but, in particular, also to hold in check the rebellious slave-owners in the interior of the country. For here we observe a phenomenon similar to what we see in other border states where the great mass of the people stands for the North and a numerically insignificant slaveholders' party for the South. What it lacks in numbers, the slaveholders' party makes up in the means of power that many years' possession of all state offices, hereditary engagement in political intrigue and concentra- tion of great wealth in few hands have secured for it.

Virginia now forms the great cantonment where the main army of secession and the main army of the Union confront each other. In the northwest highlands of Virginia the number of slaves is 15,000, whilst the twenty times as large free population consists mostly of free farmers. The eastern lowlands of Virginia, on the other hand, count well-nigh half a million slaves. Raising Negroes and the sale of the Negroes to the Southern states form the principal source of income of these lowlands. As soon as the ringleaders of the lowlands had carried through the secession ordinance by intrigues in the state legislature at Richmondb and had in all haste opened the gates of Virginia to the Southern army, northwest Virginia seceded from the secession, formed a

[^1]: a Here and below Marx cites data of the 1860 US census contained in a report datelined "New York, March 26", The Times, No. 23903, April 10, 1861.— Ed.

[^2]: b On April 17, 1861.— Ed.





**[p. 46]**

Tennessee, with 1,109,847 inhabitants, 275,784 of whom are slaves, finds itself in the hands of the Southern Confederacy, which has placed the whole state under martial law and under a system of proscription which recalls the days of the Roman Triumvirates. When in the winter of 1861 the slaveholders proposed a general convention of the people which was to vote for secession or non-secession, the majority of the people rejected any convention, in order to remove any pretext for the secession movement. Later, when Tennessee was already militarily overrun and subjected to a system of terror by the Southern Confederacy, more than a third of the voters at the elections still declared themselves for the Union. Here, as in most of the border states, the mountainous country, east Tennessee, forms the real centre of resistance to the slaveholders' party. On June 17, 1861, a General Convention of the people of east Tennessee assembled in Greeneville, declared itself for the Union, deputed the former governor of the state, Andrew Johnson, one of the most ardent Unionists, to the Senate in Washington and published a "declara- tion of grievances",3 which lays bare all the means of deception, intrigue and terror by which Tennessee was "voted out" of the Union.b Since then the secessionists have held east Tennessee in check by force of arms.

Similar relationships to those in West Virginia and east Tennessee are found in the north of Alabama, in northwest Georgia and in the north of North Carolina.

Further west, in the border state of Missouri, with 1,173,317 inhabitants and 114,965 slaves—the latter mostly concentrated in the northwest of the state—the people's convention of August 1861 decided for the Union.c Jackson, the governor of the state and the tool of the slaveholders' party, rebelled against the legislature of Missouri, was outlawed and took the lead of the armed hordes that fell upon Missouri from Texas, Arkansas and Tennessee, in order to bring it to its knees before the Confederacy and sever its bond with the Union by the sword. Next to Virginia, Missouri is at the present moment the main theatre of the Civil War.

[^1]: a Marx uses the English expression and gives the German equivalent.— Ed. b The resolutions of the Convention were reported by the New-York Daily Tribune, No. 6308, July 4, 1861, in the item "The Knoxville (Tenn.) Whig".— Ed.

[^2]: c The convention actually adopted this decision on March 9, 1861.— Ed.





**[p. 47]**

It will have been observed that we lay particular emphasis on the numerical proportion of slaves to free men in the individual border states. This proportion is in fact decisive. It is the thermometer with which the vital fire of the slave system must be measured. The soul of the whole secession movement is South Carolina. It has 402,541 slaves and 301,271 free men. Mississippi, which has given the Southern Confederacy its dictator, Jefferson Davis, comes second. It has 436,696 slaves and 354,699 free men. Alabama comes third, with 435,132 slaves and 529,164 free men.

The last of the contested border states, which we have still to mention, is Kentucky. Its recent history is particularly characteristic of the policy of the Southern Confederacy. Among its 1,135,713 inhabitants Kentucky has 225,490 slaves. In three successive general elections by the people—in the winter of 1861, when elections to a congress of the border states were held; in June 1861, when elections to the Congress in Washington took place; finally, in August 1861, in elections to the legislature of the State of Kentucky—an ever increasing majority decided for the Union. On the other hand, Magoffin, the Governor of Kentucky, and all the high officials of the state are fanatical supporters of the slaveholders' party, as is Breckinridge, Kentucky's representative in the Senate in Washington, Vice-President of the United States under Buchanan and candidate of the slaveholders' party in the presidential elections of 1860. Too weak to win over Kentucky for secession, the influence of the slaveholders' party was strong enough to make this state amenable to a declaration of neutrality on the outbreak of war. The Confederacy recognised the neutrality as long as it served its purposes, as long as the Confederacy itself was engaged in crushing the resistance in east Tennessee. Hardly was this end attained when it knocked at the gates of Kentucky with the butt of a gun to the cry of: " The South needs its entire territory. It will and must have it!"

From the southwest and southeast its corps of free-booters simultaneously invaded the "neutral" state. Kentucky awoke from its dream of neutrality, its legislature openly sided with the Union,



**[p. 48]**

The attempts of the Confederacy to annex Missouri and Kentucky, for example, against the will of these states, prove the hollowness of the pretext that it is fighting for the rights of the individual states against the encroachments of the Union. On the individual states that it considers to belong to the "South" it confers, to be sure, the right to secede from the Union, but by no means the right to remain in the Union.

Even the slave states proper, however much external war, internal military dictatorship and slavery give them everywhere for the moment a semblance of harmony, are nevertheless not without oppositional elements. A striking example is Texas, with 180,388 slaves out of 601,039 inhabitants. The law of 1845,a by virtue of which Texas became a State of the Union as a slave state, entitled it to form not merely one, but five states out of its territory. The South would thereby have gained ten new votes instead of two in the American Senate, and an increase in the number of its votes in the Senate was a major object of its policy at that time. From 1845 to 1860, however, the slaveholders found it impracticable to cut up Texas, where the German population plays an important part, into even two states without giving the party of free labour the upper hand over the party of slavery in the second state.63 This furnishes the best proof of the strength of the opposition to the slaveholding oligarchy in Texas itself.

Georgia is the largest and most populous of the slave states. It has 462,230 slaves out of a total of 1,057,327 inhabitants, therefore nearly half the population. Nevertheless, the slavehold- ers' party has not so far succeeded in getting the Constitution imposed on the South at Montgomeryb sanctioned by a general vote of the people in Georgia.

In the State Convention of Louisiana, meeting on March 21, 1861, at New Orleans, Roselius, the political veteran of the state, declared:

[^1]: a Joint Resolution for annexing Texas to the United States [1845].— Ed. b Constitution of the Confederate States of America (New-York Daily Tribune, No. 6206, March 16, 1861).— Ed.





**[p. 49]**

Indeed, the oligarchy of three hundred thousand slaveholders utilised the Congress of Montgomery not only to proclaim the separation of the South from the North. It exploited it at the same time to reshape the internal constitutions of the slave states, to subjugate completely the section of the white population that had still preserved some independence under the protection and the democratic Constitution of the Union. Between 1856 and 1860 the political spokesmen, jurists, moralists and theologians of the slaveholders' party had already sought to prove, not so much that Negro slavery is justified, but rather that colour is a matter of indifference and the working class is everywhere born to slavery.

One sees, therefore, that the war of the Southern Confederacy is in the true sense of the word a war of conquest for the spread and perpetuation of slavery. The greater part of the border states and Territories are still in the possession of the Union, whose side they have taken first through the ballot-box and then with arms. The Confederacy, however, counts them for the "South" and seeks to conquer them from the Union. In the border states which the Confederacy has occupied for the time being, it is holding the relatively free highlands in check by martial law. Within the actual slave states themselves it is supplanting the hitherto existing democracy by the unrestricted oligarchy of the 300,000 slave- holders.

Were it to relinquish its plans of conquest, the Southern Confederacy would relinquish its capacity to live and the purpose of secession. Secession, indeed, only took place because within the Union the transformation of the border states and Territories into slave states seemed no longer attainable. On the other hand, were it to cede the contested territory peacefully to the Southern Confederacy, the North would surrender to the slave republic more than three-quarters of the entire territory of the United States. The North would lose the whole of the Gulf of Mexico and the Atlantic Ocean, except the narrow strip from Penobscot Bay to Delaware Bay, and would even cut itself off from the Pacific Ocean. Missouri, Kansas, New Mexico, Arkansas and Texas would draw California after them.64 Incapable of wresting the mouth of

[^1]: a Reported in the New-York Daily Tribune, No. 6217, March 29, 1861.— Ed.





**[p. 50]**

What would in fact take place would be not a dissolution of the Union, but a reorganisation of it, a reorganisation on the basis of slavery, under the recognised control of the slaveholding oligarchy. The plan of such a reorganisation has been openly proclaimed by the principal speakers of the South at the Congress of Montgom- ery and explains the paragraph of the new Constitution which leaves it open to every state of the old Union to join the new Confederacy. The slave system would infect the whole Union. In the Northern states, where Negro slavery is in practice impossible, the white working class would gradually be forced down to the level of helotry.67 This would fully accord with the loudly proclaimed principle that only certain races are capable of freedom, and as the actual labour is the lot of the Negro in the South, so in the North it is the lot of the German and the Irishman, or their direct descendants.

The present struggle between the South and North is, therefore, nothing but a struggle between two social systems, the system of slavery and the system of free labour. The struggle has broken out because the two systems can no longer live peacefully side by side on the North American continent. It can only be ended by the victory of one system or the other.

If the border states, the disputed areas in which the two systems have hitherto contended for domination, are a thorn in the flesh of the South, there can, on the other hand, be no mistake that, in the course of the war up to now, they have constituted the chief weakness of the North. One section of the slaveholders in these districts simulated loyalty to the North at the bidding of the conspirators in the South; another section found that in fact it was in accordance with their real interests and traditional ideas to go with the Union. The two sections have equally crippled the North. Anxiety to keep the "loyal" slaveholders of the border states in good humour; fear of throwing them into the arms of secession, in a word, tender regard for the interests, prejudices and sensibilities of these ambiguous allies, has smitten the Union

When, only recently, Lincoln pusillanimously revoked3

Fremont's Missouri proclamation on the emancipation of Negroes belonging to the rebels,68 this was done solely out of regard for the loud protest of the "loyal" slaveholders of Kentucky. However, a turning point has already been reached. With Kentucky, the last border state has been pushed into the series of battlefields between South and North. With the real war for the border states in the border states themselves, the question of winning or losing them is withdrawn from the sphere of diplomatic negotiations and parliamentary discussions. One section of slaveholders will throw off the mask of loyalty; the other will content itself with the prospect of a financial compensation such as Great Britain gave the West Indian planters.69 Events themselves drive to the promulgation of the decisive slogan — emancipation of the slaves.

That even the most hardened Democrats and diplomats of the North feel themselves drawn to this point, is shown by some announcements of very recent date. In an open letter, General Cass, Secretary of State for War under Buchanan and hitherto one of the most ardent allies of the South, declared emancipation of the slaves the conditio sine qua non of the Union's salvation.b In his last Review for October, Dr. Brownson, the spokesman of the Catholic party of the North, on his own admission the most energetic adversary of the emancipation movement from 1836 to 1860, publishes an article for Abolition.

Finally, the World, a New York organ of the diplomats of the Washington Cabinet, concludes one of its latest blustering articles against the Abolitionists with the words:

[^1]: "If we have opposed Abolition heretofore," he says among other things, "because we would preserve the Union, we must a fortiori now oppose slavery whenever, in our judgement, its continuance becomes incompatible with the maintenance of the Union, or of our nation as a free republican state."c

[^2]: a In a letter to Fremont of September 11, 1861, (New-York Daily Tribune, No. 6380, September 15, 1861).— Ed.

[^3]: b Cass's statement was quoted in a leading article in the New-York Daily Tribune, No. 6381, September 16, 1861.— Ed.

[^4]: c Marx presumably quotes from the leading article in the New-York Daily Tribune, No. 6401, October 9, 1861, which contains this passage from the article in Brownson's Quarterly Review.—Ed.





**[p. 52]**

Written about October 20, 1861

First published in Die Presse, No. 306, November 7, 1861

Printed according to the news- paper



**[p. 53]**

Karl Marx

THE CRISIS IN ENGLAND70

Today, as fifteen years ago, England faces a catastrophe that threatens to strike at the root of her entire economic system. As is known, the potato formed the exclusive food of Ireland and a not inconsiderable section of the English working people when the potato blight of 1845 and 1846 struck the root of Irish life with decay. The results of this great catastrophe are known. The Irish population declined by two million, of whom one part died of starvation and the other fled across the Atlantic Ocean. At the same time, this dreadful misfortune helped the English Free Trade party to triumph; the English landed aristocracy was compelled to sacrifice one of its most lucrative monopolies, and the abolition of the Corn Laws3 assured a broader and sounder basis for the reproduction and maintenance of the working millions.

What the potato was to Irish agriculture, cotton is to the dominant branch of Great Britain's industry. On its manufacture depends the subsistence of a mass of people greater than the total number of inhabitants of Scotland and than two-thirds of the present number of inhabitants of Ireland. For according to the census of 1861, the population of Scotland consisted of 3,061,117 persons, that of Ireland now only 5,764,543,b whilst more than four millions in England and Scotland live directly or indirectly by the cotton industry. Now the cotton plant is not, indeed, diseased. Just as little is its production the monopoly of a few regions of the earth. On the contrary, no other plant that yields clothing material

[^1]: a "An Act to Amend the Laws Relating to the Importation of Corn" [1846].— Ed.

[^2]: b Population of the United Kingdom according to the Census of 1861 (The Times, No. 23992, July 23, 1861).— Ed.

[^3]: 6—1134





**[p. 54]**



[^1]: a Marx uses the English term.— Ed. b This may refer to articles on cotton cultivation published in The Economist, Nos. 370, 371 and 372, September 28, October 5 and 12, 1850.— Ed.





**[p. 55]**

Now, all of a sudden, the American Civil War menaces this great pillar of English industry. Whilst the Union blockades the harbours of the Southern states, in order to cut off the secessionists' chief source of income by preventing the export of their cotton crop of this year, the Confederacy lends compelling force to this blockade with the decision not to export a bale of cotton of its own accord, but rather to compel England to come and fetch her cotton from the Southern harbours herself. England is to be driven to the point of forcibly breaking through the blockade, of then declaring war on the Union and so of throwing her sword into the scale of the slave states.

From the beginning of the American Civil War the price of cotton in England rose continuously; for a considerable time, however, to a less degree than was to be expected. On the whole, the English commercial world appeared to look down very phlegmatically on the American crisis. The cause of this cold- blooded way of viewing things was unmistakable. The whole of the last American crop was long ago in Europe. The yield of a new crop is never shipped before the end of November, and this shipment seldom attains considerable dimensions before the end of December. Till then, therefore, it remained pretty much a matter of indifference whether the cotton bales were held back on the plantations or forwarded to the harbours of the South immediately after their packing. Should the blockade cease at any time before the end of the year, England could safely count on receiving her customary cotton imports in March or April, quite as if the blockade had never taken place. The English commercial world, in large measure misled by the English press, succumbed, however, to the delusion that a spectacle of about six months' war would end with recognition of the Confederacy by the United States. But at the end of August, North Americans appeared in the market of Liverpool to buy cotton, partly for speculation in Europe, partly for reshipment to North America. This unheard-of event opened the eyes of the English. They began to understand the seriousness of the situation. The Liverpool cotton market has since, been in a state of feverish excitement; the prices of cotton were soon driven 100 per cent above their average level; the speculation in cotton assumed the same wild features that characterised the speculation in railways in 1845.73 The spinning

[^1]: 6»



The consumption of Indian cotton is naturally increasing, and the rising prices will ensure further increase of importation from the ancient home of cotton. Nevertheless, it remains impossible radically to change the conditions of production and the course of trade at, so to speak, a few months' notice. England is, in fact, now expiating her long mismanagement of India. Her present spasmodic attempts to replace American cotton by Indian encounter two great obstacles: the lack of means of communica- tion and transport in India, and the miserable condition of the Indian peasant, which prevents him from taking advantage of the momentarily favourable circumstances. But, apart from this, apart from the process of improvement that Indian cotton has still to go through to be able to take the place of American, even under the most favourable circumstances it will be years before India can produce for export the requisite quantity of cotton. It is statistically established, however, that in four months the stocks of cotton in Liverpool will be exhausted. They will hold out even as long as this only if the limitation of the labour time to three days a week and the complete stoppage of a part of the machinery is effected by the British cotton spinners and weavers to a still greater extent than hitherto. Such a procedure is already exposing the factory districts to the greatest social sufferings. But if the American blockade continues over January! What then?

[^1]: Written about November 1, 1861 Printed according to the news- paper First published in Die Presse No. 305, November 6, 1861





**[p. 57]**

Karl Marx

BRITISH COMMERCE

London, Nov. 2, 1861

The English Board of Trade Returns for the nine months ending Sept. 30, 1861, show in exports a large diminution, and in imports a still larger increase. A comparison between the export lists of the last three years gives the following general result:

Value of Exports for the nine months ending Sept. 30.

Consequently the exports of this year, if compared to the corresponding period of 1860, have decreased by £7,929,014; of which total decrease the by far larger portion, viz.: £5,671,730, is accounted for by the sudden contraction of the American trade. The rates in which the general loss derived from this source has affected the different branches of British industry may be seen from the annexed table:

[^1]: 1859 £98,037,311 1860 101,724,346 1861 93,795,332a

[^2]: Value of Exports to the United States in the nine months ending Sept. 30.

[^3]: 1859. 1860. 1861. £ £ £

[^4]: 78,060 76,843 25,642 144,556 156,665 200,244 2,753,782 2,776,472 1,130,973 448,661 518,778 191,606

[^5]: a Here and below the tables are quoted from "The Board of Trade Returns", The Economist, No. 949, November 2, 1861.— Ed.

[^6]: Beer and ale Coals and culm Cottons Earthenware and porcelain





**[p. 58]**

Haberdashery and millinery 1,204,085 1,083,438 542,312 Linens 1,486,276 1,337,778 493,654 Hardwares and cutlery 865,066 776,772 446,095 Metals—Iron—Pig 205,947 165,052 79,086 Bar, bolt, and rod 642,822 546,493 148,587 Railway of all kinds 744,505 665,619 168,657 Cast 16,489 17,056 9,239 Wrought of all kinds 357,162 378,842 125,752 Steel, unwrought 372,465 457,490 216,246 Copper, sheets and nails 99,422 44,971 10,005 Lead, pig 53,451 66,015 1,451 Tin plates 935,692 833,644 274,488 Oil Seed 122,570 72,915 1,680 Salt 63,876 84,818 59,809 Silk stuffs, handkerchiefs, and

ribbons 197,605 102,393 88,360 Other silk articles 129,557 93,227 22,984 Soda 439,584 399,153 142,311 Spirits, (British) 53,173 56,423 12,430 Woolens—Cloths of all kinds 586,701 535,130 250,023 Mixed stuffs, flannels, blankets,

Total 15,785,784 13,698,77874 5,671,730 Beyond the diminution due to the decrease of the American trade, the general exports show, moreover, a decline of £2,257,284. The greater part of this loss was incurred during the month of September, when the high price of cotton, and the consequent rise in cotton manufactures and yarns, had begun to powerfully react on the markets of British North America,3 East India, and Australia. During the whole period of nine months ended September, 1861, Turkey and Germany were, next to the United States, the countries foremost in restraining their absorp- tion of British merchandise. The export trade to France has not grown in any observable degree, the only striking instance of increase being- limited to an agricultural article, viz., sheeps' and lambs' wool. During the first nine months of 1860, England exported to France 4,735,150 pounds of wool, worth £354,047.b

[^1]: etc 1,732,224 1,612,284 652,399 Worsted Stuffs 1,052,053 840,507 377,597

[^2]: a Canada.— Ed. b The figures here and below are quoted from the Accounts relating to Trade and Navigation for the Nine Months ended September 30, 1861 (The Economist, No. 949, November 2, 1861).— Ed.



During the corresponding period of this year, that export has risen to 8,716,082 pounds, valued at £642,468. The only other remarkable feature in the export returns refers to Italy. British exports to the new kingdom are evidently enlarging, which fact will go a great length in accounting for English sympathies with Italian liberty.75 Thus, for instance, the export of British cottons to Sardinia, Tuscany, Naples, and Sicily, has increased from £756,892 in 1860, to £1,204,287 in 1861; the export of cotton yarns from £348,158 in 1860 to £538,373 in 1861; the export of irons from £120,867 in 1860, to £160,912 in 1861.

The import tables extend only to the first eight months of the current year. Their general result is shown by the subsequent figures:

Real Value of Imports. 1859 £ 88,993,762 1860 106,894,278 1861 114,588,107

The principal part of that increase of imports is due to a large addition in the purchase of foreign wheat, which, from £6,796,131 in the first eight months of 1860, had risen to £13,431,487 in the corresponding period of 1861. As to raw cotton, the quantity imported had, during the period referred to, only slightly fallen off, while the price of the article had largely increased, as will be seen from the annexed figures:

There exist no general politics at the present moment in England. Everything and everybody are absorbed in the industrial question and the American crisis. I called your attention in a former letter to the feverish state of the Liverpool cotton market.b

For the last two weeks it has exhibited, in fact, all the symptoms of the railway mania in 1845.76 Surgeons, dentists, physicians, barristers, cooks, workingmen, clerks and lords, comedians and parsons, soldiers and sailors, newspaper writers and boarding-

[^1]: Quantity of Cotton imported (during the first eight months).

[^2]: Cwts/ Value.

[^3]: 1859 8,023,082 £24,039,197 1860 10,616,347 28,940,676 1861 9,616,087 30,809,279

[^4]: a The figures in this column are given for the period of nine months.— Ed. b See this volume, pp. 17-20.— Ed.





**[p. 60]**

The British mind once become familiar with the idea that a pound of cotton may cost 15d., the temporary barrier to speculation will break down, and the speculating mania reappear with redoubled fury. There is one thing favorable to the United States in this movement. It is hostile to the breaking-of-blockade party. Already there have been published protests on the part of the speculators, in which it is reasonably said that any warlike movement by the British Government would be an act of direct injustice to those merchants who, on the faith of the British Government's adherence to its recognized and avowed principle of non-interference, had made their calculations, speculated at home, sent out their orders abroad and purchased cotton on an estimate of the price which it would reach under the operation of natural, probable and foreseeable courses.

This day's Economist publishes a very foolish article, in which, from statistics given as to the population and the area of the United States, he arrives at the conclusion that there would be room enough for the establishment of at least seven vast empires, and that, consequently, "the dream of universal dominion" ought to be banished from the hearts of the Unionists.3 The only rational inference which The Economist might have drawn from its own statistical statements, viz., that the Northerners, even if they liked to do so, could not desist from their claims without sacrificing to Slavery the vast States and Territories "in which Slavery still lingers, but cannot maintain itself as a permanent institution" — this only rational conclusion he successfully contrives not even to touch upon.

[^1]: a "Motives of the Federalists in Coercing the Secessionists", The Economist, No. 949, November 2, 1861.— Ed.





**[p. 61]**

Apart from its own commercial difficulties, England is simul- taneously bothered by the critical state of the French finances. The maneuvers of the Bank of France to stay the bullion drain to England by accommodation bills, obtained from the Rothschilds and other great firms, have, as was to be foreseen, resulted in a but temporary mitigation of her embarrassments. She has now successively applied for succor to the banks at Berlin, Hamburg, and St. Petersburg; but all these tentatives, instead of procuring relief, have only betrayed despair. The straits to which the French Government is actually put appear from two measures recurred to in the course of a fortnight. The interest on the Treasury bills, in order to keep them afloat, had to be raised to 7 V2 per cent, while Victor Emmanuel was commanded to partially postpone the instalments of the new Italian loan, of which French capitalists hold a very large amount. He, of course, acceded to the application of his patron.

In the Tuileries there are now two opposite influences, proposing two opposite nostrums for the temporary cure of the financial disease. The real Bonapartists, Persigny, and the Crédit Mobilier,77 cherish a project by which to subject the Bank of France to the direct and complete control of the Government, to convert her into a mere dependency on the Treasury, and to use the power thus obtained for the unrestricted emission of inconvertible State paper money. The other party, represented by Fould, and other renegades of former regimes, propose a new loan, whose amount is variously estimated by the most modest at £16,000,000, by the more daring at £30,000,000.

[^1]: Written on November 2, 1861 Reproduced from the newspaper

[^2]: First published in the New-York Daily Tribune, No. 6440, November 23, 1861





**[p. 62]**

Karl Marx

ECONOMIC NOTES

London, November 3

At the present moment general politics are non-existent in England. The interest of the country is absorbed in the French financial, commercial and agricultural crisis, the British industrial crisis, the dearth of cotton and the American question.

Competent circles here are not for a moment deceived concerning the Bank of France's bill-jobbing with a few big houses on both sides of the Channel being a palliative of the weakest sort.3 All that could be achieved and has been achieved thereby was a momentary abatement of the drain of gold to England. The repeated attempts of the Bank of France to raise metallic auxiliary troops in Petersburg, Hamburg and Berlin damage its credit, without filling its coffers. The raising of the rate of interest on treasury bills, in order to keep them in currency, and the necessity of securing a remission of the payments for the new Italian loan from Victor Emmanuel—both are held here to be serious symptoms of French financial sickness. It is known, moreover, that at the present moment two projects contend in the Tuileries for precedence. The full-blooded Bonapartists, with Persigny and Péreire (of the Crédit Mobilier)b at their head, want to make the Bank of France completely subject to governmental authority, to reduce it to a mere office of the Finance Ministry, and to use the institution, thus transformed, as an assignat factory.

It is known that this principle was originally at the bottom of the organisation of the Crédit Mobilier. The less adventurous party,

[^1]: a See this volume, p. 61.— Ed. b The Crédit Mobilier bank was founded by the brothers Emile and Isaac Péreire. Marx presumably means the latter.— Ed.





**[p. 63]**

represented by Fould and other renegades of Louis Philippe's time, proposes a new national loan, which is to amount to 400 million francs, according to some; to 700 million, according to others. The Times, in a leading article today, probably reflects the view of the City79 when it states that France is completely paralysed by her economic crisis and robbed of her European influence.3 Nevertheless, The Times and the City are wrong. Should the December power80 succeed in outlasting the winter without great internal storms, it will then blow the war trumpet in the spring. The internal distress will not thereby be remedied, but its voice will be drowned.

In an earlier letterb I pointed out that the cotton swindle in Liverpool during the last few weeks fully reminds one of the maddest days of the railway mania of 1845. Dentists, surgeons, barristers, cooks, widows, workers, clerks and lords, comedians and clergymen, soldiers and tailors, journalists and persons letting apartments, man and wife, all speculated in cotton. Quite small quantities of from 1 to 4 bales were bought, sold and sold again. More considerable quantities lay for months in the same warehouse, although they changed owners twenty times. Whoever had bought cotton at 10 o'clock, sold it again at 11 o'clock with an addition of a halfpenny a pound. Thus the same cotton often circulated from hand to hand six times in ten hours. This week, however, there came a lull, and for no more rational reason than that a pound of cotton (namely, middling Orleans cotton) had risen to a shilling, that 12 pence make a shilling and are therefore a round figure. So everyone had purposed selling out, as soon as this maximum was reached. Hence sudden increase of the supply, and consequent reaction. As soon as the English make themselves conversant with the possibility that a pound of cotton can rise above a shilling, the St. Vitus's dance will return more madly than ever.

The last official monthly report of the Board of Trade" on British exports and importsd has by no means dispelled the gloomy feeling. The export tables cover the nine months' period from January to September 1861. In comparison with the same period of 1860, they show a falling-off of about £8,000,000. Of this,

[^1]: a "To those who concern themselves with French politics", The Times, No. 24080, November 2, 1861.— Ed.

[^2]: b See this volume, pp. 53-56.— Ed. c Marx uses the English name.— Ed. d Accounts relating to Trade and Navigation for the Nine Months ended September 30, 1861 {The Economist, No. 949, November 2, 1861, Supplement).— Ed.





**[p. 64]**

£5,671,730 fall to exports to the United States alone, whilst the remainder is distributed over British North America,3 the East Indies, Australia, Turkey and Germany. Only in Italy is an increase shown. Thus, for example, the export of British cotton commodities to Sardinia, Tuscany, Naples and Sicily has risen from £756,892 for the year 1860 to £1,204,287 for the year 1861; the export of British cotton yarn from £348,158 to £538,373; the export of iron from £120,867 to £160,912, etc. These figures are not without weight in the scale of British sympathy for Italian freedom.81

Whilst the export trade of Great Britain has thus declined by nearly £8,000,000 her import trade has risen in still higher proportion, a circumstance that by no means facilitates the adjustment of the balance. This rise in imports stems, in particular, from the increase in wheat imports. Whereas for the first eight months of 1860 the value of the wheat imported amounted to only £6,796,131, for the same period of the present year it totals £13,431,487.

The most remarkable phenomenon revealed by the import tables is the rapid increase of French imports which have now attained a volume of nearly £18,000,000 (yearly), whilst English exports to France are not much bigger than, perhaps, those to Holland. Continental politicians have hitherto overlooked this entirely new phenomenon of modern commercial history. It proves that the economic dependence of France on England is, perhaps, six times as great as the economic dependence of England on France, if, that is, one not only considers the English export and import tables, but also compares them with the French export and import tables. It then follows that England has now become the principal export market for France, whereas France has remained a quite secondary export market for England. Hence, despite all chauvin- ism and all Waterloo82 rodomontade, the nervous dread of a conflict with "perfidious Albion".83

Finally, one more important fact emerges from the latest English export and import tables. Whilst in the first nine months of this year English exports to the United States declined by more than 65 per centb in comparison with the same period of 1860, the port of New York alone has increased its exports to England by

[^1]: a Canada.— Ed. b The original mistakenly says 25 per cent. Marx took the figure from The Economist, No. 949, November 2, 1861, where an error had been made in the calculation.— Ed.





**[p. 65]**

Written on November 3, 1861

First published in Die Presse, No. 308, November 9, 1861

Printed according to the news- paper



**[p. 66]**

Karl Marx

INTERVENTION IN MEXICO

London, November 7

The Times of today has a leading article3 in its well-known, confusedly kaleidoscopic, affectedly humorous style, on the French government's invasion of Dappenthal and on Switzerland's protest against this violation of territory.86 The oracle of Printing House Square87 recalls how, at the time of most acute struggle between English manufacturers and landowners, little children employed in the factories were led to throw needles into the most delicate parts of the machinery to upset the motion of the whole powerful automaton. The machinery is Europe, the little child is Switzer- land and the needle that she throws into the smoothly running automaton is—Louis Bonaparte's invasion of her territory or, rather, her outcry at his invasion. Thus the needle is suddenly transformed into the outcry at the needle's prick and the metaphor into a piece of buffoonery at the expense of the reader who expects a metaphor. The Times is further enlivened by its own discovery that Dappenthal consists of a single village called Cressonnières. It ends its short article with a complete contradic- tion of its beginning. Why, it exclaims, make so much ado about this infinitely small Swiss bagatelle, when every quarter of Europe will be ablaze next spring? One may not forget that, shortly before, Europe was a well regulated automaton. The whole article appears sheer nonsense and yet it has its sense. It is a declaration that Palmerston has given carte blanche in the Swiss incident to his ally on the other side of the Channel. The explanation of this

[^1]: a "Some of our middle-aged readers may recollect the time", The Times, No. 24083, November 6, 1861.— Ed.





**[p. 67]**

It is credible that Louis Bonaparte counted on intervention in Mexico among the many possibilities which he continually has ready to divert the French people. Surely Spain, whose cheap successes in Morocco and St. Domingo 89 have gone to her head, dreams of a Restoration in Mexico. But it is certain that France's project had not yet matured and that both France and Spain were opposed to a crusade against Mexico under English command.

On September 24, Palmerston's private Moniteur, the Morning Post, announced the details of an agreement that England, France and Spain had reached for joint intervention in Mexico.*3 The following day the Patrie denied the existence of any such agreement. On September 27 The Times refuted the Patrie, without naming it. According to The Times' article, Lord Russell had communicated the English decision on intervention to the French government, whereupon M. Thouvenel had answered that the Emperor of the French had arrived at a like conclusion. It was now the turn of Spain. In a semi-official organ the Spanish government declared that it purposed an intervention in Mexico, but by no means an intervention alongside of England. It rained dementis. The Times had categorically announced that "the full assent of the American President had been given to the planned expedition". Hardly had the report reached the other side of the Atlantic Ocean when all the organs of the American government branded it as a lie, since President Lincoln was going with and not against Mexico. From all this it follows that the plan of intervention in its present form originated in the Cabinet of St. James.90

No less puzzling and contradictory than the statements concern- ing the origin of the convention were the statements concerning its points at issue. One organ of Palmerston, the Morning Post, announced that Mexico was not an organised state, with an established government, but a mere robbers' nest. It was to be treated as such. The expedition had only one object—the satisfaction of the Mexican state's creditors in England, France and

[^1]: a "Bulletin", Le Moniteur universel, No. 309, November 5, 1861.— Ed. b Here and below Marx draws on the press review published in The Free Press, No. 10, October 2, 1861 ("The Projected Intervention in Mexico").— Ed.





**[p. 68]**

The other organ of Palmerston, The Times, declared, on the contrary, that England was "steeled against plunderings on the part of bankrupt Mexico by long experience". It was not a question of the private interests of the creditors, but "they hope that the mere presence of a combined squadron in the Gulf of Mexico and the seizure of certain ports, will urge the Mexican government to new exertions in keeping the internal peace, and will compel the malcontents to confine themselves to some form of opposition more constitutional than brigandage".

According to this, the expedition would therefore take place to support the official government of Mexico. At the same time, however, The Times intimates that "the City of Mexico was sufficiently healthy, should it be necessary to penetrate so far".

The most original means of consolidating a government indisputably consists in the sequestration of its revenues and its territories by force. On the other hand, mere occupation of the ports and collection of the duties in them can only cause the Mexican government to set up a more inland-lying line of custom houses. Import duties on foreign commodities, export duties on American commodities would in this way be doubled; the intervention would in fact satisfy the claims of European creditors by extortions from European-Mexican trade. The Mexican govern- ment can become solvent only by internal consolidation, but it can consolidate itself at home only so long as its independence is respected abroad.

If the expedition's ostensible ends are so contradictory, then the ostensible means to these ostensible ends are still more contradic- tory. The English government organs themselves admit that if one thing or another would be attainable by a unilateral intervention of France or England or Spain, everything becomes unattainable by a joint intervention of these states.

One may recall that the Liberal Party in Mexico under Juarez, the official President of the republic, has now the upper hand at almost all points; that the Catholic Party under General Marquez has suffered defeat after defeat, and that the robber band organised by it has been driven back to the sierras of Queretaro and is dependent on an alliance with Mejïa, the Indian chief there. The last hope of the Catholic Party was Spanish intervention.

[^1]: a The phrase occurs in an item published in the column "Great Britain" in the New-York Daily Tribune, No. 6462, December 19, 1861.— Ed.





**[p. 69]**

And just for this reason England strengthens the Liberal government; in undertaking a crusade against it with France and Spain she seeks to suppress anarchy by supplying the clerical party lying at its last gasp with fresh allied troops from Europe!

Save during the short winter months the coasts of Mexico, pestilential as they are, can only be held by conquest of the country itself. But a third English government organ, The Economist, declares the conquest of Mexico to be impossible.

"If it is desired," says this paper, "to thrust upon her a British prince with an English army, then the fiercest wrath of the United States is excited. France's jealousy would make such a conquest impossible, and a motion to this effect would be rejected almost unanimously by an English parliament the moment it was submitted to it. England, for her part, cannot entrust the government of Mexico to France. Of Spain there can be no question whatever."3

The whole expedition is therefore a mystification, the key to which the Patrie gives in these words:

The question is simply one of applying to the states of America through a new Holy Alliance the principle according to which the Holy Alliance held itself called on to interfere in the internal governmental affairs of the countries of Europe.91 The first plan of this sort was drawn up by Chateaubriand for the Bourbons of Spain and France at the time of the Restoration.92 It was frustrated by Canning and Monroe, the President of the United States, who declared any European interference in the internal affairs of American states to be forbidden. Since then the Ameri- can Union has constantly asserted the Monroe Doctrine93 as an international law. The present Civil War, however, created the right situation for securing to the European monarchies an

[^1]: "The convention recognises the necessity of installing in Mexico a strong government that can maintain tranquillity and order there."

[^2]: a "The Case of Mexico", The Economist, No. 947, October 19, 1861.— Ed. b Marx presumably quotes this passage (La Patrie, October 29, 1861) from a reprint in the New-York Daily Tribune, No. 6434, November 16, 1861.— Ed.

[^3]: 7—1134





**[p. 70]**

Apart from all standpoints of international law in general, the affair has the great significance for Europe that by concessions in the domain of Continental politics England has purchased the support of Louis Bonaparte in the Mexican expedition.

Written on November 6-7, 1861

First published in Die Presse, No. 311, November 12, 1861

Printed according to the news- paper



**[p. 71]**

Karl Marx

THE INTERVENTION IN MEXICO

London, Nov. 8, 1861

The contemplated intervention in Mexico by England, France, and Spain, is, in my opinion, one of the most monstrous enterprises ever chronicled in the annals of international history. It is a contrivance of the true Palmerston make, astounding the uninitiated by an insanity of purpose and an imbecility of the means employed which appear quite incompatible with the known capacity of the old schemer.

It is probable that, among the many irons which, to amuse the French public, Louis Bonaparte is compelled to always keep in the fire, a Mexican Expedition may have figured. It is sure that Spain, whose never overstrong head has been quite turned by her recent cheap successes in Morocco and St. Domingo, dreams of a restoration in Mexico. But, nevertheless, it is certain that the French plan was far from being matured, and that both France and Spain strove hard against a joint expedition to Mexico under English leadership.

On Sept. 24, Palmerston's private Moniteur, The London Morning Post, first announced in detail the scheme for the joint interven- tion, according to the terms of a treaty just concluded, as it said, between England, France, and Spain.3 This statement had hardly crossed the Channel, when the French Government, through the columns of the Paris Patrie, gave it the lie direct. On Sept. 27, The London Times, Palmerston's national organ, first broke its silence

[^1]: a Here and below Marx makes use of the press review from the article "The Projected Intervention in Mexico", The Free Press, No. 10, October 2, 1861.— Ed.

[^2]: 7*





**[p. 72]**

Patrie. The Times even stated that Earl Russell had communicated to the French Government the resolution arrived at on the part of England of interfering in Mexico, and that M. de Thouvenel replied that the Emperor of the French had come to a similar conclusion. Now it was the turn of Spain. A semi-official paper of Madrid, while affirming Spain's intention to meddle with Mexico, repudiated at the same time the idea of a joint intervention with England. The dementis were not yet exhausted. The Times had categorically asserted that "the full assent of the American President had been given to the Expedition." All the American papers taking notice of The Times article, have long since contradicted its assertion.

It is, therefore, certain, and has even been expressly admitted by The Times, that the joint intervention in its present form is of English—i.e., Palmerstonian—make. Spain was cowed into adher- ence by the pressure of France; and France was brought round by concessions made to her in the field of European policy. In this respect, it is a significant coincidence that The Times of Novem- ber 6, in the very number in which it announces the conclusion at London of a convention for the joint interference in Mexico,3

simultaneously publishes a leader, pooh-poohing and treating with exquisite contumely the protest of Switzerland against the recent invasion of her territory—viz., the Dappenthal—by a French military force.b In return for his fellowship in the Mexican expedition, Louis Bonaparte has obtained carte blanche for his contemplated encroachments on Switzerland and, perhaps, on other parts of the European continent. The transactions on these points between England and France have lasted throughout the whole of the months of September and October.

There exist in England no people desirous of an intervention in Mexico save the Mexican bondholders, who, however, had never to boast the least sway over the national mind. Hence the difficulty of breaking to the public the Palmerstonian scheme. The next best means was to bewilder the British elephant by contradictory statements, proceeding from the same laboratory, compounded of the same materials, but varying in the doses administered to the animal.

[^1]: a "Paris, Tuesday, Nov. 5, 7 A.M.", The Times, No. 24083, November 6, 1861.— Ed.

[^2]: b "Some of our middle-aged readers may recollect the time", The Times, No. 24083, November 6, 1861.— Ed.





**[p. 73]**

The Morning Post, in its print of September 24, announced that there would be "no territorial war on Mexico," that the only point at issue was the monetary claims on the Mexican exchequer; that "it would be impossible to deal with Mexico as an organized and established Government," and that, consequently, "the principal Mexican ports would be temporarily occupied and their customs revenues sequestered."3

The Times of September 27 declared, on the contrary, that "to dishonesty, to repudiation, to the legal and irremediable plunder of our countrymen by the default of a bankrupt community, we were steeled by long endurance," and that, consequently, "the private robbery of the English bondholders" lay not, as The Post had it,b at the bottom of the intervention. While remarking, en passant, that "the City of Mexico was sufficiently healthy, should it be necessary to penetrate so far," The Times hoped, however, that "the mere presence of a combined squadron in the Gulf, and the seizure of certain ports, will urge the Mexican Government to new exertions in keeping the peace, and will convince the malcontents that they must confine themselves to some form of opposition more constitutional than brigandage."

If, then, according to The Post, the expedition was to start because there "exists no Government in Mexico," it was, according to The Times, only intended as encouraging and supporting the existing Mexican Government. To be sure! The oddest means ever hit upon for the consolidation of a Government consists in the seizure of its territory and the sequestration of its revenue.

The Times and The Morning Post having once given out the cue, John Bull was then handed over to the minor ministerial oracles, systematically belaboring him in the same contradictory style for four weeks, until public opinion had at last become sufficiently trained to the idea of a joint intervention in Mexico, although kept in deliberate ignorance of the aim and purpose of that interven- tion. At last, the transactions with France had drawn to an end; the Moniteur announced that the convention between the three interfering powers had been concluded on October 31 ;c and the Journal des Débats, one of whose coproprietors is appointed to the command of one of the vessels of the French squadron, informed the world that no permanent territorial conquest was intended;

[^1]: a Here and below Marx draws on the press review given in the article "The Projected Intervention in Mexico", The Free Press, No. 10, October 2, 1861.— Ed.

[^2]: b The Morning Post.—Ed. c "Bulletin", Le Moniteur universel, No. 309, November 5, 1861.— Ed.





**[p. 74]**

that Vera Cruz and other points on the coast were to be seized, an advance to the capital being agreed upon in case of non- compliance by the constituted authorities in Mexico with the demands of the intervention; that, moreover, a strong govern- ment was to be imported into the Republic.3

The Times, which ever since its first announcement on Sep- tember 27,b seemed to have forgotten the very existence of Mexico, had now again to step forward. Everybody ignorant of its connection with Palmerston, and the original introduction in its columns of his scheme, would be induced to consider the to-day's leader of The Times as the most cutting and merciless satire on the whole adventure. It sets out by stating that "the expedition is a very remarkable one" [later on it says a curious one].

"Three States are combining to coerce a fourth into good behavior, not so much by way of war as by authoritative interference in behalf of order."c

Authoritative interference in behalf of order! This is literally the Holy Alliance94 slang, and sounds very remarkable indeed on the part of England, glorying in the non-intervention principle! And why is "the way of war, and of declaration of war, and all other behests of international law," supplanted by "an authoritative interference in behalf of order?" Because, says The Times, there "exists no Government in Mexico." And what is the professed aim of the expedition? "To address demands to the constituted authorities at Mexico."

The only grievances complained of by the intervening Powers, the only causes which might give to their hostile procedure the slightest shade of justification, are easily to be summed up. They are the monetary claims of the bondholders and a series of personal outrages said to have been committed upon subjects of England, France and Spain. These were also the reasons of the intervention as originally put forth by The Morning Post, and as some time ago officially indorsed by Lord John Russell in an interview with some representatives of the Mexican bondholders in England. The to-day's Times states:

[^1]: "England, France, and Spain have concerted an expedition to bring Mexico to the performance of her specific engagements, and to give protection to the subjects of the respective crowns."

[^2]: a "France. Paris, 3 novembre", Journal des Débats, November 6, 1861.— Ed. b "The assurance, in spite of the denial of the Patrie", The Times, No. 24049, September 27, 1861, leading article.— Ed.

[^3]: c "In a very short time", The Times, No. 24085, November 8, 1861.— Ed.





**[p. 75]**

However, in the progress of its article, The Times veers round, and exclaims:

"We shall, no doubt, succeed in obtaining at least a recognition of our pecuniary claims; in fact, a single British frigate could have obtained that amount of satisfaction at any moment. We may trust, too, that the more scandalous of the outrages committed will be expiated by more immediate and substantial atonements; but it is clear that, if only this much was to be brought about, we need not have resorted to such extremities as are now proposed."

The Times, then, confesses in so many words that the reasons originally given out for the expedition are shallow pretexts; that for the attainment of redress nothing like the present procedure was needed; and that, in point of fact, the "recognition of monetary claims, and the protection of European subjects" have nothing at all to do with the present joint intervention in Mexico. What, then, is its real aim and purpose?

Before following The Times in its further explanations, we will, en passant, note some more "curiosities" which it has taken good care.not to touch upon. In the first instance, it is a real "curiosity" to see Spain—Spain out of all other countries—turn crusader for the sanctity of foreign debts! Last Sunday's3 Courrier du Dimanche already summons the French Government to improve the oppor- tunity, and compel Spain, "into the eternally delayed performance of her old standing engagements to French bondholders."

The second still greater "curiosity" is, that the very same Palmerston who, according to Lord John Russell's recent declara- tion, is about invading Mexico to make its Government pay the English bondholders, has himself, voluntarily, and despite the Mexican Government, sacrificed the treaty rights of England and the security mortgaged by Mexico to her British creditors.b

By the treaty concluded with England in 1826, Mexico became bound to not allow the establishment of Slavery in any of the territories constituting her then empire.0 By another clause of the same treaty, she tendered England, as a security for the loans obtained from British capitalists, the mortgage of 45,000,000 acres of the public lands in Texas. It was Palmerston who, ten or twelve years later,d interfered as the mediator for Texas against Mexico. In the treaty then concluded by him with Texas, he sacrificed not

[^1]: a November 3, 1861.— Ed. h The Times, No. 24049, September 27, 1861.— Ed. c Here and below Marx draws on documents cited in the article "Annexation of the Texas, a Case of War between England and the United States", The Portfolio; Diplomatic Review (new series), London, 1844, Vol. Ill, No. XI.— Ed.

[^2]: d In 1840.— Ed.





**[p. 76]**

only the Anti-Slavery cause, but also the mortgage on the public lands, thus robbing the English bondholders of their security. The Mexican Government protested at the time, but meanwhile, later on, Secretary John C. Calhoun could permit himself the jest of informing the Cabinet of St. James that its desire "of seeing Slavery abolished in Texas would be" best realized by annexing Texas to the United States. The English bondholders lost, in fact, any claim upon Mexico, by the voluntary sacrifice on the part of Palmerston of the mortgage secured to them in the treaty of 1826. But, since The London Times avows that the present intervention has nothing to do either with monetary claims or with personal outrages, what, then, in all the world, is its real or pretended aim?

"An authoritative interference in behalf of Order. " a

England, France, and Spain, planning a new Holy Alliance, and having formed themselves into an armed areopagus for the restoration of order all over the world, "Mexico," says The Times, "must be rescued from anarchy, and put in the way of self- government and peace. A strong and stable government must be established" there by the invaders, and that government is to be extracted from "some Mexican party."

Now, does any one imagine that Palmerston and his mouth- piece, The Times, really consider the joint intervention as a means to the professed end, viz: The extinction of anarchy, and the establishment in Mexico of a strong and stable government? So far from cherishing any such chimerical creed, The Times states expressly in its first leader of September 27:

In its to-day's leader, The Times goes on reasoning in the same strain, and resumes its scruples in this sentence:

Palmerston and The Times, then, are fully aware that there "exists a government in Mexico," that "the Liberal party,"

[^1]: "The only point on which there may possibly be a difference between ourselves and our allies, regards the government of the Republic. England will be content to see it remain in the hands of the liberal party which is now in power, while France and Spain are suspected of a partiality for the ecclesiastical rule which has recently been overthrown It would, indeed, be strange, if France were, in both the old and new world, to make herself the protector of priests and bandits."

[^2]: "It is hard to suppose that the intervening powers could all concur in the absolute preference of either of the two parties between which Mexico is divided, and equally hard to imagine that a compromise would be found practicable between enemies so determined."

[^3]: a The Times, No. 24085, November 8, 1861.— Ed,





**[p. 77]**

The inference The Times itself draws from those premises is really "remarkable" and "curious."

Although, it says, "these considerations may induce us to look with some anxiety to the results of the expedition, they do not militate against the expediency of the expedition itself." b

It does, consequently, not militate against the expediency of the expedition itself, that the expedition militates against its only ostensible purpose. It does not militate against the means that it baffles its own avowed end.

The greatest "curiosity" pointed out by The Times, I have, however, still kept in petto.

It would, indeed, be the greatest "curiosity" of all if the United States, living in amity with Mexico, should associate with the European order-mongers, and, by participating in their acts, sanction the interference of a European armed Areopagus with the internal affairs of American States. The first scheme of such a transplantation of the Holy Alliance to the other side of the Atlantic was, at the time of the restoration, drawn up for the French and Spanish Bourbons by Chateaubriand.95 The attempt was baffled by an English Minister, Mr. Canning, and an American President, Mr. Monroe. The present convulsion in the United States appeared to Palmerston an opportune moment for taking up the old project in a modified form. Since the United States, for the present, must allow no foreign complication to interfere with their war for the Union, all they can do is to protest. Their best well-wishers in Europe hope that they will protest, and thus,

[^1]: "If," says it, "President Lincoln should accept the invitation, which is provided for by the convention, to participate in the approaching operations, the character of the work would become more curious still."

[^2]: a The Times, No. 24049, September 27, 1861.— Ed. b Here and below, The Times, No. 24085, November 8, 1861.— Ed.





**[p. 78]**

This military expedition of Palmerston's, carried out by a coalition with two other European powers, is started during the prorogation, without the sanction, and against the will of the British Parliament. The first extra Parliamentary war of Palmer- ston's was the Afghan war softened and justified by the pro- duction of forged papers.396 Another war of that sort was his Persian war of 1856-1857.97 He defended it at the time on the plea that "the principle of the previous sanction of the House did not apply to Asiatic wars."b It seems that it does neither apply to American wars. With the control over foreign wars, Parliament will lose all control over the national exchequer, and Parliamentary government turn to a mere farce.

Written on November 8, 1861 Reproduced from the newspaper

First published in the New-York Daily Tribune, No. 6440, November 23, 1861

[^1]: a Correspondence Relating to Persia and Afghanistan, London, 1839.— Ed. b H. J. Palmerston's speech in the House of Commons on July 16, 1857, Hansard's Parliamentary Debates, Third series, Vol. CXLVI, London, 1857.— Ed.





**[p. 79]**

Karl Marx

MONSIEUR FOULD

Paris, November 16

Art experts in the field of high political comedy find a source of the purest pleasure in the French Moniteur of November 14. As in the ancient classical drama, Fate invisibly, irresistibly enmeshes the heroes—Fate in the form of a thousand million-franc deficit. As in ancient drama, the dialogue is only between two persons, Oedipus-Bonaparte and Teiresias-Fould. The tragedy turns into comedy, however, since Teiresias says only what Oedipus has whispered to him in advance.3

One of the most characteristic tricks of Bonapartist comedy is to put its old, worn dramatis personae on stage over and over again as brand-new heroes. Billault comes on in place of Persigny, and then Persigny comes on in place of Billault! And likewise in the Decembrist press!b Grandguillot, Cassagnac, Limayrac are tossed to and fro between the Constitutionnel, the Pays and the Patrie. Monsieur Véron, the "Bourgeois de Paris",0 is replaced by Cesena as director of the Constitutionnel, Cesena by Cucheval, Cucheval by Cassagnac, Cassagnac by Renée, Renée by Grandguillot, and after six years Véron comes on again in his old spot—as a brand-new hero.

Likewise under the constitutional system Thiers became new as soon as Guizot was worn out, and Mole new as soon as Thiers was worn out, and then the round was repeated. However, these

[^1]: a An allusion to Napoleon Ill's message to Fould and the latter's "Mémoire à l'Empereur", both published in Le Moniteur universel, No. 318, November 14, 1861.—Ed.

[^2]: b The press of Louis Bonaparte, who staged a coup d'état on December 2, 1851.— Ed.

[^3]: c An allusion to L. Veron's book Mémoires d'un bourgeois de Paris.—Ed.



The Times, whose weak point is comparisons, compares Louis Bonaparte with Louis XVI and Fould with Turgot.c Fould and Turgot! It is like trying to compare M. Vaillant with Carnot, because both of them were Ministers of War. Turgot was the head of the new economic school of the eighteenth century, the Physiocratic School." He was one of the intellectual heroes who overthrew the old regime, while Louis XVI was the incarnation of that old regime. But who is Fould? Fould, a member of the dynastic opposition 10° under Louis Philippe, was always passed over on principle despite the most obtrusive solicitation, whenever the dynastic opposition was in a position to nominate a Finance Minister. Fould was held to be a "financier dangereux ", a reputation he had earned owing to his various unlucky financial operations. He needed only to defend a proposal, and the Chambers rejected it. Then came the provisional government. It had hardly been proclaimed, when Fould rushed to Ledru-Rollin, offered his services as Finance Minister and—proposed national bankruptcy. The courtship was unsuccessful, and the rejected suitor got his revenge by writing the pamphlet, Pas d'assignats! Finally Fould recognised in Louis Bonaparte the man who was foolhardy enough to hand the French treasury over to Mr. Fould.

Fould was closely involved in the manoeuvres that ensured the "nephew's"d election to the presidency on December 10, 1848. Fould was a very active friend and made the financial preparations for the coup d'état. December 2, 1851 was not only the victory of

[^1]: a The section of the people having the right to vote.— Ed. b Marx uses the English phrase and gives the German translation in brackets.— Ed.

[^2]: c "The hour of reckoning has at length overtaken France", The Times, No. 24091, November 15, 1861, leading article.— Ed.

[^3]: d Louis Bonaparte's.— Ed.





**[p. 81]**

Applaudite, amici!

Written on November 16, 1861 Printed according to the news- paper First published in Die Presse, No. 318, November 19, 1861 Published in English for the first time

[^1]: a Lesser pleasures.— Ed. b High finance.— Ed. c Marx uses the English phrase "a new man" and adds "a brand new man" in German in brackets.— Ed.





**[p. 82]**

Karl Marx

FRANCE'S FINANCIAL SITUATION

The Times, which at first praised the imperialist coup d'éclat3

moderately and then lauded it in hyperboles, makes a sudden switch today from panegyrics to criticism.b The way in which this manoeuvre is executed is typical of the Leviathan of the English press:

"We will leave to others the task of congratulating Caesar on his admission that he is a finite and fallible being, and that, indisputably reigning by the power of the sword, he does not pretend to rule by virtue of Divine right. We had rather inquire what have been the financial results of ten years of Imperial sway, which are better worth thinking of than the phrases in which those results have been made known The Executive did what it pleased; the Ministers were responsible to the Emperor alone; the state of the finances was entirely concealed from the public and the Chambers. The annual form of voting a budget, instead of a check, was a mask; instead of a protection, a delusion. What, then, have the French people achieved by placing their liberties and their possessions at the disposal of a single man? M. Fould himself admits that between 1851 and 1858 extraordinary credits have been opened to the amount of 2,800,000,000 francs, and that the deficit for the present year amounts to no less than 1,000,000,000 francs.

[^1]: "We do not know how these sums were raised, but assuredly it has not been by taxation. We are told that four millions paid by the Bank of France for the renewal of its privileges have been spent, that five millions and a half of the Army Dotation Fund have been borrowed, and that securities of different kinds have been thrown into circulation. As to the present state of affairs, our Correspondent in Paris assures us that there is not money in the Treasury to pay the half-yearly dividends due next month. Such is the disastrous, the disgraceful state of French Finance, after ten years of brilliant and successful Imperialism, and it is only now, at a moment when it is unable to discharge its current obligations, that the French Government has taken the nation in some degree into its confidence and shown it a little of the reality that

[^2]: a Glorious exploit.— Ed. b "The extraordinary frankness of M. Fould", The Times, No. 24093, November 18, 1861, leading article.— Ed.



has lain hidden behind the glamorous phantasmagoria of the financial prosperity of which it has been so often assured. Nay, at this very moment the Revue des Deux Mondes is being prosecuted for making statements with regard to the financial position of France, the only fault of which is that they are far too rosy."

The Times goes on to enquire into the causes of this collapse. During the imperialist decade France's exports have more than doubled. Agriculture has developed along with industry, and the railway system with both. The credit system, only incipient before 1848, has shot up in all directions. All these developments did not arise from any decree of the Emperor's, but from the revolutionary changes in the world market since the discovery of gold in California and Australia. Then what has caused the catastrophe?

The Times mentions the extraordinary expenditures on the army and navy, the natural fruit of Louis Bonaparte's efforts to play Napoleon in Europe. It mentions the wars, and finally the gigantic outlays on public works in order to occupy the entre- preneurs and the proletariat and keep them in good humour.

"But," it continues, "all this is insufficient to account for this frightful deficit, the largest of which the history of manjcind furnishes us with an example To the aggressive military and naval armaments, public works, and occasional wars, has been added a shameless and universal system of pillage. A shower of gold has descended upon the Empire and its supporters. The enormous fortunes suddenly and unaccountably acquired have been the cause of scandal and wonder till scandal grew dumb and wonder weak from the frequency, indeed the universality, of the phenomenon. Modern France has taught us better to understand those passages in Juvenal's satires which treat suddenly acquired wealth as a crime against the people.3 The splendid mansions, the brilliant equipages, the enormous wastefulness of men who till the coup d'état notoriously starved, have been in every one's mouth. The Court has been conducted on a scale of almost incredible wastefulness. New palaces have arisen as by the wand of an enchanter, and the splendours of the ancien régimeh have been surpassed. Extravagance has had no limits but public money and public credit; the one is gone and the other shattered. This is what ten years of Imperialism have done for France."

The most important question for Europe is without doubt whether the imperialist finance system can be converted into a constitutional finance system, as the correspondence between Louis Bonaparte and Fould contemplates.0 What is involved here is not the momentary intentions of persons. It is the economic conditions for the life of the restored empire. The financial fraud

[^1]: a Juvenal, Satires, XIV, 173-78.— Ed. b The political and social system of France before the revolution of 1789.— Ed.

[^2]: c This refers to Napoleon Ill's message to A. Fould and the latter's "Mémoire à l'Empereur", published in Le Moniteur universel, No. 318, November 14, 1861.— Ed.





**[p. 84]**

We therefore called the coup d'éclat of November 14 a comedyb

from the outset, and did not doubt for a moment that this comedy had only two aims in view: remedying the immediate difficulty and — getting through the winter. Once these two goals had been achieved, the war bugles would blow in the spring and the attempt would be undertaken to make the war pay its own way this time. It should not be forgotten that up to now—and this was a necessary consequence of a merely simulated Napoleonism—Decembrist France has pfaid for all its glory out of the French state treasury.

After a brief period of wavering, the English press has arrived at the same conclusions with respect to the seriousness of the November 14 promises and the possibility of their being carried out.

Thus, The Times of to-day says in the leader cited above:

And its Stock Exchange article says:

[^1]: "The Emperor gives up the power of originating extraordinary credits. This is exactly one of those pieces of self-denying virtue which usually precede, but seldom survive, a new French loan."

[^2]: "Whether the financial sanctity suddenly adopted at the crisis of the Treasury sickness will outlast the fit for a long time after the Exchequer has been replenished and a new loan secured, is now the question Public opinion, it is asserted, will force the Emperor, whether he will or not, to carry out Fould's programme. Would it not be more correct to say that every one is prepared to accept this self-delusion, while army and navy contractors and speculators firmly rely on it that in the spring, after the present danger has been weathered, the

[^3]: Moniteur will find sufficient reasons, in 'the changed circumstances of Europe', or the necessity of rectifying something that somewhere threatens French honour, the Catholic faith, or the civilisation and liberty of the human race, for a recurrence to the old financial system, which can never be permanently abandoned in any

[^4]: a "And for life's sake, destroy the very basis of life" (Juvenal, Satires, VIII, 84).— Ed.

[^5]: b See this volume, pp. 79-81.— Ed.





**[p. 85]**

The Economist expresses itself similarly. It concludes its analysis with the following words:

"Despite the decree, political risk must still be the first thought of a man who looks to his dynasty as something which any incidental failure may uproot."b

So far, Louis Bonaparte has only exposed Europe to dangers because he himself has been continually exposed to danger in France. Is it believed that his danger to Europe will decrease to the same extent as the danger to himself in France increases? Only if the internal danger is given time to explode.

Written on November 18, 1861 Printed according to the news First published in Die Presse, No. 322, November 23, 1861 Published in English for the first time

[^1]: a "Money-Market and City Intelligence", The Times, No. 24093, November 18, 1861.— Ed.

[^2]: b "The Constitutional Change in France", The Economist, No. 951, November 16, 1861.— Ed.

[^3]: 8—1134





**[p. 86]**

Karl Marx

THE DISMISSAL OF FREMONT

Fremont's dismissal from the post of Commander-in-Chief in Missouri forms a turning point in the history of the development of the American Civil War. Fremont has two great sins to expiate. He was the first candidate of the Republican Party for the presidential office (1856), and he is the first general of the North to have threatened the slaveholders with emancipation of slaves (August 30, 1861).a He remains, therefore, a rival of candidates for the presidency in the future and an obstacle to the makers of compromises in the present.

During the last two decades the singular practice developed in the United States of not electing to the presidency any man who occupied an authoritative position in his own party. The names of such men, it is true, were utilised for election demonstrations, but as soon as it came to actual business, they were dropped and replaced by unknown mediocrities of merely local influence. In this manner Polk, Pierce, Buchanan, etc., became Presidents. Likewise Abraham Lincoln. General Andrew Jackson was in fact the last President of the United States who owed his office to his personal importance, whilst all his successors owed it, on the contrary, to their personal unimportance.

In the election year 1860, the most distinguished names of the Republican Party were Fremont and Seward. Known for his adventures during the Mexican War,104 for his intrepid explora- tion of California and his candidacy of 1856, Fremont was too striking a figure even to come under consideration as soon as it was no longer a question of a Republican demonstration, but of a

[^1]: a See this volume, pp. 51-52.— Ed.





**[p. 87]**

Republican success. He did not, therefore, stand as a candidate. It was otherwise with Seward, a Republican Senator in the Congress of Washington, Governor of the State of New York and, since the rise of the Republican Party, unquestionably its leading orator. It required a series of mortifying defeats to induce Mr. Seward to renounce his own candidacy and to give his oratorical patronage to the then more or less unknown Abraham Lincoln. As soon, however, as he saw his attempt to stand as a candidate fail, he imposed himself as a Republican Richelieu on a man whom he considered a Republican Louis XIII. He contributed towards making Lincoln President, on condition that Lincoln made him Secretary of State, an office which is in some measure comparable with that of a British Prime Minister. As a matter of fact, Lincoln was hardly President-elect, when Seward secured the Secretaryship of State. Immediately a singular change took place in the attitude of the Demosthenes of the Republican Party, whom the prophesy- ing of the "irrepressible conflict"3 between the system of free labour and the system of slavery had made famous.b Although elected on November 6, 1860, Lincoln took up office as President only on March 4, 1861. In the interval, during the winter session of Congress, Seward made himself the central figure of all attempts at compromise; the Northern organs of the South, such as the New-York Herald, for example, whose bête noire Seward had been till then, suddenly extolled him as the statesman of reconciliation and, indeed, it was not his fault that peace at any price was not achieved. Seward manifestly regarded the post of Secretary of State as a mere preliminary step, and busied himself less with the "irrepressible conflict" of the present than with the presidency of the future. He has provided fresh proof that virtuosos of the tongue are dangerously inadequate statesmen. Read his state dispatches! What a repulsive mixture of magnilo- quence and petty-mindedness, of simulated strength and real weakness!

For Seward, therefore, Fremont was the dangerous rival who had to be ruined; an undertaking that appeared so much the easier since Lincoln, in accordance with his legal tradition, has an aversion for all genius, anxiously clings to the letter of the Constitution and fights shy of every step that could mislead the "loyal" slaveholders of the border states. Fremont's character

[^1]: a Marx gives the English phrase.— Ed. b W. H. Seward [Speech at Rochester, October 25, 1858], New-York Daily Tribune, No. 5466, October 28, 1858.— Ed.

[^2]: 8*



offered another hold. He is manifestly a man of pathos, somewhat pompous and haughty, and not without a touch of the melodra- matic. First the government attempted to drive him to voluntary retirement by a succession of petty chicaneries. When this did not succeed, it deprived him of his command at the very moment when the army he himself had organised came face to face with the enemy in southwest Missouri and a decisive battle was imminent.

Fremont is the idol of the states of the Northwest, which sing his praises as the "pathfinder".3 They regard his dismissal as a personal insult. Should the Union government meet with a few more mishaps like those of Bull Run and Ball's Bluff,105 it has itself given the opposition, which will then rise up against it and smash the hitherto prevailing diplomatic system of waging war, its leader in John Fremont. We shall return later to the indictment of the dismissed generalb published by the War Department in Washington.

Written about November 19, 1861 Printed according to the news- paper First published in Die Presse, No. 325, November 26, 1861

[^1]: a Marx uses the English word.— Ed. b The reference is to Brigadier General A. Thomas's report on the investigation of General Fremont's activity as Commander of the Western military area, published in the New-York Daily Tribune, No. 6419, October 30, 1861.— Ed.





**[p. 89]**

Karl Marx

THE TRENT CASE1

London, November 28

The conflict of the English mail ship Trent with the North American warship San Jacinto in the narrow passage of the Old Bahama Channel is the lion among the events of the day. In the afternoon of November 27 the mail ship La Plata brought the news of the incident to Southampton, whence the electric telegraph at once flashed it to all parts of Great Britain. The same evening the London Stock Exchange was the stage of stormy scenes similar to those at the time of the announcement of the Italian war. Quotations for government stock sank 3/4 to 1 per cent. The wildest rumours circulated in London. The American Ambassador, Adams, was said to have been given his passports, an embargo to have been imposed on all American ships in the Thames, etc. At the same time a protest meeting of merchants was held at the Stock Exchange in Liverpool, to demand measures from the British Government for the satisfaction of the violated honour of the British flag. Every sound-minded Englishman went to bed with the conviction that he would go to sleep in a state of peace but wake up in a state of war.

Nevertheless, the fact is well-nigh categorically established that the conflict between the Trent and the San Jacinto brings no war in its train. The semi-official press, like The Times and The Morning Post, strikes a peaceful note and pours juridically cool deductions on the flickerings of passion.3 Papers like the Daily Telegraph, which at the faintest mot d'ordreb roar for the British

[^1]: a The reference is to the leading articles "It requires a strong effort", The Times, No. 24102, November 28, 1861 and "The Government of the United States has taken a step", The Morning Post, No. 27440, November 28, 1861.— Ed.

[^2]: b Watchword.— Ed.



It must be added that the event, if not the details of its enactment, was anticipated. On October 12, Messrs. Slidell, Confederacy emissary to France, and Mason, Confederacy emis- sary to England, together with their secretaries Eustis and Mac Farland, had run the blockade of Charleston on the steamship Theodora and sailed for Havana, there to seek the opportunity of a passage to Europe under the British flag. In England their arrival was expected daily. North American warships had set out from Liverpool to intercept the gentlemen, with their dispatches, on this side of the Atlantic Ocean. The British ministry had already submitted the question whether the North Americans were entitled to take such a step to its official jurisconsults for their opinion. Their answer is said to have been in the affirmative.

The legal question turns in a narrow circle. Since the foundation of the United States, North America has adopted British maritime law in all its rigour. A major principle of this maritime law is that all neutral merchantmen are subject to search by the belligerent parties.

The greatest American authority, Kent, states in the same sense:

It was not opposition to the right of search, as is sometimes erroneously suggested, that brought about the Anglo-American War of 1812 to 1814.107 Rather, America declared war because England unlawfully presumed to search even American warships, on the pretext of catching deserters from the British Navy.

The San Jacinto, therefore, had the right to search the Trent and to confiscate any contraband stowed aboard her. That dispatches in the possession of Mason, Slidell and Co. come under

[^1]: "This right," said Lord Stowell in a judgment which has become famous, "offers the sole security that no contraband is carried on neutral ships." b

[^2]: "The right of self-preservation gives belligerent nations this right. The doctrine of the English admiralty on the right of visitation and search has been recognised in its fullest extent by the courts of justice in this country."0

[^3]: a Marx uses the English expression here and below, and gives the German translation in brackets in the first case.— Ed.

[^4]: b Quoted from the leading article "It requires a strong effort", The Times, No. 24102, November 28, 1861.— Ed.

[^5]: c Ibidem; The Times quotes from J. Kent's book Commentaries on American Law—Ed.





**[p. 91]**

The political aspect of the North American procedure was estimated quite correctly by The Times in these words:

And is not the Confederacy already represented in London by Messrs. Yancey and Mann?

We regard this latest operation of Mr. Seward as a characteristic act of tactlessness by self-conscious weakness simulating strength. If the naval incident hastens Seward's removal from the Washing- ton Cabinet, the United States will have no reason to record it as an "untoward event" in the annals of its Civil War.

[^1]: "Even Mr. Seward himself must know that the voices of the Southern commissioners, sounding from their captivity, are a thousand times more eloquent in London and in Paris than they would have been if they had been heard in St. James's and the Tuileries."0

[^2]: Written on November 28, 1861 Printed according to the news- paper First published in Die Presse, No. 331, December 2, 1861

[^3]: a F. Th. Pratt, Law of Contraband of War, London, 1856, pp. LIV-LV.— Ed. b Th. Jefferson, Memoirs, Correspondence, and Private Papers, Vol. Ill, London, 1829, p. 488.— Ed.

[^4]: c "It requires a strong effort".— Ed.





**[p. 92]**

Karl Marx

THE ANGLO-AMERICAN CONFLICT110

London, November 29

The law officers of the Crown3 had yesterday to give their opinion on the naval incident in the Bahama Channel.b Their records of the case consisted of the written reports of the British officers who have remained on board the Trent and of the oral testimony of Commodore Williams, who was on board the Trent as Admiralty agent, but disembarked from the steamer La Plata on November 27 at Southampton, whence he was immediately summoned by telegraph to London. The law officers of the Crown acknowledged the right of the San Jacinto to visit and search the Trent. Since Queen Victoria's proclamation of neutrality on the outbreak of the American Civil War0 expressly lists dispatches among articles of contraband,0 there could be no doubt on this point either. There remained, then, the question whether Messrs. Mason, Slidell and Co. were themselves contraband and therefore confiscable. The law officers of the Crown appear to hold this view, for they have dropped the material legal question entirely. According to the report of The Times* their opinion blames the commander of the San Jacinto{ only for an error in procedure. Instead of Messrs. Mason, Slidell and Co., he should have taken

[^1]: a The Attorney-General and the Solicitor-General. At the time, the posts were held by R. Palmer and W. Atherton.— Ed.

[^2]: b See this volume, pp. 89-91.— Ed. c Victoria, R. A Proclamation [May 13, 1861], The Times, No. 23933, May 15, 1861.— Ed.

[^3]: d See this volume, pp. 105-107.— Ed. e "Wherever two or three men met together yesterday", The Times, No. 24103, November 29, 1861, leading article.— Ed.

[^4]: f Ch. Wilkes.— Ed.



the Trent herself in tow as a prize, brought her to the nearest American port and there submitted her to the judgment of a North American prize court.1" This is incontestably the procedure corresponding to British and therefore to North American maritime law.

It is equally incontestable that the British frequently violated this rule during the anti-Jacobin war and proceeded in the summary fashion of the San Jacinto. However that may be, the whole conflict is reduced by this opinion of the law officers of the Crown to a technical error and consequently deprived of any immediate import. Two circumstances make it easy for the Union govern- ment to accept this point of view and therefore to afford formal satisfaction. In the first place, Captain Wilkes, the commander of the San Jacinto, could have received no direct instructions from Washington. On the voyage home from Africa to New York, he called on November 2 at Havana, which he left again on November 4, whilst his encounter with the Trent took place on the high seas on November 8. Captain Wilkes's stay of only two days in Havana did not permit any exchange of notes between him and his government. The consul of the Uniona was the only American authority with whom he could deal. In the second place, however, he had obviously lost his head, as his failure to insist on the surrender of the dispatches proves.

The importance of the incident lies in its moral effect on the English people and in the political capital that can easily be made out of it by the British cotton friends of secession. Characteristic of the latter is the Liverpool protest meeting organised by them and previously mentioned by me.b The meeting took place on November 27 at three in the afternoon, in the cotton auction- rooms of the Liverpool Exchange, an hour after the alarming telegram from Southampton had arrived.

After vain attempts to press the chairmanship on Mr. Cunard, the owner of the Cunard steamships laying between Liverpool and New York, and other high trade officials, a young merchant named Spence, notorious for a work he wrote in support of the slave republic,0 took the chair. Contrary to the rules of English meetings, he, the chairman, himself proposed the motion to

[^1]: "call upon the government to assert the dignity of the British flag by requiring prompt reparation for this outrage".d

[^2]: a Charles J. Helm.— Ed. b See this volume, p. 89.— Ed. c J. Spence, The American Union, London, 1861.— Ed. d "Liverpool, Wednesday", The Times, No. 24102, November 28, 1861.— Ed.





**[p. 94]**

Tremendous applause, clapping and cheers upon cheers! The main argument of the opening speaker for the slave republic was that slave ships had hitherto been protected by the American flag from the right of search claimed by Britain. And then this philanthropist launched a furious attack on the slave trade! He admitted that England had brought about the war of 1812-14 with the United States by insisting on searching Union warships for deserters from the British Navy.

"But," he continued with wonderful dialectic, "there is a difference between the right of search to recover deserters from the British Navy and the right to seize passengers, like Mr. Mason and Mr. Slidell, men of the highest respectability, regardless of the fact that they were protected by the British flag!"

He played his highest trump, however, at the close of his diatribe.

"The other day," he bellowed, "while I was on the European Continent, I heard observations made as to our conduct in regard to the United States which made me blush. What is the feeling of every intelligent man upon the Continent? That we would slavishly submit to any outrage and suffer every indignity offered to us by the Government of the United States. What could I reply to this? I could only blush. But the pitcher goes so often to the well that it is broken at last. Our patience had been exercised long enough—as long as it was possible to control it. At last we have arrived at facts [!]: this is a very hard and startling fact [!] and it is the duty of every Englishman to apprise the Government of how strong and unanimous is the feeling of this great community of the outrage offered to our flag."

This senseless rigmarole was greeted with a peal of applause. Opposing voices were howled down and hissed down and stamped down. To the remark of a Mr. Campbell that the whole meeting was "irregular", the inexorable Spence replied: "So may it be, but the fact that we have met to consider is rather an irregular fact." To the proposal of a Mr. Turner to adjourn the meeting to the following day, in order that "the city of Liverpool can have its say and not a clique of cotton brokers usurp its name", cries of "Collar him, throw him out!" resounded from all sides. Unper- turbed, Mr. Turner repeated his motion, which, however, was not put to the vote, again contrary to all the rules of English meetings. Spence triumphed. But, as a matter of fact, nothing has done more to cool London's temper than the news of Mr. Spence's triumph.

[^1]: Written on November 29, 1861

[^2]: First published in Die Presse, No. 332, December 3, 1861

[^3]: Printed according to the news- paper





**[p. 95]**

Karl Marx

THE NEWS AND ITS EFFECT IN LONDON

London, Nov. 30, 1861

Since the declaration of war against Russia I never witnessed an excitement throughout all the strata of English society equal to that produced by the news of the Trent affair, conveyed to Southampton by the La Plata on the 27th inst. At about 2 o'clock p.m., by means of the electric telegraph, the announcement of the "untoward event" was posted in the news-rooms of all the British Exchanges. All commercial securities went down, while the price of saltpeter went up. Consols declined 3/4 per cent, while at Lloyds 112 war risks of five guineas were demanded on vessels from New-York. Late in the evening the wildest rumors circulated in London, to the effect that the American Minister3 had forthwith been sent his passports, that orders had been issued for the immediate seizure of all American ships in the ports of the United Kingdom, and so forth. The cotton friends of Secession at Liverpool improved the opportunity for holding, at ten minutes' notice, in the cotton salesroom of the Stock Exchange, an indignation meeting, under the presidency of Mr. Spence, the author of some obscure pamphlet in the interest of the Southern Confederacy.0 Commodore Williams, the Admiralty Agent on board the Trent, who had arrived with the La Plata, was at once summoned to London.

On the following day, the 28th of November, the London press exhibited, on the whole, a tone of moderation strangely contrast- ing with the tremendous political and mercantile excitement of the previous evening. The Palmerston papers, Times, Morning Post,

[^1]: a Ch. Adams.— Ed. b J. Spence, The American Union, London, 1861.— Ed.





**[p. 96]**

Daily Telegraph, Morning Advertiser, and Sun, had received orders to calm down rather than to exasperate. The Daily News, by its strictures on the conduct of the San Jacinto, evidently aimed less at hitting the Federal Government than clearing itself of the suspicion of "Yankee prejudices," while The Morning Star, John Bright's organ, without passing any judgment on the policy and wisdom of the "act," pleaded its lawfulness. There were only two exceptions to the general tenor of the London press. The Tory-scribblers of The Morning Herald and The Standard, forming in fact one paper under different names, gave full vent to their savage satisfaction of having at last caught the "republicans" in a trap, and finding a casus belli, ready cut out. They were supported by but one other journal, The Morning Chronicle, which for years had tried to prolong its checkered existence by alternately selling itself to the poisoner Palmer and the Tuileries.113 The excitement on the Exchange greatly subsided in consequence of the pacific tone of the leading London papers. On the same 28th of Nov., Commander Williams attended at the Admiralty, and reported the circumstances of the occurrence in the old Bahama Channel. His report, together with the written depositions of the officers on board the Trent, were at once submitted to the law officers of the Crown,a whose opinion, late in the evening, was officially brought under the notice of Lord Palmerston, Earl Russell and other members of the Government.

On the 29th of November there was to be remarked some slight change in the tone of the ministerial press. It became known that the law officers of the Crown, on a technical ground, had declared the proceedings of the frigate San Jacinto illegal, and that later in the day, the Cabinet, summoned to a general council, had decided to send by next steamer to Lord Lyons instructions to conform to the opinion of the English law officers. Hence the excitement in the principal places of business, such as the Stock Exchange, Lloyd's, the Jerusalem, the Baltic,114 etc., set in with redoubled force, and was further stimulated by the news that the projected shipments to America of saltpeter had been stopped on the previous day, and that on the 29th a general order was received at the Custom-House prohibiting the exportation of this article to any country except under certain stringent conditions. The English funds further fell 3/4, and at one time a real panic prevailed in all the stock markets, it having become impossible to transact any business in some securities, while in all descriptions a

[^1]: a R. Palmer and W. Atherton.— Ed.



On the 30th of November (to-day) all the London papers, with the single exception of The Morning Star, put the alternative of reparation by the Washington Cabinet or—war.

Having summed up the history of the events from the arrival of the La Plata to the present day, I shall now proceed to recording opinions. There were, of course, two points to be considered—on the one hand the law, on the other hand the policy, of the seizure of the Southern Commissioners3 on board an English mail steamer.

As to the legal aspect of the affair, the first difficulty mooted by the Tory press and The Morning Chronicle was that the United States had never recognized the Southern Secessionists as belliger- ents, and, consequently, could not claim belligerent rights in regard to them.

This quibble was at once disposed of by the Ministerial press itself.

"We," said The Times, "have already recognized these Confederate States as a belligerent power, and we shall, when the time comes, recognize their Government. Therefore we have imposed on ourselves all the duties and inconveniences of a power neutral between two belligerents."15

Hence, whether or not the United States recognize the Confederates as belligerents, they have the right to insist upon England submitting to all the duties and inconveniences of a neutral in maritime warfare.

Consequently, with the exceptions mentioned, the whole Lon- don press acknowledges the right of the San Jacinto to overhaul, visit, and search the Trent, in order to ascertain whether she carried goods or persons belonging to the category of "contraband of war." The Times's insinuation that the English law of decisions115 "was given under circumstances very different from those which now occur;" that "steamers did not then exist," and mail vessels, "carrying letters wherein all the nations of the world have immediate interest, were unknown;" that "we (the English) were fighting for existence, and did in those days what we should not allow others to do," was not seriously thrown out. Palmerston's private

[^1]: a J. Mason and J. Slidell.— Ed. b "It requires a strong effort", The Times, No. 24102, November 28, 1861, leading article.— Ed.





**[p. 98]**

In the second instance, the question arose whether by firing a round shot across the bows of the Trent, and subsequently throwing a shell, bursting close to her, the San Jacinto had not violated the usages and courtesies appurtenant to the exercise of the right of visitation and search. It was generally conceded by the London press that, since the details of the event have till now been only ascertained by the depositions of one of the parties concerned, no such minor question could influence the decision to be arrived at by the British Government.

The right of search, exercised by the San Jacinto, thus being conceded, what had she to look for? For contraband of war, presumed to be conveyed by the Trent. What is contraband of war? Are the dispatches of a belligerent Government contraband of war? Are the persons carrying those dispatches contraband of war? And, both questions being answered in the affirmative, do those dispatches and the bearers of them continue to be contraband of war, if found on a merchant ship bound from a neutral port to a neutral port? The London press admits that the decisions of the highest legal authorities on both sides of the Atlantic are so contradictory, and may be claimed with such appearance of justice for both the affirmative and the negative, that, at all events, a prima faciec case is made out for the San Jacinto.

Concurrently with this prevalent opinion of the English press, the English Crown lawyers have altogether dropped the material question, and only taken up the formal question. They assert that the law of nations was not violated in substance, but in form only. They have arrived at the conclusion that the San Jacinto failed in seizing, on her own responsibility, the Southern Commissioners,

[^1]: a "The Government of the United States has taken a step", The Morning Post, No. 27440, November 28, 1861.— Ed.

[^2]: b "It requires a strong effort".— Ed. c Plausible.— Ed.



"If the case is not so clearly in our favor as that a decision in the American Court condemning the vessel would have been liable to be questioned by us as manifestly contrary to the laws of nations, then the irregularity of the American Captain3 in allowing the Trent to proceed to Southampton, clearly redounded to the advantage of the British owners and the British passengers. Could we in such a case find a ground of international quarrel in an error of procedure which in effect told in our own favor?" b

Still, if the American Government must concede, as it seems to me, that Capt. Wilkes has committed a violation of maritime law, whether formal or material, their fair fame and their interest ought alike to prevent them from nibbling at the terms of the satisfaction to be given to the injured party. They ought to remember that they do the work of the Secessionists in embroiling the United States in a war with England, that such a war would be a godsend to Louis Bonaparte in his present difficulties, and would, consequently, be supported by all the official weight of France; and, lastly, that, what with the actual force under the command of the British on the North American and West Indian stations, what with the forces of the Mexican Expedition,0 the English Government would have at its disposal an overwhelming maritime power.

As to the policy of the seizure in the Bahama Channel, the voice not only of the English but of the European press is unanimous in expressions of bewilderment at the strange conduct of the

[^1]: a Ch. Wilkes.— Ed. b Justitia, "To the Editor of The Times", The Times, No. 24104, November 30, 1861.— Ed.

[^2]: c See pp. 71-78 of this volume.— Ed.





**[p. 100]**

"Even Mr. Seward himself must know that the voices of these Southern Commissioners, sounding from their captivity, are a thousand times more eloquent in London and in Paris than they would have been if they had been heard at St. James's and the Tuileries."3

The people of the United States having magnanimously submitted to a curtailment of their own liberties in order to save their country, will certainly be no less ready to turn the tide of popular opinion in England by openly avowing, and carefully making up for, an international blunder the vindication of which might realize the boldest hopes of the rebels.

Written on November 30, 1861 Reproduced from the newspaper

First published in the New-York Daily Tribune, No. 6462, December 19, 1861

[^1]: a "It requires a strong effort", The Times, No. 24102, November 28, 1861, leading article.— Ed.





**[p. 101]**

Karl Marx

THE PRINCIPAL ACTORS IN THE TRENT DRAMA117

London, December 4

At the present moment it is of interest to get acquainted in some measure with the leading figures in the Trent drama. On one side stands the active hero, Captain Wilkes, the commander of the San Jacinto; on the other, the passive heroes, /. M. Mason and John Slidell. Captain Charles Wilkes is a direct descendant of the brother of the celebrated English demagogue, [John] Wilkes, who threatened for a moment to shake the throne of George III.118

The struggle with the North American colonies saved the Hanoverian dynasty at that time from the outbreak of an English revolution, symptoms of which were alike perceptible in the cry of a Wilkes and the letters of a Junius. Captain Wilkes, born in New York in 1798, forty-three years in the service of the American navy, commanded the squadron that from 1838 to 1842 explored the North and South Pacific Ocean by order of the Union government. He has published a report on this expedition in five volumes.3 He is also the author of a work on Western America, which contains some valuable information on California and the Oregon district.0 It is now certain that Wilkes improvised his coup

de mainc independently and without instructions from Wash- ington.

The two intercepted commissioners of the Southern Confedera- cy— Messrs. Mason and Slidell—form a contrast in every respect. Mason, born in 1798, is descended from one of those old

[^1]: a Ch. Wilkes, Narrative of the United States Exploring Expedition, Vols. I-V, Philadelphia, 1845.— Ed.

[^2]: b Ch. Wilkes, Western America, including California and Oregon, Philadelphia, 1849.— Ed.

[^3]: c An impetuous and unexpected attack.— Ed.

[^4]: 9—1134





**[p. 102]**

Mason inherited influence; Slidell acquired it. The two men found and supplemented each other in the American Senate, the bulwark of the slave oligarchy. In accordance with the American Constitution, the Senate elects a special Committee of Foreign Relations, which plays about the same role as the Privy Council0 12° formerly played in England, before the so-called Cabinet, a quantity theoretically unknown to the English Constitution, usurped the Privy Council's functions. Mason was for a long time chairman of this committee; Slidell, a prominent member of it.

Mason, firmly convinced that every Virginian is a demi-god and every Yankee a plebeian rascal, never sought to conceal his contempt for his Northern colleagues. Haughty, overbearing,

[^1]: a G. Mason.— Ed. b Marx uses the English expression and gives the German translation in parenthesis.— Ed.

[^2]: c Marx uses the English words "tallow-chandlers" and gives the German translation in parenthesis.— Ed.

[^3]: d Marx gives the English name in brackets after its German equivalent.— Ed.





**[p. 103]**

Whilst Mason played the Jupiter Tonans* of the slave oligarchy on the proscenium, Slidell worked behind the scenes. With a rare talent for intrigue, tireless perseverance and an unscrupulous lack of regard, but at the same time wary, covert, never strutting, but always insinuating himself, Slidell was the soul of the Southern conspiratorial conclave. One may judge the man's repute from the fact that when in 1845, shortly before the outbreak of war with Mexico, he was sent there as Ambassador, Mexico refused to treat with such an individual.121 Slidell's intrigues made Polk President. He was one of the most pernicious counsellors of President Pierce and the evil genius of Buchanan's administration. The two, Mason and Slidell, were the chief sponsors of the law on runaway slaves 122; they brought about the bloodbath in Kansas,123 and both were wirepullers for the measures whereby Buchanan's administ- ration smuggled all the means to secession into the hands of the South, whilst it left the North defenceless.124

As early as 1855 Mason declared on a public occasion in South Carolina that "for the South only one way lies open—immediate, absolute and eternal separation".0 In March 1861 he declared in the Senate that "he owed the Union government no allegiance",c

but retained his seat in the Senate and continued to draw his senatorial salary as long as the safety of his person allowed—a spy in the supreme council of the nation and a fraudulent parasite on the public exchequer.

Mason's great-grandmother was a daughter of the celebrated Sir William Temple. He is therefore a distant relative of Palmerston.

[^1]: a Jupiter the thunderer.— Ed. b J. M. Mason [Statement urging the separation of the South], New-York Times, October 14, 1856.— Ed.

[^2]: c J. M. Mason [Speech in the Senate on March 11, 1861], The New-York Daily Tribune, No. 6202, March 12, 1861. In quoting, Marx uses the English word "allegiance" and gives the translation in brackets.— Ed.

[^3]: 9*





**[p. 104]**

Written on December 4, 1861

First published in Die Presse, No. 337, December 8, 1861

Printed according to the news- paper



**[p. 105]**

Karl Marx

[CONTROVERSY OVER THE TRENT CASE]125

London, December 7

The Palmerston press—and on another occasion I will show that in foreign affairs Palmerston's control over nine-tenths of the English press is just as absolute as Louis Bonaparte's over nine-tenths of the French press3—the Palmerston press feels that it works among "pleasing hindrances".15 On the one hand, it admits that the law officers of the Crown0 have reduced the accusation against the United States to a mere mistake in procedure, to a technical error. On the other hand, it boasts that on the basis of such a legal quibble a compelling ultimatum has been presented to the United States, such as can only be justified by a gross violation of law, but not by a formal error in the exercise of a recognised right. Accordingly, the Palmerston press now pleads the question of material right again. The great importance of the case appears to demand a brief examination of the question of material right.

By way of introduction, it may be observed that not a single English paper ventures to reproach the San Jacinto for the visi- tation and search of the Trent. This point, therefore, falls out- side the controversy.

First, we again call to mind the relevant passage in Queen Victoria's proclamation of neutrality of May 13, 1861. The passage reads:

[^1]: "Victoria R. "As we are at peace with the United States we warn all our beloved subjects to abstain from contravening our Proclamation by breaking the legally

[^2]: a See this volume, pp. 127-30.— Ed. b Heinrich Heine, "Neuer Frühling", Prolog.— Ed. c R. Palmer and W. Atherton.— Ed.





**[p. 106]**

This proclamation of Queen Victoria, therefore, in the first place declares dispatches to be contraband and makes the ship that carries such contraband liable to the "penalties of the law of nations". What are these penalties?

Wheaton, an American writer on international law whose authority is recognised on both sides of the Atlantic Ocean alike, says in his Elements of International Law, p. 565b:

"The carrying of dispatches of the enemy subjects the neutral vessel in which they are transported to capture and confiscation. The consequences of such a service are infinitely beyond the effect of conveying ordinary contraband As Sir W. Scott, the English judge, says, the carrying of military stores is necessarily of limited nature, while the carrying of dispatches is an act that may defeat the entire plan of campaign of the other belligerent The confiscation of the noxious article, which constitutes the usual penalty for contraband, would be ridiculous when applied to dispatches. There would be no freight dependent on their transporta- tion. Therefore, their confiscation does not affect the shipowner and hence does not punish the ship carrying them. The vehicle, in which they are carried, must, therefore, be confiscated."

Walker, in his Introduction to American Law, says:

Kent, who is accounted a decisive authority in English courts, states in his Commentaries:

Dr. Robert Phillimore, Advocate of Her Majesty in Her Office of Admiralty,0 says in his latest work on international law, p. 370:

[^1]: "Neutrals may not be concerned in bearing hostile dispatches, under the penalty of confiscation of the vehicle, and of the cargo also."

[^2]: "If, on search of a ship, it is found that she carries enemy dispatches, she incurs the penalty of capture and of confiscation by judgment of a prize court."

[^3]: "Official communications from an official person d on the affairs of a-belligerent Government are such dispatches as impress an hostile character upon the carriers of them. The mischievous consequences of such a service cannot be estimated, and extend far beyond the effect of any Contraband that can be conveyed, for it is manifest that by the carriage of such dispatches the most important plans of a

[^4]: a Here and below Marx quotes from the article "The Capture of Mason and Slidell", New-York Daily Tribune, No. 6435, November 18, 1861.— Ed.

[^5]: b Here and below Marx gives the English titles of the books and the German translation in brackets.— Ed.

[^6]: c Marx gives the English designation and supplies the German translation in brackets.— Ed.

[^7]: d Marx gives the English words "official" and, below, "carriers" in brackets after their German equivalents.— Ed.





**[p. 107]**

Two points are therefore established. Queen Victoria's procla- mation of May 13, 1861, subjects English ships that carry dispatches of the Confederacy to the penalties of international law. International law, according to its English and American interpre- ters, imposes the penalty of capture and confiscation on such ships.

Palmerston's organs consequently lied on orders from above— and we were naive enough to believe their lie—in affirming that the captain of the San Jacinto had neglected to seek for dispatches on the Trent and therefore had of course found none; and that the Trent had consequently become shot-proof through this oversight. The American journals of November 17 to 20, which could not yet have been aware of the English lie, unanimously state, on the contrary, that the dispatches had been seized and were already in print for submission to Congress in Washington. This changes the whole state of affairs. Because of these dispatches, the San Jacinto had the right to take the Trent in tow and every American prize court had the duty to confiscate her and her cargo. With the Trent, her passengers also naturally came within the pale of American jurisdiction.

Messrs. Mason, Slidell and Co., as soon as the Trent had touched at Monroe, came under American jurisdiction as rebels. If, therefore, instead of towing the Trent herself to an American port, the captain of the San Jacinto contented himself with seizing the dispatches and their bearers, he in no way worsened the position of Mason, Slidell and Co., whilst, on the other hand, his error in procedure benefited the Trent, her cargo and her passengers. And it would be indeed unprecedented if Britain wished to declare war on the United States because Captain Wilkes committed an error in procedure harmful to the United States, but profitable to Britain.

The question whether Mason, Slidell and Co. were themselves contraband, was only raised and could only be raised because the Palmerston journals had broadcast the lie that Captain Wilkes had neither searched for dispatches, nor seized dispatches. For in this case Mason, Slidell and Co. in fact constituted the sole objects on the ship Trent that could possibly fall under the category of contraband. Let us, however, disregard this aspect for the moment. Queen Victoria's proclamation designates "officers'^ of a belligerent party as contraband. Are "officers" merely military

[^1]: a R. Phillimore, Commentaries upon International Law.— Ed. b Here and further on Marx uses the English word.— Ed.





**[p. 108]**

According to the usage of the English language, therefore, Mason, Slidell and Co., these emissaries, id est, officials of the Confederacy, come under the category of "officers", whom the royal proclamation declares to be contraband. The Trent captain knew them in this capacity and therefore rendered himself, his ship and his passengers confiscable. If, according to Phillimore and all other authorities, a ship becomes confiscable as the carrier0

of an enemy dispatch because it violates neutrality, in a still higher degree is this true of the person who carries the dispatches. According to Wheaton, even an enemy ambassador, so long as he is in transitu, may be intercepted. In general, however, the basis of all international law is that any member of the belligerent party may be regarded and treated as "belligerent" by the opposing party.

"So long as a man," says Vattel, "continues to be a citizen of his own country, he is the enemy of all those with whom his nation is at war."c

One sees, therefore, that the law officers of the English Crown reduced the point of contention to a mere error in procedure, not an error in re,d but an error in forma,e because, actually, no violation of material right is to hand. The Palmerston organs chatter about the question of material right again because a mere error in procedure, in the interest of the "Trent" at that, gives no plausible pretext for a haughty-toned ultimatum.

Meanwhile, important voices have been raised in this sense from diametrically opposite sides: on the one side, Messrs. Bright and Cobden; on the other, David Urquhart. These men are enemies on grounds of principle and personally: the first two, peaceable cosmopolitans; the third, the "last of the Englishmen"™; the former always ready to sacrifice all international law to international trade; the other hesitating not a moment: "Fiat justitia, pereat mundus",1 and by "justice" he understands "English" justice. The

[^1]: a Marx gives the definition in English.— Ed. b Marx uses the English word and gives the German translation in brackets.— Ed.

[^2]: c E. de Vattel, Le Droit des gens, Tome II, livre III, chapitre V, § 71.— Ed. d In substance.— Ed. e In form.— Ed. f Let justice be done, though the world perish.— Ed.





**[p. 109]**

The usual newspaper sources will communicate Bright's speech in support of the United States and Cobden's letter, which is conceived in the same sense.3 Therefore I will not dwell on them.

Urquhart's organ, The Free Press, states in its latest issue, published on December 4:

"'We must bombard New York!' Such were the frantic sounds which met the ears of every one who traversed the streets of London on the evening of this day week, on the arrival of the intelligence of a trifling warlike incident. The act was one which, in every war, England has committed as a matter of course—namely, the seizure on board of a neutral of the persons and property of her enemies."

The Free Press further argues that, in 1856 at the Congress of Paris, Palmerston, without any authority from the Crown or Parliament, sacrificed English maritime law in the interest of Russia, and then says:

"In order to justify this sacrifice, Palmerston's organs stated at that time that if we maintained the right of visitation and search, we should assuredly be involved in a war with the United States on the occasion of the first war in Europe. And now he calls on us through the same organs of public opinion to bombard New York because the United States act on those laws which are theirs no less than our own."11

With regard to the utterances of the "organs of public opinion", The Free Press remarks:

Then humorously, it places side by side, in "strophe" and "antistrophe", the contradictions by which the English press seeks to convict the United States of a "breach of law".

[^1]: "The bray of Baron Munchausen's thawing post-horn was nothing to the clangour of the British press on the capture of Messrs. Mason and Slidell. " c

[^2]: Written on December 7, 1861 Printed according to the news- paper First published in Die Presse, No. 340, December 11, 1861

[^3]: a J. Bright's speech and R. Cobden's letter were reported in the note, "Mr. Bright on America", The Times, No. 24109, December 6, 1861.— Ed.

[^4]: b Here and above Marx quotes from the article, " 'We must bombard New York!' Such were", The Free Press, No. 12, December 4, 1861.— Ed.

[^5]: ' "'Public Opinion' on the San Jacinto Affair", The Free Press, same issue.— Ed.





**[p. 110]**

Karl Marx

PROGRESS OF FEELING IN ENGLAND

London, Dec. 7, 1861

The friends of the United States on this side of the Atlantic anxiously hope that conciliatory steps will be taken by the Federal Government. They do so not from a concurrence in the frantic crowing of the British press over a war incident, which, according to the English Crown lawryers themselves, resolves itself into a mere error of procedure, and may be summed up in the words that there has been a breach of international law, because Capt. Wilkes, instead of taking the Trent, her cargo, her passengers, and the Commissioners,3 did only take the Commissioners. Nor springs the anxiety of the well-wishers of the Great Republic from an apprehension lest, in the long run, it should not prove able to cope with England, although backed by the civil war; and, least of all, do they expect the United States to abdicate, even for a moment, and in a dark hour of trial, the proud position held by them in the council of nations. The motives that prompt them are of quite a different nature.

In the first instance, the business next in hand for the United States is to crush the rebellion and to restore the Union. The wish uppermost in the minds of the Slaveocracy and their Northern tools was always to plunge the United States into a war with England. The first step of England as soon as hostilities broke out would be to recognize the Southern Confederacy, and the second to terminate the blockade. Secondly, no general, if not forced, will accept battle at the time and under the conditions chosen by his enemy.

[^1]: a J. Mason and J. Slidell.— Ed.





**[p. 111]**

The very reasons accounting for the eagerness of England to seize upon any decent pretext for war at this "only moment" ought to withhold the United States from forwarding such a pretext at this "only moment." You go not to war with the aim to do your enemy "the minimum of harm, " and, even to confer upon him by the war, "an incidental and partial compensation. " The opportunity of the moment would all be on one side, on the side of your foe. Is there any great strain of reasoning wanted to prove that an internal war raging in a State is the least opportune time for entering upon a foreign war? At every other moment the mercantile classes of Great Britain would have looked upon a war against the United States with the utmost horror. Now, on the contrary, a large and influential party of the mercantile communi- ty has for months been urging on the Government to violently break the blockade, and thus provide the main branch of British industry with its raw material. The fear of a curtailment of the English export trade to the United States has lost its sting by the curtailment of that trade having already actually occurred. "They" (the Northern States), says The Economist, "are wretched customers, instead of good ones." The vast credit usually given by English commerce to the United States, principally by the acceptance of bills drawn from China and India, has been already reduced to scarcely a fifth of what it was in 1857. Last, not least, Decembrist France, bankrupt, paralyzed at home, beset with difficulty abroad, pounces upon an Anglo-American war as a real godsend, and, in order to buy English support in Europe, will strain all her power to support "Perfidious Albion" on the other side of the Atlantic. Read only the French newspapers. The pitch of indignation to which they have wrought themselves in their tender care for the "honor of England," their fierce diatribes as to the necessity on the part of England to revenge the outrage on the Union Jack, their vile denunciations of everything American, would be truly appalling, if they were not ridiculous and disgusting at the same time. Lastly, if the United States give way in this instance, they will not derogate one iota of their dignity. England has reduced her complaint to a mere error of procedure, a technical blunder of which

[^1]: a "The Effect of an American War upon English Commerce", The Economist, No. 954, December 7, 1861.—Ed.





**[p. 112]**

Since this day week, when I sent you my last letter,d British consols have again lowered, the decline, compared with last Friday, amounting to 2 per cent, the present prices being 893/4 to 7Is for money and 90 to 90 Vs for the new account on the 9th of January. This quotation corresponds to the quotation of the British consols during the first two years of the Anglo-Russian war.e This decline is altogether due to the warlike interpretation put upon the American papers conveyed by the last mail, to the exacerbating tone of the London press, whose moderation of two days' standing was but a feint, ordered by Palmerston, to the dispatch of troops for Canada, to the proclamation forbidding the export of arms and materials for gunpowderf and lastly, to the

[^1]: a J. Madison, To the Senate and House of Representatives of the United States [Washington, June 1, 1812].— Ed.

[^2]: b Ch. Wilkes.— Ed. c A Treaty of Peace and Amity between his Britannic Majesty and the United States of America; signed at Ghent, December 24, 1814.— Ed.

[^3]: d See this volume, pp. 95-100.— Ed. e The Crimean War of 1853-56— Ed. f Victoria, R., A Proclamation [December 4, 1861], The Times, No. 24108, December 5, 1861.— Ed.





**[p. 113]**

Of one thing you may be sure, Palmerston wants a legal pretext for a war with the United States, but meets in the Cabinet councils with a most determinate opposition on the part of Messrs. Gladstone and Milner Gibson, and, to a less degree, of Sir Cornwall Lewis. "The noble viscount" is backed by Russell, an abject tool in his hands, and the whole Whig Coterie. If the Washington Cabinet should furnish the desired pretext, the present Cabinet will be sprung, to be supplanted by a Tory Administration. The preliminary steps for such a change of scenery have been already settled between Palmerston and Disraeli. Hence the furious war-cry of The Morning Herald and The Standard, those hungry wolves howling at the prospect of the long-missed crumbs from the public almoner.

Palmerston's designs may be shown up by calling into memory a few facts. It was he who insisted upon the proclamation, acknowledging the Secessionists as belligerents, on the morning of the 14th of May, after he had been informed by telegraph from Liverpool that Mr. Adams would arrive at London on the night of the 13th May. He, after a severe struggle with his colleagues, dispatched 3,000 men to Canada, an army ridiculous, if intended to cover a frontier of 1,500 miles, but a clever sleight-of-hand if the rebellion was to be cheered, and the Union to be irritated. He, many weeks ago, urged Bonaparte to propose a joint armed intervention "in the internecine struggle," supported that project in the Cabinet council, and failed only in carrying it by the resistance of his colleagues. He and Bonaparte then resorted to the Mexican intervention as a pis aller? That operation served two purposes, by provoking just resentment on the part of the Americans, and by simultaneously furnishing a pretext for the dispatch of a squadron, ready, as The Morning Post has it, "to perform whatever duty the hostile conduct of the Government of Washington may require us to perform in the waters of the Northern Atlantic."b At the time when that expedition was started, The Morning Post, together with The Times and the smaller fry of Palmerston's press slaves, said that it was a very fine thing, and a philanthropic thing into the bargain, because it would expose the slaveholding Confederation to two fires—the Anti-

[^1]: a The last means.— Ed. b "We are glad to be able to inform our readers", The Morning Post, No. 27442, November 30, 1861.— Ed.





**[p. 114]**

"We must look to this intervention as one that may be in operation during a considerable period of time; and while the Northern Government is too distant to admit of its attitude entering materially into this question, the Southern Confederation, on the other hand, stretches for a great distance along the frontier of Mexico, so as to render its friendly disposition to the authors of the insurrection of no slight consequence. The Northern Government has invariably railed at our neutrality, but the Southern with statesmanship and moderation has recognized in it all that we could do for either party; and whether with a view to our transactions in Mexico, or to our relations with the Cabinet at Washington, the friendly forbearance of the Southern Confederacy is an important point in our favor. " b

I may remark that the Nord of December 3—a Russian paper, and consequently a paper initiated into Palmerston's designs— insinuates that the Mexican expedition was from the first set on foot, not for its ostensible purpose, but for a war against the United States.0

Gen. Scott's letter had produced such a beneficent reaction in public opinion, and even on the London Stock Exchange, that the conspirators of Downing street and the Tuileries128 found it necessary to let loose the Patrie, stating with all the airs of knowledge derived from official sources that the seizure of the Southern Commissioners from the Trent was directly authorized by the Washington Cabinet.

[^1]: Written on December 7, 1861 Reproduced from the newspaper

[^2]: First published in the New-York Daily Tribune, No. 6467, December 25, 1861

[^3]: a J. Davis, "To the Congress of the Confederate States. Richmond, Nov. 18, 1861", New-York Daily Tribune, No. 6441, November 25, 1861.— Ed.

[^4]: b "The principal intelligence conveyed by the Edinburgh", The Morning Post, No. 27448, December 7, 1861.— Ed.

[^5]: c "Résumé politique", Le Nord, No. 337, December 3, 1861.— Ed.





**[p. 115]**

Karl Marx

THE CRISIS OVER THE SLAVERY ISSUE129

London, December 10

The United States has evidently entered a critical stage with regard to the slavery question, the question underlying the whole Civil War. General Fremont has been dismissed for declaring the slaves of rebels free.3 A directive to General Sherman, the commander of the expedition to South Carolina, was a little later published by the Washington Government, which goes further than Fremont, for it decrees that fugitive slaves even of loyal slave-owners should be welcomed and employed as workers and paid a wage, and under certain circumstances armed, and consoles the "loyal" owners with the prospect of receiving compensation later.b Colonel Cochrane has gone even further than Fremont, he demands the arming of all slaves as a military measure.0 The Secretary of War Cameron publicly approves of Cochrane's "views".d The Secretary of the Interior,6 on behalf of the government, then repudiates the Secretary of War. The Secretary of War expresses his "views" even more emphatically at a public meeting stating that he will vindicate these views in his report to Congress/ General H alleck, Fremont's successor in Missouri, and General Dix in east Virginia have driven fugitive Negroes from their military camps and forbidden them to appear in future in the vicinity of the positions held by their armies. General Wool at the same time has received the black "contraband" with open

[^1]: a See this volume, pp. 86-88. Fremont's proclamation was published in the New-York Daily Tribune, No. 6366, September 1, 1861.— Ed.

[^2]: b The directive was discussed in the item "Instructions to Gen. Sherman", New-York Daily Tribune, No. 6445, November 29, 1861.— Ed.

[^3]: c Cochrane's message to soldiers, New-York Daily Tribune, No. 6433, November 15, 1861.— Ed.

[^4]: d Cameron's speech to soldiers, New-York Daily Tribune, same issue.— Ed. e C. B. Smith.— Ed. f The Smith-Cameron polemic was discussed in a report from Washington and published in The Times, No. 24111, December 9, 1861.— Ed.





**[p. 116]**

"No temporising with rebels and those sympathising with them I have told General Fremont that I would not have drawn my sword had I thought that slavery would outlast this struggle. The slaves of rebels will always find protection in this camp and we will defend them to the last man and the last bullet. I want no men who are not Abolitionists^ I have no use for them and I hope that there are no such people among us, for everyone knows that slavery is the basis, the centre and the vertex of this infernal war Should the government disapprove of my action it can take back my patent, but in that case I shall act on my own hook even if in the beginning I can only count on six men." c

The slavery question is being solved in practice in the border slave states even now, especially in Missouri and to a lesser extent in Kentucky, etc. A large-scale dispersal of slaves is taking place. For instance 50,000 slaves have disappeared from Missouri, some of them have run away, others have been transported by the slave-owners to the more distant southern states.

It is rather strange that a most important and significant event is not mentioned in any English newspaper. On November 18, delegates from 45 North Carolina counties met on Hatteras Island, appointed a provisional government, revoked the Ordi- nance of Secession and proclaimed that North Carolina was returning to the Union. The counties of North Carolina rep- resented at this convention have been called together to elect their Representatives to Congress at Washington.0

[^1]: Written on December 10, 1861 Printed according to the news- paper First published in Die Presse, No. 343, December 14, 1861

[^2]: a Croswell's letter in the New-York Daily Tribune, No. 6441, November 25, 1861. In a postscript to it Dickinson declared himself in agreement with Croswell.— Ed.

[^3]: b Marx gives the beginning of this sentence in English in brackets, after the German equivalent. In the same manner he gives the phrase "on my own hook" further in this paragraph.— Ed.

[^4]: c Jennison's address was reproduced in the item "Camp Jennison. Kansas City, Tuesday, Nov. 12, 1861", New-York Daily Tribune, No. 6441, November 25, 1861.— Ed.

[^5]: d These events were reported in the item "Hatteras Inlet, N.C., Nov. 18, 1861", New-York Daily Tribune, No. 6438, November 21, 1861.— Ed.



