---
Volume: 19
Document_Title: "23. K. Marx. American Matters ! "
Page_Range: "144-147"
---

# 23. K. Marx. American Matters ! 



**[p. 117]**

Karl Marx

AMERICAN MATTERS

London, December 13

The news of the fate of the Harvey Birch and the visit of the cruiser Nashville in Southampton harbour reached New York on November 29, but does not seem to have provoked the sensation that was every bit as expected in certain circles here as it was feared in others, hostile to the war.132 This time, one wave broke on another. For New York was stirred up by the campaign for the election of the Mayor on December 3. The Washington correspon- dent of The Times, Mr. Russell, who spoils his Celtic talent by affecting English ways, pretends to shrug his shoulders in wonder at this excitement over the mayoral election.3 Of course, Mr. Russell is flattering the illusion of the London cockney that the election of the Mayor in New York is the same kind of old-fashioned tomfoolery as the election of a Lord Mayor in London. It is well known that the Lord Mayor of London has nothing to do with the greater part of London. He is the nominal ruler of the City, a story-book character who strives to prove his reality by producing good turtle soups at banquets and bad judgments in cases of violation of police regulations. A Lord Mayor of London is a government figure only in the imagination of Paris writers of vaudeville and faits divers!3 The Mayor of New York, on the contrary, is a real power. At the beginning of the secession movement the then Mayor, the notorious Fernando Wood, was on the point of proclaiming New York an independent city republic,133 in collusion, of course, with Jefferson Davis. His plan

[^1]: a [W. H. Russell] "Washington, Nov. 29", The Times, No. 24115, December 13, 1861.— Ed.

[^2]: b Local news items.— Ed.

[^3]: 10—1134





**[p. 118]**

On November 27, Charles Sumner of Massachusetts, a member of the American Senate, where he had been beaten with a stick by a Southern senator3 at the time of the Kansas affair,135 delivered a brilliant speech before a large meeting in Cooper Union 136 in New York on the origin and secret motives of the slaveholder rebellion.b After his speech the meeting adopted the following resolution:

"The doctrine enunciated by General Fremont, with respect to the emancipa- tion of the slaves of rebels, and the more recent utterances of General Burnside, Senator Wilson,c George Bancroft (the famous historian), Colonel Cochrane and Simon Cameron, foreshadowing the eventual rooting out of slavery as the cause of the rebellion, indicate a moral, political, and military necessity. In the judgment of this meeting, the public sentiment of the North is now fully in sympathy with any practicable scheme which may be presented for the extirpation of this national evil, and it regards such a result as the only consistent issue of this contest between civilisation and barbarism." d

The New-York Tribune comments, in particular, on Sumner's address:

A private letter from Mexico states among other things:

[^1]: "The allusion of Mr. Sumner to the coming discussions of Congress on the subject of slavery will kindle a hope that that body will at last understand where Southern weakness and Northern strength really lie, and will seize the instrumen- tality by which alone the rebellion is to be brought to a speedy and final extirpation. " e

[^2]: "The English ambassadorf pretends to be a warm friend of the administration of President Juarez. Persons well acquainted with the Spanish intrigues assure us that General Marquez has been instructed by Spain to bring the scattered forces of the Clerical party together again, its Mexican as well as Spanish elements. This party is then to take advantage of the opportunity soon to be offered to beg Her Catholic Majesty s to provide a king for the Mexican throne. An uncle of the

[^3]: a P. S. Brooks.— Ed. b Sumner's speech was published in the New-York Daily Tribune, No. 6444, November 28, 1861.— Ed.

[^4]: c Presumably Henry Wilson.— Ed. d "The Sentiment of the Cooper Institute Meeting Last Night", New-York Daily Tribune, No. 6444, November 28, 1861.— Ed.

[^5]: e "It is certainly an indicative and important fact", New-York Daily Tribune, same issue, leading article.— Ed.

[^6]: f Th. Murphy.— Ed. g Isabella IL— Ed.





**[p. 119]**

Written on December 13, 1861 Printed according to the news- paper First published in Die Presse, No. 346, December 17, 1861 Published in English for the first time

[^1]: a Francisco de Paula Antonio de Borbon.— Ed.



