---
Volume: 19
Document_Title: "26. K. Marx. The Opinion of the Newspapers and the Opinion of the People "
Page_Range: "154-158"
---

# 26. K. Marx. The Opinion of the Newspapers and the Opinion of the People 



**[p. 127]**

Karl Marx

THE OPINION OF THE NEWSPAPERS AND THE OPINION OF THE PEOPLE14

London, December 25

Continental politicians, who imagine that in the London press they possess a thermometer for the temper of the English people, inevitably draw false conclusions at the present moment. With the first news of the Trent case the English national pride flared up and the call for war with the United States resounded from almost all sections of society.3 The London press, on the other hand, affected moderation and even The Times doubted whether a casus belli existed at all.b Whence this phenomenon? Palmerston was uncertain whether the Crown lawyers were in a position to contrive any legal pretext for war. For, a week and a half before the arrival of the La Plata at Southampton, agents of the Southern Confederacy had turned to the English Cabinet from Liverpool, denounced the intention of American cruisers to put out from English ports and intercept Messrs. Mason, Slidell, etc., on the high seas, and demanded the intervention of the English government. In accordance with the opinion of its Crown lawyers, the latter refused the request. Hence, in the beginning, the peaceful and moderate tone of the London press in contrast to the warlike impatience of the people. So soon, however, as the Crown lawyers—the Attorney-General and the Solicitor-General/ both themselves members of the Cabinet0—had worked out a technical pretext for a quarrel with the United States, the relationship

[^1]: a See this volume, pp. 89-94.— Ed. b The reference is to the article "It requires a strong effort", The Times, No. 24102, November 28, 1861.— Ed.

[^2]: c Marx gives the titles in English.— Ed. d W. Atherton and R. Palmer.— Ed.





**[p. 128]**

But now, consider the London press! At its head stands The Times, whose leading editor, Bob Lowe, was formerly a dem- agogue in Australia, where he agitated for separation from England. He is a subordinate member of the Cabinet, a kind of minister for education, and a mere creature of Palmerston. Punch is the court jester of The Times and transforms its sesquipedalia verba3 into flat jokes and spiritless caricatures. A principal editor of Punch was accommodated by Palmerston with a seat on the Board of Health*3 and an annual salary of a thousand pounds sterling.

The Morning Post is in part Palmerston's private property. Another part of this singular institution is sold to the French Embassy. The rest belongs to the haute voléec and supplies the most precise reports for court flunkeys and ladies' tailors. Among the English people the Morning Post is accordingly notorious as the Jenkins (the stock figure for the lackey) of the press.

The Morning Advertiser is the joint property of the "licensed victuallers",01 that is, of the public houses, which, besides beer, may also sell spirits. It is, further, the organ of the English Pietists145

and ditto of the sporting characters, that is, of the people who make a business of horse-racing, betting, boxing and the like. The editor of this paper, Mr. Grant, previously employed as a stenographer by the newspapers and quite uneducated in a literary sense, has had the honour to get invited to Palmerston's private soirées. Since then he has been enthusiastic for the "truly English minister" 146 whom, on the outbreak of the Russian war, he had denounced as a "Russian agent". It must be added that the pious patrons of this liquor-journal stand under the ruling rod of the Earl of Shaftesbury and that Shaftesbury is Palmerston's son-in-law. Shaftesbury is the pope of the Low Churchmen,147 who

[^1]: a Words of a foot and a half long (Horace, Art of Poetry, 97).— Ed. b Marx uses the English name and gives the German translation in brackets.— Ed.

[^2]: c High society.— Ed. d Here and below Marx uses the English expressions "licensed victuallers", "sporting characters", "Low Churchmen", "truly English minister" (he translates the last phrase into German in brackets).— Ed.





**[p. 129]**

The Morning Chronicle! Quantum mutatus ab illo!h For well-nigh half a century the great organ of the Whig Party and the not unfortunate rival of The Times, its star paled after the Whig war.148 It went through metamorphoses of all sorts, turned itself into a penny paperc and sought to live by "sensations",149 thus, for example, by taking the side of the poisoner, Palmer. It subsequent- ly sold itself to the French Embassy, which, however, soon regretted throwing away its money. It then threw itself into anti-Bonapartism, but with no better success. Finally, it found the long missing buyer in Messrs. Yancey and Mann—the agents of the Southern Confederacy in London.

The Daily Telegraph is the private property of a certain Levy. His paper is stigmatised by the English press itself as Palmerston's mob paper. Besides this function it conducts a chronique scan- daleuse? It is characteristic of this Telegraph that, on the arrival of the news about the Trent, by ordre from above it declared war to be impossible. In the dignity and moderation dictated to it, it seemed so strange to itself that since then it has published half-a-dozen articles about this instance of moderation and dignity displayed by it. As soon, however, as the ordre to change its line reached it, the Telegraph has sought to compensate itself for the constraint put upon it by outbawling all its comrades in howling loudly for war.

The Globe is the ministerial evening paper which receives official subsidies from all Whig ministries.

The Tory papers, The Morning Herald and The Evening Standard, both belonging to the same boutique, are governed by a double motive: on the one hand, hereditary hate for "the revolted English colonies"e; on the other hand, a chronic ebb in their finances. They know that a war with America must shatter the present coalition Cabinet and pave the way for a Tory Cabinet. With the Tory Cabinet official subsidies for The Herald and The Standard would return. Accordingly, hungry wolves cannot howl louder for prey than these Tory papers for an American war with its ensuing shower of gold!

[^1]: a Holy Spirit.— Ed. b How changed from what he once was! (Virgil, Aeneid, II, 274).— Ed. c Marx uses the English expression "penny paper" and, below, "mob paper", the latter with the German translation in brackets.— Ed.

[^2]: d Chronicle of scandal.— Ed. e An allusion to the leading article "Let those who believe", The Times, No. 24122, December 21, 1861.— Ed.





**[p. 130]**

Most of the London weekly papers are mere echoes of the daily press, therefore overwhelmingly warlike. The Observer is in the ministry's pay. The Saturday Review strives for esprit and believes it has attained it by affecting a cynical elevation above "humanitarian" prejudices.3 To show "esprit", the corrupt lawyers, parsons and schoolmasters that write this paper have smirked their approbation of the slaveholders since the outbreak of the American Civil War. Naturally, they subsequently blew the war-trumpet with The Times. They are already drawing up plans of campaign against the United States displaying a hair-raising ignorance.

The Spectator, The Examiner and, particularly, Mac Millan's Magazine must be mentioned as more or less respectable exceptions.

One sees: On the whole, the London press—with the exception of the cotton organs, the provincial papers form a commendable contrast—represents nothing but Palmerston and again Palmer- ston. Palmerston wants war; the English people don't want it. Imminent events will show who will win in this duel, Palmerston or the people. In any case, he is playing a more dangerous game than Louis Bonaparte at the beginning of 1859.150

[^1]: Written on December 25, 1861

[^2]: First published in Die Presse, No. 359, December 31, 1861

[^3]: Printed according to the news- paper

[^4]: a An allusion to the article "Unblessed Peacemakers", The Saturday Review, No. 320, December 14, 1861.— Ed.



