---
Volume: 19
Document_Title: "27. K. Marx. French News Humbug. - Economic Consequences of War "
Page_Range: "158-161"
---

# 27. K. Marx. French News Humbug. - Economic Consequences of War 



**[p. 131]**

Karl Marx

FRENCH NEWS HUMBUG.— ECONOMIC CONSEQUENCES OF WAR151

London, December 31

The belief in miracles seems to be withdrawn from one sphere only in order to settle in another. If it is driven out of nature, it now rises up in politics. At least, that is the view of the Paris newspapers and their confederates in the telegraph agencies and the newspaper-correspondence shops. Thus, Paris evening papers of yesterday announce: Lord Lyons has stated to Mr. Seward that he will wait until the evening of December 20, but then depart for London, in the event of the Cabinet at Washington refusing to surrender the prisoners.2 Therefore, the Paris papers already knew yesterday the steps that Lord Lyons took after receiving the dispatches transmitted to him on the Europa. Up to today, however, news of the arrival of the Europa in New York has not yet reached Europe. The Patrie and its associates, before they are informed of the arrival of the Europa in America, publish in Europe news of the events that ensued on the heels of the Europa's arrival in the United States. The Patrie and its associates manifestly believe that legerdemain requires no magic. One journal over here remarks in its stock exchange article that these Paris inventions, quite like the provocatory articles in some English papers, serve not only the political speculations of certain persons in power, but just as much the stock exchange speculations of certain private individuals.

[^1]: a J. Mason and J. Slidell. Marx cites the statement according to The Times, No. 24130, December 31, 1861.— Ed.





**[p. 132]**

Since the outbreak of the Civil War the American-Chinese trade, and the American-Australian trade quite as much, has diminished to an enormous extent. So far, however, as it is still carried on, it buys its cargoes in most cases with English letters of credit, therefore with English capital. English trade from India, China and Australia, always very considerable, has, on the contrary, grown still more since the interruption of the trade with the United States. American privateers would therefore have a great field for privateering; English privateers, a relatively insignificant one. English investments of capital in the United States are greater than the whole of the capital invested in the English cotton industry. American investments of capital in England are nil. The English navy eclipses the American, but not nearly to the same extent as during the war of 1812 to 1814.152

If at that time the American privateers already showed themselves far superior to the English, then how about them now? An effective blockade of the North American ports, particularly in winter, is quite out of the question. In the inland waters between Canada and the United States—and superiority here is decisive for the land warfare in Canada—the United States would, with the opening of the war, hold absolute sway.

In short, the Liverpool merchant comes to the conclusion:

[^1]: "Nobody in England dares to recommend war for the sake of mere cotton. It would be cheaper for us to feed the whole of the cotton districts for three years at

[^2]: a "The Mercantile Realities of an American War", signed "A Liverpool Merchant", and the article "Operation of a War with America on England" published in The Economist, No. 957, December 28, 1861.— Ed.

[^3]: b "The Board of Trade Tables", The Economist, same issue.— Ed.





**[p. 133]**

state expense than to wage war with the United States on their behalf for one year."

Ceterum censeo* that the Trent case will not lead to war.

Written on December 31, 1861 Printed according to the news- paper First published in Die Presse, No. 4, January 4, 1862

[^1]: a "Ceterum censeo Carthaginem esse delendam" ("By the way, I believe that Carthage should be destroyed", Plutarch, Life of Cato the Elder)—the words with which Cato, Roman soldier and statesman (234-149 B.C.) usually concluded, refrain-like, his speeches in the Senate. Here the phrase means, roughly: "I repeat".— Ed.



