---
Volume: 19
Document_Title: "31. K. Marx. A Coup d'État by Lord John Russell "
Page_Range: "172-176"
---

# 31. K. Marx. A Coup d'État by Lord John Russell 



**[p. 145]**

Karl Marx

A COUP D'ÉTAT BY LORD JOHN RUSSELL164

London, January 17

Lord John Russell's position during the recent crisis was a thoroughly vexatious one, even for a man whose whole parliamen- tary life proves that he has seldom hesitated to sacrifice real power for official position. No one forgot that Lord John Russell had lost the Premiership to Palmerston, but no one seemed to remember that he had gained the Foreign Office from Palmerston. All the world considered it a self-evident axiom that Palmerston directed the Cabinet in his own name and foreign policy under the name of Russell. On the arrival of the first peace news from New York,3

Whigs and Tories vied with one another in trumpet-blasts to the greater glory of Palmerston's statesmanship, whilst the Foreign Secretary, Lord John Russell, was not even a candidate for praise as his assistant. He was absolutely ignored. Hardly, however, had the scandal over the suppressed American dispatch of Novem- ber 30 b broken out, when Russell's name was resurrected from the dead.

Attack and defence now made the discovery that the responsible Foreign Secretary was called Lord John Russell! But now even Russell's patience gave way. Without waiting for the opening of Parliament and contrary to every ministerial convention, he published forthwith in the official Gazette of January 14 his own

[^1]: a "New York, Dec. 27, Evening", The Times, No. 24138, January 9, 1861.— Ed. b See this volume, pp. 143-44.— Ed.





**[p. 146]**

correspondence with Lord Lyons.3 This correspondence proves that Seward's dispatch of November 30 was read by Mr. Adams to Lord John Russell on December 19; that Russell expressly acknowledged this dispatch as an apology for the act of Captain Wilkes, and that Mr. Adams, after Russell's disclosures, considered a peaceful outcome of the dispute as certain. After this official disclosure, what becomes of the Morning Post of December 21, which denied the arrival of any dispatch from Seward relating to the Trent caseb; what becomes of the Morning Post of January 10, which blamed Mr. Adams for the suppression of the dispatch,0

what becomes of the entire war racket of the Palmerston press from December 19, 1861, to January 8, 1862? Even more! Lord John Russell's dispatch to Lord Lyons of December 19, 1861, proves that the English Cabinet presented no war ultimatum; that Lord Lyons did not receive instructions to leave Washington seven days after delivering "this ultimatum"; that Russell ordered the ambassador to avoid every semblance of a threat, and, finally, that the English Cabinet had decided to make a definitive decision only after receipt of the American answer. The whole of the policy trumpeted by the Palmerston press, which found so many servile echoes on the Continent, is therefore a mere chimera. It has never been carried out in real life. It only proves, as a London paper states today, that Palmerston "sought to thwart the declared and binding policy of the responsible advisers of the Crown".

That Lord John Russell's coup de main struck the Palmerston press like a bolt from the blue, one fact proves most forcibly. The Times of yesterday suppressed the Russell correspondence and made no mention of it whatever. Only today a reprint from the London Gazette figures in its columns, introduced and prefaced by a leading article that carefully avoids the real issue, the issue between the English people and the English Cabinet, and touches on it merely in the ill-humoured phrase that "Lord John Russell has exerted all his ingenuity to extract an apology out of Seward's dispatch of November 30".d On the other hand, the wrathful Jupiter Tonanse

[^1]: a "Foreign Office, January 14, 1862. Copies of Correspondence", The London Gazette, No. 22589, January 14, 1862.— Ed.

[^2]: b "In the present state of the public mind", The Morning Post, No. 27460, December 21, 1861, leading article.— Ed.

[^3]: c "We have it in our power to state", The Morning Post, No. 27476, January 10, 1862, leading article.— Ed.

[^4]: d "The following additional correspondence", The Times, No. 24144, January 16, 1862, leading article.— Ed.

[^5]: e Jupiter the thunderer.— Ed.



No less noteworthy than the English ministerial sequel to the Trent drama is its Russian epilogue. Russia, which during the entire racket stood silently in the background with folded arms, now springs to the proscenium, claps Mr. Seward on the shoulders— and declares that the moment for the definitive regulation of the maritime rights of neutrals has at last arrived. Russia, as is known, considers herself called on to put the urgent questions of civilisation on the agenda of world history at the right time and in the right place. Russia becomes unassailable by the maritime powers the moment the latter give up, with their belligerent rights against neutrals, their power over Russia's export trade. The Paris Convention of April 16, 1856, which is in part a verbatim copy of

[^1]: a Marx gives the English name.— Ed. b "The true and just instinct of the House of Commons", The Times, same issue.— Ed.

[^2]: c January 14.— Ed. d "Mr. Gilpin, M. P., and Lord Henley, M. P., on America and England", The Times, No. 24143, January 15, 1862.— Ed.

[^3]: c Marx uses the English phrase.— Ed.





**[p. 148]**

is meanwhile not yet law in England. What a trick of destiny if the Anglo-American dispute ended with the British Parliament and the British Crown sanctioning a concession that two British ministers made to Russia on their own authority at the end of the Anglo-Russian war.

Written on January 16-17, 1862 Printed according to the news- paper First published in Die Presse, No. 20, January 21, 1862

[^1]: a Here Marx probably drew on the excerpts from documents on the law of the sea published in The Free Press, No. 1, January 1, 1862.— Ed.



