---
Volume: 19
Document_Title: "46. K. Marx. English Humanity and America "
Page_Range: "236-240"
---

# 46. K. Marx. English Humanity and America 



**[p. 209]**

Karl Marx

ENGLISH HUMANITY AND AMERICA219

London, June 14

Humanity in England, like liberty in France, has now become an export article for the traders in politics.3 We recollect the time when Tsar Nicholas had Polish ladies flogged by soldiers and when Lord Palmerston found the moral indignation of some parliamentarians over the event "impolitic". We recollect that about a decade ago a revolt took place on the Ionian Islands220

which gave the English governorb there occasion to have a fairly considerable number of Grecian women flogged. Probatum est,c

said Palmerston and his Whig colleagues who at that time were in office. Just a few years ago proof was furnished to Parliament from official documents that the tax collectors in India employed means of coercion against the wives of the ryots,221 the infamy of which forbids giving further details. Palmerston and his colleagues did not, it is true, dare to justify these atrocities, but what an outcry they would have raised, had a foreign government dared to publicly proclaim its indignation over these English infamies and distinctly indicate that it would step in if Palmerston and colleagues did not at once disavow the Indian tax officials. But Cato the Censor himself could not watch over the morals of the Roman citizens more anxiously than the English aristocrats and their ministers over the "humanity" of the war-waging Yankees!

The ladies of New Orleans, yellow beauties, tastelessly bedecked with jewels and comparable, perhaps, to the women of the old Mexicans, save that they do not devour their slaves in natura? are

[^1]: a Marx gives the English words: "traders in politics".— Ed. b G. Colborne.— Ed. c Approved.— Ed. d Alive.— Ed.



This was their heroism. General Butler issued a proclamation6 in which he notified them that they should be treated as street- walkers, if they continued to act as street-walkers. Butler has, indeed, the makings of a lawyer, but does not seem to have undertaken the requisite study of English statute law.224 Otherwise, by analogy with the laws imposed on Ireland under Castlereagh,225

he would have prohibited them from setting foot on the streets at all. Butler's warning to the "ladies" of New Orleans has aroused

[^1]: a Old name of Ireland.— Ed. b Marx gives the English words: "Lords," "Commons" and "Her Majesty's government".— Ed.

[^2]: c Citizens.— Ed. d Cf. Goethe, Faust, Der Tragödie erster Teil, "Hexenküche".— Ed. e B. F. Butler, A Proclamation [May 15, 1862], The Times, No. 24272, June 14, 1862.— Ed.



Among the public here, no one is deceived by this humanity farce. It is meant partly to call forth, partly to fortify the feeling in favour of intervention, in the first place on the part of France. After the first melodramatic outbursts, the knights of humanity in the Upper and Lower House, as if by word of command, discarded their emotional mask. Their declamation served merely as a prologue to the question whether the Emperor of the Frenche had communicated with the English government in the matter of mediating, and whether the latter, as they hoped, had received such an offer favourably. Russell and Palmerston both declared they did not know of the offer. Russell declared the present moment extremely unfavourable for any mediation. Palmerston, more guarded and reserved, contented himself with saying that at the present moment the English government had no intention of mediating.

[^1]: a W. Gregory [Speech in the House of Commons, May 28, 1861], The Times, No. 23945, May 29, 1861.— Ed.

[^2]: b Marx gives the English phrase.— Ed. c Victoria's.— Ed. d The reference is to the speeches of H. Carnarvon and J. Russell in the House of Lords and of J. Walsh, W. Gregory and H. Palmerston in the House of Commons on June 13, 1862 published in The Times, No. 24272, June 14, 1862.— Ed.

[^3]: e Napoleon III.— Ed.



Written on June 14, 1862

First published in Die Presse, No. 168, June 20, 1862

Published according to the news- paper

[^1]: An allusion to Napoleon III.— Ed.



