---
Volume: 19
Document_Title: "51. K. Marx. A Criticism of American Affairs "
Page_Range: "253-257"
---

# 51. K. Marx. A Criticism of American Affairs 



**[p. 226]**

Karl Marx

A CRITICISM OF AMERICAN AFFAIRS

The crisis, which at the moment reigns in the United States has been brought about by two causes: military and political.

Had the last campaign been conducted according to a single strategic plan, the main army of the West was then bound, as previously explained in these columns,3 to exploit its successes in Kentucky and Tennessee to make its way through north Alabama to Georgia and to seize the railway junctions there at Decatur, Milledgeville, etc. The link between the Eastern and Western armies of the secessionists would thereby have been broken and their mutual support rendered, impossible. Instead of this, the Kentucky army marched south down the Mississippi in the direction of New Orleans and its victory near Memphis had no other result than to dispatch the greater part of Beauregard's troops to Richmond, so that the Confederates, with a superior army in a superior position, here now suddenly confronted Mc Clellan, who had not exploited the defeat of the enemy's troops at Yorktown and Williamsburg and, moreover, had from the first split up his own forces. Mc Clellan's generalship, already described by us previously,15 was in itself sufficient to ensure the ruin of the biggest and best disciplined army. Finally, War Secretary Stanton committed an unpardonable error. To make an impression abroad, he suspended recruiting after the conquest of Tennessee and so condemned the army to be constantly weakened, just when it was most in need of reinforcements for a rapid, decisive offensive. Despite the strategic blunders and despite Mc Clellan's generalship, with a steady influx of recruits the war, if not

[^1]: a See this volume, pp. 194, 212.— Ed. b See this volume, pp. 179-81, 205-08.— Ed.



In part, the military causes of the crisis are connected with the political ones. It was the influence of the Democratic Party that elevated an incompetent like Mc Clellan to the position of Commander-in-Chief3 of all the military forces of the North, because he had been a supporter of Breckinridge. It is anxious regard for the wishes, advantages and interests of the spokesmen of the border slave statesh that has so far broken off the Civil War's point of principle and deprived it of its soul, so to speak. The "loyal" slaveholders of these border states saw to it that the fugitive slave lawsc dictated by the South237 were maintained and the sympathies of the Negroes for the North forcibly suppressed, that no general could venture to put a company of Negfoes in the field and that slavery was finally transformed from the Achilles' heel of the South into its invulnerable horny hide. Thanks to the slaves, who do all the productive work, all able-bodied men in the South can be put into the field!

At the present moment, when secession's stocks are rising, the spokesmen of the border states are making even greater claims. However, Lincoln's appeald to them, in which he threatens them with inundation by the Abolition party, shows that things are taking a revolutionary turn. Lincoln knows what Europe does not know, that it is by no means apathy or giving way under pressure of defeat that causes his demand for 300,000 recruitse to meet

[^1]: a Marx uses the English term.— Ed. b Marx gives the English designation in brackets after the German equivalent.— Ed.

[^2]: c Marx uses the English words "fugitive slave laws" and gives the German translation in brackets.— Ed.

[^3]: d A. Lincoln [Address to the Representatives and Senators of the Border Slaveholding States, July 12, 1862], New-York Daily Tribune, No. 6643, July 19, 1862.— Ed.

[^4]: e A. Lincoln, Executive Mansion. Washington, July 1, 1862. Ordinance on the enlistment of 300,000 recruits, New-York Daily Tribune, No. 6628, July 2, 1862.— Ed.





**[p. 228]**

So far, we have only witnessed the first act of the Civil War—the constitutional waging of war. The second act, the revolutionary waging of war, is at hand.

Meanwhile, during its first session Congress, now adjourned, decreed a series of important measures that we shall briefly summarise here.

Apart from its financial legislation, it passed the Homestead Bill, which the Northern masses had long striven for in vain; in accordance with this Bill, part of the state lands is given gratis to the colonists, whether indigenous or new-comers, for cultivation.238

It abolished slavery in Columbia and the national capital, with monetary compensation for the former slaveholders.239 Slavery was declared "forever impossible" in all the Territories of the United States.c The Act, under which the new State of West Virginia is admitted into the Union, prescribes abolition of slavery by stages and declares that all Negro children born after July 4, 1863, are born free. The conditions of this emancipation by stages are on the whole borrowed from the law that was enacted 70 years ago in Pennsylvania for the same purpose.240 By a fourth Act all the slaves of rebels are to be emancipated, as soon as they fall into the hands of the republican army.d Another law, which is now being put into effect for the first time, provides that these emancipated

[^1]: a Marx uses the English words: "pressure from without".— Ed. b Marx gives the English name.— Ed. c An Act to secure Freedom to all Persons within the Territories of the United States.—Ed.

[^2]: d An Act to suppress insurrection, to punish treason and rebellion, to seize and confiscate the property of Rebels, and for other purposes.—Ed.



Thus, no matter how the dice may fall in the fortunes of war, even now it can safely be said that Negro slavery will not long outlive the Civil War.

Written in early August, 1862 Printed according to the news First published August 9, 1862

paper First published in Die Presse, No. 218,

[^1]: a "Treaty between the United States of America and Her Majesty the Queen of the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Ireland, for the Suppression of the African Slave-Trade".— Ed.



