---
Volume: 19
Document_Title: "63. K. Marx. The Dismissal of McClellan "
Page_Range: "293-297"
---

# 63. K. Marx. The Dismissal of McClellan 



**[p. 266]**

Karl Marx

THE DISMISSAL OF Mc CLELLAN

Mc Clellan's dismissal! That is Lincoln's answer to the election victories of the Democrats.3

The Democratic journals had stated with the most positive assurance that the election of Seymour as Governor of New York State would entail the immediate revocation of the proclamation in which Lincoln declared slavery abolished in Secessia from January 1, 1863.b The paper that took this prophetic imprint had hardly left the press when their favourite general—their favourite- because "next to a great defeat he most dreaded a decisive victory"0—was deprived of his command and went back to private life.

We recall that Mc Clellan replied to this proclamation of Lincoln with a counter-proclamation, an order of the day to his army, in which he indeed forbade any demonstration against the Presi- dent's measure, but at the same time let slip the fatal words: "It is the task of citizens through the polls to remedy the govern- ment's errors or to pass judgement on its actions." d Mc Clellan, at the head of the main army of the United States, therefore appealed from the President to the impending elections. He threw the weight of his

[^1]: a See this volume, pp. 263-65.— Ed.

[^2]: b A. Lincoln, A Proclamation [September 22, 1862], New-York Daily Tribune, No. 6699, September 23, 1862.— Ed.

[^3]: c Th. B. Macaulay, Critical and Historical Essays Contributed to the Edinburgh Review, Vol. I, John Hampden.— Ed.

[^4]: d G. B. Mc Clellan [Order, Enjoining on his Officers and Soldiers Obedience to the President's Proclamation of Freedom], Headquarters Army of the Potomac. Camp near Sharpsburg, Md. Oct. 7, 1862, New-York Daily Tribune, No. 6713, October 9, 1862.— Ed.





**[p. 267]**

Mc Clellan's dismissal at this moment is accordingly a political demonstration. In any case, however, it had become indispensable. Halleck, the Commander-in-Chief,3 in a report to the Secretary of War,b had charged Mc Clellan with direct insubordination.0 For, shortly after the defeat of the Confederates in Maryland, on October 6, Halleck ordered the crossing of the Potomac, particularly as the low water-level of the Potomac and its tributaries favoured military operations at the time. In defiance of this order, Mc Clellan remained immobile, under the pretext of his army's inability to march due to lack of provisions. In the report mentioned, Halleck proves that this was a hollow subterfuge, that, compared with the Western army, the Eastern army enjoyed great privileges in respect of the commissariat and that the supplies still lacking could have been received just as well south as north of the Potomac. A second report links up with this report of Halleck's; in it the committee appointed to inquire into the surrender of Harper's Ferry287 to the Confederates accuses Mc Clellan of having concentrated the Union troops stationed near that arsenal in an inconceivably slow fashion—he let them march only six English miles (about one and a half German miles) a day—for the purpose of its relief.d Both reports, that of Halleck and that of the committee, were in the President's hands before the election victory of the Democrats.

Mc Clellan's generalship has been described in these columns so repeatedlye that it is sufficient to recall how he sought to substitute strategic envelopment for tactical decision and how indefatigable he was in discovering considerations of general-staff discretion which forbade him either to take advantage of victories

[^1]: a Marx gives the title in English.— Ed. b E. M. Stanton.— Ed. c H. W. Halleck [Report to E. M. Stanton, Secretary of War], Headquarters of the Army, Washington, October 28, 1862, New-York Daily Tribune, No. 6740, November 10, 1862.— Ed.

[^2]: d [Report of the Investigating Commission], New-York Daily Tribune, same issue.— Ed.

[^3]: « See this volume, 179-81, 205-08, 226-27, 234-35.— Ed.





**[p. 268]**

Mc Clellan understood how to conceal his mediocrity under a mask of restrained earnestness, laconic reticence and dignified reserve. His very defects secured him the unshakable trust of the Democratic Party in the North and the "loyal acknowledgement" of the secessionists. Among the higher officers of his army he gained supporters through the formation of a general staff of dimensions hitherto unprecedented in the annals of military history. Some of the older officers, who had belonged to the former army of the Union and had received their training at West Point Academy, found in him a point of support for their rivalry with the newly-sprung-up "civilian generals" and for their secret sympathies with the "comrades" in the enemy camp. The soldiers, finally, knew of his military qualities only by hearsay; for the rest they ascribed to him all the merits of the commissariat and could tell many a glorious tale of his reserved affability. Mc Clellan possessed one single gift of the supreme commander—that of assuring himself of popularity with his army.

Mc Clellan's successor, Burnside, is too little known to pronounce a judgement on him. He belongs to the Republican Party. Hooker, on the other hand, who is assuming command of the army corps serving specifically under Mc Clellan, is incontestably one of the best warriors in the Union. "Fighting Joe",b as the troops call him,

[^1]: a Ph. Kearney [Letter to O. S. Halstead, Jr., August 4, 1862], New-York Daily Tribune, No. 6719, October 16, 1862.— Ed.

[^2]: b Marx gives the English nickname, and the German translation in brackets.— Ed.





**[p. 269]**

The same American papers which bring us the news of Mc Clellan's dismissal, contain utterances of Lincoln in which he resolutely declares that he will not deviate a hair's breadth from his proclamation.

"[Lincoln]," The Morning Star* observes quite justly, "has taught the world to know him as a slow, but solid man, who advances with exceeding caution, but does not go back. Each step of his administrative career has been in the right direction and has been stoutly maintained. Starting from the resolution to exclude slavery from the Territories, he has at last arrived at the ultimate purpose of all 'anti-slavery movements'—the uprooting of this evil from the soil of the Union—and has already reached the high vantage point on which the Union has ceased to be responsible in any way for the continuance of slavery."

Written on November 24, 1862

First published in Die Presse, No. 327, November 29, 1862

Printed according to the news- paper

[^1]: a Of November 22, 1862.— Ed.



