---
Volume: 19
Document_Title: "64. K. Marx. English Neutrality. - The Situation in the Southern States "
Page_Range: "297-300"
---

# 64. K. Marx. English Neutrality. - The Situation in the Southern States 



**[p. 270]**

Karl Marx

ENGLISH NEUTRALITY.— THE SITUATION IN THE SOUTHERN STATES

London, November 29

The negotiations between the Cabinet here and the government at Washington on the corsair Alabama289 are still pending, whilst fresh negotiations on the renewed fitting out of Confederate warships in English ports have already begun. Professor Francis W. Newman, one of the theoretical representatives of English radicalism, publishes a letter in today's Morning Star in which, among other things, he says:

[^1]: "After the American Consul at Liverpool3 had been assured by an English lawyer that the Alabama affair was illegal, he directed a formal protest to Lord John Russell. The law officers of the Crown were consulted on the matter and likewise declared the fitting out of the Alabama illegal; but so much time was lost in the process that the pirate meanwhile escaped. At this moment a flotilla of more or less ironclad ships is ready at Liverpool, prepared to break through the American blockade. Apart from this, a swarm of pirate ships is waiting to follow the Alabama in its infamous progress any moment. Is our government a second time going to wink at the successors of the Alabama escaping? I fear that it is. Mr. Gladstone, in his speech at Newcastle,0 said he had been informed that the rebel President,d

[^2]: whom he panegyrised, was soon to have a navy. Did this allude to the navy his Liverpool friends have built?.. Lord Palmerston and Lord Russell, as much as the Tory Party, are animated by a hatred of republicanism strong enough to overbear all scruples and doubts; while Mr. Gladstone, a probable future Prime Minister, avows himself an admirer of the perjured men who have leagued together to perpetuate and extend slavery."e

[^3]: a T. H. Dudley.— Ed. b W. Atherton and R. Palmer.— Ed. c W. E. Gladstone [Speech in Newcastle on October 7, 1862], The Times, No. 24372, October 9, 1862.— Ed.

[^4]: d J. Davis.— Ed. e F. W. Newman [To the editor of the Morning Star], The Morning Star November 29, 1862.— Ed.



"The extraordinary and sudden increase in the enemy's sea power threatens to make our prospects gloomy. This weapon has acquired such a range that in many respects it seems more dangerous to us than the power of the enemy on land. The Yankees now command 200 more warships than at the outbreak of the war. Great preparations have been made for naval operations during the coming winter and, apart from the vessels already fit for service, some 50 ironclad warships are in process of construction. We have every reason to believe that, in the armament and construction of its ships, the Yankee fleet, which will descend upon our coast this winter, far surpasses its predecessors. The objectives of the forthcoming expeditions are of the greatest importance. It is intended to capture our last seaports, complete the blockade and, finally, open up points of invasion in Southern districts, in order to put the Emancipation Acts into practical operation from the beginning of the new year. It would be foolish to deny the advantages which must accrue to our enemy from the capture of our last seaports, or to dismiss such misfortune lightly with the consoling thought that we can still always beat the foe by waging war in the interior With Charleston, Savannah and Mobile in the enemy's hands, the blockade would be carried out with a severity of which even our sufferings hitherto have given no idea. We would have to give up all thought of building a fleet on this side of the Atlantic Ocean and submit anew to the humiliation of surrendering our shipbuilding to the enemy or destroying it ourselves. Our great system of railroad connections in the cotton states would be more or less broken through, and, perhaps too late, we would make the discovery that the land warfare, on which such great hopes are built, would have to be continued under circumstances which forbade the maintenance, provisioning and concentration of great armies These disastrous results arising from the capture of our seaports became insignificant, however, before a greater danger, the greatest danger of this war—the occupation of points in the cotton states from which the enemy can carry out his emancipation plan. Great efforts are naturally being made to safeguard this pet measure of the Abolitionists from falling through and to prevent the spirit of revenge, which Mr. Lincoln has corked in a bottle till January 1, from fizzling out in the harmless hissing of soda-water The attempt is now being made on our most defenceless side; the heart of the South is to be poisoned Prediction of future misfortune sounds bad to the ears of the masses, who blindly believe in the government and consider boasting to be patriotism We do not assert that Charleston, Savannah and Mobile are in no state to defend themselves. In the South there are naturally scores of military authorities, asserting that these ports are more impregnable than Gibraltar; but military men and their mouthpieces have too often lulled our people into false security We heard the same story with regard to New Orleans. According to their description, its defences surpassed those of Tyre against Alexander.3 Nevertheless, the people woke up one fine morning to see the enemy's flag flying over its harbour The state of our ports' defences is a secret of the official circles. But the indications of the immediate past are not comforting. A few weeks ago, Galveston fell into the enemy's hands almost without a struggle. The local newspapers had been forbidden to write about the town's means of defence. No cry for help resounded, save that

[^1]: a Alexander of Macedon.— Ed.



which fell on the deaf ear of the government. The people were not stirred to action. Their patriotism was requested to remain in ignorance, to trust the leaders and to submit to the decrees of providence. In this way, another prize fell into the lap of the enemy The method of wrapping all military matters in a mantle of secrecy has borne bad fruit for the South. It may have reduced criticism to dead silence and drawn a veil over the mistakes of the government. But it has not blinded the foe. He always seems thoroughly instructed on the state of our defences, whilst our people first learn of their weakness when they have fallen into the hands of the Yankees.

Written on November 29, 1862 Printed according to the news- paper First published in Die Presse, No. 332, December 4, 1862

«.

