---
Volume: 19
Document_Title: "68. K. Marx. Proclamation on Poland by the German Workers' Educational Society in London "
Page_Range: "323-325"
---

# 68. K. Marx. Proclamation on Poland by the German Workers' Educational Society in London 



**[p. 296]**

Karl Marx [PROCLAMATION ON POLAND BY THE GERMAN WORKERS' EDUCATIONAL SOCIETY

IN LONDON]307

The London German Workers' Educational Society?08 in agreement with an agent of the Polish national government,309 has authorised the undersigned committee to organise a collection of funds for Poland among the German workers in England, Germany, Switzerland and the United States. Even if only little material help can be given Poland in this manner, great moral assistance can be rendered.

The Polish question is the German question. Without an independent Poland there can be no independent and united Germany, no emancipation of Germany from the Russian domination that began with the first partition of Poland.310 The German aristocracy long since recognised the Tsar as secret supreme sovereign. The German bourgeoisie looks on, silent, passive and indifferent, at the slaughter of the heroic nation which alone still shields Germany from the Muscovite deluge. Part of the bourgeoisie realises the danger, but is willing to sacrifice German interests to those of the individual German states, whose existence depends on the dismemberment of Germany and the maintenance of the Russian hegemony. Another section of the bourgeoisie regards the autocracy in the east as it does the reign of the coup d'etat3 in the west, as a necessary buttress of order. Finally, a third part is so absolutely obsessed by the important business of making money that it has completely lost understanding of and insight into major historical relations. The Germans of 1831 and 1832, by their open demonstration in support of Poland,311 at least forced the Federal Diet to take strong measures. Today Poland finds its

[^1]: a The reign of Napoleon III.— Ed.





**[p. 297]**

In this fateful moment, the German working class owes it to the Poles, to foreign countries and to its own honour to raise a loud protest against the German betrayal of Poland, which is at the same time treason to Germany and to Europe. It must inscribe the Restoration of Poland in letters of flame on its banner, since bourgeois liberalism has erased this glorious motto from its own flag. The English working class has won immortal historical honour for itself by thwarting the repeated attempts of the ruling classes to intervene on behalf of the American slaveholders by its enthusiastic mass meetings, even though the prolongation of the American Civil War subjects a million English workers.to the most fearful suffering and privations.

If police restrictions prevent the working class in Germany from conducting demonstrations on such a scale for Poland, they do not in any way force them to brand themselves in the eyes of the whole world as accomplices in the betrayal, through apathy and silence.

The undersigned committee requests that money be sent to Mr. Bolleter, the occupant of the Society's premises at 2 Nassau Street, Soho, London. The expenditure of the money is controlled by the Society and public account thereof will be given as soon as the purpose of this collection permits.

Bolleter, Berger, Eccarius, Krüger, Lessner, Limburg, Linden, Matzrath,

Tatschky, Toups, Wolff

[^1]: Written in late October 1863 Printed according to the leaflet

[^2]: First published as a leaflet in London in November 1863



