---
Volume: 19
Document_Title: "72. F. Engels. England's Fighting Forces as against Germany "
Page_Range: "348-356"
---

# 72. F. Engels. England's Fighting Forces as against Germany 



**[p. 121]**

Frederick Engels

ENGLAND'S FIGHTING FORCES AS AGAINST GERMANY

Manchester, June 27

The incredible is taking place: England is threatening Germany with war.327 According to the United Service Gazette orders have already gone out to the depot in Pimlico (London) and the Arsenal at Woolwich to have the equipment and arms needed for thirty thousand men ready for immediate use, and we may expect to hear in a few days' time that the Channel fleet has sailed for the Sound or the Belts.3

The Army and Navy Gazette informs us of the fighting forces available to England at the moment. It says, in its June 25 issue:

[^1]: "The naval force which we have at hand and which can weigh anchor immediately is as follows:

[^2]: Horse-

[^3]: power Guns Tonnage Men

[^4]: Edgar, wooden ship 600 71 3,094 810

[^5]: Warrior, ironcased 1,250 40 6,109 705

[^6]: Black Prince, ironcased 1,250 41 6,109 705

[^7]: Prince Consort, ironcased 1,000 35 4,045 605

[^8]: Hector, ironcased 800 28 4,089 530

[^9]: Defence, " 3,720

[^10]: Aurora, wooden frigate 2,558

[^11]: Galatea, 3,227

[^12]: Wolverene, wooden corvette 1,703 Research, ironcased 1,253

[^13]: Enterprise, "

[^14]: a The Great Belt and the Little Belt straits.— Ed.





**[p. 322]**

Frederick Engels

Geyser, paddle-wheel wooden steam vessel 280 6 1,054 175

Assurance, wooden steam vessel 200 4 681 90

Salamis, paddle-wheel wooden steam vessel 250 2 ? 65 Trinculo, wooden gunboat 60 2 268 24

"In addition, in order to have special vessels of smaller d r a u g h t for the shallow and narrow waters of the Baltic and the Danish coasts, the Admiralty has ordered the following ships to be made ready for sea:

Horsepower Guns Tonnage Men

Cordelia, wooden corvette 150 11 579 130

Fawn, " 100 17 751 175

Racer, " 150 11 579 130

'Moreover, the following new-built ships will be ready shortly:

The latter, the Army and Navy Gazette believes, would be as troublesome to an enemy as blow flies to a horse; it would be impossible to shake them off. (As if the Prussians did not have 22 such blow flies in the Baltic, too!)

So much for the Army and Navy Gazette on the fleet. We were on board several ships of the ironclad fleet last yeara and in addition have carefully followed their ups and downs and their test cruises. These have shown that none of these ironclads can hold the high seas in stormy weather; last winter the Prince Consort almost foundered in the Irish Channel during a storm, which all the wooden ships easily rode out. Thus, these ships are only usable in definite previously planned undertakings (sea battles or attacks against land fortifications), and will then have to return to port

[^1]: Horse-

[^2]: power Guns Tonnage Men

[^3]: Achilles, ironcased 1,250 30 6,121 705

[^4]: Royal Sovereign, cupola ironcased ship 800 5 3,963 500

[^5]: Caledonia, ironcased 1,000 35 4,125 605

[^6]: Ocean, " 1,000 35 4,047 605

[^7]: " I n addition there are the n u m e r o u s ships of the steamer reserve, and finally those of the Coast Guard, including 15 gunboats of 60 horsepower and mounting two heavy pieces of ordnance."

[^8]: a See this volume, pp. 289-95.— Ed.





**[p. 323]**

The armament of the ironclads usually consists of smooth-bore sixty-eight-pounders (eight-inch calibre) as broadside cannons and hundred-ten-pound Armstrongs (seven-inch calibre) as pivoted cannons on the bow and the stern. Some of these ships also had Armstrong forty-pounders and seventy-pounders on the broad- side, but it may be that these are being replaced by sixty-eight- pounders. The old sixty-eight-pounder is a very respectable, solid and, for its calibre, manageable cannon, very effective up to at least two thousand paces and certainly the best cannon of the entire English fleet. On the other hand, the Armstrong breech- loading guns are very unreliable, since the rifling grooves soon become obstructed with lead by reason of the faulty attachment of the lead coating of the shell, and in particular because the breech block is useless. It consists of a quadrilateral piece of iron inserted from above extending to somewhat below the bottom of the bore, and screwed into place and secured from behind. If we consider that in the seven-inch calibre the shell weighs 110 pounds and the breech block only 135 pounds, we shall see that, after a few shots, the powder residues will prevent the block from fitting closely and it must fly out and high in the air as soon as the explosion gases work on it from below. This happens regularly, so that these Armstrong guns, despite their otherwise good effectiveness, have a very bad reputation in the navy.

The Royal Sovereign will carry five very heavy guns in her four cupolas or turrets; the nature of the ordnance is not yet known. Her armour has no wood backing. It remains to be seen whether this ship is of any value on the high seas.



**[p. 324]**

The draught of the large ironclads is at least 25 feet, so that they are on a par with ships of the line and very heavy frigates in this respect. This makes them useless in narrow and shallow waters, but they could serve in the deep channels of narrow creeks and estuaries to attack shore batteries and coastal forts. There they are dangerous if the cannon of the defence are too light and their shells are not made of steel. It is doubtful whether the Prussian rifled twenty-four-pounder could penetrate their armour with steel shells. The rifled forty-eight-pounder can do it, in any event, if its shell is of steel and flattened at the nose, if it has a charge of a sixth to a fourth of the shell weight and if the shot can be fired at from six to eight hundred paces. Rifled guns of from seven to eight inches, which we could have made so easily of Krupp cast steel, if emplaced at suitable points, even in small numbers, would soon enough make the heavy English ironclads narmless to our coasts. Only, the shell must be of steel and cylindrical, and must not have a conical or rounded nose so that it will catch the iron armour with its sharp edge even if the impact is oblique. Whitworth has penetrated the armour with such shells even at an angle of incidence of over fifty degrees. Further, with such heavy guns it is best to leave any experiments with breech-loading quite out of consideration; beyond a certain calibre they are certainly worthless, and there is no more time for protracted tests.

So much concerning the navy; now let us hear what the Army and Navy Gazette can tell us about the available land forces:

[^1]: "Cavalry. 4th, 5th, 6th regiments of Guards Dragoons; 1st and 2nd (Dragoon); 3rd, 4th, 8th (Hussar); 9th (Lancer); 10th, 11th, 12th, 13th, 14th, 15th, 16th (Hussar) regiments. Each has 650 men, including officers, a total of 10,700 men.

[^2]: "Artillery. Ten batteries of horse-artillery (six guns each), 26 field batteries (horse-borne) also of six guns each and 25 fortress batteries. In all, 216 field guns and 13,700 men.

[^3]: "Engineers. 20 companies and two train companies, in all 2,700 men. "Infantry. The first battalions of the 2nd, 3rd, 5th, 6th, 8th, 10th, 11th, 13th, 14th, 24th, 26th, 29th, 31st, 32nd, 37th, 41st, 45th, 49th, 53rd, 58th, 59th, 60th,



This is what the Army and Navy Gazette reports. These statistics may suffice for today, since we plan to give your readers an exact report on the English forces on land anyway.328 However, your German troops should realise one thing: If they come up against Englishmen, they will be facing quite a different opponent than the brave, but badly-trained, slow Danes.

[^1]: Written on June 27, 1864

[^2]: First published in the Allgemeine Militär- Zeitung, No. 27, July 6, 1864

[^3]: Signed: F. E.

[^4]: Printed according to the news- paper

[^5]: Published in English for the first time

[^6]: 23—1134





FROM THE PREPARATORY MATERIALS



