---
Volume: 19
Document_Title: "74. K. Marx. Biographical Notes on Wilhelm Wolff "
Page_Range: "362-366"
---

# 74. K. Marx. Biographical Notes on Wilhelm Wolff 



**[p. 335]**

Karl Marx

[BIOGRAPHICAL NOTES ON WILHELM WOLFF]

1809, June 21. Born in Tarnau, Schweidnitz3 District. 1813. Russians. 1834-38. 4V2 years in Silberberg?™ "Casemate Wolf[f]" wishes to see his dying father, even if accompanied by a gendarme. Refused.

1843-February 1846, in Breslau? 1846. Wolff flees because of press prosecution. Article on uprising of Silesian weavers.c

1846-48. Brussels. "Bureau de Correspondance".331 Jailed in Brussels. (Arrested between February 26 and 28.)

1848, April to June, in Breslau. 1848, September, Cologne. Lupus presents himself [for trial].332

Warrant of arrest withdrawn.

October 22, 1848. Warrant of arrest issued by Hecker. With- drawn March 8, 1849.

June 1848 to May 10, 1849, in Cologne. Thence to Frankfurt. May 26, 1849. Scene in German Parliament (Frankfurt).333

1849, with Lupus already in Switzerland, warrant of arrest issued in connection with Rump in Stuttgart.334

July 5, 1849, to Basle. Thence to Berne, interned. l3/4 of year teacher in Zurich. March 31, 1851, written order of expulsion from Zurich. (September 10, 1850 in Zurich. Lupus protests against being assigned to Lucerne Canton in consequence of Federal Council decision on refugees.)

[^1]: a Swidnica.— Ed. b Wroclaw.— Ed. c Wolff, W., "Das Elend u n d der Aufruhr in Schlesien". In: Deutsches Bürgerbuch für 1845, Darmstadt, 1845.— Ed.





**[p. 336]**

January 12, 1861. Prussian Amnesty Decree.335 January 4, 1862, application to the Prussian government. No answer for 5 months. Another application on June 4, 1862. August 1, 1862 Schweidnitz Municipal Council requires him to name his last place of residence in Prussia.

September 5, 1862. Prussian government answers that amnesty implies resumption of investigation.15

Written in late May and early June 1864 Printed according to the manu- script First published in the journal Novaya i noveishaya istoriya, 1959, No. 4 Published in English for the first time

[^1]: 3 Marx uses the English word.— Ed. b See this volume, p. 243.— Ed.



APPENDICES



