---
Volume: 19
Document_Title: "75. Application by Marx for Restoration of His Prussian Citizen ship "
Page_Range: "366-368"
---

# 75. Application by Marx for Restoration of His Prussian Citizen ship 



**[p. 339]**

[APPLICATION BY MARX FOR RESTORATION OF HIS PRUSSIAN CITIZENSHIP]336

To the Royal Police President

His Excellency Baron von Zedlitz-Neukirch

Your Excellency,

I hereby respectfully inform you that, on the strength of the Royal amnesty, I have returned to Prussia from London, where I have lived as a political refugee since 1849, with the intention of taking up residence here in Berlin to begin with.

In this connection I respectfully request Your Excellency:

1. on the basis of the Royal order of the amnesty337 and the law of December 31, 1842 (Ges. S. 15-18)a to issue a confirmation of my reintegration into the status of a Prussian subject, for which Your Excellency is the competent authority under § 5 of the aforesaid law, and

2. to be good enough to forward to me the certificate mentioned in § 8 of the law of December 31, 1842, on the reception of newly-arrived persons (Ges. S. 5), to the effect that I have reported my entry into this community to the Royal police authorities; and I declare with respect to the latter that, upon request, I can show that I have fully independent means of subsistence through contracts as co-editor of the New-York Tribune, published in New York, as well as otherwise.

To begin with, I have taken up residence with a friend of mine,

[^1]: a "Gesetz über die Erwerbung und den Verlust der Eigenschaft als Preussischer Unterthan Vom 31. Dezember 1842", Gesetz-Sammlung für die Königlichen Preussischen Staaten, Berlin, 1843, No. 2.— Ed.





**[p. 340]**

With best respects

Your Excellency's devoted

Dr Karl Marx

Berlin, March 19, 1861

First published in: Marx and Engels,

Works, Second Russian Edition, Vol. 15, Moscow, 1959

Printed according to the manu- script

Published in English for the first time

