---
Volume: 19
Document_Title: "76. Marx's Statement on the Restoration of His Prussian Citizenship "
Page_Range: "368-372"
---

# 76. Marx's Statement on the Restoration of His Prussian Citizenship 



**[p. 341]**

[MARX'S STATEMENT ON THE RESTORATION OF HIS PRUSSIAN CITIZENSHIP]338

To the Royal Police President His Excellency Baron von Zedlitz

Your Excellency,

I have the honour in reply to your letter of the 21st inst. to state that I am surprised that my letter of March 19 did not seem quite clear. In the words of my application, my request was:

"on the basis of the Royal order of the amnesty and the law of December 31, 1842, to issue a confirmation of my reintegration into the status of a Prussian subject".3

It is this application that appears not quite clear to Your Excellency and seems to contain a contradiction insofar as I referred therein to Your Excellency's being the competent authority to issue that confirmation, pursuant to § 5 of the law of December 31, 1842.

Under the Royal order of amnesty "unimpeded return to the Prussian states" has been granted to all political refugees not condemned by military courts.0

Since I am one of those refugees and am a native Prussian, with reference to which I attach for Your Excellency as official proof my birth certificate in the form of an extract from the Register of Civil Status of the City of Trier (May 7, 1818), moreover as I left the fatherland in 1849, up to which time I had lived in Cologne as editor of the Neue Rheinische Zeitung,339 and had not been prosecuted in actions in military courts, but only in several political press suits, which I drew upon myself in my aforesaid capacity as editor, it is clear therefore that I am included in the above- mentioned amnesty.

[^1]: a See this volume, p. 339.— Ed. h "Gesetz über die Erwerbung und den Verlust der Eigenschaft als Preussischer Unterthan Vom 31. Dezember 1842", Gesetz-Sammlung für die Königlichen Preussischen Staaten, Berlin, 1843, No. 2.— Ed.

[^2]: 24—1134



But it seems possible that another question may be raised. The Royal amnesty not only declares that pardon has been extended to those already convicted under the law and those not yet convicted, but at the same time grants refugees "unimpeded return to the Prussian states".

Does this signify, apart from remission of the criminal penalty, that the status of a Prussian citizen, which they had lost by residing abroad for more than ten years, is likewise restored to the refugees?

According to my interpretation and that of all jurists, according to the unanimous conception of public opinion and the entire press, it does. And there are two arguments that prove this incontrovertibly.

First, that the amnesty order guarantees not only remission of the penalty but also expressly "unimpeded return to the Prussian states".

Secondly, because the entire amnesty would otherwise be a completely illusory one, only on paper. For, since all the refugees have lived abroad since 1848 and 1849, i.e., twelve years, this would mean that all of them have lost their status as Prussians, and if that status were not reinvigorated by the amnesty, the "unimpeded return" alleged to be granted would actually be granted to no one.

Accordingly, there can be no doubt that, in spite of the loss of Prussian nationality due to an absence of ten years, this right is to be revived by the Royal amnesty.

However, although this is my interpretation and that of the jurists, in practice only the interpretation of the authorities is decisive and provides an adequate basis for practical actions.

How then will the Royal authorities please to interpret the Royal amnesty?

Will they interpret it in the sense that the amnesty is an amnesty, and unimpeded return is unimpeded return? Or will they interpret it in the sense that the granting of unimpeded return impedes return and that the refugees are to remain deprived of the fatherland despite the decree? Upon unprejudiced consideration of the circumstances, Your Excellency cannot fail to see that this scepticism can hardly be regarded as totally unfounded.

So much has been decreed in the last twelve years and so much



**[p. 343]**

Accordingly, the only positively sure basis remaining on which practical steps can be taken seems to be the interpretation given by the authorities themselves to the particular individual. Will Your Excellency grant that, despite my loss of the status of a Prussian by virtue of the law, I have regained it through the Royal amnesty?

That is the very simple and clear question that I wanted to, and had to, address to Your Excellency.

I am all the more forced to do so, since I cannot bring my wife and children from London until this question is decided, for obviously I cannot be expected to undertake a problematical change of residence with my entire household and ;family and only thereafter engage in a contest which,, on the contrary, I should previously bring to a termination, if it is to be engaged in at all, before I take the costly step of moving and bring my wife and children back to the fatherland.

My question is all the more justified as a very natural and simple one in view of the fact that Your Excellency yourself has raised the question in your letter of the 21st inst.: on what basis do I claim "not to have lost the status of a Prussian despite absence for ten years".

Your Excellency will have seen from the foregoing the basis on which I rest my claim.

The justification for my addressing my question to Your Excellency is found in § 5 of the law of December 31, 1842, which I have adduced. For, since, according to that, Your Excellency is the competent authority to grant naturalisation, so you are a fortiori3 the competent authority to explain interpretandoh whether by virtue of the amnesty I have regained the lost status of a Prussian. It is only in this sense that I have referred to § 5 of the law in question.

Furthermore it is particularly appropriate for me to turn to Your Excellency with this question because it is in Berlin that I wish to take up domicile, my ability to do so depending on that confirmation as a legal condition, and hence Your Excellency, as chief of the police of this city, is the person on whose view in the

[^1]: a All the more certainly.— Ed. b By interpreting the law.— Ed.

[^2]: 24*





**[p. 344]**

It can surely not be in Your Excellency's interest, nor can it be expected of me, that I should wait three or four months or longer in complete uncertainty and with no possibility of taking practical steps to achieve my end until I receive notice, along with a definitive decision as to domicile, of what interpretation you give the Royal amnesty and whether thereby you will confirm my reinstatement as a Prussian or not.

Such uncertainty, lasting for months, would be extremely damag- ing to me in all my plans, arrangements and economic relationships.

It is, of course, also my right to know whether the competent authority will or will not confirm that status for me, and that authority will not regard a refusal or postponement of a reply thereto as either legitimate or worthy of itself.

Accordingly, I freely, openly and loyally put this question to Your Excellency:

whether or not you confirm that the Royal amnesty restores me to the status of a Prussian?

and I look forward to an equally free, open and loyal reply. I am all the more eager to have this answer as soon as possible since only then will it be possible for me, in the most improbable case of an unfavourable decision, to appeal to the Chambers while they are still in session, during which, in any case, a proposal for an amnesty law evoked by doubts as to the interpretation of the amnesty order will be discussed, and since, on the other hand, I can stay here only for a short time now, as family affairs call me back to London.

I therefore request Your Excellency kindly to let me have the requested open and definite answer by return of post, for only then will I be able to submit, in due form, my application for settlement in this city.

I have the honour to remain,

Your Excellency's obedient servant,

Dr Karl Marx

Berlin, March 25, 1861

[^1]: First published in: Marx and Engels, Printed according to the manu- Works, Second Russian Edition, Vol. 15,' script Moscow, 1959

[^2]: Published in English for the first time



