---
Volume: 19
Document_Title: "78. Answer to Marx's Application for Restoration of His Prussian Citizenship "
Page_Range: "380-382"
---

# 78. Answer to Marx's Application for Restoration of His Prussian Citizenship 



**[p. 353]**

[ANSWER TO MARX'S APPLICATION FOR RESTORATION OF HIS PRUSSIAN CITIZENSHIP]3

In reply to your request dated April 6 of this year,h I inform you that the conviction that you are to be regarded as a foreigner is not in any way refuted even by the considerations stated therein.

§ 20 of the law of December 31, 1842, on the acquisition and loss of the status of a Prussian subject rules that that status is lost at the issuance of the document waiving it.c Accordingly, neither the motive for your seeking that waiver nor whether you have obtained citizenship elsewhere is relevant. Further, you have not regained the status of a Prussian either in virtue of the Federal Diet's decision of March 30, 1848,d or by His Majesty's act of grace of January 12 erf What is determinant for the elections to the German National Assembly is not that decision but the order of April 11, 1848, which is not in your favour in any way. His Majesty's decree of January 12 cr. is an act of grace and hence relates only to remission or reduction of punishment (Art. 49 of the Constitution'). But the loss of the status of a Prussian is never incurred by a conviction and is therefore not cancelled by acts of grace.

[^1]: a Text on the envelope of the letter: "815. To Dr Carl Marx, Esq., Here, 13 Bellevuestr. Today, immediately!".— Ed.

[^2]: h See this volume, pp. 345-52.— Ed. ' "Gesetz über die Erwerbung und den Verlust der Eigenschaft als Preussischer Unterthan Vom 31. Dezember 1842".— Ed.

[^3]: '' In Protokolle der Deutschen Bundesversammlung vom Jahre 1848, Frankfurt am Main, 1848.— Ed.

[^4]: e Currentis—oî this year.— Ed. f "Verfassungsurkunde für den Preussischen Staat. Vom 31. Januar 1850", in Preussischer Staats-Anzeiger, No. 32, February 2, 1850.— Ed.





**[p. 354]**

Royal Police Presidium von Zedlitz Berlin, April 10, 1861

First published in: Marx and Engels,

Works, Second Russian Edition, Vol. 15, Moscow, 1959

Printed according to the manu- script

Published in English for the first time

