---
Volume: 19
Document_Title: "79. Marx's Application for Naturalisation and Right of Domicile in Berlin "
Page_Range: "382-384"
---

# 79. Marx's Application for Naturalisation and Right of Domicile in Berlin 



**[p. 355]**

[MARX'S APPLICATION FOR NATURALISATION AND RIGHT OF DOMICILE IN BERLIN]344

Official Opinion of the 33rd Police Precinct

Done at Berlin, April 10, 1861

Dr Karl Marx arrived here on March 1, 1861. After he had declared that he wished to settle here and obtain the status of a Prussian citizen by naturalisation, he gave the following information as to his personal situation:

I was born on May 5, 1818, at Trier in the Prussian Rhine Province, profess the Evangelical religion and am legally competent according to the laws of my previous homeland. I have resided in England for the last twelve years, supported myself there by literary work and have not been aided by public relief funds. I have several times been under investigation because of political press prosecutions and refer to the existing files for my conduct. I have not applied to any other Prussian authority for naturalisation or domiciliation and have never been rejected in this respect. In this connection, I have been notified that failure to report an investigation made of me or my dependents as well as incorrect data concerning my situation in general, or failure to report an application for naturalisation made to another Prussian authority will entail the cancellation and the withdrawal of the certificate of naturalisation, that the decision as to my application for domicilia- tion regardless of the declaration of the municipal authorities and acceptance of the filing fees, is made exclusively by the Royal Police Presidium, and I am therefore to refrain before obtaining the naturalisation and domiciliation certificates from any steps what- soever to establish myself.

[^1]: a The document is obviously incorrect here: Marx came to Berlin on March 17, 1861.— Ed.





**[p. 356]**

My income comes to about 2,000 reichsthaler; neither I nor my wife have any property.

With respect to my military status, I am already exempt from all service in the army because of my age.

I have no decorations. I request: that the certificate of naturalisation be issued me and that I be permitted to take up residence here.

Read aloud, accepted, signed.

Dr Karl Marx3

First published in: Marx and Engels, Printed according to the manu- Works, Second Russian Edition, Vol. 15, script Moscow, 1959

Published in English for the first time

[^1]: a Marx's authentic signature is followed by the illegible signature of an official.— Ed.



