---
Volume: 19
Document_Title: "80. Letter from Marx to Police President von Zedlitz "
Page_Range: "384-386"
---

# 80. Letter from Marx to Police President von Zedlitz 



**[p. 357]**

[LETTER FROM MARX TO POLICE PRESIDENT VON ZEDLITZJ

To His Excellency Herr von Zedlitz Royal Police President

Your Excellency,

I received your esteemed letter of April 10a last evening. Although in Your Excellency's last letterb you were of the opinion that because of the application in 1845 it would be of no effect in my case even if the amnesty should have cancelled the loss of the status of a Prussian due to absence for ten years, Your Excellency now, in view of my latest arguments, takes rather the opposite opinion that the amnesty, because as such it allegedly can only contain a pardon of penalties, cannot cancel the loss of the status of a Prussian, no matter for what reason that loss has ever been incurred.

In order not to prejudice my rights, I am forced to remark that this letter, according to the legal opinion of the undersigned, would present 1) a partial annulment of the Royal amnesty, 2) a non-recognition of the Federal Diet and its decisions and hence a violation of the German constitutional principles, as laid down in the Federal Act,345 3) finally, an equally emphatic negation of all public law in Prussia.

Mindful, however, of the practical purpose by which I am guided, J will not weary Your Excellency by a demonstration of these three legally unassailable theses, but agree, in the sense in which I expressed it to Your Excellency at the end of my last

[^1]: a See this volume, pp. 353-54.— Ed. b Of March 30, 1861.— Ed.

[^2]: 25—1134





**[p. 358]**

Being compelled to leave here in haste because of news from my family, I applied early yesterday in this sense in omnern eventumh

for the new naturalisation at the police precinct of my district.0

At the same time, I respectfully inform Your Excellency that because of my departure I empower Mr. F. Lassalle, of this city, to receive the naturalisation certificate for me, to make and take note on my behalf of all the necessary applications and steps in this matter, and in general to exercise my rights to the same extent as is in my power.

Respectfully requesting Your Excellency to kindly address the final decision to Mr. F. Lassalle, of this city, I remain,

Your Excellency's obedient servant

Dr Karl Marxd

Berlin, April 11, 1861

First published in: Marx and Engels, Printed according to the manu- Works, Second Russian Edition, Vol. 15, script Moscow, 1959 . Published in English lor the lirst time

[^1]: a See this volume, p. 351.— Ed. h In any event.— Ed. ' See this volume, pp. 355-56. At this point there is a note in the margin of the manuscript, in an unknown hand: "This request of Marx has been refused." — Ed.

[^2]: d The signature is in Marx's hand.— Ed.



