---
Volume: 19
Document_Title: "82. F. Engels. To the Directorate of the Schiller Institute "
Page_Range: "387-390"
---

# 82. F. Engels. To the Directorate of the Schiller Institute 



**[p. 360]**

Frederick Engels

TO THE DIRECTORATE OF THE SCHILLER INSTITUTE

[Draft]

I have the honour to enclose as Appendix I a copy of a communication from the Librarian which was handed to me not long since.348 When I took the liberty of making a few observations to Mr Stössel regarding certain expressions used therein, his reply, as I had expected, was that the communication was merely a copy of the set form laid down by the Literary Section of the Directorate.

If, therefore, I now feel compelled to bring the said observa- tions to the attention of the Directorate, I should first of all emphasise that these do not in any way apply to the substance of the communication as such. Everyone will, no doubt, subscribe to this last, to a strict adherence to the time limit prescribed for the loan of books, to the levying of "fines" should that limit be exceeded, and to the observance of the Institute's rules and regulations generally. What I am concerned with here is merely the tone of this document. That tone is so very different from that customary in correspondence between educated persons that I must confess I am not used to receiving such letters, nor, from what Mr. Stössel tells me, am I the first to have been struck by ihis. to put it mildly, uncouth form of address.

Indeed, when 1 had read this missive, it was as though I had been suddenly transported home. It was as though, instead of a communication from the Librarian of the Schiller Institute, I were holding a peremptory summons from a German inspector of police ordering me, on pain of a heavy penalty, to make amends for some kind of violation "within 24 hours". The otherwise very innocuous uniform of the beadle who served this writ on me could not on this occasion but help to complete the illusion.



**[p. 361]**

"that a young German should at once feel more at home here find himself better looked after and provided for, both morally and intellectually and, above all, should return to the fatherland in no way estranged from it".

No doubt, the bureaucratic style of such official communications is the very thing to make the recipient instandy feel that he is on his home ground, and to instil in him the belief that he is just as well if not "better looked after and provided for" than he would be at home, in the dear, old patriarchal police state, that great institution looking after and making provision for little children; nor, so long as such official communications continue to flourish, can there possibly be the remotest danger of any member of the Schiller Institute's becoming estranged from the fatherland. Indeed if, once in a way, there should happen to be some member of the Schiller Institute who had not had occasion to become acquainted at home with the forms of bureaucracy and the imperious language of officialdom, the Schiller Institute would seem to offer him an excellent opportunity to do so; again, this presumably is the construction to be put upon the programme's undertaking that the Schiller Institute will help ensure

Indeed, it would hardly have occurred to many members that "the German spirit in the fullest sense of the term", for the nurturing of which the Schiller Institute was to be a rallying-point, should inter alia also comprise that spirit of bureaucracy in whose hands, alas, almost all political power at home is still vested but against which the whole of Germany is fighting and over whkh, at this very moment, it is scoring victory after victory. This hectoring tone, these categorical demands that an order be obeyed within 24 hours are, at all events, out of place here, and if they entail, not a fortnight's imprisonment on a diet of bread and water, but the fearsome threat of a half-crown fine, then the effect is comical into the bargain.

Among its members the Schiller Institute numbers not only

[^1]: "that even he of advanced years, who decides to return home and settle down there again, should, along with the German language and culture, also preserve and even develop to a higher degree, his capacity for public service as a German man and citizen".





**[p. 362]**

It so happens that I myself do at present belong to the Literary Section of another society349 here which does not boast a librarian and, in similar cases, it often falls to me to send out circulars to members. I enclose herewith the customary form (Appendix II),350

not because of any pretence it might have to serve as a model, but rather because it may, perhaps, show that the same object can be attained without infringing on that deference which one educated person owes another.

I repeat that while fortiter in rea is certainly most commendable, members would also seem to me to be entitled to some suaviter in modo.h By all means, let the iron hand of the Literary Section descend on the head of every member, but let it also wear a velvet glove. And that is why I would request the Directorate to be so kind as to ensure that the Literary Section's official correspond- ence with members should be rriodelled, not so much on orders issued by German administrative offices to those they administer, as on what is proper in correspondence between educated persons.

[^1]: Written about May 3, 1861 Printed according to the manu-

[^2]: First published in: Marx and Engels,

[^3]: Works, First Russian Edition, Vol. XXV, Published in English for the first Moscow, 1934 time

[^4]: a Firmness in doing what is to be done.— Ed. b Inoffensiveness in manner.— Ed.



