---
Volume: 43
Document_Title: "2. Engels to Marx. 10 April "
Page_Range: "42-44"
---

# 2. Engels to Marx. 10 April 



**[p. 1868]**

Apropos. Borkheim will visit you IN A FEW DAYS. Don't forget that, despite all comradeship with him, I always observe reserve.

Liebknecht's papera is much too narrow-mindedly 'southern'.b

(He has not enough dialectic to strike out on two sides at once.)

First published abridged in Die Neue Zeit, Printed according to the original Bd. 2, Nr. 6, Stuttgart, 1901-1902 and in full in: Marx and Engels, Works, Second Published in English in full for the Russian Edition, Vol. 32, Moscow, 1964 first time

2

ENGELS TO MARX

IN LONDON

Manchester, 10 April 1868

Dear Moor,

Enclosed letters from Wilhelmchen7 and Siebel, please return the former to me. Poor Siebel seems to be having a bad time indeed. I shall see him in about 10 days.

Further, the draft of an advertisement for Meissner8; what do you think of it? So far it has not been pressing, since he could not advertise because of the Easter Fair anyway.

Yesterday I sent you Nos. 4 to 14 of Wilhelmchen's rag.c It is dreadfully stupid. One who was in England for such a long time and who has your book and mined should really know how to put the material supplied to him by the workers to other use than simply reproducing it at full length. Some anti-federalist passages with us in mind are rather comical in connection with the whole federalist-Struveist nature of the sheet.e9

When I got back here 2 I found such a pile of work waiting that I could only see Gumpert yesterday. Enclosed the prescription: on the

[^1]: a Demokratisches Wochenblatt - b See next letter and Engels' letter to Marx of February (present edition, Vol. 42). - c Demokratisches Wochenblatt- d Presumably the first volume of Capital and The Condition of the Working-Class in England. - e See previous letter.





**[p. 6]**

first 4-5 days you should take it only twice daily, then 3 times, always 1 V2-2 hours after a meal. And also live well and get plenty of exercise. Gumpert laughs at your assertion that arsenic makes you stupid.

The vote on parliamentary freedom of speech is explained by the fact that Bismarck had stated previously that for Prussia, for the sake of peace, he would concede this point. So it was not even, as we thought, proof of the courage of the philistines.

What Wilhelm says about the American treaty is of course nonsense from beginning to end.10

Unfortunately, I have a death to announce to Tussy. The poor hedgehog ate a round hole in his blanket, put his head through it, and got so stuck in it that he was found strangled yesterday morning. Peace to his ashes, and BETTER LUCK TO THE NEXT ONE.

During the 3 days of my absence, the fellows in Liverpool swindled cotton up by no less than 3d., from l Od. to 13d. Hence so much work. Luckily the holidays intervene, which I am using to complete the extracts for the Beesly article." I am starting right away, and thus close for today. Best greetings to your wife and the girls.

Your

F. E.

The wedding was celebrated here with great festivity: the dogs had green collars, a TEA PARTY for 6 children, Lafargue's glass basin served as a punch-bowl, and the poor hedgehog was made drunk for the last time.

[^1]: First published abridged in Der Briefwech- sel zwischen F. Engels und K. Marx, Bd. 4, Stuttgart, 1913 and in lull in MEGA, Abt. III, Bd. 4, Berlin, 1931

[^2]: Printed according to the original

[^3]: Published in English for the first time



