---
Volume: 43
Document_Title: "3. Marx to Engels. 11 April "
Page_Range: "44-46"
---

# 3. Marx to Engels. 11 April 



**[p. 3]**

MARX TO ENGELS

IN MANCHESTER

London, 11 April 1868

DEAR FRED,

D'abord" the GENERAL CONDOLATIONS, and especially from Tussychen, about the departed RIGHT HONOURABLE HEDGEHOG.

It is a good thing that the opium prescription arrived today.b

The affairs under my arm have become very vexatious since your departure.2

From the young couple,c who are now in Paris, the most satisfying news.12 They are obviously very happy. Lafargue has sent me Horn's pamphletd and another one on French finance. The second is twaddle, the first I shall send you soon. I wrote to Lafarguee that the fact that he finds time 'AT SUCH A CRITICAL JUNCTURE' to think of me and send me printed matter goes a long way to prove 'THAT HE MUST BELONG TO A BETTER THAN THE EUROPEAN RACE'. WE ARE

I have read the Histoire du Crédit mobilière As far as the real essence of the matter is concerned, I really wrote better stuff on it years ago in the Tribune.12, The author knows the business. He is himself a Paris banker. But he has in fact nothing to draw on except the official material, provided by the Crédit itself in its reports, and the facts noted in the stock market quotations. The secret material could only be obtained by legal steps. What astonishes me particularly is this: the actual TRICKS all reduce themselves to stock-jobbing on the exchange,11 and in this department au fond' there has been nothing new since Law,14

whatever the disguise. Neither on this side of the Channel, nor on the other. The interesting aspect of these things is the practice, not the theory.

I enclose a letter from Kugelmann (à renvoyer1). After you had left, I wrote to him.k But since writing is a nuisance for me at the moment because of my left arm, I enclosed Freiligrath's letter to

[^1]: ALWAYS 'CHAFFING' AT EACH OTHER.

[^2]: a First of all - b See previous letter. - c Paul and Laura Lafargue - d I. E. Horn, Frankreichs Finanzlage. - e See this volume, p. 9. - f An allusion to J. G. Seume's poem 'Der Wilde'. - s M. Aycard, Histoire du Crédit Mobilier. 1852-1867.- h See this volume, p. 11. - ' basically - J to be returned - k See this volume, pp. 3-5.





**[p. 8]**

me,5 so that Kugelmann should receive the SUFFICIENT quantum of written matter. I told him also, in reply to a previous enquiry, that I would visit him in any case for A FEW DAYS. However, he 'erred' about the date. It is not so close.

Do not forget to send me the Schweitzer^5 BY NEXT POST. From The Times of today (telegraphic dispatch) 3 you will see that we have won a complete victory in Geneva, working day reduced from 12 to 11 hours, wages increased by 10%.16 T h e matter went like this. Scarcely had you left when a deputy arrived from Geneva.17 This FACT, that the workers sent an envoy to London, to the fearsome secret tribunal, was decisive, as earlier in the STRIKE of the bronze workers of Paris.18 T h e MASTERS believe in the power and the fighting fund in London. This should show the workers in England and on the continent the power they would possess in us if they really put at o u r disposal the appropriate means, etc.

Enclosed returned Wilhelm,7 Siebel. Your draft b is not written in your EASYGOING style. Today I have particular pain in my left arm. As soon as this has passed, I shall return your draft with my probable emendations.

T h e children send their best greetings. In fact, if only for their sake, I wish you lived in London instead of Manchester.

Your

K. M.

[^1]: MY COMPLIMENTS TO MRS BURNS.

[^2]: First published in Der Briefwechsel zwischen F. Engels und K. Marx, Bd. 4, Stuttgart, 1913

[^3]: Printed according to the original

[^4]: Published in English for the first time

[^5]: a 'Switzerland, Geneva, April 10', The Times, No. 26096, 11 April 1868.- b See this volume, p. 5, and Note 8.



