---
Volume: 43
Document_Title: "5. Engels to Marx. 17 April "
Page_Range: "48-49"
---

# 5. Engels to Marx. 17 April 



**[p. 5]**

ENGELS TO MARX

IN LONDON

Manchester, 17 April 1868

Dear Moor,

Horn a 'awaits receipt', as commercial style puts it. It is certain that there is theoretically nothing of interest and nothing new to be said about agiotage. It all comes down to fraud under false pretences and nothing can change here except the manner. The secret material about the history of the Crédit mobilier13 can, by the way, and probably will, reach the light of day by itself on the fall of the Empire, even if there is no intervention by the courts.

I had already seen about the glorious victory in Geneva 16 in the newspapers on Saturday15 morning. The business is all the better since the stupid philistines had made out the International Association to be the real motive force of the affair, and it now receives all the glory. You will have seen that the intermediaries in the business were Police Prefect Camperio and the noble and serrrious Amand Goegg. This will have instilled new respect for our power in Mr Amand. Incidentally, I should like to know how long—following this business—they will leave the International Association unmolested in Germany.

By THE BY, the workers' affairs are proceeding famously. First Belgium, then Geneva, now Bologna24—I am only surprised that the International has not yet been blamed for this—it keeps going everywhere.

Tomorrow I shall send you—I have forgotten it at the office—1. a new copy of Wilhelmchen's rag,c 2. Eichhoff 's further jeremiad,25 3. a section of an editorial declaration from the

Zukunft about the curious article ad vocemd Vogt, from which you will see what shits they are.

Making extracts from your book is, with my limited time, giving me more work than I expected, car enfin" if this job is to be done, it must be done properly and not just for this special purpose.26

[^1]: You will have received the Schweitzer.15

[^2]: a I. E. Horn, Frankreichs Finanzlage. See this volume, p. 7. - b 11 April - c Demokratisches Wochenblatt - d concerning - e because after all

[^3]: 3*



