---
Volume: 43
Document_Title: "6. Marx to Ludwig Kugelmann. 17 April "
Page_Range: "49-50"
---

# 6. Marx to Ludwig Kugelmann. 17 April 



**[p. 12]**

Next week I expect to have more time, there is a pause in business, and if I can get away between 4 and 5 in the evening, this gives the whole evening a different character for working.

Kugelmann returned enclosed.27 I was very interested in his uterine polyp removed by splitting and compressed sponge; he will have to tell me about it personally in more detail in good time. But the attempt to turn Virchow into a communist with the aid of this polyp looks very much like an extra-uterine pregnancy. Even if Virchow had knowledge and theoretical interest in politics or political economy, this upright citizen is after all much too deeply engaged. 2 8

Incidentally, you will come here before you leave for the continent, cela est entendu,'1 and bring Tussy with you as promised.

Your arm must surely have settled down by now? T h e fact that Kugelmann recommends arsenic will certainly have allayed some of your anxieties. Schorlemmer took a lot of it in his time, and never noted the slightest ill effects.

Heartiest greetings to the ladies.

Your

F. E.

6

IN HANOVER

London, 17 April 1868

Dear Kugelmann,

T h e situation is simply this. T h e old sanguinary herpes (to express myself poetically) attacked me with such tactical dexterity that I

[^1]: First published abridged in Der Briefwech- Printed according to the original sei zwischen F. Engels und K. Marx, Bd. 4, Stuttgart, 1913 and in full in MEGA, Published in English for the first Abt. Ill, Bd. 4, Berlin, 1931 t i m e

[^2]: MARX T O LUDWIG KUGELMANN 2 9

[^3]: You must regard me as a great criminal for taking so long to reply to the friendly letter from your dear wifeb and yourself.27

[^4]: a that is understood - b Gertrud Kugelmann



