---
Volume: 43
Document_Title: "7. Marx to Engels. 18 April "
Page_Range: "50-51"
---

# 7. Marx to Engels. 18 April 



**[p. 13]**

could not adopt the posture necessary for writing. I could, of course, have dictated, but you know that in such cases one always hopes to be ALL RIGHT next morning. Thus the delay, and thus, also, the brevity of these lines.

It is still quite uncertain when I shall be travelling to Germany for a few days; in any case, it won't be soon. At all events, I shall come at a time when I know that you will not be away.

You have done me a great service with your lines to Virchow, though I doubt whether he will have the patience and the time to immerse himself in a subject out of his line.2 I know it cost me a great effort to read his Cellularpathologie in Manchester, particular- ly because of the way it was written.

The issues of Social-Demokrat hitherto concerned with my book are: No. 10 (22 Jan. 1868), No. 11 (24 Jan.), No. 12 (26 Jan.), No. 14 (31 Jan.), No. 15 (2 Feb.), No. 24 (23 Feb.), No. 25 (26 Feb.), No. 30 (8 March),'" and another number, which I don't have at the moment, but which contains only extracts.11

With heartiest greetings to your dear wife and Fränzchen

Yours

K. Marx Meyerc paid me a visit here.

7

MARX TO ENGELS

[London,] 18 April 1868

I have been lying fallow until today and could not leave the house. My arm was so inflamed, and there was so much suppuration, that I could wear nothing on that arm and

[^1]: First published abridged in Die Neue Zeit, Printed according to the original Bd. 2, Nr. 7, Stuttgart, 1901-1902 and in full in Pisma Marksa k Kugelmanu (Letters of Marx to Kugelmann), Moscow- Leningrad, 1928

[^2]: IN MANCHESTER

[^3]: DEAR FRED,

[^4]: A See this volume, p. 12. - b Der Social-Demokrat, No. 39, 29 March 1868. - < Gustav Mever



