---
Volume: 43
Document_Title: "8. Engels to Marx. 20 April "
Page_Range: "51-52"
---

# 8. Engels to Marx. 20 April 



**[p. 14]**

movement was upsetting, too. T h e suppuration has stopped completely this morning. T h e wounds themselves heal rapidly. I shall go out again today. With the help of arsenic I now hope that this disgusting muck is finished.

T h e Viennese affairs enclosed were sent by Fox, who is also responsible for the pencil marks.

O n Tuesdayd I have to pay £ 5 for school and £ 1 5s. for gymnastic classes for Tussy. If it is possible for you to send this by return, I would appreciate it very much, for the sake of the child.

T h e departure is still a good way off. Kugelmann jumps to conclusions too rapidly. I only wrote to him that I would be coming SOME TIME OK OTHER.13

Becker's appeal, 3 0 which is enclosed, demonstrates again the great lack of discipline. We stopped the collections in the London UNIONS, and the Parisians did the same, because it is only now that we are informed that further money is needed. If they had telegraphed from Geneva on the same day, it would have been ALL

RIGHT.

Salut.

Your

K. M.

8

ENGELS T O MARX

IN LONDON

Manchester, 20 April 1868

Dear Moor,

[^1]: First published in Der Briefwechsel zwischen Printed according to the original F. Engels und K. Marx, Bd. 4, Stuttgart, 1913 Published in English for the first time

[^2]: Enclosed two fivers to satisfy the schoolmasters. Just like the Geneva people to dawdle. It is a naive presumption too that, now that the STRIKE 16 is over, the world should help the Genevans to pay the debts contracted during the STRIKE. I have never seen anything like that in this country. Here they only ask

[^3]: a 21 April - b See this volume, p. 13.



