---
Volume: 43
Document_Title: "9. Marx to Engels. 21 April "
Page_Range: "52-53"
---

# 9. Marx to Engels. 21 April 



**[p. 15]**

for support as long as the STRIKE lasts.

T h e Vienna paper a appears to contribute to a deliberate confusion created by the industrial interests, which is obviously grafted on to the spontaneous naive-helpless confusion. In the end, you always encounter a distinctly bourgeois tendency— accordingly, the paper no longer reports the workers' meetings, but instructs them. With best greetings.

Your

F. E.

First published in Der Briefwechsel zwischen Printed according to the original F. Engels und K. Marx, Bd. 4, Stuttgart, jgjg Published in English for the first time

9

MARX T O ENGELS

IN MANCHESTER

[London,] 21 April 1868

My arm is in order again, there is just the healing itch. For some years now I have made the curious observation that my urine, which in my normal state deposits chalk or whatever it is, becomes quite clear when I have carbuncles. And in fact the mineral deposit is now appearing again. Perhaps Gumpert knows something about it.

[^1]: DEAR FRED,

[^2]: BEST THANKS FOR THE £10. Yesterday I went out for a walk again, and now here comes Jennychen to drive me out again on the pretext that you entrusted her with supervision over me.

[^3]: Apropos. Wilhelm is now sending me his rag, too.b How loyal it is of the man to call my Herr Vogt a 'deserving book' instead of saying that there are many bad jokes in it.31 And then: the Prussians persecute Hanoverians who were 'loyal to their king' ! T h e n : regarding Edgar Bauer on the paying of the South German

[^4]: a Presumably Neues Wiener Tagblatt - h Demokratisches Wochenblatt



