---
Volume: 43
Document_Title: "11. Engels to Marx. 26 April "
Page_Range: "56-57"
---

# 11. Engels to Marx. 26 April 



**[p. 11]**

ENGELS TO MARX34

IN LONDON

Manchester, 26 April 1868 Dear Moor,

The business with the rate of profit and the value of money is very neat and very clear. The only thing that is unclear to me is

how you can assume as rate of profit, for m does not flow c+v J r ' solely into the pockets of the industrialist who produces it, but has to be shared with the merchant, etc.; unless you are taking the whole branch of business together here, therefore disregarding how m is divided up between manufacturer, wholesaler, retailer, etc. In general, I am very keen to see your exposition of this point.

Wilhelmchen, as you will have seen, is now also singing the praises of the honourable Jakobus Venedeyl And they resemble one another just like one jackass resembles another. I have had enough of it now, I shall not write to him any more. Let him make a fool of himself on his own account.

To write 400c+100t» + 100m is quite acceptable, just as is £400 3s. 4d.

You have seen that the comfortable relationship between the honest Bismarck and his Reichstagers is beginning to come to an end; the latter want to make the officials of the debt administra- tion legally answerable, and Otto the Great3 cannot stand that, naturally. He'll not build them no fleet for that.35

To give full expression to the hangover affecting handsome Williamb because he confiscated the lands and property of his cousin Georg,c3fi the Prussian commission to administer King Georg's property is composed of General von Kotze and Re- gierungsrat Sauerhering (literally).d

It is very nice of Jenny that she dutifully drags you out to go for walks. I hope that she does not allow herself to be scared off by your physical indolence disguised as your need to work; in the present fine weather it would be shameful if you stayed at home. I hope that no traces of new carbuncles have shown themselves.

[^1]: a Otto von Bismarck - b William I - c Georg V - d Kotze means 'vomit', Sauerhering means 'pickled herring'.



