---
Volume: 43
Document_Title: "14. Engels to Marx. 6 May "
Page_Range: "65-67"
---

# 14. Engels to Marx. 6 May 



**[p. 28]**

conditions in these branches; all the more so since Messrs manufacturers are 'demanding' the protective tariffs solely 'for the protection' of the workers, and have in addition discovered that 'the value of iron' consists only 'of wages and freight'.

2. No reduction of tariffs before an enquête into how the railways misuse their monopoly, and before their freight (and passenger) tariffs are controlled by legal regulations.

I would like your view immediately, and also immediate return of the enclosures.

Very nice that your home-town chamber of commerce should bemoan the growing power and menace of the International Working Men's Association.

Salut.

First published abridged in Der Briefwech- sel zwischen F. Engels und K. Marx, Bd. 4, Stuttgart, 1913 and in full in MEGA, Abt. III, Bd. 4, Berlin, 1931. Marx's note appended to the letter was first published in: Marx and Engels, Works, Second Russian Edition, Vol. 32, Moscow, 1964

14

Manchester, 6 May 1868

Dear Moor,

I congratulate ANYHOW on the half saeculum,3 from which, incidentally, I am also only a short span away. Indeed, what juvenile enthusiasts we were 25 years ago when we boasted that by this time we would long have been beheaded.

Enclosed returning Kugelmann, Büchner, Schily, Reclus,46

Schweitzer49 and the Elberfelder Zeitung, and additionally some- thing on your book which Siebel's wife sent me 50; he appears to be

Your

K. M.

Printed according to the original

Published in English in full for the first time

[^1]: ENGELS TO MARX48

[^2]: IN LONDON

[^3]: a century



no longer capable of writing, is in Barmen and going to Godesberg.

The profit story is very nice,a but I shall have to think it over further in order to grasp the portée0 in all its aspects.

Ad vocemc Schweitzer. The rascal is utilising this business simply as an inducement to make us take the bait again. Of course, it does not matter that you give him information this time, but principiis obstadl Don't let the fellow catch your little finger lest he make an attempt on your whole hand. On the subject itself, I have no doubt at all that the German iron industry could dispense with the protective tariff, a majore,e therefore, could also stand the reduction of the tariff on pig iron from 7 V2 groschen to 5 groschen per hundredweight (from 15s. to 10s. per ton), and the other reductions likewise. The export of iron is increasing every year, and not only to Belgium. This would bring ruin to a few ironworks established during the wave of speculation in the 50s, situated a long way from the coal and otherwise based on insufficient, poor pits. But these are for the most part already kaputt, and the vicinity of a railway would be more use to them than any protective tariff if they should ever become viable again. (There is one like this in Engelskirchen, 500 paces from my brothers' factory—the coal has to be brought from Siegburg, 2 Va German miles/ by wagon — no wonder it lies idle. This sort of works cries out for protective tariff, and is cited as proof that it is necessary.)

The Elberfeld-Barmen Chamber of Commerce is the nastiest protective tariff institution there is, and notorious for it. Even though the main industry of the district is aimed at export. However, there are always a lot of trades in decline there, hence the lamentations.

For the rest, your plan about the enquête^ is rather good, and I like it very much. As far as railways go, the freight charges in Germany are lower than elsewhere, and, since goods traffic is the main thing in Germany, this could not be otherwise. They could be pushed still lower, and the governments have the power to do it, but what is most necessary is greater centralisation and equalisa- tion in administration and freight charges, and constitutionally this is a matter for the Reichstag. By and large, the iron-chaps have no cause to yell about high freights.

[^1]: a See this volume, pp. 21-25. - b meaning - c As regards - d guard against the first step (Ovid, Remédia amoris) - e even more - f The German mile (Meile) was a linear measure of different length in different German states, but it can be regarded as roughly 4 '/2 miles. - g enquiry



