---
Volume: 43
Document_Title: "15. Marx to Engels. 7 May "
Page_Range: "67-68"
---

# 15. Marx to Engels. 7 May 



**[p. 30]**

Liebknecht has sent me the trades regulations, on which I have promised him some critical comments.51 Progress compared to the regression under Frederick William IV, but what bureaucratic confusion. I am sending you the stuff for the fun of it.

Yesterday the inevitable Leibel Choras arrived and prevented me writing. I asked him about the persecution of Jews in Moldavia; he wailed a bit, but it does not appear to be all that bad: we have to bear it, we Jews do not have the power; he would like to be Russian or Austrian, but it does not occur to him to leave. The Hohenzollern is a stupid boy, and the government in the hands of the 'clerks' (boyars in reduced circumstances playing at bureaucracy) and they squeeze the Jews so.

Many greetings to your wife, the girls and Monsieur and Madame Lafargue.

Your

F. E.

First published in Der Briefwechsel zwischen Printed according to the original F. Engels und K. Marx, Bd. 4, Stuttgart, . 19J3 Published in English in full for the first time

15

[London,] 7 May 1868

Now I would like to ask you for information on another subject. However, you can postpone this if it should interrupt the work for the Fortnightly, which is urgent.11

In order to use the data on your factory given on p. 18652— completely sufficient to illustrate the rate of surplus value—for the rate of profit, the following would be necessary:

[^1]: MARX TO ENGELS48

[^2]: IN MANCHESTER

[^3]: DEAR FRED,

[^4]: BEST THANKS for your marginal notes. I have included them in the letter to Schweitzer as far as necessary. My letter is so coolly phrased that it will not be 'shown around'.49

[^5]: The point is that I would like to link up with Volume I in the examples given in Volume II.41



