---
Volume: 43
Document_Title: "16. Marx to Joseph Dietzgen. 9 May "
Page_Range: "68-69"
---

# 16. Marx to Joseph Dietzgen. 9 May 



**[p. 31]**

1. T h e missing data on the capital advanced for the factory building and the percentage of the SINKING FUND for this. Ditto WAREHOUSE. In both cases, the RENT should be given, if paid. Also the office costs and costs of staff for the WAREHOUSE.

With regard to the steam engine, no data is given on the percentage at which the weekly wear and tear is calculated, and therefore the capital advanced for the steam engine is not visible either.

2. Now the real question. How do you calculate the turnover of the circulating part of capital (i.e. raw material, auxiliary materials, wages)? How great then is the circulating capital advanced? I would like to receive this answered in detail, even illustrated, particularly the turnover calculation of the circulating capital advanced.

Tomorrow I shall send you the crazy Urquhart for your amusement.

Salut.

Your

K. M.

First published in Der Briefwechsel zwischen Printed according to the original F. Engels und K. Marx, Bd. 4, Stuttgart, . , . , . , , , r 1913 Published in English in full tor the first time

16

IN PETERSBURG

[London, 9 May 1868]

When I have cast off the burden of political economy, I shall write a 'Dialectic'. T h e true laws of dialectics are already contained in Hegel, though in a mystical form. What is needed is to strip away this form

First published in Der Volksstaat, Nr. 3, Printed according to the newspaper 9 January 1876 Published in English for the first time

[^1]: MARX T O JOSEPH DIETZGEN 5 3



