---
Volume: 43
Document_Title: "18. Engels to Marx. 15 May "
Page_Range: "71-72"
---

# 18. Engels to Marx. 15 May 



**[p. 34]**

begin with the conversion of money into capital, but how is still quite unclear. What do you think about this? With best greetings,

Your

F. E.

First published in Der Briefwechsel zwischen Printed according to the original F. Engels und K. Marx, Bd. 4, Stuttgart, . . 1913 Published m English in full for the first time

18

ENGELS TO MARX

IN LONDON

Manchester, 15 May 1868

Dear Moor,

You will probably have heard that Siebel died on the 9th inst. My mother wrote me that shortly before he had told his wife she should go to bed, which she did; suddenly she could no longer hear his breath, jumped up and found him dead. I am sending you 2 notices from his wife, one of which I ask you to send to Freiligrath.

Enclosed 6 prints of Lupus'a photograph. Further something about Kobes'b present activities. Have you read about the Ebergenyi trial?55 Chorinsky's letters are in fact unparalleled. One can see that the Austrians are still awaiting their 1789. I shall send you the relevant Zukunft this evening. The Ebergenyi woman is said to receive masses of visitors in her 'convict prison' with a cigarette in her mouth and as merry as a cricket.

Best greetings.

Your

F. E.

Apropos. The articles in the Fortnightly are all signed. If this is the rule, it would be most unfortunate, since then it would be easy to see through the business. In any case, I would have to know if

[^1]: a Wilhelm Wolff's - b Jakob Venedey's



