---
Volume: 43
Document_Title: "19. Marx to Engels. 16 May "
Page_Range: "72-74"
---

# 19. Marx to Engels. 16 May 



**[p. 35]**

the article must be signed, for this would change the formulation a lot, and know right away for I have reached the stage where I can start.3 What is your answer to these questions?

First published abridged in Der Briefwech- Printed according to the original sei zwischen F. Engels und K. Marx, Bd. 4, Stuttgart, 1913 and in full in MEGA, Published in English for the first Abt. Ill, Bd. 4, Berlin, 1931 t l m e

19

MARX TO ENGELS56

IN MANCHESTER

[London,] 16 May 1868

DEAR FRED,

My silence for a week has perhaps already been explained to you by Schorlemmer.b Two carbuncles on the scrotum would perhaps have made even Sulla peevish. How greatly that man, despite his more-than-Palmerstonian TEMPER, was affected by his mythical but anyway lousy sickness, is shown by the fact that just 10 days before his death he had the decurion seized in a neighbouring city, and 1 day before he himself croaked had him strangled in his own house.07

In addition, I have all sorts of trouble. For example, on the 28th of this month a bill for £15 due at the butcher's, etc. To my urgent petitions to Holland no answer.58

Finally I had cajoled myself with the illusion that by this time I would have a 2nd edition,c and thus see money for the first. But I had added up the bill without the host—I do not mean the Volkswirt,0 but the Germans in general.

POOR Siebel! In a way he had himself prepared his premature death. But WITH ALL THAT he was a good fellow. We are unlucky— Daniels, Wolff, Schramm, Weydemeyer, Siebel, Weerth! Not to speak of the living dead.

As regards The Fortnightly Review,11 I had long considered this point, and had long arranged with Lafargue (the actual negotiator with Beesly) that you should appear under any old nom de guerre,

[^1]: a See this volume, pp. 35-36 and 37, and Note 11. - b See this volume, p. 33. - c of the first volume of Capital - d Marx plays on the words Wirt (host) and Volkswirt (political economist).





**[p. 36]**

which you must let us know. Beesly himself will not be informed who the man is. And it is all the same to him. Apart from other considerations, the impact in Germany would be greatly lessened if the stuff appeared under your name.

In your last letter3 you made a mistake on one point. The notes used on p. 18652 you yourself wrote late one evening in my notebook, which still exists.59 The notes of the Russian Ermen,b on the other hand, referred mainly to technical things.

Incidentally, the main thing for me was to ascertain the magnitude of the advanced circulating capital, i.e. advanced in raw material, etc., and wages, as against the circulating capital turned over. I have enough STATEMENTS, part of them from manufacturers, handed in either to the COMMISSIONERS c or to private economists. But everywhere only the annual accounts. The devil of the thing is that there is a wide divergence in political economy between what is of practical interest and what is theoretically necessary, so that one cannot even find the necessary material, as in other sciences.

I have received cuttings from Berlin newspapers from Eichhoff and sent him cuttings from here in RETURN. We have also exchanged two letters.60 But now the enclosed shows, what Borkheim half guessed on his last visit to Berlin, that Eichhoff has let himself into concessions quoadd Stieber. Probably from sheer stupidity. For this reason he has taken up political economy as a neutral field.61 For the rest, it appears that he feels uneasy, and he told Borkheim that, after swotting up properly on economy, he will exchange Berlin for Vienna, i.\ ABOUT 6 MONTHS

In the Essener Zeitung a pompous denunciation of the Interna- tional Working Men's Association.

Did you read the warlike SPEECH by Failly when taking over the command of Chalons? I have once again worked through the finances of the Empire. And only one thing appears clear to me, that Badinguete must make war.

Salut.

Your

K. M.

[^1]: First published in Der Briefwechsel zwischen F. Engels und K. Marx, Bd. 4, Stuttgart, 1913

[^2]: Printed according to the original

[^3]: Published in English in full for the first time

[^4]: a See this volume, pp. 32-34. - b Anton Ermen - ' members of Parliamentary investigating commissions - d with regard to - e nickname of Napoleon III (after the name of a mason in whose clothes he escaped from prison in 1846)



