---
Volume: 43
Document_Title: "20. Engels to Marx. 22 May "
Page_Range: "74-75"
---

# 20. Engels to Marx. 22 May 



**[p. 20]**

ENGELS TO MARX

IN LONDON

Manchester, 22 May 1868

Dear Moor,

Schorlemmer had told me about one carbuncle, but two a tempo,1' and in addition in that place where, it is true, everything exists in pairs, c'est vraiment trop} I hope they have gone, and that the arsenic will hold back further ones.

I shall send you the money for the bill. Have you heard anything from Meissner? If not, the time would have come to ask how sales have been going; on this point he owes you an accounting after the Easter Fair as associé in the business. Then you could also refer to the advertisement asked for by Meissner,8 the man is still waiting for a reply from me.

The Fortnightly article11 will thus be written as though by an Englishman—that is how I understand you. Incidentally, I still cannot get past the beginning. It is damned difficult to make clear the dialectical method to the English who read the reviews, and I surely cannot approach the crowd with the equations C— M— C, etc.

Did my last letter give you the data you need?c If not, formulate your questions and I shall see what can be done.

Schorlemmer says that you spoke of coming here soon, which would be very desirable. The change of air will do you more good than anything else. This week and the beginning of next our house is in a revolution because of CLEANING AND WHITEWASHING, but if you can come at the end of next week, that would be very nice; you know that in the Whit week I always have plenty of time to spare. Don't forget that you promised to bring Tussy with you.

Eichhoff has finally terminated his lectures on crises.25 As was to be expected, the mortgage crisis in Berlin was the core and finale of the whole thing. But the poor devil appears finally to have bored even the reporter of the Zukunft so much that he only reported on it quite briefly and incomprehensibly.d

[^1]: a at a time - b that is really too much - c See this volume, pp. 32-34. - d Die Zukunft, No. 174, 15 May 1868 (morning edition). Engels refers to the report on the last of Eichhoff's series of lectures, 'Die Ursachen der Handelsstockungen der Gegenwart', delivered in Alt-Kölln, Berlin.



