---
Volume: 43
Document_Title: "24. Marx to Engels. 20 June "
Page_Range: "79-81"
---

# 24. Marx to Engels. 20 June 



**[p. 23]**

MARX T O ENGELS

IN MANCHESTER

London, 27 May 1868

DEAR FRED,

THANKS FOR £ 2 5 . Departure: Friday a from King's Cross 11.30. Salut.

Your

K. M.

First published in Der Briefwechsel zwischen Printed according to the original F. Engels und K. Marx, Bd. 4, Stuttgart, , , . , , • ,• , r i r- 10.13 Published in English for the Irrst time

24

MARX T O ENGELS

IN MANCHESTER

[^1]: [London,] 20 JUNE 1868

[^2]: DEAR FRED,

[^3]: Immediately after my return to London 6 8—our trip was marvelous—I found whole bundles of dunning and threatening letters. T h e people had been turned away with the excuse that I was 'travelling'. But one might think the electric telegraph had announced my return to these fellows. Si licet parva componere magnis,b OLD Niebuhr (the father of the HISTORIAN) relates with what speed the FACTS of the SILESIAN WAR 6a travelled from Europe to Asia IN NO TIME simply through the telegraphy of people's tongues. And a m o n g creditors this form of natural telegraphy appears to work even more efficiently. Among the bills there are various ones that can scarcely be delayed for one week; the worst, however, is the

[^4]: a 29 May - b If one may compare the small with the great





**[p. 43]**

enclosed scrawl payable on Tuesday,3 for, if the GAS SUPPLY is publicly cut off, things will get quite out of control.

Last Tuesday 0 there was a meeting of the International. In the meantime, papers have come into my hands which have made unavoidable a RESCINDING of the RESOLUTIONS AS TO THE CONGRESS.70 D'abordf the declaration by Minister of Justice Bara that the Congress is not permitted to take place in Brussels.d Secondly, a printed manifesto of the COMMITTEES of Brussels and Verviers in which they throw down the gauntlet to the Minister.e Thirdly, letters from De Paepe and Vandenhouten that we would ruin the Association in Belgium by transferring the Congress. This would be interpreted as a concession to the government, etc.

I do not even mention the lousy intrigues of Vésinier, who is now here, and also Pyat, etc. Naturally they have been spreading the r u m o u r that we are working at the dictation of Bonaparte.

They believed that a big scandal was to be expected at this last meeting and therefore sent guests to us. They were very désappointés when I withdrew my RESOLUTIONS after reading and referring to the documents, etc. I put the matter thus: T h e law against the FOREIGNERS was in no way a special threat against the International. It was general. T h e International would, however, have made a concession to the Belgian government if, under such legislation, it had selected Brussels as its MEETING PLACE. N O W the matter was the other way round. Now that the Belgian govern- ment had directly threatened and provoked us we would be making a concession to it if we moved the Congress away from Brussels, etc. At the same time, I made a few very contemptuous jokes about the heroic tone adopted by those who attacked my RESOLUTIONS (Odger, etc.) before they knew the CHANGED STATE OF

T h e heat is very nasty for me. I shall have Gumpert's medicine made u p for me, since I have 'puked' (as Mrs Blind would say) for

[^1]: CIRCUMSTANCES. THE ONLY DANGER THAT COULD HAVE BEEN INCURRED, WAS THAT OF

[^2]: CHEAP MARTYRDOM AND RIDICULE. MRS Law shouted 'HEAR, HEAR' for me several times, and showed her support by d r u m m i n g on the table. Anyhow I managed things so that the laughter turned against Odger, etc., and that the RESCINDING of the RESOLUTIONS did not appear as a victory on their part.

[^3]: a 23 June - b 9 June - c First of all - d J. Bara's speech in the Chamber of Deputies of 16 May 1868, reported in La Voix de l'avenir, No. 23, 7 June 1868 and La Liberté, No. 47, 17 May 1868. - e 'A Monsieur Bara, ministre de la justice', La Tribune du peuple, No. 5, 24 May 1868.

[^4]: 4*



