---
Volume: 43
Document_Title: "26. Marx to Engels. 23 June "
Page_Range: "82-83"
---

# 26. Marx to Engels. 23 June 



**[p. 26]**

MARX T O ENGELS 4 8

IN MANCHESTER

London, 23 JUNE 1868

DEAR FRED,

BEST THANKS FOR THE £10. Tussychen and Jennychen are both unfortunately very unwell— sore throats a n d vomiting. If things d o not get better TODAY, I shall have to call a doctor. O u r Allen suddenly became paralysed a week ago, so he cannot leave his house.

Vésinier is wrangling here in the FRENCH BRANCH 72 against Dupont and Jung, both of whom he brands 'as Bonapartists'. During my absence he attended a meeting of the CENTRAL COUNCIL73 (which he has no right to do) and has written a fantastic report in the

Cigale (Brussels paper). 7 4 T h e venue of the Congress was just being discussed.70

Lafargue cannot possibly sign,a since he is a FRENCHMAN, and in addition, my SON-IN-LAW. Sign it A. Williams or SOMETHING OF THE SORT. It would be best if Sam Moore signed.

Salut.

Your

K. M.

after that he suddently does an about turn and wants to develop

[^1]: Yesterday BY ACCIDENT I came across a fine passage in A. Smith. After he h a d explained that LABOUR the PRIME COST, etc., and nearly said the right things though with constant contradictions; after he had ditto declared:

[^2]: 'THE PROFITS OF STOCK, IT MAY PERHAPS BE THOUGHT, ARE ONLY A DIFFERENT NAME FOR THE WAGES OF A PARTICULAR SORT OF LABOUR, THE LABOUR OF INSPECTION AND DIRECTION. THEY ARE, HOWEVER, ALTOGETHER DIFFERENT, ARE REGULATED BY QUITE DIFFERENT PRINCIPLES, AND BEAR NO PROPORTION TO THE QUANTITY, THE HARDSHIP, OR THE INGENUITY OF THIS SUPPOSED LABOUR OF INSPECTION AND DIRECTION',

[^3]: WAGES, PROFIT, RENT, as the 'COMPONENT PARTS OF NATURAL PRICE' (with him = VALUE). Among other things, there is the following fine passage:

[^4]: a See this volume, p. 44. - b A. Smith, An Inquiry into the Nature and Causes of the Wealth of Nations, Vol. 1, Edinburgh, 1814, p. 78.



