---
Volume: 43
Document_Title: "27. Engels to Marx. 24 June "
Page_Range: "83-84"
---

# 27. Engels to Marx. 24 June 



**[p. 46]**

' W H E N T H E PRICE O F ANY COMMODITY IS NEITHER MORE NOR LESS T H A N W H A T IS

SUFFICIENT T O PAY T H E R E N T O F T H E LAND, T H E WAGES O F T H E LABOUR, AND T H E

PROFITS O F T H E STOCK EMPLOYED I N RAISING, PREPARING AND BRINGING I T T O MARKET,

ACCORDING T O T H E I R NATURAL RATES, T H E COMMODITY IS T H E N SOLD FOR W H A T MAY BE

CALLED ITS NATURAL PRICE. T H E COMMODITY IS T H E N SOLD PRECISELY FOR WHAT IT IS

WORTH, OR FOR WHAT IT REALLY COSTS THE PERSON W H O BRINGS I T T O MARKET; FOR

T H O U G H IN COMMON LANGUAGE THE PRIME COST O F ANY COMMODITY DOES NOT

COMPREHEND THE PROFIT O F T H E PERSON W H O IS T O SELL I T AGAIN, YET, IF HE SELLS I T

AT A PRICE W H I C H DOES N O T ALLOW HIM T H E ORDINARY RATE OF PROFIT IN HIS

NEIGHBOURHOOD, HE IS EVIDENTLY A LOSER BY T H E TRADE; SINCE, BY EMPLOYING HIS STOCK IN SOME OTHER WAY, HE MIGHT HAVE MADE THAT PROFIT.' (The existence of profit in the 'neighbourhood' as an explanation for the same!) 'His PROFIT, BESIDES, IS HIS REVENUE THE PROPER FUND OF HIS SUBSISTENCE. As, WHILE HE IS PREPARING AND BRINGING THE GOODS TO MARKET, HE ADVANCES TO HIS WORKMEN THEIR WAGES, OR THEIR SUBSISTENCE; SO HE ADVANCES TO HIMSELF, IN THE SAME MANNER, HIS OWN SUBSISTENCE; WHICH IS GENERALLY SUITABLE TO THE PROFIT WHICH HE MAY REASONA- BLY EXPECT FROM THE SALE OF HIS GOODS. UNLESS THEY YIELD HIM THIS PROFIT, THEREFORE, THEY DO NOT REPAY HIM WHAT THEY MAY VERY PROPERLY BE SAID TO HAVE COST HIM.'3

This second manner of pressing the profit into the PRIME COST—because already consumed—is really fine.

The same man, in whom the organs of pissing and generation also coincide mentally,75 stated previously:

27

ENGELS TO MARX

Manchester, 24 June 1868

Dear Moor,

[^1]: 'AS SOON AS STOCK HAS ACCUMULATED IN THE HANDS OF PARTICULAR PERSONS THE VALUE WHICH THE WORKMEN ADD TO THE MATERIALS RESOLVES ITSELF INTO TWO PARTS, OF WHICH THE ONE PAYS THEIR WAGES, THE OTHER THE PROFITS OF THEIR EMPLOYER UPON THE WHOLE STOCK OF MATERIALS AND WAGES WHICH HE ADVANCED.'b

[^2]: First published abridged in Der Briefwech- Printed according to the original sei zwischen F. Engels und K. Marx, Bd. 4, Stuttgart, 1913 and in full in MEGA Published in English in full for the Abt. I l l , Bd. 4, Berlin, 1931 f l r s t t l m e

[^3]: I N L O N D O N

[^4]: Enclosed S/K 60 115 and 60 116—two fivers. Yesterday I had such a fuss because of the building work in the Schiller Institute 76

[^5]: a Ibid., p p . 88-89. - b Ibid., p p . 77-78.



