---
Volume: 43
Document_Title: "31. Marx to Engels. 26 June "
Page_Range: "86-87"
---

# 31. Marx to Engels. 26 June 



**[p. 49]**

off remarkably benignly. What sort of a doctor have you got, for you cannot take risks in such cases; my means are at your disposal, write or telegraph if you need anything, and you will have it immediately if it is at all possible.

Yesterday I sent you two five-pound notes S/K 60 115 and 60 116 unregistered.

Let me know very frequently how things are going. Lizzie was terribly upset when I read this out to her; she has a tremendous affection for Tussy and talks about her all day long.''8 And now good little Jenny has to get the sickness, too. You have really been terribly unlucky.

Under these circumstances, I do not wish to write about other things, and they would not interest you as long as the present state of affairs continues. I enclose a few lines to Tussy to entertain her, and on the orders of Lizzie.78 On no account leave us without news.

Your

F. E.

First published in Der Briefwechsel zwischen Printed according to the original F. Engels und K. Marx, Bd. 4, Stuttgart, JÇJJ3 Published in English for the first time

31

MARX TO ENGELS

BEST THANKS FOR £10. The business with the children is going relatively well. (Tus- sychen was very pleased with your letter?8) Our doctor is our neighbour, the Irishman Dr Korklow, who is known in the neighbourhood particularly as a scarlet-fever doctor (also in the school which my children attended). In case of need, i.e. as soon as there is the slightest disquieting change, Lafargue will bring a doctor from his hospital. So far this has not been necessary.

[^1]: IN MANCHESTER

[^2]: London, 26 June 1868a

[^3]: DEAR FRED,

[^4]: ;i 1868 is not in Marx's handwriting.



