---
Volume: 43
Document_Title: "32. Engels to Marx. 26 June "
Page_Range: "87-88"
---

# 32. Engels to Marx. 26 June 



**[p. 50]**

I would appreciate it if you could send me a bit more money, since the major part of the £20 had to be spent to partly pay off the most urgent small debts.

Lafargue has told Beesly that 1 article is pending.11 Beesly says it must come in good time to find a place in the August number.3

My head is naturally IN TURMOIL. Since I can do nothing serious, I am writing up the stuff for Eichhoff.79 It will go off tomorrow.

Salut.

Your

Moor (verte b)

Jennychen told Tussy that she had turned from her former higher Chinese character into a LOCALISED (IRISH) BEING and was therefore no longer showing due respect to the EMPEROR.0 Tussy

r e p l i e d : FORMERLY I CLUNG TO A MAN, NOW I CLING TO A NATION.

First published abridged in Der Briefwech- Printed according to the original sei zwischen F. Engels und K. Marx, Bd. 4, Stuttgart, 1913 and in full in MEGA, Published m English for the first Abt. Ill, Bd. 4, Berlin, 1931 u m e

32

ENGELS TO MARX

Manchester, 26 June 1868

Dear Moor,

Yesterday evening, after I had written to you, I went to Gumpert to ask him about SCARLATINA, but found his house so full of patients and Solomonic persons that I couldn't really approach him. I therefore saw him again today and asked him whether he could recommend a doctor, since Allen was sick. He said the main thing was to have a man who, even if not excessively CLEVER, should really live nearby, should come 3-4 times a day at critical times, and always be on call. In his opinion, Lafargue is quite capable of handling this case properly, and if you want further assistance,

[^1]: IN LONDON

[^2]: a of The Fortnightly Review - b turn (the postscript is on the back of the sheet) - c pet name for Marx's daughter Jenny



