---
Volume: 43
Document_Title: "33. Marx to Engels. 27 June "
Page_Range: "88-89"
---

# 33. Marx to Engels. 27 June 



**[p. 51]**

Allen would be the best man to recommend one of the doctors in the vicinity. Apart from this, fresh air and PLENTY OF IT is the main thing; he himself usually prescribes washing with vinegar and water and disinfection of the house with chloride of lime; all this cannot, however, be decreed from a distance. In such acute sicknesses medicines are not really much use.

You will have received the second ten pounds in 2 fivers which I sent you the day before yesterday. Enclosed a further five pounds S/K 46 795, and next week I shall send you some more.

Incidentally, Gumpert did comfort me greatly and he confirmed that this year this sickness occurs in an exceptionally mild form.

Lizzie is afraid that you might think that Tussy could have caught the germ of the sickness here and she has urged me to write that everybody here is healthy.

Sincere greetings to your wife, the two patients,3 Laura and Laf argue.

Your

F. E.

First published abridged in Der Briefwech- sel zwischen F. Engels und K. Marx, Bd. 4, Stuttgart, 1913 and in full in MEGA, Abt. III, Bd. 4, Berlin, 1931

Printed according to the original

33

London, 27 June 1868

£5 received with THANKS. The children are getting along very well. The suppuration and swelling of the throat has improved so much that today the doctor prescribed a hearty DINNER for them (hitherto they had only port and Liebigb). They consumed the DINNER with ZEST. From the beginning Korklow prescribed air. Instead of the CHLORIDE OF LIME

[^1]: a Jenny and Eleanor Marx - h beef tea

[^2]: Published in English for the first time

[^3]: MARX T O ENGELS80

[^4]: IN MANCHESTER

[^5]: DEAR FRED,



