---
Volume: 43
Document_Title: "34. Engels to Marx. 28 June "
Page_Range: "89-90"
---

# 34. Engels to Marx. 28 June 



**[p. 52]**

another (newer) disinfectant, since he regards the former as injurious to the lungs. Luckily our house is built in such a way, and in particular the children's rooms are so situated, that they are plentifully provided with ventilation coming from every side.

Tell MRS LIZZY (TO WHOM TUSSY SENDS HER LOVE) that Manchester was not for a moment held responsible here. SCARLATINA and MEASLES are now epidemic in London. Tussy probably CAUGHT THE INFECTION FROM

THE DAUGHTER OF PROFESSOR FRANKLAND. Best greetings to Lizzy from me.

Your

Moor

Today I received a curious document. I have been summoned to appear next Wednesday a before the VESTRY of St. Pancras TO SHOW CAUSE WHY MY GOODS AND CHATTELS SHOULD NOT BE DISTRAINED. F o r t h e accursed VESTRY elected me bon gré mal gréh as 'CONSTABLE OF THE VESTRY OF ST. PANCRAS', and I went to Manchester68 instead of taking over the office and swearing the appropriate oath of office. Dr Korklow, to whom I showed the SUMMONS today, said that it WAS AN HONOUR MUCH VALUED BY THE PHILISTINES OF ST. PANCRAS. I SHOULD TELL THEM THAT I WAS A FOREIGNER AND THAT THEY SHOULD KISS ME ON THE ARSE.

34

Manchester, 28 June 1868

Dear Moor,

You lifted a heavy stone from all our hearts with your letter of yesterday. The day before yesterday and even yesterday everybody here in the house was very depressed, but today everybody is merry as a cricket again, and I myself feel quite different.

[^1]: First published abridged in Der Briefwech- Printed according to the original sei zwischen F. Engels und K. Marx, Bd. 4, Stuttgart, 1913 and in full in MECA, Abt. III, Bd. 4, Berlin, 1931

[^2]: ENGELS T O MARX 5 6

[^3]: IN LONDON

[^4]: The article is finished.11 You are quite right, Sam c is the man to

[^5]: 1 July - b whether I would or not - c Samuel Moore



