---
Volume: 43
Document_Title: "35. Marx to Engels. 29 June "
Page_Range: "90-91"
---

# 35. Marx to Engels. 29 June 



**[p. 53]**

sign it. I shall tell him today and at the same time give him the article to look through and to note possible Germanisms. But let me know by return whether I can keep it for a few days more, say, till Wednesday3 evening; if not, I can send it off on Monday. The second and final article71 (the first goes up to the conclusion of absolute surplus value) can then be finished by the end of this inst., since I am unlikely to leave here before then, so the two articles can directly follow one another. First I shall send the Zukunft the article about Prussian military nomenclature.81

Salut, ô connétable de Saint Pancrace!b Now you should get yourself a worthy outfit: a red nightshirt, white nightcap, down-at-the-heel slippers, white pants, a long clay pipe and a POT OF PORTER. Lafargue, as your squire, can invent his uniform himself. As you see, the Pancratian philistines insist that you should sacrifice yourself for the common good. And this year-long, touching attachment which nothing could shake—this you intend to reciprocate with the cold negation of KISS MY—? But 'that's just like the communists'.

Give Jennychen my heartiest greetings and tell her that since she has now finally had a fever, I would like to have heard her speaking in delirium; there would have been more sense and poetry in it than fat Freiligrath will ever develop. Ditto best greetings to your wife and the two Lafargues.

Your

F. E.

35

MARX TO ENGELS

London, 29 JUNE 1868

[^1]: First published abridged in Der Briefwech- Printed according to the original sei zwischen F. Engels und K. Marx, Bd. 4, Stuttgart, 1913 and in full in MEGA, Published m English in full for the Abt. Ill, Bd. 4, Berlin, 1931 f l r s t t l m e

[^2]: IN MANCHESTER

[^3]: DEAR FRED,

[^4]: BEST COMPLIMENTS FROM Tussy and Jennychen. The doctor0 is very satisfied although POOR Jenny is suffering from SLEEPLESSNESS and also

[^5]: 1 1 July - b Greetings, constable of St. Paneras! (See previous letter.) - c Korklow



