---
Volume: 43
Document_Title: "36. Marx to Engels. 2 July "
Page_Range: "91-92"
---

# 36. Marx to Engels. 2 July 



**[p. 54]**

from coughing. H e said today: as soon as the children are over their illness, they should leave London immediately a n d be sent to the seaside. (Perhaps they could go together with Lizzie?)

Enclosed copies of Elberfelder Zeitung which reached me today from Germany. Dr. Fr. Schnacke is named on the ENVELOPE as the author 3 and sender; I remember his name from 1848, but d o not know him personally. THERE IS MUCH MUDDLING IN HIS ARTICLES.

T h e r e is time enough if you send me the ARTICLE by the end of this week.11

I am very TIRED as the anxiety of the recent period completely prevented me from sleeping.

Salut.

Your

K. M.

Today a letter from Kugelmann. 4 pages about the treatment of SCARLATINA.b Dietzgen from Petersburg visited him at Whitsun on his way to the Rhine.

First published in MEGA, Abt. Ill, Bd. 4, Printed according to the original Berlin, 1931

36

MARX T O ENGELS

London, 2 July 1868

And secondly for the 2 5-pound halves. At the same time, I received a dunning letter from the LANDLORD, whom tomorrow (on arrival of the second halves) I shall first pay the remainder for the quarter which ended on March 25th.

[^1]: Published in English for the first time

[^2]: IN MANCHESTER

[^3]: DEAR FRED,

[^4]: D'abord0 best thanks for the article.11

[^5]: a This refers to Schnacke's review, signed E. F. S., of Volume I of Capital by Karl Marx in Elberfelder Zeitung of 17, 20, 23, 25 and 27 June 1868. The concluding part of the review appeared on 2 and 3 July. - b See this volume, p. 48. - c First of all



