---
Volume: 43
Document_Title: "37. Engels to Marx. 2 July "
Page_Range: "92-93"
---

# 37. Engels to Marx. 2 July 

Enclosed a letter from Eichhoff.82 Meissner should have sent me the scrawl from Faucher.83 It is a good thing that the fellows are beginning to give vent to their annoyance.

The children are progressing well. Naturally very weak. Tussychen also still has a little suppuration in the throat. The doctor is on the whole very satisfied. He will only know in a few days when they will be well enough to go out.

Yesterday, when buying a pencil, I found upon it Russian letters in golden script. Pycc Kiö rpa<J>H"n>.a But behind the Russian there appears to be a German named Theodor Stal (Schtal), namely Teo4opt> Ul Ta ATi. This is the first time that I found something like that in a small local shop here. Borkheim would smell treason behind this.

Best greetings to Lizzy and the little one.b

Your

K.M.

First published in Der Briefwechsel zwischen Printed according to the original F. Engels und K. Marx, Bd. 4, Stuttgart, 19,13 Published in English for the first time

37

IN LONDON

[Manchester,] 2 July 1868

Dear Moor,

Enclosed the two second halves of the two fivers, S/K 11 185 Manchester, 14 January 1867, S/K 79 542 Manchester, 12 January 1867.

[^1]: ENGELS TO MARX48

[^2]: I have written to Borkheim84 to get himself a new Russian book: Zemlya i volya, Land and Freedom, in which a German Russian, a landowner,0 shows that since the emancipation of the peasants85

[^3]: a Russian graphite. Marx gives these words and, further on, the name Theodor Schtal in Russian letters. - b Mary Ellen Burns - c [Lilienfeld, Pawel] A. n., 3e\iw u eoim, St. Petersburg, 1868.



