---
Volume: 43
Document_Title: "38. Marx to Ludwig Kugelmann. 2 July "
Page_Range: "93-94"
---

# 38. Marx to Ludwig Kugelmann. 2 July 



**[p. 56]**

the Russian peasant is being ruined through communal property, and ditto Russian agriculture—small and large. The book is said to contain much statistical proof. Exchange value has already penetrated too deeply into these primitive communities, so that after the abolition of serfdom the situation no longer appears to be viable.

Tomorrow I hope to receive good news from you again. In the meantime, best greetings for the patients,3 your wife and the Lafargues.

Your

F. E.

Printed according to the original

Published in English in full for the first time

38

London, 2 July 1868 Dear Kugelmann,

Many thanks for your letter.b The children are getting along well, though (today is the 9th day) they are not yet fit to go out.

With regard to my book/ the day before yesterday I received 5 issues of the Elberfelder Zeitung containing a very well-disposed review by Dr Schnacke.d (I recall the name from 1848, but do not know him personally.) There is a lot of confusion in his presentation of the matter. On the other hand, I have received information from Berlin that that clown Faucher made fun of my book in the June issue of his magazine.83 It's a good thing these gentry are at last blurting out their annoyance.

First published in Der Briefwechsel zwischen F. Engels und K. Marx, Bd. 4, Stuttgart, 1913

[^1]: MARX TO LUDWIG KUGELMANN29

[^2]: IN HANOVER

[^3]: a Jenny and Eleanor Marx - b See this volume, p. 54. - c the first volume of Capital- à Elberfelder Zeitung of 17, 20, 23, 25 and 27 June 1868. The review was signed E. F. S. The concluding part appeared on 2 and 3 July.



