---
Volume: 43
Document_Title: "39. Marx to Engels. 4 July "
Page_Range: "94-95"
---

# 39. Marx to Engels. 4 July 



**[p. 57]**

When and if I shall come to Germany, I do not yet know. I am finally rid of my carbuncles.

Engels will certainly come here in August or September. Salut ! and MY COMPLIMENTS TO MRS KUGELMANN AND THE LITTLE ONE."

Yours

K. M.

First published abridged in Die Neue Zeit, Printed according to the original Bd. 2, Nr. 7, Stuttgart, 1901-1902 and in full in Pisma Marhsa k Kugelmanu (Letters of Marx to Kugelmann), Moscow- Leningrad, 1928

39

MARX T O ENGELS

IN MANCHESTER

[London,] 4 July 1868

I am acknowledging the receipt (yesterday) of both second halves.

In today's Hermann the reception for Freiligrath in Cologne. Cups, etc. Nothing better than the quid pro quo to the effect that Freiligrath changed his seat 9 times, with the hint that this change was politically motivated!

[^1]: DEAR FRED,

[^2]: THANKS, ditto, FOR THE TWO little books of Schorlemmer. b

[^3]: T h e children are getting along well. Yesterday they were u p for part of the day, and Jennychen was even downstairs in the PARLOUR. T h e doctor c is now coming only every second day. Therefore he was not here yesterday, and I still await him today.

[^4]: Orsini's brother 0 is here again. H e is accused of having betrayed the Fenians,86 whose agent he was. His accuser is COLONEL Nagle and the French landlady in whose house he lived here at that time (at the time of the Fenian unrest and before he left for the UNITED

[^5]: a Franziska Kugelmann - b C. Schorlemmer, 'Researches on the Hydrocarbons of the Series C n H 2 n + 2', Proceedings of the Royal Society, No. 94, 1867 and No. 102, 1868. - c Korklow - d Cesare Orsini



