---
Volume: 43
Document_Title: "40. Marx to Sigfrid Meyer. 4 July '. "
Page_Range: "95-99"
---

# 40. Marx to Sigfrid Meyer. 4 July '. 



**[p. 58]**

STATES). His methods of exonerating himself are reminiscent of Bangya and he will clear out of London as soon as possible. Beust's action with the Czechs does not appear clear." Salut.

Your

Moor

First published abridged in Der Briefwech- Printed according to the original sei zwischen F. Engels und K. Marx, Bd. 4, . . . . Stuttgart, 1913 and in full in MEGA, Published m English for the first Abt. Ill, Bd. 4, Berlin, 1931 time

40

MARX TO SIGFRID MEYER87

IN NEW YORK

London, 4 July 1868

1 Modena Villas, Maitland Park, Haverstock Hill

Dear Friend,

Your letter of 20 May arrived while I was away from London, a fairly long absence.68 Hence the delay in replying.

Concerning Liebknecht's connections with New York, I know nothing, but will write to him on the subject.

For Sorge I enclose the following credentials.b Our direct connection is with Whaley, Sylvis AND Jessup.

The Commonwealth has long ceased to exist. The weekly reports on the proceedings of the CENTRAL COUNCIL appear in The Bee-Hive. This far from means, however, that this paper, a narrow-minded TRADES-UNION-ORGAN, represents our views.

In the German press, my bookc has hitherto been reviewed— and mostly very favourably—in the Zukunft, the Stuttgart Beobach- ter? the Württemberg Staatszeitung,e the Frankfurt Börsenzeitung,1

ditto the Hamburger Börsenzeitung,9 the Hamburg Anzeiger, etc., in various papers in Hanover and Rhine Province-Westphalia, particularly extensively in a series of articles in Schweitzer's

[^1]: a See this volume, p. 64. - b See this volume, p. 59. - c the first volume of Capital - d The reviews for the Zukunft and the Beobachter were written by Engels. - e Marx means Engels' review for the Staats-Anzeiger für Württemberg. - ! Marx evidently means the Frankfurter Zeitung und Handelsblatt The review has not been found. - s Die Börsen-Halle. Hamburgische Abendzeitung, 14 February 1868.





[^1]: Credentials of the General Council of the International written in Friedrich Sorge's

[^2]: name (in Marx' hand)







**[p. 61]**

Social-Demokrat (Berlin)15 and the Elberfelder Zeitung? The last two papers, although the latter is liberal bourgeois, are openly partisan.

The big bourgeois and reactionary papers like the Kölnische, the Augsburger, the Neue Preussische, the Vossische, etc., are carefully keeping their mouths shut.

From the ranks of the official economists, to date only in the Hildburghausen Ergänzungsblätter at the beginning of this year the review by Dr Dühringh (privatdozent at the University of Berlin, supporter of Carey) (this review was timid but, on the whole, appreciative)—and in the June issue of the economic magazine published by Faucher and Michaelis.c Mr Faucher naturally provides nothing except such remarks as one might expect from the comedian and hired jester of the German Bastiatites.

I would be grateful if you would send me a few newspapers from time to time. In particular, it would be of great value to me if you could dig up some anti-bourgeois material about land- ownership and agrarian relations in the United States. Since I shall be dealing with rent in my 2nd volume,41 material against H. Carey's 'harmonies"1 would be especially welcome.

Salut.

[^1]: Y o u r s

[^2]: K. M a r x [Appendix]

[^3]: L o n d o n , 4 JULY 1868

[^4]: W E RECOMMEND M R SORGE TO ALL THE FRIENDS OF THE INTERNATIONAL WORK-

[^5]: INGMEN'S ASSOCIATION, AND, AT THE SAME TIME, EMPOWER HIM TO ACT IN THE NAME,

[^6]: AND ON BEHALF, OF THAT ASSOCIATION.

[^7]: B Y ORDER OF THE GENERAL COUNCIL OF THE INTERN. W . Assoc. Karl M a r x ,

[^8]: SECRETARY FOR GERMANY

[^9]: First published in: Marx and Engels, Printed according to the original Works, First Russian Edition, Vol. XXV, Moscow 1934 Published in English in full for the first time

[^10]: a The review by F. Schnacke (signed: E. F. S.) in the issues of 17, 20, 23, 25 and 27 June and 2 and 3 July 1868. - b E. Dühring, 'Marx. Das Kapital. Kritik der politischen Oekonomie, I. Band, Hamburg, 1867', Ergänzungsblätter zur Kenntniss der Gegenwart, Bd. 3, Heft 3, Hildburghausen, 1867, pp. 182-86. - c 'Das Kapital. Kritik der politischen Oekonomie von Karl Marx. Erster Band. Buch I. Der Produk- tionsprozess des Kapitals. Hamburg. Otto Meissner, 1867', Vierteljahrschrift für Volkswirthschaft und Kulturgeschichte, Bd. XX, 5. Jg., Berlin, 1868, pp. 206-19. - d H. Ch. Carey, The Harmony of Interests, Agricultural, Manufacturing, and Commer- cial.



