---
Volume: 43
Document_Title: "41. Marx to Engels. 7 July "
Page_Range: "99-100"
---

# 41. Marx to Engels. 7 July 



**[p. 41]**

MARX TO ENGELS

IN MANCHESTER

London, 7 July 1868

DEAR FRED,

The children are progressing well. Yesterday for the first time they were outside for half an hour. The peeling is still very pronounced. Only when this is finished will they be MOVABLE.

During the past few days I have been pressed very hard by the baker, CHEESEMONGER, ASSESSED TAXES, God and the Devil.

You will recall that the German Workers' Educational Society here has celebrated the June Insurrection88 for ABOUT 18 years now. Only in the last few years have the French (their society here now exists as the FRENCH BRANCH of the International72) taken part. And the old meneurs* always stayed away. I mean the petits grands

hommes.h

But this year, IN PUBLIC MEETING, along came Mr Pyat and read out an alleged address of the Paris Commune (this is a euphemism for the IDENTICAL Pyat, who is in no way inferior to Blind in this LINE) in which the assassinat of Bonaparte was preached, as it was years ago in his Lettre aux étudians.c The FRENCH BRANCH, reinforced by other bawlers, acclaimed this. Vesinier had it printed in Cigale4

and Espiègle? Belgian PAPERS, and presents Pyat as giving his direction to the 'International'.89

As a result, we get a letter from the Brussels committee,90 which just at the moment is making great propaganda, under difficult circumstances (Charleroi affair 4). Contents: This demonstration threatens to wreck the entire Association on the continent. Will the FRENCH BRANCH never move forward from the old demagogic phrases, etc.? etc., etc. It should be remembered that, at this very time, our people are behind bars in Paris.91 We yesterday issued a declaration (to be printed in Brussels), disavowing any connection between the above-mentioned Pyat and the International/

Indeed I regard the whole affair (naturally based upon the

[^1]: a leaders - b little great men - c F. Pyat, Lettre aux étudions, London, 1866. - d F. Pyat's speech at a meeting in Cleveland Hall on 29 June 1868. In: La Cigale, No. 29, 19 July 1868. - e Address to the Parisians by the Paris Central Committee of Action, 24 June 1868. In: L'Espiègle, No. 27, 5 July 1868. - ' K. Marx, 'Resolution of the General Council on Félix Pyat's Provocative Behaviour'.



