---
Volume: 43
Document_Title: "42. Engels to Marx. 10 July "
Page_Range: "100-102"
---

# 42. Engels to Marx. 10 July 



**[p. 63]**

background of the enormous stupidity of the FRENCH BRANCH) as an intrigue of the old parties, the republican jackasses of 1848, especially the petits grands hommes who represent them in London. Our Association is a thorn in their flesh. After trying in vain to work against the Association, THE NEXT BEST THING, of course, is to compromise it. Pyat is just the man to do this de bonne foi." The cleverer ones therefore push him forward.

What could be funnier than this squint-eyed melodrama-writer and Charivari man before 1848, this TOASTM ASTER of 1848 who now plays Brutus, but from a safe distance!

The FRENCH BRANCH here will have to be thrown out of the International if it does not put a stop to its asininity. One cannot allow 50 unprincipled louts, round whom loudmouths of all nationalities gather at such public opportunities, to endanger the International Association at a moment when, as a result of conditions on the continent, it is beginning to become a serious power.

Salut. Your

K. M.

42

ENGELS TO MARX

Manchester, 10 July 1868 Dear Moor,

Enclosed 2 fivers, S/K 93 518 and 19, Manchester, 14 January 1867, to pacify the CHEESEMONGER and other Manicheans.

[^1]: First published in Der Briefwechsel zwischen Printed according to the original F. Engels und K. Marx, Bd. 4, Stuttgart, ig 13 Published in English for the first time

[^2]: IN LONDON

[^3]: Everybody here was overjoyed by your good news about the patients.b

[^4]: Hopefully you will really be able to calm down the FRENCH BRANCH.72 Once again there appears to be sufficient confusion in that nation to guarantee the mess-up of any revolution that may break out. Wherever you look among these fellows, nothing but stupidity.

[^5]: a in good faith - b Marx's daughters Eleanor and Jenny





**[p. 64]**

Ad vocem3 Pyat, Blind must not be forgotten. I believe I told you that the Bradford Schiller Society (id est Dr Bronner) approached the Schiller Institute76 here, in order to organise there, here, and in Liverpool 'Readings by famous Germans living in England'. I told the people right away that the whole thing revolved round Karl Blind; all the same they should, as far as I was concerned, agree to the plan sous réserveh in order to see for themselves. So, last week a letter arrived from Bradford with further information. It said approaches had been made to Prof. Goldstücker, Max Müller, K. Blind and A. Ruge\ The first two had accepted, yet only sous réserve with regard to their time and health, but the latter two had accepted immediately and unconditionally, and Ruge had immediately asked whether an historical or philosophical theme would be preferred. In short, the bomb had burst, and the gentlemen received the reply that Goldstücker and Max Müller would be quite acceptable here, but there could be no question of Blind and Ruge. And this puts paid to the attempt.

Beustc has once again made himself suspicious in my eyes. The serious attempt of the Russians to have the Eastern business explode this spring, in spite of the fact that their railway was not yet finished, only appears explicable in that they wished to exploit the presence of a Palmerston as Austrian Prime Minister as long as it lasted. According to one version, he told the Czechs, incidental- ly, that he was in possession of plans which had been agreed between Prussia and Russia for the eventuality of the dissolution of Austria, and that under these plans Bohemia would not become Russian, but would be sacrificed by the Russians.

I have read the conclusion of the Prussian war of 1866 (Main campaign)."1 According to it, the South Germans were even more stupid than one had thought and known; the blame is, incidental- ly, distributed more evenly, so that Charlemagne of Bavariae

appears as at least as great an ass as Alexander the Great of Hesse/

Best greetings to your wife, the girls and the Lafargues.

Your

[^1]: F. E. First published abridged in Der Briefwechsel Printed according to the original zwischen F. Engels und K. Marx, Bd. 4, Stuttgart, 1913 and in full in MEGA, Abt. Published in English for the first III, Bd. 4, Berlin, 1931 t , m e

[^2]: a Regarding - b with reservations - c Friedrich Ferdinand Count von Beust, then Chancellor of Austria - d Der Feldzug der prevssischen Main-Arwee im Somvier 1866. - <" Karl Theodor Maximilian August - f Alexander i.ndi.ig Georg. Prince of Hesse



