---
Volume: 43
Document_Title: "43. Marx to Engels. 11 July "
Page_Range: "102-104"
---

# 43. Marx to Engels. 11 July 



**[p. 43]**

MARX TO ENGELS92

IN MANCHESTER

London, 11 July 1868

DEAR FRED,

The £10 received with BEST THANKS. I immediately paid £3 5s. for taxes, £3 to the CHEESEMONGER (whom, by the way, I have been paying cash for weeks, since he, just like the TEA-GROCER, no longer puts it on the slate), £1 10s. to the chemist. I owe the baker about £17 and the man, who was always very friendly with us, is in great difficulties. It is awful for me that I have to press you like this. If I only knew how to find any direct way out!

The children3 are doing fairly well, though Jennychen is still very weak. The ruling TEMPER here in the house is not exactly made for convalescents. My wife is not in the best of shape either, and therefore unnecessarily IRRITABLE.

Enclosed:

1. Kugelmann: I answered him right awayb saying he should be sure not to loose the intended letter upon Faucher, the Mannequin Pisse.93

2. The review by the worthy Faucher83; another in the Literarisches Zentralblatt? Both to be returned to me.

3. Letter from Dietzgen, who has also written an article on my book for me.94

You cannot fully appreciate the farce Mannequin Pisse Faucher is putting on in making me a pupil of Bastiat. Bastiat states in his Harmoniesd:

Since I have now accomplished this terrible trick, Faucher must prove that I, in fact, accept Bastiat, who declares that there exists 'no measure' of value.

The manner in which Mr Bastiat derives the value of the

[^1]: 'If anybody were to explain to him, on the basis of the determination of value by labour time, why air has no value and a diamond a high value, he would throw his book into the fire.'

[^2]: a Jenny and Eleanor Marx - b See this volume, pp. 67-70. - c Literarisches Centralblatt für Deutschland, No. 28, 4 July 1868, pp. 754-56: 'Marx, Karl. Das Kapital. Kritik der politischen Oekonomie (in 3 Bdn.). Erster Bd. Buch I. Der Produktionsprozess des Kapitals. Hamburg, 1867. O. Meissner' (signed 'h'). - d Marx quotes from F. Bastiat's Harmonies économiques, Paris, 1850, pp. 181-82.





**[p. 66]**

diamond is given in the following truly commercial-traveller-type conversation:

'Monsieur, cédez-moi votre diamant.— Monsieur, je veux bien; cédez-moi en échange votre travail de toute une année.'3

Instead of the business friend answering: 'Mon cher, si j'étais condamné à travailler, vous comprenez bien que j'aurai autre chose à acheter que des diamants'^ he says:

'Mais, monsieur, vous n'avez pas sacrifié à votre acquisition une minute.—Eh bien, monsieur, tâchez de rencontrer une minute semblable.— Mais, en bonne justice, nous devrions échanger à travail égal.—Non, en bonne justice, vous appréciez vos services et moi les miens. Je ne vous force pas; pourquoi me forceriez-vous? Donnez-moi un an tout entier, ou cherchez vous même un diamant.— Mais cela m'en entraînerait à dix ans de pénibles recherches, sans compter une déception probable au bout. Je trouve plus sage, plus profitable d'employer ces dix ans d'une autre manière.—C'est justement pour cela que je crois vous rendre encore service en ne vous demandant qu'un an. Je vous en épargne neuf, et voilà pourquoi j'attache beaucoup de valeur à ce service.'0

Is it not a wine salesman to the very life? Incidentally—and the German Bastiatites do not know this— that unhappy assertion that the value of commodities is deter- mined, not by the labour they cost, but by the labour which they spare the buyer (the babbling about the connection between exchange and the division of labour is childish talk) is just as little Bastiat's discovery as any of the other of his wine-salesman categories.

The old jackass Schmalz, the Prussian demagogue-catcher,95 says (German edition 1818, French 1826):

[^1]: 'Le travail d'autrui en général ne produit jamais pour nous qu'une économie de temps, et cette économie de temps est tout ce qui constitue sa valeur et son prix. Le menuisier, par exemple, qui me fait une table, et le domestique qui porte mes lettres à la poste, qui bat mes habits, ou qui cherche pour moi les choses qui me sont nécessaires, me rendent l'un et l'autre un service absolument de même nature: l'un et l'autre m'épargne et le temps que je serais obligé d'employer moi-même à mes [ces] occupations, et celui qu'il m'aurait fallu consacrer à m'acquérir l'aptitude et les talents qu'elles exigent.'d

[^2]: a 'Monsieur, give me your diamond.—Gladly, monsieur; give me in exchange your work for a whole year.' - b 'My dear Sir, if I were condemned to work, you will understand that I would have something other to buy than diamonds.'- c'But monsieur, you did not sacrifice a minute for your acquisition.—All right, monsieur, try to find a similar minute.—But, in fairness, we should exchange equal labour.—No, in fairness, you should put a value on your services, and I on mine. I am not forcing you; why would you force me? Give me a whole year or look for a diamond yourself.—But that would involve me in ten years exhausting search, quite apart from the probable disappointment at the end. I find it wiser and more profitable to employ these ten years in a different manner.—That is exactly why I believe I am indeed doing you a service when I only demand one year from you. I save you nine, and that is why I attach a high value to this service.' - d 'In general, the work of others only



