---
Volume: 43
Document_Title: "47. Marx to Engels. 23 July "
Page_Range: "109-110"
---

# 47. Marx to Engels. 23 July 



**[p. 72]**

by 2,000 voters; he wants 1,000 more since there will be 6,000 voters. Now they are pressing here in Manchester whether he will accept or not. Best greetings.

Your

F. E.

First published in Der Briefwechsel zwischen Printed according to the original F. Engels und K. Marx, Bd. 4, Stuttgart, . , . , , • ^ r jo jo Published in English for the first time

47

MARX TO ENGELS

IN MANCHESTER

London, 23 July 1868

DEAR FRED,

BEST THANKS for the £25. The children will probably go to the sea next week together with MR and MRS Lafargue. Since yesterday Lafargue has been ' MEMBER OF THE ROYAL COLLEGE OF SURGEONS' and has received his patent for the KILLING OF MEN AND BEASTS. Then, in 4-5 weeks, he will go to Paris. As a result, we are in a very embarrassing position, since my wife still has to buy linen for Laura for at least £20.

I do not think we can do any business with Borkheim. Yesterday he told me that ' money was very tight' in his case, etc. The Dutchmen, of whom I can, in fact, only use August Philips, are travelling. But I shall use my head to see how and where to get a loan, since it is absolutely necessary. The practice of borrowing at 20% can in fact only happen with institutions like those utilised by Borkheim, where people lose the capital advanced if one kicks the bucket before the date of maturity.

About Dr Boruttau, the man with the sultry prick, I know nothing except that he also ' runs with' the Lassalleans (Schweitzer FRACTION). The funniest thing is the ' French' of his dedication to a sympathetic soul in Moscow.103

[^1]: You will have seen that my booka forms a point of discussion in

[^2]: a the first volume of Capital



