---
Volume: 43
Document_Title: "48. Engels to Marx. 29 July "
Page_Range: "110-111"
---

# 48. Engels to Marx. 29 July 



**[p. 73]**

the programme of the General Association of German Workers.3,04

I have sent you a scrawl by Dühring which despite the heat you might read. You could also tell me your impressions of it, since it is certainly not overtaxing. But all the more boring, to be sure.

I saw Prof. Beesly last week at Lafargue's. Beesly was absent when your article11 arrived. Immediately after his return he received it and sent it to Henry Morleyb (CHIEF EDITOR of The Fortnightly Review) in Scotland, from whence we have received no further NEWS as yet.

How do you live in this heat? I lose all capacity for thought, and without Gumpert's medicine I COULD NOT STAND IT AT ALL.

Salut.

Your

K. M.

First published abridged in Der Briefwech- Printed according to the original sei zwischen F. Engels und K. Marx, Bd. 4, Stuttgart, 1913 and in full in MEGA, Published in English for the first Abt. Ill, Bd. 4, Berlin, 1931 t l m e

48

ENGELS TO MARX

Manchester, 29 July 1868 Dear Moor,

Enclosed Liebknecht returned.105 What a feeble business with Schweitzer. He should recognise 1. you and 2. the International Working Men's Association! Wilhelmchen appears to me to have once again failed to control his tendency to stupidities. Incidental- ly, you see that Schweitzer did, after all, show off with your letters.0

As regards Liebknecht's promises about Nuremberg and the Swiss workers, I SHALL WAIT FOR PERFORMANCE BEFORE GIVING AN OPINION.

Now enclosed a letter from Kugelmann.106 The business with Keil is splendid—if Kertbény is not in fact inventing a bit. Just in

[^1]: IN LONDON

[^2]: a This refers to the programme of the Hamburg Congress of the General Association of German Workers then forthcoming. See J. B. Schweitzer, 'An die Mitglieder des Allgemeinen deutsch. Arbeiter-Vereins', Der Social-Demokrat, No. 80, 10 July 1868. - b John Morley is meant. - c See this volume, pp. 26 and 28-30.

[^3]: 5-983



