---
Volume: 43
Document_Title: "52. Engels to Marx. 6 August "
Page_Range: "117-118"
---

# 52. Engels to Marx. 6 August 



**[p. 80]**

time, it will show the jackasses in Paris, etc., that we are in no way anxious for this pleasant dictatorship. Qu'en penses tu?*

First published abridged in Der Briefwech- Printed according to the original sei zwischen F. Engels und K. Marx, Bd. 4, Stuttgart, 1913 and in full in MEG A Published in English for the first Abt. Ill, Bd. 4, Berlin, 1931 t l m e

52

ENGELS TO MARX

IN LONDON

[Manchester,] 6 August 1868

Dear Moor,

What do I do in this heat? Languish and drink. Today it is raining, the air is muggy and saturated with humidity, it is therefore doubly horrible, the sweat does not evaporate and you are damp all over.

Last Fridayb I took Lizzie and M. Ellen0 to Bridlington Quay and returned on Monday; tomorrow I shall return there with Moore, and I would take my HOLIDAY and stay the week, but Charles d has gout and is all in, so I must do his work as well as my own, and there can be no question of going away.

Eichhoff 's pamphlet6 proves something which I had scarcely credited him with—that he is capable of reporting facts objective- ly. Of course, you had also made it easy for him. The thing will have a very good effect. Now as regards the transfer to Geneva, it reminds me of the Central Authority's move to Cologne.118 I would think this coup over very thoroughly. First, are the few jackasses worth it that you should take this step for their sake and hand over responsibility for the whole thing to people who, for all their good will, and also probably instinct, just do not have the stuff to lead a movement like this? Second, once we start moving house, and the holy respect for London, which is still the Medina of the emigration, has been replaced by a very doubtful respect for Geneva—what is the guarantee that the Proudhonists will not succeed in one fine day having the Council transferred, if only as

[^1]: a What do you think about this? - b 31 July - c Lydia (Lizzie) and Mary Ellen Burns - d Charles Roesgen - e W. Eichhoff, Die Internationale Arbeiterassociation



