---
Volume: 43
Document_Title: "53. Marx to Engels. 10 August "
Page_Range: "118-119"
---

# 53. Marx to Engels. 10 August 



**[p. 81]**

a matter of international courtoisie,3 to Brussels or Paris? Finally: such centres should never be put in places where deportation is possible, as long as we have a spot free from this risk.

T h e more splendidly things go, the more important it is that you should keep them in your hands, and now that the business is also beginning to get under way in Germany, I do not believe that Becker has the stuff to manage it. I sent Kugelmann the biographical stuff on Friday from York.106

It is a very good thing that something about your book c should now simultaneously appear in French papers, too. Nota bene, have at least 20-30 reprints made of my article in the Fortnightly11 (for which we will naturally pay, s'il le fautd), they can be used very well. ANYHOW, the conspiracy of silence is now over, and if the thing is only blazing a path slowly, it is now doing it surely.

GRAVEL is Kies. For the various stages of the Irish peat-ground I have no expressions, you will have to ask an East Frisian.

Borkheim has already reminded me of the 'date of maturity'. Best greetings to the entire sea-bathing company.

Your

F. E.

53

MARX T O ENGELS

IN MANCHESTER

London, 10 August 1868

[^1]: First published abridged in Der Briefwech- Printed according to the original sei zwischen F. Engels und K. Marx, Bd. 4, Stuttgart, 1913 and in full in MEGA, Published in English for the first Abt. Ill, Bd. 4, Berlin, 1931 t l m e

[^2]: DEAR FRED,

[^3]: Enclosed letter from J. Morley, the CHIEF EDITOR of the Fortnightly. Beesly did everything he could, but Mr Morley found the matter

[^4]: not to his taste.119 NEVER MIND! T h e family is fortunately at the SEASIDE, which they all needed very much.

[^5]: a politeness - b Johann Philipp Becker - c the first volume of Capital; see also Note 116 - d if necessary



