---
Volume: 43
Document_Title: "54. Marx to Ludwig Kugelmann. 10 August "
Page_Range: "119-120"
---

# 54. Marx to Ludwig Kugelmann. 10 August 



**[p. 82]**

What you say about the transfer of the CENTRAL COUNCIL73 to Geneva is very correct. It remains possible that in Brussels, malgré nous et contre nous,1 they will propose a CHANGE in order to document their heroic resistance to the principe autoritaire}" At least in this case our delegates will have to vote for Geneva as pis aller?

Salut.

Your

K. M.

First published in Der Briefwechsel zwischen Printed according to the original F. Engels und K. Marx, Bd. 4, Stuttgart, . . . r igj3 Published in English for the first

time

54 MARX TO LUDWIG KUGELMANN29

IN HANOVER

London, 10 August 1868

Dear Kugelmann,

On receipt of your letter, I asked around, but in vain. At the moment it is impossible to get money from the UNIONS here for foreign STRIKES.1 The various data about the Linden factory contained in the latest Hanoverian papers sent me are of great interest to me.

My family is, at present, at the seaside, which was all the more necessary since both GIRLS'1 seemed very delicate after their illness. Lafargue, after passing his SURGEON examinations here in London, will operate as assistant at his hospital for a few weeks, and then move to Paris where, however, he will still have to pass the French medical examinations.121

At the moment I am more occupied with PRIVATE than with PUBLIC ECONOMY. Engels has offered to be my guarantor for a loan of £100-150 at 5% interest, the first half payable in January, the second in July. So far, however, I have not been able to find a creditor.

I hope 'verry' much that the state of my work will allow me to abandon London for good and all and move to the continent next year, at the end of September. I shall strike my tents as soon as I

[^1]: a despite us and against us - b authoritarian principle - c the lesser evil - d Jenny and Eleanor Marx



