---
Volume: 43
Document_Title: "56. Engels to Marx. 12 August "
Page_Range: "121-122"
---

# 56. Engels to Marx. 12 August 



**[p. 56]**

ENGELS TO MARX48

IN LONDON

[Manchester,] 12 August 1868

Dear Moor,

It would be worth the trouble to find out more about Mr Morley's motives,a even if this only leads to the conclusion that the petty, lousy cliquishness, which we used to assume only existed in Germany, also flourishes here. If Morley refuses the piece"9

despite Beesly's influence, then he has his reasons. These men are,

au fona\b bourgeois, and MR Morley has all the reasons in the world to prevent giving publicity to things like those you have presented in your analysis. These are no isms; THAT KNOCKS HIM ON THE HEAD, and hence the lack of space. Still, I have no fear that we shall therefore be unable to present the bookc to the English public, but the easiest and simplest way is cut off, and we shall have to search until we find a new one. In the meantime, the French articles will produce their effect,"6 and it would be a good thing if they could be shown to the gentlemen of the Fortnightly; it would be very nice if Mr Morley could still be forced to accept the piece.

The day after tomorrow I shall probably go for 10 days to Bridlington Quay (address: Mr Burns, 3 Burlington Place, Bridlington Quay, Yorkshire), since Charlesd is recovering; but, of course, something may still crop up, in which case I shall write to you. I was there with Moore from Friday till Mondaye; we made quite interesting geological studies.

Best greetings from Lizzie.

Your

F. E.

[^1]: First published in Der Briefwechsel zwischen Printed according to the original F. Engels und K. Marx, Bd. 4, Stuttgart, . jgj3 Published in English in iull for the first time

[^2]: a See this volume, p. 8 1 . - b basically-0 the first volume of Capital-d Charles Roesgen; see this volume, p. 80.- e from 7 to 10 August



