---
Volume: 43
Document_Title: "57. Marx to Engels. 13 August "
Page_Range: "122-123"
---

# 57. Marx to Engels. 13 August 



**[p. 57]**

DEAR FRED,

MARX TO ENGELS124

IN MANCHESTER

[London,] 13 August 1868

I hope that these lines will reach you before your departure, for there is periculum in mora.3

Firstly, I must send money to Ramsgate, so they can stay there another week. As their departure was delayed for weeks after your last remittance, smaller domestic debts were paid; on the other hand, my wife had to retrieve watches and other things from the pawnshop so that they could appear RESPECTABLE at the watering place.

Secondly, one of the épiciers? who is owed £6 and a few shillings, must be paid this week, since the man is shutting up shop.

Thirdly, I have already received 2 SUMMONS for QUEENS TAXES (about £8). The LOCAL TAXES are paid, as you know. I absolutely cannot put off these sums.

For two further pressing items—the LANDLORD, who is unfortu- nately in London now, and a bill of exchange for £12 payable on the 25th of this month—I shall still perhaps receive money in time from Germany.

I have written to my cousins August and Karl Philips in Amsterdam and Aachen in order to find out whether they are back.125 It would be a sheer waste of money to go to the continent in order to borrow, before one is sure that the people are there.

For the past week I have not had a wink of sleep and l'illustre Gaudissartc Borkheim, who visited me the day before yesterday to take leave, said I really should get rid of my jaundice. He entertained me with the story of the £1,000 he is trying to blackmail out of Oppenheim.

In great haste.

Your

[^1]: K. M. First published in Der Briefwechsel zwischen Printed according to the original F. Engels und K. Marx, Bd. 4, Stuttgart, « , , . , , • ,• , • r ,, r 19,13 Published in English in lull for the first time

[^2]: a danger in delay (Titus Livius, Rerum Romanorum ab Urbe condita libri, Book XXXVIII, Ch. 25)- b grocers-c L'illustre Gaudissart was Borkheim's nickname (after the title character of a novel by Balzac).



