---
Volume: 43
Document_Title: "60. Engels to Marx. 22 August "
Page_Range: "124-126"
---

# 60. Engels to Marx. 22 August 



**[p. 59]**

MARX TO ENGELS

IN BRIDLINGTON QUAY

London, 21 August 1868

DEAR FRED,

My wife returned from Ramsgate yesterday, but the children are still there. Since I have been puking gall for about 1 week, and, in addition, cholera is developing here, my wife insists that I should also go to the sea at Ramsgate for at least 2-3 days. So I shall be leaving today.126

The £25 received with many thanks: the bill of exchange for £12, as I assured myself today, falls due on 28 August. So far I have not yet received anything from the continental side.

It would be best if you send the money for the LIFE INSURANCE to me myself, on the date due, when I can pay the people. For they must, after all, hand over to me the promissory note that I signed. Dealing with this via Schyler would in fact compromise me.

Salut.

Your

K. M. Printed according to the original

60

ENGELS TO MARX

Bridlington Quay, 22 August 1868

Dear Moor,

Best thanks for the Lanterne and the B. Becker.3 The closer one comes to see the details of the Lassalle tragicomedy, the more the

[^1]: Published in English for the first time

[^2]: IN LONDON

[^3]: a B. Becker, Enthüllungen über das tragische Lebensende Ferdinand Lassalle's.

[^4]: First published in Der Briefwechsel zwischen F. Engels und K. Marx, Bd. 4, Stuttgart, 1913





**[p. 88]**

comical side emerges. This man was ruined by his IRREPRESSIBLE reflection upon himself, his permanent self-contemplation. 'How do I appear to myself?' was the eternal refrain. Poor Baron Izzy! Comic at that exalted moment when he commissioned his alter ego, Rüstow, to bed the beautiful Helen3 per procurah if necessary—he well knew how little danger this involved—as at that other moment when the Wallachianc shot away his genitals. Poor Izzy! To be gelded by a shot from a Wallachian.d You always found it so comical that his gob had been stopped, but now this as well.

Seiler! That is the impression of the whole story. Sebastian Seiler, the only worthy historiographer of this tragicomedy—he will hang himself that he missed this putrid scene. En attendant' it is quite amusing that the 'testamentary successor of Lassalle'12' declares him an aristocrat, traitor and cad, and is forced to appropriate all those things that we formerly had published against him himself and against Schweitzer.128 Bastards!

On Wednesday or Thursday5 I shall go back to Manchester from here and shall then visit my mother for a week—probably in Ostend. I am still waiting for a letter from her, and have no idea where I stand in the meantime.129

Naturally I would have sent the money for the loan from the insurance company only to you, if you had not from the start shoved the whole affair away from you and onto Borkheim, so that I had to turn to him simply to find out how much had to be paid. That I could, of course, only do with the simultaneous remark that I would send the sum to him, since he was indeed standing surety for the money. As I already wrote to you, it would never have occurred to me to send the money to that jackass Schyler.g But I expect to see you before then, in London at the end of next week.

Your

F. E.

[^1]: First published in MEGA, Abt. Ill, Bd. 4, Berlin, 1931

[^2]: Printed according to the original

[^3]: Published in English for the first time

[^4]: a Helene von Dönniges - b by proxy - c Janko von Racowija - d In the original, a play on the word Wallach (Wallachian), also German for a gelding. - e Meanwhile - f 26 or 27 August - s See this volume, p. 87.



