---
Volume: 43
Document_Title: "61. Marx to Engels. 26 August "
Page_Range: "126-127"
---

# 61. Marx to Engels. 26 August 



**[p. 61]**

MARX TO ENGELS33

IN MANCHESTER

London, 26 August 1868

DEAR FRED,

Still no 'SUPPLIES' from Germany. It is, of course, idiotic to depend completely upon half-promises. But if you are drowning you clutch at every straw. On Friday3 the bill of exchange for £12, about which I wrote to you,b is due. Since nothing had arrived by today, and to have no protest in the house, I just visited my baker, who told me he could 'perhaps' get the money by tomorrow evening, but only for a few days. At the same time, I have received the enclosed scrawl from my LANDLORD. That everything should happen to one just at this time. It is enough to drive one mad.

Bring me back or send me the screed by Becker.c His theoretical-political-economic criticisms of Lassalle have been copied from your pamphlet on the military question.d

The invitation which I received to the congress of the General Association of German Workers (Hamburg, 22-25 August)130 is signed by Schweitzer as President and by more than 20 workers from different districts of Germany (members of the Executive Committee). I had to take the latter into consideration in my reply.c

I explained that I could not come because of the work of the Central Council of the International Working Men's Association, and said I was glad to see that the starting points of any 'serious' workers' movement—agitation for complete political freedom, regulation of the working day and international co-operation of the working class—were emphasised in their programme for the congress.' That is to say, in other words, I congratulated them on

[^1]: This Becker has done us a great service with his Seileriana. He deserves to be Lassalle's 'testamentary successor'.127

[^2]: a 28 August- b See this volume, p. 87.- c B. Becker, Enthüllungen über das tragische Lebensende Ferdinand Lassalle's. - d F. Engels, The Prussian Military Question and the German Workers' Party. - e 'To the President and Executive Committee of the General Association of German Workers'. -f 'Programm der Generalversammlung des Allgemeinen deutschen Arbeiter-Vereins, stattfindend in Hamburg, vom 22. bis 25. August 1868', Die Zukunft, No. 266, 10 July 1868, and Der Social-Demokrat, No. 98, 21 August 1868.



