---
Volume: 43
Document_Title: "62. Engels to Marx. 28 August "
Page_Range: "127-128"
---

# 62. Engels to Marx. 28 August 



**[p. 90]**

having abandoned Lassalle's programme? Whether they will notice the point remains to be seen. Schweitzer, the only man with brains in the whole Lassalle gang, will certainly detect it. But whether he will think it advisable to show this or to pretend to be dense, nous

Your

K. M. First published abridged in Der Briefwech- Printed according to the original sei zwischen F. Engels und K. Marx, Bd. 4, . Stuttgart, 1913 and in full in MEGA, Published in English in full for the Abt. Ill, Bd. 4, Berlin, 1931 f , r s t t l m e

62

ENGELS TO MARX

IN LONDON

Manchester, 28 August 1868

Dear Moor,

I found your letter of the 25thc waiting for me here, and as promised yesterday,131 I enclose 2 fivers and 1 tenner, with which his lordship the LANDLORD will have to content himself for the time being.

I expect a letter from my mother any day that she has arrived in Ostend, and I will immediately dash there129; I shall see you in London in any case, but it is doubtful whether I shall be able to stay there for a day on my outward journey.

In haste.

Your

[^1]: F. E. First published in MEGA, Abt. Ill, Bd. 4, Printed according to the original Berlin, 1931 , . , r. Published in English for the first time

[^2]: a F. Lassalle, 'Offenes Antwortschreiben an das Central-Comité zur Berufung eines Allgemeinen Deutschen Arbeitercongresses zu Leipzig vom 1. März'. - b we shall see-c Engels apparently means Marx's letter of 26 August 1868.



