---
Volume: 43
Document_Title: "63. Marx to Engels. 29 August "
Page_Range: "128-129"
---

# 63. Marx to Engels. 29 August 



**[p. 63]**

MARX TO ENGELS

IN MANCHESTER

London, 29 August 1868

DEAR FRED,

The £20 received with BEST THANKS. Tussy had a great shock today. She found Dicky dead in his cage although he was still singing merrily yesterday. He has been buried with full honours.

Dupont has received the mandate from Naples to represent the Neapolitan branch.132 Since the Mentana business, as we see from Italian reports, there has been a general reactionary trend in domestic affairs, and in particular the workers' right to meet and form societies has almost been done away with.1

In Paris, happily, we still have our old people, behind bars. The committee there will send a délégué to Brussels, but against that the various corps de métier* will send 8-9.134 Our people have written to us from prison suggesting that these corps de métier MEN should be 'compromised politically' so that there should be no way back for them. Just to show the sort of. methods to which the Paris police have recourse: A gentleman calling himself 'Eugène Dupont' from London visited the wives of several of the prisoners to pump them. He was a police agent, but his play-acting did not work anywhere.

Eccarius left for Nuremberg as our délégué today.135 From there he will go to Brussels. He is correspondent of The Times in both cases.136

The so-called branche française,72 under the leadership of Messrs Pyat and Vésinier, is sending a delegate to Brussels in order— horribile dictuh — to put us in the dock!

Apropos. If Moore is still there, tell him it would be good if he could pay to me his USUAL CONTRIBUTION to the INTERNATIONAL WORKINGMEN'S ASSOCIATION by Tuesday.11 We are weakly represented in Brussels, and every shilling that we can raise now will be used to

[^1]: a trade societies-15 horrible to say-c 1 September



