---
Volume: 43
Document_Title: "64. Engels to Marx. 1 September "
Page_Range: "129-130"
---

# 64. Engels to Marx. 1 September 



**[p. 92]**

s e n d o n e MEMBER MORE t h e r e . TUESDAY NEXT IS OUR LAST SITTING this y e a r b e f o r e t h e c o n g r e s s . 1 3 '

Salut.

Your

K. M. First published abridged in Der Briefwech- Printed according to the original sei zwischen F. Engels und K. Marx, Bd. 4, Stuttgart, 1913 and in full in MEGA, Published in English for the first Abt. III, Bd. 4, Berlin, 1931 ü m e

64

ENGELS TO MARX

IN LONDON

Manchester, 1 September 1868

Dear Moor,

Enclosed the £5 for Moore's SUBSCRIPTION to the INTERNATIONAL. So get me the receipt for him.

I am waiting on tenterhooks for a letter from my mother informing me of her arrival in Ostend and of her address. I am to go there for a few days,129 and hear and see nothing. If there is no news by the day after tomorrow, hardly anything will come of it, since good old Gottfried2 wishes to go away next week. As soon as I have news, I shall notify you by telegraph of my forthcoming arrivalb in London.

I shall bring the Lassalle swindle0 with me, or Schorlemmer, who has it, will send it to you as soon as he's read it.

Jones is holding OPEN AIR MEETINGS here for the workers,102 but acts so tamely that he is already being attacked for it by his rival Henry. On Saturday*1 evening he called Gladstone 'THAT GREAT LEADER OF THE WORKING CLASSES!' I heard this myself. He is being too clever once again.

Your

[^1]: F. E. First published abridged in Der Briefwech- Printed according to the original sei zwischen F. Engels und K. Marx, Bd. 4, Stuttgart, 1913 and in full in MEGA, Published in English for the first Abt. Ill, Bd. 4, Berlin, 1931 t l m e

[^2]: a Gottfried Ermen - b In the original: reply. - c B. Becker, Enthüllungen über das tragische Lebensende Ferdinand Lassalle's. - d 29 August



