---
Volume: 43
Document_Title: "66. Marx to Georg Eccarius and Friedrich Lessner. 10 September "
Page_Range: "130-132"
---

# 66. Marx to Georg Eccarius and Friedrich Lessner. 10 September 



**[p. 65]**

MARX TO ENGELS

IN MANCHESTER

London, 9 September 1868

DEAR FRED,

The £167 paid on 8 September, RECEIPT received and BOND received back.

I am sending you enclosed The Times and 2 issues of The Daily News about the INTERNATIONAL WORKINGMENS CONGRESS.3 138 You must send back the 2 'Daily News' by return.

You see from the FIRST LEADER of The Timesh what a good policy it was to send our reportc to it alone, with a few words TO THAT

EFFECT.

In great haste. Salut

Your

K. Marx

66

London, 10 September 1868

Dear Eccarius and Lessner,

[^1]: First published in Der Briefwechsel zwischen F. Engels und K. Marx, Bd. 4, Stuttgart, 1913

[^2]: Printed according to the original

[^3]: Published in English for the first time

[^4]: MARX TO GEORG ECCARIUS AND FRIEDRICH LESSNER139

[^5]: IN BRUSSELS

[^6]: FIRST MY THANKS TO LESSNER FOR HIS LONG AND INTERESTING LETTER. 1 4 0 You must not allow the congress138 to last beyond this week.

[^7]: a 'The Congress of the International Association of Workmen. From Our Special Correspondent. Brussels, Sept. 6, 7', The Daily News, 8 and 9 September 1868. - b The Times, No. 26225, 9 September 1868. - c K. Marx, 'The Fourth Annual Report of the General Council of the International Working Men's Association', contained in Eccarius' first dispatch on the congress (see Note 136). 'International Working Men's Congress (From a Correspondent)', The Times, No. 26225, 9 September 1868.



Until now—AS FAR AS ENGLAND IS CONCERNED—there has been nothing to discredit it.

If the Belgians and French should once again place masses of new stuff on the agenda, let them know it will not do,141 since

1. the Germans are very poorly represented, as their congresses are being held almost simultaneously in Germany142;

2. England is almost not represented because of the suffrage movement;

3. the German Swiss are not yet represented at all, since they have only just affiliated, and those branches long in existence have exhausted their funds in the Geneva strike 16;

4. the discussions are being conducted one-sidedly, in French; 5. therefore, decisions on general theoretical questions must be avoided, since this can only lead to protests later from the non-Belgians and non-French.

The public is naturally interested mainly in the question of war. Pompous declamations and high-faluting phrases do no HARM here. The decision to be taken in this connection would seem to be simply that the working class is not yet sufficiently organised to throw any decisive weight onto the scales; that, however, the congress protests in the name of the working class, and denounces those who instigate war; that a war between France and Germany is a civil war, ruinous for both countries and for Europe as a whole. A statement that war could only benefit the Russian government can hardly be made acceptable to the French and Belgian gentlemen.3

K. Marx

If the question of credit mutuel is raised, Eccarius should simply declare that the workers in England, Germany and the United States have nothing to do with Proudhonist dogmas and consider the credit question to be of secondary importance.

The resolutions of the congress should be telegraphed to the London newspapers. So don't do anything discreditable.

K. M.

[^1]: Greetings to friend Becker.b

[^2]: First published in Deutsche Worte, Nr. 5, Printed according to the journal Jg. XVIII, 1898

[^3]: a See this volume, p. 101. - b Johann Philipp Becker



