---
Volume: 43
Document_Title: "68. Marx to Sigfrid Meyer. 14 September "
Page_Range: "133-135"
---

# 68. Marx to Sigfrid Meyer. 14 September 

On the return of Shaw — who was sent at Moore's expense3—the latter will receive his RECEIPT.

Salut Your

K. M.

First published abridged in Der Briefwech- Printed according to the original sei zwischen F. Engels und K. Stuttgart, 1913 and in full Abt. III, Bd. 4, Berlin, 1931

sei zwischen F. Engels und K. Marx, B d . 4, _ . ,. . . . _, ,• , r , r. c .. » loio J • r H • \*T?^A Published in English lor the first Stuttgart, 1913 and in full in MEGA, 6 time

68

MARX TO SIGFRID MEYER

IN NEW YORK

London, 14 September 1868

1 Modena Villas, Maitland Park, Haverstock Hill

Dear Meyer,

Enclosed the issue of The Times containing the 4th ANNUAL REPORT of the GENERAL COUNCIL (written by me), and the very interesting Times FIRST LEADER on this document.11 This is the first time that it has abandoned its tone of moquerie about the working class, and taken it 'verry' au sérieux. Spread this around. Inform Jessup of this.

I must reply to both your letters, the first to me and the 2nd to Eccarius, which was handed me in his absence (he has not yet returned from Brussels).

As far as the first letter is concerned, it is your fault if Sorge (who is completely unknown to me) has received credentials.144 If you wanted simply to give him a recommendation for a particular purpose, you should have written so clearly. The way you put it in your letter, I believed that Sorge was your and A. Vogt's man. So be more careful in future. Then you made the second mistake of giving the credentials to Sorge, instead of writing to me first about the misunderstanding!

The mistake has been made, but it is not irreparable. The Brussels Congress138 has once again allotted the General

[^1]: •> See this volume, pp. 91 and 92. - b The Times, No. 26225, 9 September 1868.



Council to London. But it is now to be regarded as a new COUNCIL, which revises all old credentials. So write to me whether you and A. Vogt want credentials. Write, too, in which manner we should withdraw Sorge's credentials or, alternatively, inform him that the new General Council has changed the credentials.145

Drury was here for a while. Recently, shortly before the Brussels Congress, he was proposed as authorised agent of the INTERNATIONAL WORKINGMEN'S ASSOCIATION to the AMERICAN LABOR UNION146 and its congress. We did not agree to this at the time, since the source of the suggestiona appeared suspicious to us. Please observe the man more closely first, either yourself or through friends.

No COPIES remain of the Commonwealth PAPER. For the past few years there have not been any agitational writings in our sense in England. My bookb has not yet been translated into English.147 Eccarius, otherwise very capable, but at the same time very AMBITIOUS, has intentionally not mentioned it in The Commonwealth or at other opportunities. He likes to appropriate my propositions for himself. At the congress in Brussels, Lessner mentioned my book in his speech about machinery. The correspondent of The Daily News reported this.c Eccarius, who reported the congress sessions for The Times, suppressed it.136 His conduct is all the more absurd since he owes me not only his knowledge, but also his post as general secretary on the GENERAL COUNCIL. I alone supported him (at The Commonwealth too) against attacks by the English and French.148

He relies upon the experience he already has with me, that I am only concerned with the cause, and ignore personal stupidities!

I shall not give him your letter. The more English excerpts from my book you can get into the American press the better.149

Send them to me! I attach the enclosed card. It was sent to us, with a letter, to establish contact with us. Address: G. W. Randall, SECRETARY, WORKINGMENS INSTITUTE, 3 Tremont Row, ROOM 52, Boston N. E.

I lost contact years ago with all my acquaintances in America. I am still in touch only with Meyerd in St. Louis, the friend of our J. Weydemeyer (deceased last year).

Write me all you can find out about the relationship between the railways and real estate.

[^1]: a W. R. Cremer and Huleck (see this volume, pp. 177-78). - b the first volume of Capital - c 'The International Working Men's Congress. From Our Special Corre- spondent. Brussels, Sept. 9', The Daily News, 11 September 1868. - d Hermann Meyer



