---
Volume: 43
Document_Title: "69. Marx to Hermann Jung. 14 September "
Page_Range: "135-136"
---

# 69. Marx to Hermann Jung. 14 September 

Y o u m a y h a v e seen that, at its c o n g r e s s in H a m b u r g , t h e G e n e r a l Association of G e r m a n W o r k e r s p a s s e d a special resolu- tion giving r e c o g n i t i o n to m y book.' 0 4

W r i t e t o R a n d a l l o n m y b e h a l f as GERMAN SECRETARY of t h e GENERAL

COUNCIL.

Best g r e e t i n g s to A. V o g t a n d yourself.

Y o u r s

K. M a r x

I a m s e n d i n g 2 copies of The Times, o n e f o r y o u , t h e o t h e r for Jessup."

First published in: Marx and Engels, Printed according to the original Works. First Russian Edition, Vol. XXV, Moscow, 1934 Published in English tor the first time

69

MARX T O HERMANN JUNG

London, 14 September 1868

Dear Jung,

The Times today carries Eccarius' reports of the 9th and 10th.b

In the debate on machinery, he makes Lessner's SPEECH worse; it was much better in The Daily News. Lessner quoted my book,c as you have seen in The Daily News.d Eccarius suppresses the quotation.

Yet even better. In The Daily News the resolution about machines, etc., was noted as a proposal from the GENERAL COUNCIL." In The Times, Mr Eccarius converts this into his personal proposal*

[^1]: IN LONDON

[^2]: 3 This sentence was inserted by Marx immediately under the address. - b [J. G. Eccarius,] 'The International Working Men's Congress. (From a Corre- spondent)', The Times, No. 26229, 14 September 1868 (see also Note 136). - c the first volume of Capital-^ 'The International Working Men's Congress. From Our Special Correspondent. Brussels, Sept. 9', The Daily Nevis, 11 September 1868.-e K. Marx, 'Draft Resolution on the Consequences of Using Machinery under Capitalism Proposed by the General Council to the Brussels Congress'.-f See this volume, p. 101.



