---
Volume: 43
Document_Title: "70. Engels to Marx. 16 September "
Page_Range: "136-137"
---

# 70. Engels to Marx. 16 September 



**[p. 99]**

This is a point on which you must collar him. His egotism needs a Cuff TO SET HIM RIGHT AGAIN.

Yours

K. M.

First published in: G. Jaeckh, Die Inter- Printed according to the original nationale, Leipzig, 1904

Published in English for the first time

70

ENGELS TO MARX34

IN LONDON

Manchester, 16 September 1868

Dear Moor,

I can only write briefly and badly, I have rheumatism in my right hand and have been writing all the afternoon.

Enclosed a ten-pound note. When Borkheim returns, you absolutely must force him to undertake some sort of coup, if nothing else can be done. You will understand that I myself find things rather tight at the moment. Did you ever write to Meissner asking for a settling of accounts? With the workers bombarding from all sides now, the burking will soon come to an end, and the second edition3 will not have to be awaited for long. Now is the time to insert a new advertisement for the book. Think one out, I shall send it to Meissner, whom I owe an answer anyway. But don't put it off. Furthermore, Meissner should be sent The Times with the resolution of the Germans in Brussels, the Demokratisches Wochenblatt of yesterday,150 etc., the man must be kept happy. If you have not done it, do it (I can no longer get that No. of The Times here). And then the exchange value, too, will gradually come into effect for you.

The things in The Times in Eccarius' reportb will be a big help to you here, and MR Morley will be amazed.0 The papers here also carry fairly full extracts from the report (but most in The Daily News).

[^1]: a the second German edition of Volume I of Capital-b [J. G. Eccarius,] 'The International Working Men's Congress. (From a Correspondent)', The Times, No. 26230, 15 September 1868.-c See this volume, p. 81.



