---
Volume: 43
Document_Title: "71. Marx to Engels. 16 September "
Page_Range: "137-140"
---

# 71. Marx to Engels. 16 September 



**[p. 100]**

The congress went well after all. The method of conducting the babble in public and the BUSINESS on the quiet has worked splendidly. So, the COUNCIL will remain in London, and once again the Proudhonists have only the satisfaction of having resolved that they are Proudhonists, and nobody else is.

One might also send Meissner the No. of the Zukunft about Lloyd, etc., in which you are mentioned twice. I can do all this, if you want.

Moses Hess amused me greatly.151

But the question now arises: Has not a popular short presentation of the content of your book for workers become an urgent necessity? If it is not written, some Moses or other will come along and do it and botch it up. What do you think of it?

Enclosed also Eichhoff back.3

It is impossible to leave without stupidities being committed. While I was away,129 the fellows on the comité of the Schiller Institute,76 acting on the suggestion of the Bradfordians, invited that swine Vogt to give a lecture here. I naturally announced my resignation at once, 'in order not to give an indirect vote of confidence to a man who, I considered it proved, was a paid Bonapartist agent in 1859'.b The swine is coming tomorrow.

Your

F. E.

71

MARX TO ENGELS

London, 16 September 1868

Dear Engels,

THANKS FOR THE £10. At the end of the letter I shall say more about money matters. First about 'general items'.

[^1]: First published abridged in Der Briefwech- Printed according to the original sei zwischen F. Engels und K. Marx, Bd. 4, Stuttgart, 1913 and in full in MEG A Published in English in full for i he Abt. Ill, Bd. 4, Berlin, 1931 f l r s t t i m e

[^2]: IN MANCHESTER

[^3]: a W. Eichhoff, Die Internationale Arbeiterassociation. Ihre Gründung, Organisation, politisch-sociale Thätigkeit und Ausbreitung. - b F. Engels, 'To the Directorate of the Schiller Institute'.





**[p. 101]**

T h e policy of sending the report solely to The Times has proved itself.13 It has forced all London newspapers to speak, with the exception of the deeply-indignant Levy.3 The Times did not accept Eccarius' reports from Nuremberg. It only took the bait after it had received the report from me. b The Morning Advertiser of yesterday carried (upsetting Blind) A FIRST LEADER in favour of the International against The Times.c T h e Star declares the congress to have been a •SUCCESS:6 The Standard, which first attacked us, SNEAKS before the WORKING CLASS in a leading article yesterday.6 It knocks the capitalists and will now even pull grimaces about the LAND QUESTION. T h e Journal des Débats regrets that the English and the Germans and the Belgians, as shown by the resolution on the land,152 belong to the 'secte communiste' and that the French, on the other hand, keep on reproducing 'les déclamations ridicules de Proudhon'.1

People are very dissatisfied with Eccarius and next Tuesday 8 a storm will break that will d o him good.153 T h e points of the indictment are as follows:

H e took almost no part at all in the congress and afterwards posed in The Times as the LEADING MIND. Also in The Times, he took over the proposals of the GENERAL COUNCIL as his private property, and ditto the applause for them as d u e to him. H e suppressed as far as possible the speeches of the others and, to flatter The Times, falsified Dupont's concluding speech. Apart from this, Lessner has the GRIEVANCE that when he (Lessner) read from my book, Eccarius suppressed this in The Times,154 ditto that h e only included the resolution on the book 1 5 0 in his correspondence u n d e r HIGH PRESSURE, and finally that he falsified the German resolution on war.155 H e said that a European war would be a civil war, instead of saying, as the G e r m a n resolution stated, THAT A WAR BETWEEN FRANCE AND GERMANY WAS A CIVIL WAR FOR THE PROFIT OF RUSSIA1. H e com- pletely omits the latter point. O n the other hand, he attributes to the Germans and the English the Belgian nonsense that it was necessary TO STRIKE AGAINST WAR.

O n the other hand, as a reporter he has done us some service. T h e long and the short of it is that h e will be told that he should figure only as reporter in future, with the COUNCIL paying his

[^1]: a of The Daily Telegraph - b K. Marx, 'The Fourth Annual Report of the General Council of the International Working Men's Association'. See also this volume, p. 93. - c'London, Wednesday, September 16', The Morning Advertiser, 16 September 1868. - d 'The International Congress of Workmen', The Evening Star, 15 September 1868. - e The Standard, 16 September 1868. - £ 'Proudhon's ridiculous declama- tions' - s 22 September





**[p. 102]**

travelling expenses and The Times paying for the articles. But he will never again be named as DELEGATE. Thus preserved from the

CONFLICT OF FRACTIONS.

Lessner says that we accomplished so much despite being so little represented at the congress, which was almost entirely Belgian (with the addition of FRENCHMEN), because on all decisive points the Belgian workers, notwithstanding their Brussels LEADERS, voted with London. Moses is said to have made the best SPEECH against the Proudhonists.161 Tolain was so furious that he did not appear at the banquet. Not only has the Central Council73 here been appointed once again, but the list of members, purified by us, was accepted. Within four weeks Vesinier is to submit to a commission in Brussels proof of his suspicions regarding Tolain.156

In case these are baseless (and they are), the congress has already conditionally expelled him from the Association as a slanderer. The delegate of the FRENCH BRANCH tabled a bill of indictment against the GENERAL COUNCIL which, among other things, contained the modeste demand that the French member of the GENERAL COUNCIL should be named by the FRENCH BRANCH. In response, the congress simply proceeded with the agenda (exactly as we have treated the GRIEVANCES of these fellows in the GENERAL COUNCIL).

At Nuremberg,135 Liebknecht committed a completely useless stupidity (even one contrary to the Rules) by forcing upon the people Becker's confused wishy-washy stuff as the Programme of the International Working Men's Association.151 Sonnemann remarked correctly that this was a quid pro quo.3 But Mr Wilhelm wanted to have democratic babble for the 'People's Party'l38

Meissner wrote a few lines some weeks ago. He would only be able to render an account in some weeks. It appeared to him that up to the present no profit had been made. I am sending him The Times and Liebknechtb and the Zukunft0 today. The advertisement will have to be done by you. I cannot advertise my own book.d

And it would be a very good thing if you yourself wrote a small popular explanatory pamphlet. Let us hope that things will now get going.

As regards money matters, I simply cannot go on in this way. It makes all work impossible. I believe it would be best if you would write to Borkheim and ask him whether it was not possible to raise money for me somehow since, after paying off the LOAN SOCIETY and other accumulated debts, I was now in great difficulties because of

[^1]: a confusion - b Liebknecht's paper, the Demokratisches Wochenblatt - c See this volume, p. 100. - d the first volume of Capital



