---
Volume: 43
Document_Title: "73. Marx to Engels. 19 September "
Page_Range: "142-144"
---

# 73. Marx to Engels. 19 September 



**[p. 105]**

brings stronger reinforcement to his forces than to those of Prussia.

I hope Laura is well again? Best greetings.

Your

F. E.

First published in Der Briefwechsel zwischen Printed according to the original F. Engels und K. Marx, Bd. 4, Stuttgart, . , ,. jgi3 Published in English lor the iirst time

73

MARX TO ENGELS

IN MANCHESTER

London, 19 September 1868

DEAR FRED,

Enclosed a letter from Schweitzer,160 ditto one from Essen and also 6 numbers of the Social-Demokrat. I must have all this stuff back by Tuesday* What answer should I give the cunning Schweitzer? You will see from the debates of the General Association of German Workers congress104 (in the Social-Demokrat) that the 'true-blue' Lassalleans smelt that their president was leaving Lassalle's course in proposing a congress for the establish- ment of TRADES UNIONS and settlement of STRIKES.161 He only received permission to launch this agitation independently of the Associa- tion of German Workers by threatening to resign. His purpose, of course, is to get in ahead of Liebknecht, etc. He was also aware that, with the development of a real workers' organisation in Germany based on TRADES UNIONS, his artificial sectarian Association WOULD SOON BE NOWHERE. What he now describes in a LEADER (No. 104)b

as the summa of Lassalle's discoveries: 'state credit for the foundation of productive associations', is literally copied from the programme of French Catholic socialism, ducec Bûchez, in the Atelier at the time of Louis Philippe.162 I must answer diplomati- cally and would like to know your view.

[^1]: a 22 September - b 'Der allgemeine deutsche Arbeiter-Congress. II', Der Social- Demokrat, No. 104, 6 September 1868. - c led by

[^2]: 6-Q83





**[p. 106]**

Vogt is no longer available here." But yesterday I wrote to Liebknecht and categorically requested information about the copies (perhaps 150) sent to him.163

Next Tuesdayb at the first session of the GENERAL COUNCIL there will be stormy weather. Dupont is also furious about Eccarius because he took as good as no part in the congress.153 I shall try to protect Eccarius against 'positive' measures,0 but this time I shall not be able to take sides for him so strongly as I did last year against Fox, Carter, etc.148

A Bordelaise merchant, friend of Lafargue, English-speaking, passed through here after a journey through Sweden and Denmark. He told Lafargue that in higher circles there they speak much about my book/ which does not sound very likely to me.

Laurachen is somewhat better. Her SUFFERINGS are connected with certain natural processes of development. They want to leave at the beginning of October, and this is awkward because the linen part of the trousseau is still incomplete.

L'illustre Gaudissartf returned today. The loan was like this: You borrow money FOR A CERTAIN TERM. If you die before maturity, the sum need not be paid back. On the other hand, in the contrary case repayment must be made on the date of maturity with the STIPULATED interest. The transaction is then at an end. It is thus no life insurance. You do not receive a policy, but the money, for which you make out a BOND. This was naturally returned to me. It is the peculiar form that makes the whole business so expensive — certainly the worst and the dearest way to borrow money.

The sole circumstance which would, in my opinion, favour Bonaparte in a belated campaign is that Russia would then be more paralysed, at least for military action. One thing is certain. The whole of France believes that war is IMMINENT.

As for the advertisement, I shall d'abord* see what Meissner answers. I have asked him about it.h

Salut. ,, Your

K. M. The report on the Brussels Congress in the Opinion nationale states, inter alia:

[^1]: How did things go with fat Vogt?1

[^2]: a Marx means his book Herr Vogt. - b 22 September - c See this volume, pp. 101- 02. - d man from Bordeaux - e the first volume of Capital - f Sigismund Borkheim - s first - h See this volume, p. 102. - • Ibid., p. 100.



