---
Volume: 43
Document_Title: "74. Engels to Marx. 21 September "
Page_Range: "144-146"
---

# 74. Engels to Marx. 21 September 



**[p. 107]**

'Je dois mentionner ici le rapport général de l'Association, rédigé par le conseil de Londres. Mentionner, c'est bien le seul mot que je puisse employer, car, je ne suis point assez fort légiste pour trier et élaguer les phrases incriminables par les lois de France, et il s'en pourrait trouver quelques-unes de ce genre.'3

Speaks then of the PASSAGES dealing with 'le gouvernement fran- çais'.

'La critique y est verte parfois, et souvent ironique. Je le répète, je ne puis m'en faire juge; mais je dois avouer que le public a été moins timide que votre correspondant; il a couvert d'applaudissements frénétiques tous les passages que je m'abstiens de citer.'

There were 12 REPORTERS from France there. The Emancipationc and the Journal de Bruxelles6 attacked the congress in exactly the same way as they attacked us 20 years ago.

One Russian was there as a journalist. He said he would send the General Council the Russian papers that wrote about the congress.

First published abridged in Der Briefwech- Printed according to the original sei zwischen F. Engels und K. Marx, Bd. 4, „ , , - , , . ^- •• , r , Stuttgart, 1913 and in full in MEGA, Published in English for the first Abt. Ill, Bd. 4, Berlin, 1931 t l m e

74

ENGELS TO MARX

Manchester, 21 September 1868

Dear Moor,

Enclosed returned the Schweitzer stuff.160 The man is an idiot to believe that he can bribe you with such a letter. In making you chief of 'Europe' in general, he hints delicately that your kingdom

[^1]: IN LONDON

[^2]: a 'I must mention here the general report of the Association, drafted by the Council in London. Mention is in fact the only word which I can use since I am not sufficiently qualified in law to identify and weed out the phrases punishable under French law, and there could well be some of this sort in it' (from J. I. Blanc's report on the Brussels Congress of the International Working Men's Association in L'Opinion nationale, 10 September 1868). - b 'The criticism here is sometimes sharp and often ironical. I repeat I cannot make a judgment; but I must admit that the audience was less timid than your correspondent; it received with frantic applause all those passages which I refrain from quoting' (ibid). - c L'Emancipation belge, No. 254, 10 September 1868, leading article. - d Journal de Bruxelles, Nos 252, 254-260; 8, 10-16 September 1868.

[^3]: 6*





**[p. 108]**

is, for this very reason, not in any country in particular, i.e., strictly speaking, not of this world. He appoints you Pope so that you may anoint him Kaiser of Germany, and thus give a kick to Wilhelm." In any case, it is worth much that you have this letter in your hands.

I think you should, above all, point out to the philistine that his workers' congress164 only makes sense if it is a genuine workers' congress, not merely a feeble imitation of his Hamburg congress; i.e. if Schweitzer sees to it that non-Lassallean elements are also represented. So far, there is no sign of this, and Schweitzer does not appear to have taken any steps in this direction. Whether he 'can make friends' with Wilhelm and others or not, is completely immaterial; in a matter like this he must go along with them. Then, regarding the statutes, you could write to him that what counts is less what is in them than how they are handled.

The fellow obviously wishes to push out Wilhelmchen, Bebel and consorts, and be able to appeal to something in writing from you for this purpose. That must be very important to him, otherwise he would never have written you this letter, which delivers him absolutely into your hands for ever. You are quite right that he sees that a few Lassallean phrases will no longer do and that he must expand.

If I am not mistaken you also gave Wilhelmchen copies of the 18th Brumaire.h Some of them should be brought here, I no longer have a copy.

The Spanish business165 could end all the war clamour. La innocente Isabeld was the only reliable ally that Louise had, and if a revolution should be victorious in Spain, the whole constellation will assume a different character. The affair will probably be decided very quickly; I believe the Innocent Lady is foutue.'

Your

F. E.

First published in Der Briefwechsel zwischen F. Engels und K. Marx, Bd. 4, Stuttgart, 1913

Printed according to the original

Published in English for the first time

[^1]: I shall write to Gaudissart.c

[^2]: a Wilhelm Liebknecht - b K. Marx, The Eighteenth Brumaire of Louis Bonaparte. - c Sigismund Borkheim - d Isabella II - e Napoleon III - f finished



