---
Volume: 43
Document_Title: "75. Marx to Engels. 23 September "
Page_Range: "146-147"
---

# 75. Marx to Engels. 23 September 



**[p. 75]**

MARX T O ENGELS

IN MANCHESTER

London, 23 September 1868

DEAR FRED,

From the enclosed you will see that Liebknecht wants to get rid of Schweitzer through me, just as Schweitzer wants to get rid of Liebknecht.166 I have replied to Wilhelm 8 4: No overhastiness! If he acts with tact, Schweitzer will himself SETTLE DOWN TO MORE MODERATE 'PROPORTIONS' or ruin himself. T h e dissolution of the General Association of German Workers 167 brings Lassalleanism qua3 such to a forcible end, although it still may carry on for SOME TIME A

LINGERING SECT LIFE.

I enclose Schweitzer's report in the Social-Demokrat on the catastrophe.11

I completely share your view that the Spanish revolution (it has the same significance as the Neapolitan revolution of 1848168) gives a new turn to European history and, in particular, like a deus

ex machina, cuts the Gordian knot of the repulsive German-French war.

Strohn has just arrived from the continent. So, more next time.

Your

Moor

[^1]: The Times paid Eccarius 2 V2 GUINEAS per column, sang hymns of praise to him, and made him advantageous proposals. Send Wilhelm 0 back to me.

[^2]: First published in Der Briefwechsel zwischen Printed according to the original F. Engeb und K. Marx, Bd. 4, Stuttgart, . 1913 Published in English for the first

[^3]: a as - b [J. B.] Schweitzer, 'An die Mitglieder des Allg. deutsch. Arb.-Vereins', Der Social-Demokrat, No. 110, 20 September 1868.- c Wilhelm Liebknecht's letter to Marx of 16 September 1868.



