---
Volume: 43
Document_Title: "76. Engels to Marx. 24 September "
Page_Range: "147-149"
---

# 76. Engels to Marx. 24 September 



**[p. 76]**

ENGELS TO MARX

IN LONDON

Manchester, 24 September 1868

Dear Moor,

So that is the reason for the sycophantic letter from Schweitzer!a

The fellow obviously knew what was in store for him when he wrote to you. On the one hand, it may not be altogether unwelcome to him that he can drop the strict Lassallean religion, but fundamentally the loss of the 'tight' organisation and of the possibility to play at dictator is certainly fatal to him. Of course, this is the end of the Lassallean sect's self-important pretence that it is 'the party' in Germany, and the sect will gradually expire; it will continue to twitch the longest in the Bergisches Land, the real home of sects.

Incidentally, as Wilhelmb rightly guesses, his associations will also come under attack.169 So much the better. The petty-bourgeois- people's-party-federalist fad of these fellows is not worth a penny. And it is a good thing that the government really stirs up the workers, once it sees that the workers won't let themselves be used by it against the bourgeoisie. Some form or another will surely be found.

But what a comrade Wilhelm is! Less than 4 months since he entered into a 'sort of alliance' with Schweitzer,105 and today they are again at loggerheads, and he is too SLIPPERY for him. He knew that before, didn't he—but what about the fine lads he had 'assigned to watch him'!

What is this proclamation that you are supposed to issue by all means?166 And these fine phrases in it about 'persons' which Wilhelm might construe against Baptist0 and Baptist against Wilhelm! The South German democrat is impossible to get rid of, once you have him in your system. One might think Wilhelm was writing to Struve.

Schloff el (the elder) has turned up again in Silesia. I am folding into the returned Social-Demokrat some curiosa from the Zukunft.

If you had only gone to Nuremberg! You would have been

[^1]: a See this volume, pp. 105 and 107-08. - b Wilhelm Liebknecht; see this volume, p. 109. - c Baptist Schweitzer





**[p. 111]**

compensated and afterwards been able to start again from the beginning with the SUFFERINGS. I tell you the fellow still can't distinguish you from Struve.

Apropos the dissolution of the General Association of German Workers167 Wilhelm could now reprint the pertinent passages from my pamphlet,3 in which all this was predicted for the Lassallean gentlemen. What do you think about it? I could prepare the muck for him, as I still have a few copies here.170

Your

F. E.

First published abridged in Der Briefwech- Printed according to the original sei zwischen F. Engels und K. Marx, Bd. 4, Stuttgart, 1913 and in full in MEGA, Published in English for the first Abt. Ill, Bd. 4, Berlin, 1931 t l m e

77

London, 25 September 1868

Dear FRED,

Can you send me £5 by Saturday13 morning? One of the TRADESMEN just called and told me he was on the verge of bankruptcy and would have great expenses if he had not raised A CERTAIN SUM from HIS CREDITORS by Saturday.

Your

K. M.

[^1]: MARX TO ENGELS80

[^2]: IN MANCHESTER

[^3]: First published in MEGA, Abt. Ill, Bd. 4, Printed according to the original Berlin, 1931

[^4]: a The Prussian Military Question and the German Workers' Party. - b 26 September



