---
Volume: 43
Document_Title: "77. Marx to Engels. 25 September Ill 78. Marx to Engels. 25 September "
Page_Range: "149-150"
---

# 77. Marx to Engels. 25 September Ill 78. Marx to Engels. 25 September 



**[p. 78]**

MARX TO ENGELS

IN MANCHESTER

London, 25 September 1868

DEAR FRED,

BY ALL MEANS do the stuff for Liebknecht170 as quickly as feasible. Otherwise, the fellow will do it himself and, you may depend upon it, do it badly. It appears to me it would be a good thing if you were also to draw attention to what Bernhard Becker stole from your pamphlet3 and endorsed, after bitter experience, in his shitty pamphlet.b (He cursed us so horribly when he was still 'President of Humanity'.171) You can have the pamphlet right away if you write immediately to Strohn, who took it with him to Bradford.

The time has now come to KICK this 'Lassalleanism' 'just for a start'. And there is no need at all to allow B. Becker's shitty pamphlet to be buried in silence.172

The 'appeal' the fiery Wilhelmchen speaks of166 is this: I (i. e. in the name of the INTERNATIONAL ASSOCIATION, as its SECRETARY FOR GERMANY) must naturally address SOME GENERAL LINES to the German workers, now that their relationship to us has changed as a result of their various congress decisions. But no undue haste is necessary in so doing. In all these things 'more haste, less speed', and, as we know, our Wilhelmchen has shown no 'haste' with the matter for 6-7 years.

Quant àc Schweitzer, I had a sort of presentiment that some turning point WAS LOOMING SOMEWHERE. Although my reply to him had therefore been ready for some daysd—(in which I with school- masterly reserve point out to him, in particular, the difference in conditions between a sectarian movement and a real class movement)—I have, nevertheless, held the stuff back. And I will now only answer him after the results are available of his fresh attempt to call a congress in Berlin for forming TRADES UNIONS.164 In any case, Schweitzer has learned one thing about me, that the promptness with which I answer his letters is always in inverse proportion to their 'warmth of feeling'.

[^1]: a F. Engels, The Prussian Military Question and the German Workers' Party. - b B. Becker, Enthüllungen über das tragische Lebensende Ferdinand Lassalle's. - c As for - d See this volume, pp. 132-35.



