---
Volume: 43
Document_Title: "79. Engels to Marx. 25 September "
Page_Range: "150-151"
---

# 79. Engels to Marx. 25 September 



**[p. 113]**

Wilhelm has only ONE COPY left of The 18th Brumaire. How did things go with Vogt's LECTURES in the Schiller Institute 7 6?

Your

K. M.

Blanqui was in constant attendance during the Brussels Con- gress.

In a BLUE BOOK 1 7 3 about the crisis of 1857," Cardwell, CHAIRMAN of the COMMITTEE of Inquiry and the most disgusting washerwoman in the Peelite clique of old women, asks Dixon (MANAGING DIRECTOR of a bank which had failed in Liverpool) whether the SHAREHOLDERS of the bank had consisted largely of women, parsons and other persons with no knowledge of banking. BY NO MEANS, Dixon replied, they were mainly 'MERCANTILE MEN' but, he added very KNOWINGLY:

'THE MAJORITY OF THEM ARE PEOPLE IN BUSINESS, MERCANTILE MEN; BUT HOW FAR MERCANTILE MEN CAN BE CONSIDERED COMPETENT TO FORM AN OPINION ON ANY OTHER BUSINESS THAN THEIR OWN. IS RATHER A QUESTION.' I s t h a t n o t n i c e ?

Apropos!

Moore should send me Foster's On Exchange from his lending library, since it is not in the library here. I shall send it back immediately.

79

ENGELS T O MARX

IN LONDON

Manchester, 25 September 1868

Dear Moor,

Enclosed the desired five pounds in one bank note. T h e business in Spain must be going well, since the government has so little good news to announce. Still, it is surprising that the telegraphs to the frontiers have not yet been

[^1]: First published abridged in Der Briefwech- Printed according to the original sei zwischen F. Engels und K. Marx, Bd. 4, Stuttgart, 1913 and in full in MEGA, Published in English for the first Abt. Ill, Bd. 4, Berlin, 1931 n m e

[^2]: a Report from the Select Committee on the Bank Acts; together with the Proceedings of the Committee, Minutes of Evidence, Appendix and Index. Ordered, by the House of Commons, to be Printed, 1 July 1858.



