---
Volume: 43
Document_Title: "81. Marx to Engels. 29 September "
Page_Range: "153-154"
---

# 81. Marx to Engels. 29 September 



**[p. 116]**

and that by participating in these officially it would forfeit the distinctiveness that constitutes its point d'honneur and raison d'être.

First published in Der Briefwechsel zwischen Printed according to the original F. Engels und K. Marx, Bd. 4, Stuttgart, „ , ,. , , . _ ,. , . r „ c . . Q . , 6 ° Published in English in lull tor the first time

81

MARX TO ENGELS

IN MANCHESTER

London, 29 September 1868

Dear FRED,

Enclosed and attached letter from Eichhoff176 together with 2 issues of the Social-Demokrat' and the Staatsbürger-Zeitung.

You will see from them that 'boozy' Schulze-Delitzsch has succeeded in giving momentary importance to Schweitzer's stage- trick; that Schweitzer's whole congress consists only (minus 12 men) of Lassalleans 177; and that Schweitzer believes that he can in a very simple way replace his dictatorship over the General Association of German Workers by the dictatorship over the German working class. That is very naive.

The sole practical question for us is: Should I or should I not issue an appeal at this moment? In view of its position, the General Council must maintain an impartial stand. Would it not therefore be better to wait until 1. the nullity of the results of Schweitzer's game has become more apparent and, 2. Liebknecht and Co. have really organised something?

It appears to me that the power of the General Council greatly depends upon its not tying itself down prematurely and never doing so without certainty of success; it should, rather, practise Russian diplomacy in its operations.

If you share this view (and you must declare yourself in 2-3 days), I can simply write to Wilhelm and Eichhoff that the majority of the General Council has declared itself against any public proclamation until the elements that have joined the

[^1]: a Der Social-Demokrat, Nos 112 and 113, 25 and 27 September 1868.



