---
Volume: 43
Document_Title: "82. Engels to Marx. 30 September "
Page_Range: "154-156"
---

# 82. Engels to Marx. 30 September 



**[p. 117]**

International Working Men's Association are sufficiently organised to provide the necessary backing.

Your

K. M.

In the meantime Lassalleanism, which is already crumbling, can be further subverted UNDERHAND as, e.g., by your article."

First published abridged in Der Briefwech- Printed according to the original sei zwischen F. Engels und K. Marx, Bd. 4, Stuttgart, 1913 and in full in MEGA, Published in English for the first Abt. Ill, Bd. 4, Berlin, 1931 t l m e

82

ENGELS TO MARX

IN LONDON

Manchester, 30 September 1868

Dear Moor,

Once you have entered into contact with Schweitzer in your capacity as Secretary FOR GERMANY,b I do not see how you could do anything except observe complete neutrality between him and Wilhelmchen—at least in official conduct. As far as I know, the Lassalleans accepted your programme in Hamburg,104 so more cannot be expected. One must simply leave it to Schweitzer to destroy himself; if we ourselves were in Germany, things would be different.

Even from the previous Social-Demokrat I saw that he wanted to transfer his 'tight organisation' to the TRADES UNIONS0; now we have to wait and see whether he succeeds, which I do not believe. TRADES BUSINESS is money business, and there dictatorship ends of itself. And the substitution won't work as easily as the bonhomme A

believes.

The COUNCIL can and may only take sides when it is itself attacked directly or indirectly, or when the principles of the

[^1]: a F. Engels, 'On the Dissolution of the Lassallean Workers' Association'. - b See this volume, p. 76. - c Engels presumably means the article 'Zum Allgemeinen deutschen Arbeiter-Congress. Berlin, 24. September' in Der Social-Demokrat, No. 112, 25 September 1868. - d good man





**[p. 118]**

Association are infringed. This is precisely how it acted at the time with regard to the Parisians.178

Moreover, what is Wilhelmchen's organisation169 so far, what has been the effect of the Nuremberg decision? 135 Have societies really affiliated, paid subscriptions, etc.? I know nothing about it. And what does Wilhelm want to do in relation to Schweitzer's STRIKE organisation?164 What else does he want to organise? All this is still very unclear to me.

Furthermore: What practical effect would it have if you and the General Council issued a declaration against the Lassalleans? I believe very little, at most the sect as such would stick together the more firmly. And what can they be reproached with? That they do not follow W. Liebknecht? As long as the fellows have trust in Schweitzer, and as long as Liebknecht and Schweitzer squabble, all sermonising about unity is sheer folly.

To attack the Lassalle stuff in literary form is quite another matter. But to proscribe him, so to speak, would only consolidate a sect which is otherwise in disintegration.

I suggest you also find occasion to give Schweitzer a piece of your mind concerning his dictatorial ambitions, if you write to him at all. After all, he wanted to send you the drafts first.160

Apropos. The letter from Eichhoff176 was not enclosed.

Vogt. 9 I could not write to you about this since Schorlemmer was in the LAKES, and I myself naturally asked no questions. So far, I only heard yesterday that the lecture did not cover the expenses, that Vogt, though he has always given the same lecture for the past year, nevertheless spoke very stumblingly and sloppily, often repeated himself, etc. After the lecture some people sat with him in the dining room, where the good Vogt was, however, so pressed with questions about the monkey trial by the Unitarian preacher Steinthal (brother of Weerth's3), by Kalisch, an old boring language teacher, and by yet another fellow, that he was absolutely overwhelmed and sneaked off at the first opportunity. He is said to have felt altogether very uneasy and uncomfortable here, while in Bradford he was very feted and buoyant. He made a few remarks to Davisson which caused the latter to note afterwards that he must be quite a nasty fellow, capable of anything. I shall be hearing more. In any case, he will not come here again.

Your

F. E.

[^1]: a The brother of Weerth's principal is meant.



