---
Volume: 43
Document_Title: "83. Engels to Marx. 2 October "
Page_Range: "156-157"
---

# 83. Engels to Marx. 2 October 

You will probably be hearing from Borkheim shortly, otherwise from me in re nervi rerun.3

First published abridged in Der Briefwech- Printed according to the original sei zwischen F. Engels und K. Marx, Bd. 4, Stuttgart, 1913 and in full in MEGA, Published in English for the first Abt. III, Bd. 4, Berlin, 1931 t i m e

83

ENGELS TO MARX180

IN LONDON

Manchester, 2 October 1868

Dear Moor,

Borkheim has done his business excellently. At the end of last month the sum of £72 was due for wine which Charles,b Gumpert and I had received from him. It was only at the beginning of this month, however, that I could lay my hands on the cash. So I sent it to him yesterday and asked whether he knew how to raise £100 for you or whether he could leave the wine unpaid until February. He agreed to the latter and advanced the other £28 himself. So we have, I think, peace and quiet at least for the immediate future.

But now you must get on with the 2nd volume,41 and give your liver some exercise.

The Spanish business 165 has gone brilliantly so far. The 'dynasty' had already been wrecked in the vagina of the Innocent Lady.c So the minimum consequence: a change in dynasty and an elected king, plus a constituent assembly. All very nice things, even in themselves, on MR Bonaparte's frontier. It may get better yet.

Schweitzerianad back this evening, forgotten yesterday by mistake. His manner of establishing a few nice little posts for life for himself and Fritzsche is priceless. But the whole story is impracticable. In the 'Union' 3 independent powers of different origin! 1. The committee, elected by the trades. 2. The presidium, elected by a general vote. 3. The congress, elected by the local organisations. This means collisions everywhere, and that is

[^1]: a with regard to vital (here: money) matters - b Charles Roesgen - c Isa- bella II - d See this volume, p. 116.



