---
Volume: 43
Document_Title: "84. Marx to Engels. 4 October "
Page_Range: "157-159"
---

# 84. Marx to Engels. 4 October 



**[p. 120]**

supposed to make for 'rapid action'. To be sure, the elû du suffrage universel,3 as everybody's trusted agent, is in the best position. Childish of Lassalle to have taken over these idiocies from the French Constitution,181 and of Schweitzer to treat them as eternal models to be used everywhere.13 However it may be, the whole business will get nowhere so long as only the Lassalleans are in it, and as soon as others participate, too, the stuff will come to an end.

Have to catch the last post.

Your

F. E.

Enclosed the ceremonial RECEIPT which the illustrious Gaudissartc

has accepted from you to prove that he is a serious businessman.

First published in Der Briefwechsel zwischen Printed according to the original

Published first time

F. Engels und K. Marx, Bd. 4, Stuttgart, „ . , • . . • r vu- t u t ,u jgj3 Published in English m lull tor the

84

MARX TO ENGELS

London, 4 October 1868

In the package which you will receive simultaneously there are:

1. Two letters from Eichhoff the forgotten one and one which arrived today1*2; 2. Letter from Liebknecht1M; 3. Letter from Borkheim 184; 4. Manuscript and letter from J. Dietzgen 185; 5. Letter from the Russian Danielson in Petersburg186; 6. Letter from Lessner. Since most of these letters (which you must return with the exception of the manuscript) have only just arrived, in all haste the following:

[^1]: IN MANCHESTER

[^2]: DEAR FRED,

[^3]: a man elected by universal suffrage - b See also this volume, p. 135. - c Sigismund Borkheim





**[p. 121]**

Ad No. 5. I am naturally extraordinarily pleased to hear that my book will appear in Petersburg in Russian translation. I shall immediately send the people what they requesteda (as far as I can) as soon as you have returned the letter.

Ad 4. Read through the manuscript. My view is that J. Dietzgen would do best if he condensed all his ideas into 2 printed sheets and had them printed in his name as a tanner. If he publishes them at the intended length, he will make a fool of himself because of the lack of dialectical development and the running in circles. Read it through and write your opinion.

Ad 3. To understand Gaudissart'sb letter, briefly the following: He wanted to write about the Pan-Slav democratic movement; for this I gave him your articles about Bakunin in the Neue Rheinische Zeitung? His plan to appear with you before the public is excellent, but there is no hurry because he has not turned out his 25 printed sheets by a long way yet.

Secondly, he maintained a certain correspondence, despite my warning, with Dr Crapper, alias Elard Biscamp. Now that the latter has directly attacked me and the International in the Weser-Zeitung and the Augsburgerin,d he proposes, as you see, to publish in Liebknecht's paper his latest exchange of letters with Biscamp. Ce brave" Gaudissart! In these letters he presents himself as my patron, and lets Biscamp flatter him. I wrote to him by return that I would have to protest tooth and nail against this sort of thing.84 For greater security I immediately wrote to Liebknecht that he must not print the Borkheim-Biscamp correspondence under any circumstances.8*

Ad 1 and 2. I have sent to Liebknecht for his political review an entrefilet about M. Hirsch (because of the 'International'), and, at the same time, a few blows at Biscamp as correspondent of the

Weser-Zeitung and the Augsburger?

Ad 6. The £100 (of which ABOUT £35 for Laura) I have used to pay off the most urgent things and only kept as much on hand as is necessary in order not to be absolutely penniless. I still have about £100 of debts and will soon send you a list of the ITEMS so that you can see that there are no useless expenditures on my part. Now I received the enclosed note from Lessner today. His

[^1]: a See this volume, pp. 123-25. - b Sigismund Borkheim's - c F. Engels, Democratic Pan-Slavism. - d [E. Biscamp,] 'London, 25. Sept.', Allgemeine Zeitung, No. 273, 29 September 1868 (published in the column Grossbritannien, signed A). - e Good old - f a short article - S K. Marx, 'Connections Between the International Working Men's Association and English Working Men's Organisations'.



