---
Volume: 43
Document_Title: "86. Marx to Nikolai Danielson. 7 October "
Page_Range: "160-162"
---

# 86. Marx to Nikolai Danielson. 7 October 



**[p. 86]**

MARX TO NIKOLAI DANIELSON34

IN PETERSBURG

London, 7 October 1868

1 Modena Villas, Maitland Park, N. W.

Dear Sir,

In reply to your esteemed letter,186 the following:

1. You must not wait for the second volume, the publication of which will be delayed by perhaps another 6 months.187 I cannot finish it, until certain official enquêtes," instituted during last year (and 1866) in France, the UNITED STATES and England, have been completed or published. In any case, Volume I constitutes a whole, complete in itself.

2. Enclosed is my photogram. 3. Socialist literature does not exist in the UNITED STATES. There are only workers' papers.

4. I myself possess no collection of my works, which were written in various languages and published in various places. Most of them are out of print.

Since I am unable to meet your request in this respect— la plus belle fille de France ne peut donner que ce qu'elle ah—I shall have to confine myself to giving you some brief notes on my literary-political activity, which you might be able to use in the preface to your translation.188

Dr K. Marx, born 1818 in Trier (Rhenish Prussia).

1842-43: Rédacteur en chef of the Rheinische Zeitung (Cologne). This newspaper is forcibly suppressed by the Prussian govern- ment. Marx goes to Paris; publishes there, together with Arnold Ruge, the Deutsch-Französische Jahrbücher (Paris, 1844). At the end of 1844, Marx is expelled from France by Guizot; proceeds to Brussels. Together with Friedrich Engels publishes Die heilige Familie, oder Kritik der kritischen Kritik. Gegen Bruno Bauer und Consorten (Frankfort on the Main, 1845). (This work, like the essays by Marx in the Deutsch-Französische Jahrbücher,d are directed against the ideological mysticism of Hegelian and, in general, speculative philosophy.) Also published during the stay in Brussels: Misère de

[^1]: a enquiries - b the most beautiful girl in France can only give what she has - c Editor-in-Chief - d On the Jewish Question and Contribution to the Critique of Hegel's Philosophy of Law. Introduction.





**[p. 124]**

la philosophie. Réponse à la Philosophie de la misère de M. Proudhon (Brussels and Paris, 1847). Discours sur le libre Echange (Brussels, 1848189). Finally, at the beginning of 1848, together with Friedrich Engels: Manifest der Kommunistischen Partei (London). Shortly after the outbreak of the February revolution, Marx is expelled from Belgium; receives at the same time from the French provisional government an invitation to return to France a; proceeds to Paris and, in April 1848, to Cologne (Germany), publishing there:

Neue Rheinische Zeitung (from June 1848 to May 1849). Also there:

Zwei Politische Prozesse (Cologne, 1849). (Containing the trial proceedings a n d Marx's defence speeches at the Assizes.b Marx charged on one occasion with insulting the procureur du roi,c and on the other, after the Prussian coup d'état (Manteuffel), with inciting rebellion. In both cases Marx acquitted by the jury.)

In the course of May 1849, the Neue Rheinische Zeitung is suppressed by the Prussian government and Marx expelled from Prussia.d Proceeds once more to Paris. Again expelled from France e; proceeds at the e n d of October 1849 to London, where h e still resides. During his stay there, publishes:

Neue Rheinische Zeitung. Politisch-ökonomische Revue (1850, Ham- burg and New York). Der 18te Brumaire des Louis Bonaparte (New York, 1852). Enthüllungen über den Kommunisten-Prozess zu Köln (1853, two editions, one in Basle, one in Boston, UNITED STATES).

[^1]: FLY-SHEETS AGAIXST LORD PALMERSTON1 (London, Birmingham, Glasgow, 1853-1854).

[^2]: Zur Kritik der politischen Oekonomie (Berlin, 1859). Herr Vogt (London, 1860). 1851-1861, continuous contributions in English to the New-York Tribune, Putnam's Revue190 and The New American Cyclopedia.6

[^3]: 1864: T h e foundation p r o g r a m m e of the 'INTERNATIONAL WORKING- MEN'S ASSOCIATION', that is: ADDRESS TO THE WORKING PEOPLE OF EUROPE*1 and

[^4]: a See 'Ferdinand Flocon to Marx in Brussels. Paris, March 1, 1848' (present edition, Vol. 6, p. 649). - b K. Marx and F. Engels, 'The First Trial of the Neue Rheinische Zeitung' and 'The Trial of the Rhenish District Committee of Democrats'. - c Royal Prosecutor (Zweiffel) - d See present edition, Vol. 9, p. 496. - e Ibid., pp. 526-27. - f K. Marx, Lord Palmerston. - e See present edition, Vols. 11-18. - h K. Marx, Inaugural Address of the Working Men's International Association. In: Address and Provisional Rules of the Working Men's International Association



