---
Volume: 43
Document_Title: "89. Engels to Marx. 12 October "
Page_Range: "166-167"
---

# 89. Engels to Marx. 12 October 



**[p. 89]**

ENGELS TO MARX

IN LONDON

Manchester, 12 October 1868

Dear Moor,

Enclosed the Schweitzeriana returned with thanks.3 I completely share your view on the therapy in this case. But he will scarcely be ready to part with 'his own workers' movement'. His ambitions exceed his strength, or, as the Italians put it, vuol petare piu alto del culo,b and on this inner contradiction he will work himself to death.

In my view, the statutes0 are absurd for this purpose, but it is immaterial in the end.

And please do not omit the final sentence about the attack on the Lassallean superstition; this will be effective with the fellow, who is well aware that the whole stuff is HUMBUG.

I was unable to write to you while I was in town, and now it is nearly 8 o'clock, when the post closes out here, so I cannot add anything.

The picture of Lizzie is horrible, but still the least bad after five sittings.

Your

F. E.

[^1]: First published abridged in Der Briefwech- Printed according to the original sei zwischen F. Engels und K. Marx, Bd. 4, Stuttgart, 1913 and in full in MEGA, Published in English for the first Abt. Ill, Bd. 4, Berlin, 1931 t l m e

[^2]: a See this volume, p. 127. - b he wants to fart higher up than his backside - L 'Mustersatzung für die einzelnen Arbeiterschaften' and 'Satzung für den Arbeiterschaftsverband', Der Social-Demokrat, No. 118, 9 October 1868 (supple- ment).



