---
Volume: 43
Document_Title: "90. Marx to Ludwig Kugelmann. 12 October "
Page_Range: "167-169"
---

# 90. Marx to Ludwig Kugelmann. 12 October 



**[p. 90]**

MARX TO LUDWIG KUGELMANN29

IN HANOVER

London, 12 October 1868

1 Modena Villas, Maitland Park My dear Friend,

Your obstinate silence is quite incomprehensible to me. Did I perhaps give cause for it in my last letter?a I hope not. In any case—unintentional. I need not explain to you explicitly, you know that you are my most intimate friend in Germany, and I really cannot understand how, inter amicos,h people can keep such a sharp lookout, all because of some trifle. Least of all have you such a right with regard to me, for you know how much I owe you. Apart from everything personal, you have done more for my bookc than all Germany put together.'95

Yet perhaps you are so energetically silent in order to prove to me that you are not like that set of so-called friends, who are silent when things go badly, and speak when they go well. But there is no need for such a demonstration on your part.

By speaking about the 'good state of affairs' I mean, first, the propaganda made by my book and the recognition it has received from the German workers SINCE YOU WROTE ME LAST. Second, however, the wonderful progress made by the International Working Men's Association, particularly in England, too.

A few days ago a Petersburg publisher11 surprised me with the news that a Russian translation of Capital is now at the printers.196

He asked for my photogram as a vignette for the title page, and I could not deny this trifle to 'my good friends' the Russians. It is an irony of fate that the Russians, against whom I have been fighting incessantly for 25 years, not only in German, but also in French and English, have always been my 'patrons'. In 1843- 1844 in Paris, the Russian aristocrats there waited on me hand and foot.197 My book against Proudhon (1847), ditto that published by Duncker (1859),e have nowhere had such good sales as in Russia. And the first foreign nation to translate Capital is Russia. Yet not too much should be made of all this. The Russian aristocracy are educated, in their youth, at German universities and in Paris.

[^1]: a See this volume, pp. 82-83. - b among friends - c the first volume of Capital - d N. P. Polyakov - e Karl Marx, The Poverty of Philosophy and A Contribution to the Critique of Political Economy





**[p. 131]**

They always yearn for the most extreme the West has to offer. .It is pure gourmandise, like that practised by part of the French aristocracy during the 18th century. Ce n'est pas pour les tailleurs et les bottiers,1' as Voltaire said at the time about his own Enlighten- ment. It does not hinder the very same Russians from becoming scoundrels as soon as they enter government service.

I am having plenty of 'BOTHER' JUST NOW in Germany with the leaders' squabbles, as you will see from the enclosed letters, which you will please return. On one side Schweitzer, who is appointing me Pope in partibus infidelium,b so that I can proclaim him the workers' emperor in Germany. On the other side Liebknecht, who forgets that it was, IN POINT OF FACT, Schweitzer who forced him to recall that there is a movement of the proletariat that is different from the petty-bourgeois democratic movement.

I hope you and your family are well. I hope I have not fallen into disfavour with your dear wife' Apropos. The International Ladies' Association, duced Mrs Goegg (READ Gecke), has sent an epistle to the Brussels Congress,138 asking whether the ladies might join us.198 The answer, of course, was a courteous affirmative. Should you, therefore, continue in your silence, I shall send your wife credentials as correspondent of the General Council.

I have been suffering rather a lot from the heat, on account of my liver, but am, at the moment, well.

Salut.

Yours

Karl Marx

P.S. I. The Spanish revolution 165 came like a deus ex machina to prevent the otherwise unavoidable and DISASTROUS Prussian-French war.

P.S. II. You once wrote to me that I would be receiving a book by Büchner.' When and how?

[^1]: First published abridged in Die Neue Zeit, Printed according to the original Bd. 2, Nr. 7, Stuttgart, 1901-1902 and in full in Pisma Marksa k Kugelmanu (Letters of Marx to Kugelmann), Moscow- Leningrad, 1928

[^2]: a It is not for tailors or cobblers - b in parts inhabited by unbelievers—formula added to the title of Roman Catholic bishops holding purely nominal dioceses in non-Christian countries. - c Gertrud Kugelmann - d leader - e 'Geek' (German) means 'fop' - f L. Büchner, Sechs Vorlesungen über die Darwin'sche Theorie von der Verwandlung der Arten



