---
Volume: 43
Document_Title: "92. Engels to Marx. 14 October "
Page_Range: "173-174"
---

# 92. Engels to Marx. 14 October 



**[p. 92]**

ENGELS TO MARX

IN LONDON

Manchester, 14 October 1868

Dear Moor,

Today the Kölnische Zeitung states that the workers (COLLIERS) in Essen, who have just ended the STRIKE successfully,203 have revolted against Schweitzerism and its supporters, the local bigwigs, and are demanding strict accounting of the STRIKE funds.11 The source is suspect, but the symptom is significant. This whole agitation breaks down on money matters; the Lassallean leaders are too scoundrelly in this respect.

Further, it reports that in Gladbach the cotton manufacturers have recognised that the working day is too long, and are forming an association among themselves to reduce the day from 13 hours to 12 for the time being (issue of 12 October). You see that your bookb is also having a practical effect on the bourgeoisie.

Yet another stupid issue of Wilhelm's sheetc this week! He interrupts your stuff about Hirschd in order to publish a rubbishy article which amounts to saying that bourgeois society, or 'the social', as he puts it, is determined by 'the political' and not vice versa.e Naturam si furca expellas,1 etc. Nearly every article is crawling with nonsense.

Ernest the Fox now seems to be a certainty here if you can trust the cheers with which he, in particular, is honoured everywhere among the 3 liberal candidates.102 If things go well, this will be due neither to his cunning, nor to his STRAIGHTFORWARDNESS, but only to the instinct of the masses. The Tories can find no candidate, it is said they wish to put up here one of the Hoares (London bankers); but the man will have to have a lot of money to throw away for nothing if he lets himself in for it.

[^1]: a The reports, datelined 'Essen, 8. Okt.' and 'Gladbach, 10. Okt.', appeared in the column Vermischte Nachrichten (Miscellaneous Reports), Kölnische Zeitung, No. 284, 12 October 1868. - b the first volume of Capital - c Demokratisches Wochenblatt- d K. Marx, 'Connections Between the International Working Men's Association and English Working Men's Organisations'.- e 'Der Staat und die soziale Frage', Demokratisches Wochenblatt, No. 41, 10 October 1868. - f naturam expellas furca, tarnen usque recurret—You may drive nature out with a pitchfork, still it will return (Horace, Epistles, I, 10, 24).



