---
Volume: 43
Document_Title: "93. Marx to Engels. 15 October "
Page_Range: "174-176"
---

# 93. Marx to Engels. 15 October 



**[p. 137]**

In Berlin, as a result of the great heat last summer, afternoon lessons were completely abandoned in a number of high schools and morning lessons extended by one period. The results were quite unexpected, the boys made enormously rapid progress, and the business is now going to be tried out on a larger scale.

In Spain the rule of the generals appears to be wearing out rapidly.165 The abolition of the Jesuits and the partial abolition of the monasteries had been long in coming and only seem to have been forced, at least in part, by financial difficulties; on the other hand, the reward for the officers and NCOs for joining the insurrectionary side came quickly enough. The disarmament of the people also appears to be only a question of time. All the same, in a movement like this the little tricks are not enough with which, after a coup, a general could edge his way through as Isabella's minister.

With best greetings.

Your

F. E.

First published abridged in Der Briefwech- Printed according to the original sei zwischen F. Engels und K. Marx, Bd. 4, Stuttgart, 1913 and in full in MEGA, Published in English for the first Abt. Ill, Bd. 4, Berlin, 1931 t i m e

93

London, 15 October 1868

Tomorrow or the day after tomorrow the Lafargue FAMILY is leaving for Paris. This will greatly reduce our HOUSEHOLD EXPENSES.

I have written to A. Frank et Co. in Paris. Since I know that he has sold COPIES OF MY Anti-Proudhon204 as recently as in the past few •weeks, I asked in my letter for accounts of the whole affair, REMINDING MR Frank that he and Vogler were only my agents de

vente* and that I had paid all the printing costs. Thereupon I received, a few days ago, the following reply:

[^1]: MARX T O ENGELS34

[^2]: IN MANCHESTER

[^3]: a selling agents

[^4]: 7-983





**[p. 138]**

'J'ai l'honneur, Monsieur, de vous informer que j'ai racheté la Maison A. Frank le 21 Oct. 1865, sans actifs et passifs.— Il y avait à cette époque 92 exemplaires de votre brochure Misère de la philosophie en magasin que je tiens à votre disposition.— Quant à ce qui pourrait vous revenir de solde, il faudra vous adresser soit à.M r Vogler soit au curateur de la succession de mon prédécesseur, M r Bassot, 58 rue de Bondy, Paris, etc. per F. Vieweg, propriétaire actuel de la maison A. Frank.'3

I shall now grant Lafargue power of attorney to collect the 92 exemplaires, which he will sell amongst his friends. For the remainder (there were 1,500 exemplaires), I am granting Schily power of attorney to start legal proceedings. I do not know Vogler's whereabouts, but his former associé Shee still has a librairieh in Brussels, where I can mobilise a handful of young lawyers belonging to our Association. It would be nice if I could still squeeze out some cash.

Attached packet of the Social-Demokrat, upon which you should please write me a few marginal notes (regarding the TRADES UNIONS stories) since I did not have the time to read the stuff. The let- ter to Schweitzer has gone off.c Enclosed also the latest number of Lanterne and a pamphlet about Plon-Plon, said to be written by Charras.d

Apropos. I had a meeting with Beesly. The SUB-EDITOR of Mor- ley (the EDITOR for the SCIENTIFIC DEPARTMENT) declared that the argument was irrefutable. However, the article " was too 'DRY' for A MAGAZINE. Beesly asked me to put it in a more popular form, without sacrificing the SCIENTIFIC POINTS. This is RATHER DIFFICULT. However, I'll try. In particular, he wants a longer introduction, including personalia about MY PAST and the book's impact in Germany. This, OF COURSE, you must write. But there is time for this until I send you the BULK of the article. The whole shit is then to go into The Westminster Review.

Salut

Your

K. M.

[^1]: 3 'I have the honour to inform you, Sir, that I repurchased the Maison A. Frank on 21 Oct. 1865, without assets and liabilities.—At that time, 92 copies of your pamphlet The Poverty of Philosophy were in stock, and I hold them at your disposal.— With regard to any possible balance due to you, you should address yourself to Mr Vogler or to my predecessor's executor, Mr Bassot, 58 rue de Bondy, Paris, etc. F. Vieweg, current owner of the Maison A. Frank.' Marx quotes Vieweg's letter of 12 October 1868. - b bookshop - c See this volume, pp. 132-35. - d [J. B. A. Charras,] Monsieur Napoléon Bonaparte (Jérôme).



