---
Volume: 43
Document_Title: "95. Engels to Marx. 22 October "
Page_Range: "177-179"
---

# 95. Engels to Marx. 22 October 



**[p. 95]**

ENGELS TO MARX

IN LONDON

Manchester, 22 October 1868

Dear Moor,

The little Russian Ermen,a whose fate you can see from the enclosed paper, has, on the pretext that he must now settle down, been living in our office for a week now, and has only emerged rather drunk to visit his betrothed. Since the whole office was turned into a pub, no sort of work could be done, and that is why I have only now got around to writing to you.

I have not yet been able to read the Congress 164 reports in the Social-Demokrat, which are also very boring.b Apart from this, Schweitzer shows that he is very serious about his sect. Not only has the General Association of German Workers been reformed, with its headquarters in Berlin 167 and with new statutes/ the only alterations having been made, compared to the old statutes, with an eye to the Law on Association,206 but every detail shows that in the new TRADES UNIONS GAGW aims to play (but openly) the same role as our old secret league '18 did in the legal associations. The TRADES UNIONS are only to form an exoteric party of the Lassallean church of sole salvation, but only the latter remains the one of sole salvation. If Eichhoff forms a separate association in Berlin,207 he is promised gracious toleration on the condition that his associa- tion takes a 'friendly' attitude towards GAGW. But Schweitzer and his Association remain "the party", and the others may come and join it; or else remain heretics and DISSENTERS.

Apart from this, the fellow has a much clearer grasp than all the others of the general political situation and a much clearer attitude to the other parties; and he is cleverer in his presentation than all the others. He calls 'all old parties facing us, one single reactionary mass, and their differences are scarcely of any significance for us'. He recognises that 1866 and its results are ruining the system of petty principalities, undermining the principle of legitimacy, shaking reaction, and have set the people in motion, but he has—now—also come out against the other results, the burden of

[^1]: a Anton Ermen - b Der Social-Demokrat, Nos. 114, 115, 116 and 117 (with supple- ments); 30 September, 2, 4, 7 October 1868, Allgemeiner deutscher Arbeiter- Congress. - c 'Statut. Geschäfts-Reglement', Social-Demokrat, No. 119, 11 October 1868.





**[p. 141]**

taxes, etc., and his attitude to Bismarck is more 'correct', as the Berliners say, than e.g. Liebknecht's is, with regard to the ex-princes. You will have seen that he cites the Elector of Hesse3

as a historical authority—on the all-too-familiar subjects—and in his last number he allows a true Hanoverian to strike up a Guelphic whimpering.b On this last point, couldn't you for once tell Wilhelm what is what? It is really asking a lot to expect us to support a paper in which he allows such dirty tricks.

Have at least a part of the anti-Proudhonsc sent to London; these few remaining copies cannot be replaced. I myself have none. Vieweg should be asked to account for the copies sold since 1865. It is, in addition, certainly a good thing that you are following the matter up, even though only now. There is always the possibility that something may still come out of it.

The business with the Westminsterd is very good. Do not allow time to slip by; the article should appear in the January issue; so send me the stuff as soon as possible, so I may do my part. It is very good that these fellows would not use a simple presentation of a new scientific development without the phraseology of their 'ESSAYS', which make the matter not only less clear, but also drier. I would, however, also ask Mr Beesly how many printed sheets would be available. The stuff I sent you would have made 1 sheet in the Fortnightly, but about 1 V2 in the Westminster. According to space—and since only one article is possible here—we should consider whether and which parts of the book should be left out completely—for instance I do not believe it will be possible to include the chapter on accumulation208 without cutting down the space for the main subject too much.

I've read Darwin's first volume on DOMESTICATION .e Only details are new, and then not much of importance.

With best greetings.

Your

F. E.

[^1]: First published abridged in Der Briefwech- Printed according to the original sei zwischen F. Engels und K. Marx. Bd. 4, „ , , - , , - r •• , r • r- Stuttgart, 1913 and in full in MEGA, Published in Enghsh for the first Abt. Ill, Bd. 4, Berlin, 1931 t i m e

[^2]: a Ludwig III. See Demokratisches Wochenblatt, No. 40, 3 October 1868, Politische Uebersicht. - b Demokratisches Wochenblatt, No. 42, 17 October 1868 (supplement), 'Ein Hannoveraner' - c K. Marx, The Poverty of Philosophy See this volume, p. 138. - d The Westminster Review; see this volume, p. 138. - e Ch. Darwin, The Variation of Animals and Plants under Domestication. In 2 vols. London, 1868.



