---
Volume: 43
Document_Title: "98. Engels to Marx. 28 October "
Page_Range: "181-184"
---

# 98. Engels to Marx. 28 October 



**[p. 97]**

MARX TO LUDWIG KUGELMANN29

IN HANOVER

London, 26 October 1868

My dear Friend,

Only these few lines in reply to your letter,212 which arrived at a moment when I am burdened with a visitor.

Kertbény's address: No. ll/III (what the III means I don't know, perhaps the floor) Behrenstrasse.

Now, permit me a word. Since you and Engels were of the opinion that it would be useful, I gave in on the question of the advertisement in the Gartenlaube.3 My conviction was decisively against it. And now I request you urgently finally to abandon this joke. The only result is that fellows like Keil and the Daheim sort believe one to belong to the tribe of great men, literary or other, and to need or seek their protection.

I believe this sort of thing is harmful rather than helpful and beneath the dignity of a man of science. For instance, Meyer's Konversationslexikon wrote a long time ago asking me for a biography. Not only did I not send one; I did not even reply to the letter. Everybody must work out his own salvation.

As for Kertbény, he is a pompous, confused, importunate literary idler, and the less one has to do with him the better.

Salut

Yours

K. M.

98 ENGELS TO MARX

Manchester, 28 October 1868 Dear Moor,

[^1]: First published abridged in Die Neue Zeil, Printed according to the original Bd. 2, Nr. 7, Stuttgart, 1901-1902, and in full in Pisma Marksa k Kugelmanu (Letters of Marx to Kugelmann), Moscow- Leningrad, 1928

[^2]: IN LONDON

[^3]: In all haste, I return the enclosures from Kugelmann209 and Wilhelm.b Congratulations on the professorship. The letter from

[^4]: a See this volume, p. 74. - b Ibid., p. 142.





[^1]: of Lizzie Burns by Frederick Engels (after 4 May 1





