---
Volume: 43
Document_Title: "99. Marx to William Jessup. 28 October "
Page_Range: "184-185"
---

# 99. Marx to William Jessup. 28 October 



**[p. 147]**

Wilhelm is indeed amusing. This omnium-gatherum of instructions to you, so that you might do something too. I also congratulate Strohn on the agency for the Stehfest firm of whose commercial stability I am far from convinced.3

Lizzy has rushed off with her friend MRS Chorlton (the fatty) to her relations in Lincolnshire and will return only on Friday or Saturday.13 Naturally the maid had to pick this precise moment to fall ill, but Ellenc is helping us out.

Best greetings to all. Y o u r

F. E.

First published in MEGA, Abt. Ill, Bd. 4, Printed according to the original Berlin, 1931 . . , r , r. Published in English for the first time

99

MARX T O WILLIAM JESSUP2,s

IN NEW YORK

London, 28 October 1868

1 Modena Villas, Maitland Park, Haverstock Hill

Dear Sir,

Your letter to Mr Eccarius, d.d. 3 curt, has been duly communicated by him to the General Council of the International Working Men's Association. He has been reappointed as our corresponding Secretary for America, but is at present too ill to fulfil his functions.

The General Council has appointed Mr S. Meyer and Mr August Vogt as its German-American correspondents and Mr Pelletier as its French-American correspondent. I beg to recom- mend you these citizens.

The General Council being itself yearly elected by the General Congress, it is self-understood that all its nominations can only be valid for the current year, if they be not renewed.

Yours fraternally Karl Marx

[^1]: a Engels puns on the name Stehfest and the word Stehfestigkeit (stability). - b 30 or 31 October - c Mary Ellen Burns



