---
Volume: 43
Document_Title: "100. Marx to Sigfrid Meyer and August Vogt. 28 October "
Page_Range: "185-187"
---

# 100. Marx to Sigfrid Meyer and August Vogt. 28 October 



**[p. 148]**

Wm. J. Jessup, Corresponding Representative for State of New York, National Labour Union,

11 Norfolk Street, New York City

First published in: Marx and Engels, Printed according to S. Meyer's Works, First Russian Edition, Vol. XXV, copy of the original Moscow, 1934

Published in English for the first time

100

MARX TO SIGFRID MEYER AND AUGUST VOGT

IN NEW YORK

London, 28 October 1868

Dear Meyer and Vogt,

The enclosed credentials for Meyer (I have added the same for you214) will show you that your wish had already been met by 13 October. Meyer's appointment was printed in The Bee-Hive* on 3 October.1" The GENERAL COUNCIL has resolved that the German correspondents shall correspond with me, Pelletier (for the French) with Dupont, and Eccarius with Jessup. I myself suggested the latter, as I have no time for more correspondence. You can hand the enclosed lines to Jessupc and, at the same time, show him your credentials.

With regard to Eccarius there is some misunderstanding. I have never quarrelled with him; on the contrary I have supported him to this day against the ATTACKS by the English, etc.148 But he—his preponderant and often narrow-minded egoism perhaps de- veloped as a result of his circumstances—commits unpleasant tomfooleries from time to time. I generally take no notice of this. Now and then my patience is exhausted. I give him a brain washing, and ALL. is RIGHT AGAIN for the time being. The poor devil is, at present, very ill, and he always utilises such moments to say his pater peccavi.d To what Liebknecht is referring, according to Vogt's letter, I have absolutely no idea. /, at least, have never written a word to anybody against Eccarius EXCEPT in my letter to Meyer, at a moment

[^1]: a The Bee-Hive, No. 364, 3 October 1868, 'The International Working Men's Association'. - b in the original erroneously 10 October - c See this volume, p. 147. - d Father, I have sinned (Luke IS : 21).





**[p. 149]**

when I was upset by letters from our other delegates to the Brussels Congress in which they denounced Eccarius.3 But it is quite possible that Eccarius wrote to Liebknecht without my knowledge in such a way that moved the latter to make his remarks to Vogt. This would be peculiar, since just at that time I had a big dispute with the English about and for Eccarius.

As far as Sorgeh is concerned, no further action. My lines to Jessup explain the TEMPORARY character of the credentials.

Cards for members are no longer available, must be reprinted. Liebknecht is dabbling too much in south German patriotism, and he should not print such nonsense about 'state and society'c containing the exact opposite of our opinions. Salut. In all haste.

Yours

K. Marx

Apropos. Do you know Dietzgen? He has now returned from Petersburg to the Rhine to establish himself as a small tanner. He is one of the most gifted workers I know, I mean by correspon- dence. I don't know him personally.

A translation of my book is now appearing in Russian in St. Petersburg.186 Or did I already inform you of this?

[London,] 256 High Holborn, W. C.

Citizen A. Vogt is appointed on 13 October 1868 by the General Council of the International Working Men's Association as corresponding Secretary for the year 1868-69 for the International Working Men's Association (German section in America).

13 October 1868

On behalf of the General Council

Karl Marx

[^1]: [Enclosure]

[^2]: SECRETARY FOR GERMANY

[^3]: First published abridged in: Marx and Engels, Works, First Russian Edition, Vol. XXV, Moscow, 1934, and in full in: Marx and Engels, Works, Second Russian Edi- tion, Vol. 32, Moscow, 1964

[^4]: Printed according to the original

[^5]: Published in English for the first time

[^6]: a See this volume, p. 97. - b Ibid., pp. 61, 96. - c Demokratisches Wochenblatt, No. 41, 10 October 1868, 'Der Staat und die soziale Frage'.



