---
Volume: 43
Document_Title: "103. Engels to Marx. 4 November "
Page_Range: "188-189"
---

# 103. Engels to Marx. 4 November 



**[p. 151]**

grateful if you could send me SOME £ by the day after tomorrow.

How are things with the Russian's manuscript?185 Have a look at it and then let me have your opinion. The poor fellow is certainly waiting anxiously for my reply.

Pyat has had a stroke of good luck. He has now got hold of his own German—Herr Webera from the Palatinate.

In all haste.

Your

K. M.

Enclosed letters from Eichhoff.215 He believes Schweitzer has denounced him here. NOTHING OF THE SORT. His denouncer (which he should not know) is Borkheim. In order to get rid of him ON THIS POINT and, at the same time, to elucidate the suspicion that could, in fact, be aroused by Eichhoff's reference to Bismarck (in his speech reported in Wilhelm's Wochenblatt), I have written to Eichhoff84 that he has been denounced to the General Council here and should send me his DEFENCE.

First published in Der Briefwechsel zwi- Printed according to the original sehen F. Engels und K. Marx, Bd. 4, Stutt- , , . ,. , rt jgj3 Published in English tor the irrst time

103

ENGELS TO MARX

Manchester, 4 November 1868

Dear Moor,

You must excuse me if I do not write much now. For some time I have had nasty rheumatism not only in my right arm, but also in the 3 first fingers of my right hand; as a result, after a certain time writing becomes very burdensome for me, and in the evening almost impossible. I hope the trouble disappears; I use alcohol against it—externally that is.

If the Spaniards even now do not know where they stand, following-Wilhelmchen's address, they are beyond hope. 16 Unity

[^1]: IN LONDON

[^2]: a J. V. Weber



