---
Volume: 43
Document_Title: "104. Engels to Marx. 6 November "
Page_Range: "189-191"
---

# 104. Engels to Marx. 6 November 



**[p. 152]**

between bourgeois and worker—the bourgeois must, however, realise that he has to concede this and that to the worker—anything to avoid a June battle, for this is followed by 2 December.2 7 It is really the crowning point of all confusion. If now the bourgeois will not 'understand', the worker will have to realise that he will have to make concessions to the bourgeois. This is the sole possible sense which the thing can have. Hence, the ridiculousness of measuring Spanish conditions, with the enormous beggar-proletariat, both clerical and lay, against the yardstick of conditions in Saxony. There is naturally not a single mention of the peasants. Many greetings.

Your

F. E.

Moore tells me that nearly all factory workers in Vienna are Moravians and Bohemians, mainly Czechs. This explains much about the movement there. The real Viennese do not go into factories, they become coachmen, domestics or something like that.

First published in MEGA, Abt. Ill, Bd. 4, Printed according to the original Berlin, 1931 . . . Published in English for the first time

104

Manchester, 6 November 1868

Dear Moor,

Herewith return back Eichhoffs letters215 and Dietzgen's manuscript.185 The latter I had placed in a safe place, away from the tidying females, and there it was completely forgotten.

It is difficult to pass absolutely definite judgement on the thing; the man is not a born philosopher and, in addition, half self-taught. Some of his sources (e. g., Feuerbach, your book3 and various trashy publications on the natural sciences) can be

[^1]: ENGELS TO MARX33

[^2]: IN LONDON

[^3]: a the first volume of Capital





**[p. 153]**

immediately traced partly from his terminology, but one cannot tell what else he has read. The terminology is, of course, still very confused, hence the lack of precision and frequent reiterations in new TERMS. There is also dialectics in it, but appearing more in the form of flashes than in any connected way. The presentation of the thing-in-itself as a conceivable thing [Gedankending] would be very nice and even brilliant if one could be certain that he himself had discovered it. There is plenty of wit in it and, despite the poor grammar, a marked talent for style. All in all, however, a remarkable instinct to think out so much that is correct on the basis of such inadequate studies.

The repetitions are, as I said, partly a result of the shortcomings in terminology, partly due to his lack of logical schooling. It will be a hard job to get rid of them all. If the man definitely wants to print his stuff, I do not know if the reduction to 2 printed sheets would be the best for him; in any case, it would be a frightful job for him, since he is not aware of his repetitions. In addition, I do not know whether 2 sheets would get any attention at all. 6-8 sheets would be more likely to do this. But he will never get it into a magazine.

Borkheim has written to ask whether I would agree that he should reprint my Bakunin article from the Neue Rheinische Zeitung* in Liebknecht's paperb and says, in this connection, that this article 'fits, for him, most excellently in his framework'. I replied84 that we planned to publish our earlier articles, etc., jointly, that we were already negotiating with a book-dealer, but that I did not know how things stood at the moment and had therefore written to you. I don't know though which article he means; there are several and he speaks of one. Besides, he repeats his nonsense about Bakunin, Eichhoff, etc.

Eichhoff 's thorough defence0 made me laugh. Best greetings.

Your

F. E.

[^1]: First published in Der Briefwechsel zwischen F. Engels und K. Marx, Bd. 4, Stuttgart, 1913

[^2]: Printed according to the original

[^3]: Published in English in full for the first time

[^4]: a F. Engels, 'Democratic Pan-Slavism', Neue Rheinische Zeitung, Nos. 222 and 223, 15 and 16 February 1849. - b Demokratisches Wochenblatt - c See this volume, p. 151.



