---
Volume: 43
Document_Title: "105. Marx to Engels. 7 November "
Page_Range: "191-192"
---

# 105. Marx to Engels. 7 November 



**[p. 105]**

MARX TO ENGELS33

IN MANCHESTER

London, 7 November 1868a

DEAR FRED,

THANKS FOR THE £5. I (and the whole household here) are very worried because of the typhus raging in your parts. It is so contagious. Please report again soon on the status rerum.b

It will be impossible to stop that damned Borkheim, whom I shall be seeing today, printing your 2 articles0 (those about Bakunin's manifesto to the Slavsd). However, I shall only tell him that you are an old personal friend of Bakunin, so that the business may under no circumstances appear in a context insulting to the latter. Borkheim takes himself completely au sérieux'' and really believes he has a political mission to fulfil. He is translating for me the main passages from a Russian book about agrarian disintegration,' and has also given me a French book on the subject by the Russian Schédo-Ferroti.g The latter is very much mistaken—he is altogether a very superficial fellow—in saying that the Russian communal system came into existence only as a result of the ban on peasants leaving the land. The whole business, down to the smallest detail, is absolutely identical with the primaeval Germanic communal system. Add to this, in the Russian case (and this may be found also amongst a part of the Indian communal systems, not in the Punjab, but in the South), (1) the non-democratic, but patriarchal character of the commune leadership and (2) the collective responsibility for taxes to the state, etc. It follows from the second point that the more industrious a Russian peasant is, the more he is exploited by the state, not only in terms of taxes, but also for supplying provisions and horses, etc. for the constant passage of troops, for government couriers, etc. The whole shit is breaking down.

[^1]: I regard Dietzgen's exposition,185 in so far as Feuerbach, etc., in

[^2]: a in the original erroneously 1867 - b state of things - c F. Engels, 'Democratic Pan-Slavism', Neue Rheinische Zeitung, Nos. 222 and 223, 15 and 16 February 1849. - d M. Bakunin, Aufruf an die Slaven, Koethen, 1848. - e seriously - 1 n . A[HAne H<j>e Ab4], 3e MM u eojin. Cn6., 1868. - t D. K. Schédo-Ferroti, Éludes sur l'avenir de la Russie. Dixième étude: Le patrimoine du peuple. Berlin, 1868.



