---
Volume: 43
Document_Title: "106. Marx to Engels. 8 November "
Page_Range: "192-193"
---

# 106. Marx to Engels. 8 November 



**[p. 1913]**

short his sources, do not peep through, as entirely his own independent achievement. For the rest, I agree with everything you say. I shall have something to say to him about the repetitions; it is his bad luck that it was precisely Hegel that he did not study.

The great Webera on behalf of 'German Association for Revolutionary Agitation, etc' has held a meeting together with the French Mayers under Pyat's chairmanship and with other vag- abonds, at which they instructed the Yankees in an address218 to intervene in favour of the Spanish Republic.

Our Negro, Paul Lafargue, had the misfortune that the French would not recognise his English diploma; they want to make him run the gauntlet of five new examinations, instead of the maximum 1 or 2 as he expected.121 MRS LAURA SENDS YOU HER COMPLIMENTS.

Salut.

Your

K. M.

First published abridged in Der Briefwech- sel zwischen F. Engels und K. Marx, Bd. 4, Stuttgart, 1913 and in full in MEGA, Abt. III, Bd. 4, Berlin, 1931

Printed according to the original

Published in English in full for the first time

106

MARX T O ENGELS

[London,] 8 November 1868

SECOND LETTER. Postscriptum. I have just come from Borkheim's. To my surprise I have managed to get him not to print your 2 articles'3 under his patronage.

Your

K. M.

[^1]: IN MANCHESTER

[^2]: First published in Der Briefwechsel zwischen F. Engels und K. Marx, Bd. 4, Stuttgart,

[^3]: Printed according to the original

[^4]: Published in English for the first time

[^5]: a J. V. Weber - b F. Engels, 'Democratic Pan-Slavism', see also this volume, pp. 153, 154.



