---
Volume: 43
Document_Title: "107. Engels to Marx. 10 November "
Page_Range: "193-194"
---

# 107. Engels to Marx. 10 November 



**[p. 107]**

ENGELS TO MARX

IN LONDON

Manchester, 10 November 1868

Dear Moor,

Many thanks for settling things with Borkheim. From the enclosed letter, which he wrote me, you can see what a 'nincompoop' the man is.219

Sarah'sa sickness is taking a very favourable course; it is a simple typhoid fever, vulgo gastric fever; Gumpert expects no more relapses and, by the end of this week, she should be cured. Against the contagion, which Gumpert also does not regard as dangerous, disinfection is a help.

Lizzie was in Lincolnshire, visiting a patriarchal variety of AGRICULTURAL LABOURERS who do well — they have gardens and potato land, the right of gleaning, which brings in a lot and, in addition, PASSABLE WAGES. Parallel to this, however, the GANG SYSTEM is on the increase; she described it literally as you depicted it in your book.220 These patriarchal FARM LABOURERS with land are naturally a declining remnant, and are already sending their children into the GANG, while they, for their part, provide the nurseries for the babies of the women working on neighbouring GANGS.

In Jacob Grimm's Spanish romances there is one in which Conde Claros de Montalban, son of Reinolt (Rinaldo) of the Haimon family, has a love affair with the Infanta, Charlemagne's daughter; the count takes her into a thicket in the garden, where they lie downb:

F. E.

[^1]: de la cintura en arriba (upwards) muchos abrazos se dan, de la cintura en abajo como hombre y mujer se han.c

[^2]: Old Jacob selected a lot of naïve passages like that. With many greetings. v

[^3]: First published abridged in Der Briefwech- Printed according to the original sei zwischen F. Engels und K. Marx, Bd. 4, Stuttgart, 1913 and in full in MEGA, Published in English for the first Abt. Ill, Bd. 4, Berlin, 1931 t l r a e

[^4]: a Sarah Parker - b 'Romance del conde Claros, hijo de Reynaldos de Montalvan', Silva de romances viejos. Publicada por Jacobo Grimm, Vienna, 1831. - c from the girdle upwards they gave many kisses, from the girdle downwards they behave themselves as husband and wife.



