---
Volume: 43
Document_Title: "112. Marx to Engels. 18 November "
Page_Range: "198-200"
---

# 112. Marx to Engels. 18 November 



**[p. 161]**

need to make common cause with the INTERNATIONAL WORKINGMEWS ASSOCIATION.225 Since Gustav Vogt—i.e., that sheet—is now taking great liberties with respect to us, please send me the thing back. I shall use it in Liebknecht's paper3 against G. Vogt. How did it happen that, in the 2 last issues of The Bee-Hive, there is n o word of the resolutions of the GENEVA AND BRUSSELS CONGRESS? 2 2 6

Salut to you a n d FAMILY.

Yours

K. Marx

First published in: Marx and Engels, Printed according to the original Works, First Russian Edition, Vol. XXV, Moscow 1934 Published in English for the first time

112

MARX T O ENGELS

[^1]: IN MANCHESTER

[^2]: [London,] 18 November b 1868

[^3]: DEAR FRED,

[^4]: T h e LANDLORD (unfortunately he is living pro tempore11 in London), wrote m e the enclosed letter some time ago. Yesterday he called, but was not, of course, admitted, since I was allegedly absent. T h e devil of it is that, because of the OVEREND AFFAIR,227 this fellow lives on his house rents; in addition, he will not accept bills of exchange. At other times the PRESSURE for the house has never been so IMMEDIATE, since I only owe him for 1 QUARTER. Lessner, too, is kicking me for THE REMAINDER OF MY DEBT, his wife is DESPERATELY SICK. GENERALLY the SITUATION is bad.

[^5]: Yesterday evening, on the CENTRAL COUNCIL 7 3 the ENGLISH TOO LATE but UNANIMOUSLY acknowledged that I had forecast literally for them, the, for me, HIGHLY AMUSING UPSHOT of the elections, with a criticism of the incorrect policy of the REFORM-LEAGUE.228 T h e present HOUSE is the worst since the election u n d e r Pam'sd command. T h e LONG PURSES have never h a d such an exclusive preponderance. E. Jones

[^6]: a Demokratisches Wochenblatt - b In the original erroneously 18 October. - c for the time being - d Palmerston's





**[p. 162]**

deserved his tumble OVER AND OVER.102 With regard to Bradlaugh, he had boasted in too Lassallean a manner. At the last Sunday meeting of his congregation in CLEVELAND HALL, there was displayed a placard TO THIS EFFECT: FAREWELL TO THE GREAT ICONOCLAST, THE PEOPLES

REDEEMER. LONG Ll VE TO M R BRADLAUGH, THE DREAD N A U G H T OF S T

STEPHEN'S! 2 2 9

In France things look very serious, according to Lafargue's last letters too. The government wants to force the lads on to the streets so that chassepot250 and RIFLED CANNON may then laisser 'faire merveille'3! Can you see any CHANCE of successful street conflicts? Defection of the army without a previous thrashing appears to me scarcely credible.

Biichner's clumsy workb is of interest to me in as much as it quotes most of the German research in the field of Darwinism — Prof. Jäger (Vienna) and Prof. Haeckel. According to them, the cell has been abandoned as the primaeval form; instead a formless but contractile particle of albumen is taken as STARTING POINT. This hypothesis was later confirmed by the discoveries in Canada (later also in Bavaria and SOME OTHER PLACES). The primaeval form must naturally be traced down to the point at which it may be produced chemically. And it appears that the way to this point has been found.

The conscientiousness with which Büchner has acquainted himself with the English stuff is also shown by the fact that he classifies Owen as one of Darwin's supporters.

Borkheim's letter to you,c which you sent me, I had the pleasure to have read to me for A SECOND TIME by him in person. This nincompoop now accuses Eichhoff of being a 'BUSYBODY'(!) and of 'writing long letters'. What self-knowledge!

Apropos the Irish elections, the only interesting POINT is Dungarvan, where Burry is presenting himself under the protec- tion of the defector O'Donovan. (Ditto under the protection of the priest.) There is a GENERAL CRY against him amongst the Irish Nationalists since this blackguard, as government prosecutor during the first trial of the Fenians in Dublin, hurled such slanders (à la Constitutionnel against the June insurgents)231 that even the London papers gave him a wigging.

Salut.

Your

K. M.

[^1]: a work miracles - b L. Büchner, Sechs Vorlesungen über die Darwinsche Theorie von der Verwandlung der Arten - c See this volume, p. 156.



