---
Volume: 43
Document_Title: "115. Marx to Engels. 23 November "
Page_Range: "202-204"
---

# 115. Marx to Engels. 23 November 



**[p. 165]**

state of affairs injures Bonaparte more every day; in addition, there is no special reason for attacking. Bonaparte will also take care not to give the sort of reason that only the revolutionaries need.

The secret of the elections in Lancashire is the English workers' hatred of the Irish. The damned Murphy cleared the way for the Tories. In the meantime, the Irish state church is finished no matter what. Otherwise things have happened as I said.a The Morning Herald- has already explained that, though the Tories seemed to be in the minority, they were really in the majority, since they represent the majority of the people.b

If you have not received the £20 by Monday morning, telegraph me immediately. On Sunday I cannot register and would not consider even a registered letter safe in the hands of the post from Saturday evening to Monday morning.

Many greetings.

Your

F. E.

Send me back the letter from Nincompoop,0 As you know I have to show him what grammatical blunders he makes.

115

MARX TO ENGELS

London, 23 November 1868

The FIRST HALF arrived this morning. Enclosed 2 letters, ONE from Collet and the other from Jones. As regards Collet, I have burnt my fingers with these blasted Urquhartitesd. You know—at least I think I wrote to you about

[^1]: First published in Der Briefwechsel zwischen Printed according to the original F. Engels und K. Marx, Bd. 4, Stuttgart, , . . . . ^ r • r- JQJQ Published in English lor the hrst

[^2]: IN MANCHESTER

[^3]: DEAR FRED,

[^4]: a See this volume, p. 163. - b Engels refers to the leading article 'London, Wednesday, November 18' in The Morning Herald of 18 November 1868. -

[^5]: c Borkheim; see also this volume pp. 156, 162. - d Ibid., p. 159.





**[p. 166]**

it—that, purely for the joy of MISCHIEFMONGERING, I set new bees in their bonnets about the Peel Act of 1844 2 2 3 and its useful effect for Russia. (Incidentally the matter is correct WITHIN CERTAIN LIMITS.) Now Urquhart wants to print one of these letters over my name in his NEXT Diplomatic Review.254 If I refused 'my name', I would make them mistrustful. So I am IN FOR IT. It is a consolation that not a soul reads the Diplomatic Review (EXCEPT A SMALL CLIQUE). T h e Urquhartites, however, are burning their fingers too. In order to give the affair more weight, they obviously intend to cite me as the author of Capital, which would be AN ABOMINATION in their eyes if they knew it.

As regards Ernest Jones, I find him EXCEEDINGLY COOL. / should act for him as ELECTIONEERING AGENT (for Greenwich)! I have replied 84 that I see not a GHOST OF A CHANCE for him: 1. Baxter Langley is the local candidate, and neither Mill nor Beales COULD STAND without his PERMISSION. 2. T h e GENERAL COUNCIL of the 'International' does not get mixed u p in ELECTIONEERING. In no case could we act against B. Langley because—and this is a fact—since the Brussels Congress 1 3 8 B. Langley and his SUNDAY LEACUE235 have concluded an amicable agreement with us. (In fact, our sessions take place in their hall.)

Your

K. M.

[^1]: 3. H e (Jones) is at present unpopular in London (and this is true). Reynolds's ARTICLES: 'TRAITORS IN THE CAMP', etc., had damaged him.236

[^2]: I have just received the enclosed letter from the secretary 3 of the Workers' Educational Society here. 6 7 This shows that the Lassalleans imported from Paris and Germany, who maintain secret contacts with Schweitzer, have made use of Lessner's absence d u e to his wife's sickness in order fraudulently to obtain from here a vote of confidence for Schweitzer against the Nurembergers. 1 3 5 As a well-known member of the Society, I would be made responsible for this—and this appears to me to be the aim of the whole operation. T h u s I am writing to Speyer without delay explaining the reasons that, under these cir- cumstances, I must announce my resignation from the Society.b

[^3]: a Carl Speyer - b See present edition, Vol. 21, 'Statement to the German Workers' Educational Society in London'.



