---
Volume: 43
Document_Title: "116. Engels to Marx. 23 November "
Page_Range: "204-205"
---

# 116. Engels to Marx. 23 November 



**[p. 167]**

young to pull the wool over

Printed according to the original

Published in English for the first time

116

ENGELS T O MARX

IN LONDON

V/J 71 968—Manchester, 7 January 1868 £10. T/N 14 065—London, 26 February 1868 £10. Second halves. First sent with preceding post.

[Manchester,] 23 November 1868

Dear Moor,

I can send you the above only today, but give you the good news that, after a conversation today with Calico Gottfriede it will probably be possible to prolong the contract with him for a few years.158 I intend, if all goes well, to take 3 years, the last of which would be without any obligation on my part to work. If all this is successful, which must be more or less decided by the end of February at the latest, we are over the hill, and I shall be able without difficulty to pay off the £100 debt you still have, and in general to establish the affair properly and on a solid basis, so that this load of debts will not return, at least for the period of the contract.

Lizzie suddenly became very unwell yesterday; I thought at first it was serious, but she has slept a lot, so is now much better. She had congestions to the head. Tussy's letter gave her much pleasure, and as soon as she is better again she will answer it.

The wonderful primeval mass of the respected Büchner is still a great mystery to me. Couldn't you send us the bookb here some time?

That damned Schweitzer is still too my eyes.

First published in Der Briefwechsel zwischen F. Engels und K. Marx, Bd. 4, Stuttgart, 1913

[^1]: a Ermen. See this volume, p. 170. - b L. Büchner, Sechs Vorlesungen über die Darwinsche Theorie von der Verwandlung der Arten



