---
Volume: 43
Document_Title: "117. Engels to Marx. 25 November "
Page_Range: "205-206"
---

# 117. Engels to Marx. 25 November 



**[p. 168]**

How ABOUT Ténot, Paris, le 2 décembre} Best greetings.

Your

F. E.

First published abridged in Der Briefwech- sel zwischen F. Engels und K. Marx, Bd. 4, Stuttgart, 1913 and in full in MEGA, Abt. III, Bd. 4, Berlin, 1931

Dear Moor,

Printed according to the original

Published in English for the first time

Manchester, 25 November 1868

Your

F. E.

117

ENGELS TO MARX

IN LONDON

Enclosed returned the letters/ Jones is COOL INDEED, and in every sense he has counted his chickens before they are hatched. He will scarcely find another place to elect him. LIBERALS OF HIS CALIBRE there are enough, and more than enough, ever since he identified himself with this variety. Even the great Dr Borchardt asked him (if one can believe Dr Borchardt) how he could identify himself in such a way with Bright and Gladstone, since he would certainly have to attack them in 5 years time.

Nothing else new here. I have finally prevailed on Lizzie to let Gumpert treat her; so far she resisted, and said there was nothing wrong with her. He will probably have been there today. Incidentally, she was better today.

[^1]: Büchnerb received with thanks.

[^2]: First published in MEGA, Abt. Ill, Bd. 4, Berlin, 1931

[^3]: Printed according to the original

[^4]: Published in English for the first time

[^5]: a By C. D. Collet and E. Jones (see this volume, pp. 165-66). - b L. Büchner, Sechs Vorlesungen über die Darwinsche Theorie von der Verwandlung der Arten



