---
Volume: 43
Document_Title: "119. Engels to Marx. 29 November "
Page_Range: "206-208"
---

# 119. Engels to Marx. 29 November 



**[p. 118]**

ENGELS T O W. HOLZENHAUER237

IN COLOGNE

[Draft]

[Manchester,] 26 November 1868

Following receipt of your letter dated 18 August I inquired at home84 about the circumstances in which you had left my brothers'238 business and also sought to find out whether there was any prospect of your obtaining employment there again.

Now I have received the relevant information, and unfortunate- ly it is such that I can offer you no hope whatsoever of obtaining employment there again. I am therefore returning to you enclosed the false, as you say, testimony of my brother-in-law.3 In view of the information received, I must, it is true, assume this testimony does not wholly correspond to reality, a fact on which you may congratulate yourself, to be sure.

Respectfully yours,

F. E.

Published for the first time Printed according to the original

119

Manchester, 29 November 1868 Dear Moor,

Consider very precisely the answers to the enclosed questions, and answer them for me by return, so that I may have your reply on Tuesday morning.

1. How much money do you need to pay all your debts, so AS TO

2. Can you manage with £350 for your usual regular needs for a year (from this I exclude extra expenses caused by sickness and unforeseen events), i.e., so that you do not need to get into debt. If not, tell me the sum required for it. All on the assumption that

[^1]: ENGELS TO MARX239

[^2]: IN LONDON

[^3]: HAVE A CLEAR START?

[^4]: a Adolf von Griesheim

[^5]: 8-983





**[p. 1913]**

all the old debts have previously been paid off. This question is naturally the main one.

My negotiations with Gottfried Ermena are taking the turn that, on the termination of my contract,—June 30—he wishes to buy me out, i.e., he offers me a sum of money if I undertake not to enter into any competing business for 5 years, and allow him to continue to manage the firm. This is exactly where I wanted to get the man. However, since in the past few years the balances have been poor, it is questionable whether this offer will place us in a position to live for a number of years without money troubles, even if we assume the probable case that all sorts of events will cause us to move again to the continent, and hence get us involved in extra expenses. The sum offered me by Gottfried Ermen (which, long before he offered it to me, I was determined to devote, if need be exclusively, to covering the necessary support for you) would put me in a position to provide you certainly with £350 annually for 5-6 years, and in special cases even with some more. You will, however, understand that all my arrangements would be upset if, from time to time, a sum of debts accumulated that would have to be covered out of further capital. My calculations have to be based upon the fact that our living expenses must be met not solely from revenue, but also—from the beginning—partly from capital, and for this very reason they are rather complicated and must be adhered to strictly, or we shall come to grief.

I would ask you to tell me quite frankly how these matters really stand, and your reply will determine how I conduct myself in the future vis-à-vis Gottfried Ermen. So, name yourself the sum you need regularly per annum, and we shall see what can be done.

What will happen after the 5-6 years mentioned above is not clear to me either. If everything remains as at present, I would no longer be in a position to send you £"350 a year or even more, but still at least £"150. Yet much may change by then, and your literary work will be capable of bringing something in for you.

Best greetings to your wife and the girls. Send one of the enclosed photograms to Laura.

Your

F. E.

[^1]: First published in Der Briefwechsel zwischen F. Engels und K. Marx, Bd. 4, Stuttgart,

[^2]: Printed according to the original

[^3]: a See this volume, p. 167.



