---
Volume: 43
Document_Title: "121. Marx to Engels. 5 December "
Page_Range: "209-210"
---

# 121. Marx to Engels. 5 December 



**[p. 172]**

is easier to speak of such things. But it is necessary in order to explain to you why I did not absolutely reverse Jennychen's step.

Your

K. M.

First published in Der Briefwechsel zwischen Printed according to the original F. Engels und K. Marx, Bd. 4, Stuttgart, 1913

121

MARX TO ENGELS

IN MANCHESTER

London, 5 December 1868

DEAR FRED,

Enclosed :

1. Letter from Schweitzer, 2. Mineworkers of Lugau, 3. Russe Serno-Solovyevich (author of the pamphlet against Goegg*).

So Schweitzer is determined to become king of the tailors in Germany! Good luck to him. On one point he is right—Wilhelm'sb

From the letter from Lugau 241 it emerges that he has so far done nothing with reference to the International. At the same time, he plays fine tricks on us. In his 'cosy' way, he announces that the 'International Working Men's Association' costs nothing, so that all and sundry may join without paying. From Switzerland Becker complains about this absurdity.242

Salut

Your

K. M.

[^1]: incapability! His claim that the Nurembergers 135—on pain of high treason—should enroll under his leadership is VERY COOL INDEED.240

[^2]: Wilhelm becomes stupider every day. What a lousy paper!c

[^3]: First published in MEGA, Abt. Ill, Bd. 4, Printed according to the original Berlin, 1931 . ,. Published in English lor the first time

[^4]: 3 [A. Serno-Solovyevich] À propos de la grève. Réponse à M. Goegg (signed by the pen-name A. Ébéniste). See also this volume, p. 186. - b Wilhelm Liebknecht's -

[^5]: c Demokratisches Wochenblatt



