---
Volume: 43
Document_Title: "127. Engels to Marx. 11 December "
Page_Range: "218-219"
---

# 127. Engels to Marx. 11 December 



**[p. 127]**

ENGELS TO MARX

IN LONDON

[Manchester,] 11 December 1868

Dear Moor,

I return you 2 letters, the most the ENVELOPE can hold, in all haste; I wanted to write to you from the office, but was held up, and the last post will be leaving soon out here.

Nincompoop3 is extremely charming and tactful. This honourable gentleman appears to need to apply the s NOB-standard everywhere. When you see him, just ask him sometime if he is related to Mr Hersch Kriminand, and where the man lives. (This gentleman exists and signs himself exactly thus; he lives in Lemberg.) Then you can ask him what Lemberg is called. Polish Lwow, Little Russian and Great Russian Ab BOBi>, that is to say Lvov or Löwenstadt from levb=lion. The Jews translate that as Löwenberg, abbreviated Lemberg.

Here we have the finest crisis, and this time pure (though only relative) overproduction. The spinners and manufacturers have, for nearly 2 years now, on their own account, been consigning goods unsaleable here to India and China, thus doubly overload- ing the overloaded markets. This is no longer possible, and they are failing right and left. One of the first victims was Knowles, our fatty, who failed not so much because of consignments, but through general corporeal weakness—the 4 brothers had simply gobbled, up the money.

I call this overproduction relative because it only becomes overproduction as a result of the cotton prices, which are still high. Two pence difference would and will suffice to absorb the whole lot lying around. Cotton Middling Orleans today lid., before the war 6V2 d., 7d., 8d., according to season. Thus still 60 to 80% above the old price.

What you say about cotton 1860-61 is not quite so bad.c The harvest of 1860 was the largest ever, and the STOCK at the outbreak

[^1]: a Sigismund Borkheim - b Engels gives the Russian word nee in Latin letters. - c See this volume, p. 179.



