---
Volume: 43
Document_Title: "129. Marx to Ludwig Kugelmann. 12 December "
Page_Range: "221-222"
---

# 129. Marx to Ludwig Kugelmann. 12 December 



**[p. 184]**

common with the things in themselves. Ergo, it is up to you to believe what you will. Q.E.D.

Salut.

Your

K. M. First published in Der Briefwechsel zwischen Printed according to the original F. Engels und K. Marx, Bd. 3, Stuttgart, P u b, i s hed in English for the first 1913

time

129

MARX TO LUDWIG KUGELMANN29

IN HANOVER

London, 12 December 1868 Dear Friend,

I wanted to write to you at greater length, but am prevented from doing so by unforeseen external 'business'. But do not let this keep you from taking up your pen again soon.

The letter from Freund (returned enclosed, with thanks) interested me greatly.3 It is high time for other people to come forward in Germany than the present 'pillars' of science.

I also return the portrait of Dietzgen.249 His biography is not quite what I had thought. But I always had a feeling he was 'not a worker like Eccarius'. In fact, the sort of philosophical outlook he has worked out for himself demands a certain calmness and disposable time that the EVERYDAY WORKMAN does not enjoy. I have two very good workers living in New York, A. Vogt, a shoemaker, and Sigfrid Meyer, a mining engineer, both formerly from Berlin. A third worker who could give lectures on my bookb is Lochner, a joiner (COMMON WORKING MAN), who has been here in London ABOUT 15 years.

Tell your dear wife that I never 'suspected' her of serving under Madame General Geck.c I queried only in jest.d Incidentally, the ladies cannot complain about the 'International', since it has appointed a lady, Madame Law, as a member of the General Council. Joking aside, very great progress was demonstrated at the last congress of the American 'LABOR UNION',146 inter alia, by the fact that it treated the women workers with full parity; by contrast, the English, and to an even greater extent the gallant French, are

[^1]: a See this volume, p. 180. - b the first volume of Capital - c Marx refers to Marie Goegg. Geek means dandy. - d See this volume, p. 175.



