---
Volume: 43
Document_Title: "130. Marx to Asher & Co. Not before 12 December "
Page_Range: "222-223"
---

# 130. Marx to Asher & Co. Not before 12 December 



**[p. 185]**

displaying a marked narrowness of spirit in this respect. Everyone who knows anything of history also knows that great social revolutions are impossible without the feminine ferment. Social progress may be measured precisely by the social position of the fair sex (plain ones included).

As far as the 'SETTLEMENT' is concerned, there could never, from the outset, have been any question of my taking over a business before my book was finished. Otherwise I could long have extricated myself from any embarrassing situation. The fact is simply this—but strictly between us—that, on the one hand, I made an arrangement with my family; on the other, Engels, without my knowledge, through agreement with his PARTNER about his own income (he is leaving the business in June), has made a SETTLEMENT for me, as a result of which, from next year, I shall be able to work in peace.3

With best greetings.

Yours

K. M.

First published in Die Neue Zeit, Bd. 2, Printed according to the original Nr. 11, Stuttgart, 1901-1902

130

[Draft]

[London, not before 12 December 1868] The only place where a few copies of Herr Vogt are still obtainable, is Berlin. At least, there were some to be had a few weeks ago. I shall write there and if a copy can be got, it will be forwarded to 11, Unter den Linden.

Yours truly

K. M.

[^1]: MARX TO ASHER & CO.250

[^2]: IN LONDON

[^3]: First published in: Marx and Engels, Reproduced from the original Works, Second Russian Edition, Vol. 32, Moscow, 1964

[^4]: a See this volume, pp. 169-71.



