---
Volume: 43
Document_Title: "132. Marx to Engels. 14 December "
Page_Range: "225-227"
---

# 132. Marx to Engels. 14 December 



**[p. 132]**

MARX TO ENGELS174

IN MANCHESTER

[London,] 14 December 1868

DEAR FRED,

On Saturday evening3 Ténot (Paris and Provinces)* and the proceedings of the Baudin trial222 arrived. I am sending you Ténot (Paris) and Baudin today. The Ténot (Provinces) you will receive in a few days. You can bring the whole lot back yourself, for nobody in the house except me has yet read the things.

In the Ténot (Paris) I find little new, except a few details—I have not yet read the Provinces. The enormous sensation created by the book in Paris, and in France as a whole, proves a very interesting FACT, namely that the generation that has grown up under Badinguetc knew nothing at all about the history of the regime under which it is living. Now the fellows are rubbing their eyes and are quite thunderstruck. If one may parva componere magnis,d have we not had precisely the same experience in our own way? In Germany the story is spreading, as a remarkable novelty, that Lassalle was only one of our satellites, and that he did not discover the 'class struggle'.

I can discover nothing special in the speech by Gambetta," who is now being lionised in France. His manner reminds me strikingly of Michel de Bourges. This Michel also made his name through a political trial. A few months before the February revolution he declared that he had abandoned his belief in 'democracy', since it always turned into 'demagogy'. Of course, this did not prevent him from shining as a républicain de la veille1 after February, and rendering excellent service to Bonaparte, nolens or volens,g

I was really delighted to read again IN FULL the deliberations of the 'républicains modérés', i. e., those seated in the législative, in the 10th Arrondissement-Mairie.255 I believe no similar tragicomedy

[^1]: particularly in the question of quaestors.254 He was also MORE OR LESS in contact with the republican 'Plon-Plon'.

[^2]: a 12 December - b See this volume, p. 178. - c Napoleon III (Badinguet is the name of the stone-mason in whose clothes he escaped from prison in 1846). - d compare small and great - e L. Gambetta, 'Plaidorie de M. Gambetta, avocat de M. Delescluze. Audience du 14 novembre 1868'. In: Affaire de la souscription Baudin, 3 ed., Paris, 1868. - f time-honoured republican - s willy-nilly





**[p. 189]**

can be found anywhere in world history, at least not carried out in this pure form. The Frankfurt-Stuttgart Parliament256 is nothing in comparison. The French alone understand how to put on a show, whether it be a convention or a rump parliament of thorough scoundrels.

As for the cotton, I have the import and export lists for 1861, etc., in the RETURNS of the BOARD OF TRADE.3 The only FACT of importance to me was—and this is certainly unprecedented—that for 3 years nothing was manufactured for the home market (I mean from the freshly-imported raw materials during those 3 years, or those only intended to make up stock).

Asher, the booksellers here (a BRANCH of the Berlin one, Unter den Linden) have written to me that they need a few COPIES of

Herr Vogt in Berlin.b That infernal Wilhelm,0 as you know, never answered a very pressing letter I sent him months ago,84 except to say that he had frittered away the 300 copies turned over to him, but that a few still existed in Berlin. I shall give him another kick today.84

Tussychen is enraptured at the prospect of having you here with us, and so is the WHOLE FAMILY. TUSSY IS A FANATICAL PARTISAN OF YOURS, MRS LIZZIE, AND THE CONVICTED' NATION.11 But you must write when.

Salut.

Your

K. M. In Balzac's Le Curé de Village there is this passage:

Since Nincompoop* discovered Serno, he does not treat him so severely. He is only astonished that Serno turned to me instead of to him.

[^1]: 'Si le produit industriel n'était pas le double en valeur de son prix de revient en argent, le commerce n'existerait pas.'

[^2]: Qu'en dis-tu?e

[^3]: First published in Der Briefwechsel zwischen Printed according to the original F. Engels und K. Marx, Bd. 4, Stuttgart, . iqia Published in English in full for the first time

[^4]: a 'Accounts Relating to Trade and Navigation for the Year Ended December 31, 1861'. In: The Economist, No. 966, 1 March 1862 (supplement). As a separate edition the accounts appeared under the title Annual Statement of the Trade and Navigation of the United Kingdom with Foreign Countries and British Possessions in the Year 1861, London, 1862. - b See this volume, p. 185 - c Wilhelm Liebknecht - d See this volume, p. 79. - e 'If the industrial product did not have twice the value of its production cost in money, commerce would not exist.' What do you say to that? - £ Sigismund Borkheim



