---
Volume: 43
Document_Title: "136. Marx to Engels. 19 December "
Page_Range: "232-233"
---

# 136. Marx to Engels. 19 December 



**[p. 195]**

Heartiest greetings to Mother, your wife and all my brothers and sisters, and have a good time over the holidays. With best greetings

Your

Friedrich

First published abridged in Deutsche Revue, Jg. 46, Bd. II, Stuttgart-Leipzig, 1921 and in full in: Marx and Engels, Works, First Russian Edition, Vol. XXV, Moscow, 1934

136

MARX TO ENGELS174

IN MANCHESTER

London, 19 December 1868244

DEAR FRED,

THANKS for your marginal notes!a When I wrote to you that evening I was excited. But the next morning there was already a reaction and the decision to treat the matter diplomatically, quite as you advise.

Ténot's Province is much better. It contains many new details for us. Had the Parisians held out a couple of days longer, the Empire would have been foutu.h The movement (republican) among the rural population was much bigger than we knew.

Enclosed Réveil, the organ of Ledru-Rollin. Delescluze his âme damnée, républicain de vieille roche, asinu$.c He is the provisional government's commissioner who led the Belgians into the guet The stupid idea of the workers who wanted to give a banquet for R. Johnson has been blocked by us.259 Coningsby, whose initiative it was, is a blackguard. This character was on a PLEASURE TRIP TO THE UNITED STATES and was paid by Seward for this London reception for R. Johnson. He is the same WORKMAN who wrote to The Times years ago, stating that the workers were politically satisfied and DID NOT WANT THE SUFFRAGE.

Printed according to the original

Published in English for the first time

[^1]: àpensd of Risquons Tout.258 Thus traitor or arch-Ass. Probably the latter.

[^2]: a See this volume, pp. 190 and 191-92. - b finished - c evil spirit, republican of the old guard, jackass - d ambush



