---
Volume: 43
Document_Title: "137. Marx to Laura Lafargue. 22 December "
Page_Range: "233-234"
---

# 137. Marx to Laura Lafargue. 22 December 



**[p. 196]**

If you could send me a few £ for the Christmas week now beginning, it would be very welcome.

Salut.

Your

K. M.

First published abridged in Der Briefwech- Printed according to the original sei zwischen F. Engels und K. Marx, Bd. 4, . . Stuttgart, 1913 and in full in MEGA, Abt. Pubhshed in English m full for the III, Bd. 4, Berlin, 1931 f i r s t u m e

137

MARX TO LAURA LAFARGUE260

IN PARIS

London, 22 December 1868 My dear child,

I wanted to send you together with Rückert261 a truly delicious book—Blüthen Morgenländischer Mystik by Tholuck.3 Mais la plus belle fille de France ne peut donner que ce qu'elle a.b The book was not to be had in all London. I have ordered it from Germany. You will get it in about 3 weeks.

Tell Lafargue that he must excuse my silence. I was really overworked during the last months, as I wanted to have done with certain studies before the beginning of the New Year. However,

aufgeschoben ist nicht aufgehoben.11 Meanwhile tell him that Dr Hunter, excellent as his reportd is, knows as little as most Englishmen do of the past (social) history of his own country. The degradation of the rural labourers has nothing whatever to do with the Corn Laws of 1815.262 If he wants to know the real causes which have brought them down to the zero of their present

[^1]: a F. A. Tholuck, Blüthensammlung aus der morgenländischen Mystik - b But the most beautiful girl of France can only give what she has. - c postponed does not mean abandoned - d Public Health, Seventh Report. With Appendix. 1864. London, 1865. Public Health. Eighth Report. With Appendix. 1865. London, 1866. Marx repeatedly quotes these reports in Volume I of Capital (see present edition, Vol. 35).



