---
Volume: 43
Document_Title: "140. Marx to Engels. 1 January "
Page_Range: "236-237"
---

# 140. Marx to Engels. 1 January 



**[p. 199]**

1869

140

MARX T O ENGELS

IN MANCHESTER

[London,] 1 January 1869

DEAR FRED,

HAPPY NEW YEAR! From the enclosed letter from Lafargue you will see that I have received a special NEW YEARS GIFT—THE DIGNITY OF GRANDFATHER.3

From the attached 2 numbers printed in Paris—Cloche and Diable à quatre—you can see what an arrogant tone prevails there. It should be compared to the language used by the opposition in Prussia! This petite presseh—and its men included even Rochefort—was the Bonaparte regime's very own product. Now it is the most dangerous weapon against it.

From the enclosed issues of the Vorbotec you can learn about the scandal in Basle.266 These bloody fellows—I mean our spokesmen over there—have a talent all their own for making the International Working Men's Association responsible for every local QUARREL between MASTER and MEN. At the same time, they neglect to take any measures for the event of war, i.e., establishing TRADES UNIONS. Instead they shout the more loudly. The petty cantonal government intervenes. The smallest incident thus becomes important. Then comes an appeal to the International Working Men's Association in general and the London General Council in particular to pay, ON THE SHORTEST NOTICE, the Swiss war costs. And then 'old man' Becker writesd that we should not 'compromise' ourselves again, as in the Geneva affair,16 etc. Soon more about this and the Russian-International intermezzo/

[^1]: a Marx refers to the birth of Charles Etienne Lafargue - b little press - c Der Vorbote, No. 11, November 1868 'Zur Geschichte der Internationalen Arbeiterassociation', and No. 12, December 1868, 'Bericht über die Arbeiterbewegung in Basel'. - d See this volume, p. 203. - <= Ibid., pp. 201-02.



