---
Volume: 43
Document_Title: "141. Engels to Marx. 3 January "
Page_Range: "237-238"
---

# 141. Engels to Marx. 3 January 

T h e w h o l e FAMILY s e n d s t h e COMPLIMENTS OF THE SEASON. T u s s y says POOR

FRED, HE MUST FEEL RATHER SEEDY BY THIS TIME OF THE YEAR. Addio.

Your

K. M.

First published in Der Briefwechsel zwischen Printed according to the original F. Engels und K. Marx, Bd. 4, Stuttgart, . . 2913 Published in English for the first time

141

ENGELS T O MARX

IN LONDON

[Manchester,] 3 January 1869

Happy New Year! and my best wishes on the occasion of the Paris New Year gift. I expect you and your wife cannot look at each other without laughing about the new dignity.

The Basle business is not quite clear to me from the Vorbote,b so I am waiting anxiously for the promised additions, and also the further course of the Bakuniad. Bakunin's speeches in the Kolokol are very stupid.c The fellow does not appear to have learned anything for donkey's years. I was interested to learn from the above that he and Herzen are still in collusion with each other. Hence Herzen must be completely done for, otherwise he would not give up Ko AOKOAT>.d268 Incidentally, the fellow now writes un français à lui,e which is quite appalling—and this although the chap lives in a French-speaking country! Bakunin's French is much better.

Thanks for Cloche and Diable à 4; the arrogance is indeed very

[^1]: Caro Moro,a

[^2]: a Dear Moor - b See the previous letter. - c [M.] Bakounine, 'Discours de Bakounine au deuxième congrès de la paix, à Berne', Kolokol, No. 14-15, 1 December 1868. - d Engels gives the name in Cyrillic letters. - e a French of his own



