---
Volume: 43
Document_Title: "142. Marx to Engels. 13 January "
Page_Range: "238-241"
---

# 142. Marx to Engels. 13 January 



**[p. 201]**

great. A few Orleanist millions scattered among the generals would now be very desirable.

Best greetings and congratulations to the whole FAMILY.

Your

F. E.

First published in Der Briefwechsel zwischen Printed according to the original F. Engels und K. Marx, Bd. 4, Stuttgart, igj3 Published in English for the first time

142

MARX T O ENGELS

IN MANCHESTER

London, 13 January 1869

DEAR FRED,

THANKS for the numbers of Zukunft (Thesmar and Georgios Jung!)

Now a short report about the 'international incidents'.

[^1]: I put off writing to you from day to day because of a frightful cold which, for ABOUT 2 WEEKS, has been absolutely besieging my eyes, ears, nose and entire head. Since, however, this damned foggy weather still gives no hope of an early delivery from the evil, I shall wait no longer. Is it so pleasant at your place in Manchester too? Little wonder that SUICIDES are in full blossom here now. Only an Irishman, even in Seven Dials,269 says THAT HE WOULD RATHER COMMIT SUICIDE ON ANY ONE THAN HIMSELF.

[^2]: Did the young T h . von Gimborn from Emmerich, manufacturer in nuce* present himself to you? It is not quite clear to me what he wants. First, he told me he wanted to go into a factory as a technician for a certain period, SAY half a year, or as a simple worker, in order to study the organisation, etc., of English factory work. Now it is only a question of a 14-day stay in a factory supplying agricultural machinery. Does Gimborn, AFTER ALL, simply wish to discover English factory secrets? H e won't find it easy.

[^3]: a) 'Alliance Internationale de la Démocratie Socialiste'257: O n

[^4]: a budding manufacturer

[^5]: 9-983



considérant this, stated finally, 'plusieurs membres du groupe initiateur de Genève"1 also voted in this sense in Brussels.

In the meantime, we have received letters from Brussels, Rouen, Lyon, etc., declaring unconditional support for the General Council decision. Not one voice has been raised in support of le groupe initiateur de Genève. That this group did not act quite honestly is clear from the fact they only informed us of their establishment and their activities after they had already tried to win over the Brussels people, etc. I regard the matter as closed, though we have not yet received an answer to our 'judgement' from Geneva. The attempt has, in any case, failed.

b) Ad voceme Bakunin: To understand his enclosed letter,264 you must know the following: D'abord* this letter crossed our 'MESSAGE' regarding the 'Alliance'. Bakunin is thus still under the pleasant misapprehen- sion that he will be allowed to go his own way. Further: The Russian Serno was, in his earlier correspondence with Borkheim, decidedly against Bakunin. In my reply to Serno84 I wished to use this young man as an informant about Bakunin. Since I trust no Russian, I did it in this form: 'What is my old friend (/ don't know if he still is) Bakunin doing, etc., etc' The Russian Serno

[^1]: a 1. All the articles of the Rules of the Alliance, etc., laying down its relations with the International Working Men's Association, are declared null and void. 2. The Alliance, etc., is not admitted as a branch of the International Working Men's Association. (Cf. K. Marx, The International Working Men's Association and the International Alliance of Socialist Democracy; see present edition, Vol. 21, p. 36.) - b consideration - c Johann Philipp Becker - d 'a number of members of the Geneva initiating group' -

[^2]: e regarding - f first of all





**[p. 203]**

immediately informed Bakunin of this letter, and Bakunin used it for a sentimental entree. c) Ad vocem OLD Becker:

H e has got himself badly stuck. D'abord he sends us, dated Ge- neva, 21 December, a 4-page letter about the Basle business,a but without a single fait précisa We should, however, act immediately. At the same time, he writes to Lessner that we (the General Council) h a d already 'compromised' ourselves in the Geneva affair, a n d this should not happen again. Or, he says in these precise words (in his letter to Lessner),

'does the General Council, like God, exist only in the faith of fools?' In Geneva, people only speak of us with a shrug of the shoulders, etc.

T h e r e u p o n Becker received the reply from Jung that his 4-page epistle contained nothing. How can he expect to receive money in London on the basis of such a vacuum?

In his letter of 21 December, Becker announced a further ELABORATE REPORT. Instead of this we receive the Vorbote. You saw for yourself that the Vorbote in fact only reported c on the 'concluded' LOCKOUT of the RIBBON WEAVERS,266 and certainly did not make clear how the conflict has developed since. In short, TO THIS VERY MOMENT we know no more than is reported in Vorbote. Not only can no step be taken with the TRADES UNIONS on this basis, but it is impossible to publish anything about the affair on behalf of the General Council. We cannot expose ourselves to a reply from the usurers of Basle that we are shouting to the world without knowing the facts.

Summa summarum, a week ago the General Council decided to reprimand both Becker and Perret (the French correspondent for Geneva) for not providing us to date with the necessary information on the Basle affair. T h e matter will rest there for the time being. I'm sorry for OLD Becker. But he must realise that we hold the reins, although we refrain from direct intervention as long as possible.

[^1]: d) STRIKES IN ROUEN, VIENNE, ETC. (COTTONSPINNING2 2): Are ABOUT 6-7 WEEKS OLD. T h e interesting thing about the case is that, some time ago, the MASTER-MANUFACTURERS (and SPINNERS) in Amiens held a GENERAL CONGRESS u n d e r the chairmanship of the maired of Amiens. Here it was decided—on the suggestion of a certain faiseur" named Vidal, who had h u n g out in England for a considerable time—that competition should be offered to the English in England, etc. Namely, by establishing depots for French

[^2]: a See this volume, pp. 199-200. - b precise fact - c 'Bericht über die Arbeiter- bewegung in Basel', Der Vorbote, No. 12, December 1868 - d mayor - e intriguer

[^3]: 9*



