---
Volume: 43
Document_Title: "144. Marx to Engels. 23 January "
Page_Range: "242-243"
---

# 144. Marx to Engels. 23 January 



**[p. 205]**

the result of an injury to h e r toe, an inflammation of the lymph ducts in her foot a n d leg, which could have become very unpleasant, but is now nearly over—and before she could get u p , Mary Ellen a returns sick from h e r parents, where she h a d spent a few days. What it is I shall only find out tomorrow, since Gumpert will be coming only then: he fears scarlet fever; but, u p till now, there has been no sign of a rash. In addition, there have been all sorts of stupid invitations that could not be refused—a lot of work at the office, and you will grasp that I have enough going on. With best greetings to the ladies.

Your

F. E.

Did you get the wine that time, and also the Social-Demokrat a n d Ténot, b etc.?

First published in Der Briefwechsel zwischen Printed according to the original F. Engels und K. Marx, Bd. 4, Stuttgart, „ „ ,. , r JQ.Q Published in English tor the first time

144

MARX T O ENGELS

London, 23 January 1869

Here there is a preponderance of coughs a n d colds. In my case, things were so bad that, for nearly 2 weeks, I was 'puking' regularly, to use the elegant language of Frau Blind. I went out again yesterday for the first time, and today I am smoking A CIGAR as a test.

[^1]: IN MANCHESTER

[^2]: DEAR FRED,

[^3]: We all hope that things are better at 86 Mornington STREET. Scarlet fever is apparently raging throughout England. But perhaps G u m p e r t has m a d e a mistake with Mary Ellen.3 TUSSY SENDS HER BEST COMPLIMENTS TO HER AND MRS BURNS.

[^4]: a Mary Ellen Burns - b E. Ténot, Paris en décembre 1851 (see this volume, pp. li and 191).



