---
Volume: 43
Document_Title: "145. Engels to Marx. 25 January "
Page_Range: "243-244"
---

# 145. Engels to Marx. 25 January 



**[p. 206]**

The enclosed photogram is sent to you by Jennychen, who is also coughing nastily. She asks for the return of Büchner,3 since she has studied Darwinb and now wishes to get acquainted with the great Büchner. The cross (on the photogram of Jenny) is the Polish 1864 Insurrection Cross.273

Tussy has taken over sending receipts for the wine, and believes that to date she has done so.

Enclosed are 2 Borkheimiana. So that he can deposit his 'super intellect' somewhere, and not buzz my ears full, I have recom- mended that he write 'Russian Letters' for Zukunft.274 Nous verrons.'1

I have seen from The Money Market Review that Knowles is paying 7s.6d. in the £.d How is the old boy doing?

With best greetings to the whole household.

Your

Moor First published in MEGA, Abt. Ill, Bd. 4, Printed according to the original Berlin, 1931 , , , . ,. , r , ,- Published in English for the first time

145

Manchester, 25 January 1869 7 Southgate

Dear Moor,

In all haste, just an announcement that we are all on our feet again, and that, luckily, Gumpert raised a false alarm about scarlet fever. Today I must look carefully through the draft contract with G. Ermen, which I am now getting, so that things may be settled as soon as possiblee; for this reason, only these few lines today. As soon as I see the way clear and everything has gone so far that no miscarriage may be feared, I shall come to London for a few days.

Best greetings to you all.

F. E.

[^1]: ENGELS TO MARX275

[^2]: IN LONDON

[^3]: a L. Büchner, Sechs Vorlesungen - b Ch. Darwin, On the Origin of Species by Means of Natural Selection, or the Preservation of Favoured Races in the Struggle for Life - c we shall see - à See this volume, p. 181. - e Ibid., pp. 167, 170.



