---
Volume: 43
Document_Title: "147. Marx to Engels. 28 January "
Page_Range: "244-246"
---

# 147. Marx to Engels. 28 January 



**[p. 207]**

Since Jenny has been coughing, you must have cancelled immediately the arrangement about giving lessons?a

First published in Der Briefwechsel zwischen Printed according to the original F. Engels und K. Marx, Bd. 4, Stuttgart, 1913 Published in English for the first

146

ENGELS TO MARX275

IN LONDON

Manchester, 26 January 1869 7 Southgate

Dear Moor,

Today, at 2 o'clock midday, Ernest Jones died of pneumonia. He had been sick since Thursdayb and given up by the doctors since Friday.

Another of the old gang!

Your

F. E.

147

MARX T O ENGELS

[London,] 28 January 1869

The news about E. Jones naturally caused deep dismay in our household, since he was one of our few old friends.

[^1]: First published in Der Briefwechsel zwischen Printed according to the original F. Engels und K. Marx, Bd. 4, Stuttgart, „ , ,. , , . ^ ,. , r 1013 Published in English tor the iirst time

[^2]: IN MANCHESTER

[^3]: DEAR FRED,

[^4]: a See this volume, p. 171. - b 21 January





**[p. 208]**

I am sending you 1 Vorbote and a small pamphlet I received today from Berlin. The author, who sent it, describes himself on the envelope as a university lecturer in agricultural management.

Jennychen 's cough has nearly disappeared. In the past few days I have had another bad attack, but today the business appears to me to have changed into a running cold, and thus be coming to an end.

Liebknecht writes to me that, in Switzerland and Germany, revolts are pending against Becker (OUR OLD ONE a) and that a public scandal can 0*1/31 be avoided if Becker breaks with Bakunin and abandons his dictatorial behaviour. People are very dissatisfied with his financial management, and his reports on it. Liebknecht wishes me to write privatim to Becker, since he is very STUBBORN. But the business is tricky. Wilhelm will go to Vienna in May. The last fifty copies of Herr Vogt have been deposited with Kugel- mann, on my instructions.

The Gurney affair227 AMUSES me immensely. I have studied this damned CASE in all the DETAILS, SO I found nothing new in the PROCEEDINGS in Mansion House,b EXCEPT GREAT Edwards.0

You must notify me several days in advance when you are coming here, so I can invite Prof. Beesly for one evening.

Salut.

Your

[^1]: Karlo Morod

[^2]: First published abridged in Der Briefwech- sel zwischen F. Engels und K. Marx, Bd. 4, Stuttgart, 1913 and in full in MEGA, Abt. III, Bd. 4, Berlin, 1931

[^3]: Printed according to the original

[^4]: Published in English for the first time

[^5]: 3 Johann Philipp Becker - b the official residence of the Lord Mayor of London - c E. W. Edwards [Speech on 23 January 1869 as a witness at the Overend, Gurney and Co. trial], The Times, No. 26343, 25 January 1869 - d Moor



