---
Volume: 43
Document_Title: "149. Marx to Engels. 29 January "
Page_Range: "248-249"
---

# 149. Marx to Engels. 29 January 



**[p. 211]**

than ever behind the bourgeoisie. Furthermore, amongst the politicians, he was the only educated Englishman who was, au fond,2

completely on our side.

Apropos Beesly: How are things regarding the article for the Westminster?b Strike while the iron is hot.

I still have something of a cold. With weather like this, there is no end to it. I hope you are better now, too.

Best greetings to your wife and the girls. How is MRS LAFARGUE AND

BABY?C

Your

F. E.

That the Russiand from the start announces 'Marx, K., Works, Volume I',e is also good.

First published abridged in Der Briefwech- Printed according to the original sei zwischen F. Engels und K. Marx, Bd. 4, . . . Stuttgart, 1913 and in full in MEGA, Published in English for the first Abt. III, Bd. 4, Berlin, 1931 time

149

MARX TO ENGELS

[London,] 29 January 1869

Eichhoff 's brother' wanted to reprint my '18th Brumaire' (and pay for it).

Accordingly, I thought it necessary to write to Meissner,84 to ask, as it were, for his authorisation for this (he does not like pamphlets). He writes that nobody but he may print the pamphlet, since he is my publisher ex officio* and wishes to remain such. The stuff should be sent to him direct, after minor alterations.278

QUESTION: can you get me a COPY of Louis Bonaparte? Wasn't there a copy amongst Lupus' estate?279

Your

[^1]: IN MANCHESTER

[^2]: DEAR FRED,

[^3]: K. M. First published in Der Briefwechsel zwischen Printed according to the original F. Engels und K. Marx, Bd. 4, Stuttgart, 19,13 Published in English for the first time

[^4]: a basically - b See this volume, pp. 138, 141. - c Charles Etienne - d N. F. Da- nielson - e See this volume, pp. 121, 123-25. - f Albert Eichhoff - s by virtue of office



