---
Volume: 43
Document_Title: "151. Marx to Ludwig Kugelmann. 11 February "
Page_Range: "250-251"
---

# 151. Marx to Ludwig Kugelmann. 11 February 



**[p. 151]**

MARX TO LUDWIG KUGELMANN29

IN HANOVER

London, 11 February 1869

Dear Friend,

The delay in this letter may be ascribed to two circumstances. First, the damned foggy weather here—NOTHING BUT MIST—has loaded me with a nearly four-week quite extraordinarily vicious influenza. Second, I had the enclosed photogramsa taken at least 7 weeks ago but, as a result of this very weather and atmospheric darkness, the things could only be printed from the plate very recently.

The enclosed letter from A. Rugeb has been received by my friend Strohn in Bradford, from one of his business friends. Ruge obviously could not resist the 'negation of the negation'. You must return the letter to me immediately, since Strohn must return it to the addressee.

The TREASURER of our GENERAL COUNCIL here — Cowell Stepney, a very rich and distinguished man, but completely devoted to the workers' cause, though in a somewhat eccentric way—enquired of a friend in Bonn about literature (German) on the labour question and socialism. He sent him, en réponse,0 a summary (written) made by Dr Held, Professor of Political Economy at Bonn. His comments show the tremendous narrow-mindedness of these learned mandarins. Writing about me and Engels, he (Held) states:

A nice place to find oneself! A lecturer of political economy at a German university writes to me that I have thoroughly convinced him, but—but his position enjoins him, 'like other colleagues', not to express his conviction.

This cowardice on the part of the specialist mandarins, on the

[^1]: 'Engels. "The Condition of the Working Class" etc., the best product of German socialist-communist literature.' 'Closely connected with Engels is Karl Marx. He is the author of the most scientific and learned work which socialism as a whole has to show, Capital etc. Although only recently published, this book is still an echo (!) of the movement before 1848. That is why I mention it here in connection with Engels. The work is, at the same time, (!) of great interest for the present since (!!) one may study here the source from which Lassalle drew his basic ideas.'

[^2]: a The reference is to the photograph of Marx and his eldest daughter Jenny (1869). See also this volume, p. 206. - b Ibid., p. 542. - c in reply



