---
Volume: 43
Document_Title: "155. Engels to Marx. 17 February "
Page_Range: "256-257"
---

# 155. Engels to Marx. 17 February 



**[p. 219]**

base?3 En revanche? he has become the acknowledged hero of La

Cigale, which has openly turned against 'l'équivoque Conseil General à Londres et ses acolytes à Bruxelles'.c

And now, my dear children, farewell, kiss little Fouchtrad in my name, and remember

First published in: Marx and Engels,

Works, Second Russian Edition, Vol. 32, Moscow, 1964

Old Nick

Reproduced from the original

Published in English for the first time

155

ENGELS TO MARX

IN LONDON

[Manchester,] 17 February 1869

Dear Moor,

I shall have the report281 READY for you by next Tuesday,6 though I don't know what interests you mainly. Enclosed is a letter from Lugau.280

Best thanks for the Westbury story.f I return, enclosed, the letter to Borkheim. I shall ask my SHAREBROKER about it.

Enclosed is the extract made by the illustrious Gaudissart8 about Bakunin,285 together with annotations. You see that the main strong passages, which he quoted to us in Russian, only exist in his imagination. Still, the Pan-Slavism is really spread rather too thickly, in particular the threats against the Poles are significant. And the dissolution of the Russian Empire is qualified by the fact that Great Russia should still become the centre of the Slav confederation.

Your

F. E.

[^1]: First published abridged in Der Briefwech- sel zwischen F. Engels und K. Marx, Bd. 4, Stuttgart, 1913 and in full in MEGA, Abt. III, Bd. 4, Berlin, 1931

[^2]: Printed according to the original

[^3]: Published in English for the first time

[^4]: a See this volume, p. 102. - b in return - c 'the ambiguity of the London General Council and its accomplices in Brussels' - d Charles Etienne Lafargue - e 23 February - f See this volume, p. 215. - s Sigismund Borkheim



