---
Volume: 43
Document_Title: "158. Marx to Engels. 24 February "
Page_Range: "258-259"
---

# 158. Marx to Engels. 24 February 



**[p. 221]**

translation, once you have read it, but on the explicit condition that it is not spread over more than 2 nos. Otherwise it is no use. He can send the original back to you if you need it again.

I hear from Wehner that the bad behaviour of the Prussian police in Hanover is becoming steadily worse; letters opened every day, particularly those of Hanoverian officers who have entered the service of Saxony. But, of course, what does one expect Stieber to do with the 400,000 thalers of secret funds that the Prussian Chamber voted him from the ex-princes' income!36

Your

F. E.

First published in Der Briefwechsel zwischen Printed according to the original F. Engels und K. Marx, Bd. 4, Stuttgart, , , - , , - ^ .., r 10,13 Published in English tor the first time

158

MARX TO ENGELS

[London,] 24 February 1869

Adopted. Will be sent first to The Times (or rather taken there by Eccarius). If they don't take it, then to The Daily News. Then the English press cutting will be sent to Zukunft, Social-Demokrat and

Wilhelm* The POOR DEVILS of Lugau will have the great satisfaction of being mentioned in the English press.

Enclosed RESOLUTIONS* etc., 6 in all. The circumstances are as follows. The resolution of the Congress (Brussels)138 obliged us to have the Brussels .resolutions printed.226 Using the excuse that the Geneva resolutions form part of the PLATFORM, we have printed, at the same time, part of what was tabled at the Geneva congress 143

by the London Central Council and adopted by the Geneva

[^1]: IN MANCHESTER

[^2]: DEAR FRED,

[^3]: BEST THANKS for the REPORT.281 It is transparently clear. I have changed nothing, except to strike out the final sentence (or rather some words of it). Yesterday read out in the Central Council.73

[^4]: a i.e., to Demokratisches Wochenblatt- b The International Working Men's Association. Resolutions of the Congress of Geneva, 1866, and the Congress of Brussels, 1868



