---
Volume: 43
Document_Title: "159. Engels to Marx. 25 February "
Page_Range: "259-261"
---

# 159. Engels to Marx. 25 February 



**[p. 222]**

congress, omitting the amendments, etc., proposed by the French in Geneva and also adopted—rubbishy stuff. Thus, this portion is written by me. On the other hand, I had no part in drafting the 1868 RESOLUTIONS. The only phrase from me verbatim is the FIRST

CONSIDERING 'ON THE EFFECTS OF MACHINERY'.3

That Bakunin should lay claim to the 'Slav' brothers in Courland and Livonia is great. Neither are his CLAIMS ON Silesia bad.b

What about Foster, EXCHANGES? c

Meissner is a fine fellow; I sent him, a few days before your visit to London,286 a copy of Louis Bonaparte.d Asked for immediate notification.84 No word yet.

Wilhelm remains unchangeably the same. He wrote to me that he had sent 50 or 60 copiese to Kugelmann, but Kugelmann in fact has received only 6 copies!

Salut.

Your

K. M.

Printed according to the original

Published in English for the first time

159

ENGELS TO MARX

Manchester, 25 February 1869

Dear Moor,

I have just sent Borkheim a CHEQUE for £162.10, of which £100 is to pay off his advance and £62.10 is for you, which makes, together with the £25 brought to you, the sum of £87.10=1/4 of £350. At the beginning of March, or as soon as I possibly can in

First published in Der Briefwechsel zwischen F. Engels und K. Marx, Bd. 4, Stuttgart, 1913

[^1]: IN LONDON

[^2]: a K. Marx, Draft Resolution on the Consequences of Using Machinery under Capitalism Proposed by the General Council to the Brussels Congress (see present edition, Vol. 21, p. 9). - b See this volume, p. 219. - c J. L. Foster, An Essay on the Principle of Commercial Exchanges (see also this volume, p. 215). - d K. Marx, The Eighteenth Brumaire of Louis Bonaparte - e K. Marx, Herr Vogt





**[p. 1913]**

March, you will get a further £87.10, then again at the beginning of July, etc.

I hope the English press will take the report,281 but I am firmly convinced that it will not, and that, in the last resort, only The Bee-Hive will remain. At best the fellows will make huge cuts.

I have not yet read the resolutions.226 But at first glance one is surprised that the 1867 Lausanne resolutions are not reprinted also.

NB. about the money: I only had the choice of sending it through Borkheim or else in some other way, which would cause gossip here in the office; I preferred the lesser evil. In future this will naturally not happen again.

The final sentence in the report2 was, of course, aimed only at Liebknecht's sheetb and the public.

Foster ON EXCHANGES is being sent to you today by GLOBE PARCEL EXPRESS, since the BOOKPOST is not certain enough for an irreplaceable book. If you have not received it by Saturday0 morning, you must immediately complain to GLOBE PARCEL EXPRESS, 150 Cheapside or 150 Leadenhall STREET. Best you should return it the same way. Even by MAIL TRAIN, the GLOBE is much the cheapest way to send larger consignments of books.

Regarding the copies, I would immediately haul Wilhelm over the coals, and categorically demand information. The same with Meissner. The fellow has obviously had second thoughts, but since Eichhoff is ready to print, he must decide oui ou non.d

Nothing but rain here. Apropos, I have written to Borkheim about Bakunin84 that he should raise the question as to whether it is in any way possible for us Westerners to cooperate with this Pan-Slav pack while the fellows preach their Slav supremacy; he will probably read this to you tomorrow285 when you collect the money—but, in addition, I told him he should discuss the matter with you.

Best greetings to the household.

Your

F. E.

[^1]: First published in Der Briefwechsel zwischen F. Engels und K. Marx, Bd. 4, Stuttgart,

[^2]: Printed according to the original

[^3]: Published in English for the first time

[^4]: a F. Engels, Report on the Miners' Guilds in the Coalfields of Saxony (see present edition, Vol. 21, p. 39; see also this volume, Note 281). - b Demokratisches Wochenblatt- c 27 February - d See this volume, pp. 211 and 222.



