---
Volume: 43
Document_Title: "161. Marx to Engels. 2 March "
Page_Range: "264-265"
---

# 161. Marx to Engels. 2 March 



**[p. 161]**

MARX TO ENGELS

IN MANCHESTER

[London,] 2 March 1869

DEAR FRED,

You must either send me the booklet from Lugau—or, better still, send me in German the paragraphs of the rules that you quote.281

I shall translate the stuff myself, since I do not regard Wilhelma

as competent and also because I do not wish to hand over the affair to him alone.b

Your

K. M.

A p r o p o s . A PAMPHLET, WRITTEN BY A PUBLIC ACCOUNTANT, ADDRESSED TO M R G l a d s t o n e 0 states t h a t at least 1/10 of t h e LIFE ASSURANCE CO'S ( t h e w h o l e BUSINESS IN LIFE ASSURANCE h a s a n o m i n a l c a p i t a l of £ 1 0 0 million) is bankrupt a n d is NOT WORTH THE PAPER UPON WHICH THEY PRINT

What will the bourgeois gentlemen say to this, those gentlemen who were so very very delighted about the PROSPECTIVE BANKRUPTCY (in 20 years or so) of the TRADES UNIONS?

They will keep their mouths shut.

[^1]: THEIR ADVERTISEMENTS.

[^2]: First published in part in Der Briefwechsel Printed according to the original zwischen F. Engels und K. Marx, Bd. 4, Stuttgart, 1913 and in full in MEGA, Published in English for the first Abt. Ill, Bd. 4, Berlin, 1931 t l n l e

[^3]: a Wilhelm Liebknecht - b See this volume, pp. 220-21. - c An Actuary. Life Assurance Companies: their Financial Condition. Discussed, with Reference to Impending Legislation, in a Letter Addressed to the Right Hon. W. E. Gladstone, M. P., First Lord of the Treasury, p. 6.



