---
Volume: 43
Document_Title: "162. Marx to Engels. 3 March "
Page_Range: "265-266"
---

# 162. Marx to Engels. 3 March 



**[p. 162]**

MARX TO ENGELS

IN MANCHESTER

London, 3 March 1869

DEAR FRED,

herum Crispinus!* Our valued Wilhelmb has his own PROCEEDINGS. First, he reprints from the Revue der Neuen Rheinischen Zeitung Eccarius' article about 'Tailoring in London',c without asking Eccarius and without quoting the Revue as his source. Then he writes to Eccarius that he would like to print the article as a pamphlet. Therewith Eccarius replies that, in this case, a 2nd CHAPTER is necessary, since the conditions have changed completely over the last 19 years, something that Wilhelm had absolutely overlooked in his copying craze.

Then a second move by Wilhelm: He writes to Eccarius: he should send him the issue of the Revue containing your article on the 'German Peasant War'.

So Wilhelm wanted to reprint your article without your prior knowledge and once again without citing the Revue.

Luckily, Eccarius informed me yesterday evening at the Central Council. I told him I would write to you about the case and, in the meantime, Eccarius should send him nothing.

With regards to the stuff itself, I have a SPARE COPY I could send to Wilhelm. And I believe—even supposing we should later publish our assorted articles together—that publication in Wilhelm's sheet would do us no harm and the immediate effect of the publication would be very good.

But, UNDER ALL CIRCUMSTANCES, Wilhelm should not be allowed to publish the article as an original contribution for him, instead of as a reprint from the Revue.

Write me without delay your arbitrium.6

Another curiosity. You may have seen in the Augsburg

[^1]: a Ecce iterum Crispinus—again Crispinus (Juvenal, Satires, IV, 1); fig. 'again the same'. - b Wilhelm Liebknecht - c J. G. Eccarius, 'Die Schneiderei in London oder der Kampf des großen und des kleinen Capitals', Demokratisches Wochenblatt, Nos. 2-5, 7; 9, 16, 23, 30 January and 13 February 1869 (reprinted from Neue Rheinische Zeitung. Politisch-ökonomische Revue, No. 5/6, May-October 1850). - d decision



