---
Volume: 43
Document_Title: "163. Engels to Marx. 3 March "
Page_Range: "266-268"
---

# 163. Engels to Marx. 3 March 



**[p. 229]**

Allgemeine Zeitung that both of us figure as contributors to a workers' paper to be published by Oberwinder in Vienna.3

The facts are as follows: About 4 weeks before New Year's Day, Oberwinder had Wilhelm write to me that he wanted to publish an almanac and needed my biography for it. I should send what was necessary to Oberwinder. I sent simplement11 the FACTS and a few DOCUMENTS (Cologne Trial,c etc.).84 Heard nothing further of the matter.

Now, SOME WEEKS SINCE, Oberwinder writes to me that nothing has come of the almanac, but he will place the stuff in a paper he is going to publish. About 6-7,000 subscribers are already assured. Requested me as contributor. J forgot to answer him; shall do it today .d

Incidentally I would regard it as a good thing if we had a footing in Vienna.

Salut.

Your

K. M.

Apropos. What do the German commercial oxen understand by:

1. PRIMAGE? 2. Courtage for the remboursa"

163

ENGELS TO MARX

Manchester, 3 March 1869 Dear Moor,

You see how right I was to dissuade you from taking a trip to Paris under any circumstances. It would be madness to put oneself in the hands of those scoundrels, particularly since nobody

[^1]: First published in Der Briefwechsel zwischen Printed according to the original F. Engels und K. Marx, Bd. 4, Stuttgart, „ , , . _ ,. , r , r. ,Qio Published in English for the tirst time

[^2]: IN LONDON

[^3]: a Die Volksstimme - b simply - c K. Marx, Revelations Concerning the Communist Trial in Cologne - d See this volume, pp. 233-34. - c Ibid., p. 238.





**[p. 230]**

enquires about you and the lois de sûreté293 are still in force. Let Lafargue go to Strasbourg as soon as possible and take his examinations; once that is over, he will be able to take some liberties. The fact that he has emancipated himself from Moilin is of enormous value; this Jesuit would certainly have got him into trouble. What Lafargue writes about Blanqui is very nice.a

Moore tells me that Beesly has written an article on the social question in the new Fortnightly which reaches the maximum confusion.b

The only thing linguistically new for me in the old Scottish passage292 was the participium praesentis havand, having,—showing that this form still existed in Scotland at the beginning of the 16thc century, when it had long disappeared in England.

I really did make the blunder in Russian. I have pretty well forgotten the Russian declensions.d

The Lugau material281 will be returned today by BOOK POST. Since I no longer know which passages I quoted, I cannot indicate them for you; however, I made a sort of index to the pamphlets, which is attached, and you may be able to see from this where the passages might be.

What is the pamphlet against the LIFE ASSURANCE Co., called?e We really must get hold of it.

So Wilhelmchen appealed to you against Schweitzer.294 This will make a fine story, since Schweitzer cannot be caught so easily. The row is going to be fun; don't you get the Social-Demokrat any more? Just now, Eichhoff should keep us properly au courant.1 In the next few days I shall send you some articles that he (certainly nobody else) wrote in the Zukunftß In the meantime, in Essen the Social-Democrat Hasenclever, also supported by Liebknecht, has been elected with a majority of 960 votes over what the Landrath and the National-Liberal candidate1

received together, and in Hanover (I believe Celle) there are also prospects for getting someone in.295

Incidentally, Wilhelm appears to be bestirring himself more and to be having some success in Saxony. If the jackass would only abandon his stupid South-German-federalist and his Guelphic concerns,J he could accomplish something despite his thick-

[^1]: a See this volume, p. 225. - b E. S. Beesly, 'The Social Future of the Working Class', The Fortnightly Review, Vol. V, No. XXVII, 1 March 1869 - c The original mistakenly has '15th'. - d See this volume, p. 224. - e Ibid., p. 227. - f informed -

[^2]: g 'Die Gewerksgenossenschaften', Die Zukunft, Nos. 32, 35, 37, 40 and 47; 7, 11, 13, 17 and 25 February 1869 (see also this volume, p. 239). - h Keßler - ' Dr Hammacker - J See this volume, p. 141.



