---
Volume: 43
Document_Title: "164. Marx to Ludwig Kugelmann. 3 March "
Page_Range: "268-270"
---

# 164. Marx to Ludwig Kugelmann. 3 March 



**[p. 231]**

The odd thing is that he suddenly wants to go to Berlin, that is to say, admits that he can, without danger.

Incidentally, I cannot see how you, as the GENERAL COUNCIL, could declare yourselves competent on this question—even if both parties agreed—unless they both also declared themselves willing to subject themselves to the arbitration verdict against the organisation and management of the TRADES UNIONS, etc.

Your

F. E.

First published abridged in Der Briefwech- Printed according to the original sei zwischen F. Engels und K. Marx, Bd. 4, Stuttgart, 1913 and in full in MEGA, Published in English for the first Abt. Ill, Bd. 4, Berlin, 1931 t l m e

164

London, 3 March 1869 Dear Kugelmann,

The damned photographer2 has once again been leading me by the nose for weeks, and has still not supplied additional COPIES. But I shall not delay this reply longer because of this.

With regard to Herr Vogt, I wished to make sure of those copies which could still be saved from Liebknecht's hands (I had sent him 300 from London to Berlin, i.e., all those still left) in case they were needed. I therefore took the liberty of ordering them to be stored at your place. But Orindur, solve for me this mystery of nature! b

Liebknecht sent you just 6 COPIES, but announced to me that he had sent 50 COPIES. Will you please ask him for the answer to this riddle!c

[^1]: MARX TO LUDWIG KUGELMANN29

[^2]: IN HANOVER

[^3]: a Fehrenbach - b paraphrase of the well-known words from Milliner's drama Die Schuld, Act II, Scene V - c See this volume, pp. 106, 142, 189, 208.





**[p. 232]**

It will probably take until the summer before I am finished with Vol. II.41 Then—with the manuscript—I shall come to Germany with my daughter" and see you then. Or, to be more precise, shall descend on you.

In France—a very interesting movement in progress. The Parisians are once again really studying their recent revolutionary past, to prepare themselves for the pending new revolutionary business. First, the origin of the Empire—then the coup d'état of December. This had been entirely forgotten, just as the reaction in Germany has been able to wipe out memories of 1848/49 completely.

That is why Ténot's books about the coup d'état in Paris and the provincesb aroused such enormous interest that they rapidly went through 10 editions. They were followed by dozens of other books on the same period. C'était la rage,c and this soon became a speculative business for the publishers.

These writings came from the opposition—Ténot is an homme du Siècle (I mean the liberal bourgeois paper, not our century). All the liberal and illiberal rogues belonging to the official opposition promoted this mouvement Also the republican democrats, people like Delescluze, for example, who was formerly Ledru-Rollin's adjutant and now, as republican patriarch, edits Réveil in Paris.

Until now everybody has been indulging in these posthumous revelations, or rather reminiscences—everybody who was not Bonapartist.

But then came le revers de la médaillée First, the French Government itself got the renegade Hippolyte Castille to publish Les Massacres de Juin 1848. This was a blow in the face for Thiers, Falloux, Marie, Jules Favre, Jules Simon, Pelletan, etc., in short, the chiefs of what is called in France 'l'Union Libérale',298 who wish to perform a sleight of hand with the next elections, the infamous old rogues.

[^1]: a Jenny Marx - b E. Ténot, Paris en décembre 1851 and La province en décembre

[^2]: 1859 - c This was all the rage - d the other side of the medal



