---
Volume: 43
Document_Title: "165. Marx to Heinrich Oberwinder. 3 March "
Page_Range: "270-271"
---

# 165. Marx to Heinrich Oberwinder. 3 March 



**[p. 233]**

Then came the Socialist Party, which 'unmasked' the opposition and the old-style republican democrats.

Including Vermorel: Les Hommes de 1848 and L'Opposition. Vermorel is a Proudhonist. Last came the Blanquists, for example, G. Tridon: Gironde et Girondins.

So the whole historic witches' brew is simmering. When shall we have got this far? To show you how well the French police are served:

I intended to go to Paris next week to see my daughter. Last Saturdaya a police agent enquired of Lafargue whether Mons. Marx had arrived yet. He had a commission for him.b

FOREWARNED!

My heartiest greetings to your dear wife and Fränzchen. How is Madame Tenge?

Yours

K. M.

First published abridged in Die Neue Zeit, Printed according to the original Bd. 2, Nr. 13, Stuttgart, 1901-1902 and in full in Pisma Marksa k Kugelmanu (Letters of Marx to Kugelmann), Moscow- Leningrad, 1928

165

MARX TO HEINRICH OBERWINDER

[Draft]

London, 3 MARCH 1869

Dear Sir,

I do not need to assure you that I am greatly interested in the workers' movement in Vienna.e If I could dispose freely of my

[^1]: IN VIENNA

[^2]: 1 Modena Villas, Maitland Park, Haverstock Hill, N.W.C

[^3]: You must forgive my delayed reply to your letter of 14 February, resulting from my indisposition.11

[^4]: a 27 February - b See this volume, pp. 216 and 225. - c in the original: W.C. - d See this volume, p. 229. - e deleted in the original: 'and thus in your paper', i.e.

[^5]: Volksstimme

[^6]: 10-983



