---
Volume: 43
Document_Title: "166. Engels to Marx. 4 March "
Page_Range: "271-272"
---

# 166. Engels to Marx. 4 March 



**[p. 234]**

time and my strength, I would immediately stand at your disposal as a contributor to your paper. My ability to work is, however, continually interrupted by illness. The little leisure left me after completing the second volume of my work Capital41 is absorbed by the business of the International Working Men's Association.

Thus, I cannot offer the prospect of contributions from me in the near future.

I remain, with best respects3

Karl Marx

First published in: Marx and Engels, Printed according to the original Works, First Russian Edition, Vol. XXV, Moscow 1934 Published in English for the first time

166

ENGELS TO MARX

Manchester, 4 March 1869

Dear Moor,

I must leave it quite up to you to do what you think best about the article.0 For my part, I do not think that the article would have any sort of effect in Liebknecht's paperc in instalments of 1 or 2 columns, since it would thus be spread over two years. On the other hand, if he wanted to print it cheaply for the workers, this would be different and could have an impact. Since he is now involved in a row with Schweitzer,294 I would suggest to him that he publish the last section of my pamphlet on military questions d in his sheet, or ask Meissner the price at which he would allow him to sell the remainder (he once asked me about this through Moore, but as I have had no occasion to write to him since, this too has remained unanswered). If, however, he should reprint the article, he must

[^1]: IN LONDON

[^2]: a deleted in the original: 'You cannot, therefore, expect contributions from me in the near future, but I can assure you of such in the long view.—Yours faithfully' - b See this volume, p. 228. - c Demokratisches Wochenblatt - A F. Engels, The Prussian Military Question and the German Workers' Party



