---
Volume: 43
Document_Title: "167. Marx to Engels. 5 March "
Page_Range: "272-274"
---

# 167. Marx to Engels. 5 March 



**[p. 235]**

indicate the source. I myself have not got a copy and you cannot part with yours either; we must keep one, after all!

Your

F. E.

First published in Der Briefwechsel zwischen Printed according to the original F. Engels und K. Marx, Bd. 4, Stuttgart, „ , , - , , „ . , r 1913 Published in English tor the first

167

MARX T O ENGELS33

IN MANCHESTER

[London,] 5 March 1869

DEAR FRED,

The enclosed little document arrived yesterday (though dated 27 February).299 You must send it back as soon as you have read it, since I have to lay it before the COUNCIL on TUESDAY NEXT.3 The gentlemen of the 'Alliance' have taken a long time to produce this opus.

In fact, we would rather they had kept their 'unnumbered legions' in France, Spain and Italy to themselves.

Bakunin thinks: if we approve his "programme radical' he can trumpet it forth and compromise us tant soit peu.h If we declare ourselves against it, we shall be denounced as counter- revolutionaries. Moreover: If we admit it, he will see to it that, at the Congress in Basle, he is seconded by some RIFF-RAFF. I think the answer should be along the following LINES:300

According to para. 1 of the Rules, every workers' society that is

As the stage of development reached by different sections of the workers in the same country and by the working class in different countries necessarily varies considerably, the actual movement also necessarily expresses itself in very diverse theoretical forms.

[^1]: 'AIMING AT THE SAME END; VIZ., THE PROTECTION, ADVANCEMENT AND COMPLETE EMANCIPATION OF THE WORKING CLASSES' , is to be admitted. 0

[^2]: a 9 March - b however little - c Rules of the International Working Men's Association. Founded September 28th, 1864, p. 4 (see also present edition, Vol. 20, p. 442).

[^3]: 10«



The community of action the International Working Men's Association is calling into being, the exchange of ideas by means of the different organs of the sections in all countries and, finally, the direct discussions at the general congresses would also gradually create a common theoretical programme for the general workers' movement.

With regard to the programme of the 'Alliance', therefore, it is not necessary for the General Council to submit it to an examen

critique.11 The Council does not need to examine whether it is an adequate scientific expression of the workers' movement. It has only to ask whether the general tendency of the programme is in opposition to the general tendency of the International Working Men's Association—the COMPLETE EMANCIPATION OF THE WORKING CLASSES!

This reproach might apply to only one phrase in the program- me, para. 2: 'elle veut avant tout l'égalisation politique, économi- que et sociale des classes.h 'L'égalisation des classes', interpreted literally, is simply another way of saying the 'Harmonie du capital et du travail'0 preached by bourgeois socialists. The final aim of the International Working Men's Association is not the logically impossible 'égalisation des classes', but the historically necessary 'abolition des classes'. From the context in which this phrase appears in the programme, however, it seems to be merely A SLIP OF THE PEN. The General Council has little doubt, therefore, that this phrase, which might lead to serious misunderstanding, will be deleted from the programme.301

On this assumption, it is the principle of the International Working Men's Association to leave each section the responsibility for its own programme. There is, therefore, no obstacle to the transformation of the sections of the Alliance into sections of the International Working Men's Association.

As soon as this has taken place, the General Council must, in accordance with the Rules, be supplied with a dénombrement of the newly adhering sections, according to country, residence and numbers.

This last point—the census of their legions—will, of course, upset the gentlemen. When you return the letter, tell me what you want changed in this draft reply.

Quoade Liebknecht, I have given further thought to the matterf. Publication in the lousy little sheet must not be allowed.

[^1]: a critical examination - b 'above all, it desires the political, economic and social equalisation of the classes' - c harmony of capital and labour - d listing - e with regard to - f See this volume, p. 234.



