---
Volume: 43
Document_Title: "168. Engels to Marx. 7 March "
Page_Range: "274-276"
---

# 168. Engels to Marx. 7 March 



**[p. 237]**

Publication as a pamphlet by Wilhelm is a DELUSION. Should I write to Eichhoff asking whether his brother" would publish it at a reasonable price? Could you, in this case, bestow your fee upon the GENERAL COUNCIL, which is greatly in need of money? I still have a copy of the 6th issue containing the Peasant War (apart from my bound Jî«Du«)

b which is complete). I could send this to Berlin.302

Please reply by return.

Moreover, Wilhelm should reprint the last section of the pamphlet on military questions.0 The transaction with Meissner (in which Wilhelm would have to show his cash!—anyway Meissner is very TICKLISH UPON SUCH POINTS) is impossible.

Salut.

Your

K. M.

First published in Der Briefwechsel zwischen Printed according to the original F. Engels und K. Marx, Bd. 4, Stuttgart, ig ig Published in English in full for the

first time

168 ENGELS TO MARX

Manchester, 7 March 1869 Dear Moor,

The answer300 for the Russiand and his retinue is exactly as it should be. Even in their own sommation* the fellows do not dare to call upon you to make the programme your own; they simply wish indirectly to induce you to make a theoretical criticism. A stupid Russian trap into which people in this country will surely not fall. Apart from this, the people's retreat is complete, and nothing more could be desired. The about-face by which the fellows are being compelled to allow you to review their forces is very amusing, and will act like a bucket of cold water over their phrase-mongering heads.

As for the Peasant War it must, I believe, be offered first to Meissner* for decency's sake; and if he is not interested in

[^1]: IN LONDON

[^2]: a Albert Eichhoff - b Neue Rheinische Zeitung. Politisch-ökonomische Revue (see also this volume, p. 234). - c F. Engels, The Prussian Military Question and the German Workers' Party (see also this volume, pp. 234-35) - d Mikhail Bakunin - e challenge -

[^3]: 1 See the previous letter.





**[p. 238]**

printing it as a popular, cheap pamphlet, there will still be time with Eichhoff. You will have to write to him about The 18th

Brumaire, which you could do at the same time. If Meissner does not get on with The 18th Brumaire, or is scared, then steps must be taken and the thing given to Eichhoff.a Otherwise time will be wasted and the opportunity lost.

I discovered a copy of The 18th Brumaire at Charles',b and immediately confiscated it. I read it through again and immediate- ly saw that the book must appear in French without delay.303 That will have quite a different effect from just German, and will immediately make you a name amongst the French, which will at once ensure the translation of your book.c See who you might get to do this and, in any case, take steps along these LINES. Printed in Brussels, it would get to France en masse.

Before the Peasant War is sent off, send me the copy so that I can correct the misprints, see whether a preface, etc., is necessary, or some notes for the philistines. I am not quite sure whether the Spanish Bergenroth is Frau Jung's Bergenroth. I think I heard the latter had gone to America.

Ad vocemd Oberwindere: did you ever write to the Angerstein who approached us previously?304 The fellow still has some sort of paper in Vienna. It would be good to avoid an unnecessary squabble with Oberwinder; Wilhelm will have to inform us of the relations between these two and what Angerstein, who was also recommended by him, is now doing.

PRIMAGE is unknown to me in exchange rates and exchange practice. In freightage, it is a supplement to the usual freight, i.e., you pay 36s.— per ton freight and 10% PRIMAGE, that means 39s.6d. If you quote me the context, I can probably explain.

Courtage for the rembours is also a very sloppily-worded phrase, so the whole passage would be useful here, too. It probably means courtage, i.e., BROKERAGE for calling in from the drawer the sum of a bill that has gone to protest.8

The Augsburg [Allgemeine Zeitung] is again full of the informa- tion on the International in Geneva. Clossmann appears to have approached Becker.h Quite useful.

How are things in Basle? Becker has written 3-4 pamphlets about all these things, but apparently never sends any here.301'

[^1]: a See this volume, p. 211. - b Charles Roesgen - c the first volume of Capital - d regarding - e See this volume, pp. 229, 233-34. - l Allgemeine Volkszeitung - s See this volume, p. 229. - h See 'Genf, 21 Febr.' (in the section Neueste Posten), Allgemeine Zeitung, No. 55, 24 February 1869 (supplement); 'Genf, 28 Febr.' (in the section Schweiz), Allgemeine Zeitung, No. 63, 4 March 1869.



