---
Volume: 43
Document_Title: "171. Engels to Marx. 18 March "
Page_Range: "278-280"
---

# 171. Engels to Marx. 18 March 



**[p. 170]**

ENGELS T O MARX

IN LONDON

[Manchester,] 15 March 1869

Dear Moor,

Enclosed, Meissner returned.306 Today only the following: Even in the past I considered that Bonaparte" really ought to be printed together with your 3 articles in the Revue about the period from February 1848 to 1850307; but I thought that it would cause too much loss of time. Since, however, Meissner himself is delaying, I would still do this now. This will make the whole thing more voluminous—ca. 10-12 printed sheets—and more complete.

If you write to Meissner right away, I am sure there will be enough time.

More tomorrow.

Your

F. E.

Lizzie is in bed with bronchitis and a bad cold; somewhat better today.

171

Manchester, 18 March 1869

Dear Moor,

Even according to Social-Demokrat (which I'll send you back in a

[^1]: First published in Der Briefwechsel zwischen Printed according to the original F. Engels und K. Marx, Bd. 4, Stuttgart, 2913 Published in English for the tirst time

[^2]: ENGELS TO MARX180

[^3]: IN LONDON

[^4]: I am writing to Meissner about the Peasant War.h

[^5]: a K. Marx, The Eighteenth Brumaire of Louis Bonaparte. - b F. Engels, The Peasant War in Germany (see also this volume, p. 238).





**[p. 242]**

couple of days), Wilhelma appears to have kept ahead in Saxony.b On the other hand, you have to grant the Lassalleans that they are developing quite a different sort of activity and know how to make ten times more out of the limited means than the People's Party does.38 Even when Schweitzer was imprisoned, the Social-Demokrat did not publish such idiocies as Wilhelm does.

I wonder what Wilhelm will say about the fact that, in Celle the Hanoverian particularists, defeated in the first round of polling, voted in the second round for Planck, the National-Liberal Bismarckian, and thus got him into the Reichstag instead OF Yorck, the worker. But that does not matter to Wilhelm.

Huxley's famous article in the Fortnightly24* in fact contains almost nothing except the joke about Comtism. The Comtists are said to be very furious about this, and intend to publish a thunderous reply, as a geological friendc in London writes to Moore.

What do you think of my suggestion about printing the articles from the Neue Rheinische Zeitung307 before Bonaparte? And about the French version?d

Many thanks for the Castille.e Only yesterday was I able to start reading it. Clearly a crypto-Bonapartist factional publication. However, it is enormous progress that the June insurrection is now generally seen for what it was.217

Tony Moilinf is really charming. This homme des 1869, who cheerfully declares that nobody should earn less than 2,400 fr.! I laughed myself half sick over this naïve doctor with extraordinary pretensions. If Lafargue were still to think anything of him, his wife would laugh at him.

I wanted to write to you about quite a long story, but can't recollect it at the moment. I have to go home now to hear what Gumpert has said about Lizzie, who has been in bed since Sunday.11

Your

F. E.

[^1]: First published abridged in Der Briefwech- Printed according to the original sei zwischen F Engels und K Marx. *& A P u b l i s h e d i n E n g i i s h j n fuü for t h e Stuttgart, 1913 and in full in MEGA, f; • s

[^2]: Abt. Ill, Bd. 4, Berlin, 1931

[^3]: a Wilhelm Liebknecht - b 'Zur Agitation in Sachsen', Sociat-Demokrat, Nos. 21, 22, 24, 25 and 30-32; 17, 19, 24 and 26 February, 10, 12 and 14 March 1869. - c apparently Dakyns - d See the previous letter. - e H. Castille, Les massacres de juin 1848 - f T. Moilin, La liquidation sociale. - s man of - h 14 March



