---
Volume: 43
Document_Title: "172. Marx to Engels. 20 March "
Page_Range: "280-282"
---

# 172. Marx to Engels. 20 March 



**[p. 172]**

MARX TO ENGELS56

IN MANCHESTER

[London,] 20 March 1869

DEAR FRED,

We all hope that, in your next letter, you will be sending us better news about MRS Lizzie's state of health. Tussy especially asks you to extend our deepest sympathy to her. It's damned awful weather. Jennychen can't get rid of her cold, and for the past few days I have been cold-wild and cough-confused.

Next week (Friday or Saturday3) the children are going to Paris to the Lafargues. The business with Laura was this: she had a fall 2 or 3 weeks before her accouchement. As a result of this fall, she had to keep to her bed until 1-2 weeks ago and only with difficulty avoided danger.

I intend to have myself naturalised as an Englishman,308 so I can travel to Paris safely. Without such a journey the French edition of my book309 will never materialise. My presence there is absolutely necessary. Under Pahnerston's law you can, if you wish, slough off the Englishman again after 6 months. The law provides no protection for the naturalised person with regard to illegalities committed in his country of birth before naturalisation, if he should return to that country. With this exception, a naturalised person is on the same footing as any Englishman vis-à-vis foreign GOVERNMENTS. I really cannot see why I should not visit Paris without the permission of M. Bonaparte, if I have the means to do so.

Tomorrow, as a Sunday recreation, I shall start re-reading the 2nd part, the organic chemistry (and assume that this is where the changes are to be sought).

As regards Louis Bonaparte, I am not inv favour of printing the series from the Revue up to 1850 as an introductionc. On the one hand, I don't wish to give Meissner new excuses for delay. On the other, it would be very easy, by patching in FACTS that emerged later, to revise this section, but there is no hurry. In Brussels, De

[^1]: My best thanks to Schorlemmer for the 2ND EDITION of Chemie.h

[^2]: a 26 or 27 March - b H. E. Roscoe, Kurzes Lehrbuch der Chemie nach den neuesten Ansichten der Wissenschaft. Deutsche Ausgabe, unter Mitwirkung des Verfassers bearbeitet von Carl Schorlemmer. - c See this volume, p. 241.





**[p. 244]**

Paepe has sought in vain for a French publisher for Louis Bonaparte. For such operations, these gentlemen demand money from the author.

Blanqui, who is now in Paris, made very good jokes at Lafargue's about Moilin's3 real QUACK NOSTRUM. France, he said, is always ungrateful to its great men. Moilin, for instance, has solved the problem of the century in an unprecedentedly simple manner — and Paris goes about its business as though nothing had happened.

Castille was a June insurgent, was transported as such to Cayenne, and returned after the general amnesty. H e wrote the first edition of his book b de bonne foi.c In the meantime, the government bought him, and staged this second edition as the antithesis to Ténot's writings. T h e changes made are: 1. the tone has become more bourgeois, sometimes smart-alecky. 2. Passages against the men of December d have been removed. 3. A few quietly apologetic phrases for Bonaparte have been patched in. Despite all this, the fonds" unchanged, and it remains as you say, a very satisfactory work. It is a very good thing when M. Bonaparte pushes back the writing of history to the period before 2 December. T h e struggle of the various parties, their mutual: Et tu Brute!1 will help put a stop to the 'revolutionism' of the old scoundrels of 1848 and earlier.

Yesterday I found the report on the 'miners' guilds',1 printed in full in the Social-Demokrat of last Wednesday. Whether the Zukunft has taken it I do not know.281 Possibly the report does not stand at that lofty stage of wisdom that alone can satisfy social policy. I have not yet received Wilhelm for this week J

Apropos. In the very near future there will be a demonstration here for E. Jones. T h e business is sponsored by the Clerkenwell

[^1]: I sent to Beesly, by city post, WITH A FEW RANDOM NOTES for him to read, Vermorel's pamphlet 8 that I also sent you (with the Castille). H e sent it back to me with the enclosed note, which is as stupid as it is MAGISTERIAL and arrogant. It appears to me that positive philosophy may be equated with ignorance about everything positive. T h e other sheet enclosed was sent me by Borkheim for my 'DUTCH RELATIONS'.11

[^2]: a See this volume, p. 242. - b H. Castille, Le massacres de juin 1848 - c in good faith - d This refers to the coup d'état of 2 December 1851 - e basis - 1 Cf. Shakespeare, Julius Caesar, III, 1, 77. - s A. Vermorel, Les hommes de 1848. - h See this volume, p. 215. - ' F. Engels, 'Bericht über die Knappschaftsvereine der Bergarbeiter in den Kohlenwerken Sachsens', Der Social-Demokrat, No. 33, 17 March 1869. - J The reference is to Demokratisches Wochenblatt.



