---
Volume: 43
Document_Title: "175. Marx to Engels. 29 March "
Page_Range: "285-287"
---

# 175. Marx to Engels. 29 March 



**[p. 175]**

MARX TO ENGELS

IN MANCHESTER

[London,] 29 March 1869

DEAR FRED,

Best thanks for the CHEQUE and the STAMPS. I paid Lucraft last Tuesday.3 Have you seen the short report about the demonstration in The Times OF SATURDAY LAST b? It states that a German group ('of our people!') carried a red flag inscribed Proletarier aller Länder, verunreiniget Euch!, which they said in English, means 'RAGAMUFFINS

OF ALL REGIONS, BEFOUL YOURSELVES!'

As you correctly assume, I am cold-maddened and cold- stupefied.

The children left on Friday' evening (to the horror of the English, on GOOD FRIDAY). We received a letter from them this morning. They arrived safely in Paris, but had a stormy crossing.

I am not yet a FREEBORN BRITON. One resists such a step as long as one can.308

Nothing could be more gallant than the way Wilhelm the Honourable is extracting himself from the affair of the Vogt copies/ At my INSTIGATION, Kugelmann wrote to him about it. No reply to the first letter, and to another letter he received the enclosed screed, which may be summed up as follows: If I (Liebknecht) announced [the despatch of] 60 copies, but only 6 arrived, you should be aware that J always lie, so there the matter must rest. If, however, C. Hirsch of Berlin advised you of the number (he naturally does not know that I advised Kugelmann), it is a different matter and must be investigated.

The sort of artful dodges the fellow gets up to is displayed in a letter from Hirsch to Kugelmann. Hirsch writes to Kugelmann310:

Thus Wilhelm kept it secret from Hirsch that / had demanded information about the state of affairs, and an assured place for storing those copies still available.

Kugelmann writes:

[^1]: 'Liebknecht probably hopes for nothing more than that you should circulate the books IN QUESTION in Hanover, in order to enlighten the Democratic Party there about the doings of Herr Vogt, etc'

[^2]: a 23 March - b 'The Demonstration in Trafalgar Square', The Times, No. 26396, 27 March 1869. - c 19 March - d The reference is to K. Marx, Herr Vogt (see this volume, pp. 208 and 231).





**[p. 249]**

'The coming clash of words between Liebknecht and Schweitzer reminds me less of Luther and Eck than of Pater José and Rabbi Juda' 'But it seems to me, as well, that the rabbi and the monk, both of them to heaven smell'3

With regard to this clash of words, I received (today) the enclosed letter from Bebel.sn Since the 60-copy letter,84 Wilhelm himself does not dare write to me—until more water has flowed under the bridge.

They are amazing fellows! First they wilfully get themselves into a situation where they are bound to get a drubbing. Then I am supposed to intervene as deus ex machina and elegantly reject Schweitzer's resolution on the acceptance of the programme of the International, should Schweitzer's general meeting pass it!312 And all this after Wilhelm and Co. have not taken one single step about the International since the Nuremberg Congress,135 have done absolutely nothing so that those poor devils in Lugau found it necessary to turn directly to London.b I believe Bebel to be useful and able. He only had the particular misfortune to find his 'theoretician' in Mr Wilhelm.

Something else demonstrates the fellows' carelessness and sloppiness: to date they have not informed me of a single FACT to prove the charges of high treason, etc., levelled against Schweitzer. Fine businessmen.

I have received a letter from Dietzgen, who is a prosperous tanner in Siegburg.313 I shall send it to you as soon as it is answered. Dietzgen's ideas will be published by Meissner, for whom he has guaranteed the printing costs, under the title: Die

Kopfarbeit, dargestellt von einem Handarbeiter usw.

Salut. Greetings to MRS Lizzie and the two accomplices4.

Your

K. M.

[^1]: Lloyd's Paper, in the Sunday number a week ago,c carried long hymns of praise about our RESOLUTIONS and the INTERNATIONAL ASSOCIATION in general.

[^2]: First published in part in Der Briefwechsel zwischen F. Engels und K. Marx, Bd. 4, Stuttgart, 1913 and in full in MEGA, Abt. III, Bd. 4, Berlin, 1931

[^3]: Printed according to the original

[^4]: Published in English for the first time

[^5]: a Personages from Heinrich Heine's 'Disputation', (Romanzero, III). - b See this volume, p. 172. - c 'International Labour Laws', Lloyd's Weekly London Newspaper, 21 March 1869. - d Samuel Moore and Carl Schorlemmer



