---
Volume: 43
Document_Title: "176. Engels to Marx. 2 April "
Page_Range: "287-288"
---

# 176. Engels to Marx. 2 April 



**[p. 176]**

ENGELS TO MARX

IN LONDON

Manchester, 2 April 1869

Dear Moor,

I cannot write much to you today, since for some time I have had a chronically inflamed eye (mild), and can only do the most essential work.

L'homme propose et la femme dispose.11 Yesterday evening I laid out for you a pile of copies of Zukunft, and also B. Becker on Lassalle,b but this morning the room was being swept out, so I forgot them. Die Zukunft, incidentally, has carried the Lugau story as a feature article.314

Wilhelm's stupidities exceed everything. Bebel's cry of alarm was really touching.311 As you will see from Zukunft,c his friends in Hanover, the particularists, voted in the Lüneburg election against Yorck (Lassallean) and for the National-Liberal.d The rabble are all united against the workers but this does not disturb Liebknecht. I look forward to the dread debate with great eagerness.

About Vogte: if I were you I would write directly to the Berlin Hirsch. Then you will finally reach the proper quarter.

Lizzie is better, but does not go out yet and is on a strengthening diet. How is MRS Lafargue?

Best wishes.

Your

F. E.

[^1]: First published abridged in Der Briefwech- Printed according to the original sei zwischen F. Engels und K. Marx, Bd. 4, , , . • Stuttgart, 1913 and in full in MEGA, Published in English for the first Abt. Ill, Bd. 4, Berlin, 1931 t l m e

[^2]: a Man proposes and woman disposes. - b B. Becker, Enthüllungen über das tragische Lebensende Ferdinand Lassalle's. - c 'Bei der in engerer Wahl vollzogenen Ersatz- wahl ', Die Zukunft, No. 60, 12 March 1869, in the column 'Berlin, 11. März'. - d Gottlieb Planck - e K. Marx, Herr Vogt.



