---
Volume: 43
Document_Title: "179. Marx to Engels. 5 April "
Page_Range: "290-292"
---

# 179. Marx to Engels. 5 April 



**[p. 179]**

MARX TO ENGELS

IN MANCHESTER

London, 5 April 1869

DEAR FRED,

I can't make anything of your snieunt (I can't read the following letters) jown* According to the etymology, I can only explain lucus a non lucendoh that in Danish snoe means turn, and jeon means EVEN.

I congratulate you on the energy with which you have cut the umbilical cord with Dover Street.'

Laura is quite well again. Jenny will be coming home tomorrow or the day after 'for business reasons'. Tussy will stay in Paris for at least 2 months. As you will note from the enclosed letter, she is absolutely delighted with Fouschtra,d the YOUNGSTER of the Lafargue

FAMILY.

The Wilhelm-Bebel-Schweitzer clash of words has not really been so bad; after all, when of 11,000 voters, 4,500 abstained from voting for Schweitzer, this was not exactly a triumph for this gentleman.318

With regard to the Citizen ^ the contributors to which include Dr Engel of Berlin and Dr Brentano of the same, this appears to be stillborn or, as OLD Werner says, 'laid out'. Lloyd Jones is an old tailor by trade, who figured in a STRIKE back in 1824. For a long time now he has been an apostle of cooperation, and a lazy-bones. Odger and Applegarth are both possessed by a mania for mediation and a longing for respectability. On the CENTRAL COUNCIL, we ticked off Mr Applegarth properly.319 With regard to Odger's collaboration in particular, it never went further than the prospectus, and here people simply laugh at such PROMISSORY BILLS on his part.

In 2 issues the Bonapartist Peuple (directly edited with Boustrapa320) denounces our International because of the recent

[^1]: a See this volume, pp. 247, and 251. - b Literally: 'a grove from not being light'. The expression, first used by Quintilian in De institution* oratoria (I, 6, 34), illustrates the practice ascribed to ancient Roman etymologists of deriving words from their semantic opposites, as lucus ('grove') from lucere ('to shine, be light') because a grove is not light. - c See this volume, p. 251. - d Charles-Etienne Lafargue





**[p. 254]**

exercises of terrorism in Geneva" (on the occasion of the typographers' STRIKE321), and, at the same time, makes mocking remarks about our impotence. It would naturally be very good to keep the volcanic explosion on such a small but conspicuous stage, if the means were available. But to drag in the International so directly, as Becker b and Co. are doing, without preparation, without thinking about a war-chest, without taking into consideration the good or bad state of business in Europe — this is simply compromising. I shall send you the relevant numbers of Peuple after I have presented them to the COUNCIL tomorrow.

Oberwinder has sent me the prospectus of his paper0 for subscription. It appears twice a month, and costs 45 kreuzer per quarter. If I send the list back with subscriptions, 1 copy for you, 1 copy for Moore, 1 for Borkheim and 1 for me, we shall have to send the total sum of 3 gulden. You can't send the money individually, I mean for one COPY.

Enclosed Lanterne and Cloche and Werker. Do send me copies of Zukunft, so that I can see something about the Reichstag.

And also, if possible, Manchester papers containing arguments about the price of cotton. The Liberal M.P. from Manchester0 is supposed to be agitating or spreading agitation amongst the workers in Stockport so that they should demand, directly from the GOVERNMENT, cotton production in India, that is, PROTECTION IN ANOTHER FORM.

COMPLIMENTS to MRS Lizzie ON RESTORATION OF HEALTH. Salut.

Your

Moor

I hope your eye inflammation has passed.

[^1]: First published in Der Briefwechsel zwischen Printed according to the original F. Engels und K. Marx, Bd. 4, Stuttgart, ]Cjj3 Published in English for the first time

[^2]: a Ch. Gaumont, 'La grève à Genève', Le Peuple, 29 and 30 March 1869. - b Johann Philipp Becker - c Die Volksstimme - d Thomas Bazley



