---
Volume: 43
Document_Title: "180. Engels to Marx. 6 April "
Page_Range: "292-293"
---

# 180. Engels to Marx. 6 April 



**[p. 180]**

ENGELS TO MARX124

IN LONDON

Manchester, 6 April 1869

Dear Moor,

Liebknecht has again had the good luck of fools. The vote of 6,500 against 4,500 was a tremendous defeat for Schweitzer,318 even if it was not a direct victory for Wilhelm. The Kölner Zeitung says that Schweitzer was frightfully dismayed, and though he had declared earlier that he would resign if any sort of considerable minority were to vote against him, he has taken a lot of care not to do so.322

In any case, Schweitzer's campaign for the kingdom of the tailors has failed, and his position in his own association has been shaken severely. N'est pas dictateur qui veut." The process of the disintegration of specific Lassalleanism has thus begun, and is bound to continue rapidly. The figures 6,500:4,500 mean either a split or abandonment of the 'strict' organisation and Schweitzer's personal leadership. So far Liebknecht's foolhardiness has had a good effect. And under these circumstances I shall not take it amiss that he has let himself in for a new armistice,323 although this is the third case between the two of them of 'cad's fighting, when ended, is very soon mended'.

The copies of Zukunft follow enclosed. Unfortunately, the Reichstag debate on industrial legislation is very poorly reported in them. There is nothing more comical than Schweitzer's lecture on the socialist demands, culminating in the declaration that he favours trades freedomb up to Wagener, Miquel et Co.c

I am sending the B. Becker0 to Lessner today. I hear that the latest Fortnightly has an article on it.e

[^1]: Simply childish babble. Best by far was Bebel.524

[^2]: a Not everyone who wishes is a dictator. A paraphrase from Victor Hugo's Napoleon le petit. - b J. B. Schweitzer, [Speech in the North German Diet, 17 March, 1869], Die Zukunft, No. 66, 19 March, 1869. - c H. Wagener, [Speech in the North German Diet, 17 March, 1869], Die Zukunft, No. 66, 19 March, 1869; J. Miquel, [Speech in the North German Diet, 18 March 1869], Die Zukunft, No. 67, 20 March, 1869. - d B. Becker, Enthüllungen über das tragische Lebensende Ferdinand Lassalle's - e J. M. Ludlow, 'Ferdinand Lassalle, the German Social-Democrat', The Fortnightly Review, Vol. V, No. XXVIII, 1 April 1869.



