---
Volume: 43
Document_Title: "182. Engels to Marx. 7 April "
Page_Range: "293-295"
---

# 182. Engels to Marx. 7 April 



**[p. 256]**

I shall send you the Zukunft on Schweitzer and Liebknecht, and immediately if there is anything more in it; I assume that Liebknecht sent them a report straight away.

Your

F. E.

First published abridged in Der Briefwech- sel zwischen F. Engels und K. Marx, Bd. 4, Stuttgart, 1913 and in full in MEGA, Abt. III, Bd. 4, Berlin 1931

Printed according to the original

Published in English in full for the first time

181

MARX TO ENGELS

IN MANCHESTER

[London,] 7 April 1869

DEAR FRED,

Enclosed letter from Wilhelmchen.325 Return after reading. What shall I write him about the Peasant War*? Strohn is at the door, so addio.

Your

K. M.

182

ENGELS TO MARX

Manchester, 7 April 1869 Dear Moor,

The letters from Tussy and Wilhelmchen325 returned enclosed. The latter remains true to his principle of greatly scorning all

[^1]: First published in MEGA, Abt. Ill, Bd. 4, Printed according to the original Berlin, 1931 , . Published in English for the first time

[^2]: IN LONDON

[^3]: a F. Engels, The Peasant War in Germany.





**[p. 257]**

facts. Anybody who regards facts as important, who 'takes them into consideration', is someone who idolises success, a Bismarckian. So even if Schweitzer's 'dirty deeds' were as cheap as blackberries, he would not give us any facts about them, since, according to the principles of the People's Party,38 the only important thing about all these facts is that Wilhelm declares them to be 'dirty deeds'. It follows that, as Schweitzer's dirty deeds become enormous, the friction with him disappears. The fellow's logic is as amusing as the anticipation with which he still hopes for a proclamation from you, declaring him to be the angel of light, and naming Schweitzer as Satan.

It is also amusing that he wants to sell an essay3 of at least 4 or 5 printer's sheets for 1 '/2 groschen, and emphasises: not at a profit. 'Le représentant a dit: avec du fer et du pain on va jusqu'en Chine. Il n'a pas parlé de chaussures.'h And Wilhelm has not mentioned who will meet the loss when you sell things at '/s to 'A of cost price.

I have not yet written to Meissner, and I really cannot expect him to do the wondrous things that Liebknecht boldly ventures. Once Wilhelm has spoken with an expert about the printing costs, determined a rational price and made sure that he can raise the printing costs, I am not disinclined to let him print the stuff; tell him to write to me as soon as he can fulfil these conditions, then we shall arrange further steps.

The word has caused me to rack my brains; there really are some very difficult things in West Frisian.

The Bazleyite agitation in favour of state aid for cotton cultivation has not yet become so public here that there has been anything substantial in the newspapers. However, I shall soon send you some cuttings about the STRIKE in Preston,326 which the MASTERS directly provoked in order to bring about a general shut-down of the factories there. Since they cannot agree amongst themselves on SHORT TIME or complete closure, as some would then go on working and the others would be vexed at this, the sole form to bring about joint action amongst them is a STRIKE, since no manufacturer opposes the proposal to reduce wages. The cream of the thing is that these fellows, who admit that, for 2 years, they have been losing 1 to 2d. per lb of yarn or cloth, and still did not want to close down or work SHORT TIME, now declare that a 10% wage

[^1]: Snieuntojown is sun-jovn-to-jovn — sun-eve-to-eve.c

[^2]: a F. Engels, The Peasant War in Germany. - b 'The commercial traveller said: with iron and bread you can get as far as China. He did not mention boots.' - c See this volume, pp. 247, 251, 253.



