---
Volume: 43
Document_Title: "183. Marx to Engels. 8 April "
Page_Range: "295-296"
---

# 183. Marx to Engels. 8 April 

reduction, i.e., a saving of — to —- penny per £, is a matter of life or death!

Best greetings

Your

F. E.

First published abridged in Der Briefwech- Printed according to the original sei zwischen F. Engels und K. Marx, Bd. 4, „ , , , , „ , • , r , r- Stuttgart, 1913 and in full in MEGA, Abt. Published in English for the first III, Bd. 4, Berlin, 1931 t l m e

183

MARX T O ENGELS

IN MANCHESTER

[London,] 8 April 1869

T h e thing I liked best in Zukunft was the decision of the High Court of Justice on the freedom of assembly of the Prussian subjects/ This beats the French courts holo? And this scurvy Kirchmann with his scurvy critics,' is fine and successful. This is the same Kirchniann who, a few years ago, proved the immortality of the soul.' His works, in any case, are not immortal.

a mandataries - b 'Procès-verbaux du congrès de l'Association Internationale des Travailleurs réuni à Lausanne du 2 au 8 septembre 1867', p. 37. 'Troisième Congrès de l'Association Internationale des Travailleurs' Supplément au journal Le Peuple belge, 24 septembre 1868. - c 'In Bezug auf das Vereins und Versam- mlungs-Gesetz ist vom Obertribunal folgender Rechtsgrundsatz angenommen worden', Die Zukunft, No. 61, 13 March 1869. - d completely - e 'V. Kirchmann's Aesthetik', Die Zukunft, Nos. 71 and 72; 25 and 26 March 1869. (Anonymous review of J. H. v. Kirchmann's Aesthetik auf realistischer Grundlage, in two vols.) - f J. H. Kirchmann, Ueber die Unsterblichkeit. Ein philosophischer Versuch.

[^1]: DEAR FRED,

[^2]: I wrote to Wilhelmchen immediately today, as you suggested.84 I added that it would be good if the price could be fixed, even at a minimum, above the cost, so that this surplus could be used to pay for INDIVIDUAL CARDS OF MEMBERSHIP (Id. each). According to the Lausanne 1 4 3 and Brussels I 3 8 decisions, representatives cannot be admitted to congress if their commettants3 have not contributed to the national levy.b



