---
Volume: 43
Document_Title: "184. Marx to John Malcolm Ludlow. 10 April "
Page_Range: "296-297"
---

# 184. Marx to John Malcolm Ludlow. 10 April 



**[p. did]**

The enclosed letter327 shows the frame of mind of the workers in the Rhine province about the Barmen-Elberfeld Congress. Schweitzer had forgotten that Robespierre not answer accusations only when he was sure of his cause, or when he could answer with the guillotine. But the CORRUPTIBLE should not take the INCORRUPTIBLE as their model.

Salut.

Your

K. M.

First published in Der Briefwechsel zwischen Printed according to the original F. Engek und K. Marx, Bd. 4, Stuttgart, 29i3 Published in English for the first time

184

MARX TO JOHN MALCOLM LUDLOW328

IN LONDON

[London,] 10 April 1869

1 Modena Villas, Maitland Park, Haverstock Hill, N. W.

Dear Sir,

Being aware of your services to the working class, I should before this have given myself the pleasure of sending you my last work: Das Kapital (2nd and 3d volumes not yet published41), if I had known you to be a German reader.

In your article on Lassalle in the Fortnightly" you say first that Lassalle propagated my principles in Germany and say then that I am propagating 'Lassallean principles' in England. This would indeed be what the French call 'un échange de bons procédés'.h

In the volume I send you, you will find (Preface, p. VIII, note 1) the plain facts stated viz. that 'Lassalle has taken from my writings almost literally all his general theoretical developments', but that I 'have nothing whatever to do with his practical applications'.1

[^1]: 3 J. M. Ludlow, 'Ferdinand Lassalle, the German Social-Democrat', The Fortnightly Review, Vol. V. No. XXVIII, 1 April 1869. - b exchange of good manner - c See present edition, Vol. 35.



