---
Volume: 43
Document_Title: "185. Engels to Marx. 14 April "
Page_Range: "297-299"
---

# 185. Engels to Marx. 14 April 



**[p. 260]**

His practical nostrum, government aid to co-operative societies, I call by courtesy his. It belongs in fact to, and was zealously preached, at the time of Louis Philippe, by Monsieur Bûchez, Ex-St. Simonian, author of the Histoire Parlementaire de la Révolution Française, glorifying Robespierre and the Holy Inquisi- tion.162 M. Bûchez put forward his views, f.i. in the journal

L'Atelier, in opposition to the radical views of the French communism of that time.

Since you quote my reply to Proudhon: Misère de la Philosophie, you cannot but be aware from its last chapter that in 1847, when all the political economists and all the socialists concurred on one single point—the condemnation of trades' unions, I demonstrated their historical necessity.

Yours truly

Karl Marx J. M. Ludlow, Esq.

First published in: Marx and Engels, Reproduced from the original Works, First Russian Edition, Vol. XXVI, Moscow, 1935

185

ENGELS TO MARX

Manchester, 14 April 1869 Dear Moor,

Enclosed the Solingen letter329 returned, which is also significant because it clarifies Liebknecht's boasts about the 'establishment of associations in Solingen and Bourscheid'. The one in Solingen was already there,330 and the Solingen people established the one in Bourscheid.

The article on the Cretan insurrection331 in The Diplomatic Review* is the best thing they have published for a long time; ditto Urquhart's letter to Fuad Pasha.b But, as always, the source is not given for Brunnow's statement in the Greek dispatch,c i.e.,

[^1]: IN LONDON

[^2]: a 'The "Eastern Question" Closed. Summary from the Blue-Books', The Diplomatic Review, 7 April 1869. - b D. Urquhart,'Au grand Vizir, 16 août, 1867', The Diplomatic Review, 7 April 1869, in the column 'Insurrection en Candie. M. Urquhart à Fuad Pasha'. - c 'Le Ministre Grec à Londres à son Gouvernement', 29 December 1868, [extract] The Diplomatie Review, 7 April 1869.





**[p. 261]**

whether this dispatch is published in one of the official publica- tions, which is not easy to believe (unless a Greek book), or whether it found its way into Urquhart's hands along private channels. It would be interesting to know this, in case it is quoted later. The statement coincides completely with my constant claim that Russia will not unleash a war before 2 railways are completed to the Black Sea and the Pruth. They are now building like mad, and borrowing money like crazy—in the past 3 years—about £47,000,000! A major part of this represents the future costs of war.

However, in the light of these negotiations, Beust appears to be the Austrian Palmerston, and here too there could be a motive that would favour a speed-up of the action.

Doesn't Eichhoff still send you the Social-Demokrat'? It would be very important to see how Schweitzer is conducting himself at the moment in his own paper.

You will have read the article about Lassalle in the Fortnightly,3

and will have seen that you are regarded therein as the real papa of Lassallean and other socialism. Who is this Ludlow? If he could be prevailed upon to write an article in the Fortnightly about your book,b this would be better than nothing after all.— Congreve's reply to Huxley is the DULLEST, most stupid and most confused thing I have ever seen0; if this is the supreme wisdom of the Comtists, they can let themselves to be buried without further ado.

I still must not strain my eye too much, and I feel it a little again today, since I read too much by lamplight yesterday evening; so I am closing. On Saturday1* we received a very jolly letter from Tussy.

Best greetings to your wife and Jenny.

Your

F. E.

[^1]: First published abridged in Der Briefwech- sel zwischen F. Engels und K. Marx, Bd. 4, Stuttgart, 1913 and in full in MEGA, Abt. III, Bd. 4, Berlin, 1931

[^2]: Printed according to the original

[^3]: Published in English for the first time

[^4]: a J. M. Ludlow, 'Ferdinand Lassalle, the German Social-Democrat', The Fortnightly Revue, 1 April 1869. (See this volume, p. 259.) - b the first volume of Capital - c R. Congreve, 'Mr. Huxley on M. Comte', The Fortnightly Revue, Vol. V, No. XXVIII, 1 April 1869. - <• 10 April



