---
Volume: 43
Document_Title: "187. Engels to Marx. 16 April "
Page_Range: "301-303"
---

# 187. Engels to Marx. 16 April 



**[p. 264]**

From Diderot to Jules Janin must be what the physiologists call a regressive metamorphosis. French intellect before the French Revolution and under Louis Philippe!

I shall ask Collet about the source of Brunnow's maxim. 3 I would not be at all surprised if it were to be found in the English BLUE BOOK,173 in an English legation letter from Athens. I found similar things from Brunnow in a 1839 BLUE BOOK about the SYRIAN-EGYPTIAN AFFAIRS.b

Eichhoff always sends me the Schweitzerc in great masses. So he must be coming soon.

Mr T h o r n t o n has written a thick book about CAPITAL AND LABOUR. I haven't seen it yet, only extracts in The Daily News, to the effect that capital, as a force separate from labour, will fade away in the distant future.

Take care with your eye.

Salut.

Your

K. M.

First published in part in Der Briefwechsel Printed according to the original zwischen F. Engels und K. Marx, Bd. 4, , , . , , . ^ ,. , . „ „ r , Stuttgart, 1913 and in full in MEGA, Published in English in full for the Abt. Ill, Bd. 4, Berlin, 1931 f i r s t t i m e

187

Manchester, 16 April 1869

Dear Moor,

[^1]: ENGELS T O MARX 1 8 0

[^2]: IN LONDON

[^3]: Enclosed returned the 2 Ludlows 3 3 6 and the 2 'knavish tricks'.d

[^4]: From Wilhelm you sent only the few lines for me, not those to you to which you refer.333 If Wilhelm can't do more than this, then it is a miracle he did not do even worse in Barmen. 3 1 8 In a few days I shall send you reports in Zukunft about the general assembly/ which

[^5]: a See this volume, p. 260. - b Correspondence, 1839-1841, relative to the affairs of the East, and the conflict between Egypt and Turkey, in 4 parts. - c Der Social-Demohrat - d See this volume, p. 263. - e Die Zukunft, Nos. 76, 79, 80 and 86; 2, 6, 7 and 14 April 1869.





**[p. 265]**

appeared very late and show that the ground had already been well prepared in Schweitzer's association, and that the rebellion would have broken out even without Wilhelm.

The Ludlow correspondence very useful. Many thanks for the Rameau* which will give me much pleasure. At the moment I am reading almost nothing, in order finally to get my eye back on the right track; I have also cut down on my work at the office.

Wilhelm is badly mistaken if he thinks I would send him the Peasant Warb on the basis of such vague promises, so he could subsequently pop up and yell that, if I did not send the sum of umpteen pounds, it would be impossible to print the final sheets. His letter is real twaddle, and his calm assumption that you should pay his fees is impudent.

Fowler, the STIPENDIARY MAGISTRATE here, who had the Fenians brought into court shackled to one another, has relinquished his post. Leaving behind his wife and 2 children, he has eloped with the wife of Milne, the CHAIRMAN OF QUARTER SESSIONS (daughter of the late Brooks, the rich BANKER, and WORTH £80,000 IN HER OWN RIGHT), who, for her part, left 5 children with her beloved husband. Great consternation amongst the philistines.

Salut.

Your

F. E.

[^1]: This final story can only be explained etymologically; FOWLER from Fow L=Vogel.c

[^2]: First published in part in Der Briefwechsel Printed according to the original zwischen F. Engels und K. Marx, Bd. 4, Stuttgart, 1913 and in full in MEGA, Published in English in full for the Abt. Ill, Bd. 4, Berlin, 1931 f i r s t t i m e

[^3]: a D. Diderot, Le neveu de Rameau - b F. Engels, The Peasant War in Ger- many. - c This may be an allusion to the German word 'vögeln' ('have it off with').

[^4]: 11-983



