---
Volume: 43
Document_Title: "188. Marx to Engels. 16 April "
Page_Range: "303-304"
---

# 188. Marx to Engels. 16 April 



**[p. 188]**

MARX TO ENGELS

IN MANCHESTER

[London, 16 April 1869]

E. = Eichhoff—B.=Borkheim.337 I had written to Wilhelm84

saying he should cease his malicious chatter and scribbling directed against Eichhoff, since Borkheim himself has now recognised his error. Wilhelm, of course, does not know that I know his own insinuations against Eichhoff from Kugelmann and OLD Becker.361

Did you receive the Lafargue manuscript?11 It is not noted in today's letter from you.

Apropos: Hermann is now Stieber's official organ. Juch was forced to sell it, because of his 'diverse' creditors. In today's issue, Stieber starts right away by printing, on the first page, warrant notices, e.g., against the so-and-so Jaeger for illicit abortion of the foetus. Stieber is naturally represented here by a National-Liberal 'sub-Stieber'. I shall hunt out the carefully 'hushed-up' name.'

With regard to the eye: try washing it with alcohol. This helped me. To begin with it hurts a bit. For the FIRST attempt, dilute the alcohol a bit with water. That will show you how much you can stand it. Anyway, trying can't hurt.

Salut.

Your

K. M.

[^1]: First published in: Marx and Engels, Printed according to the original Works, First Russian Edition, Vol. XXIX, Moscow 1946 Published in English for the first time

[^2]: 3 Johann Philipp Becker - b See this volume, p. 262. - c Heinemann



