---
Volume: 43
Document_Title: "190. Marx to Engels. 24 April "
Page_Range: "305-306"
---

# 190. Marx to Engels. 24 April 



**[p. 190]**

MARX TO ENGELS180

IN MANCHESTER

London, 24 April 1869

DEAR FRED,

For ABOUT 12 days I have been suffering dreadfully with my old liver complaints. I am swigging the old medicine from Gumpert, but so far without success. As a result, I am completely paralysed mentally. This condition appears every spring. If I do not pass through it SAFELY, the CARBUNCLES come next. So please ask Gumpert if he knows of anything new for me. I have not smoked for a week. Ça suffit* to make clear to you my state.

It will take me a few days to get the information for Borchardt from Dupont. I cannot find the copies of Zukunft. Apropos. The new 'sub-Stieber' who now edits Hermann is named, or calls himself, 'Dr' Heinemann, and claims to come from Manchester. Do you know anything about him?

The worthy 'Hillmann' from Elberfeld has written to me. I'll send you his letter on Monday.b He attacks Liebknecht on account of his renewed armistice with Schweitzer, as a result of which the fruits of victory have been lost. Hillmann the Honorable was, in 1867, the rival worker candidate to Schweitzer.338 Hinc Mae lacrimae.c

Salut.

Your

K. M.

[^1]: First published abridged in Der Briefwech- sel zwischen F. Engels und K. Marx, Bd. 4, Stuttgart, 1913 and in full in MEGA, Abt. III, Bd. 4, Berlin, 1931

[^2]: Printed according to the original

[^3]: Published in English in full for the first time

[^4]: a that suffices - b 26 April - c Hence these tears (Terence, Andria, Act 1, Scene 1).



