---
Volume: 43
Document_Title: "193. Marx to Eleanor Marx. 26 April "
Page_Range: "307-309"
---

# 193. Marx to Eleanor Marx. 26 April 

In addition there are some things to put in order in the International this week, which won't get going without me.339

And finally, however bad I might feel, I have to complete CERTAIN SLIPS OF PAPER, since it is always difficult to continue, not with A NEW SUBJECT, but in the middle of a certain topic.

WITH ALL THAT, if I don't get better, I shall naturally have to go away.

More tomorrow.

Your

K. M.

First published in Der Briefwechsel zwischen Printed according to the original F. Engels und K. Marx, Bd. 4, Stuttgart, 1913

193

MARX TO ELEANOR MARX

[London,] 26 April 1869

You must really excuse my long silence. I am just head over heels immersed in work.

Now first as to your animals. Sambo has become almost inseparable from me, to make some way or other up for the absence of his supreme master. Blacky behaves always like a gentleman, but a very dull one, too. Tommy has again done everything in her power to prove the truth of the Malthus theory. Helenb will to-day, I suppose, murder the new offspring of that old hag. Whiskey, that great and good personage, was at first like Calipso not to be consoled, desperate at your departure. He declined the finest bones, never left your bedroom, and altogether exhibited all symptoms of the deep sufferings of a 'schöne Seele.c

Still, when your name is uttered, he gets into a fit.— Dicky has turned out a very fine singer, and we both encourage our respective musical talents by mutual 'exercises'. Sometimes, how-

[^1]: IN PARIS

[^2]: My dear little Quoquo,3

[^3]: a Eleanor Marx was called in the family by a humorous nickname of Chinese Prince Quo-Quo. - b Demuth - c 'beautiful soul'





**[p. 271]**

ever, when I commence whistling, Dicky treats me as Luther treated the devil—he turns his upon me. Jocko has come out again, but its temper is as bad as possible. Having ascertained that you are absent, it gave vent to every sort of spleen and baffled all Helen's attempts at coaxing. Another source of annoyance for Jocko, was the arrangement of the little garden—a world Jocko considered justly as its own station and domain—by the gardener. Jocko misses its little hills, caves, rents, and all that lively disorder it delighted in.

As to the other 'animals'—as they belong not to the dumb sort, but are rather of a most talkative kind, and perfectly able to account for their own doings—I shall just now not lose one syllable upon them.

On Friday evening,3 I was at dinner at Beesley's. Besides myself, there was Crompton, a barrister, and Jung and Dupont. Jung related his own doings. He told them what 'happy (literal!) speeches he made here, and what 'cutting hits' he made there. In this world of ' Weltschmerz,h discontent, and restlessness, it gladdens your heart to be acquainted with an individual that is 'happy' and, moreover, possesses not only one shirt, but Sarah and other good things into the bargain.

The Irishman I send you tomorrow. Many thanks to Cacadouc for her letter. Many kisses to Fouschtra.d

And compliments to the African.340 It will give him great pleasure to hear—if he has not already seen from the French papers, that the first 'black' ambassador of the United States has been appointed by Grant.341 Adio my little Quoquo.

Your

Old Nick

[^1]: First published in Russian in Voin- stvuyuzhchy materialist, Book 4, Moscow, 1925

[^2]: Reproduced from the original

[^3]: Published in English for the first time

[^4]: a 23 April - b weariness of life - c Laura Lafargue - d Charles Etienne Lafargue



