---
Volume: 43
Document_Title: "196. Engels to Marx. 7 May "
Page_Range: "310-311"
---

# 196. Engels to Marx. 7 May 



**[p. 273]**

journey will scarcely do her any harm; a change of air generally has a very favourable effect upon such coughs resulting from irritation of the larynx.

You can imagine the jubilation awakened here by the news that you would bring Tussy with you, YOU ARE NOW IN FOR IT and must bring her with you whatever happens. And if she can only come a few days after you, that doesn't matter, we could meet her at the station. You might come rather earlier for health reasons. You do not write how you are doing; if I were in your shoes, I would put everything aside and come here, the sooner the better; why let the business become chronic and torment you for so long when the cure is at hand any day.

Your

F. E.

Best greetings to your wife and Jenny. The Cigale did not arrive.

First published in Der Briefwechsel zwischen Printed according to the original F. Engels und K. Marx, Bd. 4, Stuttgart, . 1913 Published in English for the first

196

ENGELS TO MARX

Manchester, 7 May 1869

Dear Moor,

Your liver must be raging, since we neither see nor hear anything of you. How are things, and when are you coming? And is your wife well again?

He, i.e., W.,c apparently doesn't give any sign of life either.

A few numbers of Zukunft by post today, and enclosed the Belgian

[^1]: IN LONDON

[^2]: No answer from Wilhelm.3 I wrote to him in a BUSINESSLIKE manner to stop him indulging in any more dodges. If he does not reply soon, we shall have to see to it that Eichhoff prints the stuff.h

[^3]: a Wilhelm Liebknecht - b F. Engels, The Peasant War in Germany; see also this volume, p. 262. - c Wilhelm Eichhoff



