---
Volume: 43
Document_Title: "198. Engels to Marx. 10 May "
Page_Range: "314-315"
---

# 198. Engels to Marx. 10 May 



**[p. 277]**

dence to state that the GENERAL COUNCIL of the 'Internationale' no longer presides in London; that the leadership has now passed into the hands 'd'un personage très haut placé™ in Paris.b

For the subscription list for the Belgians it would be very good if you could also send us SOMETHING from Manchester, and quickly.

Apropos. In the report on the EMPLOYMENT of AGRICULTURAL CHILDREN (only 2 volumes out yet, Report I and EVIDENCE), the COMMISSIONERS, in their preliminary resume, present a variety of facts about the expropriation of the workers from common land, quite in my sense.

My best greetings to MRS LIZZY, KING COLE or COAL,C and Jo LLYMAYER.d

Your

Moor

First published abridged in Der Brief- Printed according to the original Wechsel zwischen F. Engels und K. Marx, Bd. 4, Stuttgart, 1913 and in full in Published in English for the first MEGA, Abt. Ill, Bd. 4, Berlin, 1931 t l m e

198

ENGELS TO MARX

[Manchester, 10 May 1869]

Dear Moor,

Letter and 2 consignments received. Best thanks. Enclosed with speed for tomorrow's meeting £1 in STAMPS from us here for your Belgian subscription. The Irish pamphlet caused a great sensation here. Ask Eichhoff if he can get the Peasant Ware printed by his brother/ Meissner is obviously frightened.

Here we are in a lovely industrial crisis, and despite the SHORT TIME, too much is still being produced. The only means the manufacturers have of agreeing among themselves on SHORT TIME and a shutdown is—a STRIKE by the workers. They have been working towards this in a planned way for 2 months now. The one

[^1]: IN LONDON

[^2]: a of a very high-ranking person - b 'Berlin', L'International, 22 April 1869 (in the column Dernières nouvelles). - c Samuel Moore - d Carl Schorlemmer - e F. Engels,

[^3]: The Peasant War in Germany. - f Albert Eichhoff



