---
Volume: 43
Document_Title: "199. Marx to Ludwig Kugelmann. 11 May "
Page_Range: "315-317"
---

# 199. Marx to Ludwig Kugelmann. 11 May 



**[p. 278]**

in Preston3 was the first attempt, now followed by the 5% wage reduction in East Lancashire.326 If the workers accept this, it will be followed by a new one, and so on, until they strike, for this is the sole aim. The honest Watts did not even mention this type of strike in his pamphlet,b et pour cause." When will you be coming?

Your

F. E.

First published in MEGA, Abt. Ill, Bd. 4, Printed according to the original Berlin, 1931 . , r , .. Published in English for the first time

199

MARX TO LUDWIG KUGELMANN29

London, 11 MAY 1869

Dear Kugelmann,

You must excuse my PROTRACTED SILENCE. First, I suffered for many weeks from the liver complaint that always afflicts me in the months of spring, which is all the more vexatious since it lays me almost completely fallow for intellectual work. Second, I was waiting impatiently from day to day for the photogram you want, which Mr Fehrenbach, a German clot, has still not delivered.d

My wife and my youngest daughtere are, at the moment, on a visit to the Lafargues in Paris, so we are very lonely here.

The Palmerston PAMPHLETS (mine)' I could not find for you with the best will in the world. Urquhart's PUBLICATIONS against Russia and Palmerston,348 though they contain a good deal that is correct, spoil everything again because of the CROTCHETS of the great 'David'.g

[^1]: IN HANOVER

[^2]: a See this volume, p. 257. - b J. Watts, Trade Societies and Strikes. - c and for good reasons - d See this volume, pp. 213 and 231. - e Eleanor Marx - f K. Marx, Lord Palmerston. - S an ironic allusion to David Urquhart





**[p. 279]**

Your article sent to Engels.3 As we are completely isolated from the RESPECTABLE PRESS, it will be difficult for us to act for you in this

f i e l d , BUT WE SHALL TRY. I intend to descend on you ABOUT the end of August with my daughter,1" and to lodge with you until the end of September wherever you want in Germany 49; even at the risk of suspending the completion of my manuscript.0 No longer period is, of course, at my disposal.

I have read your letter to Borkheim. You note quite rightly that the St Bartholomew chatter about the BELGIAN MASSACRES WILL NOT DO. Yet you, for your part, overlook the importance and particular meaning of these events. Belgium, you should know, is the sole country where sabres and muskets regularly, year in, year out, have the last word in every STRIKE.350 The matter is made clear in an address of the GENERAL COUNCIL here, which I have written in French and English.*1 It should be printed (in English) by tomorrow. I shall send it to you immediately.

In addition, I have just written an English address for the GENERAL COUNCIL of the International Association here to the NATIONAL LABOR UNION in the UNITED STATES e regarding the war with England,351 which the bourgeois Republicans over there want to stage JUST now.

Mr Meissner has had the (printed and corrected) manuscript of the 18th Brumaire since the end of January, but to date he has repeatedly delayed publication. This is pleasant too! He is waiting until the time for a possible effect has passed, for stupid bookselling reasons.

With best wishes to your dear wife and Fränzchen.

Yours

K. Marx

[^1]: First published abridged in Die Neue Zeit, Bd. 2, Nr. 13, Stuttgart, 1901-1902 and in full in Pisma Marksa k Kugelmanu (Letters of Marx to Kugelmann), Moscow- Leningrad, 1928

[^2]: Printed according to the original

[^3]: a See this volume, p. 314. - b Jenny Marx - c the second volume of Capi- tal - d K. Marx, 'The Belgian Massacres'. - e K. Marx, 'Address to the National Labour Union of the United States'.



