---
Volume: 43
Document_Title: "200. Engels to Hermann Engels. 13 May "
Page_Range: "317-319"
---

# 200. Engels to Hermann Engels. 13 May 



**[p. 200]**

ENGELS TO HERMANN ENGELS

IN ENGELSKIRCHEN

Manchester, 13 May 1869

Dear Hermann,

My best congratulations on the increase in the family, which pleases me all the more since this finally breaks the spell that caused you so much concern. You WILL NOW HAVE TO MAKE UP FOR LOST

TIME.

The current account is so far correct, but I cannot calculate how interest at 5% on 27,924.29.4 thalers should come to 1,396.25.5 instead of 1,396.7.6 thalers. But since this does not amount to more than a bottle of moselle wine it is not worth altering much.

Not a step further contractually with Gottfried.3 The lawyers are protracting the matter excessively; my lawyer advises me not to hurry, since Gottfried has more interest in coming to a conclusion than I have, which I believe too, because as soon as I have my money I can, if the worst came to the worst, always start up a business again and compete with him; to do this I don't need to start by collecting lots of samples and notes; I've got all that in my head. In the meantime, I have already taken the greater part of my money out of the business and invested in shares, and this in such a way that he himself is now short of money, and I have purchased shares from him for about £2,400; at first he encouraged me to draw funds liberally, but he got out of his depth when I drew about £7,500, and so he had to sell me these shares himself, as he held just the sort I needed.

I am very sorry that I was so deceived by the business with the reform of weights352 at your end. I thought that such a measure would not be introduced if it were not to be carried out absolutely and be made valid for all This, however, would have meant completely excluding yourselves from the market outside Ger- many, and I concluded that you were not very interested in business outside Germany. Had this not been the case, I would, as I mentioned to Adolfb 2 years ago, and to mother last year, have

[^1]: a Gottfried Ermen - b Adolf von Griesheim





**[p. 281]**

first asked you whether you would like to go into business outside Germany, and if so, to what extent we could come to an arrangement. But I had to assume the contrary, and therefore arranged my business with G. Ermen, and now, after this was arranged, mother writes to me that you have made this weight reform for Germany only. In this case I, in your place, would not have done it at all, since in Holland, Switzerland, Austria, Italy, etc., they want anything except dutiable weight, and when you expand your business outside Germany you will have just as much trouble and entanglement as before.

Mother writes to me that 4,000 thalers were credited to me there on 1 April. This will have reduced my account to about 17,000 thalers, which will be further reduced by the COPS, which have been bought cheap and will soon be ready. This I shall remit to you in thalers at the beginning of July, since it is high time that I also finally profited from the rate of exchange. If you would prefer STERLING, that's all right too, providing we share equally, you half and I half, the whole rate-of-exchange profit you have made since 1860 on my remittances, and also the 35-38% discount you stuck on me then.

Regarding the cops, there can be no question of obtaining them directly from the spinners, since these people don't know anything, and don't want to know anything, about forwarding and advices. You will have to pay the 11/?% brokerage of some commission house, which will be well worth while, as differences of quality arise at the spinners, of which you know nothing, etc. For instance, for years I purchased the 45 from Samuel Taylor & Son in Oldham, but now suddenly the same yarn from John Wagstaffe & Co. in Stalybridge, which you and we used to utilise, has suddenly become much cheaper, so I am buying it again. The 55s and finer yarns are all from John Knowles in Bolton (formerly J. 8c G. Knowles), and you will have to stick to this yarn, or to that of his brother G. Knowles & Son, Bolton. Will you select a commission agent or shall I suggest one? As soon as you have chosen one, I can explain everything to the man, face to face. Incidentally, I always had the name of the spinners placed on the invoices.

Among my papers I found the original contract with Peter Ermen of 1862, and wanted to send it to you; but I discover that it is the one dealing only with the business here, so it would be of no use to you. So I shall keep it here, but if you should ever need it, you now know where it is. The arrangement about there you have there.

