---
Volume: 43
Document_Title: "201. Marx to Engels. 14 May "
Page_Range: "319-320"
---

# 201. Marx to Engels. 14 May 



**[p. 282]**

G. Ermen said recently to his nephew Heinrich3: 'There is really nothing to be done with Anton,b his head is completely worn out.' I calculate that the fellow has damaged us here, directly and indirectly, to the tune of between £1,000 and £2,000 per year.

Heartiest greetings to Emma and the little ones; the same to mother.

Your

Friedrich

First published abridged in Deutsche Revue, Jg. 46, Bd. II, Stuttgart-Leipzig, 1921 and in full in: Marx and Engels, Works, First Russian Edition, Vol. XXVI, Moscow, 1935

201

MARX TO ENGELS

IN MANCHESTER

[London,] 14 MAY 1869

My wife will come back only sometime next week, so I cannot be in Manchester AT THE OPPORTUNE TIME.

Eichhoff left yesterday. His proposal — quant àc the Peasant War—is that his brother should publish the stuff and that he pay out the balance ON BEHALF of the 'International' at the next Book Fair, after subtracting his commission and costs.e He says: as far as his brother is concerned, you may regard the proposal as definitive.

With regard to Herr Vogt: When Liebknecht was arrested in Berlin, he left everything in confusion and, ditto, he did not clear up at the time of his EXPULSION. So 'he cannot remember' what happened to Vogt.1 Eichhoff finally discovered that a second-hand bookseller had been advertising the book for 2 years in his sales catalogue. He visited the fellow, named Kampfmeyer. He had sold them all, and 'ditto cannot remember' how the books came into his hands. So everything Liebknecht told us was—fiction, to put it mildly.

„ , t 45 55 1 h e COPS cost , „, „, , 1 6 3 / / 213/4d.

Printed according to the original

Published in English for the first time

[^1]: DEAR FRED,

[^2]: a Henry Ermen - b Anton Ermen - c regarding - d Albert Eichhoff - e See this volume, pp. 211 and 237. - f Ibid., pp. 106, 142, 189.



