---
Volume: 43
Document_Title: "202. Engels to Marx. 19 May "
Page_Range: "320-321"
---

# 202. Engels to Marx. 19 May 



**[p. 283]**

The press here is lousy. First, they have suppressed like one man every word of our Belgian MISSIVE a (after deliberately publishing last week some stupid lines in the sense of Cherval, probably written by the 'police member' of the Brussels special committee); and not only that, they have ditto like one man suppressed our Address to the AMERICAN LABOR UNION b (written by me, approved last Tuesday0), although this is against war between the UNITED STATES and England.351 But there are things in it that these blackguards do not like.

Salut.

Your

K. M.

First published abridged in Der Briefwech- Printed according to the original sei zwischen F. Engels und K. Marx, Bd. 4, . , . , . , . . Stuttgart, 1913 and in full in MEGA, Published in English for the first Abt. Ill, Bd. 4, Berlin, 1931 t l m e

202

ENGELS TO MARX

Manchester, 19 May 1869

Dear Moor,

I must congratulate you on not having come here last week in this lousy weather. But this time you should really come.

About the Peasant War when we meet. The address about Belgium is very good, and that for the Americans even better.0 I saw them in the Bee-Hive.

Please bring with you the two numbers of the Prussian General Staff Report of 1866;e I must compare them with the Austrian ones,' which show up some pretty Prussian exaggerations.

[^1]: IN LONDON

[^2]: a K. Marx, 'The Belgian Massacres'. - b K. Marx, 'Address to the National Labour Union of the United States'. - c 11 May - d K. Marx. 'The Belgian Massacres' and 'Address to the National Labour Union of the United States'. - e Der Feldzug von 1866 in Deutschland. Redigirt von der kriegsgeschichtlichen Abtheilung des Großen Generalstabes; Der Feldzug der preußischen Main-Armee im Sommer 1866. - ! Österreichs Kämpfe im Jahre JS66..Nach Feldacten bearbeitet durch das k. k. Generalstabs-Bureau für Kriegsgeschichte, Bd. I-V.



