---
Volume: 43
Document_Title: "207. Marx to His Daughter Jenny. 2 June "
Page_Range: "327-328"
---

# 207. Marx to His Daughter Jenny. 2 June 

in the case of an Imperial Invasion of 'Fatherland', Prussia could become a dangerous antagonist of France. Addio.

Old Nick

First published in: Marx and Engels, Reproduced from the original Works, Second Russian Edition, Vol. 32, Moscow 1964 Published in English for the first time

207

MARX TO HIS DAUGHTER JENNY360

IN LONDON

[Manchester,] 2 June 1869

My dear Emperor,

The thing under the arm was no carbuncle, but another sort of abscess, which bothered me much but, since yesterday, is quickly healing. It was a fortune I was at Manchester. Otherwise, it might have turned out a troublesome affair. I am now quite in good health.

I hope to be with you in the course of next week. Tussy will probably somewhat prolong her stay at Manchester.353 After the restraint at Paris,361 she feels here quite at her ease like a new-fledged bird.

I hope Lessner's departure to Brazil is not yet definitively decided upon. I regret very much being not able to do something for him. With your usual kindness you seem to have sacrificed yourself in the interminable tête-à-tête of Sunday last. As to Lafargue's paper,2831 feel rather uneasy. On the one hand, I should like to oblige Blanqui. On the other hand, my other occupations will not allow me to do much for them, but, above all things, I fear lest old Lafarguea should suspect me to push his son to premature political action and make him neglect his professional duties.b As it is, he has not much reason to delight in his connexion with the Marx family.

[^1]: François Lafargue - b See this volume, pp. 287-88.



