---
Volume: 43
Document_Title: "210. Engels to Marx. 22 June "
Page_Range: "332-333"
---

# 210. Engels to Marx. 22 June 



**[p. 210]**

ENGELS TO MARX180

IN LONDON

Manchester, 22 June 1869

Dear Moor,

I don't know whether you have such fine weather there as we have here, but daylight has been so exhausted that, on the longest day, we had to turn the gas on at 4 o'clock in the afternoon. And it is devilish to read or write when you don't know whether it is day or night.

Tussy is very jolly. This morning the whole family went SHOPPING; tomorrow evening they want to go to the theatre. She has read right through Hermann und Dorothea,2 not without difficulty because of the idyllic philistines' twaddle. Now I have given her the younger Edda, which contains several nice stories; then she can read from the elder one362 the songs of Sigurd and Gudrun. She also plays the piano sedulously. I have also read Danish Kjämpeviserh with her.

So that is Wilhelm's entire success: that the male-female line and the all-female line of the Lassalleans have united!36S He really has achieved something there. Schweitzer will naturally be re-elected— in view of the precipitacy with which the business has been conducted—and then he will, once again, be the chosen one of general suffrage. Wilhelm is also preserving an obstinate silence about this event.

The Urningc you sent me is a very curious thing. These are extremely unnatural revelations. The paederasts are beginning to count themselves, and discover that they are a power in the state. Only organisation was lacking, but according to this source it apparently already exists in secret. And since they have such important men in all the old parties and even in the new ones, from Rösing to Schweitzer, they cannot fail to triumph. Guerre aux cons, paix aus trous-de culd will now be the slogan. It is a bit of luck that we, personally, are too old to have to fear that, when this party wins, we shall have to pay physical tribute to the victors. But

[^1]: a by Goethe - b epics - c K. H. Ulrichs, ' Argonauticus'. Zastrow und die Urninge des pietistischen, ultramontanen und freidenkenden Lagers. - d War on the cunts, peace to the arse-holes



