---
Volume: 43
Document_Title: "211. Marx to Engels. 26 June "
Page_Range: "333-335"
---

# 211. Marx to Engels. 26 June 

the younger generation! Incidentally it is only in Germany that a fellow like this can possibly come forward, convert this smut into a theory, and offer the invitation: introite," etc. Unfortunately, he has not yet got up the courage to acknowledge publicly that he is 'that way', and must still operate coram publico 'from the front', if not 'going in from the front' as he once said by mistake. But just wait until the new North German Penal Code recognises the droits du culb; then he will operate quite differently. Then things will go badly enough for poor frontside people like us, with our childish penchant for females. If Schweitzer could be made useful for anything, it would be to wheedle out of this peculiar honourable gentleman the particulars of the paederasts in high and top places, which would certainly not be difficult for him as a brother in spirit.

At the end of the week, Schorlemmer will be going to Germany for 4 weeks via Grimsby and Rotterdam.

The STRIKES here in the cotton factories326 have been over since this morning, when the Oldhamites went back. So overproduction has no restraints any more.

Close of post. Best greetings.

Your

F. E.

211

MARX TO ENGELS

[London,] 26 June 1869

With THANKS I notify the £90, first half-notes. Enclosed for Tussy 2 LETTERS. She must reply to tight-fisted Collet.

[^1]: First published in Der Briefwechsel zwischen Printed according to the original F. Engels und K. Marx, Bd. 4, Stuttgart, 1923 Published in English in full for the first time

[^2]: IN MANCHESTER

[^3]: DEAR FRED,

[^4]: a enter - b rights of the arse-hole





**[p. 297]**

The enclosed letter from Eichhoff shows, unfortunately, that his brother has become skittish.364 Write me what should happen now.

The last proof-sheets finally arrived and have been returned, ditto preface sent.3 It now turns out that the procrastination was for two reasons: 1. Mr Wigand in Leipzig is the printer, and 2. Mr Meissner, for his part, does not keep a watch on the Leipziger. He really believed that I had received the last sheets direct from Leipzig several weeks ago. German sloppiness!

The honourable Wilhelmb is maintaining a deep silence. Today the weather finally TURNS to the better.

I have received an invitation from the SOCIETY OF ARTS 35fi for a conversazione in Kensington Museum on 1 July. This takes place only once a year, and is attended by the entire London aristocracy, from the court down to, etc. So Jennychen will have a chance to see this rabble.365

Addio.

Your

K. M.

While re-arranging my bookshelves a small old edition of Rochefoucauld's Réflexions etc. fell into my hands again. Leafing through it, I found:

Thus, pinched by Sterne from Rochefoucauld366 ! And these are nice too:

[^1]: 'La gravité est un mystère du corps, inventé pour cacher les défauts de l'esprit'c [56].

[^2]: 'Nous avons tous assez de force pour supporter les maux d'autrui' [5]. 'Les vieillards aiment à donner de bons préceptes, pour se consoler de n'être plus en état de donner de mauvais exemples' [20].

[^3]: 'Les rois font des hommes comme des pièces de monnaye; ils les font valoir ce qu'ils veulent; et l'on est forcé de les recevoir selon leur cours, et non pas selon leur véritable prix' [126].

[^4]: 'Quand les vices nous quittent, nous nous flattons de la créance que c'est nous qui les quittons' [39].

[^5]: 'La modération est la langueur et la paresse de l'âme, comme l'ambition en est l'activité et l'ardeur' [63].

[^6]: 'Nous pardonnons souvent à ceux qui nous ennuyent, mais nous ne pouvons pardonner à ceux que nous ennuyons' [65].

[^7]: 'Ce qui fait que les amants et les maîtresses ne s'ennuyent point d'êtres ensemble, c'est qu'ils parlent toujours d'eux-mêmes'd [67].

[^8]: a K. Marx, The Eighteenth Brumaire of Louis Bonaparte. - b Wilhelm Liebknecht - c 'Gravity is a secret of the body, invented to hide the defects of the mind.' - d 'We are all strong enough to bear the sufferings of others.'—'The elderly like to give good precepts, to console themselves for no longer being able to set bad

[^9]: 12-1)8.3



