---
Volume: 43
Document_Title: "212. Engels to Marx. 27 June "
Page_Range: "335-336"
---

# 212. Engels to Marx. 27 June 



**[p. 298]**

I attended the TRADES UNIONS MEETING LAST WEDNESDAY,3 in Exeter Hall.367 Beesly delivered a really fine, very impudent SPEECH, recalling the June days (it was 24 JUNE).3 8 The newspapers naturally KILLED, i.e., SUPPRESSED, him. In addition, he committed the crime of speaking very contemptuously of English journalists.

First published abridged in Der Brief- Printed according to the original Wechsel zwischen F. Engels und K. Marx, Bd. 4, Stuttgart, 1913 and in full in Published in English for the first MEGA, Abt. Ill, Bd. 4, Berlin, 1931 t l m e

212

ENGELS TO MARX

Manchester, 27 June 1869

Dear Moor,

Enclosed the other halves of the notes in all haste. Thank Jenny in my name and Tussy's for her two letters. I shall write you more tomorrow or Tuesday, and also return Eichhoff.b But it is a crying shame that when the German workers have found a publisher, he cannot even hold on.

Best greetings from all of us to all of you. Sam Moore has been sentenced to be fed by Tussy at tea this evening, and she plans to

[^1]: IN LONDON

[^2]: examples.'—'Kings stamp men like money; they determine their worth as they will; and one is forced to accept them at their exchange-rate and not at their real price.'—'When vices abandon us, we flatter ourselves with the belief that we have abandoned them.'—'Moderation is the indifference and indolence of the soul, as ambition is its activity and ardour.'—'We often pardon those who bore us, but we cannot pardon those whom we bore.'—'Lovers and mistresses never bore one another when together, because they always speak of themselves.' - a 23 June - b See the previous letter.



