---
Volume: 43
Document_Title: "213. Engels to Marx. 1 July "
Page_Range: "336-337"
---

# 213. Engels to Marx. 1 July 

give him bread and butter and TREACLE, and to smear the syrup in his beard. This is the latest.

Your

F. E.

First published abridged in Der Brief- Printed according to the original Wechsel zwischen F. Engels und K. Marx, Bd. 4, Stuttgart, 1913 and in full in Published in English for the first MEGA, Abt. Ill, Bd. 4, Berlin, 1931 t l m e

213

ENGELS TO MARX180

IN LONDON

Manchester, 1 July 1869

Dear Moor,

Hurrah! Today doux commerce* is at an end, and I am a free man.369 All the main points I settled with dear Gottfriedb

yesterday; he gave way on everything. Tussy and I celebrated my first free day this morning with a long walk in the fields. In addition, my eye is considerably better, and with a bit of gentle treatment should soon be completely back to normal.

The accounts and the lawyers will keep me on the run for another few weeks, but this will not be anything like the time lost so far.

Beesly really seems to be improving.0 Just think what respect he still had for the English press that evening when he visited you.

Eichhoff returned enclosed.364 Wilhelmd now appears to be pushing him forward in order to beg forgiveness. In the meantime, war has been declared again between Schweitzer and Wilhelm, and there is rebellion in the General Association of German Workers. But always the bold expectation that we should take the side of Wilhelm and the People's Party.38 Wilhelm would do well to read the Manifesto" on the attitude of the workers' party, if reading or anything else would do any good! I am very anxious to see how this brawl develops; in any case, it will produce

[^1]: a sweet business - b Gottfried Ermen - c See this volume, p. 298. - d Wilhelm Liebknecht - e K. Marx and F. Engels, Manifesto of the Communist Party.

[^2]: 12»



