---
Volume: 43
Document_Title: "215. Marx to Engels. 3 July "
Page_Range: "340-343"
---

# 215. Marx to Engels. 3 July 



**[p. 303]**

quite differently than in my gloomy room in the WAREHOUSE, looking out on to the courtyard of an ale-house. I live ten minutes walk from my club, just far enough away from the German and lodging-house quarters to be sure that I am not overrun. At 5 or 6 in the evening I dine at home, the cooking is really quite good, and then generally go for a few hours to the club to read newspapers, etc. But I shall only be able to organise this properly when I no longer have to go to the city because of the accounts, etc.

But now adieu, dear Mother; give my heartiest greetings to all, and if you have plans to travel let me know, so that I can, if possible, adjust to them; as I am situated at the moment, you should not take me into consideration.

From my heart, your son

Friedrich

First published in Deutsche Revue, Jg. 46, Printed according to the original Bd. II, Stuttgart-Leipzig, 1921

Published in English for the first time

215

[London,] 3 July 1869

Best congratulations upon your escape from Egyptian bondage3! In honour of this event, I drank 'one glass too many', but late in the evening, not before sunrise like the Prussian gendarmes.

Enclosed a momentous letter from Wilhelm,872 from which you will see that he has suddenly appointed himself my curator, and lays down this and that which I 'must' do.

I must come to their August congress,573 must show myself to the German workers; must send the International cards immediately (after they had not replied to two queries on the subject in 3 months), must muck the Communist Manifesto about; must come to Leipzig!

[^1]: MARX TO ENGELS124

[^2]: IN MANCHESTER

[^3]: DEAR FRED,

[^4]: 3 Exodus 13:14; see also this volume, p. 299.





**[p. 304]**

It is really very naive that, in the same letter in which he complains that he cannot pay back the £2 (which I gave to Eccarius for him), he offers me my fare to Germany. Toujours le même!"

He appears to be morally indignant about you. I have already replied to him that he has misinterpreted your letter. The fellow simply cannot grasp that convictions and business management are not poles apart, as he assumes in his newspaper administration, and as others have to assume if they do not wish to become

SUSPECTS.

Our Wilhelm has a sanguine nature and is a liar. So there are probably, once again, exaggerations in his description of the victory over Schweitzer. Still, there must be something in it. Schweitzer would not have returned to the Church of Hatzfeldt had he not been shaky in his own association. On the other hand, he speeded up the general dissolution by the doltish management of his latest coup d'état.31'3 I hope that, as a result of this business, the German workers' movement will finally leave the stage of Lassallean infantile disorders behind, and that the Lassallean residue will decay in sectarian isolation.

As for Wilhelm's various 'absolute commandments', I have answered him TO THIS EFFECT: I feel absolutely no need to show myself to the German workers, and will not go to their congress. Once they have really joined the International and given themselves a proper party organisation — and the Nuremberg Congress 13a showed how little trust can be put in just promises, tendencies, etc.— then there will be an opportuni- ty BY AND BY In addition, it must be CLEARLY understood that the new organisation must be, for us, neither People's Party38 nor Lassallean church—as little the one as the other. If we went now we would have to speak against the People's Party, and that would not please Wilhelm and Bebel! And if they—mirabile dictuh— would themselves admit this, we would have to throw our weight directly onto the scales against Schweitzer and Co., instead of having the change-over appear as a free action by the workers.

As far as polishing up the Manifesto11 is concerned, we would consider this as soon as we have seen the decisions of their congress, etc.

He should hang on to his £2 and not worry about my fare. I praise their action against Becker.d

[^1]: a Always the same! - b strange to say - c K. Marx and F. Engels, Manifesto of the Communist Party. - d Johann Philipp Becker





**[p. 305]**

That's all on that. About Meissner it is probably best if I speak to him. Incidentally, if you have time (that is, if it doesn't bother your eye) to finish something, it is easier to negotiate with a manuscript rather than without one. I know enough to know that Meissner prefers 5 sheets to 2. The shorter the pamphlet, the harder to sell, as he told me himself.

What do you say about the way that the virtuous Gladstone and puritanical Bright acted with regard to Overend, Gurney, et Co.?227

Remarkable, also, was Bruce's declaration on the Mold shoot- ing,374 which was not so INNOCENT as the Manchester papers reported. So the RIOT ACT375 need not be read. It is enough for some fox-hunting UNPAID MAGISTRATE to whisper in the ear of an officer, and the peppering starts. Yet even this is not necessary. The soldiers may use their RIFLES IN SELF-DEFENCE (and they themselves judge whether this is necessary). But then, shouldn't the ARMS ACTS 37f> be repealed, so everybody would be able to use his own RIFLE in SELF-DEFENCE against the soldiers?

The Gurney business, or rather the attitude of the Ministry towards it, ditto the Mold affair, finally the ministerial trickery with Lamuda and other scoundrels against the TRADES-UNIONS- BILL3'7— have made a mighty big dent in the fascination held by the names Gladstone and Bright amongst the workers here in London.

Laura was ill and bed-riddèn for 14 days, but is said to be better now. They have given notice on their rooms, and in October will move to a more airy locality (Montmartre or some such).

El Moro

[^1]: BEST COMPLIMENTS TO ALL.

[^2]: First published abridged in Der Briefwech- sel zwischen F. Engels und K. Marx, Bd. 4, Stuttgart, 1913 and in full in MEGA, Abt. III, Bd. 4, Berlin, 1931

[^3]: Printed according to the original

[^4]: Published in English in full for the first time



