---
Volume: 43
Document_Title: "219. Engels to Jenny Marx ( daughter). 9 July "
Page_Range: "347-349"
---

# 219. Engels to Jenny Marx ( daughter). 9 July 



**[p. 219]**

ENGELS TO JENNY MARX (DAUGHTER)382

IN LONDON

Manchester, 9 July 1869

*Dear Jenny, * My best thanks for your two kind letters383 and for the beer which arrived safely on Wednesday and was tried on Thursday after a day's settling. I have just been into the cellar to fetch another bottle up, it is very nice, and Lizziea especially likes it because it reminds her more of her beloved 'Bavarian' than the regular Vienna beer. There is no doubt, it will soon be emptied, and the more so as I am afraid it will not keep very long in hot weather, being lighter than the common Vienna beer, so that there will be plenty of pretexts for taking frequent 'headers' into the cellar and fetching up a bottle or two of 'that same'.

*I, and indeed all of us, were very much amused with your description of that highly aristocratic soirée. That little bit of a printed caution about mobbing, and the fact of its being sent round with the invitations,384 is more than characteristic of 'that lot', as we say here in Lancashire. Very good, too, on the part of these Britishers, to describe this, their own darling 'vulgar habit' as one 'common throughout Europe'—common, indeed, wherever the British snob—and the snob and the flunkey is at the bottom of all of them—puts his foot! * I'd like to see any place on the Continent where such a circular would be issued on such an occasion. To be sure, it clearly follows from the entire story that the admixture of rich UPSTARTS has also begun winning the upper hand in aristocratic areas, AND IN FACT, IS NOW SWAMPING 'SOCIETY'. So much the better. Your description, like the circular, fits our Manchester MOCK-'SOCIETY' completely, and the more the smart mob in London Manchesterises, the more gratifying for us.

* I am just now in the honey-moon of my newly-recovered liberty, and you will not require to be told that I enjoy it amazingly.369 As my eye, although very much better, still requires a little * careful treatment, * I have not yet settled down to regular work and indeed shall not be able to do so until all my business

[^1]: a Lizzy Burns.



affairs are regularly settled, which will take about a month. In the meantime I walk about a good deal with Tussy and as many of the family, humane and canine, as I can induce to go with us. We have just come back from a long walk through the fields to Heaton Chapel, about 5 or 6 miles the way we went, Tussy, Lizzie, Mary Ellen," myself and two dogs, and I am specially instructed to inform you that these two amiable ladies had two glasses of beer a-piece (this is the vernacular Lancashire in which I got my orders). No wonder I had to bring them home by the train (we have a station about seven minutes' walk from our house), but no sooner arrived, than they walked, in common with me, into your Lager-Beer. Now they are getting their tea ready, or getting themselves ready for it, I don't know which, and after that there will be a reading of Irish novels which is likely to last till bedtime or nearly so, unless relieved by a bit of talk about the 'convicted nation'.b Anyhow, they seem to like it, and so it's all right to me.*

Meanwhile they all send you the heartiest greetings, and I'll do the same.

Your with all my heart

F. Engels

If you and Moor don't go to Germany before the end of this month or if you don't return before the end of September, I may possibly meet you there somewhere.c

[^1]: First published in Friedrich Engels. 1820- Printed according to the original 1970. Referate, Diskussionen, Dokumente, . Hanover 1971 Published in English in full for the first time

[^2]: a Mary Ellen Burns - b Irish - c See this volume, pp. 341-42.



