---
Volume: 43
Document_Title: "221. Marx to François Lafargue. 10 July "
Page_Range: "351-352"
---

# 221. Marx to François Lafargue. 10 July 

I would ask you from now on always to send your letters to my home address, given above.

Recently Marx sent me your study on the treatment of exanthematous disorders by means of ventilation. In my opinion you still apply the ventilation much too moderately. Here the window of the bedroom is kept open between 3 and 12 inches without further ado, without a screen, etc., and care is only taken that the patient is not lying in a direct draught—and this summer or winter. In addition extractum carnis* and port in big doses, otherwise practically no medicine. My servant-girl was treated thus last November for typhoid fever, and Marx's two unmarried daughters last summer for scarlet fever. I thought that this method of treatment had long been generally adopted in Germany too but, according to your account, the old keeping-warm and stink-hole method still seems to predominate.

Hoping to hear from you soon. With best wishes

Yours

F. Engels

First published in: Marx and Engels, Printed according to the original Works, First Russian Edition, Vol. XXVI, „ , ,. . , . _ . . . . r „ r Moscow 1934 Published in English in full for the first time

221

Paris, 10 July 1869

My dear friend,

The first thing that struck me is that Laura is still suffering greatly, and her health is very delicate.

[^1]: MARX TO FRANÇOIS LAFARGUE80

[^2]: IN BORDEAUX

[^3]: I arrived here on Thursdayb evening and I shall return to London on Monday.381

[^4]: In your letter, which I have reread, you seem to believe that Madame Marx is also here. That is a mistake.0

[^5]: 1 meat extract - b Marx wrote Thursday instead of Tuesday. See this volume, p. 315.

[^6]: c See this volume, p. 284.



