---
Volume: 43
Document_Title: "222. Marx to Engels. 14 July "
Page_Range: "352-354"
---

# 222. Marx to Engels. 14 July 



**[p. 315]**

I begin with this remark because it explains the apparent apathy of our Paul. He has not interrupted his studies, but he has neglected to take the necessary measures to pass his examinations.

To my reproaches on this subject he replied—and I must say had every right to reply—the following: 'Before I think of the future, I must occupy myself with the present. The state of Laura's health demanded a great deal of care on my part. It did not even permit me to be absent for any length of time. In order not to cause anxiety to you or to my family, I wanted to conceal all this. Laura and myself, we even did our best not to rouse the suspicions of Madame Marx.'

I have talked to a very good doctor whom Paul invited to the house. He told me that it was absolutely necessary for Laura to go to the seaside, and he suggested Dieppe because a prolonged voyage would do her harm.

Besides, Paul has promised me that on his return from Dieppe he will do his best to cut short the time necessary to pass his doctorate.

I must tell you frankly that the state of my daughter's health is a matter of serious concern to me.

Our grandson" is a charming boy. I have never seen a better shaped child's head.

My compliments to Madame Lafargue. Accept, my dear friend, the most sincere compliments of your

Karl Marx

222

MARX TO ENGELS

IN MANCHESTER

[London,] 14 JULY 1869

Arrived in Paris last Tuesday evening, left again Monday (12 July).381 I managed to remain completely incognito; on landing

[^1]: First published in : Marx and Engels, Printed according to the original Works, Second Russian Edition, Vol. 32, Moscow 1964 Translated from the French

[^2]: DEAR FRED,

[^3]: a Charles Etienne Lafargue





**[p. 316]**

at Dieppe I passed first the douaniers3 and police without them intervening, though, curiously enough, several innocent people (including a YANKEE with very black hair, who was taken for an Italian) were asked for their passports and, in accordance with the latest regulations, the Frenchmen had to give their names. I lodged as A. Williams in Paris, Rue St Placide, maison meublée0

(next street to Lafargue).

Laurachen has been suffering from a really serious illness. She is now convalescing, and is going tomorrow with Paul, etc., to Dieppe, where they will spend a month at the seaside, and will perhaps come over to England later. My BUSINESS in Paris was to have a look at the status rerum,c following a letter from Lafargue senior, and then write to the senior (from Paris), after consulta- tions with the junior/ Because of Laura's state of health, Lafargue has naturally been completely absorbed by domestic worries, but has promised most solemnly to take the necessary steps as soon as Laura is completely restored. The senior also put his foot in it in his letters to Paris. I shall see what he writes to me in his reply.

Le petit" has left Paris (where he was present incognito at all the crowd-gatherings, etc.) for Brussels and, under the circumstances, his absence was by no means unpleasant for me. Because of this, the paper has been 'postponed'.

I saw neither Schily nor ANYBODY ELSE, but confined myself entirely to the FAMILY, with whom I sauntered through more or less the whole of Paris. The bank where they live (Faubourg St Germain, etc.), has not changed much and is not Haussmannised.387 Then, as now, narrow stinking streets. However, things look much changed on the other bank of the Seine, where the CHANGE already starts with the front of the Louvre.

The females appear to have become much uglier. The heat was unbearable, particularly in the train. The biggest sensation, to the great annoyance of the democratic opposition (including the irréconciliables), was caused by Raspail's short SPEECH,388 in which he demanded the release of his election committee. He spoke of the injustice de la justice. Thereupon INTERRUPTIONS. He continued: Niez-vous les injustices commises contre moi par la Restauration? Par ce ridicule Louis-Philippe?1 etc. He wanted no peines,g was ready à brûler le code civil and le code

[^1]: a customs officials - b furnished house - c state of affairs - d See this volume, p. 309. - e Louis Auguste Blanqui - f Do you deny the injustices committed against me by the Restoration? By this ridiculous Louis Philippe? - 8 punishments



