---
Volume: 43
Document_Title: "223. Marx to Ludwig Kugelmann. 15 July "
Page_Range: "354-355"
---

# 223. Marx to Ludwig Kugelmann. 15 July 



**[p. 317]**

pénal"; in the meantime, the punishments of officials should be converted into fines (i.e., deductions from salary) and should begin with M. le préfet de la police, namely because of the 'orgies infernales de casse-tête'}" T h e language of the old man was in violent contrast to the ROUNDABOUT prattle of the faux jeunes hommes.0

And the next day, the government released his Comité. T h e sessions of the Corps législatif were relatively very stormy. For this reason, Bonaparte has adjourned.

Tussychen must also write to me about her plans for staying in Manchester. Schnaps, d a charming little lad, sends heartiest greetings.

Addio, OLD BOY.

II Moro

MY COMPLIMENTS TO MRS e BURNS.

Kirst published abridged in Der Briefwech- sel zwischen F. Engels und K. Marx, Bd. 4, Stuttgart, 1913 and in full in MEGA, Abt. III, Bd. 4, Berlin, 1931

223

London, 15 July 1869

Dear Kugelmann,

Printed according to the original

Published in English for the first time

[^1]: MARX T O LUDWIG KUGELMANN 2 9

[^2]: IN HANOVER

[^3]: Your letter of 2 June arrived here while I was in Manchester.353

[^4]: They forgot to send it on to me, and later completely forgot about its existence. I have only just put my hands on it, after my attention was drawn to it by your letter of 6 July. T h e latter letter I also received yesterday since, owing to the indisposition of my Laura, I had been for a week incognito in Paris f where, BY THE BY, a growing movement is manifest. Otherwise, I should have hastened to write to you in your time of suffering.

[^5]: a to burn the civil code and the penal code - h hellish orgies of bludgeoning' - c hypocritical young men - d Charles Etienne Lafargue - e Here the MS is damaged. - f See the previous letter.



