---
Volume: 43
Document_Title: "225. Marx to Engels. 17 July "
Page_Range: "359-360"
---

# 225. Marx to Engels. 17 July 



**[p. 322]**

Best regards to Emma, the little ones, and all brothers and sisters. Enclosed 2 lines for E. Blank.

Your

Friedrich

First published abridged in Deutsche Printed according to the original Revue, Jg 46 Bd. II Stuttgart-Leipzig, P u blished in English for the first 1921 and in full in: Marx and Engels, • Works, First Russian Edition, Vol. XXVI, Moscow, 1935

225

MARX TO ENGELS

IN MANCHESTER

[London,] 17 JULY 1869

The heat here is killing. With you too? Enclosed a mass of stuff from Eichhoff, Wilhelm,3 Fritzsche.391

Dear old Wilhelm—as always happily disposing of what is not his—naturally refers Fritzsche to me, in order to touch the TRADES UNIONS here for £300, and he guarantees repayment! And quite pointlessly puts me in the embarrassing position of having to turn down Fritzsche!

In addition, he doesn't even seem to read properly the letters sent him. I sent him 900 cards and told him the annual subscription was Id. per card. Of these 900, I placed 500 gratis at his DISPOSITION, so the fellows would at least be eligible for representation at the congress.379 And now he asks me whether fixed annual dues must be paid.

The tough conditions under which Schweitzer returned to the bosom of Hatzfeldt are shown very vividly by the fact that he has been forced to allow Mende to start a row with the Internation- al S92 in the Social-Demokrat. He himself knows best how dangerous this operation is for him!

[^1]: DEAR FRED,

[^2]: a Wilhelm Liebknecht



