---
Volume: 43
Document_Title: "226. Engels to Marx. 18 July "
Page_Range: "360-361"
---

# 226. Engels to Marx. 18 July 



**[p. 323]**

Incidentally, that old jackass Becker 3 had no need to involve the International officially in this dissolution process of the Lassallean church, instead of maintaining objective reserve. T h e old brute does a lot of damage with his longing for action.

Freiligrath, the family poet, gave me much amusement with his 'robber' and 'corsair' b—Viennese mannikin.

Best greetings to all.

Your

Moor

First published considerably abridged in Printed according to the original Der Briefwechsel zwischen F. Engels und n i . r i . j - T? I- u r u r- r^ .r T. i A c ,n,o î • Published in i-nshsh for the first K. Marx, Bd. 4, Stuttgart, 1913 and in 5

full in MEGA, Abt. III, Bd. 4, Berlin,

1931

time

226

ENGELS T O MARX

IN LONDON

Manchester, 18 July 1869

Dear Moor,

Glad the journey went off so well.

If Schweitzer attacks the International, we should consider whether to oblige him.

Frightful muck is developing as the Lassallean swindle putrefies. Fritzsche wanted 1,800 thalers from Schweitzer and, when he turned him down, then you should get him 3,000 thalers. T h e fellow is obviously just as big a blackguard as Schweitzer. From the beginning, Lassalle introduced venality, and this has grown. But where did Schweitzer get the money from, if not the Prussians?

T h e calm assumption that the English workers should provide £450 for Fritzsche, even before he and his consorts have joined the IWA, is really good. I truly believe that Wilhelm absolutely incited Fritzsche to saddle you with himself.

[^1]: Many thanks for what you sent. T h e letters will be returned tomorrow. 0

[^2]: a Johann Philipp Becker - h Apparently the reference is to Freiligrath's poems Banditenbegräbnis and Piratenromanze. - c See the previous letter.



