---
Volume: 43
Document_Title: "227. Engels to Marx. 21 July "
Page_Range: "361-363"
---

# 227. Engels to Marx. 21 July 



**[p. 324]**

You long ago read the renowned letter sent me 2 years ago. Naked assertion was the only argument to the effect that he could not and should not have acted otherwise. H e also said he and his consorts had nothing in common with the People's Party 3 8 except the name! That's a good one! He is past all remedy.

Heat? Terrible. Yesterday I lay on the floor half the night because it was simply too hot to go to bed. It is so hot that even these few lines have bathed me in sweat.

Enclosed Kugelmann. 3 9 4 What do you think of his plans? Karlsbad a would be quite excellent for you, but Jenny meanwhile in Hanover? What do you say?

Fragment of this letter first published in Der Briefwechsel zwischen F. Engels und K. Marx, Bd. 4, Stuttgart, 1913 and in full in MEGA, Abt. III, Bd. 4, Berlin,

1931

227

Your

F. E.

Printed according to the original

Published in English for the first time

[^1]: ENGELS T O MARX

[^2]: IN LONDON

[^3]: Manchester, 21 July 1869

[^4]: Dear Moor,

[^5]: T h e whole family including Tussy, has gone to see the PRINCE OF WALES b drive past. Congratulations to them in such heat.

[^6]: How dare Wilhelm assure Schweitzer publicly that'the General Council of the IWA' takes exactly the same attitude to the said Schweitzer as he, Wilhelm does? 3 9 5 This is rather much, particular- ly if, as I assume, he did so without your permission.

[^7]: That Schweitzer has lost a lot of support among the masses is shown by the fact that he has not dared to proclaim the voting figures.0 96 Incidentally, he remains—as a DEBATER—superior to all his opponents. T h e joke about the 'red' republic was very good, and his exploitation of Wilhelm's 'People's Party', ditto that

[^8]: a Karlovy Vary - b Albert Edward - c F. Mende, 'An die Mitglieder des Allgeni. deutschen Arbeiter-Vereins', 5 July 1869, Der Social-Demokrat, No. 79, 9 July 1869.





**[p. 325]**

Wilhelm is betraying the workers to the bourgeois democrats; Wilhelm is taking care not to answer both points, and altogether he appears even more incapable than usual in this polemic. How absurd, for instance, just at the moment, to reprint from Schwaben- mayer's" Demokratische Correspondenz the glorification of the bourgeois American Republic because of the Pacific Railway .b

And how can Wilhelm announce to Schweitzer that he will be shown the door at the Basle Congress379?

Monsieur Bonaparte appears to have gone right out of his mind. One cropper after another. First his message with its apparent concessions, then the sudden adjournment, now this droll ministry.388 If he had set out to show even the stupidest Frenchman that he wants to expose France to worldwide derision, he couldn't have done it better. This is just the way to shake the confidence his majority, his ministers and prefects, his judges and officers have in him. And since all the loyalty has been purchased and was conditional on his future success, they will desert him much earlier than the Senate and Corps législatif deserted the old Napoleon in 1814 and 1815.397 Really not much is needed to lose respect for Mr Louis.

What has happened to the 18th Brumaire} I see and hear nothing of it.c Apropos! You must send me a copy for Charles,d

whom I relieved of his copy (old edition) on this pledge.

What state are your travel plans in? Jenny writes that she will be returning on Saturday, and then a decision will, I suppose, soon be taken as to when you will go. Here the balancing of accounts is dragging on. Yesterday they said at least 14 days, which I translate as: at least 3 weeks. I'm afraid I'll be stuck here until about 20 August.

I shall cut to length and send to Kugelmann for the Zukunft, for its feuilleton, the biography e he returned to me. If you want to see it first, let me know.

I close because of the heat; with best greetings.

Your

F. E.

[^1]: First published abridged in Der Briefwech- Printed according to the original sei zwischen F. Engels und K. Marx, Bd. 4, Stuttgart, 1913 and in full in MEGA, Published in English for the first Abt. III, Bd. 4, Berlin, 1931 time

[^2]: a Karl Mayer - b 'Was Bürger drüben können und hüben könnten', Demokratisches Wochenblatt, No. 29, 17 July 1869, supplement. - c The reference is to the second edition of Marx's work The Eighteenth Brumaire of Louis Bonaparte. See this volume, p. 297. - d Charles Roesgen - e F. Engels, Karl Marx. See also this volume, p. 318.



