---
Volume: 43
Document_Title: "229. Marx to Engels. 24 July "
Page_Range: "365-366"
---

# 229. Marx to Engels. 24 July 



**[p. 328]**

I do not need to see the biography business.3390 This appears to be a sort of mania with Kugelmann.

First published abridged in Der Briefwech- Printed according to the original sei zwischen F Engels und K Marx, Bd. 4. Pubiished in English in full for the * ? " £ ? • n!,91,3 » n dr , n,Si 1 '" ' first time Abt. Ill, Bd. 4, Berlin, 1931

229

MARX T O ENGELS

IN MANCHESTER

[London,] 24 JULY 1869

DEAR FRED,

I can only write you a few lines today. T h e thing is in full suppuration, so very painful, but will also soon be over. T h e swilling of arsenic will have to begin again.

Salut.

Your

K. M.

I regret that I did not know the book Die Werkzeuge und Waffen, ihre Entstehung und Ausbildung, von Dr Gustav Klemm, 1858, before

[^1]: This morning I received the enclosed screed from Liebknecht.404

[^2]: Which is the more extraordinary, the stupid impudence or the impudent stupidity? This honest fellow regards official lies, such as that about non-existent resolutions of the General Council, as permissible in his own mouth, but as highly reprehensible in Schweitzer's. And why did he achieve a reconciliation with Schweitzer the Monster in Lausanne? And his theory of action! This consists of giving Mr Wilhelm the right to make 'arbitrary' use of my name and that of the General Council wherever he considers appropriate. And the courage of this honest fellow! He claims to be against Lassalle, and so takes the part of the 'true' Lassalleans against the 'false' Lassalleans! Bracke, his man, after all accuses Schweitzer of declaring Lassalle's theory of state credit to be simply an agitational tool, and of not believing in panacea. He had involved me in 'battles'! In 'scandals', I wrote to him.405

[^3]: a F. Engels, Karl Marx. See this volume, p. 325.



