---
Volume: 43
Document_Title: "231. Marx to Engels. 27 July "
Page_Range: "369-370"
---

# 231. Marx to Engels. 27 July 



**[p. 231]**

MARX T O ENGELS

IN MANCHESTER

[London,] 27 July 1869

DEAR FRED,

Amongst the enclosed PAPERS, look at the Vorbote and especially what I marked on pp. 105, 106.

You will see that OLD Becker 3 cannot give u p making himself important. 4 0 9 With his language group system he casts aside our whole Rules and the spirit of the statute, and alters our organic system into an artificial construction of arbitrary language relations instead of real state and national relations. Extremely reactionary business, fitting for the pan-Slavists! And all this because we allowed him provisionally to remain the centre for his former correspondents, until the 'International' in Germany gets stronger. I immediately put a spoke in his wheel when he attempted at the Eisenach Congress 3 7' to promote himself as centre for Germany.

[^1]: Bebel has sent me 25 thalers for the Belgians from his Workers' Educational Association.410 Today I ACKNOWLEDGED this gift, and took the opportunity to write to him about Becker's fantasy plans.

[^2]: I drew his attention to Article 6 of the Rules,h which only recognises national central committees in direct contact with the General Council and, where this is impossible because of the police, obliges the local groups in each country to correspond directly with the General Council. I explained to him the absurdity of Becker's pretensions and finally stated that if the Eisenach Congress—quoad c THE INTERNATIONAL—accepted Becker's suggestion, we would immediately and publicly quash it as contrary to the Rules.

[^3]: Incidentally Bebel and Liebknecht had written to me earlier, SPONTANEOUSLY, that they had written to Becker telling him they did not recognise him but corresponded directly with London.

[^4]: Becker himself is not dangerous. But, as we have been informed from Switzerland, his secretary Remy was pressed upon him by Mr Bakunin and is Bakunin's TOOL. This Russian obviously wishes

[^5]: a Johann Philipp Becker - b Rules and Administrative Regulations of the International Working Men's Association (see present edition, Vol. 20, pp. 441-46). - c regarding



