---
Volume: 43
Document_Title: "232. Engels to Ludwig Kugelmann. 28 July "
Page_Range: "370-371"
---

# 232. Engels to Ludwig Kugelmann. 28 July 



**[p. 333]**

to become the dictator of the European workers' movement. He should be careful. Otherwise he will be officially excommunicated.

Your

Moor

As soon as I receive copies3 from Meissner I shall send them to my friends in Manchester and Charles Roesgen.

First published in Der Briefwechsel zwischen Printed according to the original F Engels und K. Marx, Bd. 4, Stuttgart, P u b i i s h e d i n E n g l i s h f o r t h e first time

232

ENGELS TO LUDWIG KUGELMANN

IN HANOVER

Manchester, 28 July 1869

Dear Kugelmann,

Enclosed the biography suitably adapted for Zukunft,390 and drawing attention to the 18th Brumaire. I would be grateful if you had it copied there, since it would be better for Weiss not to know it is by me.

Marx will be writing to you, or will have already written, about the journey. You certainly will not get him to go to Karlsbad,13 and as far as I am concerned, the business with the final accounts, etc. is dragging on so much that I have no idea when I shall be able to get away; it's as good as certain that this will not be before 15-20 August. It's very unpleasant, but since this is the last time that COMMERCE will burden me so, I should not grumble too much. This means that I shall scarcely get to see you this year, as I shall hardly get as far afield as Karlsbad.

In order to get the biography off today I must close now—so until next time, and let Karlsbad do some good to your gall-stones.

[^1]: a K. Marx, The Eighteenth Brumaire of Louis Bonaparte, 2nd edition. - b Karlovy Vary



