---
Volume: 43
Document_Title: "233. Marx to Engels. 29 July "
Page_Range: "371-372"
---

# 233. Marx to Engels. 29 July 



**[p. 334]**

One of my sisters-in-law in Barmen also had some once, but she is happily rid of them, and once again round, fat and jolly.

Yours

F. E.

First published in: Marx and Engels, Printed according to the original Works, First Russian Edition, Vol. XXVI, p u b l i s h e d in English for the first Moscow, 1935 •

233

MARX TO ENGELS

IN MANCHESTER

[London,] 29 JULY 1869

DEAR FRED,

Enclosed the letter from Kugelmann.394

Things are better with the arm. Started with the arsenic. The Bee-Hive is now under the control of Samuel Morley, since when everything too anti-bourgeois in the REPORTS on our sessions is crossed out. For instance my entire exposition about Roman and German testate and intestate inheritance law at the last session of the GENERAL COUNCIL.411 During my stay in Paris" the fellows committed some stupidities, i.e. admitting 5 MEMBERS of the Bronterre O'Brien Society,412 fellows who are just as dumb and ignorant as they are quarrelsome and conceited about their sectarian secret wisdom.

Salut.

Your

K. M.

Jennychen has received her 'little fortune'.b The dear child feels very happy about her 'own income'.

[^1]: First published in Der Briefwechsel zwischen Printed according to the original ^Engels und K. Marx, Bd. 4, Stuttgart, P u b i i s h e d in English for the first

[^2]: time

[^3]: a in the original: London - b See this volume, pp. 327 and 330.



