---
Volume: 43
Document_Title: "235. Marx to Ludwig Kugelmann. 30 July "
Page_Range: "374-375"
---

# 235. Marx to Ludwig Kugelmann. 30 July 



**[p. 337]**

enclosed to Tussy in a disguised hand; she will wonder where - from.

First published abridged in Der Briefwech- Printed according to the original sei zwischen F. Engels und K. Marx, Bd. 4, „ , . . _ .. , c . o ir.io J • r H • „ r ^ , Published in Lnglish tor the tirst Stuttgart, 1913 and in full in MEGA, &

° time Abt. III, Bd. 4, Berlin, 1931

235

MARX TO LUDWIG KUGELMANN29

IN HANOVER

[London,] 30 July 1869

Dear Friend,

I had (not yet quite healed) for ABOUT 12 days an abscess (carbuncular) on my left arm, which I had DITTO during my stay with Engels in Manchester,353 under the armpit of my left arm. This is not, however, the reason that so far I have delayed my reply to your letter of 17 inst.

Since I would certainly not like to clash with your plans, and since I am personally interested in enjoying your company, I have taken various steps in order to arrange things in your sense. But this is positively impossible. I must be in Holland at the end of August with my relatives," where all sorts of matters of interest and importance to me have to be settled. My proposal to transfer this rendezvous to another date has been turned down flatly, as the people whom I am meeting are all tied up by their business, and only have a certain time free for the meeting in Bommel.b

You should write and tell me when you will be back in Hanover. I shall then see to what extent I can adjust my further PROGRESS accordingly.

Yours

K. M.

[^1]: I shall, therefore, be leaving London at the end of August.349

[^2]: With best greetings to your dear wife and Fränzchen,c

[^3]: a the Philips family - b Zalt-Bommel - c Kugelmann's daughter Franziska



