---
Volume: 43
Document_Title: "236. Marx to Engels. 2 August "
Page_Range: "375-376"
---

# 236. Marx to Engels. 2 August 



**[p. 338]**

P.S. In addition, during August Lafargue, wife and little son are coming to London.

First published in Pisma Marksa k Kugel- Printed according to the original manu (Letters of Marx to Kugelmann), Moscow-Leningrad, 1928

236

MARX T O ENGELS

IN MANCHESTER

[London,] 2 August 1869

DEAR FRED,

Because of Kugelmann my whole travel plan has been thrown to the winds.

If I visited him before he went to Karlsbad,3 he would move heaven and earth to take me with him to this boring and expensive place—or I would hinder him in carrying out his own plan, which he must carry out for the sake of his health.

You will I hope also be coming to London on your journey.

Your

Moor

[^1]: I have therefore written to h i m b that I must go to Holland on family business at the end of August, and from there I would perhaps have the opportunity to see him in Hanover after his return. I really knew no other way of arranging things. Other reasons for delaying the journey:

[^2]: Firstly: the Lafargue FAMILY may be coming to London soon. Secondly: If I left here now, the General Council would be completely at a loss with the necessary work with regard to the Basle Congress.379

[^3]: Tussy appears to want to stay on in Manchester. During the 14 days of your absence the excuse for this is plausible. Your drawing will be sent to her from a local (English) seaside resort.c

[^4]: Enclosed letters from Bebel and Wilhelm.414

[^5]: a Karlovy Vary - b See the previous letter. - c See this volume, p. 336.



