---
Volume: 43
Document_Title: "237. Engels to Marx. 3 August "
Page_Range: "376-377"
---

# 237. Engels to Marx. 3 August 



**[p. 339]**

So far I have not seen that Meissner has announced the 18th Brumaire. His motto: Chi va piano va sano?

First published in Der Briefwechsel zwischen Printed according to the original F^ngels und K. Marx, Bd. 4, Stuttgart, P u b l i s h e d i n E n g i i s h f o r t h e f i r s t time

237

ENGELS TO MARX

IN LONDON

Manchester, 3 August 1869

Dear Moor,

Enclosed, returned, Wilhelm and Bebel414 and, in addition, a draft on the UNION BANK OF London for £100, with which I hope the debts are done with for ever.

Since, as Tussy tells me, Jenny has September free too, you can of course postpone your journey until that month. I always thought that, because of Jenny, you were limited to only four weeks during which you had to travel.

The row between Schweitzer and the Leipzig people is getting jolly. The accusations that Bebel has been bribed by the Guelphs, and the threat of the Schweitzerians that they will impose their victory upon the congress by muscle power, point to a fine show.

How stupid it was of Wilhelm to allow Goegg to be co-signatory of his congress manifesto, and thus expose himself to the attacks of the Social-Demokrat.415 But Wilhelm simply can't get along without his philistine republicans.

My documents should now be signed today week, if the lawyers are ready. I shall certainly not get away before Wednesday, 11th inst. In any case I shall see you in London on the way there or back.

Best greetings to all.

Your

F. E.

[^1]: a Who goes slowly goes surely.



