---
Volume: 43
Document_Title: "239. Engels to Jenny Marx ( daughter). 8 August "
Page_Range: "378-379"
---

# 239. Engels to Jenny Marx ( daughter). 8 August 



**[p. 341]**

spoken form, that we cannot continue to run the General Council in this way; but that they should be so kind, before they give us successors, to pay our debts, which would reach a much higher figure if most of our secretaries did not personally cover correspondence costs.

If only I could somewhere see people who would not involve us in stupidities, I would greet with the greatest pleasure the exit of the Central Council73 from here. The business is becoming

ennuyant?

Salut.

El

Moro

Beesly married on 24 July.

First published in Der Briefwechsel zwischen Printed according to the original F. Engels und K. Marx, Bd. 4, Stuttgart, „ , , , , . ., ,. , , ,, ,. I cjj 3 Published in English for the first

time

239

Manchester, 8 August 1869 Dear Jenny,

I have received Lizzie's orders to thank you, in her name, for the very handsome and very considerate present you made her in the volume of Moore's Irish Melodies}3 You could not have made her a greater pleasure. She knows, from her childhood, most of the tunes, but scarcely one of them completely, and so now she can refresh her rather broken-down memory from the book.

Next Sunday0 there is to be a grand Irish concert in which the whole Fenian and non-Fenian company, convicted and uncon- victed, will have to join. I only regret that the whole musical talent of our house will be unable to take full advantage of the book when Tussy will have left us; but then, Mary Ellen will have to learn as much as is required for that.

[^1]: ENGELS TO JENNY MARX (DAUGHTER)4'7

[^2]: IN LONDON

[^3]: When are you and Moor going to Holland and Germany0? I

[^4]: a boring - b Thomas Moore, Irish Melodies. - c 15 August - d See this volume, p. 354.



