---
Volume: 43
Document_Title: "241. Engels to Marx. 12 August "
Page_Range: "382-383"
---

# 241. Engels to Marx. 12 August 



**[p. 241]**

ENGELS TO MARX

IN LONDON

Manchester, 12 August 1869

Dear Moor,

I have cut the Gordian knot regarding Schnaps3 by simply informing Tussy of the FACT; whether this has plunged her into a natural conflict I do not know. Unfortunately, however, she now has something else to do, for, since last Friday, she has continuously had horrible toothache in the same tooth that gave her a lot of trouble earlier. So far she has borne the thing with astonishing heroism, but shortened sleep and the long nervous tension have had an effect, and today she looks somewhat exhausted. She said you didn't want the tooth to be pulled out; but I sent her today, since things could not continue thus, together with Lizzie to one of the leading dentists here, and told her she should submit to his judgement. After a long examination he said he hoped to save the tooth, but if the pain did not cease by Saturday morning, the tooth would have to come out. At all events, the child cannot stand this constant and nerve-racking pain every 6 months; her general health suffers far more from this than the whole tooth is worth. But I think I shall soon be able to give better news.

I must just call in at the Schiller Society,76 and see what has happened in Eisenach.373 On Saturday the two parties seem to have parted in peace, so they have at least avoided general fisticuffs.

The stupidity and meanness of the Urquhartites is demonstrated by the fact that they never mention:

The book is written by two fellows, of whom St. Clair, a former Crimean officer who knows Turkish, Polish, Russian and Bul- garian, lived 3 years in the country, and the other l'/2 years, and they are still there. The thing is written in a very lively and graphic style, and is worth more than any other book I know on the subject. For Englishmen the fellows are remarkably free of prejudices, though they have their blind-spots IN ECONOMICS and also

[^1]: A RESIDENCE Z.V BULGARIA BY St. Clair, LATE CAPTN. 28. REGT, AND Ch, Brophy, 1869.

[^2]: •' Charles Etienne Lafargue; see this volume, p. 342.



