---
Volume: 43
Document_Title: "242. Marx to Hermann Jung. 13 August "
Page_Range: "383-384"
---

# 242. Marx to Hermann Jung. 13 August 



**[p. 346]**

IN POLITICS. But they can see. They arrived—at least Brophy did—as friends of the Christians, and changed their views completely in favour of the Turks. But since they also find their blind-spots in the Turkish governmental system (though here, too, they have something in common with Urquhart), the Urquhartites are not allowed to mention a book that is worth more than their entire Free Press, even from their own point of view. The FACTS in it are worth more to me than all the chatter by the Urquhartites, and SHORT-ARMED Collet can envy the two their description of Russian and French policy in Constantinople. The business is so described that you can read it, moreover with interest, and will be more useful here than 10 years of the Free Press with its oracular announcements.

Finished with Gottfried Ermen the day before yesterday.3

Everything signed.b Finally completely free from the honorable gentleman.

Best greetings to all.

Your

F. E.

242

MARX TO HERMANN JUNG

[London,] 13 August [1869]

Dear Jung,

Your letter just received (2 o'clock). Go at all events.420 The sending of Applegarth by his own Union will show to the continentals that the English workmen are not so indifferent in regard to the International as their ill-wishers say. It is only a pity that Applegarth does not even take part at our present discussions, so as to be able to represent our views.

[^1]: First published abridged in Der Briefwech- Printed according to the original sei zwischen F. Engels und K. il Stuttgart, 1913 and in full Abt. III, Bd. 4, Berlin, 1931

[^2]: sei zwischen F Engels und K. Marx, B<1 4, P u bi i shed in English for the first Stuttgart, 1913 and in full in MEGA, • 6

[^3]: IN LONDON

[^4]: a 10 August - b See this volume, p. 320.



