---
Volume: 43
Document_Title: "243. Engels to Marx. 16 August "
Page_Range: "384-385"
---

# 243. Engels to Marx. 16 August 



**[p. 1913]**

If care be not taken, the asses of Denmark street may work mischief. A letter ought also to be written to our Pole3—I have not his address.

Yours truly

K. M.

First published in Russian in Bazelsky kongress I Internatsionala 6-11 sentyabrya 1869, Moscow-Leningrad, 1934

Reproduced from the original

Published in English for the first time

243

ENGELS TO MARX

IN LONDON

Manchester, 16 August 1869 Dear Moor,

Yesterday I received a telegram informing me that my mother will not be getting to Ostend until Wednesday evening. Since I must now wait for a letter from home providing me with more detailed information and since yet another reason requires that I still be here tomorrow, I telegraphed you today that I will not be coming until Wednesday.b Also, I am worried that if in the meantime the Laf argues should come I may not find night quarters in your doubtless full house and, this being the case, would like to know whether I might find lodging somewhere near you.

Tussy's tooth is out; the dentist found that since one of the three roots was inflamed the only solution was to extract. The pain is now gone.

I am planning to take the 3:30 Midlands train that arrives in London at 8:50.

Best greetings.

Your

F. E.

[^1]: first published in Der Briefwechsel zwischen F. Engels und K. Marx, Bd. 4, Stuttgart,

[^2]: Printed according to the original

[^3]: Published in English for the first

[^4]: •' Anton Zabicki - b 18 August



