---
Volume: 43
Document_Title: "246. Marx to Engels. 18 August "
Page_Range: "386-388"
---

# 246. Marx to Engels. 18 August 



**[p. 245]**

MARX T O ENGELS

IN MANCHESTER

[London,] 17 August 1869

DEAR FRED,

Everything is READY here for your arrival. Don't forget, either, to take a TICKET only to KENTISH TOWN STATION (just near us), or, if you take it to ST. PANCRAS STATION, at least to get out at KENTISH TOWN STATION. Mr Lafargue, in principle, never announces the day of his arrival, on the basis that anxiety will thus be avoided should chance delays occur. That's a PRINCIPLE too!

I hope POOR Tussychen is ALL RIGHT again now. I send, enclosed, Schweitzeriana," for you to enjoy on the journey.

Your

K. M.

First published in MEGA, Abt. Ill, Printed according to the original Bd. 4, Berlin, 1931 Published in English for the first time

246

[London,] 18 August 1869

Rather disappointed by YOUR LETTER, since all had hoped to see you here this evening. T h e plan about Ireland is very good (Lizzie

[^1]: Enclosed—COPIES (Bonaparte) b for 1. Charles,c 2. Schorlemmer, 3. Moore, 4. Gumpert.

[^2]: MARX T O ENGELS 1 7 4

[^3]: IN MANCHESTER

[^4]: DEAR FRED,

[^5]: a This apparently refers to a series of articles: 'Der Congress zu Eisenach', Der

[^6]: Social-Demokrat, Nos. 93, 94 and 95, 10, 13 and 15 August 1869. - b K. Marx, The Eighteenth Brumaire of Louis Bonaparte, 2nd edition. - c Charles Roesgen





**[p. 350]**

and Tussy will be able to admire the 'CONVICTED' in natura) if nothing new intervenes. This evening the Lafargue FAMILY arrives, leaving Dieppe today at 10 o'clock.

The £10 received, but can't send RECEIPT before Saturday,1 on which day there is a meeting of the sub-committee. The money is very welcome just before closing time.b

Yesterday Dupont announced that the French (or Paris) TRADES UNIONISTS (BRONZE WORKERS) had paid back £45, i.e., sent it to him to pay back.422 This money was partly loaned and partly given to them years ago by the UNIONS here through our mediation. (Even earlier, £20 was sent on our instructions from Paris to Rouen.) I have arranged that deputes shall wait upon the UNIONS here to appeal to their consciences when they pay in the money.— Incidentally, the Paris UNIONISTS have behaved very decently. Ditto, a letter arrived yesterday from Ludwig Neumayr, de dato Eisenach, with the following purport423:

'At the congress in Eisenach, it was resolved that the workers of Germany should be called upon to join the International Working Men's Association by taking out cards as central members. Since I have now been appointed by Joh. Ph. Becker in Geneva as the agent of the German-language sectional groups of the International Working Men's Association for Wiener-Neustadt and surroundings, I would request exact instructions as to how I should now act. With social-republican fraternal greetings, etc. Address: Ludwig Neumayr, editor of the Wiener-Neustädter Wochenblatt in Wiener-Neustadt, Austria.'

This is a blow to OLD Becker and also, in particular, to the 'language-group cash-box'. But the matter itself may not be mucked about because of private friendship.

You will recall Werner (bookbinder) of Leipzig, to whom I wrote from Manchester. Since then he has worked for us diligently.

Yesterday the adherence of an (Italian) group from Trieste arrived. Ditto from Barcelona; I enclose a COPY of the organc of this new group.

In Posen—as Zabicki reported—the Polish workers (joiners, etc.) have victoriously ended a STRIKE with the assistance of their colleagues in Berlin.424 This struggle against Monsieur le Capital— even in the minor form of a STRIKE—will deal with national prejudice differently from the peace declamations made by bourgeois gentlemen.

[^1]: a 21 August 1869 - b See this volume, p. 348. - c Federacion



