---
Volume: 43
Document_Title: "247. Engels to Marx. 5 September "
Page_Range: "388-390"
---

# 247. Engels to Marx. 5 September 



**[p. 351]**

I HOPE TO RECEIVE SOME LINES FROM Tu SSY AS TO HER STATE OF HEALTH. M Y BEST

COMPLIMENTS TO MRS Ll ZZIE.

El Moro

Much to be regretted is the sudden death of Sylvis (aged 41), President of the American Labor Union,146 just before the meeting of the LABOR UNION CONGRESS, for which purpose he travelled across the United States agitating for nearly a whole year. Part of his work will thus be lost.

First published abridged in Der Briefwech- Printed according to the original sei zwischen F. Engels und K. Marx, n i . r i . j - TT r u • cue u _ , . ,£,* , • r „ • Published in English in lull tor the Bd. 4, Stuttgart, 1913 and in full in f- • 6

MEGA, Abt. III, Bd. 4, Berlin, 1931

247

ENGELS T O MARX

Manchester, 5 September 1869

Dear Moor,

Got back here again midday yesterday3 from Ostend. I arrived in London at 6.15 in the morning, found a train going here at 7.30, and journeyed on through, since I had scarcely slept all night, and was good for nothing else. I also thought you were away with Jenny, and only here heard the contrary. This delay in your departure looks a little queer to me; I can't think that the Basle Congress379 is alone to blame, and I am forced to ask myself whether it is not a money matter. When you asked for the £75 I sent you 100, imagining you could use the rest for the journey; since, however, I did not state this in so many words, you perhaps found another use for it; if this is so, telegraph me tomorrow morning (before 10 o'clock if possible), saying how much you need. We shall, you see, be leaving for Dublin tomorrow evening,421 and I shall be going into town around 11-12 to look after money matters, so I could deal with this at the same time.

[^1]: IN LONDON

[^2]: a 4 September - b See this volume, pp. 353-54.





**[p. 352]**

I was in Engelskirchen 418 for a few days. People in Germany are becoming increasingly stupid. It is true that the workers' movement is closing in upon them threateningly, and they all flirt with it and have NOSTRUMS of all sorts, but their intelligence has not become any sharper; the opposite is true. My brother," for instance, wanted to solve the social problem by 'redeeming labour', just as he redeems factory installations, buildings, machinery etc., by, for instance, putting a groschen on the price of each pound of yarn, and thus paying off the workers who have become old, sick and disabled! The bonhommeh was very surprised when I explained to him how hopelessly naive and absurd this idea was, and he finally promised to read your book/ Concerning the Prussian journeymen's provident funds, he gave me an article in Engel's statistical journal; the most blatant infamies of the statutes of Saxony are not present there, but otherwise everything similar.425

The greatest man in Germany is undoubtedly Strousberg. The fellow will soon become German Kaiser. Everywhere you go people talk of nothing but Strousberg. Incidentally, the fellow is not as bad as all that. My brother, who had negotiations with him, has described him very vividly to me. He has a lot of humour and some brilliant qualities, and, in any case, is immeasurably superior to Hudson the RAILWAY KING. He is now buying up all sorts of industrial establishments, and immediately cuts the working time to 10 hours everywhere, without reducing wages. He also has the clear knowledge that he will end up a really poor wretch. His main principle is: only swindle share-holders, but deal fairly with contractors and other industrialists. In Cologne I saw his portrait on exhibition; not bad at all, jovial. His background is completely dark; some say he is a qualified lawyer; according to others he kept a brothel in London.

Wilhelmchend has now fallen so low that he may no longer say that Lassalle cribbed from you, and wrongly at that. This has emasculated the whole biography, and only he can know why he

And he has declared the miserable Felleisen, not even the Vorbote, the journal of the bumpkins in Switzerland.427 They are a fine bunch. Cf. the debate about social-democratic, democratic- social, or social-democratic + democratic-social workers' party at the Eisenach Congress. And Rittinghausen their prophet!428

Wilhelm still makes no mention of the 18th Brumaire. Here, too,

[^1]: 49fi continues to print it.

[^2]: a probably Rudolf Engels - b honest fellow - c the first volume of Capital - d Wilhelm Liebknecht



