---
Volume: 43
Document_Title: "249. Marx to Laura Lafargue. 25 September "
Page_Range: "392-393"
---

# 249. Marx to Laura Lafargue. 25 September 



**[p. 249]**

MARX TO LAURA LAFARGUE80

IN LONDON

Hanover, 25 September 1869

My dear Cacadou,a

I regret that I cannot celebrate at home the birthday of my dear clear bird's eye, but Old Nick'sb thoughts are with you.432

Du bist beslôzen In minem Herzen.

I was happy to see from Möhmchen'sd letter (written in her usual amusing way, she is a real virtuoso in letter-writing) that your health is improving. Our dear little Schnappy,e I hope, will soon get better. At the same time, I fully share Kugelmann's opinion that Dr West ought to be consulted at once (or another medical man if he be absent). I trust you and Lafargue will in this case yield to my paternal authority, a thing, you know full well, I am not in the habit of appealing to. Nobody is more difficult to treat than a baby. In no case more immediate action is wanted, and any delay more hurtful. You must under no circumstances accelerate your departure from London. It would be really dangerous to the child and do no good to yourself. On this point, every medical man will give you the same advice.

I am glad the Basle Congress379 is over, and has, comparatively speaking, passed off so well. I am always fretting on such occasions of public exhibition of the party 'mit allen ihren Geschwüren'.1 None of the actors was à la hauteur des principes,8 but the higher class idiocy effaces the working class blunders. We have passed through no little German town the Winkelblatth of which was not full of the doings of 'that formidable Congress'.

We are here in a sort of fix. The Kugelmanns will not hear of an early leave-taking. At the same time, Jenny is much improving in health consequent upon the change of air and circumstances.

With Liebknecht I am likely to meet, within a few days, at Brunswick. I decline going to Leipzig, and he cannot come to

[^1]: a Laura's nickname used by her family - b Marx's nickname used by his family - c Thou art enclosed in mine heart (Middle-High German). - d Marx's wife Jenny - e Charles Etienne Lafargue - f with all its ulcers - 8 highly principled - h local rag



