---
Volume: 43
Document_Title: "250. Engels to Marx. 27 September "
Page_Range: "393-395"
---

# 250. Engels to Marx. 27 September 



**[p. 356]**

Hanover, since the Prussians would probably give him the advantages of free lodging during the present prorogation of the Reichstag.434

My best thanks to Paul for his elaborate letter.435 Meine herzlichsten Grüsse an das ganze Haus und 3 hundred kisses to yourself and my dear little Schnappy. Adio, my dear child!

Ever yours

Old Nick.b

First published in Die Neue Zeit, Bd. 1, Reproduced from the original Nr. 2, Stuttgart, 1907-1908

250

ENGELS TO MARX

IN HANOVER

Manchester, 27 September 1869

Dear Moor,

Since there is nothing doing with Eichhoffc it would be better if Wilhelm were to print the Peasant War than for it not to be printed at all. So I shall go through the piece right away. Incidentally, Wilhelm can write to me himself about it; he still has not replied to my last letter, and I don't see why I should make advances to him.431

Lafargue is madder with his doctoring than I expected. You must really take energetic steps, otherwise there might really be a misfortune.d

We returned safely from Irelande last Thursday'; were in Dublin, the Wicklow mountains, Killarney and Cork. Greatly enjoyed ourselves, but both females returned even hibernioress

than when they departed.421 Weather fine on the whole. According to the papers the weather with you is now even worse than here.

Learned from Trench's Realities of Irish Life the whole secret of why Ireland is so 'overpopulated'. The worthy gentleman proves with examples that, on average, the land is worked by the Irish peasants to such degree that an outlay of £10-15 per ACRE, which is

[^1]: a My heartfelt greetings to the whole family and - b On the inside of the letter: 'To Laura'. - ' See this volume, pp. 282 and 297. - d Ibid., p. 353. - e Ibid., pp. 348 and 351. - f 16 September - K more Irish





**[p. 357]**

completely paid off in 1-4 years, raises the rental value from Is. to 20s., and from 4s. to 25-30s. per ACRE. This profit has to be brought into the pockets of the LANDLORDS.

Mr Trench, in return, is nicely checked by his own statements to Senior, which the latter has had published.11 Trench tells the liberal Senior that, were he an Irish peasant, he too would be a

Rl BBONMAN436!

I would have visited Dietzgen from Engelskirchen,418 but the highway to Siegburg had just been washed away and communica- tions almost broken off.

Can't Jenny write to the Monroes, I should have thought the matter could be arranged.b

Ireland's trade has grown enormously over the last 14 years. Dublin port was unrecognisable. On Queenstown Quay I heard a great deal of Italian, then Serbian, French and Danish or Norwegian. THERE ARE INDEED A GOOD MANY 'ITALIANS' IN CORK, as the comedy has it. The country itself really looks depopulated, however, and you immediately get the idea that there are far too few people. Everywhere you are faced by the state of war. The ROYAL IRISH rush about everywhere in squads, with sheath-knives and sometimes revolvers at their belts, and unsheathed police batons in their hands; in Dublin a horse-drawn battery drove right through the centre of town, something I have never seen in England, and there are soldiers literally everywhere.

The worst thing about the Irish is that they become CORRUPTIBLE as soon as they cease to be peasants and fall into bourgeois ways. Of course this is true of most peasant nations. But in Ireland it's particularly bad, so the press is also particularly scurvy.

Moore is in the Tyrol; will probably return next week. I expect you'll be going to Hamburg and seeing Meissner.437 IF so, you may mention to him that I am working on something about Ireland, and will offer it to him in due time.438

Hearty greetings to Jenny and Kugelmann. Tussy and Lizzie also send greetings.

Your

[^1]: F. E.c

[^2]: First published abridged in Der Briefwech- sel zwischen F. Engels und K. Marx, Bd. 4, Stuttgart, 1913 and in full in MEG A Abt. Ill, Bd. 4, Berlin, 1931

[^3]: Printed according to the original

[^4]: Published in English for the first time

[^5]: •' N. W. Senior, Journals, Conversations and Essays Relating to Ireland, Vol. 2, London, 1868, p. 208. - b See this volume, p. 354. - c On the inside of the letter: 'To Dr Marx'.



