---
Volume: 43
Document_Title: "251. Marx to Engels. 30 September "
Page_Range: "395-396"
---

# 251. Marx to Engels. 30 September 



**[p. 251]**

MARX TO ENGELS

IN MANCHESTER

Hanover, 30 September 1869

DEAR FRED,

Your letter arrived yesterday evening. Better news today from London on Schnappy's health.a Laura and Lafargue intend to leave London as soon as the little one's condition makes it possible. Under these circumstances, Tussy's IMMEDIATE RETURN to London appears necessary. Laura will hold it against her very much if she should leave for Paris without Tussy attempting to see the Lafargue family first.

I have just gossiped away an hour with a deputation of 4 Lassalleans sent to me by the local branch of the German General Workers' Association.104 I naturally conducted myself with great reserve and diplomacy, but sub rosah I informed the people of the necessary.439 We parted good friends. I naturally rejected their invitation—extended in the name of the Association—to lecture to them.

On Sunday another delegation arrives from Brunswick: Bracke, Bonhorst, Spier.440 This is less agreeable to me.

Your

K. M.

[^1]: Liebknecht writes that he can't come because of the Prussians.434

[^2]: But: 1. In this way, to Hamburg 2 days instead of 4 hours. 2. Simply for travelling expenses—extra expenditure of ABOUT 40 thaler. I NEITHER LIKE NOR AM ABLE TO AFFORD.C

[^3]: I must close, since the mail is only open until 1.15 (the first) and now it is 10 MINUTES PAST ONE. Shall speak to Meissner about your book.438

[^4]: First published abridged in Der Briefwech- Printed according to the original sei zwischen F. Engels und K. f Stuttgart, 1913 and in full Abt. III, Bd. 4, Berlin, 1931

[^5]: sei zwischen F. Engels und K. Marx, Bd. 4, „ ,,. , , . ,. ,. , r , r. c. „ „ loio J • r ii • ,,r^ A Published in English for the first Stuttgart, 1913 and in full in MEGA, ö time

[^6]: a See this volume, pp. 353 and 356. - b confidentially - c See this volume, pp. 355-56.



