---
Volume: 43
Document_Title: "253. Marx to Paul and Laura Lafargue. 18 October "
Page_Range: "396-398"
---

# 253. Marx to Paul and Laura Lafargue. 18 October 



**[p. 252]**

MARX T O LUDWIG KUGELMANN29

IN HANOVER

London, 12 October 1869

Dear Kugelmann,

In all haste, as Tussychen and Engels have just arrived. You will see from these lines that we arrived safely in England during yesterday.349 We had several marine and other adventures, about which Jennychen will write you more.

In the meantime, our heartiest greetings to the whole family.

Your

K. M.

Special greetings to Madame la comtesse3 and Käuzchenb! Ditto greetings from Engels, Lafargue, MRS Marx, etc. The little onec is well again.

253

MARX TO PAUL AND LAURA LAFARGUE

London, 18 October 1869

My dear Paul and Laura,

I send you to-day the manuscript of Mr Keller.441 I cannot find his address. So you must through the aid of Schily get it out from M. Hess.

Tell Mr Keller that he shall go on. On the whole, I am satisfied with his translation, although it lacks elegance and is done in too negligent a way.

[^1]: First published in Pisma Marksa k Kugel- Printed according to the original manu (Letters of Marx to Kugelmann), Moscow-Leningrad, 1928

[^2]: IN PARIS

[^3]: a Gertrud Kugelmann - b Franziska Kugelmann - c Charles Etienne Lafargue



He will do best to send me every chapter through you. As to chapter IV I shall subdivide it.442

The changes I have made in this chapter II need not be maintained, but they show the direction in which I want the corrections to be made.

As to the word 'Verwertung'* see my note p. 12 of his manuscript. He must make a note on it for the French reader.

I doubt whether the frequent large printing of words will do for French printers.

In German we use the word 'Process' (procès) for economical movements, as you say chemical procès, si je ne me trompe pas.h He translates by 'phenomena' which is nonsense. If he can find no other word, he must always translate by 'mouvement' or something analogous.

Kiss dear Schnappy on my behalf.

Yours

Old Nick

I have received a letter from St Petersbourg. A Russian sends me his work (in German0) on the situation of the peasantry and the working class generally in that benighted country.443

[^1]: [In Lafargue's handwriting]

[^2]: Faire remarquer à Keller que les mots pointillés sont maintenus dans le texte.d

[^3]: First published in Annali dell'Istituto Reproduced from the original G. G. Feltrinelli, an. 1, Milano, 1958

[^4]: a increase of value - b if I am not mistaken - <-' should be 'in Russian' - d Let Keller retain the words underlined by dots.



