---
Volume: 43
Document_Title: "256. Engels to Marx. 24 October "
Page_Range: "399-400"
---

# 256. Engels to Marx. 24 October 



**[p. 362]**

According to Lafargue's letter, great excitement rules in Paris. I have been sent from St Petersburg a thick 500-page Flerovsky volume on the condition of the Russian peasants and workers.443

Unfortunately in Russian. The fellow worked on the book for 15 years.

The great Bakunin is now off to Naples, as DELEGATE to an atheists' congress being held there in opposition to the oecumeni- cal consilium.444

Salut.

Your

K. M.

First published abridged in Der Briefwech- sel zwischen F. Engels und K. Marx, Bd. 4, Stuttgart, 1913 and in full in MEGA, Abt. III, Bd. 4, Berlin, 1931

Printed according to the original

Published in English for the first

256

Manchester, 24 October 1869

Dear Moor,

My grippe has happily—in the main—been conquered by limiting beer consumption, staying at home in the evening and consuming linseed tea with lemon and honey.

I was happy to discover the Wakefielda here in my SUBSCRIPTION LIBRARY—that is to say, in the catalogue, for in reality it was not to be found. They are trying to track it down; I shall write to you about it again. It consists of 2 fat quarto volumes. In fact, I find that quite a number of the things I have here are very useful, particularly for the 1500-1800 period, and some very important, so if Wakefield comes to light and Youngb can be flushed out, I would need virtually only quite modern things. Sadlerc is here too.

[^1]: ENGELS TO MARX33

[^2]: IN LONDON

[^3]: About the Flerovskyd—the name is non-Slav and, in particular,

[^4]: a E. Wakefield, An Account of Ireland, Statistical and Political.- b A. Young, A Tour in Ireland.., Vols. I-II.- c M. Th.Sadler, Ireland; Its Evils and Their Remedies.-

[^5]: d The reference is to H. d>Aepo BCKift, nojioxenie pabouazo wiacca 66 Pocciu.-



