---
Volume: 43
Document_Title: "257. Marx to Engels. 30 October "
Page_Range: "400-402"
---

# 257. Marx to Engels. 30 October 



**[p. 363]**

un-Russian, not a single Russian word starts with //, apart from flangovy, flot, flankirovat,3 etc.—you will probably need Gaudissartb; for although one can learn enough Russian in 3 months to read such a book, you have no time for this at the moment. Let Gaudissart look at it, and if it is worth something, I may be able to read myself to some extent into Russian again with it, as soon as I am finished with Ireland. From Ireland to Russia il n'y a qu'un pas.c

Enclosed envelope of your 2nd letter from Hanover,d which shows signs of Prussian attention, though I fail to grasp how the people found the time, since you only posted the letter 10 minutes before the close of post. Between then and the time when the train left, however, they may have found the time for a tête-à-tête.

Irish history shows what a misfortune it is for one nation to subjugate another. All English abominations have their origin in the Irish PALE.445 I still have to bone up on the Cromwellian period, but it appears clear to me that things in England would have taken another turn but for the necessity of military rule in Ireland and creating a new aristocracy.

Your

F. E.

257

London, 30 October 1869

That Serno should have expedited himself from life into death is only natural, but that Bakunin, with whom he stood on bad

[^1]: First published abridged in Der Briefwech- Printed according to the original sei zwischen F. Engels und K. Marx, Bd. 4, ,. , , . ,. ,. , • t ,, r i_ _ ,^,o , • r ii • \ , r ^ . Published in English in lull tor the Stuttgart, 1913 and in full in MEGA, f- 5

[^2]: Abt. III, Bd. 4, Berlin, 1931

[^3]: MARX TO ENGELS446

[^4]: IN MANCHESTER

[^5]: DEAR FRED,

[^6]: Please return to me after reading the enclosed letters from Bonhorst and the Goeggiana.447

[^7]: a flank man, fleet, flanking - b Sigismund Borkheim - c it is only one step - d See this volume, p. 358.

[^8]: 14*





**[p. 364]**

terms right to the end, should immediately have seized his papers, is an unnatural discovery.448

Apropos. The secretary3 of our French Genevan committeeb is utterly fed up with being saddled with Bakunin, and complains that he disorganises everything with his 'tyranny'. In the Égalité, Monsieur Bakunin indicates that the German and English workers have no desire for individuality, so accept our communisme autoritaire. In opposition to this, Bakunin represents le collectivis- me anarchique." The anarchism is, however, in his head, which contains only one clear idea—that Bakunin should play first fiddle.

For a complete understanding of Goegg's and Bonhorst's letters, you should know that the bumpkins' (or rather their representatives') party in Switzerland, Austria and Germany, are screaming blue murder about the resolution of the Basle Congress on propriété foncière.0

The foolishness and weakness (exploited by the cleverer Schweitzer) with which Wilhelm and his consorts reply to the howls by Schwabenmayere and the rest of their anti-People's Party supporters,449 make one's hair stand on end. It has not even occurred to one of these jackasses to ask the liberal howlers if there does not, perhaps, exist in Germany, side by side with small peasant property, also large landed property, which forms the basis of the surviving feudal economy; whether it will not be necessary to put an end to this in the course of a revolution, if only to put an end to the present economy of the state; and whether this can be done in the antiquated manner of 1789450? Quod non} The jackasses believe Schwabenmayer's statement that the land question is only of direct practical interest for England!

[^1]: The creation of the LAND AND LABOUR League*51 (incidentally, directly inspired by the General Council) should be regarded as an outcome of the Basle Congress379; here, the workers' party makes a clean break with the bourgeoisie, NATIONALISATION OF LAND [being] the STARTING POINT.8 Eccarius has been appointed active secretary (in addition to Boon as HONORARY ONE), and is being paid for it.

[^2]: I have been instructed by the GENERAL COUNCIL to write a few words to the ENGLISH WORKING CLASS about the IRISH PRISONERS' DEMONSTRA- TION LAST SUNDAY. Being so busy, I have no inclination to do it, BUT

[^3]: a Henri Perret - b The Federal Council of Romance Switzerland - c See 'Nouvel- les de l'étranger. France, Lyon, le 1 e r octobre 1869; Paris, le 21 vendémiaire, an 78 (12 octobre 1869)', L'Égalité, No. 39, 16 October 1869. - d landed property -

[^4]: e Karl Mayer - f But no. - s See [Resolution of the Basle Congress on landed property], Report of the Fourth Annual Congress, p. 26.



