---
Volume: 43
Document_Title: "259. Marx to Engels. 6 November "
Page_Range: "404-406"
---

# 259. Marx to Engels. 6 November 



**[p. 367]**

B o l t o n , a MASTER SPINNER t o l d S a m M o o r e q u i t e f r a n k l y : W E DONT CARE

AT ALL ABOUT THE 5 % REDUCTION OF WAGES, WHAT WE WANT AND INTEND TO

HAVE IS A REDUCED PRODUCTION ( t h a t i s t O Say 3. STRIKE). The Wakefield3 has still not been found here. But before I need it, I must check the basis more thoroughly, that's to say, the history of 1600-1700.

So that my Irish sources should not lack a comic side, I have found here in the FOREIGN LIBRARY Irland by Jacobus Venedey!

Best greetings. Lousy weather here.

Your

F. E.

First published in Der Briefwechsel zwischen Printed according to the original ^Engeb und K. Marx, Bd. 4, Stuttgart, P u b l i s h e d i n E n g U s h i n f u„ f o r t h e first time

259

MARX T O ENGELS

London, 6 November 1869

I send you 1 Pionier, 1 Volksstaat, and various copies of Social-Demokrat.

You will see from the Pionier that Heinzen believes I only wrote Capital so that he should not understand it.457

Schweitzer — utilising Liebknecht's anxiety with regard to his democratic friendsb—is behaving as though polemics against landed property were the first word in the Lassallean creed! Quelle impudence! Incidentally, Bonhorst did him good service in an issue of the Volksstaat that I cannot find.458 I don't know whether you receive the Volksstaat.

Bonhorst's arrest is good.4°9

There could be nothing more ridiculous than the respectable people's fear concerning the Queen's procession today.460 Every-

[^1]: IN MANCHESTER

[^2]: DEAR FRED,

[^3]: a E. Wakefield, An Account of Ireland, Statistical and Political. - b See this volume, p. 364.





**[p. 368]**

where overrun by police as in France. The whole alarm was produced by a HOAX. A few agitators have had their fun in the past few weeks, circulating HANDBILLS calling on the starving workers of the East End to present themselves en masse to the Queen, and de ne pas laisser passer la reine*

My family has just returned from the spectacle. Icy coldness amongst the public. Madame is said to have stared fuming-mad and ultra-crabby.

I shall send you, in the next few days, a volume I happened to pick up, which contains all sorts of pamphlets on Ireland. Those by Ensor (whom I also quoted in Capital) contain many piquant points.b Ensor was a political economist of English origin (his father still lived in England when Ensor was born), Protestant and, despite all this, one of the most resolute REPEALERS461 before 1830. Being himself indifferent to religious things, he can defend Catholicism with wit against the Protestants. The first pamphlet in the book is by Arthur O'Connor. I had expected rather more of it, since this O'Connor played an important role in 1798,462 and I have found good articles by him about Castlereagh's administra- tion in Cobbett's Political Register. Tussy should sometime look through Cobbett, for something there about Ireland.

This week Tussy and I lost 3 days putting my workroom in order. It had become jumbled to the frontiers of possibility.

Salut.

Your

K. M.

[^1]: TUSSY SENDS HER BEST COMPLIMENTS TO THE FAMILY.

[^2]: First published in Der Briefwechsel zwischen F. Engels und K. Marx, Bd. 4, Stuttgart, 1913

[^3]: Printed according to the original

[^4]: Published in English for the first time

[^5]: a not let the Queen pass - b G. Ensor, An Inquiry Concerning the Population of Nations: Containing a Refutation of Mr. Malthus's Essay on Population and Anti-Union. Ireland as She Ought to Be.



