---
Volume: 43
Document_Title: "261. Marx to Engels. 12 November "
Page_Range: "407-409"
---

# 261. Marx to Engels. 12 November 

fables. T h e fellow imagines that, in South Lancashire, among other places the Forest of Rossendale (a dense industrial district), the rental is so high only because the ground here is extremely productive of corn! I am making you a whole pile of marginal notes, etc., and as soon as I have read the rent theory I shall write my opinion of it and return the book to you. H e naturally explains the origin of rent with just such a nonsensical cut-throat theory as Ricardo, and also his idea of how it took place is as absurd as the way all economists imagine such things. Yet this does not affect the theory of rent itself. What Carey means by the'best landman be seen from the fact that, according to him, even today in the Northern States it is only profitable in exceptional cases to cultivate the so-called best land!

Post closing. Best greetings to all.

Your

F. E.

Vaudeville to be returned tomorrow.

First published abridged in Der Briefwech- Printed according to the original sei zwischen F Engels und K Marx BU 4, Published in English in full for the Stuttgart, 1913 and m full in MEGA, f- 6

Abt. Ill, Bd. 4, Berlin, 1931

261

MARX T O ENGELS

IN MANCHESTER

[London,] 12 November 1869

[^1]: DEAR FRED,

[^2]: This week something suspicious has displayed itself in my left arm-pit (as in Manchester 3 5 3), and on my leg. Arsenic again immediately. Additionally, Tussy forces me to take long walks with her after 1 or 2 o'clock every day. Finally, today introduced surreptitiously for the first time a flannel vest, since a cold in this state is not pleasant.





**[p. 371]**

You are surprised by the pluck of the French,3 and speak SOMEWHAT SNEERINGLY of us upright Germans. What risks we take you will see from the enclosed extravaganza.

In Stuttgart, in accordance with his habit, Freiligrath once again had himself photographed in several dozen poses, decked out as a statue, etc. The most successful holy picture of this Classen- Kappelmann-hero463 is—verbotenus0—a scene in which he as a lion rides on a camel. This is probably a back-hander for Heine's camel who defeats the lion.c

Liebknecht will be taking off next week for 3 months in prison, and has sent Borkheim a desperate plea for money.

What scares me about the French is the terrible confusion in their heads. Ledru-Rollin's circular letter is quite that of a pretender.464 He really appears to take au sérieux'1 the dictatorship over France offered him by Heinzen. On the other hand, Zukunft has been good enough to offer Mr Acollas, whom nobody in Paris knows, a post in the provisional government, because he had called the French to accept Dr J. Jacoby's programme instead of the antiquated human and citoyen" rights of 1793. One good turn deserves another. I find that OLD Jacoby himself is not playing properly the role he dictated for himself. Grasping the opportuni- ty of the Hanoverian event,404 should he not call on the Prussian sergeant-major-government—since Prussia is, after all, a 'military state'—also to lay aside those useless and, at the same time, expensive decorations, such as chambers, civil courts and the like? Wrapping oneself up silently in the depths of one's own moral indignation does not lure a soul from his hearth.

A while ago, the Russian gentlemen bombarded an island near Korea just for amusement, as Borkheim discovered in a Moscow newspaper/ Not a word about it in the English papers. If things go on like this, these fine fellows will soon be in possession of Japan.

The latest MEETINGS in Ireland were very nice; the clerics were seized by their collars and removed from the speaker's stand. Instead of the programme on Ireland,8 for which there is no proper motive, I have had (in order to adopt resolutions) the following placed on the agenda for next Tuesday.11

1. Proceedings of the English ministry on the Irish amnesty question!

[^1]: a See this volume, p. 369. - b literally - c See H. Heine, Atta Troll. - d seriously - e citizen - f «Bo MÖap/urpo Ba Hie Kopefic Koft Kpenoc TH BHHTOBOH AO^KOH Co6ojn>», Moc Koec KÏR etdo MOcmu, No. 207, 23 September 1869. - s See this volume, p. 364. - h 16 November



