---
Volume: 43
Document_Title: "263. Engels to Marx. 17 November "
Page_Range: "409-412"
---

# 263. Engels to Marx. 17 November 

2. The attitude of the English working class to the Irish question.

Salut.

Your

K. M.

First published abridged in Der Briefwech- Printed according to the original sei zwischen F. Engels und K. 1 Stuttgart, 1913 and in full Abt. III, Bd. 4, Berlin, 1931

sei zwischen F. Engels und K. Marx, Bd. 4, „ ,,. , , . „ .. , t ., t- , c m m J • i , i • \,rs-Ä Published in English for the first Stuttgart, 1913 and in full in MEGA, • °

262

MARX TO SAMUEL DAVENPORT465

London, 12 November 1869

1 Modena Villas, Maitland Park, Haverstock Hill, N. W.

Sir,

Yours obediently

Karl Marx

263

Manchester, 17 November 1869

Dear Moor,

I hope the arsenic and the exercise will have thundered a rapid retreat to that certain 'suspicious' matter. But I also hope that

[^1]: I have the honour to enclose a post office order for 2 guineas as my yearly subscription for the Society of Arts.356

[^2]: First published in Russian in Kommunist, Printed according to the photo- No. 3, Moscow, 1983 copy of the original

[^3]: Published in English for the first time

[^4]: ENGELS TO MARX180

[^5]: IN LONDON





**[p. 373]**

these constant relapses will finally lead you to the conclusion that you must commence a more rational way of life. You poison your blood yourself by making regular digestion impossible. And you certainly don't then produce the same quantum (and quale*) of work as you would under normal circumstances.

The idyllic drama Familienglück coram Philistaco is really enchanting.13 One does not know what to admire more, the fadaisec

of the speeches and the poets (only interrupted by the nasty- sounding nonsense of boozy Karl Beck), or the importunity of the family, which has something like this printed as 'manuscript for friends' (that is PUBLIC for non-friends). But it is not quite clear to me how the noble Freiligrath can have printed the intrepid words of the tender-hearted Walesrode: that the poet Freiligrath has also achieved something in the way of worldly possessions (by begging6). I would like to have seen the faces in his family when these words were uttered.

Monsieur Ledru-Rollin is certainly reckoning on nothing other than a dictatorship. The litde fellow Louis Blanc also re-emerged as though nothing had happened—why not the others? At a moment like this, the bourgeois press does not tell us anything about what is really happening, and even the revolutionary press does not suffice to enlighten one. The confusion is certainly great, but it is equally certain that the crisis is not yet really close. But a general in Paris has said: Nous avons encore un Empereur, mais l'empire n'existe plus.d

The Russians are having a rare old time of it in Asia. They are now happily waging war with the Khan of Kashgar,e formerly subject to the Chinese, but who has now made himself indepen- dent. If they subdue him, they will run directly up against countries already under English dominion (Ladekh, Kashmir), about 200 miles from the English frontier. You will have seen Vâmbéry's news (taken over by English papers from the Augsburg Allgemeine Zeitung1) about the trickery in Bukhara (where, under treaty, Russian goods pay 3% customs, English 40%!), Afghanis- tan, etc. John Bull's stupidity is becoming ever greater, as a result of his bumptiousness.

Isn't it the best joke of the Irish to propose O'Donovan Rossa as candidate for Tipperary? If this succeeds, Gladstone will find himself in a fine fix. And now, again, an amnesty in Italy.466

[^1]: a quality - b See this volume, p. 371. - c rubbish - d We still have an Emperor, but the Empire no longer exists. - e Mohammed Jakub Beg - f H. Vâmbéry, 'Eine neue Wendung in der central-asiatischen Frage', Allgemeine Zeitung, No. 308, 4 November

[^2]: 1869. See also The Times, 8 November 1869.





**[p. 374]**

I hope to read at length about the debates, etc., in the International3 next Sunday in the Bee-Hive. Be sure to send me any documents there may be. Last Sunday the Bee-Hive had nothing about the International but, instead, something about the wedding of the Duke of Abercorn's daughters.

Prendergast's Cromwellian Settlement is OUT OF PRINT. YOU would, therefore, oblige me greatly if you order it second-hand im- mediately. Butt's Irish People: NONE in London. Other Irish pamphlets, e.g., those of Lords Rosse and Lifford: CANNOT FIND. These are the answers my bookseller received from his London agent, and he told me the English book trade could not, in any case, occupy itself with obtaining publications appearing in Ireland, since it is not usual to have a correspondent in Dublin, but only in London. Now I shall write direct to Duffy in Dublin.

I have found here a number of very useful things about Ireland. Wolfe Tone's Memoirs etc., that is, in the catalogue. As soon as I ask for these things in the library, they cannot be found, like, for instance, Wakefield.0 Some old fellow must have had all the stuff out together and returned it en masse, so the whole pile is lying hidden somewhere. In any case, these things must be found.

Goldwin Smith in Irish History and Irish Character is quite the wise bourgeois thinker. Ireland was intended by providence to be GRAZING LAND, the prophet Léonce de Lavergnec foretold it, ergo pereatd the Irish people!

I wanted to write about Careyc today, but was interrupted. Soonest.

Best greetings to all the LADIES.

Your

F. E.

[^1]: First published abridged in Der Briefwech- sel zwischen F. Engels und K. Marx, Bd. 4, Stuttgart, 1913 and in full in MEGA, Abt. III, Bd. 4, Berlin, 1931

[^2]: Printed according to the original

[^3]: Published in English in full for the first time

[^4]: a See this volume, pp. 371-72, 375-76, 386-87, 392-93. - b E. Wakefield, An Account of Ireland, Statistical and Political. - c L. de Lavergne, The Rural Economy of England, Scotland and Ireland. - d so perish - e H. Ch. Carey, Principles of Social Science.



