---
Volume: 43
Document_Title: "264. Marx to Engels. 18 November "
Page_Range: "412-414"
---

# 264. Marx to Engels. 18 November 



**[p. 264]**

MARX T O ENGELS 4 6 7

IN MANCHESTER

[London,] 18 November 1869

DEAR FRED,

I am sending you today a parcel by BOOKPOST, containing 1. the volume of Irish pamphlets" (especially Ensor OF SOME VALUE,13) 2. Social-Demokrat and Volksstaat, 3. 3 COPIES for you, Moore and Schorlemmer of the Report on the Basle Congress. I don't know if I have already sent it. In this case, the COPIES can be given to other people.

I'll look after your commissions/ T h e Bee-Hive completely suppressed the report (by Eccarius) on the latest session,*1 on the pretext that it had received it too late. T h e real reason was that:

1. it did not wish to announce that the GENERAL COUNCIL would open a discussion on the Irish question at its next meeting;

* Resolved, that in his reply to the Irish demands for the release of the imprisoned Irish patriots—a reply contained in his letter to Mr O'Shea etc. etc.— Mr Gladstone deliberately insults the Irish Nation;

that he clogs political amnesty with conditions alike degrading to the victims of misgovernment and the people they belong to;

that having, in the teeth of his responsible position, publicly and enthusiastically cheered on the American slaveholders' Rebel- lion,469 he now steps in to preach to the Irish people the doctrine of passive obedience;

[^1]: 2. in the report, unfavourable references were made to it (i.e., to Mr Potter), about the LAND AND LABOUR LEAGUE.4''1 T h e fact is that Mr Potter failed glaringly as a candidate for the COMMITTEE of the LEAGUE.

[^2]: Last Tuesday e I opened the discussion on point 1 : the attitude of the British Ministry to the IRISH AMNESTY QUESTION . I spoke for ABOUT an h o u r and a quarter, MUCH CHEERED,468 and then proposed the following resolutions ON point No. 1 :

[^3]: a See this volume, p. 368. - b G. Ensor, An Inquiry Concerning the Population of Nations and Anti-Union. Ireland as She Ought to Be. - c See the previous letter. - d of the General Council on 9 November 1869 - e 16 November



that his whole proceedings with reference to the Irish Amnesty question are the true and genuine offspring of that 'policy of conquest', by the fiery denunciation of which Mr Gladstone ousted his Tory rivals from office;

that the General Council of the 'International Working Men's Association' express their admiration of the spirited, firm and highsouled manner in which the Irish people carry on their Amnesty movement;

that these resolutions be communicated to all branches of, and working men's bodies connected with, the 'International Working Men's Association' in Europe and America.*3

Harris (an O'Brien-MAN) declared TO SECOND. But the President (Lucraft) pointed to the clock (we may only stay until 11); HENCE, adjourned until next Tuesday. However, Lucraft, Weston, Hales etc., IN FACT the whole COUNCIL, tentatively declared their agreement

IN INFORMAL WAY.

Milner, another O'Brienite, declared that the language of the RESOLUTIONS was too weak (i.e., not declamatory enough); further- more he demands that everything I said in support of the case should be included in the RESOLUTIONS. (A fine kettle of fish!)

Since the debate will continue on Tuesday, NOW THE TIME FOR YOU to tell, rather to write, me anything you might wish to amend or add to the RESOLUTIONS. In the latter case, if you, for example, wish to add a paragraph about the amnesties all over Europe, ITALY for example, write it at once in resolution form.

INCIDENT OF LAST COUNCILS SITTING. Mr Holyoake—BE EVERY MAN HIS OWN CROMWELL—appears and, after leaving, has himself proposed by Weston. Tentatively declared that he should first take out a card as a member of the INTERNATIONAL WORKING MENS ASSOCIATION, otherwise he cannot even be proposed. His aim is SIMPLY to make himself important—and to figure as a DELEGATE at the next GENERAL CONGRESS. The debate on his ADMISSION will be stormy, since he has many friends among us and, as an offended intriguant, could play some nasty tricks on us. What are your ideas about the tactics to be followed?

Enclosed—screed from Liebknecht,470 who has also complained bitterly in his letter to Borkheim that we do not support him, either morally or materially. RETURN the 2nd enclosed letter from Wilhelm, which is addressed to Borkheim.

[^1]: a K. Marx, Draft Resolution of the General Council on the Policy of the British Government Towards the Irish Prisoners



