---
Volume: 43
Document_Title: "269. Marx to Engels. 4 December "
Page_Range: "429-431"
---

# 269. Marx to Engels. 4 December 



**[p. 269]**

MARX T O ENGELS 4 8 9

IN MANCHESTER

[London,] 4 December 1869

DEAR FRED,

T h e RESOLUTIONS UNANIMOUSLY CARRIED3 despite Odger's incessant VERBAL AMENDMENTS. I gave in to him on only one point, to omit the word 'DELIBERATE' before 'INSULTS' in para. l.b I did this ON PRETENCE,THAT EVERYTHING A PRIME MINISTER PUBLICLY DID, MUST BE PRESUMED eo ipso TO BE DELIBERATE. T h e real reason was that I knew, as soon as the first para, was accepted in substance^ all further opposition would be in vain. I'm sending you 2 National Reformers containing reports on the 2 first sessions, not yet on the latest. This report, too, is poor, and much is quite wrong (due to misunderstanding), but better than Eccarius' reports in Reynolds's. They are by Harris, whose currence panacea you will also find in the latest number of the National Reformer.490

O n e has to struggle here not only against prejudices, but also against the stupidity and wretchedness of the Irish spokesmen in Dublin. The Irishman (Pigott) cannot know of the proceedings and RESOLUTIONS solely from Reynolds's, to which he subscribes and from which he often quotes. They (the RESOLUTIONS) had already been sent him directly by an Irishman on 17 November/ Till today, deliberately not a word. T h e jackass behaved in a similar way during our debate and petition for 3 MANCHESTER MEN.492 T h e 'IRISH' QUESTION must be treated as something quite distinct, excluding the outside world, and it must be concealed that English workers sympathise with the Irish! What a d u m b ox! A n d this with regard to the International, which has press organs all over Europe and the UNITED STATES! This week he has received the RESOLUTIONS officially, signed by the FOREIGN SECRETARIES. T h e material has also been sent to the 'People'.à Nous verrons? Mottershead subscribes to The

[^1]: With the exception of Mottershead, who appeared as John Bull, and Odger, who as always acted the diplomat, the English delegates have behaved excellently. T h e general debate on the attitude of the ENGLISH WORKING CLASS to the IRISH QUESTION begins on Tuesday. 4 9 1

[^2]: a See this volume, pp. 371-72. - b Ibid., p. 375. - c In the original: 'December'. - d probably The New-York Irish People - e We shall see.



Irishman a n d will not fail to use this opportunity to POKE FUN AT THE

'HIGHSOULED' IRISHMEN. But I'll play a trick on Pigott. I'm writing to Eccarius today, asking him to send the RESOLUTIONS with the signatures, etc., to Isaac Butt, the President of the IRISH WORKING MEN'S ASSOCIATION. Butt is not Pigott.

T h e following explains to you the enclosed letter from Applegarth:

After the e n d of the last session, in which he behaved very well, he took me aside and told me the following: AN EMINENT MEMBER OF

THE HOUSE OF COMMONS3 h a d written to him that he h a d been commissioned BY AN EMINENT MEMBER OF THE HOUSE OF LORDS (LORD Leach- field!) to ask him whether he h a d voted for the abolition OF ALL PRIVATE PROPERTY at Basle.379 His answer was decisive for the attitude towards him of Applegarth's parliamentary patrons. H e (Ap- plegarth) wanted to give the fellows a decisive answer, I should write down briefly the 'reasons', and this the following day. I was very busy, as well as still SUFFERING u n d e r the arm; cold made worse by the frightful FOG after the session on Tuesday evening. Thus, wrote to Applegarth on Wednesday b that I h a d been prevented, but READY TO SUPPORT HIM when he received a reply.493 With English obstinacy he did not accept; wrote enclosed letter.494 So I was WILLY-NILLY forced to write him 8 closely-written pages, which will give him a lot to pore over about LANDED PROPERTY a n d the NECESSITY

Enclosed, also, a letter from Bracke.496 I have nothing against Bonhorst; I had only told Kugelmann that I regarded him as a rather revolutionary character. Kugelmann, with his usual tact, informed Bracke of this in amplified form.

Salut.

Your

Moor

[^1]: OF ITS ABOLITION.495 T h e fellow is very important since, ON THE PART OF BOTH HOUSES OF PARLIAMENT he is the officially recognised representa- tive of the English TRADES UNIONS.

[^2]: Tussy thanks Dido c very much for his letter, a n d sends greetings to all.

[^3]: First published abridged in Der Briefwech- sel zwischen F. Engels und K. Marx, Bd. 4, Stuttgart, 1913 and in full in MEGA, Abt. III, Bd. 4, Berlin, 1931

[^4]: Printed according to the original

[^5]: Published in English in full for the first time

[^6]: il apparently A. J. Mundella - b 1 December - c See this volume, p. 389.



