---
Volume: 43
Document_Title: "271. Marx to Engels. 10 December "
Page_Range: "433-437"
---

# 271. Marx to Engels. 10 December 



**[p. 396]**

paid me the last remainder of my money,3 and we shall now probably more or less show each other our backsides. Best greetings.

Your

F. E.

How anxious Bracke is not to give an opinion about people whom he should know very well. Also appears to have more good nature than resolution.

First published abridged in Der Briefwech- Printed according to the original sei zwischen F. Engels und K. Marx, Bd. 4, n t . r i . j - r - r u • t u t .u ,„,„ , • r „ • . , ^ ^ . Published in English in full for the Stuttgart, 1913 and m full in MEGA r f m „ Abt. Ill, Bd. 4, Berlin, 1931

271

MARX TO ENGELS489

London, 10 December 1869

D'abord,h about the Solingen business.498 (Are £2 necessary here? I think only one.)

These people have BOTHERED me, the CENTRAL COUNCIL,73 the Basle Congress etc., with their APPEALS. They themselves admit that their productive cooperative is only of local interest. How can they expect foreign countries to contribute a SINGLE FARTHING to them, in view of the international sacrifices that the STRIKES, etc., cost, and of the tribulations of hundreds of French and English production cooperatives? They have seen what benefit they have gained from Becker's enthusiastic appeals.c

On the other hand: these Solingen people are supporters for you and me in the Rhine Province. They belonged (THE LEADERS) to the

[^1]: IN MANCHESTER

[^2]: DEAR FRED,

[^3]: a See this volume, p. 299. - b First of all - c Marx has in mind the appeals for aid to the Solingen cooperative issued by the Central Committee of the German language sections: 'Rundschreiben des Zentralkomite's der Sektionsgruppe deutscher Sprache an. die Sektionen und mitgenössischen Gesellschaften', Der Vorbote, No. 11, November 1868; 'Mahnruf. An unsere Bundesgenossen und die Arbeiter und Arbeitervereine aller Länder', Der Vorbote, No. 10, October 1869.





**[p. 397]**

League. 1 1 8 U n d e r Lassalle's lordly sway, when Marquis Izzy a was in Cologne, the same Karl Klein announced a TOAST for us,500 the editors of the Neue Rheinische Zeitung, and Izzy was forced de faire bonne mine à mauvais jeu .b Further, their cooperative was solid a n d maintained itself for years. T h e stupidity of the Prussian legislation forced them to fix their capital a n d thus reduce their working capital. T h e n the Rhenish bourgeois became irritable a n d decided to break them u p , partly by selling their OBLIGATIONS, and partly by withdrawing all COMMERCIAL ADVANCES (not based on

OBLIGATIONS).

Thus, the business is of general importance and, for us, personal importance.

What I suggest is this: You send the fellows 50 thaler for OBLIGATIONS, and tell them, at the same time, that they must themselves see you can d o nothing for them among the English bourgeois in Manchester. Tell them as well — and this is a FACT—that / in London have made all possible efforts on their behalf, but in vain. Finally, tell t h e m — a n d I shall try this immediately—that I shall try to raise money for them among the German bourgeois. I shall—naturally you will not tell them this—write immediately to Menke in H a m b u r g to this end. It is possible that Menke (who is a millionaire, a n d has read Capital" from beginning to end, a n d furnished it with 'correcting notes', which he himself showed me) will do something. 2,000 thaler are nothing to such people. They would naturally, d'abord, SEND SOMEBODY TO Solingen to look at how the thing works. If the business is not capable of surviving, it should not and may not receive support. If the contrary, then I am certain that these people (Menke et Co.) will provide the money.

With regard to the report in the National Reformer,1 not only has nonsense been attributed to me, but even what is rightly reported is incorrectly reported. But I didn't want to complain. D'abord, I would, thereby, offend the REPORTER (Harris). Second, as long as I don't interfere, all these reports are in n o way official. If I correct something, I admit the rest is right—yet everything is wrong the

[^1]: Ad vocemd: IRISH QUESTION. I did not attend the CENTRAL COUNCIL last T u e s d a y / My 'FAMILY' did not allow me to go in this FOG and in my PRESENT STATE OF HEALTH, although I h a d undertaken TO OPEN THE DEBATES.

[^2]: 11 Ferdinand Lassalle - b to grin and bear it - c K. Marx, Capital, Vol. I (see present edition, Vol. 35). - d As to - e 7 December - f See this volume, pp. 392 and 394.





**[p. 398]**

way it is reproduced. BESIDES, / have reasons not to convert these reports into legal EVIDENCE against me, which happens the moment I correct details

T h e way I shall express the matter next Tuesday is: that, quite apart from all 'international' and 'humane' phrases about JUSTICE FOR IRELAND—which are taken for granted on the INTERNATIONAL COUNCIL—it is in the direct and absolute interests of the ENGLISH WORKING

CLASS TO GET WD OF THEIR PRESENT CONNEXION WITH IRELAND. I a m f u l l y convinced of this, for reasons that, in part, I cannot tell the English workers themselves. For a long time I believed it would be possible to overthrow the Irish regime by ENGLISH WORKING CLASS ASCENDANCY. I always took this viewpoint in the New-York Tribune.501

Deeper study has now convinced m e of the opposite. T h e English WORKING CLASS will never accomplish anything BEFORE IT HAS GOT RID OF IRELAND. T h e lever must be applied in Ireland. This is why the Irish QUESTION is so important for the social movement in general.

I have read a lot of Davies3 in extracts. T h e book itself I have only glanced through superficially in the Museum, b so you would oblige m e if you would copy out for m e the passages relating to COMMON PROPERTY. You must get hold of Curran's 'Speeches' edited by Davies (London: James Duffy, 22 Paternoster Row). I meant to give it to you when you were in London. It is now circulating a m o n g the English MEMBERS OF THE CENTRAL COUNCIL, and God knows when I shall see it again. For the period 1779-1800 (Union 4 6 1) it is of decisive importance, not only because of Curran's 'Speeches' (namely in court; I regard Curran as the sole great lawyer (people's advocate) of the 18th century, and the noblest personality, while Grattan was a parliamentary rogue), but because you find all the sources about the UNITED IRISHMEN*62 This period is of the greatest interest, SCIENTIFI- CALLY AND DRAMATICALLY. First, the dirty infamies of the English in 1588-89 repeated (perhaps even intensified) in 1788-89. Second, class movement is easily shown in the Irish movement itself. Third, the infamous policy of Pitt. Fourth, which very much irks Messrs the English, the proof that Ireland came to grief because IN FACT, FROM A REVOLUTIONARY STANDPOINT, the Irish were too far advanced for the- ENGLISH KING AND CHURCH MOB, while, on the other hand, English reaction in England (as in Cromwell's time) h a d its roots in the subjugation of Ireland. This period must be described in at least one chapter 5 0 2: a pillory for John Bull!

Enclosed something French—and, as a contrast, Freiligrath-ish!

[^1]: " J. Davies, Historical Tracts. - b the British Museum Library



I would be glad if you would send the money for the next quarter as soon as possible.

Apropos. Tussy has undertaken A FOOLISH WORK, embroidering a sofa cushion for you for Christmas. I don't believe she will be finished before the New Year. She allows neither Mama, nor Jennychen, nor Lenchen to sew a single stitch, so she has done nothing else for weeks. This is, however, a great secret, a n d you must naturally not give the slightest hint that you know about it. Tussy would eat m e alive.

COMPLIMENTS TO MRS LIZZY.

Your

K. Moor

Of the French stuff I am sending you, Gaulois—half Bonapart- ist, half opposition—is STUPID. Père Ùuchèsne will astonish you by its impudence. A n d in such a STATE OF THINGS the bitch Eugénie dares to push herself forward 5 0 3? She really wants to get hanged.

Apropos. T h e translation of Capital GOES ON.441 Keller has now interrupted it, however. H e wants to publish 18th Brumaire1' first, believing this possible u n d e r the present circumstances a n d important for France.

[^1]: As for the current Irish movement, 3 important factors: 1. opposition to lawyers and TRADING POLITICIANS and BLARNEY; 2. opposition to the dictates of the priests who (the higher ones) are TRAITORS, as in O'Connell's time, just as in 1798-1800; 3. the emergence of the AGRICULTURAL LABOURING CLASS against the FARMING CLASS ON THE LAST MEETi Ncs.b (Similar phenomenon from 1795 to 1800.)

[^2]: T h e Irishman only made its way owing to the suppression of the FENIAN PRESS. For a long time it stood IN OPPOSITION TO Fenianism. Luby, etc., OF THE Irish People were educated people who treated religion as a bagatelle. T h e government cast them into prison, and then came the Pigotts et Co. T h e Irishman will only continue to amount to anything until those people come out of prison. H e knows this, though h e is now squeezing POLITICAL CAPITAL out of declarations on behalf of the 'FELON CONVICTS'.

[^3]: First published abridged in Der Briefivech- Printed according to the original sei zwischen F. Engels und K.Marx, Bd. 4, p u b ) i sh ed in English in full for the Stuttgart, 1913 and in full in MEGA f:rst . ; „ „ Abt. Ill, Bd. 4, Berlin, 1931

[^4]: a K.Marx, The Eighteenth Brumaire of Louis Bonaparte - b 'From Our Correspondent. Dublin, November 30' (in the 'Ireland' column), The Times, 1 December 1869; 'Great Excitement' (from the Belfast papers), The Irishman, 4 December.



