---
Volume: 43
Document_Title: "274. Engels to Marx. 16 December "
Page_Range: "438-440"
---

# 274. Engels to Marx. 16 December 



**[p. 401]**

About the Solingen people—ALL RIGHT. From the start it was my opinion that both of us had a special interest in the people.3 I shall probably go to Barmen next week, as my mother simply insists I spend a Christmas at home again, and this time it is very possible that I shall travel to Solingen and see the people myself.

Correction of incorrect reports would naturally be of no help.b

It would have to be done every week.

I have the Curran c here, in an edition that is probably much more complete, but I suppose I shall be glad also to acquire the new edition. For the time being I have enough to do with the early history up to 1660, and as soon as I'm finished with that, the period 1782-1800 will naturally be my main interest. First of all, however, I want to finish off the old stuff, particularly since I have found that the original positions between 1172-1600 are everywhere represented completely falsely, and I am only slowly discovering the original sources.

Not heard anything about Prendergast yetd? This book will soon be indispensable to me, or its lack will become very gênant.e

More tomorrow.

Your

F. E.

274

Manchester, 16 December 1869

Dear Moor,

Enclosed—the desired remittance. This time I have been able to make it one hundred pounds, since a minor error to my

[^1]: First published in Der Briefwechsel zwischen Printed according to the original F^ Engels und K. Marx, Bd. 4, Stuttgart, p u b i i s h e d in English for the first 1 9 1 3 time

[^2]: ENGELS TO MARX504

[^3]: IN LONDON

[^4]: * See this volume, pp. 395, 396-97. - b Ibid., pp. 397-98. - ' J. Ph. Curran, The Speeches of the Right Honorable John Philpot Curran, 2nd edition, Dublin, 1855. - d J. P. Prendergast, The Cromwellian Settlement of Ireland. - e painful





**[p. 402]**

disadvantage was found in the last accounts, and Sir Godfrey3 had to make it good to me subsequently—IT WILL COME IN FOR CHRISTMAS.

That damned Giraldus Cambrensis dances before me like a will-o'-the-wisp. I must get the fellow, since he is the first foreign, that is to say first authentic, source on the state of Ireland on the arrival of the English, and the quotations I have seen lead me to believe that I shall find something more. The book, called Hibernia expugnata,b is nowhere to be found, but the first part, which interests me, is in the Frankfurt (!) edition of Camden's Britannia? I don't know whether in another edition. This edition is naturally not here; an English edition in the FREE LIBRARY does not contain Giraldus505; the third volume of another edition in the lending library which might contain it is lost, and thus my only hope is the Chetham LIBRARY,480 to which I shall go tomorrow. Incidentally, this hunt for sources is quite a different sort of pleasure than it was to hunt for customers on the blasted stock exchange.

Are Petty's Political Anatomy of Ireland and Political Survey of Ireland two different works, or only different editions? For the latter is here.

I am making a written record of each period as soon as I have fairly finished my studies. Then you have the interrelations more clearly in your head and, altogether, a more vivid idea of the business, and can still make corrections. That is why, on the whole, I am keeping so strictly to the historic periods in arranging the order in which I plough through sources. I am nearly finished up to 1600.

On the side, I am reading Grant's CAMPAIGN AGAINST Richmond by Cannon.d Grant is a self-willed jackass who had so little confidence in himself and his army that he never dared undertake the simplest flanking manoeuvre against Lee, who was weaker by half, before he had weakened him by several days of frontal attack and had nailed him down in his original position. He relied upon the simple calculation that if he lost three men for every one of Lee's, then Lee would run out of people before he did. Nowhere else have there been such brutal butcheries as on that occasion. It was

[^1]: I have here a later edition of Kane's book; the one from you is unfortunately of little use because of its age (1846).506

[^2]: a Gottfried Ermen - b Giraldus Cambrensis, Topographia hibernica et expugnatio hibernica. In: Giraldi Cambrensis Opera, Vol. V. - c G. Camdenus, Britannia, sive florentissimorum regnorum Anglioe, Scotce, Hiberniœ, et insularum adiacentium ex intima

[^3]: antiquitate. - d J. Cannon, History of Grant's Campaign for the Capture of Richmond (1864-1865).



