---
Volume: 43
Document_Title: "277. Engels to Marx. 9 January "
Page_Range: "444-445"
---

# 277. Engels to Marx. 9 January 



**[p. 277]**

ENGELS TO MARX

IN LONDON

Manchester, 9 January 1870

Dear Moor,

A Happy New Year! I arrived back here at midday on Thursday, after thoroughly wrecking my stomach in Barmen with innumerable guzzlings.513

The people there are overjoyed, that is, the philistines are. The danger of war has now been finally overcome; Louis-Napoleon has once again finely maintained his superior wisdom through prudent compliance.514 Bismarck is once again able to work, confidence is returning, COMMERCE must improve, and so 1870 must be an extremely blessed year for the honest German duffers. I cannot grasp how these people manage to take leave of more of their senses every year.

Hühnerbein, the old tailor and general of the revolution, was very pleased to see me. He still has a complete set of the Neue Rheinische Zeitung bound in red, which is good to know. He sends greetings; he has two very pretty daughters.

1. It would have been very difficult for me to get away for a day at HOLIDAY time;

2. I could not very well have asked for a closer look at the business without contributing a larger sum myself, which was not possible and

3. as a Party friend, I would have been forced to take the people's word for some things, and not to have insisted so strictly, like a complete stranger, on the presentation of all documents and SECURITIES; and Menke, as a result of my report, would perhaps refrain from sending anyone, and thus load me with a responsibil- ity I would prefer to decline.

If I hadn't been so wrecked and, in addition, worried about Lizzie, whom I left unwell, and from whom I heard nothing all the time, I would have dropped in on you on the return journey.

Read practically no newspapers the whole time, but I see that

[^1]: I did not go to Solingen3 for the following reasons:

[^2]: Now I shall wait for your reply and then wiite to the people.b

[^3]: a See this volume, p. 401. - b Ibid., pp. 420-21.



