---
Volume: 43
Document_Title: "279. Marx to Engels. 22 January "
Page_Range: "447-448"
---

# 279. Marx to Engels. 22 January 



**[p. 410]**

In recent years there has been rather more criticism in Irish research, particularly in Petrie's antiquarian studies2; he also forced me to read some Celtic-Irish (naturally with a parallel translation). It doesn't seem all that difficult, but I shan't delve deeper into the stuff; I'm already hobbled with enough philologi- cal nonsense. In the next few days, when I get the book, I'll see how the ancient laws have been dealt with.

I congratulate you on your progress in Russian. You will charm Borkheim, and it is also a good thing because mine has nearly all become very rusty again, and if you let yours become rusty again, then I shall have to start once more.

Best greetings to your wife and the girls. Lafargue is in a really frightful hurry.b

Your

F. E.

First published abridged in Der Briefwech- Printed according to the original sei zwischen F. Engels und K. Marx Bd 4, Published in English in full for the Stuttgart, 1913 and in full in MEGA firsr rirrl P Abt. III, Bd. 4, Berlin, 1931

279

MARX TO ENGELS

[London,] 22 January 1870

I am only writing you THESE FEW LINES today, since my left arm is under bandages and POULTICES, that is to say, not under my command.

The business was an ABSCESS connected with the GLANDS. In addition, a few other little things, which were put in order yesterday by being lanced. Today, everything in best progress; the doctor was fully satisfied.

The port, which arrived yesterday, is doing me a great service. You should not imagine that I have learned so much Russian IN A

[^1]: IN MANCHESTER

[^2]: DEAR FRED,

[^3]: a G. Pétrie, The Ecclesiastical Architecture of Ireland, Anterior to the Anglo-Norman Invasion. In: The Transactions of the Royal Irish Academy, Vol. XX. - b See this volume, p. 551.



