---
Volume: 43
Document_Title: "280. Marx to César De Paepe. 24 January "
Page_Range: "448-452"
---

# 280. Marx to César De Paepe. 24 January 



**[p. 411]**

FEW WEEKS; I won't say as much as you have forgotten, but as much as would remain to you had you forgotten three times as much. I am still a beginner.

So Herzen is dead. Just about time I finished Twpb Ma etc.519

Plenty of things have happened in the 'International', especially with regard to Bakunin's intrigues.507 But too long to write about now.

The Paris MOVEMENTS are amusing.3 Since Ollivier is also a FREE TRADER, he is naturally a man after the heart of the English philistine, who always forgets that what suits him must be, prima facie,h DISGUSTING to French Frenchmen.

MY COMPLIMENTS TO MRS Lizzie AND ALL OF THEM.

Your

Moor

What do you say to the clever-clever stuff in Zukunft, by means of which they attempt to push themselves out of the purely political camp!

Apropos. I still have a little note from Liebknecht520 which arrived for you during your absence from England. But I can't look it out now amongst the mess of papers. Next time.

280

London, 24 January 1870

Dear citizen De Paepe,

I am writing to you WITH SOME DIFFICULTY, as my left arm is bandaged. At the end of last month, an abscess of the gland began to form near the armpit. I neglected the thing, and I am punished for my sin. Several days after I sent the letter to Brussels,512 the

[^1]: First published abridged in Der Briefwech- Printed according to the original sei zwischen F Engels und K Mo« Bd. 4, Published in English for the first Stuttgart, 1913 and in full in MEGA .:„„ Abt. Ill, Bd. 4, Berlin, 1931

[^2]: MARX TO CÉSAR DE PAEPE48

[^3]: IN BRUSSELS

[^4]: a See this volume, p. 409. - b immediately

[^5]: 16*





**[p. 412]**

pain became intolerable and I fell into the hands of doctors. I underwent two operations, and I feel better, but I am still being treated and must stay at home.

In the first place, I am writing this letter to ask you a personal favour. You probably know that a part of the English bourgeoisie has formed a sort of LAND League521 against the workers' LAND AND LABOUR LEAGUE.43' Their ostensible purpose is to transform English landed property into small-lot property, and to create a peasantry for the greater benefit of the people. Their real purpose is an attack against landed aristocracy. They want to throw land in free circulation in order to transfer it in this way from the hands of LANDLORDS into those of capitalists. To this effect, they published a series of popular tracts under the title of Cobden Treaties, in which small-scale property is painted in rosy colours. Their great battle-horse is Belgium (principally the Flemings). It would appear that in that country the peasants live under paradisiacal conditions. They established contact with Mr Laveleye who provides them with facts for their rhetoric. In the meantime, as I treat of landed property in Volume Two of Capital,1*1 I believe it useful to go into some detail there on the structure of landed property in Belgium and of Belgian agriculture.322 Will you have the goodness to send me the titles of the principal books which I must consult523?

My illness has naturally prevented me from attending the General Councila in the last weeks. Yesterday evening, the subcommittee (the executive committee) of which I am a member visited me. Among other things, they communicated to me the content of a letter sent by Mr Hins to Stepney. As Stepney believed that I would be able to attend the session of the General Council (on 25 January), he did not communicate to me any extracts from that letter. I do not know any of it except from h ")24 earsay.

In the first place, it is probably believed in Brussels that the catastrophe of Geneva, the change in the staff of L'Egalité,523 was produced by resolutions of the General Council.b That is an error. Jung was so busy with his work as watchmaker that he did not find the time to copy the resolutions and dispatch them to Geneva

before 16 January. In the interval, he received two letters from H. Perret, secretary of the Romance Committee. The first letter, dated 4 January, is official. It is a communication of the Romance Committee to the General Council stating that some editors of

[^1]: •' See this volume, p. 471. - b K. Marx, The General Council to the Federal Council of Romance Switzerland.





**[p. 413]**

L'Égalité convened to wage a public campaign against the General Council and the Swiss Committees with which they were not in accord, but that they acted against the will of the Romance Committee.

The second letter, of a later date but arriving also before the resolutions of the General Council were dispatched by Jung, is a confidential letter sent by Perret to Jung, I am giving you literal extracts from it to put you in the picture. As the letter is private, I need not tell you that these extracts must not be communicated to the Belgian Committee or that the name of the writer must remain a secret.526

'Bakunin has left Geneva. So much the better. Those kind of people bring discord among us. He was the head of the Alliance?51 These democrats are authoritarians, they do not want any opposition; such are Bakunin, Perron and Robin; these three were at the head of L'Egalité. Bakunin, with his personal attacks, cost us 200 or 300 subscribers in Geneva. Robin is even more authoritarian, his ambition was to change everything here; he has not succeeded, we do not wish to allow ourselves to be dominated by these gentlemen who believe themselves to be indispensable. They attempted to bring pressure to bear on the Federal Committee, and that did not succeed; we do not want to engage in adventures with them or to bring discord in our sections. Please believe me that l'Alliance is dangerous for us, especially now. As for their plan in Geneva, I guessed it a long time ago: to let the men of l'Alliance move to the top of all the societies in order to dominate the Federation. If you knew their mode of action—denigrating at the sections the people who do not let themselves be dominated by them; they did everything to push my candidature out of the way in Basle, the same thing in Grosselin You see the manoeuvre—sending to Basle no one but members of the l'Alliance, Heng, Brosset, Bakunin. That did not succeed at all. Besides, he a worked on the delegations at Lyons, at Naples; these methods are not ethical. They left for Basle before us to prepare their intrigues Here is something that happened at the Congress, something I guessed about but had no certain proof of. Martinaud, delegate of the Neuchâtel section, had a mandate signed by the brother of Guillaume,52,7 a forged, false mandate — we have proof of that in our hands. The Neuchâtel section was not yet definitively constituted, and the provisional committee wrote to us not to recognise either Guillaume or Martinaud. These are the morals of the apostles of l'Alliance, for Guillaume and some others from Locle are their friends. Besides, the creation of Progrès has lured away subscribers to L'Égalité, although our journal was founded by all and we must support it.

[^1]: 'The last bit of news: the cut-throats of l'Alliance have just handed in their resignation from L'Égalité—Perron, Robin and some others, more or less capable ones. A little coup d'état à la Bakunin and à la Robin. They wanted to force the hand of the Federal Committee, that it might dismiss from the staff a memberb who offered opposition and who condemned attacks made against various committees and the General Council. We do not wish to increase the authority of these gentlemen, we are going to have a quiet fight with them yet, but it seems that l'Alliance loses many of its members; it is diminishing—so much the better.'

[^2]: Mikhail Bakunin - b Pierre Waehry





**[p. 414]**

So much for the extracts from Perret's letter. If Mr Hins has not yet communicated my letter (and the resolutions of the General Council) to the Belgian Council,512 it would be better to suppress entirely the paragraph about Bakunin. I have no copy of it, but I know that I wrote it in irritation brought on by physical suffering. Thus I do not doubt that Mr Hins justly blames me for the form of that paragraph. As to the substance and the facts, they are independent both from my bad manner of expression and the good opinion of Mr Hins about Bakunin. The fact is that l'Alliance, of which Bakunin is the creator and which has not been dissolved except nominally, is a danger to the International Association and an element of disorganisation.

In the paragraph concerning Bakunin, I am told that Mr Hins again picks up the phrase 'le bonhomme Richard'." That is a SLIP OF THE PEN, which I regret all the more as Richard is one of the most active members of the Association. I used the phrase only to say that, in the correspondence cited here, he accepts with a great deal of simple-mindedness opinions which he never fathomed. Besides, when I wrote those words, Richard had just given a fresh proof of his thoughtlessness. He had sent to the Council a letter in which a judgement was expressed declaring certain persons belonging to a would-be schismatic Lyons branch to be infamous traitors expelled from the Association. We are asked to copy this judgement, to stamp and sign it, and to return it by post. And that without proof, without documents, without giving those condemned the right to defend themselves.

I am also told that Mr Hins reproaches the English Report on the Basle Congressb for having suppressed everything related to the question of heritage. That is obviously a misunderstanding. On pages 26-29 we find the report of the General Council/ the report of the committee appointed at Basle, and a summary of the discussion on this question. Moreover, the English Report on the transactions of the Congress was written by Eccarius. The Council appointed a commission to examine that report. Although I was appointed a member of this commission, I refused to take part in its work as I had not been present at the Congress and was thus not competent to judge the exactness of the report. My entire collaboration was restricted to purely stylistic improvements.

Finally, if the resolutions passed by the General Council were

[^1]: a that simpleton Richard - b Report of the Fourth Annual Congress of the International Working Men's Association held at Basle, in Switzerland - c K. Marx, 'Report of the General Council on the Right of Inheritance'.



