---
Volume: 43
Document_Title: "281. Engels to Marx. 25 January "
Page_Range: "452-453"
---

# 281. Engels to Marx. 25 January 



**[p. 415]**

not good enough to satisfy Mr. Hins, they obviously satisfied the Romance Committee, for two weeks after their adoption it passed the resolution to free itself from the dictatorship of l'Alliance.

Yours very truly,

K. M.

First published abridged in Bazelsky kon- Printed according to the original press Pervoeo Internatsionala, 6-11 Sep- ~ , , r , ,, , 7 i. u m i i . • j ,n«A j Translated irom the French tember 1869, Moscow-Leningrad, 1934 and in full in: Marx and Engels, Works, First Published in English in full for the Russian Edition, Vol. XXVI, Moscow, first time 1935

281

ENGELS T O MARX

IN LONDON

Manchester, 25 January 1870 Dear Moor,

It was a great RELIEF to learn that, this time, it was only a glandular abscess, not a carbuncle. In view of your decisively anti-lymphatic temperament, the involvement of the gland (axil- laris) can only be secondary and not mean anything. This state of affairs is fully explained by the prolonged neglect that arose from you treating the thing as a carbuncle.

Prendergasta—finally received, and, as always happens, two copies at once; W. H. Smith & Sons have also got hold of one. I shall be finished with it tonight. The book is important because of the many excerpts from unpublished documents. No wonder it is OUT OF PRINT. Longman & Co. must have been furious at having been induced to put their name on such a book, and since there was certainly little demand for it in England (Mudies have not a single copy), they will have sold the edition for pulping as soon as possible, or, also possible, have sold the edition to a syndicate of Irish LANDLORDS (for the same purpose), and will certainly not print a 2nd. What the author says about the Anglo-Norman period is correct in so far as those Irish and Anglo-Irish who lived at some distance from the Pale,445 continued during that period to live

[^1]: a J. P. Prendergast, The Cromwellian Settlement of Ireland.



