---
Volume: 43
Document_Title: "282. Marx to Engels. 27 January "
Page_Range: "453-455"
---

# 282. Marx to Engels. 27 January 



**[p. im]**

roughly the same old casual life which preceded the settlement; and that the wars, too, in this period were more easy-going in character (with a few exceptions), and had not the distinctly devastating character they assumed in the 16th century, and which became the rule thereafter. But his theory that the enormous amiability of the Irishmen, and particularly Irishwomen, mediately disarms every immigrant, however hostile, is just THOROUGHLY IRISH, since the Irish way of thinking lacks all distinction of degree.

A new edition of Giraldus Cambrensis has been published: Giraldi Cambrensis Opera, edidit J. S. Brewer, London, Longman & Co. 1863, at least 3 volumes; could you find out the price for me, and whether it would be possible to get cheaply, SECOND HAND, the whole work, or at least the volume containing 'Topographie Hiberniae', and possibly also 'Hibernia expugnata'. 6 2 8

In order not to make a fool of myself over Cromwell, I shall have to m u g u p considerably more on the English history of the period. This will d o no harm, but will steal a lot of time.

I am reading the French papers with thanks and interest, and will return them tomorrow with several numbers of Zukunft. This paper is becoming more and more depressing and difficult for both readers and writers.

It is close of post, so adieu. Best greetings to all.

Your

F. E.

First published abridged in Der Briefwech- Printed according to the original sei zwischen F. Engels und K. Marx, Bd. 4, „ , , - , , • ,-. ,• , r , r- Stuttgart, 1913 and in full in MEGA Published m Engl.sh for the first Abt. Ill, Bd. 4, Berlin, 1931 , , m e

282

[London,] 27 January 1870

[^1]: MARX T O ENGELS 1 8 0

[^2]: IN MANCHESTER

[^3]: DEAR FRED,

[^4]: I am still UNDER TREATMENT and confined to my room. T h e business was complicated to some degree by small carbuncles near the





**[p. 417]**

abscess, nearly the size of an egg. But IN A FEW DAYS ALL WILL BE QUITE

RIGHT.

It is curious how doctors have differing opinions. Dr Maddison, who was employed in Edinburgh in a hospital for skin diseases, and still works in this branch, in addition to his practice in a London hospital, states that in both hospitals they are completely against arsenic for carbuncles, though use arsenic for rashes. As long as I am in his care, which comes to an end this week, I naturally take his medicine. As soon as this finishes, I shall take arsenic regularly for 3 months for il faut en finir*

Enclosed—the announced note from Wilhelm.520 If you write to him, do inform him, in passing (referring to the screed he sent you for me) that 1. if all newspapers write as much about the 18th Brumaire as his,b that is to say, not at all, it is not surprising that nobody hears of it; and 2. that if this material cannot be obtained in Leipzig (which I regard as humbug), he should not write to me, but to Meissner direct.

Enclosed—letter from Dr J. Jacoby to Kugelmann, and note from Kugelmann. The matter is as follows: Kugelmann saw in supplement No. 18 of Zukunft (22 January) a SPEECH by Jacoby, in which the latter avows socialism and, in the main part of the same issue, the story of the meeting at which this happened, when Schweitzer seized the presidency with the help of his bullyboys and, after the end of Jacoby's speech, accused him, inter alia, of borrowing arguments from me. Kugelmann wrote with his usual fervour to Jacoby on this, congratulating him and, at the same time, dressing him down for quoting all sorts of people, but precisely not me, who had supplied him with his real matter. H T 524

ENCE JACOBY'S REPLY. ' The odd thing is only that Jacoby—during the meeting, in answer to Schweitzer—said that I myself 'utilise in my works the labours of my predecessors on countless occasions'. Since I conscientiously cite everybody who contributed as much as a comma to the exposition, this means that Jacoby can take the substance of his new beliefs from me, without citing me. In addition, I am not a 'predecessor' of 70-year-old Jacoby. A mere populariser and superficialiser has no 'predecessors'. Yet despite all this, it is very fine that Jacoby, like Arnold Ruge, has been converted to communism.'' 'Liberty' no longer suffices!

I am sending you the latest issue of the Democratic News. The sheet is no good, but it is in the hands of our own chaps, and

[^1]: •l it must be ended - h Der Volksstaat - c See this volume, pp. 542-43.



