---
Volume: 43
Document_Title: "283. Engels to Marx. 1 February "
Page_Range: "455-457"
---

# 283. Engels to Marx. 1 February 



**[p. 418]**

could be made into a counterbalance to the Bee-Hive, particularly since it only costs 1 HALFPENNY. You and Moore should both subscribe to 12 COPIES, since a similar subscription has also been imposed upon members of the General Council. In addition, one or the other of you could send me quite short reports about Lancashire etc., weekly or bi-weekly, for the sheet.

Salut

Your

K. M.

First published abridged in Der Briefwech- Printed according to the original sei zwischen F. Engels und K. Marx, Bd. 4, . Stuttgart, 1913 and in full in MEGA Published m English m full for the Abt. Ill, Bd. 4, Berlin, 1931 f l r s t t l n l e

283

ENGELS TO MARX33

IN LONDON

[Manchester,] 1 February 1870

Dear Moor,

I only received the relevant Zukunft yesterday evening, so I can only return the Jacobyana3 today. It is very clear why the old Yid did not name you; he was sheepishly ashamed of himself, but he should at least have known that, once Schweitzer had been elected president, or was simply present, the plagiarism would certainly be rammed down his throat; but an old wiseacre like he always thinks, in his stupidity, that things might go well. If conversions continue like this, we shall soon dislodge old almighty God from the Rhenish proverb which states that he 'keeps curious company'.

I shall try to raise subsidies for the Democratic News. 12-fold subscriptions can lead to nothing, as we have simply no use here for the piles of waste paper. And I don't know, either, what could be reported from here.

I shall inform Wilhelm suitably; I presume he has never spoken in his sheetb about the 18th Brumaire. That not a single copy can be obtained in Leipzig is certainly a lie, unless the whole edition has

[^1]: a See the previous letter. - b Der Volksstaat





**[p. 419]**

been sold out. Apropos, how do things stand with the French translation of it, and of your book580?

I shall send Wilhelm the Peasant War, but shall only write the introduction for the complete publication. There is no sense in writing an introduction for a serial publication that might drag on for 6 months or more.486

It is a real stroke of luck that, despite G. Flourens, no blow was struck at Noir's funeral. The fury of Pays shows the Bonapartists'3

great disappointment. They could not wish for anything better than to catch all the revolutionary masses of Paris en flagrant délith

on the open field outside Paris, even outside the fortifications, which only have a few passages. Half a dozen cannon at the posterns, an infantry regiment in skirmishing order, and a brigade of cavalry to lay about and pursue—and, in the space of half-an-hour, the entire unarmed crowd—the few revolvers some might carry in their pockets would not count—would be routed, cut down or captured. Since they have 60,000 soldiers, they could even let them enter the fortifications, occupy these, shoot down with grapeshot and ride down the crowd in the open terrain of the Champs Elysées and on the Avenue de Neuilly. Delightful! 200,000 unarmed workers should, from the open field, conquer Paris occupied by 60,000 soldiers!

The French newspapers arrived this morning. Best thanks. Have you read a full translation of Land and Freedom (the Russian thing)531? I now have one; you can have it.

Best greetings to your wife, Jenny and Tussy.

Your

F. E.

[^1]: First published abridged in Der Briefwech- sel zwischen F. Engels und K. Marx, Bd. 4, Stuttgart, 1913 and in full in MEGA, Abt. III, Bd. 4, Berlin, 1931

[^2]: Printed according to the original

[^3]: Published in English in full for the first' time

[^4]: a See this volume, p. 553. - b red-handed



