---
Volume: 43
Document_Title: "284. Engels to Karl Klein and Friedrich Moll. 8 February "
Page_Range: "457-459"
---

# 284. Engels to Karl Klein and Friedrich Moll. 8 February 



**[p. 284]**

ENGELS TO KARL KLEIN AND FRIEDRICH MOLL

IN SOLINGEN

Manchester, 8 February 1870 86 Mornington Street, Stockport Road

Dear Friends,

I must apologise very much for having left your letter of 3 December unanswered until today.498 My only excuse is that I wanted to write something really nice, so I had to look around first, also in the interests of the cooperative. If I now have no very good news, this is, as you will see, not my fault.

I remember Solingen well from anno 48 and 49. Not only were the workers of Solingen at that time the most developed and most determined in the Rhine Province, as was also shown by the Elberfeld affair; I have a reason to be personally grateful to them, since the Solingen column, with which I marched to Elberfeld, supported me and guarded me there against the cowardly and treacherous Committee of Public Safety of the bourgeois 'radicals'. Had it not been for the Solingers, these bourgeois would have bunged me into jail, where I would probably have been left as an expiatory sacrifice for the Prussian gentlemen.532 And I know full well that, during the whole period of the Lassallean triumphal processions, the Solingers did not behave as disciples of the new teaching, but as people who had belonged to the socialist movement for many years, who could, of course, join the new Association,104 but did not need to learn anything from it. And I know very well, how, when Lassalle was being idolised as a new messiah, Friend Klein had the courage to remind him and the workers that the people round the Neue Rheinische Zeitung had already contributed something towards the independence of the workers.466

Thus, it is doubly painful to me that my own means do not permit me to give the cooperative a helping hand in a way that would be of special use to it. The little money I have is so tied up that, with the best will in the world—and certainly for the next few years at least — I cannot get at it, not even for my personal ends. I can thus only dispose of my income, which is not brilliant in the circumstances here. But to show my good will, at least, I enclose 50 thaler in one Prussian banknote I. Lit. C. N. 108,126; I would ask you to send me the relevant bond title; the interest,

however, should be credited not to me, but to the reserve fund of the cooperative.

Together with Marx, with whom I have discussed the matter,3 I have looked around to see whether we might drum up money for the cooperative in some other way. Marx knows some people who have means, and who can be assumed to have good will. But the man b through whom we would have to manoeuvre this is away for a number of months, and until then nothing can be done. We intend to do the following: if we succeed in interesting these people in the matter, we shall ask them to send somebody to Solingen to inspect the state of the cooperative himself. It would then be necessary for this person to be shown all the books and records and be provided with all the necessary explanations with the greatest frankness. Otherwise, you cannot ask people to put money into a business and, if I were myself in a position to advance a larger sum, then I would come to Solingen and ask for the same. In business matters everybody has the duty to look out for himself, since anybody can make a mistake, particularly somebody who is interested in a certain thing. In addition, such a person—who naturally would be a complete stranger to Solin- gen—would have to give his word of honour that he would make no use of the information thus obtained. And when this person has convinced himself of the reliability of the business and the trustworthiness of the management, we hope a decent sum will be taken up in bonds.

I naturally give you this simply as our plan of operations, and would not like you to set great hopes in it already, as it is clear that we cannot just dispose of other people's money. I would not for the world wish the cooperative, basing itself upon such prospects, which might come to fruition at the earliest in months, or perhaps not at all, let itself in for transactions that would tie up its means, and get it into difficulties. I can only promise that we shall do our best in this matter, and remain, with best wishes for the success of the cooperative and the prosperity of all members, with greetings and a handshake

Frederick Engels My address is now as above.

[^1]: First published abridged in Borba klassov, No. 5, Moscow, 1931 and in full in: Marx and Engels, Works, First Russian Edition, Vol. XXVI, Moscow, 1935

[^2]: Printed according to the original

[^3]: Published in English for the first time

[^4]: a See this volume, pp. 395, 396-97. - b presumably Menke



