---
Volume: 43
Document_Title: "286. Marx to Engels. 10 February "
Page_Range: "459-462"
---

# 286. Marx to Engels. 10 February 



**[p. 285]**

ENGELS TO MARX

IN LONDON

Manchester, 9 February 1870

Dear Moor,

Either you are sick, or you once again cramming yourself into sickness; otherwise one would hear from you.

The blasted:

Ancient Laws of Ireland.—Senchus Mor.—PART I AND II, DUBLIN, PRINTED FOR HER MAJESTY, STATIONERY OFFICE,3 the 2nd part of which appeared 3-4 weeks ago, are said to be 'REPRINTING', and lay me completely by the heels. QUERY, can one get something of this sort SECOND HAND in London?

So Rochefort has quietly been put in quod. Ollivier obviously wants a collision; the barricade attempts will presumably turn out to be 'white smock'533 pranks. And if Ollivier doesn't want a collision, then Bonaparte, behind his back, does.

Best greetings.

Your

F. E.

286

[London,] 10 February 1870

I first went out again last Saturday, but as a result of this damned foggy weather immediately contracted a sort of inflamma-

[^1]: First published abridged in Der Briefwech- Printed according to the original sei zwischen F. Engels und K. Marx, Bd. 4, Stuttgart, 1913 and in full in MEGA, Published in English for the first Abt. Ill, Bd. 4, Berlin, 1931 t l m e

[^2]: MARX TO ENGELS534

[^3]: IN MANCHESTER

[^4]: DEAR FRED,

[^5]: a See this volume, pp. 409-10.





**[p. 423]**

tion of the tonsils. The body is naturally sensitive after some weeks of SEQUESTRATION. A north-east wind is howling here and, under the circumstances, prolongs imprisonment. But I hope to have my throat ALL RIGHT again in the course of this week.

On Sunday, LITTLE Dakyns (the geologist) visited me. I invited him for next Sunday. His Scottish cap was the sole MEMENTO of his costume as Felix Holt, THE RASCAL. a He was as sprightly as ever, and Tussy was DELIGHTED to see him.

As far as new things are concerned—such as the Irish Laws, etc.b—it is very difficult to get them here SECOND HAND.

Laura writes to us today, inter alia, that since last June the excitement in Paris has been steadily rising. Since the Victor-Noirc

tragic balladry,516 the females in the working strata have gone daft, and you know what that means in Paris.

Flourens, the CRACK-BRAINED youngster, is the son OF LATE Flourens, secrétaire perpétuel de l'Académie, who always adhered to the existing government throughout his nearly 100 years of life, and who was, in turn, Bonapartist, legitimist, Orleanist and again Bonapartist. During the last years of his life he still made himself noticeable with his fanaticism against Darwin.

Apropos, about Napoleon I. In one of the copies of Cloche that you have, there is, in one of the memoirs—I no longer remember which—a passage about the wretched behaviour of the hero.535

Jennychen wants to have the quotation. She has had a squabble at the Monroes' about it, where they wished to deny the FACTS.

I have read the first 150 pages of Flerovsky's bookd (taken up with Siberia, North Russia and Astrakhan). This is the first work to tell the truth about Russian economic conditions. The man is a determined enemy of what he calls 'Russian optimism'. I never held very rosy views about this communist El Dorado, but Flerovsky surpasses all expectations. It is, in fact, rum, and at any event sign of a change, that something like this can be published in Petersburg.

The method of presentation is quite original; sometimes it reminds you most of Monteil.£ You can see that the man has

[^1]: 'y Hac T> npo Ae Tapie BT> Ma Ao, HO 3a TO Macca Hamero paôonaro KAacca COCTOHTT, H3T> paôo THHKOBt, KOTopwxi, yiac Tb xy»e MÎ>MT> ynac Tb BCHKaro npo Ae Tapin.'e

[^2]: a A personage from George Eliot's Felix Holt, the Radical. - b See this volume, pp. 409-10 and 422. - c in the original: Louis Noir - d H. OAepoßc Kifi, riojioxeuie

[^3]: paöouaeo wiacca 8» Pocciu. - e 'We have few proletarians, but the mass of our working class consists of working people whose lot is worse than that of any proletarian.' - f A. A. Monteil, Histoire des français des divers états aux cinq derniers siècles. Volumes I-X.





**[p. 424]**

travelled about everywhere and observed things for himself. Blazing hatred of LANDLORD, capitalist and official. No socialist doctrine, no mysticism about the land (although he favours the form of communal property), no nihilistic extravagance. Here and there a certain amount of well-meaning twaddle, which is, however, suited to the stage of development of the people for whom the book is intended. At all events, it is the most important book published since your work on the Condition of the Working- Class. And the family life of the Russian peasants is also well depicted—with the awful beating-to-death of their wives, the drinking, and the concubines. It would, therefore, be very opportune if you would send me the fantasy-lies of Citizen Herzen.3

You will recall that Égalité, inspired by Bakunin, attacked the GENERAL COUNCIL, made all sorts of interpellations publicly, and threatened more.b A communicationc—which I composed—was, thereupon, sent to the Comité Romand in Geneva, and ditto to all the other Comités of French tongue corresponding with us. Result: The entire Bakunin gang has quit Egalité. Bakunin himself has taken up residence in Tessin, and will continue intriguing in Switzerland, Spain, Italy and France. Now the armistice is at an end between us, since he knows that I attacked him heatedly and inveighed against him on the occasion of the latest Geneva événements? The brute really imagines that we are 'too bourgeois' and, therefore, incapable of grasping and esteeming his lofty cohcepts about 'inheritance right', 'equality', and the replacement of the present state systems by 'l'Internationale'. Nominally, his 'Alliance de la Démocratie Socialiste'2'7 has been dissolved, but, in fact, continues. From the enclosed copy of a letter (which you must return to me) from H. Perret, secrétaire du Conseil Romand, to Jung,530 you will see that, in fact, the catastrophe in Geneva took place before they received our communication there. This, however, strengthened the new status rerum.c The Belgian 'Conseil' (Brussels) has officially declared itself completely in favour of our stand against Egalité, but the secrétaire of the Belgian COUNCIL, Hins (brother-in-law of De Paepe, but fallen out with him), has sent a letter to Stepney324 in which he takes Bakunin's side, accuses me of supporting the reactionary party amongst the Geneva workers, etc., etc.

[^1]: a See this volume, p. 426. - b Ibid., pp. 404-05. - c K. Marx, The General Council to the Federal Council of Romance Switzerland. - d events - e state of affairs



