---
Volume: 43
Document_Title: "287. Engels to Marx. 11 February "
Page_Range: "462-465"
---

# 287. Engels to Marx. 11 February 



**[p. 425]**

Did you notice, in one of the copies of Marseillaise sent to you, that Mr K. Blind had inserted an advertisement for K. Blind in the aforesaid sheet, according to which the aforesaid Blind was sent to Paris as 'ambassador' with General Schurz (Schütz does not sound good enough), was exiled from Paris by Bonaparte, and still is! and also was previously member of the German National Assembly5371

M Y COMPLIMENTS TO M R S LIZZIE AND FRIENDS.

K. M.

[Postscript from Eleanor Marx]

MY DEAR Engels,

I AM VERY MUCH OBLIGED TO YOU FOR SENDING ME THAT ADVERTISEMENT. T H E SITUATION IS ONE THAT WILL SUIT ME VERY WELL, SO I SHALL LOSE NO TIME IN APPLYING FOR IT. YOU WILL I AM SURE GIVE ME A REFERENCE.

WITH THANKS AND BEST LOVE TO ALL. GOOD BYE.

TUSSY.

First published abridged in Der Briefwech- Printed according to the original sei zwischen F. Engels und K. Marx, Bd. 4, . . Stuttgart, 1913 and in full in MEGA, Published in English in full for the Abt. Ill, Bd. 4, Berlin, 1931 first time

287

Manchester, 11 February 1870

Dear Moor,

Your tonsil business, following the abscess in your auxiliary gland, doesn't make me very happy. In any case, it shows that something is not quite kosher about your lymphatic system. If the business does not clear up soon, I would ask Allen, who made such a correct prognosis about my glandular business. Yours, however, is obviously chronic, whilst mine was extremely acute; but better is better.

as an introduction to the Peasant Wart Since, in this connection, it

[^1]: ENGELS TO MARX180

[^2]: IN LONDON

[^3]: I am sending you, enclosed, what I've written for Liebknecht520

[^4]: a F. Engels, Preface to the Second Edition of 'The Peasant War in Germany'





**[p. 426]**

is not possible to steer clear of the year 1866, which has hitherto been avoided, we shall have to reach an agreement on what to say about it. Other remarks would also be welcome.

Further, Wilhelmchen's reply.538 Totally Wilhelm. He didn't know at all that the 18th Brumaire had been published. On the other hand, / should immediately send him my address. Since he had no longer sent me his sheet, his excuse is that / must have left my address. And now this penance—belatedly throwing the whole Volksstaat from 1 October onwards at my head!

I would ask for the earliest return of these two documents, so I might send Wilhelmchen what he wants and have him leave me in peace.

Today I returned to you, per Globe Parcel Co., all copies of Cloche, Lanterne, Marseillaise, Figaro, etc. that I had here. The relevant number of Cloche is among them.535 Since Jennychen collects these things, it is best if she has them all together. I have only kept one Marseillaise here, containing the business about the guncotton539; I wish to examine Chlormeier3 further about it.

Dakyns wanted to visit you before Christmas, and wrote to Moore for your address. He, whose insight into character and sense of judgement is not, however, always unexceptionable, gave him such a picture of your inaccessibility at home that I said immediately that poor Dakyns would be quite unnecessarily intimidated. So I wanted to give you Dakyns' address last time, but forgot; but I told Moore immediately that he should not put such nonsense into Dakyns' head.

The sentence quoted from Flerovskyb is the first Russian sentence I have understood completely without a dictionary. What is the Russian title of the book? I shall acquire it for myself. What I wanted to send you was not Herzen, but the German translation of 3e MJi H u eojin, Land and Freedom, by the aristocrat Lilienfeld,0

which also describes the bad results of freedom for the peasants, and the resulting decay of agriculture.631 I wrote to you about this more than a year ago,d and since then Borkheim has also acquired it and, I believe, translated passages from it for you. As soon as I have read it through, I'll send you it.

Ferret's letter536 also returned, enclosed. It's a good thing Bakunin has gone to Tessin. He won't create much trouble there, and it proves the business in Geneva is over. Since there are simply such ambitious vain incompetents in every movement, it is au

[^1]: a Carl Schorlemmer - b See this volume, p. 423. - c In the original: Lilienthal. - d See this volume, pp. 55-56.





**[p. 427]**

fond* good that they join together in their own way, and after that move into the public eye with their cosmic whimsies. Then it soon becomes possible to demonstrate to the world that it is all gas. And this is better than if the struggle stays in the field of private gossip, in which people who have something to do are never a match for those who have the whole day for forming cliques. But an eye must be kept on the fellows, so they do not manage to occupy the field somewhere or another without resistance. Spain and Italy will have to be left to them, of course, at least for the time being.

It would be a very good thing if Mr Rochefort, or as Lizzie says RUSHFORTH, were to go missing in prison for a while.533 The petite presse is quite a good thing, but when it supplants everything else I lose my taste for it. It still has in its bones the whole quality of its origins in the bas-empire!' And when Rochefort preaches unity of the bourgeois and the worker, it is even funny. On the other hand, the 'serious' leaders of the movement are, for their part, really comically serious. It is truly marvellous. The SUPPLY of heads, which, until '48 the proletariat obtained from other classes, appears to have dried up completely, and in all countries. The workers seem to be increasingly constrained to do it themselves.

What is l'illustre Gaudissartc up to? I hear and see nothing of him. Hasn't he got any business again yet?

Best greetings.

Your

F. E.

[^1]: First published abridged in Der Briefwech- sel zwischen F. Engels und K. Marx, Bd. 4, Stuttgart, 1913 and in full in MEGA, Abt. III, Bd. 4, Berlin, 1931

[^2]: Printed according to the original

[^3]: Published in English in full for the first time

[^4]: a basically - b Lower Empire (designation of the late Roman, or Byzantine Empire, and also of any empire on the decline); here, the Second Empire in France. - c Sigismund Borkheim



