---
Volume: 43
Document_Title: "288. Marx to Engels. 12 February "
Page_Range: "465-468"
---

# 288. Marx to Engels. 12 February 



**[p. 288]**

MARX TO ENGELS174

IN MANCHESTER

[London,] 12 February 1870

DEAR FRED,

Allen visited me yesterday. Nothing but a simple chill. He advised me, however, to continue my house arrest until the Russian wind 'WHICH BLOWS NO GOOD TO ANYBODY' ceases.

Your introduction3 is very good. I know of nothing that should be altered or added. I agree verbotenush with your treatment of 1866. The double thrust at Wilhelm0 of the People's Party38 and Schweitzer, with his bodyguard of ruffians, is very pretty.

Regarding the EXCUSES made by Wilhelm,538 one never knows whether he is lying intentionally, or whether everything is revolving in confusion like a mill-wheel in his head. The FACT is that I wrote to Meissner from Hanover that he should send COPIES'1 to Wilhelm, Zukunft and Schweitzer, and the latter immediately published a detailed announcement.0 Additionally: Wilhelm's friends—Bonhorst and Bracke—saw the new edition when they visited Hanover,' and told me that they had reached agreement with Meissner on the publication of a cheaper, popular edition. Meissner wrote to me about it. I agreed this edition should consist of 2,000 copies, of which 1,000 should be supplied to Bonhorst, etc., at cost price. They pledged themselves to see to the placing of this 1,000. I've heard nothing about the matter since. We should now put Wilhelm to the test. Write to him that he should write to Meissner, asking how it is that he has not advertised the 18th Brumaire either in

Volksstaat or in Zukunft, and ditto, despite my instructions from Hanover, why he has sent neither him nor Weiss of Zukunft COPIES? The reply from Meissner would, at the same time, give me an opportunity to have a serious word with the latter about his sloppiness.

I agree entirely with your marginal notes on the FRENCH RADICAL

[^1]: a F. Engels, Preface to the Second Edition of 'The Peasant War in Germany'. - b word for word - c Wilhelm Liebknecht - d of the second edition of K. Marx, The Eighteenth

[^2]: Brumaire of Louis Bonaparte - e [The announcement of the publication of the second edition of K. Marx, The Eighteenth Brumaire of Louis Bonaparte,] Der Social-Demokrat, No. 117, 6 October 1869 (the 'Literarisches' column). - f See this volume, p. 358.





**[p. 429]**

PRESS.3 Not for nothing was Proudhon the socialist of the Imperial period. I am firmly convinced that, although the first blow will come from France, Germany is far riper for a social movement, and will grow far over the heads of the French. It is a great error and self-deception on their part that they still regard themselves as the 'chosen people'.

Apropos. Jennychen heard whispers yesterday at Monroe's that Mr John Bull Bright is not in the country as the papers report, but in town in the care of a mad-doctor. Softening of the brain HAS AGAIN SET IN. On the occasion of Castlereagh's suicide, Cobbett noted, that England DURING ONE OF ITS MOST CRITICAL EPOCHS, WAS GOVERNED BY A MADMAN.b And the same again today, during the Irish crisis.

It's extremely amusing that Bouverie, THIS INCARNATION OF PURE WHIGGISM, should find the proceedings quoad" O'Donovan to be illegal.040 Bouverie is furious that he was given the COLD SHOULDER in the distribution of offices.

The title of the book by H. (pjiepoecuiu: ' rioÄOj Keuie paöouazo wiacca et> Pocciu', C.-llemep6ypzz>. Hsdauie H. n. IJo MKoea. 1869.44S

One of the things that amuses me very much in Flerovsky is his polemic against the peasants' direct dues. It is a complete reproduction of Marshal Vauban and Boisguillebert.d He also feels that the situation of the country people has its analogy in the period of the old French monarchy (since Louis XIV). Like Monteil,e he has a great feeling for national characteristics—'the straightforward Kalmyck', 'the Mordvinian, poetic despite his dirt' (whom he compares to the Irishman), the 'agile, epicurean, lively Tartar', the 'talented Little Russian', etc. Like a good Russian, he tells his fellow-countrymen what they should do to turn the hatred all these races feel for them into the opposite. As an example of the hatred, he cites, for instance, a genuinely Russian colony from Poland which moved to Siberia. These people know only Russian, not a word of Polish, but they regard themselves as Poles, and foster a Polish hatred of the Russians, etc.

His book shows incontestably that the present conditions in Russia are no longer tenable, that the emancipation of the serfs OF

[^1]: a See this volume, p. 427. - b W. Cobbett, 'To the Boroughmongers', Cobbett's Weekly Register, Vol. 43, No. 8, 24 August 1822. - c concerning - d An allusion to S. Vau- ban, Projet d'une dime royale and [P.] Boisguillebert, Dissertation sur la nature des richesses, de l'argent et des tributs . In: Economistes financiers du XVIII-e siècle. - e See A. A. Monteil, Histoire des français des divers états aux cinq derniers siècles.





**[p. 430]**

COURSE only hastened the process of disintegration, and that fearful social revolution is at the door. Here, too, you see the real roots of the schoolboy nihilism that is now the fashion among Russian students, etc. In Geneva, BY THE BY, a new colony of exiled Russian students has grown up with a programme proclaiming opposition to pan-Slavism, which should be replaced by the 'Interna- tional'.541

In a special section, Flerovsky demonstrates that the 'Russifica- tion' of alien races is a sheer optimistic delusion, even in the East.

You don't need to send me Lilienfeld." Gaudissartb has it in Russian and German. He announced his return to me the day before yesterday. According to an earlier communication from his wife to mine, he had found a new post. But it surprises me that he doesn't mention this in his latest epistle.

Enclosed, it must be returned, a copy of the letter from Hins to Stepney? In my reply d I gave the fellow a thorough dressing down. The exact manner in which he informs himself is shown by the following points, amongst others. He says that, in our Report on the Basle Congress" we suppressed the discussion on the right of inheritance. Bakunin probably palmed this off on him, and he believes it, although he has our Report in his hands and knows enough English to read it! He speaks of 'my' letter to Geneva, though I have not addressed a line there! My expostulation about Bakunin's goings-on is in my letter to Brussels, in which—apart from communicating the missive of the GENERAL COUNCIL to Ge- nevaf— I had to give a general report and communicate the appointment of a new secretary for Belgium (Serraillier, ouvrier

bottierg from Marseilles). He accuses us of having provoked the crisis in Geneva which —as Egalité shows—ended more than a week before our MISSIVE arrived there, etc. The Belgian Conseil Général* has, despite Hins, declared its full agreement with us.

Curious that OLD Becker1 announced his withdrawal from the editorial committee of Égalité525 together with the other Bakunin-

[^1]: a In the original: Lilienthal (see also this volume, p. 426). - b Sigismund Borkheim - c See this volume, pp. 411-15. - d The reference is to Marx's letter to De Paepe of 24 January 1870 (see this volume, pp. 411-15). - e Report of the Fourth Annual Congress of the International Working Men's Association, held at Basle, in Switzerland. - f K. Marx, The General Council to the Federal Council of Romance Switzerland. - s shoemaker - h The Belgian Federal Council - ' Johann Philipp Becker



