---
Volume: 43
Document_Title: "289. Engels to Marx. 17 February "
Page_Range: "468-470"
---

# 289. Engels to Marx. 17 February 



**[p. 431]**

ists. At the same time, he publishes in his Vorbote the exact opposite of what Bakunin did in Egalité?42 The old confusionist!

Salut.

Your

K. M.

First published abridged in Der Briefwech- Printed according to the original sei zwischen F. Engels und K. Marx, Bd. 4, Stuttgart, 1913 and in full in MEGA, Published in English in full for the Abt. Ill, Bd. 4, Berlin, 1931 f l r s t t l m e

289

ENGELS T O MARX

IN LONDON

Manchester, 17 February 1870

Dear Moor,

I have written the necessary to Wilhelm.3 I'm now eager to hear how he will extricate himself.

For a long time I have seen nothing more ridiculous than Flourens' letter about his heroic deeds in Belleville, where he 'had possession of a whole faubourgb for 3 hours'. The start is wonderful, where he calls on the people to follow him, but only 100 go along, and these soon melt away to 60, and then these evaporate, until he, finally alone 'with one lad',543 is beaten in the theatre.

The story about Bright is very odd.c He has had one such attack already, and had to go to the country for 2 years fishing.

The story about the Russians changed into Poles is absolutely Irish. I must have Flerovskyd; unfortunately, I won't, fpr the time being, have any time to plough through it.

Yesterday I was at a fine blow-out, twelve of us, nothing but Tories, merchants, manufacturers, calico-printers, etc. The fellows all agreed that:

[^1]: Hins returned—enclosed. The letter is obviously only written for you.524

[^2]: a See this volume, p. 428. - b suburb - c See this volume, p. 429. - d Ibid., p. 429.





**[p. 432]**

1. for the past 3 years here in Lancashire THE HANDS HAD BEEN

ALWAYS IN THE RIGHT AND THE MASTERS ALWAYS IN THE WRONG (SHORT TIME VERSUS

REDUCTION OF WAGES);

2 . t h e BALLOT WAS NOW NECESSARY TO PROTECT THE CONSERVATIVE VOTERS, and

3. England would be a republic in 25 years, and even earlier unless the Prince of Wales," makes himself very popular.

It's amusing how people gain insight as soon as their party is OUT OF OFFICE, and how quickly they lose it as soon as they are IN.

Apropos. You probably know that, in LADY Mordaunt's DIVORCE TRIAL, the 'SOME OTHER PERSON' with whom she had a CRIMINAL CONNECTION is the Prince of Wales.

So Gladstone the mountain has successfully been delivered of his Irish mouse.344 I really don't know what the Tories could have against this BILL, which is so indulgent with the Irish LANDLORDS, and finally places their interests in the tried and trusty hands of the Irish lawyers. Nevertheless, even this slight restriction of the eviction right will result in an end to the excessive emigration, and will put a stop to the conversion of arable land into pasture. But it is very jolly if the worthy Gladstone should think that he has abolished the Irish question by means of this new prospect of endless procedure.

Is it possible to get a copy of the BILL? It would be very important for me to be able to follow the debates on the individual clauses.

You in London can have no idea of the way the telegraph has broken down since it was taken over by the Government. Only the first third of Gladstone's speech was published in yesterday's papers here, and even this was pure nonsense!' The LATEST TELEGRAMS are all 24 hours later than before, so that, if you want to know something, you have to wait for the London newspapers to arrive. A telegram from here to Nottingham, handed in on Thursday, arrived Monday.

You know that, for the past 3-4 years, there has been a big squabble between Prussian and Austrian historians about the Peace of Basle,545 because Sybel claimed that Prussia was forced to conclude it because it had been betrayed by Austria in Poland/ Now Sybel once again has a long story about it, from the Austrian

[^1]: 11 Albert Edward - b Gladstone's speech in the House of Commons on 15 February 1870 was published in The Times, 16 February and in Manchester Daily Examiner and Times, 17 February 1870. - c H. Sybel, Oestreich und Deutschland im Revolutionskrieg. Ergänzungsheft zur Geschichte der Revolutionszeit 1789 bis 1795.



