---
Volume: 43
Document_Title: "290. Marx to Ludwig Kugelmann. 17 February "
Page_Range: "470-473"
---

# 290. Marx to Ludwig Kugelmann. 17 February 

archives, in his Historische Zeitschrift:' Every line proves how Russia set Prussia and Austria at each other's throats and, at the same time, drew them into the 1792 war against France, exploited, cheated and dominated both; but stupid Sybel notices nothing of this; instead searches in this whole filthy murk of cheating, treaty-breaking and infamy, in which they were all equally involved, for only one thing: proof that Austria was even more rascally than Prussia. Never have there been such blockheads. His wrath is not directed against Russia, no, solely against Austria, and he explains Russian policy, which is displayed here quite openly and clear as day, with childish motives, such as annoyance at Austrian double-dealing.

From Flerovsky's accountb it apparently emerges that Russian power is bound to collapse very shortly. Urquhart will, of course, say that the Russians had the book written in order to throw dust in the eyes of the world.

To Tussy my best thanks for the Prussian Minister of Public Worship, sent me as a VALENTINE.

Your

F. E.

290

London, 17 February 1870

Dear Kugelmann,

Yesterday I was out in the fresh air again for the first time in a long period.

First to business: be so good as to send immediately a copy of

[^1]: First published abridged in Der Briefwech- sel zwischen F. Engels und K. Marx, Bd. 4, Stuttgart, 1913 and in full in MEGA, Abt. III, Bd. 4, Berlin, 1931

[^2]: Printed according to the original

[^3]: Published in English for the first time

[^4]: MARX TO LUDWIG KUGELMANN29

[^5]: IN HANOVER

[^6]: a H. Sybel, 'Polens Untergang und der Revolutionskrieg', Historische Zeitschrift, Vol. 23, Munich, 1870, pp. 66-154. - h H. cp Aepo BCKift, Ilojiooiceuiepaöouaeo Knacca es Pocciu.





**[p. 434]**

Vogt* to Asher & Co., Unter den Linden 11, Berlin. I would prefer it if you were to obtain a confirmation of posting certificate when you send the book off, and send me same. You would also oblige me if you would let me know roughly when C. Hirsch wrote to you about Vogt

The pamphlet you sent me is one of the appeals currently being made by the privileged estates of the German-Russian-Baltic provinces to German sympathies. These canaille, who have always distinguished themselves with their zeal in the service of Russian diplomacy, army and police, and who, since the transfer of the provinces from Poland to Russia, have happily bartered their nationality for the legal right to exploit their peasantry, are now clamouring because they see their privileged position endangered. The old system of rank and estate, orthodox Lutheranism and bleeding the peasants—that is what they call German culture, to defend which Europe should now mobilise. Hence, too, the last words of this pamphlet— landed property as the basis of civilisation, and landed property, moreover, as the wretched pamphleteer himself admits, consisting mainly of directly manorial estates or tributary peasant estates.

In his quotations—in as far as they refer to Russian communal property—the fellow displays both his ignorance and CLOVEN FOOT. Schédo-Ferrotib is one of the fellows who (naturally IN THE INTERESTS OF LANDLORDISM) attribute the miserable situation of the Russian peasantry to the existence of communal property, just as, formerly, the abolition of serfdom in Western Europe, instead of the serfs' loss of their land, was decried as the cause of pauperism. The Russian book Land and Freedom is of the same calibre. The author is a Baltic country squire von Lilienfeldc The Russian peasantry is thrown into misery by the same thing that made the French peasantry miserable under Louis XIV, etc.— state taxation and the obrokd to the big landowners. Instead of producing the misery, communal property alone diminished it.

It is, further, a historical lie that this communal property was Mongolian As I have indicated at various points in my writings,546

it is of Indian origin, and may, therefore, be found among all European peoples at the beginning of their development. The specific Slav (not Mongolian) form of the same in Russia (which is also repeated amongst the non-Russian South Slavs) even re-

[^1]: a K. Marx, Herr Vogt. - b D. K. Schédo-Ferroti, Etudes sur l'avenir de la Russie; see also this volume, p. 154. - c in the original: Lilienthal - d quit rent



semblés most, mutatis mutandis,3 the Old German modification of Indian communal property.

The Pole Duchinski in Paris declared the Great Russian race to be Mongolian and not Slav, and attempted to prove this with a great expenditure of scholarship; and from the standpoint of a Pole, this is in order. Even so, it is wrong. Not the Russian peasantry, but only the Russian aristocracy, is strongly mixed with Mongol-Tartar elements. The Frenchman Henri Martin has taken over the theory from Duchinski, and the 'enthusiastic Gottfried Kinkel' translated Martin547 and set himself up as a Polish enthusiast, in order to make the Democratic Party forget his servile homage to Bismarck.

On the other hand, the fact that the Russian state represents Mongolianism in its policy towards Europe and America is naturally a truth that has today become a platitude, and thus accessible even to people like Gottfried and Baltic country squires, philistines, clerics and professors. Despite everything, therefore, the Baltic-German cries of dismay must be exploited, since they place Prussia, the German great power, in a 'ticklish' position. Everything that arouses antipathy on our side towards these 'representatives of German culture' in Prussia's eyes is bound to make it appear worth protecting!

Another example of the crass ignorance of the pamphleteer: he sees the cession of Russian North America as no more than a diplomatic ruse by the Russian Government, which incidentally WAS VERY HARD PRESSED FOR COSTS.548 But the main point is this: the American Congress recently published the documents about this transaction. They include, among other things, a report by the American envoy, in which he writes explicidy to Washington: the acquisition is at the moment not worth a cent economically,—but England is, thereby, cut off from the sea on one side by the Yankees, and the reversion of the whole of British North America to the UNITED STATES thus accelerated. There's the rub!

I approved of the substance of your correspondence with Jacoby, but I was absolument shocked by the exaggerated praise of my activities. Est modus in rebus!c If you must praise, Old Jacoby himself is worth praising. Which other OLD RADICAL in Europe has had the sincerity and courage to align himself so directly with the proletarian movement? It is quite unimportant that his transitional measures and detailed proposals are not worth much. Between

[^1]: a with alterations of details - b See this volume, p. 417. - c All has its measure! (Horace, Satires, I, 1.)



