---
Volume: 43
Document_Title: "291. Marx to Engels. 19 February "
Page_Range: "473-475"
---

# 291. Marx to Engels. 19 February 



**[p. 436]**

ourselves—TAKE ALL IN ALL—I expect more for the social movement from Germany than from France.

I had a big row with Bakunin, that intriguer. But more about that in my next letter.

My best compliments à Madame la Comtesse" and Fränzchen.b

Your

K. M.

First published abridged in Die Neue Zeit, Printed according to the original Bd. 2, Nr. 13, Stuttgart, 1901-1902 and in full in Pisma Marhsa k Kugelmanu (Letters of Marx to Kugelmann), Moscow- Leningrad. 1928

291

MARX TO ENGELS180

IN MANCHESTER

[London,] 19 February 1870

Although it is still very inopportune to go out in the evenings in such weather, nevertheless I visited Gaudissart' yesterday evening. He had, you see, written to me that he had something very important to tell me, and could not really drag the files to me. And what was it? A giant letter about Russica, an impossible omnium-gatherum rambling on from one thing to another, with which he had honoured Zukunft?14 and which this had not printed; neither had he received an answer to his furious letter requesting 'an explanation' of such methods. Further: a letter from the publisherd of Hermann here, requesting him to write against Russia for his paper. It would thus appear that Bismarck is very cross about Katkov's attacks.

Finally, an article in Katkov's paper" in which he 1. makes" insinuations against Bakunin concerning various money matters; 2. describes him as his Siberian correspondent; 3. charges Baku- nin with having written an extremely humble letter to Emperor Nicho- las, from Siberia or shortly before being sent there—I don't re-

[^1]: DEAR FRED,

[^2]: a Gertrud Kugelmann - b Kugelmann's daughter Franziska - c Sigismund Bork- heim - d Heinemann - c Moc Koecmn ehào Mocmu





**[p. 437]**

member exactly.049 Gaudissart will send me a COPY of this, which I shall then communicate to you.

Gaudissart has business again, but not yet a new OFFICE in the CITY. He also has to get the BUSINESS going again.

This evening—although yesterday evening did me no good—I must go into town again. I have been SUMMONED to the SUBCOMMITTEE. It is, in fact, an important matter, since the people in Lyons have thrown Richard out of their society, though the GENERAL COUNCIL must make the decision. Richard, hitherto LEADER in Lyons, a very young man, is very active. Apart from his INFEODATION to Bakunin and a super-wisdom linked with this, I don't know what reproaches can be made against him. It appears that our last circular letter11 caused quite a sensation and that a hunt for Bakuninists has started in both Switzerland and France. But est modus in rebus? and I shall see to it that there is no injustice.550

The best bit of Gladstone's speechc is the long introduction, where he states that even the 'BENEFICENT' laws of the English always have the opposite effect in practice. What better proof does the fellow want that England is not fit to be lawgiver and adminis- trator of Ireland!

His measures are a pretty piece of patchwork. The main thing in them is to lure the LAWYERS with the prospect of lawsuits, and the LANDLORDS with that of 'state aid'.

Odger's election scandal was doubly useful: the lousy Whigs have seen, for the first time, that they must let workers into Parliament, or Tories will get in. Second, the lesson for Mr Odger and consorts. Despite Waterlow,551 he would have got in if part of the Irish workers had not abstained, because he had behaved so TRIMMING during the debate in the GENERAL COUNCIL, which they found out from Reynolds's.d

Salut

Your

K. M.

Apropos. Mr Siebel or Sybel,e or whatever the fellow is called, appears to forget that the Prussians had already left the Austrians

[^1]: You'll receive the Irish Bill544 next week.

[^2]: •' K. Marx, The General Council to the Federal Council of Romance Switzerland. - b all has its measure (Horace, Satires, I, 1). - c Gladstone's speech in the House of Commons on 15 February 1870 was published in The Times, 16 February and in Manchester Daily Examiner and Times, 17 February 1870. See also this volume, p. 432. - d See this volume, pp. 386-87, 392. - c Ibid., pp. 432-33.



