---
Volume: 43
Document_Title: "294. Engels to Marx. 22 February "
Page_Range: "477-480"
---

# 294. Engels to Marx. 22 February 



**[p. 293]**

MARX TO ENGELS554

IN MANCHESTER

[London,] 21 February 1870

DEAR FRED,

Enclosed—Borkheim's extract from Katkov's article.3 At the same time, you will see from Gaudissart's letter, on the reverse side, the shameless claims he makes on me as a result of a passing remark I made to him—on the evening I visited himb—about Flerovsky. How should I respond to this thirst for action?

Also enclosed—a letter from Imandt.555 To me, the Prussian claim appears superannuated. What do you think? Doesn't it depend on the form of the counter-bill he drew up for the university professorsr?

I wrote to De Paepe today about the foul deeds of the English Government against the Fenian PRISONERS. This business absolutely must get into the Continental press.356

Salut.

Your

K. M.

294

ENGELS TO MARX

Manchester, 22 February 1870

Dear Moor,

If Imandt had gone immediately to a SOLICITOR, just like the

[^1]: First published in MEGA, Abt. Ill, Printed according to the original Bd. 4, Berlin, 1931

[^2]: Published in English for the first time

[^3]: IN LONDON

[^4]: 11 «Moc KBa, 5 .HHBap H», Mo CKoec Kin ehdo Mocmu, No. 4, 6 January 1870 (see also this volume, p. 436). - b See this volume, pp. 436-37. - c Ibid., pp. 443-44.





**[p. 441]**

North German consul, he would most probably have learned that a debt contracted abroad is not recoverable by legal action in Scotland—or should Scotland be an exception to all other countries? On superannuation, the Code Civil states, Article 2262, that all plaints are superannuated after 30 years; Article 2265: who acquires something in good faith—superannuation in 10, respectively 20 years557; Article 2271: the plaint of masters and teachers of sciences and arts regarding instruction given monthly, superannuates in 6 months. Since this last article does not correspond to the case, the plaint has obviously been filed simply in order to interrupt the superannuation in Rhenish Prussia, or also to see if Imandt can be browbeaten by fear of showing himself up, and will thus pay. His counter-bills are possibly made out on word of honour, in which case he could be shown up badly, in his position. Under Article 2244 a court summons interrupts the superannuation.

Katkov's elucidations about Bakunin are not worth much.a He does not say to whom the repentant letters were supposedly sent. Borrowing money is such a normal Russian means of sustenance that no Russian should reproach another on the subject. And that Bakunin should have used the 6,000 roubles lent him in order to flee, instead of paying the otkupschtschik,h is really ludicrous. And that somebody banished to Siberia should once turn to Katkov, although otherwise he has no time for him—one can't make much of that either. It will annoy Bakunin, but I can't see that Gaudissart0 will dig much capital out of it.

You can tell Gaudissart concerning his plan regarding Flerovsky that, if an English publisher is interested, he will find himself a translator who will translate AT THE MARKET RATE, which differs considerably from what Gaudissart calls 'paying well', and who will finish it in 2-3 months, and not take a whole year. Gaudis- sart should not think that he is the only person who knows Rus- sian. There will still be time to return to the other points when he has really found a publisher. Incidentally, it won't hurt at all if Gaudissart makes enquiries amongst the London PUBLISH- ERS. If he should find somebody, which I hardly believe, this contact could be utilised at a later date. You can easily refuse the preface, saying it would be arrogant of you to wish to intro- duce a foreign book to English literature, before you yourself

[^1]: a See this volume, p. 436. - b tax agent (the Russian word is written by Engels in Latin letters in the original) - c Sigismund Borkheim

[^2]: 17-983





**[p. 442]**

had been introduced to it by an English edition of your own book.147

Apropos, why don't you put Eccarius on to tackling the foul prison deeds in Volksstaat?

Sybel, of course, does mention the second partitioning of Poland behind Austria's back," but, at the same time, he tries to prove once again that Prussia was entitled to do this, on account of some sort of previous Austrian treachery. His entire reasoning is this: when Prussia allies itself with Russia against Austria, this is in order, but if Austria attempts to ally itself with Russia against Prussia, this is treachery. The Pan-Germans and Austrians—Arneth, Vivenot and consorts—claim the opposite; so the two schools of history-mutilators today behave just as stupidly with regard to Russia as the two German powers did then.

I still haven't got hold of the damned Irish laws.481 I have discovered Giraldus Cambrensisb; it can be had from Bohn, translated, for 5s. At the moment I'm going through Wakefield," who has a lot of good things on climate, soil, etc., with all sorts of omnium-gatherum in between. The fellow considers himself very learned, and is partial to quoting German, Dutch, Danish, etc., trash.

Yesterday I laughed more than I have for ages when I read Moses' Paris letter in Volksstaat about Flourens d and the other new 'forces' that are replacing and supplanting old Blanqui, etc. The old blockhead never changes. Wilhelm6 ditto: his latest reports on 19 February are: Hanover, 13 January, Lörrach, 23 January, Munich, 25 January, Ernstthal, 17 January!

Incidentally, things are moving quickly in France. Jules Favre could do nothing better than to declare himself so vehemently against all violence, and in favour of peaceful progress, though limited.558

My move to London late in summer has now been decided. Lizzie has told me that she would like to leave Manchester, the sooner the better; she has had some rows with relations, and she is fed up with the whole business here. We shall get rid of our house

[^1]: a See this volume, pp. 432-33, 437-38. - b Ancient Laws of Ireland. Senchus Mor. Vols I-II; Giraldus Cambrensis, Topographia hibernica et expugnatio hibernica. In: Giraldi Cambrensis Opera, Vol. V. - ' E. Wakefield, An Account of Ireland, Statistical and Political. - d [M. Hess,] 'Die Woche, welche', Der Volksstaat, No. 15, 19 February 1870 (the 'Aus Frankreich' column). - e Wilhelm Liebknecht



