---
Volume: 43
Document_Title: "295. Marx to Peter Imandt. 23 February "
Page_Range: "480-481"
---

# 295. Marx to Peter Imandt. 23 February 



**[p. 443]**

in September, so everything must be arranged between July and September.

Best greetings.

Your

F. E.

First published abridged in Der Briefwech- Printed according to the original sei zwischen F. Engels und K. Marx, Bd. 4, Stuttgart, 1913 and in full in MEGA Published in English for the first Abt. Ill, Bd. 4, Berlin, 1931 t i m e

295

MARX TO PETER IMANDT

IN DUNDEE

[London,] 23 February 1870

Dear Imandt,

As far as I am aware, debts contracted abroad are not recoverable by legal action in Scotland. I expect any old SOLICITOR there would confirm this for you.

On superannuation the Code Civil states," Article 2262, that all plaints are superannuated after 30 years; Article 2265: who acquires something in good faith—superannuation in 10, respec- tively 20 years; Article 2271 : the plaint of masters and teachers of sciences and arts regarding instruction given monthly, superan- nuates in 6 months.

The whole officiousness of the Prussians is obviously simply an attempt to browbeat you, and you can just laugh in the fellows' faces. It would only be inconvenient if the counter-bills are made out on word of honour. This would not alter things legally, but would be compromising. But this is surely not the case?

As you perhaps know, Dronke went bankrupt in a big way, then disappeared. According to some he is again haunting Liverpool; according to others, however, he is knocking about in Paris or Spain. In any case, you can get the most certain and reliable news about him from Schily.

[^1]: See this volume, p. 441.

[^2]: 17»



