---
Volume: 43
Document_Title: "296. Marx to Engels. 5 March "
Page_Range: "481-483"
---

# 296. Marx to Engels. 5 March 



**[p. 444]**

That scamp Biscamp continues to send his inspirations to the Augsburg Allgemeine Zeitung and the Weser-Zeitung ditto, also, the Post,3 published here by Juch since the New Year (Hermann has passed into Bismarckian handsb). I read nothing of all this, and still less do any personal relations exist. As far as I know, the Hesse Cassel man c is hanging out SOMEWHERE in the London area, and is once again 'husband'. Since youd

First published in: Marx and Engels, Printed according to the original Works, Second Russian Edition, Vol. 32, Moscow 1964 Published in English for the first time

296

MARX TO ENGELS

IN MANCHESTER

[London,] 5 March 1870

In the meantime, all sorts of things have happened in FENIAN AFFAIRS. A letter I wrote to the 'Internationale'in Brussels, censuring the FRENCH REPUBLICANS for their narrow-minded nationalist tenden- cy, has been printed, and the editors have announced that they will publish their remarks this week.560 You should know that, in the letter of the Central Council to the Genevans'—which was communicated to the Brussels people' and the main International centres in France—I propounded, in detail, the importance of the Irish question for the working-class movement in general (owing to its repercussions in England).

A short while later, Jennychen flew into a rage at that disgusting article in The Daily News, the private organ of Gladstone's ministry,

[^1]: DEAR FRED,

[^2]: Last week we received the news that the youngest Lafargue child has died.559 The extraordinary coldness in Paris contributed to this. The child was STINTED FROM THE BEGINNING.

[^3]: a Londoner Deutsche Post - b See this volume, p. 266. - c Elard Biscamp - d The end of the letter is missing. - e K. Marx, The General Council to the Federal Council of Romance Switzerland - f See this volume, pp. 406, 411-15, 430.





**[p. 445]**

in which this wretched rag addresses itself to its 'liberal' brothers in France, and warns them not to lump the CASES OF Rochefort and O'Donovan Rossa together. The Marseillaise really fell into the trap, saying The Daily News was right, and in addition published a wretched article by that prattler Talandier, exprocureur de la République, now a teacher of French at the military school in Woolwich (and also ex-private tutor at Herzen's, about whom he wrote a glowing obituary); in this article he attacks the Irish because of their Catholicism, and accuses them of causing Odger's defeat—because of his participation on the Garibaldi committee.561

Besides, he adds, they still support Mitchel although he has sided with the SLAVEHOLDERS, as though Odger did not continue to side with Gladstone, despite his much more important support for the

4351 SLAVEHOLDERS ! Jennychen—ira facit poetam*—therefore wrote, in addition to a private letter, an article for Marseillaise, which was printed?62 And she received, from the rédacteur de la rédaction, a letter, a copy of which I enclose. Today she'll be sending another letter to the Marseillaise which, referring to Gladstone's reply (this week) to questions about the treatment of the PRISONERS, contains extracts from O'Donovan Rossa's letter (see The Irishman, Feb. 5, 70). According to Rossa's letter Gladstone is here presented to the French as a monster (insofar as Gladstone is, IN FACT, responsible for the entire treatment of the PRISONERS, under the Tories, too) and also as a ridiculous hypocrite, as author of the Prayers, The Propagation of the Gospel, The Functions of Laymen in the Church, and Ecce Homo.

With these two papers—the Internationale and Marseillaise—on the Continent we shall now unmask the English. If you should happen, ONE DAY OR THE OTHER, to find something suitable for one of these papers, you, too, should take part in our good work.

Mr W. Liebknecht displays himself this time in his full glory. First, he is in a great hurry to have your Peasant War. Now procrastination and, instead, he.prints, in No. 17 of the Volksstaat, de dato0 Hamburg, an article against the idea of 'class' differences, which comes from Heinzen's propaganda clique.

[^1]: The state of my health has not permitted me to take part in the meetings of the CENTRAL COUNCIL 73 so far. But I shall, next Tuesday,b if it doesn't rain. The discussions in the American HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES about the FENIAN PRISONERS 56S have, as far as I could see, been most carefully suppressed by the English press.

[^2]: a ire makes a poet (Juvenal, Satirae, I) - b 8 March - c dated from



