---
Volume: 43
Document_Title: "297. Marx to Laura and Paul Lafargue. 5 March "
Page_Range: "483-488"
---

# 297. Marx to Laura and Paul Lafargue. 5 March 



**[p. 446]**

Quant à Meissner and the 18th Brumaire, il observe un silence significatif.3

Salut

Your

K. M.

First published abridged in Der Briefwech- Printed according to the original sei zwischen F. Engels und K. Marx, Bd. 4, Stuttgart, 1913 and in full in MEGA Published in English for the first Abt. Ill, Bd. 4, Berlin, 1931 t l m e

297

MARX T O LAURA A N D PAUL LAFARGUE 5 6

IN PARIS

London, 5 March 1870

Dear Laura and Paul,

You feel certainly great and just indignation at my prolonged silence, but you ought to excuse it as the natural consequence, first, of illness, then of extra work to make u p for the time lost.

Apropos. Un certain M. de Gobineau, has published, il y a à peu près dix ans," a work in 4 volumes Sur l'Inégalité des races humaines, written for the purpose to prove in the first instance that 'la race blanche' is a sort of God amongst the other h u m a n races and, of course, the noble families within the 'race blanche' are again la

[^1]: T h e sad news Paul communicated to us, did not take me by surprise. b T h e evening before the arrival of his letter I had stated to the family my serious misgivings as to the little child. I have suffered myself too much from such losses to not profoundly sympathise with you. Still, from the same personal experience I know that all wise commonplaces and consolatory thrash uttered on such occasion irritate real grief instead of soothing it.

[^2]: I hope you will send us good news of little Schnappy, c my greatest favourite. T h e poor dear little fellow must have suffered severely from the cold so adverse to 'la nature mélanienne'.d M0

[^3]: a As for Meissner and the 18th Brumaire, he observes a significant silence. - b See this volume, p. 444. - c Charles Etienne Lafargue - d dark-skinned creature - e some ten years ago - f white race



4*v ^Iv WL

Y * 1 ^ ^ * ^ w ~ v v . to A,

î , i*-^ «vr^-^cv. ^ t Yi WJL'W V.tf»i** _1>M*M*« o-^jcd'VU

H*^~U | W ^ JU\&> , ^ ^ ^ V U'b^JWSç?

[^1]: First page of Marx's letter to Laura and Paul Lafargue of 5 March 1870





crème de la crème? I rather suspect that M. de Gobineau, dans ce temps là 'premier secrétaire de la légation de France en Suisse',b to have sprung himself not from an ancient Frank warrior but from a modern French huissier.c However that may be, and despite his spite against the 'race noire'd—(to such people it is always a source of satisfaction to have somebody they think themselves entitled to

mépriser')—he declares 'le nègre' ou 'le sang noir'1 to be la source matérielle de l'art,* and all artistic production of the white nations to depend on their mixture avec 'le sang noir'.

I have been much delighted by the last letter I received from my sweet ex-secretary ,h and much amused by Paul's description of Moilin's soirée.564

Ce 'grand inconnu'1 seems at last to have found the secret of catching that 'gloire'^ which till now always slipped so treacherous- ly out of his fingers when he had just laid hold of its tail. He has found out that to be successful with the world everything depends upon the circumstance of circumscribing the world within one's own four walls, where one may nominate himself president and have such an audience as will swear in verba magistri}

Here, at home, as you are fully aware, the Fenians' sway is paramount. Tussy is one of their head centres.566 Jenny writes on their behalf in the Marseillaise under the pseudonym of J. Wil- liams.062 I have not only treated the same theme in the Brussels Internationale? and caused resolutions of the Central Council73 to be passed against their gaolers.452 In a circular, addressed by the Council to our corresponding committees, I have explained the merits of the Irish Question."1

You understand at once that I am not only acted upon by feelings of humanity. There is something besides. To accelerate the social development in Europe, you must push on the catastrophe of official England. To do so, you must attack her in Ireland. That's her weakest point. Ireland lost, the British 'Empire' is gone, and the class war in England, till now somnolent and chronic, will assume acute forms. But England is the metropolis of landlordism and capitalism all over the world.

What is Blanqui about? Is he at Paris?

[^1]: a the upper crust - b at that time 'the first secretary of the French legation in Switzerland' - c usher - d black race - e to despise - f 'the Negro' or 'black blood' - s the material source of art - h Laura Lafargue - ' This 'great stranger' - i glory - k by his tutor's words (Horace, Epistles, I. 1) - ' K. Marx, The English Government and the Fenian Prisoners. - m K. Marx, The General Council to the Federal Council of Romance Switzerland, Point 5 (see present edition, Vol. 21, pp. 87-90).



You have of course heard nothing of my translator, M. K.a I am in the same predicament.441

The book of Flerovski on 'the situation of the labouring classes in Russia',b is an extraordinary book. I am really glad to be now able to read it somewhat fluently with the aid of a dictionary. This is the first time that the whole economical state of Russia has been revealed. It is conscientious work. During 15 years, the author travelled from the West to the confines of Siberia, from the White Sea to the Caspian, with the only purpose of studying facts and exposing conventional lies. He harbours of course some delusions about la perfectibilité perfectible de la Nation Russe, et le principe providentiel de la propriété communale dans sa forme Russe.c But let that pass. After the study of his work, one feels deeply convinced that a most terrible social revolution—in such inferior forms of course as suit the present Muscovite state of develop- ment—is irrepressible in Russia and near at hand. This is good news. Russia and England are the two great pillars of the present European system. All the rest is of secondary importance, even la belle France et la savante Allemagne.d

Engels will leave Manchester and, at the beginning of August next, settle definitely down in London." It will be a great boon to me.

And now farewell my dear children. Don't forget to kiss brave little Schnappy on behalf of his

Old Nick

[^1]: First published in: Marx and Engels, Reproduced from the original Works, Second Russian Edition, Vol. 32, „ , ,. . . . _ . . . . r ,, , Moscow, 1964 Published m English m full for the first time

[^2]: a Keller (see this volume, p. 359). - b H. tp Aepo BCKifl, TIo Aoxenie paöouaeo Kjiacca er> Pocciu. - c the perfectible perfectibility of the Russian Nation and providential principle of communal property in its Russian form - d Splendid France and learned Germany - e See this volume, pp. 442-43.



