---
Volume: 43
Document_Title: "298. Engels to Marx. 7 March "
Page_Range: "488-489"
---

# 298. Engels to Marx. 7 March 



**[p. 298]**

ENGELS TO MARX

IN LONDON

Manchester, 7 March 1870

Dear Moor,

Your letter arrived here yesterday3 in a very suspicious state and, what is even more suspicious, a full hour after time. Since, on Sunday, there is only one POST DELIVERY here, this looks very odd. Is the very honourable Mr Bruce taking an interest in our corres- pondence?

When I read on Saturday afternoon in the 'Irishman in Paris' the story about the Marseillaise, I knew immediately in which part of the world Mr Williams was to be found, but stupidly enough could not explain the Christian name.566 The business is very fine, and the naïve letter, with Rochefort's naïve suggestion that O'Donovan Rossa should be asked to contribute to the Marseillaise, gives Jenny an excellent opportunity to establish a link with the treatment of the prisoners, and to open the eyes of the bons

Why don't you publish the General Council's letter to the Genevansc? The central sections in Geneva, Brussels, etc., read these things, but they do not penetrate to the masses unless they are published. And they should also be published in German in the papers in question. You don't publish anything like enough.

Please send me the relevant copies of Marseillaise and Inter- nationale for a few days.d Jennychen's success has been greeted with a general hurrah here, and Mr J. Williams' health has been drunk with ALL DUE HONOURS. I am very eager to hear how the matter develops. The stupid correspondent of the 'Irishman in Paris'6

should try some time to get such things into his friend Ollivier's papers.

A couple of days ago my bookseller suddenly sent me the Senchus Mor, the ancient Irish laws,481 and what's more, not the new edition but the first. So, with a lot of pushing, I have

[^1]: hommesb over there.

[^2]: a 6 March. A reference to Marx's letter of 5 March 1870. - b simple souls - ' K. Marx, The General Council to the Federal Council of Romance Switzerland. - d See this volume, pp. 445, 453. - e An allusion to the anonymous article printed in the 'Irishman in Paris' column of The Irishman, No. 36, 5 March 1870.



