---
Volume: 43
Document_Title: "299. Engels to Rudolf Engels. 8 March "
Page_Range: "489-490"
---

# 299. Engels to Rudolf Engels. 8 March 

succeeded in that And such difficulties with a book carrying Longmans as the London firm on its title page, and published by the government! I haven't been able to look at the stuff yet, since, in the meantime, I have started on various modern things (about the 19th century) and must finish them first.

I have concluded with Meissner on the basis of sharing the profits.567

I have just received a semi-incomprehensible telegram from Barmen, undated, from which it can only be seen that my mother is seriously ill. I don't know whether a letter is on its way, or whether an earlier telegram got lost.368 I didn't get Liebknecht's sheet2 today, either. It is very possible that I shall have to go to Germany in a few days, IF SO I shall see you on my way there. But I hope everything will still go well.

Your

F. E.

First published abridged in Der Briefwech- Printed according to the original sei zwischen F. Engels und K. Marx, Bd. 4, . . . . . . . Stuttgart, 1913 and in full in MEGA, Published in English for the first Abt. Ill, Bd. 4, Berlin, 1931 t l m e

299

ENGELS TO RUDOLF ENGELS

Manchester, 8 March 1870

Dear Rudolf,

I received your telegram today a few minutes before 5, which means it took scarcely 3 hours, since it was dated 1.52 p.m. So far your news is good, and I hope it remains so.

Hermann's letter from Saturdayb I received only this morning; the storms must have delayed the Sunday boat from Ostend. In the regular run of things I should have received it yesterday afternoon, some hours before Hermann's telegram,0 and then your information would have accorded properly. The matter seems to

[^1]: IN BARMEN

[^2]: a Der Volksstaat - b 5 March - c See the previous letter.



