---
Volume: 43
Document_Title: "300. Marx to Engels. 9 March "
Page_Range: "490-491"
---

# 300. Marx to Engels. 9 March 



**[p. 453]**

me extremely serious, and the worst is that it can drag on for a very long time and cause mother, at her age, a great deal of suffering, even if everything goes well this time. That the doctor is quite satisfied I understand to mean under the prevailing circumstances; a haemorrhage lasting from Wednesday until the following Tuesday appears to me to be certainly something serious. But we should hope for the best, namely that, when this is past, this does not re-occur.

I am ready to leave at any moment and, if my presence is desirable, I can, depending on the time at which I receive your telegram, either leave here at midday and arrive there the following evening, or leave late in the evening, per day-boat to Ostend, and get to Cologne the same day, where I would surely have to lie up for the night.

Try to keep mother as cheerful and in as good heart as possible. Best greetings.

Your

Frederick

First published in Deutsche Revue, Jg. 46, Printed according to the original Bd. II, Stuttgart, 1921

300

MARX TO ENGELS

[London,] 9 March 1870

Dear FRED,

Enclosed—2 copies of the Internationale. You don't need to return them, since they have sent me 5 COPIES OF EACH NUMBER.

As TO No. I, I had written it quickly to De Paepe as a private letter for him to work up into an article. Instead, he published it verbatim," adding nonsensical clauses, e.g., that the BODILY punish-

[^1]: Published in English for the first time

[^2]: IN MANCHESTER

[^3]: In No. II there is nothing by me, except for translation of the FACTS from The Irishman.569

[^4]: a K. Marx, The English Government and the Fenian Prisoners.



