---
Volume: 43
Document_Title: "301. Marx to Engels. 10 March "
Page_Range: "491-492"
---

# 301. Marx to Engels. 10 March 



**[p. 454]**

ment of O'Donovan should be understood as—lashes with a whip!

Have you read the stuff by Huxley about the lack of difference between ANGLO-SAXON (vulgo ENGLISHMEN) and CELT?570 He is giving his 2nd lecture on the subject next Sunday. LITTLE Dakyns has sent us TICKETS for this.

We are much DISTURBED here about the silence of the Parisiansa

since the notice of death.b Let's hope there has been no new misfortune.

Strohn was here the day before yesterday, and left for the Continent the same day.

Salut

Your

K. M.

First published in Der Briefwechsel zwischen Printed according to the original F. Engels und K. Marx, Bd. 4, Stuttgart, . 19,13 Published in English lor the first time

301

MARX TO ENGELS

Since I know this stuff amuses you, the following with all haste (post just closing): in addition to a few introductory marginal notes on Gladstone's latest declaration in the House of Commons about the PRISONERS, Jennychen sent the Marseillaise an extract from an older letter by O'Donovan Rossa, published in The Irishman on 5 February (I believe that was the date). The Marseillaise (in a truly French way it gives this letter as from 'Newgate') proceeds to publish this in a special issue on Tuesday evening, containing only articles by 'prisonniers politiques' and costing 50 centimes.571 This has now been reprinted (re-translation into English) this evening in The Echo, etc. Levy's Telegraph also refers to it in its Paris correspon-

[^1]: IN MANCHESTER

[^2]: [London,] 10 Marchc 1870

[^3]: DEAR FRED,

[^4]: a Paul and Laura Lafargue - b See this volume, p. 444. - c In the original 9 February is corrected to 10 March by Engels.



