---
Volume: 43
Document_Title: "302. Engels to Marx. 13 March "
Page_Range: "492-494"
---

# 302. Engels to Marx. 13 March 



**[p. 455]**

dence. The Irishman may well complain that it is not quoted as the source. But Jennychen will use this to demonstrate how the English press suppresses the FACTS published in the Irish press, and only publishes them as such when they come from Paris in some extraordinary manner. The English press will soon note that the idyllic days of systematic lying and hushing up the FACTS are over.

Pays remarks that the increase in the price of the Marseillaise to 50 c. is against all the rules, since 'prison goods are always sold cheaper than others'.

Salut

Your

K. M.

First published in Der Briefwechsel zwischen Printed according to the original F. Engels und K. Marx, Bd. 4, Stuttgart, . . . 1013 Published in English for the first time

302

ENGELS TO MARX

IN LONDON

Manchester, 13 March 1870

Dear Moor,

MR J. Williams" has certainly had a bang-up and well-earned success. The dodge by the Marseillaise in printing the letter as an originalb has got the whole English press into a fine pickle, and has finally forced The Irishman to admit its debt to the Marseillaise and the Internationale. The hushing-up is at an end, and MR Bruce—although in the lousy Daily News he again has O'Donovan Ros-sa described as 'ORDINARY CONVICT AND NOTHING ELSE'—will probably sing quite a different tune in answering the interpellations that are to come. Bravo Jenny! Lizzie is particularly grateful to you for the articles in the Internationale,'' which pleased her enormously.

The two letters enclosed came to me from Solingen. I had

[^1]: a Marx's daughter Jenny - b See the previous letter. - c K. Marx, The English Government and the Fenian Prisoners.





**[p. 2923]**

a d d r e s s e d this M o l l a as ' t h o u ' , a s s u m i n g h i m t o b e t h e b r o t h e r of J u p p , b a n d a n o l d m e m b e r of t h e L e a g u e 0 ; t h u s t h e i n t i m a t e t o n e . Y o u will also n o t e t h a t w e h a v e also fallen p r e y t o m y t h - f o r m a t i o n . I k n o w n o t h i n g a b o u t e i t h e r t h e S c h a p p e r business, w h i c h looks very f u d d l e d , o r t h e b u s i n e s s with m y o l d m a n . d M y old m a n w o u l d h a v e t a k e n c a r e n o t t o let m e p a y o u t w a g e s o r a n y t h i n g like t h a t ; f o r this, I c o u l d n o t c o u n t well e n o u g h f o r his taste. 5 7 2 Since I h a v e t o a n s w e r t h e fellows s o o n , y o u m i g h t let m e k n o w w h e t h e r y o u h a v e h e a r d a n y t h i n g c o n c e r n i n g M e n k e i n t h e m e a n t i m e .

T h e w h o l e w e e k I h a v e b e e n s t a n d i n g r e a d y t o h a v e t o g o a w a y b e c a u s e of m y m o t h e r , b u t luckily t h i n g s a r e g e t t i n g better. 6

T h e following p a s s a g e suffices t o c h a r a c t e r i s e g e n t l e o l d G l a d s t o n e ' s w h o l e l o n g LAND B I L L 5 4 4 as p u r e m u c k :

'THE LEASES IN QUESTION' (namely, as they are given today, now and then, in Ireland by the LANDLORDS to the TENANTS) ' ARE QUITE AS PRECARIOUS AS TENANCIES AT WILL. THEY HAVE NO EFFICACY WHATEVER IN REMOVING THE SENSE OF INSECURITY. A LEASE TO BE OF ANY AVAIL FOR THAT PURPOSE, SHOULD, SAVE IN THE PARTICULARS OF SUBDIVIDING AND SUBLETTING, BE FREE AND UNFETTERED—ABOVE ALL, IT SHOULD PUT IVO OBSTACLE TO THE SALE OF THE TENANT'S INTEREST. BUT MODERN LEASES ARE THE REVERSE OF THIS—THEY ARE ENCUMBERED WITH CLAUSES AND COVENANTS PRESCRIBING THE MODE OF CULTIVATION AND THE DISPOSAL OF THE PRODUCE, NEGATIVELY AND AFFIRMATIVELY REGULATING THE ACTION OF THE TENANT AND ENTIRELY FORBIDDING THE ESSENTIAL POWER OF FREE ALIENATION. EVERY LINE IN THESE DOCUMENTS MAY WITHOUT MUCH EXAGGERATION BE SAID TO CONTAIN A LEGAL PITFALL FOR THE UNWARY AND THERE ARE FEW, INDEED, IF ANY, WHO CAN ESCAPE THE EFFECT OF THE LAST CLAUSE WITH WHICH THEY WIND UP, MAKING VOID THE LEASE IN CASE OF THE BREACH OF ANY OF THE FOREGOING COVENANTS. SUCH LEASES AFFORD NO SECURITY. THEY ARE QUITE AS PRECARIOUS AND MORE DANGEROUS THAN TENANCIES AT WILL.'

[^1]: A n d w h o says this? M R Gallwey, AGENT (11) OF THE K e n m a r e

[^2]: ESTATE, AT THE K i l l a r n e y BOARD OF GUARDIANS, 4 N o v e m b e r , 1 8 6 9 . A n d t h e K e n m a r e ESTATE b e l o n g s t o MARQUIS OF L a n d s d o w n e , w h o s e g e n e r a l a g e n t f o r all h i s Irish ESTATES is t h e h o n o u r a b l e 'REALITY' Trenchl1 O n e c o u l d n o t h o p e f o r a b e t t e r a u t h o r i t y . A n d t h e s e

[^3]: LEASES a r e t h e c o n t r a c t s BY WHICH, AFTER THE PASSING OF THIS BILL, EVERY

[^4]: IRISH TENANT IS TO BE HELD BOUND a c c o r d i n g t o t h e n o b l e G l a d s t o n e . H a v e y o u h a d n e w s f r o m t h e L a f a r g u e s ? Best g r e e t i n g s t o all of y o u .

[^5]: Y o u r

[^6]: F. E. First published in Der Briefwechsel zwischen Printed according to the original F. Engels und K. Marx, Bd. 4, Stuttgart, Published in English for the first time a Friedrich Moll - b Joseph Moll - c the Communist League - d Frederick Engels' father — Friedrich Engels, Senior - e See this volume, pp. 452-53. - f an allusion to Trench's Realities of Irish Life; see this volume, p. 356.



