---
Volume: 43
Document_Title: "303. Engels to Jenny Marx ( daughter). 17 March "
Page_Range: "494-495"
---

# 303. Engels to Jenny Marx ( daughter). 17 March 



**[p. 303]**

ENGELS T O JENNY MARX (DAUGHTER)

IN LONDON

Manchester, 17 March 1870

Dear Jenny,

I congratulate you on your well-earned success.573 That Mr Bruce had to stammer his apologies in yesterday's Daily News is priceless.574 It will now be necessary to show u p the hollowness of these apologies, and that is not difficult. Here is some material, as I do not know whether you still have a copy of the Pollock and Knox Report* about THINGS NOT GENERALLY KNOWN.

Bruce says:

'WITH REFERENCE TO THE COMPLAINT THAT HE WAS COMPELLED TO BATHE IN UNCLEAR BATHS, THE COMMISSIONERS, AFTER FULL INQUIRY INTO THE PRACTICE OF THE PRISON, SAY "IT WOULD BE IDLE TO DWELL UPON SUCH ABSURDITIES."'

What d o the Commissioners say? PAGE 23:

'AT BATHING HOURS, HE STOOD NO. 1 OF A PARTY OF 30, HE WAS NOT CALLED FIRST

THUS,THE ABSURDITY does not consist in fact that it is stated that Rossac had to bathe in the dirty water of criminals. No, but in the fact that he complains about it. Bruce changes the fact (admitted by the COMMISSIONERS) in such a way as if they had treated it 'as an absurdity'. That's the way Bruce treats the truth.

I might further remark that PENAL SERVITUDE is similar to the French travaux forcés or the so-called galères, and a CONVICT PRISON of this sort = the French bagne, and CONVICT = galérien. T h e enclosed clipping is a LEADER from the local John Blight's paper. d T h e Manchester Guardian also has a leader on the subject,

[^1]: TO THE BATH. I T TURNED OUT THAT THE WARDER IN CHARGE ON ONE OCCASION BEGAN WITH N O . 1, NEXT WEEK WITH N o . 3 0 ; THE 3 R D WEEK HE TOOK N o . 1 6 AND 1 7 FIRST

[^2]: AND WORKED ROUND TO THE FLANKS SO AS TO GIVE EACH HIS PRIORITY, WITHOUT WHICH THERE WOULD HAVE BEEN UNIVERSAL DISCONTENT. IT WOULD BE IDLE TO DWELL ON SUCH ABSURDITIES' b

[^3]: O n the fact itself, the CONVICT of Clonmel explains (THINGS NOT

[^4]: GENERALLY KNOWN, p . 9 ) .

[^5]: 'IT IS NOT GENERALLY KNOWN THAT WE HAD T O BATHE IN THE SAME WATER IN WHICH SEVERAL OF THESE CRIMINALS BATHED OR WERE BATHING AT THE TIME.'

[^6]: a This refers to [A. A. Knox and G. D. Pollock,] Report of the Commissioners on the Treatment of the Treason-Felony Convicts in the English Convict Prisons. - b italics by Engels - c O'Donovan Rossa - d Manchester Daily Examiner and Times, leader, 17 March 1870



