---
Volume: 43
Document_Title: "304. Marx to Engels. 19 March "
Page_Range: "495-497"
---

# 304. Marx to Engels. 19 March 

aping that of yesterday's Times,3 but also with the comment that political prisoners have a claim to some CONSIDERATION.

Nota Bene: if you do not have the above report or the THINGS etc., I can send them to you immediately.

You should see the pleasure which this whole thing gave my wife. She is infinitely grateful to you for bringing all these infamies to light, and sends you the enclosed twig of SHAMROCK, for today is St Patrick's day and we don't know if you have any there.076 T h e r e is also a SHAMROCK for Tussy.

Give my affectionate greetings to Moor, your Mama, Tussy and Ellen.

Your

F. Engels

First published in Friedrich Engels. 1820- Printed according to the original 1970. Referate, Diskussionen, Dokumente, Hanover 1971 Published in English for the first time

304

[^1]: MARX T O ENGELS 5 7 7

[^2]: IN MANCHESTER

[^3]: London, 19 MARCH 1870

[^4]: DEAR FRED,

[^5]: Enclosed, the Marseillaise, which should, however, be returned with the previous ones. I haven't read it myself yet. T h e article was written jointly by Jennychen and myself,562 as she hadn't got SUFFICIENT TIME available. This is also why she hasn't answered your letter, and why she is sending MRS Lizzie h e r thanks for the SHAMROCK ",7I> PROVISIONALLY through me.

[^6]: From the enclosed letter from Pigott to Jenny you will see that MRS O'Donovan, to whom Jenny sent a private letter, together with 1 Marseillaise,b took her for a GENTLEMAN, although she signed it Jenny Marx. I answered Pigott today on Jennychen's behalf, and took the opportunity to explain to him briefly MY VIEWS OF THE IRISH

[^7]: QUESTION.378

[^8]: a 'The Fenian Convict O'Donovan Rossa', The Times, 16 March 1870. - b Apparently carrying the second article by Jenny Marx from the Irish question series.





**[p. 459]**

Your HINT about Bruce's falsificationa has already been used in the letter Jenny sent yesterday to the Marseillaise .b We have Knox'

et Pollock's Report c (but did not consult it) and ditto 'THINGS NOT GENERALLY KNOWN'. O n the other hand, you would oblige me if you would send by return: 1. Lassalle's publication against Schulze- Delitzsch, and 2. the book by 'Clement', the crazy Frisian.d

T h e sensation caused in Paris and London by Jennychen's second letter (containing the CONDENSED TRANSLATION of O'Donovan's LETTER) has robbed Talandier of his sleep; he is loathsome and importunate (but very FLUENT with gob and pen). In the Marseillaise he had denounced the Irish as CATHOLIC IDIOTS. Now, equally FULLMOUTHED, he is taking their side in a review of what The Times, The Daily Telegraph and The Daily News have said about O'Donovan's letter.579 Since Jennychen's second letter was left unsigned (BY ACCIDENT), he obviously flattered himself with the idea that he would be taken for the secret sender. This was frustrated by Jennychen's third letter. T h e fellow is, du reste, TEACHER OF FRENCH AT THE

MILITARY SCHOOL OF Sandhurst.

Last Tuesday" I was back again, for the first time, at a meeting of the GENERAL COUNCIL.580 With me—Felix Holt, THE RASCAL.' H e had a very good time since, for a change, there was really something interesting going on. As you know, the prolétaires 'positivistes' in Paris had sent a deputy 8 to the Basle Congress. T h e r e was a discussion as to whether he should be admitted, since he represented a philosophical society and not a workers' society (although he and his consorts all belong 'personally' to the WORKING GLASS). Finally, he was admitted as a delegate of personal MEMBERS of the 'Internationale'. These fellows have now constituted themselves in Paris as a branche of the Internationale—an event about which the London and Paris Comtists have made a great FUSS. They thought that they had driven in THE THIN WEDGE. T h e GENERAL COUNCIL, being informed by the 'prolétaires positivistes' of their affiliation, reminded them politely that the COUNCIL could only permit their admission after examining their programme. So they sent a programme—real Comtist-orthodox—which was discussed last Tuesday. In the chair was Mottershead, h a very intelligent (though anti-Irish) old Chartist,

[^1]: a See this volume, p. 455 - b The fourth article by Jenny Marx from the Irish question series. - c [A. A. Knox and G. D. Pollock,] Report of the Commissioners on the Treatment of the Treason-Felony Convicts in the English Convict Prisons. - d F. Lassalle, Herr Bastiat-Schultze von Delitzsch, der ökonomische Julian, oder: Capital und Arbeit; K. J. Clement, Schleswig, das urheimische Land des nicht dänischen Volks der Angeln und Frisen und Englands Mutterland, wie es war und ward. - e 15 March - f Dakyns (see this volume, p. 423.). - R Gabriel Mollin - h See this volume, p. 386.



