---
Volume: 43
Document_Title: "305. Engels to Marx. 21 March "
Page_Range: "497-499"
---

# 305. Engels to Marx. 21 March 



**[p. 460]**

and a personal enemy of, and expert on, Comtism.581 After a longish debate: Since they are workers they may be admitted as a simple branch. Not, however, as 'branchepositiviste', since the principles of Comtism directly contradict our Rules. And anyway, it was their own affair how they reconciled their philosophical private views with those of our Rules.

About the screeds from Solingen soon.

Salut

Your

Moro

First published abridged in Der Briefwech- Printed according to the original sei zwischen F. Engels und K. Marx, Bd. 4, . . . . . Stuttgart, 1913 and in full in MEGA Published in English for the first Abt. Ill, Bd. 4, Berlin, 1931 t l m e

305

ENGELS TO MARX

Manchester, 21 March 1870

Dear Moor,

Your letter of the day before yesterday3 was only delivered to me today, and the state of the envelope (enclosed) leaves no further doubt that the scoundrel Bruce is keeping an eye on our correspondence. I am, therefore, not sending these lines by post and, at the same time, a few lines, in which Pigott's letterb is returned, are going off to you by post.582

Close your envelopes carefully, and seal them with sealing-wax over the glue so that the signet-print touches all four flaps of the envelope. Your present envelopes are not suitable; the 4 flaps have to come quite close together so that this can be done. This makes things more difficult, so that, in the short time the fellows have they are forced to leave visible evidence, and then one can denounce them publicly. In the meantime, write important things to

[^1]: IN LONDON

[^2]: a 19 March - b See this volume, p. 458.





**[p. 461]**

me under the address: Schorlemmer, Owens College, Manchester, or 172 Brunswick Street, Manchester, or S. Moore, 25 Dover Street, Oxford Street, Manchester, and don't write the address yourself. For very secret things, the best way is some sort of packet per Globe Parcel Co. like this one. In this way you could also let me have another address; it must not be that of your house. It's a good thing that I am soon moving to London, then this will come to an end. I have just given notice on my house. In fact, the beastly government could wish for no better medium than our correspondence in order to keep informed of the activities of the entire proletarian party; the government will also find things in our correspondence that they can utilise with their continental colleagues. At least because of this we must take all precautions. We must not correspond for Stieber's sake.

Jenny can shout: victoire sur toute la ligne!3 If it were not for her, the honourable Gladstone would never have granted the new

enquête^ How Moorec allowed himself to be diddled again by Gladstone concerning this enquiry can be shown by comparing the hopeful NOTE on p. 608 of The Irishman, which obviously proceeds from Moore, with Gladstone's Thursday speech, in which he reserved for himself the composition, procedures, etc.583

An attempt was also made, probably in Cologne, to open the letter from Solingend to me, but it was unsuccessful, owing to proper use of sealing-wax.

Hearty greetings.

Your

F. E.

In their haste, the fellows laid together the four flaps of the envelope incorrectly, the proof is therefore absolute.

[^1]: First published in Der Briefwechsel zwischen F. Engels und K. Marx, Bd. 4, Stuttgart, 1913

[^2]: Printed according to the original

[^3]: Published in English for the first time

[^4]: a victory along the whole line! - b enquiry - fc George Henry Moore - d See this volume, p. 455.



