---
Volume: 43
Document_Title: "306. Marx to Engels. 24 March "
Page_Range: "499-501"
---

# 306. Marx to Engels. 24 March 



**[p. 306]**

MARX T O ENGELS 1 7 4

IN MANCHESTER

[London,] 24 MARCH 1870

DEAR FRED,

Enclosed, 2 copies of Marseillaise (1 J. Williamsa in it), and Het Volk, more about which in the course of this letter.

T h e fellows here should look out with their letter-opening. T h e times of the worthy Graham are past.584 As soon as I have any completely striking, certain proof, I shall write directly to the POSTMASTER GENERAL. / / ne faut pas se gênera

I thought I was properly back on my feet, was working away gaily again for the past 2 weeks, but then there appeared, d'abord,c

a lousy cough from the March east wind — I'm still suffering from it—and then, since the day before yesterday, once again unpleas- ant manifestations on my right thigh, which for two days now have made walking and the seated position difficult. À tous les diables!4

Enclosed, a letter from the Russian colony in Geneva. We have admitted them; I have accepted their commission to be their representative on the General Council, and have also sent them a short reply (official, apart from lettre privée) with permission to publish it in their paper. e 5 4 1 Drôle de position{ for me to be functioning as the representative of jeune Russiegl A man never knows what he may achieve, or what STRANGE FELLOWSHIP he may have to suffer. In the official reply I praise Flerovsky h and emphasise that the chief job of the Russian branche is to work for Poland (i.e., to free Europe from Russia as a neighbour). I thought it safer to say no word about Bakunin, either in the public or the confidential letter. But what I shall never forgive these fellows is that they turn me into a vénérable. They obviously believe I am between 80 and 100 years old.

T h e letter from the publisher of Volk1 enclosed herewith—was addressed to me without a particular address on the envelope, but instead: 'Her Karl Marx, Algemeen Correspondent voor Nederland der

[^1]: a Jenny Marx's fourth article on the Irish question - b One should not constrain oneself. - c first - d The devil take it! - e Hapodnoe d&jio - f Odd position - s young Russia - h The reference is to H. Ct>Aepo Bc Ki H, Tlojioxeme paôonaio KJiacca et Pocciu. - ' Het Volk.





**[p. 463]**

Internationale Arbeiders Vereeniging, London.'3 This post of an 'Algemeen Correspondent voor Nederland' was completely un- known to m e hitherto. But before I get mixed u p in any way with 'Herr Philipp von Roesgen von Floss', I thought it safer to write

d'abord to o u r Flemish branche in Antwerp to request information about this long name. b

Best greetings to MRS LIZZY.

Your

Moor

Apropos. OLD Becker C has finally written to J u n g (also a few lines to me,585 which I shall answer tomorrow). H e presents all the stupidities he committed as deep and intentional machiavellianism. Le bon homme!d Thereby, the interesting datum that Bakunin, who hitherto, as Becker states, shouted blue murder about Herzen, began to sing hymns of praise as soon as he was dead.D86 Thereby he achieved his aim, that the propaganda money, ABOUT 25,000 frs annually, which the rich Herzen had paid to himself from Russia (his party there), is now transferred to Bakunin. Bakunin appears to love this type of 'inheritance',087 despite his antipathy contre l'héritage.e379

[^1]: T h e Napoleon RACE has fallen pretty low when they, à tort et à travers,f attempt to prove that they are being treated to boxed ears.5SB

[^2]: First published abridged in Der Briefwech- Printed according to the original sei zwischen F. Engels und K. Marx, Bd. 4, . . Stuttgart, 1913 and in full in MEGA, Published m English in full for the Abt. Ill, Bd. 4, Berlin, 1931 f l r s t t i m e

[^3]: a Mr Karl Marx, general correspondent of the International Working Men's Association for the Netherlands, London. - b See this volume, pp. 464-65. - c Johann Philipp Becker - d The good fellow! - e against inheritance --f so impru- dently



