---
Volume: 43
Document_Title: "308. Marx to Philippe Coenen. 24 March "
Page_Range: "501-502"
---

# 308. Marx to Philippe Coenen. 24 March 



**[p. 307]**

MARX TO WILHELM BRACKE589

IN BRUNSWICK

[London, 24 March 1870] Dear Friend,

Yesterday3 I send you 3,000 CARDS OF MEMBERSHIP addressed to von Bonhorst590

I have information for you, which is not uninteresting, about the internal affairs of the Internationals. This will reach you by an indirect route.b In accordance with the Rules, all national committees in contact with the General Council must send it three-monthly reports on the situation of the movement. When I remind you of this, I would ask you to consider that this report is not written for the public, and should, therefore, present the facts completely factually, without make-up.

From Borkheim and from the latest letter from Bonhorst I know that the finances of the Eisenachers are in a bad state.591 As a consolation, the information that the finances of the General Council are below zero, steadily growing negative dimensions.

308

London, 24 March 1870 1 Modena Villas, Maitland Park,

Haverstock Hill, London Citizen,

Yesterday I received the proeflladc of Het Volk published at Rotterdam and a letter from its editor, Philipp von Roesgen von Floss,d in which he asks, among other things, for a card as a

[^1]: First published in: W. Bracke, Der Printed according to the book Braunschweiger Ausschuss der socialdemok- ratischen Arbeiter-Partei in Lätzen und vor Published in English for the first dem Gericht, Brunswick, 1872 t i m e

[^2]: MARX T O PHILIPPE COENEN 5 9 2

[^3]: IN ANTWERP

[^4]: a 23 March - b See this volume, p. 470. - c specimen number - d See this volume, pp. 462-63.



