---
Volume: 43
Document_Title: "309. Marx to Engels. 26 March "
Page_Range: "502-503"
---

# 309. Marx to Engels. 26 March 



**[p. 465]**

member of the International. I know neither Mr Philipp von Roesgen von Floss nor the state of our affairs at Rotterdam. I suppose that you are better informed, and I am asking you to please write to me on these two points: (1) What is the state of affairs of the International at Rotterdam? (2) Can the General Council establish relations with Mr Philipp von Roesgen von Floss?

Greetings and fraternity.

Karl Marx

First published in: Marx and Engels, Printed according to a copy of the Works, First Russian Edition, Vol. XXVI, original Moscow, 1935 Translated from the French

309

MARX TO ENGELS

IN MANCHESTER

[London,] 26 MARCH 1870

Returned, enclosed, the letter from the 'wrong' Moll.a I have heard nothing from Menke yet. When you write to the lads, please tell them, also, 1. that Lessner has written repeatedly to them that the Central Council* can do nothing on this matter; 2. that they can work it out on their own 5 fingers that their cooperative society is of absolutely no interest to the English; and 3. that the Central Council is bombarded from all parts of Europe with demands for money, without receiving financial contributions from anybody on the continent.

I don't understand your lines of this morning. This is probably due to the fact that my head, as a result of physical infirmity, is not at its most lucid.

I would appreciate it if you could send me, tomorrow evening (if there is a post on Sunday, which is not the case here), £5 as an advance on the coming quarter. My wife informed me too late, i.e. at a moment of EXHAUSTED EXCHEQUER, that the gas bill has to be paid at 2 o'clock on Monday.

[^1]: DEAR FRED,

[^2]: a Friedrich Moll (see this volume, pp. 455-56). - b General Council



