---
Volume: 43
Document_Title: "310. Marx to Ludwig Kugelmann. 26 March "
Page_Range: "503-504"
---

# 310. Marx to Ludwig Kugelmann. 26 March 



**[p. 466]**

I think I left behind in Manchester 3 5 3 the number of the Queen's Messenger containing the biography of Clanricarde. Since this brute is putting on great airs in connection with the Irish COERCION BILL,593 it is high time for J. Williams" to introduce to the French a counterpart for Pierre Bonaparte. 5 6 2

Have you ever seen such filthy weather as this winter and autumn? No wonder that one can't get back on one's feet.

Salut

Your

K. M.

First published abridged in Der Briefwech- Printed according to the original sei zwischen F. Engels und K. Marx, Bd. 4, Stuttgart, 1913 and in full in MEGA, Published m English for the first Abt. III., Bd. 4, Berlin, 1931 t l m e

310

MARX T O LUDWIG KUGELMANN 2 9

[London,] 26 March 1870

Dear Kugelmann,

I am only writing you a few lines today, since a Frenchman has arrived, just at the moment when I was getting ready to correspond again with you after such a long period. I shall not get rid of the fellow this afternoon, and the post goes at 5.30.

Tomorrow, however, is Sunday, when a good Christian like myself is allowed to interrupt his work and write to you at greater length, particularly about the Russian casus, which has taken a pretty turn.

[^1]: IN HANOVER

[^2]: Jennychen, OUR ILLUSTRIOUS J. Williams,562 has quite a good edition of Father Goethe.594 BY THE BYE, she was recently invited to Madame Vivanti's, the wife of a rich Italian merchant. T h e r e was a great assemblée, including a number of English people. Jennychen had a furibundusb success with a Shakespeare declamation. Je te prie de saluer Madame la comtesse" de ma part et de la remercier

[^3]: a Marx's daughter Jenny - b furious - c Kugelmann's wife Gertrud



