---
Volume: 43
Document_Title: "312. Engels to Marx. 28 March "
Page_Range: "506-507"
---

# 312. Engels to Marx. 28 March 



**[p. 469]**

more or less clear signs of MANIPULATION. T h e one I received this morning was, if it had been opened, at least decently closed. Best greetings.

Your

F. E.

First published abridged in Der Briefwech- Printed according to the original sei zwischen F. Engels und K. Marx, Bd. 4, Stuttgart, 1913 and in full in MEGA, Published in English for the first Abt. Ill, Bd. 4, Berlin, 1931 t l n l e

312

ENGELS T O MARX

Manchester, 28 March 1870

[^1]: IN LONDON

[^2]: Dear Moor,

[^3]: Yesterday I sent you, in a letter that was not registerable because it was Sunday, a £ 5 NOTE, S/7, 29,808, Manchester, 16 January 1869, which I hope you received together with the letter. Enclosed now follow £82.10—DRAFT ON DEMAND ON UNION BANK OF LONDON, DRAWN BY MANCHESTER AND COUNTY BANK TO ORDER OF F. ENGELS AND ENDORSED TO YOU, and, further, the various Dutch and Russian letters. T h e Roesgen h e r e a claims that he is certainly not a relative of the Rotterdam one. b T h e latter is quite something in his confusion— the divine right of the king and the people—the protest against hedendaagschec Communism, the defence of constitutional monar- chy against the republic (though in this there is in Holland an atom of historical idea) and, finally, protective tariffs. In such a case one may well be called Philipp von Roesgen von Floss. A n d it is also rather cool that he accuses the bourgeoisie that they first want hunne eigene beurs vullend and then het door her uitgezogen land

[^4]: 3 Charles Roesgen - b Philipp von Roesgen von Floss - c contemporary - d to fill their own purses



