---
Volume: 43
Document_Title: "314. Marx to Sigfrid Meyer and August Vogt. 9 April "
Page_Range: "508-514"
---

# 314. Marx to Sigfrid Meyer and August Vogt. 9 April 



**[p. 314]**

MARX T O SIGFRID MEYER AND A U G U S T VOGT 1 7 4

IN NEW YORK

London, 9 April 1870

Dear Meyer and dear Vogt,

So here you have me in all postures, one time together with my eldest daughter Jenny. Kugelmann had all these things printed from earlier photograms. a Je ne suis pas l'auteur responsable de ces folies.b

First of all, with regard to my long letter-debt to you, you will see from the enclosed note from Eccarius that the General Council has passiert^ a votum OF CONDOLENCE598 because of the state of my health. (You see, I am practising Pennsylvanian German.) In fact, because of repeated relapses, I have only been able to attend the meetings of the General Council twice since the beginning of December, so, for all important discussions, the SUBCOMMITTEE came to my place. Under these circumstances (and I am still not completely restored), my free moments have literally been so absorbed by work that my correspondence has been limited to the completely unavoidable.

[^1]: First, ad vocemd Sorge: he has written two letters to Eccarius as General Secretary. Eccarius informed the General Council of this. T h e latter instructed Eccarius to deliver the letters to me for answering, as I was Secretary for the German branches in the UNITED STATES. I tarried intentionally, as I knew that Meyer was on a trip to the West Indies, and could not find Vogt's private address.

[^2]: I do not know Sorge's private letters to Eccarius. They probably deal simply with the money question, payment to Eccarius for his contributions to the Arbeiter-Union. Eccarius regards his position as General Secretary too much as a means of making money, and in a way that compromises us Germans in the eyes of the French and English. See, for instance, the enclosed note to me from Lessner. 3" This is also the reason that I shall not communicate Meyer's letter to Eccarius,600 since it conveys the information, irresistible to Eccarius, that Sorge has 'pecuniary resources'.

[^3]: a See this volume, p. 213 - b I am not the author responsible for these follies. - *- An unidiomatic use of the German verb passieren (to happen, take place, pass by), on which Marx comments in the parenthesis. - d regarding





**[p. 472]**

With regard to Sorge's two official letters, they are written in the name of the General German Workers' Association 'LABOR UNION' No. 5, and signed Corresponding Secretary.

One letter contains orders for the reports of the General Council, and various other commonplace stuff.

The other letter contains nothing essential except for the notification that the association has joined the 'International'.

I shall write a few lines to Mr Sorge today, sending him the 15 COPIES of the latest report he requests."

A certain Robert William Hume (Astoria, Long Island, New York) sent us a detailed letter some time ago, on the occasion of the decisions of the General Council concerning the Irish amnestyb— a letter better than anything we had so far received from English-American circles. On my recommendation, he was named American-English correspondent, and has accepted this. I would, therefore, request you to get into contact with this man, and for this purpose I enclose a few lines addressed to him.

From the enclosed cutting from the Marseillaise of 2 April, you will see that F. Carl and F. Jubitz—persons unknown to us here—have sent an address to Paris in the name of the German workers.601 I would like to know whether these people belong to you. What was regarded as dubious here—on the General Council — was the fact that the International was not mentioned at all, but rather treated as non-existent.

General Cluseret has offered himself from New York to the General Council as French correspondent. Whether he was accepted I cannot say, believe I have heard so, however. He is a flighty, superficial, officious, boastful fellow. For instance, in one of his latest letters to the Marseillaise' he presents himself as a recognised representative of the workers of New York. But the man is of a certain importance for us just because of his links with the Marseillaise. In case you should wish to get to know this 'hero', even if only to sound him out, I enclose for you a CREDENTIAL, which might also be OF USE elsewhere.

The money Meyer sent to Stepney has been delivered to the General Council. Stepney is a very pedantic, but honest English- man. He sent me the letter from Meyer with enclosures, so I had to send the stuff back to the General Council.

[^1]: a Report of the Fourth Annual Congress of the International Working Men's Association, held at Basle, in Switzerland. - b K. Marx, Draft Resolution of the General Council on the Policy of the British Government Towards the Irish Prisoners (see also this volume, pp. 375-76). - c G. P. Cluseret, 'Aux travailleurs américains', La Marseillaise, No. 103, 2 April 1870.



The day after tomorrow (11 April) I shall send you what International things I have at hand. (It is too late for the mail today.) I shall, ditto, send more of the 'Basle'.a

Amongst the stuff sent, you will also find a few copies of the RESOLUTIONS of the General Council of 30 November on the Irish amnesty, which you already know, and which I initiatedb; ditto an Irish pamphlet on the treatment of FENIAN CONVICTS.0

I had intended to submit further RESOLUTIONS on the necessary transformation of the present Union461 (i.e., enslavement of Ireland) IN A FREE AND EQUAL FEDERATION WITH GREAT BRITAIN. Further progress on this matter has been temporarily suspended AS FAR AS PUBLIC RESOLUTIONS GO because of my enforced absence from the General Council. No other member of it has enough knowledge of Irish affairs or sufficient prestige with the English members of the General Council to be able to replace me on this matter.

Time has not passed uselessly, however, and I would ask you to pay particular attention to the following:

After studying the Irish question for years I have come to the conclusion that the decisive blow against the ruling classes in England (and this is decisive for the workers' movement ALL OVER THE WORLD) cannot be struck in England, but only in Ireland.

On 1 January 1870 d the General Council issued a secret circular, written by me in French6—{for repercussions in England, only the French papers are important, not the German} —on the relationship of the Irish national struggle to the emancipation of the working class, and thus on the attitude the International Association must take towards the Irish question.

Here I give you, quite shortly, the salient points. Ireland is the BULWARK of the English landed aristocracy. The exploitation of this country is not simply one of the main sources of their material wealth; it is their greatest moral power. They represent, IN FACT, the domination of England over Ireland. Ireland is, thus, the grand moyen1

by which the English aristocracy maintains its domination in England itself.

[^1]: a Report of the Fourth Annual Congress of the International Working Men's Association, held at Basle, in Switzerland. - b K. Marx, Draft Resolution of the General Council on the Policy of the British Government Towards the Irish Prisoners. - c Apparently Marx refers to the first five articles on the Irish question written by Jenny Marx and published by that time in the Marseillaise. - d the original has: 1 December 1869 - e The General Council to the Federal Council of Romance Switzerland. - f cardinal means

[^2]: 18-983



O n the other hand: if the English army and police were withdrawn from Ireland tomorrow, you would immediately have

AN AGRARIAN REVOLUTION IN IRELAND. But the overthrow of the English aristocracy in Ireland would entail, and would lead immediately to, its overthrow in England. This would bring about the prerequisites for the proletarian revolution in England. In Ireland, the land question has, so far, been the exclusive form of the social question; it is a question of existence, a question of life or death for the immense majority of the Irish people; at the same time, it is inseparable from the national question: because of this, destruction of the English landed aristocracy is an infinitely easier operation in Ireland than in England itself—quite apart from the more passionate and more revolutionary character of the Irish than the English.

As for the English bourgeoisie, it has, d'abord,11 a common interest with the English aristocracy in turning Ireland into simple pastureland to provide meat and wool at the cheapest possible price FOR THE ENGLISH MARKET. It has the same interest in reducing the Irish population to such a low level, through EVICTION and forced emigration, that English capital (leasehold capital) can function with 'SECURITY' in that country. It has the same interest IN CLEARING

But the English bourgeoisie also has much more important interests in the present Irish economy. As a result of the steadily-increasing concentration of leaseholding, Ireland is steadi- ly supplying its SURPLUS for the English LABOUR MARKET, and thus forcing down the WAGES and material and moral position of the

[^1]: THE ESTATE OF IRELAND as it had IN THE CLEARING OF THE AGRICULTURAL DISTRICTS

[^2]: OF ENGLAND and SCOTLAND. T h e £"6,000-10,000 ABSENTEE and other Irish revenues that at present flow annually to London must also be taken into account.

[^3]: ENGLISH WORKING CLASS.

[^4]: And most important of all! All industrial and commercial centres in England now have a working class divided into two hostile camps, English PROLETARIANS and Irish PROLETARIANS. T h e ordinary English worker hates the Irish worker as a competitor who forces down the STANDARD OF LIFE. In relation to the Irish worker, he feels himself to be a member of the ruling nation and, therefore, makes himself a tool of his aristocrats and capitalists against Ireland, thus strengthening their domination over himself. H e harbours religious, social and national prejudices against him. His attitude towards him is roughly that of the POOR WHITES to the

[^5]: a in the first place





**[p. 475]**

NIGGERS3 in the former slave states of the American Union. T h e Irishman PAYS HIM BACK WITH INTEREST IN HIS OWN MONEY. H e sees in the English worker both the accomplice and the stupid tool of English rule in Ireland. This antagonism is kept artificially alive and intensified by the press, the pulpit, the comic papers, in short by all the means at the disposal of the ruling class. This antagonism is the secret of the English working class's impotence, despite its organisation. It is the secret of the maintenance of power by the capitalist class. And the latter is fully aware of this.

But the evil does not end here. It rolls across the ocean. T h e antagonism between English and Irish is the secret basis of the conflict between the UNITED STATES and England. It renders any serious and honest cooperation impossible between the working classes of the two countries. It enables the governments of the two countries, whenever they think fit, to blunt the edge of social conflict by MUTUAL BULLYING and, IN CASE OF NEED, by war between the two countries.

England, as the metropolis of capital, as the power that has hitherto ruled the world market, is for the present the most important country for the workers' revolution and, in addition, the only country where the material conditions for this revolution have developed to a certain state of maturity. Thus, to hasten the social revolution in England is the most important object of the International Working Men's Association. T h e sole means of doing so is to make Ireland independent. It is, therefore, the task of the 'INTERNATIONAL' to bring the conflict between England and Ireland to the forefront everywhere, and to side with Ireland publicly everywhere. T h e special task of the Central C o u n c i l n in London is to awaken the consciousness of the English working class that, for them, the national emancipation of Ireland is not a QUESTION OF ABSTRACT

SOCIAL EMANCIPATION. These are roughly the main points of the circular letter, which, at the same time, gave the raisons d'être for the resolutions of the Central Council on the Irish amnesty. Shortly afterwards I sent a strongly-worded anonymous article on the English treatment of the FENIANS etc., and against Gladstone etc., to the International (organ of our Belgian Central Committee c in Brussels). In this article I also pilloried the FRENCH REPUBLICANS—(the Marseillaise had

[^1]: JUSTICE OR HUMANITARIAN SENTIMENT, b u t THE FIRST CONDITION OF THEIR OWN

[^2]: •' See p. XXXVIII of the Preface.— Ed. - b K. Marx. The English Government and the Fenian Prisoners. - c Belgian Federal Committee

[^3]: IS»



published some stupid nonsense about Ireland, written here by the wretched Tallandier 2)—for saving, in their national egoism, all their colèresh for the Empire.

This worked. My daughter Jenny wrote a series of articles for the Marseillaise u n d e r the name J. Williams (she signed herself Jenny Williams in her private letter to the editors), and published, a m o n g other things, O'Donovan Rossa's letter. HENCE IMMENSE NOISE. After many years of cynical refusal, Gladstone was thereby finally compelled to authorise a parliamentary enquête' into the treatment of the FENIAN PRISONERS. She is now REGULAR CORRESPONDENT ON IRISH AFFAIRS for the Marseillaise. (This is naturally a secret between us.) T h e British Government and press are furious that the Irish question has thus been placed on the ordre du jourd in France, and that these blackguards will now be watched and exposed all over continent, via Paris.

A second bird was hit by the same stone. We have, thereby, forced the Irish leaders, journalists, etc. in Dublin to establish contact with us, something the General Council had hitherto failed to achieve!

You have a wide field in America for work along the same lines. A coalition of the German workers with the Irish workers (naturally, also, with the English and American workers who wish to join in) is the greatest thing you could undertake now. This must be done in the name of the 'International'. T h e social significance of the Irish question must be made clear.

Next time, several special things about the position of the English workers.

Salut et fraternité!

Karl Marx

[^1]: First published abridged in Die Neue Zeit, Printed according to the original Bd. 2, Nr. 33, Stuttgart, 1906-1907 and in „ , ,. , , . ^ ,. L . , „ , , full in: Marx and Engels, Works, First Published in English m full for the Russian Edition, Vol. XXVI, Moscow, f l r s t t l m e

[^2]: 1935

[^3]: a See this volume, p. 445. - b wrath - c investigation - d agenda



