---
Volume: 43
Document_Title: "317. Engels to Marx. 15 April "
Page_Range: "519-522"
---

# 317. Engels to Marx. 15 April 



**[p. 482]**

written a small pamphlet against Huxley and his protoplasm .d As a Scotsman, the fellow has naturally adopted Hegel's false religion and Idea-istic mysticism (so induced Carlyle to declare publicly his conversion to Hegelianism). But his knowledge of Hegel's dialectic allows him to demonstrate Huxley's weaknesses—where he indulges in philosophising. His business in the same pamphlet against Darwin comes to the same as what the Berliner Blutschulze b (Hegelian OF THE OLD SCHOOL) said some years ago at the natural scientists' meeting in Hanover. 6 1 0

First published abridged in Der Briefwech- Printed according to the original sei zwischen F. Engels und K. Marx, Bd. 4, „ , ,. , . . _ .. , . r ,, . , Stuttgart, 1913 and in full in MEGA, Published in English in full for the Abt. Ill, Bd. 4, Berlin, 1931 t i r s t t i m e

317

ENGELS TO MARX34

IN LONDON

Manchester, 15 April 1870

Dear Moor,

[^1]: Enclosed, returned, Borkheim. 6 0 4 Good old Wilhelm' did not expect his bragging about you would be communicated to you ipsissimis verbis.d Remains a blockhead all his life. T h e papers will be returned to you on Sunday evening. I shall try to see Gumpert tomorrow, but since he has himself been suffering with his nerves for some time because of 'over-work' (of what sort?), it's possible he'll be away during the holidays. In the meantime, I suggest you try taking strenuous walks—3-4 hours together—for several consecutive days and, WEATHER PERMITTING, walk at least 1-2 hours daily, and then every week such a long walk at least 1-2 times. Now I can no longer work properly until I have walked for an hour or more; it has a wonderful effect and will certainly also get your liver more or less going again. In addition, I quite agree with Kugelmann's view.e

[^2]: a J. H. Stirling, As Regards Protoplasm in Relation to Prof. Huxley's Essay on the Physical Basis of Life; T. H. Huxley, 'On the Physical Basis of Life', The Fortnightly Review, Vol. V, No. XXVI, 1 February 1869. - •> Franz Eilhard Schulze - c Wilhelm Liebk- necht - d verbatim - e See this volume, p. 479.



Fränkelche3 is a real yiddisher lad. He learned 'la formule' in Paris, and delivers good wares.b It's delicious that he understands the frais généraux' as part of surplus value, including wear and tear of machinery, lubrication, coal (if this is not raw material), ground rent, etc.

BOGS are simply peat bogs or marshes, which occur in 2 main sorts of locality: 1. on the plains, in valleys (old lake beds) or depressions, the exit from which has become blocked; 2. on heights with a flat or mildly-rolling summit, as a result of deforestation, where the moss, grass, heather, etc., become matted, and the water flows off, on average, more slowly than it rains in. A marsh in the plains sometimes even has a big river flowing through it, which, however, does not dry it out (various places on the Shannon, Donaumoss in Bavaria, etc.). Very usually such bogs are also the source reservoirs of rivers (the Bog of Allen, from which there flowed, in its original but now very reduced size, the Boyne, the Barrow, various tributaries of these two, and the Shannon). Chat Moss, between Liverpool and Manchester, which you know, is a real, typical Irish BOG, as Wakefieldd confirms. It lies at least 30-40 feet above the Mersey and Irwell, which flow around it in a semicircle, so drainage very easy, yet this is only about 7s done, and they've been at it since 1800. This is because of the landlords; such an object can naturally only be drained systematically and compulsorily. They have them in Holland too—peat bogs are the same all over Europe. The Irish name those on the plain RED BOG and the mountain [bog] BLACK BOG. Water trickling down can produce on the slopes—even very steep, 30-40 degrees—similar marshy places which, in time, produce peat. On steep slopes it's naturally only thin; on flatter ones it can get thicker and thicker. The thickest, naturally, is on the flat summits.

TOWNLANDS are the lowest administrative divisions in Ireland, which are everywhere based on the old Irish CLAN divisions, and in the north and the west these have mostly been retained unchanged. The counties represent the local dukedoms (Donegal, the realm of THE O'Donnell, who then had others under him, e.g., THE Mac Swine and his people. Tyrone is that of THE O'Neill, Fermanagh that of THE Maguire, etc.). The baronies represent the individual CLANS, and in these the ballybetaghs (as Davies writes itc) or, translated into English, TOWNLANDS, the individual village bounds,

[^1]: 11 Leo Frankel - b See this volume, p. 479. - c general costs - d E. Wakefield, An Account of Ireland, Statistical and Political. - e J. Davies, Historical Tracts.





**[p. 484]**

held jointly by the inhabitants. In Ulster, for example, these have been completely retained in their old boundaries; in other parts m o r e or less. T h e PARISH, the POOR LAW UNION a n d other special English divisions, were later inserted between BARONY and TOWNLAND.

Your conclusions from the PARLIAMENTARY REPORTS a agree with my results. It should not, however, be forgotten that, in the first period after 1846, the process of CLEARING the 40SH. FREEHOLDERS609

was mixed u p with the CLEARING OF LABOURERS, the reason being that, u p to 1829, in o r d e r to produce FREEHOLDERS, LEASES FOR 21 or 31 YEARS AND A LIFE (if not longer) had to be made, since a m a n could only become a FREEHOLDER if he could not be turned out during his lifetime. These LEASES almost never excluded SUBDIVIDING. These LEASES were partly still valid in 1846, respectively the consequences, i.e., the peasants were still on the ESTATE. Ditto, on the estates then in the hands of MIDDLEMEN (who mostly held LEASES for 64 years AND THREE LIVES, or even for 99 years); these estates often only reverted between 1846 and 1860. Thus, these processes ± b ran mixed u p , respectively the Irish LANDLORD was never, or seldom, in a situation of having to decide whether particularly LABOURERS, rather than other traditional small TENANTS should be cleared. Essentially it comes to the same thing in England as in Ireland: the land must be tilled by labourers who live in other POOR LAW UNIONS, SO that the landlord and his tenant might be spared the pauper-rate. 6 1 1 This is stated by Senior, or rather by his brother Edward, POOR LAW COMMISSIONER in Ireland: T H E GREAT INSTRUMENT WHICH is CLEARING IRELAND is

Land sold since the ENCUMBERED ESTATE COURT amounts, according to my notes, to as much as V5 of the total; the purchasers were indeed largely usurers, speculators, etc., mainly Irish Catholics. Partly, also, GRAZIERS who had become rich. Yet even now there are only about 8-9,000 landowners in Ireland. What do you say to the way the whole European bourgeoisie has made itself a laughing-stock, by pledging itself to the empire liberal, and lately awarding laurels to Louis Bonaparte for his sincere transition to constitutionalism? And now it comes to light that he means this so sincerely that he explicitly reserves for himself, for the suitable moment, the right to a coup d'état, vulgo a plebiscite.612

Nobody should be able to say that he had overthrown the constitution for a 2nd time. This is also a commentary on 'gouvernement direct par le peuple'," which the Swiss are now

[^1]: THE POOR LAW.

[^2]: a See this volume, pp. 480-81. - b more or less - c direct government by the people



