---
Volume: 43
Document_Title: "318. Marx to Paul Lafargue. 18 April "
Page_Range: "522-524"
---

# 318. Marx to Paul Lafargue. 18 April 

introducing613 and the French frankly don't want. What is a plebiscite called in Swiss—veto or referendum? This question should be put to Wilhelm. Ad vocem Wilhelm—have you seen the marvellous advertisement in No. 27 of Volksstaat: Who borrowed from me 'Kolb's Statistik""? W. Liebknecht. Not enough that he is sloppy; he has to advertise the fact too.

Zukunft—very amusing.b The jackasses! Best greetings.

Your

F. E.

First published abridged in Der Briefwech- Printed according to the original sei zwischen F. Engels und K. Marx, Bd. 4, Stuttgart, 1913 and in full in MEGA, Published in English in full for the Abt. Ill, Bd. 4, Berlin, 1931 f l r s t t l m e

318

MARX TO PAUL LAFARGUE614

[London,] 18 April 1870

I send enclosed credentials for Mr H. Verlet.616 Let him give to the new section he is about to establish no sectarian 'name', either Communistic or other. Il faut éviter les 'étiquettes' sectaires dans l'Association Internationale.0 The general aspirations and tendencies of the working class emanate from the real conditions in which it finds itself placed. They are therefore common to the whole class although the movement reflects itself in their heads in the most diversified forms, more or less phantastical, more or less adequate. Those who interpret best the hidden sense of the class struggle going on before our eyes—the Communists are the last to commit the blunder of affecting or fostering sectarianism.

Mr Verlet would do well to put himself in communication with our friend Jules Johannard, 126 rue d'Aboukir.

[^1]: IN PARIS

[^2]: Dear Paul-Laurent,615

[^3]: a G. F. Kolb, Handbuch der vergleichenden Statistik der Völkerzustands- und Staaten- kunde. - b See this volume, p. 479. - c Sectarian 'labels' must be avoided in the International Association.





**[p. 486]**

One thing which ought to be done as quickly as possible, and which might be done by Paul-Laurent, is to publish in the Libre pensée a true and literal translation of the International Rules.3 The French current translation, emanating from our first Paris Committee, Tolain et Co., is full of intentional mistakes. They suppressed everything which they did not like. If a true translation was made, it would be well to send it me before its publication.617

In Germany people would much wonder at Verlet's appreciation of Büchner.b M8 In our country he is only considered, and justly so, as a vulgarisateur.

You know how much I admire le 'Roman de Conspiration'^ I was, therefore, truly delighted to see it so well appreciated by Paul-Laurent.

I am now forced to say a few words which Paul-Laurent will a little fret at, but I cannot help doing so.

Your father wrote me a letter to Hanover which I have not yet answered, because I did not know what to say.

I feel quite sure that Paul has discarded all notion of finishing, or occupying himself with, his medical studies. When at Paris I wrote to his father in a different sense, and I was warranted in doing so by Paul's own promises.d Thus I am placed in quite a false position towards M. Lafargue aine." I cannot remain in that fix. I see no other prospect of getting out of it but by writing to him that I have as little influence with his beloved son as himself. If you see any other way of escape for me, any other means of clearing my position, please communicate it to me.

In my opinion, which however I neither pretend nor hope to see accepted and acted upon, Paul-Laurent cum figlio* ought to pay a visit to their parents at Bordeaux and try to coax them by the many means personal intercourse permits of.

[^1]: Yours trulyg

[^2]: First published in Annali dell'Istituto Reproduced from the original G. G. Feltrinelli, an. 1, Milano, 1958

[^3]: a See this volume, p. 557. - b L. Büchner, Kraft und Stoff. - c This refers to Paul Lafargue's article 'Le Roman d'une conspiration par A. Ranc', La Libre pensée, No. 13, 16 April 1870, signed Paul-Laurent Lafargue. - d See this volume, p. 315. - e senior - f and son - R The signature is torn off.



