---
Volume: 43
Document_Title: "319. Engels to Marx. 19 April "
Page_Range: "524-525"
---

# 319. Engels to Marx. 19 April 



**[p. 319]**

ENGELS TO MARX

IN LONDON

Manchester, 19 April 1870

Dear Moor,

I forgot to write to you on Friday" that I had no money in the house and could, therefore, enclose nothing for that poor devil Dupont.b Enclosed S/6 11,916, Leeds, 15 July 1869—£5 for him. I hope it will suffice him until he has found a place again,

About Schapper, write to me, too, how things are going. I have not yet seen Gumpert. I am, however, firmly convinced that plenty of exercise during the present marvellous weather will do you a lot of good, and will constitute an excellent pre-cure to Karlsbad.1 Yesterday, with Schorlemmer, I walked some 17-18 miles; you do the same, and you will soon forget you have a liver.

Today I am returning you 2 issues of Marseillaise and Égalité and the Vienna newspaper,d and enclose a few cuttings from the Examiner and Times on Ireland, which are particularly remarkable since they come from a Methodist who, as a result of his isms (TEETOTALISM), etc., hangs out with the /smists here; otherwise, the Examiner would certainly not have accepted them. I shall need them later, so send them back sometime.c

Apropos, what is Mr Williamsf doing? Tussy writes that he is still working, but I see no results.

I ordered Flerovsky8 some time ago, but have heard nothing further, so I assume it has been confiscated and is no longer available.

Best greetings.

Your

F. E.

[^1]: First published in Der Briefwechsel zwischen Printed according to the original F. Engels und K. Marx, Bd. 4, Stuttgart, „ , , . , , . ^ •• , r , r- 1913 Published in English tor the first time

[^2]: a 15 April - b See this volume, p. 481. - c Karlovy Vary - d Volkswille - e J. Fourlong, 'The Irish Roman Catholic Bishops on the Land Question', Manchester Daily Examiner and Times, 30 March 1870. - f Marx's daughter Jenny - 8 H . 0Aepo BCKift, IIoÄOJKe Hie paôonaeo KJiacca er> Pocciu.



