---
Volume: 43
Document_Title: "320. Marx to Engels. 19 April "
Page_Range: "525-526"
---

# 320. Marx to Engels. 19 April 



**[p. 320]**

MARX TO ENGELS

IN MANCHESTER

[London,] 19 April 1870

IN ALL HASTE

DEAR FRED,

I am sending you 2 PARLIAMENTARIES ON IRELAND, and the latest Egalité, ditto La Solidarité. From the enclosed letter from Perret,619

ex-secretary of the Federal Comité in Geneva—which I must have back by Friday—you will see how the Muscovite beast a is acting. H e was naturally forced to appeal also—which he did—to the CENTRAL COUNCIL73 through his secretaire général Robert. I also enclose this letter.620 What d o you think we should d o about these fellows?

MR WILLIAMS SENDS YOU HIS COMPLIMENTS. ONE OF HIS ARTICLES HE HAD SENT TO Reynolds's. H E WENT TO TOWN TO FIND ANOTHER COPY FOR YOU, BUT IT WAS NOT TO

BE GOT. T W O further ARTICLES b together with OTHER Marseillaises HE

My wife took the £5 to Dupont this morning. BEST THANKS FOR IT.

I have visited Schapper. Bad inflammation of the lungs, very emaciated, but perhaps h e can still be saved.

Salut.

Your

K. M.

[^1]: SHALL FORWARD YOU THIS WEEK.

[^2]: HIS WIFE IS DYING IN THE HOSPITAL.

[^3]: We shall put a spoke in Bakunin's wheel in the Marseillaise through Flourens, who has seen through the 'FRENCH BRANCH' 7 2 and annexed himself to us. H E IS A MAN OF VERY GREAT RESOLUTION. LEARNED.

[^4]: T o o SANGUINE.

[^5]: First published in Der Briefwechsel zwischen Printed according to the original F. Engels und K. Marx, Bd. 4. Stuttgart, 1913 and in full in MEGA, Abt. III, Bd. 4, Published in English for the first Berlin, 1931 t l m e

[^6]: a Mikhail Bakunin - b the sixth and seventh articles by Jenny Marx from the Irish question series



