---
Volume: 43
Document_Title: "324. Engels to Wilhel m Bracke. 28 April "
Page_Range: "535-536"
---

# 324. Engels to Wilhel m Bracke. 28 April 



**[p. 498]**

and debates, etc.a I should introduce the formal motion6 on the decision of the COUNCIL next Tuesday.c

Salut.

Your

Moor

First published abridged in Der Briefwech- Printed according to the original sei zwischen F. Engels und K. Marx, Bd. 4, . . . Stuttgart, 1913 and in full in MEG A Polished I n Enghsh for the first Abt. Ill, Bd. 4, Berlin, 1931 t I m e

324

ENGELS TO WILHELM BRACKE632

IN BRUNSWICK

[Manchester, 28 April 1870]

I was very pleased by the detailed and precise financial statement.h33 Here, in England, in front of my very eyes, so many attempts to found workers' movements and organisations have failed because of bad treasurer's work and book-keeping, and the resultant recurrent justified and unjustified charges of embezzle- ment and so on, that in this case I can consider myself competent to deliver judgement on the importance of this point. The workers have to deprive themselves for every farthing, so have the fullest right to know where every farthing goes, as long as they do not need and are not putting aside secret funds. And I believe that this is of special importance, particularly in Germany, since there, too, exploitation of the workers by knavish agitators has become the fashion. It is a hollow pretext to say that, by publishing such financial statements, you betray the weakness of your own party to the enemy. If the enemy wishes to judge the strength of a workers' party according to its specifically weak side — the state of its funds — it will, in any case, be out in its reckoning. And the damage done in one's own ranks by keeping such things secret is far greater than that which can arise from publication.

[^1]: a Record of Marx's Speech on 'The Bee-Hive'. From the Minutes of the General Council Meeting of April 26, 1870. - b K. Marx, Resolution of the General Council on 'The Bee-Hive'. - c 3 May



