---
Volume: 43
Document_Title: "325. Engels to Marx. 29 April "
Page_Range: "536-538"
---

# 325. Engels to Marx. 29 April 



**[p. 499]**

Bonhorst bewails the apathy of the workers634—but I find that things are going unexpectedly swimmingly in Germany. The individual successes naturally entail a hard struggle, and those involved naturally think things are going too slowly. But compare 1860 and 1870, and compare the present state of affairs in Germany with that in France and England — and recall the head start that these two countries had over us! The German workers have got half a dozen of their people into parliament; the French and the English not a single one Allow me to remark, in this connection, that all of us here regard it as of the greatest importance that as many worker candidates stand as possible in the coming elections, and that as many are elected as possible.a

First published in Der Volksstaat, No. 39, Printed according to the news- 14 May 1870 paper

Published in English for the first time

325

ENGELS TO MARX

Manchester, 29 April 1870

Dear Moor,

I wrote immediately to Borkheim,635 addressed to 10 Brunswick Gardens, Kensington W.b If that is not correct, be so good as to notify him.

I would, in fact, have been glad to come over to see Schapper, and would still do so, had not your letter led me to assume he was already dead. There was always something so elementally rev- olutionary about him, and even if the poor fellow -has to go sometime, I am pleased at least that he is behaving so finely to the end. If, as the result of the pleurisy, he has contracted consumption, then there is nothing to be done, and it will happen very quickly.

Bakunin's letter is really very naïve.629 What hard luck for the world, were it not a ghastly lie, if there were 40,000 revolutionary students in Russia, without a proletariat or even a revolutionary

[^1]: IN LONDON

[^2]: 11 See this volume, p. 500. - b Ibid., p. 496.



peasantry behind them, and with any career ahead of them except the dilemma: Siberia, or emigration to Western Europe. If there were anything that could ruin the West European movement, it would be the importation of these 40,000±a educated, ambitious, hungry Russian nihilists; all of them officer cadets without an army, which we should provide them; a marvellous piece of impertinence that, in order to bring unity to the European proletariat, it must be commanded in Russian! Yet however greatly Bakunin exaggerates, it is as clear as day that the danger exists. Catt Tafi Pycbb will spit out a certain number of these 'careerless' Russians every year, and, with the excuse of the principe international, they will creep in everywhere amongst the workers, swindle their way into leading roles, carry their private intrigues and brawls—unavoidable amongst the Russians—into the sections, and then the GENERAL COUNCIL will have its work cut out. It has already struck me that Utine has already found a way to obtain a position with the Genevans. And these Russians moan that, back at home, all positions are occupied by Germans!

I have had it out in all friendship with Wilhelm on various points, both about his previous attitude and also about his present attitude in the Reichstag. Bonhorst was arrested in Eschweiler because he lacked legitimation papers, after the Reichstag had passed the Passport Abolition Law, yet Monsieur Liebknecht misses the chance to interpellate the government about flagrant illegality and to force it to confess that such laws are in no way intended to apply to workers. And the jackasses expect the workers to re-elect them. Incidentally, I have also written to Bracke, who approached me for money for the 'Party', saying how necessary it is that they should nominate worker candidates and force them through everywhere/ Wilhelm is capable of saying that this is not necessary at all.

The Spanish papers and the Flagd—received with thanks. When I travelled past Majorca in 1849 I would not have dreamed that, in 20 years, we would have a papere there. At the time that hole was regarded as a Corsican wilderness.

Pigott remains the same ambiguous figure. In Ireland they must have a 'Republic', but the French should remain under Bonaparte. They will pass over my bookf in silence when it appears, just as they do now with the Irish articles in the Marseillaise^

[^1]: a more or less - b Holy Russia - c See this volume, p. 499. - d The Flag of Ireland (see this volume, p. 497) - e El Obrero - ! F. Engels, The History of Ireland - g Jenny Marx's articles on the Irish question.



