---
Volume: 43
Document_Title: "326. Marx to Engels. 29 April "
Page_Range: "538-539"
---

# 326. Marx to Engels. 29 April 



**[p. 501]**

T h e ancient laws of Ireland, 3 through which I am at present rummaging, are a bitter mouthful. First, the text itself is not very clear, since it assumes a knowledge of all ancient Irish law, which no longer exists. 2. It is very garbled. 3. T h e translation is bad, and in places definitely wrong, but it is clear that the agrarian conditions were not quite as simple as good old Daviesh—with interest — described them. T h e laws insofar as published, give only the complicated side, not the simple one. Incidentally, I am not yet through with the stuff; from time to time I am forced to refer to the Celtic text, too, a n d since I don't even have a grammar, I don't get along very fast. But so much is clear: the editors, for all their knowledge of Celtic, don't understand the contents any more than I do.

These things have been published at state cost by the COMMISSIONERS FOR THE PUBLICATION OF THE ANCIENT LAWS AND INSTITUTES OF IRELAND.636 It is obviously a gruelling job. In which PARLIAMENTARY PAPER can one find out how much these fellows cost annually? They have been in session since 1852, do nothing except engage WORKING UNDERSTRAPPERS, and these two volumes are all that has appeared so far.

Best greetings to you all.

Your

F. E.

3,26

MARX T O ENGELS

[London,] 29 April 1870

POOR Schapper died yesterday morning at 9 o'clock. Enclosed, 3 issues of Marseillaise containing J. Williams.c 562 I

[^1]: First published abridged in Der Briefwech- Printed according to the original sei zwischen F. Engels und K. Marx, Bd. 4, „ , , , , • ^ ,• , r , r- Stuttgart, 1913 and in full in MEGA Polished .n English for the first Abt. III, Bd. 4, Berlin, 1931 time

[^2]: IN MANCHESTER

[^3]: Dear FRED,

[^4]: a Ancient Laws of Ireland. Senchus Mor. Volumes I-II. - b J. Davies, Historical Tracts. - c Jenny Marx, see this volume, p. 503.



