---
Volume: 43
Document_Title: "327. Engels to Marx. 1 May "
Page_Range: "539-541"
---

# 327. Engels to Marx. 1 May 



**[p. 502]**

must have them back (with the Swiss Egalité and Solidarité) because of notes for the GENERAL COUNCIL,11 for which I have not yet found time. (Don't send back the Spanish papers.) Ditto, latest Vorbote. You will see from this that Becker b has broken openly with Bakunin. c

(Don't send back.) Finally, ONE COPY of the Russian translation of our Communist Manifesto for you. I saw in the Werker, etc., that the Kolokol publishing house, which was willed to Bakunin, also includes 'this stuff, so ordered 6 copies from Geneva.037 It's very interesting for us.

Addio OLD BOY. COMPLIMENTS TO MRS Lizzy, Jollymeyer AND Moore.

Old

Nick

First published in Der Briefwechsel zwischen Printed according to the original F. Engels und K. Marx, Bd. 4, Stuttgart, . . I913 Published in English for the first time

327

ENGELS T O MARX

[Manchester,] 1 May 1870

Dear Moor,

POOR Schapper! T h e toll amongst our old comrades is getting very high.e Weerth, Weydemeyer, Lupus, Schapper—but, all the same, à la guerre comme à la guerre.1 Couldn't you get me a photograph of him? Or, if possible, two, you know the Solingen people also want one.

Thanks for the papers. Everything requested goes back tomor- row. I would have sent Egalité and Solidarité long ago, but I thought the GENERAL COUNCIL would have received several copies. In the Spanish things, which certainly still betray a rather Spanish standpoint, you can see how Bakunin's phraseology shines through.

[^1]: IN LONDON

[^2]: " See this volume, pp. 497-98. - b Johann Philipp Becker - c 'Zur Geschichte der Internationalen Arbeiterassociation', Der Vorbote, No. 4, April 1870. - d Carl Schorlemmer - e See the previous letter. - f war is war





**[p. 503]**

I saw Gumpert yesterday. When he asked after you, and I told him your liver complaints were flaring up again, he blew up without waiting for anything further: Why doesn't he go to Karlsbad? There you have the answer/ He thinks it would be best early in the summer, or only towards autumn, since it is very full there in July-August, and horribly hot. The Crown Prince of Prussia13 is there at the moment, wouldn't you like to keep him company? He is an 'edicated'c man.

The resolution on Bee-Hived will please Sam Moore greatly; he has taken Bee-Hive up to now, and been very annoyed at the lousy sheet. I shall tell him he should take Reynolds's, or do you know something better? Does the Democratic News still exist?

Enclosed, the latest from Wilhelm." He very much favours Prussia being the only serious opponent of the revolution in Germany, but is very much against it being a serious opponent.638

Pauvre hère!1

Lizzie, for whom I immediately made a quick translation of the 3 Williams,g is absolutely enthusiastic about them, and thanks MR Williams warmly.

Best greetings.

Your

F. E.

For some time now your letters have been arriving in an unobjectionable condition. At least they have become more careful.

Steps have presumably been taken for a decent obituary on Schapper in the press? I don't know whether Eccarius is the man to do justice to this best type of old conspirator.

[^1]: First published abridged in Der Briefwech- Printed according to the original sei zwischen F. Engels und K. Marx, Bd. 4, . . . . Stuttgart, 1913 and in full in MEGA, Published in English for the first Abt. Ill, Bd. 4, Berlin, 1931 ü m e

[^2]: a See this volume, p. 479. - b Frederick William - c In the original 'jebildeter' (Berlin dialect). - d K. Marx, Resolution of the General Council on 'The Bee-Hive'. - e Wilhelm Liebknecht - f Poor devil - s the sixth, seventh and eighth articles by Jenny Marx from the Irish question series



