---
Volume: 43
Document_Title: "332. Engels to Marx. 11 May "
Page_Range: "550-552"
---

# 332. Engels to Marx. 11 May 



**[p. 513]**

soon, the 4,000 military NO VOTERS of Paris will have vanished, partly to Algeria, partly to distant provincial punitive garrisons.6

First published abridged in Der Briefwech- Printed according to the original sei zwischen F. Engels und K. Marx, Bd. 4, „ , , - , , . x. , • , . , • • • r Stuttgart, 1913 and in full in MEGA, Published in English in full for the Abt. Ill, Bd. 4, Berlin, 1931 f i r s t t i m e

332

ENGELS TO MARX56

IN LONDON

Manchester, 11 May 1870

Dear Moor,

The relevant Liebknecht stuff was missing; I suppose it will turn

fi4R up tomorrow.

Holding the congress in Germany would present some difficul- ties, since one simply does not know what laws rule there, though one does know which police practices prevail. But it is fairly certain that a dissolution of the congress by the police would be the worst to be expected; the people would be safe, with the exception of a possible 24-hour detention; but it would have to be determined now where the congress should reassemble if dis- solved— in Belgium or Switzerland. Otherwise, Mainz would be quite a good place, and Mannheim, too; the Baden Government is so harassed by the People's Party38 and the ultramontanists that it would scarcely take any action.

Since Wilhelm mucked about my Peasant War in such a manner,647

Could you get together for me that material for a note, with citation of the sources, on the Welsh phanerogamic being6? I could use it just now, in a few days I shall be writing about this.

The bourgeois vandalism with regard to Leibniz's house is very common. In any case, I congratulate you on the relics.

I shall hardly likely be needing Swift before I move to London. The decision in the large towns in France is very fine. The remainder is faked and doesn't count. Regarding the way the

[^1]: think what he will do with your articles3!

[^2]: a K. Marx, The Class Struggles in France, 1848 to 1850. - b See this volume, pp. 512, 515-16.





**[p. 514]**

Republicans urged the army about non, this would only have been useful if immediate action had been intended, but it is agreed that this was not the case. As things have now turned out, the soldiers will have to suffer, and 'more reliable' regiments will be sent to Paris.612

If you and your family wish to reconnoitre the surrounding dis- trict for a house for me, this would be very agreeable for us he- re. I have my house here until the end of September, so if I move at the end of August there is time enough. In addition, I have enough material to made through here, and it's easier here than in London. You know the sort of house I need: at least 4, if possible 5 bedrooms (since Pumps3 is growing up), and apart from a study for me, two living rooms and kitchen, etc. If possible without a close dominant vis-à-vis. It would be desirable that it should not be much higher up than you live, since Lizzie has an asthmatic reluctance about hill climbing. If you find something, then I can come over. It doesn't need to be as big as your house, and smaller rooms would suffice for me.

Best greetings to all.

Your

F. E.

Your letter appeared to have been opened again, and badly stuck down with too much gum, so that the excess of gum made it adhere to another letter, and traces remained.

Do you know of an Irish grammar, or is one to be had second-hand? I would very much dislike to quote a Celtic word incorrectly, perhaps in the genitive or nominative plural—instead of nominative singular.

[^1]: First published abridged in Der Briefwech- sel zwischen F. Engels und K. Marx, Bd. 4, Stuttgart, 1913 and in full in MEGA, Abt. III, Bd. 4, Berlin, 1931

[^2]: Printed according to the original

[^3]: Published in English in full for the first time

[^4]: 3 Mary Ellen Burns



