---
Volume: 43
Document_Title: "335. Marx to Engels. 16 May "
Page_Range: "556-558"
---

# 335. Marx to Engels. 16 May 



**[p. 519]**

The letter from Wilhelm648 (which is returned, enclosed, together with the Brunswick one) is really the silliest thing I have ever read. What a dumb ox! Now I am wondering what reply he will give me. At the end I advised him633 to consider whether it were not fitting to first study something if you want to teach it.

In which PARLIAMENTARY PAPER can one see how much money is thrown away annually on the COMMISSIONERS FOR THE PUBLICATION OF THE ANCIENT LAWS AND INSTITUTES OF IRELAND 636? This is a simply colossal job (in miniature). It would also be important to know how much of this money is allocated 1. as remuneration for the inactive commissioners, 2. as salaries for the actually-working UNDERSTRAPPERS, printing costs, etc. This must be given in some PARLIAMENTARY PAPER. The fellows have been drawing emoluments since 1852, and until now 2 volumes have been published! 3 LORDS, 3 judges, 3 priests, 1 general, and 1 professional Irologist, now long dead.481

First published abridged in Der Briefwech- Printed according to the original sei zwischen F. Engels und K. Marx, Bd. 4, Stuttgart, 1913 and in full in MEGA, Published in English for the first Abt. Ill, Bd. 4, Berlin, 1931 t , m e

335

Dear FRED,

Enclosed—a very well-behaved screed from Wilhelm655! The old fool is beginning to take fright. In my last letter,649 I told him that Borkheim was very sick; the Dr had forbidden him to do literary work for a long time even after his recovery; the continuation of Bakunin's twaddle,629 which should never have been started, must now be stopped, etc.!

And what does the brute do? In the issue of Volksstaat that arrived today he published a personally defamatory article against Borkheim, written by the vagabond Nechayev.656 I am really afraid this will excite Borkheim in a dangerous manner. Borkheim wrote to me the day before yesterday; he wanted to see me. I could not go because of my very foul cold and cough. But my wife was there yesterday. He is still very weak, and all

[^1]: MARX TO ENGELS180

[^2]: IN MANCHESTER

[^3]: [London,] 16 MAY 1870654





**[p. 520]**

excitement has specifically been prohibited by the Dr! The arrival of Volksstaat today will have caused an awful scene!

I wrote immediately to Wilhelm, the silly blockhead, and fittingly hauled him over the coals. At the same time, I mentioned that his effusions about you were 'too childish' to be answered, but he could rely upon it that his (Wilhelm's) 'private views about Hegel or ANYTHING ELSE' were a matter of indifference to you,3 ditto the circumstance 'which' and 'what assortment of studies' he (Wilhelm) 'rather despises'. The fellow's claim that he has led 'for 22 years a restless life, with no time for any leisure' is delicious. We know he spent ABOUT 15 years of the 22 in idleness.

I am sending you the Echo, which you must preserve, because of the disavowal of the FRENCH BRANCH^ also published in the Marseillaise, Internationale (Brussels), and our other organs. Circumstances were finally so favourable that we had an opportunity to give an official kick to the rabble.

Mayence! soit!c

It is un peu indiscret0 for Bracke to have had extracts from your private letter to hime published in Volksstaat. But the intention is good, and I even believe this operation was politically correct. They obviously wished thereby to take a kick at Schweitzer.

There has already been a lot in The Irishman about the scurvy IRISH Laws COMMISSION.636 I shall try to find out the necessary about it.

If my condition doesn't quickly change so that it no longer disturbs my work, I might come for 8-14 days to Manchester.639

If nothing else helps, perhaps a change of air will.

Your

K. M.

[^1]: First published in MEGA, Abt. Ill, Bd. 4, Berlin, 1931

[^2]: Printed according to the original

[^3]: Published in English in full for the first time

[^4]: a See this volume, pp. 509-10. - b K. Marx, Draft Resolution of the General Council on the 'French Federal Section in London'. -c Mainz! for all I care! - d a little indiscreet - e See this volume, pp. 498-99.



