---
Volume: 43
Document_Title: "337. Marx to Engels. 18 May "
Page_Range: "559-560"
---

# 337. Marx to Engels. 18 May 



**[p. 522]**

22,000 men as 'han selv' said, but still with Tussy—or then the day after tomorrow. Best greetings.

Your

F. E.

Bracke queried me about publication of the letter,3 and set a term for my prohibition, which I allowed to pass, since I attached no importance to it.

First published abridged in Der Briefwech- Printed according to the original sei zwischen F. Engels und K. Marx, Bd. 4, Stuttgart, 1913 and in full in MEGA, Published in English for the first Abt. III, Bd. 4, Berlin, 1931 t , m e

337

MARX TO ENGELS446

IN MANCHESTER

[London,] 18 May 1870

On Mondayb we shall be travelling to join you for 14 days, not longer, since Tussy is interrupting all her lessons. It's no go this week, since SWEET Jennychen has holidays until Monday, and we should not leave her alone for this period.

The enclosed muck from Heinzen discloses at the tail-end—the false story about my relationship with Lassalle—who is prompting Heineke, the doughty bondsman.658 It is OLD Hatzfeldt, probably operating through Weber junior, who deliberates in New York. Incidentally, Heineke is making a grievous mistake if he expects me to honour him with a word of rebuttal. He has been working to this end for years—to no avail!

Our French MEMBERS are demonstrating ad oculosc the French Government the difference between a political secret society and a genuine workers' association. No sooner had the government jailed all the members of the Paris, Lyons, Rouen, Marseilles etc., COMMITTEES642 (some of them fled to Switzerland and Belgium) than committees twice as numerous announced themselves in the newspapers as their successors with the most daring and defiant

[^1]: DEAR FRED,

[^2]: a See this volume, pp. 498-99, 520. - •> 23 May - c to the eyes of



