---
Volume: 43
Document_Title: "338. Engels to Marx. 19 May "
Page_Range: "560-561"
---

# 338. Engels to Marx. 19 May 



**[p. 523]**

declarations (and, as an added touch, with their private addresses as well). The French Government has finally done what we so long wanted it to do: transform the political question—EMPIRE or Republic—into a question de vie ou de mort3 for the working class!

Altogether, the plebiscite is dealing the final blow to the EMPIRE! Because so many voted 'yes' for the empire avec la phrase constitutionelle,b Boustrapa320 believes he can now unceremoniously restore the empire sans phrase, c'est à dire le régime du Décembre.0 In Paris—according to all private information— la société du 10

Décembre641 has been fully restored and is fully active.

Salut.

Your

K. M.

The transfer of the congress to Mainz—UNANIMOUSLY VOTED yesterday—will give Bakunin a fit.

First published abridged in Der Briefwech- Printed according to the original sei zwischen F. Engels und K. Marx, Bd. 4, Stuttgart, 1913 and in full in MEGA, Published in English in full for the Abt. Ill, Bd. 4, Berlin, 1931 f i r s t t l m e

338

ENGELS TO MARX

Manchester, 19 May 1870

Dear Moor,

So Monday.d Had you come yesterday you could just as well have brought Jennychen with you; she could have slept with Tussy for the few days until Sunday, and she ought to see Manchester once before we leave here.

Bonaparte really is an incorrigible jackass. The blockhead has no conception of any sort of historic movement; all history is a JUMBLE of unconnected chance events, in which the little dodges of the old trickster play the decisive role—and what dodges! Always the same old recipe for every EMERGENCY. That he is once again organising his December 10 gang is []e

[^1]: IN LONDON

[^2]: a of life or death - b Empire with the constitutional phrase - c Empire without phrase, that's to say the December regime - d 23 May - e The manuscript is damaged here.



