---
Volume: 43
Document_Title: "339. Marx to His Daughter Jenny. 31 May "
Page_Range: "561-563"
---

# 339. Marx to His Daughter Jenny. 31 May 

Old Heinzen is really entertaining. For twenty years and even longer the same old tune, but literally, it's really moving. You only need to say: Communist, and up jumps Heinzen, like a frog in strychnine-tetanus leaps when you touch the table on which it is lying. Old Hatzfeldt's hand is unmistakable here, and the thing was certainly made in America,658 since nobody in Germany knows Heinzen's tune, the one you must whistle to make OLD Heinzen dance. The myths about Lassalle's attempted revolution, which we caused to fail in Cologne, are just too stupid.

The behaviour of the French workers is grand. The people are now active again and are in their element; there they are masters.

Best greetings.3

The extant part of the letter was first Printed according to the original published abridged in Der Briefwechsel , , . , , . • r ••• zwischen F. Engels und K. Marx, Bd. 4, Published in English for the first Stuttgart, 1913 and in full in MEGA, Abt. Ill, Bd. 4, Berlin, 1931

time

339

MARX TO HIS DAUGHTER JENNY

Manchester, 31 May 1870

My dear child,

We were beginning to fret somewhat at the obstinate London taciturnity, but your letter659 has again cleared up the horizon. I think not that we shall stay longer than to the beginning of next week.

My cold is not yet quite gone, but the general state of health has [been] wonderfully improved consequent upon the change of air. I see Gumpert almost daily and his advice is the more valuable the less he gets paid for it.

Here things are going on pretty much in the old track. Fred is quite jolly since he has got rid of 'den verfluchten* Commerce'. His book on Irelandc—which by the by costs him a little more time than he had at first supposed—will be highly interesting. The

[^1]: IN LONDON

[^2]: a The signature is missing, the manuscript is damaged. - b damned - c F. Engels,

[^3]: The History of Ireland.



illustrious Doppeljua who is so much up in the most recent Irish history and plays so prominent a part in it, will there find his archeological material ready cut.

Lange's bookb differs from an 'Irish stew' in that particular point that it is all sauce and no substance. This muddled meddler evidently intends to fish out some compliments from me in return for his 'sweets', but he is woefully mistaken. How much he has understood of the Capital is clearly shown by his discovery that my theory of 'value' has nothing whatever to do with the develop- ments on the Arbeitstagc etc.

Our friend Gumpert settles more and more down into a liberal, town-talk speaking, commonplace sort of fellow. What with his self-produced and with his 'inherited' family, this is hardly to be wondered at. It is too much of a good thing.

Tussy looks very blooming and is quite merry. She has happily found the live stock at Mornington Palace660 increased by a new supply of kittens and so forth. She crossexamined Fred of course as to the 'threatening letters'; he considered it dangerous to allude to such a thing in letters conveyed by post and possibly falling under the eye of some Stieber. The true Stieber, who, I see, is eagerly busying himself at Paris to hatch a new complot, in which the 'Intern. W. Ass.' is to play the principal part and where I, as his old protégé, and 'wirklicher geheimer Oberhauptchef'd must of course put e in my appearance.

While I write these lines, damned Fred is bothering me by continual 'fragmentary' communications from the old Norse Sagas. Apropos of Norse Sagas, has Möhmchenf not assisted at K. Blind's poetical lecture Sunday last?

Little Dakyns came over Saturday evening and stayed here on Sunday. This his visit was paid to Tussy and myself. This brave gnome was horselaughing all the time over. His costume was faster than ever before—papierne Vatermörder ohne Kravatte,g a dirty white hat instead of the Scotch cap, and eine Sorte weisser Schuhe wie man sie at the seaside trägt.h At our Sunday walk— Schorlemmer and Moore belonging of course to the party—his success with the general public was more than a succès d'estime. He created quite a sensation.

[^1]: a The reference is to Jenny Marx's pseudonym: J. Williams. - b F. A. Lange, Die Arbeiterfrage. Ihre Bedeutung für Gegenwart und Zukunft (see also this volume, pp. 527-28). - c working day - d 'real secret leader' - e In the original: set - f Marx' wife, Jenny - s a paper stand-up collar without a tie - h a kind of white shoes such as one wears at the seaside



