---
Volume: 43
Document_Title: "342. Marx to Engels. 5 July "
Page_Range: "566-569"
---

# 342. Marx to Engels. 5 July 



**[p. 342]**

MARX TO ENGELS

IN MANCHESTER

[London,] 5 July 1870

DEAR FRED,

You must excuse the interruption in our correspondence since my return to London.639 THERE WAS so MUCH INTERNATIONAL AND OTHER

BUSINESS PRESSING UPON ME.

Dupont, whose one child (BABY) is, for the time being, staying with his brother-in-law, the second with Serraillier, the third with him3—all small girls—has in the meantime received two OFFERS as sort of MANAGER or chief OVERLOOKER (in wind-music-instrument factories), one in Paris, the other in Manchester. I advised against No. I, since there he would not only soon be arrested, but also become completely absorbed IN QUARRELS with the various cliques. I strongly advised, on the other hand, No. II, despite his aversion to it. He has, therefore, accepted the offer of J. Higham, 131 Strangeways, Manchester (BRASS MUSICAL INSTRUMENTS).

The difficulty is that he will have to take one child, No. II, with him immediately, and will have the two others follow him in a few weeks, so he needs a little house in Manchester, and some sort of reliable female person to look after the children and for DOMESTIC MANAGEMENT. His income for a start will be £3 WEEKLY. Could LIZZY do something directly or indirectly on this matter?

Dupont is politically a character, but privatim enormously weak. D'abordb he can stand very little liquor without getting very EXCITED. SECONDLY he is easily dominated and exploited by his company.

He will perhaps go to Manchester in the course of this week. In any case, I shall write in advance about his day of arrival.

From the enclosed letter from Meissner663 you will see how things are there. I had a pressing letter from Kugelmann, who will be leaving for Karlsbadc on 12 August, and is waiting for my declaration before renting accommodation, to which I replied with Meissner's letter. I reminded him that Meissner had spoken in his presence of certain prospects for a second edition,d and payment for the Easter Fair; and I added that, UNDER PRESENT CIRCUMSTANCES, I

[^1]: a See this volume, p. 487. - b Firstly - c Karlovy Vary - d of the first volume of Capital; see also the previous letter.





**[p. 530]**

could not say either when I would go to Karlsbad, or whether I would go at all. HENCE his enclosed letter. I have not yet replied, since we are still awaiting an answer from Dublin concerning O'Donovan Rossa's photograph.

Lafargue had notified me that a young Russian, Lopatin, would bring a letter of introduction from him. Lopatin called on Saturday3; I invited him for Sunday (he was with us from 10 O'CLOCK until 12 at night),665 and he returned on Monday to Brighton, where he is living.

He is still very young, was two years in the lock-up, after this 8 months fortress confinement in the Caucasus, from which he escaped. He is the son of an impoverished nobleman, and had to earn his living at the University of St Petersburg by private tutoring. Today is living very meagrely from translations for Russia. Lives in Brighton, since there he can bathe in the sea 2-3 times a day, gratis, at a certain distance from the official bathing beach.

A very wide-awake critical brain, cheerful character, stoical, like a Russian peasant who simply accepts what he gets. Weak point: Poland. Here he talks just like an Englishman—SAY AN ENGLISH CHARTIST OF THE OLD SCHOOL—does about Ireland.

He told me the whole story about He Hae Bi>b (23 years) is an abominable lie. Henae B-b has never been in a Russian prison; the Russian Government never undertook an assassinat against him, etc.

The story is this. Henae B-b (one of Bakunin's few agents in Russia) belonged to a secret society. Another young man, X,c rich and enthusiastic, supported this society with money via Henae B-b. ONE FINE MORNING X tells Henaeß-b that he will not give another kopeck, since he does not know what is being done with the money. Whereupon, Mr Henae B-b suggested to his secret society (perhaps because he could not account for the money) that X be murdered, since he might change his views at a future date, and could become a traitor. He really did murder him. He is thus sought by the government simply as a murderer vulgaris.

In Geneva, Lopatin d'abord took Henae BT> personally to task (about his lies), and he excused himself with the sensational political usefulness for the so-called cause. Lopatin then told the story to Bakunin, who told him that as a 'bon vieillard'0 he had believed it all. Bakunin then challenged Lopatin to repeat the story in the presence of Henae Bij. Lopatin immediately went with Bakunin to Henae B-b where the scene was repeated. Henae B-b

[^1]: a 2 July - b S. G. Nechayev - c Ivan Ivanov - d 'good old man'





**[p. 531]**

remained silent. All the time Lopatin was in Geneva, He Hae BT. remained very unobtrusive, no longer saying a word. Scarcely had Lopatin left for Paris, and the whole buffoonery started again. Shortly after this, Lopatin received an insulting letter from Bakunin about the affair. He replied in even more insulting terms. Result: Bakunin wrote a Pater-peccavi3 letter (in Lopatin's posses- sion here), but—il est un bon vieillard crêduleh\ {En passant:11 Lopatin says that whole sentences written by Borkheim are completely unintelligible and make complete nonsense in Russian, not only grammatically wrong but 'nothing at all'! And that fool Borkheim has, in the meantime, as he told me before my meeting with Lopatin, sent his bungling work through our friend Eichhoff in Berlin to a German there—who is used by the Berlin police as a Russian interpreter—in order to obtain from him a certificate that he can write Russian. The talent of our Gaudissart for unconscious comedy is really UNRIVALLED!)

Hep HMiue BCKi H,d I learned from Lopatin, was sentenced in 1864 to 8 years travaux forcés* in the Siberian mines; so he still has two years to slave. The first court was decent enough to declare that there was absolutely nothing against him, and that the alleged intriguing, plotting secret letters were obvious FORGERIES (which they were). But the Senate, on the Tsar's orders, most graciously reversed this verdict, and sent off to Siberia this cunning man who, as the judgement said 'was so clever that he cast his writing in a legally unexceptionable form, but nevertheless publicly dispensed poison therein'. Voilà la justice russe.1

Flerovsky is in a better situation. He is only in administrative exile in a miserable little hole between Moscow and Petersburg!

You suspected rightly that Flerovsky is a pseudonym. But Lopatin says that the name, although not originally Russian, occurs quite frequently amongst Russian clerics (namely MONKS, who think it is the Russian translation of Fleury, and who are just as keen on sweet-scented names as are the German Jews). Lopatin was originally a naturalist by professional training. He has also been concerned in commercial business, and it would be a good thing if one could find something for him in this line.g I shall speak about it with Borkheim and Pohl. About Paris, etc., very soon.

Your

Moor

[^1]: a Father, I have sinned - b he is a credulous good old man - c by the way -

[^2]: d N. G. Chernyshevsky - e forced labour - f Such is Russian justice. - g See this volume, p. 535.



