---
Volume: 43
Document_Title: "345. Engels to Marx. 7 July "
Page_Range: "572-573"
---

# 345. Engels to Marx. 7 July 



**[p. 344]**

MARX TO HERMANN LOPATIN666

IN BRIGHTON

[London, 6 July 1870]

The occupation of a translator is abominable; commerce will give you a great deal. A greater chance to use your free time for the study and propaganda

First published in Istoriya SSSR, No. 6, Printed according to the letter of Moscow, 1959 Hermann Lopatin to Pyotr Lavrov of 6 July 1870

Translated from the French

Published in English for the first time

345

ENGELS TO MARX

Manchester, 7 July 1870 Dear Moor,

I had to write to you yesterday about Dupont3 in all haste, and without being able to consider the case properly with Lizzie; I had been busy in town the whole day, and in the evening there was a BALLOT at the club, so I could only discuss the business properly with Lizzie later; and it thus turned out that there is no reason to burden either Serraillier or Dupont's brother-in-law with the girl, for it will be hard enough for them to look after the other children; the child can sleep perfectly well with Mary Ellenb and will not inconvenience us in any way. Dupont can also stay with me for the first few days, until we have got him fixed up to some extent, and it will be much better if I do this together with him, rather than alone, without having him along. Lizzie says she has bedding enough, without that used by Mary Ellen during her scarlet fever, which I naturally would not like to have used yet.

[^1]: IN LONDON

[^2]: a See this volume, p. 532. - b Mary Ellen Burns



