---
Volume: 43
Document_Title: "346. Marx to Engels. 8 July "
Page_Range: "573-574"
---

# 346. Marx to Engels. 8 July 



**[p. 536]**

When I wrote to you yesterday morning I had no way of knowing this yet, but so that you might receive today other news in addition to yesterday's letter, I telegraphed you this morning:

D u p o n t ' s LITTLE GIRL WELCOME TO STAY WITH US, DIRECT THEM BOTH TO MY

HOME, ADVISE TIME OF ARRIVAL.

I hope you received this telegram before further consultations with Dupont. You must persuade him that he should not hesitate to accept my offer (if it is necessary, i.e., the persuasion), he is making things easier not only for himself but for me too, by coming to me right away with the little one. So request him in my name to do as I suggest, and just let me know when he will be arriving so I can meet him at the station.

Best greetings.

Your

F. E.

First published abridged in Der Briefwech- Printed according to the original sei zwischen F. Engels und K. Marx, Bd. 4, . Stuttgart, 1913 and in full in MEG A Published in English for the first Abt. Ill, Bd. 4, Berlin, 1931 t l m e

346

MARX T O ENGELS

IN MANCHESTER

[London,] 8 July 1870 Damn heat!

After receipt of your telegram I informed Dupont of the necessary. He is leaving on Monday," 11 o'clock, from Euston

I would recommend you to let the child sleep with him for the short time he'll be there. Since the sickness and death of the mother there has been a certain neglect and, owing to school attendance, the possibility of creepy-erawlies on her head. At least it appears so to the female section here.

[^1]: DEAR FRED,

[^2]: STATION.

[^3]: Tomorrow I'll send you the FRENCH PAPERS with the trial proceed-

[^4]: a 11 July



