---
Volume: 43
Document_Title: "347. Marx to Hermann Jung. 14 July "
Page_Range: "574-578"
---

# 347. Marx to Hermann Jung. 14 July 

ings.667 I must have them back as soon as possible. Little Jew Frankel3 has won laurels. Both with the accusésh and in the newspapers etc., you will note the tendency to claim for themselves (Paris) the invention of the Internationale.

I'll go and see Beesly about the London catalogue tomorrow.

Salut.

Your

K. M. (Verte)c

Jenny has still had no reply from Ireland, apart from the enclosed letter from Pigott.d The fellow writes as if he were replying to an ADVERTISEMENT. Jennychen is TOO gentille for him. // lui faut" THE FEROCIOUS IRISH GIRL. If FOREIGNERS here are, in general, prejudiced against the Irish, aren't narrow-minded nationalists like Pigott responsible?

First published abridged in Der Briefwech- sel zwischen F. Engels und K. Marx, Bd. 4, Stuttgart, 1913 and in full in MEGA, Abt. III, Bd. 4, Berlin, 1931

347

[London,] 14 July 1870

* Dear Jung, Enclosed the Programme. The questions are arranged in such an order as will facilitate the business of next Congress. You'll understand my meaning.

Yours truly *

K. M.

Printed according to the original

Published in English for the first time

[^1]: MARX TO HERMANN JUNG668

[^2]: IN LONDON

[^3]: a Leo Frankel - b accused - c Turn over - d See this volume, p. 562. - e He needs

[^4]: 20-983



(1) On the necessity of abolishing the public debt. Discussion on the right of indemnity to be accorded.

(2) The relations between political action and the social move- ment of the working class.

(3) Practical measures for converting landed property into public property (see the note).

(4) On the conversion of currency banks into national banks. (5) Conditions of cooperative production on a national scale. (6) On the necessity for the working class to keep general statistics of labour in accordance with the resolutions of the Geneva Congress of 1866.

(7) Reconsideration by the congress of the question of measures to abolish war.

Note to point (3): The General Council of Belgium has proposed this question:

'Practical measures to set up agricultural sections within the International and to achieve solidarity between the proletarians in agriculture and the proletarians in other industries.'

The General Council of the International Association believes that this question is inherent in point (3).

* The following must not be published but only communicated by letter to the different sections.*

Confidential notice to the different sections.

(1) The General Council requests that the different sections give their delegates formal instructions on the opportunity of changing the seat of the General Council for the year 1870-71.

(2) In the event that the change were to be decided upon, the General Council would propose Brussels as the seat of the General Council for the same year.

[^1]: First published abridged in Kommunis- tichesky Internatsional, No. 29, Moscow, 10 October 1934 and in full in: Marx and Engels, Works, Second Russian Edition, Vol. 32, Moscow, 1964

[^2]: Printed according to the original

[^3]: Translated from the French

[^4]: Published in English for the first time



APPENDICES



