---
Volume: 43
Document_Title: "5. Jenny Marx ( daughter) to Ludwig Kugelmann. 27 December 1869 "
Page_Range: "584-587"
---

# 5. Jenny Marx ( daughter) to Ludwig Kugelmann. 27 December 1869 

with the enjoyment of the portwine at the clubs.—On the following day, Monday, all the papers made a furious onslaught on those confounded 'foreigners', and cursed the day they had landed in England to demoralize sober John Bull by means of their bloodred flags, noisy choruses and other enormities

It is tea-time—and I have promised to roast some chestnuts for Tussy, so thank your good stars or rather the chestnuts that this scrawl doesn't run on for ever.— (I am sure you have been thinking I was never going to stop.) With kindest remembrances from all at home.

Believe me dear 'Doctor'

Very faithfully yours

Jenny Marx

You seem surprised at my bestowing upon you your sonorous title. Believe me I do not grudge it to you. In 'our new society' there will be litde need for priests of the body; they will go to the wall along with their brethren physicians of the soul—meanwhile I wish you joy—make the most of your dignities—while they last! I enclose Weerth's photographic*

JENNY MARX (DAUGHTER) TO LUDWIG KUGELMANN

London, 27 December 1869

My dear Doctor,

I hope you do not fancy that true to the code of certain forefathers of mine, I am indulging in a spirit of revenge. The only reason why I have so long left unanswered your very kind letter is, that I haven't been able to call one hour my own. Until two o'clock you know I am every day engaged371—then, as our poor Helenb has been very unwell, my afternoons were often

[^1]: First published in Movimento Operaio, Reproduced from the original No. 2, Milan, 1955 . Published in English for the first time

[^2]: IN HANOVER

[^3]: a See this volume, p. 389. - b Helene Demuth



spent in housework, besides which I have looked through several hundred newspapers, in order to make extracts from them to Moor of the financial swindling concerns etc.— (By the bye Overend and Gurney have just been acquitted.227 The bourgeoisie throughout the length and breadth of the land rejoice at the liberation of these 'martyrs', whom they declare to have been more sinned against than sinning. I shouldn't be at all surprised if these thieves in broadcloth were one of these days returned to Parliament to legislate for their countrymen. The partiality of the Judge for the defendants was so glaring, that it struck even the obtuse jury, and on one occasion elicited a protest from them.)—You see I have excuses to offer for my silence. But nevertheless, I will admit, that though you were right in supposing that I do not bow down before a God of vengeance, I am just as little inclined to worship ein sanftes Lämmerschwänzchen .a To prove to you that I am not in the habit of returning 'good for evil', I have condemned you as a punishment to eat a most indigestible compound—a truly English plum-pudding, for the performance of which feat, remission for all your sins shall be granted you.

All at home send you their best wishes for the New Year, in which I most heartily join. We were so sorry to hear of your illness, and trust that by this time you have quite recovered from the effects of it. Moor is in pretty good health at this moment, that is to say, comparatively speaking.—A few days ago Engels paid us a visit of a few hours. He was on his way to Barmen where he intends spending the Christmas days with his mother.513 He looked particularly well, and very happy at having effected his escape from the counting-house, in which he felt like a fish out of water. He works hard at his book on Ireland.b Your questions concerning that book, I am unable to answer, being altogether ignorant as to its contents. I suppose it will be something of a pendant to The Condition of the Working-Class in Englands It gave us much pleas- ure to see that you sympathize with us as regards the Irish question. We are all of us downright Fenians. On the day we received the news of Donovan'sd election we all danced with joy—Tussy was quite wild.466

You can imagine what consternation the intelligence of the election of a Fenian produced in England. At first the Press, with the exception of Reynolds's and The National Reformer, could only

[^1]: a a sweet little lamb's tail - b F. Engels, The History of Ireland - c F. Engels, The Condition of the Working-Class in England. From Personal Observation and Authentic Sources. - d O'Donovan Rossa



shriek in chorus 'A felon convicted has been elected—horror of horrors!' Then having in concert rung the changes on those to them magical words, the hireling crew fell foul of each other—the Tory papers abused Gladstone, declaring this election to be the fruit of his policy—the Whig organs ranted on the subject of ingratitude and lamented the fate of a country in which messages of peace and good will were thus answered, in which treason flaunts itself in the daylight and the praises of murder are sung. The British government at once despatched thousands of soldiers to the Sister Isle. It must be admitted that as the Tories say, Gladstone's measure of Church disestablishment678 has already borne fruit. Religious fanaticism is dying a natural death, the hostility of Catholics and Protestants is at an end, there is a split in the Orange camp679 and Orangemen, Ribbonmen436 and Fenians are uniting against their common enemy the British Government. Consequently the influence of the priests is vanishing, the Irish movement is no longer in their hands, in fact the election of Donovan Rossa was in direct opposition to the clerical party. For instance, these gentlemen being opposed to the release of the political prisoners, convoked meetings for the tinkering of some sort of land bill, which meetings were forcibly broken up by the people, who declared that they would come to no terms with the British Government, until the prisoners had been released. As the Government turned a deaf ear to amnesty meetings etc. the people elected Donovan Rossa, the Fenian, in defiance of the British Government and of the Irish professional agitators, lay and clerical, whose insincerity they had at last discovered.

Meanwhile the noblest Irish are pining in British dungeons. It is impossible to describe the sufferings of these men. Donovan Rossa had been at one time for 35 days kept in a dark cell with his hands manacled behind his back, night and day, and was not loosed even to take food—thin porridge—which was left for him on the floor of the cell. Altogether, my dear Doctor, England is at this moment a country of horrors. In the East End of London famine fever has broken out—in the workhouses the paupers are murdered wholesale. The doctors no longer satisfied with the corpses of the paupers are making their experiments on the living, and yet the time is still fresh in my memory when the English Press expressed the greatest indignation at the Practice of the vivisection of animals in France.

Last week a case happened in Wales, which makes one's hair stand on end. A Welsh farmer had spread the report that his daughter, a girl of 12 years, had lived without food for two years.

