---
Volume: 43
Document_Title: "6. Jenny Marx to Engels. About 17 January 1870 "
Page_Range: "587-589"
---

# 6. Jenny Marx to Engels. About 17 January 1870 

Now though this poor Welshman received money for exhibiting his child, it is possible (in Wales the belief in witches etc. still exists) that he is half a lunatic and believed his tale. But that doctors of the first London hospitals should have done so, seems incredible. Be that as it may, they formed a commission and appointed nurses from Guy's Hospital to go to Wales in order to watch this so-called fasting girl during a fortnight. Daily these same physicians issued bulletins to the public as to the girl's state. For six days they kept her without food, and on the seventh the miserable child died. On the night before the child's death, Doctor Davies told the father of the girl that there was no danger, and on being examined that gentleman declares, that he did not suggest food because he did not like to 'offend' the father. How very polite and considerate to be sure!

I will try jo procure the whole case for you. It certainly does not give one a high opinion of the medical profession in England. I do believe that if a person were to declare that he can walk over red-hot iron-bars unhurt or jump out of a window, doctors would be found to investigate the matter. We shall return to the trials by ordeal one of these days!680

With best wishes for the new year

Believe me, very sincerely yours

Jenny Marx

JENNY MARX TO ENGELS

[London, about 17 January 1870]

Dear Mr Engels,

Seldom can a HAMPER have arrived so à propos as that of yesterday. The crate had just been unpacked, and the 50 slim fellows were standing in rank and file in the kitchen when Dr Allen and his PARTNER, a young Scots doctor, arrived to operate on

[^1]: First published in Movimento Operaio, Reproduced from the original No. 2, Milan, 1955 „ , . • ,, ,• , c .. ,. .. Published in English for the first time

[^2]: IN MANCHESTER



poor Moor, so that, immediately after the operation, Moor, and his two Aesculapii could refresh themselves with the delicious Braunenberger. The business was very bad this time. For 8 days we had applied all the remedies, compresses, basilicum etc., etc., that have so often been of help: but all in vain. The abscess steadily grew, the pain became unbearable, and no opening or discharge could be induced. It had to be lanced, so Moor finally decided to take the unavoidable step of calling in a doctor. Immediately after the very deep incision he felt great relief, and although he was not yet free of pain this morning, he is on the whole much much better, and will, we hope, have recovered in a few days. But now I must go into action against him with a whole register of sins. Since returning from Germany, and particularly since the Hanoverian campaign,349 he has been unwell, coughed continually, and instead of looking after himself, began to study Russian hammer and tongs, went out seldom, ate infrequently, and only showed the CARBUNCLE under his arm when it was already very swollen and had hardened. Dear Mr Engels, how often in the past years have I wished that you had been here!! Some things would have been different. Now I hope that he will take this latest experience as a warning. Please, dear Mr Engels, don't make any remarks to him in your letters about this. He is very irritable at the moment, and would be very cross with me. But it has been a great relief to pour out my heart to you, since I am quite incapable of changing his lifestyle in any way. Perhaps it would be possible to speak to him seriously through Gumpert, when he comes to Manchester once again. He is the only doctor in whom he still has confidence. Dominant in our house at present is a general disdain for all medicine and all doctors; but they are still a necessary evil; you can't get along without them.

What do you say to the second New Year present with which Laura has presented usa? I hope that the rapid pace will soon come to an end; otherwise we could sing

1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6

[^1]: 1 0 LITTLE NIGGERb BOYS!

[^2]: First published in MEGA, Abt. Ill, Bd. 4, Berlin, 1931

[^3]: Printed according to the original

[^4]: Published in English for the first time

[^5]: a The reference is to the birth of the Lafargues' daughter (see this volume, p. 552). - b See p. XXXVIII of the Preface.— Ed.



