---
Volume: 43
Document_Title: "8. Paul Lafargue to Marx. 18 April 1870 "
Page_Range: "592-595"
---

# 8. Paul Lafargue to Marx. 18 April 1870 



**[p. 555]**

property. But joking apart I really should not like to see the bracelet on Trautchen's arm—it is rather too 'primitive'.

With Moor's kindest regards to the Frau Gräfin," Käuzchen und an den Mann von der plastischen Bewegung}

I remain very sincerely yours

First published in Movimento Operaio, Reproduced from the original No. 2, Milan, 1955

Jenny Marx

the original

Published in English for the first

8

PAUL LAFARGUE TO MARX

IN LONDON

Paris, [18 April 1870]

My dear Mr Marx,c

I have just returned from the labour federation conference about which Laura wrote you in her letter.627 All the sections of the International, all the labour groups and all the corporations were convoked644; each group sent one or two delegates. There were at least 1,200 or 1,300 members of the International or delegates from different labour groups. The Rules which had been drawn up by a commission were adopted unanimously; except for paragraph 2 to which was added a new amendment, the gist of which is that all the sections would appoint substitute delegates who would be prepared to assume their functions should the government ever arrest the members of the Federal Council. This proves to you how far the working class has come along; your advice given in the Basle manifesto 'if you want freedom you must take it' was heeded and understood.685 Thanks to the International, which, owing to the federal bureau of labour societies, has made enormous strides since the last elections, the working class has a sense of its power and wants to take action whatever the cost. The mutualist group686 is shattered; it was not

[^1]: a Gertrud Kugelmann - b and master of plastic movement (Ludwig Kugelmann). The reference is to the course of treatment advised by Kugelmann to Marx. - c Marx's answer see on pp. 489-93 of this volume.





**[p. 556]**

represented at the conference; it vigorously opposed all calls for federation. What was most encouraging about the assembly was the need for centralisation felt by all members as well as the acute and precise awareness the working class had of its individuality as a class and of its antagonism towards the bourgeoisie. As champion of class struggle, you would have enjoyed attending this rally. Following the Rules vote delegates spoke about the plebiscite and of the manner in which the working class ought to conduct itself; all the speakers were in favour of abstention but considered it an opportune time to draw up a manifesto. A commission was appointed of which I am a member. It met that same evening to discuss the manifesto's groundwork, etc.687 The document should contain the following three main points:

1) The empire is not recognised as having the right to ask questions;

2) insofar as the empire represents the bourgeoisie, the people have nothing to do with the improvements of the imperial constitution;

3) the necessity of abstaining or casting a blank ballot must be impressed upon peasants. Appointed as literary editors were Tolain, Avrial, Paul-Laurent, etc That's what happened yes- terday.

You must have seen in the Marseillaise the big notice of the French section688; fortunately, however, it has as much influence here as a spit in the sea. When the Federal Council is constituted an order will be given to the Marseillaise not to print anything on the International without the authorisation of the Federal Council; you must know that the Marseillaise is at the mercy of the International and that if the latter ever placed its notices in the

Réveil, the Marseillaise would die.

I could get myself appointed by any section as a member of the Federal Council but I believe it would be better if I were the representative of the London Council; would you like to appoint me next Tuesday representative of the Council to the Paris federation? The International has some invaluable members here; Varlin in particular has a talent for organisation and an influence which cannot be overestimated. Combault, delegate of the Vaugirard section is also an invaluable member; he is a most eloquent speaker, is adept at handling matters in a lively and amusing fashion and is liked even by those he lampoons. He has the wit of a Gaudissart. Thank you for your letter. I shall heed your advice but I do not believe that it will sway Verlet, who is more of an enthusiast than a tactician.689 As for my father, I



**[p. 557]**

believe you will do well to speak to him in such a manner; it will be better for you, for him and for me.

You think that the pseudonym Paul-Laurent is altogether sentimental in origin; 'sentiment' does in fact play into it to a small degree, but there is more to it than that, as the following item published in the Libre pensée will prove to you.

'In our last issue we said that our collaborator Paul Lafargue, not wishing to be confused with the Lafargues of the Figaro and

Paris-faillite stores, felt compelled [s'était senti forcé] to add the name Laurent. The inveterate wit of Figaro, a purist of broken French, informs us that the rules of syntax do not allow the figurative use of the verb 'to feel' [sentir]. Do not the words 'vil me sens' bring to mind in the Lafargue in question (Gustave) the name of a certain person (Villemessant)? At any rate the scholar Guguste, whose every lucubration is felt to reveal his character [sentent la terroir] should try hard to avoid appearing pedantic [sentent le pédant] if he does not want people to see just how ignorant he really is [qu'on ne sente trop son ignorance].'690

Since the Libre pensée is a purely literary newspaper it will not be possible to publish the Rules in it, but once the Federal Council reprints the Rules I shall, if I am a member of it, oversee the operation most carefully617; that will be more important.

Greetings to Williams (Jenny). I let Prudhomme in on the literary secret.562 I saw Franckel who is taking great pleasure in spreading it everywhere.

Greetings to all.

Heartily,

P. Lafargue

[^1]: First published in Novaya i noveishaya Printed according to the original istoriya, No. 5, Moscow, 1964 , r , _ , J Translated trom the trench Published in English for the first time



