---
Volume: 43
Document_Title: "10. Jenny Marx to Engels. 12 July 1870 "
Page_Range: "597-599"
---

# 10. Jenny Marx to Engels. 12 July 1870 



**[p. 560]**

answer I shall begin to think that the letter I have written to the wives of the prisoners has been intercepted by the British Government. Unluckily I signed my real name!

Post-time. Kiss dear Fränzchena for me, my good Trautchen,b and with ever so many thanks for your kindness

Believe me

Affectionately yours

Jenny

Mama and Tussy send their kindest regards—I forgot to tell you that Dr Gunz called upon us three times. He sent us tickets for several operas.

First published in Movimento Operaio, Reproduced from the original No. 2, Milan, 1955 n , ,. , , . „ ,. , , . . . Published in English tor the first time

10

JENNY MARX TO ENGELS

[London, 12 July 1870] Tuesday evening

My dear Mr Engels,

I have just returned from a new journey of exploration, and hasten to report to you. I have now found a house, which charms all of us because of its wonderful open situation. Jenny and Tussy were with me, and both find it particularly nice. Because of its position and interior fittings it is naturally rather more expensive than Shrewsbury Villa, for which the man insists on £55. Our present house costs £60. It is next to Primrose Hill, so all the FRONT rooms have the finest and openest view and air. And round about, in the side streets, there are SHOPS of all sorts, so your wife will be able to buy everything herself. Now for the interior fittings. Basement, big attractive kitchen with large range. Next to this, a very spacious bathroom with large bathtub and cheminée/ BACK

[^1]: IN MANCHESTER

[^2]: a Franziska Kugelmann - b Gertrud Kugelmann - c fireplace





**[p. 561]**

KITCHEN, cupboards of all kinds, COAL CELLAR, and a dungeon lying deeper, which although it has no flooring at present, could be a very good cool wine-cellar; a small, very small, garden, not bigger than for hanging out the washing, etc. Then rez-de-chaussée" 2 very nice rooms divided by folding doors; the back one has, instead of a window, a particularly charming GREENHOUSE or, if you like, double window, which makes the room very light and friendly. Bel étage,b

in front—a very fine large room, next to it a smaller one, no folding doors. 2nd floor—3 BEDROOMS: 2 very roomy, the third rather smaller, all in full REPAIR. The two bottom rooms are just being papered. I think you could scarcely find a better house, and I am convinced your wife will like it very much. Its situation is just too cheerful and amusing. You scarcely need to leave the house to be in the open and see thousands of people.

It is naturally of the utmost importance that you and your wife see it for yourselves, and as quickly as possible, since a house situated as well as this one will certainly go quickly. But if it is not to your taste I have found another 2 nearby; but they are not situated in such a pleasant way. It would be best if your wife came with you right away and saw for herself. You know we shall be very happy to have her with us. Write straight away about it, so we know whether we should go on looking or whether you will be coming.

I would like to get these lines into the post this evening so that you might consider the matter in the course of the day.

Therefore, a hasty adieu from

Your

Jenny Marx

[^1]: First published in MEGA Abt. Ill, Bd. 4, Berlin, 1931

[^2]: Printed according to the original

[^3]: Published in English for the first time

[^4]: a ground floor - b first floor



