---
Volume: 43
Document_Title: "11. Jenny Marx ( daughter) to Ludwig Kugelmann. 17 July 1870 "
Page_Range: "599-602"
---

# 11. Jenny Marx ( daughter) to Ludwig Kugelmann. 17 July 1870 



**[p. 11]**

JENNY MARX (DAUGHTER) T O LUDWIG KUGELMANN

IN HANOVER

[London,] 17 July 1870

My dear Doctor,

I hope you -do not think that laziness or negligence has had anything to do with my silence. The fact is, that I no sooner received your letter than I wrote to Mr Pigott, the editor of The Irishman to enquire of him where I could obtain a photograph of O'Donovan Rossa. Mr Pigott wrote to say that he was unable to give me any information on the subject (the British Government does not allow the portraits of the Fenians to be sold) but that he had sent my letter to Mrs Rossa, as that lady could perhaps procure for me a photograph of her husband. Now I have waited from day to day for a letter from Mrs Rossa—but in vain—and as I think it will be of no use to wait any longer, I write these lines to ask you whether the enclosed print,3 which appeared some time ago in The Irishman will be of any use to Mr Risse? It certainly is a very bad likeness—but it is better than nothing.

It would be a thousand pities to give up the excellent plan of publishing Rossa's portrait. Its publication would greatly annoy John Bull—for the British Government dreads nothing so much as that its infamous treatment of the Fenian prisoners should become known on the Continent. Indeed, the Prison Enquiry is solely got up for the purpose of hushing up the unpleasant truths that were oozing out. On the eve of the Enquiry, the pretended object of which is to elucidate things, the prisoners are more closely guarded than ever, lest they might inform their friends of the treatment they are undergoing. A few days ago Mrs Luby, wife of one of the prisoners, visited her husband to bear to him the tidings of his mother's death, (grief for her son's sufferings hastened Mrs Luby's death) and though the unfortunate woman had not seen her husband since three years, she was not allowed to see him face to face without the intrusion of a jailor. Mrs Luby was led into one huge iron cage grated with heavy iron bars, Luby

[^1]: a At the beginning of the letter there is a note by Kugelmann: 'Rossa's portrait is missing'.



was brought from his cell to another cage grated also with heavy iron bars, apart from that in which the wife was detained. A jailor stood close beside the prisoner watchful, ready to interfere should he utter a word relative to the Prison treatment.

But poor Luby had no need to complain—his pallid, shrunk and shrivelled form spoke but too eloquently of a tale of horrors. The fact is that Mrs Luby did not even recognize her husband— so altered, and aged does he look. The friends of the prisoners being thus carefully excluded, the evidence of the prisoners suppressed, it is not difficult to guess that the whole commission will turn out to be a regular sham from beginning to end. As the governors, jailors, warders are to have it all their own way in the coming inquiry, the end of it all will be that the venal scribes of the press will be enabled to paint in glowing colours the amenities of English prison life and to brand the statements of O'Donovan Rossa as so many lies!

For the notes required for the preface of Mr Rissé's book692

I addressed myself to Engels who with his usual amiability and promptitude at once sent me the enclosed remarks3 which will I think prove of interest to the German public.

As regards Carlsbadb I am sorry to say that thanks to that desperate gambler at Parisc our long projected voyage has come to nothing. To travel without a passport is of course an impossibility in the present state of affairs and to obtain one equally out of the question. Even to naturalised Englishmen the British Government refuses passports.308 But Moor will himself write to you on the subject. Tell Trautchend I will also write to her in a few days to give vent to my disappointment—and please will you also tell that lady that I think she has grown unconscionably lazy. I have not heard from her for months.

What do you think of the war? We have not yet recovered from our surprise and indignation at the turn affairs have taken. It is not easy to reconcile oneself to the thought that instead of fighting for the destruction of the Empire, the French people are sacrificing themselves for its aggrandizement, that instead of hanging Bonaparte they are prepared to enroll themselves under his banner. Who could have dreamt of such things a few months ago when the Revolution in Paris seemed a fact. This revival of chauvinism in the 19th Century is indeed a hideous farce693!

[^1]: a F. Engels, Notes for the Preface to a Collection of Irish Songs. - b Karlovy Vary - c Napoleon III - d Gertrud Kugelmann



It is time to post this long letter—so with best love to dear Trautchen and Fränzchen.a

Believe me dear 'Doctor', very faithfully yours

Jenny Marx

First published in Movimento Operaio, Reproduced from the original No. 2, Milan, 1955 „ , , . _ ,. , , , r. Published in English for the first time

[^1]: a Franziska Kugelmann



