---
Volume: 4
Document_Title: "F. Engels. Continenta l Socialism "
Page_Range: "238-240"
---

# F. Engels. Continenta l Socialism 

«NO GAZETTE OF TIE RATIONAL SOCIETY.

fera Ori mir Ach rf Tm Htmnt, It Cn. ir. t. X, mi 4, i, WULIV. «. «•.

"1XY at KuÂi cnuucng, n o * n i j m TO THE »OUT, n o « THE W»T IOMOKAKT TO THE MOR tmawmtv. MAT M OITEK TO »nr numvm TY, «TEX TO THE_WO«>o IFli»01, EJ.™«. *:.l;'-iÇ.A„T,.0Jl.0.'..,?2'ïî_¥1^^»- »'»«» »«*•» » I I » ! SUAT IXTMT AT IUI COMMA»» A»V UXO** TM4

cbx Tno L or n n u wao IUTI w n v t i m iv TB« ATTAIU or Mi«.--«»»ato»n.

No. IS. V«. VI TVWSm«. SATURDAY, OCTOBER 9, 1844.

Frederick Engels

[CONTINENTAL SOCIALISM]72

Continental Socialism seems to deserve and to obtain a consider- able portion of public attention at present. I forward you a few extracts from a letter addressed me from Barmen in Prussia, by a former contributor to the New Moral World.

"In Paris, on my way home, I visited a Communist Club of the mystic school. I was introduced by a Russian who speaks French and German perfectly,3 and who very cleverly opposed Feuer- bach's reasoning,* to them. They mean just as much by the term God as the Ham Common folks73 by Love-Spirit. They however declared this a secondary question, and to all practical intents agreed with us, and said, "enfin, l'athéisme c'est votre religion": — In the end, atheism is your religion. Religion, in French, means

conviction, feeling, not worship. They affirmed, that the noise and hubbub of the Bourgeois, or middle class, against England, is all nonsense; and they were very anxious to convince us, that they had not the slightest national prejudice, that the working men of France care nothing about Morocco,74 but know that the ouvriers, workers, of all countries are allies, having the same interests. The French middle class are quite as egotistical, as avaricious, and quite as insupportable in society as the English, but the French ouvriers are fine fellows. We have made much progress among the Russians at Paris. There are three or four noblemen and pro- prietors of serfs now at Paris who are radical Communists and Atheists. We have in Paris a German Communist Paper, the

[^1]: * The resolution of the God idea into man.— Note by Engels.

[^2]: a Evidently, by M. A. Bakunin.— Ed.





**[p. 213]**

Thinking the above facts would be interesting to your readers, I forward them for insertion in your paper.

[^1]: Written about September 20, 1844

[^2]: First published in the newspaper The New Moral World No. 15, October 5, 1844 Signed: Anglo-German

[^3]: Printed according to the news- paper

[^4]: 3 E. Bauer, Der Streit der Kritik mit Kirche und Staat.— Ed.



