---
Volume: 4
Document_Title: "III. Hierarchy of Bankruptcy "
Page_Range: "650-652"
---

# III. Hierarchy of Bankruptcy 



**[p. 624]**

"Why then does the same public good-naturedly tolerate the issue of counterfeit money by the merchants when it does not allow it for governments, even when these are cautious enough to prepare for the bankruptcy by a slow depreciation which affords the holders of the papers the possibility to evade it? This possibility does not exist for the holders of the securities issued by trade. Bankruptcy strikes them like a thunderclap. Many a man goes to sleep tonight in possession of 300,000 francs and wakes up tomorrow with no more than 100,000 as a result of a bankruptcy. The National Convention copied this manoeuvre in the operation of the Consolidated Third ; people did not tire of reproaching it with this as a fully established robbery. And yet every merchant is allowed the right to commit still more vexatious robberies and to steal by bankruptcy two-thirds of what he received, whereas the Convention withheld two-thirds of sums it had never received. How outrageous the crimes of trade become when compared with other, and even the biggest, political infamies!3

"The following details will demonstrate that modern politics, by handing over trade to completely free merchants exempt from any kind of obligation, has set the wolf among the fold and provoked robberies of all kinds."

Let us now go on to bankruptcy to describe it in somewhat greater detail.

[^1]: Ill HIERARCHY OF BANKRUPTCY

[^2]: "When a crime becomes very frequent, one gets accustomed to it and witnesses it with indifference. In Italy or Spain people remain quite cool at the sight of a hired assassin stabbing his designated victim and taking refuge in a church, where he enjoys immunity. In Italy one sees fathers mutilate and murder their children to improve their voice, while the servants of 'the God of peace' encourage them to perpetrate these brutalities so as to obtain good singers for their choirs. Such abominations would arouse the indignation of all other civilised nations if they occurred amongst them," but on the other hand they "have other outrageous customs which would make the Italians' blood boil.

[^3]: "If the customs and opinions within civilisation differ so much from nation to nation, how much more must they differ from one social epoch to another; how hateful would the vices which are tolerated in civilisation seem in less imperfect social stages! One can hardly believe that countries which call themselves well ordered can tolerate for a moment such abominations as bankruptcy.b

[^4]: "Bankruptcy is the most ingenious and shameless villainy that has ever existed; it guarantees every merchant the ability to rob the public of a sum proportionate to his fortune or his credit, so that a rich man can say: 'I set up as a tradesman in 1808; on such and such a day in the year 1810 I will steal so and so many millions, whoever they may belong to.'

[^5]: Fourier has "such as the infamies of the Convention", which Engels omits.—Ed.

[^6]: The last sentence is given by Engels abridged.—Ed.





**[p. 625]**

"Let us leave aside a present development, the new French code2 4 and its intention to punish bankruptcy. There is no unanimity in respect of the success of this intention and means of evading the new laws are already being suggested. Therefore we shall first let practice decide and meanwhile base our arguments on already known facts; consider the disorders which result from the philosophical system and the principle: Leave the merchants complete freedom, without demanding any guarantee of the cleverness, the honesty or the solvency of each individual.

"From these arises, alongside other abuses, bankruptcy, a still more heinous robbery than highway robbery. However, people have become accustomed to it and put up with it so well that they even recognise honest bankruptcies—those in which the speculator steals only half.

"Let us go on to a detailed description of this kind of heroism, which was little known in antiquity. Since then it has experienced a brilliant upswing. It presents analysts with a series of developments which testify to our progress towards perfectibility.

Hierarchy of Bankruptcy.—Feature 31.—The Crime* of Trade.—A Free Series in Three Orders, Nine Genera, and Thirty-Six Species215

"Right or ascending wing. Light hues.

I. The Innocent.

1) Child bankruptcy. 2) Daredevil bankruptcy. 3) Stealthy bankruptcy. . 4) Posthumous bankruptcy.

[^1]: II. The Honourable.

[^2]: 5) Goose bankruptcy. 6) Ecstatic bankruptcy. 7) Unprincipled bankruptcy.

[^3]: III. The Seductive.

[^4]: 8) Amiability bankruptcy. 9) Bankruptcy de bon ton. 10) Amorous bankruptcy. 11) Bankruptcy by favour. 12) Sentimental bankruptcy.

[^5]: "Centre of the Series. Grandiose Hues.

[^6]: IV. The Tacticians.

[^7]: 13) Fat bankruptcy. 14) Cosmopolitan bankruptcy. 15) Hopeful bankruptcy. 16) Transcendent bankruptcy. 17) Graded bankruptcy.

[^8]: V. The Manoeuvrers.

[^9]: 18) Running fire bankruptcy. 19) Close-column bankruptcy. 20) Marching-in-file bankruptcy. 21) Skirmisher bankruptcy.



