---
Volume: 4
Document_Title: "F. Engels. ' Young Germany' in Switzerland. (Conspiracy against Church and State) "
Page_Range: "677-680"
---

# F. Engels. " Young Germany" in Switzerland. (Conspiracy against Church and State) 

Frederick Engels

"YOUNG GERMANY" IN SWITZERLAND^ (Conspiracy Against Church and State!)

The Constitutionnel Neuchâtelois gives a long, apparently official, report on a "vast conspiracy of atheists spread all over Switzer- land" We take from it the following extracts: —

"After the discovery made some time ago of the Communist secret society, in the canton of Neuchâtel, another far more dangerous association has been discovered—an association extending its nets all over the Swiss confederacy, and purposing to overthrow, by means of Atheism, the fundamental principles of morality, and to revolutionize Germany by any means, Regicide not excepted. The members of this Association, which is known by the name of Young Germany, or the Leman Confederacy, are almost without exception German working men, with some of the old political refugees. In consequence of some information at the headquar- ters of the conspiracy, Lausanne, the chiefs of the great club of La Chaux-de-Fonds were apprehended, and a commission of inquiry appointed, the results of which are the following disclosures. This secret society exists since 1838, and has at its head Messrs. Standau and Döleke, professors of the German language, Wm. Marr, editor of their papera; and Hoffmann, druggist. Dr. Fein and Dr. Rauschen- platt, German refugees; the first imprisoned at Lucerne on account of his having taken part in the late civil war —the secondât Strasburg, appear also to be connected with this society. The rules of the association contain the following articles:

[^1]: The society is essentially and necessarily a secret one, its end being political propaganda. Every member obliges himself to remain within the association until forty years of age, to devote all his powers to the attainment of its aims, and not to stand in fear of any sacrifice. Every member engages himself to destroy all written documents, by which the association or its members might be traced. In Switzerland a central office is formed, corresponding with all those members that are returned to Germany, and leading the whole of the operations. None to be admitted as members who do not profess themselves atheists and revolutionists.

[^2]: By the incredible activity of its members among the German working men — of whom there is a floating population of about 25,000 in Switzerland — this society

[^3]: a Blätter der Gegenwart für soziales Leben.— Ed.

[^4]: 22**



"We are obliged to use great caution, on account of most of the newly arriving men being frightened by the ordinances and intimidations of the German governments. They will never enter a club unless they are told that it is not a political one. Thus we are obliged to treat them very cautiously, to bring them bit by bit into the right road, and the principal thing in this respect is to show them that religion is nothing but a pile of rubbish and dung. The only thing we can do is to prepare them here for the clubs in French Switzerland, and there we send those who intend leaving Zurich."

When the Morges club wanted to get into connection with the whitesmiths of that town, none of whom was a member, they instantly wrote to the central office, to send them a whitesmith who might be clever enough to bring those workmen into the society. The clubs were all in correspondence with each other, as well as with the central office. This correspondence has been partly seized, and shows by its contents how much the whole conspiracy was pervaded by a revolutionary spirit. Every club had a committee for preparing the subjects of discussion. The debates extended over all political, social, and religious questions. Some clubs were comparatively rich, and possessed libraries, newsrooms, pianos, &c; they were furnished with everything which might attract the workmen. The most powerful clubs were those of Geneva, Berne, Zurich, Lausanne, and La Chaux-de-Fonds; the last named club numbered (in a very small town) 200 members; and if we consider that in this same town, besides Young Germany, there existed a very numerous Communist club, we may think ourselves entitled to say, that Atheists and Communists in Switzerland are to be numbered by thousands. The association had a secret agitation committee, which was generally not known to the members at large; but every club contained one or two of those "Propagandists", whose business it was to keep up the steam, to direct the proceedings, and to develop the spirit of Atheism and revolutionism. Unfortunately, they succeeded but too well in this, as is proved by the fact, that the "infernal" periodical of Young Germany, published by Marr, numbered above 500 subscribers among the working people only. The paper openly proclaims Atheism as its principle.— "Germany," says this paper, "wants a political, religious, and social revolution; and if religion and politics should, during the course of this revolution, end in smoke, so much the better; socialised man will come forth purer and better from this purgatory."

Thus far the report, which is altogether written in an infamous and calumniatory style. Young Germany had existed in Switzer- land since 1831, when, in consequence of the many insurrections in Germany, great numbers of young men, students, workmen, &c; were obliged to leave their country. After a period of considerable activity this association collapsed towards 1837, when the general Bourgeoisie Government throughout Europe sue-



[^1]: Written between September 20 and 26, 1845 Published in the newspaper The Northern Star No. 411, September 27, 1845 with an editorial note "From our German correspondent"

[^2]: Printed according to the news- paper

[^3]: See pp. 645-48 of this volume.—Ed.



