---
Volume: 23
Document_Title: "1871"
Page_Range: "38-99"
---

# 1871



**[p. 3]**

Karl Marx

[GENERAL RULES AND ADMINISTRATIVE REGULATIONS

OF THE INTERNATIONAL WORKING MEN'S

ASSOCIATION]l

GENERAL RULES OF THE INTERNATIONAL WORKING MEN'S ASSOCIATION

Considering,

That the emancipation of the working classes must be con- quered by the working classes themselves; that the struggle for the emancipation of the working classes means not a struggle for class privileges and monopolies, but for equal rights and duties, and the abolition of all class-rule;

That the economical subjection of the man of labour to the monopolizer of the means of labour, that is the sources of life, lies at the bottom of servitude in all its forms, of all social misery, mental degradation, and political dependence;

That the economical emancipation of the working classes is therefore the great end to which every political movement ought to be subordinate as a means;

That all efforts aiming at that great end have hitherto failed from the want of solidarity between the manifold divisions of labour in each country, and from the absence of a fraternal bond of union between the working classes of different countries;

That the emancipation of labour3 is neither a local nor a national, but a social problem, embracing all countries in which modern society exists, and depending for its solution on the concurrence, practical and theoretical, of the most advanced countries;

That the present revival of the working classes in the most industrious countries of Europe, while it raises a new hope, gives solemn warning against a relapse into the old errors, and calls for

[^1]: a The German edition has "the emancipation of the working class".— Ed.





**[p. 4]**

For these Reasons— The International Working Men's Association has been founded.

It declares: That all societies and individuals adhering to it will acknowledge truth, justice, and morality, as the basis of their conduct towards each other and towards all men, without regard to colour, creed, or nationality;

That it acknowledges no rights without duties, no duties without rights;

And in this spirit the following rules have been drawn up.

1. This Association is established to afford a central medium of communication and co-operation3 between Working Men's Societies existing in different countries and aiming at the same end; viz., the protection, advancement, and complete emancipation of the working classes.

2. The name of the Society shall be "The International Working Men's Association".

3. There shall annually meet a General Working Men's Con- gress, consisting of delegates of the branches of the Association. The Congress will have to proclaim the common aspirations of the working class, take the measures required for the successful working of the International Association, and appoint the General Council of the Society.

4. Each Congress appoints the time and place of meeting for the next Congress. The delegates assemble at the appointed time and place without any special invitation. The General Council may, in case of need, change the place, but has no power to postpone the time of meeting. The Congress appoints the seat and elects the members of the General Council annually. The General Council thus elected shall have power to add to the number of its members.

On its annual meetings, the General Congress shall receive a public account of the annual transactions of the General Council. The latter may, in cases of emergency, convoke the General Congress before the regular yearly term.

5. The General Council shall consist of working men from the different countries represented in the International Association. It shall from its own members elect the officers necessary for the

[^1]: a The German edition has "systematic co-operation".— Ed.



AND

ADMINISTRATIVE REGULATIONS

OF THE

INTERNATIONAL WORKING-MEN'S

ASSOCIATION.

OFFICIAL EDITION, REVISED BY THE GENERAL COUNCIL.

LONDON:

Çrmtfto for ttjt «entrai Council hp

EDWAKD TRUELOVE, 256, HIOH HOLBORN.

1871.

[^1]: Title page of the English edition of the General Rules and Administrative Regulations of the International Working Men's Association







**[p. 7]**

transaction of business, such as a treasurer, a general secretary, corresponding secretaries for the different countries, etc.

6. The General Council shall form an international agency between the different national and local groups of the Association, so that the working men in one country be constantly informed of the movements of their class in every other country: that an inquiry into the social state of the different countries of Europe be made simultaneously, and under a common direction3; that the questions of general interest mooted in one society be ventilated by all; and that when immediate practical steps should be needed—as, for instance, in case of international quarrels—the action of the associated societies be simultaneous and uniform. Whenever it seems opportune, the General Council shall take the initiative of proposals to be laid before the different national or local societies. To facilitate the communications, the General Council shall publish periodical reports.

7. Since the success of the working men's movement in each country cannot be secured but by the power of union and combination, while, on the other hand, the usefulness of the International General Council must greatly depend on the circumstance whether it has to deal with a few national centres of working men's associations, or with a great number of small and disconnected local societies; the members of the International Association shall use their utmost efforts to combine the discon- nected working men's societies of their respective countries into national bodies, represented by central national organs. It is self-understood, however, that the appliance of this rule will depend upon the peculiar laws of each country, and that, apart from legal obstacles, no independent local society shall be precluded from directly corresponding with the General Council.

8. Every section has the right to appoint its own secretary corresponding with the General Council.

9. Everybody who acknowledges and defends the principles of the International Working Men's Association is eligible to become a member. Every branch is responsible for the integrity of the members it admits.

10. Each member of the International Association, on removing his domicile from one country to another, will receive the fraternal support of the Associated Working Men.

11. While united in a perpetual bond of fraternal co-operation,

[^1]: a The French edition has "in a common spirit".— Ed.





**[p. 8]**

the working men's societies joining the International Association will preserve their existent organizations intact.

12. The present rules may be revised by each Congress, provided that two-thirds of the delegates present are in favour of such revision.

13. Everything not provided for in the present rules will be supplied by special regulations, subject to the revision of every Congress.

A D M I N I S T R A T I V E R E G U L A T I O N S , REVISED IN ACCORDANCE WITH THE RESOLUTIONS PASSED BY THE CONGRESSES (1866 TO 1869), AND BY THE LONDON CONFERENCE (1871)

/

The General Congress

1. Every member of the International Working Men's Associa- tion has the right to vote at elections for, and is eligible as, a delegate to the General Congress.

2. Every branch, whatever the number of its members, may send a delegate to the Congress.

3. Each delegate has but one vote in the Congress. 4. The expenses of the delegates are to be defrayed by the branches and groups which appoint them.

5. If a branch be unable to send a delegate, it may unite with other neighbouring branches for the appointment of one.

6. Every branch or group consisting of more than 500 members may send an additional delegate for every additional 500 mem- bers.

7. Only the delegates of such societies, sections, or groups as form parts of the International, and shall have paid their contributions to the General Council, will in future be allowed to take their seats and to vote at Congresses. Nevertheless, for such countries where the regular establishment of the International may have been prevented by law, delegates of trades' unions and working men's co-operative societies will be allowed to participate in Congress debates on questions of principle, but not to discuss, or to vote on, administrative matters.

8. The sittings of the Congress will be twofold—administrative sittings, which will be private, and public sittings, reserved for the



**[p. 9]**

discussion of, and the vote upon, the general questions of the Congress programme.

9. The Congress programme, consisting of questions placed on the order of the day by the preceding Congress, questions added by the General Council, and questions submitted to the acceptance of that Council by the different sections, groups, or their committees, shall be drawn up by the General Council.

Every section, group, or committee which intends to propose, for the discussion of the impending Congress, a question not proposed by the previous Congress, shall give notice thereof to the General Council before the 31st of March.

10. The General Council is charged with the organization of each Congress, and shall, in due time, through the medium of the Federal Councils or Committees, bring the Congress programme to the cognizance of the branches.

11. The Congress will appoint as many committees as there shall be questions submitted to it. Each delegate shall designate the committee upon which he may prefer to sit. Each Committee shall read the memorials presented by the different sections and groups on the special question referred to it. It shall elaborate them into one single report, which alone is to be read at the public sittings. It shall moreover decide which of the above memorials shall be annexed to the official report of the Congress transactions.

12. In its public sittings, the Congress will, in the first instance, occupy itself with the questions placed on the order of the day by the General Council, the remaining questions to be discussed afterwards.

13. All resolutions on questions of principle shall be voted upon by division (appel nominal).

14. Two months3 at latest before the meeting of the annual Congress, every branch or federation of branches shall transmit to the General Council a detailed report of its proceedings and development during the current year. The General Council shall elaborate these elements into one single report, which alone is to be read before Congress.

/ / The General Council

1. The designation of General Council is reserved for the Central Council of the International Working Men's Association.

[^1]: a The French edition has "one month".— Ed.





**[p. 10]**

The Central Councils of the various countries, where the International is regularly organized, shall designate themselves as Federal Councils, or Federal Committees, with the names of the respective countries attached.

2. The General Council is bound to execute the Congress Resolutions.

3. As often as its means may permit, the General Council shall publish a bulletin or report embracing everything which may be of interest to the International Working Men's Association.

For this purpose it shall collect all the documents to be transmitted by the Federal Councils or Committees of the different countries and such others as it may be able to procure by other means.

The bulletin, drawn up in several languages, shall be sent gratuitously to the Federal Councils or Committees, which are to forward one copy to each of their branches.

In case the General Council should be unable to publish such bulletins, it shall every three months send a written communication to the different Federal Councils or Committees, to be published in the newspapers of their respective countries, and especially in the International organs.

4. Every new branch or society intending to join the Interna- tional, is bound immediately to announce its adhesion to the General Council.

5. The General Council has the right to admit or to refuse the affiliation of any new branch or group, subject to appeal to the next Congress.

Nevertheless, wherever there exist Federal Councils or Commit- tees, the General Council is bound to consult them before admitting or rejecting the affiliation of a new branch or society within their jurisdiction; without prejudice, however, to its right of provisional decision.

6. The General Council has also the right of suspending, till the meeting of next Congress, any branch of the Interna- tional.

7. In case of differences arising between societies or branches of the same national group, or between groups of different nationalities, the General Council shall have the right of deciding such differences, subject to appeal to the next Congress, whose decision shall be final.

8. All delegates appointed by the General Council to distinct missions shall have the right to attend, and be heard at, all meetings of Federal Councils or Committees, district and local



**[p. 11]**

9. English, French, and German editions of the General Rules and Regulations are to be reprinted from the official texts published by the General Council.

All versions of the General Rules and Regulations in other languages shall, before publication, be submitted to the General Council for approval.

Ill

Contributions to Be Paid to the General Council

1. An annual contribution of One Penny3 per member shall be levied from all branches and affiliated societies for the use of the General Council. This contribution is intended to defray the expenses of the General Council, such as the remuneration of its General Secretary, costs of correspondence, publications, prepara- tory work for Congresses, etc. etc.

2. The General Council shall cause to be printed uniform adhesive stamps representing the value of one penny each, to be annually supplied, in the numbers wanted, to the Federal Councils or Committees.

3. These stamps are to be affixed to a special sheet of the livret or to a copy of the Rules which every member of the Association is held to possess.b

4. On the 1st of March of each year, the Federal Councils or Committees of the different countries0 shall forward to the General Council the amounts of the stamps disposed of, and return the unsold stamps remaining on hand.

5. These stamps, representing the value of the individual contributions, shall bear the date of the current year.

[^1]: a The French and German editions have "10 centimes" and "one groschen" respectively.— Ed.

[^2]: b In the German and French editions Article 3 reads as follows: "The Federal Councils or Committees shall provide the local Committees, or, in their absence, their respective branches, with the number of stamps corresponding to the number of their members." Then follow articles 4, 5 and 6 which correspond to articles 3, 4 and 5 in the English edition.— Ed.

[^3]: c The French edition has "of the different countries or localities".— Ed.





**[p. IV]**

Federal Councils or Committees

1. The expenses of the Federal Councils or Committees shall be defrayed by their respective branches.

2. The Federal Councils or Committees shall send one report at least every month to the General Council.

3. The Federal Councils or Committees shall transmit to the General Council every three months a report on the administra- tion and financial state of their respective branches.

4. Any Federation may refuse to admit or may exclude from its midst societies or branches. It is, however, not empowered to deprive them of their International character, but it may propose their suspension to the General Council.

V

Local Societies, Branches, and Groups

1. Every branch is at liberty to make rules and bye-laws for its local administration, adapted to local circumstances and the laws of its country. But these rules and bye-laws must not contain anything contrary to the General Rules and Regulations.

2. All local branches, groups, and their committees are hence- forth to designate and constitute themselves simply and exclusively as branches, groups, and committees of the International Working Men's Association, with the names of their respective localities attached.

3. Consequently, no branches or groups will henceforth be allowed to designate themselves by sectarian names,— such as Positivists, Mutualists, Collectivists, Communists, etc., or to form separatist bodies, under the name of sections of propaganda, etc., pretending to accomplish special missions distinct from the common purposes of the Association.

4. Art. 2 of this division does not apply to affiliated Trades' Unions.

5. All sections, branches, and working men's societies affiliated to the International are invited to abolish the office of President of their respective branch or society.

6. The formation of female branches amongst the working class is recommended. It is, however, understood that this resolution



**[p. 13]**

does not at all intend to interfere with the existence, or formation of branches composed of both sexes.

7. Wherever attacks against the International are published, the nearest branch or committee is held to send at once a copy of such publication to the General Council.

8. The addresses of the offices of all International Committees and of the General Council are to be published every three months in all the organs of the Association.

VI

General Statistics of Labour

1. The General Council is to enforce Article 6 of the Rules3

relating to general statistics of the working class, and the Resolutions of the Geneva Congress, 1866, on the same subject.

2. Every local branch is bound to appoint a special Committee of Statistics, so as to be always ready, within the limits of its means, to answer any question which may be put to it by the Federal Council or Committee of its country or by the General Council.

It is recommended to all branches to remunerate the secretaries of the Committees of Statistics, considering the general benefit the working class will derive from their labour.

3. On the 1st of August of each year the Federal Councils or Committees will transmit the materials collected in their respective countries to the General Council, which, in its turn, is to elaborate them into a general report, to be laid before the Congresses or Conferences annually held in the month of September.15

4. Trades' Unions and International branches refusing to give the information required, shall be reported to the General Council, which will take action thereupon.

5. The Resolutions of the Geneva Congress, 1866, alluded to in Article 1 of this division are the following.2

One great International combination of efforts will be a statistical inquiry into the situation of the working classes of all civilized countries'" to be instituted by the working classes

[^1]: a The reference is to Article 6 of the "Provisional Rules of the Association" (present edition, Vol. 20, pp. 15-16). The French edition refers to Article 5 of the Statuts et Règlements, London, 1866, p. 5 (cf. Rules of the International Working Men's Association, London [1867], p. 5. See present edition, Vol. 20, p. 443).— Ed.

[^2]: b The words "annually held in the month of September" are omitted in the French edition.— Ed.

[^3]: c The French edition has "of different countries".— Ed.

[^4]: 3—1006





**[p. 14]**

The Congress therefore proposes that in each locality where branches of our Association exist, the work be immediately commenced, and evidence collected on the different points specified in the subjoined scheme of inquiry; the Congress invites the working men of Europe and the United States of America to co-operate in gathering the elements of the statistics of the working class; reports and evidence to be forwarded to the General Council. The General Council shall elaborate them into a report, adding the evidence as an appendix. This report, together with its appendix, shall be laid before the next annual Congress, and after having received its sanction, be printed at the expense of the Association.

General scheme of inquiry, which may of course be modified by each locality. 1. Industry, name of. 2. Age and sex of the employed. 3. Number of the employed. 4. Salaries and wages; (a) apprentices; (b) wages by the day or piece work; scale paid by middle men. Weekly, yearly average. 5. (a) Hours of work in factories, (b) The hours of work with small employers and in home work,3 if the business be carried on in those different modes, (c) Nightwork and daywork. 6. Meal-times and treatment. 7. Sort of workshop and work; overcrowding, defective ventilation, want of sunlight, use of gaslight, cleanliness, etc. 8. Effect of employment upon the physical condition. 9. Moral condition. Education. 10. State of trade: whether season trade, or more or less uniformly distributed over the year, whether greatly fluctuat- ing, whether exposed to foreign competition—whether destined principally for home or foreign consumption, &c.b

The Conference held at London from 17th to 23rd September, 1871, has charged the General Council to issue a new, authentic and revised edition, in English, French, and German, of the "General Rules and Regulations of the International Working Men's Association"; for the following reasons: —

[^1]: APPENDIX

[^2]: a The rest of the sentence is omitted in the French edition.— Ed. b The French and German editions add Point 11: "Particular laws on the relations between the worker and the employer". The German edition has Point 12: "The dietary and housing conditions of the workers".— Ed.





**[p. 15]**

I. General Rules

The Geneva Congress (1866) adopted, with a few additions, the Provisional Rules of the Association, published at London in November, 1864. It also decided (see "Congrès ouvrier de l'Association Internationale des Travailleurs, tenu à Genève du 3 au 8 Septbre., 1866", Genève, 1866, p. 27, note), that the General Council should publish the official and obligatory text of the Rules as well as of the Regulations voted by the Congress.3 The General Council was prevented from executing this order by the seizure, on the part of the Bonapartist Government, of the minutes of the Geneva Congress on their transit through France.3 When at last, through the intercession of Lord Stanley, then British Foreign Secretary, the minutes were recovered, a French edition had already been issued at Geneva, and the text of the Rules and Regulations contained in it was at once reproduced in all French-speaking countries. This text was faulty in many respects.

1. The Paris edition of the London Provisional Rules had been accepted as a true translation; but the Paris Committee to which this translation is due, had not only introduced most important alterations4 in the preamble of the Rules which, on the interpella- tion of the General Council, were represented as changes unavoidable under the existing political state of France. From an insufficient acquaintance with the English language, it had also misinterpreted some of the articles of the Rules.

2. The Geneva Congress having to give a final character to the Provisional Rules, the Committee appointed for this purpose simply struck out all passages in which anything of a provisional nature was alluded to, without noticing that several of these passages contained most important matter of no provisional character whatever. In the English edition published after the Lausanne Congress (1867) the same omissions are repeated.

77. Administrative Regulations

The Administrative Regulations hitherto published conjointly with the Rules, are but those voted by the Geneva Congress (1866). It thus became necessary to codify the further regulations voted by subsequent Congresses and by the late London Confer- ence.

[^1]: :1 The French edition adds here: "in its report on the Congress".— Ed.

[^2]: 3*





**[p. 16]**

The following publications have been made use of for the present revised edition: —

"Address and Provisional Rules of the International Working Men's Association", &c. London. 1864.

"Rules of the International Working Men's Association". Lon- don. 1867.

"Congrès ouvrier de l'Association Internationale des Travail- leurs, tenu à Genève du 3 au 8 Septbre., 1866". Genève, 1866.a

"Procès-verbaux du Congrès de l'Association Internationale des Travailleurs, réuni à Lausanne, du 2 au 8 Septbre., 1867". Chaux-de-Fonds. 1867.

"Troisième Congrès de l'Association Internationale des Travail- leurs (Brussels Congress)—Compte-rendu officiel". Bruxelles. 1868.

"The International Working Men's Association. Resolutions of the Congress of Geneva, 1866, and the Congress of Brussels, 1868". London. 1869.

"Compte-rendu du 4me Congrès International, tenu à Bale en Septbre., 1869". Bruxelles. 1869.

"Report of the Fourth Annual Congress of the International Working Men's Association, held at Basel, 1869". Published by the General Council. London. 1869.

"Quatrième Congrès de l'Association Internationale des Travail- leurs, tenu à Bâle, 1869. Rapport du délégué des Sections de la Fabrique à Genève". Genève. 1869.

"Resolutions of the Conference of Delegates of the International Working Men's Association, assembled at London, 1871". London. 1871.

For the Basel Congress, the German report of the Congress proceedings, published in fly-sheets at Basel, and the notes taken during the Congress by the General Secretary,b have also been consulted.

How these various sources have been made use of for the purposes of the present revised edition will appear from the following statement.0

[^1]: a The French edition has an additional source: "Compte-rendu du Congrès de Genève" (publié d'après les procès-verbaux par le Conseil général dans le Courrier international, Londres, mars et avril 1867).— Ed.

[^2]: b J. G. Eccarius.— Ed. c In the French edition this paragraph reads as follows: "In the following report, next to the articles of the present Rules and Regulations, the corresponding articles of previous editions are indicated, as well as information relating to administrative resolutions, compiled here for the first time. The changes in the French text, made by the decision of the Conference, to bring it into accord with the English one, have not been indicated."—Ed.





**[p. 17]**

GENERAL RULES

Preamble.—After the words, "For these reasons", there have been restored the words, "the International Working Men's Association has been founded". See Provisional Rules, p. 13.a

The passage, "They hold it the duty of a man", &c, has been omitted, because there exist two equally authentic versions of it, irreconcilable with each other. The true meaning of it is, besides, already contained in the passage immediately preceding, and in that immediately following: "No rights without duties", &c.5

Art. 3 is restored from Art. 3 of Provisional Rules. Art. 4.— Part of Art. 3 and the whole of Art. 4 of Rules, London, 1867.

Art. 5.— Introductory part of Art. 3, Rules, 1867. The words "a president" have been omitted, in agreement with Administrative Resolution I. of Basel Congress.6

Art. 6.—Art. 5, Rules, 1867. The words "Co-operating Associa- tions" have been changed into "national and local groups of the Association", because the expression, in some translations, has been misinterpreted as meaning co-operative societies.6

Art. 7.—Art. 6, Rules, 1867. Art. 8.—Art. 10, Rules, 1867. Art. 10.—Art. 8, Rules, 1867. Art. 12 forms Art. 13 of the Administrative Regulations in "Rules, 1867".c

Art. 13.—Art. 12, Rules, 1867. Art. 7, Rules, 1867, has been omitted, because its insertion was contrary to a resolution of the Lausanne Congress. See "Procès- verbaux du Congrès de Lausanne", p. 36.d

1. The General Congress

Art. 1.—Art. 11 of Regulations voted by Geneva Congress ("Congrès de Genève", Genève, 1866, p. 26, [27,] &c); Art. 10, Rules, &c, 1867, which is incomplete.

[^1]: ADMINISTRATIVE REGULATIONS

[^2]: a See present edition, Vol. 20, pp. 14-15. The reference to the "Provisional Rules" is omitted in the German edition.— Ed.

[^3]: b The sentence is omitted in the French edition.— Ed. c The French edition refers to another source: "Règlement administratif. Art. 15, Congrès ouvrier de Genève".— Ed.

[^4]: d This point is omitted in the French edition.— Ed.





**[p. 18]**

Art. 2.—Art. 9, Congrès de Genève; Art. 6, Rules, &c, 1867. Art. 3.—Art. 13, Congrès de Genève; Art. 11, Rules, &c, 1867. Art. 4.—Art. 10, Congrès de Genève; Art. 9, Rules, &c, 1867. Art. 5.—Art. 9, Congrès de Genève; Art. 7, Rules, &c, 1867. Art. 6.—Art. 12, Congrès de Genève; Art. 8, Rules, &c, 1867. Art. 7.—Basel Administrative Regulations, VIII. Art. 8.—For this article the Guide pratique pour le Congrès de l'Internationale (Compte-rendu du Congrès de Bale, Bruxelles,

1869) has been completed by the other materials on the Basel Congress, quoted above.

Art. 9.—First part as for Art. 8. Second part, Resolution of Lausanne Congress (Procès-verbaux, p. 74, 1).

Art. 10.—Art. 16, Congrès de Genève; Art. lb, Rules, &c, 1867. Art. 11.—Guide Pratique, Basel Congress, Art. 3 and 11. Art. 12.—Guide Pratique, &c, Art. 10. Art. 13.—Guide Pratique, &c, Art. 7. Art. 14.—Guide Pratique, &c, Art. 4.

II. The General Council

Art. 1.—London Conference, 1871, II. 1. Art. 2.—Congrès de Genève, Art. 1; Rules, &c, 1867, Art. 1. Art. 3.—The two first Alineas, Art. 2 and Art. la; Congrès de Genève, and Rules, &c, 1867. Third Alinea, Art. 3, Congrès de Genève. Last Alinea, Lausanne Congress, Procès-verbaux, p. 37, Art. 2.

Arts. 4 to 7.—Basel Administrative Resolutions, IV. to VII. Art. 8.—London Conference, III. Art. 9.—Resolution of London Conference, sittings of 18th and 22nd September.

III. Contributions to Be Paid to the General Council

Art. 1.— First Alinea, Lausanne Congress, Procès-verbaux, p. 37, 3; and Art. IX., Basel Administrative Resolutions. Second Alinea, Art. 4, Congrès de Genève, and Rules, 1867.

Arts. 2 to 6.—London Conference, IV., 1 to 5.

IV. Federal Councib or Committees

Art.l.—Art. 6, Congrès de Genève, and Rules, 1867. Art. 2.—Art. 5, ditto.



**[p. 19]**

Art. 3.—Brussels Congress, "Compte-rendu Officiel", p. 50, Appendice, Séances Administratives, Resolution N» 3.

Art. 4.—Art. VI., Basel Administrative Resolutions.

V. Local Societies, Branches, and Groups

Art. 1.—Art. 14, Congrès de Genève; Art. 12, Rules, &c, 1867. Arts. 2 to 4.—London Conference, II., 2 to 4. Art. 5.—Art. I., Basel Administrative Resolutions. Art. 6.—London Conference, V. Art. 7.—Art. II., Basel Administrative Resolutions. Art. 8.—Art. III., ditto.

VI. General Statistics of Labour

Arts. 1 to 4.—London Conference, VI., 1 to 4. Art. 5.—Resolution of Geneva Congress (London edition of Geneva and Brussels Congress Resolutions, p. 4).

By order, and in the name of the London Conference, 1871,

The General Council

R. Applegarth, M. J. Boon, Fred. Bradnick, G. H. Buttery, V. De- lahaye, Eugene Dupont (on mission), Wm. Hales, G. Harris, Hurli- man, Jules Johannard, Harriet Law, Fred. Lessner, Lochner, Ch. Lon- guet, C. Martin, Zévy Maurice, Henry Mayo, George Milner, Ch. Mur- ray, Pfänder, John Roach, Riihl, Sadler, Cowell Stepney, Alfred Taylor, W. Townshend, E. Vaillant, John Weston.3

Corresponding Secretaries

Leo Frankel, for Austria and Hungary; A. Herman, Belgium; T. Mottershead, Denmark; A. Serraillier, France; Karl Marx, Ger- many and Russia; Charles Rochat, Holland; /. P. Mc Donnell, Ire- land; Fred. Engels, Italy and Spain; Walery Wrdblewski, Poland;

[^1]: a Both the French and German editions have the names of Ant. Arnaud, F. Cournet and G. Ranvier among the General Council members, and the German edition, Vitale Regis as well; besides that the words "(on mission)" after the name of Eugène Dupont are omitted in the German edition.— Ed.





**[p. 20]**

Hermann Jung, Switzerland; /. G. Eccarius, United States; Le Moussu, for French Branches of United States.

Charles Longuet, Chairman Hermann Jung, Treasurer John Hales, General Secretary

256, High Holborn, W.C., London, 24th October, 1871

Drawn up in October 1871

First published as pamphlets in English and French in November- December 1871, and in German in Feb- ruary 1872

Reproduced from the English pamphlet checked with the French and German editions



**[p. 21]**

Frederick Engels

[RESOLUTION OF THE GENERAL COUNCIL

EXPELLING GUSTAVE DURAND FROM THE INTERNATIONAL WORKING MEN'S

ASSOCIATION]7

The General Council having received full evidence that Gustave Durand, working jeweller of Paris, ex-delegate of the jewellers to the Federal Chamber of Paris Working Men,8 ex-chief of Battalion of the National Guards, ex-chief cashier at the Delegation of Finance under the Commune, passing as a refugee in London, has served, and is now serving, as a spy for the French police upon the Communal refugees and especially upon the General Council of the International Working Men's Association, and has already received 725 francs for his services.

and expelled from the International Association.

This resolution to be published in all the organs of the International.

[^1]: The said Gustave Durand is therefore branded as infamous3

[^2]: Adopted by the General Council on October 7, 1871

[^3]: First published in The Eastern Post, No. 159 and Der Volksstaat, No. 83, on October 14, 1871

[^4]: Reproduced from the Minute Book of the General Council checked with the newspapers

[^5]: a Der Volksstaat has "a traitor" instead of "infamous".— Ed.



G10RNALE REPÜBBUCANO

. < —«1 ^W.Orp Ml »yi yog» t«l) — t*f f**ktm Jl

Frederick Engels

[TO ENRICO BIGNAMI, EDITOR OF LA PLEBE]9

London, October 13 [1871]

Citizen Editor of La Plebe,

The General Council has entrusted me with sending you the enclosed resolution3 and requesting that you publish it in the columns of your esteemed newspaper.

I remain yours sincerely,

Frederick Engels, Secretary for Italy

[^1]: First published in La Plebe, No. 122, Printed according to the news- October 19, 1871 paper

[^2]: Translated from the Italian

[^3]: a F. Engels, "Resolution of the General Council Expelling Gustave Durand from the International Working Men's Association" (see this volume, p. 21).— Ed.





**[p. 23]**

Karl Marx

[DECLARATION OF THE GENERAL COUNCIL

ON NECHAYEV'S MISUSE OF THE NAME OF THE INTERNATIONAL WORKING MEN'S

ASSOCIATION]10

International Workingmen's Association

The Conference of the Delegates of the International Working- men's Association, assembled at London from the 17th to the 23d September 1871, has charged the General Council to declare publicly:

that Netschajeff has never been a member or an agent of the International Workingmen's Association;

that his assertions3 to have founded a branch at Brussels and to have been sent by a Brussels branch on a mission to Geneva, are false;

that the above said Netschajeff has fraudulently used the name of the International Workingmen's Association in order to make dupes and victims in Russia.

By order of the General Council, etc.

14 October 1871

[^1]: Adopted by the General Council on October 16, 1871

[^2]: First published in Qui vive!, No. 14, October 18, 1871 and in Der Volksstaat, No. 88, November 1, 1871

[^3]: Reproduced from the manuscript checked with the text in Der Volks- staat

[^4]: a Der Volksstaat has the following words inserted here: "(made known through the political process in St. Petersburg)".—Ed.





**[p. 24]**

Karl Marx

[RESOLUTION OF THE GENERAL COUNCIL

ON THE RULES OF THE FRENCH

SECTION OF 1871] n

INTERNATIONAL WORKING MEN'S ASSOCIATION 256, High Holborn, London.—W.C.

RESOLUTION OF THE GENERAL COUNCIL ADOPTED AT THE MEETING OF OCTOBER 17, 1871

TO CITIZEN MEMBERS OF THE FRENCH SECTION OF 1871

Citizens,

Considering the following articles of the administrative resolu- tions voted on by the Basle Congress: Article 4. "Every new section or society which comes into existence and wishes to join the International must immediately notify the General Council of its adherence."

The General Council confirms the Rules of the French Section of 1871 with the following modifications:

I. That in Article 2 the words "justify his means of existence" be erased and that it should simply be said: in order to be admitted as member of the section a person must present guarantees of morality, etc.

Article 9 of the General Rules states:

"Everybody who acknowledges and defends the principles of the International Working Men's Association is eligible to become a member. Every branch is responsible for the integrity of the members it admits. " b

[^1]: Article 5. "The General Council is entitled to accept or to refuse the affiliation of every new society or group, etc."a

[^2]: a Compte-rendu du IVe Congrès international, tenu à Bâle en septembre 1869, Brussels, 1869, p. 172.— Ed.

[^3]: b Here and further on Marx quotes the 1867 English edition of the General Rules and Regulations, published in accordance with the Geneva Congress decisions—Rules of International Working Men's Association, London [1867] (see present edition, Vol. 20, p. 444). In the manuscript the last sentence in this paragraph is repeated in English in brackets.— Ed.





**[p. 25]**

II. (1) Considering that Article 4 of the General Rules states: "The Congress elects the members of the General Council with power to add to their numbers"a; that consequently the General Rules only recognise two ways of election for General Council members: either their election by the Congress, or their co-option by the General Council; that the following passage of Article 11 of the Rules of the French Section of 1871: "One or several delegates shall be sent to the General Council" is therefore contrary to the General Rules which give no branch, section, group or federation the right to send delegates to the General Council.

That Article 12 of the Regulations prescribes: "Every section is at liberty to make Rules and Bye-Laws for its local administration, suitable to the peculiar circumstances and laws of the different countries. But these Bye-Laws must not contain anything contrary to the General Rules." b

For these reasons: The General Council cannot admit the above-mentioned para- graph of the Rules of the "French Section of 1871".

(2) It is quite true that the different sections existing in London had been invited to send delegates to the General Council which, so as not to violate the General Rules, has always proceeded in the following manner:

It has first determined the number of delegates to be sent to the General Council by each section, reserving itself the right to accept or refuse them depending on whether it considered them able to fulfil the general functions it has to perform. These delegates became members of the General Council not by virtue of the fact that they were delegated by their sections but by virtue of the right of co-opting new members accorded to the Council by the General Rules.

Having acted up to the decision taken by the last Conference

[^1]: a Cf. this volume, p. 4 and present edition, Vol. 20, p. 442. In the manu- script this sentence is in English; it is repeated in French in brackets.— Ed.

[^2]: b Cf. present edition, Vol. 20, p. 446.— Ed.



It would have been a big mistake to identify the electoral procedure of the General Council of the International Working Men's Association with that of the Paris Federal Council which was not even a national Council nominated by a national Congress like, for example, the Brussels Federal Council or that of Madrid.

The Paris Federal Council being only a delegation of the Paris sections, the delegates of these sections could well be invested with an imperative mandate on a council where they had to defend the interests of their section. The General Council's electoral proce- dure is, on the contrary, defined by the General Rules and its members would not accept any other imperative mandate than that of the General Rules and Regulations.

(3) The General Council is ready to admit two delegates from the "French Section of 1871" on the terms prescribed by the General Rules and never contested by the other sections existing in London.

III. In Article 11 of the Rules of the "French Section of 1871", this paragraph appears:

Interpreted literally, this paragraph could be accepted since it says only that a member of the "French Section of 1871" should not present himself to the General Council as delegate from another section.

But if we take into consideration the paragraph that precedes it, Article 11 means nothing else but completely changing the General Council's composition and making out of it, contrary to Article 3 of the General Rules, a delegation of London sections where the influence of local groups would be substituted for that of the whole International Working Men's Association.

The meaning of the paragraph in Article 11 from the Rules of the "French Section of 1871" is clearly confirmed by the obligation which it imposes for opting between the title of member of the Section and the function of member of the General Council.

For these reasons the General Council cannot admit the above-mentioned paragraph since it is contrary to the General

[^1]: "Each member of the section should not accept any delegation to the General Council other than that of his section."





**[p. 27]**

IV. The General Council is sure that the "French Section of 1871" will understand the necessity for the proposed modifica- tions and will not hesitate to bring its Rules into conformity with the letter and spirit of the General Rules and Regulations and that it will thereby forestall any discord which, in the present circumstances, could only hinder the progress of the International Working Men's Association.

Greetings and equality. In the name and by order of the General Council

Auguste Serraillier, Corresponding Secretary for France

Adopted by the General Council on Printed according to A. Serrail- October 17, 1871 lier's manuscript

First published in: Marx and Engels, Translated from the French Works, Second Russian Edition, Vol. 17, Moscow, 1960



**[p. 160]**

Frederick Engels

[ON THE PROGRESS OF THE INTERNATIONAL WORKING MEN'S

ASSOCIATION IN ITALY AND SPAIN

ENGELS' RECORD OF HIS REPORT AT THE GENERAL COUNCIL MEETING OF OCTOBER 17, 1871]13

The news from Italy was of a most cheering character, the spread of the Association being really wonderful in that country. Three months ago Mazzini stated that there was only one town in Italy, where the International counted numerous adherents.3 Now, from one end of the country to the other, it is fully established. It is represented in the press by one, if not two, daily papers in Rome; a daily paper in Milan; a semi-weekly one in Turin; weekly papers in Ravenna, Lodi, Pavia, Girgenti, and Catania, besides a number of other papers published in smaller localities. These papers are subject to incessant Government prosecutions; one of them the Proletario Italiano of Turin had six consecutive numbers seized by the Police, and one or more actions at law brought against it for each number seized; nevertheless, these papers continue undaunted in their crusade against the Priests, the capitalists, and Mazzini, who has been attacking the International because it was not religious.b The Government has dissolved two International sections in Florence and Naples, but the result has only been the immediate formation of new sections all over the country. In Girgenti, the new section has just published its rules,c

preceded by the translation of the Statutes, published by the General Council,*1 in Ravenna six Republican and Working Men's Societies, have organised themselves into sections of the Interna- tional, with a common Council.

[^1]: a G. Mazzini, "Agli opérai italiani", La Roma del Popolo, No. 20, July 13, 1871.— Ed.

[^2]: b Ibid.— Ed. c Statuto e Regolamento délia Società Internazionale degli Opérai seguiti dal Regolamento interno della Sezione Girgentina, Girgenti, 1871.— Ed.

[^3]: d Statuts et règlements. 1866, London [1866].— Ed.





**[p. 1871]**

In Spain the progress of the Association has been as rapid as in Italy. The Spanish trades' unions, having been created almost exclusively by the International, form an essential part of its organisation. The trades' unions of each locality have a local trades' council, corresponding directly with the Spanish Federal Council at Madrid, on general matters relating to the Internation- al; while each trade all over the country again is under the direction of a Central Board, corresponding with the Spanish Federal Council on all matters relating to its trade.

This organisation, as finally settled by the Conference of Valencia, held from the 10th to the 18th of September, 1871, is now being carried out all over Spain.14 There is scarcely a single large town in Spain without its local "Trades' Council", and a great many small towns are organized upon the same principle. New sections are forming everywhere, and individual adhesions are coming in by hundreds. The Republican party, which only a short time ago attacked the International as a party of "Jesuits", has been made to feel its power acutely. The rising of the Commune in Paris had already split the Republican party in two camps. The middle class section took the side of Versailles, while the younger elements and the Republican working men, sup- ported the Commune. This latter section has been drawn, naturally, nearer and nearer to the International, and will soon enter its ranks, thus strengthening it by the adhesion of numerous and valuable new elements. The Republican papers belonging to this section begin to advocate the nationalization of the land, and other socialistic tenets; to these belong La Asociacion, of Leon; El Comunero, of Madrid; La Justicia, of Malaga; El Trabajo, of Ferrol, and others. At a great Republican meeting, held in Madrid October 15th, the proposal for joint action with the International was cheered enthusiastically.

[^1]: First published in The Eastern Post, Reproduced from the newspaper No. 160, October 21, 1871

[^2]: a The reference is to G. Garibaldi's letters of August 20, 1871 to the editorial boards of // Romagnolo and // Proletario Italiano, and to his letter of September 20, to The Echo in London, which were reprinted by other newspa- pers.— Ed.



Cnrnsmi S MILINO I PKOVIKCU y L'Uffici« i in Mil««, <ia S. ftttro jirorto. 23 »^ UN MUMIRO AMJmt Jtro Crar. l O

Frederick Engels

[TO THE EDITORS OF THE GAZZETTINO ROSA

COVERING LETTER TO THE "DECLARATION OF THE GENERAL COUNCIL ON NECHAYEV'S MISUSE OF THE NAME OF THE INTERNATIONAL WORKING MEN'S

ASSOCIATION"]

In the trial, known by the name of Nechayev, conducted several months ago before the Court of Assizes of St. Petersburg, a number of assertions relating to the International Working Men's Association were made, assertions which naturally attracted the attention of the Conference of Delegates of this Association in session in London.

The Conference consequendy took the following decision, ordering it to be published in the organs of the International.3

London, October 20, 1871

Certified copy Frederick Engels, Secretary for Italy

[^1]: First published in Gazzettino Rosa, Printed according to Gazzettino No. 306, November 3, 1871 and in Rosa L'Eguaglianza,No. 18, November 12, 1871

[^2]: Translated from the Italian Published in English for the" first time

[^3]: a This is followed by the text of the "Declaration of the General Council on Nechayev's Misuse of the Name of the International Working Men's Associa- tion" in Engels' translation (see p. 23 of this volume).— Ed.





**[p. 31]**

Frederick Engels

[STATEMENT BY THE GENERAL COUNCIL CONCERNING ALEXANDER BAILLIE COCHRANE'S

LETTER]15

TO THE EDITOR OF THE EASTERN POST

Sir,—A letter appeared in The Times on October 31st on the In- ternational, signed Alexander Baillie Cochrane, which I ask space to reply to in your columns. In the first instant, Mr. A. B. C. is

Ever since September, 1867, the office of president of the General Council of the International, which Mr. A. B. C. calls the English branch of this society, has been abolished.16 It is well-known that after the publication of our manifesto on the civil war in France3 (in June last) Mr. Odger withdrew from the General Council.

Having read some continental gossip about the composition of our conference of delegates, held in London last September, Mr. A. B. C. applies this information to the public meeting held in St. Martin's Hall, on the 28th September, 1864. At that meeting, as the writer in The Times of October 27th correctly stated,b the provisional council of the International Working Men's Association was elected, but not "Mr. Odger elected president, Mr. Cremer and Mr. Wheeler, Secretary" as Mr. A. B. C. says.

[^1]: "ignorant whether Mr. Odger is still president of the English branch of this society".

[^2]: a K. Marx, The Civil War in France.— Ed. b [J. G. Eccarius,] "The International Working Men's Association", 77»« Times, No. 27205, October 27, 1871.— Ed.





**[p. 32]**

"The red flag is the symbol of universal love."

This authentic document is nothing but the preamble of one of the innumerable forgeries, lately published, in the name of the International by the Paris police, and disowned at the time by the General Council.

Secondly—

"The programme of Geneva, under the presidency" (it is rather hard to make out how a programme can be under a presidency) "of the Russian Michael Bakounine was accepted by the General Council of London, July 1869."

This programme of Geneva is nothing else but the statutes of the "Alliance de la Démocratie Socialiste", of Geneva, already quoted in Jules Favre's circular on the International. Now, in reply to that circular I stated, (see The Times, of June 13th) the Gene- ral Council never issued such a document.3 On the contrary, it issued a document which quashed the original statutes of the Al- liance.11

and that the Journal de Genève, this worthy representative of the party tenets of Mr. A. B. C, has taken up the defence of the Alliance against the International.0

Thirdly—Mr. A. B. C. pulls out of his bundle of "authentic documents" some garbled extract from private letters written by our friend Eugène Dupont, long since published by the Bonapart- ist ex-procureur Oscar Testut. Before Mr. A. B. C. set out for the Continent in search of this "trustworthy information", it had already gone the round of the English Press.

[^1]: I may now add that the conference, lately held at London, has finally disposed of the Alliance, founded by Michael Bakounine,c

[^2]: a K. Marx and F. Engels, "Statement by the General Council on Jules Favre's Circular" (published in The Times under the signature of John Hales).— Ed.

[^3]: b K. Marx, "The International Working Men's Association and the Internation- al Alliance of Socialist Democracy".— Ed.

[^4]: c See present edition, Vol. 22, pp. 429-30.— Ed. d "La Liberté dans l'Association Internationale des Travailleurs. Confédération Suisse. Genève, le 27 octobre 1871", Journal de Genève, No. 254, October 27, 1871.— Ed.



I am, Sir,

Yours obediently,

International Working Men's Association 256, High Holborn

Written on October 31, 1871 Reproduced from the newspaper

Adopted by the General Council on October 31, 1871

John Hales, General Secretary

First published in The Eastern Post, No. 163, November 11, 1871

®tpn bet fojtol-bemok«ti Wen^rbtttonart(f soft ter Jtrtentatiatralen •et«tlwgt86fftitfi|aftra.

Frederick Engels

[ON THE COMPANY SWINDLE IN ENGLAND]

London, November 4.—We here are now in the full swing of prosperity and thriving business—we, i.e., official England, the big capitalists. There is a surplus of capital on the market and it is looking everywhere for a profitable home; bogus companies, set up for the happiness of mankind and the enrichment of the entrepreneurs, are shooting up out of the ground like mush- rooms. Mines, asphalt quarries, horse-drawn tramways for big cities, and iron works seem to be the most favoured at the moment. Mines are being offered for sale on the Volga and in New Mexico; people are buying asphalt quarries in Savoy, the Jura and Hanover; Lisbon and Buenos Aires are to have horse-drawn tramways, and so on. The sole aim of all these joint-stock compa- nies is, of course, briefly to raise the value of the stock so the en- trepreneurs can rid themselves of their share at a profit; what then becomes of the stockholders does not bother them: "After us the deluge!"3 In three or four years, five-sixths of these com- panies will have gone the way of all flesh and, with them, the money of the ensnared stockholders. As always, it will be mainly small people who put their savings into these "most reliable and profitable" enterprises and always, when the swindle has forced the stock up to its peak on the market—and it serves them right. The stock exchange swindle is one of the most effective ways of transferring the ostensibly, and in part probably genuinely, self- earned assets of the small people into the pockets of the big capitalists, so even the most stupid can see that, in the social order of today, there can be no such thing as capital "earned by one's

[^1]: a These words are attributed to Louis XV and Mme. de Pompadour.— Ed.





**[p. 35]**

This deluge of capital on the money market reflects, however, only the way big industry is blossoming. In almost all branches of production work is going ahead at a brisker pace than it has for many a year. This is the picture in England's two main industries, where iron and cotton are the raw materials.

At last, the Lancashire spinners again have enough cotton to be able to extend their mills on a massive scale; and they will not let the opportunity slip. In the small town of Oldham alone there are fifteen new mills under construction, with an average of fifty thousand spindles each—a total of 750,000 spindles, almost as many as there are (excluding Alsace) in the whole of the Customs Union18! A corresponding number of weaving-looms is being provided, and the picture is the same in the other Lancashire towns. The machine factories have work for months ahead, in some cases a year, and can demand any price, if only they can deliver. In short, things again look as they did in 1844, after the Chinese market was opened up,19 when the manufacturers' only fear was that they might not be able to satisfy the huge demand. As they said at the time, they had to make clothes for 300 million people! Then came the reverses of 1845 and 1847, when it suddenly turned out that the 300 million Chinese had, so far, been making their own clothing, thank you very much, and huge surpluses of English-made goods accumulated on all markets, with no one to buy them, while the manufacturers and speculators went bankrupt in their hundreds. That is what will happen again this time; these people never learn anything, and even if they do, they are forced by the intrinsic law of capitalist production constantly to repeat the old, familiar cycle of boom, overproduction and crisis, and to repeat it on an ever-increasing scale until, finally, the proletariat rises and liberates society from enduring this absurd cycle.

In the Volksstaat, one Herr Schwitzguébel demands,3 on behalf of some federal committee in Romance Switzerland of which I have

[^1]: a A. Schwitzguébel, "An die Redaktion des Volksstaat in Leipzig", Der Volksstaat, No. 81, October 7, 1871.— Ed.





**[p. 36]**

concerning Herr Elpidin.* I have had no dealings whatsoever with

Herr Schwitzguébel and cannot be answerable in this matter to just any third party who chooses to take issue with me. If, however,

Herr Elpidin himself should contact the editor's office on this matter, I shall place myself at his disposal and, in that event, shall ask the editor of the Volksstaat to inform Herr Elpidin of my address, so he may contact me directly.

Written on November 4, 1871 Printed according to the news- paper First published in Der Volksstaat, No. 91, November 11, 1871 Published in English for the first time

[^1]: a F. Engels, "The Address The Civil War in France and the English Press", Der Volksstaat, No. 54, July 5, 1871 (Elpidin was accused of espionage in the last paragraph of the article).— Ed.





**[p. 37]**

Karl Marx

[RESOLUTION OF THE GENERAL COUNCIL

ON THE FRENCH SECTION OF 1871]20

International Working Men's Association

RESOLUTIONS OF THE GENERAL COUNCIL

ADOPTED AT ITS MEETING

OF NOVEMBER 7, 1871

J. Preliminary remarks

The General Council considers that the ideas expressed by the "French Section of 1871" about a radical change to be made in the articles of the General Rules concerning the constitution of the General Council have no bearing on the question which it ought to discuss.

With regard to the insulting references to the General Council made by that section, these will be judged for what they are worth by the councils and federal committees of the various countries.

The Council merely wishes to note: That three years have not yet elapsed since the Basle Congress (which met on September 6-11, 1869), as the above-mentioned section deliberately asserts;

That in 1870, on the eve of the Franco-Prussian war, the Council addressed a general circular to all the federations, including the Paris Federal Council, proposing that the seat of the General Council be transferred from London3;

That the replies received were unanimously in favour of retaining the present seat of the Council and of prolonging its term of office;

That in 1871, as soon as the situation permitted, the General Council summoned a Conference of Delegates, this being the only action possible in the given circumstances;

That at this Conference delegates from the Continent gave voiceb to the misgivings in their respective countries that the

[^1]: a See K. Marx, Confidential Communication to All Sections.—Ed. b In the second manuscript this sentence begins as follows: "That at this Conference, held in London on September 17-23, 1871, delegates from the Continent, as members of the French section are fully aware, gave voice".— Ed.





**[p. 38]**

That the Conference (see its "Resolutions, etc." XVa) "leaves it to the discretion of the General Council to fix, according to events, the day and place of meeting of the next Congress or Conference which might replace it".

With regard to the said section's claim to exclusive representa- tion of "the French revolutionary element", because its members include ex-presidents of Paris workers' societies, the Council remarks:

The fact that this or that person has in the past been president of a workers' society may well be taken into account by the General Council, but does not in itself constitute the "right" to a seat on the Council or to represent the "revolutionary element" on that body. If this were so, the Council would be obliged to grant membership to M. Gustave Durand, former President of the Paris Jewellers' Society and secretary of the French section in London. Moreover, members of the General Council are bound to represent the principles of the International Working Men's Association, rather than the opinions and interests of this or that corporation.

//. Objections presented by the "French Section

of 1871" at the General Council meeting of October 31 to the resolutions of October 17

1) With respect to the following passage from Article 2 of the section's Rules:

the section remarks:

On this argument, a section of the International founded by TEETOTALLERS could include in its own rules this type of article: "To be admitted as member of the section, a person must swear to abstain from all alcoholic drinks." In short, it would be always possible for individual sections to impose in their local rules the most absurd

[^1]: "In order to be admitted as member of the section, a person must justify his means of existence, present guarantees of morality, etc."

[^2]: "The General Rules make the sections responsible for the morality of their members and, as a consequence, recognise the right of sections to demand the guarantees they think necessary."

[^3]: a Cf. present edition, Vol. 22, p. 429.— Ed.





**[p. 39]**

and incongruous conditions of admittance into the International, under the pretext that they "think it necessary in this way" to discharge their responsibility for the integrity of their members.

In its Resolution I of October 17, the General Council stated that there may be "cases in which the absence of means of existence may well be a guarantee of morality". It is of the opinion that the section repeated this point unnecessarily when it said that "refugees" are "above suspicion by virtue of the eloquent proof of their poverty".

As to the phrase that strikers' "means of existence" consist of "the strike fund" this might be answered by saying, first, that this "fund" is often fictitious.3

Moreover, official English inquiries have shown that the majority of English workers who, generally speaking, enjoy better conditions than their brothers on the Continent, are forced as a result of strikes and unemployment, or because of insufficient wages or terms of payment and many other causes, to resort incessantly to pawnshops or to borrowing, that is, to "means of existence" about which one cannot demand information without interfering in an unqualified manner in a person's private life.

There are two alternatives. Either the section sees "means of existence" purely as "guaran- tees of morality",b in which case the General Council's proposal that "to be admitted as member of the section a person must present guarantees of morality" serves the purpose since it assumes (see Resolution I of October 17) that "in dubious cases a section may well take information about means of existence as guarantee of morality".

Or in Article 2 of its Rules the section deliberately refers to the furnishing of information about "means of existence" as a condition for admission, over and above the "guarantees of morality" which it is empowered to require, in which case the General Council affirms that "it is a bourgeois innovation contrary to the letter and spirit of the General Rules".

2) With respect to the General Council's rejection of the following clause of Article 11 of the section's Rules:

[^1]: "One or several delegates shall be sent to the General Council"

[^2]: a The second manuscript continues as follows: "and is it not the case that strikes invariably result in deprivation and suffering for the strikers, which fact appears to have been ignored by the 1871 Section."—Ed.

[^3]: b The second manuscript continues as follows: "in order to avoid its responsibility".— Ed.





**[p. 40]**

"We are not unaware that the literal sense of the General Rules confers on it" (the General Council) "the right to accept or reject delegates."

This is a patent demonstration of the fact thata the section is not familiar with the literal sense of the General Rules.

In actual fact, the General Rules, which recognise only two ways of election to the General Council, namely, election by the Congress or co-option by the Council itself, nowhere state that the Council has the right to accept or reject delegates from the sections or groups.

The admission of delegates initially proposed by the London sections has always been a purely administrative measure on the part of the General Council, which in this case only made use of its power of co-option (see Resolution II, 2, of the General Council of October 17). The exceptional circumstances which led the General Council to have recourse to co-option of this kind were explained at sufficient length in its resolutions of October 17.

In the same resolution (II, 3) the Council declared that it would admit delegates from the "French Section of 1871" on the same conditions as those from the London sections. It cannot, however, be expected to give serious consideration to a demand that would grant this section a privileged position contrary to the General Rules. By the inclusion of the following paragraph in Article 11 of its Rules:

"One or several delegates shall be sent to the General Council", the "French Section of 1871" is claiming the right to send del- egates to the General Council allegedly basing itself on the General Rules. It acted as though fully convinced that it possessed this imaginary right, and even before the section had been recog- nised by the General Council (see Article VI of the Admin- istrative Resolutions of the Basle Congressb), it did not hesitate to send "by right" to the General Council meeting of October 17 two delegates,0 armed with "imperative mandates" in the name of the 20 full members of the section. Finally, in its latest com- munication it again insists on "the duty and right to send dele- gates to the General Council".

[^1]: a The second manuscript continues as follows: "on this point as on many others".— Ed.

[^2]: b Compte-rendu du IVe Congrès international, tenu à Bâle, en septembre 1869, Brussels, 1869, p. 172.— Ed.

[^3]: c Chautard and Camélinat.— Ed.





**[p. 41]**

3) With respect to the General Council's refusal to recognise the following passage in the section's Rules:

"Each member of the section should not accept any delegation to the General Council other than that of his section", the section states:

"In response to this, we shall limit ourselves to the observation that our Rules pertain to our section alone; our agreements are of no concern or relevance to anyone but ourselves, and this claim in no way contradicts the General Rules which include no provision on this subject."

It is difficult to comprehend how the Rules which include no provision on the right of delegation to the General Council, should suddenly specify the conditions of this delegation. On the other hand, it is not so difficult to see that the section's own Rules do not apply outside its field of competence. Nevertheless, it cannot be admitted that the specific rules of any section "are of no concern or relevance to anyone but that section alone".b For were the General Council to approve Article 11 of the Rules of the "French Section of 1871", for example, it would be obliged to insert it into the rules of all the other sections, and this article, once it began to apply generally, would completely nullify the right of co-option conferred on the Council by the General Rules.c

For these reasons: I) The General Council reaffirms in their entirety its resolutions of October 17, 1871d;

[^1]: a The second manuscript continues as follows: "although he is in fact a member of it".— Ed.

[^2]: b The second manuscript continues as follows: "This kind of argument would mean, firstly, the negation of the homogeneity and of the principle of solidarity uniting the groups and committees of the International and, secondly, it would fetter the Federal Councils as well as the General Council."—Ed.

[^3]: c The second manuscript continues as follows: "Finally, if this article were adopted, the Federal Councils and even the national Congresses would be restricted to the utmost in their activity owing to its delegates being faced with the alternative of remaining members of their section or of the delegation. This would be the case with the Belgian national Congress and the Liège section, to which Citizen Herman belongs, if this article were included in its Regulations, as the French Section of 1871 seems to demand."—Ed.

[^4]: d In the second manuscript the next paragraph II is crossed out, and in paragraph I "reaffirms and declares final" is substituted for "reaffirms in their entirety".— Ed.



London, November 7, 1871

In the name and by order of the General Council3

First published in: Marx and Engels, Printed according to Marx's raanu- Works, Second Russian Edition, Vol. 17, script checked with Delahaye's Moscow, 1960 manuscript (second manuscript)

Translated from the French

[^1]: a In the second manuscript there follow the signature and the addressee: "Corresponding Secretary for France Auguste Serraillier. To Citizen Members of the French Section of 1871."—Ed.





**[p. 43]**

Frederick Engels

[GIUSEPPE GARIBALDI'S STATEMENT

AND ITS EFFECTS ON THE WORKING CLASSES IN ITALY

ENGELS' RECORD OF HIS REPORT

AT THE GENERAL COUNCIL MEETING OF NOVEMBER 7, 1871] 22

The news from Italy was of a peculiar interest, letters were received from a number of Italian cities, amongst whom were Turin, Milan, Ravenna, and Girgenti. These confirmed in every respect the immense strides with which the Association was advancing in Italy. The working-classes, in the towns at least, were rapidly abandoning Mazzini, whose denunciations of the Interna- tional had no effect whatever upon the masses.3 But Mazzini's denunciations had produced one good effect; they had caused Garibaldi, not only to pronounce himself entirely in favour of our Association, but also, on this very question, to come to an open rupture with Mazzini. In a long letter addressed to M. Petroni,b a Sardinian lawyer, who has been since elected president of the Italian Working Men's Congress,23 now sitting at Rome, Garibaldi expresses his indignation that the Mazzinians should venture to speak of him as of an old fool, who always had done what ever the men surrounding him, his satellites and flatterers, had persuaded him to do. Who were these satellites, he asks? Were they the men of his staff that came with him from South America in 1848, those he found at Rome in '49, or those of his staff of '59 and '60, or those who fought with him recently against the Prussians?24 If so, he maintains they were men whose names will for ever live in the memory of grateful Italy. But let them re-enter these satellites and flatterers.

[^1]: a See G. Mazzini, "Il moto délie classi artigiane e il congresso","L'Internazionale Svizzera", and "L'Internazionale. Cenno storico", La Roma del Popolo, Nos. 28-31, September 7, 14, 21 and 28, 1871.— Ed.

[^2]: b G. Garibaldi's letter was published in La Favilla, No. 255, October 31, 1871, and other newspapers.— Ed.



Garibaldi then states that Mazzini, in 1860, did everything in his power to frustrate and to render abortive the general's expedition to Sicily, which ended in the unification of Italy; that when Mazzini heard of Garibaldi's success, he insisted upon the latter proclaiming the Republic in Italy, a thing absurd and utterly foolish under the circumstances, and he a finally reproaches "the great exile, whom everybody knew to be in Italy", with his meanness in bespattering the fallen of Paris,"3 the only men who in this time of tyranny, of lies, of cowardice and degradation have waved high, even while dying, the sacred banner of rights and justice. He continues,

[^1]: "You cry anathema upon Paris, because Paris destroyed the Vendôme Column and the house of Thiers. Have you ever seen a whole village destroyed by the flames for having given shelter to a volunteer, or a franc-tireur? And that not only in France, the same in Lombardy, in Venetia. As to the palaces set fire to in Paris by petroleum, let them ask the priests who, from their intimate acquaintance with the hell-fire about which they preach, ought to be good judges, what difference there is between petroleum fire and those fires which the Austrians lit in order to burn down the villages in Lombardy and Venetia, when those countries were still under the yoke of the men who shot Ugo Bassi, Ciceruacchio and his two sons, and thousands of Italians who committed the sacrilege of demanding a free Rome and a free Italy.

[^2]: "When the light of day shall once have dispersed the darkness which covers Paris, I hope that you, my friend, will be more indulgent for the acts caused by the desperate situation of a people which, certainly, was badly led, as it generally happens to nations, who allow themselves to be allured by the phraseology of the doctrinaires, but who, in substance, fought heroically for their rights. The detractors

[^3]: a G. Garibaldi.— Ed. b G. Mazzini, "II Comune di Francia", La Roma del Popolo, No. 9, April 26, 1871.— Ed.



of Paris may say what they like, they will never succeed in proving that a few miscreants and foreigners—as they said of us in Rome in 1849—have resisted for three months against a grand army, backed as it was by the most potent armies of Prussia.

"And the International? What need is there to attack an Association almost without knowing it? Is that Association not an emanation of the abnormal state of society all over the world? A society where the many have to slave for bare subsistence, and where the few, by lies and by force, appropriate the greater portion of the produce of the many, without having earned it by the sweat of their brow, must not such a society excite the discontent, and the vengeance of the suffering masses.

"I wish that the International should not fare as did the people of Paris—that is to allow itself to be circumvented by the concoctors of doctrines which would drive it to exaggerations, and finally to ridicule; but that it should well study, before trusting them, the character of the men who are to lead it on the path of moral and material improvement."

He returns for a moment to Mazzini,

"Mazzini and I, we are both old; but no one speaks of reconciliation between him and me. Infallible people die, but they do not bend. Reconciliation with Mazzini? there is only one possible way for it—to obey him; and of that I do not feel myself capable."

And finally the old soldier proves by referring to his past, that he has always been a true International, that he has fought for liberty everywhere and anywhere, first in South America, then offering his services to the Pope3 (aye, even to the Pope, when he played the liberal), then under Victor Emmanuel, lastly in France, under Trochu and Jules Favre—and he concludes,

This crowning letter of Garibaldi's, coming as it does after a number of others, in which he has plainly expressed his sympathies for the International, but abstained from speaking plainly as to Mazzini, has had an immense effect in Italy, and will induce many recruits to rally round our banner.

It was also announced that a full report of the working men's Congress at Rome would be laid before the next meeting of the Council.b

[^1]: "I and the youth of Italy are ready to serve Italy, also side by side with you, the Mazzinians, if it should be necessary."

[^2]: First published in The Eastern Post, Reproduced from the newspaper No. 163, November 11, 1871

[^3]: a Pius IX.— Ed. b On November 14, 1871.— Ed.

[^4]: 4—1006





**[p. 46]**

Frederick Engels

[WORKING MEN'S CONGRESS AT ROME.— BEBEL'S SPEECHES IN THE REICHSTAG

ENGELS' RECORD OF HIS REPORT AT THE GENERAL COUNCIL MEETING

OF NOVEMBER 14, 1871]25

From Italy numerous communications had again come to hand. From them it appeared that the so-called Working Men's Congress at Rome was but a dodge of Mazzini's, intended to deceive the public as to the giant strides with which the International is advancing in Italy. In the course of last summer the local leaders of the well-organised Mazzinian party in many large Italian towns, for the first time, and quite unexpectedly, became aware of the fact that they were losing the absolute hold they had hitherto possessed over the working-classes. The sound instinct of the Italian working men had enabled them to see that the working men of Paris, under the Commune, execrated as they were by the common voice of the ruling classes of Europe, had been in reality but the champions of the cause of the whole proletariat; and when Mazzini gave the word to his followers to join in the general middle-class outcry against the people of Paris,3 he himself destroyed the foundation of his hitherto almost undisputed sway over the Italian workmen. The working people of the Italian towns then began to see that they had class interests reaching beyond Mazzini's republic; that these interests were the same for all workmen all over the civilised world; and that there was a vast society in existence for the upholding of these common interests— the International. Moreover, they had been tired, for some time, of Mazzini's religious preachings, quite out of place as they were in the most priest-ridden country in Europe, and of his everlastingly reminding them that the grand object of their lives was the

[^1]: a G. Mazzini, "II Coraune di Francia", La Roma del Popolo, No. 9, April 26, 1871.— Ed.



The Congress opened its sittings on the 1st November. Mazzini and Garibaldi were elected honorary presidents, and that a week after Garibaldi's letter to Petroni appeared, in which he had finally broken with Mazzini!a Then the act of fraternisation of the Naples Congress was re-discussed. On this occasion a delegate proposed that it should be amended by adding a declaration that the Congress adhered expressly to the principles of Giuseppe Mazzini. The debate was long, but the old Mazzinian organisation at last prevailed. Thirty-four voted yes, nineteen no, six abstained, ten were absent. By a majority of fifteen upon the number of votes given, but by a minority of one upon the total number of

[^1]: a See this volume, pp. 43-45.— Ed.

[^2]: 4»





**[p. 48]**

We may add that already in the first preliminary meeting of Congress it had been privately settled that neither the question of the International nor any religious question should be discussed. The standing orders were to be suspended in favour of Mazzini only!

The other votes of the Congress were of interest to the Mazzinians alone. They represent attempts to galvanise back into life the dying influence of Mazzini, attempts utterly fruitless in presence of the immense International movement now pervading the Italian working class. The Radical Italian press in Rome, especially La Capitale and II Tribuno,b severely blame the Congress for its implicit note of confidence in Mazzini. The latter paper says:

"This vote was a verdict upon the plot between Mazzini and Garibaldi; between the theological notions of the high priest, and the downright affirmations of the working man's rights." It was intended to say to Garibaldi: — "You are wrong in denying the principles of Mazzini, which are those of the Italian working class; it was intended to say to the vanquished of the Commune that the Royalist squires of Versailles were right in shooting them down; it was intended to say to the International that the various Governments did right in trying to kill it, and that Italy would oppose a dam to the torrents coming down upon privilege and monopoly. It would have been well if the Italian workmen, in Congress united1, had thoroughly discussed, and well examined every proposition, but instead of this the exceptions taken even before the questions themselves arose, the Ait Philosophus,c

The same paper has a remarkable article on the Agricultural labours or small peasants in Italy, which demanded that all the immense estates now uncultivated or left in the state of bogs, should be declared the property of the labouring class, unless reclaimed and cultivated by their owners within a limited time.

In the first speech, he attacked the increasing military expendi- ture.

[^1]: the word of the master accepted as a gospel, constitutes acts damaging no one but that party which was compelled to recur to similar means in order to get rid of a propaganda it could not otherwise vanquish."

[^2]: In the German Parliament, our friend Bebel has spoken twice.d

[^3]: a C. Cafiero, G. Montel and A. Tucci.— Ed. b Ciceruacchio. II Tribuno.—Ed. c Said the philosopher.— Ed. d A. Bebel's speeches at the Reichstag sittings of October 30 and November 8, 1871, Der Volksstaat, Nos. 91 and 92, November 11 and 15, 1871.— Ed.



In the second speech, upon the Liberal motion that all German States should be bound to have representative institutions, Bebel said that all constitutions of the German States, great and small, were not worth the paper upon which they were written; the Prussian Executive Government were supreme and did what they liked all over Germany, and he wished that all the small states, falsely supposed to be the last refuges of liberty, were swallowed up by Prussia, so as to place the people for once face to face with their true enemy, the Prussian Government. Upon his declaring that he did not except the constitutions of the German Empire from this sweeping condemnation, the House, upon the motion of the speaker,3 stopped him in the midst of his speech.

This is liberty of discussion, as understood by the aristocrats, bureaucrats, capitalists, and lawyers of the German Parliament. The one working-man amongst them is so much a match for the whole of the rest that they have to put him down by main force.

[^1]: First published in The Eastern Post, Reproduced from the newspaper No. 164, November 18, 1871; reprinted in the second issue, November 19, 1871

[^2]: a Dr. Simpson.— Ed.





**[p. 50]**

Karl Marx

DECLARATION

I Karl Marx of 1 Maitland park Road Haverstock Hill in the County of Middlesex, Secretary for Germany of the General Council of the International Working Men's Association, do solemnly and sincerely declare as follows

1) That the German Social Democratic Working Men's Party whose Committee in the beginning of September One thousand eight hundred and seventy was still seated at Brunswick27 has never demanded to be enrolled as part and parcel or as a Section of the International Working Men's Association.

2) That for this reason such an enrolment has never taken place.

3) That many members of the aforesaid German Social Demo- cratic Working Men's Party have on their demand been individual- ly admitted as Members of the International Working Men's Association.

4) That this Declaration is made at the request of Wilhelm Bracke a Merchant at Brunswick and himself a Member of the International Working Men's Association.

And I make this solemn Declaration conscientiously believing the same to be true and by virtue of the provisions of an Act made and passed in the Session of Parliament of the fifth and sixth years of the reign of His late Majesty King William the Fourth, intituled "An Act to Repeal an Act of the present Session of Parliament intituled An Act for the more effectuell abolition of Oaths and Affirmations taken and made in various departments of the State, and to substitute Declarations in lieu thereof, and for the more entire suppression of voluntary and extra judicial Oaths



**[p. 51]**

and Affidavits and to make other provisions for the abolition of unnecessary Oaths."

Subscribed and Declared at the Mansions House in the City of London this seventeenth day of November 1871.

Karl Marx

Before me Sills John Gibbons, Lord Mayor

First published, in English, in Der Proceß Reproduced from the book gegen den Ausschuß der Socialdemokratischen Arbeiterpartei, Brunswick, 1871, p. 151



**[p. 52]**

Karl Marx

[STATEMENT SENT BY THE GENERAL COUNCIL

TO THE EDITORS OF THE FRANKFURTER ZEITUNG UND HANDELSBLATT]

On page 2 of the Frankfurter Zeitung, No. 326, is a report, dated London, November 18, which runs as follows:

"At its last meeting the London section of the International passed the following resolution: 'The outstanding services of Sir Charles Dilke to the people's cause give him the right to recognition by the people; therefore he is invited to accept the title of honorary member of the international working men's union.' At an earlier meeting Kossuth was elected member."

The International does not recognise any honorary membership. In all probability the above-mentioned decision relates to a small London society, which first called itself "The International Democratic Association" and later changed its name to the "Universal Republican League".29 It has no connection whatsoever with the International.

In the name of the General Council of the International Working Men's Association

Corresponding Secretary for Germany,

Karl Marx

[^1]: Written on November 24, 1871 Printed according to the news-

[^2]: paper checked with the manu- First published in Frankfurter Zeitung und script Handelsblatt, No. 333, November 28, 1871





**[p. 53]**

Frederick Engels

TO THE FEDERAL COUNCIL OF THE SPANISH REGION

IN MADRID

London, November 25, 1871

Since the return of Citizen Lorenzo from the last conference3

we have not had any news from you. I have written two letters to you; the last one, dated the eighth of this November, which was registered, asked you to write to us immediately to explain this long silence. We have not yet received any answer but we have heard that a small minority of members of the International, seeking to sow divisions in the ranks of the association, is conspiring against the resolutions of the Conference and the General Council, spreading calumnies of all sorts.30 We have no doubt that your mysterious silence is caused by your having received letters of this type. If this is the case, we want you to inform us of the accusations and insinuations expressed against us, as is your duty, so that we can refute them.

In any case, you cannot prolong this silence which is contrary to our General Rules which instruct you to send us regular reports. We ask for an immediate reply to this letter; if you do not reply to it, we shall have to conclude that your silence is deliberate and that you believe the calumnies which we have mentioned, without having the courage to inform us of them. And we shall have to proceed in that case in the manner which the interest of the International will dictate.

[^1]: First published in: Marx and Engels, Printed according to the rough Works, First Russian Edition, Vol. XXVI, manuscript Moscow, 1935

[^2]: Translated from the Spanish Published in English for the first time

[^3]: a London Conference.— Ed.





**[p. 54]**

Frederick Engels

TO THE EDITORS OF IL PROLETARIO ITALIANO51

Citizens,

In your issue No. 39 you publish an announcement by Turin workers which contains the following:

"We hereby publicly announce that the decision of the Grand Council in London to subordinate socialism to politics was communicated to us by the editors of the Proletario immediately after it was made and that the decision was not of an official nature since it was withdrawn by the Grand Council in view of the fact that many European associations would have rejected it outright, as would we."

This assertion obliges the General Council to declare:

1) that it never took any decision to subordinate socialism to politics,

2) that it therefore could not have withdrawn such a decision, 3) that no European or American association could reject such a decision, or has indeed rejected any other decision of the General Council.

The position of the General Council as regards the political action of the proletariat is sufficiently well defined. It is defined:

1) By the General Rules, in which the fourth paragraph of the preamble runs: "That the economical emancipation of the working classes is the great end to which every political movement ought to be subordinate as a means."3

2) By the text of the Inaugural Address of the Association (1864), this official and essential commentary on the Rules, which says:

[^1]: a See this volume, p. 3.— Ed.





**[p. 55]**

"The lords of land and the lords of capital will always use their political privileges for the defence and perpetuation of their economical monopolies. So far from promoting, they will continue to lay every possible impediment in the way of the emancipation of labour To conquer political power has therefore become the great duty of the working classes."3

3) By the resolution of the Congress of Lausanne (1867) to the effect that: "The social emancipation of the workmen is insepara- ble from their political emancipation."13

4) By Resolution IX of the London Conference (September 1871) which, in agreement with the above, reminds the members of the International that in the struggle of the working classes their economical movement and their political action are indissolubly united.c

The Council has always followed the line of conduct thus prescribed and will do so in future. It therefore declares the above communication made by persons unknown to the editors of the Proletario to be false and slanderous.

By order and in the name of the General Council

Secretary for Italy,

F. E.

P. S. I have just received La Révolution Sociale from Geneva which says that a small group in the Jura has rejected the decisions of the London Conference.32 The General Council has received no official communication as yet. As soon as it does, it will take the necessary measures.

November 29, 1871

[^1]: First published in: Marx and Engels, Printed according to the rough Works, First Russian Edition, Vol. XXVI, manuscript Moscow, 1935

[^2]: 1 ranslated rrom the Italian

[^3]: a See present edition, Vol. 20, p. 12.— Ed. b Procès-verbaux du Congrès de l'Association Internationale des Travailleurs réuni à Lausanne du 2 au 8 septembre 1867, La Chaux-de-Fonds, 1867, p. 19.— Ed.

[^4]: c See present edition, Vol. 22, pp. 426-27.— Ed.





**[p. 56]**

Frederick Engels

[CREDENTIALS FOR GIUSEPPE BORIANI]

November 30, 1871

Citizen Giuseppe Boriani is accepted member of the Interna- tional Working Men's Association and is authorised to admit new members and form new sections, on condition that he, and the members and sections newly admitted, recognise as obligatory the official documents of the Association, namely:

The General Rules and Administrative Regulations, The Inaugural Address, Resolutions of the Congresses, The resolutions of the London Conference of September 1871.

By order and in the name of the General Council

Secretary for Italy,

[^1]: Frederick Engels3

[^2]: First published in: Max Nettlau, Bakunin e Printed according to the manu- I'lnternazionale in Italia dal 1864 al 1872, script Geneva, 1928

[^3]: Translated from the Italian

[^4]: a The document bears the stamp "International Working Men's Association, 256, High Holborn, London.—W. C." and the oval seal "International Working Men's Association. General Council. London".— Ed.





**[p. 57]**

Frederick Engels

[THE POSITION OF THE DANISH MEMBERS OF THE INTERNATIONAL

ON THE AGRARIAN QUESTION

ENGELS' RECORD OF HIS REPORT AT THE GENERAL COUNCIL MEETING

OF DECEMBER 5, 1871]34

A report was received from Denmark referring chiefly to the condition of the agricultural labourers, and the agitation taking place amongst them. In Denmark there are but two official political parties—the "Doctrinaires" who represent the capitalist class, and the "Peasants Friends", as they call themselves, who represent the landed proprietors including the landed nobility, and the large peasant owner. They also pretend to represent the agricultural labourers, but as a matter of course nothing was ever done for them. The nobility are comparatively powerless in Denmark, so the large peasant holders form the bulk of the "Peasants Friends" party. The small farmers and labourers have hitherto been led by them, for though a few representatives of the latter class had been elected to Parliament, they acted under the influence of the large peasant holders, and were used as mere instruments by them.

The International aims at freeing the small peasants and agricultural labourers from this submission to the men who grow rich out of their labour, and is endeavouring to form them into an independent party—distinct from the so-called "Peasants Friends", but in intimate union with the working men of the towns. This new labourer's party starts with the basis laid down by the Congress of Basle, the Nationalisation of the Land.35

[^1]: "It is a truth more and more acknowledged," says Socialisten, our Copenhagen organ, "that the land is the common property of the people, that the people ought to cultivate it in common, enjoy its common produce, and hand over its excess (rent) to the state for common purposes."3

[^2]: a L. Pio, "Om vore Landboforhold", Socialisten, No. 17, November 4, 1871.— Ed.





**[p. 58]**

But as the land in Denmark is principally the property of a numerous class of Peasant Proprietors, each holding from 50 to 100 acres of good soil, the immediate expropriation of such a considerable body would be impossible. A plan has therefore been proposed, which offers many advantages to the holder as well as to the labourers, that is, to establish Agricultural Co-operative Societies consisting of peasant holders and labourers, for the common cultivation of the land, now cultivated by them individu- ally. The small and medium farms would thus be replaced by farms of 500 acres and upwards, and would allow of the introduction of agricultural implements, steam culture, and other modern improvements, which cannot be taken advantage of, when agriculture is conducted on a small scale. The necessary capital is to be advanced by the state on the security of the land belonging to each association; these propositions are necessarily of a very elementary character, but they appear to be well adapted to the intellect and capacity of the agricultural population, whilst the constant reference to the Nationalisation of the land as the ultimate end of the movement, will powerfully assist in breaking up that political subserviency in which the large landowners, with the help of the parson, the village schoolmaster, and the government official, have hitherto held the agricultural labourers.

[^1]: First published in The Eastern Post, Reproduced from the newspaper No. 167, December 9, 1871





**[p. 59]**

Frederick Engels

[ON THE POSITION OF THE INTERNATIONAL'S

SECTIONS IN EUROPEAN COUNTRIES]36

With regard to the Conference's resolution on politics,3 I am pleased to announce that the Spanish federation has fully accepted it, as can be seen from the latest issues of the Emancipacion of Madrid and the Federation of Barcelona (December 3).b The transformation of the International in Spain into a distinct and independent political party is now secure. We are doing wonder- fully in Spain: from 19 to 20,000 new members in under three months! In Denmark the International has only been in existence for three months and it has 2,000 members in the capital alone, a smaller city than Milan. The peasants are joining in large numbers too, and a big campaign is being prepared for the forthcoming elections, which promise to give us a strong and respectable representation in the Danish Parliament.

We are doing well in Germany and Holland. In France we have 26 newspapers and the sections are re-forming behind M. Thiers' back.

[^1]: Written between December 5 and 10, Printed according to the news- 1871 paper

[^2]: First published in La Plebe, No. 144, Translated from the Italian December 12, 1871 . . . . Published in English lor the hrst time

[^3]: a The reference is to Resolution IX ("Political Action of the Working Class") of the London Conference of the International (see present edition, Vol. 22, pp. 426-27).— Ed.

[^4]: b "La politica de la Internacional", La Emancipacion, No. 24, November 27, 1871; reprinted in La Federation, No. 120, December 3, 1871.— Ed.





**[p. 60]**

Frederick Engels

[DECLARATION SENT BY THE GENERAL COUNCIL

TO THE EDITORS OF ITALIAN NEWSPAPERS

CONCERNING MAZZINI'S ARTICLES

ABOUT THE INTERNATIONAL]37

INTERNATIONAL WORKING MEN'S ASSOCIATION, 256, High Holborn, London.—W.C. December 6, 1871

TO THE EDITOR OF LA ROMA DEL POPOLO

Dear Sir,

I count on you having the honesty to publish the enclosed declaration. If we are going to fight, let's fight honestly.

Yours most respectfully,

F. Engels, General Council Secretary for Italy

In number 38 of La Roma del Popolo Citizen Giuseppe Mazzini publishes the first of a series of articles entitled "Documents about the International".3 Mazzini notifies the public:

And these are the documents he intends publishing. He begins by giving two samples.

[^1]: INTERNATIONAL WORKING MEN'S ASSOCIATION

[^2]: TO THE EDITORS OF LA ROMA DEL POPOLO

[^3]: "I have gathered from all the sources I was able to refer to all its resolutions, all the spoken and written declarations of its influential members."

[^4]: I. "The abstention" (from political action) "went so far that some of the French founders [of the International] promised Louis Napoleon that they would renounce all political action provided he grant the workers I don't know what sum of material aid."

[^5]: a Published on November 16, 1871; the next two articles of the series appeared in La Roma del Popolo, Nos. 39 and 41, November 23 and December 7, 1871.— Ed.



II. "In a speech at the Berne Congress of the League of Peace and Freedom in 1868, Bakunin said: 'I want the equalisation of individuals and classes: without this an idea of justice is impossible and peace will not be established. The worker must no longer be deceived with lengthy speeches. He must be told what he ought to want, if he doesn't know himself. I'm a collectivism not a communist, and if I demand the abolition of inheritance rights, I do so to arrive at social equality more quickly'."

Whether Citizen Bakunin pronounced these words or not is quite immaterial for us. What is important for the General Council of the International Working Men's Association to establish is:

1) that these words, as Mazzini himself asserts, were spoken at a congress not of the International but of the bourgeois League of Peace and Freedom;

2) that the International congress, which met at Brussels in September 1868, disavowed this same congress of the League of Peace and Freedom by a special vote38;

3) that when Citizen Bakunin pronounced these words, he was not even a member of the International;

4) that the General Council has always opposed the repeated attempts to substitute for the broad programme of the Interna- tional Working Men's Association (which has made membership open to Bakunin's followers) Bakunin's narrow and sectarian programme, the adoption of which would automatically entail the exclusion of the vast majority of members of the International;

5) that the International can therefore in no way accept responsibility for the acts and declarations of Citizen Bakunin.

As for the other documents about the International, which Citizen Mazzini intends to publish shortly, the General Council hereby declares that it is only responsible for its official documents.

By order and in the name of the General Council of the International Working Men's Association,

Secretary for Italy,

Frederick Engels

[^1]: First published in La Plebe, No. 144, Printed according to La Roma del December 12, 1871; Gazzettino Rosa, Popolo checked with Engels' rough No. 345, December 12, 1871; La Roma manuscript del Popolo, No. 43, December 21, 1871

[^2]: Translated from the Italian





**[p. 62]**

Karl Marx

TO THE EDITOR OF THE EASTERN POST1

Sir,— In his last epistle to you, Mr. Charles Bradlaugh makes the report of the sitting of the General Council of December 12th,a—a sitting from which I was absent in consequence of illness—the pretext for discharging upon me his ruffianism. He says,

"I feel indebted to Karl Marx for his enmity."

My enmity to Mr. Charles Bradlaugh! Ever since the publication of the "Address on the Civil War in France", Mr. Bradlaugh's voice has chimed in with the world-wide chorus of slander against the "International" and myself. I treated him, like the other revilers, with contemptuous silence. This was more than the grotesque vanity of that huge self-idolater could stand. I "calum- niated" him because I took no notice of his calumnies. My silence drove him mad; in a public meeting he denounced me as a Bonapartist because, in the "Address on the Civil War", I had, forsooth, laid bare the historic circumstances that gave birth to the Second Empire. He now goes a step further and transforms me into a police agent of Bismarck. Poor man! He must needs show that the lessons he has recently received at Paris from the infamous Emile de Girardin and his clique are not lost upon him. For the present, I shall "betray him" to the German public by giving the greatest possible circulation to his epistle. If he be kind enough to

[^1]: a J. Hales, "International Working Men's Association", The Eastern Post, No. 168, December 16, 1871.— Ed.

[^2]: b C. Bradlaugh, "To the Editor of The Eastern Post", The Eastern Post, No. 168 (second edition), December 17, 1871.— Ed.





**[p. 63]**

clothe his libels in a more tangible shape, I shall "betray him" to an English law-court.

I am, Sir,

Yours obediently,

Karl Marx London, December 20th

First published in The Eastern Post, Reproduced from the newspaper No. 169, December 23, 1871

