---
Volume: 23
Document_Title: "15. F. Engels. To the Federal Council of the Spanish Region in Madrid "
Page_Range: "88-89"
---

# 15. F. Engels. To the Federal Council of the Spanish Region in Madrid 



**[p. 53]**

Frederick Engels

TO THE FEDERAL COUNCIL OF THE SPANISH REGION

IN MADRID

London, November 25, 1871

Since the return of Citizen Lorenzo from the last conference3

we have not had any news from you. I have written two letters to you; the last one, dated the eighth of this November, which was registered, asked you to write to us immediately to explain this long silence. We have not yet received any answer but we have heard that a small minority of members of the International, seeking to sow divisions in the ranks of the association, is conspiring against the resolutions of the Conference and the General Council, spreading calumnies of all sorts.30 We have no doubt that your mysterious silence is caused by your having received letters of this type. If this is the case, we want you to inform us of the accusations and insinuations expressed against us, as is your duty, so that we can refute them.

In any case, you cannot prolong this silence which is contrary to our General Rules which instruct you to send us regular reports. We ask for an immediate reply to this letter; if you do not reply to it, we shall have to conclude that your silence is deliberate and that you believe the calumnies which we have mentioned, without having the courage to inform us of them. And we shall have to proceed in that case in the manner which the interest of the International will dictate.

[^1]: First published in: Marx and Engels, Printed according to the rough Works, First Russian Edition, Vol. XXVI, manuscript Moscow, 1935

[^2]: Translated from the Spanish Published in English for the first time

[^3]: a London Conference.— Ed.



