---
Volume: 23
Document_Title: "16. F. Engels. To the Editors of II Proletario Italiano "
Page_Range: "89-91"
---

# 16. F. Engels. To the Editors of II Proletario Italiano 



**[p. 54]**

Frederick Engels

TO THE EDITORS OF IL PROLETARIO ITALIANO51

Citizens,

In your issue No. 39 you publish an announcement by Turin workers which contains the following:

"We hereby publicly announce that the decision of the Grand Council in London to subordinate socialism to politics was communicated to us by the editors of the Proletario immediately after it was made and that the decision was not of an official nature since it was withdrawn by the Grand Council in view of the fact that many European associations would have rejected it outright, as would we."

This assertion obliges the General Council to declare:

1) that it never took any decision to subordinate socialism to politics,

2) that it therefore could not have withdrawn such a decision, 3) that no European or American association could reject such a decision, or has indeed rejected any other decision of the General Council.

The position of the General Council as regards the political action of the proletariat is sufficiently well defined. It is defined:

1) By the General Rules, in which the fourth paragraph of the preamble runs: "That the economical emancipation of the working classes is the great end to which every political movement ought to be subordinate as a means."3

2) By the text of the Inaugural Address of the Association (1864), this official and essential commentary on the Rules, which says:

[^1]: a See this volume, p. 3.— Ed.





**[p. 55]**

"The lords of land and the lords of capital will always use their political privileges for the defence and perpetuation of their economical monopolies. So far from promoting, they will continue to lay every possible impediment in the way of the emancipation of labour To conquer political power has therefore become the great duty of the working classes."3

3) By the resolution of the Congress of Lausanne (1867) to the effect that: "The social emancipation of the workmen is insepara- ble from their political emancipation."13

4) By Resolution IX of the London Conference (September 1871) which, in agreement with the above, reminds the members of the International that in the struggle of the working classes their economical movement and their political action are indissolubly united.c

The Council has always followed the line of conduct thus prescribed and will do so in future. It therefore declares the above communication made by persons unknown to the editors of the Proletario to be false and slanderous.

By order and in the name of the General Council

Secretary for Italy,

F. E.

P. S. I have just received La Révolution Sociale from Geneva which says that a small group in the Jura has rejected the decisions of the London Conference.32 The General Council has received no official communication as yet. As soon as it does, it will take the necessary measures.

November 29, 1871

[^1]: First published in: Marx and Engels, Printed according to the rough Works, First Russian Edition, Vol. XXVI, manuscript Moscow, 1935

[^2]: 1 ranslated rrom the Italian

[^3]: a See present edition, Vol. 20, p. 12.— Ed. b Procès-verbaux du Congrès de l'Association Internationale des Travailleurs réuni à Lausanne du 2 au 8 septembre 1867, La Chaux-de-Fonds, 1867, p. 19.— Ed.

[^4]: c See present edition, Vol. 22, pp. 426-27.— Ed.



