---
Volume: 23
Document_Title: "19. F. Engels. On the Position of the International's Sections in European Countries "
Page_Range: "94-95"
---

# 19. F. Engels. On the Position of the International's Sections in European Countries 



**[p. 59]**

Frederick Engels

[ON THE POSITION OF THE INTERNATIONAL'S

SECTIONS IN EUROPEAN COUNTRIES]36

With regard to the Conference's resolution on politics,3 I am pleased to announce that the Spanish federation has fully accepted it, as can be seen from the latest issues of the Emancipacion of Madrid and the Federation of Barcelona (December 3).b The transformation of the International in Spain into a distinct and independent political party is now secure. We are doing wonder- fully in Spain: from 19 to 20,000 new members in under three months! In Denmark the International has only been in existence for three months and it has 2,000 members in the capital alone, a smaller city than Milan. The peasants are joining in large numbers too, and a big campaign is being prepared for the forthcoming elections, which promise to give us a strong and respectable representation in the Danish Parliament.

We are doing well in Germany and Holland. In France we have 26 newspapers and the sections are re-forming behind M. Thiers' back.

[^1]: Written between December 5 and 10, Printed according to the news- 1871 paper

[^2]: First published in La Plebe, No. 144, Translated from the Italian December 12, 1871 . . . . Published in English lor the hrst time

[^3]: a The reference is to Resolution IX ("Political Action of the Working Class") of the London Conference of the International (see present edition, Vol. 22, pp. 426-27).— Ed.

[^4]: b "La politica de la Internacional", La Emancipacion, No. 24, November 27, 1871; reprinted in La Federation, No. 120, December 3, 1871.— Ed.



