---
Volume: 23
Document_Title: "20. F. Engels. Declaration Sent by the General Council to the Editors of Italian Newspapers Concerning Mazzini's Articles about the International "
Page_Range: "95-97"
---

# 20. F. Engels. Declaration Sent by the General Council to the Editors of Italian Newspapers Concerning Mazzini's Articles about the International 



**[p. 60]**

Frederick Engels

[DECLARATION SENT BY THE GENERAL COUNCIL

TO THE EDITORS OF ITALIAN NEWSPAPERS

CONCERNING MAZZINI'S ARTICLES

ABOUT THE INTERNATIONAL]37

INTERNATIONAL WORKING MEN'S ASSOCIATION, 256, High Holborn, London.—W.C. December 6, 1871

TO THE EDITOR OF LA ROMA DEL POPOLO

Dear Sir,

I count on you having the honesty to publish the enclosed declaration. If we are going to fight, let's fight honestly.

Yours most respectfully,

F. Engels, General Council Secretary for Italy

In number 38 of La Roma del Popolo Citizen Giuseppe Mazzini publishes the first of a series of articles entitled "Documents about the International".3 Mazzini notifies the public:

And these are the documents he intends publishing. He begins by giving two samples.

[^1]: INTERNATIONAL WORKING MEN'S ASSOCIATION

[^2]: TO THE EDITORS OF LA ROMA DEL POPOLO

[^3]: "I have gathered from all the sources I was able to refer to all its resolutions, all the spoken and written declarations of its influential members."

[^4]: I. "The abstention" (from political action) "went so far that some of the French founders [of the International] promised Louis Napoleon that they would renounce all political action provided he grant the workers I don't know what sum of material aid."

[^5]: a Published on November 16, 1871; the next two articles of the series appeared in La Roma del Popolo, Nos. 39 and 41, November 23 and December 7, 1871.— Ed.



II. "In a speech at the Berne Congress of the League of Peace and Freedom in 1868, Bakunin said: 'I want the equalisation of individuals and classes: without this an idea of justice is impossible and peace will not be established. The worker must no longer be deceived with lengthy speeches. He must be told what he ought to want, if he doesn't know himself. I'm a collectivism not a communist, and if I demand the abolition of inheritance rights, I do so to arrive at social equality more quickly'."

Whether Citizen Bakunin pronounced these words or not is quite immaterial for us. What is important for the General Council of the International Working Men's Association to establish is:

1) that these words, as Mazzini himself asserts, were spoken at a congress not of the International but of the bourgeois League of Peace and Freedom;

2) that the International congress, which met at Brussels in September 1868, disavowed this same congress of the League of Peace and Freedom by a special vote38;

3) that when Citizen Bakunin pronounced these words, he was not even a member of the International;

4) that the General Council has always opposed the repeated attempts to substitute for the broad programme of the Interna- tional Working Men's Association (which has made membership open to Bakunin's followers) Bakunin's narrow and sectarian programme, the adoption of which would automatically entail the exclusion of the vast majority of members of the International;

5) that the International can therefore in no way accept responsibility for the acts and declarations of Citizen Bakunin.

As for the other documents about the International, which Citizen Mazzini intends to publish shortly, the General Council hereby declares that it is only responsible for its official documents.

By order and in the name of the General Council of the International Working Men's Association,

Secretary for Italy,

Frederick Engels

[^1]: First published in La Plebe, No. 144, Printed according to La Roma del December 12, 1871; Gazzettino Rosa, Popolo checked with Engels' rough No. 345, December 12, 1871; La Roma manuscript del Popolo, No. 43, December 21, 1871

[^2]: Translated from the Italian



