---
Volume: 23
Document_Title: "24. K. Marx. To the Editor of The Eastern Post "
Page_Range: "107-109"
---

# 24. K. Marx. To the Editor of The Eastern Post 



**[p. 72]**

Karl Marx

TO THE EDITOR OF THE EASTERN POST*

Sir,— In his immortal poem, Dante says that one of the most cruel tortures of an exile is the necessity of having to rub elbows with all sorts of people.b I have deeply felt the truth of his complaint when being forced to enter for a moment into a public controversy with men like Messrs. Charles Bradlaugh and Co. I shall, however, no longer allow him to turn the quarrel he has fastened upon me into the cheap and convenient means of advertising himself abroad.

I thereupon challenged him to publish such facts as might have lent him the slightest pretext for a calumny as ridiculous as it is infamous. I did so in order, not to justify myself, but to expose him. With the low cunning of a solicitor's clerk he tries to escape this liability by inviting me to a "Court of Honour".

Does he really fancy that a Bradlaugh, or the editors of the Paris demi-monde Press, or those of the Bismarckian papers at Berlin, or the Tages-Presse at Vienna, or the Criminal-Zeitung at New York, or the Moscow Gazette,6 have only to slander me, in order to make me amenable to clear my public character, and even to do so before a "Council of Honour", of which the friends of those "honourable" gentlemen must form part?

[^1]: He published against me an accusation which, if published in Germany, would have made him the laughing-stock of all parties.0

[^2]: a The letter is provided with the editor's headline: "Dr. Karl Marx and Mr. Bradlaugh".— Ed.

[^3]: b Dante, The Divine Comedy, Paradise, Canto XVII.— Ed. c See this volume, p. 71.— Ed. d Moc Koec Kin eÈdo Mocmu.—Ed.





**[p. 73]**

I am, Sir,

Yours obediently,

Karl Marx

Written before January 28, 1872 Reproduced from the newspaper

First published in The Eastern Post, No. 174, January 28 (second edition), 1872

