---
Volume: 23
Document_Title: "25. F. Engels. Letter to the Editors of the Gazzettino Rosa "
Page_Range: "109-111"
---

# 25. F. Engels. Letter to the Editors of the Gazzettino Rosa 



**[p. 74]**

Frederick Engels

[LETTER TO THE EDITORS OF THE GAZZETTINO ROSA]4$

INTERNATIONAL WORKING MEN'S ASSOCIATION 256, High Holborn, London.—W. C. London, February 7

TO THE CITIZEN EDITOR OF THE GAZZETTINO ROSA

Citizen,

For several months now, the Libero Pensiero of Florence has not ceased to attack the International, as if the great workers' association could get jealous of the society of rationalist prebendaries promoted by this newspaper. Up till now it seem- ed superfluous for me to reply to these attacks, but when the aforementioned publication sinks to the level of spreading rumours of a Bismarckian sort in Italy against the International and its General Council, it is time to protest. I have therefore sent the following letter to the Libero Pensiero, and I should like you to publish it in the Gazzettino Rosa as well.

Fraternal greetings,

F. Engels,

General Council Secretary for Italy

Dear Sir,

Issue number 1 of the Libero Pensiero, January 4, 1872, contains an article, "L'Internazionale ed il Consiglio supremo di Londra", to which I must submit a brief reply.

It says in the article:

I do not claim and have never claimed to represent Italy. I have the honour of being, in the General Council, the secretary with

[^1]: TO MR. LUIGI STEFANONI, EDITOR OF IL LIBERO PENSIERO

[^2]: "We should like to ask what mandate Mr. Engels has to represent Italy."





**[p. 75]**

special responsibility for corresponding with Italy, a capacity in which it is my duty to represent the Council, not Italy.

The article then gives translations of several items of correspon- dence from London taken from the Neuer Social-Demokrat of Berlin, items which are full of the most infamous slanders against the General Council and the whole International. To these I shall not reply. One does not engage in dispute with that newspaper. It is well known throughout Germany what the Neuer Social-Demokrat is: a newspaper funded by Bismarck, the organ of Prussian governmental socialism. If you require more detailed information about this paper, write to your correspondent Liebknecht in Leipzig and you will get all you want. Allow me merely to add that if you are keen to have such slanders against the International you will find them in abundance in the Figaro, Gaulois, Petit-Journal and the other newspapers of the Parisian demi-monde, in the London Standard, the Journal de Genève, the Vienna Tages-Presse and the Moscow Gazette* authorities which will relieve you of having to quote this poor devil Schneider.

In an editorial note it says:

"Perhaps this alludes to the communist secret society set up by Karl Marx in Cologne in 1850; when it was uncovered, as usual, many poor devils fell into the clutches of the Prussian police, while the principal organisers fled in safety to London."

Whoever told you this was lying. I was a member of this society.44 It was founded neither by Marx, nor in 1850, nor in Cologne. It was already in existence at least ten years previously. Marx and I had already been in England for a year, exiles driven out by the Prussian government, when the Cologne section, through its own imprudence, fell into police hands. If you want further information you can ask Mr. Becker, mayor of Dortmund and member of the Prussian and German parliaments; Klein, doctor and municipal councillor in Cologne; Bürgers, editor of the

Wiesbadener Zeitung; Lessner, tailor and member of the General Council of the International in London. All of these were sentenced in this trial against the communists.45

I beg you to publish this correction in your next issue.

Yours sincerely,

Frederick Engels

[^1]: First published in Gazzettino Rosa, No. 50, Printed according to the Gazzettino February 20, 1872 and in II Libero Pen- Rosa siero, February 22, 1872 Translated from the Italian

[^2]: a Moc Koeaiia ebdo Mocmu.—Ed.



