---
Volume: 23
Document_Title: "26. F. Engels. To the Section of Commercial Employees in Barcelona '. "
Page_Range: "111-112"
---

# 26. F. Engels. To the Section of Commercial Employees in Barcelona '. 



**[p. 76]**

Frederick Engels

TO THE SECTION OF COMMERCIAL EMPLOYEES

IN BARCELONA46

Citizens,3

In reply to your letter of January 23, I regret that I cannot give you the addresses of the sections of your occupation because no such sections are known to us. What you say, relating to your country, about commercial employees being very opposed to proletarian progress also applies to other countries: this class generally consists of lackeys of the bourgeoisie who expect sooner or later to become bourgeois themselves. There are many honourable exceptions; but I believe that you are the first to succeed in forming a section of your profession.

If you also want to send me about twenty copies of your circular, I will disseminate them in the big commercial cities of Europe and America and it will serve well for propaganda.

Greetings and Social Revolution.

[^1]: Written on February 16, 1872

[^2]: First published in: Marx and Engels,

[^3]: Works, Second Russian Edition, Vol. 33, Moscow, 1964

[^4]: Printed according to the rough manuscript

[^5]: Translated from the Spanish

[^6]: Published in English for the first time

[^7]: a In the rough manuscript there is a note in Engels' hand: "Barcelona 23 January 72. Section of commercial employees. Answered. 16 February. The reply enclosed."—Ed.



