---
Volume: 23
Document_Title: "I "
Page_Range: "114-119"
---

# I 



**[p. 79]**

Karl Marx and Frederick Engels

FICTITIOUS SPLITS IN THE INTERNATIONAL

PRIVATE CIRCULAR FROM THE GENERAL COUNCIL OF THE INTERNATIONAL WORKING MEN'S ASSOCIATION

Until now the General Council has completely refrained from any interference in the International's internal conflicts and has never replied publicly to the overt attacks launched against it during more than two years by some members of the Associa- tion.

But if the persistent efforts of certain meddlers to deliberately maintain confusion between the International and a society3 which has been hostile to it since its origin allowed the General Council to maintain this reserve, the support which European reaction finds in the scandals provoked by that society at a time when the International is undergoing the most serious crisis since its foundation obliges it to present a historical review of all these intrigues.

I

After the fall of the Paris Commune, the General Council's first act was to publish its Address on The Civil War in Franceh in which it came out in support of all the Commune's acts which, at the moment, served the bourgeoisie, the press and the governments of Europe as an excuse to heap the most vile slander on the vanquished Parisians. A part of the working class still failed to realise that their cause was lost. The Council came to understand

[^1]: a International Alliance of Socialist Democracy.— Ed. b K. Marx, The Civil War in France.—Ed.

[^2]: 5*





**[p. 80]**

the fact, among other things, by the resignation of two of its members, Citizens Odger and Lucraft, who repudiated all support of the Address. It may be said that the unity of views among the working class regarding the Paris events dates from the publica- tion of the Address in all the civilised countries.

On the other hand, the International found a very powerful means of propaganda in the bourgeois press and particularly in the leading English newspapers, which the Address forced fo engage in the polemic kept going by the General Council's replies.49

The arrival in London of numerous refugees from the Commune made it necessary for the General Council to constitute itself as a Relief Committee and for more than eight months perform this function, which lay quite outside its regular duties.50

It goes without saying that the vanquished and exiles from the Commune had hothing to hope for from the bourgeoisie. As for the working class, the appeals for aid came at a difficult moment. Switzerland and Belgium had already received their contingent of refugees whom they had either to support or send on to London. The funds collected in Germany, Austria and Spain were sent to Switzerland. In England, the big fight for the nine-hour working day, the decisive battle of which was fought at Newcastle,51 had exhausted both the workers' individual contributions and the funds set up by the Trades Unions, which could be used, incidentally, according to the rules, only for labour conflicts. Meanwhile, by tireless work and active correspondence, the Council succeeded in raising, bit by bit, a certain amount of money, which it distributed weekly. The American workers responded more generously to its appeal. It is unfortunate that the Council could not avail itself of the millions which the ter- rified bourgeoisie believed the International to have amassed in its safes!

After May 1871, some of the Commune's refugees were asked to join the Council,52 in which, as a result of the war, the French side was no longer represented. Among the new members were some old Internationals and a minority composed of men known for their revolutionary energy whose election was an act of homage to the Paris Commune.

The violent measures taken by the Bonapartist government against the International had prevented the holding of the Congress at Paris, which had been provided for by a resolution of

[^1]: Along with all these preoccupations, the Council had to prepare for the Conference of Delegates that it had just called.53



LES

PRÉTENDUES SCISSIONS

DANS

L'INTERNATIONALE

CIRCULAIRE PRIVÉE

DU

C O N S E I L G É I V É R A

DE

L ASSOCIATION IHTIUATIONALB DIS TBAVAILLBUBS

GENÈVE

[^1]: IMPRIMERIE COOPÉRATIVE, RUE DU CONSEIL-GÉNÉRAL; 8

[^2]: 1872

[^3]: Title page of Marx's and Engels' pamphlet Fictitious Splits in the International







**[p. 83]**

As soon as the political situation permitted, the General Council called a private Conference, acting on the precedents of the 1865 Conference56 and the private administrative meetings of each Congress. A public Congress was impossible and could only have resulted in the continental delegates being denounced at a moment when European reaction was celebrating its orgies; when Jules Favre was demanding from all governments, even the British, the extradition of refugees as common criminals; when Dufaure was proposing to the Rural Assembly a law banning the International,57 a hypocritical counterfeit of which was later presented by Malou to the Belgians; when, in Switzerland, a Commune refugeeb was put under preventative arrest while awaiting the federal government's decision on the extradition order; when hunting down members of the International was the ostensible basis for an alliance between Beust and Bismarck, whose anti-International clause Victor Emmanuel was quick to adopt; when the Spanish Government, putting itself entirely at the disposal of the butchers of Versailles, was forcing the Madrid Federal Council to seek refuge in Portugal58; at a time, lastly, when the International's prime duty was to strengthen its organisation and to accept the gauntlet thrown down by the governments.

All sections in regular contact with the General Council were invited in good time to the Conference, which, even though it was not to be a public meeting, nevertheless faced serious difficulties. In view of the internal situation France was, of course, unable to elect any delegates. In Italy, the only organised section at the time

[^1]: a Rules of the International Working Men's Association. Founded September 28th, 1864, London [1867].— Ed.

[^2]: b A. E. Razoua.— Ed.



