---
Volume: 23
Document_Title: "III "
Page_Range: "129-137"
---

# III 



**[p. 94]**

relation to Geneva, as the Romance Federal Committee, and "that it was up to the General Congress to judge this affair". On September 4, the same Committee challenged the Conference's competence, even though it had been the first to call for its convocation. The Conference could have replied by questioning the competence of the Paris Federal Committee which the Chaux-de-Fonds Committee had requested before the siege of Paris to deliberate on the Swiss conflict.73 But it confined itself to the General Council^ decision of June 28, 1870 (see the motives expounded in the Egalité of Geneva, October 21, 187174).

Ill

The presence in Switzerland of some of the outlawed French who had found refuge there put some life back into the Alliance.

The Geneva members of the International did all they could for the emigrants. They came to their aid right from the beginning, initiated a wide campaign and prevented the Swiss authorities from serving an extradition order on the refugees as demanded by the Versailles government. Several risked the grave danger by going to France to help the refugees to gain the frontier. Imagine the surprise of the Geneva workers when they saw several of the ringleaders such as B. Malon* immediately come to an under- standing with the Alliance people and with the help of N. Zhukovsky, ex-Secretary of the Alliance, try to found at Geneva, outside of the Romance Federation, the new "Section of Propaganda and Revolutionary Socialist Action".75 In the first article of its rules it

[^1]: * Do the friends of B. Malon, who have been advertising him in a stereotyped way for the last three months as the founder of the International, who have called his book [La troisième défaite du prolétariat français] the only independent work on the Commune, know the attitude taken by this assistant of the Mayor of Batignolles on the eve of the February elections? At that time, B. Malon, who did not yet foresee the Commune and saw nothing more than the success of his election to the Assembly, plotted to get himself put on the list of the four committees as a member of the International. To these ends he insolently denied the existence of the Paris Federal Council and submitted to the committees the list of a section founded by himself at Batignolles as coming from the entire Association.— Later, on March 19, he insulted in a public document the leaders of the great Revolution accomplished on the eve.— Today, this anarchist from top to toe prints or has printed what he was saying a year ago to the four committees: I am the International! B. Malon has hit on a way of parodying Louis XIV and Perron the chocolate manufacturer at one and the same time. It was Perron who declared that his chocolate was the only edible chocolate!





**[p. 95]**

In other words, it reserves for itself full freedom to continue the work of the Alliance.

In a letter from Malon, of October 20, 1871, this new section for the third time asked the General Council for admission into the International. Conforming to Resolution V of the Basle Congress, the Council consulted the Geneva Federal Committee which vigorously protested against the Council recognising this new "seedbed of intrigues and dissentions". The Council acted, in fact, in a rather "authoritarian" manner so as not to bind the whole Federation to the will of B. Malon and N. Zhukovsky, the Alliance's ex-Secretary.

The Solidarité having gone out of business, the new Alliance supporters founded the Révolution Sociale under the supreme management of Madame André Léo who had just said at the Lausanne Peace Congress that

"Raoul Rigault and Ferré were the two sinister figures of the Commune who, up till then" (up till the execution of the hostages), "had not stopped calling for bloody measures, albeit always in vain".a

From its very first issue, the newspaper hastened to put itself on the same level as the Figaro, Gaulois, Paris-Journal and other disreputable sheets, reproducing the mud they were throwing at the General Council. It thought the moment opportune to fan the flames of national hatred, even within the International. It called the General Council a German committee led by a Bismarckian brain.*

After having definitely established that certain General Council members could not boast of being "Gaub first and foremost" the

Révolution Sociale could find nothing better than to take up the second slogan put in circulation by the European police and to denounce the Council's authoritarianism.

What, then, were the facts on which this childish rubbish rested? The General Council had let the Alliance die a natural death and,

[^1]: * Here is the national composition of the Council: 20 Englishmen, 15 French, 7 Germans (of whom five are foundation members of the International), 2 Swiss, 2 Hungarians, 1 Pole, 1 Belgian, 1 Irishman, 1 Dane and 1 Italian.

[^2]: a A. Léo, La guerre sociale. Discours prononcé au Congrès de la Paix à Lausanne (1871), Neuchâtel, 1871, p. 7.— Ed.





**[p. 96]**

Apart from these "authoritarian" acts, what use did the General Council make, between October 1869 and October 1871, of the fairly extensive powers that the Basle Congress had conferred upon it?

1) On February 8, 1870, the Paris "Society of Positivist Proletarians" applied to the General Council for admission. The Council replied that the principles of the positivists, the part of the society's special rules concerning capital, were in flagrant con- tradiction with the preamble of the General Rules; that the society had therefore to drop them and join the International not as "positivists" but as "proletarians", while remaining free to reconcile their theoretical ideas with the Association's general principles. Realising the justness of this decision, the section joined the International.

2) At Lyons, there was a split between the 1865 section and a recently-formed section in which, amidst honest workers, the Alliance was represented by Albert Richard and Gaspard Blanc. As had been done in similar cases, the judgment of a court of arbitration, formed in Switzerland, was turned down. On February 15, 1870, the recently-formed section, besides requesting the General Council to resolve the conflict by virtue of Resolution VII of the Basle Congress, sent it a ready-made resolution excluding and branding the members of the 1865 section, which was to be signed and sent back by return mail. The Council condemned this unprecedented procedure and demanded that the evidence be produced. In reply to the same request, the 1865 section said that the accusatory documents against Albert Richard, which had been submitted to the court of arbitration, had been seized by Bakunin, who refused to give them up. Consequently, it could not completely satisfy the desires of the General Council. The Council's decision on the affair, dated March 8, met with no ob- jection from either side.77

3) The French branch in London, which had admitted people of a more than dubious character, had been gradually trans- formed into a sleeping partners concern run by Mr. Félix Pyat. He used it to organise damaging demonstrations calling for the assassination of Louis Bonaparte, etc., and to spread his absurd manifestos in France under cover of the International. The



**[p. 97]**

démarche was proved by the declaration of the Paris Federal Committee, published in the same newspapers, and by that of the Paris members of the International during their trial, both declarations referring to the Council's resolution. The French branch disappeared at the outbreak of the war, but like the Alliance in Switzerland, it was to reappear in London with new allies and under other names.

During the last days of the Conference, a "French Section of 1871", about 35 members strong, was formed in London among the Commune refugees. The first "authoritarian" act of the General Council was to publicly denounce the secretary of this section, Gustave Durand, as a French police spy.c The documents in our possession prove the intention of the police to assist Durand, firstly, to attend the Conference and then to secure for him membership in the General Council. Since the rules of the new section directed its members not to "accept any delegation to the General Council other than that of their section", Citizens Theisz and Bastelica withdrew from the Council.

On October 17, the section delegated to the Council two of its members, holding imperative mandates; one was none other than Mr. Chautard, ex-member of the artillery committee. The Council refused to admit them prior to an examination of the rules of the

[^1]: a K. Marx, Resolution of the General Council on Félix Pyat's Provocative Behaviour.—Ed.

[^2]: b K. Marx, Draft Resolution of the General Council on the "French Federal Section in London".—Ed.

[^3]: c See this volume, p. 21.— Ed.





**[p. 98]**

"In order to be admitted as member of the section, a person must justify his means of existence, present guarantees of morality, etc."

In its resolution of October 17, 187l,a the Council proposed deleting the words "justify his means of existence".

"In dubious cases," said the Council, "a section may well take information about means of existence as 'guarantee of morality', while in other cases, like those of the refugees, workers on strike, etc., absence of means of existence may well be a guarantee of morality. But to ask candidates to justify their means of existence as a general condition to be admitted to the International, would be a bourgeois innovation contrary to the spirit and letter of the General Rules." The section replied:

"The General Rules make the sections responsible for the morality of their members and, as a consequence, recognise the right of sections to demand the guarantees they think necessary."

To this the General Council replied, November 7b: "On this argument, a section of the International founded by TEETOTALLERS (société de tempérance) could include in its own rules this type of article: To be admitted as member of the section, a person must swear to abstain from all alcoholic drinks. In a word, the most absurd and most incongruous conditions of admittance into the International could be imposed by sections' rules, always on the pretext that they intend, in this way, to be assured of the morality of their members 'The means of existence of strikers,' adds the French Section of 1871, 'consist of the strike fund.' This might be answered by saying, first, that this fund is often fictitious Moreover, official English questionnaires have proved that the majority of English workers is forced—by strikes or unemploy- ment, by insufficient wages or terms of payment, as well as many other causes—to resort incessantly to pawnshops or to borrowing. These are means of existence about which one cannot demand information without interfering in an unqualified manner in a

[^1]: * A little later, this Chautard whom they had wanted to put on the General Council was expelled from his section as an agent of Thiers' police. He was accused by the same people who had judged him worthy among all others of representing them on the General Council.

[^2]: a See this volume, pp. 24-27.— Ed. »> Cf. ibid., pp. 37-42.— Ed.





**[p. 99]**

person's private life. There are thus two alternatives: either the section is only to seek guarantees of morality through means of existence, in which case the General Council's proposal serves the purpose Or the section, in Article 2 of its rules, intentionally says that the members have to provide information as to their means of existence as a condition of admission, over and above the guarantees of morality, in which case the Council affirms that it is a bourgeois innovation, contrary to the letter and spirit of the General Rules."

Article 11 of their rules states:

"One or several delegates shall be sent to the General Council."

The Council asked for this article to be deleted "because the International's General Rules do not recognise any right of the sections to send delegates to the General Council". "The General Rules," it added, "recognise only two ways of election for General Council members: either their election by the Congress, or their co-option by the General Council"

It is quite true that the different sections existing in London had been invited to send delegates to the General Council which, so as not to violate the General Rules, has always proceeded in the following manner: it has first determined the number of delegates to be sent by each section, reserving itself the right to accept or refuse them depending on whether it considered them able to fulfil the general functions assigned to them. These delegates became members of the General Council not by virtue of their nomination by their sections, but by virtue of the right that the Rules accord the Council to co-opt new members. Having operated up to the decision taken by the last Conference both as the International Association's General Council and as the Central Council for England, the London Council thought it expedient to admit, besides the members that it co-opted directly, also members nominated initially by their respective sections. It would be a serious mistake to identify the General Council's electoral proce- dure with that of the Paris Federal Council which was not even a national Council nominated by a national Congress like, for example, the Brussels Federal Council or that of Madrid. The Paris Federal Council was only a delegation of the Paris sections The General Council's electoral procedure is defined in the General Rules and its members would not accept any other imperative mandate than that of the Rules and General Regula- tions If we take into consideration the article that precedes it, Article 11 means nothing else but a complete change of the



**[p. 100]**

Moreover, the Council declared that it would admit two delegates from the section on the same conditions as those of the other London sections.

The "1871 section", far from being satisfied with this reply, published on December 14 a "declaration"3 signed by all its members, including the new secretary who was shortly expelled as a scoundrel from the refugee society. According to this declara- tion, the General Council, by refusing to usurp the legislative functions, was accused of "a gross distortion of the social idea".

Here are some samples of the good faith displayed in the drawing up of this document.

and approved unanimously, only referred to the German mem- bers of the International who paid and are still paying for their anti-chauvinist behaviour during the war by imprisonment. Fur- thermore, in order to avoid any possible misinterpretation, the Secretary of the General Council for France had just explained the true sense of the resolution in a letter published by the journals Qui Vive!,6 Constitution, Radical, Emancipation, Europe*etc. Nonetheless, eight days later, on November 20, 1871, fifteen members of the French Section of 1871 inserted in Qui Vive! a "protest" full of abuse against the German workers and denounc-

[^1]: The London Conference approved the conduct of the German workers during the war.79 It was apparent that this resolution, proposed by a Swiss delegate,b seconded by a Belgian delegate0

[^2]: a Déclaration de la Section française fédéraliste de 1871, siégeant à Londres, London, 1871. Although it was refused admission by the General Council the section put the words "International Working Men's Association" before the title of the pamphlet. E. Navarre signed the declaration as the section's secretary.— Ed.

[^3]: b Nikolai Utin.— Ed. c Alfred Herman.— Ed. d A. Serraillier, "Au citoyen Vermersch, rédacteur du Qui Vive!", Qui Vive!, No. 39, November 16, 1871.— Ed.

[^4]: e Presumably Courrier de l'Europe.—Ed.





**[p. 101]**

To show "the dangerous slope of authoritarianism down which the General Council was slipping" the declaration cited "the publication by the very same General Council of an official edition of the General Rules as revised by it".

One glance at the new edition of the Rules is enough to see that each new article has, in the appendix, reference to the original sources establishing its authenticity3! As for the words "official edition", the first Congress of the International decided that "the official and obligatory text of the Rules and Regulations would be published by the General Council" (see Congrès ouvrier de l'Association Internationale des Travailleurs, tenu à Genève du 3 au 8 septembre 1866, page 27, note).

Naturally enough, the 1871 section was in continuous contact with the dissidents of Geneva and Neuchâtel. One Chalain, a member who had shown more energy in attacking the General Council than he had ever shown in defending the Commune, was unexpectedly rehabilitated by B. Malon, who quite recently level- led very grave charges against him in a letter to a Council mem- ber. The French Section of 1871, however, had scarcely launched its declaration when civil war exploded in its ranks. First Theisz, Avrial and Camélinat withdrew. Thereafter the section broke up into several small groups, one of which was led by Mr. Pierre Vesinier, expelled from the General Council for his slander against Varlin and others, and then cast out of the International by the Belgian Commission appointed by the Brussels Congress of 1868. Another of these groups was founded by B. Landeck who had been relieved by the sudden flight of police prefect Piétri, on September 4, of his obligation,

On the other hand, the mass of French refugees in London have formed a section which is in complete harmony with the General Council.

[^1]: "scrupulously fulfilled, not to engage any more in political affairs, nor in the International in France!" (see Troisième procès de l'Association Internationale des Travailleurs de Paris, 1870, p. 4).

[^2]: a See this volume, pp. 3-20.— Ed.



