---
Volume: 23
Document_Title: "VII "
Page_Range: "154-159"
---

# VII 



**[p. 119]**

The Sonvillier conclave requests all sections of the International, in a pathetic appeal, to insist on the urgency of an immediate Congress "to curb the consistent encroachments of the London Council", according to Citizens Malon and Lefrançais, but actually to replace the International with the Alliance. This appeal received such an encouraging response that they immediately set about falsifying a resolution voted at the last Belgian Congress. Their official organ (Révolution Sociale, January 4, 1872) writes as follows:

"Lastly, which is even more important, the Belgian sections met at the Congress of Brussels on December 24 and 25 and voted unanimously for a resolution identical with that of the Sonvillier Congress, on the urgency of convening a General Congress."

It is important to note that the Belgian Congress voted the very opposite. It charged the Belgian Congress, which was not due to meet until the following June, to draft new General Rules for submission to the next Congress of the International.88

In accordance with the will of the vast majority of members of the International, the General Council is to convene the annual Congress only in September 1872.

VII

Some weeks after the Conference, Messrs. Albert Richard and Gaspard Blanc, the most influential and most ardent members of the Alliance, arrived in London. They came to recruit, among the French refugees, aides willing to work for the restoration of the Empire, which, according to them, was the only way to rid themselves of Thiers and to avoid being left destitute. The General Council warned all concerned, including the Brussels Federal Council, of their Bonapartist plots.

In January 1872, they dropped their mask by publishing a pamphlet entitled L'Empire et la France nouvelle. Appel du



**[p. 120]**

With the modesty characteristic of the charlatans of the Alliance, they declaim the following humbug:

"We who have built up the great army of the French proletariat we, the most influential leaders of the International in France,* happily, we have not been shot, and we are here to flaunt in their face (to wit: ambitious parliamentarians, smug republicans, sham democrats of all sorts) the banner under which we are fighting, and despite the slander, threats, and all manner of attacks that await us, to hurl at an amazed Europe the cry that comes from the very heart of our conscience and that will soon resound in the hearts of all Frenchmen: 'Long live the Emperor V

"Napoleon III, disgraced and scorned, must be splendidly reinstated";

and Messrs. Albert Richard and Gaspard Blanc, paid out of the secret funds of Invasion III, are specially charged with this restoration.

Incidentally, they confess:

"It is the normal evolution of our ideas that has made us imperialists."

Here is a confession that should give pleasure to their co-religionists of the Alliance. As in the heyday of the Solidarité, A. Richard and G. Blanc mouth again the old clichés regarding "abstention from politics" which, on the principle of their "normal evolution", can become a reality only under the most absolute despotism, with the workers abstaining from any meddling in politics, much like the prisoner abstaining from a walk in the sun.

[^1]: * Under the heading "Au Pilori!", L'Égalité (of Geneva), February 15, 1872, had this to say:

[^2]: "The day has not yet come to describe the story of the defeat of the movement for the Commune in the South of France; but what we can announce today, we, most of whom witnessed the deplorable defeat of the Lyons insurrection on April 30,89 is that one of the reasons for the insurrection's failure was the cowardice, the treachery and the thievery of G. Blanc, who intruded everywhere carrying out the orders of A. Richard, who kept in the shade.

[^3]: "By their carefully prepared manoeuvres these rascals intentionally compro- mised many of those who took part in the preparatory work of the insurrectionary Committees.

[^4]: "Further, these traitors managed to discredit the International at Lyons to such an extent that by the time of the Paris Revolution the International was regarded by the Lyons workers with the greatest distrust. Hence the total absence of organisation, hence the failure of the insurrection, a failure which was bound to result in the fall of the Commune which was left to rely on its own isolated forces! It is only since this bloody lesson that our propaganda has been able to rally the Lyons workers around the flag of the International.

[^5]: "Albert Richard was the pet and prophet of Bakunin and company."





**[p. 121]**

Perhaps this is the voice of the great hierophant,3 who has taken upon himself, ever since the Alliance's foundation, in his capacity as a Russian, the special task of representing the Latin races? Or do we have here the "true missionaries" of the Révolution Sociale (November 2, 1871) denouncing

"the backward march which the German and Bismarckian minds endeavour to foist upon the International"?

Fortunately, however, the true tradition has survived, and Messrs. Albert Richard and Gaspard Blanc have not been shot! Thus, their own "contribution" consists in "setting a new course" for the International in central and southern France to follow, by an effort to found Bonapartist sections, ipso facto basically "autonomous".

As for the constitution of the proletariat as a political party, as recommended by the London Conference,

these gentlemen base their hopes on anarchy within the Inter- national.

Anarchy, then, is the great war-horse of their master Bakunin, who has taken nothing from the socialist systems except a set of labels. All socialists see anarchy as the following programme: once the aim of the proletarian movement, i.e., abolition of classes, is attained, the power of the State, which serves to keep the great majority of producers in bondage to a very small exploiter minority, disappears, and the functions of government become simple administrative functions. The Alliance reverses the whole process. It proclaims anarchy in proletarian ranks as the most infallible means of breaking the powerful concentration of social

[^1]: " after the restoration of the Empire, we"—Richard and Blanc—"shall quickly deal not only with the socialist theories but also with any attempts to implement them through revolutionary organisation of the masses".

[^2]: Briefly, exploiting the great "autonomy principle of the sections" which "constitutes the real strength of the International especially in the Latin countries (Révolution Sociale, January 4)",

[^3]: a Mikhail Bakunin.— Ed.





**[p. 122]**

General Council:

R. Applegarth, Antoine Arnaud, M. J. Boon, F. Bradnick, G. H. Buttery, F. Cournet, Delahaye, Eugene Dupont, W. Haies, Hurliman, Jules Johannard, Harriet Law, F. Lessner, Lochner, Mar- guerittes, Constant Martin, Zévy Maurice, Henry Mayo, George Milner, Charles Murray, Pfänder, Vitale Regis, J. Roz- wadowski, John Roach, Rühl, G. Ranvier, Sadler, Cowell Stepney, Alf. Taylor, W. Townshend, Ed. Vaillant, John Wes- ton, F. J. Yarrow.

Corresponding Secretaries:

Karl Marx, Germany and Russia; Led Frankel, Austria and Hungary; A. Her- man, Belgium; Th. Mottershead, Den- mark; /. G. Eccarius, United States; Le Moussu, French sections in the United States; Aug. Serraillier, France; Charles Rochat, Holland; /. P. Mac Don- nell, Ireland; Fred. Engels, Italy and Spain; Walery Wroblewski, Poland; H. Jung, Switzerland.

[^1]: * In the report on the Dufaure law, Sacase, the Rural Assembly deputy, attacks above all the International's "organisation". He positively hates that organisation. After having verified "the mounting popularity of this formidable Association", he goes on to say: "This Association rejects the shady practices of the sects that preceded it. Its organisation was created and modified quite openly. Because of the power of this organisation it has steadily extended its sphere of activity and influence. It is expanding throughout the world." Then he gives a "short description of the organisation" and concludes: "Such is, in its wise unity the plan of this vast organisation. Its strength lies in its very conception. It also rests in its numerous adherents, who are linked by their common activities, and, lastly, in the invincible impulse which drives them to action."





**[p. 123]**

33, Rathbone Place, W. London, March 5, 1872

Written between mid-January and March Printed according to the pamphlet 5, 1872

Translated from the French First published as a pamphlet in Geneva in 1872

