---
Volume: 23
Document_Title: "29. K. Marx. Resolutions on the Split in the United States' Federation Passed by the General Council of the I. W. A. in Its Sittings of 5th and 12th March, 1872 "
Page_Range: "159-162"
---

# 29. K. Marx. Resolutions on the Split in the United States' Federation Passed by the General Council of the I. W. A. in Its Sittings of 5th and 12th March, 1872 



**[p. 124]**

Karl Marx

RESOLUTIONS ON THE SPLIT IN THE UNITED STATES' FEDERATION PASSED BY THE GENERAL COUNCIL OF THE I.W.A. IN ITS SITTINGS OF 5TH AND 12TH MARCH, 187290

I. THE TWO FEDERAL COUNCILS

Art. 1. Considering, that Central Councils are but instituted in order to secure, in every country, to "the Working Men's movement the power of union and combination" (Art. 7 of the General Rules)3; that, consequently, the existence of two rival Central Councils for the same federation is an open infraction of the General Rules;

The General Council calls upon the two provisional Federal Councils at New York to re-unite and to act as one and the same provisional Federal Council for the United States until the meeting of an American General Congress.

Art. 2. Considering, that the efficiency of the Provisional Federal Council would be impaired if it contained too many members who have only quite recently joined the International Working Men's Association;

The General Council recommends that such new-formed sections as are numerically weak, should combine amongst each other for the appointment of a few common delegates.

II. GENERAL CONGRESS OF THE UNITED STATES' FEDERATION

Art. 1. The General Council recommends the convocation, for the 1st of July 1872, of a General Congress of the delegates of sections and affiliated societies of the United States.

Art. 2. To this Congress will belong the appointment of the

[^1]: a See this volume, p. 7.— Ed.





**[p. 125]**

Art. 3. This Congress will have the sole power of determining the bye-laws and regulations for the organisation of the I.W.A. in the United States, "but such bye-laws and regulations must not contain anything contrary to the General Rules and Regulations of the Association" (Adm. Reg., V. Art. l).a

III. SECTIONS6

Art. 1. Considering, that Section No. 12 at New York has not only passed a formal resolution by virtue of which "each section" possesses "the independent right" to construe, according to its fancy, "the proceedings of the several congresses" and the "General Rules and Regulations",0 but moreover has fully acted up to this doctrine which, if generally adopted, would leave nothing of the I.W.A. but its name;

that the same section has never ceased to make the I.W.A. the vehicle of issues some of which are foreign to, while others are directly opposed to, the aims and purposes of the I.W.A.;

and to declare Section No. 12 suspended till the meeting of the next General Congress of the I.W.A. which is to take place in September 1872.

Art. 2. Considering, that the I.W.A., according to the General Rules, is to consist exclusively of "working men's societies" (see Art. 1, Art. 7 and Art. 11 of the General Rules);

that, consequendy, Art. 9 of the General Rules to this effect: "Everybody who acknowledges and defends the principles of the I.W.A. is eligible to become a member", although it confers upon the active adherents of the International, who are no working men,e the right either of individual membership or of admission to working men's sections, does in no way legitimate the foundation

[^1]: For these reasons the General Council considers it its duty to put in force Administrative Resolution VI of the Bale Congressd

[^2]: * Cf. ibid., p. 12.— Ed. b In the Woodhull & Claflin's Weekly this part is headed "Section XII".— Ed. c "Appeal of Section No. 12", Woodhull & Claflin's Weekly, No. 19 (71), September 23, 1871.— Ed.

[^3]: d Compte-rendu du IV' Congres international, tenu à Bâle, en septembre 1869, Brussels, 1869, p. 172.— Ed.

[^4]: e The words "who are no working men" are omitted in the Woodhull & Claflin's Weekly.—Ed.





**[p. 126]**

that for this very reason the General Council was some months ago precluded from recognising a Slavonian section, exclusively composed of students91;

that, according to the General Regulations V, 1, the General Rules and Regulations are to be adapted "to local circumstances of each country";

that the social conditions of the United States, though in many other respects most favourable to the success of the working-class movement, peculiarly facilitate the intrusion into the International of bogus reformers, middle-class quacks and trading politicians;

For these reasons the General Council recommends that in future there be admitted no new3 American section of which two-thirds at least do not consist of wage-labourers.

Art. 3. The General Council calls the attention of the American Federation to Resolution II, 3, of the London Conference relating to "sectarianb sections" or "separatist bodies pretending to accomplish special missions" distinct from the common aim of the Association,0 viz., to emancipate the man of labour from his "economical subjection to the monopoliser of the means of labour", which "lies at the bottom of servitude in all its forms, of all social misery, mental degradation, and political dependence" (see Preamble of the General Rules).d

[^1]: Written on about March 5, 1872

[^2]: First published in La Emancipacion, No. 43, April 6, 1872; Woodhull & Claflin's Weekly, No. 103, May 4, 1872; Der Volks- staat, No. 37, May 8, 1872

[^3]: a The word "new" is omitted in the Woodhull & Claflin's Weekly.—Ed. b The word "sectarian" is omitted in the Woodhull & Claflin's Weekly.—Ed. c K. Marx and F. Engels, Resolutions of the Conference of Delegates of the International Working Men's Association Assembled at London from 17th to 23rd September 1871 (present edition, Vol. 22, pp. 423-24).— Ed.

[^4]: d See this volume, p. 3.— Ed.

[^5]: Reproduced from the manuscript checked with the Woodhull & Claf- lin's Weekly



