---
Volume: 23
Document_Title: "34. F. Engels. To Citizen Delegates of the Regional Spanish Congress Assembled at Saragossa "
Page_Range: "172-174"
---

# 34. F. Engels. To Citizen Delegates of the Regional Spanish Congress Assembled at Saragossa 

PERIODICO SOCIALIST*. SE PUBLICA TODOS LOS SABA DOS

-.* ?t»ctû H wm*tam: *«•*• lrh»»«lr*. j 5*^4^4 ta *« «t>rft 4« IST». fir» su«erjc P9««t «frnjpr« ) (s titrer)«

fe Sa« ftarti*» Pwrti^l Sol - « *

Frederick Engels

TO CITIZEN DELEGATES OF THE REGIONAL SPANISH CONGRESS

ASSEMBLED AT SARAGOSSA"

London, April 3, 1872 Citizens,

The General Council of the International Working Men's Association has asked me to congratulate you on its behalf on the occasion of the second congress of the Spanish sections. You are indeed to be congratulated for the results you have obtained in so short a time. The International, founded in Spain less than three years ago, now covers the whole country with its sections and federations, is established in all the towns and is penetrating into the countryside. Thanks to your efforts, and also to the senseless and ridiculous persecution by successive governments of your country, it has been possible to obtain these fine results and make the International a real force in Spain. We ought not to forget, at the same time, that these results are also due to the special constitution of our Association which leaves every national or local federation complete freedom of action, granting the central organs only such powers as are absolutely essential to enable them to safeguard the unity of the programme and common interests, and to prevent the Association from becoming a plaything of bourgeois intrigues and police machinations.3

You have probably still to come in for further persecutions. Remember then that there are other countries, like France, Germany, and Austria and Hungary, where the members of the

[^1]: a The rough copy of the letter continues: "No bourgeois association would ever be able to subsist in such conditions; the merit of the modern proletariat is that it organised for the common struggle an association embracing all civilised countries and yet in no way restricting the autonomy of each federation."—Ed.





**[p. 138]**

Greetings and fraternity, On behalf of the General Council

Secretary for Spain,

Frederick Engels

First published in La Emancipation, Printed according to the news- No. 44, April 13, 1872 and in other paper checked with the rough newspapers of the International copy of the letter in French

Translated from the Spanish

