---
Volume: 23
Document_Title: "38. F. Engels. Letters from London. I. The English Agricultural Labourers' Strike "
Page_Range: "183-186"
---

# 38. F. Engels. Letters from London. I. The English Agricultural Labourers' Strike 



**[p. 148]**

Frederick Engels

LETTERS FROM LONDON

I

[THE ENGLISH AGRICULTURAL LABOURERS' STRIKE]

London, April 20, 1872

The labour movement in England has made enormous progress in the last few days. It has established itself—solidly—among the agricultural labourers. In Great Britain, as is well known, all the land belongs to an extremely small number of large landowners who receive, in the form of rent, annual incomes ranging from 100,000 lire in the case of the poorest to several million for the richest. The Marquis of Westminster enjoys an annual income of over 10 million lire.

The land is divided up into large lots, worked by a small number of agricultural labourers, with the aid of machines, on be- half of the tenant farmer. There are no small peasant proprie- tors. The number of agricultural workers, already small in propor- tion to the area of land they cultivate is decreasing every year as a result of the introduction of new machinery. Hence the English agricultural labourers—ignorant, slaves of the soil as were never seen before and at the same time victims of competition—form the lowest paid class of the population. On several occasions they have rebelled against their hard fate. In 1831, in the south of England, they burned the farmers' corn and hay ricks.107 A few years ago they did the same thing in Yorkshire. From time to time there have been attempts at setting up resistance societies among them, but with no real results. The present movement, however, has in a few weeks assumed dimensions which guarantee it an enormous success. This movement began among the labourers of Warwickshire. They demanded a rise in their wages from 11 or 12 shillings (13 or 14 francs) a week to 16 shillings (19 francs). In order to obtain it they formed a resistance society and went on strike.108 There was general horror among the landowners,



**[p. 149]**

Last week, the English Parliament discussed the International. Mr. Cochrane, a rabid reactionary, accused the terrible workers' association of having ordered the Paris Commune to murder the archbishop3 and set fire to the city! He then demanded repressive measures against the General Council which is based, for the moment, in London. Naturally the government replied that the members of the International, like all the inhabitants of England, are responsible before the law alone, and as they have not yet broken it there was no reason to persecute them.b It is believed

[^1]: a Georges Darboy.— Ed. b This refers to the reply of Bruce, Home Secretary, at the sitting of the House of Lords on April 12, 1872 in connection with A. B. Cochrane's speech against the International Working Men's Association (The Times, No. 27350, April 13, 1872).— Ed.





**[p. 150]**

Written on April 20, 1872

First published in La Plebe, No. 48, April 24, 1872

Signed: F. E.

"Our correspondence"

Printed according to the news- paper

Translated from the Italian

[^1]: a See this volume, pp. 140-45.— Ed.



