---
Volume: 23
Document_Title: "45. F. Engels. To the Emancipation of the Proletarian Society in Turin "
Page_Range: "203-205"
---

# 45. F. Engels. To the Emancipation of the Proletarian Society in Turin 



**[p. 168]**

Frederick Engels

TO THE EMANCIPATION OF THE PROLETARIAN SOCIETY IN TURIN128

[Outline of a letter]

In Milan, Ferrara, Naples, everywhere there are friends of Bakunin. As for the Fascio Operaio* of Bologna, we have never had a word from it. The Jura party, abandoned everywhere, seems to want to make Italy its great fortress. This party has formed within the International a secret societyb for the purpose of dominating it; we have in our possession proofs as regards Spain, it must be the same thing in Italy. These men, who always have on their lips the words autonomy and free federation, treat the workers like a flock of sheep which is good only for being directed by the heads of this secret society and used to attain ends unknown to the masses. You have had a good example of this in Terzaghi (investigations are being made concerning the handing over of the letter). The Jura Committee, having revolted against the whole organisation of the International, and knowing that it would have had great difficulty in justifying itself at the Congress in the coming September, is now searching everywhere for letters and mandates originating from the General Council in order to fabricate a false accusation against us. We fully agree to all our letters being read at the Congress but it does not suit us to learn that the same letters which we wrote to this or that section have been placed at the disposal of these gentlemen.0129

Meanwhile we ask you to postpone any decision and then act as the interests of the International dictate to you; I hope that you

[^1]: a Workers' Union.— Ed. b This refers to the International Alliance of Socialist Democracy.— Ed. c The record published in the Russian edition further has: "The circular [Fictitious Splits in the International] informs".— Ed.





**[p. 169]**

will discover that it was not the General Council, but certainly these Jura men, acting exclusively in the interest of the ambition of Bakunin, the head of the secret society, who sowed the discord. (Request an immediate reply concerning the letter.)

Written on June 14, 1872

First published in: Marx and Engels,

Works, First Russian Edition, Vol. XXVI, Moscow, 1935

Printed according to La Corrispon- denza di Marx e Engels con italiani 1848-1895, Milan, 1964, pp. 226- 27

Translated from the Italian

