---
Volume: 23
Document_Title: "46. F. Engels. Announcement of the General Council on the Convocation and the Agenda of the Congress at The Hague "
Page_Range: "205-209"
---

# 46. F. Engels. Announcement of the General Council on the Convocation and the Agenda of the Congress at The Hague 

«Buhl »igan rf % gntisfc »utfara et % Jittenratiimal Ä * k g Ufa's JW#P».À •;

z=r- • v-ii:::: :::: ::::•!- •• •• .. .v- • " : • " " • • • • r::m.^imci:i«>£i^a0SS S«. 13 SATURDAY, JUNE 23, 1872, ; v/^Ü"Älkfc

Frederick Engels

[ANNOUNCEMENT OF THE GENERAL COUNCIL

ON THE CONVOCATION AND THE AGENDA

OF THE CONGRESS AT THE HAGUE]130

1. Considering the resolution of the Basel Congress fixing the seat of the next Congress at Paris, also the resolution of the Gen- eral Council dated July 12th, 1870, by which, it being then impos- sible to hold a Congress at Paris, and conformably with Art. 4 of the General Rules, the Congress was convoked to meet at Mayence.

Considering further that up to this day the government persecutions3 directed against the International in France, as well as in Germany, render impossible the meeting of a Congress either in Paris or in Mayence.

Conformably with Art. 4 of the General Rulesb which confers upon the General Council the rights of changing, in case of need, the place of meeting of the Congress, the General Council convokes the next Congress of the I.W.M.A. for Monday, September 2nd, at The Hague, Holland.

2. Considering that the questions contained in the programme of the Congress which was to be held at Mayence on the 5th September 1870c do not correspond with the present wants of the International, these wants having been profoundly affected by the great historic events which have taken place since then.

That numerous sections and federations belonging to various countries have proposed that the next Congress should occupy itself with the revision of the General Rules and Regulations.

[^1]: a The manuscript has "prosecutions".— Ed. b See this volume, p. 4.— Ed. c Cf. K. Marx, "Programme for the Mainz Congress of the Interna- tional".— Ed.



<*'<.'J y ."WF"'ffl * ' 1 "S.Ilir . ^ Z, IJL "l""^"T^'l|||Cj.,'

1 » r* *r 7^>

[^1]: —-4

[^2]: d J-Cf J^J,

[^3]: Page of Engels' manuscript with the announcement of the General Council on the convocation of the I.W.M.A.'s Congress at The Hague





The General Council, while reserving to itself the faculty of drawing up hereafter a more extensive programme, to be completed by the propositions of the sections and federations, places on the order of the day, as the most important questions to be discussed by the Congress of The Hague, the revision of the General Rules and Regulations.

Written between June 18 and 28, 1872 Reproduced from the newspaper checked with Engels' rough man- First published in The International uscript Herald, No. 13, June 29, 1872

