---
Volume: 23
Document_Title: "47. K. Marx and F. Engels. Preface to the 1872 German Edition of the Manifesto of the Communist Party "
Page_Range: "209-211"
---

# 47. K. Marx and F. Engels. Preface to the 1872 German Edition of the Manifesto of the Communist Party 



**[p. 174]**

Karl Marx and Frederick Engels

PREFACE TO THE 1872 GERMAN EDITION

OF THE MANIFESTO OF THE COMMUNIST PARTY131

The Communist League,132 an international association of work- ers, which could of course be only a secret one under the conditions obtaining at the time, commissioned the undersigned, at the Congress held in London in November 1847, to draw up for publication a detailed theoretical and practical programme of the Party. Such was the origin of the following Manifesto, the manuscript of which travelled to London, to be printed, a few weeks before the February Revolution.3 First published in German, it has been republished in that language in at least twelve different editions in Germany, England and America.133 It was published in English for the first time in 1850 in The Red Republican, London, translated by Miss Helen Macfarlane, and in 1871 in at least three different translations in America.134 A French version first appeared in Paris shortly before the June insurrection of 1848 135

and recently in Le Socialiste of New York. A new translation is in the course of preparation. A Polish version appeared in London shortly after it was first published in German. A Russian translation was published in Geneva in the sixties. Into Danish, too, it was translated shortly after its first appearance.136

However much the state of things may have altered during the last twenty-five years, the general principles laid down in this Manifesto are, on the whole, as correct today as ever. Here and there some detail might be improved. The practical application of the principles will depend, as the Manifesto itself states, everywhere and at all times, on the obtaining historical conditions, and, for that reason, no special stress is laid on the revolutionary

[^1]: a The 1848 revolution in France.— Ed.





**[p. 175]**

measures proposed at the end of Section II. That passage would, in many respects, be very differently worded today. In view of the gigantic strides of Modern Industry in the last twenty-five years, and of the accompanying improved and extended party organisa- tion of the working class, in view of the practical experience gain- ed, first in the February Revolution, and then, still more, in the Paris Commune, where the proletariat for the first time held politi- cal power for two whole months, this programme has in some details become antiquated. One thing especially was proved by the Commune, viz., that "the working class cannot simply lay hold of the ready-made State machinery, and wield it for its own pur- poses". (See The Civil War in France. Address of the General Council of the International Working Men's Association, German edition, p. 19, where this point is further developed.3) Further, it is self-evident that the criticism of socialist literature is deficient in relation to the present time, because it comes down only to 1847; also, that the remarks on the relation of the Communists to the various opposition parties (Section IV), although in principle still correct, yet in practice are antiquated, because the political situation has been entirely changed, and the progress of history has swept from off the earth the greater portion of the parties there enumerated.

But, then, the Manifesto has become an historical document which we have no longer any right to alter. A subsequent edition may perhaps appear with an introduction bridging the gap from 1847 to the present day; this reprint was too unexpected to leave us time for that.

Karl Marx Frederick Engels London, June 24, 1872

[^1]: First published in Das kommunistische Printed according to the pamphlet Manifest. Neue Ausgabe mit einem Vorwort der Verfasser, Leipzig, 1872

[^2]: a See present edition, Vol. 22, p. 328.— Ed.

[^3]: 8*



