---
Volume: 23
Document_Title: "50. F. Engels. To Citizen Vincenzo Spotti, Secretary of the Committee for the Emancipation of the Working Classes in Parma "
Page_Range: "219-220"
---

# 50. F. Engels. To Citizen Vincenzo Spotti, Secretary of the Committee for the Emancipation of the Working Classes in Parma 



**[p. 184]**

Frederick Engels

TO CITIZEN VINCENZO SPOTTI, SECRETARY OF THE COMMITTEE

FOR THE EMANCIPATION OF THE WORKING CLASSES IN PARMA142

INTERNATIONAL WORKING MENS ASSOCIATION 33, Rathbone Place, London

July 18, 1872

Dear Citizen,

From your kind letter dated June 7 (postmarked Parma, July 9 and delivered here on July 13), I conclude that your Society wishes to become affiliated to the great International Working Men's Association.

As your rules3 do not contain anything contrary to the General Rules and Regulations of the Association, there is no obstacle to your affiliation. It will only be necessary for you to adhere to the General Rules and Regulations of the Association, of which I enclose a copy in French (there being no complete and authentic edition in Italian).

I should be grateful if you would discuss this proposal and let me know the outcome if affirmative so that I may complete the necessary formalities for your affiliation.

Fraternal greetings. In the name of the General Council

Secretary for Italy,

Frederick Engels

Write to the address I sent you last time, i.e. that of my place, so that your letter reaches me sooner.

[^1]: First published in: Marx and Engels, Printed according to the manuscript Works, First Russian Edition, Vol. XXVI, checked with the text in La corrispon- Moscow, 1935 denza de Marx e Engels

[^2]: Translated from the Italian

[^3]: Published in English for the first time

[^4]: a Comitato per l'Emancipazione dette Classi Lavoratrici. Statuta, Parma [1872].— Ed.



