---
Volume: 23
Document_Title: "52. K. Marx. The General Council's Reply to the Protest of the Jura Federation Against the Convening of a Congress at The Hague "
Page_Range: "223-225"
---

# 52. K. Marx. The General Council's Reply to the Protest of the Jura Federation Against the Convening of a Congress at The Hague 



**[p. 188]**

Karl Marx

[THE GENERAL COUNCIL'S REPLY TO THE PROTEST OF THE JURA FEDERATION

AGAINST THE CONVENING OF A CONGRESS AT THE HAGUE]144

GENERAL COUNCIL OF THE INTERNATIONAL WORKING MEN'S ASSOCIATION

33, Rathbone Place, Oxford Street, London

To Citizen Schwitzguébel, Corresponding Secretary of the Jura Federal Committee

I have placed your letter of July 15 inst. before the General Council and it has instructed me to inform you that its decision to hold the next Congress at The Hague was reached after due consideration of all the arguments contained in your letter, and that this choice was dictated by the following considerations:

The Congress could not be held in Switzerland, since that is the place of origin and focal point of the disputes; the Congress is always influenced to some extent by the place in which it is held; in order to add more weight to its decisions and enhance the wisdoms of its debates, the local character must be avoided, for which it was necessary to choose a place remote from the main centre of disputes.

You can scarcely be ignorant of the fact that three of the last four Congresses were held in Switzerland,3 and that at Basle the Belgian delegates were most insistent that the next Congress should be held either at Verviers or in Holland.

In spite of the relative freedom which she enjoys, Switzerland can hardly claim the right to monopolise Congresses.

[^1]: a In Geneva (1866), Lausanne (1867) and Basle (1869).— Ed.





**[p. 189]**

Greetings and equality,

H. Jung, Corresponding Secretary for Switzerland

July 28, 1872

First published in Bulletin de la Fédération Printed according to the news- jurassienne, No. 14, August 1, 1872 paper

Translated from the French

