---
Volume: 23
Document_Title: "54. K. Marx. Amendments to the General Rules and Administrative Regulations of the International Working Men's Association Adopted by the General Council in the Summer of 1872 "
Page_Range: "233-240"
---

# 54. K. Marx. Amendments to the General Rules and Administrative Regulations of the International Working Men's Association Adopted by the General Council in the Summer of 1872 



**[p. 198]**

Karl Marx

[AMENDMENTS TO THE GENERAL RULES

AND ADMINISTRATIVE REGULATIONS OF THE INTERNATIONAL WORKING MEN'S

ASSOCIATION ADOPTED BY THE GENERAL COUNCIL

IN THE SUMMER OF 1872]150

GENERAL RULES OF THE INTERNATIONAL WORKING MEN'S ASSOCIATION

Art 1. This Association is founded to organise common action by the workers of different countries151 aiming at the same end; viz., the protection, advancement, and complete emancipation of the working classes.

Art. 4. Each Congress appoints the time and place of meeting for the next Congress. The delegates assemble at the appointed time and place without any special invitation. The General Council may, in case of need, change the place and the date of the Congress and, with the sanction of the majority of the federations, may replace it with a private Conference which shall have the same powers. However, the Congress or the Conference which may replace it must meet within three months after the date fixed by the previous Con- gress.

The Congress appoints the seat and elects the members of the General Council annually, three from each nationality. The Council thus elected has the power to replace members who have resigned or who are unable, for one reason or another, to carry out their duties, and to co-opt members when the Congress elects fewer members than stipulated by the Rules.

On its annual meetings, the General Congress shall receive a public account of the annual transactions of the General Council. The latter may, in cases of emergency, convoke the General Congress before the regular yearly term.

Art. 7. Since the success of the working men's movement in each country cannot be secured but by the power of union and combination, while, on the other hand, the usefulness of the International General Council must greatly depend on the

— 4 — Que ton« let effort« tendant a ce bnt ont jusqu'ici échoué, faute de solidarité entre les travailleur* des différente» professions dans le mima paya et d'une union fraternelle entre lea classes ouvrières des divers W S

Que l'émancipation da tra Tail, n'étant no problème ni local ni national, maie social, embrasse tons les paya dans lesquels existe la société" moderne, et nécessite, poor sa solution, le concours théorique et pratique des pays les pins avancés;

Que le mouvement qui rient de renaîtra parmi les os- Triers des pays les plus industrieux de l'Europe, tonten réveillant de nouvelle« espérances, donne on solennel avertissement de ne pas retomber dans les -vieilles er. rears et de combiner le pi as tôt possihja les efforts en. core isolés; *

P*ur ces mitons,

VAssociation Internationale (Us Travailleur) a été fondée.

Elle déclare,

Art. 2. — Le nom de oette association sfeajl: Associa, tion International* de* Travailleur*. yj Art. A — Tons lea ans aura lien un Congrès ouvrier général Vxnposé de délégués des branches do l'Associa- tion. Ce Congres proclamer» les aspirations commîmes . de la classe ouvriers, prendra l'initiative des mesures nécessaires pour 1« «noces de l'ceuvre de l'Assoeiatioai internationale, et en nommera le Conseil générât M Art JL — Chaque Congrès fixera la date et le siège de la ifaûaa dn Congres suivant. Les délégués se réu- niront'de plein droit aux lien et jour désignés, sans qu'une convocation spéciale s d'urgenoé$9 Conseil général pei

> siège dn

„»„„.^ VAJUIKH1 general pssaasfceh Siiiftill'Tll THlff

Twai Ta» ans, lé Congrès réuni indiquera lo swge Conseil génfrslîyt^ nunmuji^tesn BBll IWlju. Iaj PUB» »ml glafaal aiasi fis sunt ill il Ut UU s'adjai—Ts> * ) . util Hallali« ' •* « . - u - - ^ « , ^ ' * ^ ^ * ^ A chaque Congres annuel, le îonseil général fera un rapport public do sea travaux. ] I pourra, au cas de be. soin, convoquer le Congrès avan le terme fixé. U AH.fi, — Lo Conseil général se composera de tra- vailleurs appartenant aux differ »tes ration* représen- tées dans l'Association Internati maie. Il cneûtira dans son sein les membres du bureau lécessairespour la ges- tun des affaires, tels qui Ul Sllo T ET; iiuuûwite &''«t»l, miwutoüeiu pusttisliws puiu lu» liffi'iuui« pnr», i'tr »Vy Art. m. — Le Gonscil généra fonctionner» comme agent international entre les dil 'erents groupes natio- naux et locaux, do telle sorto qi « les ouvriers de cha- que pays soient constamment a i courant dos mouve. stents de leur classe dans les autres pays; qu'une eu. quête sur l'état social soit faite simultanément et dans «ani Am« «sprit; — que les question« d'intérêt général,

[^1]: Qae tontes les sociétés ot individus y adhérant re- connaîtront comme base de leur conduite envers tone les hommes, sans distinction de couleur, de croyance et de nationalité, la Vérité, la Justice et la Morale,

[^2]: fat de devoirs mns droits, pas de droits sans devoir«. Cest dans cet esprit qae les statuts suivants ont été

[^3]: *\|Ök£ »ewtlsfàîdÛ'rîrniiuii.iii Bliuu Ut «u «^p Xr UUUu »Ulfe WM «UUWlés lumi'i Mi ^«^«ftuiagjia«!« «spîrantau même but, savoir : le ooneours Tmutuel, le progrès et lo omplet affranchisement de la classe ouvrière,

[^4]: Pages of the French edition of the General Rules and Administrative Regulations of the First International with corrections by Marx







**[p. 201]**

circumstance whether it has to deal with a few national centres of working men's associations, or with a great number of small and disconnected local societies; the members of the Internation- al Association shall use their utmost efforts to combine the dis- connected working men's societies of their respective countries into national bodies, represented by central national organs which, as far as possible, should be international in their composition. It is self-understood, however, that the appliance of this rule will depend upon the peculiar laws of each country, and that, apart from legal obstacles, no independent local society shall be precluded from directly corresponding with the General Council.

Art. 8.152 In its struggle against the collective power of the propertied classes, the working class cannot act as a class except by constituting itself into a political party, distinct from, and opposed to, all old parties formed by the propertied classes. This constitution of the working class into a political party is indispensable in order to insure the triumph of the social revolution, and of its ultimate end, the abolition of classes. The combination of forces which the working class has already effected by its economical struggles ought, at the same time, to serve as a lever for its struggles against the political power of its exploiters.

The lords of land and the lords of capital will always use their political privileges for the defence and perpetuation of their economical monopolies, and for the enslavement of labour. The conquest of political power has therefore become the great duty of the working class.

Art. 9. Everybody who acknowledges and defends the principles of the International Working Men's Association is eligible to become a member.

However, in order to guarantee the proletarian character of the Association, no less than two-thirds of the members of each branch must consist of wage-workers)53

Every branch is responsible for the integrity of the members it admits.

Art. 11. The working men's resistance societies joining the International Association may preserve their existent organisations intact.154



**[p. 202]**

ADMINISTRATIVE REGULATIONS,

REVISED IN ACCORDANCE WITH THE RESOLUTIONS PASSED BY THE CONGRESSES (1866 TO 1869), AND BY THE LONDON CONFERENCE (1871)

I

The General Congress

1. Every member of a branch of the International Working Men's Association has the right to vote at elections for the General Congress, and every member of the Association is eligible as a delegate.

2. Every branch or group of branches consisting of not less than 50 members may send a delegate to the Congress.

3.a Every branch or group of branches numbering more than 50 members may send an additional delegate for every additional 10 members.

7. The sittings of the Congress will be twofold—administrative sittings, which will be private, and public sittings, reserved for the discussion of, and the vote upon, the questions of principle of the Congress programme.

8. The Congress official programme, consisting of questions placed on the order of the day by the preceding Congress, questions added by the General Council, and questions submitted to the acceptance of that Council by the different sections, groups, or their committees, and which it will accept, shall be drawn up by the General Council.

Every section, group, or committee which intends to propose, for the discussion of the impending Congress, a question not proposed by the previous Congress, shall give notice thereof to the General Council before the 31st of March.

II

The General Council

2. The General Council is bound to execute the Congress resolutions and to take care that in every country the basic principles of the International are strictly observed.

[^1]: a With the introduction of this new article the subsequent articles of this section have been renumbered.— Ed.



3. The General Council shall publish a report of its proceedings every week.

4. Every group which is outside federal associations intending to join the I n t e r n a t i o n a l is bound immediately to announce its adhesion to the General Council.

g 155 -p n e Q e n e r a ] Council has also the right to suspend branches, sections, Federal Councils or committees, and federations of the International, till the meeting of the next Congress.

Nevertheless, in the case of sections belonging to a federation, the General Council will exercise this right only after having consulted the respective Federal Council.

In the case of the dissolution of a Federal Council, the General Council shall, at the same time, call upon the sections of the respective Federation to elect a new Federal Council within 30 days at most.

In the case of the suspension of an entire federation, the General Council shall immediately inform thereof the whole of the federations. If the majority of them demand it, the General Council shall convoke an extraordinary conference, composed of one delegate for each nationality, which shall meet within one month and finally decide upon the question.

Nevertheless, it is well understood that the countries where the International is prohibited shall exercise the same rights as the regular federations.

8. All delegates appointed by the General Council to distinct missions shall have the right to attend, and be heard at, all federal or local meetings of the organisations of the International, without, however, being entitled to vote thereat.

V

Local Societies, Branches, and Groups

2. Conformity of the local rules and regulations with the General Rules and Regulations shall be established by the Federal Councib and, for branches outside the federal associations, by the General Council?

9. The addresses of the Federal Committees and of the General Council are to be published every three months in all the organs of the Association.

[^1]: a With the introduction of this new article the subsequent articles of this section have been renumbered.— Ed.





**[p. VI]**

G e n e r a l S t a t i s t i c s of L a b o u r

General scheme of inquiry, which may of course be modified by each locality

1. Industry, which? 5. (a) Hours of work in factories, (b) The hours of work with small employers and in home work, (c) Nightwork and daywork. (d) Hours of rest.

6. Regulations in workshops. 12. Habitation and nourishment.

Drawn up in June-August 1872

First published, in Russian, in Problemy mira i sotsializma, No. 4, 1964

Reproduced from the 1871 English edition of the General Rules and Administrative Regulations. The amendments made in Marx's hand in the French copy of the Rules and Regulations are translated from the French

