---
Volume: 23
Document_Title: "56. K. Marx and F. Engels. To the Spanish Sections of the International Working Men's Association "
Page_Range: "246-249"
---

# 56. K. Marx and F. Engels. To the Spanish Sections of the International Working Men's Association 



**[p. 211]**

Karl Marx and Frederick Engels

TO THE SPANISH SECTIONS OF THE INTERNATIONAL WORKING MEN'S ASSOCIATION158

London, August 8, 1872

In view of the intrigues launched against the International Working Men's Association by some members of the Alliance secret society, the Executive Committee of the General Council had, at its meeting of July 24, 1872, instructed Citizen F. Engels, Secretary for Spain, to write the Spanish Federal Council in Valencia the following letter:

Citizens,

We hold proof that within the International, and particularly in Spain, there exists a secret society called the Alliance of Socialist Democracy. This society, whose centre is in Switzerland, considers it its special mission to guide our great Association in keeping with its own particular tendencies and lead it towards goals unknown to the vast majority of International members. Moreover, we know from the Seville Razon that at least three members of your Council belong to the Alliance.

When this society was formed in 1868 as a public society, the General Council was obliged to refuse it admission to the International, so long as it preserved its international character, for it pretended to form a second international body functioning within and without the International Working Men's Association. The Alliance was admitted to the International only after promising to limit itself to being purely a local section in Geneva (see the private circular of the General Council on Fictitious Splits etc., p. 7 onwards3).

[^1]: TO THE SPANISH FEDERAL COUNCIL

[^2]: a See this volume, pp. 86-87.— Ed.



1) a list of all the members of the Alliance in Spain, with indication of the functions they fulfil in the International;

2) information about the nature and activities of the Alliance, and also about its organisation and ramifications outside Spain;

3) a copy of your private circular of July 7a; 4) an explanation of how you reconcile your duties towards the International with the presence in your Council of at least three notorious members of the Alliance.

Unless it receives a categoric and exhaustive answer by return, the General Council will be obliged to denounce you publicly in Spain and abroad for having violated the spirit and the letter of the General Rules, and having betrayed the International in the interests of a secret society that is not only alien but hostile to it.

Greetings and fraternity. On behalf of the General Council

Secretary for Spain,

Frederick Engels 33, Rathbone Place, W. London, July 24, 1872

[^1]: a Federation Regional Espanola. Circular reservada, Valencia, July 7, 1872.— Ed.





**[p. 213]**

"Comrades, we have received your last letter, but as it is in French we are unable to acquaint ourselves with its contents since our usual translator is not in Valencia. We have asked another comrade to translate it as soon as possible so that we can answer it."

At its meeting of August 8, 1872, the Executive Committee of the General Council decided that pending the receipt of the requested information from the Spanish Federal Council, it was necessary to publish the above letter in order to move all the Spanish federations and sections to undertake their general inquiries into the existence, acts and aims of the Alliance secret society.

The Executive Committee of the General Council: Leo Franke^ Corresponding Secretary for Austria and Hungary /. P. Mc Donnell Ireland F. Engels Spain and Italy A. Serraillier France Le Moussu America Hermann Jung Switzerland Karl Marx Germany and Russia

Chairman of the meeting Walery Wrôblewski, Secretary for Poland

Secretary of the meeting

F. Cournei, Secretary for Holland

[^1]: Written on August 8, 1872 Printed according to the news- paper checked with the rough First published in La Emancipation, manuscript in French No. 62, August 17, 1872

[^2]: Translated from the Spanish



