---
Volume: 23
Document_Title: "60. F. Engels. Address of the General Council to the Italian Sections of the International Working Men's Association Concerning the Rimini Conference "
Page_Range: "252-253"
---

# 60. F. Engels. Address of the General Council to the Italian Sections of the International Working Men's Association Concerning the Rimini Conference 



**[p. 217]**

Frederick Engels

[ADDRESS OF THE GENERAL COUNCIL TO THE ITALIAN SECTIONS OF THE INTERNATIONAL

WORKING MEN'S ASSOCIATION CONCERNING THE RIMINI CONFERENCE]162

33, Rathbone Place, London August 23, 1872

We have received a resolution, dated Rimini, August 6, from the Conference of what claims to be the Italian Federation of the International Working Men's Association, breaking all solidarity with the General Council in London and calling on its own authority an anti-authoritarian Congress3 in Neuchâtel, Switzerland, to which all sections of the same opinion are invited to send delegates, instead of to The Hague, where the regular Congress of the International is to be held.

It should be pointed out that of the 21 sections whose delegates have signed this resolution, there is only one (Naples) which belongs to the International. None of the other 20 sections has ever fulfilled any of the conditions prescribed by our General Rules and Regulations for the admission of new sections. An Italian federation of the Working Men's Association therefore does not exist. Those who want to found it, form their own international outside the great Working Men's Association.

It will be the task of the Hague Congress to deliberate on these usurpations.

In the name and by order of the General Council

Secretary for Italy,

[^1]: Frederick Engelsb

[^2]: First published in part in La Plebe, Printed according to II Popolino No. 95, August 28, 1872 and in II Ladro, checked with the rough copy of September 3, 1872; and in full in II the letter Popolino, No. 20, September 29, 1872 Translated from the Italian

[^3]: a The rough copy of the letter has "a so-called anti-authoritarian Congress".— Ed. b In II Popolino the letter begins with the address: "To the Turin Sections"; there is the postscript after the signature: "N.B. The letter containing the 25 lire was not received."—Ed.



