---
Volume: 23
Document_Title: "I. Resolution Relative to the General Rules "
Page_Range: "278-279"
---

# I. Resolution Relative to the General Rules 



**[p. 243]**

Karl Marx and Frederick Engels

RESOLUTIONS OF THE GENERAL CONGRESS HELD AT THE HAGUE

FROM THE 2nd TO THE 7th SEPTEMBER, 1872 193

I

RESOLUTION RELATIVE T O T H E GENERAL RULES

The following article which resumes the contents of Resolution IX of the Conference of London (September 1871) to be inserted in the Rules after Article 7, viz.: —

Article 7a.— In its struggle against the collective power of the propertied classes, the working class cannot act as a class except by constituting itself into a political party, distinct from, and opposed to, all old parties formed by the propertied classes.

This constitution of the working class into a political party is indispensable in order to insure the triumph of the social revolution, and of its ultimate end, the abolition of classes.

The combination of forces which the working class has already effected by its economical struggles ought, at the same time, to serve as a lever for its struggles against the political power of landlords and capitalists.3

The lords of land and the lords of capital will always use their political privileges for the defence and perpetuation of their economical monopolies, and for the enslavement of labour. The conquest of political power has therefore become the great duty of the working class.

[^1]: Adopted by 29 votes against 5, and 8 abstentions.0

[^2]: a The French edition has here "its exploiters" instead of "landlords and capitalists".— Ed.

[^3]: b The French text of the resolutions continues as follows: "Voted for: Arnaud, J. Ph. Becker, B. Becker, Cournet, Dereure, Dumont, Dupont, Duval, Eccarius, Engels, Farkas, Friedländer, Frankel, Hepner, Heim, Johannard, Kugelmann, Lafargue, Longuet, Le Moussu, Mottershead, Pihl, Ranvier, Serraillier, Sorge, Swarm, Vaillant, Wilmot, Mac Donnel.

[^4]: "Voted against: Brismée, Coenen, Gerhard, Schwitzguébel, Van der Hout.



