---
Volume: 23
Document_Title: "II. Resolutions Relating to the Administrative Regulations"
Page_Range: "279-280"
---

# II. Resolutions Relating to the Administrative Regulations



**[p. II]**

RESOLUTIONS RELATING T O T H E ADMINISTRATIVE REGULATIONS

1. Powers of the General Council. Articles II, 2 and 6 have been replaced by the following articles: —

"Article 2.—The General Council is bound to execute the Congress Resolutions, and to take care that in every country the principles and the General Rules and Regulations of the Interna- tional are stricdy observed.

"Article 6.—The General Council has also the right to suspend Branches, Sections, Federal Councils or committees, and federa- tions of the International, till the meeting of the next Congress.

"Nevertheless, in the case of sections belonging to a federation, the General Council will exercise this right only after having consulted the respective Federal Council.

"In the case of the dissolution of a Federal Council, the General Council shall, at the same time, call upon the Sections of the respective Federation to elect a new Federal Council within 30 days at most.

"In the case of the suspension of an entire federation, the General Council shall immediately inform thereof the whole of the federations. If the majority of them demand it, the General Council shall convoke an extraordinary conference, composed of one delegate for each nationality, which shall meet within one month and finally decide upon the question.

"Nevertheless, it is well understood that the countries where the International is prohibited shall exercise the same rights as the regular federations."

[^1]: Article 2 was adopted by 40 votes against 4; abstentions, ll. a

[^2]: "Abstained: Van den Abeele, Dave, Eberhardt, Fluse, Guillaume, Herman, Sauva, Marselau.

[^3]: "The Congress officially decided to recognise as valid the votes of the delegates who could not attend the sitting because of their work in commissions. The following delegates voted for: Cuno, Lucain, Marx, Vichard, Walter, Wroblewski; 6 in all. Not a vote against."

[^4]: In Engels' manuscript the following passage is crossed out: "As the resolution obtained more than two-thirds of the votes, according to Article 12 of the General Rules, it henceforth becomes part of the General Rules."—Ed.

[^5]: a The French text of the resolutions continues as follows: "Voted for: Arnaud, Barry, J. Ph. Becker, B. Becker, Cournet, Cuno, Dereure, Dumont, Dupont, Duval, Engels, Farkas, Frankel, Friedländer, Hepner, Heim, Johannard, Kugelmann, Lafargue, Lessner, Le Moussu, Longuet, Lucain, Mac Don-



