---
Volume: 23
Document_Title: "III. Resolutions Relating to the Internationalisation of Trades' Societies "
Page_Range: "280-281"
---

# III. Resolutions Relating to the Internationalisation of Trades' Societies 

I l l

R E S O L U T I O N S R E L A T I N G T O T H E I N T E R N A T I O N A L I S A T I O N O F TRADES' S O C I E T I E S 0

The new General Council is entrusted with the special mission to establish International trades unions.

For this purpose it will, within the month following this Congress, draw up a circular which shall be translated and published in all languages, and forwarded to all trades' societies whose addresses are known, whether they are affiliated to the International or not.

nell, Marx, Milke, Pihl, Ranvier, Roach, Sauva, Scheu, Serraillier, Sexton, Sorge, Swarm, Schumacher, Vaillant, Vichard, Walter, Wröblewski.

"Voted against: Fluse, Gerhard, Splingard, Van der Hout. "Abstained: Alerini, Coenen, Dave, Eberhardt, Guillaume, Herman, Morago, Marselau, Farga Pellicer, Schwitzguébel, Van den Abeele.

[^1]: "Article 6—adopted by 36 votes against 6, abstentions, 16. "Voted for: Arnaud, Barry, J. Ph. Becker, B. Becker, Cournet, Cuno, Dereure, Dupont, Duval, Engels, Farkas, Frankel, Friedländer, Hepner, Heim, Johannard, Kugelmann, Lafargue, Lessner, Le Moussu, Longuet, Ludwig, Mac Donnell, Marx, Milke, Pihl, Ranvier, Serraillier, Schumacher, Sexton, Sorge, Swarm, Vaillant, Vichard, Walter, Wröblewski.

[^2]: "Voted against: Brismée, Coenen, Fluse, Herman, Sauva, Splingard. "Abstained: Alerini, Cyrille, Dave, Dumont, Eberhardt, Guillaume, Lucain, Marselau, Morago, Mottershead, Farga Pellicer, Roach, Schwitzguébel, Van den Abeele, Van der Hout, Wilmot." — Ed.

[^3]: a The French text has "10 centimes" here and below.— Ed. b The French text of the resolutions continues as follows:

[^4]: "Voted against the contribution being altered: J. Ph. Becker, Brismée, Coenen, Cyrille, Dupont, Duval, Eberhardt, Eccarius, Farkas, Fluse, Gerhard, Herman, Hepner, Serraillier, Sorge, Swarm, Wilmot.

[^5]: "Voted for the contribution being altered: Dumont, Engels, Frankel, Heim, Johannard, Lafargue, Le Moussu, Longuet, Lucain, Mac Donnell, Pihl, Sauva.

[^6]: "Abstained: Alerini, Dave, Dereure, Guillaume, Marselau, Morago, Farga Pellicer, Schwitzguébel.

[^7]: "The following delegates, obliged to leave The Hague before this question was discussed, handed in their vote in writing for the raising of the contribution: Arnaud, Cournet, Ranvier, Vaillant."—Ed.

[^8]: c The French text has here "societies of resistance" instead of "trades' societies".— Ed.



