---
Volume: 23
Document_Title: "IV. Resolutions Relating to the Admission of Sections "
Page_Range: "281-283"
---

# IV. Resolutions Relating to the Admission of Sections 



**[p. 246]**

Every Union3 shall be invited to fix itself the conditions under which it proposes to enter the International Union of its trade.

The General Council shall, from the conditions fixed by the Unions,b adopting the idea of International union, draw up a general plan, and submit it to the provisional acceptance of the Societies.0

The next Congress will finally settle the fundamental treaty for the International trades unions.

(Voted unanimously minus a few abstentions, the number of which has not been stated in the minutes.)

IV

RESOLUTIONS RELATING TO THE ADMISSION OF SECTIONSd

1. Section 2 (New York, French) of the North American Federa- tion.—This Section had been excluded by the American Federal Council. On the other hand, it had not been recognised as an independent Section by the General Council. It was not admitted by the Congress. Voted against the admission, 38; for, 9; abstained, 11.

2. Section 12 (New York, American) of the North American Federation.—Suspended by the General Council.6

In the course of the debate on the credentials of Section 12, the following resolution was adopted by 47 votes against 0; absten- tions, 9:

"The International Working Men's Association, based upon the principle of the abolition of classes, cannot admit any middle class Sections."*

[^1]: a The French text has here "trades' society" instead of "Union".— Ed. b The French text has here "societies" instead of "Unions".— Ed. c The French text adds here: "which would wish to enter the International trades unions".— Ed.

[^2]: d In the French edition, item 1 is preceded by the following text:

[^3]: "The Mandate Commission was composed as follows: Gerhard (50 votes), Ranvier (44), Roach (41), Marx (41), Mac Donnell (39), Dereure (36), Frankel (22)." —Ed.

[^4]: e See this volume, p. 125.— Ed. f After this the French text of the resolutions has: "Voted for: Arnaud, J. Ph. Becker, Barry, Brismée, Cournet, Cuno, Coenen, Dave, Dereure, Dietzgen, Dupont, Duval, Eberhardt, Fluse, Farkas, Frankel,



Section 12 was excluded by 49 votes against 0; abstentions, 9.a

3. Section of Marseilles.—This Section, quite unknown to the General Council, and to the French Sections in correspondence with the latter, is not admitted. Against the admission, 38; for, 0; abstentions, 14.

4. Section of Propaganda and Revolutionary Action, at Geneva.— This Section, which is but the resurrection of the (public) "Alliance de la Démocratie Socialiste", of Geneva, dissolved in August 1871, had been recognised neither by the Romance Federal Committee nor by the General Council, which, indeed, had returned its contributions when sent by the Jurassian Federal Committee. The Congress resolved to suspend it till after the debate on the secondb Alliance. The suspension was voted unanimously, less a few abstentions not counted.

5. New Federation of Madrid.—The new Federation of Madrid was formed by the members of the previous Spanish Federal Council, after the old Federation of Madrid, in flagrant breach of the rules then in force, had expelled them for having denounced the conspiracy of the secret alliance against the International Working Men's Association. They addressed themselves, in the first instance, to the Spanish Federal Council, which refused to affiliate the new Federation. They then addressed themselves to the General Council,0 which took upon itself the responsibility of

[^1]: Friedländer, Guillaume, Gerhard, Heim, Hepner, Herman, Johannard, Kugelmann, Lafargue, Le Moussu, Lessner, Lucain, Marx, Milke, Mottershead, Pihl, Ranvier, Sauva, Scheu, Schumacher, Serraillier, Sexton, Sorge, Splingard, Swarm, Vaillant, Vichard, Wilmot, Wröblewski, Walter, Van den Abeele.

[^2]: "Abstained: Alerini, Eccarius, Harcourt, Marselau, Morago, Farga Pellicer, Roach, Schwitzguébel, Van der Hout."—Ed.

[^3]: a After this the French text of the resolutions has:

[^4]: "Voted for the exclusion: Arnaud, Barry, J. Ph. Becker, Brismée, Cournet, Coenen, Cuno, Dave, Dereure, Dietzgen, Dumont, Dupont, Duval, Eberhardt, Fluse, Farkas, Frankel, Friedländer, Gerhard, Heim, Hepner, Herman, Johannard, Kugelmann, Lafargue, Le Moussu, Lessner, Lucain, Mac Donnell, Marx, Milke, Pihl, Ranvier, Roach, Sauva, Scheu, Schumacher, Serraillier, Sexton, Sorge, Splingard, Swarm, Vaillant, Van den Abeele, Van der Hout, Vichard, Wilmot, Wröblewski, Walter.

[^5]: "Abstained: Alerini, Eccarius, Guillaume, Harcourt, Marselau, Morago, Farga Pellicer, Mottershead, Schwitzguébel." — Ed.

[^6]: b The French text has "secret" instead of "second". Further the following pas- sage is crossed out in Engels' manuscript: "Forced to stop its work right after this discussion, the Congress has not decided this question."—Ed.

[^7]: c In Engels' manuscript the following passage is crossed out: "which recognised it without first asking the Spanish Federal Council, as is laid down in the Administrative Rules. In this case, the General Council was acting on its own



