---
Volume: 23
Document_Title: "VI. Powers Issue d by the General Council, and by Federal Councils "
Page_Range: "283-284"
---

# VI. Powers Issue d by the General Council, and by Federal Councils 



**[p. 248]**

recognising ita without consulting the Spanish Council, amongst whose eight members not less than five belonged to the Alliance. The Congress admitted this Federation by 40 votes against 0; the few abstentions were not counted.

V

A U D I T OF T H E ACCOUNTS OF T H E GENERAL COUNCIL

The Committee appointed by the Congress for the auditing of the accounts of the General Council for the year 1871-72, was composed of the following citizens::—Dumont, for France; Alerini, for Spain; Farkas, for Austria and Hungary; Brismée, for Belgium; Laf argue, for the new Federation of Madrid and for Portugal; Pihl, for Denmark; J. Ph. Becker, for German Switzer- land; Duval, for the Romance Swiss Federation; Schwitzguébel, for the Jurassian Swiss Federation; Dave, for Holland; Dereure, for America; and Cuno, for Germany.

The accounts submitted to this Committee were approved and signed by all its members excepting Dave, absent.

The accounts having been read, the Congress approved of them by a unanimous vote.

VI

POWERS ISSUED BY THE GENERAL COUNCIL, AND BY FEDERAL COUNCILS

The Congress resolved, "To annul all powers issued, as well by the General Council as by any of the Federal Councils, to members of the International in such countries where the Association is prohibited, and to reserve to the new General Council the exclusive right of appointing, in those countries, the plenipotentiaries of the International Working Men's Association."

Adopted unanimously, less a few abstentions not specially counted.

[^1]: responsibility and despite of the Regulations, because the Spanish Federal Council had at least 5 secret Alliance members amongst its 8 members. It was for disclosing this conspiracy against the International Working Men's Association that they wanted to ban the New Madrid Federation."—Ed.

[^2]: a See this volume, p. 215.— Ed.



