---
Volume: 23
Document_Title: "VII. Resolutions Relating to the Alliance "
Page_Range: "284-285"
---

# VII. Resolutions Relating to the Alliance 



**[p. VII]**

R E S O L U T I O N S R E L A T I N G T O T H E ALLIANCE

The Committee charged with the inquiry regarding the (sec- ond3) Alliance of Socialist Democracy, consisted of the citizens— Cuno (33 votes), Lucain (24), Splingard (31), Vichard (30), and Walter (29).

In its report to the Congress, the majority of this Committee declared that "the secret Alliance was established with rules entirely opposed to those of the International". It proposed:—

"To exclude from the International Michael Bakounine, as founder of the Alliance, and for a personal affair.

"To exclude Guillaume and Schwitzguébel, as members of the Alliance.

"To exclude B. Malon, Bousquet* (Secretary of Police at Béziers, France), and Louis Marchand, as convicted of acts aiming at the disorganisation of the International Working Men's Association.

"To withdraw the charges against Alerini, Marselau, Morago, Farga Pellicer, and Joukowski, upon their formal declaration that they no longer belong to the Alliance.

"To authorise the Committee to publish the documents upon which their conclusions were based."

The Congress resolved— "1. To exclude Michael Bakounine. Voted for, 27; against, 6; abstentions, 7.b

[^1]: "2. To exclude Guillaume. 25 for, 9 against, 8 abstentions.0

[^2]: * The Committee was not acquainted with the fact that M. Bousquet, upon the demands of his Section, had already been excluded by a formal vote of the General Council.

[^3]: a The French text has here "secret" instead of "second".— Ed. b The French text of the resolutions continues as follows: "Voted for: J. Ph. Becker, Cuno, Dereure, Dumont, Dupont, Duval, Engels, Farkas, Frankel, Heim, Hepner, Johannard, Kugelmann, Lafargue, Le Moussu, Longuet, Lucain, Mac Donnell, Marx, Pihl, Serraillier, Sorge, Swarm, Vichard, Wilmot, Walter, Wroblewski.

[^4]: "Voted against: Brismée, Dave, Fluse, Herman, Coenen, Van den Abeele. "Abstained: Alerini, Guillaume, Marselau, Morago, Sauva, Splingard, Schwitz- guébel."— Ed.

[^5]: c The French text of the resolutions continues as follows:

[^6]: "Voted for: J. Ph. Becker, Cuno, Dumont, Dupont, Duval, Engels, Farkas, Fran- kel, Heim, Hepner, Johannard, Kugelmann, Lafargue, Le Moussu, Longuet, Lucain, Marx, Pihl, Serraillier, Sorge, Swarm, Vichard, Walter, Wilmot, Wroblewski.

[^7]: "Voted against: Brismée, Cyrille, Dave, Fluse, Herman, Coenen, Sauva, Splingard, Van den Abeele.



