---
Volume: 23
Document_Title: "X. Committee to Draw up the Minutes "
Page_Range: "288-289"
---

# X. Committee to Draw up the Minutes 

Bertrand (German) Bolte (German) Laurel (Swede) Kavanagh (Irish) Saint Clair (Irish) Levièle (French)

Votes

29 29 29 29 29 28

Carl (German) David (French) Dereure (French) Fornaccieri (Italian) Speyer (German) Ward (American)

Votes

28 26 26 25 23 22

IX

PLACE O F M E E T I N G O F N E X T CONGRESS

The proposition that the new Congress should meet in Switzerland, and that the new General Council should determine in what town, was adopted. There voted for Switzerland 15, for London 5, for Chicago 1, and for Spain 1.

The following were appointed, without opposition:—Dupont, Engels, Frankel, Le Moussu, Marx and Serraillier.

{

E. Dupont, F. Engels, Leo Frankel, Le Moussu, Karl Marx, Auguste Serraillier London, 21st October, 1872

[^1]: X

[^2]: C O M M I T T E E T O DRAW U P T H E M I N U T E S

[^3]: First published as a pamphlet: Resolutions

[^4]: du congrès general tenu à la Haye du 2 au 7 septembre 1872. London, 1872, and in the newspapers La Emancipation, No. 72, November 2, 1872, and The International Herald, No. 37, December 14, 1872

[^5]: Reproduced from the text of The International Herald checked with Engels' manuscript and the pamphlet

[^6]: "Voted for London: Arnaud, Cournet, Dereure, Duval, Frankel, Heim, Hepner, Ludwig, Milke, Ranvier, Schumacher, Vaillant, Wilmot, Walter.

[^7]: "Abstained: Cyrille, Eberhardt, Gerhard, Guillaume, Johannard, Alerini, Marselau, Morago, Farga Pellicer, Sorge, Schwitzguébel, Van der Hout."

[^8]: In the French text the number of the abstained is 13.— Ed. a The French text has here "three other members" instead of "them".— Ed.



