---
Volume: 23
Document_Title: "68. K. Marx. To the Editor of Le Corsaire "
Page_Range: "292-294"
---

# 68. K. Marx. To the Editor of Le Corsaire 



**[p. 257]**

Karl Marx

TO THE EDITOR OF LE CORSAIRE

Dear Sir,

The Figaro of September 11 reproduces a conversation which I am alleged to have had with the correspondent of the Soir.a The Figaro -type press can allow itself any calumny without anybody taking the trouble to point it out, but when the mercenary imagination of a correspondent goes so far as to put in my mouth grave accusations against my friends of the ex-General Council, I feel bound to say that he has violated all the rules of truth in daring to claim to have exchanged a single word with me.

I profit by this opportunity to let our friends and enemies know that I never dreamed of resigning from the International and that the transfer of the General Council to New York was proposed by me and several other members of the previous General Council.

It is false to report that Bakunin and his acolyte Guillaume were expelled as heads of a so-called federalist party. The expulsion of Bakunin and Guillaume was motivated by the creation within our Association of a secret society, the Alliance of Socialist Democracy, which claimed to direct the International to aims contrary to its principles.

The resolution of the London Conference on the political action of the working class was approved by the great majority of the Congress, and its insertion in the General Rules was voted.b

[^1]: a "On continue à ne pas voir", Le Figaro, September 11, 1872. The article is signed ". " .".— Ed

[^2]: b See this volume, p. 243.— Ed





**[p. 258]**

The working-class public of The Hague and Amsterdam were most sympathetic towards the Congress.

So much for the value of the reports in the reactionary press.

Yours sincerely,

Karl Marx The Hague, September 12, 1872

First published in Le Corsaire, September 15, 1872; Gazzettino Rosa, No. 260, Sep- tember 18, 1872; La Emancipation, No. 66, September 21, 1872; II Popolino, No. 19, September 22, 1872

Printed according to Le Cor- saire

Translated from the French

