---
Volume: 23
Document_Title: "73. F. Engels. Letters from London. II. More about the Hague Congress "
Page_Range: "318-320"
---

# 73. F. Engels. Letters from London. II. More about the Hague Congress 



**[p. 283]**

Frederick Engels

LETTERS FROM LONDON

II

[MORE ABOUT THE HAGUE CONGRESS]205

London, October 5, 1872

I hope that the outcome of the Hague Congress will make our Italian "autonomous" friends think. They ought to know that wherever there is an organisation, some autonomy is sacrificed for the sake of unity of action. If they do not realise that the International is a society organised for struggle, and not for fine theories, I am very sorry, but one thing is certain: the great International will leave Italy to act on its own until it agrees to accept the conditions common to all.

In the secret Alliance of Socialist Democracy there are three grades: international brethren (a tiny number), national brethren, and mere Alliancists. C.a is an international brother, just as Guil- laume (chief of Bakunin's general staff) and one or two Spaniards.

Among the French delegates, five came from France under fictitious names, the others are refugees of the Commune. I attach the list, in which the names and localities of the French sections are not given so as not to betray them to the police.b But we have re-organised in more than thirty of the French départements and the International there is stronger and more active than ever.

It was gratifying to see the French and the Germans always voting in agreement at The Hague: it was obvious that all the wars, the conquests, the national hatred did not exist for the International. It was this union of the French and the Germans that led to all the resolutions without exception being adopted.

The reason for the transfer of the General Council to New York was: 1. The firm determination of Marx, Serraillier, Dupont and

[^1]: a Carlo Cafiero.— Ed. b Liste nominale des délégués composant le 5-me Congrès universel, tenu à la Haye (Hollande), du 2 au 7 Septembre 1872, Amsterdam [1872].— Ed





**[p. 284]**

First published in La Plebe, No. 107, Printed according to the news- October 8, 1872 paper

[^1]: Signed: Federico Engels Translated from the Italian "Our correspondence"

[^2]: a September 7.— Ed.



