---
Volume: 23
Document_Title: "74. F. Engels. To the British Federal Council, International Working Men's Association Concerning Portuguese Strikes "
Page_Range: "320-321"
---

# 74. F. Engels. To the British Federal Council, International Working Men's Association Concerning Portuguese Strikes 



**[p. 285]**

Frederick Engels

T O THE BRITISH FEDERAL COUNCIL, INTERNATIONAL WORKING MEN'S ASSOCIATION

[CONCERNING PORTUGUESE STRIKES]3

122 Regent's Park Road. N.W. London, 16th October, 1872

Citizens,

I had the honour of submitting to you, by citizen Dupont, at your meeting of September 26, a communication addressed to me by the Lisbon Federal Council regarding some trade matters of Interna- tional Sections there, which required immediate action here.206 I have seen this communication published in The International Heraldh

but have not had any intimation that the Federal Council has taken any further steps in the matter.

As I am bound to give an account to my Lisbon Correspondents of what I have done on behalf of the parties interested, I hope the Federal Council will be good enough to let me know whether anything, and what, has been done by the Council with regard to the subject in question.

I remain Citizens fraternally yours,

F. E.

[^1]: First published in: Marx and Engels, Reproduced from the rough manu- Works, First Russian Edition, Vol. XXVI, script Moscow, 1935

[^2]: 3 The rough manuscript has Engels' note: "London, 16 October 72. To Brit. Fed. Council wegen [on account of] Portug. Strikes." — Ed.

[^3]: b E. Hill, "International Working Men's Association. Federal Council", The International Herald, No. 27, October 5, 1872.— Ed.



