---
Volume: 23
Document_Title: "89. F. Engels. News on the Activities of the International on the Continent "
Page_Range: "444-449"
---

# 89. F. Engels. News on the Activities of the International on the Continent 



**[p. 409]**

Frederick Engels

[NEWS ON THE ACTIVITIES OF THE INTERNATIONAL ON THE CONTINENT]277

I

[The International Herald, No. 41, January 11, 1873]

From the Continent we receive the following information: — From the Italian International newspaper La Plebe* it appeared that the Italian Government, which nowhere interferes with the Secessionist Sections, had opened a campaign of violent prosecu- tions against the Lodi Section, which had recognised the new General Council, and adhered to the Hague resolutions. The Section was dissolved and warrants of arrest launched against all the members of the Committee, three of whom were actually thrown into prison, while the six others escaped. Amongst those arrested is Bignami, the editor of the Plebe. The number of that paper containing the address of the General Council (published in No. 34 of The International Herald)h was also seized on that account, while the most violent manifestoes of the Secessionists are freely allowed to circulate. The prisoners are to be tried for high treason.

Our Madrid paper La Emancipation, states that the movement of resistance to the secessionist action of the Spanish Federal Council is growing daily.c The moment that Council convoked a Congress

[^1]: a This refers to the articles "Séquestre LIX", "Uno post unum", "Jeri é stato", and to Petrus, "Ai lettori!" in La Plebe, Nos. 119-121, December 4, 8 and 12, 1872.— Ed.

[^2]: b The reference is to the General Council address of October 20, 1872, "To the Federations, Affiliated Societies, Sections and All Members of the International Working Men's Association" published by The International Herald, No. 34, November 23, 1872; the Italian translation appeared in La Plebe, No. 118, November 27, 1872.— Ed.

[^3]: c "La Nueva Federacion Madrilena a todas las federaciones y secciones de la Asociacion Internacional en Espana", La Emancipacion, No. 76, November 30, 1872.— Ed.





**[p. 410]**

From a letter from Portugal,280 it appeared that the working- class movement there, organised by the International, was growing to extraordinary dimensions. In Lisbon and neighbourhood alone, above fifteen thousand working men had been organised in Trades' Unions, and the organisation was spreading to Oporto and the North. The whole of these societies have been formed by, and continue under the direct influence of the International, which, however, is prevented by the laws of the country to organise itself with full liberty. The International paper, O Pen- samento Social, is now self-supporting. We may add that in Portugal there are no secessionists. The Hague resolutions have been not only unanimously endorsed, but received with en- thusiasm. The Pensamento, in its No. 25, contains an article declaring the Hague Congress to be the most important one ever held since the foundation of the International, and hailing its resolutions as establishing an immense progress in the develop- ment of the Association.0

It will be seen by the above statements that the late majority of the British Federal Council have, in their action, imitated to the letter that of the Spanish Secessionist Council. It is thus evident

[^1]: a "La Nueva Federacion Madrilena a todas las federaciones, secciones é individuos de la Asociacion Internacional en Espana", La Emancipacion, No. 73, November 9, 1872.— Ed.

[^2]: b Mariano Rodriguez.— Ed. c "O Congreso da Internacional na Haya", O Pensamento Social, No. 25, October 6, 1872.— Ed.





**[p. 411]**

II

[The International Herald, No. 44, February 1, 1873]

A letter from the Spanish Federal Council invited our attention to the fact that the engine-drivers and stokers are now on strike in Spain, and that the railway companies are sending to England, Belgium, and other countries for men to use in defeating the attempts of their employees to improve their position. Our Council appointed a committee to draw up a paragraph containing a statement of the case, and to send it to the newspapers.282 The committee attended to its duty, as proved by the appearance of the paragraph in the papers published the following Saturday.3

Other steps for making the Spanish strike known to the engine-drivers and stokers of England were adopted.

The news we have from the Continent is interesting. The report from Germany brought intelligence of a great victory. The International deputy to the German Parliament, Bebel, who had been sentenced by a Saxon Law-court for offences committed in a speech, to be imprisoned for nine months, and to lose all rights derived from public election, has just been re-elected on the 20th January, by the majority of 10,470 votes283 against 4,420 given to the government candidate.*5 This is the third time that Bebel has been elected in his district, and by 2,500 more votes than he had at any previous election. Thus, Bismarck will again have to face the only man who, in the present parliament, dares openly to oppose him in the interest of the working class, and

[^1]: Ill

[^2]: [The International Herald, No. 45, February 8, 1873]

[^3]: a February 1, 1873.— Ed. b Ernst Petzold.— Ed.





**[p. 412]**

Further details have arrived respecting the Secessionist Congress in Spain. It appears that it was to all intents and purposes a Minority Congress. Out of 101 local federations, counting altogether 398 Sections, only 41 local federations, or 57 Sections, were represented; so that the votes passed at that Congress have been taken by delegates representing less than one sixth of the Sections existing in Spain. The above statistics being taken from the secessionist paper "La Federation",* will not be disputed. To act by surprise, and to get a minority vote to sanction their acts, is everywhere the policy of the Secessionists; another proof that they are everywhere acting under the same secret instructions.

In France, numerous arrests of pretended members of the International have taken place in almost all the large towns. It is of course impossible to know whether the real members of the Association have been found out, and even if it were known, it could not be published, in the interests of the parties arrested, as it is now punishable in France to belong to the International. All that is known is, that the few secessionists in France have gone scot-free. They, on the contrary, are on such excellent terms with M. Thiers's government, that, for instance, at Béziers they are represented by a superintendent of police, a certain Bousquet, for whose honesty the gospel of the secession party, the Bulletin jurassien, has lately vouched in the most enthusiastic manner.284

From Portugal we hear that the Portuguese Federation, on learning that the so-called Spanish congress at Cordova had declared for secession, immediately wrote to the new federation of

[^1]: IV

[^2]: [The International Herald, No. 46, February 15, 1873]

[^3]: a "Tercer Congreso Regional de la Federacion Espanola" and "Movimento obrero universal. Espana", La Federacion, Nos. 177 and 178, January 4 and 11, 1873.— Ed.



Written in January-mid-February 1873 Reproduced from the newspaper

First published in The International Herald, Nos. 41, 44, 45 and 46, January 11, February 1, 8 and 15, 1873

[^1]: a This refers to M. Bakunin's letter to F. Mora of April 5, 1872 (see this volume, pp. 578-80)—Ed.



