---
Volume: 23
Document_Title: "I "
Page_Range: "444-446"
---

# I 



**[p. 409]**

Frederick Engels

[NEWS ON THE ACTIVITIES OF THE INTERNATIONAL ON THE CONTINENT]277

I

[The International Herald, No. 41, January 11, 1873]

From the Continent we receive the following information: — From the Italian International newspaper La Plebe* it appeared that the Italian Government, which nowhere interferes with the Secessionist Sections, had opened a campaign of violent prosecu- tions against the Lodi Section, which had recognised the new General Council, and adhered to the Hague resolutions. The Section was dissolved and warrants of arrest launched against all the members of the Committee, three of whom were actually thrown into prison, while the six others escaped. Amongst those arrested is Bignami, the editor of the Plebe. The number of that paper containing the address of the General Council (published in No. 34 of The International Herald)h was also seized on that account, while the most violent manifestoes of the Secessionists are freely allowed to circulate. The prisoners are to be tried for high treason.

Our Madrid paper La Emancipation, states that the movement of resistance to the secessionist action of the Spanish Federal Council is growing daily.c The moment that Council convoked a Congress

[^1]: a This refers to the articles "Séquestre LIX", "Uno post unum", "Jeri é stato", and to Petrus, "Ai lettori!" in La Plebe, Nos. 119-121, December 4, 8 and 12, 1872.— Ed.

[^2]: b The reference is to the General Council address of October 20, 1872, "To the Federations, Affiliated Societies, Sections and All Members of the International Working Men's Association" published by The International Herald, No. 34, November 23, 1872; the Italian translation appeared in La Plebe, No. 118, November 27, 1872.— Ed.

[^3]: c "La Nueva Federacion Madrilena a todas las federaciones y secciones de la Asociacion Internacional en Espana", La Emancipacion, No. 76, November 30, 1872.— Ed.





**[p. 410]**

From a letter from Portugal,280 it appeared that the working- class movement there, organised by the International, was growing to extraordinary dimensions. In Lisbon and neighbourhood alone, above fifteen thousand working men had been organised in Trades' Unions, and the organisation was spreading to Oporto and the North. The whole of these societies have been formed by, and continue under the direct influence of the International, which, however, is prevented by the laws of the country to organise itself with full liberty. The International paper, O Pen- samento Social, is now self-supporting. We may add that in Portugal there are no secessionists. The Hague resolutions have been not only unanimously endorsed, but received with en- thusiasm. The Pensamento, in its No. 25, contains an article declaring the Hague Congress to be the most important one ever held since the foundation of the International, and hailing its resolutions as establishing an immense progress in the develop- ment of the Association.0

It will be seen by the above statements that the late majority of the British Federal Council have, in their action, imitated to the letter that of the Spanish Secessionist Council. It is thus evident

[^1]: a "La Nueva Federacion Madrilena a todas las federaciones, secciones é individuos de la Asociacion Internacional en Espana", La Emancipacion, No. 73, November 9, 1872.— Ed.

[^2]: b Mariano Rodriguez.— Ed. c "O Congreso da Internacional na Haya", O Pensamento Social, No. 25, October 6, 1872.— Ed.



