---
Volume: 23
Document_Title: "III "
Page_Range: "446-447"
---

# III 



**[p. 411]**

II

[The International Herald, No. 44, February 1, 1873]

A letter from the Spanish Federal Council invited our attention to the fact that the engine-drivers and stokers are now on strike in Spain, and that the railway companies are sending to England, Belgium, and other countries for men to use in defeating the attempts of their employees to improve their position. Our Council appointed a committee to draw up a paragraph containing a statement of the case, and to send it to the newspapers.282 The committee attended to its duty, as proved by the appearance of the paragraph in the papers published the following Saturday.3

Other steps for making the Spanish strike known to the engine-drivers and stokers of England were adopted.

The news we have from the Continent is interesting. The report from Germany brought intelligence of a great victory. The International deputy to the German Parliament, Bebel, who had been sentenced by a Saxon Law-court for offences committed in a speech, to be imprisoned for nine months, and to lose all rights derived from public election, has just been re-elected on the 20th January, by the majority of 10,470 votes283 against 4,420 given to the government candidate.*5 This is the third time that Bebel has been elected in his district, and by 2,500 more votes than he had at any previous election. Thus, Bismarck will again have to face the only man who, in the present parliament, dares openly to oppose him in the interest of the working class, and

[^1]: Ill

[^2]: [The International Herald, No. 45, February 8, 1873]

[^3]: a February 1, 1873.— Ed. b Ernst Petzold.— Ed.



