---
Volume: 23
Document_Title: "IV "
Page_Range: "447-449"
---

# IV 



**[p. 412]**

Further details have arrived respecting the Secessionist Congress in Spain. It appears that it was to all intents and purposes a Minority Congress. Out of 101 local federations, counting altogether 398 Sections, only 41 local federations, or 57 Sections, were represented; so that the votes passed at that Congress have been taken by delegates representing less than one sixth of the Sections existing in Spain. The above statistics being taken from the secessionist paper "La Federation",* will not be disputed. To act by surprise, and to get a minority vote to sanction their acts, is everywhere the policy of the Secessionists; another proof that they are everywhere acting under the same secret instructions.

In France, numerous arrests of pretended members of the International have taken place in almost all the large towns. It is of course impossible to know whether the real members of the Association have been found out, and even if it were known, it could not be published, in the interests of the parties arrested, as it is now punishable in France to belong to the International. All that is known is, that the few secessionists in France have gone scot-free. They, on the contrary, are on such excellent terms with M. Thiers's government, that, for instance, at Béziers they are represented by a superintendent of police, a certain Bousquet, for whose honesty the gospel of the secession party, the Bulletin jurassien, has lately vouched in the most enthusiastic manner.284

From Portugal we hear that the Portuguese Federation, on learning that the so-called Spanish congress at Cordova had declared for secession, immediately wrote to the new federation of

[^1]: IV

[^2]: [The International Herald, No. 46, February 15, 1873]

[^3]: a "Tercer Congreso Regional de la Federacion Espanola" and "Movimento obrero universal. Espana", La Federacion, Nos. 177 and 178, January 4 and 11, 1873.— Ed.



Written in January-mid-February 1873 Reproduced from the newspaper

First published in The International Herald, Nos. 41, 44, 45 and 46, January 11, February 1, 8 and 15, 1873

[^1]: a This refers to M. Bakunin's letter to F. Mora of April 5, 1872 (see this volume, pp. 578-80)—Ed.



