---
Volume: 23
Document_Title: "90. F. Engels. Notes for the General Council "
Page_Range: "449-452"
---

# 90. F. Engels. Notes for the General Council 



**[p. 414]**

Frederick Engels

NOTES FOR THE GENERAL COUNCIL

1. The International Herald and the Emancipation sent regularly, hope they have arrived.

2. The Hales gang actually did hold their congress on January 26, all 10 of them; they dare not even say which sections they claim to represent. A wretched fiasco. Naturally decided not to recognise the Hague decisions or the General Council. Report—first half—in The Eastern Post, February 1; today's contains no continuation !286 The Federal Council will send you the things officially. These people have lost almost all their support, apart from Hales' personal following in the East End of London. One of the signatories of Hales' first circular,3 Bennett, has returned to our people with strict orders from his section (Halifax) to stand by them and the LAWFUL Association. He was only re-admitted after much EATING OF HUMBLE PIE. (See today's International Heraldb)

3. In Lodi, the Plebe is remaining loyal, though not breaking openly with the others, which they would not be able to do for the time being anyway. But the others themselves are carrying things to the limit. They are convening an Italian congress for March 15, but only intend to admit sections that have recognised the Rimini resolutions287 or recognise them by the deadline! So much for autonomy and free federations. It is all right to trample the Rules of the International underfoot, but the Rimini resolutions are sacrosanct.

[^1]: a To the Branches, Sections and Members of the British Federation of the International Working Men's Association, [London,] December 10, 1872.— Ed.

[^2]: b J. Mitchell, S. Vickery, "International Working Men's Association. British Federal Council", The International Herald, No. 45, February 8, 1873.— Ed.





**[p. 415]**

4. We greatly regret that the G.C., instead of simply stating that the Jurassians have resigned by rejecting the Hague resolutions and forming a separate league [Sonderbund], has merely sus- pended them.288 First, it is always possible that a conference will be demanded. Second, the issue now comes before Congress in a quite different form: their delegates must be admitted provisional- ly, until their mandate has been put to the vote. Third, the G.C. must take the same steps against the Belgians and the Spaniards, ditto against the Hales gang, and these successive suspensions make a much worse impression than if the G.C. had waited a few more weeks, until it knew the results of the Belgian and Spanish congresses, and then issued one general proclamation setting out the formal reasons and also explaining in simple terms that one cannot be both inside and outside the International, cannot claim to belong to it and simultaneously declare its rules invalid, and then purement et simplement stating that those in question had placed themselves outside the International.

5. I hope the relevant resolution has been sent to Sonvillier and Geneva from there, as I have received no instruction to this effect. As far as Serraillier is concerned, he cannot send anything there at the moment, with arrests raining down and all correspondence with France cut.

6. Your authorised representative Larroque has collected his authorisation here himself—as a refugee. From here he went to San Sebastian, where he will get the thing moving again.

7. In Portugal all is well, as the Emancipacion sent today shows. We also have private letters from there; the people are working very hard on the TRADE UNIONS.

8. In Lodi only Bignami is left. The party3 committee in Hamburg has sent them 20 thalers and Oberwinder 50 guldens from Vienna, which has not failed to have an effect.

9. Cuno's manoeuvre, to disguise himself as Capestro, has already been exposed in the Brussels Internationale.289

10. If the G.C. is not already receiving the secessionist sheets, some unknown name will have to take out a subscription to them. Here, with the greatest difficulty and by roundabout ways, we obtain one copy of each, and not always that—we still have not received the last three issues of the Bulletin jurassien. So, with the best will in the world, we cannot procure them for you. Anyway, they are only L'Internationale (Brussels), the Bulletin de la Federation jurassienne. (Sonvillier) and La Federacion (Barcelona).

[^1]: a Social-Democratic Workers' Party.— Ed.



11. I have spoken to Le Moussu about the STAMPS; he will procure them, just as last year.290 Yet it is odd that this could not be done in New York.

12. What has become of Mac Donnell? He must have arrived long since. I have neither seen nor heard anything of him.

Must catch the post.

Best wishes,

F. Engels London, February 8, 1873a

First published in: Marx and Engels, Works, First Russian Edition, Vol. XXVI, Moscow, 1935

Printed according to the manu- script

Published in English for the first time

[^1]: a In the manuscript mistakenly: "1872".— Ed.



