---
Volume: 23
Document_Title: "I "
Page_Range: "461-462"
---

# I 



**[p. 426]**

Frederick Engels

[NEWS ON THE INTERNATIONAL LABOUR MOVEMENT]

[I]

[The International Herald, No. 51, March 22, 1873]

Spain

The strike of the engineers and stokers on the Northern Railway still continues.3 The middle class papers state that the engineers and stokers, on strike of the Valencia Railway, have given in, but this is about the third time this assertion is made by them, and we shall not believe it until we see it confirmed in the Spanish International papers.

The demand of the International factory workers of Barcelona and neighbourhood for a reduction of the hours of work to ten, appears to have been complied with, as the factories keep working, and the respectable papers are ominously silent on this point. The hours of work, heretofore, were from 12 to 13. It is to be observed that this point has been carried principally by the men of Gracia, the manufactory suburb of Barcelona, and that they, as early as November last, had unanimously declared for the Hague Resolu- tions.

The letter-press compositors of Madrid have compelled the masters, without strike, to agree to the new terms proposed by them.

Germany

The type-compositors of Germany are engaged in a struggle which threatens to become very severe. They have a Trades Union which numbers about 4,000, out of 7,000 type-compositors in all Germany. On the other hand, the master printers have a society

[^1]: a See this volume, p. 411.— Ed.



