---
Volume: 23
Document_Title: "IV "
Page_Range: "466-468"
---

# IV 



**[p. 431]**

At Neuchâtel, the shoemakers have gained an advance without resorting to a strike.

America

The servant girls of Ottawa (Canada) have formed a Trades Union.

[IV]

[The International Herald, No. 56, April 26, 1873]

Germany

Berlin.—The gardeners' journeymen are on strike for ten hours and an advance of wages.—A strike of the pianoforte makers for 33 72 per cent advance of wages and 8 hours a day is impending.

Munich.—The working class movement here is very active. Almost all trades have their unions; a central Trades' Council is being formed. The jewellers have carried an advance of wages of 25 per cent; the tailors, without a strike, 15 per cent.

Augsburg.—A portion of the carpenters—those employed by the seven largest masters of the town, about 90 in all—are locked out, because they will not accept the new tariff of wages offered by the masters.

Leipzig.—The great struggle between the master printers and the type-compositors, which from here spread all over Germany, has ended in the complete victory of the men. The haughty masters have had to accept all the conditions imposed by the latter, namely, withdrawal of the general notice given to all union men, and settlement of a new scale of wages by a mixed committee of men and masters. These conditions being agreed to, the men's committee declared the strike at an end.

Danzig.3—The ships' carpenters' strike has ended in a defeat, owing to the direct interference of the government in favour of the masters, by threatening with dismissal every man employed in

[^1]: a Gdansk.— Ed.

[^2]: 16*



Hamburg.—A strike of the shoemakers of Hamburg, Altona, and neighbourhood is impending, as the masters seem determined to resist the demands of the men.

Of smaller strikes we noticed those of the ships' carpenters at Kiel (Holstein); the moulders at Itzehoe (Holstein); the cork cutters at Delmenhorst, about 900; the joiners and cabinet-makers at Bremerhaven, etc., principally caused by insufficient wages. All over Germany the organization of Trades Unions, local and national, and even international (comprising the workmen of each trade in Germany, Austria, and Switzerland) is progressing very actively, and wages are more and more approaching the English level.

Austria

Vienna.—The tailors' strike continues. That of the engineers in a large machine shop, begun inconsiderately, has broken down completely. On the other hand, that of the file cutters has been triumphant; the whole of the masters have agreed to the 20 per cent advance asked by the men.

Graz.—The cabinet-makers and joiners went on strike on the 21st April for shorter hours and 20 per cent advance of wages. The shoemakers in a large shoe shop have struck for 11 hours a day, which is now the usual time in Vienna.

Hungary

Pesth.—The Hungarian Working Men's Organization suppressed after the defeat of the Paris Commune, has now been re- established at a large meeting held on the 23rd March.299 The Organization possesses two newspapers, one in the Hungarian, the other in the German language.3 The committee is composed of old Internationals, amongst whom we find the name of C. Farkas,b

delegate at the Hague Congress as treasurer.

[^1]: a The reference is to the weekly published in Hungarian (Munkâs-Heti-Kronika) and German (Arbeiter-Wochen-Chronik).— Ed.

[^2]: b In the newspaper mistakenly: O. Farkas.— Ed.



