---
Volume: 23
Document_Title: "VI "
Page_Range: "469-472"
---

# VI 



**[p. 434]**

Munich.—The shoemakers are on strike for 30 per cent advance of wages and 12 hours maximum daily labour. Masters employing 250 men have given in; 150 unmarried men have left the place, so that victory appears certain.

Berlin.—The shoemakers, about 3,000 in number, have struck for an advance of wages of 33 per cent. All unmarried men are leaving. The strike of the gardeners' assistants appears to have broken down, for want of a proper organization. This however is now being prepared. The men have formed a union with a view to speedy action.

Pforzheim.—The shoemakers' strike is at an end. The men asked for an advance of 20 per cent, and have got 15 per cent.

Mayence.—The strike in Wolfs' shoe-factory has been brought to a close by the employers withdrawing the notice of 15 per cent reduction of wages and paying to the men about £20 towards the expenses of the strike.

At Cologne the joiners, at Trier the tanners, were on the point of striking for higher wages.

Austria

Workers in wood visiting the Vienna Exhibition are informed that the Committee of the Vienna Union of the trade meets at the Florian Tavern, Stumpergasse, Mariahilf, Vienna.

[VI]

America

The Gasmen of the New York Gas Company went on strike on April 5th for the restoration of the eight hours working day, which had been conceded to them some time ago, but soon

[^1]: [The International Herald, No. 60, May 24, 1873]





**[p. 435]**

This is the way in which the Model Republic proceeds, as soon as the working class, in demanding its rights, interferes with the interests of the comforts of the capitalist class.

Austria

Vienna.—The File-cutters' strike continues. The Tailors' strike is at an end—the men have gained considerable advantages if they could not carry all their points; their wages have been raised and their hours of labour reduced.

Graz.—Great agitation among the journeymen Bakers in order to reduce the working hours, hitherto from 18 to 20 a day]—The Joiners' strike continues.

The working men's agitation in Austria is everywhere proceed- ing in a most satisfactory manner.

Hungary

A general congress of the Hungarian Shoemakers is going to take place on the 1st June at Pesth. The Austrian Shoemakers

[^1]: a Where the emigrants were placed in quarantine.— Ed.





**[p. 436]**

Switzerland

The Jewellers' strike just closed by the victory of the men, has again proved what fools the masters are to themselves when they resist the just demands of the workmen. Barely one fourth of the strikers have returned to work; the rest have found employment elsewhere, and the masters now have the greatest difficulty in finding the sufficient number of men. Serves them right.

Germany

Halle.—A strike of Miners has been successful, it lasted only a few days, when the masters gave in.

Hamburg.—The Shoemakers' strike continues. Altenburg.—The Tailors, after a short strike, obtained an advance of 162/3 per cent.

Numerous strikes are in preparation, among others, those of the Brushmakers of Berlin for 25 per cent advance; of the Saddlers of Stuttgart for 10 hours a day and 25 per cent advance, together with the abolition of compulsory boarding and lodging in the master's house.

A lock out has taken place among the Stonemasons of Zeitz and neighbourhood, but as this trade is internationally united in Germany, Austria, and Switzerland, success is pretty safe. The same association has a strike on its hands at Hamburg.

The annual general congress of the German Building Trades, will take place at Chemnitz (Saxony) in June.

[^1]: Written in March-May 1873 Reproduced from the newspaper

[^2]: First published in The International Herald, Nos. 51, 52, 54, 56, 57, 60, March 22 and 29, April 12 and 26, May 3 and 24, 1873



