---
Volume: 23
Document_Title: "94. F. Engels. To the General Council of the International Working Men's Association "
Page_Range: "472-474"
---

# 94. F. Engels. To the General Council of the International Working Men's Association 



**[p. 437]**

Frederick Engels

TO THE GENERAL COUNCIL

OF THE INTERNATIONAL WORKING MEN'S ASSOCIATION

122 Regent's Park Road N. W. London 15-th April 1873

Citizens, I have received your letter of the 21-st March along with Bill £8.-6 for Lodi. At the same time I received a letter from Bignami stating that he was again hiding in order to avoid being dragged to prison to undergo a sentence of imprisonment which he prefers doing later on after having been restored to better health. The money could therefore not have arrived at a more favourable moment. I got it changed for 200 francs in French banknotes which I sent to him immediately.

Le Moussu has undertaken to do the stamps300 and I have repeatedly reminded him of it, but as far as I know they are not much advanced yet.

The Arbeiter-Zeitung has come to hand regularly. The cost of printing of the Rules3 in English and French was about £15 each, those in German were much cheaper as they were first printed in the Volksstaat and nothing charged for composi- tion, but only for paper, printing and binding.301 This of course could not be repeated now.

and he has some still.

German Rules are still here, several hundreds which are at the

[^1]: The report on the Allianceb is now being drawn up, and Lafargue & I work at it daily, no time is being lost. The documents were kept by Lucain at Brussels until after Christmas,0

[^2]: a See this volume, pp. 3-20.— Ed. b Ibid., pp. 454-580.— Ed. c This refers to the papers of the Commission to investigate the Bakuninist Alliance appointed at the Hague Congress.— Ed.



As soon as the Alliance is put into shape, we shall do the Congress minutes.302

The Emancipacion of Madrid is dying if not dead. We have sent them £15.-, but as scarcely anybody paid for the copies received, it appears impossible to keep it up.303 I am in correspondence with Mesa with regard to another paper to be started but cannot say what will be the result.

The Pensamento Social of Lisbon, an excellent paper which in its last number had a very good reply to the Spanish federal Commission of Alcoy on the Alliance question,6 will also have to suspend its publication for a short time, but will reappear.

The International Herald, as you will have seen, also is on its last legs. We may try to keep it alive till the next English Congress (Whit-week)304 after which it may be possible to start something else. The Herald is not worth much except as an organ of publicity for the B.F.C., but, as such, for the moment almost indispensable.

You will have seen from the French papers that Walter (Heddeghem) comes out as a downright spy. He is said to have been a Bonapartist mouchard.c At Toulouse, Swarm (Dentraygues) has not behaved much better, but not having read the full report, I cannot speak with certainty; at all events he was no mouchard before, but seems weak & capricious.

Fraternal Greeting

F. Engels

So far, no money has been received by me for the Council. No news either from Italy, except that temporarily the Plebe appears to be suspended too. The arrest of the Alliancists at Bologna & Mirandola will not last long, they will soon be liberated; if some of them are now and then arrested by mistake, they never suffer seriously.

[^1]: First published in an abridged form, in Reproduced from the manuscript English, in: Briefe und Auszüge aus Briefen von Joh. Phil. Becker, Jos. Dietzgen, Friedrich Engels, Karl Marx u. A. an F. A. Sorge und Andere, Stuttgart, 1906

[^2]: a British Federal Council.— Ed. b "Da commissao de correspondencia", O Pensamento Social, No. 51, April 5, 1873.— Ed.

[^3]: c Police agent.— Ed.



