---
Volume: 23
Document_Title: "98. F. Engels. To the General Council of the International Working Men's Association "
Page_Range: "482-483"
---

# 98. F. Engels. To the General Council of the International Working Men's Association 



**[p. 447]**

Frederick Engels

TO THE GENERAL COUNCIL

OF THE INTERNATIONAL WORKING MEN'S ASSOCIATION

122 Regents Park Road N.W. London, June 14th, 1873

Citoyens, I have to reply to your two letters of the 11th April and 14th May. As communicated before,3 the whole of the money for Lodi (fr. 200) was forwarded by me on April 10th to Bignami, new persecutions having arisen. The money was acknowledged by Bignami whose receipt I hold.— About 10 days ago, the Plebe has re-appeared and brought your address to the Spaniards and also, in a very prominent place, your declaration about the self- exclusion, from our Association, of the Secessionists.312

The documents in question have been sent to the Spanish Federal Council.

My copy of the alterations of rules as prepared for the late General Council313 has disappeared, I have however been prom- ised another which shall be forwarded as soon as received.

As the Plebe is alive again I shall report about Italian Emigration and Gas strike etc. in my first correspondence to that paper. I could not act before, my only correspondent Bignami being out of the way and not having given me another address.

The £4.-3 are to hand and shall be used and directed as soon as a safe address in Paris can be found.

Fraternally yours,

[^1]: Le Moussu has been reminded of the stamps.0

[^2]: F. Engels First published in: Marx and Engels, Reproduced from the manuscript Works, First Russian Edition, Vol. XXVI, Moscow, 1935

[^3]: a See this volume, p. 437.— Ed. b Ibid.— Ed.



