---
Volume: 23
Document_Title: "101. F. Engels. Comment upon Giuseppe Garibaldi's Letter to Prospero Crescio "
Page_Range: "488-489"
---

# 101. F. Engels. Comment upon Giuseppe Garibaldi's Letter to Prospero Crescio 



**[p. 453]**

Frederick Engels

[COMMENT UPON GIUSEPPE GARIBALDI'S LETTER TO PROSPERO CRESCIO]321

My dear Crescio,

Hearty thanks for sending to me your Avvenire Sociale which I shall read with interest.

You intend, in your paper, to make war upon untruth and slavery. That is a very fine programme, but I believe that the International, in fighting against the principle of authority, makes a mistake and obstructs its own progress. The Paris Commune fell because there was in Paris no authority but only anarchy. Spain and France are suffering from the same evil.

It is necessary to explain that "the International" which Garibaldi evidently has in mind's eye is the Italian portion of the Association, the majority of which is, upon this very question of authority, in rebellion against the General Council. Garibaldi's censure of the "anti-authoritists" as they call themselves, is, therefore, a justification of the attitude which the Association generally, holds on this question.

[^1]: I wish success to the Avvenire, and,

[^2]: Remain yours,

[^3]: G. Garibaldi.3

[^4]: Written between July 7 and 12, 1873 Reproduced from the newspaper

[^5]: First published in The Eastern Post, No. 250, July 13, 1873

[^6]: a G. Garibaldi, "Caro Crescio", La Favilla, No. 134, June 5, 1873.— Ed.



