---
Volume: 23
Document_Title: "1. Bakunin's Hegira "
Page_Range: "591-593"
---

# 1. Bakunin's Hegira 



**[p. 556]**

of some of the sections and federations. The resolutions adopted by the Hague Congress against the Alliance were therefore merely a matter of duty: the Congress could not allow the International, that great creation of the proletariat, to fall into nets spread by the riff-raff of the exploiting classes. As for those who wish to deprive the General Council of the prerogatives without which the International would be nothing but a confused, disjointed and, to use the language of the Alliance, "amorphous" mass, we cannot regard them otherwise than as traitors or dupes. London, July 21, 1873

The Commission: E. Dupont, F. Engels, Léo Frankel, C. Le Moussu, Karl Marx, Aug. Serraillier3

X

APPENDIX

1. BAKUNIN'S HEGIRA384

In 1857, Bakunin was sent to Siberia, not to forced labour, as his accounts would have us believe, but simply to live there in exile. At that period, the governor of Siberia was Count Muravyov-Amursky, Bakunin's cousin and a relative of the Muravyov who was the executioner of Poland. Thanks to this relationship and to the services which he had rendered to the government, Bakunin enjoyed exceptional position and favours in Siberia.

was in Siberia at that time. Bakunin adopted an openly hostile attitude to him and tried to harm him in every way possible, which was easy for him as a cousin of the governor-general. His persecution of Petrashevsky gave Bakunin further grounds for governmental favours. A shady affair, which had considerable repercussions in Siberia and in Russia, put an end to this struggle between the two exiles. As a result of criticism levelled against the conduct of a highly-placed official who was playing at liberalism, a storm broke out in the governor-general's entourage and ended in a duelb to the death. Now this whole affair stank so much of personal intrigues and fraudulent dealings, that the whole population was disturbed and accused the chief officials of having

[^1]: Petrashevsky, leader and organiser of the 1849 conspiracy,385

[^2]: a See this volume, pp. 454-57.— Ed. b Between F. A. Beklemishev and M. S. Neklyudov, who was killed.— Ed.





**[p. 557]**

assassinated the victim of the duel, a young friend of Petrashev- sky's. Unrest took on such proportions that the government became fearful of a popular riot. Bakunin sided with the high officials, Muravyov included. He used his influence to have Petrashevsky exiled to a remoter place and he defended Petrashevsky's persecutors in a long letter signed by him as witness and sent to Herzen.386 The latter, when publishing it in the Kolokol* sup- pressed all the attacks against Petrashevsky; but the manuscript copy made of this letter while on its way to St. Petersburg was circulated there, and so the original text reached the public.

The merchants of Siberia, who are generally more liberal than those in Russia, wanted to found a university there in order not to have to send their children any more to distant schools in Russia, and to create an intellectual centre in those parts. For this, they needed imperial authorisation.11 Muravyov, advised and encour- aged by Bakunin, opposed this project. Bakunin's hatred of science goes back a long way. This is perfectly well-known in Siberia. Challenged on this point several times by the Russians, Bakunin could not deny it, but always explained his conduct by saying that, while preparing for his escape, he sought to win the good graces of his cousin the governor.

Not only did Bakunin use and abuse governmental favours, but for trifling sums of money he obtained them in abundance for the capitalists, contractors and tax-farmers. Bakunin's proclamations, confiscated from Nechayev's victims and published by the govern- ment in 1869 and 1870, contained lists of proscribed persons, including the notorious Katkov, editor-in-chief of the Moscow Gazette* The latter took his revenge by publishing the following disclosure in his newspaper: he had in his possession letters sent to him by Bakunin from London on his arrival from Siberia, in which he begged Katkov, as an old friend, to advance him several thousand rubles.d Bakunin admits that during his stay in Siberia he had been receiving an annuity from a vodka tax-farmere who paid him for ensuring, by his intercession, the good graces of the

[^1]: a [M. Ba Ky HHH,] «ÜHCb Mo BT> pe4a Kn;ho no no B04y 4y3AH Ee KAe MHiue Ba CT> He KAK>40BUM», Kojio KOJih, np HAco Ke HHe «Ilcv^b cy4i>!», A.A. 6, 7, July 1 and 15, I860.— Ed.

[^2]: b By Alexander II.— Ed. c Moc Koec Kin ebdo Mocmu.—Ed. d [M. H. Kar KOB,] «Ca Moe THHce Aoe Bne Ha TAfcme», Mocxoec Kin Bbdouocmu, No. 4, January 6, 1870. (Katkov referred to Bakunin's letter from Irkutsk of January 2, 1861.)—Ed.

[^3]: e Dmitry Benardaki.— Ed.

[^4]: 20—1006



