---
Volume: 23
Document_Title: "I. Introduction 1500- 1789 "
Page_Range: "634-638"
---

# I. Introduction 1500- 1789 



**[p. 599]**

Frederick Engels

VARIA ON GERMANY

I. INTRODUCTION 1500-1789

1. Germany more and more fragmented and the centre weakened end of 15th century, with France and England already more or less centralised and the nation in the process of formation. This impossible in Germany because 1. feudalism developed later than in the countries that had suffered conquest3; 2. Germany had French and Slavonic constituents and saw Italy as belonging to it and Rome as its centre—thus no national complex; 3. because, and this is the main thing, the individual provinces and groups of provinces were still utterly isolated from one another, no traffic, etc. (vid. Peasant War).b The Hansa, the Rhenish League of Cities and Swabian League of Cities404 represented natural, but separate groups.

Ad I, 1. Spain, France, England end 15th century grown together into constituted national states. This consolidation epoch- making for 15th century (Spain—unification of the Catalan and Castilian nationalities; Portugal, the Iberian Holland, had estab- lished its right to a separate existence through its navigation; France—through the dynasty-allodium, which gradually absorbed the nation.— England (England only reached this stage after being forced to renounce its Quixotic plans for conquest of France— similar to Germany's Roman campaigns—which would have bled it white, as the Roman campaigns had bled white Germany)—by the Wars of the Roses,405 which destroyed the nobility.—Germany

[^1]: a The allusion is to the conquest of Western Europe by the Germanic tribes in the 5th-6th centuries.— Ed

[^2]: b See F. Engels, The Peasant War in Germany (present edition, Vol. 10, p. 401).— Ed





**[p. 600]**

The "Kulturkampf"40fci between the Emperor and the Pope in the Middle Ages split Germany and Italy (where the Pope was an obstacle to national unity and, at the same time, often apparently its champion, but in such a way that, e.g., Dante saw the saviour of Italy in the foreign Emperor3) and, by 1500, the Pope had positioned himself right across Italy as the prince possessing the middle of the country, and made unity physically impossible.

2. Nevertheless, Germany would have grown into a single entity through the natural development of trade, the Germanisation of the Slavs and the loss of the French provinces407 and of Italy since the world trade route passed through Germany, had two decisive events not occurred to prevent this:

— 1) The German burghers made their revolution—which, in accordance with the spirit of the age, appeared in a religious form—the Reformation. But how lousy! Impossible without the imperial knights and the peasants; but all 3 estates prevented by conflicting interests: knights often the robbers of the towns (vid. Mangold von Eberstein) and oppressors of the peasants, and towns also peasant-bashers (Council of Ulm and peasants!408); imperial knights rise up first, are left in the lurch by the burghers, perish; peasants rise up, are directly opposed by the burghers. At the same time, the bourgeois religious revolution so castrated that it appeals to the princes, and the latter are given the leadership. Ad 2, 1: Specifically theological-theoretical character of the German revolu- tion of the 16th century. Predominant interest in things not of this world, abstraction from wretched reality—basis of subsequent theoretical superiority of the Germans from Leibniz to Hegel.

— 2) The world trade route removed from Germany, and

[^1]: Dante Alighieri, De Monorchia.— Ed.





**[p. 601]**

— 3) Result that cuius regio, eius religio,a and that Germany actually disintegrated into a predominantly Protestant North, predominantly Catholic but very mixed Southwest, and exclusively Catholic Southeast. This already predetermined developments of 1740-1870 (Prussia, split between North and South, finally Little Germany409 and Austria). Opposite of France. Suppression of the Huguenots (vid. "Varia" p. 2b).

3. Germany, once condemned industrially to passivity and setbacks, was bound to be more exposed to the influences of changing political factors than industrially active and progressive countries. (Develop this in general terms.) The split into 2 parties placed civil war on the agenda; enumeration of the wars up to 1648—civil war. French exploitation of the opportunity and the alliance with and payment of the Protestant princes and German mercenaries. Culminates in the Thirty Years War.410 Thirty Years War—Irishmen in Germany, Germans in Ireland, 1693 and 1806.411 Description of the devastation. Result: economically, socially, politically—losses to France; settlement by Sweden and Denmark in Germany; the guarantee-powers' right of interven- tion; total collapse of the central power; right of rebellion against the Emperor, civil war and treason guaranteed by Europe to the German princes.

4. 1648-1789 a. Political condition. The German princes exploit the Peace of Westphalia by trying to outdo one another in selling themselves to foreign countries, and these—France, and also the princes— exploit Germany's weakness in order gradually to appropriate all Germany's French possessions and encircle Alsace. Historical right of France, and Teutons' outcry about "robbery".412 Unchanging nature of linguistic boundaries (vid. Menkec) since circa A.D. 1000, except for the districts left of the Vosges. This the general situation. In particular: Rise of a rival power to Austria and the empire in the North: Prussia. Beginning of the realisation of the division into North and South. Critique of Prussian history.

[^1]: a The ruler of a country determines its religion (the underlying principle of the Augsburg Religious Peace of 1555; it ended a series of Catholic-Protestant wars in Germany by leaving it to the respective princes to lay down the religion for their subjects).— Ed.

[^2]: b See this volume, pp. 607-08.— Ed. c [K.] Spruner and [H. Th.] Menke, Hand-Atlas für die Geschichte des Mittelalters und der neueren Zeit, Gotha, [1871-] 1880.— Ed.



b. Economic matters. For all that, slow recovery from the consequences of the Thirty Years War and renewed crawling up of the burghers. Only the possession of infamous virtues made this revival possible in such circumstances. For all that, economic progress only made possible through political intervention—by the infamy of the princes and the money paid to them from abroad. This proves how deeply humiliated Germany was economically. This period the source of the patriarchal régime. After 1648, the state really called on to perform social functions and forced to assume them by financial embarrassment; where it failed to exercise them— stagnation (the Westphalian bishoprics). What a state of humilia- tion! And how lousy the state aid! In relation to the world market, purely passive; only as neutrals in great world wars (American and Revolutionary Wars until 1801)413 was anything to be earned. On the other hand, powerless against the robber states. (Thanks to the French Revolution this European disgrace eliminated.)

c. Literature and language utterly degenerate; theology wooden dogmatism; in other sciences Germany also in a state of degradation, yet rays of hope: J. Böhme (again, a sign of the philosophers to come), Kepler, Leibniz—again abstraction from the existing, the real. Bach.

d. State of Germany in 1789. a) Agriculture—peasant condi- tions. Serfdom, corporal punishment, dues, b) Industry—a sheer starvation affair, essentially manual labour, but in England already the beginnings of large-scale industry, and German industry, before it was even fully developed, doomed to die. c) Trade— passive, d) Social status of the burghers vis-à-vis nobility and government.—e) Political obstacle to development: fragmentation. Description as in Menke. Tolls, prevention of river traffic. FREE TRADE along internal borders forced through by dismemberment. Tolls chiefly urban consumption dues.

These princes, powerless to do good, even when enlightened— as Schubart's patrons414 and Karl August—all were happy to join the Confederation of the Rhine,415 rather than fight a war. Invasion of 1806a the test, when it was a matter of life or death for them. Moreover, all of these 1,000 princes absolute monarchs, coarse, uneducated scoundrels, from whom no cooperation could

[^1]: a Napoleon's army invaded Germany in the course of France's war against Prussia.— Ed.



