---
Volume: 23
Document_Title: "I "
Page_Range: "652-654"
---

# I 



**[p. 617]**

Frederick Engels

THE IMPERIAL MILITARY LAW

I

[Der Volksstaat, No. 28, March 8, 1874]

It is truly comical the way the National Liberals and the men of Progress439 are acting in the Imperial Diet with respect to §1 of the Military Law:

"The effective strength of the army in peacetime in non-commissioned officers and soldiers shall, until the issue of further legal regulations, amount to 401,659 men." »

This paragraph, they cry, is unacceptable; it cancels out the Imperial Diet's budgetary rights and turns the approval of military estimates into a mere farce!

Quite right, gentlemen! And precisely because this is so, because the article is unacceptable, you will accept it in its essentials. Why make so much fuss because you are expected to bend your knees once again, as you have so often done before with such grace?

During the whole period of the conflict, the liberal opposition put into practice Manteuffel's principle: "He who is strong gives way bravely."441 After the Danish War their braveness in giving way increased considerably. Yet when Bismarck returned in triumph from Sadowa in 1866 and went so far as to apply for an indemnity for his previous unauthorised expenditure—then their giving way no longer knew any bounds.442 The military estimate was immediately approved, and in Prussia what has once been

[^1]: The root of the whole wretched business is the re-organisation of the Prussian army. It engendered the glorious conflict.440

[^2]: a Entwurf eines Reichs-Militär-Gesetzes. Engels quotes from a newspaper. Cf. Stenographische Berichte über die Verhandlungen des Deutschen Reichstags. 2. Legislatur- Periode. 1. Session. 1874, Vol. 3, Berlin, 1874.—Ed.





**[p. 618]**

Then came the North German Imperial Diet, which debated the constitution of the Confederation.443 There was much talk of budgetary rights, the government proposal was declared unaccept- able on the grounds of inadequate control over finances; there was much twisting and turning this way and that, and finally they swallowed the bitter pill and transferred the regulations of the Prussian constitution on the military estimate to the North German Confederation on all major points. By this measure, the strength of the army in peacetime was already raised from 200,000 to 300,000 men.

Then came the glorious war of 1870, and with it the "German Empire". Another constituent (!) Imperial Diet and a new imperial constitution.444 More high-minded speeches and countless reserva- tions on account of the budgetary rights. And what did the gentlemen decide?

The Imperial Constitution §60:

"The strength of the German army in peacetime is set until December 31, 1871, at one per cent of the population of 1867 and shall be provided pro rata in respect of the same by the individual federal states. After this date, the strength of the army in peacetime shall be laid down by means of imperial legislation." h

One per cent of the population of 1867 means 401,000 men. This effective strength has since been prolonged by decision of the Imperial Diet until December 31, 1874.

That was the third time our Nationals had knelt down before the inviolable military estimate. And when Bismarck now comes and demands that the happy provisorium be turned into an even happier definitivum, these gentlemen cry out at the infringement of the budgetary rights, which they themselves have sacrificed three times in a row!

[^1]: §62: "To meet the expenditure for the whole of the German army and the institutions appertaining to the same, the Emperor shall have 225 thalers multiplied by the number of men constituting the peacetime strength of the army according to §60 placed annually at his disposal until December 31, 1871. After December 31, 1871, these amounts shall continue to be paid to the Imperial Exchequer by the individual states of the Confederation. For the purpose of calculating the same, the peacetime effective strength provisionally laid down in §60 shall be retained until changed by imperial law."

[^2]: a Engels quotes §109 of the 1850 Prussian constitution.— Ed. b Here and below cf. "Verfassung des Deutschen Reichs", Reichs-Gesetzblatt, No. 628, Berlin, 1871.— Ed.



