---
Volume: 31
Document_Title: "g) Mr. Rodbertus, Dritter Brief an v. Kirchmann von Rodbertus. Widerlegung der Ricardoschen Lehre von der Grundrente und Begründung einer neuen Rententheorie, Berlin, 1851 "
Page_Range: "257-351"
---

# g) Mr. Rodbertus, Dritter Brief an v. Kirchmann von Rodbertus. Widerlegung der Ricardoschen Lehre von der Grundrente und Begründung einer neuen Rententheorie, Berlin, 1851 



**[p. 250]**

"We suppose that the wealthy non-producers of every description-, with their families, and dependents, amount only to 2 millions of persons, yet this number alone would cost the working classes £30,000,000 annually, if their maintenance were averaged, like that of the latter, at £15 per head" (pp. 83, 84). "But upon the most moderate computation their maintenance will cost not less than £50 per head. This gives a total of £100,000,000 as the annual cost of the mere drones of society—the utterly unproductive" (p. 84).

"Add to this2 the double and quadruple ALLOWANCE received by the various classes of small proprietors, manufacturers, and tradesmen, in the shape of [X-444] profit and interest. Upon the most moderate computation, the share of wealth enjoyed by this extensive portion of the COMMUNITY will amount to not less than £140,000,000 annually, above the average of what is received by an equal number of the best paid of the working class. Thus, along with their government, the 2 classes of idlers and livers on profit—comprising perhaps V4 of the entire population—absorb about £300,000,000 annually, or above one half of the entire wealth produced" (p[p. 84,] 85). "An average loss of above £50 per head to every working man in the empire! This leaves no more than an average of £11 per head per annum, to be divided amongst the remaining 3/4 of the nation. From calculations made in 1815, it appears that the annual income of the whole people of the UNITED KINGDOM amounted to about £430,000,000; of which the working class received £99,742,547, and the rent, pension, and profit class £330,778,825! The whole property of the country was at the same time calculated to be worth nearly three thousand millions of pounds sterling" (p. 85).

Cf. the list of King98 etc.

The following remark has to be made beforehand: supposing the necessary wage =10 hours, then this is most easily explained in the following manner. If 10 hours' labour (i.e., a sum of money =10 hours) enabled the agricultural labourer, on an aver- age, to purchase all the necessary means of subsistence, agricultur- al, industrial products, etc., then this is the average wage for UNSKILLED LABOUR. We are thus concerned here with the value of his daily product which must fall to his share. In the first place this value exists in the form of the commodity which he produces, i.e., [in] a certain quantity of this commodity, in exchange for which, after

[^1]: 1844: ENGLAND. POPULATION: NOBILITY AND GENTRY=1,181,000. TRADESMEN, FARMERS, etc. =4,221,000 (combined total—5,402,000). LABOURERS, PAUPERS, etc. =9,567,000. Banfield (T.C.), The Organisation of Industry, 2nd ed., London, 1848 [pp. 22-23].

[^2]: [X-445] g) Mr. RODBERTUS DRITTER BRIEF AN V. KIRCHMANN VON RODBERTUS. WIDERLEGUNG DER RICARDOSCHEN LEHRE VON DER GRUNDRENTE

[^3]: UND BEGRÜNDUNG EINER NEUEN RENTENTHEORIE, BERLIN, 1851"

[^4]: a Brav has "likewise".— Ed.





**[p. 251]**

Mr. Rodbertus first investigates the situation in a country where there is no separation between land ownership and ownership of capital. And here he comes to the right conclusion that rent (by which he means the entire surplus value) is simply=to the unpaid labour or the quantity of products which it represents.

In the first instance it is noteworthy that Rodbertus only takes into account the growth of relative surplus value, i.e., the growth of surplus value in so far as it arises out of the growing productivity of labour and not the growth of surplus value derived from the prolongation of the working day itself. All absolute surplus value is of course relative in one respect. Labour must be sufficiently productive for the worker not to require all his time to keep himself alive. But from this point the distinction comes into force. Incidentally, if originally labour is but little productive, the needs are also extremely simple (as with slaves) and the masters themselves do not live much better than the servants. The relative productivity of labour necessary before a PROFIT-MONGER, a parasite, can come into being is very small. If we find a high rate of profit though labour is as yet very unproductive, and machinery, division of labour, etc., are not used, then this is the case only under the following circumstances: either as in India, partly because the requirements of the worker are extremely small and he is depressed even below his modest needs, but partly also because low productivity of labour is identical with a relatively small fixed capital in proportion to the share of capital which is spent on wages or, and this comes to the same thing, with a relatively high proportion of capital laid out in labour in relation to the total capital; or finally, because labour time is excessively long. The latter is the case in countries (such as Austria, etc.) where the capitalist mode of production is already in existence but which have to compete with far more developed countries. Wages can be low here partly because the requirements of the worker are less developed, partly because agricultural products are cheaper or—this amounts to the same thing as far as the capitalist is concerned—because they have less value in terms of money. Hence the quantity of the product of, say, 10 hours' labour, which

[^1]: 17»





**[p. 252]**

Quite apart from the variation in rent according to the fertility of the land, rent as such—hence the modern form of landed property—would already be possible, it could exist, because the average wage of the agricultural labourer is below that of the industrial worker. Since, to start with, by tradition (as the farmer of the old times turns capitalist before capitalists turn farmers) the capitalist passed on part of his gain to the LANDLORD, he compensated himself by forcing wages down below their level. With the labourers' desertion of the land, wages had to rise and they did rise. But hardly has this pressure become evident, when machinery, etc., is introduced and the land once more boasts a (relative) SURPLUS POPULATION. (Vide England.) Surplus value can be increased, without the extension of labour time or the development of the productive power of labour, by forcing wages below their traditional level. And indeed this is the case wherever agricultural production is carried on by capitalist methods. Where it cannot be achieved by means of machinery, it is done by turning the land over to sheep grazing. Here then we already have a potential basis of [X-446] rent since, in fact, the agricultural labourer's wage does not=the average wage. This rent would be feasible quite independent of the price of the product, which is=to its value.

Ricardo is also aware of the second type of rent increase, which arises from a greater product sold at the same price,3 but he does not take it into account, since he measures rent per qr and not per ACRE. He would not say that rent has risen (and in this way rent can rise with falling prices) because 20 qrs [at] 2s. is more than 10 [quarters at] 2s. or 10 qrs [at] 3s.

Incidentally, however the phenomenon of rent may be ex-

[^1]: D. Ricardo, On the Principles of Political Economy—Ed.





**[p. 253]**

Thus if we admit that the varying fertility of the land accounts not for rent itself, but only for the differences in rent, there remains the law that while in industry, on an average, excess profit arises from the lowering of the price of the product, in agriculture the relative size of rent is determined not only by the relative raising of the price (raising the price of the product of fertile land above its value) but by selling the cheaper product at the cost of the dearer. This is, however, as I have already demonstrated (Proudhon),b merely the law of competition, which does not emanate from the "soil" but from "capitalist production" itself.

Furthermore, Ricardo would be right in another respect, except that, in the manner of the economists, he turns a historical phenomenon into an eternal law. This historical phenomenon is the relatively faster development of manufacture (in fact the truly bourgeois branch of industry) as against agriculture. The latter has

[^1]: a In the manuscript the German term is followed by its English equiva- lent.— Ed

[^2]: b See K. Marx, The Poverty of Philosophy (present edition, Vol. 6, pp. 197-206).— Ed





**[p. 254]**

Suppose the relation of industry A to industry B is as 1:1. Originally agriculture [was] more productive because not only natural forces but also a machine created by nature play a part in agriculture; right from the start, the individual worker is working with a machine. Hence, in ancient times and in the Middle Ages agricultural products were relatively much cheaper than industrial products, which is obvious (see Wade") from the ratio of the two within the average wage.

At the same time let 1:1 indicate the fertility of the two [branches of production]. Now if industry A=10, [i.e.] its fertility increases tenfold while industry B merely increases threefold,=3, then whereas the industries were previously as 1 : 1 they are now as 10: 3 or as 1 :3/io- The fertility of industry B has decreased relatively by "''lw although absolutely it has increased threefold. For the highest rent [it is] the same—relatively to industry—as if it had risen because the poorest land had become 7/io less fertile.

Now it does not by any means follow, as Ricardo supposes,b that the rate of profit has fallen because wages have risen as a result of the relative increase in the price of agricultural products [X-447]. For the average wage is not determined by the relative but by the absolute value of the products which enter into it. It does however follow that the rate of profit (really the rate of surplus value) has not risen in the same ratio as the productive power of manufacturing industry, and this is due to agriculture (not the land) being relatively less productive. This is absolutely certain. The reduction in the necessary labour time seems small compared with the progress in industry. This is evident from the fact that

[^1]: a [J. Wade,] History of the Middle and Working Classes, London, 1833, p. 25.— Ed.

[^2]: b See D. Ricardo, On the Principles of Political Economy, pp. 111-12.— Ed





**[p. 255]**

The fact that less productive land is brought under cultivation does not necessarily prove that agriculture has become less productive. On the contrary, it may prove that it has become more productive; that the inferior land is being cultivated, not [only] because the price of the agricultural product has sufficiently risen to compensate for the capital investment, but also the converse, that the means of production have developed to such an extent that the unproductive land has become "productive" and capable of yielding not only the normal profit but also rent. Land which is fertile at a [given] stage of development of productive power may be unfertile for a lower developmental stage.

In agriculture, the absolute extension of labour time—i.e., the augmentation of absolute surplus value—is only possible to a limited degree. One cannot work by gaslight on the land, etc. True, one can rise early in spring and summer. But this is offset by the shorter winter days when, in any case, only a relatively small amount of work can be accomplished. So in this respect absolute surplus value is greater in industry so long as the normal working day is not regulated by force of law. A second reason for a smaller amount of surplus value being created in agriculture is the long period during which the product remains in the process of production without any labour being expended on it. With the exception of certain branches of agriculture such as stock raising, sheep farming, etc., where the population is positively ousted from the land, the number of people employed relatively to the constant capital used, is still far greater—even in the most advanced large-scale agriculture—than in industry, or at least in the



**[p. 256]**

In general terms the question to be answered with regard to Rodbertus is as follows:

The general form of capital advanced is:

Constant capital Variable capital Machinery—Raw materials100 Labour power3

In general the two elements of constant capital are the instruments of labour and the object of labour. The latter is not necessarily a commodity, a product of labour. It may therefore not exist as an element of capital, although it is invariably an element in the labour process. Soil is the husbandman's raw material, the mine that of the miner, the water that of the fisherman and even the forest is that of the hunter. In the most complete form of capital, however, these 3 elements of the labour process also exist as 3 elements of capital, i.e., they are all commodities, use values which have an exchange value and are products of labour. In this case all 3 elements enter into the valorisation process, although machinery [enters into it] not to the extent to which it enters into the labour process but only in so far as it is consumed.

The following question now arises: Can the absence of one of these elements in a particular branch of industry enhance the rate of profit (not the rate of surplus value) in that industry? In general terms, the formula itself provides the answer:

The rate of profit equals the ratio of surplus value to the total capital advanced.

Throughout this investigation it is assumed that the rate of surplus value, i.e., the division of the value of the product between the capitalist and the wage worker, remains constant.

[^1]: a In the manuscript "wages"; changed to "labour power" presumably by Engels.— Ed.





**[p. 5]**

S = • Since S, the rate of surplus value, is given, V is given

S and — is assumed to be a constant magnitude. Therefore the

5 magnitude of can only alter when C+V changes and since V Cv H~ V is given, this can only increase or decrease because C decreases or

S increases. And further, will increase or decrease not in the C+V ratio of C: V but according to C's relation to the sum of C + V . If

S s C = 0 , then —• = — T h e rate of profit [would] in this case equal the rate of surplus value and this is its highest possible amount, since no sort of calculation can alter the magnitude of S and V.

S 50 1 Suppose V = 100 and S = 50, then — = =—=50%. If a constant

capital of 100 were added, then the rate of profit=

50 50 1 = =— = 2 5 % . T h e rate of profit would have decreased 100+100 200 4 by half. If 150 were added to 100 then the rate of profit= 50 50 1 = = — = 2 0 % . In the first instance, total capital = 150+100 250 5 > r V=variable capital, hence the rate of profit=the rate of surplus value. In the second instance, total capital=2x V, hence the rate of profit is only half the rate of surplus value. In the third instance, total capital = 2 'A>x 100=2 V2x V = 5 / 2 x V; V is now only 2/5 of total capital. T h e rate of surplus value='/2 of V, i.e., V2 of 100, hence is only V2 of 2/5 of total capital=2/io of total capital. 250/io=25 and 2/10 of 250 = 50. But 2/, 0=20%. Hence to start with this much has been established. Provided V

V composed. If C has a certain magnitude, say 100, then it makes no

difference whether it consists of 50 raw material and 50 machinery or 10 raw material and 90 machinery, or 0 raw material and 100 machinery or the other way about. For the rate of profit is

determined by the relationship ; how the elements of C+V production of which C consists relate, as value components, to C as a whole is irrelevant here. For instance, in the production of coal

[^1]: S remains constant and — too, then it is of no consequence how C is





**[p. 258]**

matière instrumentale) may be reckoned as nought and the entire constant capital can be assumed to consist of machinery (including buildings and instruments of labour). On the other hand, with a tailor, machinery can be considered as nought and here the whole of constant capital resolves into raw materials (particularly where tailors running a large business do not as yet use sewing-machines and, on the other hand, even save buildings, as sometimes occurs nowadays in London, by employing their workers as OUTDOOR LABOURERS. This is a new phenomenon, where the 2nd division of labour reappears in the form of the first101). If the colliery owner employs 1,000 units of machinery and 1,000 units of wage labour and the tailor 1,000 of raw materials and 1,000 of wage labour, then with an equal rate of surplus value, the rate of profit in both instances is the same. If [we] assume that surplus value is 20%, then the rate of profit would in both cases be 10%, namely: 20°/2,ooo=2/2o=1/io=10%. Hence there are only two instances in which the ratio between the component parts of C, i.e., raw materials and machinery, can affect the rate of profit: 1) If a change in this ratio modifies the absolute magnitude of C. 2) If the ratio between the component parts of C modifies the size of V. This would imply organic CHANGES in production itself and not merely the tautologous statement that if a particular part of C accounts for a smaller portion, then the other must make up a larger portion of the total amount.

In the REAL BILL of an ENGLISH FARMER, WAGES amount to £1,690, MANURE to £686, SEED to £150, fodder FOR cows to £100. Thus "raw material" comes to £936, which is more than half the amount spent on WAGES. (See F. W. Newman, Lectures on Political Economy, London, 1851, p. 166.)

And so even manure, plain muck, has become merchandise, not to speak of bone-meal, guano, potash, etc. That the elements of production are estimated in terms of money is not merely due to the formal change in production. New materials are introduced

[^1]: *"In Flanders"* (in the Belgian areas) *"dung and hay are in these parts imported from Holland" * (for flax-growing, etc. In turn they export flax, LINSEED, etc.). "The * refuse in Dutch towns isa a matter of trade, and is regularly sold at high prices to Belgium. At about 20 miles from Antwerp, up the Scheide, the reservoirs may be seen for the manure that is brought from Holland. The trade is managed by a company of capitalists on b Dutch boats" etc.* (Banfield [The Organisation of Industry, 2nd ed., London, 1848, pp. 40 and 42]).

[^2]: a Newman has "The refuse of the towns has therefore become".— Ed. b Newman has "and the" instead of "on".— Ed.





**[p. 259]**

A German peasant who year after year produces his own elements of production, seeds, manure, etc., and, with his family, consumes part of his crops needs to spend money (as far as production itself is concerned) only on the purchase of a few tools for cultivating the land, and on wages. Let us assume that the value of all his expenses= 100. He consumes half in natura (production costs). The other half he sells and he receives, say, 100. His gross income thus=100 and if he relates this to his capital of 50 then it amounts to 100%. If Vs of the 50 is deducted for rent and Vs for taxes (33 Vs in all) then he retains 162/3, calculated on 50 this is 33Vs%. But in fact he has only received 162/3%.102

The peasant has merely miscalculated and has cheated himself. The capitalist FARMER does not make such errors.

Mathieu de Dombasle says in his Annales agricoles etc., Paris, 1829 (4th instalment, 1828) that under the métairie contract (in [the province of] Berry, for example),

[^1]: "the landowner supplies the land, the buildings and usually all or part of the livestock and the tools required for cultivation; the tenant for his part supplies his labour and nothing, or almost nothing else. The products of the land are snared in equal parts" ([p.] 301). "The tenants are as a rule submerged in dire poverty" ([p.] 302). "If the métayer, having laid out 1,000 francs, increases his gross product by 1,500 francs" (i.e., a gross gain of 500 francs) "he must pass half of it on to the landowner, retaining merely 750, and so loses 250 francs of his expenses" ([p.] 304).a "Under the previous system of cultivation the expenses or costs of production were almost exclusively drawn in kind, from the products themselves, for the consumption of the animals and of the cultivator of the land and his family; hardly any cash was paid out. Only these particular circumstances could give rise to the belief that landowner and tenant could divide amongst themselves the whole of the harvest which had not been consumed during production. But this process is only applicable to this type of agriculture, namely, low-level agriculture. But when it is desired to raise that level, it is realised that this is only possible by making certain advances which have to be deducted from the gross product in order to be able to utilise them again in the following year. Hence this kind of division of the gross

[^2]: a Marx quotes Mathieu de Dombasle partly in French, partly in German.— Ed.





**[p. 260]**

Mr. Rodbertus seems to think that competition brings about a normal profit, or average profit or general rate of profit by reducing the commodities to their real value; i.e., that it regulates their price relationships in such a manner that the correlative quantities of labour time realised in the various commodities are expressed in money or whatever else happens to be the measure of value.3 This is of course not brought about by the price of a commodity at any given moment being equal to its value nor does it have to be equal to its value. For example the price of commodity A rises above its value and for a time remains, moreover, at this high level, or even continues to rise. The profit of [the capitalist who produces] A thus rises above the average profit in that he appropriates not only his own "unpaid" labour time, but also a part of the unpaid labour time which other capitalists have "produced". This has to be compensated by a fall in profit in one or other sphere of production provided the price of the other commodities in terms of money remains constant. If the commodity is a means of subsistence generally consumed by the worker, then it will depress the rate of profit in all other branches; if it enters as a constituent part into the constant capital, then it will force down the rate of profit in all those spheres of production where it forms an element in constant capital.

Finally, the commodity may neither be an element in any constant capital, nor form a necessary item in the workers' means of subsistence (for those commodities which the worker can choose to buy or abstain from buying, he consumes as a consumer in general and not as a worker) but it may be one of the consumer goods, an article for individual consumption in general. If, as such, it is consumed by the industrial capitalist himself, then the rise in its price in no way affects the amount of surplus value or the rate of surplus value. Now if the capitalist wanted to maintain his previous STANDARD OF CONSUMPTION, then that part of profit (surplus value) which he uses for individual consumption would rise in relation to that which he sinks into industrial reproduction. The latter would decrease. As a result of the price rise, or the rise in profit above its average rate, in A, the volume of profit in B, C, etc. would diminish within a certain space of time (which is also determined by reproduction). If article A was exclusively con-

[^1]: a [J. K.] Rodbertus, Sociale Briefe an von Kirchmann. Dritter Brief, Berlin, 1851, p. 92.— Ed.





**[p. 261]**

Incidentally, it may well be that in this process—assuming the value of money to be constant—the money prices of B, C, etc., never regain their original level, although they may rise above the value of commodities B, C, etc. and hence the rate of profit in B, C, etc. may also rise above the general rate of profit. Improve- ments, inventions, greater economy in the means of production, etc. are introduced not at times when prices rise above their average level, but when they fall below it, i.e., when profit falls below its normal rate. Hence during the period of falling prices of B, C, etc., their real value may fall, in other words the minimum labour time required for the production of these commodities may decrease. In this case, the commodity can only regain its former money price if the rise in its price over its value=the MARGIN, i.e., the difference between the price which expresses its new value and the price which expressed its higher former value. Here the price of the commodity would have changed the value of the commodity by affecting supply, and the production costs.

The result of the above-mentioned movement: If we take the average of the increases and decreases in the price of the commodity above or below its value, or the period of equalisation of rises and falls—periods which are constantly repeated—then



**[p. 262]**

What is the effect of the competition between capitals? The average price of the commodities during a period of equalisation is such that these prices yield the same rate of profit to the producers of commodities in every sphere, for instance, 10%. What else does this mean? That the price of each commodity stands at Vio above the price of the production costs, which the capitalist has incurred, i.e., the amount he has spent in order to produce the commodity. In general terms this just means that capitals of equal size yield equal profits, that the price of each commodity is one-tenth higher than the price of the capital advanced, consumed or represented in the commodity. It is however quite incorrect to say that capitals in the various spheres of production produce the same surplus value in relation to their size, even if we assume that the absolute working day is equally long in all spheres, i.e., if we assume a set rate of surplus value. //We leave aside here the possibility of one capitalist enforcing longer working hours than another, and we assume a fixed absolute working day for all spheres. The variation between different days is partly offset in the absolute working days by the varying intensity of labour, etc., and partly these differences only signify arbitrary excess profits, exceptional cases, etc.//

Bearing in mind the above assumption, the amount of surplus value produced by capitals of equal size varies firstly according to the correlation of their organic components, i.e., of variable and constant capital; secondly according to their period of circulation in so far as this is determined by the ratio of fixed capital to circulating capital and also [by] the various periods of reproduc- tion of the different sorts of fixed capital; thirdly according to the duration of the actual period of production as distinct from the duration of labour time itself, 04 which again may lead to substantial differences between the length of the production period and circulation period. (The first of these correlations, namely, that between constant and variable capital, can itself



**[p. 263]**

Thus, if the commodities were sold at their values or if the average prices of the commodities were equal to their values, then the rate of profit in the various spheres would have to vary a great deal. In one case it would be 50, in others 40, 30, 20, 10, etc. Taking the total volume of commodities for a year in sphere A, for instance, their value would be equal to the capital advanced in t h e m + t h e unpaid labour they contain. Ditto in spheres B and C. But since A, B and C contain different amounts of unpaid labour, for instance, A more than B and B more than C, the commodities A might perhaps yield 3 S (S=surplus value) to their producers, B = 2 S and C = S. Since the rate of profit is determined by the ratio of surplus value to capital advanced, and as on our assumption this is the same in A, B, C, etc., then [X-451] if C is the capital

advanced, the various rates of profit will be , — , —. Compell- ed C C ^ tion of capitals can therefore only equalise the rates of profit, for instance in our example, by making the rates of profit equal to 2S 25 2S , —, — in the spheres A, B, C. A would sell his commodity at

As the example of B shows, it can in fact happen that the average price and the value of a commodity coincide. This occurs when the surplus value created in sphere B itself equals the average profit; in other words, when the relationship of the various components of the capital in sphere B is the same as that which exists when the sum total of capitals, the capital of the capitalist class, is regarded as a single magnitude on which the whole of surplus value [is] calculated, irrespective of the particular sphere of the total capital within which it has been created. In this total capital the periods of turnover, etc. are equalised; one can, for instance, consider that the whole of this capital is turned over during one year. In that case every section of the total capital would in accordance with its magnitude participate in the total surplus value and draw a corresponding part of it. And since every individual capital is to be regarded as SHAREHOLDER in this total capital, it would be correct to say first that its rate of profit is the same as that of all the others, capitals of the same size

[^1]: C> C< CJ IS less and C at I S more than its value. T h e average price in sphere A would be below, and in sphere C would be above, the value of the commodities A and C.





**[p. 264]**

GENERAL CAPITAL WHICH ARE OWNED BY THE CAPITALIST. C o m p e t i t i o n a m o n g capitals thus seeks to treat every capital as a share of the total capital and correspondingly to regulate its participation in surplus value and hence also in profit. Competition plus ou moins11 succeeds in this by means of its equalisations (we shall not examine here the reason why it encounters particular obstacles in certain spheres). But in plain language this just means that the capitalists strive (and this striving is competition) to divide among themselves the quantity of unpaid labour—or the products of this quantity of labour—which they squeeze out of the working class, not according to the surplus labour produced directly by a particular capital, but corresponding firstly to the relative portion of the total capital which a particular capital represents and secondly according to the amount of surplus labour produced by the aggregate capital. The capitalists, like hostile brothers, divide among themselves the loot of other people's labour which they have appropriated so that on an average one receives the same amount of unpaid labour as another.105

Competition achieves this equalisation by regulating average prices. These average prices themselves, however, are either above or below the value of the commodity so that no commodity yields a higher rate of profit than any other. It is therefore wrong to say that competition among capitals brings about a general rate of profit by equalising the prices of commodities to their values. On the contrary it does so by converting the values of the commodities into average prices, in which a part of surplus value is transferred from one commodity to another, etc. The value of a commodity=the quantity of paid+unpaid labour contained in it. The average price of a commodity=the quantity of paid labour it contains (objectified or living)+an average quota of unpaid labour. The latter does not depend on whether this amount was contained in the commodity itself or on whether more or less of it was embodied in the value of the commodity.

It is possible—I leave this over for a later inquiry which does not belong to the subject-matter of this book—that certain spheres of production function under circumstances which work against a reduction in their values to average prices in the above sense, and do not permit competition to achieve this victory.106 If this were

[^1]: a More or less.— Ed.





**[p. 265]**

Supposing industrial capitals which are producing 10 or 20 or 30% more surplus value [X-452] than industrial capitals of equal size in other spheres of production, not just temporarily, but because of the very nature of their spheres of production as opposed to others; supposing I say, they were able to hang on to this excess surplus value in the face of competition and to prevent it from being included in the general accounts (distribution) which determine the GENERAL RATE OF PROFIT, then, in this case, one could distinguish between 2 recipients in the spheres of production of these capitals, THE ONE WHO WOULD GET THE GENERAL RATE OF PROFIT, AND THE OTHER WHO WOULD GET THE SURPLUS EXCLUSIVELY INHERENT in THIS SPHERE. Every capitalist could pay, hand over, this excess to the privileged one, in order to invest his capital here, and he would retain for himself

THE GENERAL RATE OF PROFIT, LIKE EVERY OTHER CAPITALIST, DEPENDENT UPON THE SAME CHANCES. If this were the case in agriculture, etc., then the splitting of surplus value into profit and rent would by no means indicate that labour as such is actually "more productive" (OF SURPLUS VALUE) here than in manufacture. Hence [it would not be necessary] to ascribe any magic powers to the soil; this, moreover, is in any case absurd, since value=labour, therefore surplus=value [and] cannot possibly=soil (although relative surplus value may be due to the natural fertility of the soil, but under no circumstances could this result in a higher price for the products of the soil. Rather the opposite). N o r would it be necessary to have recourse to Ricardo's theory, which is disagreeably linked with the Malthusian trash, has repulsive consequences and, though in theory it is not especially opposed to my views on relative surplus value, it deprives them of much of their practical significance. Ricardo's point is this a:

[^1]: a See D. Ricardo, On the Principles of Political Economy, p. 59.— Ed.

[^2]: 18-176





**[p. 266]**

But how is this possible? The commodity wheat, like every other commodity, is sold at its value, i.e., it is exchanged for other commodities in relation to the labour time embodied in it. //This is the first erroneous assumption which complicates the problem by posing it artificially. Only in exceptional circumstances are commodities exchanged at their value. Their average prices are determined in a different way. Vide supra.h// The farmer who grows wheat makes the same profit as all the other capitalists. This proves that, like all the others, he appropriates that portion of labour time for which he has not paid his workers. Where, on top of this, does the rent come from? It must represent labour time. Why should surplus labour in agriculture resolve into profit and rent while in industry it is just profit? And, how is this possible at all, if the profit in agriculture=the profit in every other sphere of production? //Ricardo's faulty conception of profit and the way in which he confuses it with surplus value have also a detrimental effect here. They make the whole thing more difficult for him.//

Ricardo solves this difficulty by assuming that IN PRINCIPLE it is non-existent. //This indeed is in principle the only possibility of overcoming any difficulty. But there are two ways of doing this. Either one shows that the contradiction to the PRINCIPLE is an illusion which arises from the development of the thing itself, or one denies the existence of the difficulty at one point, as Ricardo does, and then takes this as a starting-point from which one can proceed to explain its existence at some other stage.//

He assumes a point at which the farmer's capital, like everyone else's, only yields profit. //This capital may be invested in a non-rent paying individual farm, or in a non-rent paying part of

[^1]: a Excess.— Ed. b See above.— Ed.





**[p. 267]**

Originally the farmer's capital only pays profit, no rent //although this pseudo-historical form is of no consequence and in other "laws" is common to all bourgeois economists//. It is no different from any other industrial capital. Rent only enters into it because the demand for grain rises and now, in contrast to other branches of industry, it becomes necessary to resort to "less" fertile ground. The FARMER (the SUPPOSED original FARMER) suffers, like any other industrial capitalist, in so far as he has to pay his workers more because of the rise in [the price of] food. But he gains because of the rise in price of his commodity above its value, firstly, to the extent to which the value of other commodities which enter into his constant capital falls relatively to his commodity and so he buys them more cheaply, and secondly, in so far as he owns the surplus value in the form of his dearer commodity. Thus this farmer's profit rises above the average rate of profit, which has, however, fallen. HENCE another capitalist moves onto the less fertile land, No. II, which, with this lower rate of profit, can supply produce at the price of I or perhaps even a little more cheaply. Be that as it may, we now have, once more, [X-453] the normal situation on II, that surplus value merely resolves itself into profit. But we have explained the rent for I by the existence of a twofold price of production: the production price of II is simultaneously the market price of I. A temporary SURPLUS GAIN has been [achieved], just as with the factory-made commodity which is produced under more favourable conditions. The price of corn, which in addition to profit comprises rent, in fact consists only of objectified labour, and is equal to its value; it is however equal not to the value embodied in itself, but to the value of II. It is impossible to have two market prices side by side. //While Ricardo introduces farmer [No.] II because of the fall in the rate of profit, Stirling introduces him because wages [have] fallen not risen following upon the price of corn. This fall in wages allows II to cultivate [a piece of land] No. II at the old rate of profit, although the soil is less fertile.7/ Once the existence of rent has been established in this way, the rest follows easily. The difference between rents according to varying fertility, etc., of course remains correct. This does not necessarily imply that less and less fertile land has to come under cultivation.

[^1]: a See P. J. Stirling, The Philosophy of Trade; or, Outlines of a Theory of Profits and Prices, Edinburgh, London, 1846, pp. 209-10.— Ed.

[^2]: 18*





**[p. 268]**

Others seek to by-pass this difficulty (Carey for instance) by directly denying its existence. Rent [they say] is only interest on the capital which, at an earlier stage, was incorporated in the land. Therefore, again only A FORM OF PROFIT. Here then the very existence of rent is denied and so indeed explained away.3

Others, for instance Buchanan, regard it just as a consequence of monopoly. See also Hopkins.107 With them it is merely a SURCHARGE above the value.

With Ricardo the examination is rendered more difficult by the two false assumptions. //Ricardo it is true was not the inventor of the theory of rent. West and Malthus had put it into print before him. The SOURCE, however, is Anderson. But what distinguished Ricardo is the way in which he links rent with his theory of value (although West did not entirely miss the real interconnection either). As his later polemic about rent with Ricardo shows, Malthus himself did not understand the theory he had adopted from Anderson.// If we start from the correct principle that the value of commodities is determined by the labour time necessary for their production (and that value in general is nothing other than realised social labour time) then it follows that the average price of commodities is determined by the labour time required for their production. This conclusion would be the right

[^1]: For Mr. Opdyke, a typical Yankee, landed property or rent becomes "THE LEGALISED REFLEXION OF THE VALUE OF CAPITAL".b

[^2]: a See this volume, pp. 367-68, 371, 388-89.— Ed. b G. Opdyke, A Treatise on Political Economy, New York, 1851, p. 60. See this volume, p. 328, Marx's footnote.— Ed.





**[p. 269]**

D'abord,3 it follows that even commodities whose average price (IF we disregard the value of constant capital) resolves only into wages and profit, in such a way that these stand at their normal rate, i.e., are average wages and average profit, can be sold above or below their own value. The fact that the commodity yields rent on top of profit [X-454] does not prove that the commodity is sold above its intrinsic value, any more than the circumstance of the surplus value of a commodity only expressing itself in the category of normal profit proves that the commodity is sold at its value. If a commodity can yield an average rate of profit or general rate of profit on capital which is below its own rate of profit determined by its real surplus value, then it follows that if on top of this average rate of profit commodities in a particular sphere of production yield a second amount of surplus value which carries a separate name, for instance, rent, then profit+rent, the sum of profit+rent need not be higher than the surplus value contained in the commodity. Since profit can be < than the intrinsic surplus value of the commodity, or the quantity of unpaid labour it embodies, profit-(-rent need not be > than the intrinsic surplus value of the commodity.

Why this occurs in a particular sphere of production as opposed to other spheres has of course still to be explained. But the problem has already been simplified. This commodity differs from the others in the following way: In a number of these other commodities average price is above their intrinsic value, but only in order to raise their rate of profit to the level of the general rate. In another section of these other commodities the average price stands at a level below their intrinsic value, but only to the extent required to reduce their rate of profit to concur with the general rate. Finally in a third section of these other commodities, average price=their intrinsic value, but only because if sold at their intrinsic value they yield the general rate of profit. But the commodity which yields rent differs from all these 3 instances. Whatever the

[^1]: a In the first place.— Ed.





**[p. 270]**

Now the question arises, which, or how many, of these 3 instances can occur. Supposing the whole of the surplus value the commodity contains is realised in its price. In that case, it excludes the 3rd instance, namely, those commodities whose entire surplus value is realised in their average price, because they only yield ordinary profit. We may, therefore, dismiss this one. Similarly, on this presupposition, we can exclude the 1st instance, where the surplus value realised in the price of the commodity is above its intrinsic surplus value. For it is assumed, that "the surplus value contained in it is realised" in its price. This instance is thus analogous with case 2 of those commodities whose intrinsic surplus value is higher than the surplus value realised in their average price. As with these commodities the profit form of this surplus value—which has been equated by the reduction to the general rate of profit—constitutes in this case profit on the capital invest- ed. The excess intrinsic surplus value of the commodity over and above this profit is, however, in contrast to commodity 2, also realised in these exceptional commodities, but accrues not to the owner of the capital, but to the owner of the land, the NATURAL AGENT, the mine, etc.

Or [what happens if we assume that] the price is forced up to such a degree that it carries more than the average rate of profit? This is, for instance, the CASE with actual monopoly prices. This assumption—applied to every sphere of production where capital and labour may be FREELY employed [and] whose production, so far as the volume of capital employed is concerned, is subject to the general laws—would not only be a petitio principii, but would directly contradict the foundations of [economic] science and of capitalist production—the former being merely the theoretical expression of the latter. For such an assumption presupposes the very phenomenon which is to be explained, namely, that in a particular sphere of production, the price of a commodity must carry more than the general rate of profit, more than the average profit, and to this end [the commodity] must be sold above its value. It presupposes that agricultural products are excluded from the general laws of value of commodities and of capitalist production. It, moreover, presupposes this, because the peculiar presence of rent side by side with profit prima facie makes it appear so. Hence this is absurd.

So there is nothing left but to assume that special circumstances exist in this particular sphere of production, which influence the



**[p. 271]**

In this way the problem has already become much simpler. It is no longer a question of explaining how it comes about that the price of a commodity yields rent as well as profit, thus apparently evading the general law of value and by raising its price above its intrinsic surplus value, carrying more than the general rate of profit for a given capital. The question is why, in the process of equalisation of commodities at average prices, this particular commodity does not have to pass on to other commodities so much of its intrinsic surplus value that it only yields the average profit, but is able to realise a portion of its own surplus value which forms an excess over and above average profit; so that it is possible for a FARMER, who invests capital in this sphere of production, to sell the commodity at prices which yield him the ordinary profit and at the same time enable him to pay the excess in surplus value realised over and above this profit to a third PERSON, the LANDLORD.

[X-455] Put in this way, the very formulation of the problem carries its own solution.

It is quite simply the private ownership of land, mines, water, etc. by certain people, which enables them to snatch, intercept and seize the excess surplus value over and above profit (average profit, the rate of profit determined by the general rate of profit) contained in the commodities of these particular spheres of production, these particular fields of capital investment, and so to prevent it from entering into the general process by which the general rate of profit is formed. Moreover, some of this surplus value is actually collected in every industrial enterprise, since rent for the plot of land used (by factory buildings, workhouses, etc.) figures in every instance, for even where the land is available free, no factories are built, except in the more or less populated areas with good means of communication.

Supposing the commodities produced by the poorest cultivated land belonged to category 3, i.e., those commodities whose average price = their value, in other words, the whole of their intrinsic surplus value is realised in their price because only thus do they yield the ordinary profit; in this case the land would pay no rent

Assume that in a country like the UNITED STATES, the number of competing FARMERS is as yet so small and the appropriation of land so much just a matter of form that everyone has the opportunity to invest his capital in land and the cultivation of the soil, without the permission of hitherto-existing owner-cultivators or farmers. In these circumstances it is possible over a considerable period— with the exception of that landed property which by its very situation in populated areas carries a monopoly—that the surplus value which the farmer produces on top of average profit is not realised in the price of his product, but that he may have to share it with his brother capitalists in the same way as this is done with the surplus value of all commodities which would give an excess profit, i.e., raise the rate of profit above the general rate, if their surplus value were realised in their price. In this case the general rate of profit would rise, because wheat, etc., like other manufactured commodities, would be sold below its value. This selling below its value would not constitute an exception, but rather would prevent wheat from forming an exception to other commodities in the same category.

[^1]: a F. W. Newman, Lectures on Political Economy, p. 155.— Ed.





**[p. 273]**

Secondly, assume that in a given country the land is all of a particular quality, so that if the whole of the surplus value from the commodity were realised in its price, it would yield the usual profit on capital. In this case no rent would be paid. The absence of rent would in no way affect the general rate of profit, it would neither raise it nor lower it, just as it is not influenced by the fact that other non-agricultural products are to be found in this category. Since the commodities belong to this category just because their intrinsic surplus value equals the average profit [they] cannot alter the level of this profit, on the contrary they CONFORM with it and do not influence it at all, although it influences them.

Thirdly, assume that all the land consists of a particular type of soil, but this is so poor that the capital employed in it is so unproductive that its product belongs to that kind of commodity whose surplus value [lies] below average profit. Since wages would rise everywhere as a result of the unproductiveness of agriculture, surplus value could in this case of course only be higher where absolute labour time can be prolonged, where the raw material, such as iron, etc., is not the product of agriculture or, further, where it [is],like cotton, silk,etc., an imported article and a product of more fertile soil. In this case, the price of the [agricultural] commodity would include a surplus value higher than that inherent in it, to enable it to yield the usual profit. The general rate of profit would consequently fall, despite the absence of rent.

Or assume in CASE 2, that the soil is very unproductive. Then surplus value of this agricultural product, by its very equality with average prof it, would show that the latter is altogether low since in agriculture perhaps 11 of the 12 working hours are required to produce just the wages, and the surplus value only equals 1 hour or less.

[X-456] These various examples illustrate the following: In the first case, the absence or lack of rent is bound up with, or concurs with, an increased rate of profit—as compared with other countries where the phenomenon of rent has developed.

In the second case the lack or absence of rent does not affect the rate of profit at all.

In the third case, compared with other countries where rent exists, it is bound up with and indicative of a low, a relatively low, general rate of profit.

It follows from this that the development of a particular rent in itself has absolutely nothing to do with the productivity of agricultural labour, since the absence or lack of rent can be associated with a rising, falling or constant rate of profit.



**[p. 274]**

Surplus value is nothing other than unpaid labour; the average or normal profit is nothing other than the quantity of unpaid labour WHICH EACH CAPITAL OF A GIVEN MAGNITUDE OF VALUE IS SUPPOSED TO REALISE. If we say that average profit is 10% then this means nothing other than that a capital of 100 commands 10 units of unpaid labour; or 100 units of objectified labour command Ao of their amount in unpaid labour. Thus excess of surplus value over average profit implies that a commodity (its price or that part of its price which consists of surplus value) contains a quantity of unpaid labour [which is] > than the quantity of unpaid labour that forms average profit, which therefore in the average price of the commodities forms the excess of their price over the price of their production costs. In each individual commodity the production costs represent the capital advanced, and the excess over these production costs represents the unpaid labour which the advanced capital commands; hence the relationship of this excess in price over the price of production costs shows the rate at which a given capital—employed in the production process of commodities— commands unpaid labour, irrespective of whether the unpaid labour contained in the commodity of the particular sphere of production is equal to this rate or not.

Now what forces the individual capitalist, for instance, to sell his commodity at an average price, which yields him only the average profit and makes him realise less unpaid labour than is in fact worked into his own commodity? This average price is thrust upon him; it is by no means the result of his own free will; he would prefer to sell the commodity above its value. It is forced upon him by the competition of other capitals. For every capital of the same size could also be rushed into A, the branch of production in which the relationship of unpaid labour to the invested capital, for instance, £100, is greater than in production spheres B, C, etc. whose products by their use value also satisfy a social need just as much as the commodities of production sphere A.

When there are spheres of production in which certain natural conditions of production, such as, for example, arable land, coal seams, iron mines, waterfalls, etc.—without which the production process cannot be carried out, without which commodities cannot be produced in this sphere—are in the hands of others than the proprietors or owners of the objectified labour, the capitalists,



**[p. 275]**

If I let you have this condition of production for your use, then you will make your average profit; you will appropriate the normal quantity of unpaid labour. But your production yields an excess of surplus value, of unpaid labour, above the rate of profit. This excess you will not throw into the common account, as is usual with you capitalists, but I am going to appropriate it myself. It belongs to me. This transaction should suit you, because your capital yields you just the same in this sphere of production as in any other and besides, this is a very solid branch of production. Apart from the 10% unpaid labour which constitutes the average profit, your capital will also provide a further 20% of additional unpaid labour here. This you will pay over to me and in order to do so, you add 20% unpaid labour to the price of the commodity, and this you simply do not account for with the other capitalists. Just as your ownership of one condition of labour—capital, objectified labour—enables you to appropriate a certain quantity of unpaid labour from the workers, so my ownership of the other condition of production, the land, etc., enables me to intercept and divert away from you and the entire capitalist class, that part of unpaid labour which is excessive to your average profit. Your law will have it that under normal circumstances, capitals of equal size appropriate equal quantities of unpaid labour and you capitalists can force each other [X-457] into this position by competition among yourselves. WELL, I happen to be applying this law to you. You are not to appropriate any more of the unpaid labour of your workers than you could with the same capital in any other sphere of production. But the law has nothing to do with the excess of unpaid labour which you have "produced" over the normal quota. Who is going to prevent me from appropriating this "excess"? Why should I act according to your custom and throw it into the common POT of capital to be shared out among the capitalist class, so that everyone should draw out a part of it in accordance with his SHARE in the aggregate capital? I am not a capitalist. The condition of production which I allow you to utilise is not objectified labour but a natural phenomenon. Can you manufacture land or water or mines or coal pits? Quod non.3 The means of compulsion which can be applied to you in order to make you release again a part of the surplus labour you have managed to get hold of does not exist for me. So out with it! The

[^1]: a Certainly not.— Ed.





**[p. 276]**

EMPOWERED T O SQUEEZE FROM YOU.

The following problems should now be set forth: 1) The transition from feudal landownership to a different form, commercial land rent, regulated by capitalist production, or, on the other hand, the conversion of this feudal landed property into free peasant property; 2) How rent comes into existence in countries such as the UNITED STATES, where originally land has not been appropriated and where, at any rate in a formal sense, the bourgeois mode of production prevails from the beginning; 3) The Asiatic forms of landownership still in existence. But all this does not belong here.

According to this theory then, the private ownership of objects of nature such as the land, water, mines, etc., the ownership of these conditions of production, this essential ingredient of production emanating from nature, is not a source from which flows value, since value is only objectified labour time. Neither is it the source from which [excess] surplus value flows, i.e., an excess of unpaid labour over and above the unpaid labour contained in profit. This ownership is, however, a source of revenue. It is a claim, a means, which in the sphere of production that the property enters as a condition of production enables the owner to appropriate that part of the unpaid labour squeezed out by the capitalist which would otherwise be tossed into the capital fund as excess over normal profit. This ownership is a means of obstructing the process which takes place in the rest of the spheres of capitalist production, and of holding on to the surplus value created in this particular sphere, so that it is divided between the capitalist and the landowner in that sphere of production itself. In this way landed property, like capital, constitutes a promissory note to unpaid labour, gratis labour. And just as with capital, the worker's objectified labour appears as a power over him, so with landed property, the circumstance which enables the landowners to take part of the unpaid labour away from the capitalists, makes landownership appear as a source of value.

This then explains modern rent, its existence. With a given capital investment, the variation in the amount of rent is only to be explained by the varying fertility of the land. The variation



**[p. 277]**

For this theory it is immaterial whether the least fertile land yields a rent or not. Further, it is by no means necessary for the fertility of agriculture to decline, although the diversity in productivity, if not artificially overcome (which is possible), is much greater than in similar spheres of industrial production. When we speak of greater or lesser fertility, we are still concerned with the same product. The relationship of the various products, one to another, is another question.

Rent as calculated on the land itself is the RENTAL, the AMOUNT OF RENT. It can rise without an increase in the rate of rent. If the value of money remains unchanged, then the relative value of agricul- tural products can rise, not because agriculture is becoming less productive, but because, although its productivity is rising, it is rising slower than in industry. On the other hand, a rise in the money price of agricultural products, while the value of money remains the same, is only possible if their value rises, i.e., if agriculture becomes less productive (provided it is not caused by temporary PRESSURE OF DEMAND UPON SUPPLY as with other commodities).

In the cotton industry, the price of the raw material fell continuously with the development of the industry itself; the same applies to iron, etc., coal, etc. The growth of rent here was possible, not because its rate rose, but only because more capital was employed.

Ricardo is of the following opinion: The powers of nature, such as air, light, electricity, steam, water are gratis; the land is not, because it is limited. So already for this reason alone, agriculture is less productive than other industries. If the land were just as COMMON, UNAPPROPRIATED, available in any quantities, as the other elements and powers of nature, then it would be much more productive."

[X-458] D'abord, if the land were so easily available, at everyone's free disposal, then a principal element for the formation of capital would be missing. A most important condition of production and—apart from man himself and his labour—the only original

[^1]: a See D. Ricardo, On the Principles of Political Economy, p. 56.— Ed.





**[p. 278]**

So far as the powers of nature indicated by Ricardo are concerned, it is true that these are partly to be had for nothing and do not cost the capitalist anything. Coal costs him something, but steam costs him nothing so long as he gets water gratis. But now, for example, let us take steam. T h e properties of steam always existed. Its industrial usefulness is a new scientific discovery which the capitalist has appropriated. As a consequence of this scientific discovery, the productivity of labour and with it relative surplus value rose. In other words, the quantity of unpaid labour which the capitalist appropriated from a day's labour grew with the aid of steam. T h e difference between the productive power of steam and that of the soil is thus only that the one yields unpaid labour to the capitalist and the other to the landowner, who does not take it away from the worker, but from the capitalist. T h e capitalist is therefore so enthusiastic about this element "belonging to no one".

[^1]: Only this much is correct: Assuming the capitalist mode of production, the capitalist is not only a necessary functionary, but the dominating function- ary in production. T h e landowner, on the other hand, is quite superfluous in this mode of production. Its only requirement is that land should not be COMMON PROPERTY, that it should confront the working class as a condition of production, not belonging to it, and the purpose is completely fulfilled if it becomes State property, i.e., if the State draws the rent. T h e landowner, such an important functionary in production in the ancient world and in the Middle Ages, is A USELESS SUPERFETATION in the industrial world. T h e radical bourgeois I 0 8 (WITH AN EYE BESIDES TO THE SUPPRESSION OF ALL OTHER TAXES) therefore goes forward theoretically to a refutation of the private ownership of the land, which, in the form of State property, he would like to turn into the COMMON PROPERTY of the bourgeois class, of capital. But in practice he lacks the courage, since an attack on one form of property—a form of the private ownership of a condition of labour—might cast considerable doubts on the other form. Besides, the bourgeois has himself become an owner of land.





**[p. 279]**

Although hardly any fixed capital or machinery is to be found in one section of manufacture, in another section—the entire transport industry, the industry which produces change of location, [using] wagons, railways, ships, etc.—there is no raw material but only tools of production. Do such branches of industry yield a rent apart from profit? How does this branch of industry differ from, say, the mining industry? In both of them only machinery and matière instrumentale are used, such as coal for steamships and locomotives and mines, fodder for horses, etc. Why should the rate of profit be calculated differently in one sector than in the other? [Supposing] the advances to production which the peasant makes in natura = l/5 of the total capital he advances, to which we would then have to add 4/s in advances for the purchase of machinery and wages, the expenditure amounting to 150 qrs. If he then makes 10% profit [this would be] equal to 15 qrs, i.e., the gross product would be 165 qrs. If he now deducted 75 = 30 qrs and calculated the 15 qrs only on 120, then he would have made a profit of 12 72 [%]•

Alternatively, we could put it in this way: The value of his product, or his product=165 qrs (=£330). He reckons his advances to be 120 qrs (£240), 10% on this=12 qrs (£24). But his gross product=165 qrs; from which thus 132 qrs are to be deducted, which leaves 33 qrs. But from these, 30 qrs are

[^1]: a [F] Quesnay, Analyse du tableau économique. In: Physiocrates, Part I, Paris, 1846, p. 58 et seq.— Ed.





**[p. 280]**

In other words, the product of unpaid labour embodied in the 165 qrs=15 qrs=£30=30 labour weeks. Now if these 30 labour weeks or 15 qrs or £30 were calculated on the total advances of 150 qrs, then they would only form 10%; if they were calculated only on 120 qrs, then they would represent a higher percentage, because 10% on 120 qrs would be 12 qrs and 15 qrs are not 10% of 120 qrs but 12Vs%- In other words: Since the peasant did not include some of his advances in the account as a capitalist would have done, he calculates the surplus labour he has saved on too small a portion of his advances. Hence it represents a higher rate of profit than in other branches of industry and can therefore yield a rent which is based solely on a miscalculation. The game would be over if the peasant realised that it is by no means necessary first to convert his advances into real money, i.e., to sell them, in order to assess them in money, and hence to regard them as commodities.

Without this mathematical error (which may be committed by a large number of German peasants but never by a capitalist FARMER) Rodbertus' rent would be an impossibility. It only becomes possible where raw material enters into production costs, but not where it does not. It only becomes feasible where the raw material enters [into production] without entering into the accounts. But it is not possible where it does not enter [into production], although Mr. Rodbertus wants to derive his explanation of the existence of rent not from a miscalculation, but from the absence of a real ITEM of expenditure.

Take the mining industry or the fisheries. Raw material does not figure in these, except as matière instrumentale, which we can omit, since the use of machinery always implies (with very few exceptions) the consumption of matières instrumentales, the food of



**[p. 281]**

That the amount of surplus value depends on the size of the capital employed does not hold good—according to the general laws of surplus value—for capitals in different spheres of production, but for different capitals in the same sphere of production, in which it is assumed that the organic component parts of capital are in the same proportion. If one says for example: the volume of profit in spinning, for instance, corresponds to the size of the capitals employed (which is also not quite correct, unless one adds that productivity is assumed to be constant), this in fact merely means that, given the rate of exploitation of the spinners, the total amount of exploitation depends on the number of exploited spinners. If, on the other hand, one says that the volume of profit in different branches of production corresponds to the size of the capitals employed, then this means that the rate of profit is the same for each capital of a given size, i.e., the volume of profit can only change with the size of this capital. In other words, the rate of profit is independent of the organic relationship of the components of a capital in a particular sphere of production; it is altogether independent of the amount of surplus value which is realised in these particular spheres of production.

Mining production ought to be considered right from the start as belonging to industry and not to agriculture. Why? Because no product of the mine is used, in natura, as an element of production; no product of the mine enters in kind, straight from the mine, into the constant capital of the mining industry (the same applies to fishing and hunting, where the outlay consists to a still higher degree of the instruments of labour and wages or labour itself). [X-460] In other words, because every element of

[^1]: 19-176





**[p. 282]**

Now let us take manufacture itself, and in particular that section where all the elements of the labour process are also elements in the valorisation process; i.e., where all the production elements enter into the production of the new commodity as items of expenditure, as use values that have a value, as commodities. There is a considerable difference between the manufacturer who produces the first intermediate product and the second and all those that follow in the process towards the finished product. The raw material of the latter type of manufacturers enters the production process not only as a commodity, but is already a commodity of the 2nd degree; it has already taken on a different form from the first commodity, which was a raw product in its natural form, it has already passed through a second phase of the production process. For example, the spinner: His raw material is cotton, itself a raw product (already a commodity too), but the raw product as commodity. The raw material of the weaver however is the yarn produced by the spinner; that of the printer or dyer is the woven fabric, the product of the weaver; and all these products, which reappear as raw materials in further phases of the process are at the same time commodities.109

[X-461] We seem to have returned here to the question with which we have already been concerned on two other occasions, once when discussing John Stuart Mill," and again during the general analysis of the relationship between constant capital and revenue.b26 The continual recurrence of this question shows that there is still a hitch somewhere. Really this belongs into Ch. Ill on profit.29 But it fits in better here.

[^1]: a See this volume, pp. 55-59.— Ed. b Ibid., pp. 59, 114.—Ed.





**[p. 283]**

4,000 lbs cotton =£100; 4,000 lbs yarn=£200;

4,000 YARDS CALICO=£400. On the basis of this assumption, 1 lb. cotton=6d., 1 lb. yarn = Is., 1 YARD [calico] = 2S.

Given a rate of profit of 10%, then

A in £100, the outlays 9010/u and the profit = 9'/u B in £200, the outlay=181 9/ n and the profit= 18 2/ H C in £400, the outlay=363 7 / n and the profit= 3 6 4 / n A = COTTON [the product of the] peasant (I); B = )iarn [the product of the] spinner (II), C = woven fabric [the product of the] weaver (III).

Under this assumption it does not matter whether A's 9010/n itself includes a profit or not. It will not do so if it constitutes self-replacing constant capital. It is equally irrelevant for B, whether the £100 includes profit or not, and ditto with C in relation to B.

The relationship of B (the COTTON-GROWER) or I, of S (spinner) or II and of weaver or III is as follows:

I does not have to repay any profit, because it is assumed that his constant capital of 9010/n does not include any profit, but represents purely constant capital. The entire product of I figures as constant capital in II's outlay. That part of constant capital which =100 yields a profit of 9Vn to I. The entire product [of] 11 = 200 enters into Ill's outlay, and thus yields a profit of 18 2/ n. However, this does not in any way alter the fact that I's profit is not one iota larger than II's or Ill's, because the capital which he has to replace is smaller to the same degree and the profit

[^1]: I) Outlays 90 1 0/,, Profit = 9l/u Total = 100 II) Outlay = 100 (I)+ 81 9/„ i Jro/i( = 182/11 7o(«/=200 III) Outlay=200 (II)+163 7/„ Pro/it=36 4/ u To*a/=400

[^2]: The grand total=700. Pro/i( = 9 i / u + 18 2/n+36 4/ 1 1

[^3]: Capital advanced in all 3 sections: 90 1 0/ n + 181 9 / n + 3 6 3 7 / n = 6 3 6 4 / n Excess of 700 over 6 3 6 4 / n = 6 3 7 / u . But 6 3 7 / u : 636 4/ n = 10 ; 100. Continuing to analyse this rubbish, we obtain the following:

[^4]: I) Outlay= 90 1 0/,, Profit = 9 Vu Total = 100 II) Oirf/ay = 100 (I)+ 8 1 9 / u Profit = 10+ 8 2/„ Tota J = 200 III) Outlay=200 (II)+163 7/„ Profit=20+16 4/ u Total=400

[^5]: 19*





**[p. 284]**

Now let us assume that III produces everything himself. Then the position seems to change, because his outlay now appears as follows:

90 10/n in the production of COTTON; 181 9/n in the production of yarn and 363 Vu in the production of the woven fabric. He buys all 3 branches of production and must therefore continually employ a definite amount of constant capital in all 3. If we now total this up we get: 90 10/,, + 181 9/ n + 363 7n = 6364/ii. 10 per cent of this is exactly 637/n, as above, only that one individual pockets the lot, whereas previously the 637/n were shared among I, II and III.

[X-462] How did the wrong impression arise a little while ago? But first, one other comment. If from the 400, we deduct the profit of the weaver, which amounts to 364/n, then we are left with 400-36 4/n = 363 7/n, his outlay. This outlay includes 200 paid out for yarn. Of these 200, 182/ii are the profit of the spinner. If we now deduct these 182/n from the outlay of 363 7/ n, we are left with 345 5/n- But the 200 which are returnable to the spinner, also contain 9 /u profit for the COTTON GROWER. If we deduct these from the 345 5/n, we are left with 3364/n. And if we deduct these 3364/n from the 400—the total value of the woven fabric—then it becomes evident that it contains a profit of 637/n.

According to this calculation, therefore, 1834/37% would be made on 100 of this same capital, whereas according to the previous calculation only 10%.

How does this tally? Supposing I, II and III are one and the same person, but that this individual does not employ 3 capitals simultaneously, one in co TTON-growing, one in spinning and one in weaving. Rather, as soon as he ceases to grow cotton, he begins to spin it and as soon as he has spun, he finishes with this and begins to weave.

Then his accounting would look like this: He invests £9010/n in co TTON-growing. From this he obtains 4,000 lbs of COTTON. In order to spin these he needs to lay out a further £819/n in machinery, matière instrumentale and wages. With this he makes the 4,000 lbs of yarn. Finally he weaves these

[^1]: But a profit of 63 7/ u on 3364/n is=to 1834/37%. Previously we calculated these 63 /n on 636 4/n, and obtained a profit of 10%. The excess of the total value of 700 over 636 4/n was in fact 63 /u.





**[p. 285]**

What does the FALLACY consist of? First of all it is evident that if spinning and weaving are combined, they should yield a rent, just as if spinning is combined with cultivation or if agriculture is carried on independently.

Evidently two different problems are involved here.

Firstly we are calculating the £637/n only on one capital of £3364/n, whereas we should be calculating it on 3 capitals of a total value of £6364/n Secondly in the last capital, that of III, we are reckoning his outlay to be £3364/n, instead of £363 7/ n.

Let us go into these points separately.

Firstly: If III, II and I are united in one person, and if he spins up the entire product of his cotton harvest, then he does not use any part of this harvest at all to replace his agricultural capital. He does not employ part of his capital in [X-463] co TTON-growing—in expenditure on co TTON-growing, seeds, wages, machinery—and another part in spinning, but he first puts a part of his capital into co TTON-growing, then this part+a second into spinning, and then the whole of these 2 first parts, now existing in the form of yarn + a 3rd part, into weaving. Now when the fabric of 4,000 YARDS has been woven, how is he to replace i*s elements? While he was weaving he wasn't spinning, and he had no material from which to spin; while he was spinning he did not grow any COTTON. Therefore his elements of production cannot be replaced. To help ourselves along, let us say: Well, the fellow sells the 4,000 YARDS and then "buys" yarn and the elements of COTTON out of the £400. Where does this get us? To a position where we are in fact assuming that 3 capitals are simultaneously employed and engaged and laid out in production. But yarn cannot be bought unless it is available and in order to buy COTTON it must be available as well. And so that they are available to replace the woven yarn and the



**[p. 286]**

Thus, whether III combines all 3 branches of production or whether 3 producers share them, 3 capitals must be available simultaneously. If he wants to produce on the same scale, he cannot carry on spinning and co-rro N-growing with the same capital which he used for weaving. Every one of these capitals is engaged and their reciprocal replacement does not affect the problem under discussion. The replacement capitals are the constant capital which must be invested and operating in each of the 3 branches simultaneously. If the £400 contain a profit of 637/n, then this is only because besides his own profit of 364/n, we allow III to gather in the profit which he has to pay to II and I and which, according to the assumption, is realised in his commodity. But the profit was not made on his £363 7/n. The peasant made it on his additional £9010/„ and the spinner on his 1819/n- When he pockets the whole amount himself, he likewise has not made it on the £363 7/n that he invested in weaving, but on this capital + his two other capitals invested in spinning and co TTON-growing.

Secondly: If we reckon Ill's outlay to be £3364/n instead of 3637/n, then this arises from the following:

We take his outlay on co TTON-growing to be only 90 /n instead of 100. But he needs the whole product and this=100 and not 9010/n. It contains the profit of 9'/ii. Or else he would be employing a capital of 90 %i which would bring him no profit His co TTON-growing would yield him no profit but would just replace his expenditure of 9010/n. In the same way, spinning would not bring him any profit, but the whole of the product would only replace his outlay.

[^1]: In this case, his expenditure would indeed be reduced to 90 1 0/ n + 81 9/ii+163 7/ii = 3364/ii- This would be the capital he has advanced. 10% on this would be £337/n. And the value of the product=£370. The value would not be one farthing higher because, according to the supposition, portions I and II have not brought in any profit. Accordingly III would have done much better to leave I and II well alone and to keep to the old method of production. For instead of the 637/n which were previously at the disposal of I, II and III, III now has only £337/n for himself whereas previously, when his fellows were alongside of him, he had £36 In. He would indeed be a very bad hand at business. He would only have saved an outlay of £9'/n in II because he had made no profit in I, and he would have saved an outlay of 18 In





**[p. 287]**

Whether constant capital is wholly or partially replaced in natura, in other words, whether it is replaced by the producers of the commodity for which it serves as constant capital, is of no consequence. D'abord, all constant capital must in the end be replaced in natura: machinery by machinery, raw material by raw material, matière instrumentale by matière instrumentale. In agricul- ture, constant capital may also enter as a commodity, i.e., be mediated directly by purchase and sale. In so far as organic3

substances enter into reproduction, the constant capital must of course be replaced by products of the same sphere of production. But it need not be replaced by the individual producers within this sphere of production. The more agriculture develops, the more all its elements enter into it as commodities, not just formally, but in actual fact. In other words, they come from outside, for instance, seeds, fertilisers, cattle, animal substances, etc., are the products of other producers. In industry, for example, the continual move- ment to and fro of iron into the machine SHOP and machines into the iron mines, is just as constant as is the movement of wheat from the granary to the land and from the land to the granary of

[^1]: a The word "organised" is written above this word in the manuscript.— Ed.





**[p. 288]**

It is difficult to see what difference it is supposed to make to the rate of profit if the peasant, who lays out the 90I0/n on a product of £100, were to compute that, for instance, he spends £20 on seeds etc., 20 on machinery etc., and 5010/n on wages. What he wants is a profit of 10% on the total sum. The £20 of the product which he sets against seeds do not include any profit. Neverthe- less, this is just as much £20 as the £20 in machinery, in which there may be a profit of 10%, although this may be only formal. In actual fact the £20 in machinery, like the £20 in seeds, may not contain a single FARTHING of profit. This is the case if these £20 are merely a replacement for components of the machine builder's constant capital, which he draws from agriculture, for instance.

Just as it would be wrong to say that all machinery goes into agriculture as its constant capital, so it is incorrect to say that all raw material goes into manufacture. A very large part of it remains fixed in agriculture and only represents a reproduction of constant capital. Another part of it goes directly into revenue in the form of means of subsistence and some of it, like fruit, fish, cattle etc., does not undergo a "manufacturing process" at all. It would therefore be incorrect to burden industry with the entire bill for all the raw materials "manufactured" by agriculture. Of course in those branches of manufacture where the raw material features as an advance, alongside wages and machinery, the capital advanced must be greater than in those branches of agriculture which supply the raw material used. It could also be assumed that if these branches of manufacture had their own rate of profit (different from the general rate) it would be smaller here than in agriculture and precisely because less labour is employed. For, with a given rate of surplus value, more constant capital and less variable capital necessarily bring in a lower rate of profit. This, however, applies equally to certain branches of manufacture as against others and to certain branches of agriculture (in the economic sense) as against others. It is in fact least likely to occur in agriculture proper, because, although it supplies raw material to industry, it differentiates between raw materials, machinery and wages in its own expenditure account, but industry by no means pays agriculture for the raw material, i.e., for that part of constant capital which it replaces from within itself and not by exchange with industrial products.



**[p. 289]**

How a "rate of capital gain" (rate of profit) comes about, is explained by Mr. Rodbertus purely from the fact that money now provides a "measure" of gain, making it possible to "express the relationship of gain to capital" (p. 94) and thus "supplying a standard gauge for the equalisation of capital gains" (p. 94). He has not even a remote idea that this uniformity of profit is in contradiction to the equality of rent and unpaid labour in each branch of production, and that therefore the values of com- modities and the average prices must differ. This rate of profit also becomes the norm in agriculture because the "return on property cannot be calculated upon anything other than capital" (p. 95) and by far the "larger part of the national capital is employed" (p. 95) in manufacture. Not a word about the fact that with the advent of capitalist production, agriculture itself is revolutionised, not only in a formal sense but really, and the landowner is reduced to a mere receptacle, ceasing to fulfil any function in production. According to Rodbertus

The entire bit is incorrect. Rodbertus now asks himself whether apart from the industrial profit, the profit on capital, there "remains a rent for the raw product", and "for what reasons" (p. 96).

He even assumes

[^1]: "in manufacture, the value of the entire product of agriculture" is included "in the capital as raw material, whereas this cannot be the case in primary production" (p. 95).

[^2]: "that the raw product like the manufactured product exchanges according to its labour costs, that the value of the raw product is only equal to its labour cost" (p. 96).





**[p. 290]**

"I have assumed that the rent" (the surplus value, the unpaid labour time) "is distributed according to the v a 1 u e of the raw product and the manufactured product, and that this value is determined by labour costs" (labour time) (pp. 96-97).

To begin with we must examine this first assumption. In fact this just means that the surplus values contained in the commodities are in the same proportion as their values, or, in other words, the unpaid labour contained in the commodities is proportionate to the total quantities of labour they contain. If the quantity of labour contained in the commodities A and B is as 3:1, then the unpaid labour—or surplus values—contained in them is as 3:1. Nothing could be further from the truth. Given the necessary labour time, for instance 10 hours, one commodity may be the product of 30 workers while the other is the product of 10. If the 30 workers only work 12 hours, then the surplus value created by them=60 hours=5 days (5x12), and if 10 work 16 hours a day, then the surplus value created by them also=60 hours. According to this,

the value of commodity A=30x 12=120x3 = 360: |12 =30 working

3 days //12 hours =1 working day//. And the value of commodity

B=160 working hours: 12 L_=13Vs working days. The values of

[X-466] Therefore, the surplus values of the commodities are not proportionate to their values, d'abord if the absolute surplus values, the extension of labour time beyond the necessary labour, i.e., the rates of surplus value [are different].

[^1]: 40 36

[^2]: ~4

[^3]: commodities A:B = 360:160 = 36:16= 5:16/6=6:24/6=6:22/3. The sur- plus values contained in the commodities, however, areas 60:60= 1:1. They are equal, although the values are almost as 3:1.

[^4]: a See D. Ricardo, On the Principles of Political Economy, pp. 60-61.— Ed.





**[p. 291]**

Mr. Rodbertus' first assumption, that, if the values of com- modities are determined by labour time, it follows that the quantities of unpaid labour contained in various commodities—or their surplus values—are directly related to their values is therefore fundamentally wrong. It is therefore also incorrect to say that

"rent is distributed according to the value of the raw product and the manufactured product", if "this value is determined by labour costs" (pp. 96-97).

"Of course it follows from this that the size of these portions of rent is not determined by the size of the capital on which the gain is calculated but by the direct labour, whether it be agricultural or manufacturing+that amount of labour which must be added on account of the wear and tear of tools and machines" (p. 97).

Wrong again. The volume of surplus value (and in this case surplus value is the portion of rent, since rent is here regarded as the general term, as opposed to profit and ground rent) depends only on the immediate labour involved and not on the wear and tear of fixed capital. Just as it does not depend on the value of the raw material or indeed on any part of the constant capital.

The wear and tear does, of course, determine the rate at which fixed capital must be reproduced. (At the same time, its production depends on the formation of new capital, on the accumulation of capital.) But the surplus labour which is performed in the production of fixed capital does not affect the sphere of production into which this fixed capital enters as such, any more than does the surplus labour which goes into the production of, say, the raw materials. It is rather equally valid for all of them, agriculture, production of machines and manufacture, that their surplus value is determined only by the amount of labour employed, if the rate of surplus value is given, and, by the rate of surplus value, if the amount of labour employed is given. Mr. Rodbertus seeks to "drag in" wear and tear in order to chuck out "raw materials".

[^1]: On the other hand, Mr. Rodbertus maintains that the size of the rent can [never] be influenced by "that part of capital which consists of material value",





**[p. 292]**

The labour time which is required for spinning and weaving is as much, or rather as little, dependent on the labour time—i.e., the value of the machine—as it is on the labour time which the raw material costs. Both machine and raw material enter into the labour process; neither of them enters into the valorisation process.

"On the other hand, the value of the primary product, or the material value, does figure as capital outlay in the capital upon which the owner has to calculate his gain, the part of the rent falling on the manufactured product. But in agricultural capital this part of capital is missing. Agriculture does not require any material which is the product of a previous production, in fact it actually begins the production, and in agriculture, that part of the property which is analogous with material, would be the land itself, which is however assumed to be without cost" (pp. 97-98).

This is the conception of the German peasant. In agriculture (excluding mining, fishing, hunting but by no means stock-raising) seeds, feeding stuffs, cattle, mineral fertilisers, etc., form the material [X-467] for manufacturing and this material is the product of labour. This "outlay" grows proportionately to the development of industrialised agriculture. All production—once we are no longer dealing with mere taking and appropriating—is reproduction and hence requires "the product of a previous production as material". Everything which is the result of production is at the same time a prerequisite of production. And the more large-scale agriculture develops the more it buys products of "a previous production" and sells its own. In agriculture these expenses feature as commodities in a formal sense—converted into commodities by being reckoned in money— as soon as the FARMER becomes at all dependent on the sale of his product; as soon as the prices of various agricultural products (like hay for example) have established themselves, for division of the spheres of production takes place in agriculture as well. Queer things must be happening in the mind of a peasant if he reckons the quarter of wheat which he sells as income, but does not reckon the quarter which he puts into the soil as "expenditure". Incidentally, Mr. Rodbertus ought to try somewhere to "begin the production", for instance of flax or silk, without "products of a previous production". This is absolute nonsense.

And therefore also the rest of Rodbertus' conclusions:

[^1]: "The two parts of capital that influence the size of the rent are thus common to agriculture and industry. The part of capital, however, that does not influence the size of the rent—but on which gain, i.e., the rent determined by those parts of capital, is also calculated—is to be found in industrial capital alone. According to





**[p. 293]**

First wrong proposition: If industrial products and agricultural products exchange according to their values (i.e., in relation to the labour time required for their production), then they yield to their owners equal amounts of surplus value or quantities of unpaid labour. Surplus values are not proportional to values.

Second wrong proposition: Since Rodbertus presupposes a rate of profit (which he calls rate of capital gain) the supposition that commodities exchange in the proportion of t h e i r v a l u e s is incorrect. One proposition excludes the other. For a (general) rate of profit to exist, the values of the commodities must have been transformed into average prices or must be in the constant process of transformation. The particular rates of profit which are formed in every sphere of production on the basis of the ratio of surplus value to capital advanced, are equalised in this general rate. Why then not in agriculture? That is the question. But Rodbertus does not even formulate this question correctly, because firstly he presupposes that there is a general rate of profit and secondly he assumes that the particular rates of profit (hence also their differences) are not equalised and thus that commodities exchange at their values.

Third wrong proposition : The value of the raw material does not enter into agriculture. Rather here, the advances of seeds, etc., are component parts of constant capital and are calculated as such by the FARMER. To the same degree that agriculture becomes a mere branch of industry—i.e., that capitalist production is established on the land—[X-468] to the degree to which agriculture produces for the market, produces commodities, articles for sale and not for its own consumption—to the same degree it calculates its outlay and regards each ITEM of expenditure as a commodity, whether it buys it from itself (i.e., from production) or from a third person.



**[p. 294]**

It is therefore wrong to say that there is a part of capital which enters into industry but not into agriculture.

Suppose then, according to Rodbertus' (false) proposition, that the "portions of rent" (i.e., shares of surplus value) yielded by the agricultural product and the industrial product are given, and that they are proportionate to the values of the agricultural product and the industrial product. Supposing, in other words, industrial products and agricultural products of equal values yield equal surplus values to their owners, i.e., contain equal quantities of unpaid labour, then no disproportion occurs through the entry into industry (for raw material) of one single part of capital which did not enter into agriculture, so that, for instance, the same surplus value in industry would be reduced in proportion to a capital augmented by this component. For the same ITEM of capital goes into agriculture. There only remains the question of whether it does so in the same proportion. But this brings us to mere quantitative differences whereas Mr. Rodbertus wants a "qualitative" difference. These same quantitative differences occur between different industrial spheres of production. They compensate one another in the general rate of profit. Why not as between industry and agriculture (IF THERE ARE SUCH DIFFERENCES)? Since Mr. Rodbertus allows agriculture to partici- pate in the general rate of profit, why not in the process of its formation? But of course that would mean the end of his argument.



**[p. 295]**

Fifth wrong proposition: If Mr. Rodbertus wants to differentiate between agriculture and industry, then that element of capital which consists of fixed capital such as machinery and tools belongs entirely to industry. This element of capital, in so far as it becomes part of any capital, can only enter into constant capital, and can never increase surplus value by a single farthing. On the other hand, as a product of industry, it is the result of a particular sphere of production. Its price, or the part of value which it forms within the whole of social capital, at the same time represents a certain quantity of surplus value (just as is the case with raw material). Now it does enter into the agricultural product, but it stems from industry. If Mr. Rodbertus reckons raw material to be an element of capital in industry which comes from outside, then he must reckon machines, tools, vessels, buildings, etc., as an element of capital in agriculture which comes from outside. He [must] therefore say that industry comprises only wages and raw materials (because fixed capital, in so far as it is not raw materials, is a product of industry, its own product) whereas agriculture comprises only wages [X-469] and machinery, etc., i.e., fixed capital, because raw material, in so far as it is not embodied in tools, etc., is the product of agriculture. It would then be necessary to examine how the absence of this "ITEM" affects the account in industry.

Sixthly: It is quite true that mining, fishing, hunting, forestry (in so far as the trees have not been planted by man), etc., in short, the extractive industries—concerned with the extraction of raw material that is not reproduced in kind—use no raw materials, EXCEPT matières instrumentales. This does not apply to agriculture.

But it is equally [true] that the same does hold good for a very large part of industry, namely the transport industry, in which outlays consist only of machinery, matières instrumentales, and wages.

Finally, there are certainly other branches of industry, such as tailoring, etc., which, relatively speaking, only absorb raw materials and wages, but no machinery, fixed capital, etc.

[^1]: a Result.— Ed.



Mr. Rodbertus surmises that there is a difference between surplus value and its special forms, in particular profit. But he misses the point because, right from the beginning, he is concerned with the explanation of a particular phenomenon (ground rent) and not [with] the establishment of a general law.

Reproduction occurs in all branches of production; but only in agriculture does this industrial reproduction coincide with natural reproduction. It does not do so in extractive industry. That is why, in the latter, the product does not in its natural form become an element in its own reproduction //except in the form of matière instrumentale//.

What distinguishes agriculture, stock-raising, etc., from other industries is, firstly, not the fact that a product becomes a means of production, since that happens to all industrial products which have not the definitive form of individual means of subsistence. And even as such they become means of production of the producer who reproduces himself or maintains his labour capacity by consuming them.

Secondly, the difference is not the fact that agricultural products enter into production as commodities, i.e., as component parts of capital; they go into production just as they come out of it. They emerge from it as commodities and they re-enter it as com- modities. The commodity is both the prerequisite and the result of capitalist production.

Hence thirdly, there only [remains] the fact that they enter as their own means of production into the production process whose product they are. This is also the case with machinery. Machine builds machine. Coal helps to raise coal from the shaft. Coal transports coal, etc. In agriculture this appears as a natural pro- cess, guided by man, although he also causes it "to some extent". In the other industries it appears to be a direct effect of industry.

But Mr. Rodbertus is on the wrong track altogether if he thinks that he must not allow agricultural products to enter into



**[p. 50]**

Constant capital Variable Surplus Machinery capital value

500 500 200 If the same variable capital were laid out in those branches of manufacture (or of agriculture) in which raw materials play a part, and furthermore, if the utilisation of this variable capital (i.e., the employment of this particular number of workers) required machinery, etc., to the value of £500, then indeed a third element, the value of the material, would have to be added, say again, £500. Hence in this case:

The 200 would now have to be reckoned on 1,500 and would only be 13 ll%%. This example would still apply, if in the first case the transport industry had been quoted as an illustration. On the other hand, the rate of profit would remain the same in the second case if machinery cost 100 and raw materials 400.

[X-470] What, therefore, Mr. Rodbertus imagines is that in industry 100 are laid out in machinery, 100 in wages and x in raw materials, whereas in agriculture 100 are laid out in wages+100 in machinery. The scheme would be like this:

[^1]: Constant capital Variable [Surplus Machinery Raw materials capital value]

[^2]: 500+500=£l,000 500 200

[^3]: I) Agriculture

[^4]: Constant Variable Surplus Rate of capital capital value profit Machinery

[^5]: 50/2oo=1/4

[^6]: 20-176





**[p. 50]**

Constant capital Variable Raw materials Machinery capital

100 100

Surplus value

50

Rate of profit

50

200+x must therefore be, at any rate, less than 1/i. Hence the rent in I. Firstly then, this difference between agriculture and manufac- ture is imaginary, NON-EXISTENT; it has no BEARING on THAT FORM OF RENT

WHICH DETERMINES ALL OTHERS.

Secondly, Mr. Rodbertus could find this difference between the rates of profit IN ANY TWO individual BRANCHES OF INDUSTRY. The difference is dependent on the proportion of constant capital to variable capital and the proportion in turn may or may not be determined by the addition of raw materials. In those branches of industry which use raw materials as well as machinery, the value of the raw materials, i.e., the relative share which they form of the total capital, is of course very important, as I have shown earlier.3

This has nothing to do with ground rent.

"Only when the value of the raw product falls below the labour cost is it possible that in agriculture too the whole portion of rent accruing to the raw product is absorbed in the gain calculated on capita L For then this portion of rent may be so reduced that although agricultural capital does not comprise the value of material, the ratio between these two is similar to that existing between the portion of rent accruing to the manufactured product and the manufacturing capital, although the latter contains the value of material. Hence only in those circumstances is it possible that in agriculture too, no rent is left over besides capital gain. But in so far as, in practice, as a rule, conditions gravitate towards the law that value equals labour cost, so, as a rule, ground rent is also present. The absence of rent and the existence of nothing but capital gain, is not the original state of affairs, as Ricardo maintains, but only an exception" (p. 100).

Thus, continuing with the above example; but taking raw materials as £100, to have something tangible, we get:

[^1]: I) Agriculture

[^2]: Constant capital Machinery

[^3]: Variable capital

[^4]: Surplus value

[^5]: Value Price Profit

[^6]: 100 100 50 250 233 2/6 16 2/3%

[^7]: II) Industry

[^8]: Constant capital Raw Machinery materials

[^9]: Variable capital

[^10]: Surplus value

[^11]: Rate of profit

[^12]: Profit

[^13]: £100 50/3oo=1/6 £50+16 2/3%

[^14]: a See this volume, pp. 60-67.— Ed.



^ „ .. . .

\lg£b.\!sit^

foe v>»u. c»c y AIL- - ^ \ ' ç<*

V^TV- -^- ^ y ^ ^ _ ^ ~ -<^u-.

W-v— ^ _fl> »-• :*><>

»!»>•;, %, i Mys-S. ^u^y^'-«

'J. V ï-lr U^Vî-Jr'.^^ W-*

V - v

[^1]: ,-»Sr- vr1,',. > s ^ - - ^ 2 S ^ W ^ ;v;.vi* ^->~^o,> A ^ ' ^ - - ^ v ^ i - - ^

[^2]: V - H H >

[^3]: • » * * > -»•"" if. I

[^4]: l4-«* i^\fi „ï_L- VA"*-

[^5]: Page 471 of Notebook X of the Economic Manuscript of 1861-1863

[^6]: 20*







**[p. 250]**

In order to make this law quite clear, and this is far more important than Rodbertus, we shall take 5 examples. We assume the rate of surplus value to be the same throughout.

I) Constant capital Variable capital Rate of surplus value Profit Rate of profit Raw Ma- Wages Surplus materials chinery value

T h e value of the product = 1,100 {verte to the next page). It is not at all necessary to compare commodities of equal value; they are to be compared only at their value. T o simplify matters, the commodities compared here are taken as produced by capitals of equal size.

[X-471]

[^1]: 700 100 200 100 50/ioo=5/lo= V2 = 50% 100 100/i,ooo=1/10=10%

[^2]: Constant Machinery

[^3]: capital Raw mate- rials

[^4]: Variable capital (wages)

[^5]: Surplus value

[^6]: Rate of surplus value

[^7]: Profit Rate of profit

[^8]: Value of product

[^9]: 50% 10% 1,100 50% 20% 1,200 50% 30% 1,300 none 50% 15% 1,150 none 50% 25% 1,250 We have here, in the categories I, II, III, IV and V (five different spheres of production), commodities whose respective values are £1,100, £1,200, £1,300, £1,150 and £1,250. These are the money prices at which these commodities would exchange if they were exchanged according to their values. In all of them the

[^10]: a Rodbertus has "below the labour cost".— Ed.





**[p. 200]**

If we consider the total capital advanced in all 5 spheres of production, then one portion of this (I) yields 10%, another (II) 20%, etc. The average yielded by the total capital equals the average yielded by the 5 portions, and this is:

100 (the total sum of [the rates of] profit) „„„ . . S . , i.e., 20%. 5 (the number of different rates of profit)

In fact we find that the [£] 5,000 capital advanced in the 5 spheres yields a profit= 100+200 + 300+150 + 250= 1,000; 1,000 on 5,000 = 1/5=20%. Similarly: if we work out the value of the total product, it comes to 6,000 and the excess on the 5,000 capital advanced= 1,000,=20% in relation to the capital advanced, = l U or 162/s% of the total product. (This again is another calculation.)

However, so that in fact each of the capitals advanced, i.e., I, II, III, etc.—or what comes to the same thing, that capitals of equal size—should receive a part of the surplus value yielded by the aggregate capital only in proportion to their magnitude, i.e., only in proportion to the share they represent in the aggregate capital advanced, each of them should get only 20% profit and each must get this amount. [X-472] But to make this possible, the products of the various spheres must in some cases be sold above their value and in other cases more or less below their value. In other words, the total surplus value must be distributed among them not in the proportion in which it is made in the particular sphere of production, but in proportion to the magnitude of the capitals advanced. All must sell their product at £1,200, so that the excess of the value of the product over the capital advanced = Vs of the latter=20%.

According to this apportionment:

[^1]: Value of product

[^2]: Surplus value

[^3]: Average price

[^4]: Excess of average price over value

[^5]: Excess of profit

[^6]: over surplus

[^7]: value

[^8]: Calcu- lated profit

[^9]: 1,100 1,200 Value = price

[^10]: 100% 200

[^11]: 1.200 1,200 Decrease in average price below value

[^12]: Decrease in profit below surplus value

[^13]: 1,300 1,200 33>/3%





**[p. 200]**

Excess of value over Excess of surplus value price over profit V 1,250 250 1,200 50 [25%] [200]

Decrease in profit below surplus value

V5=20%

This shows that only in one instance II) the average price=the value of the commodity, because by coincidence, the surplus value equals the normal average profit of 200. In all other instances a greater or a lesser amount of surplus value is taken away from one sphere and given to another, etc.

What Mr. Rodbertus had to explain was, why this is not the case in agriculture, hence [why] its commodities should be sold at their value and not their average price.

Competition brings about the equalisation of profits, i.e., the reduction of the values of the commodities to average prices. T h e individual capitalist, according to Mr. Malthus, expects an equal profit from every part of his capital 1 1 1—which, in other words, means only that he regards each part of his capital (apart from its organic function) as an independent source of profit, that is how it seems to him. Similarly, in relation to the class of capitalists, every capitalist regards his capital as a source of profit equal in volume to that which is being made by every other capital of equal size. This means that each capital in a particular sphere of production is only regarded as part of the aggregate capital which has been advanced to production as a whole and demands its SHARE in the total surplus value, in the total amount of unpaid labour or labour products—in proportion to its size, its stock—in accordance to the proportion of the aggregate capital it constitutes. This illusion confirms for the capitalist—to whom everything in competition appears in reverse—and not only for him, but for some of his most devoted pharisees and scribes, that capital is a source of income independent of labour, since in fact the profit on capital in each particular sphere of production is by no means solely determined by the quantity of unpaid labour which it itself "produces"; it is thrown into the pot of aggregate profits, from which the individual capitalists draw their quota in proportion to their SHARES in the total capital.

Hence Rodbertus' nonsense. Incidentally, in some branches of agriculture—such as stock-raising—the variable capital, i.e., that

"Rent, by its very nature, is always ground rent" (p. 113). Wrong. Rent is always paid to the LANDLORD; voilà tout* However, if, as so often occurs in practice, it is partially or wholly a deduction from normal profit or a deduction from normal wages //true surplus value, i.e., profit + rent, is never a deduction from wages, but is that part of the product of the worker which remains after deduction of the wage from this product//, then, from an economic point of view, it is not rent of land. In practice this is proved as soon as [X-473] competition restores the normal wage and the normal profit.

Average prices, to which competition constantly tends to reduce the values of commodities, are thus achieved by constant additions to the value of the product of one sphere of production and deductions from the value of the product of another sphere— except in case II in the above table—in order to arrive at the general rate of profit. With the commodities of the particular sphere of production where the ratio of variable capital to the total sum of capital advanced //assuming the rate of surplus labour to be given and equal// corresponds to the average ratio of social capital—value=average price; neither an addition to nor a deduction from value is therefore made. If, however, owing to special circumstances which we will not go into here, in certain spheres of production a deduction is not made from the value of the commodities (although it stands above the average price, not just temporarily but on an average) then this retention of the entire surplus value in a particular sphere of production—although the value of the commodity is above the average price and therefore yields a rate of profit higher than the average—is to be regarded as a privilege of that sphere of production. What we are concerned with here and have to explain as a peculiar feature, as an exception, is not that their average price is reduced below their value—this [would be] a general phenomenon and a necessary prerequisite for equalisation—but why, in contrast to other commodities, certain commodities are sold at their value, above the average price.

The average price of a commodity equals its production costs (the capital advanced in it, be it in wages, raw material, machinery or whatever else) + average profit. Hence if, as in the above case, average profit=20% = '/5, then the average price of each

[^1]: a That's al).— Ed.





**[p. c]**

c o m m o d i t y = C (the capital advanced) (the average rate of C + P .

profit). If equals the value of this commodity, i.e., if S, the surplus value created in this sphere of p r o d u c t i o n s P, then the

P . value of the commodity equals its average price. If CM is < than

the value of the commodity, i.e., if the surplus value S, created in this sphere, is > than P, then the value of the commodity is reduced to its average price and part of its surplus value is added on

P to the value of other commodities. Finally, if C + -~ is > than the

value tr the commodity, i.e., S is < than P, then the value of the commo' ;ty is raised to its average price and surplus value created in other spheres of production is added to it.

Finally, should there be commodities which are sold at their

p value, although their value is > than C H , or whose value is at

any rate not reduced to such an extent as to bring it down to the

P level of the normal average price C + —, then certain conditions

must be operative, which put these commodities into an exception- al position. In this case the profit realised in these spheres of production stands above the general rate of profit. If the capitalist receives the general rate of profit here, the LANDLORD can get the excess profit in the form of rent.

What I call rate of profit and rate of interest or rate of rent, Rodbertus calls "level of capital gain and of interest" (p. 113).

This is bad. T h e rate of rent is, in the first place, to be calculated on the capital, i.e., as the excess of the price of a commodity over its production costs and over that part of the price which forms the profit. Because it helps him to understand certain phenomena Mr. Rodbertus makes the calculation with an ACRE or a morgen, [X-474] the apparent form of the thing, in which the intrinsic connection is lost. T h e rent yielded by an ACRE is the RENTAL, THE

[^1]: This level "depends on its ratio to capital In all civilised nations a capital of 100 is taken as a unit, which provides the standard measurement for the level to be calculated. Thus, the larger the figure that expresses the relation between the gain or interest falling to the capital of 100, in other words, the 'more per cent' a capital yields, the higher are profit and interest" ([pp.] 113-14).

[^2]: "The level of ground rent and of rental follows from their proportion to a particular piece of land" ([p.] 114).

[^3]: ABSOLUTE AMOUNT OF RENT. I T MAY RISE IF THE RATE OF RENT REMAINS THE SAME OR IS

[^4]: EVEN LOWERED.





**[p. 306]**

The word "level" is nonsense here. For to what does it express a relationship? That 10 per cent yields more than 20 is obvious; but the unit of measurement here is 100. Altogether the "level of the value of land" is the same general phrase as the high or low level of commodity prices in general.

Mr. Rodbertus now wants to investigate:

"What then determines the level of capital gain and of ground rent}" (p. 115). First of all he examines: What determines the "level of rent in general", i.e., what regulates the rate of surplus value?

"1) With a given value of a product, or a product of a given quantity of labour or, which again amounts to the same thing, with a given national product, the level of rent in general bears an inverse relationship to the level of wages and a direct relationship to the level of productivity of labour in general. The lower the wages, the higher the rent; the higher the productivity of labour in general, the lower the wages and the higher the rent" (pp. 115-16).

The "level" of rent—the rate of surplus value—says Rodbertus, depends upon the "size of this portion left over for rent" ([p.] 117), i.e., after deducting wages from the total product, in which "that part of the value of the product which serves as replacement of capital can be disregarded" ([p.] 117).

This is good (I mean that in this consideration of surplus value the constant part of capital is "disregarded"). The following is a somewhat peculiar notion:

The last bit is good. But it is incorrect to say that when the variable capital that is laid out in wages decreases, the constant capital must diminish. In other words, it is not true that the rate of profit //the quite inappropriate reference to area of land, etc., is omitted here// must rise because the rate of surplus value rises. For instance, wages fall because labour becomes more productive and in all cases this expresses itself in more raw material being worked up by the same worker in the same period of time; this part of

[^1]: "when wages fall, i.e., from now on form a smaller share of the total value of the product, the aggregate capital on which the other part of rent" //i.e., the industrial profit// "is to be calculated as profit, becomes smaller. Now it is, however, solely the ratio between the value that becomes capital gain or ground rent, and the capital, or the land area on which it has to be calculated as such, which determines their level Thus if wages allow a greater value to be left over for rent, a greater value is to be reckoned as profit and ground rent, even with a diminished capital and the same area of land. The resulting ratio of both increases and, therefore, the two together, or rent in general, has risen It is assumed that the value of the product in general remains the same Because the wage, which the labour costs, diminishes, the labour, which the product costs, does not necessarily diminish" ([pp.] 117-18).





**[p. 307]**

Rodbertus correctly defines the necessary wage as equal to

"the amount of necessary subsistence, that is to a fairly stable definite quantity of material products for a particular country and a particular period" (p. 118).

[X-475] Mr. Rodbertus then puts forward in a most intricately confused, complicated and clumsy fashion, the propositions set up by Ricardo on the inverse relationship of profit and wages and the determination of this relationship by the productivity of labour. The confusion arises partly because, instead of taking labour time as his measure, he foolishly takes quantities of product and makes non-sensical differentiations between "level of the value of the product" and "magnitude of the value of the product".

By "level of the value of the product" this stripling means nothing other than the relation of the product to the labour time. If the same amount of labour time yields many products then the value of the product, i.e., the value of separate portions of the product is low, if the reverse, then the reverse. If one working day yielded 100 lbs yarn and later 200 lbs then in the 2nd case the value of the yarn would be half what it was in the first. In the first case its value=1/ioo of a working day; in the second, the value of the lb. of yarn = 7200 of a working day. Since the worker receives the same amount of product, whether its value be high or low, i.e., whether it contains more or less labour, wages and profit move inversely, and wages take more or less of the total product, according to the productivity of labour. He expresses this in the following intricate sentences:

[^1]: "If the wage, as necessary subsistence, is a definite quantity of material products, then, if the value of the product is high, the wage must have a high value, if it is low, it must constitute a low value and, since the value of the product available for distribution is assumed as constant, the wage will absorb a large part if the value of the product is high, a small part of it, if its value is low and finally, it will therefore leave either a large or a small share of the value of the product for rent. But if one accepts the rule that the value of the product equals the quantity of labour which it cost, then the level of the value of the product is again determined purely by the productivity of labour or the relationship between the amount of product and the quantity of labour which is used for its production if the same quantity of labour brings forth more product, in other words, if productivity increases, then the same quantity of product contains less labour and conversely, if the same quantity of labour brings forth less product, in other words, if productivity decreases, then the same quantity of product contains more labour. But the quantity of labour determines the value of the product and the relative value of a particular





**[p. 308]**

But this is only correct if the product, for whose production the worker is employed, belongs to that SPECIES which—according to tradition or necessity—figures in his consumption as a means of subsistence. If this is not the case, then the productivity of this labour has no effect on the relative height of wages and of profit, or on the amount of surplus value in general. The same share in the value of the total product falls to the worker as wages, irrespective of the number of products or the quantity of the product in which this share is expressed. The division of the value of the .product in this case is not altered by any change in the productivity of labour.

"II) If with a given value of the product, the level of rent in general is given, then the level of ground rent and of capital gain bear an inverse relationship to one another, and also to the productivity of extractive labour and manufacturing labour respectively. The higher or lower the rent, the lower or higher the capital gain and vice versa; the higher or lower the productivity of extractive labour or of manufacturing labour, the lower or higher the rent or capital gain, and alternately also the higher or lower is the capital gain or rent" (I.e., [p.] 116).

First [in thesis] I) we had the Ricardian [law] that wages and profit are related inversely.3

Now the second Ricardian [law]—differently evolved or, RATHER, "made involved" — that profit and rent have an inverse relation.

It is obvious, that when a given surplus value is divided between capitalist and landowner, then the larger the share of one, the smaller will be that of the other and vice versa. But Mr. Rodbertus adds something OF HIS OWN which requires closer examination.

In the first place, Mr. Rodbertus regards it as a new discovery that surplus value in general //"the value of the product of labour which is in fact available for sharing out as rent"//, the entire surplus value filched by the capitalists, "consists of the value of the raw product+the value of the manufactured product" ([p.] 120).

Mr. Rodbertus first reiterates his "discovery" of the absence of "the value of the material" in [X-476] agriculture. This time in the following flood of words:

[^1]: "That portion of rent which accrues to the manufactured product and determines the rate of capital gain is reckoned as profit not only on the capital which is actually used for the production of this product but also on the whole of the raw product value which figures as value of the material in the capital fund of the manufacturer. On the other hand, as regards that portion of rent which accrues to the raw product and from which the profit on the capital used in raw material production is calculated according to the given rate of profit in manufacture"

[^2]: a See this volume, p. 306.— Ed.





**[p. 309]**

We repeat: quod non\ Assume that a ground rent exists—which Mr. Rodbertus has not proved and cannot prove by his method—that is to say, a certain portion of the surplus value of the raw product falls to the

LANDLORD.

Further assume that:

"the level of rent in general" (the rate of surplus value) "in a particular value of the product is also given" ([p.] 121).

This amounts to the following: For instance, in a commodity of £100, say half, £50, is unpaid labour; this then forms the fund from which all categories of surplus value, rent, profit, etc., are paid. Then it is quite evident that one SHAREHOLDER in the £50 will draw the more, the less is drawn by the other and vice versa, or that profit and rent are inversely proportional. Now the question is, what determines the apportionment between the two?

In any case it remains true that the revenue of the MANUFACTURER (be he AGRICULTURIST or industrialist) = the surplus value which he draws from the sale of his manufactured product (which he has pilfered from the workers in his sphere of production), and that rent of land (where it does not, as with the waterfall which is sold to the industrialist, stem directly from the manufactured product, which is also the case with rent for houses, etc., since houses can hardly be termed raw product) only arises from the excess profit (that part of surplus value which does not enter into the general rate of profit) which is contained in the raw products and which the FARMER pays over to the LANDLORD.

It is quite true that when the value of the raw product rises [or falls], the rate of profit in those branches of industry which use raw material will rise or fall inversely to the value of the raw product. As I showed in a previous example," if the value of cotton doubles, then with a given wage and a given rate of surplus value, the rate of profit will fall. The same applies however to agriculture. If the harvest is poor and production is to be continued on the same scale (we assume here that the commodities are sold at their value) then a greater part of the total product or of its value would have to be returned to the soil and after deducting wages, if these remain stationary, the FARMER'S surplus value would consist of a smaller quantity of product, hence also a smaller quantity of value would be available for sharing out

[^1]: a See this volume, pp. 60-65.— Ed.





**[p. 310]**

Let us assume the opposite. Supposing the cotton harvest is twice as rich112 and that that part of it which is returned direct to the soil, for instance as fertiliser and seed, costs less than before. In this case the portion of value which is left for the co TTON-grower after deduction of wages is greater than before. The rate of profit would rise here just as in the cotton industry. True, in one yard of CALICO, the proportion of value formed by the raw product would now be smaller than before and that formed by the manufacturing process would be larger than before. Assume that CALICO costs 2s. a yard when the value of the cotton it contains = Is. Now if cotton goes down from Is. to 6d. (which, on the assumption that its value=its price, is only possible because its cultivation has become more productive), then the value of a yard of CALico=18d. It has decreased by 74 = 25%. But where the co TTON-grower previously sold 100 lbs at Is., he is now supposed to sell 400 at 6d. Previously the value = 100s.; now it is 200s. Although previously cotton formed a greater proportion of the value of the product—and the rate of surplus value in cotton growing itself decreased simulta- neously—the co TTON-grower obtained only 50 yds of CALICO for his 100s. cotton at Is. per lb.; now that the lb. [is sold] at 6d., he receives 133 Vs yds for his 200s.

On the assumption that the commodities are sold at their value, it is wrong to say that the revenue of the producers who take part in the production of the product is necessarily dependent on the portion of value [X-477] represented by their products in the total value of the product.

Let the value of the total product of all manufactured commodities, including machinery, be £300 in one branch, 900 in another and 1,800 in a third.

If it is true to say that the proportion in which the value of the whole product is divided between the value of the raw product and the value of the manufactured product determines the proportion in which the surplus value—the rent, as Rodbertus says—is divided into profit and ground rent, then this must also be true of different products in different spheres of production



**[p. 311]**

Suppose out of a value of £900, manufactured product accounts for £300 and raw material for £600, and that £1 = 1 working day. Furthermore, the rate of surplus value is given as, say, 2 hours on 10, with a normal working day of 12 hours, then the 300 [manufactured product] embody 300 working days, and the 600 [raw product] twice as much, 2x300. The amount of surplus value in the one=600 hours, in the other= 1,200. This only means that, given the rate of surplus value, its volume depends on the number of workers or the number of workers employed simultaneously. Furthermore, since it has been assumed (not proved) that of the surplus value which enters into the value of the agricultural product a portion falls to the LANDLORD as rent, it would follow that in fact the amount of ground rent grows in the same proportion as the value of the agricultural product compared with the "man- ufactured product".

In the above example the ratio of the agricultural product to the manufactured product=2:l,=600:300. Suppose in another case it is as 300:600. Since the rent depends on the surplus value contained in the agricultural product, it is clear that if this [amounts to] 1,200 hours in the first case as against 600 in the 2nd, and if the rent constitutes a certain PART of this surplus value, it must be greater in the first case than in the 2nd. Or—the larger the portion of value which the agricultural product forms in the value of the total product, the larger will be its share in the surplus value of the whole product, for every portion of the value of the product contains a certain portion of surplus value and the larger the share in the surplus value of the whole product which falls to the agricultural product, the larger will be the rent, since rent represents a definite proportion of the surplus value of the agricultural product.

Let the rent be '/io of the agricultural surplus value, then it is 120 hours if the value of the agricultural product is 600 out of the 900 and only 60 if it is 300. According to this, the volume of rent would in fact alter with the amount of the value of the agricultural product, hence also with the relative value of the agricultural product in relation to the manufactured product. But the "level" of the rent and of the profit—their rates—would have absolutely nothing to do with it whatsoever. In the first case the value of the product=900 of which 300 is manufactured product and 600 agricultural product. Of this, 600 hours surplus value accrue to the manufactured product and 1,200 to the agricultural product.



**[p. 312]**

If here with the increased portion of value that falls to agricultural product the volume of rent also rises and with this, its volume, increases its proportional share in the total surplus value—i.e., the rate at which surplus value accrues to rent also rises compared to that at which it accrues to profit—then this is only so, because Rodbertus assumes that rent participates in the surplus value of the agricultural product in a d e f i n i t e p r o p o r t i o n . Indeed this must be so, if this FACT is given or presupposed. But the FACT itself by no means follows from the rubbish which Rodbertus pours forth about "the value of the material" and which I have already cited above at the beginning of page 476.a

But the level of the rent does not rise in proportion to the [surplus value in the] product in which it participates, because now, as before, this [proportion is] Viol its volume grows because the product grows, and because it grows in volume, without a rise in its "level", its "level" rises in comparison with the quantity of profit or the share of profit in the [X-478] value of the total product. Because it is presupposed that a greater part of the value of the total product yields rent, i.e., a greater part of surplus value is turned into rent, that part of surplus value which is converted into rent is of course greater. This has absolutely nothing to do with the "value of the material". But that a

[^1]: "greater rent" at the same time represents a "higher rent", "because the area or number of morgen on which it is calculated remains the same and hence a greater amount of value falls to the individual morgen" ([p.] 122)b

[^2]: a See this volume, pp. 308-09.— Ed. b Marx quotes Rodbertus with some alterations.— Ed.





**[p. 313]**

Since we do not know as yet what rent is, had we put the above example differently and had left the same rate of profit for the agricultural product as for the manufactured product, only adding on Vio for rent, which is really necessary since the same rate of profit is assumed, then the whole business would look different and become clearer.

I)

Manufactured Agricultural product product I 600 300 1,200 surplus value for manufacture, 600 for ag- riculture and 60 for rent. Altogether 1,860. 1,800 for profit.

II 300 600 600 surplus value for man- ufacture, 1,200 for agricul- ture and 120 for rent. Al- together 1,920. 1,800 for profit.

If Rodbertus wants to charge the "value of the material" exclusively to industry, then above all, it should have been his duty to burden agriculture alone with that part of constant capital which consists of machinery, etc. This part of capital enters into agriculture as a product supplied to it by industry—as a "manufactured product", which forms the means of production for the "raw product".

Since we are dealing here with an account between two firms, so far as industry is concerned, that part of the value of the machinery which consists of "raw material" is already debited to it u n d e r the heading of "raw material" or "value of the material". We cannot therefore book this twice over. T h e other portion of the value of the machinery used in manufacture, consists of added "manufacturing labour" (past and present) and this resolves into

[^1]: In CASE II the rent is twice that in I because the agricultural product, the share of the value of the product on which it sponges, has grown in proportion to the industrial product. T h e volume of profit remains the same in both cases, i.e., 1,800. In the first case [the rent is] Vsi of the total surplus value, in the second case it is Vi6-

[^2]: 21-176





**[p. 314]**

(The error usually made in such calculations is that, for instance, the wear and tear of the machinery or of the tools used is embodied in the machine itself, in its value and although, in the last analysis, this wear and tear can be reduced to labour—either labour contained in the raw material or that which transformed the raw material into machine, etc.—this past labour never again enters into profit or wages, but only acts as a produced condition of production (in so far as the labour time necessary for reproduction does not alter) which, whatever its use value in the labour process, only figures as value of constant capital in the valorisation process. This is of great importance and has already been explained in the course of my examination of the exchange of constant capital and revenue.3 But apart from this, it needs to be further developed in the section on the accumulation of capital.15)

So far as agriculture is concerned—i.e., purely the production of raw products or so-called primary production—in balancing the accounts between the firms "primary production" and "manufacture" that part of the value of constant capital which represents machinery, tools, etc., can on no account be regarded in any other way than as an item which enters into agricultural capital without increasing its surplus value. If, as a result of the employment of machinery, etc., agricultural labour becomes more productive, the higher the price of this machinery, etc., the smaller will be the increase in productivity. It is the use value of the machinery and not its value which increases the productivity of agricultural labour or of any other sort of labour. Otherwise one might also say that the productivity of industrial labour is, in the first place, due to the presence of raw material and its properties. But again it is the use value of the raw material, not its value, which constitutes a condition of production for industr). Its value, on the contrary, is A DRAWBACK. Thus what Mr. Rodbertus SAYS about the "value of the material" IN RESPECT TO THE INDUSTRIAL CAPITAL, is literally, [X-479] mutatis mutandis, valid for machinery, etc.

[^1]: a See this volume, pp. 143-49.— Ed. b See K. Marx, Capital, Vol. Ill, Part II, Ch. XXI (present edition, Vol. 37). —Erf.





**[p. 315]**

In other words: That portion of the value of wheat and cotton representing the value of the wear and tear of the plough or GIN, is not the result of the work of ploughing or of separating the cotton fibre from its seed, but the result of the labour which manufac- tured the plough and the GIN. This component part of value goes into the agricultural product without being produced in agriculture. It only passes through agriculture, which uses it merely to replace ploughs and GINS by buying new ones from the maker of machines.

The machines, tools, buildings and other manufactured prod- ucts required in agriculture consist of 2 component parts: 1) the raw materials of these manufactured products. Although these raw materials are the product of agriculture, they are a part of its product which never enters into wages or into profit. Even if there were no capitalist, the farmer still could not chalk up this part of his product as wages for himself. He would IN FACT have to hand it over gratis to the machine manufacturer so that the latter would make him a machine from it and besides he would have to pay for the labour which is added to this raw material (=wages + profit). This happens in reality. The machine maker buys the raw material but in purchasing the machine, agricultural producer must buy back the raw material. It is just as if he had not sold it at all, but had lent it to the machine maker to give it the form of the machine. Thus that portion of the value of the machinery employed in agriculture which resolves into raw material, although it is the product of agricultural labour and forms part of its value, belongs to production and not to the producer, it therefore figures in his expenses, like seed. The other part, however, represents the manufacturing labour embodied in the machinery and is a "product of manufacture" which enters into agriculture as a means of production, just as raw material enters as a means of production into industry.

Thus, if it is true that the firm "primary production" supplies the firm "manufacturing industry" with the "value of the material" which enters as an ITEM into the capital of the industrialist, then it is no less true that the firm "manufacturing industry" supplies the firm "primary production" with the value of the machine which enters wholly (INCLUDING that part which consists of raw material) into the FARMER'S capital without this

[^1]: 21*





**[p. 316]**

At the same time this supplies Mr. Rodbertus with striking proof of how irrelevant it is to the nature of a capital advance, whether that portion of the product which is laid out in constant capital is replaced in natura and therefore only accounted for as a commodity—as money value—or whether it has really been alienated and has gone through the process of purchase and sale. Supposing the producer of raw materials handed over gratis to the machine builder the iron, copper, wood, etc., embodied in his machine, so that the machine builder in selling him the machine would charge him for the added labour and the wear and tear of his own machine, then this machine would cost the agriculturist just as much as it costs him now and the same component part of value would figure as constant capital, as an advance, in his production. Just as it amounts to the same thing whether a farmer sells the whole of his harvest and buys seed from elsewhere with that portion of its value which represents seed (raw material) perhaps to effect a desirable CHANGE in the type of seed and to prevent degeneration by inbreeding—or whether he deducts this component part of value directly from his product and returns it to the soil.

But in order to arrive at his results, Mr. Rodbertus misinterprets that part of constant capital which consists of machinery.

A second aspect that has to be examined in connection with [case] II of Mr. Rodbertus is this:

He speaks of the manufactured and agricultural products which make up the revenue, which is something quite different from those manufactured and agricultural products which make up the total annual product. Now supposing it were correct to say of the latter that after deducting the whole of that part of the agricultural capital which consists of machinery, etc., [X-480] and that part of the agricultural product which is returned direct to agricultural production, the proportion in which the surplus value is [distributed] between FARMER and MANUFACTURER—and therefore also the proportion in which the surplus value accruing to the FARMER is distributed between himself and the LANDLORD—must be determined by the share of manufacture and of agriculture in the total value of the products; then it is still highly questionable whether this is correct if we are speaking of those products which form the common fund of revenue. Revenue (we exclude here that



**[p. 317]**

The mass of products which make up revenue, as I have demonstrated earlier,3 does not contain any products that enter into production as instruments of labour (machinery), matière instrumentale, semi-finished goods and the raw material of semi- finished goods, which form a part of the annual product of labour. Not only the constant capital of primary production is excluded but also the constant capital of the machine makers and the entire constant capital of the FARMERS and the CAPITALISTS which does not enter into the valorisation process though it enters into the labour process. Furthermore, it excludes not only constant capital, but also the part of the unconsumable products that represents the revenue of their producers and enters into the capital of the producers of products consumable as revenue, for the replacement of their used up constant capital.

The mass of products on which the revenue is spent and which IN FACT represents that part of wealth which constitutes revenue, in terms of both use value and exchange value—this mass of products can, as I have demonstrated earlier,b be regarded as consisting only of newly added (during the year) labour. Hence it can be resolved only into revenue, i.e., wages and profit (which again splits up into profit, rent, taxes, etc.), since not a single particle of it contains any of the value of the raw material which goes into production or of the wear and tear of the machinery which goes into production, in a word, it contains none of the value of the means of labour. Leaving aside the derivative forms of revenue because they merely show that the owner of the revenue relinquishes his proportional share of the said products to another, be it for SERVICES, etc. or debt, etc.—let us consider this revenue and assume that wages form Vs of it, profit Vs and rent Vs and that the value of the product=£90. Then each will be able to draw the equivalent of £30 worth of products from the whole amount.

Since the amount of products which forms the revenue consists

[^1]: a See this volume, pp. 143-49.— Ed. h Ibid., pp. 134-43.— Ed.





**[p. 318]**

If the productivity of two different spheres of production is to be compared, this can only be done relatively. In other words, one starts at any arbitrary point, for instance, when the values of hemp and linen, i.e., the correlative quantities of labour time embodied in them, are as 1:3. If this ratio alters, then it is correct to say that the productivity of these different types of labour has altered. But it is wrong to say that because the labour time required for the production of an ounce of gold [X-481] = 3 and that for a ton of iron also=3, gold production is "less productive" than iron production.

The relative value of two commodities shows that the one costs more labour time than the other; but one cannot say that because

[^1]: "But again it is only the productivity of labour in primary production or manufacture, which determines the relative level of the value of the raw product and manufactured product or their respective shares in the value of the total product. The value of the raw product will be the higher, the lower the productivity of labour in primary production and vice versa. In the same way, the value of the manufactured product will be the higher, the lower the productivity in manufacture and vice versa. Since a high value of the raw product effects a high ground rent and low capital gain, and a high value of the manufactured product effects a high capital gain and low ground rent, if the level of rent in general is given, the level of ground rent and of capital gain must not only bear an inverse relationship to one another, but also to the productivity of their respective labour, that in primary production and that in manufacture" ([p.] 123).





**[p. 319]**

It would be entirely wrong to say that manufacture is 3 times as productive as agriculture if the value of the raw product is to that of the manufactured product as 3:1. Only if the ratio changes say to 4:1 or 3:2 or 2:1, etc., when it rises or falls, could one say that the relative productivity in the two branches has altered.

Ill) "The level of capital gain is solely determined by the level of the value of the product in general and by the level of the value of the raw product and the manufactured product in particular; or by the productivity of labour in general and by the productivity of labour employed in the production of raw materials and of manufactured goods in particular. The level of ground rent is, apart from this, also dependent on the magnitude of the value of the product or the quantity of labour, or productive power, which, with a given state of productivity, is used for production" ([pp.] 116-17).

In other words: The rate of profit depends solely on the rate of surplus value and this is determined solely by the productivity of labour. On the other hand, given the productivity of labour, the rate of ground rent also depends on the amount of labour (the number of workers) employed.

This assertion contains almost as many falsehoods as words.

Firstly the rate of profit is by no means solely determined by the rate of surplus value. But more about this shortly. First of all, it is wrong to say that the rate of surplus value depends solely on the productivity of labour. Given the productivity of labour, the rate of surplus value alters according to the length of surplus labour time. Hence the rate of surplus value depends not only on the productivity of labour but also on the quantity of labour employed because the quantity of unpaid labour can grow (while productivity remains constant) without the quantity of paid labour, i.e., that part of capital laid out in wages, growing. Surplus value—absolute or relative (and Rodbertus only knows the latter from Ricardo)— cannot exist unless labour is at least sufficiently productive to leave over some surplus labour time apart from that required for the worker's own reproduction. But assuming this to be the case, with a given minimum productivity, then the rate of surplus value alters according to the length of surplus labour time.

Firstly, therefore, it is wrong to say that because the rate of surplus value, or the "level of capital gain", is solely determined by the productivity of the labour exploited by capital, the rate of profit is so determined. Secondly: The rate of surplus value—which, if the productivity of labour is given, alters with the length of the working day and, with a given normal working day,



**[p. 320]**

Hence what Rodbertus says is fundamentally wrong:

"Thus, as the amount of capital gain increases consequent upon the increase in product value, so also in the same proportion increases the amount of capital value on which the gain has to be reckoned, and the hitherto existing ratio between gain and capital is not altered at all by this increase in capital gain" ([p.] 125).

This is only valid if it [signifies] the tautology that: given the rate of profit Hvery different from the rate of surplus value and surplus value itself//, the amount of capital employed is immaterial, precisely because the rate of profit is assumed to be constant. But as a rule the rate of profit can increase although the productivity of labour remains constant, or it can fall even though the productivity of labour rises and rises moreover IN EVERY DEPARTMENT.

And now again the silly remark (pp. 125-26) about ground rent, the assertion that the mere increase of rent raises its rate, because in every country it is calculated on the basis of an "unalterable number of morgen" ([p.] 126). If the volume of profit grows (given the rate of profit), then the amount of capital from which it is drawn, grows. On the other hand, if rent increases, then [according to Rodbertus] only one FACTOR changes, namely rent itself, while its standard of measurement, "the number of morgen", remains unalterably fixed.

On p. 128, Rodbertus makes the strange discovery that even if the value of the raw product fell below its normal level, causing rent to disappear completely, it would be impossible

[^1]: [X-482] "Hence rent can rise for a reason which enters into the economic development of society everywhere, namely the increase in labour used for production, in other words, the increasing population. This does not necessarily have to be followed by a rise in the raw product value since the drawing of rent from a greater quantity of raw product must already have this effect" ([p.] 127).

[^2]: a If such exists.— Ed.





**[p. 200]**

AND WHY?

"Because it" (the capital gain) "is merely the result of the division of the value of the product. It must, accordingly, always be a fraction of this unit" ([pp.] 127-28).

This, Mr. Rodbertus, depends entirely upon the nature of your calculation.

Let the constant capital advanced be 100, the wages advanced 50 and let the product of labour over and above this 50 be 150. We would then have the following calculation:

Constant Variable Surplus Value Production Profit capital capital value costs

100 50 150 300 150 150=100%

T h e only requirement to produce this situation is that the worker should work for his MASTER 3/4 of his working day, it is therefore assumed that '/* of his labour time suffices for his own reproduction. Of course, if Mr. Rodbertus takes the total value of the product, which = 300, and does not consider the excess it contains over the production costs, but says that this product is to be divided between the capitalist and the worker, then IN FACT the capitalist's portion can only amount to a part of this product, even if it came to 999/i,ooo- But the calculation is incorrect, or at least useless in almost every respect. If a person lays out 150 and makes 300 he is not in the habit of saying that he has made a profit of 50% on the basis of reckoning the 150 on 300 instead of 150. Assume, in the above example, that the worker has worked 12 hours, 3 for himself and 9 for the capitalist. Now let him work 15 hours, i.e., 3 for himself and 12 for the capitalist. Then, according to the former production ratio, an outlay of 25 on constant capital would have to be added (less IN FACT, because the outlay on machinery would not grow to the same degree as the quantity of labour). Thus:

T h e n Rodbertus comes u p again with the growth of "rent to infinity", firstly because he interprets its mere increase in volume as a rise, and therefore speaks of its rise when the same rate of

[^1]: Constant Variable Surplus Value Production Profit Per cent capital capital value costs

[^2]: 114*/7





**[p. 322]**

The following points can be dealt with quite briefly, since they have nothing to do with my purpose.

The "value of land" is the "capitalised ground rent". Hence this, its expression in terms of money, depends on the level of the prevailing rate of interest. Capitalised at 4%, it would have to be multiplied by 25, since 4% = V25 of 100; at 5% by 20, since 5% = V2o of 100. This would amount to a difference in land value of 20% ([p.] 131). Even with a fall in the value of money, ground rent and hence the value of land would rise nominally, since—unlike the increase in interest or profit (expressed in money)—the monetary expression of capital does not rise evenly. The rent, however, which has risen in terms of money has to be related "to the unchanged number of morgen of the piece of land" ([p.] 132).

Mr. Rodbertus sums up his wisdom as applied to Europe in this way:

1) "with the European nations, the productivity of labour in general—labour employed in primary production and manufacturing—has risen as a result of which the part of the national product used for wages has diminished, the part left over for rent has increased so rent in general has risen" ([pp.] 138-39).

Here Mr. Rodbertus, just like Ricardo, explains the rise of rent and the fall of the rate of profit one by the other; the fall of one=the rise of the other and the rise of the lattera is explained by the relative unproductiveness [X-483] of agriculture. Indeed, Ricardo says somewhere quite expressly that it is not a matter of absolute but of "relative" unproductiveness.11 But even if he had said the opposite, it would not comply with the principle he establishes since Anderson, the original author of the Ricardian concept, expressly declares that every piece of land is capable of absolute improvement.0

If "surplus value" (profit and rent) in general has risen then it is not merely possible that the rate of the total rent has fallen in proportion to constant capital, but it will have fallen because

[^1]: 2) "the increase in productivity is relatively greater in manufacture than in primary production an equal value of national product will therefore at present yield a larger rent share to the raw product than to the manufactured product. Therefore notwithstanding the rise in rent in general, in fact only ground rent has risen while capital gain has fallen" ([p.] 139).

[^2]: a Rent.— Ed. b See this volume, p. 546.— Ed. c J. Anderson, An Inquiry into the Causes that Have Hitherto Retarded the Advance- ment of Agriculture in Europe, Edinburgh, 1779, p. 5.— Ed.





**[p. 323]**

productivity has risen. Although the number of workers employed has grown, as has the rate at which they are exploited, the amount of capital expended on wages as a whole has fallen relatively, although it has risen absolutely; because the capital which is set in motion by these workers as an advance, a product of the past, entering production as a prerequisite, forms an ever growing share of the total capital. Hence the rate of profit+rent taken together has fallen, although not only its volume (its absolute amount) has grown, but also the rate at which labour is being exploited has risen. This Mr. Rodbertus cannot see, because for him constant capital is an invention of industry of which agriculture is ignorant.

But so far as the relative magnitude of profit and rent is concerned, it does not by any means follow that, because agriculture is relatively less productive than industry, the rate of profit has fallen absolutely. If, for instance, its relationship to rent was as 2:3 and is now as 1:3, then whereas previously it formed 2/3 of rent, it now forms only 7s, or previously [profit] formed 2/s of the total surplus value and now only V4, [or] previously 8/2o and now only 5/2o', it would have fallen by 3/2o or [by] 15%.

Assume that the value of 1 lb. of cotton was 2s. It falls to Is. 100 workers who previously span 100 lbs in one day, now spin 300. Assume finally that since the product becomes cheaper, the outlay for 300 lbs amounted previously to 600s.; now it is only 300s. Further, assume that in both cases machinery = 7io=60s. Finally, previously 300 lbs cost 300s. as an outlay for 300 workers, now only 100s. for 100 [workers]. Since the productivity of the workers "has increased", and we must suppose that they are paid here in their own product, assume that whereas previously the surplus value=20% of wages, now it=40.

Thus the cost of the 300 lbs is:

Suppose the rent was Vs of 1 lb., then in the first case it=200s.=£l0; in the second it=100s.=£5. The rent has fallen here because the raw product has become cheaper by 50%. But the whole of the product has become cheaper by more than 50%. The industrial labour added in I [is to the value of the raw material] as 360:600=6/,o=l:l2/3; in II, as 140:300= 1:2V?. Indus-

[^1]: in the first case: 600 raw material, 60 machinery, 300 wages, 60 surplus value, altogether= 1,020s.

[^2]: in the second case: 300 raw material, 60 machinery, 100 wages, 40 surplus value, altogether=500s.

[^3]: The production costs in the first case 960. Profit 60. Per cent 6l/^%. In the second case: 460. Profit 40. 816/23%.





**[p. 324]**

Assume that the amount of raw materials in II doubles so that 600 lbs are spun and the ratio would be:

II) 600 lbs—600 raw material, 120 machinery, 200 wages, 80 surplus value. Altogether 920 production costs, 80 profit, per cent 8)6/23%.

The rate of profit [has] risen compared with I. Rent would be just the same as in I. The 600 lbs would cost only 1,000, whereas before they cost 2,040.

[X-484] It does not by any means follow from the relative dearness of the agricultural product that it yields a [higher] rent. However, if one assumes—as Rodbertus can be said to assume, since his so-called proof is absurd—that rent clings as a percentage on to every particle of value of the agricultural product, then indeed it follows that rent rises with the increasing dearness of AGRICULTURAL PRODUCE.

"As a result of the increased population, the value of the total national product has also grown to an extraordinary extent today, therefore, the nation draws more wages, more profit, more ground rent furthermore, this increased amount of ground rent has raised it, whereas the increased amount of wages and profit could not have a similar effect" ([p.] 139).

Let us strip Mr. Rodbertus of all nonsense (not to speak of such defective conceptions as I have detailed more fully above, for instance that the rate of surplus value ("level of the product") can only rise when labour becomes more productive, i.e., the overlooking of absolute surplus value, etc.);

namely the absurd conception that the "value of the material" does not form part of the expenditure in (capitalist) agriculture in the strict sense.

The second piece of nonsense: that he does not regard the machinery, etc., the second part of the constant capital of agriculture and manufacture, as a "component part of value", which—just as the "value of the material"—does not arise from the labour of the sphere of production into which it enters as machinery, and upon which the profit made in each sphere of production is also calculated, even though the value of the machinery does not add a farthing to the profit, as little as the "value" of the material although both are means of production and as such enter into the labour process.

The third piece of nonsense: that he does not charge to agriculture the entire "component part of value" of the "machin-



**[p. 325]**

The fourth piece of nonsense: his belief that in addition to machinery and its matière instrumentale the "value of the material" enters into all branches of industry, whereas this is not the case in the entire transport industry any more than it is in the extractive industry.

The fifth piece of nonsense: that he does not see that although, besides variable capital, "raw material" does enter into many branches of manufacture (and this the more they supply FINISHED PRODUCE for consumption), the other component part of constant capital disappears almost completely or is very small, incomparably smaller than in large-scale industry or agriculture.

The sixth piece of nonsense: that he confuses the average prices of commodities with their values.

Stripped of all this, which has allowed him to derive his explanation of rent from the FARMER'S wrong calculation and his own wrong calculation, so that rent would have to disappear to the extent to which the FARMER accurately calculates the outlay he makes, then only the following assertion remains as the real kernel:

When the raw products are sold at their values, their value stands above the average prices of the other commodities or above their own average price, this means their value is greater than the production costs+average profit, thus leaving an excess profit which constitutes rent. Furthermore, assuming the same rate of surplus value, this means that the ratio of variable capital to constant capital is greater in primary production than it is, on an average, in those spheres of production which belong to industry (which does not prevent it from being higher in some branches of industry than it is in agriculture). Or, putting it into even more general terms: agriculture belongs to that class of industries, whose variable capital is greater proportionately to constant capital than in industry, on an average. Hence its surplus value, calculated on its production costs, must be higher than the average in the industrial spheres. Which means again, that its particular rate of profit stands- above the average rate of profit or the general rate of profit. Which means again: when the rate of surplus value is the same and the surplus value itself is given, then the particular rate of profit in each sphere of production depends on the



**[p. 326]**

This would therefore only be an application of the law developed by me in a general form to a particular branch of industry.3

[X-485] Consequently:

1) One has to prove that agriculture belongs to those particular spheres of production whose commodity values are above their average prices, whose profit, so long as they appropriate it themselves and do not hand it over for the equalisation of the general rate of profit, thus stands above the average profit, yielding them, therefore, in addition to this, an excess profit. This point 1) appears certain to apply to agriculture on an average, because manual labour is still relatively dominant in it and it is characteristic of the bourgeois mode of production to develop manufacture more rapidly than agriculture. This is, however, a historical difference which can disappear. At the same time this implies that, on the whole, the means of production supplied by industry to agriculture fall in value, while the raw material which agriculture supplies to industry generally rises in value, the constant capital in a large part of manufacture has consequently a proportionately greater value than that in agriculture. In the main, this will probably not apply to the extractive industry.

2) It is wrong to say, as Rodbertus does: If—according to the general law—the agricultural product is sold on an average at its value then it must yield an excess profit, alias rent; as though this selling of the commodity at its value, above its average price, were the general law of capitalist production. On the contrary, it must be shown why in primary production—by way of exception and in contrast to the class of industrial products whose value similarly stands a b o v e their a v e r a g e price—the values are not reduced to the average prices and therefore yield an excess profit, alias rent. This is to be explained simply by property in land. The equalisation takes place only between capitals, because only the action of capitals on one another has the force to assert the inherent laws of capital. In this respect, those who derive rent from monopoly are right. Just as it is the monopoly of capital alone that enables the capitalist to squeeze surplus labour out of the worker, so the monopoly of landownership enables the landed proprietor to squeeze that part of surplus labour from the capitalist which would form a constant excess profit. But those who derive rent from monopoly are

[^1]: •> See this volume, pp. 298, 301-05.— Ed.





**[p. 327]**

Modified in this way, the proposition is correct. It explains the existence of rent, whereas Ricardo only explains the existence of different rents and actually does not credit the ownership of land with any economic effect. Furthermore, it does AWAY with the SUPERSTRUCTURE, which with Ricardo himself was anyhow only arbitrary and not necessary for his presentation, namely, that the agricultural industry becomes gradually less productive; it admits on the contrary that it becomes more productive. Only on the bourgeois basis agriculture is relatively less productive, or slower to develop the productive forces of labour, than industry. Ricardo is right when he derives his "surplus value"3 not from greater productivity but from smaller productivity.

So far as the difference in rents is concerned, provided equal capital is invested in land areas of equal size, it is due to the difference in natural fertility, in the first place, specifically with regard to those products which supply bread, the chief nutriment; provided the land is of equal size and fertility, differences in rent arise from unequal capital investment. The first, natural, difference causes not only the difference in the size but also in the level or rate of rent, relatively to the capital which has been laid out. The second, industrial, difference only effects a greater rent in propor- tion to the volume of capital which has been laid out. Successive capital investments on the same land may also have different results. The existence of different excess profits or different rents on land of varying fertility does not distinguish agriculture from industry. What does distinguish it is that those excess profits in agriculture become permanent fixtures, because here they rest on a natural basis (which, it is true, can be plus ou moins levelled out). In industry, on the other hand—given the same average profit—these excess profits can only turn up fleetingly and they only appear because of a change-over to more productive machines and combinations of labour. In industry it is always the most recently added, most productive capital that yields an excess profit by reducing average prices. In agriculture excess profit may be the result, and very often must be the result, not of the absolute increase in fertility of the best fields, but the relative increase in

[^1]: 11 Marx means "excess surplus value".— Ed.





**[p. 328]**

[X-486] It can, however, also happen in agriculture (and Ricardo admits this) that more fertile land—land which is either naturally more fertile or which becomes more fertile due to advanced farming technidues than the old land under the old [conditions] — comes into use at a later stage and even throws a part of the old land out of cultivation (as in the mining industry and with colonial products), or forces it to turn to another SPECIES of agriculture which supplies a different product.

The fact that the differences in rents (excess profits) become more or less fixed distinguishes agriculture from industry. But the fact that the market price is determined by the average conditions of production, thus raising the price of the product which is below this average, above its price and even above its value, this fact by no means arises from the land, but from competition, from capitalist production. Hence this is not a law of nature, but a social law.

This theory neither demands the payment of rent for the worst land, nor the non-payment of rent. Similarly, it is possible that a lease rent is paid where no rent is yielded, where only the ordinary profit is made, or where not even this is made. Here the landowner draws a rent although economically none is available.

First. Rent (excess profit) is paid only for the better (more fertile) land Here rent "as such" does not exist. In such cases excess profit—just as the excess profit in industry—rarely becomes fixed in the form of rent (as in the West of the United States of North America).*

This is the case where, on the one hand, RELATIVELY great areas OF DISPOSABLE LAND have not become private property and, on the other, the natural fertility is so great that the VALUES of the agricultural products are equal to (sometimes below) their average prices, despite the scant development of capitalist production and therefore the high proportion of variable capital to constant capital. If their values were higher, competition would reduce them to this level. It

[^1]: * // As O p d y k e calls landed property " T H E LEGALISED REFLEXION OF THE VALUE OF CAPITAL", SO "CAPITAL is THE LEGALISED REFLEXION OF OTHER PEOPLE'S LABOUR".//





**[p. 329]**

But in countries where landed property exists, the same situation, namely that the last cultivated land pays no rent, may also occur for the reverse reasons. Supposing, for instance, that the value of the grain crops was so low (and that its low value was in no way connected with the payment of rent), that owing to the relatively lowb fertility of the last cultivated land the value of its crop were only equal to the average price, this means that, if the same amount of labour were expended here as on the land which carried a rent, the number of quarters would be so small (on the capital laid out), that with the average value of bread products, only the average price of wheat would be obtained.

[X-487] Supposing for example, that the last land which carries rent (and the land which carries the smallest rent represents pure rent; the others already differential rent) produces, [with] a capital investment of £100, [a product] equal to £120 or 360 qrs of wheat at £'/s- In this case 3 qrs=£l. Let £1 equal one week's labour. £100=100 weeks' labour and £120=120 weeks' labour. 1 qr=Vs of a week=2 days and of these 2 days or 24 hours (IF THE NORMAL WORKING DAY= 12 HOURS) '/s, or 4 4/s hours, are unpaid labour=the surplus value embodied in the qr. 1 qr=£'/s=62/ss. or 66/g S.lls

If the qr is sold at its value and the average profit=10% then the average price of the 360 qrs=£110 and the average price per qr 6V9S. The value would be £10 above the average price. And since the average profit =10% the rent would be equal to half the surplus value,=£10 or 5/9S. per qr. Better types of land, which would yield more qrs for the same outlay of 120 weeks' labour (of which, however, only 100 are paid labour, be it objectified or living), would, at the price of 66/9S. per qr, yield a higher rent. But the worst cultivated land would yield a rent of £10 on a capital of £100, or of 5/g S. per qr of wheat.

Assume that a new piece of land is cultivated, which only yields

[^1]: a See this volume, p. 382.— Ed. b In the manuscript: "high".— Ed.

[^2]: 22-176





**[p. 330]**

There are two situations in which the worst land would here yield a rent apart from profit.

Firstly if the value of the qr of wheat were above 66/g S. (its price could be above 66/9S., i.e., above its value, as a result of demand; but this does not concern us here. The 66/9S., the price per qr, which yielded a rent of £10 on the worst land cultivated previously, was equal to the value of the wheat grown on this land, which yields a non-differential rent), that is [if] the worst land previously cultivated and all others, while yielding the same rent, were proportionately less fertile, so that their value were higher above their average price and the average price of the other commodities. That the new worst land does not yield a rent is thus not due to its low fertility but to the relatively high fertility of the other land. As against the new type of land with the new capital investment, the worst, [previously] cultivated, rent-yielding land rep- resents rent in general, the non- differential rent. And that its rent is not higher is due to the [high] fertility of the rent-yielding land.

Assume that there are 3 other classes of land besides the last rent-yielding land. Class II (that above I, the last rent-yielding land) carries a rent of Vs more because this land is Vs more fertile than class I; class III again Vs more because it is Vs more fertile than class II, and the same again in class IV because it is Vs more fertile than class III. Since the rent in class I=£10, it= 10 + V5=£12 in class II, 12 + V5=£142/5 in class III and 142/5 + Vä=£177/25 in class IV.

If IV's fertility were less, the rent of III-I inclusive [X-488] would be greater and that of IV also greater absolutely (but would the proportion be the same?). This can be taken in two ways, If I were more fertile then the rent of II, III, IV would be proportionately smaller. On the other hand, I is to II, II is to III and III is to IV



**[p. 331]**

Hence the phenomenon that here the 5th class, the newly cultivated land I' (as opposed to I) yields no rent, is not to be ascribed to its own lack of fertility, but to its relative lack of fertility compared with I, therefore, to the relative fertility of I as compared with I'.

[Secondly.] The value [of the product] of the rent-yielding types of land I, II, III, IV, that is 6s. 8d. per quarter (to make it more realistic, one could say BUSHEL instead of quarter117), equals the average price of I' and is below its own value. Now many intermediary stages are in fact possible. Supposing on a capital investment of £100, I' yielded ANY QUANTITY OF QRS BETWEEN ITS REAL RETURN OF 330 BUSHELS and the RETURN of I which is 360 BUSHELS, say 333, 340, 350 up to 360-x BUSHELS. Then the value of the qr at 6s. 8d. would be above the average price of I' (per BUSHEL) and the last cultivated land would yield a rent. That it yields the average profit at all, it owes to the relatively low fertility of I, and therefore of I-IV. That it yields no rent, is due to the relatively high fertility of I and to its own relatively low fertility. The last cultivated land I' could yield a rent if the value of the BUSHEL were above 6s. 8d., that is, if I, II, III, IV were less fertile, for then the value of the wheat would be greater. It could however also yield a rent if the value were given at 6s. 8d., i.e. the fertility of I, II, III and IV were the same. This would be the case if it were more fertile itself, yielded more than 330 BUSHELS and if the value of 6s. 8d. per qr were thus above its average price; in other words, its average price would then be below 6s. 8d., and therefore below the value of the wheat

[^1]: 22»





**[p. 332]**

This shows: When comparing different spheres of production— for instance industry and agriculture—the fact that value is above average price indicates lower productivity in the sphere of production that yields the excess profit, the EXCESS of value over the average price. In the same sphere, on the other hand, [it indicates] greater productivity of one capital in comparison with other capitals in the same sphere of production. In the above example, I yields a rent in general, only because in agriculture the proportion of variable capital to constant capital is greater than in industry, i.e., more new labour has to be added to the objectified labour—and because of the existence of landed property this excess of value over average price is not levelled out by competition between capitals. But that I yields a rent at all is due to the fact that the value of 6s. 8d. per BUSHEL is not below its average price, and that its fertility is not so low that its own value rises above 6s. 8d. per BUSHEL. Its price moreover is not determined by its own value but by the value of the wheat grown on II, III, IV or, to be precise, by that grown on II. Whether the market price is merely equal to its own average price or stands above it, and whether its value is above its average price, depends on its own productivity.

Hence Rodbertus' view that in agriculture every capital which yields the average profit must yield rent is wrong. This false conclusion follows from his [X-489] false basis. He reasons like this: The capital in agriculture, for instance, yields £10. But because, in contrast to industry, raw materials do not enter into it, the £10 are reckoned on a smaller sum. They represent therefore more than 10%, for instance. But the point is this: It is not the absence of raw materials (on the contrary, they do enter into agriculture proper; it wouldn't matter a straw if they didn't enter into it, provided machinery, etc., increased proportionally) which raises the value of the agricultural products above the average price (their own and that of other commodities). Rather is this due to the higher proportion of variable to constant capital compared with that existing, not in particular spheres of industrial production, but on an average in industry as a whole. The magnitude of this general difference determines the amount and the existence of rent on No. I, the absolute, non-differential rent and hence the smallest rent. The price of wheat from I', the newly cultivated land which does not yield a rent, is, however, not determined by the value of its own product, but by the value of I, and consequently



**[p. 333]**

The privilege of agricultural product (resulting from landed property), that it sells its product not at the average price but at its value if this value is above the average price, is by no means valid for products grown on different types of land as against one another, for products of different values produced within the same sphere of production. As against industrial products, they can only claim to be sold at their average prices. As against the other products of the same sphere, they are determined by the market price, and it depends on the fertility of I whether the value— which=the average market price here—is sufficiently high or low, i.e., whether the fertility of I is sufficiently high or low, for I', if it is sold at this value, to participate little, much or [not] at all in the general difference between the value and the average price of wheat. But, since Mr. Rodbertus makes no distinction at all between values and average prices, and since he considers it to be a general law for all commodities, and not a privilege of agricultural products, that they are sold at their values—he must of course believe that the product of the least fertile land has also to be sold at its individual value. But it loses this privilege in competition with products of the same type.

Now it is possible for the value of I' to be below 6s. 8d. per BUSHEL, the average price of I.118 It can be assumed (although this is not quite correct), that for land I' to be cultivated at all, demand must increase. The price of wheat from I must therefore rise above its value, above 6s. 8d., and indeed persistently so. In this case land I' will be cultivated. If it can make the average profit at 6s. 8d. although its value is above 6s. 8d. and if it can satisfy demand, then the price will be reduced to 6s. 8d., since demand now again corresponds to supply, and so I must sell at 6s. 8d. again, ditto II, III, IV; hence also I'. If, on the other hand, the average price in I' amounted to 7s. 8d. so that it could make the usual profit at this price only (which would be far below its individual value) and if the demand could not be otherwise satisfied, then the value of the BUSHEL would have to consolidate itself at 7s. 8d. and the price of wheat of I would rise above its value. That of II, III, IV, which is already above their individual value, would rise even higher. If, on the other hand, there were prospects of grain imports which would by no means permit of such a stabilisation, then I' could nevertheless be cultivated if small FARMERS were prepared to be satisfied with less than the average profit. This is constantly happening in both agriculture and



**[p. 334]**

One can see how the differentiation between value and average price surprisingly solves the question and shows that Ricardo and his opponents are right.119

[XI-490] If I, the land which yields absolute rent, were the only cultivated land, then it would sell the BUSHEL of wheat at its value, at 6s. 8d., or 66/9S. and not reduce it to the average price of 6 VQS., or 6s. 1 Väd. If all land were of the same type and if the cultivated area increased tenfold, because demand grew, then since I yields a rent of £10 per £100, the rent would grow to £100, although only a single type of land existed. But its rate or level would not grow, neither compared with the capital advanced nor compared with the area of land cultivated. Ten times as many ACRES would be cultivated and ten times as much capital advanced. This would therefore merely be an augmentation of the RENTAL, of the volume of rent, not of its level. The rate of profit would not fall; for the value and price of the agricultural products would remain the same. A capital which is ten times as large can naturally hand over a rent which is ten times larger than a capital which is Vio its size. On the other hand, if ten times as much capital were employed on the same area of land with the same result, then the rate of rent compared with the capital laid out would have remained the same; it would have risen in proportion to the area of land, but would not have altered the rate of profit in any way.

Now supposing the cultivation of I became more productive, not because the land had altered but because more constant capital and less variable capital is being laid out, that is more capital is



**[p. 335]**

The Ricardian law would prevail just the same, even if landed property were non-existent. With the abolition of landed property and the retention of capitalist production, this excess profit arising from the difference in fertility would remain. If the State appro- priated the land and capitalist production continued, then rent from II, III, IV would be paid to the State, but rent as such would remain. If landed property became people's property then the whole basis of capitalist production would go, the foundation on which the conditions of labour become independent vis-à-vis the worker.

A question which is to be later examined in connection with rent: How is it possible for rent to rise in value and in amount, with more intensive cultivation, although the rate of rent falls in relation to the capital advanced? This is obviously only possible



**[p. 336]**

Now let us assume that, as a result of increasing demand, the movement is from I to II. [Category] I pays the absolute rent, II would pay a differential rent, but the price of wheat (value for I, excess value for II) remains the same. The rate of profit, too, [is supposed] not to be affected. And so on till we come to IV. Thus the level, the rate of rent is also rising if we take the total capital laid out in I, II, III, IV. But the average rate of profit from II, III, IV would remain the same as that from I, which equals that in industry, the general rate of profit. Thus if [XI-491] we go on to more fertile land, the AMOUNT AND RATE of rent can grow, although the rate of profit remains unchanged and the price of wheat constant. The rise in level and AMOUNT of rent would be due to the growing productivity of the capital in II, III, IV, not to the diminishing productivity in I. But the growing productivity would not cause a rise in profits and a fall both in the price of the commodity and in wages, as happens necessarily in industry.

Supposing, however, the reverse process took place: from IV to III, II, I. Then the price would rise to 6s. 8d. at which it would still yield a rent of £10 on £100 on I. For the rent of wheat on IV [amounts to] £17'/2s on £100, of which, however, £7'/2s are the excess of its price over the value of I.a [Category] I gave 360 qrs at £100 (with a rent of £10 and the value of the BUSHEL at 6s. 8d.). 11—432 qrs. Ill—518 2/ 5 qrs and IV—6222/25 qrs. But the price per qr of 6s. 8d. yielded IV an excess rent of £7 '/2s per 100. IV sells 3 qrs for £1 or 6222/25 qrs at £2079/25. But its value is only £120, as in I; whatever is above this amount is excess of its price over its value. IV would sell the qr at its value, or RATHER the BUSHEL, if he sold it at 3s. 108/27d. and at this price he would have a rent of £10 on 100. The movement from IV to III, III to II and II to I, causes the price per qr (and with it the rent) to rise until it eventually reaches 6s. 8d. with I, where this price now yields the same rent that it previously yielded with IV. The rate of profit would fall with the rise in price, partly owing to the rise in value of the means of subsistence or raw materials. The transition from

[^1]: a See this volume, p. 330.— Ed.





**[p. 337]**

Thus the rate of profit falls with this downward movement on the assumptions which we have made, namely, that III cannot yield a rent at the price of IV and that III can only be cultivated at the old rate of profit because wages have momentarily fallen below their level.

Under these conditions [it is again possible for] the Ricardian law [to apply]. But not necessarily, even according to his interpretation. It is merely possible in CERTAIN circumstances. In reality the movements are contradictory.

This has disposed of the essence of the theory of rent. With Mr. Rodbertus, rent arises from eternal nature, at least of capitalist production, because of his "value of the material". In our view rent arises from an historical difference in the organic component parts of capital which may be partially ironed out and indeed disappear completely, with the development of agriculture. True, the difference in so far as it is merely due to variation in actual fertility of the land remains even if the absolute rent disappeared. But—quite apart from the possible ironing out of natural variations—differential rent is linked with the regulation of the market price and therefore disappears along with the price and with capitalist production. There would remain only the fact that land of varying fertility is cultivated by social labour and, despite the difference in the labour employed, labour can become more productive on all types of land. But the amount of labour used on the worse land would by no means result in more labour being paid for [the product] of the better land as now with the bourgeois. Rather would the labour saved on IV be used for the improvement of III and that saved from III for the improvement of II and finally that saved on II would be used to improve I. Thus the whole of the capital eaten up by the landowners would serve to equalise the labour used for the cultivation of the soil and to reduce the amount of labour in agriculture as a whole.

[XI-492] //Adam Smith, as we saw above,3 first correctly

[^1]: a See present edition, Vol. 30, pp. 376-91, 398-403.— Ed.





**[p. 338]**

Now to return briefly to the remainder of Rodbertus.

[^1]: "The increase in wages, capital gain and ground rent respectively, which arises from the increase in the value of the national product can raise neither the wages nor the capital gain of the nation, since more wages are now distributed among more workers and a greater amount of capital gain accrues to capital increased in the same proportion; ground rent, on the other hand, must rise since this always accrues to land whose area has remained the same. It is thus possible to explain satisfactorily the great rise in land value, which is nothing other than ground rent capitalised at the normal rate of interest, without having to resort to a fall in productivity of agricultural labour, which is diametrically opposed to the idea of the perfectibility of human society and to all agricultural and statistical facts" ([pp.] 160-61).

[^2]: D'abord1 it should be noted that Ricardo nowhere seeks to explain the "great rise in land value". This is no problem at all for him. H e says further, and Ricardo even noted this explicitly (see later in connection with Ricardo), that—given the rate of rent — rent can increase with a constant value of corn or AGRICULTURAL PRODUCE.b This increase again presents no problem for him. T h e rise in the RENTAL while the rate of rent remains the same, is no problem for him either. His problem lies in the rise in

[^3]: a First of all.— Ed. b See this volume, p. 529.— Ed.





**[p. 339]**

The rate of rent can indeed rise relatively to the capital advanced, in other words, the relative value of the agricultural product can rise in proportion to the industrial product, even though agriculture is constantly becoming more productive. And this can happen for 2 reasons.

Firstly take the above example, the transition from I to II, III, IV, i.e., to ever more fertile land (but where the additional supply is not so great as to throw I out of cultivation or to reduce the difference between value and average price to such an extent that IV, III, II pay relatively lower rents and I no rent at all). If I's rent amounts to 10, II's to 20, Ill's to 30 and IV's to 40 and if £100 are invested in all 4 types of land, then I's rent would be Vio or 10% on the capital advanced, II's would be 2Ao or 20%, Ill's would be 3/io or 30% and IV's rent would be 4/io or 40%. Altogether 100 on 400 capital advanced, which gives an average rate of rent of 100/4=25%. Taking the entire capital invested in agriculture, the rent amounts now to 25%. Had only the cultivation of land I (the least fertile land) been extended, then the rent would be 40 on 400, 10% just as before, and it would not have risen by 15%. But in the first case (if 330 BUSHELS resulted from an outlay of £100 on I) only 1,320 BUSHELS would have been produced at the price of 6s. 8d. per BUSHEL. In the second case, 1,518 BUSHELS have been produced at the same price. The same capital has been advanced in both cases.120

But the rise in the level of the rent here is only apparent.121 For if we calculate the capital outlay in relation to the product, then 100 [would have been] needed in I to produce 330 and 400 to produce 1,320 BUSHELS. But now only 100+90+80 + 70, i.e., £340 122

are needed to produce 1,320 BUSHELS. £90 in II produce as much as 100 in I, 80 in III as much as 90 in II and 70 in IV as much as 80 in III. The rate of rent [has] risen in II, III, IV, compared with I.

If we take society as a whole, it means that a capital of 340 [was] employed to raise the same product, instead of a capital of 400, that is 85% [of] capital [advanced].

Apart from this rise in the rate of rent—which corresponds to the uneven rise in excess profit in individual branches of industry, though here it does not become fixed—there is only one other possibility of the rate of rent rising although the value of the product remains the same, that is, labour does not become less productive. It occurs either when productivity in agriculture remains the same as before but productivity in industry rises and this rise expresses itself in a fall in the rate of profit, in other words when the ratio of variable to constant capital diminishes. Or, alternatively, when productivity is rising in agriculture as well though not at the same rate as in industry but at a lower rate. If productivity in agriculture rises as 1:2 and in industry as 1:4, then it is relatively the same as if it had remained at one in agriculture and had doubled in industry. In this case the ratio of variable capital to constant capital would be decreasing in industry twice as fast as in agriculture.

In both cases the rate of profit in industry would fall, and because it fell the rate of rent would rise. In the other instances the rate of profit does not fall absolutely (rather it remains constant) but it falls relatively to rent. It does so not because it itself is decreasing but because rent, the rate of rent in relation to the capital advanced, is rising.

Ricardo does not differentiate between these cases. Except in these cases (that is where the general ratio of constant to variable capital alters as a result of the increased productivity of industry and hence increases the excess of value of agricultural [products] above their average price or where the rate of profit, although constant, falls relatively because of the differential rents of the capital employed on the more fertile types of land) the rate of rent can only rise if the rate of profit falls without industry becoming more productive. This is, however, only possible if wages rise or if



**[p. 341]**

On the whole it can be assumed that under the cruder, pre-capitalist mode of production, agriculture is more productive than industry, because nature assists here as a machine and an organism, whereas in industry the powers of nature are still almost entirely replaced by human action (as in the craft type of industry, etc.). In the period of the stormy growth of capitalist production, productivity in industry develops rapidly as compared with agriculture, although its development presupposes that a significant change as between constant and variable capital has already taken place in agriculture, that is, a large number of people have been driven off the land. Later, productivity advances in both, although at an uneven pace. But when industry reaches a certain level the disproportion must diminish, in other words, productivity in agriculture must increase relatively more rapidly than in industry. This requires: 1) The replacement of the easy-going FARMER by the BUSINESSMAN, the FARMING capitalist; transformation of the husband- man into a pure wage labourer; large-scale agriculture, i.e., with concentrated capitals. 2) In particular however: Mechanics, the really scientific basis of large-scale industry, had reached a certain degree of perfection during the eighteenth century. The develop- ment of chemistry, geology and physiology, the sciences that directly form the specific basis of agriculture rather than of industry, [XI-494] does not take place till the nineteenth century and especially the later decades.3

It is nonsense to talk of the greater or lesser productivity of two different branches of industry when merely comparing the values

[^1]: a I.e., the 1840s and 1850s.— Ed.





**[p. 342]**

If, on an average, according to the conditions of production, £500 is needed in the form of raw material and machinery, etc. //at given values// in order to employ 100 workers [whose wages] amount to £100, in the cotton industry, and, on the other hand, £150 is needed for raw materials and machinery in order to employ 100 workers [whose wages] amount to £100, in the cultivation of wheat, then the variable capital in I would form 7Ô of the total capital of £600, and 7B of the constant capital; in II, the variable capital would constitute 2/5 of the total capital of £250 and 2/Î of constant capital. Thus every £100 which is laid out in I can only contain £162/3 variable capital and must contain £83 7s constant capital; whereas in II it comprises £40 of variable capital and £60 of constant. In I, variable capital forms 7Ô or 162/s% and in II, 40%. Clearly the histories of prices are at present quite wretched. And they can be nothing but wretched until theory shows what needs to be examined. If the rate of surplus value were given at, say, 20% then the surplus value in I would amount to £3 7s (hence profit 3 73%)- In II, however, £8 (hence profit 8%). Labour in I would not be so productive as in II because it would be more productive (in other words, not so productive of SURPLUS VALUE, because it is MORE PRODUCTIVE OF PRODUCE). Incidentally, it is clearly only possible to have a ratio of 1:76, for example, in the cotton industry, if a constant capital (this depends on the machines, etc.) amounting to say £10,000 has been laid out, hence wages amounting to 2,000, making a total capital of 12,000. If only 6,000 were laid out, of which wages would be 1,000, then the machinery would be less productive, etc. At 100 it could not be done at all. On the other hand it is possible that if £23,000 is laid



**[p. 343]**

out, the resulting increase in the EFFICIENCY of the machinery and other economies, etc., are so great that the £19,1662/s is not entirely allocated to constant capital, but that more raw material and the same amount of labour require less machinery, etc. ([in terms of] value); on which £1,000 are assumed to have been saved. Then the ratio of variable to constant capital grows again, but only because the absolute [amount of] capital has grown. This is a CHECK against the fall in the rate of profit. Two capitals of 12,000 would produce the same quantity of commodities as the one of 23,000, but firstly the commodities would be dearer since they required an outlay of £1,000 more, and secondly the rate of profit would be smaller because within the capital of 23,000, the variable capital is > than 1/e of the total capital, i.e., more than in the sum of the two capitals of 12,000.

Already Petty tells us that the LANDLORDS of his time feared improvements in agriculture because they would cause the price of agricultural products and hinc (the level of) rent to fall; ditto the extension of the land and the cultivation of previously unused land which is equivalent to an extension of the land. (In Holland this extension of the land is to be understood in an even more direct way.) He says:

(On the one hand, with the advance of industry, machinery becomes more effective and cheaper; hence, if only the same quantity of machinery were employed as in the past, this part of constant capital in agriculture would diminish; but the quantity of machinery grows faster than the reduction in its price, since this element is as yet little developed in agriculture. On the other hand, with the greater productivity of agriculture, the price of raw material—see cotton—falls, so that raw material does not increase as a component part of the valorisation process to the same degree as it increases as a component part of the labour process.)

Petty fights this view and D'Avenant goes [XI-495] even further and shows how the level of rent may decrease while the amount of rent or the RENTAL increases. He says:

[^1]: "that the draining of fens, IMPROVING of WOODS, INCLOSING of COMMONS, SOWING OF ST. FOYNE AND CLOVERGRASS, be grumbled against by LANDLORDS, AS THE WAY TO DEPRESS THE PRICE OF VICTUALS" (Political Arithmetick, London, 1699, p. 230). ("The rent of all ENGLAND, WALES, and the LOW-LANDS of Scotland, be about nine millions per annum) (I.e., p. 231).

[^2]: "Rents may fall IN SOME PLACES, AND SOME COUNTIES, and yet the land of the nation" (he means value of the land) "IMPROVE ALL THE WHILE: AS for example, when PARKS ARE DISPARKED, and forests, and COMMONS ARE TAKEN IN, AND ENCLOSED; WHEN FEN-LANDS ARE DRAINED, and when many parts" (of the country) "are meliorated by industry and MANURING, IT MUST CERTAINLY DEPRECIATE THAT GROUND



