---
Volume: 15
Document_Title: "K. Marx. The Causes of the Monetary Crisis in Europe "
Page_Range: "146-152"
---

# K. Marx. The Causes of the Monetary Crisis in Europe 



**[p. 117]**

Karl Marx

[THE CAUSES OF THE MONETARY CRISIS IN EUROPE]

The monetary crisis in Germany, which began about the middle of September last, reached its climax on the 26th of that month, when it gradually subsided; like the monetary panic in England in 1847, which first manifested itself in the last [days] of April and gradually disappeared after the 4th of May, the day of its culmination. Then, the sacrifices made by several leading houses in London, for the sake of a respite during the panic, laid the immediate foundation of the complete ruin in which they were involved a few months later. Similar results will, ere long, be experienced in Germany, since at the bottom of the panic there was no scarcity of currency, but a disproportion between the disposable capital and the vastness of the industrial, commercial and speculative enterprises then in hand. The means by which the panic was temporarily subdued was the enhancement of the rate of discount by the different Government, joint-stock and private banks; some of them raising their rate to 6, some as high as 9 per cent. Consequent upon this enhancement of the rate of discount, the efflux of bullion was checked, the importation of foreign produce paralyzed, foreign capital attracted by the bait of high interest, outstanding debts were called in, the French Crédit Mobilier, which in the month before had paid by bills of accommodation its installments on the German railways contracted for by it, was forced to pay in cash, and France, in general, obliged to discharge in specie the balance then due on account of corn and provisions. The monetary panic in Germany thus rebounded on France, where it at once assumed a more threatening aspect. The Bank of France, following in the track of the German banks, raised its rate of discount to 6 per cent, an



**[p. v]**

a Here: a meeting of the Board of Directors.— Ed. b The Bank of England is located in this street.— Ed. c See Le Moniteur universel, No. 280, October 6, 1856.— Ed.



**[p. 119]**

Oct.b Sept.c

Cash in hand 77,062,910 113,126,401 Cash in branches 89,407,036 122,676,090 Bills discounted 271,955,426 221,308,498 Bills at branch banks 239,623,602 217,829,320 Prem. on gold and silver 2,128,594 1,496,313

In other words, during one month the cash on hand had diminished by 69,332,545 francs, discounts of bills had increased by 72,441,210 francs; while the premium on the purchase of gold and silver exceeds the figures for September by 632,281 francs. Unhappily, also, it is the fact that hoarding of the precious metals is now going on to an unprecedented degree among the French; and that the rumors of a suspension of cash payments at the Bank are daily gaining ground. The intervention of Napoleon proves to be about as efficient on the money market as his intervention in the inundated districts on the waters of the Loire.155

The present crisis in Europe is complicated by the fact that a drain of bullion — the common harbinger of commercial disas- ters—is interwoven with a depreciation of gold, as compared with silver. Independently of every other commercial and industrial agency, this depreciation could not but induce those countries, where there exists a double standard of value, and where both gold and silver must be received in payment according to proportions prescribed by law, but declared to be false by economical facts, to export their silver to those markets where gold is the standard of value, and where the official price of silver does not swerve from its market price. This being the relative position of England and France, silver must naturally flow from France to England, and gold from England to France, till the silver currency of the latter is replaced by a gold currency. On the

a P. Magne, "Rapport à l'Empereur", Le Moniteur universel, No. 281, October 7, 1856.— Ed.

b "Situation de la Banque de France et de ses succursales au jeudi 9 octobre 1856", Le Moniteur universel, No. 284, October 10, 1856.— Ed.

c "Situation de la Banque de France et de ses succursales au jeudi 11 septembre 1856", Le Moniteur universel, No. 256, September 12, 1856.— Ed.



**[p. 120]**

Within the last four or five months the specie in the Austrian National Bank has, it is true, increased from $20,000,000 to $43,000,000, the whole of which, Austria not having yet returned to cash payments, is hoarded in the Bank vaults. The principal part of this increase of $23,000,000 has been drawn from Paris and Germany for railways bought by the Crédit Mobilier. This is certainly one of the causes which explain the recent drain of silver, but it would be erroneous to look upon this circumstance as in any large degree accounting for the late phenomena in the money market. It must not be forgotten that from 1848 to 1855, one hundred and five millions of gold have been thrown into the money markets of the world by the production of California and Australia,156 exclusive of the yield of Russia and the other old established sources of supply. Of these one hundred and five millions the more sanguine free-traders suppose that fifty-two millions have been required for the modern increase of commerce, whether as currency, as bank reserves, as bullion for the settling of balances and the correction of exchanges between different countries, or as articles of luxury. Of the other fifty-three millions they suppose, and we think them rather below the mark, that they have merely replaced a similar amount of silver formerly in use in



**[p. 121]**

Gold Imported in 1855. Silver Imported in 1855.

Ingots £11,045,268 Ingots £1,717,459 Coin 4,306,887 Coin 3,121,250

Total £45,352,155 Total £4,838,709

Gold Exported in 1855. Silver Exported in 1855.

Ingots £203,544 Ingots £3,067,229 Coin 6,306,060 Coin 9,783,345

Total £6,509,604 Total £12,850,574

Balance gold imp'ed £8,842,551 Balance silver exp'd £8,011,865

Nobody, then, can pretend that the setting free of so large an amount of silver (fifty-three millions sterling) is accounted for either by the displacement in the currency of France and America, or by the hoarding of the Bank of Austria, or both together. It has been justly asserted that silver, not being threatened, like gold, with a diminution in value, the Italian and Levant traders were giving it a marked preference over other coin; that the Arabs have received and hoarded large quantities of it; and lastly, that the French corn-dealers, in payment for their purchases in the Black Sea and the Sea of Azof, preferred to abstract silver from France, where it maintains its antiquated relation to gold, instead of gold, which has changed its relation to silver in the south of Russia. Taking all these causes of the drain of silver together, we cannot estimate the amount abstracted by them at more than fifteen or sixteen millions sterling. The abstraction of silver by the Oriental warb is most absurdly alleged by the economical writers in the English Press as another special reason of this drain, though they have included it in the general estimate of the fifty-two millions of gold absorbed by the increased requirements of modern com- merce. They cannot, of course, put on the shoulders of silver what they have already put on the shoulders of gold. There is, then,

a The Economist, No. 683, September 27, 1856, "Foreign Correspondence". Ed.

[^1]: b The Crimean war, 1853-56.— Ed.





**[p. V]**

besides all these special influences, some greater agency at work by which the drain of silver is accounted for, and this is the trade to China and India, which, curiously enough, also formed the leading feature in the great crisis of 1847. We shall return to this subject, as it is important to study the economical forerunners of the impending crisis in Europe.

This much our readers will understand, that whatever may be the temporary cause of the monetary panic, and the drain of bullion which appears as its immediate occasion, all the elements of commercial and industrial revulsion were ripe in Europe, and aggravated in . France by the failure of the silk crop, by the shortcomings of the vintage, by the enormous imports of grain necessitated by the partial failure of the harvest of 1855 and the inundations of 1856, and lastly by the scarcity of dwelling houses produced in Paris by the economical contrivances of Mr. Bo- naparte. For us, the mere perusal of the financial manifesto of M. Magne, which we published on Saturday," seems sufficient to justify the suspicion that in spite of the second Congress of Paris157 now assembling, and in spite of the Naples question,158 the third Napoleon would have good reason to congratulate himself if the year 1857 came upon France with no worse auspices than, a decade earlier, attended the year 1847.

Written on about October 14, 1856 Reproduced from the New-York . . . . . .. Daily Tribune First published in the New-York Daily Tribune,..No. 4843, October 27, 1856 as a leading article; reprinted in the New-York

Weekly Tribune, No. 791, November 8, 1856 under the title "The Coming Crash"

a P. Magne, "Rapport à l'Empereur", Le Moniteur universel, No. 281, October 7, 1856. Published in the New-York Daily Tribune, No. 4842, October 25, 1856. This part of the sentence belongs to the NYDT editors.— Ed.

