---
Volume: 15
Document_Title: "K. Marx. The Maritime Commerce of Austria ( Second article) "
Page_Range: "173-180"
---

# K. Marx. The Maritime Commerce of Austria ( Second article) 



**[p. 144]**

Karl Marx

THE MARITIME COMMERCE OF AUSTRIA

(Second article)

In a former article3 we traced the natural circumstances which have brought about the resurrection of Adriatic commerce at Trieste. The development of that commerce is, in a great measure, due to the efforts of the Austrian Lloyd—a Company founded by Englishmen, but, since 1836, in the hands of Triestine capitalists. At first, the Lloyd had only one steamer running once a week between Trieste and Venice. This communication soon became a daily one. By and by the steamers of the Lloyd engrossed the commerce of Rovigno, Fiume, Pirano, Zara and Ragusa, on the Istrian and Dalmatian coast. The Romagna was the next to be enveloped in this intercourse; then came Albania, Epirus and Greece. The steamers had not left the Adriatic, before the Archipelago, Salonica, Smyrna, Beyrout, Ptolemais and Alexandria already solicited admission into the network projected by the Lloyd. Lastly, its vessels penetrated into the Black Sea, taking possession, under the very eyes of Turkey and Russia, of the lines connecting Constantinople with Sinope, Trebizond, Varna, Ibraila and Galatz. Thus a company, organized for the mere coast service of Austria in the Adriatic, gradually pushes out into the Mediterranean, and having made sure of the Black Sea, appears to wait only for the cutting of the Isthmus of Suez to push on into the Red Sea and the Indian Ocean.

The capital of the Lloyd Company, originally fixed at 1,000,000 florins, has been increased by successive emissions of new shares, and by loans, to 13,000,000 florins. Its movement and operations

[^1]: a See this volume, pp. 139-43.— Ed.





**[p. 87]**

1836-7. 1853-4.

Capital 1,000,000 fl. 8,000,000 fl. Number of steamers Horse-power 7,990 Tunnage 1,944 23,665 Value of ships 798,824 fl. 8,010,000 fl. Number of trips 1,465 Miles traversed 43,652 776,415 Passengers 7,967 331,688 Bullion 3,934,269 fl. 59,523,125 fl. Letters and dispatches 35,205 748,930 Parcels 5,752 565,508 Total expenses 232,267 fl. 3,611,156 fl. In a period of seventeen years the Com- pany had a total of expenses (including dividends) of 25,147,403 fl. And a total of receipts of 26,032,452 fl.

Hence there is a reserve of 885,049 fl.

The Lloyd, being itself a commercial enterprise of great importance, as may be judged from the above table, has rendered immense service to the growth of industry and commerce wherever its ships have penetrated. It is calculated that, on valuing the Austrian quintal at 300 fl., and each passenger's parcels at 10 fl., the Lloyd has transported between 1836 and 1853:

In merchandise 1,255,219,200 florins In baggage 84,847,930 florins In coins and bullion 461,113,767 florins

Total 1,801,180,897 florins

"It is certain," says a French author, "that the modest but sustained action of this company of merchants on the affairs of the Levant has been for years, to say the least, quite as efficient, and much more honorable than that of Austrian diplomacy."

The revival of commerce and the development of steam navigation in the Adriatic cannot fail to call into life, in a more or less remote future, an Adriatic navy, extinct since the downfall of Venice. Napoleon, with his peculiar turn of mind,, thought to create this navy without waiting for the reestablishment of maritime commerce—an experiment he made simultaneously at Antwerp and at Venice. Having succeeded in raising armies



**[p. 146]**

Strabo long ago observed15 that while the Adriatic coast of Italy is totally deficient in creeks and harbors, the Illyrian coast on the opposite side abounds in excellent ports; and, during the civil wars of Rome,1" we see Pompey easily forming large fleets on the coasts of Epirus and Illyria, while Caesar, on the Italian shores, was able only after unexampled efforts to collect small force of

a "There stands the shadow of glorious name" (Lucan, Pharsalia, I, 135).— Ed. b Strabonis rerum geographicarum libri 17, Libr. 7, cap. 5.—Ed.



**[p. 147]**

At Trieste 12,000 At Spalato 5,000 At Fiume 6,000 At Ragusa 8,500 At Zara 9,500 At Cattaro 2,500

Total 43,500 Their number must now be at least 55,000.

[^1]: a Strong north-easterly wind.— Ed.





**[p. 148]**

The Austrians have been very slow in familiarizing themselves with the notion of becoming a naval power. Up to a very recent period their naval administration was, in their own eyes, merely a branch of their land service. A colonel in the army had the rank of a naval captain; a lieutenant-colonel, that of a captain of a frigate; a major, that of a captain of a corvette; and the equivalence in the rank list seemed to guarantee to the Austrians an equivalence in the services. To make a midshipman, they considered to have hit on. the best expedient by making him previously a cornet of hussars. The recruits of the navy were levied in the same manner as the recruits for the army—with the

a C. F. Beautemps-Beaupré, Rapports sur les rades, ports et mouillages de la côte orientale du golfe de Venise, visités en 1806, 1808 et 1809, par ordre de l'empereur.— Ed.



**[p. 149]**

The separation of the two services, like all modern progress in Austria, is the result of the revolution of 1848. In spite of the Napoleonian precedent, Venice had remained up to 1848 the only arsenal of Austria. The defects of the Venetian harbor had failed to strike the Austrians, because they had, in fact, no modern navy at all. Their naval force consisted of but 6 frigates, 5 corvettes, 7 brigs, 6 sloops, 16 steamers, and 36 armed boats—in all 850 guns. By way of punishing the Italian revolution, the Austrians transferred from Venice to Trieste the naval school, the observat- ory, the hydrographie office, the floating matériel and the artillery park. The building-yards and the stores remained behind; and thus, by a bureaucratic vengeance, the naval service was cut in two. Instead of Venice being punished, both branches were deprived of their efficiency. Slowly the Austrian Government discovered that, however excellent Trieste might be for a commercial harbor, it was unfit for a naval station. At last they had to fall back on the lesson Napoleon had set up in the Adriatic, and to make Pola the center of their naval administration. Quite in keeping with Austrian usage, the first few years after this removal of their Admiralty to Pola have been employed in building barracks instead of ship-yards. The system of defense reposes on the establishment of a cross-fire from the islands at the entrance of the harbor, with a chain of Maximilian towers3 to prevent ships from throwing bombs into the harbor. Beside its strategical advantages, Pola answers the indispensable condition of a good port, viz: of being able to provision a good fleet. Istria has oaks equal to Naples; Carniola, Carinthia and Styria are inexhaustible in pines, which already form the staple tunnage of Trieste exportation; Styria is rich in iron; the hemp of Ancona has no more commodious outlet than Pola; coal is hitherto received from England, but the Dalmatian works at Sebenico begin to yield a better quality; and when the Trieste-Vienna Railway opens, the best quality may be had from Semmering. All Istrian produce, being grown on a chalky soil, endures long voyages. Oil is abundant, Hungarian grain at hand, and pork in immense quantities to be had from the Dànubian valley. That pork goes now to Galatz and Hamburg, but the railway will bring it to Trieste and Pola.

[^1]: a Named after Maximilian Este.— Ed.





**[p. 150]**

Written in late November 1856 Reproduced from the newspaper

First published in the New-York Daily Tribune, No. 5082, August 4, 1857

