---
Volume: 15
Document_Title: "K. Marx. Defeat of the Palmerston Ministry "
Page_Range: "242-248"
---

# K. Marx. Defeat of the Palmerston Ministry 



**[p. 213]**

Karl M a r x

DEFEAT OF THE PALMERSTON MINISTRY

London, March 6, 1857

After having raged for four nights, the Chinese debates'* subsided at last in a vote of censure passed by the House of Commons on the Palmerston Ministry. Palmerston retorts the censure by a "penal dissolution." He punishes the Commons by sending them home.

The immense excitement prevailing on the last night of the debates, within the walls of the House as well as among the masses who had gathered in the adjoining streets, was due not only to the greatness of the interests at stake, but still more to the character of the party on trial. Palmerston's administration was not that of an ordinary Cabinet. It was a dictatorship. Since the commencement of the war with Russia,b Parliament had almost abdicated its constitutional functions; nor had it, after the conclusion of peace, ever dared to reassert them. By a gradual and almost impercepti- ble declension, it had reached the position of a Corps Législatif,272

distinguished from the genuine, Bonapartist article by false pretenses and high-sounding pretensions only. The mere forma- tion of the Coalition Cabinet273 denoted the fact that the old parties, on the friction of which the movement of the Parliamen- tary machine depends, had become extinct. This impotence of parties, first expressed by the Coalition Cabinet, the war helped to incarnate in the omnipotence of a single individual, who, during half a century of political life, had never belonged to any party, but always used all parties. If the war with Russia had not intervened, the very exhaustion of the old official parties would

» See this volume, pp. 207-12.—Ed. b The Crimean war, 1853-56.— Ed.

9*



**[p. 214]**

have led to transformation. New life would have been poured into the Parliamentary body by the infusion of new blood, by the admission to political rights of at least some fractions of the masses of the people who are still deprived of votes and representatives. The war cut short this natural process. Preventing the neutraliza- tion of old Parliamentary antagonisms from turning to the benefit of the masses, the war turned it to the exclusive profit of a single man. Instead of the political emancipation of the British people, we have had the dictatorship of Palmerston. War was the powerful engine by which this result was brought about, and war was the only means of insuring it. War had therefore become the vital condition of Palmerston's dictatorship. The Russian war was more popular with the British people than the Paris peace.274 Why, then, did the British Achilles, under whose auspices the Redan disgrace and the Kars surrender275 had occurred, not improve this opportunity? Evidently because the alternative lay beyond his control. Hence his Paris treaty, backed by his misunderstandings with the United States, his expedition to Naples, his ostensible squabbles with Bonaparte, his Persian invasion, and his Chinese massacres.2"1

In passing a vote of censure upon the latter, the House of Commons cut off the means of his usurped power. Its vote was, therefore, not a simple Parliamentary vote, but a rebellion—a forcible attempt at the resumption of the constitutional attributes of Parliament. This was the feeling which pervaded the House, and whatever may have been the peculiar motives actuating the -several fractions of the heterogeneous majority—composed of Derbyites, Peelites, Manchester men,277 Russellites, and so-called Independents—all of them were sincere in asserting that it was no vulgar anti-Ministerial conspiracy which united them in the'same lobby. Such, however, was the gist of Palmerston's defense. He covered the weakness of his case by an argumentum ad misericor- diam* by presenting himself as the victim of an unprincipled conspiracy. Nothing could be more happy than Mr. Disraeli's rebuke of this plea, so common to Old Bailey278 prisoners.

"The First Minister," he said, "is of all men the man who cannot bear a coalition. Why, he is the archtype of political coalitions without avowed principles. See how his Government is formed. It was only last year that every member of his Cabinet in this House supported a bill introduced, I think, by a late colleague. It was opposed in the other House by a member of the Government who, to excuse his apparent inconsistency, boldly declared that when he took office the First

[^1]: a Appeal to mercy.— Ed.





**[p. 215]**

It would, however, be quite a mistake to presume that the debates were interesting because such passionate interests hinged upon them. There was one night's debate after another night's debate, and still no division. During the greater part of the battle the voices of the gladiators were drowned in the hum and hubbub of private conversation. Night after night the placemen spoke against time to win another twenty-four hours for intrigue and underground action. The first night Mr. Cobden made a clever speech. So did Bulwer and Lord John Russellb; but the Attorney-General was certainly right in telling them that "he could not for one moment compare their deliberations or their arguments on such a subject as this, with the arguments that, had

a B. Disraeli's speech in the House of Commons on March 3, 1857, The Times, No. 22619, March 4, 1857.— Ed.

b Speeches of R. Cobden, E. Bulwer-Lytton and J. Russell in the House of Commons on February 26, 1857 see in The Times, No. 22615, February 27, 1857.— Ed.



**[p. 216]**

Kars, listened to with silence only for a few minutes, but after these few minutes spontaneously dropped by the House and fully understood not to be the man they had taken him for. There was, lastly, Sir Sidney Herbert. This elegant scion of Peelite statesman- ship made a speech which was, indeed, terse, pointed, antithetical, but girding at the arguments of the placemen rather than producing new arguments of his own. But the last night the debate rose to a hight compatible with the natural measure of the Commons. Roebuck, Gladstone, Palmerston and Disraeli were great, each in his own way.

The difficult point was to get rid of the stalking-horse of the debate, Sir J. Bowring, and to bring home the question to Lord Palmerston himself, by making him personally responsible for the "massacre of the innocents." This was at last done. As the impending general election in England will in the main revolve upon this point, it may not be amiss to condense, in as short a compass as possible, the results of the discussion. The day after the defeat of the Ministry, and the day before the ministerial announcement of the dissolution of the House of Commons, The London Times ventured upon the following assertions:

"The nation will be at a loss to know the precise question to be answered. Has Lord Palmerston's Cabinet forfeited the confidence of the people on account of a series of ads committed on the other side of the world six weeks before they were even heard ol here, and by public servants appointed under a former administration!- It was at Christmas when Ministers heard of the matter and they were at that time as ignorant as everybody else. In fact had the scene of the

a R. Bet hell. Here and below speeches in the House of Commons on February 27, 1857 see in The Times, No. 22616, February 28, 1857.— Ed.

b James Moncreiff.— Ed. < Cf. Matthew 27 : 24.— Ed. A In future.— Ed. e In reality.— Ed.



**[p. 217]**

narrative been the moon, or had it been a chapter from the Arabian Nights, the present Cabinet could not have less to do with it Is Lord Palmerston's administration to be condemned and displaced for what it never did and could not do, for what it only heard of when everybody else heard of it, for what was done by men whom it did not appoint and with whom it has not, as yet, been able to hold any communication?"3

To this impudent rhodomontade of a paper which has all along vindicated the Canton massacre as a supreme stroke of Palmersto- nian diplomacy, we can oppose a few facts painfully elicited during a protracted debate, and not once controverted by Palmerston or his subordinates. In 1847, when at the head of the Foreign Office, Lord Palmerston's first dispatch on the admission of the British Hong-Kong authorities into Canton was couched in menacing terms. However, his ardors were damped by Earl Grey, his colleague, the then Secretary for the Colonies, who sent out a most peremptory prohibition to the officers commanding the naval forces, not only at Hong-Kong, but at Ceylon, ordering them, under no circumstances, to allow any offensive movement against the Chinese without express authority from England. On the 18th August, 1849, however, shortly before his dismissal from the Russell Cabinet, Lord Palmerston wrote the following dispatch to the British Plenipotentiary at Hong-Kong:

"Let not the great officers of Canton nor the Government of Peking deceive themselves. The forbearance which the British Government has hitherto displayed arises not from a sense of weakness, but from consciousness of superior strength. The British Government well knows that, if occasion required it, British military force would be able to destroy the town of Canton, not leaving one single house standing, and could thus inflict the most signal chastisement upon the people of that city."b

Thus the bombardment of Canton occurring in 1856, under Lord Palmerston as Premier, was foreshadowed in 1849 by the last missive sent to Hong-Kong by Lord Palmerston, as Foreign Secretary of the Russell Cabinet. All the intervening Governments have refused to allow any relaxation of the prohibition put upon the British representatives at Hong-Kong against pressing their admission into Canton. This was the case with the Earl of Granville under the Russell Ministry, the Earl of Malmesbury under the Derby Ministry, and the Duke of Newcastle under the Aberdeen Ministry. At last, in 1852, Dr. Bowring, till then Consul at Hong-Kong, was appointed Plenipotentiary. His appointment, as Mr. Gladstone states, was made by Lord Clarendon, Palmera The Times, No. 22620, March 5, 1857, leading article.— Ed. b Quoted from J. Graham's speech in the House of Commons on February 27, 1857, The Times, No. 22616, February 28, 1857.— Ed.



**[p. 218]**

There can, then, exist no doubt that the Chinese massacre was planned by Lord Palmerston himself. Under what colors he now hopes to rally the electors of the United Kingdom is a question which I hope you will allow me to answer in another letter*, as this has already exceeded the proper limits.

Written on March 6, 1857 Reproduced from the newspaper

First published in the New-York Daily Tribune, No. 4970, March 25, 1857

[^1]: a See this volume, pp. ^07-12.— Ed. b Ralph Bernai Osborne.— Ed.



