---
Volume: 15
Document_Title: "K. Marx. The Defeat of Cobden, Bright and Gibson "
Page_Range: "267-272"
---

# K. Marx. The Defeat of Cobden, Bright and Gibson 



**[p. 238]**

Karl Marx

THE DEFEAT OF COBDEN, BRIGHT AND GIBSON3

London, March 31, 1857

"The mass of candidates put forward their intention to give a general support to Lord Palmerston, as their best claim to be returned as representatives of public opinion in the new Parliament. Palmerston will enter the House, not as the head of a Conservative, or a Whig, or a Peelite,' or a Radical party, but as the leader of the English people, and as the great designer and administrator of a national party." a

Such are the words of The Morning Post, Lord Palmerston's private organ. Palmerston as dictator, the new Parliament as his corps législatif2,03—such is their meaning, which the electoral bulletins seem to warrant. As to the "public opinion" spoken of by The Post, it has been justly said that Palmerston manufactures one half of it, and laughs at the other half.

The complete rout of the Manchester School304—Bright and Milner Gibson being unseated at Manchester, Cobden at Hudders- field, Sir E. Armitage at Salford, Fox at Oldham and Miall at Rochdale—is the great event of the electoral battle. The issue of the Manchester election particularly took every one by surprise, even the Palmerston Government. How little stress it had laid upon the chances of victory in that quarter may be inferred from its unsettled and hesitating conduct. First, on the receipt of some Manchester addresses, Palmerston threatened to proceed himself to Cottonopolis, hurling defiance at his antagonists on "their own dunghill." On second thought, however, he shrank back. Then Bob Lowe, the Ministerial understrapper, came forward. Invited by a coterie of great mill lords to stand for Manchester, and receiving pledges that, if defeated, a sum of £2,000 should be

a The Morning Post, No. 25971, March 27, 1857, leading article.— Ed.



**[p. 239]**

The defeat of the Manchester School in their own strongholds, by the bulk of their own army, bears all the appearances of a persona] triumph on the part of Palmerston, not only because Cobden and Gibson-moved the vote of censure, which was to drive him from the Cabinet, and which afforded the pretext for the dissolution of Parliament. A deadly antagonism of principles and situations seems to resume itself in the persons of Palmerston on the one side, of Bright, Cobden & Co., on the other. Palmerston, the trumpet of national glory, they, the organs of industrial interests; the diplomatic Viscount concentrating in his person all the usurpations of the British oligarchy, the parvenu demagogues representing all the vitality of the British middle classes; he deriving his strength from the decay of parties, they owing their force to the struggle of classes—the last unscrupulous incarnation of old Toryism against the chiefs of the new defunct Anti-Corn- Law League.307 Thus the defeat of Cobden, Bright & Co. appears

a R. Cobden's speech in the Freetrade Hall, Manchester, on March 18, 1857, The Times, No. 22633, March 20, 1857.— Ed.

[^1]: b Aesop, "The Fox and the Crow".— Ed.





**[p. 240]**

Yet, in spite of appearances, the appeal of Palmerston against Gobden and Co.a afforded, not the cause, but only the pretext for the explosion of combustible materials which, for a long time, were gathering round the precincts of the Manchester School. Manchester forming the nucleus of the party, and Bright being acknowledged as its.true hero, it will suffice to consider his defeat to account for the simultaneous failure of his companions in arms at other manufacturing places. There were, first, the old Whigs and Tories of Manchester, eager to revenge themselves for their political nullity since the days of the Anti-Corn-Law League. The elections of 1852, when Bright carried it over them by a majority of 100 votes only, had already shown their numerical force to be by no means contemptible. Unable, as they certainly were, to vanquish under their own banners, they formed a powerful contingent for any seceding corps of the Bright army. Then, in second line, came the leaders of the high-priced press, with their inveterate rancor and lurid malignity against the parliamentary godfathers of the penny press.308 Mr. Garnett, the editor of The Manchester Guardian, stirred heaven and earth against Bright, and proved indefatigable in clothing in more or less decent garbs the shabby motives of the anti-Bright coalition—an attempt facilitated by the unpopularity Bright and Cobden had incurred at the time

a A reference to Lord Palmerston's speech at the meeting in Tiverton on March 27, 1857.— Ed.

"It is not the question of the Chinese war, or of the Russian war, or of any war at all. The question is, whether Manchester shall any longer submit to the dictation of the remnant of the party that assembles at Newall's buildings."

In finally burying the incubus of the Anti-Corn-Law League rump, the Manchester mill lords, while flattering themselves that they were closing the doors of their Jacobin club, were, of course, not aware that they were sweeping away the main obstruction to a new revolutionary movement.

The rationale, however, of the Manchester election was betrayed by a drunken anti-Bright man, who, during the polling, kept on crying vociferously: "We won't have home policy; we want foreign



**[p. 242]**

The true secret, then, of the Manchester election is, the abdication on the part of the mill lords of the revolutionary leadership they had usurped during the Anti-Corn-Law League agitation.

Written on March 31, 1857 Reproduced from the newspaper

First published in the New-York Daily Tribune, No. 4990, April 17, 1857

