---
Volume: 15
Document_Title: "K. Marx. Result of the Election "
Page_Range: "276-280"
---

# K. Marx. Result of the Election 



**[p. 247]**

Karl Marx

RESULT OF THE ELECTION

London, April 7, 1857

The electoral lists are being closed. Their clearest sum is Palmerston's triumph, a great change in the personnel of the House, involving about one-fourth of its members, and its unprecedented loss in intellectual character. The computations, however, of the English papers as to the numerical force of the Ministerial majority, their bickerings and squabbles about these computations, and still more, their classifications under exploded rubrics of the newly-returned members, are silly work altogether. While The Morning Post, for instance, glories in a Ministerial majority of 80 votes, the Disraeli Press estimates the loss of its own men at four in the boroughs and about 20 in the counties. According to The London Times, the exclusion of the Peelites and the Manchester men316 and professional Protectionists has restored Parliament to its status quo ante? and delivered it back to its legitimate owners, the antediluvian parties of Whigs and Tories. It would fain persuade the world that

"the British people have gone back to what they were some thirty years ago."

The Disraeli Press is not very far from indorsing The Times's opinion. This optimist creed, with which the oligarchy may try to comfort themselves, is, however, no more absurd than that of the sham Radicals, such as The Examiner.

"A Reform Parliament," says it, "answers to Lord Palmerston's appeal.'"

He has asked for a lot of lackeys, and the enlightened country, that is to say, a small minority of privileged electors, returns his

[^1]: a Former state.— Ed. b The Times, No. 22648, April 7, 1857, leading article.— Ed.





**[p. 248]**

In comparing the new House to its predecessors, it seems opportune to begin with the old parliamentary sections that have completely vanished during the electoral struggle—the Peelite fraction and the Manchester School.

In contradistinction to Whigs, Tories and the Manchester School, the Peelite fraction did not represent a class or fractions of a class. They were a mere Parliamentary clique, which, without the walls of both Houses, might number friends, but could never muster an army. Relics of a bygone administration; estranged from the Tories by the Corn-Law317 treason of their late chiefb; loth to dissolve in the Whig ranks from the memory of old feuds, and the conviction, cherished by themselves and accepted to a certain degree by the public, that the administrative talent of the country centered in them; prevented by their aristocratic connec- tions from mixing into one mass with the Manchester School, sure of influencing Parliamentary debates from the rhetorical ability of some of their members,—this pretentious nucleus of self-styled statesmen fluctuated uncertain, impossible of classification, and representing under the form of a peculiar Parliamentary party the decomposition of all Parliamentary parties effected by Peel's free-trade legislation. This principle of dissolution to which they owed their origin, they worked out by helping to overthrow the Derby Ministry, and by giving their nominal chiefc to the combination of parties known as the Coalition Cabinet or the Cabinet of all the talents.318 On the visible precipitation of the Parliamentary dissolving process, on their band devolved the honor of hoisting the colors under which the mutual suicide of the old parties was to be consummated. While thus securing to themselves for a moment a supreme position, they were simultane- ously destroying the only reason for their existence as a separate body. The joint stock power of the combined parties ended necessarily in their common impotence and their joint prostration before one man. The Peelites held the ladder on which Palmerston mounted.

a Tausend und eine Nacht. Geschichte Sinbads des Seefahrers. Fünfte Reise.— Ed.

[^1]: b Robert Peel.— Ed. c George Aberdeen.— Ed.





**[p. 249]**

One revelation made by Mr. Herbert on the hustings to his South Wilts constituents is characteristic of the manner in which Palmerston did the Peelites. Nothing had made them so unpopular as the conduct of the Russian war, and especially the sparing of Odessa,319 which was accounted for by Mr. Herbert being the nephew of Prince Woronzoff. Foremost in spreading the en- venomed calumny were Palmerston's myrmidons, such as The Morning Post, The Sun, and The Morning Advertiser. Now, Mr. Herbert told his electors that he had actually signed an order to attack Odessa, and that on his secession from office Lord Palmerston issued the order to spare the place.3 This ranks on one line with Lord John Russell's revelation on the City of London hustings.b He notoriously broke down in consequence of his Vienna Embassy.320 During the election turmoil, the beery Morning

a S. Herbert's speech before the electors of the Southern division of Wiltshire on April 1, 1857, The Times, No. 22644, April 2, 1857.— Ed.

b J. Russell's speech before the electors of the City of London on March 27, 1857, The Times, No. 22640, March 28, 1857.— Ed.



**[p. 250]**

From what has been said, it is evident that the few Peelite generals who have outlived their army will reappear in Parliament no longer in their corporate, but in their individual capacity only. As an individual, Mr. Gladstone, now cleared from the obstruc- tions of a coterie, roused by passion, and undoubtedly the greatest orator in the new Commons, may play a more conspicuous part than ever before. During their protracted Parliamentary duel, Gladstone and Disraeli, as occurs sometimes in ardent encounters, have from time to time dropped each his own weapons to seize those of his adversary. To a certain degree Gladstone has laid hold on Disraeli's polemical pungency, while Disraeli has caught Gladstone's pompous unction—Disraeli being hardly the winner in this exchange.

In taking leave of the Peelites, we may still point out the satire of history which, dating the birth of that fraction from the decomposition by the Anti-Corn-Law League of the old Parliamen- tary parties, registers its death simultaneously with the Parliamen- tary extinction of the Manchester School.

Written on April 7, 1857 Reproduced from the newspaper

First published in the New-York Daily Tribune, No. 4994, April 22, 1857

