---
Volume: 15
Document_Title: "K. Marx. Political Situation in Europe "
Page_Range: "360-365"
---

# K. Marx. Political Situation in Europe 



**[p. 331]**

Karl Marx

[POLITICAL SITUATION IN EUROPE]

The last sitting but one of the Commons before their prorogation was seized upon by Lord Palmerston to allow them to take some faint glimpses at the entertainments he keeps in store for the English public during the interregnum between the session that has passed away and the session that is to come.3 The first item of his programme is the announcement of the revival of the Persian war, which as he had stated some months ago, was definitely terminated by a peace concluded on the 4th of March.b

General Sir de Lacy Evans having expressed the hope that Col. Jacob was ordered back to India with his forces n'ow stationed on the Persian Gulf,c Lord Palmerston stated plainly that until Persia had executed the engagements contracted by the treaty, Col. Jacob's troops could not be withdrawn. Herat, however, had not yet been evacuated. There were, on the contrary, rumors afloat affirming that additional forces had been sent by Persia to Herat. This, indeed, had been denied by the Persian Embassador at Parisd; but great doubts were justly entertained of the good faith of Persia, and consequently the British forces under Col. Jacob would continue to occupy Bushire. On the day following Lord Palmerston's statement, the news was conveyed by telegraphic dispatch of the categorical demand pressed upon the Persian Government by Mr. Murray for the evacuation of Herat—a

a Palmerston's speech in the House of Commons on August 20, 1857, The Times, No. 22765, August 21, 1857.— Ed.

b See this volume, pp. 293-96.— Ed. c Sir de Lacy Evans' speech in the House of Commons on August 20, 1857, The Times, No. 22765, August 21, 1857.— Ed.

14—844

[^1]: d Ferrukh Khan.— Ed.





**[p. 332]**

The second item of Lord Palmerston's programme makes good for its want of details by the wide perspective it unrolls. When he first announced the withdrawal of large military forces from England to be dispatched to India, he answered his opponents, accusing him of denuding Great Britain of her defensive power, and thus affording foreign countries an opportunity to take advantage of her weakened position, that

"the people of Great Britain would never tolerate any such proceeding, and that men would be raised suddenly and rapidly, sufficient for any contingency that would arrive."3

Now, on the eve of the prorogation of Parliament, he speaks in quite a different strain. To the advice of Gen. de Lacy Evans to send out to India the troops in screw line-of-battle ships, he did not reply, as he had done before, by asserting the superiority of the sail to the screw-propeller, but on the contrary, admitted that the General's plan appeared in the first instance highly advantage- ous. Yet, the House ought to bear in mind, that

"there were other considerations to be kept in view, in regard to the propriety of keeping up sufficient military and naval forces at home Certain circumstances pointed out the inexpediency of sending out of the country a greater naval force than was absolutely necessary. The steam line-of-battle ships were, no doubt, lying in ordinary, and were of no great use at present; but if any such events as had been alluded to took place, and they wanted their naval forces to put to sea, how could they meet the danger which threatened, if they allowed their line-of-battle ships to do the duty of transports to India? They should be falling into a grave error if they sent to India the fleet which < in miistunces occurring in Europe might render it necessary to arm for their uini //«•/»•nw at a ver\ short notice."^

Lord Palmerston, il will not be denied, plants John Bull on the horns of a very fine dilemma. 11 In uses the adequate means for a decisive suppression of the Indian revolt, he will be attacked at home; and if he allows the Indian revolt to consolidate, he will, as Mr. Disraeli said,

a Palmerston's speech in the House of Commons on August 11, 1857, The Times, No. 22757, August 12, 1857.— Ed.

b Palmerston's speech in the House of Commons on August 20, 1857, The Times, No. 22765, August 21, 1857 (Marx gives the quotation in his own rendering).— Ed.

Before casting a glance at the "European circumstances" so mysteriously alluded to, it may not be amiss to gather up the confessions made during the same sitting of the Commons in regard to the actual position of the British forces in India. First, then, all sanguine hopes of a sudden capture of Delhi were dropped as if by mutual agreement, and the highflying expecta- tions of former days came down to the more rationa.1 view that they ought to congratulate themselves, if the English were able to maintain their posts until November, when the advance of the re-enforcements sent from home was to take place. In the second instance, misgivings oozed out as to the probability of their losing the most important of those posts, Cawnpore, on the fate of which, as Mr. Disraeli said, everything must depend, and the relief of which he considered of even greater import than the capture of Delhi.b From its central position on the Ganges, its bearing on Oude, Rohilcund, Gwalior, and Bundelcund, and its serving as an advanced fort to Delhi, Cawnpore is, in fact, in the present circumstances, a place of prime importance. Lastly, Sir F. Smith, one of the military members of the House, called its attention to the fact that, actually, there were no engineers and sappers with their Indian army, as all of them had deserted, and were likely "to make Delhi a second Saragossa.383"0 On the other hand, Lord Palmerston had neglected to forward from England either any officers or men of the engineer corps.

Returning now to the European events said to be "looming in the future," we are at once astonished at the comment The London Times makes on Lord Palmerston's allusions. The French Con- stitution, it says, might be overthrown, or Napoleon disappear from the scene of life, and then there would be an end to the French alliance, upon which the present security rests.d In other words, The Times, the great organ of the British Cabinet, while considering a revolution in France an event not unlikely to occur any day, simultaneously proclaims the present alliance to be

a B. Disraeli's speech in the House of Commons on August 11, 1857, The Times, No. 22757, August 12, 1857.— Ed.

b B. Disraeli's speech in the House of Commons on August 20, 1857, The Times, No. 22765, August 21, 1857.— Ed.

c J. M. F. Smith's speech in the House of Commons on August 20, 1857, The Times, same issue.— Ed.

(l The Times, same issue, leading article.— Ed.

14*



**[p. 334]**



[^1]: a See this volume, pp. 322-26.— Ed. b Oscar I.— Ed. c Carl Ludvig Eugène.— Ed.





**[p. 335]**

Written on August 21, 1857 Reproduced from the newspaper

First published in the New-York Daily Tribune, Ne 5110, September 5, 1857 as a leading article

a "Traité signé à Londres, le 8 mai 1852, entre le Danemark d'une part, et l'Autriche, la France, la Grande-Bretagne, la Russie et la Suède de l'autre part, relatif à l'ordre de succession dans la monarchie danoise."—Ed.

