---
Volume: 15
Document_Title: "K. Marx. The Revolt in India "
Page_Range: "403-408"
---

# K. Marx. The Revolt in India 



**[p. 374]**

Karl Marx

[THE REVOLT IN INDIA]

The mail of the Arabia brings us the important intelligence of the fall of Delhi. This event, so far as we can judge from the meager details at hand, appears to have resulted upon the simultaneous occurrence of bitter dissensions among the rebels, a change in the numerical proportions of the contending parties, and the arrival on Sept. 5 of the siege train which was expected as long ago as June 8.

After the arrival of Nicholson's re-enforcements, we had estimated the army before Delhi at a total of 7,521 men,'1 an estimate fully confirmed since. After the subsequent accession of 3,000 Cashmere troops, lent to the English by the Rajah Ranbeer Singh, the British forces are stated by The Friend of India to have amounted in all to about 11,000 men. On the other hand, The Military Spectator of London affirms that the rebel forces had diminished in numbers to about 17,000 men, of whom 5,000 were cavalry; while The Friend of India computes their forces at about 13,000, including 1,000 irregular cavalry. As the horse became quite useless after the breach was once effected and the struggle within the town had begun, and, consequently, on the very entrance of the English they made their escape, the total forces of the Sepoys, whether we accept the computation of The Military Spectator or of The Friend of India, could not be estimated beyond 11,000 or 12,000 men. The English forces, less from increase on their side than from a decrease on the opposite one, had, therefore, become almost equal to those of the mutineers; their slight numerical inferiority being more than made up by the moral

a See this volume, pp. 370-71.— Ed.



**[p. 375]**

The decrease on the part of the rebel forces was caused still more by the withdrawal of whole contingents in consequence of internal dissensions than by the heavy losses they suffered in their incessant sorties for a period of about ten days. While the Mogul specter himself, like the merchants of Delhi, had become averse to the rule of the Sepoys, who plundered them of every rupee they had amassed, the religious dissensions between the Hindoo and Mohammedan Sepoys, and the quarrels between the old garrison and the new re-enforcements, sufficed to break up their superfi- cial organization and to insure their downfall. Still, as the English had to cope with a force but slightly superior to their own, without unity of command, enfeebled and dispirited by dissensions in their own ranks, but who yet, after 84 hours' bombardment, stood a six days' cannonade and street-fight within the walls, and then quietly crossed the Jumna on the bridge of boats, it must be confessed that the rebels at last, with their main forces, made the best of a bad position.

The facts of the capture appear to be, that on Sept. 8 the English batteries were opened much in advance of the original position of their forces and within 700 yards of the walls. Between the 8th and the 11th the British heavy ordnance guns and mortars were pushed forward still nearer to the works, a lodgment being effected and batteries established with little loss, considering that the Delhi garrison made two sorties on the 10th and 11th, and made repeated attempts to open fresh batteries, and kept up an annoying fire from rifle-pits. On the 12th the English sustained a loss of about 56 killed and wounded. On the morning of the 13th the enemy's magazine, on one bastion, was blown up, as also the wagon of a light gun, which enfiladed the British batteries from the Talwara suburbs; and the British batteries effected a practicable breach near the Cashmere gate. On the 14th the assault was made on the city. The troops entered at the breach near the Cashmere gate without serious opposition, gained possession of the large buildings in its neighborhood, and advanced along the ramparts to the Moree bastion and Cabul gate, when the resistance grew very obstinate, and the loss was consequently severe. Preparations were being made to turn the guns from the captured bastions on the city, and to bring up other



**[p. 376]**

At this date, owing, it is said by The Bombay Courier, to the plunder of the Punjaub and Lahore mails on the Scinde frontier, the official accounts of the storm break off. In a private communication addressed to the Governor of Bombay,b it is stated that the entire city of Delhi was occupied on Sunday, the 20th, the main forces of the mutineers leaving the city at 3 a.m. on the same day, and escaping over the bridges of boats in the direction of Rohilcund. Since a pursuit on the part of the English was impracticable until after the occupation of Selimgurh, situated on the river front, it is evident that the rebels, slowly fighting their way from the extreme north end of the city to its south-eastern extremity, kept, until the 20th, the position necessary for covering their retreat.

As to the probable effect of the capture of Delhi, a competent authority, The Friend of India, remarks that

"it is the condition of Bengal, and not the state of Delhi, that ought at this time to engage the attention of Englishmen. The long delay that has taken place in the capture of the town has actually destroyed any prestige that we might have derived from an early success; and the strength of the rebels and their numbers are diminished as effectually by maintaining the siege as they would be by the capture of the city."

Meanwhile, the insurrection is said to be spreading north-east from Calcutta, through Central India up to the north-west; while on the Assam frontier, two strong regiments of Poorbeahs,0 openly proposing the restoration of the ex-Rajah Parandur Singh, had revolted; the Dinapore and Ranghur mutineers, led by Kooer Singh, were marching by Banda and Nagode in the direction of Subbulpore, and had forced, through his own troops, the Rajah of Rewah to join them. At Subbulpore itself the 52d Bengal Native Regiment had left their cantonments, taking with them a British officer as a hostage for their comrades left behind. The Gwalior mutineers are reported to have crossed the Chumbul, and are

a The Times, Nos. 22823 and 22824, October 28 and 29, 1857, "India", "India and China", "The Fall of Delhi".— Ed.

b John Elphinstone.— Ed. c Poorbeah means "eastern"; here the reference is to the regiments in eastern Bengal.— Ed.



**[p. 377]**

In another place our readers will find a tabular statement of the forces dispatched from England since June 18; the days of arrival of the respective vessels being calculated by us on official statements, and therefore in favor of the British Government.417

From that list it will be seen that, apart from the small detachments of artillery and engineers sent by the overland route, the whole of the army embarked amounts to 30,899 men, of whom 24,739 belong to the infantry, 3,826 to the cavalry, and 2,334 to the artillery. It will also be seen that before the end of October no considerable re-enforcements were to be expected.

Troops for India The following is a list of the troops which have been

sent to India from England since June 18, 1857

September 20 214 October 1 300 October 15 1,906 October 17 288 October 20 4,235 October 30 2,028

Total for Oct. 8,757 5,036 3,721

a The Times, Nos. 22823 and 22824, October 28 and 29, 1857, "India", "The Fall of Delhi".— Ed.

b "Trieste, Monday, Oct. 26", "Alexandria, Oct. 20", The Times, No. 22822, October 27, 1857.— Ed.

214 300 124 288 3,845 479

1,782

390 1,549

[^1]: Date of arrival Total Calcutta Ceylon Bombay Kurrachee Madras





**[p. 204]**

November 1 3,495 1,234 1,629 November 5 November 10 2,700 1,056 November 12 1,633 1,633 November 15 2,610 2,132 November 19 November 20 1,216 November 24 November 25 1,276 1,276 November 30 

Total for Nov. 15,115 6,782 3,593 1,542 1,922 1,276

December 1 354 354 December 5 459 201 258 December 10 1,758 607 1,151 December 14 1,057 1,057 December 15 948 647 301 December 20 693 185 300 208 December 25 624 624

Total for Dec. 5,893 1,851 607 .2,559 2,284 258

January 1 340 340 January 5 220 220 January 15 140 140 January 20 220 220

Total for Jan. 920 340 580

Sept. till Jan. 20 30,899 12,217 7,921 4,441 4,206 2,114

Troops dispatched by the overland route:

October 2 235 R.E. 117 ' 118 October 12 221 Art. 221 October 14 224 R.E. 122 122

Total for Oct. 700 460 240 Total 31,599 Men en route from Cape, partly arrived 4,000 Grand total 35,599

Written on October 30, 1857 Reproduced from the newspaper

First published in the New-York Daily

Tribune, No. 5170, November 14, 1857 as a leading article

