---
Volume: 15
Document_Title: "K. Marx. The Attempt upon the Life of Bonaparte "
Page_Range: "482-488"
---

# K. Marx. The Attempt upon the Life of Bonaparte 



**[p. 453]**

Karl Marx

THE ATTEMPT UPON THE LIFE OF BONAPARTE

Quos deus vult perdere prius dementat* seems the judgment pretty generally passed in Europe on the French usurper, whom, but a few weeks ago, the numberless sycophants of success in all countries, and of all languages, concurred to magnify into a kind of sublunary providence. Now, all at once, on the first approach of real danger, the demi-god is supposed to have run mad. To those, however, who are not to be carried away by first impressions, nothing will appear more evident than that the hero of Boulogne463 is to-day what he was yesterday—simply a gambler. If he stakes his last card and risks all, it is not the man that has changed, but the chances of the game. There had been attempts on Bonaparte's life before without producing any visible effect on the economy of the Empire. Why did the quicksilver which exploded on the 14th of January464 not only kill persons, but a state of things? It is with the hand-grenades of the Rue Lepelletier as it was with the greased cartridges dealt out at Barrackpore.b

They have not metamorphosed an empire, but only rent the veil which concealed a metamorphosis already accomplished.

The secret of Bonaparte's elevation is to be found on the one hand in the mutual prostration of the antagonist parties, and on the other in the coincidence of his coup d'état with the entrance of the commercial world upon a period of prosperity. The commer- cial crisis, therefore, has necessarily sapped the material basis of the Empire, which never possessed any moral basis, save the

a "Those whom the gods wish to destroy they first make mad" (Sophocles, Antigone, 620).— Ed.

P See this volume, p. 298.— Ed.



**[p. 454]**

"On the night of the 14th a person high in the Imperial household, but not that night on service, was crossing the Boulevards, when he heard the explosions, and saw people running toward the Opera. He ran thither also, and was present at the whole scene. Being recognized directly, one of the persons most nearly concerned

a Napoleon III, Napoleon I.— Ed. h "Paris, le 14 janvier", Le Moniteur universel, No. 15, January 15, 1858.— Ed.

If such was the secret of the street enthusiasm paraded by the Moniteur, its paragraphs on the "spontaneous illuminations of the Boulevards after the attempt"3 could certainly not mislead the Parisians who had witnessed that illumination, which was limited to the shops of the tradespeople employed by the Emperor and the Empress. Even these individuals were not backward in saying that half an hour after the explosion of the "infernal machine," police agents paid them a visit, to suggest the propriety of instantly illuminating, in order to prove how enchanted they were at the Emperor's escape.

Still more the character of the congratulatory addresses and the public protestations of devotion to the Emperor bears witness to his complete isolation. There is not a single man who signed them who does not, one way or the other, belong to the Administration, that ubiquitous parasite feeding on the vitals of France, and put in motion like a mannikin by the touch of the Minister of the Interior.b The Moniteur was obliged, day after day, to register these monotonous congratulations, addressed by the Emperor to the Emperor, as so many proofs of the unbounded love of the people for the coup d'état.1 Some efforts were, indeed, made to

a "Paris, le 14 janvier", Le Moniteur universel, No. 15, January 15, 1858.— Ed. b Adolphe Billault.— Ed. c "Adresses présentées à l'Empereur", Le Moniteur universel, No. 17, January 17, 1858; see also the following issues.— Ed.



**[p. 456]**

"According to my informants," writes the Vienna correspondent of The London Times, "who have recently arrived from Paris, the general opinion in that city is, that the present dynasty is nodding to its fall."3465

Bonaparte himself, till then the only man in France believing in the final victory of the coup d'état, became at once aware of the hollowness of his delusions. While all public bodies and the press were swearing that the crime of the Rue Lepelletier, perpetrated as it was by Italians solely, but served to put in relief the love of France for Louis Napoleon, Louis Napoleon himself hastened to the Corps Législatif,466 there publicly to declare that the conspiracy was a national one, and that France consequently wanted new "repressive laws" to keep her down.b Those laws already proposed, at the head of which figure the lois des suspects,467 are nothing but a repetition of the identical measures employed in the first days of the coup d'état. Then, however, they were announced as temporary expedients, while they are now pro- claimed as organic laws. Thus it is declared by Louis Napoleon himself, that the Empire can be perpetuated only by the very infamies through which it was produced; that all its pretensions to the more or less respectable forms of a regular Government must be dropped, and that the time of the sullen acquiescence of the

a See the report from Vienna of January 29 in The Times, No. 22906, February 2, 1858.— Ed.

b Napoleon Ill's speech at the opening of the Corps Législatif, January 18, 1858, published in Le Moniteur universel. No. 19, January 19, 1858.— Ed.

Shortly before the execution of the coup d'état, Louis Napoleon contrived to gather from all departments, and principally from the rural districts, addresses leveled at the National Assembly, and expressive of unlimited confidence in the President. This source being now exhausted there remained nothing but to appeal to the army. The military addresses, in one of which the Zouaves469

"almost regret not to have had an opportunity to manifest in a striking manner theii devotion to the Emperor,"3 are simply the undisguised proclamation of pretorian rule470 in France. The division of France into five great military pashalics, with five marshals at their head, under the supreme control of Pelissier as marshal general,471 is a simple consequence of that premise. On the other hand, the installation of a Privy Council, which is at the same time to act as Council during the eventual Regency of a Montijo, composed of such grotesque fellows as Fould, Morny, Persigny, Baroche and the like, shows France at the same time what sort of regime the newly-installed statesmen have in store for her. The installation of this Council, together with the family reconciliation, denoted to the astounded world by Louis Napoleon's letter in the Moniteur, by virtue of which Jerome, the ex-King of Westphalia, is nominated President of the State Councils in the Emperor's absence15 — all this, it has been justly remarked, "looks like the pilgrim about to set out on a perilous journey."0 On what new adventure is the hero of Strasbourg then to embark?472 Some say that he means to relieve himself by a campaign in Africa; others that he intends an invasion of England. As to the first plan, it reminds one of his former notion of going to Sevastopol473; but now, as then, his discretion might prove the better part of his valor.d As to any hostility against England, it would only reveal to Bonaparte his isolation in Europe, as the attempt of the Rue Lepelletier revealed his isolation in France. Already the threats held out to England in the addresses of the soldiery have put the final extinguisher upon the Anglo-French

a "Le régiment de zouaves de la garde imperiale", Le Moniteur universel, No. 26, January 26, 1858.— Ed.

b Napoleon Ill's decree on the appointment of Prince Jerome President of the State Council, February 1, 1858, Le Moniteur universel, No. 34, February 3, 1858.— Ed.

c J. Bunyan, The Pilgrim's Progress.— Ed. d Shakespeare, King Henry IV, Part I, Act V, Scene IV.— Ed.



**[p. 458]**

Written on February 5, 1858 Reproduced from the newspaper

First published in the New-York Daily Tribune, No. 5254, February 22, 1858 as a leading article

[^1]: a At the point of death.— Ed.



