---
Volume: 15
Document_Title: "K. Marx. The Rule of the Pretorians "
Page_Range: "493-497"
---

# K. Marx. The Rule of the Pretorians 



**[p. 464]**

Karl Marx

THE RULE OF THE PRETORIANS

Paris, Feb. 22, 1858

"When is Gérard the lion-killer to be named Minister of Public Instruction?" Such is the cant phrase current in the faubourgs of Paris since the appointment of Gen. Espinasse of Dobrudja memory475 as Minister of the Interior and Public Safety. In Russia, it is well known, a general of cavalry presides over the Holy Synod.3 Why not Espinasse over the French Home-Ministry, since France has become the home of Pretorians only?4"1 By such apparent incongruities the rule of the naked sword is proclaimed in most unmistakable terms, and Bonaparte wants France to clearly understand that the imperial rule does rest not on her will but on 600,000 bayonets. Hence the Pretorian addresses cut out by the colonels of the different regiments, after a pattern supplied from the Tuileries—addresses in which the slightest allusion to the so-called "will of the people" is anxiously shunned; hence the parceling out of France into five pashalics477; hence the transfor- mation of the Home-Ministry into an appendage of the Army. Here the change is not to stop. About 60 prefects are said to be on the eve of being disgraced, and to be replaced, for the most part, by military men. Prefectorial administration is to devolve upon half-pay colonels and lieutenant-colonels. The antagonism between the Army and the population is to, be organized as the guarantee of "Public Safety," viz: the safety of the hero of Satory478 and his dynasty.

A great modern historian has told us that, disguise the fact as you like, France, since the days of the Great Revolution, has been

[^1]: a A. P. Tolstoi.—Ed.





**[p. 465]**

It is to represent the State in antagonism to the society. It must not be imagined that Bonaparte is not aware of the dangerous character of the experiment he tries. In proclaiming himself the chief of the Pretorians, he declares every Pretorian chief his competitor. His own partisans, with Gen. Vaillant at their head, demurred against the division of the French Army into five Marshalships, saying that if it was good for the cause of order, it was not so for that of the Empire, and would one day end in civil war. The treacheries of Napoleon's Marshals, with Berthier at their head, were ransacked by the Palais Royal,480 which feels extremely vexed at the new turn of Imperial policy.

The future conduct of the five Marshals, who hate each other cordially, at a critical juncture, may be best judged from their past. Magnan betrayed Louis Philippe; Baraguay d'Hilliers be- trayed Napoleon; Bosquet betrayed the Republic, to which he owed

•' Final reason or argument.— Ed.



**[p. 466]**

a The Crimean war, 1853-56.— Ed. b Nicholas I.— Ed. c Napoleon Ill's decree on the nomination of the five Marshals, February 13, 1858, Le Moniteur universel, No. 45, February 14, 1858.— Ed.

[^1]: d However.— Ed.





**[p. 467]**

when Cassagnac, in the Constitutionnel,3 denounced Mr. Villemain as a "provoker of hatred" to the Empire, and accused the Journal

des Débats of "complicity" in the attentat "through its silence," this was at first considered to be an act of foolish zeal on the part of the man whom Guizot has described as the roi des drôles.b Soon, however, it oozed out that the article had been imposed upon the

Constitutionnel by Mr. Rouland, the Minister of Public Instruction, who had himself corrected the proofs of it. This explanation, by the by, was given to Mr. De Sacy of the Débats by Mr. Mirés, the proprietor of the Constitutionnel, who did not choose to bear the responsibility of the article. The denunciation of all parties as his personal enemies enters, therefore, into the game of Bonaparte. It forms part of his system. He tells them, in so many words, that he indulges no delusion as to the general aversion his rule is the subject of, but that he is ready to encounter it with grape and musketry.

Written on February 22, 1858 Reproduced from the newspaper

First published unsigned in the New-York Daily Tribune, No. 5270, March 12, 1858

a A. Granier de Cassagnac, "La palinodie des honnêtes gens", Le Constitutionnel, No. 31, January 31, 1858.— Ed.

b King of fools. The description has been cited by E. Dupont in "Chronique de l'Intérieur", La Voix du Proscrit, No. 8, December 15, 1850.— Ed.

