---
Volume: 15
Document_Title: "K. Marx. The Derby Ministry. - Palmerston's Sham Resignation "
Page_Range: "497-501"
---

# K. Marx. The Derby Ministry. - Palmerston's Sham Resignation 



**[p. 468]**

Karl Marx

THE DERBY MINISTRY.— PALMERSTON'S SHAM RESIGNATION

If Orsini did not kill Louis Napoleon,482 he certainly killed Palmerston. Made dictator of England by a Chinese Mandarin at Canton,a it is historically appropriate that this political gamester should finally be ruined by an Italian Carbonaro at Paris.483 But that he should be succeeded by Lord Derby is something above the range of mere historical propriety, and approaches the dignity of a historical law. It is in accordance with the traditional working of the British Constitution. Pitt was followed by Fox; Fox by Perceval, a weaker Pitt; Wellington by Grey, a weaker Fox; Grey by Wellington; Wellington by Melbourne, a weaker Grey; Mel- bourne by Wellington again, under the name of Peel; Peel by Melbourne again, under the name of Russell; Russell by Derby, the substitute of Peel; Derby again by Russell. Why should not Palmerston, the usurper of Russell's place, be followed by Derby in his turn?

If there be in England any new force able to put an end to the ancient routine exemplified by this last change of places between right honorable gentlemen on one side of the House and right honorable gentlemen on the other side; if there be any man or body of men able to confront and supplant the traditional governing class, the world has not yet found it out. But of one thing there can be no doubt; and that is. that a Tory Administration is far more favorable to every kind of progress than any other. For the ^ast fifty years, all popular movements have either been initiated or consummated under Tory rule. It was a Tory Ministry which passed the Catholic Emancipation

[^1]: a Yeh Ming-chin.— Ed.



lorded it over the old landed aristocracy of England; so did Peel, the son of a parvenu cotton spinner,0 who had originally been a hand-loom weaver; so does Disraeli, the son of a simple literary man,d and a Jew into the bargain. Lord Derby himself converted the son of a small shopkeepere of Lewes into a Lord High Chancellor of England, under the name of Lord St. Leonards. The Whigs, on the other hand, have always proved strong enough to bury their plebeian tools in vain decorations, or to drop them by dint of haughty insult. Brougham, the soul of the Reform movement, was nullified by being made over to the Lords; and Cobden, the chief of the Anti-Corn-Law League, was offered the place of Vice President of the Board of Trade by the very Whigs he had reinstalled in office.487

In point of mere intellectual ability, the new Cabinet can easily bear comparison with its predecessor. Men like Disraeli, Stanley, and Ellenborough, suffer no harm when matched against people of the stamp of Mr. Vernon Smith, late of the Board of Control,488 of Lord Panmure, a War Minister, whom nothing but his "Take care of Dowb,"489 can ever make immortal, and of Sir G. C. Lewis, of Edinburgh Review dullness, or even against such moral grandeurs as Clanricarde of the Privy Seal. In fact Palmerston had not only replaced the Ministry of all parties by a Ministry of no party, but also the Cabinet of all the talents490 by a Cabinet of no talent except his own.

There can be no question that Palmerston had no idea of the finality of his ruin. He believed Lord Derby would decline the

[^1]: a Shakespeare, Romeo and Juliet.— Ed. b Mary Anne Castello.— Ed. c Robert Peel.—Ed d Isaac D'Israeli.— Ed. e Richard Sugden.— Ed.





**[p. 470]**

We do not believe in any cordial and lasting alliance between British Toryism and French Bonapartism. The instincts, traditions, aspirations of both parties revolt at it. We do not believe it possible that the new Cabinet will take up and press Palmerston's Conspiracy bill, as the Paris journals so confidently anticipate. If they do, it will not be till after they shall have answered Walewski and De Morny, and answered them in the spirit of Pitt and

a Victoria.— Ed. b A. Walewski's dispatch to the French Ambassador in London of January 20, 1858, Le Constitutionnel, No. 41, February 10, 1858.— Ed.

But the significance of the late vote is unaffected by any presumption of speedy feud between the two Governments. It is as a proclamation to Europe that Britain has ceased to play second to French Imperialism that we deem it most important. Thus it is understood at Brussels, at Turin, and even at Vienna; thus it will soon be understood at Berlin, at Madrid, at St. Petersburg. England, so long the jailer of the first Napoleon, has pointedly refused to be longer the jackal of his successor.493

Written on February 26, 1858 Reproduced from the New-York Daily Tribune First published in the New-York Daily Tribune, No. 5272, March 15, 1858 as a leading article; reprinted in the New-York

Semi-Weekly Tribune, No. 1337, March 19, 1858, under the title "The End of Palmerston"

