---
Volume: 15
Document_Title: "April 1858"
Page_Range: "519-556"
---

# April 1858



**[p. 490]**

Karl Marx

THE FRENCH TRIALS IN LONDON

Paris, April 4, 1858

When Victor Hugo marked the nephew as Napoleon the Little, he acknowledged the uncle as Napoleon the Great. The title of his celebrated pamphlet3 meant an antithesis, and,to some degree, did homage to that very Napoleon-worship on which the son of Hortense Beauharnais contrived to raise the bloody fabric of his fortune. What is more useful to impress on the present generation is that Napoleon the Little represents in fact the littleness of Napoleon the Great. The plainest illustration of this fact is afforded by the recent "painful misconceptions" between England and France, and the criminal proceedings against refugees and printers which they have led to on the part of the English Government. A short historical review will prove that during the whole of this miserable melo-drama Napoleon the Little has only re-enacted with anxious minuteness the shabby part invented and played before by Napoleon the Great.

It was only during the short interval separating the peace of Amiens525 (March 25, 1802) from the new declaration of war on the part of Great Britain (May 18, 1803) that Napoleon could indulge his desire for interference with the internal state of Great Britain. He lost no time. Even while the peace negotiations were still pending, the Moniteur emitted his venom on all the London papers venturing to question "the moderation and sincerity of Bonaparte's views," and gave no very unintelligible hint that "such disbelief might ere long be followed with chastisement." b Nor did

a V. Hugo, Napoléon le petit (Originally this epithet was used by the author of the pamphlet in his speech in the Legislative Assembly in 1851.).— Ed.

b "Paris, le 22 ventôse", "Paris, le 25 ventôse", Gazette nationale, ou Le Moniteur universel, Nos. 173, 176, 23, 26 ventôse an 10 de la République française.— Ed.

"to see such obstacles removed which stood very much in the way of the perfect reconciliation between the two countries and their Governments."

What he demanded, was simply the removal out of the British dominions of

"all the French princes and their adherents, together with the French bishops and other French individuals whose political principles and conduct must necessarily occasion great jealousy of the French Government The protection and favor which all the persons in question continued to meet with, in a country so close a neighbor to France, must alone be always considered as an encouragement to the disaffected here, even without those persons themselves being guilty of any acts leading to foment fresh disturbances in this country; but that the Government here possessed proofs of the abuse which they were now making of the protection which they enjoyed in England, and of the advantage they were taking of their vicinity to France, by being really guilty of such acts, since several printed papers had lately been intercepted, which it was known they had sent, and caused to be circulated in France, and which had for their object to create an opposition to the Government."*1

There existed at that time an alien law526 in England, which, however, was framed strictly with a view to the protection of the

a "Paris, le 10 nivôse an 11", Gazette nationale, ou Le Moniteur universel, No. 101, 11 nivôse an 11 de la République française.;— Ed.

b W. Elliot's speech in the House of Commons on November 4, 1801, Cobbett's Annual Register, Vol. II, col. 1187.— Ed.

1 R. St. Castlereagh's and W. Pitt's speeches in the House of Commons on November 3, 1801, Cobbett's Annual Register, Vol. II, col. 1133-34, 1144.— Ed.

d Ch. M. Talleyrand's conversation with A. Merry on the 3 rd of June 1802, Cobbett's Annual Register, Vol. Ill, col. 998.— Ed.

19—844



**[p. 492]**

"His Majesty the King3 certainly expected that all foreigners who might reside within his dominions, should riot only hold a conduct conformable to the laws of the country, but abstain from all acts hostile to the Government of any country with which his Majesty might be at peace. As long, however, as they conduct themselves according to these principles, his Majesty would feel it inconsistent with his dignity, with his honor, and with the common laws of hospitality, to deprive them of that protection which individuals resident in his dominions can only forfeit by their own misconduct. The greater part of the persons to whom allusion has been made in Mr. Talleyrand's conversation, are living in retirement."15

In delivering Lord Hawkesbury's dispatch to Talleyrand, Mr. Merry was by no means sparing of assurances calculated to "soothe, tranquilize and satisfy the First Consul."c Talleyrand, however, insisted upon his pound of flesh,d stating that the First Consul had solicited no more than the British Government itself had demanded of Louis XIV., when the Pretender6 was in France, that he could not see any humiliation in the measure intimated, and that he must repeat

"that the adoption of it would be in the highest degree agreeable and satisfactory to the First Consul," and be considered by him as "the most convincing proof of his Majesty's disposition to see a cordial good understanding established between the two countries."f

On July 25, 1802, Mr. Otto, from his residence at Portman Square, addressed a letter to Lord Hawkesbury, requesting, in a very categorical way, nothing less than the suppression of the liberty of the English press, as far as Bonaparte and his Government were concerned.

"I transmitted," he says, "some time ago, to Mr. Hammond, a number of Peltier, containing the most gross calumnies against the French Government, and against the whole nation; and I observed, that I should probably receive an order to demand a punishment of such an abuse of the press. That order is actually arrived, and I cannot conceal from you, my Lord, that the reiterated insults of a small number of foreigners, assembled in London to conspire against the French Government, have produced the most unfavorable effects on the good understanda George III.— Ed. b R. Hawkesbury's dispatch to A. Merry, dated June 10, 1802, Cobbett's Annual Register, Vol. Ill, col. 999-1000.— Ed.

c A. Merry's dispatch to R. Hawkesbury, dated Paris, June 17, 1802, Cobbett's Annual Register, Vol. Ill, col. 1000-02.— Ed.

d Shakespeare, The Merchant of Venice, Act I, Scene 3.-r-£d. e James II.— Ed. f Ch. M. Talleyrand's conversation with A. Merry, Cobbett's Annual Register, Vol. Ill, col. 1000-01.— Ed.



**[p. 493]**

Courrier Français de Londres (Reynaud), to Cobbett, and to other writers who resemble them, that I have to direct the attention of his Majesty's Government The want of positive laws against these sorts of offenses cannot palliate the violation of the laws of nations, according to which peace should put a stop to all species of hostilities; and doubtless those which.wound the honor and reputation of a Government, and which tend to create a revolt of the people whose interests are confided to that Government, are the most apt to lessen the advantages of peace and to keep up national resentments."3

Instead of meeting these first reproaches of Bonaparte's interference on the subject of the press with a firm and dignified reply, Lord Hawkesbury, in a letter to M. Otto on July 28, made a paltry apology for the existence of the liberty of the press. He says that it is

"impossible his Majesty's Government could peruse Peltier's article without the greatest displeasure, and without an anxious desire thai a person who published it should suffer the punishment he so justly deserves."

Then, after lamenting the "inconveniences" of prosecutions for libel, and the "difficulty" of obtaining judgment against the offenders, he concludes by stating that he has referred the matter to the King's Attorney-Generalb "for his opinion whether it is or is not a libel."c

While the British Government was thus preparing a crusade against the liberty of the press, in order to soothe the susceptibility of its great and new ally, there appeared suddenly, on August 9, a menacing article in the Moniteur, in which England was not only accused of receiving French robbers and assassins, of harboring them at Jersey, and of sending them to make predatory excursions on the coasts of France, but in which the English King himself was represented as a rewarder and instigator of assassination:

"The Times, which is said to be under Ministerial inspection, is filled with perpetual invectives against France. Two of its four pages are every day employed in giving currency to the grossest calumnies. All that imagination can depict, that is low, vile and base, is by that miserable paper attributed to the French Government. What is its end? Who pays it? What does it effect? A French journal,d edited by some miserable emigrants, the remnant of the most impure, a vile refuse, without country, without honor, sullied with crimes which it is not in the power of any amnesty to wash away, outdoes even The Times." "Eleven Bishops, presided over

a L. G. Otto's letter to R. Hawkesbury, dated July 25, 1802, Cobbett's Annual Register, Vol. Ill, col. 1002.— Ed.

h Spencer Perceval.— Ed. < R. Hawkesbury's letter to L. G. Otto, dated July 28, 1802, Cobbett's Annual Register, Vol. Ill, col. 1003.— Ed.

(l L'Ambigu, variétés atroces et. amusantes.—Ed.

[^1]: 19*





**[p. 494]**

When the menacing Moniteur arrived late at night in London, it produced such an irritation that The True Briton, the Ministerial paper, was compelled to declare,

"That article could not have been inserted in the Moniteur with the knowledge or consent of the French Government."d

In the House of Commons Dr. Laurence called upon Mr. Ad- dington (afterward Lord Sidmouth) as to the French libels on his Majesty/ The Minister replied that

"he wished he could show to the learned gentleman the satisfactory explanations which had taken place on that head."'

It was replied that while the British Government made a public matter of a jest on Bonaparte and his wife, and Mr. Peltier was, for his jokes upon those people, to be brought into the Court of King's Bench3 and to be arraigned as a criminal; in the other case, when the British nation was libeled and its royal master, in the official gazette of France, styled the rewarder of assassins, the matter was to be settled by an "explanation", and that explanation so secret, too, as not to admit of being communicated to Parliament. Encouraged by the apparent vacillation of the English

c "Paris, le 19 thermidor", Gazette nationale, ou Le Moniteur universel, No. 320, 20 thermidor an 10 de la République française. (The last sentence of this passage was quoted by Marx in his letter to Engels of February 14, 1858. See present edition, Vol. 40, p. 266.).—£d.

d The True Briton's declaration, Cobbett's Annual Register, Vol. II, col. 130.— Ed. e Fr. Laurence's speech in the House of Commons on December 9, 1802, Cobbett's Annual Register, Vol. II, col. 1774-76.— Ed.

f H. Addington's speech in the House of Commons on December 9, 1802, Cobbett's Annual Register, Vol. II, col. 1776-77.— Ed.

[^1]: a Georges Cadoudal.— Ed. b The reference is to the attempt on the life of Napoleon Bonaparte on December 24, 1800 in the rue Saint-Nicaise.— Ed.



"a legal and sufficient power to restrain foreigners, without having recourse to the courts of law;"

and he adds,

"The French Government, which offers on this point a perfect reciprocity, thinks it gives a new proof of its pacific intentions, by demanding that those persons should be sent away whose machinations uniformly tend to sow discord between the two nations."3

Lord Hawkesbury's answer, dated Aug. 28, sent in the form of a dispatch to the English Plenipotentiary at Paris, has during the late quarrel with Bonaparte III. been quoted by the London press as a model of statesmanlike dignity; but it must be confessed that in spite of the terms of virtuous indignation in which it is couched, promises are held out of sacrificing the French emigrants to the jealous fears of the First Consul.b

In the beginning of the year 1803 Napoleon took upon himself to regulate the proceedings of Parliament and to restrain the liberty of speech among its members. With respect to the ex-Ministers, Mr. Windham, Lord Grenville, and Lord Minto, he intimated literally in his Moniteur,

• "It would be a patriotic and wise law which should ordain that displaced Ministers should not, for the first seven years after their dismissal, be competent to sit in the English Parliament. Another law, not less wise, would be that every member who should insult a friendly people and power should be condemned to silence for two years. When the tongue offends, the tongue must suffer punishment."c

At the same time Gen. Andréossy, who had meanwhile arrivf d at London, complained in a note to Lord Hawkesbury that the despicable pamphleteers and libelers of the Bjitish press

a L. G. Otto's note to R. Hawkesbury, dated August 17, 1802, Cobbett's Annual Register, Vol. Ill, col. 1103.— Ed.

b R. Hawkesbury's dispatch to A. Merry, dated August 28, 1802, Cobbett's Annual Register, Vol. Ill, col. 1007-13.— Ed.

c "Paris, le l Onivôsean 11", Gazette nationale, ou Le Moniteur universel, Ko. 101, 11 nivôse an 11 de la République française.— Ed.



**[p. 496]**

Of these speeches it is said that

"every reasonable Englishman must be humiliated by such unheard-of licentiousness. "

In the name of the First Consul he expresses the wish

"that means should be adopteci to prevent in future any mention being made of what is passing in France, either in the official discussions or in the polemical writings in England, as in like manner, in the French official discussions and polemical writings, no mention should be made of what is passing in England."3

While Bonaparte in this tone of mingled hypocrisy and arrogance privately addressed the British Government, the Moniteur teemed with insults against the British people, and also published an official report of Col. Sebastiani, containing the most injurious charges against the British army in Egypt.'5 On Feb. 5, 1803, the French Commissaire de Relation Commerciale at Jersey, though acknowledged in no public capacity, had the insolence to prefer a complaint against some printers for inserting paragraphs from the London papers offensive to Bonaparte, and to threaten that if the practice was not punished, Bonaparte would certainly revenge himself upon Jersey. This threat had the desired effect. Two of the printers were brought before the Royal Court, and the positive injunction was laid on them not to publish in future anything offensive to France, even from the London papers.0 On Feb. 20, 1803, one day before Peltier's trial, Lord Whitworth, the English Embassador at Paris, was summoned into the presence of the great man himself. Being received in his cabinet, Whitworth was desired to sit down after Bonaparte had sat down himself on the other side of the table. He enumerated the several provoca- tions which he pretended to have received from England.

"He adverted to the abuse thrown out about him in the English prints, but this he said he did not so much regard as that which appeared in the French papers published in London. This he considered as much more mischievous, since it was meant to excite his country against him and his Government. He complained of the protection given to Georges and others of his description; [] he acknowledged that the irritation he feit against England increased daily, because every wind which

a A. Fr. Andréossy's note to R. Hawkesbury, dated March 29, 1803, Cobbett's Annual Register, Vol. Ill, col. 1053-57.— Ed.

b H. Sebastiani, "Rapport fait au Premier Consul", Gazette nationale, ou Le Moniteur universel, No. 130, 10 pluviôse an 11 de la République française.— Ed.

c "Summary of Politics", Cobbett's Annual Register, Vol. Ill, col. 315.— Ed.



**[p. 497]**

On Feb. 21, Peltier was tried before Lord Ellenborough and a special Jury, for libeling Bonaparte and "intending to excite the people of France to assassinate their ruler."1' Lord Ellenborough had the meanness to terminate his address to the Jury with the following words:

"Gentlemen, I trust your verdict will strengthen the relations by which the interests of this country are connected with those of France, and that it will illustrate and justify in every quarter of the world the conviction that has been long and universally entertained of the unsullied purity of British judicature."c

The Jury, without retiring from their box, immediately returned the verdict of Guilty. In consequence of the subsequent rupture between the two countries, Mr. Peltier was, however, not called upon to receive judgment, and the prosecution thus stopped. Having goaded the British Ministry into these persecutions of the press, and wrung from them Peltier's condemnation, the truthful and heroic Moniteur, March 2, 1803, published the following commentary:

"A person of the name of Peltier has been found guilty, before a court of justice at London, of printing and publishing some wretched libels against the First Consul. It is not easy to imagine why the English Ministry should affect to make this a matter of so much éclat. As it has been said in the English newspapers that the trial was instituted at the demand of the French Government, and that the French Embassador was even in the Court when the Jury gave in their verdict, we have authority to deny that any such things did ever take place. The First Consul was even ignorant of the existence of Peltier's libels till they came to his knowledge in the public accounts of the proceedings at his trial Yet it is to be acknowledged that these proceedings, however useless in other respects, have afforded an occasion to the Judges who presided at the trial to evince, by their wisdom and

a Napoleon I's conversation with Lord Whitworth, dated February 20, 1803, Cobbett's Annual Register, Vol. Ill, col. 1034.— Ed.

b Cited according to "Trial of Mr. Peltier", Cobbett's Annual Register, Vol. Ill, col. 276-83.— Ed.

c E. L. Ellenborough's speech at the trial of J. G. Peltier on February 21, 1803, Cobbett's Annual Register, Supplement to Vol. Ill, col. 1232.— Ed.

While the Moniteur in the same article insisted that the duty weighed on all "civilized nations in Europe" reciprocally to put down the barbarians of the press, M. Reinhard, the French Plenipotentiary at Hamburg, summoned together the Hamburg Senate, in order to consider a requisition from the First Consul to insert in the Hamburger Correspondent an article most offensive to the British Government. It was the wish of the Senate at least to be allowed to omit or qualify the most offensive passages; but M. Reinhard said his orders were positive for the full and exact insertion of the whole. The article appeared consequently in its original coarseness. The French Minister desired that the same should be published in the papers at Altona; but the Danish magistrates said that they could not possibly permit it without an express order from their Government. In consequence of this refusal, M. D'Aguesseau, the French Minister at Copenhagen, received from his colleague at Hamburg a copy of the article, with the request that he would solicit permission for its publication in the Danish papers. When called upon with respect to this libel by Lord Whitworth, M. Talleyrand declared that

Such was Napoleon the Great.

Written on April 4, 1858 Reproduced from the newspaper

First published unsigned in the- New-York Daily Tribune, No. 5309, April 27, 1858

a "Paris, le 11 ventôse", Gazette nationale, ou Le Moniteur universel, No. 162, 12 ventôse an 11 de la République française.— Ed.

b Ch. M. Talleyrand's conversation with Lord Whitworth, Cobbett's Annual Register, Vol. Ill, col. 1066.— Ed.

[^1]: "the British Ministers could not be more surprised than the First Consul had been at seeing such an article inserted by authority; that an immediate explanation had been required of M. Reinhard, etc." b





**[p. 499]**

Karl Marx

[THE FINANCIAL STATE OF FRANCE]

Paris, April 13, 1858

By mere force of circumstances the restored Empire finds itself more and more compelled to throw up its adventitious graces and show its real features in their native hideousness. The hour of confessions has broken in upon it unexpectedly. It had already dropped every pretense of being a regular Government, or the offspring of the "suffrage universel." It had proclaimed itself the régime of the upstart, the informer and the 12-pounder.528 It goes now a step further, and avows itself the régime of the swindler. The Moniteur of April 11 contains a note stating that certain journals have announced prematurely the fixation of the dividend upon the shares of certain railway companies and other industrial societies, and have attributed to this dividend a lower figure than that which has been since determined by the Councils of Administration.

"These are maneuvers against which the industry and the capital of the country must be protected. The editors of the journals referred to have been called before the

Procureur Imperial, and warned that such facts will for the future be sent before the tribunals, as constituting the offense of publishing false views. The duty of the press is to enlighten the public, and not deceive it."a

In other words, it is the duty of the press writers, at the peril of being transported to Cayenne,529 to bolster up the Crédit Mobilier,530 instead of warning the public of the impending breaking up of that monster imposture, as they have done of late, although in very timid and subdued tones. The Crédit Mobilier is to hold its general annual meeting April 29 and declare its dividend for the past year. While its directors shrouded themselves

a "Paris, le 10 avril", Le Moniteur universel, No. 101, April 11, 1858.— Ed.



**[p. 500]**

c P. Magne, "Rapport à l'Empereur. Paris, le 29 octobre, 1857", Le Moniteur universel, No. 303, October 30. 1857.—Ed.

[^1]: a At the point of death.— Ed. b The Economist, No. 756, February 20, 1858, "Foreign Correspondence".— Ed.

[^2]: d Napoleon III.—Ed. e "Paris, le 11 mars", Le Moniteur universel, No. 71, March 12,1858.— Ed.





**[p. 501]**

The re-enactment of the coup d'état on an enlarged scale, the wholesale transportations, the parceling out of France into Praetorian camps, the rumors of war, the complications without and the conspiracies within—in one word, the convulsive spasms of the lesser Empire since the attempt of Jan. 14,552 have somewhat distracted the general attention from the financial state of France. Otherwise the public would have become aware that during that same epoch the factitious prosperity of the Bonapartist régime has already resolved itself into its elementary principles of peculation and jobbery. In proof of this proposition, I will content myself with enumerating such facts as have from time to time found their way into the European press. There is first M. Prost, the chief of the Compagnie Générale de Caisses d'Escompte, which not only engaged in all sorts of Bourse speculations, but took upon itself to establish banks of discount all over France. The capital was $6,000,000, in 60,000 shares. It had effected an amalgamation with the Portuguese Crédit Mobilier, and was magna parsh of the Crédit Mobilier of Madrid. All the capital is gone, and the liabilities amount to about $3,000,000/ M. Damonieu, of the

Compagnie Parisienne des Equipages de grandes Remises, was con- demned by the tribunal of police correctionelle for having swindled his shareholders out of $100,000 in cash and shares, having plunged them into debt to the amount of $400,000, and squandered all the capital, amounting to $ 1,600,000.d The manager of another company—the Lignéenne—professing to make paper from wood, has also been condemned for embezzling the capital of $800,000. Two other Bonapartist "saviors of property" were convicted for having entered into an arrangement with some

a "Direction générale des douanes et des contributions indirectes", Le Moniteur universel, No. 80, March 21, 1858.— Ed.

b An important part.— Ed. c The Economist, No. 756, February 20, 1858, "Foreign Correspondence".— Ed. cl Here and below The Economist, No. 760, March 20, 1858, "Foreign Correspondence".— Ed.



**[p. 502]**

"the operations of the last half-year have produced no profits at all, so that it would not be possible to declare a dividend, nor even to pay the ordinary half-year's interest, but that he would pay this interest out of his own pocket."a

Thus the social ulcers of the lesser Empire are breaking up. The ridiculous conferences of Louis Bonaparte with the principal stock-jobbers as to the remedies to be applied to French commerce and industry have, of course, resulted in nothing. The Bank of France finds itself in a bad plight, since it is unable to sell the bonds of the railway companies, on the security of which it has been obliged to provide them with the money for carrying out their works. Nobody wants to buy these bonds at a moment when all railway property is rapidly depreciating in France, and the weekly railway returns exhibit a continuous falling off in receipts.

"With respect to the state of French trade," remarks the Paris correspondent of The London Economist, "it remains what it was; that is to say manifesting a tendency to improve, but not improving."b

Meanwhile, Bonaparte clings to his old way of sinking capital in unproductive works, but which, as Mr. Hausmann, the Prefect of

a M. Millaud's report to the shareholders of the Caisse des Actionnaires of February 10, 1858 was published in The Economist, No. 756, February 20, 1858, and also in the Allgemeine Zeitung, No. 45, "February 14, 1858, supplement. Italics by Marx.— Ed.

b The Economist, No. 763, April 10, 1858, "Foreign Correspondence". — Ed.



**[p. 503]**

"It was quite right that a muster of troops should mark the inauguration of such an artery of the capital, and, after the Emperor, our soldiers were the first who ought to have trodden a soil bearing the name of so glorious a victory."3

Written on April 13, 1858 Reproduced from the newspaper

First published unsigned in the New-York Daily Tribune, No. 5312, April 30, 1858

a "Paris, le 5 avril", Le Moniteur universel, No. 95-96, April 5-6, 1858.— Ed.



**[p. 504]**

Frederick Engels

THE FALL OF LUCKNOW

The second critical period of the Indian insurrection has been brought to a close. The first found its center in Delhi, and was ended by the storming of that city; the second centered in Lucknow, and that place, too, has now fallen. Unless fresh insurrections break out in places hitherto quiet, the revolt must now gradually subside into its concluding, chronic period, during which the insurgents will finally take the character of dacoits or robbers, and find the inhabitants of the country as much their enemies as the British themselves.

The details of the storming of Lucknow are not yet received, but the preliminary operations and the outlines of the final engagements are known. Our readers recollect3 that after the relief of the residency of Lucknow, Gen. Campbell blew up that post, but left Gen. Outram with about 5,000 men in the Alumbagh, an intrenched position a few miles from the city. He himself, with the remainder of his troops, marched back to Cawnpore, where Gen. Windham had been defeated by a body of rebels; these he completely beat, and drove them across the Jumna at Calpee. He then awaited at Cawnpore the arrival of re- enforcements and the heavy guns, arranged his plans of attack, gave orders for the concentration of the various columns destined to advance into Oude, and especially turned Cawnpore into an intrenched camp of strength and proportions requisite for the immediate and principal base of operations against Lucknow. When all this was completed, he had another task to perform before he thought it safe to move—a task the attempting of which

[^1]: a See this volume, pp. 441-42.— Ed.





**[p. 505]**

The arrangements made for this campaign of Oude were on a scale hitherto unprecedented in India. In the greatest expedition ever undertaken by the British there, the invasion of Afghanis- tan,534 the troops employed never exceeded 20,000 at a time, and of these the great majority were natives. In this campaign of Oude, the number of Europeans alone exceeded that of all the troops sent into Afghanistan. The main army, led by Sir Colin Campbell personally, consisted of three divisions of infantry,3 one of cavalry, and one of artillery and engineers. The first division of infantry, under Outram, held the Alumbagh. It consisted of five European and one native regiment. The second (four European and one native regiment) and third (five European and one native regiment), the cavalry division under Sir Hope Grant (three European and four or five native regiments) and the mass of the artillery (forty-eight field-guns, siege trains and engineers), formed Campbell's active force, with which he advanced on the road from Cawnpore. A brigade concentrated under Brigadier Franks at Juanpore and Azimghur, between the Goomtee and the Ganges, was to advance along the course of the former river to Lucknow. This brigade numbered three European regiments and two batteries, beside native troops, and was to form Campbell's right wing. Including it, Campbell's force in all amounted to—

Europeans 15,000 2,000 3,000 20,000 Natives 5,000 3,000 2,000 10,000

a Here and below Engels used the material from The Times, Nos. 22954, 22959 and 22963, March 30, April 5 and 9, 1858.— Ed.

[^1]: Infantry. Cavalry. Artillery Total. and Erig'rs.





**[p. 506]**

The concentration of this immense force is the result partly of Gen. Campbell's combinations, but partly also of the suppression of the revolt in various parts of Hindostan, in consequence of which the troops naturally concentrated toward the scene of action. No doubt Campbell would have ventured to act with a smaller force; but while he was waiting for this, fresh resources were thrown, by circumstances, on his hands; and he was not the man to refuse to avail himself of them, even against so contemptible an enemy as he knew he would meet at Lucknow. And it must not be forgotten that, imposing as these numbers look, they still were spread over a space as large as France; and that at the decisive point at Lucknow he could only appear with about 20,000 Europeans, 10,000 Hindoos, and 10,000 Ghoorkas— the value of the last, under native command, being at least doubtful. This force, in its European components alone, was certainly more than enough to insure a speedy victory, but still its strength was not out of proportion to its task; and very likely Campbell desired to show the Oudians, for once, a more formidable army of white faces than any people in India had ever seen before, as a sequal to an insurrection which had been based on the small number and wide dispersion of the Europeans over the country.

The force in Oude consisted of the remnants of most of the mutinous Bengal regiments and of native levies from the country



**[p. 507]**

The concentric movement upon Lucknow began about the middle of February. From the 15th to the 26th the main army and its immense train (60,000 camp followers alone) marched from Cawnpore upon the capital of Oude, meeting with no resistance. The enemy, in the mean time, attacked Outram's position, without a chance of success, on February 21 and 24. On the 19th Franks advanced upon Sultanpore, defeated both columns of the in- surgents in one day, and pursued them as well as the want of cavalry permitted. The two defeated columns having united, he beat them again on the 23d, with the loss of 20 guns and all their camp and baggage. Gen. Hope Grant, commanding the advanced guard of the main army, had also, during its forced march, detached himself from it, and making a point to the left had, on the 23d and 24th, destroyed two forts on the road from Lucknow to Rohilcund.

On March 2 the main army was concentrated before the southern side of Lucknow. This side is protected by the canal, which had to be passed by Campbell in his previous attack on the city; behind this canal strong intrenchments had been thrown up. On the 3d, the British occupied the Dilkhoosha Park, with the storming of which the first attack also had commenced. On the 4th, Brig. Franks joined the main army, and now formed its right flank, his right supported by the River Goomtee. Meantime, batteries against the enemy's intrenchments were erected, and two floating bridges were constructed, below the town, across the Goomtee; and as soon as these were ready, Sir J. Outram, with his division of infantry, 1,400 horse, and 30 guns, moved across to take position on the left or north-eastern bank. From here he could enfilade a great part of the enemy's line along the canal, and many of the intrenched palaces to its rear; he also cut off the enemy's communications with the whole north-eastern part of

20—844



**[p. 508]**



[^1]: a See this volume, p. 419.— Ed.





**[p. 509]**

The operations of Sir C. Campbell in this campaign, as far as we can now judge, were characterized by his usual prudence and vigor. The dispositions for his concentric march on Lucknow were excellent, and the arrangements for the attack appear to have taken advantage of every circumstance. The conduct of the insurgents, on the other hand, was as contemptible, if not more so, than before. The sight of the redcoats struck them everywhere with panic. Franks's column defeated twenty times its numbers, with scarcely a man lost; and though the telegrams talk of "stout resistance" and "hard fighting,"3 as usual, the losses of the British appear, where they are mentioned, so ridiculously small that we fear there was no more heroism needed and no more laurels to be gathered this time at Lucknow than when the British got there before.b

Written on April 15, 1858 Reproduced from the New-York Daily Tribune First published in the New-York Daily Tribune, No. 5312, April 30, 1858 as a leading article; reprinted in the New-York

Semi-Weekly Tribune, No. 1350, May 4,

1858

a "The Siege of Lucknow", The Times, No. 22966, April 13, 1858.— Ed.

20*

[^1]: b See this volume, pp. 419-24 and 435-42.— Ed.





**[p. 510]**

Karl Marx

MR. DISRAELI'S BUDGET

London, April 20, 1858

Mr. Disraeli's speech on the Budget in the Commons, on April 19,a fills about ten columns of The London Times, but, at all events, it is pleasant to read, perhaps rather more so than the Young Duke of the same author. As to lucidity of analysis, simplicity of composition, skillful arrangement and easy handling of details, it stands in happy contrast with the cumbersome and circumlocutory lucubrations of his Palmerstonian predecessor.b Neither does it contain or pretend to any striking novelty. Mr. Disraeli found himself in the happy position of a Minister of Finance who has to deal with a deficit not of his own making, but bequeathed by a rival. His part was that of the doctor, not of the patient. On the one hand, then, he had to meet a deficit; on the other, all serious restriction of expenditure was put out of the question by the ventures England had embarked in under the auspices of Lord Palmerston. Mr. Disraeli roundly told the House that, if they wanted a policy of invasion and aggression, they must pay for it, and that their loud cry for economy was a mere mockery, blended, as it was, with an unscrupulous readiness for expenditure. According to his statement, the charges devolving upon the financial year 1858-59 would be:

Charge on the funded debt £28,400,000 Permanent charge on the consolidated fund 1,900,000 Army estimates 11,750,000 Charge for the navy, including packet service 9,860,000 Civil service 7,000,000

[^1]: a The Times, No. 22972, April 20, 1858.— Ed. b G. C. Lewis.— Ed.





**[p. 511]**

Total charge . £67,110,000

The revenue of the year 1858-59 was estimated as follows:

Customs £23,400,000 Excise 18,000,000 Stamp duty 7,550,000 Land 8c assessed taxes 3,200,000 Post-Office 3,200,000 Property and income tax 6,100,000 Crown lands 270,000 Miscellaneous 1,300,000

Total revenue £63,020,000 A comparison between the estimated expenditure and the estimated income shows, despite the rather sanguine views taken by Mr. Disraeli of the eventual produce of the customs, the excise and the post-office, a clear deficit of £4,000,000. How was it to be met? The Palmerstonians had chuckled at the mere idea that Mr. Disraeli would be forced to suspend the decline in the next year of the income tax from 7d. to 5d. in the pound, a proposition which, when made by Sir Cornewall Lewis, he and Mr. Gladstone had distinguished themselves by opposing. Then the cry of factious opposition would have been raised, and the unpopularity of the tax turned to good account. In one word, the income tax was the rock which it was confidently predicted the Derby state ship must split upon. Mr. Disraeli, however, was too old a fox to be ensnared in such a trap. He told the House, on the contrary, that John Bull, during the last five years, had "behaved" like a good boy in financial matters; had borne the public burdens with great spirit, and should, therefore, under his present distressed circumstances, not be grieved by a tax he had always felt a peculiar aversion to, especially since, by the arrangement of the year 1853,535 resolved upon by an immense majority of the House, the good boy had been promised the progressive diminution of the tax, and its final extinction at the end of a certain number of years. Mr. Disraeli's own prescriptions for meeting the deficit, and securing even a small margin of surplus income, amount to this: Postpone the liquidation of two millions of Exchequer bonds to a later period; do not pay the £1,300,000 for the war sinking fund until there is a bona fide surplus to be sunk in it; equalize the



**[p. 512]**

Now as to the trifling new taxes imposed by Mr. Disraeli, no serious objection can be raised against them. Though the representatives of Paddy felt it, of course, their duty to protest, any check put upon the spirit consumption in Ireland must be considered a curative measure. In proposing it, the Chancellor of the Exchequer could not withstand the temptation of poking some fun at his Irish friends. "In the most cordial spirit" he asked "the high-spirited Irishmen" to concur in the proposition for taxing "Irish spirit," and mingle their "spirits" with those of Englishmen and Scotchmen, &c. The penny stamp on bankers' checks was fiercely attacked by Mr. Glyn,a the representative of the London banking and stock-jobbing interest. That unfortunate penny, he felt sure, would prevent the monetary circulation of the country from performing its duties; but, whatever terror Mr. Glyn might feel or feign to feel at the audacity of imposing a trifling duty on bankers and stock-jobbers, his feelings are not likely to find an echo among the mass of the British people.

The serious feature of Mr. Disraeli's budget is the stopping of the operation of the artificial sinking fund, that great financial sham reintroduced by Sir Cornewall Lewis, on occasion of the debts contracted during the Russian war.b The genuine British sinking fund is one of those monster delusions which obscure the mental faculties of a whole generation, and the gist of which the following one is hardly able to understand. It was first in the year 1771, that Dr. Richard Price, in his observations on reversionary payments, revealed to the world the mysteries of compound interest and the sinking fund.

"Money," he said, "bearing compound interest, increases at first slowly; but, the rate of increase being continually accelerated, it becomes in some time so rapid as to mock all the powers of imagination. One penny, put out at our Savior's birth at five per cent interest, would, before this time, have increased to a greater sum than would be contained in 150 millions of earths, all solid gold. But, if put out at simple interest, it would in the same time have amounted to no more than 7s. 4 V2d. Our Government has hitherto chosen to improve money in the last rather

a G. G. Glyn's speech in the House of Commons on April 19, 1858, The Times, No. 22972, April 20, 1858.— Ed.

[^1]: b The Crimean war of 1853-56.— Ed.





**[p. 513]**

Consequently he proposed,

"an annual saving, to be applied invariably, together with the interest of all the sums redeemed by it, to the purpose of discharging the public debt; or, in other words, the establishment of a sinking fund."'

This fantastic scheme, rather less ingenious than the financial plan of the fool in one of Cervantes' novels,d who proposed to the whole Spanish people to abstain for only two weeks from eating and drinking, in order to get the means of discharging the public- debt, nevertheless caught the imagination of Pitt. It was avowedlv on this basis that he built up his sinking fund in 1786, allotting a fixed sum of 5,000,000 sterling, to be paid every year "without fail," for this purpose. The system was not abandoned until 1825, when the Commons passed a resolution that only the bona fide surplus revenue of the country was to be applied in payment of the national debt. The whole system of public credit had been thrown into confusion by this curious sort of sinking fund. Between what was borrowed from necessity, and what was borrowed from amusement; between loans that were to increase the debt, and loans that were to pay it off, there arose a tumultuous medley. Interest and compound interest, debt and redemption, danced before men's eyes in such perpetual succes- sion; there was such a phantasmagoria of consols and bonds, of debentures and exchequer bills, of capital without interest and interest without capital, that the strongest understanding became bewildered. Dr. Price's principle was that the State should borrow money at simple interest in order to improve it at compound interest. In fact, the United Kingdom contracted a debt of 1,000 millions sterling, for which it nominally received about 600 millions, 390 millions of this sum being, however, destined not for the payment of the debt, but to keep up the sinking fund. This glorious institution, which marks the golden era of stock-jobbers and speculators, the Palmerstonian Chancellor of the Exchequer

a R. Price, An Appeal to the Public on the Subject of the National Debt, pp. 18 and 19.— Ed.

b R. Price, Observations on Reversionary Payments, pp. XIV and 140.— Ed. c Ibid., p. 139.— Ed. d M. de Cervantes Saavedra, Novelas exemplaires.—Ed.



**[p. 514]**

Written on April 20, 1858 Reproduced from the newspaper

First published unsigned in the New-York Daily Tribune, No. 5318, May 7, 1858



**[p. 515]**

Karl Marx

THE ENGLISH ALLIANCE

Paris, April 22, 1858

The Anglo-French alliance has taken a new turn since Dr. Ber- nard's acquittal353b and the public enthusiasm that cheered it. In the first instance, being shrewd enough to understand that the "heart of England" spoke not "in the starched compliments with which the municipality of Dover overwhelmed the frank nature of the Duke of Malakoff", but rather "in the infamous huzzas raised by the people in the Court of Old Bailey," the Univers proclaimed England not only a "den of assassins," but a people of assassins, juries and judges included.b The original proposition of the colonels337 is thus affirmed on a broader basis. At the heels of the

Univers, in steps the Constitutionnel with an article appearing at the head of its columns, and signed by M. Renée,0 the son-in-law of Mr. Macquard, who in his turn is the known amanuensis, confidant, and factotum of Bonaparte. If the Univers had taken up the colonels' definition of the English people, while enlarging its meaning, the Constitutionnel repeats their menaces, only that it tries to back the exasperation of the barracks by the alleged indignation of the "towns and rural districts." Affecting that tone of wounded moral sensibility so peculiar to the meretricious literature of the second Empire, it exclaims:

"We will not dwell at any length on such an acquittal, which throws an unheard-of scandal on public morality; for what man of honor in France or England could entertain a doubt of Bernard's guilt? We will only inform those of

a "Trial and acquittal of Simon Bernard", The Times, No. 22971, April 19, 1858.— Ed.

b The Times, No. 22973, April 21, 1858, "France".— Ed. 1 Am. Renée, "L'acquittement de Bernard a causé", Le Constitutionnel, No. I l l , April 21, 1858.— Ed.



**[p. 516]**

So far so good. On the mere chance whether or not Mr. James's speech,3 advertised by the Constitutionnel itself,b be or be not circulated in France, it will then depend whether or not France shall rush upon England. But after this quasi-declaration of war, there follows, a day later, a curious and startling winding-up in the

Patrie. The French invasion is to be averted, but only by a new turn to be given to the Anglo-French alliance. Bernard's acquittal has revealed the rising power of anarchy in British society. Lord Derby is to save society in England in the same way as Bonaparte has saved it in France. Such is the upshot of the alliance, and such is its conditio sine qua non.c The Earl of Derby, it is added, is a "man of immense talent, and of almost royal alliances," and consequently the man to save society in England!d The English daily papers cling to the weakness, tergiversation, and infirmity of purpose, betrayed in this alternation of rage, menace and sophism. The Paris correspondent of The Daily Nexus imagines himself to have solved the riddle of these dissolving views exhibited in the

Univers, the Constitutionnel, and the Patrie, by dwelling upon the well-known fact that Bonaparte has a double set of advisers—the drunken revelers of the evening, and the sober counselors of the morning. He smells in the articles of the Univers and the Constitutionnel the fumes of Chateau Maryaux and cigars, and in the article of the Patrie the showers of the cold water bath. But the same double set acted during Bonaparte's duel with the French Republic. The one, after January, 1849, threatened, in its little evening journals, with a coup d'état, while the other, in the heavy columns of the Moniteur, gave them the lie direct. Still it was not in the "starched" articles of the Moniteur, but in the drunken "huzzas" of the Pouvoir, that the shadow of coming events was traced. We are, however, far from believing that Bonaparte is

a E. James speech at the court hearing of S. Bernard's case on April 16, 1858, The Times, No. 22970, April 17, 1858.— Ed.

b "Affaire Simon Bernard.— Complicité dans l'attentat du 14 janvier", Le Constitutionnel, No. 108, April 18, 1858.— Ed.

[^1]: c Indispensable condition.— Ed. d The Times, No. 22975, April 23, 1858, "France".—Ed.





**[p. 517]**

The comical lucubrations in that line, which The N. Y. Herald had taken upon itself to publish, are sure to raise a smile on the lips even of mere tyros in military science. But we are decidedly of opinion that Bonaparte, a civilian, it ought never to be forgotten, at the head of a military Government, has, in the Patrie, put the last and the only possible interpretation on the Anglo-French alliance which will satisfy his "colonels." He finds himself in a situation at once the most grotesque and the most dangerous. To impose upon foreign Governments, he must clap on the sword. To soothe the sword-bearers, and prevent them from taking his rhodomontades in real good earnest, he must recur to such impossible fictiones juris as that the Anglo-French alliance means the saving of society in England in the approved Bonapartist fashion. Of course, facts must clash with his doctrines, and the upshot, if his reign is not, as we are inclined to think, cut short by a revolution, will be that his fortune is engulfed, as it has been raised, in mad-brain adventures in some expédition de Boulogne538

on an enlarged scale. The Emperor will subside into the adventurer, as the adventurer has been converted into the Emperor.

In the mean time, while the Patrie has spoken the last word Bonaparte can utter as to the meaning of the Anglo-French alliance, it is worth the while to direct attention to the manner in which this alliance is now spoken of among the governing classes of England. In this respect an article of The London Economist, entitled "The French Alliance, its character, its value and its price, "h

claims peculiar notice. It is written with studied pedantry, such as fits the position of an ex-Secretary of the Treasury under Palmerston's Administration, and an expounder of the economical views of English capitalists. Mr. Wilson sets out with the thesis that "the thing gained may not be exactly the thing bargained for." "Scarcely," he says, "any estimate of the value of a real alliance between France and England can be too high;" but then there exist different sorts of alliances, real ones and artificial ones, genuine alliances and alliances of a hot-house growth, "natural" ones and "governmental" ones, "governmental" alliances and "personal" alliances. In the first place, The Economist gives full swing to his "imagination;" and it may be remarked with respect to The Economist, what has been said with respect to lawyers, that

a The Channel.— Ed. b Here and below The Economist, No. 763, April 10, 1858.— Ed.



**[p. 518]**

"imagination to dwell on the influence which a real alliance between the two great peoples which stand at the head of modern civilization would exercise on the destinies of Europe and the fortune and felicity of all other lands."

Still he is forced to admit that, although he hopes and believes the two nations to be "ripening" for a genuine alliance, they "are not ripe for it yet." If, then, England and France are not yet ripe for a genuine, national alliance, the question will naturally arise, of what sort is the present Anglo-French alliance?

"Our alliance of late," confesses the ex-member of the Palmerston Administra- tion and the oracle of English capitalists, "has been to a great extent, we admit, unavoidably with the Government rather than with the nation—with the Emperor rather than the Empire—with Louis Bonaparte rather than with France; and further, in the value we have set upon the alliance and the price we have paid for it, we have somewhat lost sight of this material arid weighty fact."

Bonaparte, of course, is the chosen of the French nation, and all that bosh, but, unfortunately,

"he represents only the numerical and not the intellectual majority of the French people. By mischance, it so happens that the classes which stand aloof from him comprise precisely those parties whose opinions on nearly all the great questions of civilization, are analogous to our own."

Having thus in most cautious and civil language, and in circumlocutory sentences which we will not discomfort the reader with, laid down the axiom that the present so-called Anglo-French alliance is rather governmental than national, The Economist goes the length of confessing that it is more personal even than purely governmental.

"Louis Napoleon," he says, "has hinted more plainly than became the head of a great nation that he was our especial friend in France—that he, rather than his people, desired and sustained the English alliance; and it may be that we have acquiesced in this view of the matter more readily and fully than was perfectly prudent and sincere."3

Take it all in all, the Anglo-French alliance is a spurious, adulterated article—an alliance with Louis Bonaparte, but not an alliance with France. The question, therefore, naturally arises, whether that spurious article was worth the price paid for it? Here The Economist beats his own bosom and cries, in the name of the English governing classes, Pater, peccavi!h In the first place,

a Here and below The Economist, No. 764, April 17, 1858.— Ed. b "Father, I have sinned", Luke 15:18.— Ed.



**[p. 519]**

"We owed to ourselves that our frank and loyal courtesy toward the de facto sovereign of France should be allowed to ripen and to warm into cordial and affectionate admiration only as far and as fast as his policy turned out such as we could honestly and righteously approve."

Instead of applying thus a sliding scale to their Bonapartism, the English people, a constitutional people,

"have lavished on an Emperor who had destroyed the constitutional liberties of his subjects, attentions such as were never before bestowed on a constitutional king who had granted and respected them. And when he was angry and irritated, we have stooped to soothe him by language of fulsome adulation which sounded marvelous from English lips. Our proceedings and our language have alienated all those sections of the French people jn whose eyes Louis Napoleon is either a usurper or a military despot. It has especially irritated and disgusted the Parliamentary party in France, whether "Republican or Orleanist."

The Economist discovers at last that this prostration before a lucky usurper was far from prudent.

"It is impossible," he says, "to believe that the existing régime in France can be the permanent one under which that energetic and restless nation will consent to live Is it wise, therefore, so to ally ourselves with a passing phase of government in France as to excite the enmity of its future and more permanent development?"

Moreover, the English alliance was more necessary to Bonaparte than his alliance to England. In 1852, he was an adventurer—a successful one, but still an adventurer.

"He was not recognized in Europe; it was questionable whether he would be recognized. But England promptly and unhesitatingly accepted him; acknowledged his title deeds at once; admitted him to the circle of royal exclusiveness, and gave him thus currency among the courts of Europe." "Nay, more, by the exchange of visits and cordial' coalitions, our Court allowed acquaintanceship to ripen into intimacy Those enterprising moneyed and commercial classes, by whom it was especially important to him to be supported, saw at once how vast was the strength he gained by the closeness and cordiality of the alliance with England."

That alliance was necessary for him, and he "would have bought it at almost any price." Did the English Government prove their commercial acumen and wonted sharpness in fixing that price? They asked no price at all; they insisted upon no condition whatever; but, like Oriental satraps, crawled in the dust while handing to him the gift of the alliance. No infamy on his part was colossal enough to make them halt for one moment in their race "of thriftless generosity," as The Economist calls it—of reckless flunkeyism, as we should call it.



**[p. 520]**

Not only have the English thus fostered, supported and promoted his abominable domestic policy, but, as The Economist avows, allowed him to hamper, modify, emasculate and degrade their foreign policy.

"To continue longer in such a false position," concludes The Economist, "may redound neither to our honor nor to our profit, nor to the benefit of the commonwealth of nations."

Compare this declaration with that of the Patrie, and there can remain no doubt that the Anglo-French alliance is gone, and with it the only international prop of the second Empire.

Written on April 22, 1858 Reproduced from the newspaper

First published unsigned in the New-York Daily Tribune, No. 5319, May 8, 1858



**[p. 521]**

Karl Marx

IMPORTANT BRITISH DOCUMENTS

London, April 30, 1858

There have been recently issued on the part of the British Government several statistical papers—the Board of Trade returns for the first quarter of 1858,a a comparative statement of Pauperism for January, 1857 and 1858,b and lastly, the half-yearly reports of the Inspectors of Factories. The Board of Trade returns, as was to be expected, show a considerable falling off in exports as well as imports during the first three months of 1858, if compared with the same quarter of the previous year. The total declared value of all articles exported, which during the latter period amounted to £28,827,493, had fallen for the first three months of this year to £23,510,290, so that the aggregate decrease in British exports may be rated at about 19 per cent. The table of the values of the principal articles of import, given only up to the end of February, shows a decline, as compared with the first two months of 1857, from £14,694,806 to £10,117,920, the downward movement in imports being thus more marked still than that in exports. The comparative state of the export trade from the United Kingdom to the United States during the first three months of 1857 and 1858 may be ascertained from the following extract:

a "Accounts Relating to Trade and Navigation for the Three Months Ended March 31", "The Board of Trade Returns", The Economist, No. 765, April 24, 1858.— Ed.

b Presumably a reference to Monthly Comparative Return of Paupers relieved in each month in each year [1857, 1858].— Ed.



**[p. 1858]**

Beer and Ale (bbls.) 9,504 Coal and Culm (tuns) 19,972 Cottons (yards) 61,198,140 Hardw's & Cutlery (cwt.) 44,096 Linens (yards) 18,373,022 Iron, Pig (tuns) 10,172 Iron, Bar (tuns) 70,877 Iron, Cast (tuns) Wrought of all sorts 12,578 Steel, unwrought 3,607 Copper (cwt.) 11,075 Lead (tuns) Oil Seed (gals.) 400,200 Salt (tuns) 66,022 Silk manufactures (lb) 66,973 Woolens, Cloth (pieces) 106,519 Woolens, mixed stuffs (ps).. 9,030,643 Worsted stuffs (pieces) 212,763 Earthenware Sc Porcel'n Haberdashery & Millin'y Tin Plates

With some trifling exceptions, this list exhibits a general and heavy falling off; but what strikes us is that in most instances the decline in the value of exports hardly keeps pace with the diminution in their quantity. The United States proves in this respect a far better market than other countries whence the Britishers for an increased quantity fetched in return a smaller value. Thus, for instance, of wool there were exported to Holland, in 1858, 277,342 lbs. against 254,593 lbs. in 1857; but the former realized but a value of £24,949, while the latter had brought £25,563; and for 1,505,621 lbs. exported to France in 1858, as against 1,445,322 lbs. exported in 1857, the value returned amounts but to £103,235, while for the smaller export of 1857 it reached the sum of £108,412. Moreover, if we compare the

unities Deck ired Val.

6,581 £40,893 £29,269

44,299 11,975 24,818

35,371,538 1,128,453 618,540

14,623 301,275 104,668

8,757,750 527,076 265,536

6,569 39,927 20,344

6,417 610,124 54,602

2,362 4,659 14,475

2,097 151,602 29,218

1,118 128,178 43,666

1,954 69,286 10,595 60 21,793 1,324

42,790 62,576 5,768

35,205 33,169 16,990

22,920 82,280 25,212

30,624 351,911 110,096

6,368,551 401,249 232,202

80,601 249,013 106,913

a Here and below "Accounts Relating to Trade and Navigation", III.— Exports of the Principal and Other Articles of British and Irish Produce and Manufactures— Ed.

[^1]: 155,700 70,998

[^2]: 614,825 288,752 273,409 105,847 a





**[p. 523]**

Quantities. Declared Val. 1857 1858 1857 1858

Beer and ale, bbls 24,817 51,913 £77,845 £166,567 Cotton, yards 120,092,475 151,463,533 1,385,888 1,787,943 Hardw's & Cut'ry, cwt 10,642 16,776 42,849 67,287 Cotton yarn, yards 5,145,044 10,609,434 276,469 531,567 Iron bar, tuns 20,674 26,266 191,528 217,539 Cop'r sh'ts & rails, cwt 18,503 23,313 115,927 132,156 Woolens, cloth 12,123 19,571 63,846 90,584 Earthware & porcel'n 9,989 19,631 Haberd'y & millinery 21,350 31,427 Steam engines 31,408 36,019

The increase in the British exports to India may, for some items, woolens for instance, be accounted for by the war demand. Generally, however, the rationale of that ascending movement is not to be sought in that direction. The case is simply this, that the insurrection for some months had shut up the Indian market altogether, thus causing the commodities floating in the market to be absorbed and creating a vacuum now again filled up. With respect to Australia, the returns show also considerable increase in some articles of British export, but the letters received from Sidney and Melbourne leave no doubt as to the merely speculative character of those shipments which, instead of selling at their declared value, will have to be disposed of at a heavy discount.

The comparative statement of Paupers in England and Wales,539

who received official relief in the fifth week of January, 1857 and 1858, shows their number, from 920,608, to which it amounted in the former period, to have increased to 976,773 in the latter one, thus exhibiting an aggregate increase of 6.10 per cent. For the North Midland, North-Western and York divisions, however, that is, for the industrial districts, the increase in the percentage of paupers rose respectively by 20.52, 44.87, and 23.13 per cent. Besides, it must be kept in view that a very considerable portion of



**[p. 524]**

Industrial Stalistiis.

Ratio per cent of persons aged 20 vears and upward,

occupied in

, A i, y No. of per- Median- Mining sons aged ical Ans, Agri- Manu- and Mine- Divisions. 20 years Trade and cul- f'ao ral Works, and upward. Domestic lure. lures. Service.

1. The Metropolis 1,394,963 47.6 1.1 6.0 3.5 2. South-Eastern 887,131 30.7 20.8 2.5 2.4 3. South Midland 660,775 28.8 25.4 7.1 2.4 4. Eastern 603,720 27.4 26.5 4.0 2.3 5. South-Western 978,025 28.6 23.3 4.6 5.6 6. West Midland 1,160,387 29.1 15.5 5.2 12.6 7. North Midland 654.679 31.8 21.7 6.4 5.3 8. North-Wesiern 1,351.830 29.8 8.3 21.5 5.4 9. York 961,945 25.2 14.3 17.5 7.3 10. Northern 521,460 27.7 16.1 4.2 12.4 11. Welsh 641,680 21.8 25.7 2.5 12.4

England and Wales.. 9,816,597 31.0 16.1 8.4 6.3

The reports of the Inspectors of Factories, extending only to the end of October, 1857, are deprived of their usual interest, because, as the Inspectors unanimously state, the closing of mills, the working of short time, the numerous bankruptcies among mill-owners, and the general depression of trade, which set in at the very time when they drew up their returns, prevented them from collecting that reliable information, which on former occasions allowed them to prepare a statement of the number of new factories, of factories that had added to their motive power, and of those which had ceased to work. The industrial statistics, therefore, illustrating the effects of the crisis, must be looked for in their next reports. The only new feature exhibited in the present publication is limited to some revelations as to the treatment of children and young persons in printing works. It was not until 1845 that the British Legislature extended their interference from textile fabrics to print-works. The Print-Works



**[p. 525]**

The three classes under the Factory acts are: 1. Males over 18 years of age, whose labor is unrestricted; 2. Males between 13 and 18 years of age, and females above 13 years of age, whose labor is restricted; 3. Children between 8 and 13 years of age, whose labor is restricted, and who are required to attend school daily.

The corresponding classes in print-works are: 1. Males above 13 years of age, whose labor is unrestricted; 2. Females above 13 years of age, whose hours of labor are restricted; 3. Children of both sexes, between the ages of 8 and 13, whose labor is restricted, and who are required to attend school periodically. The Print- Works act differs essentially from the Factory acts, in containing no provisions of any kind for either of the following purposes: For setting apart times for meals; for the Saturday holiday; for the cessation from work on Christmas day and Cood Friday; for periodical half-holidays; for the secure fencing of dangerous machinery; for the reporting of accidents, and compensation of injured persons; for the periodical lime-washing of the premises. The hours of labor in factories are now assimilated to the ordinary hours of work of mechanics and general laborers, i.e., from 6 a. m. to 6 p. m., with intervals of one hour and a half for meals. The hours of labor in print-works may practically be considered to be unrestricted, notwithstanding the existence of statutory limita- tion. The only restriction upon labor is contained in § 22 of the Print-Works act (8 and 9 Vict., 29), which enacts that no child between the ages of 8 and 13 years, and no female, shall be

a Here and below [A. Redgrave,] "Report of Alexander Redgrave, Esq., Inspector of Factories, for the Half Year Ended the 31st October 1857", Reports of the Inspectors of Factories, pp. 38, 39, 41, 43.— Ed.



**[p. 526]**

Written on April 30, 1858 Reproduced from the newspaper

First published unsigned in the New-York Daily Tribune, No. 5329, May 20, 1858

