---
Volume: 15
Document_Title: "K. Marx. The Financial State of France. "
Page_Range: "528-533"
---

# K. Marx. The Financial State of France. 



**[p. 499]**

Karl Marx

[THE FINANCIAL STATE OF FRANCE]

Paris, April 13, 1858

By mere force of circumstances the restored Empire finds itself more and more compelled to throw up its adventitious graces and show its real features in their native hideousness. The hour of confessions has broken in upon it unexpectedly. It had already dropped every pretense of being a regular Government, or the offspring of the "suffrage universel." It had proclaimed itself the régime of the upstart, the informer and the 12-pounder.528 It goes now a step further, and avows itself the régime of the swindler. The Moniteur of April 11 contains a note stating that certain journals have announced prematurely the fixation of the dividend upon the shares of certain railway companies and other industrial societies, and have attributed to this dividend a lower figure than that which has been since determined by the Councils of Administration.

"These are maneuvers against which the industry and the capital of the country must be protected. The editors of the journals referred to have been called before the

Procureur Imperial, and warned that such facts will for the future be sent before the tribunals, as constituting the offense of publishing false views. The duty of the press is to enlighten the public, and not deceive it."a

In other words, it is the duty of the press writers, at the peril of being transported to Cayenne,529 to bolster up the Crédit Mobilier,530 instead of warning the public of the impending breaking up of that monster imposture, as they have done of late, although in very timid and subdued tones. The Crédit Mobilier is to hold its general annual meeting April 29 and declare its dividend for the past year. While its directors shrouded themselves

a "Paris, le 10 avril", Le Moniteur universel, No. 101, April 11, 1858.— Ed.



**[p. 500]**

c P. Magne, "Rapport à l'Empereur. Paris, le 29 octobre, 1857", Le Moniteur universel, No. 303, October 30. 1857.—Ed.

[^1]: a At the point of death.— Ed. b The Economist, No. 756, February 20, 1858, "Foreign Correspondence".— Ed.

[^2]: d Napoleon III.—Ed. e "Paris, le 11 mars", Le Moniteur universel, No. 71, March 12,1858.— Ed.





**[p. 501]**

The re-enactment of the coup d'état on an enlarged scale, the wholesale transportations, the parceling out of France into Praetorian camps, the rumors of war, the complications without and the conspiracies within—in one word, the convulsive spasms of the lesser Empire since the attempt of Jan. 14,552 have somewhat distracted the general attention from the financial state of France. Otherwise the public would have become aware that during that same epoch the factitious prosperity of the Bonapartist régime has already resolved itself into its elementary principles of peculation and jobbery. In proof of this proposition, I will content myself with enumerating such facts as have from time to time found their way into the European press. There is first M. Prost, the chief of the Compagnie Générale de Caisses d'Escompte, which not only engaged in all sorts of Bourse speculations, but took upon itself to establish banks of discount all over France. The capital was $6,000,000, in 60,000 shares. It had effected an amalgamation with the Portuguese Crédit Mobilier, and was magna parsh of the Crédit Mobilier of Madrid. All the capital is gone, and the liabilities amount to about $3,000,000/ M. Damonieu, of the

Compagnie Parisienne des Equipages de grandes Remises, was con- demned by the tribunal of police correctionelle for having swindled his shareholders out of $100,000 in cash and shares, having plunged them into debt to the amount of $400,000, and squandered all the capital, amounting to $ 1,600,000.d The manager of another company—the Lignéenne—professing to make paper from wood, has also been condemned for embezzling the capital of $800,000. Two other Bonapartist "saviors of property" were convicted for having entered into an arrangement with some

a "Direction générale des douanes et des contributions indirectes", Le Moniteur universel, No. 80, March 21, 1858.— Ed.

b An important part.— Ed. c The Economist, No. 756, February 20, 1858, "Foreign Correspondence".— Ed. cl Here and below The Economist, No. 760, March 20, 1858, "Foreign Correspondence".— Ed.



**[p. 502]**

"the operations of the last half-year have produced no profits at all, so that it would not be possible to declare a dividend, nor even to pay the ordinary half-year's interest, but that he would pay this interest out of his own pocket."a

Thus the social ulcers of the lesser Empire are breaking up. The ridiculous conferences of Louis Bonaparte with the principal stock-jobbers as to the remedies to be applied to French commerce and industry have, of course, resulted in nothing. The Bank of France finds itself in a bad plight, since it is unable to sell the bonds of the railway companies, on the security of which it has been obliged to provide them with the money for carrying out their works. Nobody wants to buy these bonds at a moment when all railway property is rapidly depreciating in France, and the weekly railway returns exhibit a continuous falling off in receipts.

"With respect to the state of French trade," remarks the Paris correspondent of The London Economist, "it remains what it was; that is to say manifesting a tendency to improve, but not improving."b

Meanwhile, Bonaparte clings to his old way of sinking capital in unproductive works, but which, as Mr. Hausmann, the Prefect of

a M. Millaud's report to the shareholders of the Caisse des Actionnaires of February 10, 1858 was published in The Economist, No. 756, February 20, 1858, and also in the Allgemeine Zeitung, No. 45, "February 14, 1858, supplement. Italics by Marx.— Ed.

b The Economist, No. 763, April 10, 1858, "Foreign Correspondence". — Ed.



**[p. 503]**

"It was quite right that a muster of troops should mark the inauguration of such an artery of the capital, and, after the Emperor, our soldiers were the first who ought to have trodden a soil bearing the name of so glorious a victory."3

Written on April 13, 1858 Reproduced from the newspaper

First published unsigned in the New-York Daily Tribune, No. 5312, April 30, 1858

a "Paris, le 5 avril", Le Moniteur universel, No. 95-96, April 5-6, 1858.— Ed.

