---
Volume: 15
Document_Title: "K. Marx. Bonaparte's Financial Maneuvers.- Military Despotism "
Page_Range: "579-582"
---

# K. Marx. Bonaparte's Financial Maneuvers.- Military Despotism 



**[p. 550]**

Karl Marx

[BONAPARTE'S FINANCIAL MANEUVERS.

— MILITARY DESPOTISM]557

Paris, May 27, 1858

The dilapidated state of the Bonapartist Exchequer cannot longer be said to form a matter of dispute. It has been openly proclaimed by the "savior of property"538 himself. In no other way is it possible to account for General Espinasse's circular to the French Prefects,3 calling upon them to use their influence, and, "if need be, their authority," in order to induce the trustees of hospitals and other charitable institutions to convert the real property from which they derive their revenues into three per cent consols. That property amounts to $100,000,000, but, as Bonaparte, in the name of the poor, bewails, does not report an income of more than 2 l/2 per cent. If invested in the Funds the revenue would improve by at least one half. In his paternal solicitude Bonaparte had recently bid the Council of State to initiate a law for this conversion of the landed property of the charitable establishments into funded property, but, strange to say, his own Council of State doggedly declined to take the hint. What he thus failed in effecting in the legislative way he now tries to get at in the "executive way," by a military ordre du jour. There are some people silly enough to fancy that he only intends increasing the funds by the maneuver. Nothing can be further off the mark. If the above-named landed property was sold at its nominal value of $100,000,000, a great part of that purchase money would of course be forthcoming from capital till now invested in consols and other public securities, so that the artificially created demand for the funds would be met by heaps of them thrown into the

a [Ch. M. E. Espinasse,] "La circulaire au sujet des biens immeubles". Le Moniteur universel, No. 142, May 22, 1858.'—Ed.



**[p. 551]**

d'état. The financial policy initiated by the theft from the Bank cellars of 25,000,000 francs, continued in the confiscation of the Orleans estates, is now to receive a further development in the confiscation of the property of the charitable establishments.

The latter operation, however, would cost Bonaparte one of his armies, his army of priests, who administer by far the greatest portion of the charitable establishments* Already, for the first time since the coup d'état, the Univers dares openly dissent from the savior of society, and even implores the Siècle to make common cause against this intended encroachment upon "private prop- erty."

a "Debt register".— Ed. b See this volume, pp. 289-92.— Ed. ' Napoléon III, "Loi portant prorogation du privilège de la Banque de France", Le Moniteur universel, No. 162, June 11, 1857.— Ed.

a 1. Péreire, "Rapport présenté au nom du Conseil d'administration [29 avril 1858]", Le Moniteur universel, No. 120, April 30, 1858.— Ed.



**[p. 552]**

boldly to show its front, all discipline will be at an end, and the army prove unable to withstand any shock from without. Another such event as the assassination of the rédacteur, of the Figaro,b and that shock will take place. The general exasperation prevailing may be inferred from the one fact, that when the account of the duel got to Paris about 5,000 young men flocked to the bureaux of the Figaro, requesting to be inscribed upon a list, as ready to fight with any sub-lieutenant who might be forthcoming. The Figaro, of course, is itself a Bonapartist creation, heading that literature of scandal and chantage and private slander which suddenly shot up after the violent extinction of the political press, and found in the soil and atmosphere of the lesser Empire all the conditions for a luxuriant growth. It is a fine trait of historical irony that the signal for the impending conflict should be given by the murderous quarrel between the literary and the military representatives of the Bonapartist swell mob.

Written on May 27, 185S Reproduced from the newspaper

First published unsigned in the New-York Daily Tribune, No. 5348, June 11, 1858

a Napoleon III.— Ed. h For details on the duel of Henri de Pêne and the Sub-Lieutenant Hyenne in which the former was wounded see The Times, No. 23000, May 22, 1858.— Ed.

