---
Volume: 15
Document_Title: "June 1858"
Page_Range: "585-609"
---

# June 1858



**[p. 556]**

Frederick Engels

[THE BRITISH ARMY IN INDIA]5'

Our indiscreet friend, Mr. William Russell of The London Times, has recently been induced, by his love of the picturesque, to illustrate, for the second time, the sack of Lucknow, to a degree which other people will not think very flattering to the British character.a It now appears that Delhi, too, was "looted" to a very considerable extent, and that besides the Kaiserbagh, the city of Lucknow generally contributed to reward the British soldier for his previous privations and heroic efforts. We quote from Mr. Russell:

"There are companies which can boast of privates with thousands of pounds worth in their ranks. One man I heard of who complacently offered to lend an officer 'whatever sum he wanted if he wished to buy over the Captain.' Others have remitted large sums to their friends. [] Ere this letter reaches England, many a diamond, emerald and delicate pearl will have told its tale in a very quiet, pleasant way, of the storm and sack of the Kaiserbagh. It is as well thai the fair wearers saw not how the glittering baubles were won, or the scenes in which the treasure was trove Some of these officers have made, literally, their fortunes There are certain small caskets in battered uniform cases which cou tain estates in Scotland and Ireland, and snug fishing and shooting boxes in every game-haunted or salmon-frequented angle of the world."b

This, then, accounts for the inactivity of the British army after the conquest of Lucknow. The fortnight devoted to plunder was well spent. Officers and soldiers went into the town poor and debt-ridden, and came out suddenly enriched. They were no longer the same men; yet they were expected to return to their

a Here and below see W. H. Russell, "Lucknow, April 5", The Times, No. 23007, May 31, 1858.— Ed.

[^1]: b Italics by Engels.— Ed.





**[p. 557]**

"It is curious to observe how riches develop disease; how one's liver is affected by loot, and what tremendous ravages in one's family, among the nearest and dearest, can be caused by a few crystals of carbon The weight of the belt round the private's waist, full of rupees and gold mohurs, assures him the vision" (of a comfortable independency at home) "can be realized, and it is no wonder he resents the 'fall in, there, fall in!' Two battas, two shares of prize-money, the plunder of two cities, and many 'pickings by the way', have made some of our men too rich for easy soldiering."

Accordingly, we hear that above 150 officers have sent in their resignations to Sir Colin Campbell — a very singular proceeding indeed in an army before the enemy, which in any other service would be followed up in twenty-four hours by cashiering and severest punishment otherwise, but which, we suppose, is consid- ered in the British army as a very proper act for "an officer and a gentleman" who has suddenly made his fortune. As to the private soldiers, with them the proceeding is different. Loot engenders the desire for more; and if no more Indian treasures are at hand for the purpose, why not loot those of the British Government? Accordingly, says Mr. Russell:

"There has been a suspicious upsetting of two treasure tumbrils under a European guard, in which some few rupees were missing, and paymasters exhibit a preference for natives in the discharge of the delicate duty of convoy!"*

Very good, indeed. The Hindoo or Sikh is better disciplined, less thieving, less rapacious than that incomparable model of a warrior, the British soldier! But so far we have seen the individual British only employed. Let us now cast a glance at the British army, "looting" in its collective capacity:

"Every day adds to the prize property, and it is estimated that the sales will produce £600,000. [] The town of Cawnpore is said to be full of the plunder of Lucknow, and if the damage done to public buildings, the destruction of private property, the deterioration in value of houses and land, and the results of depopulation could be estimated, it would be found that the capital of Oude has siistained a loss of five or six millions sterling."'1

The Calmuck hordes of Jenghiz Khan and Timur, falling upon a city like a swarm of locusts, and devouring everything that came

[^1]: a Italics by Engels.— Ed.





**[p. 558]**

The Hindoos must, however, by this time be still less fit for regular battle than they were at Lucknow, but that is not now the main question. It is far more important to know what shall be done if the insurgents, after a show of resistance, again shift the seat of war, say to Rajpootana, which is far from being subdued. Sir Colin Campbell must leave garrisons everywhere; his field army has melted down to less than one-half of the force he had before Lucknow. If he is to occupy Rohilcund what disposable strength will remain for the field? The hot weather is now upon him, in June the rains must have put a stop to active campaigning, and allowed the insurgents breathing time. The loss of European soldiers through sickness will have increased every day after the middle of April, when the weather became oppressive; and the young men imported into India last Winter must succumb to the climate in far greater numbers than the seasoned Indian campaigners who last Summer fought under Havelock and Wilson. Rohilcund is no more the decisive point than Lucknow was, or Delhi. The insurrection, it is true, has lost most of its capacity for pitched battles; but it is far more formidable in its present scattered form, which compels the English to ruin their army by marching and exposure. Look at the many new centers of resistance. There is Rohilcund, where the mass of the old Sepoys are collected; there is Northeastern Oude beyond the Gogra, where the Oudians have taken up position; there is Calpee, which for the present serves as a point of concentration for the insurgents of Bundelcund. We shall most likely hear in a few weeks, if not sooner, that both Bareilly and Calpee have fallen. The former will be of little importance, inasmuch as it will serve to absorb nearly all, if not the whole of Campbell's disposable forces. Calpee, menaced now by General Whitlock, who has led his column from Nagpoor to Banda, in Bundelcund, and by General Rose, who approaches from Jhansi, and has defeated the advanced



**[p. 559]**

guard of the Calpee forces, will be a more important conquest; it will free Campbell's base of operations, Cawnpore, from the only danger menacing it, and thus perhaps enable him to recruit his field forces to some extent by troops set at liberty thereby. But it is very doubtful whether there will be enough to do more than to clear Oude.

Thus, the strongest army England ever concentrated on one point in India is again scattered in all directions, and had more work cut out than it can conveniently do. The ravages of the climate, during the Summer's heats and rains, must be terrible; and whatever the moral superiority of the European over the Hindoos, it is very doubtful whether the physical superiority of the Hindoos in braving the heat and rains of an Indian Summer will not again be the means of destroying the English forces. There are at present but few British troops on the road to India, and it is not intended to send out large re-enforcements before July and August. Up to October and November, therefore, Campbell has but that one army, melting down rapidly as it is, to hold his own with. What if in the mean time the insurgent Hindoos succeed in raising Rajpootana and Mahratta country in rebellion? What if the Sikhs, of whom there are 80,000 in the British service, and who claim all the honor of the victories for themselves, and whose temper is not altogether favorable to the British, were to rise?

Altogether, one more Winter's campaign, at least, appears to be in store for the British in India, and that cannot be carried on without another army from England.

Written on about June 4, 1858 Reproduced from the newspaper

First published in the New-York Daily Tribune, No. 5361, June 26, 1858 as a leading article



**[p. 560]**

Karl Marx

THE STATE OF BRITISH COMMERCE

London, June 8, 1858

The trade and navigation tables just published by the British Board of Trade 3 comprise an account of the declared value of the exports of the United Kingdom in the three months ending 31st March, 1858, compared with the corresponding period of the year 1857; an account of the number and tunnage of vessels entered inward and cleared outward, with cargoes, in the four months ending 30th April, 1858, compared with the corresponding period of the years 1856 and 1857; and, lastly, an account of the principal exports and imports for the four months ending 30th April, 1858. The amount of the exports for the month of April, 1858, is £9,451,000, against £9,965,000 in 1857, and £9,424,000 in 1856,b while for the four months there is a reduction of nearly £6,000,000 in the year 1858. Accordingly the British exports of the month of April, 1858, would appear not only to have risen above the level of 1856, but closely to approach that reached in 1857, some months prior to the commercial explosion in the United States. Hence it might be inferred that the last traces of the crisis are rapidly disappearing, and that British commerce, at least, is again entering a new epoch of expansion. Such a conclusion, however, would be altogether erroneous. In the first place, it must be considered that the official statistics, as far as they relate to declared value, do not show the actual returns, but the returns as anticipated by the exporters. Moreover, a closer

a "Accounts Relating to Trade and Navigation for the Four Months ended April 30", The Economist, No. 770, May 29, 1858, supplement.— Ed.

b "The Board of Trade Tables", The Economist, No. 770, May 29, 1858, p. 592.—Ed.



**[p. 561]**

"The later advices from the East show symptoms of reaction from the extraordinary high range of prices which have been current in Bombay and in Calcutta during the period when supplies there were so short. A not inconsiderable decline has already been submitted to upon the arrival out of cargoes which were shipped not later than December. The supplies since then have been to both markets most liberal, if not excessive; and it seems very probable, therefore, that for some time to come we must look for less support to prices from the great activity of the Eastern demand than has been so far experienced since the beginning of January."

Beside India, those European and other countries which till now had not been reached by the effects of the commercial crisis, have been blocked up by British merchandise, not in consequence of increased demand, but by way of experiment. The countries thus blessed were Belgium, Spain and its dependencies, some Italian States—principally the Two Sicilies—Egypt, Mexico, Central America, Peru, China, and some minor markets. At the very time when the most disastrous news was arriving from Brazil and put a check upon the aggregate export to that country, some branches of British industry, compelled to find an outlet for their exuberant produce, did not only not curtail, but actually augment their shipments for that market. Thus, during the month of April, linens, earthenware and porcelain, destined for Brazil, were increasing in quantity as well as declared value. Nobody can consider this bona fide exports. The same remark holds true with respect to Australia, which had acted as so elastic a center of absorption during the first months of the crisis. Australia was then and is still overstocked; a sudden reaction took place; the aggregate exports thither were diminished, but again some branches of British industry, instead of contracting, have actually expanded — speculatively, of course—their supplies in spite of the warnings of all the Australian local papers. The export tables of the month of April, therefore, must be considered not as the bona fide standard of the recovery of British industry, but as mere feelers thrown out in order to ascertain what pressure the markets of the world are again able to bear. The following table contains an account of the declared value of the British and Irish exports in the three months ending 31st of March, 1858, compared with the corresponding period of the year 1857:



**[p. 567]**

Russia, Northern Ports Russia, Southern Ports Sweden

Norway Denmark Prussia Mecklenburg Hanover Oldenburg Hanse Towns Holland Belgium France Portugal proper Azores Madeira Spain Canary Islands Sardinia Tuscany Papal States Two Sicilies Austrian Territories Greece Turkey Wallachia and Moldavia Syria and Palestine Egypt (ports on the Mediterra- nean) Tunis Algeria Morocco Western Coast of Africa (foreign) Eastern Coast of Africa African Ports on the Red Sea Cape Verde Islands Java

1857.

£3,015

72,777 48,007

30,217 92,046 133,000

9,502 288,648

3,520 2,318,260

1,305,606

515,175 1,631,672

380,160

10,793

9,955 496,788

18,817 290,131

189,534

69,953 284,045 253,042

40,860 969,288

111,052 199,070

449,497

865

4,790 55,826

235,527

1,130 2,419 234,071

1858.

£8,853

42,493

3,717 5,911 40,148 78,917

3,099 236,669

1,957 1,645,419

975,428 546,033 1,035,096

356,178

12,581 16,245 584,287

8,475 293,138 257,508

123,059 375,177 323,086

69,570 821,204

98,135 81,874

483,516

2,323 4,831 37,206

196,484

1,927

3,965 149,493

a Here and below "An Account of the Declared Value of British and Irish Produce and Manufactures," The Economist, No. 770, May 29, 1858.— Ed.



**[p. 585]**

Philippine Islands 144,992 212,942 China (exclusive of Hong Kong) 290,441 389,647 South Sea Islands Foreign West Indies 620,022 521,435 United States (Ports on the Atlan- tic) 6,231,501 2,565,566 California \ 50,219 94,147 Mexico 112,277 151,890 Central America 22,453 46,201 New Granada 88,502 117,411 Venezuela 105,417 62,685 Ecuador 2,099 Brazil 1,292,325 826,583 Uruguay 145,481 177,281 Buenos Ayres 285,187 279,913 Chili 336,309 270,176 Peru 209,889 299,725

Total to foreign countries £20,636,473 £14,940,756

British Possessions.

Channel Islands £136,071 £120,431 Gibraltar 152,926 210,575 Malta 116,821 131,238 Ionian Islands 66,148 52,849 West Coast of Africa (British) 135,452 62,343 Cape of Good Hope 442,796 403,579 Natal 26,605 23,106 Ascension 3,832 2,308 St. Helena 3,837 8,416 Mauritius 142,303 164,042 Aden 11,263 11,996 British Territories in the East In- dies (exclusive of Singapore and Ceylon) 2,822,009 3,502,664 Singapore 101,535 308,545 Ceylon 98,817 153,090 Hong Kong 133,743 242,757 West Australia 15,515 13,813 South Australia 180,123 249,162 New South Wales 706,337 682,265



**[p. 564]**

Victoria £1,427,248 £1,056,537 Tasmania 67,550 82,942 New Zealand 96,893 93,768 British North American Colonies.. 818,560 439,433 British West India Islands 334,024 426,421 British Guiana 122,249 95,385 Honduras (British Settlements) 28,363 31,869

Total to British Possessions £8,191,020 £8,569,534

Total to Foreign Countries and

British Possessions 28,827,493 23,510,290

The Economist thinks that, from an accurate analysis of these figures,

"the curious fact is disclosed that the entire decrease has taken place in the British trade to foreign countries as contrasted with the colonial possessions."3

In fact, the above tables may be condensed as follows:

Exports for three months.

To foreign countries £20,636,473 £14,940,756 To British possessions 8,191,020 8,569,534

Total £28,827,493 £23,510,290

Yet the conclusion arrived at by The Economist seems a fallacy. According to the condensed statement there would appear to have taken place a reduction in the trade to foreign countries to the amount of £5,695,717, simultaneously with an increase of £378,514 in the colonial trade. However, if we deduct the increase in the trade of British smuggling places such as Gibraltar, Malta, Hong Kong, and of mere depots for foreign countries, such as Singapore, a decrease in the aggregate colonial trade becomes evident; and if we deduct India, the decrease appears very considerable. Of the decrease in the trade to foreign countries, the main percentage falls upon the following countries:

a Here and below "The Board of Trade Tables", The Economist, No. 770, May 29, 1858 (italics by Marx).— Ed.

[^1]: 1857. 1858.





**[p. 565]**

United States £6,231,501 £2,565,566 Brazil 1,292,325 826,583 Hanse Towns 2,318,260 1,645,410 France 1,631,672 1,035,096 Holland 1,305,606 975,428

The accounts relating to navigation show a slight increase in the number as well as tunnage of the British vessels entered inward, but a decrease in the number and tunnage of the vessels cleared outward. Of foreign countries, the navigation of the United States continues to maintain the first rank. The following figures show the movement of their vessels to and from the British ports:

Entered Inward.

1856. 1857. 1858.

Ships. Tunnage. Ships. Tunnage. Ships. Tunnage.

United States 382 383,255 367 366,407 366 366,650

Cleared Outward.

United

States 414 395,102 440 427,221 343 321,015

According to the same accounts, Norway, Denmark and Russia seem the countries upon whose navigation the commercial crisis told with the most disastrous effect.

Written on June 8, 1858 Reproduced from the newspaper

First published unsigned in the Netit-York Daily Tribune, No. 5356, June 21, 1858



**[p. 566]**

Karl Marx

[POLITICAL PARTIES IN ENGLAND.— SITUATION IN EUROPE]

England offers at this moment the curious spectacle of dissolution appearing at the summit of the State, while at the base of society all seems immovable. There is no audible agitation among the masses, but there is a visible change among their rulers. Shall we believe that the upper strata are liquefying, while the lower remain in the same dull solidity? We are, of course, not alluding to the cynical attempts of Palmerston and his compeers to "loot" the Treasury.563 The battles between the exiles and their proscribers form no more a standing feature in the medieval annals of Italian towns than the conflicts between the Ins and Outs in the Parliamentary history of England. But now we have the Tory leader in the House of Commons winding up a speech with the ominous declaration that

There is the House of Lords passing one point of the People's Charter—the abolition of the property qualification for the members of the Commons564; there is Lord Grey, the descendant of the Whig Reformer,*3 warning his noble compeers that they are drifting to "a total revolution in the whole system of their Government and in the character of their Constitution;"0 there is

a B. Disraeli's speech in the House of Commons on May 31, 1858, The Times, No. 23008, June 1, 1858.— Ed.

b Charles Grey.— Ed. c H. G. Grey's speech in the House of Lords on June 10, 1858, The Times, No. 23017, June 11, 1858.— Ed.

[^1]: "There is one bond of union between us [the Radicals and the Tories] in this House and in this country; and that is, that we shall not any longer be the tools or the victims of an obsolete oligarchy! " a



The fact is that the two ruling oligarchic parties of England were long ago transformed into mere factions, without any distinctive principles. Having in vain tried first a coalition and then a dictatorship, they are now arrived at the point where each of them can only think of obtaining a respite of life by betraying their common interest into the hands of their common foe, the radical middle-class party, who are powerfully represented in the Commons by John Bright. Till now, the Tories have been aristocrats ruling in the name of the aristocracy, and the Whigs aristocrats ruling in the name of the middle class; but the middle class having assumed to rule in their own name, the business of the Whigs is gone. In order to keep the Wrhigs out of office, the Tories will yield to the encroachments of the middle-class party until they have worried out Whig patience and convinced these oligarchs that, in order to save the interests of their order, they must merge in the conservative ranks and forsake their tradition- ary pretensions to represent the liberal interest or form a power of their own. Absorption of the Whig faction into the Tory faction, and their common metamorphosis into the party of the aristocracy, as opposed to the new middle-class party, acting under its own chiefs, under its own banners, with its own watchwords— such is the consummation we are now witnessing in England.

If we consider this state of internal affairs in England, and couple with it the fact that the Indian war will continue to drain her of men and money, we may feel sure that she will be disabled

a Ch. C. J. Rutland's speech in the House of Lords on June 10, 1858, The Times, No. 23017, June 11, 1858.— Ed.

b "In those sad days of Ireland's history," The Times, No. 23016, June 10, 1858.— Ed.

c "There was a time within the memory", The Times, No. 23017, June 11, 1858.— Ed.



**[p. 568]**

Everything, then, depends upon France, and there the commer- cial and agricultural distress, financial coup d'état, and the substitution of the rule of the army for rule by the army, are hastening the explosion. Even the French press at length admits that all hopes of a return of prosperity must be abandoned for the present. "We believe that it would be foolish to tantalize the public with the chimerical hope of an immediate reaction," says the

Constitutionnel^ "The stagnation continues, and in spite of the existing favorable elements, we must not expect any immediate modification," says the Patrie.

The Union and the Univers re-echo these complaints." "It is

a Alexander II.— Ed. b Frederick William IV.— Ed. c William, Prince of Prussia.— Ed. d "Bulletin hebdomadaire de la Bourse de Paris". Le Constitutionnel, No. 158, June 7, 1858.— Ed.

e "Paris, Monday, June 7, 6 p.m.", The rimes. No. 23015, June 9, 1858.— Ed.



**[p. 569]**

Written on June 11, 1858 Reproduced from the Neiv-York Daily Tribune First published in the New-York Daily Tribune, No. 5359, June 24, 1858 as a leading article; reprinted unsigned in the New-York Semi-Weekly Tribune, No. 1365, June 25, 1858 under the title "The European Revolution"

a The Times, No. 23014, June 8, 1858.— Ed. h See this volume, pp. 550-52.— Ed. c Napoléon III, "Loi relative à la création d'une dotation de l'armée, an rengagement, au remplacement et aux pensions militaires".— Ed.



**[p. 570]**

Karl Marx

THE BRITISH GOVERNMENT AND

THE SLAVE-TRADE

London, June 18, 1858

In the sitting of the House of Lords on June 17, the question of the slave-trade was introduced by the Bishop of Oxford, who presented a petition against that trade from the Parish of St. Mary in Jamaica.3 The impression these debates are sure to produce upon every mind not strongly prejudiced is that of great moderation on the part of the present British Government, and its firm purpose of avoiding any pretext of quarrel with the United States. Lord Malmesbury dropped altogether the "right of visit," as far as ships under the American flag are concerned, by the following declaration:

"The United States say that on no account, for no purpose, and upon no suspicion shall a ship carrying the American flag be boarded except by an American ship, unless at the risk of the officer boarding or detaining her. I have not admitted the international law as laid down by the American Minister for Foreign Affairs,b until that statement had been approved and fortified by the law officers of the Crown. But having admitted that, I have put it as strong as possible to the American Government that if it is known that the American flag covers every iniquity, every pirate and slaver on earth will carry it and no other; that this must bring disgrace on that honored banner, and that instead of vindicating the honor of the country by an obstinate adherence to their present declaration the contrary result will follow; that the American flag will be prostituted to the worst of purposes. I shall continue to urge that it is necessary in these civilized times, with countless vessels navigating the ocean, that there should be a police on the ocean; that there should be, if not a right by international law, an agreement among nations how far they would go to verify the nationality of vessels, and ascertain their right to bear a particular flag. From the language I have used, from the conversations which I had with the American Minister resident in this country,0

a The Times, No. 23023, June 18, 1858. Speeches by the members of the House of Lords quoted below are to be found in the same issue.— Ed.

[^1]: b L. Cass.— Ed.

[^2]: c J. M. Dallas.— Ed.





**[p. 571]**

On the Opposition benches there was also no attempt made at vindicating the right of visit on the part of Great Britain against the United States, but, as Earl Grey remarked,

"The English had treaties with Spain and other powers for the prevention of the slave-trade, and if they had reasonable grounds for suspecting that a vessel was engaged in this abominable traffic, and that she had for the time made use of the United States flag, that she was not really an American ship at all, they had a right to overhaul her and to search her. If, however, she produced the American papers, even though she be full of slaves, it was their duty to discharge her, and to leave to the United States the disgrace of that iniquitous traffic. He hoped and trusted that, the orders to their cruisers were strict in this respect, and that any excess of that discretion which was allowed their officers under the circumstances would meet with proper punishment."

The question then turns exclusively upon the point, and even this point seems abandoned by Lord Malmesbury, whether or not vessels suspected of usurping the American flag may not be called upon to produce their papers. Lord Aberdeen directly denied that any controversy could arise out of such a practice, since the instructions under which the British officers were to proceed on such an occurrence—instructions drawn up by Dr. Lushington and Sir G. Cockburn—had been communicated at the time to the American Government and acquiesced in by Mr. Webster, on the part of that Government.3 If, therefore, there had been no change in these instructions, and if the officers had acted within their limits, "the American Government, could have no ground of complaint." There seemed, indeed, a strong suspicion hovering in the minds of the hereditary wisdom, that Palmerston had played one of his usual tricks by effecting some arbitrary change in the orders issued to the British cruisers. It is known that Palmerston, while boasting of his zeal in the suppression of the slave-trade, had, during the eleven years of his administration of foreign affairs, ending in 1841, broken up all the existing slave-trade treaties, had ordered acts which the British law authorities pronounced criminal, and which actually subjected one of his instruments to legal procedure and placed a slave-dealer under the protection of the law of England against its own Government.

a "Annex (B) to the treaty between Great Britain, Austria; signed at London, the Twentieth Day of December in the Year One Thousand Eight Hundred and Forty-One. Instructions to Cruisers."—Ed. .

22—844



**[p. 572]**

"No matter what instructions had been given, if the Government gave authority to the British vessels to go in such numbers into the American waters, a difference would sooner or later arise between us and the United States."

Yet, whatever may have been Palmerston's secret intentions, it is evident that they are baffled by the Tory Government in 1858, as they had been in 1842, and that the war cry so lustily raised in the Congress and in the press is doomed to result in "much ado about nothing."

As to the question of the slave-trade itself, Spain was denounced by the Bishop of Oxford, as well as Lord Brougham, as the main stay of that nefarious traffic. Both of them called upon the British Government to force, by every means in its power, that country into a course of policy consonant to existing treaties. As early as 1814 a general treaty was entered into between Great Britain and Spain, by which the latter passed an unequivocal condemnation of the slave-trade. In 1817 a specific treaty was concluded, by which Spain fixed the abolition of the slave-trade, on the part of her orôn subjects, for the year 1820, and, by way of compensation for the losses her subjects might suffer by carrying out the contract, received an indemnity of £400,000. The money was pocketed* but no equivalent was tendered for it. In 1835 a new treaty15 was entered into, by which Spain bound herself formally to bring in a

a "Lettre adressée le 18 mai 1841, par le département des affaires étrangères aux lords de l'amirauté, au sujet de la poursuite des bâtimens américains" — Ed.

b "Treaty between His Majesty and the Queen Regent of Spain signed in Madrid, June 28, 1835." — Ed.



**[p. 573]**

"Spain," said the Bishop of Oxford, "had not the excuse that this traffic was a system which her Government was not strong enough to put down, because Gen. Valdez had shown that such a plea could not be urged with any show of truth. On his arrival in the island he called together the principal contractors, and, giving them six months' time to close all their transactions in the slave-trade, told them that he was determined to put it down at the end of that period. What was the result? In 1840, the year previous to the administration of Gen. Valdez, the number of ships which came to Cuba from the coast of Africa with slaves was 56. In 1842, while Gen. Valdez was Captain-General, the number was only 3. In 1840 no less than 14,470 slaves were landed at the island; in 1842 the number was 3,100."

Now what shall England do with Spain? Repeat her protests, multiply her dispatches, renew her negotiations? Lord Malmesbury himself states that they could cover all the waters from the Spanish coast to Cuba with the documents vainly exchanged between the two Governments. Or shall England enforce her claims, sanctioned by so many treaties? Here it is that the shoe pinches. In steps the sinister figure of the "august ally," now the acknowledged guardian angel of the slave-trade. The third Bonaparte, the patron of Slavery in all its forms, forbids England to act up to her convictions and her treaties. Lord Malmesbury, it is known, is strongly suspected of an undue intimacy with the hero of Satory. Nevertheless, he denounced him in plain terms as the general slave-dealer of Europe—as the man who had revived the infamous traffic in its worst features under the pretext of "free emigration" of the blacks to the French colonies. Earl Grey completed this denunciation by stating that "wars had been undertaken in Africa for the purpose of making captives, who were to be sold to the agents of the French Government." The

22*

[^1]: a "Leave it till tomorrow." — Ed. b Leopoldo O'Donnel y Jorris.— Ed. c P. J. Pidal.— Ed.





**[p. 574]**

Such, then, is the glorious position England finds herself in by having lent her help to that man in overthrowing the Republic. The second Republic, like the first one, had abolished Slavery. Bonaparte, who acquired his power solely by truckling to the meanest passions of men, is unable to prolong it save by buying day by day new accomplices. Thus he has not only restored Slavery, but has bought the planters by the renewal of the slave-trade. Everything degrading the conscience of the nation, is a new lease of power granted to him. To convert France into a slave-trading nation would be the surest means of enslaving France, who, when herself, had the boldness of proclaiming in the face of the world: Let the colonies perish, but let principles live! One thing at least has been accomplished by Bonaparte. The slave-trade has become a battle-cry between the Imperialist and the Republican camps. If the French Republic be restored to-day, to-morrow Spain will be forced to abandon the infamous traffic.

Written on June 18, 1858 Reproduced from the New-York Daily Tribune First published in the New-York Daily Tribune, No. 5366, July 2, 1858; re- printed unsigned in the New-York Semi- Weekly Tribune, No. 1367, July 2, 1858



**[p. 575]**

Karl Marx

[TAXATION IN INDIA]

According to the London journals, Indian stock and railway securities have of late been distinguished by a downward movement in that market, which is far from testifying to the genuineness of the sanguine convictions which John Bull likes to exhibit in regard to the state of the Indian guerrilla war; and which, at all events, indicates a stubborn distrust in the elasticity of Indian financial resources. As to the latter, two opposite views are propounded. On the one hand, it is affirmed that taxes in India are onerous and oppressive beyond those of any country in the world; that as a rule throughout most of the presidencies, and through those presidencies most where they have been longest under British rule, the cultivators, that is, the great body of the people of India, are in a condition of unmitigated impoverishment and dejection; that, consequently, Indian revenues have been stretched to their utmost possible limit, and Indian finances are therefore past recovery. A rather discomfortable opinion this at a period when, according to Mr. Gladstone,3 for some years to come, the extraordinary Indian expenditure alone will annually amount to about £20,000,000 sterling. On the other hand, it is asserted— the asseveration being made good by an array of statistical illustrations—that India is the least taxed country in the world; that, if expenditure is going on increasing, revenue may be increased too; and that it is an utter fallacy to imagine that the Indian people will not bear any new taxes. Mr. Bright, who may be considered the most arduous and influential representative of

a W. E. Gladstone's speech in the House of Commons on June 7, 1858, The Times, No. 23014, June 8, 1858.— Ed.



**[p. 576]**

"The Indian Government had cost more to govern India than it was possible to extort-from the population of India, although the Government had been by no means scrupulous either as to the taxes imposed, or as to the mode in which they had been levied. [] It cost more than £30,000,000 to govern India, for that was the gross revenue, and there was always a deficit, which had to be made up by loans borrowed at a high rate of interest. [] The Indian debt now amounted to £60,000,000, and was increasing; while the credit of the Government was falling, partly because they had not treated their creditors very honorably on, one or two occasions, and now on account of the calamities which had recently happened in India. [] He had alluded to the gross revenue; but as that included the opium revenue, which was hardly a tax upon the people of India, he would take the taxation which really pressed upon them at £25,000,000. Now, let not this £25,000,000 be compared with the £60,000,000 that was raised in this country. Let the House recollect that in India it was possible to purchase twelve days' labor for the same amount of gold or silver that would be obtained in payment for one in England. This £25,000,000 expended in the purchase of labor in India would buy as much as an outlay of £300,000,000 would procure in England. [] He might be asked how much was the labor of an Indian worth? Well, if the labor of an Indian was only worth 2d. a day, it was clear that we could not expect him to pay as much taxation as if it was worth 2s. [] We had 30,000,000 of population in Great Britain and Ireland; in India there were 150,000,000 inhabitants. [] We raised here £60,000,000 sterling of taxes; in India, reckoning by the days' labor of the people of India, we raised £300,000,000 of revenue, or five times a greater revenue than was collected at home. Looking at the fact that the population of India was five times greater than that of the British Empire, a man might say that the taxation per head in India and England was about the same, and that therefore there was no great hardship inflicted. But in England there was an incalculable power of machinery and steam, of means of transit, and of everything that capital and human invention could bring to aid the industry of a people. In India there was nothing of the kind. They had scarcely a decent road throughout India."3

Now, it must be admitted that there is something wrong in this method of comparing Indian taxes with British taxes. There is on the one side the Indian population, five times as great as the British one, and there is on the other side the Indian taxation amounting to half the British. But, then, Mr. Bright says, Indian labor is an equivalent for about one-twelfth only of British labor. Consequently £30,000,000 of taxes in India would represent £300,000,000 of taxes in Great Britain, instead of the £60,000,000 actually there raised. What then is the conclusion he ought to have arrived at? That the people of India in regard to their numerical strength pay the same taxation as the people in Great Britain, if allowance is made for the comparative poverty of the people in

a J. Bright's speech in the House of Commons on June 24, 1858, The Times, No. 23029, June 25, 1858.— Ed.



**[p. 577]**

Aggregate sum raised £30,000,000 Deduct for opium revenue 5,000,000 Deduct for rent of land 16,000,000

Taxation proper £9,000,000 Of this £9,000,000, again, it must be admitted that some important items, such as the post-office, the stamp duties, and the customs duties, bear in a very minute proportion on the mass of the people. Accordingly, Mr. Hendriks, in a paper recently laid before the British Statistical Society on the Finances of India,3 tries

a The Economist, No. 772, June 12, 1858.— Ed.

The following comparative view of the average amount of taxation derived from each inhabitant of India and the United Kingdom, during the years 1855-56, is abstracted from Mr. Hendriks's statement:

Bengal, per head, Revenue £0 5 0Taxation proper. £0 1 4 North-West Provinces 3 5Taxation proper. 0 7 Madras 4 7Taxation proper. 1 0 Bombay 8 3Taxation proper. 1 4 Punjaub 3 3Taxation proper. 0 9 United Kingdom - -Taxation proper. 1 10 0

For a different year the following estimate of the average paid by each individual to the national revenue is made by Gen. Briggsa:

In England, 1852 £ 1 19 4 In France 1 12 0 In Prussia 0 19 3 In India, 1854 0 3 8 V2

From these statements it is inferred by the apologists of the British Administration that there is not a single country in Europe, where, even if the comparative poverty of India is taken into account, the people are so lightly taxed. Thus it seems that not only opinions with respect to Indian taxation are conflicting, but that the facts from which they purport to be drawn are themselves contradictory. On the one hand, we must admit the nominal amount of Indian taxation to be relatively small; but on the other, we might heap evidence upon evidence from Parliamentary documents, as well as from the writings of the greatest authorities on Indian affairs, all proving beyond doubt that this apparently light taxation crushes the mass of the Indian people to the dust, and that its exaction necessitates a resort to such infamies as torture, for instance. But is any other proof wanted beyond the constant and rapid increase of the Indian debt and the accumulaa The Economist, No. 772, June 12, 1858.— Ed.



**[p. 1805]**

tion of Indian deficits? It will certainly not be contended that the Indian Government prefers increasing debts and deficits because it shrinks from touching too roughly upon the resources of the people. It embarks in debt, because it sees no other way to make both ends meet. In the Indian debt amounted to £25,626,631a; in 1829 it reached about £34,000,000 b; in 1850 £47,151,018c; and at present it amounts to about £60,000,000. By the by, we leave out of the count the East Indian debt contracted in England, which is also chargeable upon the East Indian revenue.

The annual deficit, which in 1805 amounted to about two and a half millions, had, under Lord Dalhousie's administration, reached the average of five millions. Mr. George Can Tpbell of the Bengal Civil Service, and of a mind strongly biased in favor of the Anglo-Indian administration, was obliged to avow, in 1852, that:

"Although no Oriental conquerors have ever obtained so complete an ascendency, so quiet, universal and undisputed possession of India as we have, yet all have enriched themselves from the revenues of the country, and many have out of their abundance laid out considerable sums on works of public improvements. From doing this we are debarred. The quantity of the whole burden is by no means diminished" (under the English rule), "yet we have no surplus." à

In estimating the burden of taxation, its nominal amount must not fall heavier into the balance than the method of raising it and the manner of employing it. The former is detestable in India, and in the branch of the land-tax, for instance, wastes perhaps more produce than it gets. As to the application of the taxes, it will suffice to say that no part of them is returned to the people in works of public utility, more indispensable in Asiatic countries than anywhere else, and that, as Mr. Bright justly remarked, nowhere so extravagant is a provision made for the governing class itself.e

Written on June 29, 1858 Reproduced from the newspaper

First published in the New-York Daily Tribune, No. 5383, July 23, 1858 as a leading article

a G. Campbell, Modern India: a Sketch of the System of Civil Government, p. 412.— Ed.

e J. Bright's speech in the House of Commons on June 24, 1858, The Times, No. 23029, June 25, 1858.—Erf.

[^1]: b Ibid., p. 414.— Ed. 1 Ibid., p. 417.— Ed. d Ibid., p. 406. Italics by Marx.— Ed.



