---
Volume: 15
Document_Title: "K. Marx. Political Parties in England. - Situation in Europe "
Page_Range: "595-599"
---

# K. Marx. Political Parties in England. - Situation in Europe 



**[p. 566]**

Karl Marx

[POLITICAL PARTIES IN ENGLAND.— SITUATION IN EUROPE]

England offers at this moment the curious spectacle of dissolution appearing at the summit of the State, while at the base of society all seems immovable. There is no audible agitation among the masses, but there is a visible change among their rulers. Shall we believe that the upper strata are liquefying, while the lower remain in the same dull solidity? We are, of course, not alluding to the cynical attempts of Palmerston and his compeers to "loot" the Treasury.563 The battles between the exiles and their proscribers form no more a standing feature in the medieval annals of Italian towns than the conflicts between the Ins and Outs in the Parliamentary history of England. But now we have the Tory leader in the House of Commons winding up a speech with the ominous declaration that

There is the House of Lords passing one point of the People's Charter—the abolition of the property qualification for the members of the Commons564; there is Lord Grey, the descendant of the Whig Reformer,*3 warning his noble compeers that they are drifting to "a total revolution in the whole system of their Government and in the character of their Constitution;"0 there is

a B. Disraeli's speech in the House of Commons on May 31, 1858, The Times, No. 23008, June 1, 1858.— Ed.

b Charles Grey.— Ed. c H. G. Grey's speech in the House of Lords on June 10, 1858, The Times, No. 23017, June 11, 1858.— Ed.

[^1]: "There is one bond of union between us [the Radicals and the Tories] in this House and in this country; and that is, that we shall not any longer be the tools or the victims of an obsolete oligarchy! " a



The fact is that the two ruling oligarchic parties of England were long ago transformed into mere factions, without any distinctive principles. Having in vain tried first a coalition and then a dictatorship, they are now arrived at the point where each of them can only think of obtaining a respite of life by betraying their common interest into the hands of their common foe, the radical middle-class party, who are powerfully represented in the Commons by John Bright. Till now, the Tories have been aristocrats ruling in the name of the aristocracy, and the Whigs aristocrats ruling in the name of the middle class; but the middle class having assumed to rule in their own name, the business of the Whigs is gone. In order to keep the Wrhigs out of office, the Tories will yield to the encroachments of the middle-class party until they have worried out Whig patience and convinced these oligarchs that, in order to save the interests of their order, they must merge in the conservative ranks and forsake their tradition- ary pretensions to represent the liberal interest or form a power of their own. Absorption of the Whig faction into the Tory faction, and their common metamorphosis into the party of the aristocracy, as opposed to the new middle-class party, acting under its own chiefs, under its own banners, with its own watchwords— such is the consummation we are now witnessing in England.

If we consider this state of internal affairs in England, and couple with it the fact that the Indian war will continue to drain her of men and money, we may feel sure that she will be disabled

a Ch. C. J. Rutland's speech in the House of Lords on June 10, 1858, The Times, No. 23017, June 11, 1858.— Ed.

b "In those sad days of Ireland's history," The Times, No. 23016, June 10, 1858.— Ed.

c "There was a time within the memory", The Times, No. 23017, June 11, 1858.— Ed.



**[p. 568]**

Everything, then, depends upon France, and there the commer- cial and agricultural distress, financial coup d'état, and the substitution of the rule of the army for rule by the army, are hastening the explosion. Even the French press at length admits that all hopes of a return of prosperity must be abandoned for the present. "We believe that it would be foolish to tantalize the public with the chimerical hope of an immediate reaction," says the

Constitutionnel^ "The stagnation continues, and in spite of the existing favorable elements, we must not expect any immediate modification," says the Patrie.

The Union and the Univers re-echo these complaints." "It is

a Alexander II.— Ed. b Frederick William IV.— Ed. c William, Prince of Prussia.— Ed. d "Bulletin hebdomadaire de la Bourse de Paris". Le Constitutionnel, No. 158, June 7, 1858.— Ed.

e "Paris, Monday, June 7, 6 p.m.", The rimes. No. 23015, June 9, 1858.— Ed.



**[p. 569]**

Written on June 11, 1858 Reproduced from the Neiv-York Daily Tribune First published in the New-York Daily Tribune, No. 5359, June 24, 1858 as a leading article; reprinted unsigned in the New-York Semi-Weekly Tribune, No. 1365, June 25, 1858 under the title "The European Revolution"

a The Times, No. 23014, June 8, 1858.— Ed. h See this volume, pp. 550-52.— Ed. c Napoléon III, "Loi relative à la création d'une dotation de l'armée, an rengagement, au remplacement et aux pensions militaires".— Ed.

