---
Volume: 16
Document_Title: "6. K. Marx. The Anglo- Chinese Treaty "
Page_Range: "59-64"
---

# 6. K. Marx. The Anglo- Chinese Treaty 



**[p. 1845]**

Karl Marx

[THE ANGLO-CHINESE TREATY]12

The unsuccessful issue, in a commercial point of view, of Sir Henry Pottinger's Chinese treaty, signed on August 29, 1842, and dictated, like the new treaties with China, at the cannon's mouth, is a fact now recollected even by that eminent organ of British Free Trade, the London Economist."1 Having stood forward as one of the staunchest apologists of the late invasion of China, that journal now feels itself obliged to "temper" the sanguine hopes which have been cultivated in other quarters. The Economist considers the effects on the British export trade of the treaty of 1842, "a precedent by which to guard ourself against the result of mistaken operations." This certainly is sound advice. The reasons, however, which Mr. Wilson alleges in explanation of the failure of the first attempt at forcibly enlarging the Chinese market for Western produce, appear far from conclusive.

The first great cause pointed out of the signal failure is the speculative overstocking of the Chinese market, during the first three years following the Pottinger treaty, and the carelessness of the English merchants as to the nature of the Chinese demand. The English exports to China which, in 1836, amounted to £1,326,000, had fallen in 1842 to £969,000. Their rapid and continued rise during the following four years, is shown by these figures:

[^1]: £969,000 £2,305,000 1,456,000 2,395,000

[^2]: 3 Here and below see the article "The Commercial Effects of the Treaty with China. The Export Trade", The Economist, No. 784, September 4, 1858.— Ed.





**[p. 29]**

Yet in 1846 the exports did not only sink below the level of 1836, but the disasters overtaking the China houses at London during the crisis of 1847 proved the computed value of the exports from 1843 to 1846, such as it appears in the official return tables, to have by no means corresponded to the value actually realized. If the English exporters thus erred in the quantity, they did not less so in the quality of the articles offered to Chinese consumption. In proof of the latter assertion, The Economist quotes from Mr. W. Cooke, the late correspondent of the London Times at Shanghai and Canton, the following passages:

"In 1843, 1844 and 1845, when the northern ports had just been opened, the people at home were wild with excitement. An eminent firm at Sheffield sent out a large consignment of knives and forks, and declared themselves prepared to supply all China with cutlery. [] They were sold at prices which scarcely realized their freight. A London house, of famous name, sent out a tremendous consignment of pianofortes, which shared the same fate. What happened in the case of cutlery and pianos occurred also, in a less noticeable manner, in the case of worsted and cotton manufactures. Manchester made a great blind effort when the ports were opened, and that effort failed. Since then she has fallen into an apathy, and trusts to the chapter of accidents."

Lastly, to prove the dependence of the reduction, maintenance or improvement of the trade, on the study of the wants of the consumer, The Economist reproduces from the same authority the following return for the year 1856:

Now all these arguments and illustrations explain nothing beyond the reaction following the overtrade of 1843-45. It is a phenomenon by no means peculiar to the Chinese trade, that a sudden expansion of commerce should be followed by its violent contractions, or that a new market, at its opening, should be choked by British oversupplies; the articles thrown upon it being not very nicely calculated, in regard either to the actual wants or the paying powers of the consumers. In fact, this is a standing feature in the history of the markets of the world. On Napoleon's fall, after the opening of the European continent, British imports proved so disproportionate to the continental faculties of absorp-

[^1]: Worsted Stuffs (pieces).. 13,569 8,415 7,428 Camlets 13,374 8,034 4,470 Long ells 91,530 75,784 36,642 Woolens 62,731 56,996 38,553 Printed Cottons 100,615 81,150 281,784 Plain Cottons 2,998,126 1,859,740 2,817,624 Cotton Twist, lbs 2,640,090 5,324,050 5,579,600





**[p. 1855]**

Now take, on the other hand, the movement of the

For the period following the opening of the market in 1842 and the acquisition of Hong Kong by the British, we find the following returns:

[^1]: 1852. 1853. 1854. 1855. 1856.

[^2]: Silk imp'd. lb. 2,418,343 2,838,047 4,576,706 4,436,862 3,723,693 Value £ - - 3,318,112 3,013,396 3,676,116

[^3]: BRITISH EXPORTS TO CHINA, VALUED IN POUNDS STERLING. 1834 £842,852 1836 £1,326,388 1835 1,074,708 1838 1,204,356

[^4]: £2,359,000 1,200,000 1,445,950 2,508,599

[^5]: £1,749,597 1,000,716 1,122,241 1856, upward of 2,000,000





**[p. 31]**

The last cause assigned to trie trifling importance the Chinese import market has assumed since its opening in 1842, is the Chinese revolution,14 but notwithstanding that revolution, the exports to China relatively shared, in 1851-52, in the general increase of trade, and, during the whole of the revolutionary epoch, the opium trade, instead of falling off, rapidly obtained colossal dimensions. However that may be this much will be admitted, that all the obstacles to foreign imports originating in the disordered state of the empire must be increased, instead of being diminished, by the late piratical war,15 and the fresh humiliations heaped on the ruling dynasty.

It appears to us, after a careful survey of the history of Chinese



**[p. 32]**

John Bull, however, used to plume himself on his high standard of morality, prefers to bring up his adverse balance of trade by periodical war tributes, extorted from China on piratical pretexts. He only forgets that the Carthaginian and Roman methods of making foreign people pay,16 are, if combined in the same hands, sure to clash with, and destroy each other.

[^1]: Written on September 10, 1858 Reproduced from the newspaper

[^2]: First published in the New-York Daily Tribune, No. 5446, October 5, 1858 as a leading article



