---
Volume: 16
Document_Title: "14. K. Marx. The King of Prussia's Insanity "
Page_Range: "96-101"
---

# 14. K. Marx. The King of Prussia's Insanity 



**[p. 65]**

Karl Marx

THE KING OF PRUSSIA'S INSANITY

Berlin, Oct. 12, 1858

It was to-day that the King left Berlin en route to Tyrol and Italy. Among the silent crowd waiting at the Potsdam Railway terminus to watch his departure there were many who, in 1840, had assisted at his coronation, and in his first public delivery of stump oratory, heard him solemnly swear that he would never allow a "Gallic bit of paper to interfere between him and his people."3 The same man had the misfortune not only to accept on his oath a "Gallic bit of paper"—a romantic byword this for a written charter or constitution—but to become himself the god-father of the Prussian Constitution, and, in a certain sense, to be dethroned by virtue of that same mischievous "bit of paper." You will have remarked the discrepancy existing between the King's rescript to the Prince of Prussia and the Prince's rescript to the Ministry. The King in his rescript says:

The Prince, in his counter-rescript, says:

[^1]: "Continuing to be personally hindered from conducting public affairs, I request your Royal Highness and Liebden for the time being, etc., to exercise the kingly power as Regent in my name, according to your best knowledge and conscience, and with responsibility to God alone."b

[^2]: "In consequence of this Royal request and under virtue of Article 56 of the Constitution I being the next male heir to the throne, hereby take upon myself the

[^3]: a Friedrich Wilhelm IV, Der 11. April 1847. Thron-Rede zur Eröffnung des Vereinigten Landtages, Berlin, 1847, S. 6. See also this volume, p. 75.— Ed.

[^4]: b Here and below the quotations are from Friedrich Wilhelm IV, "Allerhöchster Erlass vom 7. Oktober 1858, betreffend die Aufforderung an Seine Königliche Hoheit den Prinzen von Preussen zur Uebernahme der Regentschaft".— Ed.

[^5]: 4-359





**[p. 66]**

Regency of the country, and, according to Article 56 of the Constitution, convoke the two Houses of the Diet of the Monarchy."3

Now, in the Royal rescript, the King acts as a free agent, and, by his own free will, temporarily resigns. The Prince, however, refers at the same time to the "Royal request" and to "Article 56 of the Constitution" which assumes the King to be insane or captive, and, consequently, unable to install the Regency himself. The King, furthermore, in his rescript, calls upon the Regent to exercise his power "with responsibility to God alone," while the Prince, by referring to the Constitution,b leaves all the responsibility to the existing Ministry. According to the article quoted by the Regent, the "next heir to the throne," has immediately to convoke the Chambers, which in a united sitting, are to decide on the "necessity of the Regency." To take the latter power out of the hands of the Diet, the voluntary resignation of the King was insisted upon, but to become not altogether dependent upon the King's caprices, the Constitution was referred to. Thus there is a flaw in the Regent's claim as it professes to proceed from two titles, which extinguish each other. Article 58 of the Constitution declares that

How does this tally with "the responsibility to God alone"? The acknowledgment of the King's rescript is a pretext, because the Diet is convoked, and the convocation of the Diet is a pretext, because it is not to decide upon the "necessity" of the Regency. By the mere force of circumstances the Prince of Prussia, who, in 1850, declined taking the oath to the Constitution, sees himself now placed in the awkward position of not only accepting, but of appealing to it. It must not be forgotten that from the Autumn of 1848 to the beginning of 1850, the Absolutists, especially in the ranks of the army, had cherished, and occasionally, even openly avowed their plan of supplanting the vacillating King by the sober Prince, who, at all events, was not prevented by any elasticity of intellect, from possessing a certain strength of will, and who,

[^1]: "from the moment of his (the Regent's) oath relative to the Constitution (before the united Diet), the existing Ministry remains responsible for all governmental acts."

[^2]: a Wilhelm, Prinz von Preussen, Regent, "Erlass Seiner Königlichen Hoheit des Prinzen von Preussen vom 9. Oktober 1858, die Uebernahme der Regentschaft und die Einberufung der beiden Häuser des Landtages der Monarchie betref- fend".— Ed.

[^3]: b "Verfassungs-Urkunde für den Preussischen Staat. Vom 31. Januar 1850."— Ed.





**[p. 67]**

The history itself of that Constitution forms one of the most

[^1]: a Napoleon III.— Ed.

[^2]: 4*





**[p. 68]**



[^1]: a "Verfassungs-Gesetz für den Preussischen Staat. Vom 20. Mai 1848."—Ed. b Friedrich Wilhelm IV, "Zusammenstellung der in der Allerhöchsten Botschaft vom 7. Januar 1850 vorgeschlagenen Abänderungen und Ergänzungen der Verfassung vom 5. Dezember 1848".— Ed.





**[p. 69]**

Such is the history of this Constitution. Of its contents I propose giving you a succinct sketch in another letter,b since, by a strange concurrence of circumstances, that "airy nothing"0 has now become, at least, the ostensible basis of operations for the contending official parties, which in Prussia, as elsewhere, are destined to initiate the general movement, that in due time must appear upon the scene.

Written on October 12, 1858 Reproduced from the New-York Daily Tribune First published in the New-York Daily Tribune, No. 5465, October 27, 1858; reprinted in the New-York Semi-Weekly Tribune, No. 1401, October 29, 1858

[^1]: a Frederick William IV's speech at the sitting of both Prussian Chambers on February 6, 1850.— Ed.

[^2]: b See this volume, pp. 74-77.— Ed. c Shakespeare, A Midsummer Night's Dream, Act V, Scene 1.— Ed.



