---
Volume: 16
Document_Title: "44. K. Marx. Peace or War "
Page_Range: "287-289"
---

# 44. K. Marx. Peace or War 



**[p. 256]**

Karl Marx

PEACE OR WAR2

We print elsewhere the recent article of the Moniteur,3 oracularly disclaiming on the part of its master and inspirer, Louis Napoleon, any purpose of plunging Europe into war,— an article which would seem to have inflated the Exchanges, and half dispelled the apprehensions of the Old World. Yet whoever reads carefully that article will find in it little warrant for the hopes which it has excited. Beyond the single assertion that the Emperor's engage- ments to the King of Sardinia extend no further than assurances of defense against Austrian aggression — assurances which Victor Emmanuel cannot have needed, at all events, since his troops were dispatched to reenforce those of France and England before Sevastopol—we see nothing more in this manifesto than a fresh insult to the public understanding. It virtually asks the world to forget, in the interest of the French usurper, that it was he, and not the newspapers, that alarmed and convulsed Europe by a gratuitous and ostentatious menace, addressed to Austria through her Embassador,b on the first day of the present year211—that his presses, his pamphleteers, his cousin/ his armaments and pur- chases of materiel, have stimulated and diffused the war panic which his own premeditated language excited—and that this very article contains no line, no phrase, that savors of abatement of his pretensions or his intrigues in Italy or Moldo-Wallachia.212 He may have concluded to recoil before the public opinion of Europe (Italy excepted, France not excepted); but he may also have

[^1]: a Le Moniteur universel, No. 64, March 5, 1859.— Ed. b Alexander Hübner.— Ed. c Joseph Charles Paul Bonaparte.— Ed.





**[p. 257]**

The comments of the London Times are even more significant in what they suggest by a constrained forbearance than in what they openly affirm.3 Louis Napoleon can never more be the demigod of the Bourse and the Bourgeois. He rules henceforth by the sword alone.

[^1]: Written about March 8, 1859 Reproduced from the New-York Daily Tribune First published in the New-York Daily Tribune, No. 5593 (as a leading article) and in the New-York Semi-Weekly Tribune, No. 1443, March 25, 1859

[^2]: The Times, No. 23247, March 7, 1859 (leading article).— Ed.



