---
Volume: 16
Document_Title: "46. K. Marx. The War Prospect in France "
Page_Range: "292-298"
---

# 46. K. Marx. The War Prospect in France 



**[p. 261]**

Karl Marx

THE WAR PROSPECT IN FRANCE

Paris, March 9, 1859

At the time when the war alarm had seized upon all the Bourses of Europe, I wrote that Bonaparte was far from having definitively decided upon war; but that whatever his real intentions might be, the control of circumstances was likely to slip from his hands.3 At the present moment, when the greater part of the European press seems inclined to believe in peace, I feel sure that there will be war, unless some happy combination lead to a sudden overthrow of the usurper and his dynasty. This much the most superficial observer must admit, that the prospects of peace being circumscribed within the limits of talk, the prospects of war, on the contrary, are based upon material facts. War preparations are being carried on, both in France and Austria, on a scale unprecedented; and if one considers the desperate state of the two Imperial treasuries, no long chain of arguments is wanted to lead to the conclusion that fighting is meant, and at no distant period, too. Let me remark that Austria is pursued by a merciless fate, whose threads you might perhaps trace to St. Petersburg, which, whenever her finances seem on the point of recovering, flings her back into an abyss of financial distress as certainly as the malignant marble painfully rolled up the mountain by Sisyphus was darted down by unseen hands, whenever the doomed martyr approached the summit. Thus Austria, after years of incessant efforts, had in 1845 succeeded in approaching the point where income and expense meet each other; when the Cracovian revolution215 broke out, and necessitated an extra expenditure on her part, which led to the catastrophe of 1848.216 Again, in 1858, she was announcing

[^1]: a See this volume, pp. 162-66.— Ed.





**[p. 262]**

to the world the resumption of cash payments by the Bank of Vienna, when all at once the New-Year's congratulation217 sent over from Paris roughly cut short all plans of economy, and doomed her to a waste of treasure and an exhaustion of resources which, even in the eyes of the most sober Austrian statesmen, makes war appear the last chance of salvation.

Of all journals which boast a more than local influence, the Tribune is, perhaps, the only one that has never condescended to share in the common slang—I will not say of praising Louis Bonaparte's character, because that would have been too bad—but of crediting him with genius and superior force of will. You analyzed his political, military and financial exploits, and, in my opinion, proved incontrovertibly that his success, so overwhelming in the estimation of the vulgar, was due to a concatenation of circumstances which he had not created, and in using which he never rose beyond the mediocrity of the professional gambler, gifted with a keen eye for expedients, for surprises and coups de

main, but always remaining the humble servant of hazard, and anxiously concealing beneath a mask of iron a soul of gutta- percha. Now, this is exactly the view which from the first all the great powers of Europe have silently consented to take of the grand saltimbanque,* as Russian diplomatists called him. Under- standing that he was dangerous because he had placed himself in a dangerous position, they agreed to allow him to play the successor of Napoleon, on the express, although tacit condition, that he should always content himself with the mere appearance of influence, and never overstep the boundaries which separate the actor from the hero he personates. This game went on successfully for some time, but the diplomatists, as is their habit, had, in their wise calculations, overlooked one important item, the people. When Orsini's grenades exploded, the hero of Satory feigned to assume an attitude of dictation against England, and the British Government proved quite willing to allow him to do so; but popular clamor exercised so violent a pressure on Parliament, that Palmerston was not only thrown out,218 but an anti-Bonapartist policy became a vital condition for the tenancy of Downing street. Bonaparte gave way, and from that moment his foreign policy has proved one uninterrupted chain of blunders, humiliations and failures. I need only allude to his Free-Negro Immigration scheme and his Portuguese adventures.219 Meanwhile, Orsini's attempt had created a recrudescence of despotism in the interior of France,

[^1]: a Great charlatan.— Ed.





**[p. 263]**

while the commercial crisis, converted by empirical quackery from an acute fever into a chronic malady, withdrew from beneath the parvenu throne the only real basis upon which it rested, material prosperity. Signs of disaffection showed themselves in the ranks of the army; signals of mutiny became audible in the camp of the bourgeoisie; menaces of personal vengeance on the part of Orsini's countrymen poisoned the sleep of the usurper; when all of a sudden he tried to create for himself a new position, by repeating, mutatis mutandis, Napoleon's rough apostrophe, after the peace of Lunéville,220 to the English Embassador,11 and by throwing, in the name of Italy, the gauntlet into the face of Austria. It was not from his free will, but from the force of circumstances, that he, the representative of reserve, the field marshal of expedients, the hero of nocturnal surprises, undertook such a desperately bold step.

There is no doubt that he was pushed on by false friends. Palmerston, who, at Compiègne, had flattered him with the sympathies of the English Liberals, ostensibly turned against himb

on the opening of Parliament.221 Russia, which had urged him on by secret notes and public newspaper articles, entered seemingly into diplomatic pourparlers0 with her Austrian neighbor. But the die was cast—the war trumpet had sounded; and Europe was, so to say, forced to reconsider the past, the present and the future, of the successful blackleg who had at last arrived at the Italian campaign with which his uncle had begun his career. By the days of December, he had restored Napoleonism in France; but by an Italian campaign he seemed determined upon restoring it all over Europe. What he meant was not an Italian war, but an Austrian humiliation without a war. Successes which his namesake had bought at the mouth of the cannon, he was to wring from the fear of revolution. That he meant no war, but only a succès d'estime,d is evident. Otherwise, he would have commenced with diplomatic negotiations and ended with war, instead of following the opposite course. He would have prepared for war before talking war. He would, in one word, not have put the carriage before the horses.

But he had sadly mistaken the power with which he picked a quarrel. England, Russia, and the United States may go a great length in the way of apparent concession without losing one single

[^1]: a Charles Whitworth.— Ed. b Lord Palmerston's speech in the House of Commons on February 3, 1859, The Times, No. 23221, February 4, 1859.— Ed.

[^2]: c Negotiations.— Ed. d Limited success.— Ed.





**[p. 264]**

Now, do you think in earnest, that the necessity which in January, 1859, led the man into the Austrian complication, will be overcome by a ridiculous and shameful reculade? or that the hero of Satory himself thinks he has improved his desperate position by the greatest and most unmistakable defeat he ever underwent? He knows that the French officers do not even affect to conceal their desperate anger at his ridiculous lies told in the Moniteur*3

about the present war preparations; he knows that the Paris shop-keeper is already beginning to draw parallels between Louis Philippe's retreat before an European coalition in 1840,223 and Louis Bonaparte's grande retiradec in 1859; that the bourgeoisie are pervaded by an evident, although smothered rage at their subjection under an adventurer who turns out to be cowardly; that in Germany undisguised contempt for him rules supreme, and that a few more steps in the same direction will make him the laughing-stock of the world. N'est pas monstre qui veut,d said Victor Hugo; but the Dutch adventurer cannot do without the reputation of being not only a Quasimodo, but a terrible one. The chances

[^1]: a Retreat.— Ed. b Le Moniteur universel, No. 64, March 5, 1859. See also this volume, p. 256.— Ed. c Grand retreat.— Ed d "Not everybody can be a monster" (Victor Hugo, Napoléon le petit. Conclusion. Première partie).— Ed.





**[p. 265]**



[^1]: a Circular dispatch to the Prussian Ambassadors at the German Courts, early March 1859, Neue Preussische Zeitung, No. 56, March 8, 1859.— Ed.





**[p. 266]**

and cut his throat. The doctor called in gave as his opinion that the cut was so energetically made that life must have been extinguished on the instant.

Written about March 11, 1859 Reproduced from the newspaper

First published in the New-York Daily Tribune, No. 5598, March 31, 1859

