---
Volume: 16
Document_Title: "50. K. Marx. Great Trouble in Indian Finances "
Page_Range: "310-318"
---

# 50. K. Marx. Great Trouble in Indian Finances 



**[p. 279]**

Karl Marx

GREAT TROUBLE IN INDIAN FINANCES

I

London, April 8, 1859

The Indian financial crisis, which at this moment shares with the war rumors and the electioneering agitation in the privilege of absorbing public interest in England, must be considered in a double point of view. It involves both a temporary necessity and a permanent difficulty.

On the 14th of February Lord Stanley brought in a bill in the House of Commons3 authorizing the Government to raise a loan of £7,000,000 in England, in order to adjust the extra expendi- ture of the Indian administration for the current year. About six weeks later, John Bull's self-congratulations as to the small cost of the Indian rebellion243 were roughly interrupted by the arrival of the Overland Mail, conveying a cry of financial distress from the Government at Calcutta. On March 25, Lord Derby rose in the House of Lords to stateb that a further loan for India of £5,000,000, in addition to the £7,000,000 loan now before Parliament, would be required to meet the demands of the present year, and that even then, certain claims for compensation and prize money,244 amounting to £2,000,000 at least, would remain to be paid from some source not yet apparent. To make things pleasant, Lord Stanley had, in his first statement, only provided for the wants of the Indian Treasury at London, leaving the British Government in India to its own resources, which, from the dispatches received, he could not but know to be far from sufficient. Quite apart from the expenses of the Home Govern- ment, or the Indian administration at London, Lord Canning

[^1]: » The Times, No. 23230, February 15. 1859.— Ed. b The Times, No. 23264, March 26, 1859.— Ed.





**[p. 280]**

It will be seen from this succinct statement that the Indian Government was very unfairly dealt with by its English masters, who left it in the lurch, in order to throw dust in the eyes of John Bull; but it must, on the other hand, be admitted that the financial operations of Lord Canning surpass in awkwardness even his military and political exploits. Up to the end of January, 1859, he had contrived to raise the necessary means by loans in India, issued partly in Government stocks, partly in Treasury bills; but, strange to say, while his efforts had answered during the epoch of the revolution, they failed entirely from the moment English authority was restored by the force of arms. And not only did they fail, but there was a panic in regard to Government securities;

[^1]: a Ch. J. Canning's report of February 21, 1859, The Times, No. 23268, March 31, 1859.— Ed.





**[p. 281]**

In the very same proclamation, sweeping away the entire value of the assurances just given, he proceeds:

[^1]: "when this amount shall have been realized, the loan of 1859-60 shall be closed, and no further loan will be opened in India during that year."





**[p. 282]**

But that is not all. He opens, in fact, a double loan on different terms. While announcing that "the issue of Treasury bills on the terms notified on Jan. 26, 1859, will be closed on April 30," he proclaims "that a new issue of Treasury bills will be notified from the 1st of May," bearing interest of nearly 53/4 per cent, and redeemable at the expiration of one year from the date of issue. Both loans are kept open together, while, at the same time, the loan opened in January has not yet been concluded. The only financial matter which Lord Canning seems able to comprehend is that his annual salary amounts to £20,000 in name, and to about £40,000 in fact. Hence, despite the sneers of the Derby Cabinet, and his notorious incapacity, he sticks to his post from "a feeling of duty."

The effects of the Indian financial crisis on the English home market have already become apparent. In the first instance, the silver remittances on account of Government coming to swell the large remittances on mercantile account, and falling at an epoch when the ordinary silver supplies from Mexico are held back in consequence of the distracted condition of that country,245 have, of course, sent up the price of bar silver. On March 25, it had risen to the factitious price of 623/4 d. per ounce standard, causing such an influx of silver from every part of Europe that the price in London again fell to 623/8 d.; while the rate of discount at Hamburg rose from 2V2 t o 3 per cent. Consequent upon these heavy importations of silver, exchanges have turned against England, and a drain of gold bullion has set in, which, for the present, only relieves the London money market of its plethora, but in the long run may seriously affect it, coupled, as it will be, with large Continental loans. The depreciation, however, on the London money market, of the Indian Government stocks and guaranteed railway securities, prejudicial as it must prove to the Government and railway loans still to be brought forward in the course of this season, is certainly the most serious effect on the home market as yet, resulting from the Indian financial crisis. The shares of many Indian railways, although 5 per cent interest upon them is guaranteed by the Government, are now at 2 or 3 per cent discount.

Taking all in all, however, I regard the momentary Indian financial panic as a matter of secondary importance, if compared with the general crisis of the Indian Exchequer, which I may perhaps consider on another occasion.



**[p. 283]**

II

London, April 12, 1859

The latest overland mail, so far from showing any abatement of the financial crisis in India, reveals a state of derangement hardly anticipated. The shifts to which the Indian Government is driven in order to meet its most urgent wants, may be best illustrated by a recent measure of the Governor of Bombay. Bombay is the market where the opium of Malwa, averaging 30,000 chests annually, finds its outlet by monthly instalments of 2,000 or 3,000 chests, for which bills are drawn upon Bombay. By charging 400 rupees upon every chest imported into Bombay, the Government raises a revenue of £"1,200,000 annually on Malwa opium.3 Now, to replenish his exhausted Exchequer, and ward off immediate bankruptcy, the Bombay Governor has issued a notification, which raises the duty on each chest of Malwa opium from 400 to 500 rupees; but, at the same time, he declares that this increased duty will not be levied till after the 1st of July, so that the holders of opium in Malwa have the privilege of bringing in the drug under the old duties for four months longer. Between the middle of March, when the notification was issued, and the 1st of July, there are only two months and a half during which opium can be imported, the monsoon setting in on the 15th of June. The holders of opium in Malwa will, of course, avail themselves of the interval allowed them for sending in opium at the old duty; and, consequently, during the two months and a half pour all their stock in hand into the Presidency.246 Since the balance of opium, of the old and new crops, remaining at Malwa amounts to 26,000 chests, and the price of Malwa opium reaches 1,250 rupees per

[^1]: a The Times, No. 23274, April 7, 1859.— Ed.





**[p. 284]**

Let us now turn to the general state of Indian finances, as it has grown out of the late insurrection. According to the last official accounts,0 the net revenue derived by the British from their Indian farm amounts to £23,208,000, say £24,000,000. This annual revenue has never sufficed to defray the annual expenses. From 1836 to 1850 the net deficit amounted to £13,171,096, or, on a rough average, to £1,000,000 annually. Even in the year 1856, when the Exchequer was exceptionally filled by the wholesale annexations, robberies and extortions of Lord Dalhousie, the income and expense did not exactly square, but, on the contrary, a deficit of about a quarter of a million was added to the usual crop of deficits. In 1857 the deficiency was £9,000,000, in 1858 it amounted to £13,000,000, and in 1859 it is estimated by the Indian Government itself at £12,000,000. The first conclusion, then, which we arrive at is that even under ordinary cir- cumstances, deficits were accumulating, and that under extraordi- nary circumstances they must assume such dimensions as to reach one-half and more of the annual income.

The question which next presents itself is, To what degree has this already existing gap between the expenses and the income of the Indian Government been widened by recent events? The new permanent debt of India accruing from the suppression of the mutiny is calculated by the most sanguine English financiers at between forty and fifty millions sterling, while Mr. Wilson estimates the permanent deficit, or the annual interest for this new debt to be defrayed out of the annual revenue, at not less than three millions. However, it would be a great mistake to think that

[^1]: a As a threat.— Ed. b J. Wilson's speech in the House of Commons on March 7, 1859, The Times, No. 23248, March 8, 1859.—Erf.





**[p. 285]**

To this must be added two other items—the one accruing from an increase of liabilities, the other from a diminution of income. By a recent statement of the Railway Department of the Indian

[^1]: a Here and below the data are taken from the speeches made by E. Ellen- borough and E. Derby in the House of Lords on April 7, 1859, The Times, No. 23275, April 8, 1859.— Ed.





**[p. 286]**

It will be confessed that these financial fruits of the "glorious" reconquest of India have not a charming appearance; and that John Bull pays exceedingly high protective duties for securing the monopoly of the Indian market to the Manchester free-traders.

[^1]: "to vote four or five millions annually as a subsidy for what was called a valuable dependency of the British crown.''b

[^2]: Written on April 8 and 12, 1859

[^3]: First published in the New-York Daily Tribune, No. 5624, April 30, 1859; re- printed in the New-York Semi-Weekly Tribune, No. 1454, May 3, 1859

[^4]: a R. Crawford's speech in the House of Commons on April 4, 1859, The Times, No. 23272, April 5, 1859.— Ed.

[^5]: b G. Lewis' speech in the House of Commons on April 4, 1859, The Times, No. 23272, April 5, 1859.— Ed.

[^6]: Reproduced from the New-York Daily Tribune



