---
Volume: 16
Document_Title: "II "
Page_Range: "314-318"
---

# II 



**[p. 283]**

II

London, April 12, 1859

The latest overland mail, so far from showing any abatement of the financial crisis in India, reveals a state of derangement hardly anticipated. The shifts to which the Indian Government is driven in order to meet its most urgent wants, may be best illustrated by a recent measure of the Governor of Bombay. Bombay is the market where the opium of Malwa, averaging 30,000 chests annually, finds its outlet by monthly instalments of 2,000 or 3,000 chests, for which bills are drawn upon Bombay. By charging 400 rupees upon every chest imported into Bombay, the Government raises a revenue of £"1,200,000 annually on Malwa opium.3 Now, to replenish his exhausted Exchequer, and ward off immediate bankruptcy, the Bombay Governor has issued a notification, which raises the duty on each chest of Malwa opium from 400 to 500 rupees; but, at the same time, he declares that this increased duty will not be levied till after the 1st of July, so that the holders of opium in Malwa have the privilege of bringing in the drug under the old duties for four months longer. Between the middle of March, when the notification was issued, and the 1st of July, there are only two months and a half during which opium can be imported, the monsoon setting in on the 15th of June. The holders of opium in Malwa will, of course, avail themselves of the interval allowed them for sending in opium at the old duty; and, consequently, during the two months and a half pour all their stock in hand into the Presidency.246 Since the balance of opium, of the old and new crops, remaining at Malwa amounts to 26,000 chests, and the price of Malwa opium reaches 1,250 rupees per

[^1]: a The Times, No. 23274, April 7, 1859.— Ed.





**[p. 284]**

Let us now turn to the general state of Indian finances, as it has grown out of the late insurrection. According to the last official accounts,0 the net revenue derived by the British from their Indian farm amounts to £23,208,000, say £24,000,000. This annual revenue has never sufficed to defray the annual expenses. From 1836 to 1850 the net deficit amounted to £13,171,096, or, on a rough average, to £1,000,000 annually. Even in the year 1856, when the Exchequer was exceptionally filled by the wholesale annexations, robberies and extortions of Lord Dalhousie, the income and expense did not exactly square, but, on the contrary, a deficit of about a quarter of a million was added to the usual crop of deficits. In 1857 the deficiency was £9,000,000, in 1858 it amounted to £13,000,000, and in 1859 it is estimated by the Indian Government itself at £12,000,000. The first conclusion, then, which we arrive at is that even under ordinary cir- cumstances, deficits were accumulating, and that under extraordi- nary circumstances they must assume such dimensions as to reach one-half and more of the annual income.

The question which next presents itself is, To what degree has this already existing gap between the expenses and the income of the Indian Government been widened by recent events? The new permanent debt of India accruing from the suppression of the mutiny is calculated by the most sanguine English financiers at between forty and fifty millions sterling, while Mr. Wilson estimates the permanent deficit, or the annual interest for this new debt to be defrayed out of the annual revenue, at not less than three millions. However, it would be a great mistake to think that

[^1]: a As a threat.— Ed. b J. Wilson's speech in the House of Commons on March 7, 1859, The Times, No. 23248, March 8, 1859.—Erf.





**[p. 285]**

To this must be added two other items—the one accruing from an increase of liabilities, the other from a diminution of income. By a recent statement of the Railway Department of the Indian

[^1]: a Here and below the data are taken from the speeches made by E. Ellen- borough and E. Derby in the House of Lords on April 7, 1859, The Times, No. 23275, April 8, 1859.— Ed.





**[p. 286]**

It will be confessed that these financial fruits of the "glorious" reconquest of India have not a charming appearance; and that John Bull pays exceedingly high protective duties for securing the monopoly of the Indian market to the Manchester free-traders.

[^1]: "to vote four or five millions annually as a subsidy for what was called a valuable dependency of the British crown.''b

[^2]: Written on April 8 and 12, 1859

[^3]: First published in the New-York Daily Tribune, No. 5624, April 30, 1859; re- printed in the New-York Semi-Weekly Tribune, No. 1454, May 3, 1859

[^4]: a R. Crawford's speech in the House of Commons on April 4, 1859, The Times, No. 23272, April 5, 1859.— Ed.

[^5]: b G. Lewis' speech in the House of Commons on April 4, 1859, The Times, No. 23272, April 5, 1859.— Ed.

[^6]: Reproduced from the New-York Daily Tribune



