---
Volume: 16
Document_Title: "62. F. Engels. The Battle of Montebello "
Page_Range: "369-372"
---

# 62. F. Engels. The Battle of Montebello 



**[p. 338]**

Frederick Engels

THE BATTLE OF MONTEBELLO

The mails of the Africa add little to our previous knowledge with regard to this famous battle, of which such great account has been made by the Bonapartist press on both sides of the Atlantic.3

Of Gyulay's reportb we have as yet only a brief telegraphic extract; and the mass of the French and Sardinian accounts are but the gossip of Turin and Paris, with so small pretensions to accuracy that they do not even give correctly the numbers of the regiments engaged. The deficiency is indeed supplied to some extent by Gen. Forey's report' which we received by the City of Washington on Monday night; but Forey does not undertake to state either the strength or the losses of the Austrians. From Baraguay d'Hilliers, unfortunately, we have nothing; for as there were troops of his corps engaged, in addition to Forey's division, his report would certainly clear up some doubtful points. But, while waiting for more ample and authentic intelligence, we proceed to make some observations founded on a careful comparison of all the documents before us, which may not be without their value. The Austrians, having been informed that a movement of the French toward the line of the Po, between Pavia and Piacenza, was in contemplation, had a bridge thrown across that river at Vaccarizza, not far from Pavia. The corps of Gen. Stadion was sent over to reconnoiter the position and the

[^1]: a This sentence is inserted by the editors of the New-York Daily Tribune.—Ed. b "Official Bulletin Published To-day. Vienna, May 26", The Times, No. 23317, May 27, 1859.—Ed.

[^2]: c "Rapport officiel de M. le général Forey, transmis par S. Exe. le maréchal Baragaey d'Hilliers à l'Empereur", Le Moniteur universel, No. 114, May 24, 1859.—Ed.





**[p. 339]**

The Austrians cannot have had more than about two brigades on the battle-field, for three battalions at least must have been left on the road, and two more were required to fight two battalions of the French 91st at Oriolo, from which reason only one battalion of this regiment fought at Montebello. Of these two brigades or ten battalions, a portion only can have been engaged; the Austrian General, who should engage his last reserves in a reconnoissance, would certainly be very severely blamed.

On the French side there were three regiments (74th, 84th and 98th), and one battalion of the line (of the 91st), beside one battalion of Chasseurs; in all eleven battalions, supported at the



**[p. 340]**



[^1]: Written about May 24, 1859

[^2]: First published in the New-York Daily Tribune, No. 5659, June 10, 1859 as a leading article; reprinted in the New-York Semi-Weekly Tribune, No. 1465, June 10, 1859 and the New-York Weekly Tribune, No. 927, June 18, 1859

[^3]: Reproduced from the New-York Daily Tribune

[^4]: a The New-York Daily Tribune has "fifteen".— Ed.



