---
Volume: 16
Document_Title: "81. K. Marx. Introductory Note to the ' Memoir on Russia, for the Instruction of the Present Emperor' "
Page_Range: "446-447"
---

# 81. K. Marx. Introductory Note to the " Memoir on Russia, for the Instruction of the Present Emperor" 



**[p. 415]**

Karl Marx

INTRODUCTORY NOTE TO THE "MEMOIR ON RUSSIA,

FOR THE INSTRUCTION OF THE PRESENT EMPEROR"320

Just after the settlement of the Regency question in Prussia, and the dismissal of Manteuffel's ministry, his successors in office discovered, among other official papers, a most curious "Memoir on Russia," an extract of which, despite all precautions taken, found its way into the hands of some outsiders who consider the present moment opportune for the publication of such a State paper.

All the passages literally quoted from the original are indicated by quotation marks. Passing over the general considerations on Russian history, with which the document opens, we begin with what relates to the time of Peter the Great.3

[^1]: Written on July 14, 1859

[^2]: First published in Das Volk, No. 12, July 23, 1859; reprinted in the New-York Daily Tribune, No. 5703, August 3, 1859

[^3]: a In Das Volk Marx introduced the text of the document with the following lines: "Under this heading the Urquhartist Free Press publishes a document of so great importance for Prussia and Germany that we reprint it in full. In one of our next issues we shall deal with the secret strings of the drama whose stage player is Bonaparte, but whose manager is Russia. For the present we let The Free Press speak." — Ed.

[^4]: Reproduced from the New-York Daily Tribune



