---
Volume: 16
Document_Title: "I "
Page_Range: "476-481"
---

# I 



**[p. 445]**

Karl Marx

QUID PRO QUO

I

General Clausewitz, in his work on the Austrian-French campaign of 1799, remarks that the reason why Austria was so often defeated was that its battle plans, strategically as well as tactically, were designed not so much for actually winning the victory as for exploiting the anticipated victory.3 Turning the enemy on both flanks, encirclement, dispersion of one's own army to the most distant places in order to block off all the places where the enemy, already imagined as defeated, might hide—these and similar measures for exploiting the fanciful victory were in every case the most practical way of ensuring defeat. What was true of Austria's way of waging war holds good for Prussia's diplomacy.

Prussia undoubtedly strove to play a big role with low costs of production. Some instinct told it that the moment was favourable for the inflation of mediocrities. The France of the Vienna treaties, the France of Louis Philippe, was rechristened from a kingdom to an empire by simple decree,b without a single boundary stone being moved in Europe. In the place of the Italian campaign of 1796 and the expedition to Egypt, the establishment of the swindler Society of December 10 and the sausage parade of Satory sufficed to bring about December 2 as a travesty of the 18th Brumaire.335 Prussia knew that the illusion of the French peasants about the resurrection of the real Napoleon was not shared in its entirety by the great powers. It was tacitly agreed that the adventurer who had to play Napoleon in France had assumed

[^1]: a C. Clausewitz, Die Feldzüge von 1799 in Italien und der Schweiz.—Ed. b Napoleon Ill's decree of December 2, 1852, Le Moniteur universel, No. 337, December 2, 1852.— Ed.





**[p. 446]**

a dangerous role and therefore could become dangerous for official Europe at any moment. France could only endure the Brummagem3 empire on condition that Europe seemed to believe the farce. The thing was, therefore, to make the part easier for the comedian and ensure there was a vigorous claque in the stalls and the gallery. Whenever France's internal conditions became untenable—and two years seem to be the maximum period of rotation of the rococo empire on its axis—a foreign adventure had, to be permitted to the ex-prisoner of Ham. The travesty of some article of the Napoleonic programme capable of execution beyond the French border then became part of Europe's agenda. The son of Hortense might wage war, but only under Louis Philippe's motto: "La France est assez riche pour payer sa gloire." b

The old king of Prussia,0 the man with the brainless head, once said that his Prussia differed from the Prussia of Frederick the Great in that the latter was in abstract opposition to Christianity, while his had overcome the transitional epoch of the insipid Enlightenment and penetrated to a deep inner understanding of revelation. So, the old Napoleon stuck to the superficial rationalis- tic prejudice that a war was only in France's favour when the foreign countries had the expenses of the war while France got the proceeds. His melodramatic successor, on the other hand, has penetrated to the depth of the perception that France itself must pay for its military glory, that the maintenance of its old frontiers is a law of nature and that all its wars must be "localised", i.e., take place within the narrow stage that Europe condescends to allow him to play on for each performance. Consequently, his wars are in fact only periodic blood-lettings for France, which enrich it by adding a new state debt and cost it an old army.

After every such war, however, certain inconveniences arise. France is dejected; but Europe hastens to do everything it can to cajole la belle France4 out of the blues. It plays the Barnum of the Dutchfish.e After the Russian war, was he not clothed in all the theatrical attributes of the arbiter of Europe? Did not Baron von Seebach shuttle back and forth from Dresden to Paris and from Paris to Dresden?336 Was he not waited on by Orlov, the poisoner, and Brunnow, the forger?337 Did not the Prince of Montenegrof

[^1]: a Marx uses the English word.— Ed. b "France is rich enough to pay for its glory."—Ed. c Frederick William III.— Ed. d Beautiful France.— Ed. e Here, Dutch boor.— Ed. 1 Danilo I.— Ed.





**[p. 447]**

and Jacobus Venedey believe in his plenitude of power?338 Was he not allowed to put through Russia's demands in the name of perfidies towards England? The Russian treaty of peace, which Palmerston had sealed with the betrayal at Kars and the negative magnitude of his own General Williams,339 was it not denounced by The Times as a betrayal of England by Bonaparte? Did he not shine, therefore, in the light of the slyest head in Europe? During the war, had he not occupied all the capitals, if not of the modern, at least of the ancient world,340 and did not his kind-hearted evacuation of the Dardanelles indicate deeper-lying plans? The old Napoleon seized what was at hand. The apparent resignation of the new-model Napoleon hints at unfathomable Machiavellianism. He only rejected the good because he sought the better. And finally the peace treaty of Paris, was it not crowned by a "notice" of Europe to the anti-Bonapartist newspaper writers of Belgium, the giant state?341

In the meantime, the two normal years of the rotation of pseudo-Napoleonic France kept rolling on. The official represent- atives of Europe felt they had done enough for the man's image for the time being. He was allowed to sail to China in the wake of the English, and to put Colonel Cuza into the Danubian Principalities at the behest of the Russians.342 But as soon as the delicate borderline between the hero and the buffoon playing the hero was overstepped even tentatively, Louis Napoleon found him- self relegated with mockery to his ordained territory. His in- trigue against the United States of North America, his attempt at reviving the slave trade, his melodramatic threats against Eng- land, his anti-Russian demonstration over the Suez Canal, which he had to undertake on instructions from Russia to justify Palmer- ston's Russian opposition to the project in the eyes of John Bull—all those things collapsed. It was only against little Portugal that he could show his muscle,343 in order to put his feebleness as against the great powers in proper relief. Belgium itself began to fortify and even Switzerland declaimed William Tell.344 The official powers of Europe had obviously made the mistake that so often led astronomers astray in earlier times, miscalculating the period of rotation.

Meanwhile, the two years of the rotation period of the lesser empire3 had elapsed. During the first rotation—1852 to 1854—a silent decay had taken place, which could be smelt but not heard.

[^1]: a "Lesser empire" is in English in the original.— Ed.





**[p. 448]**

Louis Bonaparte had once more reached the fateful point at which official Europe had to realise that the danger of revolution could only be averted by travestying a new article of the old Napoleonic programme. The travesty had begun with Napoleon's end, the Russian campaign. Why not continue it with Napoleon's beginning, the Italian campaign? Of all the characters in the European drama, Austria was the least grata.d Prussia had to avenge the Congress of Warsaw, the battle of Bronzell and the march to the North Sea.348 Palmerston had for a long time certified his striving for civilisation by hatred of Austria. Russia saw with terror that Austria had announced that its bank would resume payments in specie. When in 1846 Austria's treasury showed no deficit for the first time in human memory, Russia had given the signal for the Cracow revolution.349 Finally, Austria was the bête noire" of liberal Europe. Therefore, Louis Bonaparte's second theatrical Attila campaign had to be against Austria, under the usual conditions: no war indemnities, no extension of the French frontiers, "localised" war within the bounds of common

[^1]: a "Safety valve" is in English in the original.— Ed. b "Not everybody can be a monster" (Victor Hugo, Napoléon le petit. Conclusion. Première partie).— Ed.

[^2]: c P.-J. Proudhon, De la justice dans la révolution et dans l'église, Paris, 1858.— Ed. d Acceptable.— Ed. e Bugbear.— Ed.





**[p. 449]**

Under these circumstances, since once again a comedy was being performed, Prussia believed the moment had come for it too to play a major part, with the agreement of its overlords and good assurance. The treaty of Villafranca350 put it in the pillory as a dupe before all Europe. In view of its great advance in constitutionalism, an advance demonstrable in the geometrical progression of its national debt, it believed it in order to plaster over the wound with a blue book of its own make.3351 We shall listen to its apology in an article.

[^1]: a "Blue book of its own make" is in English in the original.— Ed.



