---
Volume: 16
Document_Title: "II "
Page_Range: "481-485"
---

# II 



**[p. 450]**

II

If the Prussia of the regency speaks as it writes, it is easy to explain its talent, newly proved in the European comedy of errors, not only to misunderstand but also to be misunderstood. In this it has a certain similarity with Falstaff, who not only was witty himself but was also the cause of other people's wit.

On April 14 Archduke Albrecht arrived in Berlin, where he stayed until April 20. He had a secret to tell the Regent3 and a proposal to make. The secret was the imminent Austrian ultimatum to Victor Emmanuel. The proposal was a war on the Rhine. Archduke Albrecht would operate beyond the Upper Rhine with 260,000 Austrians and the South German Confederate corps, while the Prussian and North German corps, under Prussian command, would form a northern army on the Rhine. Instead of a "Confederation Generalissimo" Francis Joseph and the Prince Regent would make the decisions jointly from a headquarters.

Prussia, with restrained indignation, not only rejected the war plan out of hand but "made the most pressing representations to Archduke Albrecht against the rash procedure of the ultimatum".b

When Prussia brings the donkeypower (large machines are, as we know, rated by horsepower0) of its verbose cunning into play, no one can stand up against it, least of all an Austrian. The regent and his four satellites—Schleinitz, Auerswald, Bonin and Herr Dr. Zabel—were "convinced" that they had "convinced" Austria.

[^1]: a William, Prince of Prussia.— Ed. b "Zur Mission des Erzherzogs Albrecht", Allgemeine Zeitung, No. 210, July 29, 1859.— Ed.

[^2]: c Marx uses the English words "donkeypower" and "horsepower".— Ed.





**[p. 451]**

After the war had broken out, Prussia refused to declare its neutrality. Schleinitz, in a "Dispatch to the Prussian missions at the German courts, dated Berlin, June 24", reveals to us the secret of this heroic decision.

"Prussia," he whispers, "has never abandoned its position as interceding power" (another dispatch says mediation powerb). "Its major effort since war broke out was, on the contrary, directed towards maintaining this position by declining to guarantee its neutrality, keeping clear of any commitment on any side and thus remaining completely impartial and free for interceding action."c

In other words: Austria and France, the contending parties, will exhaust one another in the war "localised" for the time being in Italy, while England as a neutral (!) stays far in the background. The neutrals have paralysed themselves, and the fighters' hands are tied because they have to use their fists. Between the ones and the others Prussia floats "completely impartial and free", a Euripidean deus ex machina. The middleman has always come off better than the extremes. Christ got further than Jehovah, St. Peter further than Christ, the priest further than the saints, and Prussia, the armed mediator, will get further than the rivals and the neutrals. Contingencies must arise in which Russia and England will give the signal to put an end to the comedy. Then they will slip their secret instructions into Prussia's pocket from behind, while it wears its Brennus352 mask in front. France will not know whether Prussia is mediating on behalf of Austria; Austria will not know whether Prussia is mediating for France; neither will know whether Prussia is not mediating against both of them for Russia and England. Prussia will have the right to • ask the confidence of "all sides" and arouse mistrust on every side. Its lack of commitment will commit everybody. If Prussia were to declare itself neutral, then nothing would prevent Bavaria and other members of the Confederation from taking sides with Austria. But as armed mediator, with the neutral great powers to protect it on its flanks and in the rear, with the misty image of its always menacing "German" great exploit in prospect, it might well

[^1]: a "Zur Mission des Erzherzogs Albrecht", Allgemeine Zeitung, No. 210, July 29, 1859.— Ed.

[^2]: b Cf. this volume, p. 461.— Ed. c The Neue Preussische Zeitung, No. 171, July 26, 1859.— Ed.

[^3]: 16*





**[p. 452]**

Not only a German great power but a European great power and also a "mediation power" and tyrant of the Confederation into the bargain! We shall see in the course of events how Schleinitz gets more and more entangled in this sequence of ideas, as cunning as it is noble. The fifth wheel of the European wagon of state up to now, the great power "by courtesy", the character "on sufferance"3 in the European drama353—this same Prussian is now entrusted with the grandiose position of the quos ego!b And that not because he draws his sword but only shoulders his musket, without shedding anything more than the tears of the regent and the ink of his satellites. It was not really Prussia's fault that the glory even of "Mittler"c of Goethe's Wahlverwandtschaften remained incomprehensible.

Prussia realised that in the first act the advisable course was to pinprick Austria, avoid the slightest suspicion on the part of Louis Bonaparte and above all to recommend itself to Russia and England by good behaviour.

Despite all these difficulties Prussia successfully played the part of the gendarme of the German Confederation. It developed its mediating action from the end of April to the end of May, forcing its fellow Confederation members to remain inactive.

At the same time the Berlin Cabinet opened the sluices of the

[^1]: "It was not easy," as Schleinitz admits in the above-mentioned dispatch, "to achieve this goal, so important for our own interests, given the agitation that prevailed in many German states. In addition, we need hardly mention that the direction of our policy in this diverged from that of a large number of German governments and that Austria in particular was not in agreement with it."d

[^2]: "Our efforts," Schleinitz says euphemistically, "were directed above all towards preventing premature involvement of the Confederation in the war."

[^3]: a Marx uses the English phrases "by courtesy" and "on sufferance".— Ed. b "I'll show you!" — Poseidon's words from Virgil's Aeneid, I, 135.— Ed. c Marx plays on "Mittler", the name of a character in Goethe's novel Die Wahlverwandtschaften, and the German word for "middleman".— Ed.

[^4]: d Here and below Marx quotes from Alexander Schleinitz's "Depesche an die preussischen Missionen an den deutschen Höfen", dated Berlin, June 24, Neue

[^5]: Preussische Zeitung, No. 171, July 26, 1859.— Ed.





**[p. 453]**

What made Prussia's operation a little difficult was that it had the mission "in its own good time" not only to mediate but to mediate "under arms". While it was to suppress the cries for war, it had at the same time to call to arms. While it was issuing the arms, it had to warn against using them:

Don't play with the firearm, It feels pain just like you.

"But if we," says Schleinitz, "simultaneously took all the steps for ensuring the security of Germany, which lies between the two warring great powers, and if, likewise, the Confederate agencies, with our cooperation, unremittingly took precautionary defence measures, then the new duty arose for us to see that these precautionary measures did not change suddenly into means of attack and thereby seriously compromise the Confederation's position and our own."

At the same time, the "mediation power" obviously could not always proceed unilaterally in the same direction. Moreover, dangerous symptoms appeared.

In order to guard against these "inconveniences" and begin the second act of the "mediation", General Willisen went on a mission to Vienna. Its results are given in Schleinitz's dispatch, dated Berlin, June 14, addressed to Werther, the Prussian ambassador in Vienna. So long as Schleinitz is only writing to the members of the German Confederation he uses the well-known Prussian government counsellor style in ordinary.0 If he is writing to foreign great powers, this is fortunately in a language he does not know. But his dispatches to Austria! Yard-long tapeworm sen- tences, steeped in the green sentimental soap of Gothaism, powdered with the dry bureaucratic sand of the Uckermark355 and half drowned in streams of the perfidious Berlin treacle.d

[^1]: "There were," Schleinitz says, "to our great distress, indications of prospective special arrangements in the direction deviating from our policy, and here the seriousness of the situation could not but arouse the fear that this might increasingly strengthen the tendency towards a dissolution of the Confederation relationships."

[^2]: a William, Prince of Prussia, Regent.— Ed. b Published in the Allgemeine Zeitung, No. 211, July 30, 1859.— Ed. c Marx uses the English phrase "in ordinary".— Ed. d Marx uses the English word.— Ed.



