---
Volume: 16
Document_Title: "III "
Page_Range: "485-492"
---

# III 



**[p. 454]**

III

If we analyse a part of the Berlin blue book,3 which is now three weeks old, in greater detail, this is not because of an antiquarian whim or interest in Brandenburg history. Rather, these are documents that are now being trumpeted abroad by German liberals and democrats as proofs of Prussia's future imperial calling.

Schleinitz's last dispatch to General Willisen arrived in Vienna on May 27.b Werther's dispatches to Schleinitz concerning Willisen's reception by the imperial Cabinet are dated May 29 and 3l.c They were left unanswered for half a month. In order to gloss over all the contradictions between the original "mission" and its subsequent "interpretation", both Schleinitz's dispatches to Willisen and Werther's dispatches to Schleinitz are suppressed in the Prussian blue book, as are all the negotiations between the Prince Regent and Boustrapa.356 Rechberg, the Austrian Minister of Foreign Affairs, could not in any way produce the original text, since Willisen and Werther were not to give him copies of the Prussian dispatches but only read them to him. One can imagine the position of a Minister who may not read a sentence construction like the following but has to hear it:

[^1]: "Guided by the desire," says Schleinitz, "to have full clarity prevail in so important a matter, I had been careful in my letter directed to General von Willisen to indicate our position very definitely, both in relation to what we

[^2]: a Marx uses the English words "blue book".— Ed. b Schleinitz's dispatch of May 26, 1859 concerning mediation in the Italian war.— Ed.

[^3]: c The Allgemeine Zeitung, No. 211, July 30, 1859. There is an error in the newspaper: the last dispatch is dated May 30.— Ed.





**[p. 455]**

intended to do from our side under certain circumstances and in relation to the assumptions that must necessarily underlie the action we had in view."3

Before Schleinitz set about making an official interpretation of the Willisen mission to Vienna, he had, with characteristic prudence, let events pass him by. The Austrian army had lost the battle of Magenta, evacuated all the Lombard fortresses and was in full retreat behind the Chiese. Gorchakov's circular dispatch to the small German states, in which he peremptorily orders strict neutrality under menace of the knout, had found its way into the press.b Derby, suspected of secret sympathy with Austria, resigned and was replaced by Palmerston. Finally, on June 14, the date of Schleinitz's dispatch to Werther, the Preussischer Staats-Anzeiger published an order for the mobilisation of six Prussian army corps.c Willisen's mission to Vienna, followed by this mobilisation! All Germany was full of Prussia's heroic prudence and prudent heroism.

We come at last to Schleinitz's dispatch to the Prussian ambassador in Vienna. "Magnanimous words" had fallen from the regent's lips. Willisen had moreover oracularly uttered "the most honourable intentions", "the most unselfish plans" and "the most trustful trust", and Count Rechberg had "expressed his agreement with the standpoint we have taken",d but in the end that same Rechberg, a Vienna Socrates, wanted to bring the debate down from the heaven of phrases to solid earth. He attached "particular value" to "seeing the Prussian intentions formulated". And so Prussia, through Schleinitz's pen, prepares to bring the "inten- tion" of the Willisen "mission" to "precision". Accordingly, he "sums up in what follows the intentions we made known to them in the exchange of thoughts that took place in Vienna", which summing up we recapitulate in brief here. The point of Willisen's mission was this: To say that Prussia had "fixed intentions, on an explicit assumption". Schleinitz would have done better to say that

[^1]: a Schleinitz's dispatch to Karl Werther, the Prussian ambassador in Vienna, of June 14, 1859, Allgemeine Zeitung, No. 211, July 30, 1859.— Ed.

[^2]: h A. Gortschakow, "Circularschreiben an die russischen Gesandtschaften vom 15. (27.) Mai 1859", Allgemeine Zeitung, No. 167, June 16, 1859.— Ed.

[^3]: c William, Prince of Prussia, Regent, "Allerhöchster Erlass vom 14. Juni 1859 betreffend die Mobilmachung von sechs Armee-Corps", Königlich-Preussischer Staats-Anzeiger, No. 142, June 19, 1859. (There is an inaccuracy in the text of the article: the order was published on June 19, not June 14.)—Ed.

[^4]: d Schleinitz's dispatch to Karl Werther, the Prussian ambassador in Vienna, of July 14, 1859. Below, on pp. 455-57, Marx sets forth the contents of this dispatch (ending with the words "hope to find in the imperial court a trust corresponding to ours").— Ed.





**[p. 456]**

Prussia had flexible intentions on a fixed assumption. The assumption was that Austria would leave the initiative in the German Confederation to Prussia, renounce separate treaties with German courts, in a word, temporarily abandon the hegemony in Germany to Prussia; the intention was to ensure Austria's "territorial possessions in Italy based on the treaties of 1815" and "work for peace on that basis". The relations of Austria to the other Italian states and "the relations among the latter" were regarded by Prussia as "an open question". Were Austria's "Italian possessions to be seriously threatened", Prussia would "attempt an armed mediation" and

"according to the success thereof in reaching the goal indicated above, act in such a way thereafter as its duties as a European power and the lofty calling of the German nation require".

"It is," says the disinterested Schleinitz, "in our own interest not to be too late with our intervention. But the choice of the moment, both for the mediation and for the further action of Prussia resulting therefrom, must be reserved to the free judgment of the royal court."

Schleinitz asserts, first, that this "exchange of thoughts" me- diated by Willisen was designated as an "exchange of opinions" by Rechberg; secondly, that the intentions and assumptions of Prussia "had to have the approval of the imperial court", and thirdly, that Rechberg, an enemy of pure thought, as it appears, wanted the "exchange of thoughts" transformed into an "exchange of notes", "the agreement of the two cabinets authenticated in writing", in a word, wanted to see the Prussian "assumption" and the Prussian "intention" "stated" in black and white. At this point Schleinitz's noble consciousness3 revolts. What is Rechberg's unreasonable suggestion aimed at? Actually, the transformation of our "most secret political thoughts, revealed in confidence, into binding assur- ances". Schleinitz engages in real secret political exercises in thought, and Rechberg tries to tie down the unapproachable idea in profane notes! Quelle horreur for a Berlin thinker! What is more, such an exchange of notes would amount to a "guarantee" of the Austrian-Italian possessions. As if Prussia wanted to guarantee anything! What is more, the exchange of thoughts, wantonly transformed into an exchange of notes, could "im- mediately and logically be regarded by the French and Russian side as an engagement formelb and as entry into the war". As if

[^1]: a The "noble consciousness" is a philosophical category in Hegel's Phänomenologie des Geistes (VI. Der Geist).— Ed.

[^2]: b Formal undertaking.— Ed.





**[p. 457]**

Prussia would ever think of entering into a war or compromising itself on any side, and especially the French and Russian! Finally, though, and this is the main point, such an exchange of notes would "obviously make the contemplated attempt at mediation impossible". But Austria must realise that the question is not its Italian possessions, nor the 1815 treaties, nor French usurpation, nor Russian world domination, nor any kind of profane interests, but that the European complications were only introduced in order to improvise Prussia's new lofty "position" as "mediation power". Shakespeare's poor devil, who wakes up as a lord after having gone to sleep as a tinker,3 does not speak more movingly than Schleinitz, once he is overcome by the fixed idea of Prussia's calling to be the "armed mediation power" of Europe. He is stung and disturbed, as if by a tarantula, by the "uneasy conviction that he ought to act up to his newborn sublimity of character".b

The "trust" with which Schleinitz whispers into Rechberg's ear the fixed idea of Prussia's calling as mediation power makes him, as he says, "hope to find in the imperial court a trust corresponding to ours".c Rechberg, for his part, wants a copy of this curious note of Schleinitz. To document the Prussian trust Werther explains that he is, "according to his instructions", empowered to read the note orally but by no means to hand over the corpus delicti. Rechberg then requests that Werther accompany him to Francis Joseph in Verona, so that the latter "might at least orally obtain full and exact knowledge of Prussia's views". Prussian trust is averse to this unreasonable suggestion too, and Rechberg remarks, with ironical resignation, that if he in "his answer may not have been able to follow all the arguments of the Berlin dispatch completely and correctly", this would be due to the fact that he knew Schleinitz's constructions only by hearsay.

Rechberg's answer, directed to Koller, the Austrian ambassador in Berlin, is dated Verona, June 22. It suggests doubts as to the consonance of Willisen's mission at the end of May with the Berlin interpretation of that mission in mid-June.

[^1]: a The reference is to Christopher Sly, a character from Shakespeare's comedy The Taming of the Shrew (Induction, Scenes I and II).— Ed.

[^2]: b The entire phrase is quoted in English in the original.— Ed. c In the following passage, down to the words "must keep its freedom in the domain of relationships of the German Confederation undiminished" (pp. 457-59) Marx gives the contents of "Abschrift eines Erlasses des k. k. Ministers des Äussern Grafen Rechberg an Frhrn. v. Koller in Berlin, dd. Verona am 22. Jun. 1859", Allgemeine Zeitung, No. 210 (supplement), July 29, 1859.— Ed.





**[p. 458]**

Even less had Willisen's mission prepared Rechberg for Prussia's lofty calling as the armed mediation power of Europe. The real point at issue, says Rechberg, is "Europe's independence as against the supremacy of France". The events themselves had disclosed the hollowness and triviality of the "pretexts"

"under which our opponents sought to gloss over their real intentions up to the moment of maturity". "In addition, Prussia had obligations as a member of the German Confederation with which the maintenance of the position of mediator could become incompatible at any moment."

Finally, Austria's hope had been to see Prussia "as a participant" on its side and it had therefore from the outset denied its calling as "mediator". Hence, if Austria had, since the beginning of the Italian complications, declared itself against Prussia's "attempts to occupy the position of mediator", obviously it could still less ever approve of an "armed mediation by Prussia".

"An armed mediation," Rechberg says, "includes, by the very meaning of the term, a case of war on both sides. Such a case fortunately does not exist between Prussia and Austria, so that we cannot conceive of the possibility of armed mediation by Prussia for the relation between these two powers. It would seem that the name, like the thing itself, must remain forever alien to this relation."

As we see, Rechberg contradicts Schleinitz's dispatch and its interpretation of the Willisen mission. He finds Prussia's tone altered since the end of May; he bluntly denies that Austria ever had recognised the lofty calling of Prussia as armed mediation power. Schleinitz owes an explanation of this misunderstanding No. 2 (the first occurred between Archduke Albrecht and the Prince Regent) by publishing his dispatches to Willisen and those of Werther to himself.

By the way, Rechberg replies as an Austrian, and why should the Austrian change his spots vis-à-vis the Prussian? Why should not Prussia "guarantee" Austria's possessions in Italy? Does not such a guarantee, Rechberg asks, correspond to the spirit of the Vienna treaties?

[^1]: "In the period after the Congress of Vienna, and indeed down to our days, could France have hoped to find only a single opponent if it tried to contravene an important part of the European order set up by treaty? France could not think of infringing the relations of possession by a localised war."





**[p. 459]**

"provided that these proposals leave intact the territorial status of 1815 and the sovereign rights of Austria and the other princes of Italy".

In other words, Austria, in its "confidential communications to Prussia" as mediation power, was not inclined to go beyond meaningless commonplaces. But once Prussia

"came in as an active ally, there could be no question of drawing up peace conditions except by mutual understandings".

Finally, Rechberg puts his finger on the Prussian scars. Austria had agreed to the "intention" of the Prussian initiative in the Diet on the "assumption" of the conversion of the Prussian exchange of thoughts into an exchange of notes. The conclusion falls with the premise. Even Schleinitz, with his curious comprehension, should "comprehend" that, since Berlin "has in no respect assumed binding obligations", since it has itself pushed "the moment of its decisions to be taken in the form of armed mediation" back into the azure "future and reserved its freedom of option", Vienna for its part "must keep its freedom in the domain of relationships of the German Confederation undi- minished".

Prussia's attempt surreptitiously to usurp from Austria the supremacy in Germany and to get full powers for the sublime role of European mediation power, had thus decisively miscarried, whereas the mobilisation of the six Prussian army corps had taken place. Prussia owed Europe an explanation. And so, in a "circular dispatch dated June 19 to the Prussian embassies to the European powers", Schleinitz states:

And not to leave any doubt either as to the policy or the means, the dispatch ends by saying that it "is Prussia's intention to forestall divisions of Germany". The regency felt that it had to weaken even

[^1]: "By means of its mobilisation Prussia has taken a position more in keeping with the present situation, without abandoning the principles of moderation Prussia's policy has remained the same as it has pursued from the beginning of the complication of the Italian question. But now Prussia has also brought its means for contributing to a solution to the level of the situation."





**[p. 460]**

"It is hoped that France will not interpret Prussia's military measures in a bad light. We have no illusions; we know how impolitic a war against France would be, what dangerous consequences it would have. But we hope the Emperor will realise the difficult position we are in. The Prince Regent's government is being pushed and shoved from all sides. We are confronted with mistrustful sensibilities and are compelled to spare them."

Or:

"We shall mobilise but it should not be believed that this is an offensive measure against France. In his capacity as quasi-head of the German Confederation the Regent has the duty not only to protect the Confederation's interests but also to adopt a position within it that would allow him to prevent precipitate actions and impose his policy of moderation on the other German states. We trust that the Emperor will understand this fully and do all he can to ease our task."

The Prussian fiddling took the comic course of suggesting to the French government:

Hence Walewski had a perfect right to say in his circular dispatch of June 20:

Prussia's lofty calling as armed mediation power had become such a byword among the great powers that Walewski could make the poor witticism that Prussia was mobilising not against France but against "the other two great powers", which otherwise might deprive it of its "just" influence on the "arrangements for agreement".

Thus ended the second act of the Prussian mediation.

[^1]: "It is hoped that the government newspapers will not praise Prussia too much at the expense of Bavaria, Saxony, etc. That could only compromise Prussia."

[^2]: "The new military measures taken in Prussia cause us no concernThe Prussian government states that it has no other intention, in mobilising a part of its army, than to protect Germany's security and put itself in a position to exert a just influence on further arrangements for agreement with the other two great powers."

[^3]: a Probably Louis Eugène Ginain.— Ed. b "Note des Grafen Walewski an die französischen Gesandten bei den deutschen Regierungen", Allgemeine Zeitung, No. 187, July 6, 1859.— Ed.



