---
Volume: 16
Document_Title: "IV "
Page_Range: "492-496"
---

# IV 



**[p. 461]**

IV

The first act of the Prussian mediation, from the end of April to the end of May, sentenced Germany to la mort sans phrase.3 In the second act, from the end of May to June 24, the hamstringing of the "great fatherland" was adorned by the empty words of the Willisen mission and the arabesque of the Prussian mobilisation. An afterpiece of this second act was played at the smaller German courts, who got to listen to a note from Schleinitz. Schleinitz, like Stieber, likes "mixed" oral procedure. We cite here only two passages from his above-mentioned note, dated Berlin, June 24, "to the Prussian missions at the German courts".b Why did Prussia deny the Austrian wish to transform the "exchange of thoughts" into an "exchange of notes"?

Thus, from the point of view of Berlin the loss of Lombardy was neither "a serious menace to the Austrian possessions in Italy" nor "the definite eventuality" the Prussian sword was waiting for to spring from its scabbard.

[^1]: "The fulfilment of this wish," Schleinitz whispers to the German courts, "would be equivalent to a guarantee of Lombardy. Assuming such an obligation in the face of indefinite eventualities was something that Prussia could not do."

[^2]: "In addition," Schleinitz continues, "any commitment of a formal nature that could affect our position as mediation power would have to be avoided."

[^3]: a "Death without qualification"—words allegedly uttered by Abbé Sieyès when voting in the French Convention on January 17, 1793 for Louis XVI's execution.— Ed.

[^4]: h See this volume, p. 451.— Ed.





**[p. 462]**

In the third act of the mediation Prussia finally appears as a European great power, and Schleinitz prepares a dispatch in two copies, one addressed to Count Bernstorff in London, the other to Baron Bismarck in Petersburg, one to be read to Lord John Russell, the other to be read to Prince Gorchakov.b Half the dispatch consists of obeisances and excuses. Prussia has mobilised a part of its armed forces, and Schleinitz is inexhaustible in his motivation of this bold deed. In the general circular letter to the European great powers, dated June 19, it was the security of the territory of the German Confederation, the role as armed mediation power, and particularly "forestalling divisions of Ger- many".0 In the letter to the members of the German Confedera- tion, "this measure" was to "tie down the military armed forces of France and alleviate Austria's position considerably".d In the dispatch to England and Russia it is "the arming of the neighbours", the "supervision of events", the "approach of the war to the German frontier", dignity, interests, calling and so forth. But "on the other hand" and "nonetheless" and "I repeat, Herr Graf, Herr Baron", Prussia is arming in all good faith. It is "certainly not its intention to add new complications". It strives for "no other goal than it strove for a short time ago in agreement with England and Russia". Nous n'entendons pas malice? Schleinitz cries out.

[^1]: "What we desire" is "peace", and "we appeal in full confidence to the cabinets of London and Petersburg, so as to find out, together with them, the means of putting a stop to the bloodshed."

[^2]: a See this volume, p. 451.— Ed. b Schleinitz's dispatch of June 24, 1859 to Albrecht Bernstorff, Prussian ambassador in London, and Otto Bismarck, Prussian ambassador in St. Petersburg, on mediation in the Italian war, Neue Preussische Zeitung, No. 170, July 24, 1859.— Ed.

[^3]: c See this volume, p. 459.— Ed. d See this volume, p. 451.— Ed. e We mean no harm.— Ed.





**[p. 463]**

And these platitudinous insipidities are all that Prussia, "with full confidence and candid openness", stutters out in embarrass- ment to the neutral great powers concerning its "mediation plans". Schleinitz, "the sober, modest youth", is afraid of "prejudicing the question to a certain extent if he should make his ideas more precise". Only the fixed idea finally pops up: Prussia believes itself "called to be an armed mediation power". May England and Russia recognise this vocation! May they

"express their views about a solution of the present complications and the way in which it could be made acceptable to the warring parties".

May they, in particular, furnish Prussia with instructions that permit it, under high sovereign licence, so to speak avec garantie du gouvernement^ to take over the role of mediating lion! Prussia, thus, wants to play the European lion,c but in the capacity of Snug the joiner.

Schleinitz's dispatch is dated June 24, the day of the battle of Solferino. Both copies of the dispatch were still lying on Schleinitz's desk when the news of the Austrian defeat arrived in Berlin. At the same time a dispatch of Lord John Russelle came in

[^1]: Lion: Then know, that I, one Snug, the joiner, am A lion-fell, nor else no lion's dam: For if I should as lion come in strife Into this place, 'twere pity on my life. Theseus: A very gentle beast, and of a good conscience. Lysander: This lion is a very fox for his valour. Theseus: True; and a goose for his discretion.

[^2]: a "Self-denying declarations" is in English in the original.— Ed. b With government guarantee.— Ed. c Marx uses the English word.— Ed. d Shakespeare, A Midsummer Night's Dream, Act V, Scene 1.— Ed.

[^3]: e Lord John Russell's dispatch of June 22, 1859 to Lord Bloomfield, British Ambassador at the Berlin Court, Allgemeine Zeitung, No. 199 (supplement), July 18, 1859. The original English text of this dispatch is not available.— Ed.





**[p. 464]**

recalls Prussia's "lofty calling to mediation" and, with his customary little sweet-and-sour smirk, the little man leaves his pupil in constitutionalism with the consoling words:

"A time may perhaps come very soon when the voice of friendly and conciliatory powers can be successfully heard, and ideas of peace no longer remain without effect!" (Russell's dispatch to Lord Bloomfield in Berlin, dated London, June 22.)

Written between the end of July and the Printed according to the news- middle of August, 1859 paper

[^1]: First published in Das Volk, Nos. 13, 14, Published in English for the first 15 and 16, July 30, August 6, 13 and 20, time 1859

[^2]: a "Little man", "tom-tit of English liberalism" and "coercion-bills" are in English in the original.— Ed.

[^3]: b "Jack of all trades" is in English in the original.— Ed.



