---
Volume: 16
Document_Title: "August 1859"
Page_Range: "496-523"
---

# August 1859



**[p. 465]**

Frederick Engels

KARL MARX, A CONTRIBUTION TO THE CRITIQUE OF POLITICAL ECONOMY

358 PART ONE, FRANZ DUNCKER, BERLIN, 1859

I

The Germans have long since shown that in all spheres of science they are equal, and in most of them superior, to other civilised nations. Only one branch of science, political economy, had no German name among its leading figures. The reason is obvious. Political economy is the theoretical analysis of modern bourgeois society and therefore presupposes developed bourgeois conditions, conditions which for centuries, following the wars of the Reformation and the peasant wars and especially the Thirty Years' War, could not establish themselves in Germany. The separation of the Netherlands from the Empire359 forced Ger- many out of world trade and restricted its industrial development from the very beginning to the pettiest scale; and while the Germans painfully and slowly recovered from the devastations of the civil wars, while they used up all their civic energy, which had never been very great, in futile struggle against the customs barriers and absurd commercial regulations which every petty princeling and imperial baron imposed upon the industry of his subjects, while the imperial cities with their craft-guild practices and patrician spirit went to ruin—Holland, England and France meanwhile captured the leading positions in world trade, estab- lished one colony after another and brought manufactory produc- tion to the height of its development, until finally England, owing to steam power, which gave value to its coal and iron deposits, headed modern bourgeois development. But political economy could not arise in Germany so long as a struggle had still to be waged against such preposterously antiquated remnants of the Middle Ages as those which hampered the bourgeois development of its material forces until 1830. Only with the establishment of



**[p. 466]**

although his celebrated work is entirely copied from the French- man Ferrier,b the theoretical creator of the Continental System. In opposition to this trend the free-trade school was formed in the forties by merchants from the Baltic provinces, who rehashed the arguments of the English Free Traders0 with childlike, but not disinterested, faith. Finally, among the schoolmasters and bureau- crats who had to handle the theoretical aspect of the subject there were desiccated and uncritical herbarium collectors, like Herr Rau,d would-be clever speculators who translated foreign proposi- tions into undigested Hegelian language, like Herr Stein,e or gleaners with literary pretensions in the field of the "history of culture", like Herr Riehl.f The outcome of all this was cameralistics,361 a hotchpotch of sundry trivialities sprinkled with an eclectic economic sauce, the sort of stuff a junior civil servant might find useful to remember during his final examination.

While in this way in Germany the bourgeoisie, the schoolmasters and the bureaucrats were still exerting themselves to learn by rote, and in some measure to understand, the first elements of Anglo-French political economy, which they regarded as incontest-

[^1]: a F. List, Das nationale System der politischen Oekonomie. See also present edition, Vol. 4, pp. 265-93.— Ed.

[^2]: b F. L. Ferrier, Du gouvernement considéré dans ses rapports avec le commerce. See also present edition, Vol. 4, pp. 290-93.— Ed.

[^3]: c "Free Traders" is in English in the original.— Ed. d The jeference is probably to Karl Rau's books Grundriss der Kameralwis- senschaft, Über die Kameralwissenschaft and Lehrbuch der politischen Ökonomie.-—Ed.

[^4]: e Engels presumably refers to Lorenz von Stein's books System der Staatswis- senschaft and Lehrbuch der Volkswirtschaft.—Ed.

[^5]: f The reference is probably to Wilhelm Riehl's book Kulturstudien aus drei Jahrhunderten.—Ed.



Mt Scatf*«" u " * * ' * " **«*»»*•»*••. oaf

M »ri*» Hit Uebttlcgtabtit legtaaba bot ftotart ri»<''l,rtfm "«•t»»«. bemitfen. Mm gilt «Bi M*«" »ikl" M M" "»i1«"» kcn» 0oi ftamc* W « {«na X«i»»b*c«: Mc »•> «M* Qrfoaimic. 9 n 0tnnb liegt «nf bn ««ib. Sic »ttitiiebe Oefcncmitifl bk t^co> ntlfcbt W«l»(t »et mobftaen b MTQrtllcfyni «iftliojaft, Hub fegt tobet entieit Jc Ite biigcr- H4i3nj Mnbc »otau«, Suj Mnbc bic in Scuticb«

UKt kit ben Wcfotmaiiou«» nnb Qanctnfiic MI ub befonbn« (rit bem btciiigjltiigcn l(;lcg «if 3«(ibunbcitc lang niebt auffc-m» art fointcn. D« «»«ttennang $ouanb*

»0* *«'* k l i l( < ( IX«'!«*1«"* H l BMI. banbcl ab, »"• tcfru(itt( («IM inbufli UOt Cot« v MIwg **K »orobntin auf bit ricinltctllc M «Jctbait«t'<i «nb mibreub bit Scutfeben fub fo mibl'am «»» langfam »•» beu Scimù{hin> MI l i Bntgctfriege ct^rltt» J sd^rrnb fir «Oc Ibte bfirgtilubc Cncegie, bit nlejfebt «roi »«, «btcbctliicn IM fikcbtlofc« «tamnf gegen bit 3i Uictr«r<it nnb Ktiudtcu •ttonteldrcftii. Uticnen bit jetée ftiiut 3)uobt)fntft uub gicicblbaiou bit 3nbufltic feinn Uutcilbaiieu «uf Ugtc, »abieub bit atc Ub*ii«btt im 3"*'' tiamnb JWriiictlbim Mtlamcn—u>4buiib befleu etobetten go Qaub, <>nglaub uub gianf« „M) bit «Uni Wabe im fflcltbaiibcl, legten jlotouk «nf «clonic M , nnb cntmicfcltcn bie S«ma|«taf3MHfrcif* ,ut bocbfliu Blütbe, MI cnblicb Suglanb buio) ben S>am»f, bei feinen ««bien nnb üifcu Ugct« erft SDetlb gib, an bit 6»tbc bei mtketicn büigctliibcu f ntmkflaatj hat. 6* langt obet aiift bei ««•ff gegen f* lacbcilltb anliquitte Mcftc

,fa)n »IMbtnt Jbafûtiil, mit ben r Hge Htbnm«> „oetbiltntt K Innttbalb bntn *t ffab b Wbet „bemegi batttn. *n« On»»ieflnng#f«tm»« .bitfet 5Ptcbn«i»lt4fte febl H« *«r» •»«•«•• „niflt in Jefleln btrfelben nm. 0« tritt bank .tint «»»•« fatlaltt Bttoolntian«» .ein. BW bet Octanbtiung bet ôtonomifibtn .emublagc mtl»t M *«t gan|t nngebenit .Ucbctban Ungfamtt obet tafeba nmSic .bitgttlieben Vrob«ttlcn«Ktballni Rc ftab bk .lebte «nuganlftifibe 8"" «** ! * • • • * • »lieben Çtobuetion*»tteeffe«, antagonist* .Hiebt Im Sinn »on Inbtaibnellem »ntagan«- ,mn«, fonbetn eint« an« btn gtfe Bjebaftliebt« ,«ebcn«bebingnngeu bn 3«W»'»"» *"•" .»atbfcnben «nlagon Umn«, obet bit im .6*00, tet bütgtelicben «efenjcbafi M ent- .»iifelnben Çeobnfti»ttâfte febaffen .ngk M) ,bit matetit Otn »Aingnngcn »m 8*fnn| .Weft« «ntagon Wrnn«." » e Çetfretti»« anf eine gemaltige, anf bit gt KOitigiic «ein* ti.n «Ott 3»ittn ttofintt f Ub »n« a«. W»rl bei mtitetem «Erfolgen nnfettt motetiali W- ftben IW« nnb bti ibtet «nioenbnng anf bit

U»natbba»ebctiagebn«tet«lati MM« 1848.49 tin 3rit Mtatt tmttat, ma bit ftin> mirinng anf JHntitkla»*, Mjalrn Jimw« an«, mebe nnb mebe namiglict nmrbt, âbtttitf naftc l Urtei to« gelb be« «Jn*i««ati«««at» ' -benn, bo« Wttb bit tmaêgmlglimr

i-bnmritfan9tn^a«i«. "3*brt«b bieft fk* notb «erienéln» btemmbefte, M bente tabbalglt, ma motgrn la ftottiaip Ra, nnb àbctmotgea mietet ibtt goay f»ma|i«y «ij*e MC btt 9ctt «n«e»n»eb, nfobmab ft bneb goal Mmttaa betteln ging, am akâk batanf «et bic ecetbcilnng ba t««t ctbomît. ttn Xbalet nenen «jlaabal OBortieboen - a m anftc •Jottri fto* mieba einige btnbe gam

etnbincnpi fuben. 6 « botjt kta «roi» t)«tp^,eimtnentn Hf Meb«ftliebe1Ufrbi«nig ,«t*r«ietiffb«n«>n«bl**t.ba»en, bona Rn Mibcitamg ike bteemben» ta tbna |t*; foïtnbefmetcn faaalt (knie |.lbrf»at»mv men mit bit H»*»» « * - " « bagmittiiiia. •Dleeif*gtnabtbiefce6tm>ienb>ba«««jc n X licgnbt Ontb.

•m OH — «»lilil ht 3»>» WW-

[^1]: JJliiicialicc |H fibicn BMI mie fit bl# 1830 bicmalctw Dcbuignliobc (iutwidluug tfculftb' Un M fcfjeltea, |» langt »ae feint btutfebe

[^2]: »eliiifcbc Otfauamlt moglicb. «ift mit ret •nia)WHgbt«3«0Mttin< fauitubici Dculfo Veu ii ein tagt in btt fit »olllifebe Oefenoniie ibnbau M nnt •ciftcbca bunten. (Jon biefei 3eit •• begann In cet Übat bie Dm»ce. lation e«gli|tbet «b ftanjlfifcbti Otlenimie

[^3]: inm 0cficn be» beutfebeu Sùtgeitbunt«. Salb bemaebtigte (leb bat «debilen» mit «üteau' haiculbum b« Imaottiirtu Stoff«, «nb »et- aibeitctc ibn «n einet bem »bentfeben ©rift" nie«« febi crebita Me» SJeiie. ««« bem Sam« mcifniinm »on febriflftc Oetiiben D«k<«rnie-

[^4]: tiltcin, «anlenltn, eebulmtiftetn nnb Ci. Tranhattn enlftanb bann tint bentjti»*itn»« mlfebc (itciatni bic an goboije, €ci*ll,jlcit, «tcbantraliflglcit, «icile unb Çl«gl«ii#mu« nie am bentfeben Roman ei« Scitenfind bat. Unla bei teuten mit »tafiijcben 3meden biibetc fia) jneift bit e*u»5Wnttfd)ule btt 3*t*gtlr!(n on«, beten Autorität, tift.immet 1*4 b U8cfti ift, mat bit btniftbtbutgttlitb' Houmrftbt ïitrutut yiobnjlit bat, obmebl fein ji Kjrt glociofcl l&erl »an bem 8ean|ifen gndet, bem tbeoieliicbtn Uebt»« **• 8e""' nentalfvflcmi, «tgejebrlcbcn iil. Dicfee Siicb-

[^5]: QNgt UMCt.

[^6]: G« icigt M •»« an* fafen bei nabelet ectcacbtnng, ba| bei anfebetarnb f. tinfaa Vt 6a|, baf *« e»«»»Wri" »" *"**• *- ihrem 6«in abbingt unb «io)t nmgefebrt, gleicb in feinen trflen ö«nftantn|t« attm 3bt«H«mn«, ant» bem »ttftc*t««. Wteli ,„ben*.»f MI«. €«—«i*. bngebt«*te nnb «ngem»bnte «uiebanungen ibtt dt« ©ef(*lebtli*e »oben bueeb ib» "»«'»t. »«*

[^7]: ,nag Ja«t4ttmt* Mk H* «• |iw W*' «^^•«obre.bbc.efcgi yt.K.mnrt U. lut; «iebialeb Mhan WHItfcbÄBameba. M U * «Jcmeat aafcwïW««-*«»* « * log «Mtfc Xb>t(^ke«8tb M*IL«la («afti* mt Ka f Wi»*c, ankw «otmf «Hjf k , Hkb, fribft m. e^3ata«ft filait g Hm H

[^8]: (jtbbik* bo Mtb«*«efobna«irktai. mh fcicbt t« mot tafnlé« Rtmoa mot ta ft Ja ci Mnrtf^tattnfe Wtbrn; ambirfca Haa V tbe Oinbcfeitigea, «la« « «4 bk Xbiaaag • M a ; ri Wabob«mt»«tbi»7a BBi|a rinn eamt1(ca<Jiir(a)lblgaag tat aattattamn. f1lrf,fnneirme«««nbni4tgftbl«»|a»^»t«. flaebbem Ztbt bt« btagn M batte b Wkmb ta »olen bk Orkaaag aoebet letta Mca mob, -^mt So Vtn« — bfcltmtmbma Wmiatia »«mbiertmlleb Mb«lll*ia«(*» •*"*• in ttb Jlcn, «*ae jtbm» m Mftai ta *•>** biefee kbtcttn, «abat «Jcfam gn iiifolgta, tiningrtifrn. » a «em Himam tabr>a mot, ri«nrtnfa V«n-«etaf Weng^tnlnl*a. wrb bit M M * < »^*laltoa«B da« OHft ta «abtin, mk t« aafcta 3mc«Va bkak, «»» t« (taa 3ttt banc bk Warte ak Ma Me lat Ngr «n«4t, tnbrm(k(aefj«lta oafleaab; «Ma Mt tnttrfo VIInaet awb« onineigtfélagen, bk nrfltfibt Vf» Ibkf tmf tbwai «itt amb bem mttle Mn Mfebea «on« «af Ma »abt-. •ig,*)nnb«e»«nneinene£kg. »f MIDkarc

[^9]: Part of a page from Das Volk containing Frederick Engels' review of Karl Marx's work A Contribution to the Critique of Political Economy







[^1]: a See present edition, Vol. 30.— Ed. b Das Volk, No. 5, June 4, 1859.— Ed. c See present edition, Vol. 30.— Ed.





**[p. 470]**

However, closer consideration also shows immediately that, already in its first consequences, the apparently so simple proposition—that the consciousness of men depends on their being and not the other way round—is a fatal blow to all forms of idealism, even the most concealed. Through it, all the conventional and customary views of history are denied. The entire traditional manner of political reasoning falls to the ground; patriotic nobility indignantly resists such an unprincipled interpretation. It was thus inevitable that the new point of view should shock not only the exponents of the bourgeoisie but also the mass of French socialists who intended to revolutionise the world by the magic formula,

liberté, égalité, fraternité. But it utterly enraged the vociferous German vulgar democrats. Nevertheless, they have been fond of trying to plagiarise the new ideas in their own interest, although with a rare lack of understanding.

The development of the materialist conception in respect of even a single historical example was a scientific task requiring years of quiet research, for it is evident that mere phrases can achieve nothing here and that only an abundance of critically examined historical material which has been completely mastered can make it possible to solve such a problem. Our party was propelled on to the political stage by the February Revolution and was thus prevented from pursuing purely scientific aims. The basic outlook, nevertheless, runs like an unbroken thread through all literary productions of the party. Every one of them shows that action in each particular case was initiated by direct material causes and not by the accompanying phrases, that on the contrary the political and legal phrases, like political action and its results, originated in material causes.

After the defeat of the Revolution of 1848-49, at a time when it became increasingly impossible to exert any influence on Germany from abroad, our party relinquished the field of emigrant squabbles—for that was the only feasible action left—to the vulgar democrats. While these were chasing about to their heart's content, scuffling today, fraternising tomorrow and once more washing their dirty linen in public the day after, while they went begging throughout America and immediately afterwards started another row over the division of the few dollars they had collected—our party was glad to have peace once more for study. It had the great advantage that its theoretical foundation was a new scientific

outlook the elaboration of which kept it busy enough; for this reason alone it could never become so demoralised as the "great men" of the exile.3

The book under consideration is the first result of these studies.

[^1]: a Cf. The Great Men of the Exile by Marx and Engels (present edition, Vol. 11, pp. 227-326).— Ed.





**[p. 472]**

II

The purpose of a work like the one under review cannot simply be a desultory criticism of separate propositions of political economy or a discussion of some economic issue or other in isolation. On the contrary, it is from the beginning designed to give a systematic résumé of the whole complex of political economy and a coherent elaboration of the laws governing bourgeois production and bourgeois exchange. This elaboration is at the same time a critique of all economic literature, for economists are nothing but interpreters of and apologists for these laws.

Since Hegel's death hardly any attempt has been made to develop any branch of science in its specific inner coherence. The offici- al Hegelian school had assimilated only the most simple devices of the master's dialectics and applied them to everything and anything, often with ridiculous incompetence. Hegel's whole legacy was, so far as they were concerned, limited to a mere template, by means of which any subject could be shaped aright, and to a list of words and phrases whose only purpose was to turn up at the right moment, when ideas and positive knowledge were lacking. Thus it happened, as a professor at Bonn has said, that these Hegelians understood nothing but could write about everything. And that is what it came to. For all their conceit these gentlemen were, however, sufficiently conscious of their weakness to avoid major problems as far as possible. The old pedantic learning held its ground because of its superior positive knowledge, and then with Feuerbach's renunciation of the speculative method,

Hegelianism gradually fell asleep, and it seemed that science was once more dominated by the old metaphysics with its fixed categories.

For this there were quite natural reasons. The rule of the Hegelian Diadochi,362 which ended in empty phrases, was naturally followed by a period in which the positive content of science predominated once more over the formal aspect. But at the same time Germany applied itself with quite extraordinary energy to the natural sciences, according to the immense bourgeois development after 1848; and with the coming into fashion of these sciences, in which the speculative trend had never achieved any real importance, the old metaphysical mode of thinking, even down to the extreme platitude of Wolff, also regained its ground. Hegel was forgotten and a new materialism arose in the natural sciences; theoretically it differed very little from the materialism of the eighteenth century and its advantage consisted mostly in its greater stock of data relating to the natural sciences, especially chemistry and physiology. We find the narrow-minded philistine mode of thinking of the pre-Kantian period reproduced in its most banal form by Büchner and Vogt, and even Moleschott, who swears by Feuerbach, gets himself stuck most amusingly at every turn in the most simple categories. The jaded cart-horse of the commonplace bourgeois mind falters of course in confusion in front of the ditch separating substance from appearance, and cause from effect; but one should not ride cart-horses if one in- tends to go hunting over the very rough ground of abstract reasoning.

Here there was, therefore, a question to be solved which was not connected with political economy as such. How was science to be dealt with? There was, on the one hand, the Hegelian dialectic in the quite abstract, "speculative" form in which Hegel had left it, and on the other hand the ordinary, essentially Wolffian, metaphysical method, which had again come into vogue and which was used by bourgeois economists to write their bulky rambling volumes. The second method had been theoretically so demol- ished by Kant and particularly by Hegel that its continued use in practice could only be rendered possible by inertia and the absence of an alternative simple method. The Hegelian method, on the other hand, was in its existing form quite inapplicable. It was essentially idealist, while the task here was to elaborate a world outlook more materialist than any previous one. Hegel's method took as its point of departure pure thought, whereas here the starting point was to be inexorable facts. A method which,



**[p. 474]**

What distinguished Hegel's mode of thinking from that of all other philosophers was the exceptional historical sense underlying it. However abstract and idealist the form employed, the development of his ideas runs always parallel to the development of world history, and the latter is indeed supposed to be only the proof of the former. Although this reversed the actual relation and stood it on its head, yet the real content was invariably incorporated in his philosophy, especially since Hegel—unlike his pupils—did not rely on ignorance, but was one of the most erudite thinkers of all time. He was the first to try to demonstrate that there is development, an intrinsic coherence in history, and however strange some things in his philosophy of history may seem to us now, the grandeur of the basic conception is still admirable today, compared with either his predecessors or those who following him ventured to advance general observations on history. This monumental conception of history pervades the Phenomenology, the Aesthetics and the History of Philosophy, and the material is everywhere set forth historically, in a definite historical context even if in an abstract distorted manner.

This epoch-making conception of history was the direct theoreti- cal precondition of the new materialist outlook, and already this constituted a connecting link with the logical method as well. Since, even from the standpoint of "pure thinking", this forgotten dialectics had led to such results, and had moreover with the greatest ease coped with the whole of the former logic and metaphysics, there had, at all events, to be more to it than sophistry and hairsplitting. But criticism of this method, which the entire official philosophy had evaded and still evades, was no small matter.

Marx was and is the only one who could undertake the work of extracting from the Hegelian logic the kernel containing Hegel's

[^1]: a G. W. F. Hegel, Wissenschaft der Logik, Th. 1, Abt. 2.— Ed.



Even after the determination of the method, the critique of political economy could still be arranged in two ways—historically or logically. Since in the course of history, as in its literary reflection, development proceeds by and large from the simplest to the more complex relations, the historical development of political economy constituted a natural clue, which the critique could take as a point of departure, and then the economic categories would appear on the whole in the same order as in the logical development. This form seems to have the advantage of greater lucidity, for it traces the actual development, but in fact it would thus become, at most, more popular. History often moves in leaps and bounds and in zigzags, and as this would have to be followed throughout, it would mean not only that a considerable amount of material of slight importance would have to be absorbed, but also that the train of thought would frequently have to be interrupted; it would, moreover, be impossible to write the history of political economy without that of bourgeois society, and the work would thus be endless because of the absence of all preliminary studies. The logical method of approach was therefore the only suitable one. This, however, is indeed nothing but the historical method, only stripped of the historical form and of interfering contingencies. The point where this history begins must also be the starting point of the train of thought, and its further progress will be simply the reflection, in abstract and theoretically consistent form, of the course of history, a corrected reflection, but corrected in accordance with laws provided by the actual course of history, since each moment can be examined at the stage of development where it reaches its full maturity, its classical form.

Using this method we begin with the first and simplest relation which is historically, actually available, thus in this context with the first economic relation to be found. We analyse this relation. The fact that it is a relation already implies that it has two aspects which are related to each other. Each of these aspects is examined separately; this reveals the nature of their attitude to one another, their reciprocal action. Contradictions will emerge which require a solution. But since we are not examining here an abstract mental



**[p. 476]**

Political economy begins with commodities, with the moment when products are exchanged, either by individuals or by primitive communities. The product being exchanged is a commodity. But it is a commodity only because of the thing, the product being linked with a relation between two persons or communities, the relation between producer and consumer, who at this stage are no longer united in the same person. Here is at once an example of a peculiar fact, which pervades the whole of economics and has produced serious confusion in the minds of bourgeois economists: economics is not concerned with things but with relations between persons, and in the final ana- lysis between classes; these relations, however, are always bound to things and appear as things. Some economists had an inkling of this connection in isolated instances, but Marx was the first to reveal its significance for the whole of economics, thus making the most difficult problems so simple and clear that even bourgeois economists will now be able to grasp them.

If we examine the various aspects of the commodity, i.e., of the fully evolved commodity and not as it at first slowly emerges in the spontaneous barter of two primitive communities, it presents itself to us from two angles, that of use value and of exchange value, and thus we come immediately to the sphere of economic debate. Anyone wishing to find a striking instance of the fact that the German dialectical method at its present stage of development is at least as superior to the old superficially glib metaphysical method as railways are to medieval means of transport, should look up Adam Smith or some other officially recognised economist of repute to see how much distress exchange value and use value caused these gentlemen, how much difficulty they had in distinguishing properly between the two and in grasping each of them in its peculiar determinateness, and then compare the clear, simple exposition given by Marx.

After use value and exchange value have been expounded, the commodity, seen as a direct unity of the two, is described as it enters the exchange process. The contradictions arising here may be

We see that with this method, logical development need by no means be confined to the purely abstract sphere. On the contrary, it requires historical illustration and continuous contact with reality. A great variety of such evidence is therefore included, comprising references both to the actual course of history at various stages of social development and to literature on economics, in which the working out of lucid definitions of econo- mic relations is traced from the beginning. The criticism of particular, more or less one-sided or confused points of view is thus given essentially already in the logical exposition and can be kept quite short.

The economic content of the book itself will be discussed in a third article.

[^1]: Written between August 3 and 15, 1859 Printed according to the news- paper First published in Das Volk, Nos. 14 and

[^2]: 16, August 6 and 20, 1859

[^3]: a See present edition, Vol. 30.— Ed. b Ibid.— Ed.





**[p. 478]**

Karl Marx

BRITISH COMMERCE

The British Board of Trade has just published returns of the exports for the first six months of the present year, while its table of the declared values of the imports embraces only the five months ending May 31.a On comparing the corresponding periods of 1858 and 1859, it will be found that, with some small exceptions not worth mentioning, the British imports from the United States had generally decreased, in value at least, while the British exports to this country were increasing in quantity as well as in value. To illustrate this fact, we have extracted the following tabular statement from the official returns:

[^1]: BRITISH EXPORTS TO THE UNITED STATES FOR THE SIX MONTHS ENDING JUNE 30.

[^2]: Articles. Quantities. Declared value.

[^3]: 1858. 1859. 1858. 1859. £ £ Cottons, yards 60,150,771 110,360,198 1,031,724 1,924,951 H'ware & Cut., cwts 35,349 78,432 242,914 534,107 Linens, yards 17,379,691 31,170,751 515,416 961,956 Iron, Pig, tuns 22,745 39,370 68,640 111,319 Bar, Bolt and Rod 21,463 56,026 175,944 457,384 Wrought 9,153 19,368 113,436 238,903 Sheet and nails, cwts 5,293 15,522 28,709 77,840 Lead, tuns 1,214 1,980 27,754 44,626

[^4]: a "Accounts Relating to Trade and Navigation for the Six Months Ended June 30, 1859"; "Real Value of the Principal Articles Imported. An Account of the Computed Real Value of the Principal Articles of Foreign and Colonial Merchandise Imported in the Five Months Ended 31st May 1859", The Economist, No. 831 (supplement), July 30, 1859.— Ed.





**[p. 3]**

1859. 1858. 1859. £ £ ) 930,784 50,950 111,103 134,470 51,277 144,417 81,686 273,409 421,006 30,893,901 562,749 1,188,859 489,171 229,981 758,914 168,927 279,407 456,364 861,921 397,027 607,011

£371,452 £7,013 693,847 14,666 11,631,523 10,486,418

Articles.

1858.

Oil (seed), gals 411,769 Silk manufactures, lbs 47,101 Woolen cloths, p'cs 76,311 Wool's, mix. st'fs, y's 13,897,331 Do., worsted st'fs, p's 185,129 Earth'ware & porce'n H'dashery & millin'y Tin plates

BRITISH IMPORTS FROM THE UNITED STATES FOR FIVE MONTHS ENDING MAY 31.

Articles. Wheat Wheat and Corn Flour Cotton (raw)

The returns of the British Exports show, generally, an increase not only on 1858, but also on 1857, as will be seen from the following statement3:

On closer examination, however, it becomes evident that not only the total increase in the value of the exports of 1859 over those of 1857 is due to the extension of the commerce with India, but that there would have been a falling off of more than £2,000,000 in the general British export trade of 1859—as compared with that of 1857—if India had not made up more than the deficit. On the market of the world, therefore, all traces of the crisis of 1857 have not yet altogether disappeared. The most important and surprising feature of the Board of Trade Returns is, undoubtedly, the rapid development of the British export trade to the East Indies. Let us first by official figures, illustrate the fact:

[^1]: BRITISH EXPORTS FOR THE SIX MONTHS ENDING JUNE 30.

[^2]: Declared value. 1857. 1858. 1859.

[^3]: £60,826,381 £53,467,804 £63,003,159

[^4]: a "The Board of Trade Returns for the Half-Year Ending June 30, 1859", The Economist, No. 831, July 30, 1859.— Ed.





**[p. 480]**

EXPORTS TO BRITISH EAST INDIES, 6 MONTHS ENDING JUNE 30.

1856. 1857. 1858. 1859.

Beer and Ale £210,431 Cottons, Calicoes, &c 2,554,976 Cotton Yarn 579,807 Earthenware and Porce- lain 30,374 Haberdashery and Milli- nery 39,854 Hardwares and Cutlery 84,758 Saddlery and Harness 12,339 Machinery—steam-engines [37,503 other sorts 156,028 Iron—bar, bolt, and rod (ex- clusive of railway iron) 506,201 Railway Iron Iron — wrought (exclusive of railway iron) 266,355 Copper—unwrought 62,928 Sheets and Nails 144,218 Salt 23,995 Stationery 66,495 Woolen Cloths 96,045

£130,213 £474,438 £569,398 3,116,869 4,523,849 6,094,433 540,576 967,332 1,280,435

23,521 43,975 43,195

70,502 77,319 105,723 101,083 139,813 153,423 15,587 35,947 19,498 54,074 59,104 100,803] 313,461 170,959 179,255

228,838 166,321 172,725 272,812 475,413 578,749

217,484 192,711 242,213 34,139 9,018 51,699 228,325 318,381 205,213 31,119 21,849 4,468 79,968 86,425 89,711 166,509 202,076 174,826

Recollecting the fact that for about 16 years—from 1840 to 1856—the British export trade to India was generally stationary, although there was sometimes a small rise beyond, sometimes a perceptible fall below the average figure of £8,000,000—one is rather startled to see this stationary trade doubled in the short interval of two years, and that sudden progress, too, taking place at the epoch of an atrocious servile war.363 The question whether this expansion of commerce is due to only temporary cir- cumstances or to a bona fide development of Indian demand, derives its peculiar interest from the present conjuncture of Indian finances which forces the British Government to ask Parliament for leave to contract a new Indian loan in London, and which, simultaneously, induces even the London Times to moot the question whether, after all, England had not better confine

[^1]: £5,625,080 £7,964,930 , 00,065,767 Total £4,872,307

[^2]: a The figures in square brackets are missing in the New-York Daily Tribune and are given here according to The Economist, No. 831, July 30, 1859.— Ed.





**[p. 481]**

With the scanty materials before us, it would be impossible to arrive at a categorical judgment as to the real character of the sudden expansion of the British export trade to India, but all the data known incline us to the opinion that transitory circumstances have, so to say, swelled that trade beyond its organic dimensions. In the first instance, we are unable to discover any peculiar movement in the British imports from India which might have led to the increase of exports to that country. There has been an increase in some articles, but it is almost balanced by a decrease in others; and, altogether, the vacillations of the Indian exports are too feeble to account one way or the other for the sudden changes in the imports thither. The civil war may, however, have helped the English to explore countries formerly little known, and the soldier may thus have cleared the way for the merchant. Besides, an excessive import and accumulation of silver has of late years been going on in India, and even the Hindoo, somewhat vivified by the scenes of excitement just passed through, may have encroached upon his hoarding mania, and, to some degree, taken to spending silver instead of burying it. Still, we are not warranted in laying too great stress upon such hypotheses, especially as, on the other side, the positive fact stares us in the face of an extraordinary Government expenditure to the annual amount of about £14,000,000. This state of things, while it sufficiently accounts for the sudden growth of the English export trade to India, can hardly be thought to prognosticate a long continuance of this new movement. The most lasting effect will probably be the complete destruction of Indian native industry, since, as the reader will have seen from the last tabular statement, the surplus of British exports to India is principally due to the intrusion of British cottons and cotton-yarns. Overtrading on the part of Manchester may, to some degree, also have contributed to swell the figures of the British export table.

[^1]: Written about August 5, 1859 Reproduced from the newspaper

[^2]: First published in the New-York Daily Tribune, No. 5717, August 19, 1859 as a leading article

[^3]: a The Times, No. 23375, August 3, 1859 (leading article).— Ed.

[^4]: 17-359





**[p. 482]**

Karl Marx

LOUIS NAPOLEON AND ITALY

Every day throws new light on the words and acts of Napole- on III in Italy, and helps us to understand what freedom "from the Alps to the Adriatic"a means on his lips. The war, so far as he was concerned, was only another French expedition to Rome—on a grander scale in all respects, to be sure, but in motive and results not dissimilar to that "Republican" enterprise.364 Having "saved" France from a European war by concluding the treaty of Villafranca, the Liberator is now about to "save" Italian society by the compulsory restoration of the princes, whom a word from the Tuileries drove from power, and by the military suppression of popular movements in Central Italy and the Legations.13 While the British press was teeming with vague conjectures and on ditsc as to the probable changes which the stipulations of Villafranca were likely to undergo in the Conference at Zurich, and Lord John Russell, with the incorrigible indiscretion that induced Lord Palmerston to intrust the seals of the Foreign Office to him, felt himself warranted in the solemn declaration to the House of Commons'1 that Bonaparte would abstain from lending his bayonets to the dethroned princes, the Wiener Zeitung of August 8 appeared, headed by the following official declaration:

[^1]: "The Zurich Conference is about to meet, in order definitively to conclude the peace of which the main features were agreed upon at Villafranca. It is difficult for one who considers this evident significance of the Conference, to understand how

[^2]: a Napoleon III, "Proclamation, L'empereur au peuple français "Le Moniteur universel, special edition, May 3, 1859.— Ed.

[^3]: b See this volume, p. 357.— Ed. c Rumours.— Ed. d John Russell's speech in the House of Commons of July 22, 1859, The Times, No. 23366, July 23, 1859.— Ed.





**[p. 483]**

This is plain language. On the one hand, there are the vain declamations of the deluded Italians; on the other hand, there is the "Sic volo, sic jubeo"b of Francis Joseph and Louis Bonaparte, which is backed by bayonets, rifled cannon and other "armes de

précision. "c If the Italian patriots refuse to yield to oily persua- sions, they must give way to brute force. There is no other alternative, Lord John Russell's declaration—which he probably uttered in perfect good faith, as it was only put in his mouth that it might help to get rid of the British Parliament during the period appointed for crushing Italy under the iron heel of the allied despots—to the contrary notwithstanding. As to the Pope's temporal power in the Legations, Louis Napoleon did not even wait for the end of the war to dictate its maintenance. The preliminaries of Villafranca stipulate for the restoration of the Austrian princes in Tuscany and Modena. The return of the Duchess of Parma to power was not included in the stipulations, for Francis Joseph wished to wreak his vengeance upon that princess for having declined openly to pin her fortunes to those of Austria. Yet with his native magnanimity Louis Napoleon has condescended to listen to the humble prayers of the donna errante.d

Through the instrumentality of Walewski he has pledged his word of honor to Sr. Mon, the Spanish Embassador at Paris, who is also the Plenipotentiary of the Duchess, that she shall be restored to a throne over the same extent of territory as before, with the single exception, perhaps, of the fortress of Piacenza, which is to be made over to Victor Emmanuel in case he behave well at the Conference at Zurich. At the idea of playing protector to the sister of the Bourbons, the parvenu not only felt immensely flattered, but thought that he had at last hit upon a sure means of conciliating the good will of the Faubourg St. Germain,365 which had hitherto scornfully repulsed his advances and held toward him a haughty attitude of reserve.

[^1]: a The declaration from the Wiener Zeitung of August 8, 1859 (evening edition) is quoted in the Allgemeine Zeitung, No: 223, August 11, 1859.— Ed.

[^2]: b "Thus I wish it, thus I order it" (Juvenal. Satires, VI, 223).— Ed. c Precision weapons (rifled guns).— Ed. d Lady-errant.— Ed.

[^3]: 17*





**[p. 484]**

Napoleon's second step, which he did not take until the feverish excitement of the public mind had been somewhat allayed, was in Sardinia. He strove to induce Victor Emmanuel to do his work for him—a thing not easily to be managed. Whatever Austria and her dependents had lost, Victor Emmanuel seemed to have gained. He had become, in point of fact though not yet in name, the regent of Central Italy and of the Legations, the inhabitants of which countries generally proclaimed his dynasty out of hatred to Austria, if not from love of Piedmont. The first demand which the French crusader of liberty made of his new vassal was that he should resign his official leadership of the popular movement. This Victor Emmanuel could not refuse. He withdrew the Sardinian commissioners from the Duchies and the Papal ter- ritories, recalling Boncompagni from Florence, Massimo d'Azeglio

[^1]: a Lord Palmerston's speech in the House of Commons on August 8, 1859, The Times, No. 23380, August 9, 1859.— Ed.

[^2]: b The Allgemeine Zeitung, No. 223, August 11, 1859.— Ed.





**[p. 485]**

But the Imperial liberator was not yet satisfied. From previous experience in France he had seen reason to conclude that under proper management popular suffrage forms the best machinery in the world by which to establish a despotism upon a firm and comely basis. The King of Sardinia was, consequently, requested to operate upon the popular elections in the insurgent provinces so as to make the restoration of their princes appear to be the will of the people. Victor Emmanuel would not, of course, hear of a request, the fulfillment of which was sure to blight forever the prospects of Italian freedom, and to change evvivas into a general cry of execration throughout the Peninsula. He is said to have answered Count de Reiset, the French tempter, in these words:

"Monsieur, I am, first of all, an Italian Prince; do not forget that fact. The interests of Italy appear to me of more consequence than those of Europe, to which you have been pleased to allude. I cannot lend the authority of my name to the restoration of the dethroned princes; I will not do so. I have already been too indulgent in allowing things to follow their own course as they do."

And the chivalrous King is even said to have added:

"If armed intervention is determined upon, you will hear from me. As to the Confederation, my interest and my honor are alike opposed to it, and I will, therefore, combat it to the death." 3

Soon after this reply was transmitted to Paris, the famous article of Granier de Cassagnac on Italian ingratitude,6 containing the sinister intimation that if the protection of a mighty hand was withdrawn, the Austrian eagle would soon perch on the royal palace of Turin, made its appearance. Victor Emmanuel was presently informed that his possession of Piacenza would depend on his good behavior, and that the relative influence of the Italian Princes in the proposed Confederation was still a matter of debate. And the final blow was given to him by bringing the question of the nationality of Savoy upon the carpet, accompanied with an intimation that, if Bonaparte had aided Victor Emmanuel in freeing Italy from the yoke of Austria, he could hardly refuse to free Savoy from the yoke of Sardinia. These menaces soon assumed a tangible shape in the agitation which, on a signal from Paris, broke out among the feudal and Catholic party of Savoy.

[^1]: a Cf. "Nouvelles d'Italie (Correspondance particulière de L'Indépendance belge). Turin, 5 août", L'Indépendance belge, No. 221, August 9, 1859.— Ed.

[^2]: b A. Granier de Cassagnac, "Ingratitude de l'Italie", Le Constitutionnel, No. 215, August 3, 1859.— Ed.





**[p. 486]**

This was a strong argumentum ad hominem to Victor Emmanuel and if he has not directly accepted the task set before him, there is some reason to fear that he has at least promised to pave the way for armed French intervention. If the intelligence contained in the telegram dated Parma, Aug. 9, according to which "the Piedmon- tese have been driven from the city, and the Red Republic proclaimed, while property-holders and the friends of order are taking flight,"3 is to be relied upon, it is ominous of the future. But true or false, it may well be the signal for the "Savior of Order and Property," to intervene, to march his Zouaves against the "incorrigible anarchists," and to clear the road for the returning princes, one of whom, the son in whose behalf the Grand Duke of Tuscanyb abdicated, has met with a "cordial reception" at the Tuileries. And the French troops, who are on their way home, have received orders to stay in Italy, so that the obstacles in the way of successful negotiations at Zurich will soon disappear.

Written in mid-August 1859 Reproduced from the New-York Daily Tribune First published in the New-York Daily Tribune, No. 5725, August 29, 1859 as a leading article; reprinted in the New-York Semi-Weekly Tribune, No. 1488, August 30, 1859 and the New-York Weekly Tribune, No. 938, September 3, 1859

[^1]: a "Telegraphische Berichte. Wien, 11. August", Allgemeine Zeitung, No. 224 (supplement), August 12, 1859.— Ed.

[^2]: ° The reference is to Ferdinand IV and his father Leopold II.— Ed.





**[p. 1858]**

Karl Marx

POPULATION, CRIME, AND PAUPERISM

London, August 23, 1859

A Blue Book, headed "Statistical Abstract for the United Kingdom in each of the last fifteen years from 1844 to 1858," was presented to both Houses of Parliament during the last session. Dry as the figures, arrayed in the close columns of the official print, may look, they contain, in fact, more valuable contributions to the history of the national movement than volumes of rhetorical claptrap and political gossip. The first item that calls for our attention, is the population tables, but, strange to say, the figures relating to the movement of the population of Ireland during the fifteen years are altogether omitted. The Scotch table shows but feeble oscillations which we shall not dwell upon. The following is an account of the population movement in England and Wales:

[^1]: Years. Estim'd Popula'n.

[^2]: 16,520,000 16,721,000 16,925,000 17,132,000 17,340,000 17,552,000 17,766,000 17,983,000 18,205,000 18,403,000 18,618,000 18,787,000 19,045,000 19,305,000 19,523,000

[^3]: Marriages.

[^4]: 540,763 356,950 132,249 543,521 349,366 143,743 572,625 390,315 145,664 539,965 423,304 135,845 563,059 399,800 138,230 578,159 440,853 141,883 593,422 368,986 151,738 615,865 395,174 154,206 624,171 407,938 158,439 612,391 421,097 164,520 634,506 438,239 159,349 635,123 426,242 151,774 657,704 391,369 159,262 663,071 419,815 159,097 655,627 450,018 154,500





**[p. 488]**

COMMITTED FOR TRIAL.

Years. Females. Total. Convicted.

4,993 26,542 18,919 4,962 24,303 17,402 5,257 25,107 18,144 5,930 28,833 21,542 5,763 30,349 22,900 5,401 27,816 21,001 5,265 26,813 20,537 5,569 27,960 21,579 5,625 27,510 21,304 6,178 27,057 20,756 6,636 29,359 23,047 6,082 25,972 19,971 4,012 19,437 14,734 4,299 20,269 15,307 3,990 17,855 13,246

1844 21,549 1845 19,341 1846 19,850 1847 22,903 1848 24,586 1849 22,415 1850 21,548 1851 22,391 1852 21,885 1853 20,879 1854 22,723 1855 19,890 1856 15,425 1857 15,970 1858 13,865

The tabular statement relating to the number of paupers (exclusive of vagrants) in receipt of relief in the several unions and parishes under Boards of Guardians in England and Wales, begins with the year 1849:

By comparing these three tables of population, crime and pauperism, it will be found that from 1844 to 1854 crime grew faster than population, while pauperism from 1849 to 1858 remained almost stationary, despite the enormous changes worked during that interval in the state of British society. Three great facts mark the decennial period of 1849-1858—facts which would almost justify us in comparing that period to the most illustrious epochs of the 16th century. The corn laws had been repealed, the gold fields discovered,367 and an immense emigration had taken place. There were, besides, other circumstances which gave a new start to industry and commerce. From revolutionary convulsions, Europe had turned to an industrial mania. The conquest of the Punjaub,368 and then the Russian war and the Asiatic wars, had

[^1]: Years. Total of Paupers. Years. Total of Paupers.

[^2]: 1849 934,419 1854 818,337 1850 920,543 1855 851,369 1851 860,893 1856 877,767 1852 834,424 1857 843,806 1853 798,822 1858 908,186





**[p. 489]**

There must be something rotten in the very core of a social system which increases its wealth without diminishing its misery, and increases in crimes even more rapidly than in numbers. It is true enough that, if we compare the year 1855 with the preceding years, there seems to have occurred a sensible decrease of crime from 1855 to 1858. The total number of people committed for trial, which in 1854 amounted to 29,359, had sunk down to 17,855 in 1858; and the number of convicted had also greatly fallen off, if not quite in the same ratio. This apparent decrease of crime, however, since 1854, is to be exclusively attributed to some technical changes in British jurisdiction; to the Juvenile Offenders' act369 in the first instance, and, in the second instance, to the operation of the Criminal Justice act of 1855, which authorizes the Police Magistrates to pass sentences for short periods, with the consent of the prisoners. Violations of the law are generally the offspring of economical agencies beyond the control of the legislator, but, as the working of the Juvenile Offenders' act testifies, it depends to some degree on official society to stamp certain violations of its rules as crimes or as transgressions only. This difference of nomenclature, so far from being indifferent, decides on the fate of thousands of men, and the moral tone of society. Law itself may not only punish crime, but improvise it, and the law of professional lawyers is very apt to work in this direction. Thus, it has been justly remarked by an eminent historian, that the Catholic clergy of the medieval times, with its dark views of human nature, introduced by its influence into criminal legislation, has created more crimes than forgiven sins.

Strange to say, the only part of the United Kingdom in which crime has seriously decreased, say by 50, and even by 75 per cent, is Ireland. How can we harmonize this fact with the public-opinion slang of England, according to which Irish nature, instead of British misrule, is responsible for Irish shortcomings? It is, again, no act on the part of the British ruler, but simply the consequence of a famine, an exodus, and a general combination of cir- cumstances favorable to the demand for Irish labor, that has



**[p. 883]**

I.—CRIMES IN IRELAND. C O M M I T T E D FOR TRIAL.

Years. Males. Females. Total. Convicted.

1844 14,799 4,649 19,448 8,042 1845 12,807 3,889 16,696 7,101 1846 14,204 4,288 18,492 8,639 1847 23,552 7,657 31,209 15,233 1848 28,765 9,757 38,522 18,206 1849 31,340 10,649 41,989 21,202 1850 22,682 8,644 31,326 17,108 1851 17,337 7,347 24,684 14,377 1852 12,444 5,234 17,678 10,454 1853 10,260 4,884 15,144 8,714 1854 7,937 3,851 11,788 7,051 1855 6,019 2,993 9,012 5,220 1856 5,097 2,002 7,099 4,024 1857 5,458 1,752 7,210 3,925 1858 4,708 1,600 6,308 3,350

IL—PAUPERS IN IRELAND.

It is to be regretted that the emigration table does not specify the different parts of the United Kingdom, from which the movement started, and the ratio in which each part has

[^1]: Years. Total of Paupers.

[^2]: 1849 620,747 1850 307,970 1851 209,187 1852 171,418 1853 141,822

[^3]: Years. Total of Paupers.

[^4]: 1854 106,802 1855 86,819 1856 73,083 1857 56,094 1858 50,582

[^5]: a The figures that follow were taken by the editors of the present edition from the "Statistical Abstract" used by Marx. In the New-York Daily Tribune the following table, referring to Scotland, was published under the heading "Paupers in Ireland":

[^6]: No. of No. of Years. Parishes Paupers. Years. Parishes. Paupers.

[^7]: 82,357 78,929 79,031 79,887 76,906 79,973 75,111 79,217 75,437 79,199.

[^8]: — Ed.





**[p. 491]**

NUMBER OF EMIGRANTS FROM THE UNITED KINGDOM TO VARIOUS DESTINATIONS.

To the N.A. T o the Australia and Other Total. Colonies. U.S. N e w Zealand. Places.

[^1]: 1844 22,924 43,660 2,229 1,873 70,686 1845 31,803 58,538 830 2,330 93,501 1846 43,439 82,239 2,347 1,826 129,851 1847 109,680 142,154 4,949 1,487 258,270 1848 31,065 188,233 23,904 4,887 248,089 1849 41,367 219,450 32,191 6,490 299,498 1850 32,961 223,078 16,037 8,773 280,849 1851 42,605 267,357 21,532 4,472 335,966 1852 32,873 244,261 87,881 3,749 368,764 1853 34,522 230,885 61,401 3,129 329,937 1854 43,761 193,065 83,237 3,366 323,429 1855 17,966 103,414 52,309 3,118 176,807 1856 16,378 111,837 44,584 3,755 176,554 1857 21,001 126,905 61,248 3,721 212,875 1858 9,704 59,716 39,295 5,257 113,972

[^2]: Written on August 23, 1859 Reproduced from the news-

[^3]: First published in the New-York Daily Tribune, No. 5741, September 16, 1859



