---
Volume: 16
Document_Title: "88. F. Engels. Karl Marx, A Contribution to the Critique of Political Economy "
Page_Range: "496-509"
---

# 88. F. Engels. Karl Marx, A Contribution to the Critique of Political Economy 



**[p. 465]**

Frederick Engels

KARL MARX, A CONTRIBUTION TO THE CRITIQUE OF POLITICAL ECONOMY

358 PART ONE, FRANZ DUNCKER, BERLIN, 1859

I

The Germans have long since shown that in all spheres of science they are equal, and in most of them superior, to other civilised nations. Only one branch of science, political economy, had no German name among its leading figures. The reason is obvious. Political economy is the theoretical analysis of modern bourgeois society and therefore presupposes developed bourgeois conditions, conditions which for centuries, following the wars of the Reformation and the peasant wars and especially the Thirty Years' War, could not establish themselves in Germany. The separation of the Netherlands from the Empire359 forced Ger- many out of world trade and restricted its industrial development from the very beginning to the pettiest scale; and while the Germans painfully and slowly recovered from the devastations of the civil wars, while they used up all their civic energy, which had never been very great, in futile struggle against the customs barriers and absurd commercial regulations which every petty princeling and imperial baron imposed upon the industry of his subjects, while the imperial cities with their craft-guild practices and patrician spirit went to ruin—Holland, England and France meanwhile captured the leading positions in world trade, estab- lished one colony after another and brought manufactory produc- tion to the height of its development, until finally England, owing to steam power, which gave value to its coal and iron deposits, headed modern bourgeois development. But political economy could not arise in Germany so long as a struggle had still to be waged against such preposterously antiquated remnants of the Middle Ages as those which hampered the bourgeois development of its material forces until 1830. Only with the establishment of



**[p. 466]**

although his celebrated work is entirely copied from the French- man Ferrier,b the theoretical creator of the Continental System. In opposition to this trend the free-trade school was formed in the forties by merchants from the Baltic provinces, who rehashed the arguments of the English Free Traders0 with childlike, but not disinterested, faith. Finally, among the schoolmasters and bureau- crats who had to handle the theoretical aspect of the subject there were desiccated and uncritical herbarium collectors, like Herr Rau,d would-be clever speculators who translated foreign proposi- tions into undigested Hegelian language, like Herr Stein,e or gleaners with literary pretensions in the field of the "history of culture", like Herr Riehl.f The outcome of all this was cameralistics,361 a hotchpotch of sundry trivialities sprinkled with an eclectic economic sauce, the sort of stuff a junior civil servant might find useful to remember during his final examination.

While in this way in Germany the bourgeoisie, the schoolmasters and the bureaucrats were still exerting themselves to learn by rote, and in some measure to understand, the first elements of Anglo-French political economy, which they regarded as incontest-

[^1]: a F. List, Das nationale System der politischen Oekonomie. See also present edition, Vol. 4, pp. 265-93.— Ed.

[^2]: b F. L. Ferrier, Du gouvernement considéré dans ses rapports avec le commerce. See also present edition, Vol. 4, pp. 290-93.— Ed.

[^3]: c "Free Traders" is in English in the original.— Ed. d The jeference is probably to Karl Rau's books Grundriss der Kameralwis- senschaft, Über die Kameralwissenschaft and Lehrbuch der politischen Ökonomie.-—Ed.

[^4]: e Engels presumably refers to Lorenz von Stein's books System der Staatswis- senschaft and Lehrbuch der Volkswirtschaft.—Ed.

[^5]: f The reference is probably to Wilhelm Riehl's book Kulturstudien aus drei Jahrhunderten.—Ed.



Mt Scatf*«" u " * * ' * " **«*»»*•»*••. oaf

M »ri*» Hit Uebttlcgtabtit legtaaba bot ftotart ri»<''l,rtfm "«•t»»«. bemitfen. Mm gilt «Bi M*«" »ikl" M M" "»i1«"» kcn» 0oi ftamc* W « {«na X«i»»b*c«: Mc »•> «M* Qrfoaimic. 9 n 0tnnb liegt «nf bn ««ib. Sic »ttitiiebe Oefcncmitifl bk t^co> ntlfcbt W«l»(t »et mobftaen b MTQrtllcfyni «iftliojaft, Hub fegt tobet entieit Jc Ite biigcr- H4i3nj Mnbc »otau«, Suj Mnbc bic in Scuticb«

UKt kit ben Wcfotmaiiou«» nnb Qanctnfiic MI ub befonbn« (rit bem btciiigjltiigcn l(;lcg «if 3«(ibunbcitc lang niebt auffc-m» art fointcn. D« «»«ttennang $ouanb*

»0* *«'* k l i l( < ( IX«'!«*1«"* H l BMI. banbcl ab, »"• tcfru(itt( («IM inbufli UOt Cot« v MIwg **K »orobntin auf bit ricinltctllc M «Jctbait«t'<i «nb mibreub bit Scutfeben fub fo mibl'am «»» langfam »•» beu Scimù{hin> MI l i Bntgctfriege ct^rltt» J sd^rrnb fir «Oc Ibte bfirgtilubc Cncegie, bit nlejfebt «roi »«, «btcbctliicn IM fikcbtlofc« «tamnf gegen bit 3i Uictr«r<it nnb Ktiudtcu •ttonteldrcftii. Uticnen bit jetée ftiiut 3)uobt)fntft uub gicicblbaiou bit 3nbufltic feinn Uutcilbaiieu «uf Ugtc, »abieub bit atc Ub*ii«btt im 3"*'' tiamnb JWriiictlbim Mtlamcn—u>4buiib befleu etobetten go Qaub, <>nglaub uub gianf« „M) bit «Uni Wabe im fflcltbaiibcl, legten jlotouk «nf «clonic M , nnb cntmicfcltcn bie S«ma|«taf3MHfrcif* ,ut bocbfliu Blütbe, MI cnblicb Suglanb buio) ben S>am»f, bei feinen ««bien nnb üifcu Ugct« erft SDetlb gib, an bit 6»tbc bei mtketicn büigctliibcu f ntmkflaatj hat. 6* langt obet aiift bei ««•ff gegen f* lacbcilltb anliquitte Mcftc

,fa)n »IMbtnt Jbafûtiil, mit ben r Hge Htbnm«> „oetbiltntt K Innttbalb bntn *t ffab b Wbet „bemegi batttn. *n« On»»ieflnng#f«tm»« .bitfet 5Ptcbn«i»lt4fte febl H« *«r» •»«•«•• „niflt in Jefleln btrfelben nm. 0« tritt bank .tint «»»•« fatlaltt Bttoolntian«» .ein. BW bet Octanbtiung bet ôtonomifibtn .emublagc mtl»t M *«t gan|t nngebenit .Ucbctban Ungfamtt obet tafeba nmSic .bitgttlieben Vrob«ttlcn«Ktballni Rc ftab bk .lebte «nuganlftifibe 8"" «** ! * • • • * • »lieben Çtobuetion*»tteeffe«, antagonist* .Hiebt Im Sinn »on Inbtaibnellem »ntagan«- ,mn«, fonbetn eint« an« btn gtfe Bjebaftliebt« ,«ebcn«bebingnngeu bn 3«W»'»"» *"•" .»atbfcnben «nlagon Umn«, obet bit im .6*00, tet bütgtelicben «efenjcbafi M ent- .»iifelnben Çeobnfti»ttâfte febaffen .ngk M) ,bit matetit Otn »Aingnngcn »m 8*fnn| .Weft« «ntagon Wrnn«." » e Çetfretti»« anf eine gemaltige, anf bit gt KOitigiic «ein* ti.n «Ott 3»ittn ttofintt f Ub »n« a«. W»rl bei mtitetem «Erfolgen nnfettt motetiali W- ftben IW« nnb bti ibtet «nioenbnng anf bit

U»natbba»ebctiagebn«tet«lati MM« 1848.49 tin 3rit Mtatt tmttat, ma bit ftin> mirinng anf JHntitkla»*, Mjalrn Jimw« an«, mebe nnb mebe namiglict nmrbt, âbtttitf naftc l Urtei to« gelb be« «Jn*i««ati«««at» ' -benn, bo« Wttb bit tmaêgmlglimr

i-bnmritfan9tn^a«i«. "3*brt«b bieft fk* notb «erienéln» btemmbefte, M bente tabbalglt, ma motgrn la ftottiaip Ra, nnb àbctmotgea mietet ibtt goay f»ma|i«y «ij*e MC btt 9ctt «n«e»n»eb, nfobmab ft bneb goal Mmttaa betteln ging, am akâk batanf «et bic ecetbcilnng ba t««t ctbomît. ttn Xbalet nenen «jlaabal OBortieboen - a m anftc •Jottri fto* mieba einige btnbe gam

etnbincnpi fuben. 6 « botjt kta «roi» t)«tp^,eimtnentn Hf Meb«ftliebe1Ufrbi«nig ,«t*r«ietiffb«n«>n«bl**t.ba»en, bona Rn Mibcitamg ike bteemben» ta tbna |t*; foïtnbefmetcn faaalt (knie |.lbrf»at»mv men mit bit H»*»» « * - " « bagmittiiiia. •Dleeif*gtnabtbiefce6tm>ienb>ba«««jc n X licgnbt Ontb.

•m OH — «»lilil ht 3»>» WW-

[^1]: JJliiicialicc |H fibicn BMI mie fit bl# 1830 bicmalctw Dcbuignliobc (iutwidluug tfculftb' Un M fcfjeltea, |» langt »ae feint btutfebe

[^2]: »eliiifcbc Otfauamlt moglicb. «ift mit ret •nia)WHgbt«3«0Mttin< fauitubici Dculfo Veu ii ein tagt in btt fit »olllifebe Oefenoniie ibnbau M nnt •ciftcbca bunten. (Jon biefei 3eit •• begann In cet Übat bie Dm»ce. lation e«gli|tbet «b ftanjlfifcbti Otlenimie

[^3]: inm 0cficn be» beutfebeu Sùtgeitbunt«. Salb bemaebtigte (leb bat «debilen» mit «üteau' haiculbum b« Imaottiirtu Stoff«, «nb »et- aibeitctc ibn «n einet bem »bentfeben ©rift" nie«« febi crebita Me» SJeiie. ««« bem Sam« mcifniinm »on febriflftc Oetiiben D«k<«rnie-

[^4]: tiltcin, «anlenltn, eebulmtiftetn nnb Ci. Tranhattn enlftanb bann tint bentjti»*itn»« mlfebc (itciatni bic an goboije, €ci*ll,jlcit, «tcbantraliflglcit, «icile unb Çl«gl«ii#mu« nie am bentfeben Roman ei« Scitenfind bat. Unla bei teuten mit »tafiijcben 3meden biibetc fia) jneift bit e*u»5Wnttfd)ule btt 3*t*gtlr!(n on«, beten Autorität, tift.immet 1*4 b U8cfti ift, mat bit btniftbtbutgttlitb' Houmrftbt ïitrutut yiobnjlit bat, obmebl fein ji Kjrt glociofcl l&erl »an bem 8ean|ifen gndet, bem tbeoieliicbtn Uebt»« **• 8e""' nentalfvflcmi, «tgejebrlcbcn iil. Dicfee Siicb-

[^5]: QNgt UMCt.

[^6]: G« icigt M •»« an* fafen bei nabelet ectcacbtnng, ba| bei anfebetarnb f. tinfaa Vt 6a|, baf *« e»«»»Wri" »" *"**• *- ihrem 6«in abbingt unb «io)t nmgefebrt, gleicb in feinen trflen ö«nftantn|t« attm 3bt«H«mn«, ant» bem »ttftc*t««. Wteli ,„ben*.»f MI«. €«—«i*. bngebt«*te nnb «ngem»bnte «uiebanungen ibtt dt« ©ef(*lebtli*e »oben bueeb ib» "»«'»t. »«*

[^7]: ,nag Ja«t4ttmt* Mk H* «• |iw W*' «^^•«obre.bbc.efcgi yt.K.mnrt U. lut; «iebialeb Mhan WHItfcbÄBameba. M U * «Jcmeat aafcwïW««-*«»* « * log «Mtfc Xb>t(^ke«8tb M*IL«la («afti* mt Ka f Wi»*c, ankw «otmf «Hjf k , Hkb, fribft m. e^3ata«ft filait g Hm H

[^8]: (jtbbik* bo Mtb«*«efobna«irktai. mh fcicbt t« mot tafnlé« Rtmoa mot ta ft Ja ci Mnrtf^tattnfe Wtbrn; ambirfca Haa V tbe Oinbcfeitigea, «la« « «4 bk Xbiaaag • M a ; ri Wabob«mt»«tbi»7a BBi|a rinn eamt1(ca<Jiir(a)lblgaag tat aattattamn. f1lrf,fnneirme«««nbni4tgftbl«»|a»^»t«. flaebbem Ztbt bt« btagn M batte b Wkmb ta »olen bk Orkaaag aoebet letta Mca mob, -^mt So Vtn« — bfcltmtmbma Wmiatia »«mbiertmlleb Mb«lll*ia«(*» •*"*• in ttb Jlcn, «*ae jtbm» m Mftai ta *•>** biefee kbtcttn, «abat «Jcfam gn iiifolgta, tiningrtifrn. » a «em Himam tabr>a mot, ri«nrtnfa V«n-«etaf Weng^tnlnl*a. wrb bit M M * < »^*laltoa«B da« OHft ta «abtin, mk t« aafcta 3mc«Va bkak, «»» t« (taa 3ttt banc bk Warte ak Ma Me lat Ngr «n«4t, tnbrm(k(aefj«lta oafleaab; «Ma Mt tnttrfo VIInaet awb« onineigtfélagen, bk nrfltfibt Vf» Ibkf tmf tbwai «itt amb bem mttle Mn Mfebea «on« «af Ma »abt-. •ig,*)nnb«e»«nneinene£kg. »f MIDkarc

[^9]: Part of a page from Das Volk containing Frederick Engels' review of Karl Marx's work A Contribution to the Critique of Political Economy







[^1]: a See present edition, Vol. 30.— Ed. b Das Volk, No. 5, June 4, 1859.— Ed. c See present edition, Vol. 30.— Ed.





**[p. 470]**

However, closer consideration also shows immediately that, already in its first consequences, the apparently so simple proposition—that the consciousness of men depends on their being and not the other way round—is a fatal blow to all forms of idealism, even the most concealed. Through it, all the conventional and customary views of history are denied. The entire traditional manner of political reasoning falls to the ground; patriotic nobility indignantly resists such an unprincipled interpretation. It was thus inevitable that the new point of view should shock not only the exponents of the bourgeoisie but also the mass of French socialists who intended to revolutionise the world by the magic formula,

liberté, égalité, fraternité. But it utterly enraged the vociferous German vulgar democrats. Nevertheless, they have been fond of trying to plagiarise the new ideas in their own interest, although with a rare lack of understanding.

The development of the materialist conception in respect of even a single historical example was a scientific task requiring years of quiet research, for it is evident that mere phrases can achieve nothing here and that only an abundance of critically examined historical material which has been completely mastered can make it possible to solve such a problem. Our party was propelled on to the political stage by the February Revolution and was thus prevented from pursuing purely scientific aims. The basic outlook, nevertheless, runs like an unbroken thread through all literary productions of the party. Every one of them shows that action in each particular case was initiated by direct material causes and not by the accompanying phrases, that on the contrary the political and legal phrases, like political action and its results, originated in material causes.

After the defeat of the Revolution of 1848-49, at a time when it became increasingly impossible to exert any influence on Germany from abroad, our party relinquished the field of emigrant squabbles—for that was the only feasible action left—to the vulgar democrats. While these were chasing about to their heart's content, scuffling today, fraternising tomorrow and once more washing their dirty linen in public the day after, while they went begging throughout America and immediately afterwards started another row over the division of the few dollars they had collected—our party was glad to have peace once more for study. It had the great advantage that its theoretical foundation was a new scientific

outlook the elaboration of which kept it busy enough; for this reason alone it could never become so demoralised as the "great men" of the exile.3

The book under consideration is the first result of these studies.

[^1]: a Cf. The Great Men of the Exile by Marx and Engels (present edition, Vol. 11, pp. 227-326).— Ed.





**[p. 472]**

II

The purpose of a work like the one under review cannot simply be a desultory criticism of separate propositions of political economy or a discussion of some economic issue or other in isolation. On the contrary, it is from the beginning designed to give a systematic résumé of the whole complex of political economy and a coherent elaboration of the laws governing bourgeois production and bourgeois exchange. This elaboration is at the same time a critique of all economic literature, for economists are nothing but interpreters of and apologists for these laws.

Since Hegel's death hardly any attempt has been made to develop any branch of science in its specific inner coherence. The offici- al Hegelian school had assimilated only the most simple devices of the master's dialectics and applied them to everything and anything, often with ridiculous incompetence. Hegel's whole legacy was, so far as they were concerned, limited to a mere template, by means of which any subject could be shaped aright, and to a list of words and phrases whose only purpose was to turn up at the right moment, when ideas and positive knowledge were lacking. Thus it happened, as a professor at Bonn has said, that these Hegelians understood nothing but could write about everything. And that is what it came to. For all their conceit these gentlemen were, however, sufficiently conscious of their weakness to avoid major problems as far as possible. The old pedantic learning held its ground because of its superior positive knowledge, and then with Feuerbach's renunciation of the speculative method,

Hegelianism gradually fell asleep, and it seemed that science was once more dominated by the old metaphysics with its fixed categories.

For this there were quite natural reasons. The rule of the Hegelian Diadochi,362 which ended in empty phrases, was naturally followed by a period in which the positive content of science predominated once more over the formal aspect. But at the same time Germany applied itself with quite extraordinary energy to the natural sciences, according to the immense bourgeois development after 1848; and with the coming into fashion of these sciences, in which the speculative trend had never achieved any real importance, the old metaphysical mode of thinking, even down to the extreme platitude of Wolff, also regained its ground. Hegel was forgotten and a new materialism arose in the natural sciences; theoretically it differed very little from the materialism of the eighteenth century and its advantage consisted mostly in its greater stock of data relating to the natural sciences, especially chemistry and physiology. We find the narrow-minded philistine mode of thinking of the pre-Kantian period reproduced in its most banal form by Büchner and Vogt, and even Moleschott, who swears by Feuerbach, gets himself stuck most amusingly at every turn in the most simple categories. The jaded cart-horse of the commonplace bourgeois mind falters of course in confusion in front of the ditch separating substance from appearance, and cause from effect; but one should not ride cart-horses if one in- tends to go hunting over the very rough ground of abstract reasoning.

Here there was, therefore, a question to be solved which was not connected with political economy as such. How was science to be dealt with? There was, on the one hand, the Hegelian dialectic in the quite abstract, "speculative" form in which Hegel had left it, and on the other hand the ordinary, essentially Wolffian, metaphysical method, which had again come into vogue and which was used by bourgeois economists to write their bulky rambling volumes. The second method had been theoretically so demol- ished by Kant and particularly by Hegel that its continued use in practice could only be rendered possible by inertia and the absence of an alternative simple method. The Hegelian method, on the other hand, was in its existing form quite inapplicable. It was essentially idealist, while the task here was to elaborate a world outlook more materialist than any previous one. Hegel's method took as its point of departure pure thought, whereas here the starting point was to be inexorable facts. A method which,



**[p. 474]**

What distinguished Hegel's mode of thinking from that of all other philosophers was the exceptional historical sense underlying it. However abstract and idealist the form employed, the development of his ideas runs always parallel to the development of world history, and the latter is indeed supposed to be only the proof of the former. Although this reversed the actual relation and stood it on its head, yet the real content was invariably incorporated in his philosophy, especially since Hegel—unlike his pupils—did not rely on ignorance, but was one of the most erudite thinkers of all time. He was the first to try to demonstrate that there is development, an intrinsic coherence in history, and however strange some things in his philosophy of history may seem to us now, the grandeur of the basic conception is still admirable today, compared with either his predecessors or those who following him ventured to advance general observations on history. This monumental conception of history pervades the Phenomenology, the Aesthetics and the History of Philosophy, and the material is everywhere set forth historically, in a definite historical context even if in an abstract distorted manner.

This epoch-making conception of history was the direct theoreti- cal precondition of the new materialist outlook, and already this constituted a connecting link with the logical method as well. Since, even from the standpoint of "pure thinking", this forgotten dialectics had led to such results, and had moreover with the greatest ease coped with the whole of the former logic and metaphysics, there had, at all events, to be more to it than sophistry and hairsplitting. But criticism of this method, which the entire official philosophy had evaded and still evades, was no small matter.

Marx was and is the only one who could undertake the work of extracting from the Hegelian logic the kernel containing Hegel's

[^1]: a G. W. F. Hegel, Wissenschaft der Logik, Th. 1, Abt. 2.— Ed.



Even after the determination of the method, the critique of political economy could still be arranged in two ways—historically or logically. Since in the course of history, as in its literary reflection, development proceeds by and large from the simplest to the more complex relations, the historical development of political economy constituted a natural clue, which the critique could take as a point of departure, and then the economic categories would appear on the whole in the same order as in the logical development. This form seems to have the advantage of greater lucidity, for it traces the actual development, but in fact it would thus become, at most, more popular. History often moves in leaps and bounds and in zigzags, and as this would have to be followed throughout, it would mean not only that a considerable amount of material of slight importance would have to be absorbed, but also that the train of thought would frequently have to be interrupted; it would, moreover, be impossible to write the history of political economy without that of bourgeois society, and the work would thus be endless because of the absence of all preliminary studies. The logical method of approach was therefore the only suitable one. This, however, is indeed nothing but the historical method, only stripped of the historical form and of interfering contingencies. The point where this history begins must also be the starting point of the train of thought, and its further progress will be simply the reflection, in abstract and theoretically consistent form, of the course of history, a corrected reflection, but corrected in accordance with laws provided by the actual course of history, since each moment can be examined at the stage of development where it reaches its full maturity, its classical form.

Using this method we begin with the first and simplest relation which is historically, actually available, thus in this context with the first economic relation to be found. We analyse this relation. The fact that it is a relation already implies that it has two aspects which are related to each other. Each of these aspects is examined separately; this reveals the nature of their attitude to one another, their reciprocal action. Contradictions will emerge which require a solution. But since we are not examining here an abstract mental



**[p. 476]**

Political economy begins with commodities, with the moment when products are exchanged, either by individuals or by primitive communities. The product being exchanged is a commodity. But it is a commodity only because of the thing, the product being linked with a relation between two persons or communities, the relation between producer and consumer, who at this stage are no longer united in the same person. Here is at once an example of a peculiar fact, which pervades the whole of economics and has produced serious confusion in the minds of bourgeois economists: economics is not concerned with things but with relations between persons, and in the final ana- lysis between classes; these relations, however, are always bound to things and appear as things. Some economists had an inkling of this connection in isolated instances, but Marx was the first to reveal its significance for the whole of economics, thus making the most difficult problems so simple and clear that even bourgeois economists will now be able to grasp them.

If we examine the various aspects of the commodity, i.e., of the fully evolved commodity and not as it at first slowly emerges in the spontaneous barter of two primitive communities, it presents itself to us from two angles, that of use value and of exchange value, and thus we come immediately to the sphere of economic debate. Anyone wishing to find a striking instance of the fact that the German dialectical method at its present stage of development is at least as superior to the old superficially glib metaphysical method as railways are to medieval means of transport, should look up Adam Smith or some other officially recognised economist of repute to see how much distress exchange value and use value caused these gentlemen, how much difficulty they had in distinguishing properly between the two and in grasping each of them in its peculiar determinateness, and then compare the clear, simple exposition given by Marx.

After use value and exchange value have been expounded, the commodity, seen as a direct unity of the two, is described as it enters the exchange process. The contradictions arising here may be

We see that with this method, logical development need by no means be confined to the purely abstract sphere. On the contrary, it requires historical illustration and continuous contact with reality. A great variety of such evidence is therefore included, comprising references both to the actual course of history at various stages of social development and to literature on economics, in which the working out of lucid definitions of econo- mic relations is traced from the beginning. The criticism of particular, more or less one-sided or confused points of view is thus given essentially already in the logical exposition and can be kept quite short.

The economic content of the book itself will be discussed in a third article.

[^1]: Written between August 3 and 15, 1859 Printed according to the news- paper First published in Das Volk, Nos. 14 and

[^2]: 16, August 6 and 20, 1859

[^3]: a See present edition, Vol. 30.— Ed. b Ibid.— Ed.



