---
Volume: 16
Document_Title: "I "
Page_Range: "496-503"
---

# I 



**[p. 465]**

Frederick Engels

KARL MARX, A CONTRIBUTION TO THE CRITIQUE OF POLITICAL ECONOMY

358 PART ONE, FRANZ DUNCKER, BERLIN, 1859

I

The Germans have long since shown that in all spheres of science they are equal, and in most of them superior, to other civilised nations. Only one branch of science, political economy, had no German name among its leading figures. The reason is obvious. Political economy is the theoretical analysis of modern bourgeois society and therefore presupposes developed bourgeois conditions, conditions which for centuries, following the wars of the Reformation and the peasant wars and especially the Thirty Years' War, could not establish themselves in Germany. The separation of the Netherlands from the Empire359 forced Ger- many out of world trade and restricted its industrial development from the very beginning to the pettiest scale; and while the Germans painfully and slowly recovered from the devastations of the civil wars, while they used up all their civic energy, which had never been very great, in futile struggle against the customs barriers and absurd commercial regulations which every petty princeling and imperial baron imposed upon the industry of his subjects, while the imperial cities with their craft-guild practices and patrician spirit went to ruin—Holland, England and France meanwhile captured the leading positions in world trade, estab- lished one colony after another and brought manufactory produc- tion to the height of its development, until finally England, owing to steam power, which gave value to its coal and iron deposits, headed modern bourgeois development. But political economy could not arise in Germany so long as a struggle had still to be waged against such preposterously antiquated remnants of the Middle Ages as those which hampered the bourgeois development of its material forces until 1830. Only with the establishment of



**[p. 466]**

although his celebrated work is entirely copied from the French- man Ferrier,b the theoretical creator of the Continental System. In opposition to this trend the free-trade school was formed in the forties by merchants from the Baltic provinces, who rehashed the arguments of the English Free Traders0 with childlike, but not disinterested, faith. Finally, among the schoolmasters and bureau- crats who had to handle the theoretical aspect of the subject there were desiccated and uncritical herbarium collectors, like Herr Rau,d would-be clever speculators who translated foreign proposi- tions into undigested Hegelian language, like Herr Stein,e or gleaners with literary pretensions in the field of the "history of culture", like Herr Riehl.f The outcome of all this was cameralistics,361 a hotchpotch of sundry trivialities sprinkled with an eclectic economic sauce, the sort of stuff a junior civil servant might find useful to remember during his final examination.

While in this way in Germany the bourgeoisie, the schoolmasters and the bureaucrats were still exerting themselves to learn by rote, and in some measure to understand, the first elements of Anglo-French political economy, which they regarded as incontest-

[^1]: a F. List, Das nationale System der politischen Oekonomie. See also present edition, Vol. 4, pp. 265-93.— Ed.

[^2]: b F. L. Ferrier, Du gouvernement considéré dans ses rapports avec le commerce. See also present edition, Vol. 4, pp. 290-93.— Ed.

[^3]: c "Free Traders" is in English in the original.— Ed. d The jeference is probably to Karl Rau's books Grundriss der Kameralwis- senschaft, Über die Kameralwissenschaft and Lehrbuch der politischen Ökonomie.-—Ed.

[^4]: e Engels presumably refers to Lorenz von Stein's books System der Staatswis- senschaft and Lehrbuch der Volkswirtschaft.—Ed.

[^5]: f The reference is probably to Wilhelm Riehl's book Kulturstudien aus drei Jahrhunderten.—Ed.



Mt Scatf*«" u " * * ' * " **«*»»*•»*••. oaf

M »ri*» Hit Uebttlcgtabtit legtaaba bot ftotart ri»<''l,rtfm "«•t»»«. bemitfen. Mm gilt «Bi M*«" »ikl" M M" "»i1«"» kcn» 0oi ftamc* W « {«na X«i»»b*c«: Mc »•> «M* Qrfoaimic. 9 n 0tnnb liegt «nf bn ««ib. Sic »ttitiiebe Oefcncmitifl bk t^co> ntlfcbt W«l»(t »et mobftaen b MTQrtllcfyni «iftliojaft, Hub fegt tobet entieit Jc Ite biigcr- H4i3nj Mnbc »otau«, Suj Mnbc bic in Scuticb«

UKt kit ben Wcfotmaiiou«» nnb Qanctnfiic MI ub befonbn« (rit bem btciiigjltiigcn l(;lcg «if 3«(ibunbcitc lang niebt auffc-m» art fointcn. D« «»«ttennang $ouanb*

»0* *«'* k l i l( < ( IX«'!«*1«"* H l BMI. banbcl ab, »"• tcfru(itt( («IM inbufli UOt Cot« v MIwg **K »orobntin auf bit ricinltctllc M «Jctbait«t'<i «nb mibreub bit Scutfeben fub fo mibl'am «»» langfam »•» beu Scimù{hin> MI l i Bntgctfriege ct^rltt» J sd^rrnb fir «Oc Ibte bfirgtilubc Cncegie, bit nlejfebt «roi »«, «btcbctliicn IM fikcbtlofc« «tamnf gegen bit 3i Uictr«r<it nnb Ktiudtcu •ttonteldrcftii. Uticnen bit jetée ftiiut 3)uobt)fntft uub gicicblbaiou bit 3nbufltic feinn Uutcilbaiieu «uf Ugtc, »abieub bit atc Ub*ii«btt im 3"*'' tiamnb JWriiictlbim Mtlamcn—u>4buiib befleu etobetten go Qaub, <>nglaub uub gianf« „M) bit «Uni Wabe im fflcltbaiibcl, legten jlotouk «nf «clonic M , nnb cntmicfcltcn bie S«ma|«taf3MHfrcif* ,ut bocbfliu Blütbe, MI cnblicb Suglanb buio) ben S>am»f, bei feinen ««bien nnb üifcu Ugct« erft SDetlb gib, an bit 6»tbc bei mtketicn büigctliibcu f ntmkflaatj hat. 6* langt obet aiift bei ««•ff gegen f* lacbcilltb anliquitte Mcftc

,fa)n »IMbtnt Jbafûtiil, mit ben r Hge Htbnm«> „oetbiltntt K Innttbalb bntn *t ffab b Wbet „bemegi batttn. *n« On»»ieflnng#f«tm»« .bitfet 5Ptcbn«i»lt4fte febl H« *«r» •»«•«•• „niflt in Jefleln btrfelben nm. 0« tritt bank .tint «»»•« fatlaltt Bttoolntian«» .ein. BW bet Octanbtiung bet ôtonomifibtn .emublagc mtl»t M *«t gan|t nngebenit .Ucbctban Ungfamtt obet tafeba nmSic .bitgttlieben Vrob«ttlcn«Ktballni Rc ftab bk .lebte «nuganlftifibe 8"" «** ! * • • • * • »lieben Çtobuetion*»tteeffe«, antagonist* .Hiebt Im Sinn »on Inbtaibnellem »ntagan«- ,mn«, fonbetn eint« an« btn gtfe Bjebaftliebt« ,«ebcn«bebingnngeu bn 3«W»'»"» *"•" .»atbfcnben «nlagon Umn«, obet bit im .6*00, tet bütgtelicben «efenjcbafi M ent- .»iifelnben Çeobnfti»ttâfte febaffen .ngk M) ,bit matetit Otn »Aingnngcn »m 8*fnn| .Weft« «ntagon Wrnn«." » e Çetfretti»« anf eine gemaltige, anf bit gt KOitigiic «ein* ti.n «Ott 3»ittn ttofintt f Ub »n« a«. W»rl bei mtitetem «Erfolgen nnfettt motetiali W- ftben IW« nnb bti ibtet «nioenbnng anf bit

U»natbba»ebctiagebn«tet«lati MM« 1848.49 tin 3rit Mtatt tmttat, ma bit ftin> mirinng anf JHntitkla»*, Mjalrn Jimw« an«, mebe nnb mebe namiglict nmrbt, âbtttitf naftc l Urtei to« gelb be« «Jn*i««ati«««at» ' -benn, bo« Wttb bit tmaêgmlglimr

i-bnmritfan9tn^a«i«. "3*brt«b bieft fk* notb «erienéln» btemmbefte, M bente tabbalglt, ma motgrn la ftottiaip Ra, nnb àbctmotgea mietet ibtt goay f»ma|i«y «ij*e MC btt 9ctt «n«e»n»eb, nfobmab ft bneb goal Mmttaa betteln ging, am akâk batanf «et bic ecetbcilnng ba t««t ctbomît. ttn Xbalet nenen «jlaabal OBortieboen - a m anftc •Jottri fto* mieba einige btnbe gam

etnbincnpi fuben. 6 « botjt kta «roi» t)«tp^,eimtnentn Hf Meb«ftliebe1Ufrbi«nig ,«t*r«ietiffb«n«>n«bl**t.ba»en, bona Rn Mibcitamg ike bteemben» ta tbna |t*; foïtnbefmetcn faaalt (knie |.lbrf»at»mv men mit bit H»*»» « * - " « bagmittiiiia. •Dleeif*gtnabtbiefce6tm>ienb>ba«««jc n X licgnbt Ontb.

•m OH — «»lilil ht 3»>» WW-

[^1]: JJliiicialicc |H fibicn BMI mie fit bl# 1830 bicmalctw Dcbuignliobc (iutwidluug tfculftb' Un M fcfjeltea, |» langt »ae feint btutfebe

[^2]: »eliiifcbc Otfauamlt moglicb. «ift mit ret •nia)WHgbt«3«0Mttin< fauitubici Dculfo Veu ii ein tagt in btt fit »olllifebe Oefenoniie ibnbau M nnt •ciftcbca bunten. (Jon biefei 3eit •• begann In cet Übat bie Dm»ce. lation e«gli|tbet «b ftanjlfifcbti Otlenimie

[^3]: inm 0cficn be» beutfebeu Sùtgeitbunt«. Salb bemaebtigte (leb bat «debilen» mit «üteau' haiculbum b« Imaottiirtu Stoff«, «nb »et- aibeitctc ibn «n einet bem »bentfeben ©rift" nie«« febi crebita Me» SJeiie. ««« bem Sam« mcifniinm »on febriflftc Oetiiben D«k<«rnie-

[^4]: tiltcin, «anlenltn, eebulmtiftetn nnb Ci. Tranhattn enlftanb bann tint bentjti»*itn»« mlfebc (itciatni bic an goboije, €ci*ll,jlcit, «tcbantraliflglcit, «icile unb Çl«gl«ii#mu« nie am bentfeben Roman ei« Scitenfind bat. Unla bei teuten mit »tafiijcben 3meden biibetc fia) jneift bit e*u»5Wnttfd)ule btt 3*t*gtlr!(n on«, beten Autorität, tift.immet 1*4 b U8cfti ift, mat bit btniftbtbutgttlitb' Houmrftbt ïitrutut yiobnjlit bat, obmebl fein ji Kjrt glociofcl l&erl »an bem 8ean|ifen gndet, bem tbeoieliicbtn Uebt»« **• 8e""' nentalfvflcmi, «tgejebrlcbcn iil. Dicfee Siicb-

[^5]: QNgt UMCt.

[^6]: G« icigt M •»« an* fafen bei nabelet ectcacbtnng, ba| bei anfebetarnb f. tinfaa Vt 6a|, baf *« e»«»»Wri" »" *"**• *- ihrem 6«in abbingt unb «io)t nmgefebrt, gleicb in feinen trflen ö«nftantn|t« attm 3bt«H«mn«, ant» bem »ttftc*t««. Wteli ,„ben*.»f MI«. €«—«i*. bngebt«*te nnb «ngem»bnte «uiebanungen ibtt dt« ©ef(*lebtli*e »oben bueeb ib» "»«'»t. »«*

[^7]: ,nag Ja«t4ttmt* Mk H* «• |iw W*' «^^•«obre.bbc.efcgi yt.K.mnrt U. lut; «iebialeb Mhan WHItfcbÄBameba. M U * «Jcmeat aafcwïW««-*«»* « * log «Mtfc Xb>t(^ke«8tb M*IL«la («afti* mt Ka f Wi»*c, ankw «otmf «Hjf k , Hkb, fribft m. e^3ata«ft filait g Hm H

[^8]: (jtbbik* bo Mtb«*«efobna«irktai. mh fcicbt t« mot tafnlé« Rtmoa mot ta ft Ja ci Mnrtf^tattnfe Wtbrn; ambirfca Haa V tbe Oinbcfeitigea, «la« « «4 bk Xbiaaag • M a ; ri Wabob«mt»«tbi»7a BBi|a rinn eamt1(ca<Jiir(a)lblgaag tat aattattamn. f1lrf,fnneirme«««nbni4tgftbl«»|a»^»t«. flaebbem Ztbt bt« btagn M batte b Wkmb ta »olen bk Orkaaag aoebet letta Mca mob, -^mt So Vtn« — bfcltmtmbma Wmiatia »«mbiertmlleb Mb«lll*ia«(*» •*"*• in ttb Jlcn, «*ae jtbm» m Mftai ta *•>** biefee kbtcttn, «abat «Jcfam gn iiifolgta, tiningrtifrn. » a «em Himam tabr>a mot, ri«nrtnfa V«n-«etaf Weng^tnlnl*a. wrb bit M M * < »^*laltoa«B da« OHft ta «abtin, mk t« aafcta 3mc«Va bkak, «»» t« (taa 3ttt banc bk Warte ak Ma Me lat Ngr «n«4t, tnbrm(k(aefj«lta oafleaab; «Ma Mt tnttrfo VIInaet awb« onineigtfélagen, bk nrfltfibt Vf» Ibkf tmf tbwai «itt amb bem mttle Mn Mfebea «on« «af Ma »abt-. •ig,*)nnb«e»«nneinene£kg. »f MIDkarc

[^9]: Part of a page from Das Volk containing Frederick Engels' review of Karl Marx's work A Contribution to the Critique of Political Economy







[^1]: a See present edition, Vol. 30.— Ed. b Das Volk, No. 5, June 4, 1859.— Ed. c See present edition, Vol. 30.— Ed.





**[p. 470]**

However, closer consideration also shows immediately that, already in its first consequences, the apparently so simple proposition—that the consciousness of men depends on their being and not the other way round—is a fatal blow to all forms of idealism, even the most concealed. Through it, all the conventional and customary views of history are denied. The entire traditional manner of political reasoning falls to the ground; patriotic nobility indignantly resists such an unprincipled interpretation. It was thus inevitable that the new point of view should shock not only the exponents of the bourgeoisie but also the mass of French socialists who intended to revolutionise the world by the magic formula,

liberté, égalité, fraternité. But it utterly enraged the vociferous German vulgar democrats. Nevertheless, they have been fond of trying to plagiarise the new ideas in their own interest, although with a rare lack of understanding.

The development of the materialist conception in respect of even a single historical example was a scientific task requiring years of quiet research, for it is evident that mere phrases can achieve nothing here and that only an abundance of critically examined historical material which has been completely mastered can make it possible to solve such a problem. Our party was propelled on to the political stage by the February Revolution and was thus prevented from pursuing purely scientific aims. The basic outlook, nevertheless, runs like an unbroken thread through all literary productions of the party. Every one of them shows that action in each particular case was initiated by direct material causes and not by the accompanying phrases, that on the contrary the political and legal phrases, like political action and its results, originated in material causes.

After the defeat of the Revolution of 1848-49, at a time when it became increasingly impossible to exert any influence on Germany from abroad, our party relinquished the field of emigrant squabbles—for that was the only feasible action left—to the vulgar democrats. While these were chasing about to their heart's content, scuffling today, fraternising tomorrow and once more washing their dirty linen in public the day after, while they went begging throughout America and immediately afterwards started another row over the division of the few dollars they had collected—our party was glad to have peace once more for study. It had the great advantage that its theoretical foundation was a new scientific

outlook the elaboration of which kept it busy enough; for this reason alone it could never become so demoralised as the "great men" of the exile.3

The book under consideration is the first result of these studies.

[^1]: a Cf. The Great Men of the Exile by Marx and Engels (present edition, Vol. 11, pp. 227-326).— Ed.



