---
Volume: 16
Document_Title: "98. K. Marx. A Radical View of the Peace "
Page_Range: "563-567"
---

# 98. K. Marx. A Radical View of the Peace 



**[p. 532]**

Karl Marx

A RADICAL VIEW OF THE PEACE

Paris, Oct. 20, 1859

The treaty of peace concluded at Zurich between the Plenipotentiaries of France and Austria, appears, in its main features, a simple reproduction of the articles stipulated at Villafranca.397 The negotiations for the definitive peace consuming about twice as much time as the operations of the war that stopped short before the walls of Mantua, there were a great many sanguine people ready to account for the slow-coach progress of the peacemakers by a deep-laid scheme on the part of Louis Bonaparte, who, they said, wanted to give to the Italians full scope for taking their affairs in their own hands, so that, Italian unity having once consolidated itself, the French liberator might, with good grace, back out of the awkward concessions made to Francis Joseph, and, from the word of his bond, appeal to the superior force of a fait accompli. Political contracts are not exempt from the casualties besetting civil contracts, which, according to the Code Napoleon, get nullified by the interference of a force majeure?98 The people arguing in this way have again betrayed their woful ignorance, not only of their pet hero's character, but of the traditional diplomacy of France, from the Red Cardinal3 down to the Man of December, and from the profligates of the Directory down to the Blues of 1848.399 The first article of that traditional diplomacy proclaims it the first duty of France to prevent the formation on her confines of mighty States, and, consequently, under all circumstances, to keep up the anti-Unitarian Constitu- tions of Italy and Germany. It is the same policy that dictated the peace of Münster, and the peace of Campoformio.400 The real

[^1]: a Richelieu.— Ed.





**[p. 533]**

Mazzini himself, in his appeal to Victor Emmanuel,3 confesses that the national stream of enthusiasm is rapidly congealing in provincial ponds, and that the conditions of a return to the old state of things, are in the finest way of maturing.403 It is true that the dreary intermezzo between the treaty of Villafranca and the peace of Zurich was filled up, in the Duchies and the Romagna, by some great state actions,404 under the management of Piedmontese stage directors; but, despite the noisy plaudits from all the galleries of Europe, those political tricksters played only into the hands of their secret foes. The Tuscanese, Modenese, Parmesans and Romagnoles, were welcome to establish Provisional Govern- ments, to depose their absentee Princes from their diminutive

[^1]: a G. Mazzini, A Vittorio Emanuele lettera.—Ed.





**[p. 534]**



[^1]: "the territorial limits of the Independent States of Italy, which did not take part in the last war, can be changed only with the assent of the other Powers of Europe, which took part in forming and guaranteeing the existence of these States." At the

[^2]: a Elected King.— Ed. b Revolutionary ways.— Ed. c The reference is to Articles 7 and 8 of the treaty.— Ed.





**[p. 535]**

Thus the provisional Italian Governments, having played the part cut out for them, are most scornfully ignored, and the populations, whom they have contrived to keep in such a normal state of passiveness, may, if they like, go a-begging at the doors of the framers of the treaty of Vienna.

Written on October 20, 1859 Reproduced from the New-York Daily Tribune First published in the New-York Daily Tribune, No. 5786 and the New-York Semi-Weekly Tribune, No. 1508, November 8, 1859

