---
Volume: 16
Document_Title: "107. K. Marx. Symptoms of the Revival of France's Internal Life "
Page_Range: "644-646"
---

# 107. K. Marx. Symptoms of the Revival of France's Internal Life 



**[p. 613]**

Karl Marx

[SYMPTOMS OF THE REVIVAL OF FRANCE'S INTERNAL LIFE]4;

Paris, November 9

People in this city are generally so much bored with the progress of liberty abroad that they almost forget minding the progress of servitude at home. Still, now and then, symptoms of returning internal life appear on the surface of the social body.

Take for instance M. Berryer's vigorous denunciation of the decay of the barreau3 and of the growing servility of the French Courts of Justice. Another instance is the efforts made by liberals of every shade of opinion to rally and make a literary stand at least against the streams of turpitude daily poured over the country through the floodgates of the Decembrist press. Thus at Paris Messrs. d'Haussonville, Jules Simon, Barthélemy-St.-Hilaire, Odilon Barrot, Duvergier de Hauranne, Barni, Hauréau and others, are trying their best in this direction. In the department de

la Meurthe a cluster of independent writers have started a periodical publication under the title of Varia with a view to combat the monster centralisation that envelops France in i^s deadly embrace, as the serpents did the body of Laocoon; and similar undertakings are set on foot in Alsace. The Courrier du Dimanche, however, a weekly Paris paper, now evidently takes the lead of the new liberal opposition. On casting a glance on its sheets, one becomes at once aware of the enormous difficulties its way is beset with, and, moreover, its writers appear more or less tainted with the exhalations of the corrupt medium they breathe

[^1]: a The Bar.— Ed.





**[p. 614]**

Written on November 9, 1858 Printed according to the original

First published in: K. Marx and Published in English for the first F. Engels, Works, Second Russian Edition, time Vol. 44, Moscow, 1977

[^1]: a The manuscript breaks off here.— Ed.



