---
Volume: 16
Document_Title: "108. F. Engels. The Italian War. 1859 "
Page_Range: "646-648"
---

# 108. F. Engels. The Italian War. 1859 



**[p. 615]**

Frederick Engels

THE ITALIAN WAR. 1859451

January 1 February 26

March April 23

24 25 26 27

29 May 1

Bonaparte's New-Year speech.3

Cowley's mission0 aimed at appeasement and evacuation of the Papal States by both [states].c

Austria arms and reinforces the army in Italy. Austrian ultimatum to Turin: immediate disarma- ment or hostilities. Cavour appeals to the Con- gress, to which, on England's proposal, France, Prussia and Russia agree.452

Sentries on the border. French troops land in Genoa. Austrians cross the Ticino, begin hostilities. Flight of the Grand Duke of Tuscanyd owing to revolution. Provisional Government, replaced by Piedmontese Commission453 on May 11. Accord- ing to reports from Vienna, offensive and defensive alliance between France and Russia. Austria definitively in Lomellina. Duchess of Parma forced to flee, returned for a few days, but then left for good.e

[^1]: a Napoleon Ill's address to the Austrian Ambassador von Hübner at a reception for the Diplomatic Corps in the Tuileries, January 1, 1859, The Times, No. 23196, January 6, 1859. See this volume, p. 149.— Ed.

[^2]: b See this volume, p. 304.— Ed. c France and Austria.— Ed. d Leopold II.— Ed. e "For good" is in English in the original.— Ed.





**[p. 24]**

June

July

5 In a dispatch Lord Russell advises against annexa- tion of Savoy.454

7 Villafranca armistice. 11 Ditto peace preliminaries^

Written about July 19, 1859 Printed according to the original

First published in: K. Marx and Published in English for the first F. Engels, Works, Second Russian Edition, time Vol. 44, Moscow, 1977

[^1]: a On the fighting at Montebello, Palestro, Magenta and Solferino see this volume, gip. 338-40, 360-63, 368-71, 372-79, 392-95, 396-99, 400-03.— Ed. '•-•' b See this volume, pp. 407-09, 412-14, 416-20, and also Engels' letter to Marx of July 14, 1859 (present edition, Vol. 40).— Ed.



