---
Volume: 16
Document_Title: "109. K. Marx. On the Division of Labour "
Page_Range: "648-652"
---

# 109. K. Marx. On the Division of Labour 



**[p. 617]**

Karl Marx

[ON THE DIVISION OF LABOUR]

forming a [socijal whole. My labour thus appears as an independent part of all social labour. The various kinds of labour represent various parts of social labour, and taken together all appear thus as the division of labour, and through exchange they constitute a whole^ mutually supplementary parts, links in a system of social labour

In this division of labour which is manifested in exchange of the various kinds of useful labour, two things are to be distinguished.

First: What here relates the various kinds of labour to one another is their variety, and not their sameness, their manifoldness, and not their unity. The division of social labour is an aggregate of manifold kinds of labour, which are mutually supplementary precisely through their difference, their variety.

The shoemaker wants to exchange the bootmaking labour contained in boots for bread, tea, sugar, coal, meat, clothes, a hat, etc., that is, for the baker's labour, the labour of the tea-grower, the labour of the sugar-refiner, the labour of the butcher, the labour of the tailor, the labour of the hat-maker, and so on. He exchanges his labour for that of the others because the kinds of labour performed by the others are different from his, and therefore satisfy needs which his own labour does not satisfy; they are realised in means of subsistence in which his own labour is not realised. If the others' labour were of the same kind as his own, he would not need it, and would not exchange his labour for theirs. Hence, the kinds of labour are exchanged for one another, insofar as they are useful labour, because they are different from one another, to the extent that they differ from one another and belong to different systems of human needs.



**[p. 618]**

My labour is one-sided; but it satisfies a social need, the need of other members of society. I could not perform exclusively this one-sided labour if I did not know that other members of society perform other necessary kinds of labour and thereby complement mine. Labour for the satisfaction of a social need is thus exclusive labour of separate definite individuals who make it their profes- sion.

Written in the autumn of 1859 Printed according to the original

First published in: K. Marx and Published in English for the first F. Engels, Works, Second Russian Edition, time Vol. 44, Moscow, 1977

APPENDICES



