---
Volume: 10
Document_Title: "2. K. Marx and F. Engels. Announcement of the Neue Rheinische Zeitung. Politisch- ökonomische Revue "
Page_Range: "29-31"
---

# 2. K. Marx and F. Engels. Announcement of the Neue Rheinische Zeitung. Politisch- ökonomische Revue 



**[p. 5]**

Karl Marx and Frederick Engels

[ANNOUNCEMENT OF THE NEUE RHEINISCHE ZEITUNG. POLITISCH-ÖKONOMISCHE REVUE]2

THE NEUE RHEINISCHE ZEITUNG. Politisch-ökonomische Revue

edited by Karl Marx will appear in January 1850.

The periodical bears the title of the newspaper of which it is to be considered the continuation. One of its tasks will consist in returning in retrospect to the period which has elapsed since the suppres- sion of the Neue Rheinische Zeitungß

The greatest interest of a newspaper, its daily intervention in the movement and speaking directly from the heart of the movement, its reflecting day-to-day history in all its amplitude, the continuous and impassioned interaction between the people and its daily press, this interest is inevitably lacking in a review. On the other hand, a review provides the advantage of comprehending events in a broader perspective and having to dwell only upon the more important matters. It permits a comprehensive and scientific investigation of the economic conditions which form the foundation of the whole political movement.

A time of apparent calm such as the present must be employed precisely for the purpose of elucidating the period of revolution just experienced, the character of the conflicting parties, and the social conditions which determine the existence and the struggle of these parties.

The review will be published in monthly issues of at least five printers' sheets at a subscription price of 24 silver groschen per quarter, payable upon delivery of the first issue. Single issues 10 sgr. Messrs. Schuberth and Co., in Hamburg, will attend to retail distribution through bookshops.



**[p. 6]**

London, Dec. 15, 1849

K. Schramm

Manager of the Neue Rheinische Zeitung 4 Anderson Street, King's Road, Chelsea

Published in the Westdeutsche Printed according to the newspaper Zeitung No. 6, January 8, 1850 „ U1. , , . ^ ,. , c >u *• ° J ' Published in English lor the tirst time

