---
Volume: 10
Document_Title: "11. Striking Proofs of the Glorious Progress of Red Republicanism ! "
Page_Range: "45-48"
---

# 11. Striking Proofs of the Glorious Progress of Red Republicanism ! 



**[p. 21]**

ii

STRIKING PROOFS OF THE GLORIOUS PROGRESS OF RED REPUBLICANISM!

[The Democratic Review, February 1850] Paris, January 21st, 1850

A great many important events have occurred since my last, but as the generality of readers will have been informed of them from the daily and weekly papers, I shall refrain from going over the same ground from beginning to end, and instead shall limit this letter to some general observations on the state of the country.

During the last twelve or fifteen months, the revolutionary spirit has made immense progress throughout France. A class, which by its social position was kept apart, as much as possible in civilised society, from taking an interest in public business, which by the old monarchical legislation was shut out from all political rights, which never read a newspaper, and which, nevertheless, forms the vast majority of Frenchmen—this class, at last, is rapidly coming to its senses. This class is the small peasantry, numbering about twenty- eight millions of men, women, and children, counting amongst its ranks from eight to nine millions of small landed proprietors, who possess, in the shape of freehold34 property, at least four-fifths of the soil of France. This class has been oppressed by all governments since 1815, not excepting the provisional government, which imposed on it the tax of 45 additional centimes upon every franc of the land-tax,35 which in France is very heavy. This class,borne down also by a band of usurers to whom their property almost without exception is mortgaged at extraordinary high interest, is at last beginning to see that no government, except one acting in the interest of the working men of the towns, will free them from the misery and starvation into which, notwithstanding their land- allotments, they are falling deeper and deeper every day.a This class,

[^1]: a Cf. this volume, pp. 27-28, 122-23 and 262-63.— Ed.

[^2]: 3-1124





**[p. 22]**

The history of the last months affords innumerable proofs of this most important fact. Take the circular of Minister d'Hautpoul to the gendarmerie, ;by which espionage is carried into the very heart of the most obscure village; take the law against the schoolmasters,36

who, in French villages, are generally the best expression of the public opinion of their localities, and who are now to be placed at the mercy of government, because they now almost all profess social- democratic opinions; and many other facts. But one of the most striking proofs is to be found in the election which has just taken place in the department du Gard.37 This department is known as the most ancient stronghold of the "Whites"—the Legitimists.38 It was the scene of the most horrid outrages against the republicans in 1794 and '95, after the downfall of Robespierre; it was the central seat of the "white terrorism" in 1815, when Protestants and Liberals were publicly murdered, and outrages of the most horrible nature were committed on the wives, daughters, and sisters of those victims by Legitimist mobs, headed by the renowned Trestaillon, and protected by the government of legitimate Louis XVIII. Well, this department had to elect a deputy, in the place of a Legitimist, deceaseda; and the result was, a great majority for a thoroughly Red candidate,0 while the two Legitimist candidates were in a signal minority.0

Another proof of the rapid progress of this alliance of the working men in the towns and the peasantry of the country, is the new law on public education.39 The most inveterate Voltairians of the bourgeoisie, even M. Thiers, see there is no way left to oppose that

[^1]: a Jean Baptiste de Beaune.— Ed.

[^2]: Etienne Favand. — Ed. c E. de Grail and H. de Lourdoueix.— Ed.





**[p. 23]**

Again. There is, now, a general rush of all public papers and public characters, that are not exacdy reactionaries, to claim the once despised tide of "Socialist". The oldest enemies of Socialism now proclaim themselves Socialists. The National, even the Siècle, monarchist under Louis Philippe, declare they are Socialists. Even Marrast, the infamous traitor of 1848, now hopes, though in vain, to get elected by proclaiming himself a Socialist. The people, however, are not thus to be duped, and the rope to hang that vagabond is ready, and only waiting for the occasion.

To-day they discuss in the National Assembly the law for killing the remaining 468 prisoners of the June insurrection,40 by transport- ing them to, and setting them to work in the most unhealthy parts of Algeria. No doubt the law will pass by an immense majority. But before the unfortunate heroes of that grand battle of labour can reach the shore destined to bury them, there is little doubt but another popular storm will have swept away the voters of this law of murder, and carry, perhaps, to that land of banishment, those of the present majority who may have escaped a prompter, more radical, and most righteous revenge on the part of the people.

[^1]: 3*



