---
Volume: 10
Document_Title: "III. Signs of the Times.- The Anticipated Revolution "
Page_Range: "48-51"
---

# III. Signs of the Times.- The Anticipated Revolution 



**[p. 24]**

i n

SIGNS OF THE TIMES.— THE ANTICIPATED REVOLUTION

[The Democratic Review, March 1850]

Paris, February 19th, 1850

I must limit this letter somewhat in space, but the facts which have occurred in the course of this month are so striking, that they will speak for themselves. The revolution is advancing so rapidly, that every one must see its approach. In all spheres of society it is spoken of as imminent; and all foreign papers, even if opposed to democracy, declare it an unavoidable thing. Nay, more, you may with almost certainty foresee, that if no unexpected events give a turn to public affairs, the great contest between the united Ordermongers and the vast majority of the people, can hardly be postponed beyond the latter end of this spring. And what the result of that contest will be, is a matter admitting of no doubt. The people of Paris are so sure of having very shortly the most splendid case for a revolution they ever had, that there is a general order amongst them — "Avoid all petty squabbles, submit to anything which puts not a vital question to you." Thus, with all their efforts, the other day, when the trees of liberty were cut down, the government could not excite the working people to even a petty street-row, and the individuals dancing round the tree at the Porte Saint-Martin, which your London Illustrated News depicted in such a terrific manner,3

consisted of a set of police spies who lost all their day's job through the coolness of the people.41 Thus, in spite of what the government papers say to the contrary, the 24th of this month will pass off very quietly.b The government would give almost anything if they could have a row in Paris, with some fictitious conspiracies and outbreaks

[^1]: a See The Illustrated London News No. 412, February 9, 1850.— Ed. The second anniversary of the February Revolution. Cf. this volume, p. 128.— Ed.





**[p. 25]**



[^1]: a Duprat's interpellation made in the Legislative Assembly on February 16, 1850. dealt with the new system of military administration.— Ed.





**[p. 26]**

You see what even this precious majority thinks of Louis Napoleon! The Minister of War then got up, and, turning to the left, concluded a most violent speech with these words: "And now, gentlemen, if you like to commence we are ready!"e This expression of the Minister will show you more than anything, how generally a violent struggle is expected.

In the meantime, the Social-Democratic party are actively preparing for the elections. Although there is a chance for the "honest and moderate", to elect one or two of their candidates in Paris, where some sixty thousand working men have been, under a variety of pretexts, struck off the voting register; yet there is no doubt that the socialists will have a signal triumph in the departments. The government themselves are expecting it. They therefore have prepared a measure for doing away with what is now openly called the conspiracy of "Universal Suffrage". They intend to make the suffrage indirect; the voters to elect a limited number of electors, who again name the representative. In this the government are sure of the support of the majority. But as this amounts to an open overthrow of the constitution, which cannot be revised before 1851, and by an assembly elected for the purpose, they expect violent resistance on the part of the people. These, therefore, are to be intimidated by the foreign armies making their appearance on the Rhine at the time this measure is brought into the House. If this really come to pass—and Louis Napoleon seems foolish enough to risk such a thing—then you may expect to hear something like the thunder of a revolution. And then, the Lord have mercy upon the souls of all Napoleons, Changarniers, and Ordermongers!

[^1]: Napoleon I Bonaparte.— Ed. See Le Moniteur universel No. 48, February 17, 1850.— Ed. André Dupin.— Ed.

[^2]: Alphonse d'Hautpoul.— Ed. e Cf. this volume, pp. 32 and 128.— Ed.



