---
Volume: 10
Document_Title: "VI "
Page_Range: "57-58"
---

# VI 



**[p. 33]**

VI 47

[The Democratic Review, June 1850]

[End of May 1850]

"If the proletarians suffer the suffrage to be taken from them, they submit to the undoing of the Revolution of February, as far as they are concerned For them the republic will no longer exist. They will be shut out from it. Will they allow this?

"The law certainly will pass. Not a titde of it will be weakened. The will of the majority, upon this point, has already shown itself clearly.48 And as matters stand to-day, no one can tell what will follow, whether the people will rise and hurl down the government and Assembly, or whether they will wait until another occasion. Paris seems quiet; there is no direct sign of an approaching revolution; but a spark will suffice to call forth a tremendous explosion.

"That explosion would have taken place before now but for the treacherous conduct of the popular chiefs, who have been doing nothing but preaching 'peace', 'tranquillity', and 'majestic calm'.3

This, however, cannot last long. The situation of France is eminently revolutionary. The Ordermongers cannot stand where they are. They must advance a step every day in order to maintain themselves. If this law should pass without provoking a revolution, they will come out with fresh, more violent, and more direct attacks on the constitution and the Republic. They want an émeute, and they will have a revolution, and have it soon, too. For it must be borne in mind that this is a question of weeks, perhaps days, not of years."

[^1]: a An allusion to Victor Hugo's speech made in the Legislative Assembly on May 21, 1850, in which he called for "calme majestueux".— Ed.



