---
Volume: 10
Document_Title: "5. K. Marx and F. Engels. Announcement "
Page_Range: "65-69"
---

# 5. K. Marx and F. Engels. Announcement 



**[p. 41]**

Karl Marx and Frederick Engels

ANNOUNCEMENT58

Circumstances beyond the control of the editorial board delayed publication of the first issue of the Neue Rheinische Zeitung. The second issue will therefore appear a fortnight after the first at the latest, and will contain amongst others the following articles:

1848-49. II. June 13, 1849.—III. Repercussions of June 13 on the Continent.—IV. Current Situation; England.59—By Karl Marx. The Campaign for the German Imperial Constitution. III. The Palatinate.—IV. To Die for the Fatherland.60—By Frederick Engels. The third issue will contain among other items: What Is Bourgeois Property? II. Landed Property.—Lectures

by Karl Marx. The Last Days of the German Parliament. By W. Wolff. The Financial State of Prussia, etc., etc.62

Care will be taken that in future the paper is published between the first and the tenth of each month.

The Editorial Board

[^1]: given at the German Workers' Educational Society in London,61

[^2]: Written in late February 1850 Printed according to the journal

[^3]: First published in the Neue Rheinische Published in English for the first. Zeitung. Politisch-ökonomische Revue time No. 1, January 1850, London, Hamburg, New York, 1850





Sfltut

Ytbtgttt tow

A a r ! SR«*,?.

185 0.

0 « » ft » v g un* 0t « » * 0 « » t

M £J>u*Mtl) * Ar.

[^1]: Cover of the Atewe Rheinische Zeitung. Politisch-ökonomische Revue





