---
Volume: 10
Document_Title: "15. K. Marx and F. Engels. Review, March- April 1850 "
Page_Range: "362-366"
---

# 15. K. Marx and F. Engels. Review, March- April 1850 



**[p. 338]**

Karl Marx and Frederick Engels

REVIEW

[March-April 1850]246

(Our monthly review had to be held over from the last issue due to lack of space. We print here only that part of the review which concerns England.)

Shortly before the anniversary of the February Revolution, when Carlier had the trees of liberty3 cut down, Punch printed a drawing of a tree of liberty whose leaves are bayonets and whose fruits are bombs, and opposite this French tree of liberty, bristling with its bayonets, in a song of its own it sings the praises of the tree of English liberty, bearing the only sound fruit: pounds, shillings and pence.b

But this feeble counting-house joke vanishes beside the immense outbursts of rage with which The Times has been foaming since March 10 at the triumphs of "anarchy".c The reactionary party in England, as in all countries, feels the blow struck in Paris as if it itself had been directly hit.

What threatens "order" in England most at present, however, is not the dangers emanating from Paris but a new and quite direct consequence of this order, a fruit of that English tree of liberty: a trade crisis.

In our January review (No. 2)d we already referred to the approach of the crisis. Several circumstances have hastened it. Before the last crisis in 1845, surplus capital found an outlet in railway speculation. The over-production and over-speculation in

[^1]: See this volume, p. 24.— Ed. b Punch, London, March 1850, Vol. 18, p. 92.— Ed. c The Times No. 20436, March 14, 1850. On March 10, 1850, the Left-wing forces in France scored a success in a by-election to the Legislative Assembly.— Ed.

[^2]: See this volume, pp. 263-65.— Ed.





**[p. 339]**



The effects of the trade crisis now breaking will be more sig- nificant than those of any crisis hitherto. It coincides with the ag- ricultural crisis which already began with the repeal of the Corn Laws in England247 and was intensified with the recent good har- vests. For the first time England is simultaneously experiencing an industrial crisis and an agricultural crisis. This double crisis, in England is being hastened and extended, and made more inflammable by the simultaneously impending convulsions on the Continent, and the continental revolutions will assume an incomparably more pro- nounced socialist character through the recoil of the English crisis on the world market. It is common knowledge that no European country reacts so directly, so extensively and so intensively to the effects of the English crisis as Germany. The reason is simple: Germany forms the largest continental market for England's exports, and the major German export articles, wool and corn, have by far their most significant outlet in England. History seems to have a weakness for that epigram to the Friends of Order, according to which the working classes revolt from insufficient consumption and the upper classes go bankrupt from superfluous production.

The Whigs will naturally be the first victims of the crisis. As of old they will abandon the helm of state as soon as the threatening storm breaks out. And this time they will say farewell to the Downing Street offices for good. A short-lived Tory ministry may follow them in the first instance, but the ground will be quaking under it, all the opposition parties will unite against it, with the industrialists in the van. These have no such popular panacea to oppose to the crisis as they had in the repeal of the Corn Laws. They will be forced to advance at least to a reform of Parliament. That is, they will assume the political power which cannot be denied them, in conditions which open the doors of Parliament to the proletariat, place the demands of the latter on the agenda of the House of Commons and hurl England into the European revolution.

* * *•

We have but little to add to these notes, written a month ago, concerning the impending trade crisis. The momentary improve- ment in business which regularly comes in spring has at last occurred this time also, although admittedly to a lesser degree than usual. French industry, which for the most part supplies light summer



**[p. 341]**

Commerce in East India has experienced a momentary improve- ment as well.- The more favourable rate of exchange in relation to England allowed the sellers to get rid of part of their stock below former prices, and the Bombay market was thus eased a little. This local and momentary improvement of business is also one of those border-line cases which occur from time to time, particularly at the start of every crisis, and which only have an insignificant influence on its general course of development.

On the other hand, reports have just come in from America which depict the market there as completely depressed. The American market, however, is the most decisive. With the glutting of the American market, with the standstill in business and the fall of prices in America the crisis proper will begin—the direct, rapid and irresistible reaction upon England will commence. We need only refer to the crisis of 1837. Only one article continues to rise in America: the United States national debt bonds, the only state bond which offers secure asylum to the capital of our European Friends of Order.

Following the entry of America into the recession brought about by over-production we may expect the crisis to develop rather more rapidly in the coming month than hitherto. Political developments on the Continent are likewise pressing daily more urgently towards a showdown, and the coincidence of trade crisis and revolution, which has already been mentioned several times in this Revue* is becoming more and more certain. Que les destins s'accomplissent!b

London, April 18, 1850

[^1]: Written between mid-March and April 18, 1850

[^2]: First published in the Neue Rheinische Zeitung. Politisch-ökonomische Revue No. 4, 1850

[^3]: See this volume, pp. 52-53.— Ed. Let fate take its course! — Ed

[^4]: Printed according to the journal

[^5]: Published in English for the first time

[^6]: 13-1124



