---
Volume: 10
Document_Title: "23. K. Marx and F. Engels. Address of the Central Authority to the League, June 1850 "
Page_Range: "395-402"
---

# 23. K. Marx and F. Engels. Address of the Central Authority to the League, June 1850 



**[p. 371]**

Karl Marx and Frederick Engels

ADDRESS OF THE CENTRAL AUTHORITY TO THE LEAGUE270

June 1850

CENTRAL AUTHORITY TO THE LEAGUE

Brothers!

In our last circular letter,3 brought to you by the emissary of the League,b we gave you an account of the position of the workers' party and, in particular, the League, both at the present time and in the event of a revolution.

The chief purpose of this letter is to report on the present state of the League.

The defeats of the revolutionary party last summer brought for a moment the League to the point of almost total disorganisation. The most active League members who had taken part in the various movements were scattered; contact was lost, addresses were unreli- able, and this together with the danger of letters being opened made correspondence impossible for a time. So until towards the end of last year the Central Authority was condemned to complete inactivity.

As the first effects of the defeat suffered wore off, the need for a strong secret organisation of the revolutionary party throughout Germany made itself felt. In the Central Authority this need gave rise to the decision to send an emissary to Germany and Switzerland. On the other hand it led to an attempt to organise a new clandestine group in Switzerland and to an attempt by the Cologne community to reorganise the League in Germany on their own initiative.

In Switzerland, early in the year, a number of refugees who had made a more or less distinguished name for themselves in the various movements formed themselves into a group whose aim was

[^1]: a See this volume, pp. 277-87.—Ed.

[^2]: Heinrich Bauer.— Ed.



At the time a large number of people from Baden and the Palatinate seeking positions or with lesser ambitions were in Switzerland. For them this group offered desirable opportunities for self-advancement.

Nor were the instructions which the group sent to its agents and which are in the possession of the Central Authority of a kind to inspire confidence. The.absence of a definite party point of view as well as the attempt to bring all the available oppositional elements into a specious unity were poorly concealed under a mass of detail about industrial, agricultural, political and military conditions in the different localities. The strength of this group was likewise very insignificant. According to the complete list of members in our possession the whole society at its zenith consisted of barely 30 members in Switzerland. It is noteworthy that among these there were hardly any workers. From the start it was an army consisting exclusively of N.C.O.s and officers without soldiers. It included people like P. Fries and Greiner from the Palatinate, Körner from Elberfeld, Sigel, etc.

They sent two agents to Germany. The first, Bruhn, was a League member from Holstein. He contrived by false pretences to induce a number of League members and communities to join the new group for a time, in the belief that it was the resurrected League. At the same time he sent a report on the League to the Swiss Central Authority in Zurich and another on the Swiss group to us. Not content with this ambiguous position, while he was still in correspondence with us, he wrote direct libels to the above-named people in Frankfurt, who had been won for the Swiss affairs, and instructed them to have nothing to do with London. Because of this he was at once expelled from the League. The matter in Frankfurt was settled by the League emissary. For the re§t Bruhn's labour on behalf of the Swiss Central Authority remained without effect. The second agent was a student named Schurz from Bonn. He too achieved nothing because, as he wrote to Zurich, "he found that the League already controlled all useful forces". He then left Germany suddenly and is now drifting around Brussels and Paris, where the

Another attempt of the same sort was made earlier by Struve, Sigel and others, who were united in Geneva at the time. These people were impertinent enough to pretend that the organisation they had tried to form actually was the League and to misuse the names of the League members for this purpose. Of course, their lies deceived no one. Their attempt was so futile in all respects that the few remaining members of this abortive organisation in Switzerland were finally forced to join the group already mentioned. But the more impotent this coterie became the more imposing were the titles they gave to themselves—like "Central Committee of European Democracy", etc. Here in London, too, Struve continued his efforts in this direction together with other disillusioned great men. Manifestos and invitations to join the "Central Bureau of the United German Emigration" and the "Central Committee of European Democra- cy"2 2 were sent all over Germany, but once more without the slightest response.

The alleged connections between this coterie and French and other non-German revolutionaries simply do not exist. All its activities are confined to a number of petty intrigues among the local German refugees. They have no direct effect on the League and represent no threat. It is easy to keep an eye on them.

All attempts of this sort either have the same goal as the League, i. e. the revolutionary organisation of the workers' party. In this case they destroy the centralisation and strength of the party by fragmenting it and so they are definitely to be regarded as harmful separatism. Or they can only aim at misusing the workers' party for purposes alien or directly opposed to it. The workers' party can use other parties and party factions for its own purposes on occasion but must never subordinate itself to any other party. But those people who were in the government during the last movement0 and who

[^1]: a Wilhelm Wolff.— Ed. b Ernst Dronke.— Ed. c The reference is to the insurgent movement for the Imperial Constitution in Germany in the spring and summer of 1849.— Ed.

[^2]: 14-1124





**[p. 374]**

We have the following to report about the state of the League.

I. Belgium

The organisation of the League as it existed among the Belgian workers in 1846 and 1847 has, of course, disappeared since 1848, when the chief members were arrested, condemned to death and had their sentences commuted to imprisonment for life.273 In general the League in Belgium has lost much of its strength since the February Revolution and the expulsion of most of the members of the German Workers' Society274 from Brussels. The present policy of the police has not permitted it to reorganise. Despite this a community has managed to survive in Brussels to this day and it functions to the best of its ability.

II. Germany

It had been the intention of the Central Authority to give in this circular a special report on the situation of the League in Germany. But this is not possible at the present time as the Prussian police is investigating a widespread organisation among the revolutionary party.3 This circular will be sent to Germany by a safe route but copies may possibly fall into the hands of the police here and there in the course of distribution within Germany. It must therefore be so formulated that its content will not give the police any evidence that could be used against the League. For the moment then the Central Authority confines itself to the following remarks.

The chief centres of the League in Germany are Cologne, Frankfurt am Main, Hanau, Mainz, Wiesbaden, Hamburg, Schwe- rin, Berlin, Breslau, Liegnitz, Glogau,b Leipzig, Nuremberg, Munich, Bamberg, Würzburg, Stuttgart and Baden.

The following are appointed leading districts: Hamburg for Schleswig-Holstein; Schwerin for Mecklenburg; Breslau for Silesia; Leipzig for Saxony and Berlin; Nuremberg for Bavaria; Cologne for Rhineland and Westphalia.

For the time being the communities in Göttingen, Stuttgart and Brussels shall remain in direct communication with the Central

[^1]: a See this volume, pp. 378 and 382-83.— Ed.

[^2]: The Polish names are Wroclaw, Legnica, Glogow.— Ed.



The position of the League in Baden will not be determined until receipt of the report from the emissary sent there and to Swit- zerland.3

Where, as in Schleswig-Holstein and Mecklenburg, there are peasants' and labourers' associations, League members have been able directly to influence them and in part to gain complete control. The workers' and labourers' associations in Saxony, Franconia, Hesse and Nassau are also for the most part under the leadership of the League. The most influential members of the Workers' Fraternity275 also belong to the League. The Central Authority would point out to all communities and League members that such influence on the workers', sport, peasants' and labourers' associa- tions, etc., is of the very greatest importance and should be achieved wherever possible. The Central Authority requests the leading districts and the communities which correspond directly with it to make special mention of what has happened in this respect in their next reports.

The emissary to Germany,b who has received a commendation from the Central Authority for his efforts, has everywhere admitted only the most reliable people as members to the League and has left the further expansion of the League in their hands, relying on their greater knowledge of local conditions. Whether it will be possible to recruit resolute revolutionaries to the League will depend on the situation in the various localities. Where this is not possible a second class of League members should be formed from among people who do not yet understand the communist consequences of the present movement but who are useful and reliable. This second class must be told that their organisation is purely local or provincial and it must constantly be under the supervision of the actual League members and authorities. For with the aid of these additional contacts it will be possible to gain a firm grip on the peasants' and sport associations. The detailed organisation can be left to the leading districts and the Central Authority looks forward to their reports on these matters as soon as possible.

One community has proposed to the Central Authority that a League congress be convened immediately on German soil. The communities and districts will realise themselves that in the present circumstances it is not advisable to convene even provincial

[^1]: a Ernst Dronke.— Ed.

[^2]: Heinrich Bauer.— Ed.

[^3]: 14*





**[p. 376]**

III. Switzerland

We are still awaiting the report of our emissary13 and so we shall return to this in greater detail in our next circular.

IV. France

Contacts with the German workers in Besançon and other places in the Jura will be re-established from Switzerland. In Paris, Ewerbeck, the League member who has been the leader of the communities there, has announced his resignation from the League as he thinks that his literary activities are more important. In consequence, contact has been disrupted for the time being and must be re-established with all the more caution as the Parisians have admitted a number of people who are quite useless and who in the past have even been directly hostile to the League.

V. England

The London district is the strongest in the whole League. It has distinguished itself above all by the fact that for some years now it has financed the League and in particular the emissaries' journeys almost unaided. It recently strengthened itself still further by admitting new elements and it continually provides leadership for the local German Workers' Society276 as well as the most energetic section of German refugees here.

The Central Authority maintains contact with the resolutely revolutionary parties among the French, English and Hungarians through a few members delegated for the purpose.

[^1]: Peter Nothjung.— Ed. Ernst Dronke's first report to the Central Authority was sent on July 3, 1850. Dronke wrote to Engels about the League's affairs on July 10, 1850.— Ed.





**[p. 377]**

The leaders of the revolutionary Chartist party are also in regular close contact with the delegates of the Central Authority.277 Their journals are at our disposal. The breach between this revolutionary . independent workers' party and the more conciliatory faction led by O'Connor was substantially hastened thanks to League delegates.

Similarly the Central Authority is in contact with the most progressive party of the Hungarian refugees. This party is important as it boasts a number of excellent military leaders whose services would be available to the League in a revolution.

The Central Authority requests the leading districts to distribute this circular among their members as quickly as possible and to report soon. All members are urged to make the greatest possible efforts, especially at this moment when the situation is so critical that the outbreak of a new revolution can no longer be very far away.

Written in June 1850 Printed according to the book

[^1]: Distributed in manuscript copies

[^2]: Published by Engels in the Appendices to the book: K. Marx, Enthüllungen über den Kommunisten-prozess zu Köln, Hottingen-Zürich, 1885



