---
Volume: 10
Document_Title: "25. K. Marx and F. Engels. To the Editor of TheSpectator "
Page_Range: "404-405"
---

# 25. K. Marx and F. Engels. To the Editor of TheSpectator 



**[p. 380]**

Karl Marx and Frederick Engels

TO THE EDITOR OF THE SPECTATOR

(Private)

Sir,

We take the liberty of requesting you to insert the enclosed letter in your next.8 We have every reason to believe, that there exists, on the part of the government, an inclination to enforce the Alien Bill and to have it then renewed by Parliament. We are, it seems, to be the first victims. We think that the honour of the English nation is somewhat interested in preventing the execution of such a plan; we think, too, we cannot do better but appeal frankly from the British Government to public opinion. And, therefore, hope you will not refuse to our letter the publicity which your widely-circulated paper is sure to give it.

In case you should wish any further information, we shall be glad to give it, if you will only be kind enough to let us know when and where we can meet you.

We are, Sir, yours most respectfully.

[^1]: Written on June 14, 1850 Printed according to the original in Engels' hand

[^2]: First published in: K. Marx and F. Engels,

[^3]: Works, first Russ. ed., Vol. XXV, Moscow, 1934

[^4]: Published in English for the first time

[^5]: a The following sentence is crossed out in the manuscript: "The spy system exercised upon us, by the British Government, to an almost incredible extent, is a sufficient proof, that the reiterated requests of the Prussian Ambassador"—Ed.



