---
Volume: 10
Document_Title: "35. K. Marx and F. Engels. Editorial Comment on the Article ' Tailoring in London or the Struggle between Big and Small Capital' by J. G. Eccarius "
Page_Range: "509-510"
---

# 35. K. Marx and F. Engels. Editorial Comment on the Article " Tailoring in London or the Struggle between Big and Small Capital" by J. G. Eccarius 



**[p. 485]**

Karl Marx and Frederick Engels

[EDITORIAL COMMENT ON THE ARTICLE "TAILORING IN LONDON OR THE STRUGGLE

BETWEEN BIG AND SMALL CAPITAL"

BY J. G. ECCARIUS]345

The author of this article is himself a worker in one of London's tailoring shops.3 We ask the German bourgeoisie how many authors it numbers capable of grasping the real movement in a similar manner?

Before the proletariat fights out its victories on the barricades and in the battle lines it gives notice of its impending rule with a series of intellectual victories.

The reader will note how here, instead of the sentimental, moral and psychological criticism employed against existing conditions by Weitling and other workers who engage in authorship, a purely materialist understanding and a freer one, unspoilt by sentimental whims, confronts bourgeois society and its movement. Whereas craftsmen resist the collapse of their semi-medieval position and would like to unite as craftsmen, particularly in Germany and to a great extent also in France, the subjection of craft labour to large-scale industry is comprehended here as a step forward and celebrated, while at the same time, in the results and productions of large-scale industry, the real preconditions of the proletarian revolution, generated by history itself and daily generating them- selves anew, are recognised and revealed.

[^1]: Written in October 1850 Printed according to the journal

[^2]: First published in the Neue Rheinische Zeitung. Politisch-ökonomische Revue No. 5-6, 1850, marked by the editors "Editorial Comment"

[^3]: Published in English for the first time

[^4]: The word Schneidershop used in the original is a mixture of the German Schneider and the English "shop".— Ed.



