---
Volume: 10
Document_Title: "4. Accounts of the Committee of Support for German Refugees in London "
Page_Range: "623-626"
---

# 4. Accounts of the Committee of Support for German Refugees in London 



**[p. 12]**

ACCOUNTS OF THE COMMITTEE OF SUPPORT FOR GERMAN REFUGEES IN LONDON

On November 18 of this year the German Workers' Society in London held a general meeting, attended by the majority of the political refugees there, to adopt the accounts of the Committee of Support [for refugees] formed at an earlier meeting.3

[^1]: Total receipts since September 22 of this year were:

[^2]: £ s d

[^3]: 1. From the Workers'Society in London 2 8 4 /2 2. From the German Readers' Society in Lon- don 2 15 —

[^4]: 3. From the editorial board of The Northern

[^5]: Star in London — 5 —

[^6]: 4. From Citizen Eddäus in London — 1 —

[^7]: 5. Collected by Citizen Siefert in London — 9 6 6. From Citizen Görringer in London 1 5 9 7. Collected by Citizen H. Bauer in London 7 1 9 8. From German workers in Paris, through

[^8]: Citizen Heidecker — 12 1 9. From Huddersfield through Citizen Krepp 3 — —

[^9]: 10. From Stettin in Prussia —

[^10]: Total 5l/2

[^11]: See this volume, p. 597.— Ed.





**[p. 4]**

Expenditures on refugees from September 22 to November 18 of this year were:

£ s 1. Kleiner 2. Zschinski 3. Fröhlich 4. Henser 5. Egener — 6. W. Töpffer 7. J. Töpffer 8. To the refugees Blei, Bergmann, Osoba,

Wessely, Braulichy and Klein, together 2 8 10 9. To the refugee merchant Schopp

and family, against an I. O. U 4 — — 10. Costs of printing and subscription

lists 1 15 2'/ 2

Total 26 3 '/2 Total receipts 36 12 5l/2 Total expenditure 26 3 /2

Cash in hand 10 9 5

Clothing has also been received which has been distributed to the refugees.

The above accounts were adopted unanimously by the meeting. Receipts are to hand for all expenditures and the donors from Huddersfield and Stettin who were not represented have been requested to nominate representatives in London to inspect the receipts.

As the Committee had been depleted by the departure of two members, A. Füster and K. Blind, and as, moreover, an attempt is being made here to set up a counter-committee, independent of the Workers' Society and of the refugees of the social-democratic trend, the Committee returned its mandate to the Society.

The Society thereupon resolved:

1. That the German Workers' Society, acknowledging the work of the hitherto existing Committee, appoints a new committee of five of its members under the title "Social-Democratic Committee of Support for German Refugees".426 This Committee takes over the balance of the former Committee.

2. The Committee will give priority to members of the social-democratic party but, as far as its funds allow, will not exclude refugees of other trends from its support.



**[p. 601]**

3. The Committee will present monthly accounts to the Workers' Society and will thereupon be reappointed. The accounts will be published in the Deutsche Londoner Zeitung, in The Northern Star, in the Frankfurt Neue Deutsche Zeitung, in Cologne in the Westdeutsche Zeitung, in the Norddeutsche Freie Presse in Hamburg, in the Berlin Demokratische Zeitung, in the Schweizerische National-Zeitung, in the Schnellpost and in the Staatszeitung in New York.3

4. Contributors will be entitled to be personally present at the monthly presentation of accounts, or, if they are not in London, to send a representative to check the books, receipts, and cash in hand.

5. The Workers' Society appoints as committee members Karl Marx, August Willich, Frederick Engels, Heinrich Bauer, Karl Pfänder.

In publishing the above accounts and the decisions of the Workers' Society, the undersigned Committee requests that contributions be sent to Heinrich Bauer, 64 Dean Street, Soho, London.

London, December 3, 1849

The Committee: Karl Marx, August Willich, Frederick Engels,

Heinrich Bauer, Karl Pfänder

[^1]: Published in the Deutsche Londoner Zeitung Printed according to the West- No. 245, December 7, 1849; the West- deutsche Zeitung deutsche Zeitung No. 173, December 12, 1849, and the Demokratische Zeitung Published in English for the first No. 258, December 15, 1849 time

[^2]: d Deutsche Schnellpost and New-Yorker Staatszeitung.—Ed.



