---
Volume: 10
Document_Title: "10. Meeting of Refugee Committee on April 8, 1850 "
Page_Range: "636-638"
---

# 10. Meeting of Refugee Committee on April 8, 1850 



**[p. 612]**

MEETING OF REFUGEE COMMITTEE ON APRIL 8, 1850433

Citizen Kleiner declares that Citizen R. Schramm has assured him that he does not belong to a refugee committee, but has merely received a number of lottery tickets from Galeer in Geneva with instructions to send the money to Geneva. The other committee meets at Hillmann's, is merely posing as a committee and, he believes, has no money.

Read, approved and signed

W. Kleiner Beyerle

Citizen Gnam: Citizen Struve declares that he has no money for refugees. He has received a hundred lottery tickets from Galeer but has not yet disposed of them. Should he receive the money for them, he will either pay the money in to some committee that might be set up, or use his own judgment in giving the money to the refugees in return for a receipt. He regrets the splits that exist amongst the German émigrés; if these splits did not exist thousands of guilders would find their way here. For this reason he would advise the refugees to form a committee among themselves.

Read, approved and signed

Gnam Josef Leoni Jakob Klein

Citizen Struve then donated £ 1, which Gnam suggested should be given to the committee—at which Citizen Struve said: No, not to a



**[p. 613]**

Gnam Josef Leoni Lucas

The minutes were written by Engels on April 8, 1850

First published in: K. Marx and F. Engels,

Works, Vol. 44, second Russ. ed., 1977

Printed according to the manu- script

Published in English for the first time

