---
Volume: 10
Document_Title: "11. Universal Society of Revolutionary Communists "
Page_Range: "638-640"
---

# 11. Universal Society of Revolutionary Communists 



**[p. 614]**

UNIVERSAL SOCIETY OF REVOLUTIONARY COMMUNISTS434

ARTICLE 1

The aim of the association is the downfall of all privileged classes, the submission of those classes to the dictatorship of the prole- tarians by keeping the revolution in continual progress until the achievement of communism, which shall be the final form of the constitution of the human family.

To contribute to the realisation of this aim, the association will form ties of solidarity between all sections of the revolutionary communist party, causing national divisions to disappear according to the principle of republican fraternity.

The founding committee of the association is constituted its Central Committee, and, wherever necessary for the accomplish- ment of the work, it will establish committees which will be in cor- respondence with the Central Committee.

The number of association members is not limited, but no member may be admitted unless he has been voted in unanimously. In no case can the election be held by secret ballot.

All the association members pledge themselves by solemn oath to preserve absolutely in these terms Article 1 of the present rules. Any modification which might lead to the weakening of the intentions

[^1]: ARTICLE 2

[^2]: ARTICLE 3

[^3]: ARTICLE 4

[^4]: ARTICLE 5





**[p. 615]**

ARTICLE 6

All the society's decisions are taken by a majority of two-thirds of the voters.

(Signed:) /. Vidil, Auguste Willich,

G.Julian Harney, Adam, Ch. Marx, F.Engels

Drawn up in mid-April 1850 Printed according to the manu- script First published in Russian (Papers of the

Marx-Engels Institute No. 1, Moscow- Translated from the French Leningrad, 1926) Published in English for the first time

