---
Volume: 10
Document_Title: "12. Accounts of the Social- Democratic Refugee ' Committee in London "
Page_Range: "640-643"
---

# 12. Accounts of the Social- Democratic Refugee " Committee in London 



**[p. 1072]**

ACCOUNTS OF THE SOCIAL-DEMOCRATIC REFUGEE COMMITTEE IN LONDON

Receipts

February 25

March 13

£ s d

Balance in hand i 17 11 8 From the Social Reform Association

in London 30 18 5 From the Cologne Refugee Commit- tee 36 — — From A. F., member of the Workers'

Society — 5 — Through Herr Wichmann in Ham- burg 6 — — Through " Rempel in Bielefeld 3 — — " Engels of E.B.a 1 — — From several English workers — 7 —

[^1]: March 18

[^2]: April 16

[^3]: April 20

[^4]: March

[^5]: Expenditure

[^6]: 53 grants @ 7s 7 ' 10s 1 - 9s 6d 1 ' 2s 8V2d 6 - 5s 2 • Is 2 - 4s 1

[^7]: ige and

[^8]: 2s

[^9]: 'ost ige and petty expenses

[^10]: 95

[^11]: 18 3

[^12]: 11 10 9 2 10 2 8 2

[^13]: 3

[^14]: Presumably Elberfeld-Barmeri.—Ed.





**[p. 4]**

Petty expenses — 6 5

Balance in hand

58 10

85 17 I1/*

H7 2

The Committee, set up on September 18, 1849, has since its foundation supported about a hundred refugees for shorter or longer periods, and the total sum of moneys passed through its hands amounts to £161 3s 8V2d. In addition, the Workers' Society here has catered for the exceptional needs of individual refugees by collections, found work for others and put its premises with news- papers at the disposal of all refugees.

The books and receipts concerning the above accounts, which were submitted to and adopted by the German Workers' Society, are available with the Treasurer of the Committee for inspection by the donors or their representatives.

Messrs. Struve, Bobzin, Bauer (Stolpe) and others have lately seen fit to use their names to attract from Germany adequate funds for the refugees. Accordingly they have grouped around themselves a number of refugees and formed their own commit- tee at a meeting yesterday. It goes without saying that this re- newed project to form a parallel committee can no more divert us from our work for the refugees than the earlier projects which failed.

As the accounts show, the Committee's funds are so depleted that they barely suffice for the needs of one more week. But more refugees apply for support every day. We therefore call on the German social-democratic party once again not to let down their



**[p. 618]**

London, April 23, 1850

The Social-Democratic Refugee Committee:

K. Marx, President, August Willich, K. Pfänder, Frederick Engels, Heinrich Bauer

Published in the Deutsche Londoner Zeitung Printed according to the Nord- No. 265, April 26, 1850 (abridged); deutsche Freie Presse and checked the Westdeutsche Zeitung No. 104 (supple- with the Westdeutsche Zeitung ment), May 2, 1850; the Neue Deutsche Zeitung No. 106, May 3, 1850, and the Published in English for the first Norddeutsche Freie Presse No. 349, May 10, time 1850

