---
Volume: 10
Document_Title: "14. Accounts of the Social- Democratic Refugee Committee in London for May, June and July 1850 "
Page_Range: "645-648"
---

# 14. Accounts of the Social- Democratic Refugee Committee in London for May, June and July 1850 



**[p. 11]**

ACCOUNTS OF THE SOCIAL-DEMOCRATIC REFUGEE COMMITTEE

IN LONDON FOR MAY, JUNE AND JULY 1850

Receipts

£ April 24 Cash in hand according to previous

account 9 May From Hanau through Citizen Schärttner, £ 13 less 7s 9d income tax 12 From an Englishman — Frankfurt am Main £5 and £20 25

s d

4 111/,

12 3 2 — — —

10 —

[^1]: 46

[^2]: June From Trier 2 " Paris (German workers) 1 Through Citizen Betzler —

[^3]: 4

[^4]: July From Frankfurt am Main " Cologne — " Wiesbaden (Workers' Associa- tion) Hamburg (Norddeutsche Freie Presse) " London Workers'Society Frankfurt am Main " Neustadt a.d. Haardt " Hamburg (Despatch Dept. of the Freischütz)436 " La Chaux-de-Fonds " Hamburg (Workers' Association of St. Georg)

[^5]: 19 2'/,

[^6]: 2 6 18 6

[^7]: 6 —

[^8]: 11 4

[^9]: 11 10 9 6

[^10]: —

[^11]: —





**[p. 46]**

April 24 to May 30

June

July

grants @ 3s 6d " " 3s " " 2s " " Is " " 5s Occasional grants Shoemakers' work for refugees. Petty expenses

58 grants @ 2s 59 " " Is 25 " " ls6d Occasional gran ts Petty expenses

28 grants @ 2s 24 " " Is 93 " " 6d Occasional grants

£ s — — — — — — — — —

39 2 11

5 16 2 19 — 1 17 6 — 10 — — 11 6

11 14 —

2 16 1 4 — 2 6 6 1 6 —

The above accounts were submitted to the meeting of the Workers' Society on July 30 of this year and were approved. Books and

[^1]: For the refugees' board and lodging

[^2]: 9s 6d

[^3]: £7 £5 £5 £5 £6 £6

[^4]: 10s — 10s —

[^5]: For working equipment Advances to refugees Advances to a refugee with family Petty expenses

[^6]: 35

[^7]: Cash in hand

[^8]: 12

[^9]: 19

[^10]: 6

[^11]: 3'/2

[^12]: 58 13 9A Total expenditure 109 10 8 7* Total receipts 155 16 2 A Less expenditure 109 10 8/2



receipts are ready and available for inspection by the donors or their representatives.

Since in the month of June contributions received were very scanty and the need of the refugees was often unbearable, it was decided to set up a communal lodging and eating-house for them. The local Workers' Society and a section of the refugees who had already found work made it possible by their contributions to begin the execution of this plan. From funds received later the house could be provided with the necessary utensils and furniture. Up to now 18 refugees have found lodgings there and about 40 have received meals. At first the unemployed shoemakers among the refugees were used to provide their comrades with the necessary footwear. Later the Committee allocated funds and took the steps necessary to equip a common workshop for the refugees on the same premises and so to enable them to earn part of their living expenses themselves.

If the first attempt proves a success, the thing will be done on a larger scale and the public will be further informed about it at the appropriate time. The Committee expects that this double enterprise of providing aid and employment for the refugees will be supported by a great many contributions from Germany until the refugees are able to support themselves.

London, July 30, 1850

The Social-Democratic Refugee Committee:

Karl Marx, Frederick Engels, August Willich,

Karl Pfänder, Heinrich Bauer

[^1]: Published in the Norddeutsche Freie Presse No. 425, August 7, 1850; the Deutsche Londoner Zeitung No. 280, August 9, 1850; Der Freischütz No. 98, August 15, 1850

[^2]: Printed according to the Nord- deutsche Freie Presse

[^3]: Published in English for the first time



