---
Volume: 10
Document_Title: "18. Accounts of the Social- Democratic Refugee Committee in London from August 1 to September 10, 1850 "
Page_Range: "655-657"
---

# 18. Accounts of the Social- Democratic Refugee Committee in London from August 1 to September 10, 1850 



**[p. 6]**

ACCOUNTS OF THE SOCIAL-DEMOCRATIC REFUGEE

COMMITTEE IN LONDON FROM AUGUST 1 TO SEPTEMBER 10 ] 1850]445

Receipts

£ August Balance 46 Collected by Miss Berg 12 From the Workers' Association in St. Georg, Hamburg 2 From the same 1 From Neustadt an der Haardt 8 From Mr. C. Flory through the edi- torial board of the Deutsche Londo- ner Zeitung — September From the German Workers' Associa- tion in Paris 2 Collected by Herr John Berg 17

10 10

[^1]: Total 90

[^2]: 10 —

[^3]: Expenditure

[^4]: August For the refugees' board and lodg- ing To the brushmakers' workshop For leather, etc — 56grants ®6d » " I s " " 2 s 6 d — Various grants — 4 grants ©10s Advances to refugees To four refugees for the voyage to

[^5]: America

[^6]: — — — —





**[p. 15]**

etc _ H September For board and lodging 39 grants of 6d — " of Is _ — " of 10sandlof5s _ _

Distributed according to the donor's

(Herr Berg's) instructions 8 15 — Advances to refugees l 18 — Petty expenses — 6 10

Total 90 3 6

Since the four undersigned members of the hitherto existing Social-Democratic Committee, oh submitting these accounts, de- clared their resignation from the Committee, the Society in Great Windmill Street3 appointed a commission to check the books and receipts, which reported on the 15th that it had found everything in order.

The undersigned saw fit to leave all books and receipts concerning their administration with the hitherto treasurer, K. Pfänder, 21 King Street, Soho Square, since they had resigned not only from the Committee but from the Society and the documents cannot be dispensed with in case enquiries are made by members of the public.

Donors* are therefore requested to appoint representatives in London to inspect the books and receipts at the above-mentioned hitherto treasurer's.

London, September 18, 1850

Karl Marx, H. Bauer, K. Pfänder, Fr. Engels

[^1]: Published in the Deutsche-Londoner Zeitung Printed according to the newspaper No. 287, September 27, 1850

[^2]: Published in English for the first time

[^3]: a The German Workers' Educational Society in London.— Ed.



