---
Volume: 5
Document_Title: "[ 5. Development of the Productive Forces as a Material Premise of Communism] "
Page_Range: "71-73"
---

# [ 5. Development of the Productive Forces as a Material Premise of Communism] 

[ 181 This "estrangement" ["Entfremdung"] (to use a term which will be comprehensible to the philosophers) can, of course, only be abolished given two practical premises. In order to become an "unendurable" power, i.e., a power against which men make a revolu- tion, it must necessarily have rendered the great mass of humanity "propertyless", and moreover in contradiction to an existing world of wealth and culture; both these premises presuppose a great increase in productive power, a high degree of its development.

[^1]: [5. DEVELOPMENT OF THE PRODUCTIVE FORCES AS A MATERIAL PREMISE OF COMMUNISM]

[^2]: a Here Marx added a passage in the margin which is given in this edition as the first two paragraphs of Section 5.— Ed.





**[p. 49]**

And, on the other hand, this development of productive forces (which at the same time implies the actual empirical existence of men in their world-historical, instead of local, being) is an absolutely necessary practical premise, because without it privation, want is merely made general, and with want the struggle for necessities would begin again, and all the old filthy business would necessarily be restored; and furthermore, because only with this universal development of productive forces is a universal intercourse between men established, which on the one side produces in all nations simultaneously the phenomenon of the "propertyless" mass (univer- sal competition), making each nation dependent on the revolutions of the others, and finally puts world-historical, empirically universal individuals in place of local ones. Without this, 1) communism could only exist as a local phenomenon; 2) the forces of intercourse themselves could not have developed as universal, hence unendurable powers: they would have remained home-bred "conditions" sur- rounded by superstition; and 3) each extension of intercourse would abolish local communism. Empirically, communism is only possible as the act of the dominant peoples "all at once" and simultaneously,19

which presupposes the universal development of productive forces and the world intercourse bound up with them.*

1191 Moreover, the mass of workers who are nothing but workers—labour-power on a mass scale cut off from capital or from even a limited satisfaction [of their needs] and, hence, as a result of competition their utterly precarious position, the no longer merely temporary loss of work as a secure source of life—presupposes the world market. The proletariat can thus only exist world-historically, just as communism, its activity, can only have a "world-historical" existence. World-historical existence of individuals, i.e., existence of individuals which is directly linked up with world history.

|18| Communism is for us not a state of affairs which is to be established, an ideal to which reality [will] have to adjust itself. We call communism the real movement which abolishes the present state of things. The conditions of this movement result from the now existing premise.3

* * *

[^1]: * [Above the continuation of this passage, which follows on the next page of the manuscript, Marx wrote:] Communism.

[^2]: a In the manuscript this paragraph was written down by Marx in a free space above the paragraph starting with the words: This "estrangement".— Ed.



