---
Volume: 5
Document_Title: "[ 8. The Inconsistency of the Idealist Conception of History in General and of German post- Hegelian Philosophy in Particular] "
Page_Range: "78-80"
---

# [ 8. The Inconsistency of the Idealist Conception of History in General and of German post- Hegelian Philosophy in Particular] 



**[p. 55]**

[8. THE INCONSISTENCY OF THE IDEALIST CONCEPTION OF HISTORY IN GENERAL AND OF GERMAN POST-HEGELIAN PHILOSOPHY IN PARTICULAR]

In the whole conception of history up to the present this real basis of history has either been totally disregarded or else considered as a minor matter quite irrelevant to the course of history. History must, therefore, always be written according to an extraneous standard; the real production of life appears as non-historical, while the histori- cal appears as something separated from ordinary life, something extra-superterrestrial. With this the relation of man to nature is excluded from history and hence the antithesis of nature and history is created. The exponents of this conception of history have consequently only been able to see in history the spectacular political events and religious and other theoretical struggles, and in particular with regard to each historical epoch they were compelled to share the illusion of thai epoch. For instance, if an epoch imagines itself to be actuated by purely 'political" or "religious" motives, although "religion" and "politics" are only forms of its true motives, the historian accepts this opinion. The 'fancy", the 'conception" of the people in question about their real practice is transformed into the sole determining and effective force, which dominates and deter- mines their practice. When the crude form of the division of labour which is to be found among the Indians and Egyptians calls forth the caste-svstem in their state and religion, the historian believes that the caste-system [26] is the power which has oroduced this crude social forrn,

While the French and the English at least stick to the political illusion, which is after all closer to reality, the Germans move in the realm of the "pure spirit', and make religious illusion the driving force of history. The Hegelian philosophy of history is the last consequence, reduced to its "clearest expression", of all this German historiography for which it is not a question of real, nor even of poli- tical, interests, but of pure thoughts, which must therefore appear to Saint Bruno as a series of "thoughts" that devour one another and are finally swallowed up in "self-consciousness" *; and even more consistently the course of historv must appear to Saint Max Stirner, who knows not a thing about real history, as a mere "tale of knights, robbers and ghosts",24 from whose visions he can, of course, only save himself by "unholiness". This conception is truly religious: it postulates religious man as the primitive man, the starting-point of

[^1]: * [Marginal note by Marx:] So-called objective historiography consisted precisely in treating the historical relations separately from activity. Reactionary character.

[^2]: 4—2086





**[p. 56]**

history, and in its imagination puts the religious production of fancies in the place of the real production of the means of subsistence and of life itself.

This whole conception of history, together with its dissolution and the scruples and qualms resulting from it, is a purely national affair of the Germans and has merely local interest for Germany, as for instance the important question which has been under discussion in recent times: how exactly one "passes from the realm of God to the realm of Man"3—as if this "realm of God" had ever existed anywhere save in the imagination, and the learned gentlemen, without being aware of it, were not constantly living in the "realm of Man" to which they are now seeking the way; and as if the learned pastime (for it is nothing more) of explaining the mystery of this theoretical bubble-blowing did not on the contrary lie in demonstrat- ing its origin in actual earthly relations. For these Germans, it is altogether simply a matter of resolving the ready-made nonsense they find into [27] some other freak, i.e., of presupposing that all this nonsense has a special sense which can be discovered; while really it is only a question of explaining these theoretical phrases from the actual existing relations. The real, practical dissolution of these phrases, the removal of these notions from the consciousness of men, will, as we have already said, be effected by altered circum- stances, not by theoretical deductions. For the mass of men, i.e., the proletariat, these theoretical notions do not exist and hence do not require to be dissolved, and if this mass ever had any theoret- ical notions, e.g., religion, these have now long been dissolved by circumstances.

The purely national character of these questions and solutions is moreover shown by the fact that these theorists believe in all seriousness that chimeras like "the God-Man", "Man", etc., have presided over individual epochs of history (Saint Bruno even goes so far as to assert that only "criticism and critics have made history",b

and when they themselves construct historical systems, they skip over all earlier periods in the greatest haste and pass immediately from "Mongolism"c to history "with meaningful content", that is to say, to the history of the Hallische and Deutsche Jahrbücher and the dissolution of the Hegelian school into a general squabble. They forget all other nations, all real events, and the theatrum mundi is

[^1]: Ludwig Feuerbach, "Ueber das 'Wesen des Christentums'.,.".—Ed. Bruno Bauer, "Charakteristik Ludwig Feuerbachs".—Ed. Max Stirner, Der Einzige und sein Eigenthum. CA. this volume, pp. 130-36. and pp. 163-70.— Ed.



