---
Volume: 5
Document_Title: "[ 5. The Contradiction between the Productive Forces and the Form of Intercourse as the Basis of Social Revolution] "
Page_Range: "97-98"
---

# [ 5. The Contradiction between the Productive Forces and the Form of Intercourse as the Basis of Social Revolution] 



**[p. 74]**

It is evident that large-scale industry does not reach the same level of development in all districts of a country. This does not, however, retard the class movement of the proletariat, because the proletarians created by large-scale industry assume leadership of this movement and carry the whole mass along with them, and because the workers excluded from large-scale industry are placed by it in a still worse situation than the workers in large-scale industry itself. The countries in which large-scale industry is developed act in a similar manner upon the more or less non-industrial countries, insofar as the latter are swept by world intercourse into the universal competitive struggle.

* * *

These different forms [of production] are just so many forms of the organisation of labour, and hence of property. In each period a unification of the existing productive forces takes place, insofar as this has been rendered necessary by needs.

The contradiction between the productive forces and the form of intercourse, which, as we saw, has occurred several times in past history, without, however, endangering its basis, necessarily on each occasion burst out in a revolution, taking on at the same time various subsidiary forms, such as all-embracing collisions, collisions of various classes, contradictions of consciousness, battle of ideas, political struggle, etc. From a narrow point of view one may isolate one of these subsidiary forms and consider it as the basis of these revolutions; and this is all the more easy as the individuals who started the revolutions had illusions about their own activity according to their degree of culture and the stage of historical development.

Thus all collisions in history have their origin, according to our view, in the contradiction between the productive forces and the form 1531 of intercourse. Incidentally, to lead to collisions in a

[^1]: [5. THE CONTRADICTION BETWEEN THE PRODUCTIVE FORCES

[^2]: AND THE FORM OF INTERCOURSE AS THE BASIS

[^3]: OF SOCIAL REVOLUTION]



