---
Volume: 5
Document_Title: "[ 7. Contradiction between Individuals and Their Conditions of Life as Contradiction between the Productive Forces and the Form of Intercourse. Development of the Productive Forces and the Changing Forms of Intercourse] "
Page_Range: "104-107"
---

# [ 7. Contradiction between Individuals and Their Conditions of Life as Contradiction between the Productive Forces and the Form of Intercourse. Development of the Productive Forces and the Changing Forms of Intercourse] 



**[p. 81]**

within certain conditions, of fortuity and chance has up till now been called personal freedom.—These conditions of existence are, of course, only the productive forces and forms of intercourse at any particular time.

Communism differs from all previous movements in that it overturns the basis of all earlier relations of production and intercourse, and for the first time consciously treats all naturally evolved premises as the creations of hitherto existing men, strips them of their natural character and subjugates them to the power of the united individuals. Its organisation is, therefore, essentially economic, the material production of the conditions of this unity; it turns existing conditions into conditions of unity. The reality which communism creates is precisely the true basis for rendering it impossible that anything should exist independently of individuals, insofar as reality is nevertheless only a product of the preceding intercourse of individuals. Thus the Communists in practice treat the conditions created up to now by production and intercourse as inorganic conditions, without, however, imagining that it was the plan or the destiny of previous generations to give them material, and without believing that these conditions were inorganic for the individuals creating them.

[60] The difference between the individual as a person and what- ever is extraneous to him is not a conceptual difference but a histo- rical fact. This distinction has a different significance at different times—e.g., the estate as someting extraneous to the individual in the eighteenth century, and so too, more or less, the family. It is not a distinction that we have to make for each age, but one which each age itself makes from among the different elements which it finds in existence, and indeed not according to any idea, but compelled by material collisions in life.

What appears accidental to a later age as opposed to an earlier— and this applies also to the elements handed down by an earlier age—is a form of intercourse which corresponded to a definite

[^1]: [7. CONTRADICTION BETWEEN INDIVIDUALS AND THEIR CONDITIONS OF LIFE AS CONTRADICTION

[^2]: BETWEEN THE PRODUCTIVE FORCES AND THE FORM OF INTERCOURSE. DEVELOPMENT OF THE PRODUCTIVE FORCES

[^3]: AND THE CHANGING FORMS OF INTERCOURSE]





**[p. 82]**

stage of development of the productive forces. The relation of the productive forces to the form of intercourse is the relation of the form of intercourse to the occupation or activity of the indi- viduals. (The fundamental form of this activity is, of course, material, on which depend all other forms—mental, political, religious, etc. The different forms of material life are, of course, in every case dependent on the needs which are already developed, and the production, as well as the satisfaction, of these needs is an historical process, which is not found in the case of a sheep or a dog (Stirner's refractory principal argument3 advers us kominem), al- though sheep and dogs in their present form certainly, but in spite of themselves, are products of an historical process). The conditions under which individual:- have intercourse with each other, so long as this contradiction is absent, are conditions appertaining to their individuality, in no way external to them; conditions under which alone these definite individuals, living under definite relations, can produce their material life and what is connected with it, are thus the conditions of their self-activity and are produced by this self-activity.* The definite condition under which they produce thus corresponds, as long as [61J the contradiction has not yet appeared, to the reality of their conditioned nature, their one-sided existence, the one-sidedness of which only becomes evident when the contradiction enters on the scene and thus exists solely for those who live later. Then this condition appears as an accidental fetter, and the consciousness that it is a fetter is imputed to the earlier age as well.

These various conditions, which appear first as conditions of self-activity, later as fetters upon it, form in the whole development of history a coherent series of forms of intercourse, the coherence of which consists in this: an earlier form of intercourse, which has become a fetter, is replaced by a new one corresponding to the more developed productive forces and, hence, to the advanced mode of the self-activity of individuals—a form which in its turn becomes a fetter and is then replaced by another. Since these conditions correspond at every stage to the simultaneous development of the productive forces, their history is at the same time the history of the evolving productive forces taken over by each new generation, and is therefore the history of the development of the forces of the individuals themselves.

[^1]: * [Marginal note by Marx:] Production of the form of intercourse itself.

[^2]: Cf. Max Stirner. "Recensenten Stirners", and also this volume, pp. 95-96.—Ed.





**[p. 83]**

On the other hand, in countries like North America, which start from scratch in an already advanced historical epoch, the develop- ment proceeds very rapidly. Such countries have no other natural premises than the individuals who have settled there and were led to do so because the forms of intercourse of the old countries did not correspond to their requirements. Thus they begin with the most advanced individuals of the old countries, and, therefore, with the correspondingly most advanced form of intercourse, even before this form of intercourse has been able to establish itself in the old countries. This is the case with all colonies, insofar as they are not mere military or trading stations. Carthage, the Greek colonies, and Iceland in the eleventh and twelfth centuries, provide examples of this. A similar relationship issues from conquest, when a form of intercourse which has evolved on another soil is brought over complete to the conquered country: whereas in its home it was still encumbered with interests and relations left over from earlier periods, here it can and must be established completely and without hindrance, if only to assure the conquerors' lasting power. (England and Naples after the Norman conquest,34 when they received the most perfect form of feudal organisation.)

