---
Volume: 5
Document_Title: "[ 11.] The Relation of State and Law to Property "
Page_Range: "112-115"
---

# [ 11.] The Relation of State and Law to Property 



**[p. 89]**

due to the fact that the average individual of the later stage was al- ways foisted on to the earlier stage, and the consciousness of a later age on to the individuals of an earlier. Through this inversion, which from the first disregards the actual conditions, it was possible to transform the whole of history into an evolutionary process of con- sciousness.

Civil society embraces the whole material intercourse of individu- als within a definite stage of the development of productive forces. It embraces the whole commercial and industrial life of a given stage and, insofar, transcends the state and the nation, though, on the other hand again, it must assert itself in its external relations as nationality and internally must organise itself as state. The term "civil society"35 emerged in the eighteenth century, when property relations had already extricated themselves from the ancient and medieval community. Civil society as such only develops with the bourgeoisie; the social organisation evolving directly out of produc- tion and intercourse, which in all ages forms the basis of the state and of the rest of the idealistic3 superstructure, has, however, always been designated by the same name.

The first form of property, in the ancient world as in the Middle Ages, is tribal property, determined with the Romans chiefly by war, with the [69] Germans by the rearing of cattle. In the case of the ancient peoples, since several tribes live together in one city, tribal property appears as state property, and the right of the individual to it as mere "possession" which, however, like tribal property as a whole, is confined to landed property only. Real private property began with the ancients, as with modern nations, with movable property. (Slavery and community) (dominium ex jure Quiritumh).—In the case of the nations which grew out of the Middle Ages, tribal property evolved through various stages—feudal landed property, corporative movable property, capital invested in man- ufacture—to modern capital, determined by large-scale industry and universal competition, i.e., pure private property, which has cast

[^1]: [11.] THE RELATION OF STATE AND LAW TO PROPERTY

[^2]: a I. e., ideal, ideological.—Ed.

[^3]: Ownership in accordance with the law applying to full Roman citizens.—Ed.

[^4]: s*





**[p. 90]**

Since the state is the form in which the individuals of a ruling class assert their common interests, and in which the whole civil society of an epoch \s epitomised,, it follows that all common institutions are set up with the help cf the state and are given a political form. Hence the illusion that law is based on the will, and incieed on the will divorced from its real basis—on freewill. Similarly, justice is in its turn reduced to statute law.

Civil law develops simultaneously with private property out of the disintegration of the natural community. With the Romans the development of private property and civil law had no further industrial and commercial consequences, because their whole mode of production did not alter.* With modern peoples, where the feudal community was disintegrated by industry and trade, there began with the rise of private property and civil law a new phase, which was capable of funher development. The very first town which carried

[^1]: * [Marginal note by Engels:] (Usury!)





**[p. 91]**

on an extensive maritime trade in the Middle Ages, Amalfi, also developed maritime law.36 As soon as industry and trade developed private property further, first in Italy and later in other countries, the highly developed Roman civil law was immediately adopted again and raised to authority. When later the bourgeoisie had acquired so much power that the princes took up its interests in order to overthrow the feudal nobility by means of the bourgeoisie, there began in all countries—in France in the sixteenth century—the real development of law, which in all |7l | countries except England proceeded on the basis of the Roman code of laws. In England, too, Roman legal principles had to be introduced to further the develop- ment of civil law (especially in the case of movable property). (It must not be forgotten that law has just as little an independent history as religion.)

In civil law the existing property relations are declared to be the result of the general will. The jus utendi et abutendi* itself asserts on the one hand the fact that private property has become entirely independent of the community, and on the other the illusion that private property itself is based solely on the private will, the arbitrary disposal of the thing. In practice, the abuti has very definite economic limitations for the owner of private property, if he does not wish to see his property and hence his jus abutendi pass into other hands, since actually the thing, considered merely with reference to his will, is not a thing at all, but only becomes a thing, true property, in intercourse, and independently of the law (a relationship, which the philosophers call an idea*). This juridical illusion, which reduces law to the mere will, necessarily leads, in the further development of property relations, to the position that a man may have a legal title to a thing without really having the thing. If, for instance, the income from a piece of land disappears owing to competition, then the proprietor has certainly his legal title to it along with the jus utendi

et abutendi. But he can do nothing with it: he owns nothing as a landed proprietor if he has not enough capital elsewhere to cultivate his land. This illusion of the jurists also explains the fact that for them, as for every code, it is altogether fortuitous that individuals enter into relations among themselves (e.g., contracts); it explains why they consider that these relations [can] be entered into or not at will,

[^1]: * [Marginal note by Marx:] For the philosophers relationship = idea. They only know the relation of "Man" to himself and hence for them all real relations become ideas.

[^2]: a The right of use and of disposal.—Ed.



