---
Volume: 5
Document_Title: "[ 12. Forms of Social Consciousness] "
Page_Range: "115-117"
---

# [ 12. Forms of Social Consciousness] 



**[p. 92]**

1721 and that their content [rests] purely on the individual free will of the contracting parties.

Whenever, through the development of industry and commerce, new forms of intercourse have been evolved (e.g., insurance companies, etc.), the law has always been compelled to admit them among the modes of acquiring property.3

[12. FORMS OF SOCIAL CONSCIOUSNESS]

The influence of the division of labour on science.

The role of repression with regard to the state, law, morality, etc. It is precisely because the bourgeoisie rules as a class that in the law it must give itself a general expression.

Natural science and history. There is no history of politics, law, science, etc., of art, religion, etc.*

Why the ideologists turn everything upside-down. Clerics, jurists, politicians. Jurists, politicians (statesmen in general), moralists, clerics. For this ideological subdivision within a class: 1) The occupation assumes an independent existence owing to division of labour. Everyone believes his craft to be the true one. Illusions regarding the connection between their craft and reality are the more likely to be cherished by them because of the very nature of the craft. In consciousness—in jurisprudence, politics, etc.—relations become concepts; since they do not go beyond these relations, the concepts of the relations also become fixed concepts in their mind. The judge, for example, applies the code, he therefore regards legislation as the real, active driving force. Respect for their goods, because their craft deals with general matters. '

Idea of law. Idea of state. The matter is turned upside-down in ordinary consciousness.

[^1]: * [Marginal note by Marx:] To the "community" as it appears in the ancient state, in feudalism and in the absolute monarchy, to this bond correspond especially the religious conceptions.

[^2]: a The following notes, written by Marx, were intended for further elabora- tion.— Ed.





**[p. 93]**

Religion is from the outset consciousness of the transcendental arising from actually existing forces. This more popularly.

Tradition, with regard to law, religion, etc.

[73]a Individuals always proceeded, and always proceed, from themselves. Their relations are the relations of their real life-process. How does it happen that their relations assume an independent existence over against them? and that the forces of their own life become superior to them?

In short: division of labour, the level of which depends on the development of the productive power at any particular time.

Landed property. Communal property. Feudal. Modern. Estate property. Manufacturing property. Industrial capital.

[^1]: a This, the last, page is not numbered in the manuscript. It contains notes relating to the beginning of the authors' exposition of the materialist conception of history. The ideas oudined here are set forth in the clean copy, Section 3 (see this volume, pp. 32-35).—Ed.



