---
Volume: 5
Document_Title: "2. Saint Bruno's Views on the Struggle between Feuerbach and Stirner "
Page_Range: "128-130"
---

# 2. Saint Bruno's Views on the Struggle between Feuerbach and Stirner 



**[p. 105]**

"self-control" and, intoxicated, stammers a dithyramb to female beauty, to its "tenderness, softness, womanliness", to the "full and rounded limbs" and the "surging, undulating, seething, rushing and hissing, wave-like structure of the body"3 of woman. Innocence, however, always reveals itself—even where it sins. Who does not know that a "surging, undulating, wave-like structure of the body" is something that no eye has ever seen, or ear heard? There- fore—hush, sweet soul, the spirit will soon prevail over the rebellious flesh and set an insurmountable "barrier" to the overflowing, seething lusts, "against which" they will soon deal themselves a "mortal blow".

"Feuerbach"—the saint finally arrives at this through a critical understanding of Die heilige Familie—"is a materialist tempered with and corrupted by humanism, i.e., a materialist who is unable to endure the earth and its being" (Saint Bruno knows the being of the earth as distinct from the earth itself, and knows how one should behave in order to "endure the beingoi the earth"!) "but wants to spiritualise himself and rise into heaven; and at the same time he is a humanist who cannot think and build a spiritual world, but one who is impregnated with materialism", and so on (p. 123).

Just as for Saint Bruno humanism, according to this, consists in "thinking" and in "building a spiritual world", so materialism consists in the following:

First, matter is an existing, actual being, but only in itself, concealed; only when it "actively extends and realises itself in mul- tiplicity" (an "existing, actual being" "realises itself"!!), only then does it become nature. First there exists the concept of matter, an abstrac- tion, an idea, and this latter realises itself in actual nature. Word for word the Hegelian theory of the pre-existence of the creative categories. From this point of view it is understandable that Saint Bruno mistakes the philosophical phrases of the materialists con- cerning matter for the actual kernel and content of their world out BETWEEN FEUERBACH AND STIRNER Having thus admonished Feuerbach with a few weighty words, Saint Bruno takes a look at the struggle between Feuerbach and the unique. The first evidence of his interest in this struggle is a methodical, triple smile.

[^1]: "The materialist recognises only the existing, actual being, matter" (as though man with all his attributes, including thought, were not an "existing, actual being"), "and recognises it as actively extending and realising itself in multiplicity, nature" (p. 123).

[^2]: ° ° ' 2. SAINT BRUNO'S VIEWS ON THE STRUGGLE

[^3]: a Marx and Engels have inserted the words "seething, rushing and hissing"— which occur in Schiller's poem Der Taucher ("The Diver")—into the passage they quote from Bruno Bauer's article "Charakteristik Ludwig Feuerbachs".—Ed.





**[p. 106]**

Saint Bruno—this is thus established—-pursues his path but he does not pursue it like other people, he follows a critical course, he accomplishes this important action with a smile.

"He does smile his face into more lines than are in the new map, with the augmentation of the Indies. I know my lady will strike him: if she do, he'll smile and take't for a great art"3—like Shakespeare's Malvolio.

Saint Bruno himself does not lift a finger to refute his two opponents, he knows a better way of ridding himself of them, he leaves them—divide et impera—to their own quarrel. He confronts Stirner with Feuerbach's man (p. 124), and Feuerbach with Stirner's unique (p. 126 et seq.); he knows that they are as incensed against each other as the two Kilkenny cats in Ireland, which so completely devoured each other that finally only their tails remained.43 And Saint Bruno passes sentence on these tails, declaring that they are "substance" and, consequently, condemned to eternal damnation.

In confronting Feuerbach with Stirner he repeats what Hegel said of Spinoza and Fichte, where, as we know, the punctiform ego is represented as one, and moreover the most stable, aspect of substance. However much Bruno formerly raged against egoism, which he even considered the odor specificus of the masses, on page 129 he accepts egoism from Stirner—only this should be "not that of Max Stirner', but, of course, that of Bruno Bauer. He brands Stirner's egoism as having the moral defect "that his ego for the support of its egoism requires hypocrisy, deception, external violence". For the rest, he believes (see p. 124) in the critical miracles of Saint Max and sees in the latter's struggle (p. 126) "a real effort to radically destroy substance". Instead of dealing with Stirner's criticism of Bauer's "pure criticism", he asserts on p. 124 that Stirner's criticism could affect him just as little as any other, "beca- use he himself is the critic'".

Finally Saint Bruno refutes both of them, Saint Max and Feuerbach, applying almost literally to Feuerbach and Stirner the antithesis drawn by Stirner between the critic Bruno Bauer and the dogmatist.

[^1]: Wigand, p. 138: "Feuerbach puts himself in opposition to, and thereby" (!) "stands in opposition to, the unique. He is a communist and wants to be one. The unique is an egoist

[^2]: d Shakespeare, Twelfth Night, Act III, Scene 2. Marx and Engels quote these lines from the German translation by August Wilhelm von Schlegel. But they have substituted the word Kunst (art) for the word Gunst (favour).—Ed.



