---
Volume: 5
Document_Title: "3. The Ancients "
Page_Range: "159-167"
---

# 3. The Ancients 



**[p. 136]**

3. The Ancients

Properly speaking we ought to begin here with the Negroes; but Saint Max, who undoubtedly sits in the "Council of Guardians", in his unfathomable wisdom introduces the Negroes only later, and even then "without any claim to thoroughness and authenticity". If, therefore, we make Greek philosophy precede the Negro era, i.e., the campaigns of Sesostris and Napoleon's expedition to Egypt,48 it is because we are confident that our holy author has arranged everything wisely.

"Let us, therefore, take a look at the activities which tempt" Stirner's ancients.

'"For the ancients, the world was a truth,' says Feuerbach; but he forgets to make the important addition: a truth, the untruth of which they sought to penetrate and, finally, did indeed penetrate" (p. 22).

"For the ancients", their "world" (not the world) "was a truth"—whereby, of course, no truth about the ancient world is stated, but only that the ancients did not have a Christian attitude to their world. As soon as untruth penetrated their world (i.e., as soon as this world itself disintegrated in consequence of practical con- flicts—and to demonstrate this materialistic development empirically would be the only thing of interest), the ancient philosophers sought to penetrate the world of truth or the truth of their world and then, of course, they found that it had become untrue. Their very search was itself a symptom of the internal collapse of this world. Jacques le bonhomme transforms the idealist symptom into the material cause of the collapse and, as a German church father, makes antiquity itself seek its own negation, Christianity. For him this position of antiquity is inevitable because the ancients are "children' who seek to penetrate the "world of things". "And that is fairly easy too": by transforming the ancient world into the later consciousness regard- ing the ancient world, Jacques le bonhomme can, of course, jump in a single leap from the materialistic ancient world to the world of religion, to Christianity. Now the "word of God" immediately emerges in opposition to the real world of antiquity; the Christian conceived as the modern sceptic emerges in opposition to the ancient man conceived as philosopher. His Christian "is never convinced of the vanity of the word of God" and, in consequence of this lack of



**[p. 137]**

"The Christian must consider himself a 'stranger on the earth' (Epistle to the Hebrews 11 : 13)" (p. 23).

On the contrary, the strangers on earth (arising from extremely natural causes e.g., the colossal concentration of wealth in the whole Roman world, etc., etc.) had to consider themselves Christians. It was not their Christianity that made them vagrants, but their vagrancy that made them Christians.

On the same page the holy father jumps straight from Sophocles' Antigone and the sacredness of the burial ceremonial connected with it to the Gospel of Matthew, 8:22 (let the dead bury their dead), while Hegel, at any rate in the Phänomenologie, gradually passes from the Antigone, etc., to the Romans. With equal right Saint Max could have passed at once to the Middle Ages and, together with Hegel, have advanced this biblical statement against the Crusaders or even, in order to be quite original, have contrasted the burial of Polynices by Antigone with the transfer of the ashes of Napoleon from St. Helena to Paris. It is stated further:

This proposition, in which reality is again turned upside-down, should be put the right way up as follows: the actual untruth of family ties (concerning which, inter alia, the still existing documents of pre-Christian Roman legislation should be examined) is depicted in Christianity as an inviolable truth, "and so in everything".

From these examples, therefore, it is superabundantly evident how Jacques le bonhomme, who strives to "get rid as quickly as possible" of empirical history, stands facts on their heads, causes material history to be produced by ideal history, "and so in everything". At the outset we learn only the alleged attitude of the ancients to their world; as dogmatists they are put in opposition to the ancient world, their own world, instead of appearing as its creators; it is a question only of the relation of consciousness to the

[^1]: "In Christianity the inviolable truth of family ties" (which on page 22 is noted as one of the "truths" of the ancients) "is depicted as an untruth which should be got rid of as quickly as possible (Mark, 10:29) and so in everything" (p. 23).





**[p. 138]**

Thus the history of Greece, from the time of Pericles inclusively, is reduced to a struggle of abstractions: reason, spirit, heart, worldli- ness, etc. These are the Greek parties. In this ghostly world, which is presented as the Greek world, allegorical persons such as Madame Purity of Heart "machinate" and mythical figures like Pilate (who must never be missing where there are children) find a place quite seriously side by side with Timon of Phlius.

After presenting us with some astounding revelations about the Sophists and Socrates, Saint Max immediately jumps to the Sceptics. He discovers that they completed the work which Socrates began. Hence the positive philosophy of the Greeks that followed im- mediately after the Sophists and Socrates, especially Aristotle's encyclopaedic learning, does not exist at all for Jacques le bonhomme. He strives "to get rid as quickly as possible" of the past and hurries to the transition to the "moderns", finding this transition in the Sceptics, Stoics and Epicureans. Let us see what our holy father has to reveal about them.

We refer Jacques le bonhomme—the man who wants to realise himself and who knows how to live—to, inter alia, Diogenes Laertius: there he will discover that the wise man, the sophos, is nothing but the idealised Stoic, not the Stoic the realised wise man; he will discover that the sophos is by no means only a Stoic but is met with just as much among the Epicureans, the Neo-academists and the Sceptics. Incidentally, the sophosis the first form in which the Greek philosophos confronts us; he appears mythologically in the seven wise men, in practice in Socrates, and as an ideal among the Stoics, Epicureans, Neo-academists49 and Sceptics. Each of these schools, of course, has its own cro^og ,a just as Saint Bruno has his own "unique sex". Indeed, Saint Max can find "le sage" again in the eighteenth century in the philosophy of Enlightenment, and even in Jean Paul in the shape of the "wise men" like Emanuel,b etc. The Stoical wise man by no means

[^1]: "The Stoics wish to realise the ideal of the wise man the man who knows how to live they find this ideal in contempt for the world, in a life without living development [] without friendly intercourse with the world, i.e., in a life of isolation [] not in a life in common with others; the Stoic alone lives, for him everything else is dead. The Epicureans, on the other hand, demand an active life" (p. 30).

[^2]: a Wise man.— Ed. Jean Paul, Hesperus oder 45 Hundsposttage.— Ed.





**[p. 139]**

immortalisa as Lucretius says, the atom, and, in opposition to Aristotle's divine energy, divine leisure is put forward as the ideal of life instead of "active life".

"The ethics of the Stoics (their only science, for they were unable to say anything about the spirit except what its relation to the world should be; and about nature—physics—they could say only that the wise man has to assert himself against it) is not a doctrine of the spirit, but merely a doctrine of rejection of the world and of self-assertion against the world" (p. 31).

The Stoics were able to "say about nature" that physics is one of the most important sciences for the philosopher and consequently they even went to the trouble of further developing the physics of Heraclitus; they were "further able to say" that the wpa , masculine beauty, is the highest that the individual could represent, and glorified life in tune with nature, although they fell into contradic- tions in so doing. According to the Stoics, philosophy is divided into three doctrines: "physics, ethics, logic".

"They compare philosophy to the animal and to the egg, logic—to the bones and sinews of the animal, and to the outer shell of the egg, ethics—to the flesh of the animal and to the albumen of the egg, and physics—to the soul of the animal and to the yolk of the egg" (Diogenes Laertius, Zeno).

From this alone it is evident how little true it is to say that "ethics is the only science of the Stoics". It should be added also that, apart from Aristotle, they were the chief founders of formal logic and systematics in general.

That the "Stoics were unable to say anything about the spirit" is so little true that even seeing spirits originated from them, on account of which Epicurus opposes them, as an Enlightener, and ridicules them as "old women",b while precisely the Neo-Platonists borrowed part of their tales about spirits from the Stoics. This spirit-seeing of the Stoics arises, on the one hand, from the impossibility of achieving a dynamic concept of nature without the material furnished by empirical natural science, and, on the other hand, from their effort to interpret the ancient Greek world and even religion in a speculative manner and make them analogous to the thinking spirit.

The "ethics of the Stoics" is so much a "doctrine of world rejection and of self-assertion against the world" that, for example, it was

[^1]: a Immortal death. Lucretius, De rerum natura libri sex, Book 3, Verse 882.— Ed. See present edition, Vol. 1, p. 43.—Ed.





**[p. 140]**

"Let not the wise man wonder at anything that seems wonderful—but neither will the worthy man live in solitude, for he is social by nature and active in practice" (Diogenes Laertius, Book VII, 1).

Incidentally, it would be asking too much to demand that, for the sake of refuting this schoolboyish wisdom of Jacques le bonhomme, one should set forth the very complicated and contradictory ethics of the Stoics.

In connection with the Stoics, Jacques le bonhomme has to note the existence of the Romans also (p. 31), of whom, of course, he is unable to say anything, since they have no philosophy. The only thing we hear of them is that Horace (!) "did not go beyond the Stoics' worldly wisdom" (p. 32). Integer vitae, scelerisque purus!a

In connection with the Stoics, Democritus is also mentioned in the following way: a muddled passage of Diogenes Laertius (Democritus, Book IX, 7, 45), which in addition has been inaccurately translated, is copied out from some textbook, and made the basis for a lengthy diatribe about Democritus. This diatribe has the distinguishing feature of being in direct contradiction to its basis, i.e., to the above-mentioned muddled and inaccurately translated passage, and converts "peace of mind" (Stirner's translation of evrôujjua , in Low German Wellmuth) into "rejection of the world". The fact is that Stirner imagines that Democritus was a Stoic, and indeed of the sort that the unique and the ordinary schoolboyish consciousness conceive a Stoic to be. Stirner thinks that "his whole activity amounts to an endeavour to detach himself from the world", "hence to a rejection of the world", and that in the person of Democritus he can refute the Stoics. That the eventful life of Democritus, who had wandered through the world a great deal, flagrantly contradicts this notion of Saint Max's; that the real source from which to learn about the philosophy of Democritus is Aristotle and not a couple of anecdotes from Diogenes Laertius; that Democritus, far from rejecting the world, was, on the contrary, an empirical natural scientist and the first encyclopaedic mind among the Greeks; that his almost unknown ethics was limited to a few remarks which he is

[^1]: a He of life without flaw, pure from sin. Horace, The Odes, Book 1 —Ode XXII. Verse 1.—Ed.





**[p. 141]**

Of the Epicureans our friend knows exactly as much as he does of the Stoics, viz., the unavoidable schoolboy's minimum. He contrasts the Epicurean "hedone" b with the "ataraxia"c of the Stoics and Sceptics, not knowing that this "ataraxia" is also to be found in Epicurus and, moreover, as something placed higher than the "hedone"—in consequence of which his whole contrast falls to the ground. He tells us that the Epicureans "teach only a different attitude to the world" from that of the Stoics; but let him show us the (non-Stoic) philosopher of "ancient or modern times" who does not do "only" the same. Finally, Saint Max enriches us with a new dictum of the Epicureans: "the world must be deceived, for it is my enemy". Hitherto it was only known that the Epicureans made statements in the sense that the world must be disillusioned, and especially freed from fear of gods, for the world is my friend.

To give our saint some indication of the real base on which the philosophy of Epicurus rests, it is sufficient to mention that the idea that the state rests on the mutual agreement of people, on a contrat social (oov-ft-qx T) d), is found for the first time in Epicurus.

The extent to which Saint Max's disclosures about the Sceptics follow the same line is already evident from the fact that he considers their philosophy more radical than that of Epicurus. The Sceptics reduced the theoretical relation of people to things to appearance, and in practice they left everything as of old, being guided by this appearance just as much as others are guided by actuality; they merely gave it another name. Epicurus, on the other hand, was the true radical Enlightener of antiquity; he openly attacked the ancient religion, and it was from him, too, that the atheism of the Romans,

[^1]: a By abuse, i. e., improperly, wrongly.— Ed.

[^2]: Pleasure.—Ed. L Equanimity, imperturbability, intrepidity.—Ed.

[^3]: Contract (see present edition, Vol. 1, pp. 409-10).—Ed.





**[p. 142]**

Thus, according to Stirner, the Stoics finally arrive at "contempt for the world" (p. 30), the Epicureans at "the same worldly wisdom as the Stoics" (p. 32), and the Sceptics at the point where they "let the world alone and do not worry about it at all". Hence, according to Stirner, all three end in an attitude of indifference to the world, of "contempt for the world" (p. 485). Long before him, Hegel expressed it in this way: Stoicism, Scepticism, Epicureanism "aimed at making the mind indifferent towards everything that actuality has to offer" (Philosophie der Geschichte^ p. 327).

The history of ancient philosophy has to conform to Stirner's design. In order that the Greeks should retain their role of children, Aristotle ought not to have lived and his thought in and for itself (ri vôrjatc i? xa-ö-'au TTJv), his self-thinking reason (aûxôv ôè vosîô vovc) and his self-thinking intellect (TJ,V67JGIÇ x^Ç VOTJCSÜX;) should never have occurred; and in general his Metaphysics and the third book of his Psychology^ ought not to have existed.

With just as much right as Saint Max here recalls "what was said earlier about our childhood", when he discussed "our childhood" he could have said: let the reader look up what will be said below about the ancients and the Negroes and will not be said about Aristotle.

[^1]: "The ancients," writes Saint Max, summing up his criticism of the ancient world of ideas, "it is true, had ideas, but they did not know the idea" (p. 30). In this connection, "one should recall what was said earlier about our childhood ideas" (ibid.).

[^2]: a See present edition, Vol. 1, p. 488.—Ed.

[^3]: G.W.F. Hegel, Vorlesungen über die Philosophie der Geschichte.—Ed. Aristoteles, De anima.—Ed.





**[p. 143]**

Incidentally, if our good man wanted to make the history of ancient philosophy into a history of antiquity, then as a matter of course he ought to have merged the Stoics, Epicureans and Sceptics in the Neo-Platonists, whose philosophy is nothing but a fantastic combination of the Stoic, Epicurean and Sceptical doctrine with the content of the philosophy of Plato and Aristotle. Instead of that, he merges these doctrines directly in Christianity.**

It is not "Stirner" that has left Greek philosophy "behind him", but Greek philosophy that has "Stirner" behind it (cf. Wigand, p. 186b). Instead of telling us how "antiquity" arrives at a world of things and "copes" with it, this ignorant school-master causes antiquity blissfully to vanish by means of a quotation from Timon; whereby antiquity the more naturally "arrives at its final goal" since, according to Saint Max, the ancients "found themselves placed bv nature" in the ancient "communality", which, "let us say in conclusion", "can be understood" the more easily because this communality, the family, etc., are dubbed "the so-called natural ties" (p. 33). By means of nature the ancient "world of things" is created, and by means of Timon and Pilate (p. 32) it is destroyed. Instead of describing the "world of things" which provides the material basis of

[^1]: * [The following passage is crossed out in the manuscript:] just as after the Revolution the French aristocrats became the dancing instructors of the whole of Europe, and the English lords will soon find their true place in the civilised world as stable-hands and kennel-men.

[^2]: ** [The following passage is crossed out in the manuscript:] On the contrary, Stirner should have shown us that Hellenism even after its disintegration still continued to exist for a long time; that next to it the Romans gained world domination, what they really did in the world, how the Roman world developed and declined, and finally how the Hellenic and Roman world perished, spiritually in Christianity and materially in the migration of the peoples.

[^3]: a Refusal to express any definite opinion.— Ed. Max Stirner, "Recensenten Stirners".—Ed.



