---
Volume: 5
Document_Title: "4. The Moderns "
Page_Range: "167-208"
---

# 4. The Moderns 



**[p. 144]**

The German philosophers are accustomed to counterpose antiqui- ty, as the epoch of realism, to Christianity and modern times, as the epoch of idealism, whereas the French and English economists, historians and scientists are accustomed to regard antiquity as the period of idealism in contrast to the materialism and empiricism of modern times. In the same way antiquity can be considered to be idealistic insofar as in history the ancients represent the "citoyen", the idealist politician, while in the final analysis the moderns turn into the "bourgeois", the realist ami du commerce*—or again it can be considered to be realistic, because for the ancients the communality was a "truth", whereas for the moderns it is an idealist "lie". All these abstract counterposings and historical constructions are of very little use.

The "unique thing" we learn from this whole portrayal of the ancients is that, whereas Stirner "knows" very few "things" about the ancient world, he has all the "better seen through" them (cf.

Wigand, p. 191).

Stirner is truly that same "man child" of whom it is prophesied in the Revelation of St. John, 12:5, that he "was to rule all nations with a rod of iron". We have seen how he sets about the unfortunate heathen with the iron rod of his ignorance. The "moderns" will fare no better.

4. The Moderns

By means of this biblical saying the ancient world has now indeed "passed away" or, as Saint Max really wanted to say, "all gone",b and with one leapc we have jumped over to the new, Christian, youthful, Mongoloid "world of the spirit". We shall see that this, too, will have "all gone" in a very short space of time.

[^1]: "Therefore if any man be in Christ, he is a new creature; old things are passed away; behold, all things are become new" (2 Corinthians 5:17) (p. 33).

[^2]: "Whereas it was stated above 'for the ancients, the world was a truth', we must say here 'for the moderns the spirit was a truth', but in neither case should we forget the important addition: a truth, the untruth of which they sought to penetrate and, finally, did indeed penetrate'" (p. 33).

[^3]: a An expression of Fourier (see Ch. Fourier, Des trois unités externes).—Ed.

[^4]: Here the authors ironically use the Berlin dialect words alle jeworden.—Ed. In German a pun on the word Satz, which means a leap, a jump and also a sentence, a proposition.—Ed.





**[p. 145]**

At the same time we see a faithful imitation of the speculative manner, by which children beget their father, and what is earlier is brought about by what is later. From the very outset Christians must "seek to penetrate the untruthfulness of their truth", they must immediately be hidden atheists and critics, as was already indicated concerning the ancients. But not satisfied with this, Saint Max gives one more brilliant example of his "virtuosity in" (speculative) "thought" (p. 280):

Since allegedly the last consequence of Christianity has been drawn, "one" can state that it has been drawn. As soon as the later

[^1]: "Now, after liberalism has acclaimed man, one can state that thereby only the last consequence of Christianity has been drawn and that Christianity originally set itself no other task than that of realising man."





**[p. 146]**

"Hence" (namely because one can attribute an imaginary task to Christianity) "there follows the delusion" (of course, before Feuerbach it was impossible to know what task Christianity "had originally set itself") "that Christianity attaches infinite value to the ego, as revealed, for example, in the theory of immortality and pastoral work. No, it attaches this value to man alone, man alone is immortal, and only because I am a man, am I also immortal."

If, then, from the whole of Stirner's scheme and formulation of tasks it emerges, already sufficiently clearly, that Christianity can lend immortality only to Feuerbach's "man", we learn here in addition that this comes about also because Christianity does not ascribe this immortality—to animals as well.

Let us now also draw up a scheme à la Saint Max. "Now, after" modern large-scale landownership, which has arisen from the process of parcellation, has actually "proclaimed" primogen- iture, "one can state that thereby only the last consequence" of the parcellation of landed property "has been drawn" "and that" parcellation "in truth originally set itself no other task than that of realising" primogeniture, true primogeniture. "Hence there follows the delusion" that parcellation "attaches infinite value" to equal rights of members of the family, "as revealed, for example", in the laws of inheritance of the Code Napoléon. "No, it,attaches this value solely" to the eldest son; "only" the eldest son, the future owner of the entailed estate, will become a large landowner, "and only because I am" the eldest son "I will also be" a large landowner.

In this way it is infinitely easy to give history "unique" turns, as one has only to describe its very latest result as the "task" which "in truth originally it set itself". Thereby earlier times acquire a bizarre and hitherto unprecedented appearance. It produces a striking impression, and does not require great production costs. As, for instance, if one says that the real "task" which the institution of landed property "originally set itself" was to replace people by sheep—a consequence which has recently become manifest in Scotland, etc., or that the proclamation of the Capet dynasty51

"originally in truth set itself the task" of sending Louis XVI to the guillotine and M. Guizot into the Government. The important thing is to do it in a solemn, pious, priestly way, to draw a deep breath, and then suddenly to burst out: "Now, at last, one can state it."



**[p. 147]**

Finally Saint Max gives us a few more examples of his faith, showing that he is so little ashamed of the Gospel that he asserts: "We really are nothing but spirit", and maintains that at the end of the ancient world "after long efforts" the "spirit" has really "rid itself of the world". And immediately afterwards he once more betrays the secret of his scheme, by declaring of the Christian spirit that "like a youth it entertains plans for improving or saving the world". All this on page 36.

The apocalyptic prophet did not prophesy accurately this time. Now at last, after Stirner has acclaimed man, one can state that he ought to have said: So he carried me into the wilderness of the spirit. And I saw a man sit upon a scarlet-coloured beast, full of blasphemy

[^1]: "So he carried me away in the spirit into the wilderness: and I saw a woman sit upon a scarlet-coloured beast, full of names of blasphemy And upon her forehead was a name written, Mystery, Babylon the Great and I saw the woman drunken with the blood of the saints", etc. (Revelation of St. John, 17, Verses 3, 5, 6).

[^2]: a G.W.F. Hegel, Vorlesungen über die Geschichte der Philosophie.— Ed.





**[p. 148]**

A. The Spirit (Pure History of Spirits)

The first thing we learn about the "spirit" is that it is not the spirit but "the realm of spirits" that "is immensely large". Saint Max has nothing to say immediately of the spirit except that "an immensely large realm of spirits" exists—just as all he knows of the Middle Ages is that this period lasted for "a long time". Having presupposed that this "realm of spirits" exists, he subsequently proves its existence with the help of ten theses.

1. The spirit is not a free spirit until it is not occupied with itself alone, until it is not "solely concerned" with its own world, the "spiritual" world (first with itself alone and then with its own world).

2. "It is a free spirit only in a world of its own." 3. "Only by means of a spiritual world is the spirit really spirit." 4. "Before the spirit has created its world of spirits, it is not spirit." 5. "Its creations make it spirit." 6. "Its creations are its world." 7. "The spirit is the creator of a spiritual world." 8. "The spirit exists only when it creates the spiritual." 9. "Only together with the spiritual, which is its creation, is it real." 10. "ß u t the works or offspring of the spirit are nothing but—spirits" (pp. 38-39).

In thesis 1 the "spiritual world" is again immediately presupposed as existing, instead of being deduced, and this thesis 1 is again preached to us in theses 2-9 in eight new transformations. At the end of thesis 9 we find ourselves exactly where we were at the end of thesis 1—and then in thesis 10 a "fru£" suddenly introduces us to " spirits'', about whom so far nothing has been said.

According to theses 3, 4, 5, 8, and 9, however, the spirit is its own creation. This is now expressed thus, the spirit, i.e., the first creation of the spirit,

[^1]: "Since the spirit exists only by creating the spiritual, we look around for its first creations" (p. 41).

[^2]: "must arise out of nothing" "it must first create itself" "its first creation is itself, the spirit" (ibid.). "When it has accomplished this creative act there follows from then on a natural reproduction of creations just as, according to the myth, only the first human beings had to be created and the rest of the human race was reproduced of itself" (ibid.).

[^3]: "However mystical this may sound, we nevertheless experience this daily. Are you a thinking person before you think? In creating your first thought, you create yourself,





**[p. 149]**

the thinker, for you do not think until you think, i.e."—i.e.,—"havesome thought. Is it not your singing alone that makes you a singer, your speech that makes you a speaking person? Well, in the same way only the creation of the spiritual makes you spirit."

Our saintly conjurer assumes that the spirit creates the spiritual in order to draw the conclusion that the spirit creates itself as spirit; on the other hand, he assumes it as spirit in order to allow it to arrive at its spiritual creations (which, "according to the myth, are reproduced of themselves" and become spirits). So far we have the long-familiar orthodox-Hegelian phrases. The genuinely "unique" exposition of what Saint Max wants to say only begins with the example he gives. That is to say, if Jacques le bonhomme cannot get any further, if even "One" and "It" are unable to float his stranded ship, "Stirner" calls his third serf to his assistance, the "You", who never leaves him in the lurch and on whom he can rely in extremity. This "You" is an individual whom we are not encountering for the first time, a pious and faithful servant,3 whom we have seen going through fire and water, a worker in the vineyard of his lord, a man who does not allow anything to terrify him, in a word he is: Szeliga.* When "Stirner" is in the utmost plight in his exposition he cries out: Szeliga, help!—and trusty Eckart Szeliga immediately puts his shoulder to the wheel to get the cart out of the mire. We shall have more to say later about Saint Max's relation to Szeliga.

It is a question of spirit which creates itself out of nothing, hence it is a question of nothing, which out of nothing makes itself spirit. From this Saint Max derives the creation of Szeliga's spirit from Szeliga. And who else if not Szeliga could "Stirner" count on allowing himself to be put in the place of nothing in the manner indicated above? Who could be taken in by such a trick but Szeliga, who feels highly flattered at being allowed to appear at all as one of the dramatis personae? What Saint Max had to prove was not that a given "you", i.e., the given Szeliga, becomes a thinker, speaker, singer from the moment when he begins to think, speak, sing—but that the thinker creates himself out of nothing by beginning to think, that the singer creates himself out of nothingby beginning to sing, etc., and it is not even the thinker and the singer, but the thought and the singing as subjects that create themselves out of nothingby beginning to think and to sing. For the rest, "Stirner makes only the extremely simple

[^1]: * Cf. Die heilige Familie, oder Kritik der kritischen Kritik, where the earlier exploits of this man of God have already been set forth.b

[^2]: a Matthew 25:21.—Ed.

[^3]: See present edition, Vol. 4, pp. 55-77. Ed.





**[p. 150]**

reflection" and states only the "extremely popular" proposition (cf.

Wigand, p. 156) that Szeliga develops one of his qualities by developing it. There is, of course, absolutely nothing "to be wondered at" in the fact that Saint Max does not even "make" correctly "such simple reflections", but expresses them incorrectly in order thereby to prove a still much more incorrect proposition with the aid of the most incorrect logic in the world.

Far from it being true that "out of nothing" I make myself, for example, a "speaker", the nothing which forms the basis here is a very manifold something, the real individual, his speech organs, a definite stage of physical development, an existing language and dialects, ears capable of hearing and a human environment from which it is possible to hear something, etc., etc. Therefore, in the development of a property something is created by something out of something, and by no means comes, as in Hegel's Logik, from nothing, through nothing to nothing,3

Now that Saint Max has his faithful Szeliga close at hand, everything goes forward smoothly again. We shall see how, by means of his "you", he again transforms the spirit into the youth, exactly as he earlier transformed the youth into the spirit; here we shall again find the whole history of the youth repeated almost word for word, only with a few camouflaging alterations—just as the "immensely large realm of spirits" mentioned on page 37 was nothing but the "realm of the spirit", to found and enlarge which was the "aim" of the spirit of the youth (p. 17).

After previously for a long time occupying ourselves with the trick of making something out of nothing, we now suddenly, perfectly "naturally", come to an individual who is something else as well as spirit, consequently is something, and wants to become pure spirit,

[^1]: "Just as you, however, distinguish yourself from the thinker, singer, speaker, so you distinguish yourself no less from the spirit and are well aware that you are something else as well as spirit. However, just as in the enthusiasm of thinking it may easily happen that sight and hearing fail the thinking ego, so the enthusiasm of the spirit has seized you too, and you now aspire with all your might to become wholly spirit and merged in spirit. The spirit is vour ideal, something unattained, something of the beyond: spirit means your—God, 'God is spirit' You inveigh against yourself, you who cannot get rid of a relic of the non-spiritual. Instead of saying: I am more than spirit, you say contritely: I am less than spirit, and I can only envisage spirit, pure spirit, or the spirit which is nothing but spirit, but I am not it, and since Î am not it, then it is an other, it exists as an other, whom I call 'God'."

[^2]: a Cf. G.W.F. Hegel, Wissenschaft der Logik, Th. I, Abt. 2.—Ed. b John 4:24.—Ed.





**[p. 151]**

i.e., nothing. This much easier problem, i.e., to turn something into nothing, once again poses the whole storv of the vouth, w7ho "has ve to seek the perfect soiri'", and one needs mereiv to repeat the old Dhrases irom pages 17-18 to be extricated from all difficulties. Particularly, when one has such an obedient and gullible servant as Szeiiga, on whom "Stirne~ can impose the idea that just as "in the enthusiasm of thinking it mav easily" (Ts "happen that sight and hearing fail" him "Stirner". 50 he, Szeliga. has also neen 'seized with tne enthusiasm of the spirit' and he, Szeliga. is now aspiring with a L his mignt to become spirit'', instead of acouiring spirit, that is to sa\, ne now has to piav the ro^e or the voutii as presented on page 16. Szeliga believes it and in fear and trembling he obevs: he obevs when Saint Max thunders at him: The spirit is vour ideal—vour God Y01: do this for me, YOU do that for me. Nov vou ' inveigh'", now \m: sav", now 'vou can envisage", etc. When "Stirner'" imposes on him the idea that "the pure spirit is an other, for he" CSzeliga) 'is notv' then in truth, it is onlv Szeliga who is capable of believing him and wno gabbles the entire nonsense after him, word for word. Ina dentally, the method by which Jacques le bonhomme makes up this nonsense was alreadv exhaustively anaivsed when dealing with th'j

vouth Since you are well aware that vou are something else as well as a mathematician, vou aspire to become wholly a mathematician, to become merged in mathematics, the mathematician is your ideal, mathematician means vour—God. Y ou sav contritelv: I am less than a mathematician and I can oniv envisage the mathematician, and since I am not him, then he is an other he exists as an other, whom 1 cal! "God". Someone else in Szehga s place would say—Arago.

"Now. ar last, after' we have proved Stirner's thesis to be a repetition of the 'vouth'", 'one can state' that he "in truth originally set himsell no other task" than to identity the spirit of Christian asceticism with spirit in general, and to identify the frivolous esprit, for example, of the eighteenth centurv with Christian spiritlessness.

It follows, therefore that the necessio of spirit dwelling in the bevonu, i.e., being Got*, is nor to be explained, as Stirner asserts, 'because ego and spirit are different names lor different things, because ego is not spirit and spirit is not ego" (p. 42). The explanation lies in the "enthusiasm of the spirit" which is ascribed without any grounds to Szeliga and which makes him an ascetic, i.e., a man who wishes to become God (pure spirit), and because he is not able to do this posits God outside himself. But it was a matter of the spirit having first to create itselj out of nothing and then having to create spirits out of itself. Instead of this, Szeliga now produces God (the unique spirit that makes its appearance here) not because he,

[^1]: 7—2086





**[p. 152]**

"Precisely because we are not the Precisely because we are not the spirit which dwells within us, for that stomach which dwells within us, for that very reason we had to very reason we had to

put it outside of ourselves; it was not us, and therefore we could not conceive it as existing except outside of ourselves, beyond us, in the beyond" (p. 43).

It was a matter of the spirit having first to create itself and then having to create something other than itself out of itself; the ques- tion was: What is this something else? No answer is given to this ques- tion, but after the above-mentioned "various transformations" and twists, it becomes distorted into the following new question:

"The spirit is something other than the ego. But what is this something other?" (p. 45).

Now, therefore, the question arises: What is the spirit other than the ego? whereas the original question was: What is the spirit, owing to its creation out of nothing, other than itself? With this Saint Max jumps to the next "transformation".

Without realising it, Saint Max has so far done no more than give instruction in the art of spirit-seeing, by regarding the ancient and modern world only as the "pseudo-body of a spirit", as a spectral phenomenon, and seeing in it only struggles of spirits. Now, however, he consciously and ex professo gives instruction in the art of ghost-seeing.

Instructions in the art of seeing spirits. First of all one must become transformed into a complete fool, i.e., imagine oneself to be Szeliga, and then say to oneself, as Saint Max does to this Szeliga: "Look around you in the world and say for yourself whether a spirit is not looking at you from everywhere!" If one can bring oneself to imagine this, then the spirits will come "easily", of themselves; in a "flower" one sees only the "creator", in the mountains—a^'spirit of loftiness", in water—a "spirit of longing" or the longing of the spirit, and one hears "millions of spirits speak through the mouths of

[^1]: B. The Possessed (Impure History of Spirits)





**[p. 153]**

people". If one has achieved this level, if one can exclaim with Stir- ner: " Yes, ghosts are teeming in the whole world," then "it is not difficult to advance to the point" (p. 93) where one makes the further exclamation: "Only in it? No, the world itself is an apparition" (let your communication be, Yea, yea; Nay, nay: for whatsoever is more than these cometh of evil,a i.e., a logical transition), "it is the wandering pseudo-body of a spirit, it is an apparition." Then cheerfully "look near at hand or into the distance, you are surrounded by a ghostly world You see spirits". If you are an ordinary person you can be satisfied with that, but if you are thinking of ranking yourself with Szeliga, then you can also look into yourself and then "you should not be surprised" if, in these circumstances and from the heights of Szeligality, you discover also that "your spirit is a ghost haunting your body", that you yourself are a ghost which "awaits salvation, that is, a spirit". Thereby you will have arrived at the point where you are capable of seeing "spirits" and "ghosts" in "all" people, and therewith spirit-seeing "reaches its final goal" (pp. 46, 47).

The basis of this instruction, only much more correctly expressed, is to be found in Hegel, inter alia, in the Geschichte der Philosophie, III, pp. 124, 125.

Saint Max has such faith in his own instruction that as a result he himself becomes Szeliga and asserts that

"Stirner" "sees spirits". Saint Max intends to give us a phenomenology of the Christian spirit and in his usual way seizes on only one aspect. For the Christian the world was not only spiritualised but equally ^spiritualised as, for example, Hegel quite correctly admits in the passage mentioned, where he brings the two aspects into relation with each other, which Saint Max should also have done if he wanted to proceed historically. As against the world's despiritualisation in the Christian conscious- ness, the ancients, "who saw gods everywhere", can with equal justification be regarded as the spiritualisers of the world—a con- ception which our saintly dialectician rejects with the well-meaning warning: "Gods, my dear modern man, are not spirits" (p. 47). Pious Max recognises only the holy spirit as spirit.

But even if he had given us this phenomenology (which after Hegel is moreover superfluous), he would all the same have given us

[^1]: "ever since the word was made flesh, the world is spiritualised, bewitched, a ghost" (p. 47).

[^2]: :I Matthew 5 : 37.—Ed.

[^3]: b John 1:14.—Ed.





**[p. 154]**

Since Stirner "does not stick to the rules" (p. 45), it is possible, before dealing in more detail with spirit-seeing, to say here and now that the various "transformations" of Stirner's people and their world consist merely in the transformation of the entire history of the world into the body of Hegel's philosophy; into ghosts, which only apparently are an "other being" of the thoughts of the Berlin professor. In the Phänomenologie, the Hegelian bible, "the book", individuals are first of all transformed into "consciousness" [and the] world into "object", whereby the manifold variety of forms of life and history is reduced to a different attitude of "consciousness" to the "object". This different attitude is reduced, in turn, to three cardinal relations: 1) the relation of consciousness to the object as to truth, or to truth as mere object (for example, sensual consciousness, natural religion, Ionic philosophy, Catholicism, the authoritarian state, etc.); 2) the relation of consciousness as the true to the object (reason, spiritual religion, Socrates, Protestantism, the French Revolution); 3) the true relation of consciousness to truth as object, or to the object as truth (logical thinking, speculative philosophy, the spirit as existing for the spirit). In Hegel, too, the first relation is defined as God the Father, the second as Christ, the third as the Holy Spirit, etc. Stirner already used these transformations when speaking of child and youth, of ancient and modern, and he repeats them later in regard to Catholicism and Protestantism, the Negro and the Mongol, etc., and then accepts this series of camouflages of a thought

[^1]: Its own cause.—Ed.





**[p. 155]**

in all good faith as the world against which he has to assert and maintain himself as a 'corporeal individual".

Second set of instructions in spirit-seeing. How to transform the world into the spectre of truth, and oneself into something made holv or spectral. A conversation between Saint Max and his servant Szeiiga (pp. 47, 48).

Saint Max; "You have spirit, ior you have thoughts. What are your thoughts"" Szeiiga: "Spiritual entities.'

Saint Max: "Kence thev are not things-*"

Szeiiga: "No, but thev are the spirit of things, tne important element in all tfiings, their innermost essence, their idea."

Saint Max: ' Wnat vou think is, therefore, not merelv your thought0"

Szeiiga: "On the contrarv, it is the most real, genuinely true thing in the world: it I-, truth itself: when Î but trulv think. I think the truth. Î can admittedlv be mistaken about the truth and fail to perceive it, but when I trulv perceive, then the object of mv perception is the truth "

Saint Max: "Thus, you endeavour all the time to perceive the truth0" Szeiiga: 'Tor me the truth is sacred' The truth I cannot abolish; in the truth i believe, and therefore I investigate into its nature: there is nothing higher than k. it is eternal. The truth is sacred, eternal, it is the hoiv, the eternal."

Saint Max (indignantly): "But you, bv allowing yourself to become filled with this holiness, become yourself holv.'

Thus, when Szeliga truly perceives some object, the object ceases to be an object and becomes "the truth". This is the first manu- facture of spectres on a large scale.—It is now no longer a matter of perceiving objects, but of perceiving the truth: first he per- ceives objects truiy, which ne defines as the truth of perception and he transforms this into perception of the truth. But after Szeiiga has thus allowed truth as a spectre to be imposed on him bv the threatening saint, his siern master strikes home with a question o' conscience, whether he is filled "all the time" with longing for the truth whereupon the thoroughly confused Szeiiga blurts oir somewhat prematurely: "For me the truth is sacred." Bu; iu immediatelv notices his error and tries to correct it, by shamefaced h transforming objects no longer into the truth, out into a number o- truths, and abstracting "the truth'" as the trutn of these truths, "the truth" which he can now no longer abolish after he has distinguished it from truths which are capable of being abolished. Therebv it becomes "eternal". But not satisfied with giving it predicates such as "sacred, eternal", he transforms it into the holy, the eternal, as suoject. Alter this, of course. Saint Max can explain to him tha

[^1]: Here and in the following passages the German word heilig and its derivatives are used, which can mean: hoiy, pious, sacred, sacredness, saintly, saint, to consecrate, etc.— Ed.





**[p. 156]**

"The holy, moreover, is not for your senses" and quite consistently appends by means of the conjunction "and': "never will you, as a sensuous being, discover its traces"; that is to say, after sensuous objects are "all gone" and "the truth", "the sacred truth", "the holy" has taken their place. "But"—obviously!—"for your faith or more exactly for your spirit" (for your lack of spirit), "for it is itself som^/ungspiritual" (per appositionerrf), "a spirit" (again per appos.), "is spirit for the spirif.

Such is the art of transforming the ordinary world, "objects", by means of an arithmetical series of appositions, into "spirit for the spirit". Here we can only admire this dialectical method of appositions—later we shall have occasion to explore it and present it in all its classical beauty .b

The method of appositions can also be reversed—for example here, after we have once produced "the holy", it does not receive further appositions, but is made the apposition of a new definition; this is combining progression with equation. Thus, as a result of some dialectical process "there remains the idea of another entity" which "I should serve more than myself" (per appos.), "which for me should be more important than everything else" (per appos.), "in short—a something in which I should seek my true salvation'' (and finally per appos. the return to the first series), and which becomes "something 'holy' " (p. 48). We have here two progressions which are equated to each other and can thus provide the opportunity for a great variety of equations. We shall deal with this later. By this method too, "the sacred", which hitherto we have been acquainted with only as a purely theoretical designation of purely theoretical relations, has acquired a new practical meaning as "something in which I should seek my true salvation", which makes it possible to make the holy the opposite of the egoist. Incidentally we need hardly mention that this entire dialogue with the sermon that follows is nothing but another repetition of the story of the youth already met with three or four times before.

Here, having arrived at the "egoist", we need not stick to Stirner's "rules" either, because, firstly, we have to present his argument in all its purity, free from any intervening intermezzos, and, secondly, because in any case these intermezzi (on the analogy of "a Laza- roni"—Wigand, p. 159, the word should be Lazzarone—Sancho would say intermezzi's) will occur again in other parts of the book,

[^1]: By means of an apposition.—Ed. See this volume, p. 274 et seq.—Ed.





**[p. 157]**

for Stirner, far from obeying his own requirement "always to draw back into himself", on the contrary expresses himself again and again. We shall only just mention that the question raised on page 45: What is this something distinct from the "ego" that is the spirit? is now answered to the effect that it is the holy, i.e., that which is foreign to the "ego", and that everything that is foreign to the "ego" is—thanks to some unstated appositions, appositions "in themselves"—accordingly without more ado re- garded as spirit. Spirit, the holy, the foreign are identical ideas, on which he declares war, in the same way almost word for word as he did at the very outset in regard to the youth and the man. We have, therefore, still not advanced a step further than we had on page 20.

a) The Apparition

Saint Max now begins to deal seriously with the "spirits" that are "offspring of the spirit" (p. 39), with the ghostliness of everything (p. 47). At any rate, he imagines so. Actually, however, he only sub- stitutes a new name for his former conception of history according to which people were from the outset the representatives of general concepts. These general concepts appear here first of all in the Negroid form as objective spirits having for people the character of objects, and at this level are called spectres or—apparitions. The chief spectre is, of course, "man" himself, because, according to what has been previously said, people only exist for one another as represen- tatives of a universal—essence, concept, the holy, the foreign, the spirit—i.e., only as spectral persons, spectres, and because, according to Hegel's Phänomenologie, page 255 and elsewhere, the spirit, insofar as for man it has the "form of thinghood", is another man (see below about "the man').

Thus, we see here the skies opening and the various kinds of spectres passing before us one after the other. Jacques le bonhomme forgets only that he has already caused ancient and modern times to parade before us like gigantic spectres, compared with which ail the harmless fancies about God, etc., are sheer trifies.

Spectre No. 1 : the supreme being, God (p. 53). As was to be expected from what has preceded, Jacques le bonhomme, whose faith moves all the mountains3 of world history, believes that "for thousands of years people have set themselves the task", "have tired themselves out struggling with the awful impossibility, the endless Danaidean labour"—"to prove the existence of God". We need not waste any more words on this incredible belief.

[^1]: a Cf. 1 Corinthians 13 : 2.—Ed





**[p. 158]**

Spectre No. 3: the vanity of the world. There is nothing to say about this except that from it "easily" arises

Spectre No. 4: good and evil beings. Something, indeed, could be said about this but is not said—and one passes at once to the next:

Spectre No. 5: the essence and its realm. We should not be at all surprised that we find here essence for the second time in our honest author, for he is fully aware of his "clumsiness" (Wigand, p. 166), and therefore repeats everything several times in order not to be misunderstood. Essence is here in the first place defined as the proprietor of a "realm" and then it is said of it that it is "essence" (p. 54), after which it is swiftly transformed into

Spectre No. 6: "essences". To perceive and to recognise them, and them alone, is religion. "Their realm" (of essences) "is—a realm of essences" (p. 54). Here there suddenly appears for no apparent reason

Spectre No. 7: the God-Man, Christ. Of him Stirner is able to say that he was "corpulent". If Saint Max does not believe in Christ, he at least believes in his "actual corpus". According to Stirner, Christ introduced great distress into history, and our sentimental saint relates with tears in his eyes "how the strongest Christians have racked their brains in order to comprehend him"—indeed,

Saint Max sheds a sympathetic tear at the grave of the victims of Christ and then passes on to the "horrible being",

Spectre No. 8, man. Here our bold writer is seized with immediate "horror"—"he is terrified of himself", he sees in every man a "frightful spectre", a "sinister spectre." in which something "stalks" (pp. 55, 56). He feels highly uncomfortable. The split between phenomenon and essence gives him no peace. He is like Nabal, Abigail's husband, of whom it is written that his essence too was separated from his phenomenal appearance: "And there was a man in Maon, whose possessions'1 were in Carmel". (1 Samuel 25 : 2.) But

[^1]: "there has never been a spectre that caused such mental anguish, and no shaman, spurring himself into wild frenzy and nerve-racking convulsions, can have suffered such agony as Christians have suffered on account of this most incomprehensible spectre".

[^2]: In German a pun on the word Wesen (essence)—in Luther's Bible translation Wesenis used in its old meaning: "possession".—Ed





**[p. 159]**

Spectre No. 9, the national spirit (p. 56), about which too Saint Max, who can no longer be restrained, indulges in "frightful" fantasies, in order to transform

Spectre No. 10, "everything", into an apparition and, finally, where all enumeration ends, to hurl together in the class of spectres the "holy spirit", truth, justice, law, the good cause (which he still cannot forget) and half a dozen other things completely foreign to one an- other.

Apart from this there is nothing remarkable in the whole chapter except that Saint Max's faith moves an historical mountain. That is to say, he utters the opinion (p. 56):

"Only for the sake of a supreme being has anyone ever been worshipped, only as a spectre has he been regarded as a sanctified, i.e." (that is!) "protected and recognised person."

If we shift this mountain, moved by faith alone, back into its prop- er place, then "it will read": Only for the sake of persons who are protected, i.e., who protect themselves, and who are privileged, i.e., who seize privileges for themselves, have supreme beings been worshipped and spectres sanctified. Saint Max imagines, for example, that in antiquity, when each people was held together by material relations and interests, e.g., by the hostility of the various tribes, etc., when owing to a shortage of productive forces each had either to be a slave or to possess slaves, etc., etc., when, therefore, belonging to a particular people was a matter of "the most natural interest" (Wigand, p. [162])—that then it was only the concept peo- ple, or "nationality" that gave birth to these interests from itself; he imagines also that in modern times, when free competition and world trade gave birth to hypocritical, bourgeois cosmopolitanism and the notion of man—that here, on the contrary, the later philosophical construction of man brought about those relations as its "revelations" (p. 51). It is the same with religion, with the realm of essences, which he considers the unique realm, but concerning the essence of which he knows nothing, for otherwise he must have known that religion as such has neither essence, nor realm. In religion people make their empirical world into an entity that is only conceived, imagined, that confronts them as something foreign. This again is by no means to be explained from other concepts, from "self-consciousness" and similar nonsense, but from the entire hitherto existing mode of production and intercourse, which is just



**[p. 160]**

All the "spectres" which have filed before us were concepts. These concepts—leaving aside their real basis (which Stirner in any case leaves aside)—understood as concepts inside consciousness, as thoughts in people's heads, transferred from their objectivity back into the subject, elevated from substance into self-consciousness, are—whimsies or fixed ideas.

Concerning the origin of Saint Max's history of ghosts, see Feuerbach in Anekdota II, p. 66.d where it is stated:

"Theology is belief in ghosts. Ordinary theology, however, has its ghosts in the sensuous imagination, speculative theology has them in non-sensuous abstraction."

And since Saint Max shares the belief of all critical speculative philosophers of modern times that thoughts, which have become independent, objectified thoughts—ghosts—have ruled the world and continue to rule it, and that all history up to now was the history of theology, nothing could be easier for him than to transform history into a history of ghosts. Sancho's history of ghosts, therefore, rests on the traditional belief in ghosts of the speculative philosophers.

b) Whimsy

"Man, there are spectres in your head! You have a fixed idea!" thunders Saint Max at his slave Szeliga. "Don't think I am joking," he threatens him. Don't dare to think that the solemn "Max Stirner" is capable of joking.

The man of God is again in need of his faithful Szeliga in order to pass from the object to the subject, from the apparition to the whimsy.

Whimsy is the hierarchy in the single individual, the domination

[^1]: The English term is used in the manuscript.—Ed.

[^2]: In German a pun on the words Wesen—essence, substance, being—and Unwesen—literally inessence. Unwesen can be rendered in English as disorder, nuisance, confusion or, in a different context, monster.—Ed.

[^3]: See this volume, pp. 53-54.—Ed.

[^4]: Ludwig Feuerbach, "Vorläufige Thesen zur Reformation der Philo- sophie".— Ed.





**[p. 161]**

The whimsy which Saint Max discovers in the heads of people is nothing but his own whimsy—the whimsy of the "saint" who views the world sub specie aeterno and who takes both the hypocritical phrases of people and their illusions for the true motives of their ac- tions; that is why our naive, pious man confidently pronounces the great proposition: "Almost all mankind clings to something higher" (P- 57).

"Whimsy" is "a fixed idea", i.e., "an idea which has subordinated man to itself" or—as is said later in more popular form—all kinds of absurdities which people "have stuffed into their heads". With the utmost ease, Saint Max arrives at the conclusion that everything that has subordinated people to itself—for example, the need to produce in order to live, and the relations dependent on this—is such an "absurdity" or "fixed idea". Since the child's world is the only "world of things", as we learned in the myth of "a man's life", everything that does not exist "for the child" (at times also for the animal) is in any case an "idea" and "easily also" a "fixed idea". We are still a long way from getting rid of the youth and the child.

The chapter on whimsy aims merely at establishing the existence of the category of whimsy in the history of "man". The actual struggle against whimsy is waged throughout the entire "book" and particularly in the second part. Hence a few examples of whimsy can suffice us here.

Hence, according to Jacques le bonhomme, people engage in politics because our newspapers are full of them! If a church father were to glance at the stock exchange reports of our newspapers, he could not judge differently from Saint Max and would have to say: these newspapers are full of stock exchange reports because they are

[^1]: On page 59, Jacques le bonhomme believes that "our newspapers are full of politics, because they are in the grip of the delusion that man was created in order to become a zoon politikon" .

[^2]: d Under the aspect of eternity (see Benedictus Spinoza, Ethica, Pars quinta).—Ed. Political animal—thus Aristotle defines man at the beginning of De republica, Book I.—Ed.





**[p. 162]**

in the grip of the delusion that man was created in order to engage in financial speculation. Thus, it is not the newspapers that possess whimsies, but whimsies that possess "Stirner".

Stirner explains the condemnation of incest and the institutions of monogamy from "the holy", "they are the holy". If among the Persians incest is not condemned, and if the institution of polygamv occurs among the Turks, then in those places incest and polygamy are "the holy". It is not possible to see any difference between these two "holies" other than that the nonsense with which the Persiajhs and Turks have "stuffed their heads" is different from that with which the Christian Germanic peoples have stuffed their heads.—Such is the church father s manner of "detaching himself" from historv "in good time".—Jacques le bonhomme has so little inkling of the real, materialist causes for the condemnation of polygamy and incest in certain social conditions that he considers this condemnation to be merely the dogma of a creed and in common with every philistine imagines that when a man is imprisoned for a crime of this kind, it means that "moral puritv" is confining him in a "house of moral correction" (p. 60)—just as jails in general seem to him to be houses for moral correction—in this respect he is at a lower level than the educated bourgeois, who has a better understanding of the matter—cf. the literature on prisons. "Stirner's" "jails" are the most trite illusions of the Berlin burgher which for him, however, hardly deserve to be called a "house of moral correction".

After Stirner, with the help of an "episodically included" "historical reflection", has discovered that

When a gendarme stops him for smoking in the Tiergarten,52 the cigar is knocked out of his mouth not by the royal Prussian gendarme who is paid to do so and shares in the monev from fines, but by the "official oath". In precisely the same way the power of the bourgeois in the jurv court becomes transformed for Stirner—owing to the pseudo-hoiy appearance which the amis du commerce assume here—into the power of making a vow, the power of the oath, into the "holy". "Verily, I say unto you: I have not found so great faith, no, not in Israel." (Matthew 8 : 10.)

[^1]: "u had to come to pass that the whole man with all his abilities would prove to be religious" (p. 64) "so, too, in point of fact" "it is not surprising"—"for we are now so thoroughly religious"—"that" the oath "of the members ofthe /uncondemns us to death and that bv means of the 'official oath' the police constable, as a good Christian, has us put in the clink".

[^2]: "For some persons a thought becomes a maxim, so that it is not the person who possesses the maxim, but rather the latter that possesses him, and with the maxim he again acquires a firm standpoint." But "it is not of him that willeth, nor of him that runneth, but of God that sheweth mercy" (Romans 9: 16).





**[p. 163]**

C. The Impurely Impure History of Spirits

a) Negroes and Mongols

We now go back to the beginning of the "unique" historical scheme and nomenclature. The child becomes the Negro, the youth—the Mongol. See "The Economy of the Old Testament".

"The historical reflection on our Mongolhood, which I shall include episodically at this point, I present without any claim to thoroughness or even to authenticity, but solely because it seems to me that it can contribute to clarifying the rest" (p. 87).

Saint Max tries to "clarify" for himself his phrases about the child and the youth by giving them world-embracing names, and he tries to "clarify" these world-embracing names by replacing them with his phrases about the child and the youth. "The Negroid character represents antiquity, dependence on things" (child); "the Mongoloid character—the period of dependence on thoughts, the Christian epoch" (the youth). (Cf. "The Economy of the Old Testament".) "The following words are reserved for the future: I am owner of the world of things, and I am owner of the world of thoughts" (pp. 87, 88). This "future" has already happened once, on page 20, in connection with the man, and it will occur again later, beginning with page 226.

First "historical reflection without claim to thoroughness or even to authenticity": Since Egypt is part of Africa where Negroes live, it follows that "included" "in the Negro era" (p. 88) are the "campaigns of Sesostris", which never took place, and the "signifi- cance of Egypt" (the significance it had also at the time of the Ptolemies, Napoleon's expedition to Egypt, Mohammed Ali, the Eastern question, the pamphlets of Duvergier de Haurannes, etc.), "and of North Africa in general" (and therefore of Carthage, Hannibal's campaign against Rome, and "easily also", the signifi- cance of Syracuse and Spain, the Vandals, Tertullian, the Moors, Al Hussein Abu Ali Ben Abdallah Ibn Sina, piratical states, the French

[^1]: 2 Corinthians 12:7.—Ed.





**[p. 164]**

Second "historical reflection": "To the Mongoloid era belong the campaigns of the Huns and Mongols up to the Russians" (and Wasserpolackerf4): thus here again the campaigns of the Huns and Mongols, together with the Russians, are "clarified" by their inclusion in the "Mongoloid era", and the "Mongoloid era"—by pointing out that it is the era of the phrase "dependence on thoughts", which we have already encountered in connection with the youth.

Third "historical reflection": In the Mongoloid era the "value of my ego cannot possibly be put at a high level because the hard diamond of the non-ego is too high in price, because it is still too gritty and impregnable for it to be absorbed and consumed by my ego. On the contrary, people are simply exceptionally busv crawling about on this static world, this substance, like parasitic animalcules on a body from whose juices they extract nourishment, but nevertheless do not devour the body. It is the bustling activity of noxious insects, the industriousness of Mongols. Among the Chinese indeed everything remains as of old, etc Therefore" (because among the Chinese everything remains as of old) "in our Mongol era every change has onlv been reformatory and corrective, and not destructive, devouring or annihilating. The substance, the object remains. All our industriousness is only the activity of ants and the jumping of fleas juggling on the tightrope of the objective", etc. (p. 88. Cf. Hegel, Philosophie der Geschichte, pp. 113, 118, 119 (unsoftened substance), p. 140, etc., where China is understood as "substan- tiality").

We learn here, therefore, that in the true Caucasian era people will be guided by the maxim that the earth, "substance", the "ob- ject", the "static" has to be devoured, "consumed", "annihilated", "absorbed", "destroyed", and along with the earth the solar system that is inseparable from it. World-devouring "Stirner" has alread) introduced us to the "reformatory or corrective activity" of the Mongols as the youth's and Christian's "pians for the salvation and correction of the world" on page 36. Thus we have still not advanced a step. It is characteristic of the entire "unique" conception of history that the highest stage of this Mongol activity earns the title of "scientific"—from which already now the conclusion can be drawn, which Saint Max later tells us, that the culmination of the Mongolian heaven is the Hegelian kingdom of spirits.

Fourth "historical reflection". The world on which the Mongols crawl about is now transformed by means of a "flea jump" into the "positive", this into the "precept", and, with the help of a paragraph on page 89. the precept becomes "morality". "Morality appears in its



**[p. 165]**

"To act in accordance with the morals and customs of one's country means here" (i.e., in the sphere of morality) "to be moral". "Therefore" (because this occurs in the sphere of morality as a custom) "pure, moral behaviour in the most straightforward form is practised in China]"

Saint Max is unfortunate in his examples. On page 116 in just the same way he attributes to the North Americans the "religion of honesty". He regards the two most rascally nations on earth, the patriarchal swindlers—the Chinese, and the civilised swindlers—the Yankees, as "straightforward", "moral" and "honest". If he had looked up his crib he could have found the North Americans classed as swindlers on page 81 of the Philosophie der Geschichte and the Chinese ditto on page 130.

"One"—that friend of the saintly worthy man—now helps him to arrive at innovation, and from this an "and" brings him back to custom, and thus the material is prepared for achieving a master stroke in the

Fifth historical reflection: "There is in fact no doubt that by means of custom man protects himself against the importunity of things, of the world"—for example, from hunger;

"and"—as quite naturally follows from this— "founds a world of his own"—which "Stirner" has need of now— "in which alone he feels in his native element and at home",—"alone", after he has first by "custom" made himself "at home" in the existing "world"—

"i.e., builds himself a heaven"—because China is called the Celestial Empire.

"For indeed heaven has no other significance than that of being the real homeland of man"—in this context, however, it signifies the imagined unreality of the real homeland—

"where nothing alien any longer prevails upon him", i.e., where what is his own prevails upon him as something alien, and all the rest of the old story. "Or rather", to use Saint Bruno's words, or "it is easily possible", to use Saint Max's words, that this proposition should read as follows:

[^1]: Stirner's proposition without claim to thoroughness or even to authenticity

[^2]: "There is in fact no doubt that by means of custom man protects himself against the importunity of things, of the world, and founds a world of his own., in which alone he feels in his native element and at home, i.e., builds himself a heaven.

[^3]: Clarified proposition

[^4]: "There is in fact no doubt" that because China is called the Celestial Empire, because "Stirner" happens tobe speaking of China and as he is "accus- tomed" by means of ignorance "to protect himself against the importunity of things, of the world, and to found a



Sixth "historical reflection". On pasre 90, Stirner imagines tha?

"in Cnina everyttiing is provided for; no matter what happens, the Chinese always knows how he should behave, and he has no need to decide according to circumstances; no unforeseen event will overthrow his celestial calm .

Nor anv British bombardment eitner—he knew exactly 'how he should behave", particularly in regard to the unfamiliar steamships and shrapnel-bombs.0"

Saint Max extracted that from Hegel s Philosophie der Geschichte. pages 118 and 127. to which, of course he had to add something unique, in order to achieve his reflection as given above.

"Consequently", i.e., because Hegei oegins history with China and because 'the Chinese does not lose ms equanimity", "Stirner" transforms mankind into a person who ' mounts the first rung of the ladder o culture' and indeed does so '"bv means of custom", because China has no other meaning for Stirner than that of being the embodiment of "custom". Now it is oni\ a question for our zealoî against the holv of transforming the "ladder" into a 'heaveniv lad- der", since China is also called the Celestial Empire. "Since mankind imagines" ("wherefrom" does Stirner 'know everything that" mankind imagines, see Wigand, page 189)—and this ought to have been proved by Stirner—firstly that it transforms "culture" into the "heaven of culture", and secondly that it transforms the "heaven of

[^1]: ' Consequenti}.' continues Saint Max, ' mankind climbs the first rung of the ladder oi education bv means oi custom, and since u imagines that bv gaining culture, it has gained heaven, rhe realm oi culture or second nature it actually mounts the first run^ o! the heaveniv ladder" .p. 90;.



culture" into the 'culture of heaver."—an alleged notion on the part of mankind which appears on page 9i as a notion of Stirner's and therebv receives its correct expression»—"so it actually mounts the first rung of the heaveniv ladder". Since it imagines that it mounts the first rung of the heaveniv iadder—so—it mounts ir actuallyl "Since" the youth" "imagines' that he becomes pure spirit, he does actually become such! See the ' vouth" and the "Christian" on the transition from the world of things to the world of the spirit, where the simple formula for this heavenly ladder of * unique" ideas alreadv occurs.

Seventh historical reflection, page 90. "If Mongolism" (it follows immediatelv after the heaveniv iadder, whereby "Stirner", through the alleged notion on the part of mankind, was able to ascertain the existence of a spiritual essence [Wesen]), "if Mongolism has established the existence of spiritual beings [Wesen]" (rather—if "Stirner" has established his fancv about the spiritual essence of the Mongols), "then the Caucasians have fought for thousands of years against these spiritual beings, in order to get to the bottom of their". (The youth, who becomes a man and tries all the time" "to penetrate behind thoughts", the Christian who "tries all the time" "to explore the depths of divinity".'} Since the Chinese have noted the existence of God knows what spiritual beings ("Stirner" does not note a single one, apart from his heavenly iadder)—so for thousands of years the Caucasians have to wrangle with 'these" Chinese "spiritual beings"; moreover, two lines below Surner puts on record that they actually "stormed the Mongolian heaven, the tien", and continues: "When will they destroy this heaven, when will thev finally become actual (Caucasians and find themselves^"

Here we have the negative unity, already seen earlier as man, now appearing as the 'actual Caucasian", i.e., not Negroid, no*. Mongolian, but as the Caucasian Caucasian. This latter, therefore a> a concept, as essence, is here separated from the actual Caucasians, is counterposed to them as the ' ideai of the Caucasian'', as a "vocation" in which thev should "lind themselves", as a "destiny". ;< "task", as "the hoiv", as 'the holv" Caucasian, 'the perfect" Caucasian, "who indeed" is the Caucasian "in heaven—God".

"in the sedulous struggle of the Mongolian race, men had built a heaven"—so "Stirner" believes iyp. 91), forgetting that actual Mon- gols are much more occupied with sheep than with heavena— when the people of the Caucasian stock, so long as they have

[^1]: In German a pun based on the words die Hammel—the-sheep, and die Himmel—the heavens.—Ed.





**[p. 168]**

Eighth historical reflection, which is the reflection of reflections, the alpha and omega of the whole of Stirner's history: Jacques le bonhomme, as we have pointed out from the beginning, sees in all the movement of nations that has so far taken place merely a sequence of heavens (p. 91), which can also be expressed as follows: successive generations of the Caucasian race up to the present day did nothing but squabble about the concept of morality (p. 92) and "their activity has been restricted to this" (p. 91). If they had got out of their heads this unfortunate morality, this apparition, they would have achieved something; as it was, they achieved nothing, absolutely nothing, and have to allow Saint Max to set them a task as if they were schoolboys. It is completely in accordance with his view of history that at the end (p. 92) he conjures up speculative philosophy so that "in it this heavenly kingdom, the kingdom of spirits and spectres, should find its proper order"—and that in a later passage speculative philosophy should be conceived as the "perfect kingdom of spirits".

Why it is that for those who regard history in the Hegelian manner the result of all preceding history was finally bound to be the kingdom of spirits perfected and brought into order in speculative philosophy—the solution of this secret "Stirner" could have very simply found by recourse to Hegel himself. To arrive at this result "the concept of spirit must be taken as the basis and then it must be shown that history is the process of the spirit itself" (Geschichte der Philosophie, III, p. 91). After the "concept of spirit" has been imposed on history as its basis, it is very easy, of course, to "show" that it is to be discovered everywhere, and then to make this as a process "find its proper order".

After making everything "find its proper order", Saint Max can now exclaim with enthusiasm: "To desire to win freedom for the spirit, that is Mongolism", etc. (cf. p. 17: "To bring to light pure thought, etc.—that is the joy of the youth", etc.), and can declare hypocritically: "Hence it is obvious that Mongolism represents non-sensuousness and unnaturalness", etc.—when he ought to have said: it is obvious that the Mongol is only the disguised youth who,

[^1]: Sequence of tenses.—Ed.





**[p. 169]**

being the negation of the world of things, can also be called "unnaturalness", "non-sensuousness", etc.

We have again reached the point where the "youth" can pass into the "man": "But who will transform the spirit into its nothing? He, who by means of the spirit represented nature as the futile, the finite, the transitory" (i.e., imagined it as such—and, according to page 16 et seq., this was done by the youth, later the Christian, then the Mongol, then the Mongoloid Caucasian, but properly speaking only by idealism), "he alone can also degrade the "spirit" (namely in his imagination) "to the same futility" (therefore the Christian, etc.? No, exclaims "Stirner" resorting to a similar trick as on pages 19-20 in the case of the man). "I can do it, each of you can do it who operates and creates" (in his imagination) "as the unrestricted ego", "in a word, the egoist can do it" (p. 93), i.e., the man, the Caucasian Caucasian, who therefore is the perfect Christian, the true Christian, the holy one, the embodiment of the holy.

Before dealing with the further nomenclature, we also "should like at this point to include an historical reflection" on the origin of Stirner's "historical reflection about our Mongolism"; our reflection differs, however, from Stirner's in that it definitely "lays claim to thoroughness and authenticity". His whole historical reflection, just as that on the "ancients", is a concoction out of Hegel.

The Negroid state is conceived as "the child" because Hegel says on page 89 of his Philosophie der Geschichte:

Here we meet again all Stirner's determinations of the child and the Negro—dependence on things, independence of ideas and especially of "the idea", "the essence", "the absolute" (holy) "being", etc.

He found that in Hegel the Mongols and, in particular, the Chinese appear as the beginning of history and since for Hegel, too, history is a history of spirits (but not in such a childish way as with "Stirner"), it goes without saying that the Mongols brought the spirit into history and are the original representatives of everything "sacred". In particular, on page 110, Hegel describes the "Mongolian kingdom" (of the Dalai-Lama) as the "ecclesiastical" realm, the

[^1]: "Africa is the country of the childhood of history." "In defining the African" (Negroid) "spirit we must entirely discard the category of universality" (p. 90)—i.e., although the child or the Negro has ideas, he still does not have the idea. "Among the Negroes consciousness has not yet reached a firm objective existence, as for example God, law, in which man would have the perception of his essence" "thanks to which, knowledge of an absolute being is totally absent. The Negro represents natural man in all his lack of restraint" (p. 90). "Although they must be conscious of their dependence on the natural" (on things, as "Stirner" says), "this, however, does not lead them to the consciousness of something higher" (p. 91).





**[p. 170]**

b) Catholicism and Protestantism (Cf. "The Economy of the Old Testament")

•w What we here call Catholicism, "Stirner" calls the "Middle Ages", but as he confuses (as "in everything") the pious, religious character of the Middle Ages, the religion of the Middle Ages, with the actual, profane Middle Ages in flesh and blood, we prefer to give the matter its right name at once.

"The Middle Ages" were a "lengthy period, in which people were content with the illusion of having the truth" (they did not desire or do anything else), "without seriously thinking about whether one must be true oneself in order to possess the truth".—"In the Middle Ages people" (that is, the whole of the Middle Ages) "mortified the flesh, in order to become capable of assimilating the holy" (p. 108).

Hegel defines the attitude to the divine in the Catholic church by saying

"Stirner" makes this transition by saying:

Since in "Stirner's" "book" the Middle Ages are identified with Catholicism, they naturally end with Luther (p. 108). Luther himself is reduced to the following definition, which has already cropped up in connection with the youth, in the conversation with Szeliga and elsewhere:

Concerning Lutheranism, Hegel says:

[^1]: "that people's attitude to the absolute was as to something purely external" (Christianity in the form of externality) (Geschichte der Philosophie, III, p. 148, and elsewhere). Of course, the individual has to be purified in order to assimilate the truth, but "this also occurs in an external way, through redemptions, fasts, self-flagellations, visits to holy places, pilgrimages" (ibid., p. 140).

[^2]: "In the same way, too, as people strain their eyes in order to see a distant object so they mortified the flesh, etc."

[^3]: "Man, if he wants to attain truth, must become as true as truth itself. Only he who already has truth in faith can participate in it."





**[p. 171]**

"The truth o! the gospe! exists onlv in the true attitude to it The essential attitude of the spirit exists only for the spirit Hence the attitude of the spirit to the content is that although the content is essential, it is equally essential that the hoiy and consecrating spirit should stand in relation to this content" (Geschichte der Philosophie, III, p. 234s "This then is the Lutheran faith—his" u.e., man's) "faith is required of him aim it alone can truly he taken into account'' (ibid., p. 230;. "Luther affirms tha: the divine is divine oiiiv msoiar as it IS apprehended in this subjective spirituaiitv o: faith" (ibid., p. 138). "1 he doctrine of the' (Catholic) "church is truth as existent truth" (Philosophie der Religion,'" II, p. 331).

"Stirne^" continues:

"Accordingly, with Luther the knowledge arises that truth, because it is though*, exists oniv tor the thinking man and this means that with regard to his objerr— thought—man must adopt a totaliv difiereni standpoint, a pious" (per uppos.). 'scientific standpoint, or that of thinking' (p. 110).

Apart from the repetition which "Stirner" again "includes" here, only the transition from faith to thinking deserves attention. Hegel makes the transition in the following wav:

"But this spirit" (nameiv, the holy and consecrating spirit) ' is, secondly, essentially also thinking spirit. Thinking a- surh must also have its development in i ' , etc. ([Geschichte der Philosophie,] p. 234;.

"Stirner" continues:

"This thought" ("that I am spirit, spirit aione") "pervades the historv of the Reformation down to the present dav" (p. 111;.

From the sixteenth century onw7ards. no other historv exists for "Stirner" than the historv of the Reformation—and the latter only in the interpretation in which Hegel presents it.

Saint Max has again dispiaved his gigantic faith. He has again taken as literal truth all the illusions of German speculative Philosophv; indeed, he has made them still more speculative, still more abstract. For him there exists only the history ot religion and philosophy—and this exists for him onlv through the medium of Hegel, who with the passage of time has become the universal crib, the rererence source for all the latest German speculators about principles and manufacturers oi systems.

Catholicism—attitude to truth as thing, child, Negro, the 'an- cient".

Protestantism = attitude to truth in the spirit, youth, Mongol, the "modern".

The whole scheme was superfluous, since all this was already- present in the section on "spirit".

As already mentioned in "The Economy of the Old Testament", it

[^1]: a G.W.F. Hegel, Vorlesungen über die Philosophie der Religion.—Ed.





**[p. 172]**

"One"—i.e., Hegel—"expelled Bacon from the realm of philosophy." "And, indeed, what is called English philosophy does not seem to have got any farther than the discoveries made by so-called clear intellects such as Bacon and Hume" (p. 112).

Hegel expresses this as follows:

"Bacon is in fact the real leader and representative of what is called philosophy in England and beyond which the English have by no means gone as yet" (Geschichte der Philosophie, III, p. 254).

The people whom "Stirner" calls "clear intellects" Hegel (ibid., p. 255) calls "educated men of the world"—Saint Max on one occa- sion even transforms them into the "simplicity of childish nature", for the English philosophers have to represent the child. On the same childish grounds Bacon is not allowed to have "concerned himself with theological problems and cardinal propositions", regardless of what may be said in his writings (particularly De Augmentis Scientiarum* Novum Organum and the Essaysb). On the other hand, "German thought sees life only in cognition itself" (p. 112), for it is the youth. Ecce iterum Crispinus!c

How Stirner transforms Descartes into a German philosopher, the reader can see for himself in the "book", p. 112.

In the foregoing presentation Jacques le bonhomme conceives history merely as the product of abstract thoughts—or, rather, of his notions of abstract thoughts—as governed by these notions, which, in the final analysis, are all resolved into the "holy". This domination of the "holy", of thought, of the Hegelian absolute idea over the empirical world he further portrays as a historical relation existing at the present time, as the domination of the holy ones, the ideologists, over the vulgar world—as a hierarchy. In this hierarchy, what previously appeared consecutively exists side by side, so that one of the two co-existing forms of development rules over the other. Thus, the

[^1]: D. Hierarchy

[^2]: Francis Bacon, De Dignitate et Augmentis Scientiarum.—Ed. Francis Bacon, The Essays or Councels. Civill and Morall.—Ed. And there is Crispinus again—the opening words of Juvenal's fourth satire.—Ed.





**[p. 173]**

youth rules over the child, the Mongol over the Negro, the modern over the ancient, the selfless egoist (citoyen) over the egoist in the usual sense of the word (bourgeois), etc.—see "The Economy of the Old Testament". The "destruction" of the "world of things" by the "world of the spirit" appears here as the "domination" of the "world of thoughts" over the "world of things". The outcome, of course, is bound to be that the domination which the "world of thoughts" exercises from the outset in history is at the end of the latter also presented as the real, actually existing domination of the think- ers—and, as we shall see, in the final analysis, as the domination of the speculative philosophers—over the world of things, so that Saint Max has only to fight against thoughts and ideas of the ideologists and to overcome them, in order to make himself "possessor of the world of things and the world of thoughts".

"Hierarchy is the domination of thought, the domination of the spirit. We are still hierarchical to this day, we are under the yoke of those who rely on thoughts, and thoughts"—who has failed to notice it long ago?—"are the holy" (p. 97). (Stirner has tried to safeguard himself against the reproach that in his whole book he has only been producing "thoughts", i.e., the "holy", by in fact nowhere producing any thoughts in it. Although in the Wigand periodical he ascribes to himself "virtuosity in thinking", i.e., according to his interpretation, virtuosity in the fabrication of the "holy"—and this we shall concede him.)—"Hierarchy is the supreme domination of spirit" (p. 467). —"The medieval hierarchy was only a weak hierarchy, for it was forced to allow all kinds of profane barbarism to exist unrestricted alongside it" ("how Stirner know;; so much about what the hierarchy was forced to do", we shall soon see), "and onlv the Reformation steeled the power of the hierarchy" (p. 310). "Stirner" indeed thinks that "the domination of spirits was never before so all-embracing and omnipotent" as after the Reformation; he thinks that this domination of spirits "instead of divorcing the religious principle from art, sto;-' and science, on the contrary, raised these wholh from actuality into the kingdom of the spirit and made them religious".

This view of modern history merely dilates upon speculative philosophv's old illusion of the domination of spirit in history. Indeed, this passage even shows how pious Jacques le bonhomme in all good faith continually takes the world outlook derived from Hegel, and which has become traditional for him, as the real world, and "manoeuvres" on that basis. What may appear as "his own" and "unique" in this passage is the conception of this domination of the spirit as a hierarchy—and here, again, we will "include" a brief "historical reflection" on the origin of Stirner's "hierarchy".

Hegel speaks of the philosophy of hierarchy in the following "transformations" :

[^1]: "We have seen in Plato's Republic the idea that philosophers should govern; now" (in the Catholic Middle Ages) "the time has come when it is affirmed that the spiritual should dominate; but the spiritual has acquired the meaning that the clerical, the clergy, should dominate. Thus, the spiritual is made a special being, the individual"





**[p. 174]**

Hegel expresses this true domination of spirit in two forms:

And, finally, this domination of the religious, the spiritual, etc., is expressed as the domination of philosophy:

Hegel, therefore, ascribes to the Catholic hierarchy of the Middle Ages the intention of wanting "to be the domination of spirit" and thereupon regards it as a restricted imperfect form of this domination of spirit, the culmination of which he sees in Protestant- ism and its alleged further development. However unhistorical this may be, nevertheless, Hegel is sufficiently historically-minded not to extend the use of the name "hierarchy" beyond the bounds of the Middle Ages. But Saint Max knows from this same Hegel that the later epoch is the "truth" of the preceding one; hence the epoch of the perfect domination of spirit is the truth of that epoch in which the domination of spirit was as yet imperfect, so that Protestantism is the truth of hierarchy and therefore true hierarchy. Since,

[^1]: "State, government, law, property, civic order" (and, as we know from his other works, art, science, etc., as well), "all this is the religious emerging in the form of the finite" (Geschichte der Philosophie, III, p. 185).

[^2]: "Consciousness of the spiritual is now" (in the eighteenth century) "essentially the foundation, and thereby domination has passed to philosophy" (Philosophie der Geschichte, p. 440).





**[p. 175]**

Accordingly there is no need to say or prove anything more concerning Stirner's hierarchy, apart from why Saint Max copied out Hegel—a fact, however, for the explanation of which further material data are necessarv, and which, therefore, is only explicable for those who are acquainted with the Berlin atmosphere. It is another question how the Hegelian idea of the domination of spirit arose, and about this see what has been said above.3

Saint Max's adoption of Hegel's world domination of the philosophers and his transformation of it into a hierarchy are due to the extremely uncritical credulity of our saint and to a "holy" or unholy ignorance which is content with "seeing through" history (i.e., with glancing through Hegel's historical writings) without trou- bling to "know" many "things" about it. In general, he was bound to be afraid that as soon as he "learned" he would no longer be able to "abolish and dissolve" (p. 96), and, therefore, remain stuck in the

[^1]: '' See this volume, pp. 59-62.—Ed.





**[p. 176]**

If, like Hegel, one designs such a system for the first time, a system embracing the whole of history and the present-day world in all its scope, one cannot possibly do so without comprehensive, positive knowledge, without great energy and keen insight and without dealing at least in some passages with empirical history. On the other hand, if one is satisfied with exploiting an already existing pattern, transforming it for one's "own" purposes and demonstrating this conception of one's own by means of isolated examples (e.g., Negroes and Mongols, Catholics and Protestants, the French Revolution, etc.)—and this is precisely what our warrior against the holy does—then absolutely no knowledge of history is necessary. The result of all this exploitation inevitably becomes comic; most of all comic when a jump is made from the past into the immediate present, examples of which we saw already in connection with "whimsy".3

As for the actual hierarchy of the Middle Ages, we shall merely note here that it did not exist for the people, for the great mass ot human beings. For the great mass only feudalism existed, and hierarchy only existed insofar as it was itself either feudal or anti-feudal (within the framework of feudalism). Feudalism itself had entirely empirical relations as its basis. Hierarchy and its struggle against feudalism (the struggle of the ideologists of a class against the class itself) are only the ideological expression of feudalism and of the struggles developing within feudalism itself—which include also the struggles of the feudally organised nations among themselves. Hierarchy is the ideal form of feudalism; feudalism is the political form of the medieval relations of production and intercourse. Consequently, the struggle of feudalism against hierarchy can only be explained by elucidating these practical material relations. This elucidation of itself puts an end to the previous conception of history which took the illusions of the Middle Ages >n trust, in particular those illusions which the Emperor and the Pope brought to bear in their struggle against each other.

Since Saint Max merely reduces the Hegelian abstractions about the Middle Ages and hierarchy to "pompous words and paltry thoughts", there is no need to examine in more detail the actual, historical hierarchy.

From the above it is now clear that the trick can also be reversed and Catholicism regarded not just as a preliminary stage, bur

[^1]: See this volume, pp. 160-63.—Ed.





**[p. 177]**

By carrying over the old domination of the clerics to modern times, Saint Max interprets modern times as "clericalism"; and then by regarding this domination of the clerics carried over to modern times as something distinct from the old medieval clerical domina- tion, he depicts it as domination of the ideologists, as "scholasticism". Thus clericalism=hierarchy as the domination of the spirit, scholasticism = the domination of the spirit as hierarchy.

"Stirner" achieves this simple transition to clericalism—which is no transition at all—by means of three weighty transformations.

Firstly, he "has" the "concept of clericalism" in anyone "who lives for a great idea, for a good cause" (still the good cause!), "for a doctrine, etc."

Secondly, in his world of illusion Stirner "comes up against" the "age-old illusion of a world that has not yet learned to dispense with clericalism", namely—"to live and create for the sake of an idea, etc."

Thirdly, "it is the domination of the idea, i.e., clericalism", that is: "Robespierre, for example" (for example!), "Saint-Just, and so on" (and so on!) "were out-and-out priests", etc. All three transforma- tions in which clericalism is "discovered", "encountered" and "called upon" (all this on p. 100), therefore, express nothing more than what Saint Max has already repeatedly told us, namely, the domination of spirit, of the idea, of the holy, over "life" (ibid.).

After the "domination of the idea, i.e., clericalism" has thus been foisted upon history, Saint Max can, of course, without difficulty find this "clericalism" again in the whole of preceding history, and thus depict "Robespierre, for example, Saint-Just, and so on" as priests and identify them with Innocent III and Gregory VII, and so all uniqueness vanishes in the face of the unique. All of them, properly speaking, are merely different names, different disguises for one person, "clericalism", which made all history from the beginning of Christianity. As to how, with this sort of conception of history, "all cats become grey", since all historical differences are "abolished"



**[p. 178]**

and "resolved" in the 'notion of clericalism"—as to this. Saint Max at once gives us a striking example in his "Robespierre, ror example, Saint-just, and so on". Here we are first given Robespierre as an "example" of Saint-Just, and Saint-just—as an "and-so-or" of Robespierre. It is then said:

"These representatives of holy interests are confronted by a world of innumerable "personal , earthly interests."

Bv whom were they confronted? Bv the Girondists and Ther- midonans, who (see "for example" R. Levasseurs Mémoires, "and so on", "i.e.", Nougaret, Histoire des prisons; Barère; "Deux amis de la liberté"4'* \et au commerce)': Montgaillard, Histoire de trance; Madame Roland, Appel a la postérité; T. B. Louvet's Mémoires and even the disgusting Essais historiques by Beauneu, etc., etc., as weh as all the proceedings before tne revolutionary tribunal, ' and so on") constantly reproached tnem, the real representatives ot revolution- ary power, i.e., of the class which alone was trulv revolutionary, the ' innumerable' masses, for violating "sacred interests", tne constitu- tion, ireedom, equality, the rights of man, republicanism, law, sainte propriété? "tor example" the division of powers, humamtv, morality, moderation, "and so on". They were opposed by all the priests, who accused them of violating all the mam and secondary items of the religious and moral catechism (see "for example" Histoire du clergé de France pendant la révolution, by M. R.c, Paris, libraire catholique, 1828, ' ana so on"). The historical comment oî the bourgeois that during the règne de la terreur "Robespierre, for example, Saint-just, and so on" cut off the heads of honnêtes gens1' see the numerous writings of the simpleton Monsieur Peltier, "tor example", La conspiration ae Robespierre bv Montjoie ' and so on") is expressed bv Samt Max in the following transformation:

This, of course, saves Saint Max the trouble of wasting even one "unique" little word about the actual, empirical grounds for the cutting off of heads—grounds which were based on extremelv worldiv interests, though not, of course, of the stockjobbers, but of the 'innumerable" masses. An earlier "priest", Spinoza, already in the seventeenth centurv had the brazen audacity to act the "strict

[^1]: "Because the revolutionary nriests and schooi-masters served Man, they cut the tnroats of mer '

[^2]: Two friends of freedom i.and of commerce).—Ed. Sacred property.—Ed. Hippolvte Régnier d'Estourbet.—Ed. Respectable people.—Ed.





**[p. 179]**

Blessed Max, who has found sufficient grounds for everything ("I have now found the ground into which my anchor is eternally fastened,"b in the idea, "for example", in the "clericalism", "and so on" of "Robespierre, for example, Saint-Just, and so on", George Sand, Proudhon, the chaste Berlin seamstress,0 etc.)—this blessed Max "does not blame the class of the bourgeoisie for having asked its egoism how far it should give way to the revolutionary idea as such". For Saint Max "the revolutionary idea" which inspired the habits bleus"*7 and honnêtes gens of 1789 is the same "idea" as that of the sansculottes of 1793, the same idea concerning which people deliberate whether to "give way" to it—but no further "space can be given"d to any "idea" about this point.

We now come to present-day hierarchy, to the domination of the idea in ordinary life. The whole of the second part of "the book" is filled with struggle against this "hierarchy". Therefore we shall deal with it in detail when we come to this second part. But since Saint Max, as in the section on "whimsy", takes delight in anticipating his ideas here and repeats what comes later in the beginning, as he repeats the beginning in what comes later, we are compelled already at this point to note a few examples of his hierarchy. His method of writing a book is the unique "egoism" which we find in the whole book. His self-delight stands in inverse proportion to the delight experienced by the reader.

Since the middle class demand love for their kingdom, their regime, they want, according to Jacques le bonhomme, to "establish the kingdom of love on earth" (p. 98). Since they demand respect for their domination and for the conditions in which it is exercised, and therefore want to usurp domination over respect, they demand, according to this worthy man, the domination of respectas such, their attitude towards respect is the same as towards the holy spirit dwelling within them (p. 95). Jacques le bonhomme, with his faith

[^1]: Benedictus Spinoza, Ethica, Pars prima, Appendix.—Ed. The words are from a Protestant hymn.—Ed. *j Marie Wilhelmine Dähnhardt.—Ed. In German a pun: Raum geben—to give way, to yield to, and to give space to something.—Ed.





**[p. 180]**

that can move mountains, takes as the actual, earthly basis of the bourgeois world the distorted form in which the sanctimonious and hypocritical ideology of the bourgeoisie voices their particular interests as universal interests. Why this ideological delusion assumes precisely this form for our saint, we shall see in connection with "political liberalism".3

Saint Max gives us a new example on page 115, speaking of the family. He declares that, although it is very easy to become emancipated from the domination of one's own family, nevertheless, "refusal of allegiance easily arouses pangs of conscience", and so people retain family affection, the concept of the family, and therefore have the "holy conception of the family", the "holy" (p. 116).

Here again our good man perceives the domination of the holy where entirely empirical relations dominate. The attitude of the bourgeois to the institutions of his regime is like that of the Jew to the law; he evades them whenever it is possible to do so in each individual case, but he wants everyone else to observe them. If the entire bourgeoisie, in a mass and at one time, were to evade bourgeois institutions, it would cease to be bourgeois—a conduct which, of course, never occurs to the bourgeois and by no means depends on their willing or running.58 The dissolute bourgeois evades marriage and secretly commits adultery; the merchant evades the institution of property by depriving others of property by speculation, bankruptcy, etc.; the young bourgeois makes himself independent of his own family, if he can by in fact abolishing the family as far as he is concerned. But marriage, property, the family remain untouched in theory, because they are the practical basis on which the bourgeoisie has erected its domination, and because in their bourgeois form they are the conditions which make the bourgeois a bourgeois, just as the constantly evaded law makes the religious Jew a religious Jew. This attitude of the bourgeois to the conditions of his existence acquires one of its universal forms in bourgeois morality. One cannot speak at all of the family "as such''. Historically, the bourgeois gives the family the character of the bourgeois family, in which boredom and money are the binding link, and which also includes the bourgeois dissolution of the family, which does not prevent the family itself from always continuing to exist. Its dirty existence has its counterpart in the holy concept of it in official phraseology and universal hypocrisy. Where the family is actually abolished, as with the proletariat, just the opposite of what

[^1]: a See this volume, pp. 193-97.—Ed.





**[p. 181]**

One other example of the domination of the idea in everyday life. Since school-masters may be told to find consolation for their scanty pay in the holiness of the cause they serve (which could only occur in Germany), Jacques le bonhomme actually believes that such talk is the reason for their low salaries (p. 100). He believes that "theholy" in the present-day bourgeois world has an actual money value, he believes that the meagre funds of the Prussian state (see, inter alia, Browning on this subject3) would be so increased by the abolition of "the holy" that every village school-master could suddenly be paid a ministerial salary.

This is the hierarchy of nonsense. The "keystone of the magnificent cathedral"—as the great Micheletb puts it—of hierarchy is "sometimes" the work of "One"

[^1]: a G. Browning, The domestic and financial Condition of Great Britain; preceded by a Brief Sketch of her Foreign Policy; and of the Statistics and Politics of France, Russia, Austria and Prussia.— Ed.

[^2]: b Carl Ludwig Michelet, Geschichte der letzten Systeme der Philosophie in Deutschland von Kant bis Hegel.— Ed.



''One sometime'; divides people into two classes, the educated and the uneducated." 'One sometimes divides aoes into two classes, the tailed and the tailless.) "The former insofar as thev were worthv of tneir name, occupied themselves witn thoughts, with the spirit." Thev "dominatea in the post-Christian epoch and ror their thoughts they demanded respec•;'". The uneducated (the animal, the child, the Negro; are "powerless" against thoughts and ' are dominated bv them. That is the meaning of hierarchv "

The 'educated'" (the vouth, the Mongol, the modern) are, therefore, again onlv occupied with "spirit' , pure thought, etc.; they are metaphysicians by profession, in the final analysis Hegelians. "Hence" the "uneducated" are the non-Hegehans.a Hegei was indubitabiv ' the most educated" Hegelian and therefore in his case it mus* "become apparent what a longing for things particularly me most educated man possesses". The point is that the " educated" anu * uneducated" are within themselves in conflict with each other mdeed, in everv man the 'uneducated' is in conflict with the "educated". And since the greatest longing for things, i.e., for that which belongs to the 'uneducated' , becomes apparent in Hegel, ir also becomes apparent here that "the most educated" man is at the same time "the most uneducated' .

"There" {in Hegel', "realirv should be completer ir accordance with thought anc no conceoi be withou; reaiiu

This should read: there the ordinary idea of reality should receive its complete philosophical expression, while Hegei imagines, on the contrary, that "consequently" every philosophical expression creates the reality that is in accordance with it. Jacques le bonhomme takes Hegels illusion about his own phiiosophv for tne genuine coin of Hegelian piiiiosophv

The Hegehan philosophy, which in the form of the domination of the Hegelians over the non-Hegelians appears as the crown of the hierarchy, now conquers the last world empire.

Here, therefore, we tina ourselves in the realm of spirits of Hegeiian philosophy, which stretches from Berlin to Halle and Tübingen, the realm oi spirits whose history was written by Herr Bayrhoffer-" and lor which the great Michelet collected the statistical aata.

[^1]: "Hege", svsieni «as -he supreme des-honsrn and autocrac\ of thought. th.~ omnivoience and aimightiness of the spin " >> 9 7

[^2]: Here the authors ironically use Berlin dialect words for educated, uneducated and most educated (Jebildete, Unjebildete, Allerjebildetste).—Ed.

[^3]: Karl Theodor Bayrhoffer, Die Idee und Geschichte der Philosophic.—Ed.





**[p. 183]**

The preparation for this realm of spirits was the French Revolution, which "did nothing but transform things into ideas about things" (p. 115; cf. above Hegel on the revolution, p. ["]).

"So people remained citizens" (in "Stirner", this occurs earlier, but "what Stirner says is not what he has in mind, and what he has in mind cannot be said", Wigand, p. 149) and "lived in reflection, they had their eye on an object, before which" (per appos.) "they felt reverence and fear". "Stirner" says in a passage on page 98: "The road to hell is paved with good intentions." But we say: the road to the unique is paved with bad concluding clauses b, with appositions, which are his "heavenly ladder" borrowed from the Chinese, and his "rope of the objective" (p. 88) on which he makes his "flea- jumps". In accordance with this, for "modern philosophy or modern times"—since the emergence of the realm of spirits modern times are indeed nothing but modern philosophy—it is an easy matter to "transform the existing objects into notional objects, i.e., into con- cepts", page 114, a work which Saint Max continues.

We have already seen our knight of the rueful countenance even "before the mountains were brought forth"/ which he later moved by his faith, right at the beginning of his book, galloping headlong towards the great result of his "magnificent cathedral". His "donkey", apposition, could not jump swiftly enough for him; now, at last, on page 114, he has reached his goal and by means of a mighty "or" has transformed modern times into modern philosophy.

Thereby ancient times (i.e., the ancient and modern, Negroid and Mongolian but, properly speaking, only pre-Stirnerian times) "reached their final goal". We can now reveal why Saint Max gave the title "Man" to the whole of the first part of his book and made out his entire history of miracles, ghosts and knights to be the history of "man". The ideas and thoughts of people were, of course, ideas and thoughts about themselves and their relationships, their consciousness of themselves and of people in general—for it was the consciousness not merely of a single individual but of the individual in his interconnection with the whole of society and about the whole of the society in which they lived. The conditions, independent of them, in which they produced their life, the necessary forms of intercourse connected herewith, and the personal and social relations thereby given, had to take the form—insofar as they were

[^1]: See this volume, pp. 174-75.—Ed. b In German a pun: Vorsätze—intentions, and Nachsätze—concluding clauses, conclusions.—Ed.

[^2]: c Psalms 90:2.—Ed.

[^3]: 8—2086





**[p. 184]**

The unique history takes place at the beginning in the Stoa in Athens, later almost wholly in Germany, and finally at the Kupfergraben59 in Berlin, where the despot of "modern philosophy or modern times" set up his imperial residence. That already shows how exclusively national and local is the matter dealt with. Instead of world history, Saint Max gives a few and, what is more, extremely meagre and biased comments on the history of German theology and philosophy. If on occasion we appear to go outside Germany, it is only in order to cause the deeds and thoughts of other peoples, e.g., the French Revolution, to "reach their final goal" in Germany, namely, at the Kupfergraben. Only national-German facts are given, they are dealt with and interpreted in a national-German manner, and the result remains a national-German one. But even that is not enough. The views and education of our saint are not only German, but of a Berlin nature through and through. The role allotted to Hegelian philosophy is that which it plays in Berlin, and Stirner confuses Berlin with the world and world history. The "youth" is a Berliner; the good citizens that we encounter throughout the book are Berlin beer-drinking philistines. With such premises for the starting-point, it is natural that the result arrived at is merely one

