---
Volume: 5
Document_Title: "A. The Spirit ( Pure History of Spirits) "
Page_Range: "171-175"
---

# A. The Spirit ( Pure History of Spirits) 



**[p. 148]**

A. The Spirit (Pure History of Spirits)

The first thing we learn about the "spirit" is that it is not the spirit but "the realm of spirits" that "is immensely large". Saint Max has nothing to say immediately of the spirit except that "an immensely large realm of spirits" exists—just as all he knows of the Middle Ages is that this period lasted for "a long time". Having presupposed that this "realm of spirits" exists, he subsequently proves its existence with the help of ten theses.

1. The spirit is not a free spirit until it is not occupied with itself alone, until it is not "solely concerned" with its own world, the "spiritual" world (first with itself alone and then with its own world).

2. "It is a free spirit only in a world of its own." 3. "Only by means of a spiritual world is the spirit really spirit." 4. "Before the spirit has created its world of spirits, it is not spirit." 5. "Its creations make it spirit." 6. "Its creations are its world." 7. "The spirit is the creator of a spiritual world." 8. "The spirit exists only when it creates the spiritual." 9. "Only together with the spiritual, which is its creation, is it real." 10. "ß u t the works or offspring of the spirit are nothing but—spirits" (pp. 38-39).

In thesis 1 the "spiritual world" is again immediately presupposed as existing, instead of being deduced, and this thesis 1 is again preached to us in theses 2-9 in eight new transformations. At the end of thesis 9 we find ourselves exactly where we were at the end of thesis 1—and then in thesis 10 a "fru£" suddenly introduces us to " spirits'', about whom so far nothing has been said.

According to theses 3, 4, 5, 8, and 9, however, the spirit is its own creation. This is now expressed thus, the spirit, i.e., the first creation of the spirit,

[^1]: "Since the spirit exists only by creating the spiritual, we look around for its first creations" (p. 41).

[^2]: "must arise out of nothing" "it must first create itself" "its first creation is itself, the spirit" (ibid.). "When it has accomplished this creative act there follows from then on a natural reproduction of creations just as, according to the myth, only the first human beings had to be created and the rest of the human race was reproduced of itself" (ibid.).

[^3]: "However mystical this may sound, we nevertheless experience this daily. Are you a thinking person before you think? In creating your first thought, you create yourself,





**[p. 149]**

the thinker, for you do not think until you think, i.e."—i.e.,—"havesome thought. Is it not your singing alone that makes you a singer, your speech that makes you a speaking person? Well, in the same way only the creation of the spiritual makes you spirit."

Our saintly conjurer assumes that the spirit creates the spiritual in order to draw the conclusion that the spirit creates itself as spirit; on the other hand, he assumes it as spirit in order to allow it to arrive at its spiritual creations (which, "according to the myth, are reproduced of themselves" and become spirits). So far we have the long-familiar orthodox-Hegelian phrases. The genuinely "unique" exposition of what Saint Max wants to say only begins with the example he gives. That is to say, if Jacques le bonhomme cannot get any further, if even "One" and "It" are unable to float his stranded ship, "Stirner" calls his third serf to his assistance, the "You", who never leaves him in the lurch and on whom he can rely in extremity. This "You" is an individual whom we are not encountering for the first time, a pious and faithful servant,3 whom we have seen going through fire and water, a worker in the vineyard of his lord, a man who does not allow anything to terrify him, in a word he is: Szeliga.* When "Stirner" is in the utmost plight in his exposition he cries out: Szeliga, help!—and trusty Eckart Szeliga immediately puts his shoulder to the wheel to get the cart out of the mire. We shall have more to say later about Saint Max's relation to Szeliga.

It is a question of spirit which creates itself out of nothing, hence it is a question of nothing, which out of nothing makes itself spirit. From this Saint Max derives the creation of Szeliga's spirit from Szeliga. And who else if not Szeliga could "Stirner" count on allowing himself to be put in the place of nothing in the manner indicated above? Who could be taken in by such a trick but Szeliga, who feels highly flattered at being allowed to appear at all as one of the dramatis personae? What Saint Max had to prove was not that a given "you", i.e., the given Szeliga, becomes a thinker, speaker, singer from the moment when he begins to think, speak, sing—but that the thinker creates himself out of nothing by beginning to think, that the singer creates himself out of nothingby beginning to sing, etc., and it is not even the thinker and the singer, but the thought and the singing as subjects that create themselves out of nothingby beginning to think and to sing. For the rest, "Stirner makes only the extremely simple

[^1]: * Cf. Die heilige Familie, oder Kritik der kritischen Kritik, where the earlier exploits of this man of God have already been set forth.b

[^2]: a Matthew 25:21.—Ed.

[^3]: See present edition, Vol. 4, pp. 55-77. Ed.





**[p. 150]**

reflection" and states only the "extremely popular" proposition (cf.

Wigand, p. 156) that Szeliga develops one of his qualities by developing it. There is, of course, absolutely nothing "to be wondered at" in the fact that Saint Max does not even "make" correctly "such simple reflections", but expresses them incorrectly in order thereby to prove a still much more incorrect proposition with the aid of the most incorrect logic in the world.

Far from it being true that "out of nothing" I make myself, for example, a "speaker", the nothing which forms the basis here is a very manifold something, the real individual, his speech organs, a definite stage of physical development, an existing language and dialects, ears capable of hearing and a human environment from which it is possible to hear something, etc., etc. Therefore, in the development of a property something is created by something out of something, and by no means comes, as in Hegel's Logik, from nothing, through nothing to nothing,3

Now that Saint Max has his faithful Szeliga close at hand, everything goes forward smoothly again. We shall see how, by means of his "you", he again transforms the spirit into the youth, exactly as he earlier transformed the youth into the spirit; here we shall again find the whole history of the youth repeated almost word for word, only with a few camouflaging alterations—just as the "immensely large realm of spirits" mentioned on page 37 was nothing but the "realm of the spirit", to found and enlarge which was the "aim" of the spirit of the youth (p. 17).

After previously for a long time occupying ourselves with the trick of making something out of nothing, we now suddenly, perfectly "naturally", come to an individual who is something else as well as spirit, consequently is something, and wants to become pure spirit,

[^1]: "Just as you, however, distinguish yourself from the thinker, singer, speaker, so you distinguish yourself no less from the spirit and are well aware that you are something else as well as spirit. However, just as in the enthusiasm of thinking it may easily happen that sight and hearing fail the thinking ego, so the enthusiasm of the spirit has seized you too, and you now aspire with all your might to become wholly spirit and merged in spirit. The spirit is vour ideal, something unattained, something of the beyond: spirit means your—God, 'God is spirit' You inveigh against yourself, you who cannot get rid of a relic of the non-spiritual. Instead of saying: I am more than spirit, you say contritely: I am less than spirit, and I can only envisage spirit, pure spirit, or the spirit which is nothing but spirit, but I am not it, and since Î am not it, then it is an other, it exists as an other, whom I call 'God'."

[^2]: a Cf. G.W.F. Hegel, Wissenschaft der Logik, Th. I, Abt. 2.—Ed. b John 4:24.—Ed.





**[p. 151]**

i.e., nothing. This much easier problem, i.e., to turn something into nothing, once again poses the whole storv of the vouth, w7ho "has ve to seek the perfect soiri'", and one needs mereiv to repeat the old Dhrases irom pages 17-18 to be extricated from all difficulties. Particularly, when one has such an obedient and gullible servant as Szeiiga, on whom "Stirne~ can impose the idea that just as "in the enthusiasm of thinking it mav easily" (Ts "happen that sight and hearing fail" him "Stirner". 50 he, Szeliga. has also neen 'seized with tne enthusiasm of the spirit' and he, Szeliga. is now aspiring with a L his mignt to become spirit'', instead of acouiring spirit, that is to sa\, ne now has to piav the ro^e or the voutii as presented on page 16. Szeliga believes it and in fear and trembling he obevs: he obevs when Saint Max thunders at him: The spirit is vour ideal—vour God Y01: do this for me, YOU do that for me. Nov vou ' inveigh'", now \m: sav", now 'vou can envisage", etc. When "Stirner'" imposes on him the idea that "the pure spirit is an other, for he" CSzeliga) 'is notv' then in truth, it is onlv Szeliga who is capable of believing him and wno gabbles the entire nonsense after him, word for word. Ina dentally, the method by which Jacques le bonhomme makes up this nonsense was alreadv exhaustively anaivsed when dealing with th'j

vouth Since you are well aware that vou are something else as well as a mathematician, vou aspire to become wholly a mathematician, to become merged in mathematics, the mathematician is your ideal, mathematician means vour—God. Y ou sav contritelv: I am less than a mathematician and I can oniv envisage the mathematician, and since I am not him, then he is an other he exists as an other, whom 1 cal! "God". Someone else in Szehga s place would say—Arago.

"Now. ar last, after' we have proved Stirner's thesis to be a repetition of the 'vouth'", 'one can state' that he "in truth originally set himsell no other task" than to identity the spirit of Christian asceticism with spirit in general, and to identify the frivolous esprit, for example, of the eighteenth centurv with Christian spiritlessness.

It follows, therefore that the necessio of spirit dwelling in the bevonu, i.e., being Got*, is nor to be explained, as Stirner asserts, 'because ego and spirit are different names lor different things, because ego is not spirit and spirit is not ego" (p. 42). The explanation lies in the "enthusiasm of the spirit" which is ascribed without any grounds to Szeliga and which makes him an ascetic, i.e., a man who wishes to become God (pure spirit), and because he is not able to do this posits God outside himself. But it was a matter of the spirit having first to create itselj out of nothing and then having to create spirits out of itself. Instead of this, Szeliga now produces God (the unique spirit that makes its appearance here) not because he,

[^1]: 7—2086



