---
Volume: 5
Document_Title: "B. The Possessed ( Impure History of Spirits) "
Page_Range: "175-180"
---

# B. The Possessed ( Impure History of Spirits) 



**[p. 152]**

"Precisely because we are not the Precisely because we are not the spirit which dwells within us, for that stomach which dwells within us, for that very reason we had to very reason we had to

put it outside of ourselves; it was not us, and therefore we could not conceive it as existing except outside of ourselves, beyond us, in the beyond" (p. 43).

It was a matter of the spirit having first to create itself and then having to create something other than itself out of itself; the ques- tion was: What is this something else? No answer is given to this ques- tion, but after the above-mentioned "various transformations" and twists, it becomes distorted into the following new question:

"The spirit is something other than the ego. But what is this something other?" (p. 45).

Now, therefore, the question arises: What is the spirit other than the ego? whereas the original question was: What is the spirit, owing to its creation out of nothing, other than itself? With this Saint Max jumps to the next "transformation".

Without realising it, Saint Max has so far done no more than give instruction in the art of spirit-seeing, by regarding the ancient and modern world only as the "pseudo-body of a spirit", as a spectral phenomenon, and seeing in it only struggles of spirits. Now, however, he consciously and ex professo gives instruction in the art of ghost-seeing.

Instructions in the art of seeing spirits. First of all one must become transformed into a complete fool, i.e., imagine oneself to be Szeliga, and then say to oneself, as Saint Max does to this Szeliga: "Look around you in the world and say for yourself whether a spirit is not looking at you from everywhere!" If one can bring oneself to imagine this, then the spirits will come "easily", of themselves; in a "flower" one sees only the "creator", in the mountains—a^'spirit of loftiness", in water—a "spirit of longing" or the longing of the spirit, and one hears "millions of spirits speak through the mouths of

[^1]: B. The Possessed (Impure History of Spirits)





**[p. 153]**

people". If one has achieved this level, if one can exclaim with Stir- ner: " Yes, ghosts are teeming in the whole world," then "it is not difficult to advance to the point" (p. 93) where one makes the further exclamation: "Only in it? No, the world itself is an apparition" (let your communication be, Yea, yea; Nay, nay: for whatsoever is more than these cometh of evil,a i.e., a logical transition), "it is the wandering pseudo-body of a spirit, it is an apparition." Then cheerfully "look near at hand or into the distance, you are surrounded by a ghostly world You see spirits". If you are an ordinary person you can be satisfied with that, but if you are thinking of ranking yourself with Szeliga, then you can also look into yourself and then "you should not be surprised" if, in these circumstances and from the heights of Szeligality, you discover also that "your spirit is a ghost haunting your body", that you yourself are a ghost which "awaits salvation, that is, a spirit". Thereby you will have arrived at the point where you are capable of seeing "spirits" and "ghosts" in "all" people, and therewith spirit-seeing "reaches its final goal" (pp. 46, 47).

The basis of this instruction, only much more correctly expressed, is to be found in Hegel, inter alia, in the Geschichte der Philosophie, III, pp. 124, 125.

Saint Max has such faith in his own instruction that as a result he himself becomes Szeliga and asserts that

"Stirner" "sees spirits". Saint Max intends to give us a phenomenology of the Christian spirit and in his usual way seizes on only one aspect. For the Christian the world was not only spiritualised but equally ^spiritualised as, for example, Hegel quite correctly admits in the passage mentioned, where he brings the two aspects into relation with each other, which Saint Max should also have done if he wanted to proceed historically. As against the world's despiritualisation in the Christian conscious- ness, the ancients, "who saw gods everywhere", can with equal justification be regarded as the spiritualisers of the world—a con- ception which our saintly dialectician rejects with the well-meaning warning: "Gods, my dear modern man, are not spirits" (p. 47). Pious Max recognises only the holy spirit as spirit.

But even if he had given us this phenomenology (which after Hegel is moreover superfluous), he would all the same have given us

[^1]: "ever since the word was made flesh, the world is spiritualised, bewitched, a ghost" (p. 47).

[^2]: :I Matthew 5 : 37.—Ed.

[^3]: b John 1:14.—Ed.





**[p. 154]**

Since Stirner "does not stick to the rules" (p. 45), it is possible, before dealing in more detail with spirit-seeing, to say here and now that the various "transformations" of Stirner's people and their world consist merely in the transformation of the entire history of the world into the body of Hegel's philosophy; into ghosts, which only apparently are an "other being" of the thoughts of the Berlin professor. In the Phänomenologie, the Hegelian bible, "the book", individuals are first of all transformed into "consciousness" [and the] world into "object", whereby the manifold variety of forms of life and history is reduced to a different attitude of "consciousness" to the "object". This different attitude is reduced, in turn, to three cardinal relations: 1) the relation of consciousness to the object as to truth, or to truth as mere object (for example, sensual consciousness, natural religion, Ionic philosophy, Catholicism, the authoritarian state, etc.); 2) the relation of consciousness as the true to the object (reason, spiritual religion, Socrates, Protestantism, the French Revolution); 3) the true relation of consciousness to truth as object, or to the object as truth (logical thinking, speculative philosophy, the spirit as existing for the spirit). In Hegel, too, the first relation is defined as God the Father, the second as Christ, the third as the Holy Spirit, etc. Stirner already used these transformations when speaking of child and youth, of ancient and modern, and he repeats them later in regard to Catholicism and Protestantism, the Negro and the Mongol, etc., and then accepts this series of camouflages of a thought

[^1]: Its own cause.—Ed.





**[p. 155]**

in all good faith as the world against which he has to assert and maintain himself as a 'corporeal individual".

Second set of instructions in spirit-seeing. How to transform the world into the spectre of truth, and oneself into something made holv or spectral. A conversation between Saint Max and his servant Szeiiga (pp. 47, 48).

Saint Max; "You have spirit, ior you have thoughts. What are your thoughts"" Szeiiga: "Spiritual entities.'

Saint Max: "Kence thev are not things-*"

Szeiiga: "No, but thev are the spirit of things, tne important element in all tfiings, their innermost essence, their idea."

Saint Max: ' Wnat vou think is, therefore, not merelv your thought0"

Szeiiga: "On the contrarv, it is the most real, genuinely true thing in the world: it I-, truth itself: when Î but trulv think. I think the truth. Î can admittedlv be mistaken about the truth and fail to perceive it, but when I trulv perceive, then the object of mv perception is the truth "

Saint Max: "Thus, you endeavour all the time to perceive the truth0" Szeiiga: 'Tor me the truth is sacred' The truth I cannot abolish; in the truth i believe, and therefore I investigate into its nature: there is nothing higher than k. it is eternal. The truth is sacred, eternal, it is the hoiv, the eternal."

Saint Max (indignantly): "But you, bv allowing yourself to become filled with this holiness, become yourself holv.'

Thus, when Szeliga truly perceives some object, the object ceases to be an object and becomes "the truth". This is the first manu- facture of spectres on a large scale.—It is now no longer a matter of perceiving objects, but of perceiving the truth: first he per- ceives objects truiy, which ne defines as the truth of perception and he transforms this into perception of the truth. But after Szeiiga has thus allowed truth as a spectre to be imposed on him bv the threatening saint, his siern master strikes home with a question o' conscience, whether he is filled "all the time" with longing for the truth whereupon the thoroughly confused Szeiiga blurts oir somewhat prematurely: "For me the truth is sacred." Bu; iu immediatelv notices his error and tries to correct it, by shamefaced h transforming objects no longer into the truth, out into a number o- truths, and abstracting "the truth'" as the trutn of these truths, "the truth" which he can now no longer abolish after he has distinguished it from truths which are capable of being abolished. Therebv it becomes "eternal". But not satisfied with giving it predicates such as "sacred, eternal", he transforms it into the holy, the eternal, as suoject. Alter this, of course. Saint Max can explain to him tha

[^1]: Here and in the following passages the German word heilig and its derivatives are used, which can mean: hoiy, pious, sacred, sacredness, saintly, saint, to consecrate, etc.— Ed.





**[p. 156]**

"The holy, moreover, is not for your senses" and quite consistently appends by means of the conjunction "and': "never will you, as a sensuous being, discover its traces"; that is to say, after sensuous objects are "all gone" and "the truth", "the sacred truth", "the holy" has taken their place. "But"—obviously!—"for your faith or more exactly for your spirit" (for your lack of spirit), "for it is itself som^/ungspiritual" (per appositionerrf), "a spirit" (again per appos.), "is spirit for the spirif.

Such is the art of transforming the ordinary world, "objects", by means of an arithmetical series of appositions, into "spirit for the spirit". Here we can only admire this dialectical method of appositions—later we shall have occasion to explore it and present it in all its classical beauty .b

The method of appositions can also be reversed—for example here, after we have once produced "the holy", it does not receive further appositions, but is made the apposition of a new definition; this is combining progression with equation. Thus, as a result of some dialectical process "there remains the idea of another entity" which "I should serve more than myself" (per appos.), "which for me should be more important than everything else" (per appos.), "in short—a something in which I should seek my true salvation'' (and finally per appos. the return to the first series), and which becomes "something 'holy' " (p. 48). We have here two progressions which are equated to each other and can thus provide the opportunity for a great variety of equations. We shall deal with this later. By this method too, "the sacred", which hitherto we have been acquainted with only as a purely theoretical designation of purely theoretical relations, has acquired a new practical meaning as "something in which I should seek my true salvation", which makes it possible to make the holy the opposite of the egoist. Incidentally we need hardly mention that this entire dialogue with the sermon that follows is nothing but another repetition of the story of the youth already met with three or four times before.

Here, having arrived at the "egoist", we need not stick to Stirner's "rules" either, because, firstly, we have to present his argument in all its purity, free from any intervening intermezzos, and, secondly, because in any case these intermezzi (on the analogy of "a Laza- roni"—Wigand, p. 159, the word should be Lazzarone—Sancho would say intermezzi's) will occur again in other parts of the book,

[^1]: By means of an apposition.—Ed. See this volume, p. 274 et seq.—Ed.



