---
Volume: 5
Document_Title: "C. The Impurely Impure History of Spirits loo a) Negroes and Mongols "
Page_Range: "186-193"
---

# C. The Impurely Impure History of Spirits loo a) Negroes and Mongols 



**[p. 163]**

C. The Impurely Impure History of Spirits

a) Negroes and Mongols

We now go back to the beginning of the "unique" historical scheme and nomenclature. The child becomes the Negro, the youth—the Mongol. See "The Economy of the Old Testament".

"The historical reflection on our Mongolhood, which I shall include episodically at this point, I present without any claim to thoroughness or even to authenticity, but solely because it seems to me that it can contribute to clarifying the rest" (p. 87).

Saint Max tries to "clarify" for himself his phrases about the child and the youth by giving them world-embracing names, and he tries to "clarify" these world-embracing names by replacing them with his phrases about the child and the youth. "The Negroid character represents antiquity, dependence on things" (child); "the Mongoloid character—the period of dependence on thoughts, the Christian epoch" (the youth). (Cf. "The Economy of the Old Testament".) "The following words are reserved for the future: I am owner of the world of things, and I am owner of the world of thoughts" (pp. 87, 88). This "future" has already happened once, on page 20, in connection with the man, and it will occur again later, beginning with page 226.

First "historical reflection without claim to thoroughness or even to authenticity": Since Egypt is part of Africa where Negroes live, it follows that "included" "in the Negro era" (p. 88) are the "campaigns of Sesostris", which never took place, and the "signifi- cance of Egypt" (the significance it had also at the time of the Ptolemies, Napoleon's expedition to Egypt, Mohammed Ali, the Eastern question, the pamphlets of Duvergier de Haurannes, etc.), "and of North Africa in general" (and therefore of Carthage, Hannibal's campaign against Rome, and "easily also", the signifi- cance of Syracuse and Spain, the Vandals, Tertullian, the Moors, Al Hussein Abu Ali Ben Abdallah Ibn Sina, piratical states, the French

[^1]: 2 Corinthians 12:7.—Ed.





**[p. 164]**

Second "historical reflection": "To the Mongoloid era belong the campaigns of the Huns and Mongols up to the Russians" (and Wasserpolackerf4): thus here again the campaigns of the Huns and Mongols, together with the Russians, are "clarified" by their inclusion in the "Mongoloid era", and the "Mongoloid era"—by pointing out that it is the era of the phrase "dependence on thoughts", which we have already encountered in connection with the youth.

Third "historical reflection": In the Mongoloid era the "value of my ego cannot possibly be put at a high level because the hard diamond of the non-ego is too high in price, because it is still too gritty and impregnable for it to be absorbed and consumed by my ego. On the contrary, people are simply exceptionally busv crawling about on this static world, this substance, like parasitic animalcules on a body from whose juices they extract nourishment, but nevertheless do not devour the body. It is the bustling activity of noxious insects, the industriousness of Mongols. Among the Chinese indeed everything remains as of old, etc Therefore" (because among the Chinese everything remains as of old) "in our Mongol era every change has onlv been reformatory and corrective, and not destructive, devouring or annihilating. The substance, the object remains. All our industriousness is only the activity of ants and the jumping of fleas juggling on the tightrope of the objective", etc. (p. 88. Cf. Hegel, Philosophie der Geschichte, pp. 113, 118, 119 (unsoftened substance), p. 140, etc., where China is understood as "substan- tiality").

We learn here, therefore, that in the true Caucasian era people will be guided by the maxim that the earth, "substance", the "ob- ject", the "static" has to be devoured, "consumed", "annihilated", "absorbed", "destroyed", and along with the earth the solar system that is inseparable from it. World-devouring "Stirner" has alread) introduced us to the "reformatory or corrective activity" of the Mongols as the youth's and Christian's "pians for the salvation and correction of the world" on page 36. Thus we have still not advanced a step. It is characteristic of the entire "unique" conception of history that the highest stage of this Mongol activity earns the title of "scientific"—from which already now the conclusion can be drawn, which Saint Max later tells us, that the culmination of the Mongolian heaven is the Hegelian kingdom of spirits.

Fourth "historical reflection". The world on which the Mongols crawl about is now transformed by means of a "flea jump" into the "positive", this into the "precept", and, with the help of a paragraph on page 89. the precept becomes "morality". "Morality appears in its



**[p. 165]**

"To act in accordance with the morals and customs of one's country means here" (i.e., in the sphere of morality) "to be moral". "Therefore" (because this occurs in the sphere of morality as a custom) "pure, moral behaviour in the most straightforward form is practised in China]"

Saint Max is unfortunate in his examples. On page 116 in just the same way he attributes to the North Americans the "religion of honesty". He regards the two most rascally nations on earth, the patriarchal swindlers—the Chinese, and the civilised swindlers—the Yankees, as "straightforward", "moral" and "honest". If he had looked up his crib he could have found the North Americans classed as swindlers on page 81 of the Philosophie der Geschichte and the Chinese ditto on page 130.

"One"—that friend of the saintly worthy man—now helps him to arrive at innovation, and from this an "and" brings him back to custom, and thus the material is prepared for achieving a master stroke in the

Fifth historical reflection: "There is in fact no doubt that by means of custom man protects himself against the importunity of things, of the world"—for example, from hunger;

"and"—as quite naturally follows from this— "founds a world of his own"—which "Stirner" has need of now— "in which alone he feels in his native element and at home",—"alone", after he has first by "custom" made himself "at home" in the existing "world"—

"i.e., builds himself a heaven"—because China is called the Celestial Empire.

"For indeed heaven has no other significance than that of being the real homeland of man"—in this context, however, it signifies the imagined unreality of the real homeland—

"where nothing alien any longer prevails upon him", i.e., where what is his own prevails upon him as something alien, and all the rest of the old story. "Or rather", to use Saint Bruno's words, or "it is easily possible", to use Saint Max's words, that this proposition should read as follows:

[^1]: Stirner's proposition without claim to thoroughness or even to authenticity

[^2]: "There is in fact no doubt that by means of custom man protects himself against the importunity of things, of the world, and founds a world of his own., in which alone he feels in his native element and at home, i.e., builds himself a heaven.

[^3]: Clarified proposition

[^4]: "There is in fact no doubt" that because China is called the Celestial Empire, because "Stirner" happens tobe speaking of China and as he is "accus- tomed" by means of ignorance "to protect himself against the importunity of things, of the world, and to found a



Sixth "historical reflection". On pasre 90, Stirner imagines tha?

"in Cnina everyttiing is provided for; no matter what happens, the Chinese always knows how he should behave, and he has no need to decide according to circumstances; no unforeseen event will overthrow his celestial calm .

Nor anv British bombardment eitner—he knew exactly 'how he should behave", particularly in regard to the unfamiliar steamships and shrapnel-bombs.0"

Saint Max extracted that from Hegel s Philosophie der Geschichte. pages 118 and 127. to which, of course he had to add something unique, in order to achieve his reflection as given above.

"Consequently", i.e., because Hegei oegins history with China and because 'the Chinese does not lose ms equanimity", "Stirner" transforms mankind into a person who ' mounts the first rung of the ladder o culture' and indeed does so '"bv means of custom", because China has no other meaning for Stirner than that of being the embodiment of "custom". Now it is oni\ a question for our zealoî against the holv of transforming the "ladder" into a 'heaveniv lad- der", since China is also called the Celestial Empire. "Since mankind imagines" ("wherefrom" does Stirner 'know everything that" mankind imagines, see Wigand, page 189)—and this ought to have been proved by Stirner—firstly that it transforms "culture" into the "heaven of culture", and secondly that it transforms the "heaven of

[^1]: ' Consequenti}.' continues Saint Max, ' mankind climbs the first rung of the ladder oi education bv means oi custom, and since u imagines that bv gaining culture, it has gained heaven, rhe realm oi culture or second nature it actually mounts the first run^ o! the heaveniv ladder" .p. 90;.



culture" into the 'culture of heaver."—an alleged notion on the part of mankind which appears on page 9i as a notion of Stirner's and therebv receives its correct expression»—"so it actually mounts the first rung of the heaveniv ladder". Since it imagines that it mounts the first rung of the heaveniv iadder—so—it mounts ir actuallyl "Since" the youth" "imagines' that he becomes pure spirit, he does actually become such! See the ' vouth" and the "Christian" on the transition from the world of things to the world of the spirit, where the simple formula for this heavenly ladder of * unique" ideas alreadv occurs.

Seventh historical reflection, page 90. "If Mongolism" (it follows immediatelv after the heaveniv iadder, whereby "Stirner", through the alleged notion on the part of mankind, was able to ascertain the existence of a spiritual essence [Wesen]), "if Mongolism has established the existence of spiritual beings [Wesen]" (rather—if "Stirner" has established his fancv about the spiritual essence of the Mongols), "then the Caucasians have fought for thousands of years against these spiritual beings, in order to get to the bottom of their". (The youth, who becomes a man and tries all the time" "to penetrate behind thoughts", the Christian who "tries all the time" "to explore the depths of divinity".'} Since the Chinese have noted the existence of God knows what spiritual beings ("Stirner" does not note a single one, apart from his heavenly iadder)—so for thousands of years the Caucasians have to wrangle with 'these" Chinese "spiritual beings"; moreover, two lines below Surner puts on record that they actually "stormed the Mongolian heaven, the tien", and continues: "When will they destroy this heaven, when will thev finally become actual (Caucasians and find themselves^"

Here we have the negative unity, already seen earlier as man, now appearing as the 'actual Caucasian", i.e., not Negroid, no*. Mongolian, but as the Caucasian Caucasian. This latter, therefore a> a concept, as essence, is here separated from the actual Caucasians, is counterposed to them as the ' ideai of the Caucasian'', as a "vocation" in which thev should "lind themselves", as a "destiny". ;< "task", as "the hoiv", as 'the holv" Caucasian, 'the perfect" Caucasian, "who indeed" is the Caucasian "in heaven—God".

"in the sedulous struggle of the Mongolian race, men had built a heaven"—so "Stirner" believes iyp. 91), forgetting that actual Mon- gols are much more occupied with sheep than with heavena— when the people of the Caucasian stock, so long as they have

[^1]: In German a pun based on the words die Hammel—the-sheep, and die Himmel—the heavens.—Ed.





**[p. 168]**

Eighth historical reflection, which is the reflection of reflections, the alpha and omega of the whole of Stirner's history: Jacques le bonhomme, as we have pointed out from the beginning, sees in all the movement of nations that has so far taken place merely a sequence of heavens (p. 91), which can also be expressed as follows: successive generations of the Caucasian race up to the present day did nothing but squabble about the concept of morality (p. 92) and "their activity has been restricted to this" (p. 91). If they had got out of their heads this unfortunate morality, this apparition, they would have achieved something; as it was, they achieved nothing, absolutely nothing, and have to allow Saint Max to set them a task as if they were schoolboys. It is completely in accordance with his view of history that at the end (p. 92) he conjures up speculative philosophy so that "in it this heavenly kingdom, the kingdom of spirits and spectres, should find its proper order"—and that in a later passage speculative philosophy should be conceived as the "perfect kingdom of spirits".

Why it is that for those who regard history in the Hegelian manner the result of all preceding history was finally bound to be the kingdom of spirits perfected and brought into order in speculative philosophy—the solution of this secret "Stirner" could have very simply found by recourse to Hegel himself. To arrive at this result "the concept of spirit must be taken as the basis and then it must be shown that history is the process of the spirit itself" (Geschichte der Philosophie, III, p. 91). After the "concept of spirit" has been imposed on history as its basis, it is very easy, of course, to "show" that it is to be discovered everywhere, and then to make this as a process "find its proper order".

After making everything "find its proper order", Saint Max can now exclaim with enthusiasm: "To desire to win freedom for the spirit, that is Mongolism", etc. (cf. p. 17: "To bring to light pure thought, etc.—that is the joy of the youth", etc.), and can declare hypocritically: "Hence it is obvious that Mongolism represents non-sensuousness and unnaturalness", etc.—when he ought to have said: it is obvious that the Mongol is only the disguised youth who,

[^1]: Sequence of tenses.—Ed.





**[p. 169]**

being the negation of the world of things, can also be called "unnaturalness", "non-sensuousness", etc.

We have again reached the point where the "youth" can pass into the "man": "But who will transform the spirit into its nothing? He, who by means of the spirit represented nature as the futile, the finite, the transitory" (i.e., imagined it as such—and, according to page 16 et seq., this was done by the youth, later the Christian, then the Mongol, then the Mongoloid Caucasian, but properly speaking only by idealism), "he alone can also degrade the "spirit" (namely in his imagination) "to the same futility" (therefore the Christian, etc.? No, exclaims "Stirner" resorting to a similar trick as on pages 19-20 in the case of the man). "I can do it, each of you can do it who operates and creates" (in his imagination) "as the unrestricted ego", "in a word, the egoist can do it" (p. 93), i.e., the man, the Caucasian Caucasian, who therefore is the perfect Christian, the true Christian, the holy one, the embodiment of the holy.

Before dealing with the further nomenclature, we also "should like at this point to include an historical reflection" on the origin of Stirner's "historical reflection about our Mongolism"; our reflection differs, however, from Stirner's in that it definitely "lays claim to thoroughness and authenticity". His whole historical reflection, just as that on the "ancients", is a concoction out of Hegel.

The Negroid state is conceived as "the child" because Hegel says on page 89 of his Philosophie der Geschichte:

Here we meet again all Stirner's determinations of the child and the Negro—dependence on things, independence of ideas and especially of "the idea", "the essence", "the absolute" (holy) "being", etc.

He found that in Hegel the Mongols and, in particular, the Chinese appear as the beginning of history and since for Hegel, too, history is a history of spirits (but not in such a childish way as with "Stirner"), it goes without saying that the Mongols brought the spirit into history and are the original representatives of everything "sacred". In particular, on page 110, Hegel describes the "Mongolian kingdom" (of the Dalai-Lama) as the "ecclesiastical" realm, the

[^1]: "Africa is the country of the childhood of history." "In defining the African" (Negroid) "spirit we must entirely discard the category of universality" (p. 90)—i.e., although the child or the Negro has ideas, he still does not have the idea. "Among the Negroes consciousness has not yet reached a firm objective existence, as for example God, law, in which man would have the perception of his essence" "thanks to which, knowledge of an absolute being is totally absent. The Negro represents natural man in all his lack of restraint" (p. 90). "Although they must be conscious of their dependence on the natural" (on things, as "Stirner" says), "this, however, does not lead them to the consciousness of something higher" (p. 91).



