---
Volume: 5
Document_Title: "D. Hierarchy "
Page_Range: "195-208"
---

# D. Hierarchy 



**[p. 172]**

"One"—i.e., Hegel—"expelled Bacon from the realm of philosophy." "And, indeed, what is called English philosophy does not seem to have got any farther than the discoveries made by so-called clear intellects such as Bacon and Hume" (p. 112).

Hegel expresses this as follows:

"Bacon is in fact the real leader and representative of what is called philosophy in England and beyond which the English have by no means gone as yet" (Geschichte der Philosophie, III, p. 254).

The people whom "Stirner" calls "clear intellects" Hegel (ibid., p. 255) calls "educated men of the world"—Saint Max on one occa- sion even transforms them into the "simplicity of childish nature", for the English philosophers have to represent the child. On the same childish grounds Bacon is not allowed to have "concerned himself with theological problems and cardinal propositions", regardless of what may be said in his writings (particularly De Augmentis Scientiarum* Novum Organum and the Essaysb). On the other hand, "German thought sees life only in cognition itself" (p. 112), for it is the youth. Ecce iterum Crispinus!c

How Stirner transforms Descartes into a German philosopher, the reader can see for himself in the "book", p. 112.

In the foregoing presentation Jacques le bonhomme conceives history merely as the product of abstract thoughts—or, rather, of his notions of abstract thoughts—as governed by these notions, which, in the final analysis, are all resolved into the "holy". This domination of the "holy", of thought, of the Hegelian absolute idea over the empirical world he further portrays as a historical relation existing at the present time, as the domination of the holy ones, the ideologists, over the vulgar world—as a hierarchy. In this hierarchy, what previously appeared consecutively exists side by side, so that one of the two co-existing forms of development rules over the other. Thus, the

[^1]: D. Hierarchy

[^2]: Francis Bacon, De Dignitate et Augmentis Scientiarum.—Ed. Francis Bacon, The Essays or Councels. Civill and Morall.—Ed. And there is Crispinus again—the opening words of Juvenal's fourth satire.—Ed.





**[p. 173]**

youth rules over the child, the Mongol over the Negro, the modern over the ancient, the selfless egoist (citoyen) over the egoist in the usual sense of the word (bourgeois), etc.—see "The Economy of the Old Testament". The "destruction" of the "world of things" by the "world of the spirit" appears here as the "domination" of the "world of thoughts" over the "world of things". The outcome, of course, is bound to be that the domination which the "world of thoughts" exercises from the outset in history is at the end of the latter also presented as the real, actually existing domination of the think- ers—and, as we shall see, in the final analysis, as the domination of the speculative philosophers—over the world of things, so that Saint Max has only to fight against thoughts and ideas of the ideologists and to overcome them, in order to make himself "possessor of the world of things and the world of thoughts".

"Hierarchy is the domination of thought, the domination of the spirit. We are still hierarchical to this day, we are under the yoke of those who rely on thoughts, and thoughts"—who has failed to notice it long ago?—"are the holy" (p. 97). (Stirner has tried to safeguard himself against the reproach that in his whole book he has only been producing "thoughts", i.e., the "holy", by in fact nowhere producing any thoughts in it. Although in the Wigand periodical he ascribes to himself "virtuosity in thinking", i.e., according to his interpretation, virtuosity in the fabrication of the "holy"—and this we shall concede him.)—"Hierarchy is the supreme domination of spirit" (p. 467). —"The medieval hierarchy was only a weak hierarchy, for it was forced to allow all kinds of profane barbarism to exist unrestricted alongside it" ("how Stirner know;; so much about what the hierarchy was forced to do", we shall soon see), "and onlv the Reformation steeled the power of the hierarchy" (p. 310). "Stirner" indeed thinks that "the domination of spirits was never before so all-embracing and omnipotent" as after the Reformation; he thinks that this domination of spirits "instead of divorcing the religious principle from art, sto;-' and science, on the contrary, raised these wholh from actuality into the kingdom of the spirit and made them religious".

This view of modern history merely dilates upon speculative philosophv's old illusion of the domination of spirit in history. Indeed, this passage even shows how pious Jacques le bonhomme in all good faith continually takes the world outlook derived from Hegel, and which has become traditional for him, as the real world, and "manoeuvres" on that basis. What may appear as "his own" and "unique" in this passage is the conception of this domination of the spirit as a hierarchy—and here, again, we will "include" a brief "historical reflection" on the origin of Stirner's "hierarchy".

Hegel speaks of the philosophy of hierarchy in the following "transformations" :

[^1]: "We have seen in Plato's Republic the idea that philosophers should govern; now" (in the Catholic Middle Ages) "the time has come when it is affirmed that the spiritual should dominate; but the spiritual has acquired the meaning that the clerical, the clergy, should dominate. Thus, the spiritual is made a special being, the individual"





**[p. 174]**

Hegel expresses this true domination of spirit in two forms:

And, finally, this domination of the religious, the spiritual, etc., is expressed as the domination of philosophy:

Hegel, therefore, ascribes to the Catholic hierarchy of the Middle Ages the intention of wanting "to be the domination of spirit" and thereupon regards it as a restricted imperfect form of this domination of spirit, the culmination of which he sees in Protestant- ism and its alleged further development. However unhistorical this may be, nevertheless, Hegel is sufficiently historically-minded not to extend the use of the name "hierarchy" beyond the bounds of the Middle Ages. But Saint Max knows from this same Hegel that the later epoch is the "truth" of the preceding one; hence the epoch of the perfect domination of spirit is the truth of that epoch in which the domination of spirit was as yet imperfect, so that Protestantism is the truth of hierarchy and therefore true hierarchy. Since,

[^1]: "State, government, law, property, civic order" (and, as we know from his other works, art, science, etc., as well), "all this is the religious emerging in the form of the finite" (Geschichte der Philosophie, III, p. 185).

[^2]: "Consciousness of the spiritual is now" (in the eighteenth century) "essentially the foundation, and thereby domination has passed to philosophy" (Philosophie der Geschichte, p. 440).





**[p. 175]**

Accordingly there is no need to say or prove anything more concerning Stirner's hierarchy, apart from why Saint Max copied out Hegel—a fact, however, for the explanation of which further material data are necessarv, and which, therefore, is only explicable for those who are acquainted with the Berlin atmosphere. It is another question how the Hegelian idea of the domination of spirit arose, and about this see what has been said above.3

Saint Max's adoption of Hegel's world domination of the philosophers and his transformation of it into a hierarchy are due to the extremely uncritical credulity of our saint and to a "holy" or unholy ignorance which is content with "seeing through" history (i.e., with glancing through Hegel's historical writings) without trou- bling to "know" many "things" about it. In general, he was bound to be afraid that as soon as he "learned" he would no longer be able to "abolish and dissolve" (p. 96), and, therefore, remain stuck in the

[^1]: '' See this volume, pp. 59-62.—Ed.





**[p. 176]**

If, like Hegel, one designs such a system for the first time, a system embracing the whole of history and the present-day world in all its scope, one cannot possibly do so without comprehensive, positive knowledge, without great energy and keen insight and without dealing at least in some passages with empirical history. On the other hand, if one is satisfied with exploiting an already existing pattern, transforming it for one's "own" purposes and demonstrating this conception of one's own by means of isolated examples (e.g., Negroes and Mongols, Catholics and Protestants, the French Revolution, etc.)—and this is precisely what our warrior against the holy does—then absolutely no knowledge of history is necessary. The result of all this exploitation inevitably becomes comic; most of all comic when a jump is made from the past into the immediate present, examples of which we saw already in connection with "whimsy".3

As for the actual hierarchy of the Middle Ages, we shall merely note here that it did not exist for the people, for the great mass ot human beings. For the great mass only feudalism existed, and hierarchy only existed insofar as it was itself either feudal or anti-feudal (within the framework of feudalism). Feudalism itself had entirely empirical relations as its basis. Hierarchy and its struggle against feudalism (the struggle of the ideologists of a class against the class itself) are only the ideological expression of feudalism and of the struggles developing within feudalism itself—which include also the struggles of the feudally organised nations among themselves. Hierarchy is the ideal form of feudalism; feudalism is the political form of the medieval relations of production and intercourse. Consequently, the struggle of feudalism against hierarchy can only be explained by elucidating these practical material relations. This elucidation of itself puts an end to the previous conception of history which took the illusions of the Middle Ages >n trust, in particular those illusions which the Emperor and the Pope brought to bear in their struggle against each other.

Since Saint Max merely reduces the Hegelian abstractions about the Middle Ages and hierarchy to "pompous words and paltry thoughts", there is no need to examine in more detail the actual, historical hierarchy.

From the above it is now clear that the trick can also be reversed and Catholicism regarded not just as a preliminary stage, bur

[^1]: See this volume, pp. 160-63.—Ed.





**[p. 177]**

By carrying over the old domination of the clerics to modern times, Saint Max interprets modern times as "clericalism"; and then by regarding this domination of the clerics carried over to modern times as something distinct from the old medieval clerical domina- tion, he depicts it as domination of the ideologists, as "scholasticism". Thus clericalism=hierarchy as the domination of the spirit, scholasticism = the domination of the spirit as hierarchy.

"Stirner" achieves this simple transition to clericalism—which is no transition at all—by means of three weighty transformations.

Firstly, he "has" the "concept of clericalism" in anyone "who lives for a great idea, for a good cause" (still the good cause!), "for a doctrine, etc."

Secondly, in his world of illusion Stirner "comes up against" the "age-old illusion of a world that has not yet learned to dispense with clericalism", namely—"to live and create for the sake of an idea, etc."

Thirdly, "it is the domination of the idea, i.e., clericalism", that is: "Robespierre, for example" (for example!), "Saint-Just, and so on" (and so on!) "were out-and-out priests", etc. All three transforma- tions in which clericalism is "discovered", "encountered" and "called upon" (all this on p. 100), therefore, express nothing more than what Saint Max has already repeatedly told us, namely, the domination of spirit, of the idea, of the holy, over "life" (ibid.).

After the "domination of the idea, i.e., clericalism" has thus been foisted upon history, Saint Max can, of course, without difficulty find this "clericalism" again in the whole of preceding history, and thus depict "Robespierre, for example, Saint-Just, and so on" as priests and identify them with Innocent III and Gregory VII, and so all uniqueness vanishes in the face of the unique. All of them, properly speaking, are merely different names, different disguises for one person, "clericalism", which made all history from the beginning of Christianity. As to how, with this sort of conception of history, "all cats become grey", since all historical differences are "abolished"



**[p. 178]**

and "resolved" in the 'notion of clericalism"—as to this. Saint Max at once gives us a striking example in his "Robespierre, ror example, Saint-just, and so on". Here we are first given Robespierre as an "example" of Saint-Just, and Saint-just—as an "and-so-or" of Robespierre. It is then said:

"These representatives of holy interests are confronted by a world of innumerable "personal , earthly interests."

Bv whom were they confronted? Bv the Girondists and Ther- midonans, who (see "for example" R. Levasseurs Mémoires, "and so on", "i.e.", Nougaret, Histoire des prisons; Barère; "Deux amis de la liberté"4'* \et au commerce)': Montgaillard, Histoire de trance; Madame Roland, Appel a la postérité; T. B. Louvet's Mémoires and even the disgusting Essais historiques by Beauneu, etc., etc., as weh as all the proceedings before tne revolutionary tribunal, ' and so on") constantly reproached tnem, the real representatives ot revolution- ary power, i.e., of the class which alone was trulv revolutionary, the ' innumerable' masses, for violating "sacred interests", tne constitu- tion, ireedom, equality, the rights of man, republicanism, law, sainte propriété? "tor example" the division of powers, humamtv, morality, moderation, "and so on". They were opposed by all the priests, who accused them of violating all the mam and secondary items of the religious and moral catechism (see "for example" Histoire du clergé de France pendant la révolution, by M. R.c, Paris, libraire catholique, 1828, ' ana so on"). The historical comment oî the bourgeois that during the règne de la terreur "Robespierre, for example, Saint-just, and so on" cut off the heads of honnêtes gens1' see the numerous writings of the simpleton Monsieur Peltier, "tor example", La conspiration ae Robespierre bv Montjoie ' and so on") is expressed bv Samt Max in the following transformation:

This, of course, saves Saint Max the trouble of wasting even one "unique" little word about the actual, empirical grounds for the cutting off of heads—grounds which were based on extremelv worldiv interests, though not, of course, of the stockjobbers, but of the 'innumerable" masses. An earlier "priest", Spinoza, already in the seventeenth centurv had the brazen audacity to act the "strict

[^1]: "Because the revolutionary nriests and schooi-masters served Man, they cut the tnroats of mer '

[^2]: Two friends of freedom i.and of commerce).—Ed. Sacred property.—Ed. Hippolvte Régnier d'Estourbet.—Ed. Respectable people.—Ed.





**[p. 179]**

Blessed Max, who has found sufficient grounds for everything ("I have now found the ground into which my anchor is eternally fastened,"b in the idea, "for example", in the "clericalism", "and so on" of "Robespierre, for example, Saint-Just, and so on", George Sand, Proudhon, the chaste Berlin seamstress,0 etc.)—this blessed Max "does not blame the class of the bourgeoisie for having asked its egoism how far it should give way to the revolutionary idea as such". For Saint Max "the revolutionary idea" which inspired the habits bleus"*7 and honnêtes gens of 1789 is the same "idea" as that of the sansculottes of 1793, the same idea concerning which people deliberate whether to "give way" to it—but no further "space can be given"d to any "idea" about this point.

We now come to present-day hierarchy, to the domination of the idea in ordinary life. The whole of the second part of "the book" is filled with struggle against this "hierarchy". Therefore we shall deal with it in detail when we come to this second part. But since Saint Max, as in the section on "whimsy", takes delight in anticipating his ideas here and repeats what comes later in the beginning, as he repeats the beginning in what comes later, we are compelled already at this point to note a few examples of his hierarchy. His method of writing a book is the unique "egoism" which we find in the whole book. His self-delight stands in inverse proportion to the delight experienced by the reader.

Since the middle class demand love for their kingdom, their regime, they want, according to Jacques le bonhomme, to "establish the kingdom of love on earth" (p. 98). Since they demand respect for their domination and for the conditions in which it is exercised, and therefore want to usurp domination over respect, they demand, according to this worthy man, the domination of respectas such, their attitude towards respect is the same as towards the holy spirit dwelling within them (p. 95). Jacques le bonhomme, with his faith

[^1]: Benedictus Spinoza, Ethica, Pars prima, Appendix.—Ed. The words are from a Protestant hymn.—Ed. *j Marie Wilhelmine Dähnhardt.—Ed. In German a pun: Raum geben—to give way, to yield to, and to give space to something.—Ed.





**[p. 180]**

that can move mountains, takes as the actual, earthly basis of the bourgeois world the distorted form in which the sanctimonious and hypocritical ideology of the bourgeoisie voices their particular interests as universal interests. Why this ideological delusion assumes precisely this form for our saint, we shall see in connection with "political liberalism".3

Saint Max gives us a new example on page 115, speaking of the family. He declares that, although it is very easy to become emancipated from the domination of one's own family, nevertheless, "refusal of allegiance easily arouses pangs of conscience", and so people retain family affection, the concept of the family, and therefore have the "holy conception of the family", the "holy" (p. 116).

Here again our good man perceives the domination of the holy where entirely empirical relations dominate. The attitude of the bourgeois to the institutions of his regime is like that of the Jew to the law; he evades them whenever it is possible to do so in each individual case, but he wants everyone else to observe them. If the entire bourgeoisie, in a mass and at one time, were to evade bourgeois institutions, it would cease to be bourgeois—a conduct which, of course, never occurs to the bourgeois and by no means depends on their willing or running.58 The dissolute bourgeois evades marriage and secretly commits adultery; the merchant evades the institution of property by depriving others of property by speculation, bankruptcy, etc.; the young bourgeois makes himself independent of his own family, if he can by in fact abolishing the family as far as he is concerned. But marriage, property, the family remain untouched in theory, because they are the practical basis on which the bourgeoisie has erected its domination, and because in their bourgeois form they are the conditions which make the bourgeois a bourgeois, just as the constantly evaded law makes the religious Jew a religious Jew. This attitude of the bourgeois to the conditions of his existence acquires one of its universal forms in bourgeois morality. One cannot speak at all of the family "as such''. Historically, the bourgeois gives the family the character of the bourgeois family, in which boredom and money are the binding link, and which also includes the bourgeois dissolution of the family, which does not prevent the family itself from always continuing to exist. Its dirty existence has its counterpart in the holy concept of it in official phraseology and universal hypocrisy. Where the family is actually abolished, as with the proletariat, just the opposite of what

[^1]: a See this volume, pp. 193-97.—Ed.





**[p. 181]**

One other example of the domination of the idea in everyday life. Since school-masters may be told to find consolation for their scanty pay in the holiness of the cause they serve (which could only occur in Germany), Jacques le bonhomme actually believes that such talk is the reason for their low salaries (p. 100). He believes that "theholy" in the present-day bourgeois world has an actual money value, he believes that the meagre funds of the Prussian state (see, inter alia, Browning on this subject3) would be so increased by the abolition of "the holy" that every village school-master could suddenly be paid a ministerial salary.

This is the hierarchy of nonsense. The "keystone of the magnificent cathedral"—as the great Micheletb puts it—of hierarchy is "sometimes" the work of "One"

[^1]: a G. Browning, The domestic and financial Condition of Great Britain; preceded by a Brief Sketch of her Foreign Policy; and of the Statistics and Politics of France, Russia, Austria and Prussia.— Ed.

[^2]: b Carl Ludwig Michelet, Geschichte der letzten Systeme der Philosophie in Deutschland von Kant bis Hegel.— Ed.



''One sometime'; divides people into two classes, the educated and the uneducated." 'One sometimes divides aoes into two classes, the tailed and the tailless.) "The former insofar as thev were worthv of tneir name, occupied themselves witn thoughts, with the spirit." Thev "dominatea in the post-Christian epoch and ror their thoughts they demanded respec•;'". The uneducated (the animal, the child, the Negro; are "powerless" against thoughts and ' are dominated bv them. That is the meaning of hierarchv "

The 'educated'" (the vouth, the Mongol, the modern) are, therefore, again onlv occupied with "spirit' , pure thought, etc.; they are metaphysicians by profession, in the final analysis Hegelians. "Hence" the "uneducated" are the non-Hegehans.a Hegei was indubitabiv ' the most educated" Hegelian and therefore in his case it mus* "become apparent what a longing for things particularly me most educated man possesses". The point is that the " educated" anu * uneducated" are within themselves in conflict with each other mdeed, in everv man the 'uneducated' is in conflict with the "educated". And since the greatest longing for things, i.e., for that which belongs to the 'uneducated' , becomes apparent in Hegel, ir also becomes apparent here that "the most educated" man is at the same time "the most uneducated' .

"There" {in Hegel', "realirv should be completer ir accordance with thought anc no conceoi be withou; reaiiu

This should read: there the ordinary idea of reality should receive its complete philosophical expression, while Hegei imagines, on the contrary, that "consequently" every philosophical expression creates the reality that is in accordance with it. Jacques le bonhomme takes Hegels illusion about his own phiiosophv for tne genuine coin of Hegelian piiiiosophv

The Hegehan philosophy, which in the form of the domination of the Hegelians over the non-Hegelians appears as the crown of the hierarchy, now conquers the last world empire.

Here, therefore, we tina ourselves in the realm of spirits of Hegeiian philosophy, which stretches from Berlin to Halle and Tübingen, the realm oi spirits whose history was written by Herr Bayrhoffer-" and lor which the great Michelet collected the statistical aata.

[^1]: "Hege", svsieni «as -he supreme des-honsrn and autocrac\ of thought. th.~ omnivoience and aimightiness of the spin " >> 9 7

[^2]: Here the authors ironically use Berlin dialect words for educated, uneducated and most educated (Jebildete, Unjebildete, Allerjebildetste).—Ed.

[^3]: Karl Theodor Bayrhoffer, Die Idee und Geschichte der Philosophic.—Ed.





**[p. 183]**

The preparation for this realm of spirits was the French Revolution, which "did nothing but transform things into ideas about things" (p. 115; cf. above Hegel on the revolution, p. ["]).

"So people remained citizens" (in "Stirner", this occurs earlier, but "what Stirner says is not what he has in mind, and what he has in mind cannot be said", Wigand, p. 149) and "lived in reflection, they had their eye on an object, before which" (per appos.) "they felt reverence and fear". "Stirner" says in a passage on page 98: "The road to hell is paved with good intentions." But we say: the road to the unique is paved with bad concluding clauses b, with appositions, which are his "heavenly ladder" borrowed from the Chinese, and his "rope of the objective" (p. 88) on which he makes his "flea- jumps". In accordance with this, for "modern philosophy or modern times"—since the emergence of the realm of spirits modern times are indeed nothing but modern philosophy—it is an easy matter to "transform the existing objects into notional objects, i.e., into con- cepts", page 114, a work which Saint Max continues.

We have already seen our knight of the rueful countenance even "before the mountains were brought forth"/ which he later moved by his faith, right at the beginning of his book, galloping headlong towards the great result of his "magnificent cathedral". His "donkey", apposition, could not jump swiftly enough for him; now, at last, on page 114, he has reached his goal and by means of a mighty "or" has transformed modern times into modern philosophy.

Thereby ancient times (i.e., the ancient and modern, Negroid and Mongolian but, properly speaking, only pre-Stirnerian times) "reached their final goal". We can now reveal why Saint Max gave the title "Man" to the whole of the first part of his book and made out his entire history of miracles, ghosts and knights to be the history of "man". The ideas and thoughts of people were, of course, ideas and thoughts about themselves and their relationships, their consciousness of themselves and of people in general—for it was the consciousness not merely of a single individual but of the individual in his interconnection with the whole of society and about the whole of the society in which they lived. The conditions, independent of them, in which they produced their life, the necessary forms of intercourse connected herewith, and the personal and social relations thereby given, had to take the form—insofar as they were

[^1]: See this volume, pp. 174-75.—Ed. b In German a pun: Vorsätze—intentions, and Nachsätze—concluding clauses, conclusions.—Ed.

[^2]: c Psalms 90:2.—Ed.

[^3]: 8—2086





**[p. 184]**

The unique history takes place at the beginning in the Stoa in Athens, later almost wholly in Germany, and finally at the Kupfergraben59 in Berlin, where the despot of "modern philosophy or modern times" set up his imperial residence. That already shows how exclusively national and local is the matter dealt with. Instead of world history, Saint Max gives a few and, what is more, extremely meagre and biased comments on the history of German theology and philosophy. If on occasion we appear to go outside Germany, it is only in order to cause the deeds and thoughts of other peoples, e.g., the French Revolution, to "reach their final goal" in Germany, namely, at the Kupfergraben. Only national-German facts are given, they are dealt with and interpreted in a national-German manner, and the result remains a national-German one. But even that is not enough. The views and education of our saint are not only German, but of a Berlin nature through and through. The role allotted to Hegelian philosophy is that which it plays in Berlin, and Stirner confuses Berlin with the world and world history. The "youth" is a Berliner; the good citizens that we encounter throughout the book are Berlin beer-drinking philistines. With such premises for the starting-point, it is natural that the result arrived at is merely one

