---
Volume: 5
Document_Title: "5. ' Stirner' Delighted in His Construction "
Page_Range: "208-216"
---

# 5. " Stirner" Delighted in His Construction 



**[p. 185]**

In Germany alone, in Germany alone, Would I for ever live.3

The local Berlin conclusion of our valiant saint—that in Hegelian philosophy the world has "all gone"—enables him now without much expense to arrive at a universal empire of his "own". The Hegelian philosophy transformed everything into thought, into the holy, into apparition, into spirit, into spirits, into spectres. "Stirner" will fight against them, he will conquer them in his imagination and will erect on their dead bodies his "own", "unique", "corporeal" empire, the empire of the "whole fellow".

"For we wrestle not against flesh and blood, but against principalities, against powers, against the rulers of the darkness of this world, against spiritual wickedness in high places" (Ephesians 6:12).

Now "Stirner" has his "feet shod with the preparation" for waging the fight against thoughts. He has no need first to "take the shield of faith", for he has never laid it down. Armed with the "helmet" of disaster and the "sword" of spiritlessness (see ibid.b), he goes into battle. "And it was given unto him to make war with the holy" but not "to overcome" it. (Revelation of St. John 13:7.)

5. ''Stirner" Delighted in His Construction

We now find ourselves again exactly where we were on page 19 in connection with the youth, who became the man, and on page 90 in connection with the Mongoloid Caucasian, who was transformed into the Caucasian Caucasian and "found himself". We are, therefore, at the third self-finding of the mysterious individual whose "arduous life struggle" Saint Max depicts for us. Only the whole story is now behind us, and, in view of the extensive material we have worked through, we must take a retrospective look at the gigantic corpse of the ruined man.

Though on a later page, where he has long ago forgotten his history, Saint Max asserts that "genius has long since been regarded as the creator of new world-historic productions" (p. 214), we have

[^1]: a From the poem Auf der Wanderung by Hoffmann von Fallersleben.— Ed. ' Ephesians 6 : 1 5 , 16, 17 (paraphrased).—Ed.

[^2]: r





**[p. 186]**

Repetitio est mater studiorum* Saint Max, who expounded his whole history of "philosophy or time" only in order to find an opportunity for a few hurried studies of Hegel, finally repeats once again his whole unique history. However, he does it with a turn towards natural history, offering us important information about "unique" natural science, the reason being that for him, whenever the "world" has to play an important role, it immediately becomes transformed into nature. "Unique" natural science begins at once with the admission of its impotence. It does not examine the actual relation of man to nature, determined bv industry and natural science, but proclaims a fantastic relation of man to nature.

"How little can man conquer! He has to allow the sun to trace its course, the sea to roll its waves, the mountains to tower to the sky" (p. 122).

Saint Max who, like all saints, loves miracles, but can only perform a logical miracle, is annoyed because he cannot make the sun dance the cancan, he grieves because he cannot still the ocean, he is indignant because he must allow the mountains to tower to the sky. Although on page 124 the world already becomes "prosaic" at the end of antiquity, it is still, for our saint, highly unprosaic. For him it still is the "sun" and not the earth that traces its course, and to his sorrow he cannot à la Joshua command "sun, stand thou still".b On page 123, Stirner discovers that

This sentence contains the most important data of the "unique" philosophy of nature, which on the previous page had already ar- rived at the conclusion that for man nature is the "unconquerable". Earthly physics knows nothing about a mechanical impact which becomes ineffective—unique physics alone has the merit of this discovery. Earthly chemistry knows no "gases" which stimulate "chemical tensions" and, what is more, "in the interior". Gases which enter into new combinations, into new chemical relations, do not stimulate any "tensions", but at most lead to a fall of tension,

[^1]: at the end of the ancient world, "spirit" "again foamed and frothed over irresistib- ly because gases" (spirits) "developed within it and, after the mechanical impact from outside became ineffective, chemical tensions, which stimulate in the interior, began to come into wonderful play".

[^2]: Repetition is the mother of learning.—Ed. Joshua 10:12.—Ed.





**[p. 187]**

insofar as they pass into a liquid state of aggregation and thereby their volume decreases to something less than one-thousandth of their former volume. If Saint Max feels "tensions" "in" his own "interior" due to "gases", these are highly "mechanical impacts", and by no means "chemical tensions". They are produced by a chemical transformation, determined by physiological causes, of certain mixtures into others, whereby part of the constituents of the formel mixture becomes gaseous, therefore, occupies a larger volume and, in the absence of space for it, causes a "mechanical impact" or pressure towards the outside. [That] these nonexistent "chemical tensions" "come" into extremely "wonderful play" in Saint Max's "interior", namely, this time in his head, "we see" from the role they play in "unique" natural science. Incidentally, it is to be desired that Saint Max would no longer withhold from the profane natural scientists what nonsense he has in mind with the crazy expression "chemical tensions", which moreover "stimulate in the interior" (as though a "mechanical impact" on the stomach does not "stimulate it. in the interior" as well).

Saint Max wrote his "unique" natural science only because on this occasion he was unable to touch on the ancients in decent fashion without at the same time letting fall a few words about the "world of things", about nature.

At the end of the ancient world the ancients, we are assured here, are all transformed into Stoics, "whom no collapse of the world" (how many times is it supposed to have collapsed?) "could put out of countenance" (p. 123). Thus, the ancients become Chinese, who also "cannot be thrown down from the heavens of their tranquillity by any unforeseen event" (or idea3) (p. 90). Indeed, Jacques le bonhomme seriously believes that against the last of the ancients "the mechanical impact from outside became ineffective". How far this corresponds to the actual situation of the Romans and Greeks at the end of the ancient world, to their complete lack of stability and confidence, which could hardly oppose any remnant of vis inertiae to the "mechanical impact"—on this point compare, inter alia, Lucian. The powerful mechanical shocks which the Roman empire received as a result of its division among several Caesars and their wars against one another, as a result of the colossal concentration of property, particularly landed property, in Rome, and the decrease in Italy's population caused by this, and as a result of the [pressure of the] Huns and Teutons—these shocks, in the opinion of our saintly

[^1]: "' In the German original a pun: Fall—event—and Finfall, which can mean idea, brain wave, invasion or collapse.— F.d.





**[p. 188]**

historian, "became ineffective"; only the "chemical tensions", only the "gases" which Christianity "stimulated in the interior" over- threw the Roman Empire. The great earthquakes [in the West] and in the East, and other "mechanical impacts" which buried hundreds of thousands of people under the [ruins] of their towns and [which by no] means left the consciousness of people unchanged, were presumably, according to "Stirner", also "ineffective" or were chemical tensions. And "in fact" (!) "ancient history ends in this, that I have made the world my property"—which is proved by means of the biblical saying: "All things are delivered unto me" (i.e., Christ) "of my Father."3 Here, therefore, I = Christ. In this connection, Jacques le bonhomme cannot refrain from believing the Christian that he could move mountains, etc., if he "only wanted to". As a Christian he proclaims himself the lord of the world, but he is this only as a Christian; he proclaims himself the "owner of the world". "Thereby egoism won its first full victory, since I elevated myself to be the owner of the world" (p. 124). In order to rise to the level of the perfect Christian, Stirner's ego had only to carry through the struggle to become poor in spirit as well (which he succeeded in doing even before the mountains arose). "Blessed are the poor in spirit: for theirs is the kingdom of heaven."b Saint Max has reached perfection as regards poverty of spirit and even boasts of it in his great rejoicing before the Lord.

Saint Max, poor in spirit, believes in the fantastic gas formations of the Christians arising from the decomposition of the ancient world. The ancient Christian owned nothing in this world and was, therefore, satisfied with his imaginary heavenly property and his divine right to ownership. Instead of making the world the possession of the people, he proclaimed himself and his ragged fraternity to be "God's own possession" (1 Peter 2:9). According to "Stirner", the Christian idea of the world is the world into which the ancient world is actually dissolved, although this is at most [a world] of fantasy into which the world of ancient ideas has [been transformed] and in which the Christian [by faith] can move mountains, can feel [all-powerful] and press forward to a position where the "mechanical impact is ineffective". Since for "Stirner" people are no longer determined by the [external] world, are no longer driven forward by the mechanical impact of the need to produce, since, in general, the mechanical impact, and with it the sexual act as well, has ceased to operate, it is only by a miracle that

[^1]: \ Matthew 11 :27.— Ed.

[^2]: b Matthew 5 : 3.—Ed.





**[p. 189]**

they have been able to continue to exist. Of course, for German prigs and school-masters with a gaseous content like that of "Stirner", it is far easier to be satisfied with the Christian fantasy about proper- ty—which is truly nothing but the property of Christian fan- tasy—than to describe the transformation of the real property relations and production relations of the ancient world.

That same primitive Christian who, in the imagination of Jacques le bonhomme, was the owner of the ancient world, actually belonged for the most part to the world of owners; he was a slave and could be sold on the market. But "Stirner", delighted in his construction, irrepressibly continues his rejoicing.

"The first property, the first splendour has been won!" (p. 124).

In the same way, Stirner's egoism continues to gain property and splendour and to achieve "complete victories". The theological attitude of the primitive Christian to the ancient world is the perfect prototype of all his property and all his splendour.

The following are the grounds given for this property of the Christian:

"The world has lost its divine character it has become prosaic, it is my property, which I dispose of as I (viz., the spirit) choose" (p. 124).

This means: the world has lost its divine character, therefore, it is freed from my fantasies for my own consciousness; it has become prosaic, consequently its relation to me is prosaic and it disposes of me in the prosaic way it favours, by no means to please me. Apart from the fact that "Stirner" here actually thinks that in ancient times the prosaic world did not exist and the divine principle held sway in the world, he even falsifies the Christian concept, which continually bemoans its impotence in relation to the world, and itself depicts its victory over the world in its fantasy as merely an ideal one, by transferring it to the day of judgment. Only when a great secular power took possession of Christianity and exploited it, whereupon, of course, it ceased to be unworldly, could Christianity imagine itself to be the owner of the world. Saint Max ascribes to the Christian the same false relation to the ancient world as he ascribes to the youth with regard to the "world of the child"; he puts the egoist in the same relation to the world of the Christian as he puts the man to the world of the youth.

The Christian has now nothing more to do than to become poor in spirit as quickly as possible and perceive the world of spirit in all its vanity—just as he did with the world of things—in order to be able to "dispose as he chooses" of the world of spirit also, whereby he becomes a perfect Christian, an egoist. The attitude of the Christian



**[p. 190]**

"After various transformations the holy spirit in the course of time became the absolute idea, which again in manifold refractions split up into the various ideas of love of mankind, civic virtue, rationality, etc." (pp. 125, 126).

The German stay-at-home again turns the thing upside-down. The ideas of love of mankind, etc.—coins whose impressions had already been totally worn away, particularly owing to their great circulation in the eighteenth century—were recast by Hegel in the sublimate of the absolute idea, but after this reminting they were just as little successful in retaining their value abroad as Prussian paper money.

The consistent conclusion—which has already appeared again and again—of Stirner's view of history is as follows:

"Concepts should play the decisive role everywhere, concepts should regulate life, concepts should rule. That is the religious world to which Hegel gave systematic expression" (p. 126), and which our good-natured philistine so much mistakes for the real world that on the following page (p. 127) he can say:

"Now nothing but spirit rules in the world." Stuck fast in this world of illusion, he can (on p. 128) build first of all an "altar" and then "erect a church" "round this altar", a church whose "walls" have legs for making progress and "move ever farther forward". "Soon this church embraces the whole earth." He, the unique, and Szeliga, his servant, stand outside, they "wander round these walls, and are driven out to the very edge". "Howling with agonising hunger", Saint Max calls to his servant: "One step more and the world of the holy has conquered." But Szeliga suddenly "sinks into the outermost abyss", which lies above him—a literary miracle! For, since the earth is a sphere, the abyss can only lie above Szeliga as soon as the church embraces the whole earth. So he reverses the laws of gravity, ascends backwards into heaven and thereby reflects honour on "unique" natural science, which is all the easier for him since, according to page 126, "the nature of the thing and the concept of relation" are a matter of indifference to "Stirner", "do not guide him in his treatment or conclusion", and the "relationship into which" Szeliga "entered" with gravity "is itself unique" by virtue of Szeliga's "uniqueness", and by no means "depends" on the nature of gravity or on how "others", for instance, natural scientists, "classify it". "Stirner" moreover objects to



**[p. 191]**

Having thus arranged for decent accommodation in heaven for his faithful servant, Saint Max passes on to the subject of his own passion. On page 95 he discovers that even the "gallows" has the "colour of the holy"; "people loathe coming into contact with it, there is something uncanny, i.e., unfamiliar, strange about it". In order to transcend this strangeness of the gallows, he transforms it into his own gallows, which he can only do by hanging himself on it. The lion of Juda makes also this last sacrifice to egoism.3 The holy Christian allows himself to be nailed to the cross, not to redeem the cross, but to redeem people from their impiety; the unholy Christian hangs himself on the gallows in order to redeem the gallows from holiness or to redeem himself from the strangeness of the gallows.

"The first splendour, the first property has been won, the first complete victory achieved!" The holy warrior has now conquered history, he has transformed it into thoughts, pure thoughts, which are nothing but thoughts—and at the end of time only a host of thoughts confront him. And so Saint Max, having taken his "gallows" on his back, just like an ass that carries a cross, and his servant Szeliga, who was welcomed in heaven with kicks and has returned to his master with his head hanging, set out to fight against this host of thoughts or, rather, against the mere halo of these thoughts. This time it is Sancho Panza, full of moral sayings, maxims and proverbs, who takes on himself the struggle against the holy, and Don Quixote plays the role of his pious and faithful servant. The honest Sancho fights just as bravely as the caballero Manchegobdid in the old days, and like him does not fail several times to mistake a herd of Mongolian sheep for a swarm of spectres. The plump Maritornes "in the course of time, after various transformations in manifold refractions", is transformed into a chaste Berlin seam- stress/ dying of anaemia, a subject on which Saint Sancho composes an elegy, one which causes all young graduates and Guards lieu- tenants to remember Rabelais' statement that the world-liberating "soldier's prime weapon is the flap of his trousers".

Sancho Panza achieves his heroic feats by perceiving the entire opposing host of thoughts in its nullity and vanity. All his great deed

[^1]: Cf. Revelation of John 5:5.—Ed.

[^2]: Knight of La Mancha, i.e., Don Quixote.—Ed. c Marie Wilhelmine Dähnhardt.—Ed. d Cf. the heading of Chapter 8, Book 3 of Rabelais' Gargantua and Pantagruel.—Ed.





**[p. 192]**

Thus, after the ancients have been presented realistically as child, Negro, Negroid Caucasians, animal, Catholics, English philosophy, the uneducated, non-Hegelians, and the world of things, and the moderns have been presented idealistically as youth, Mongol, Mongoloid Caucasians, man, Protestants, German philosophy, the educated, Hegelians, and the world of thoughts — after everything has happened that was from time immemorial decided in the Coun- cil of Guardians, the time has at last arrived. The negative unity of the ancient and the modern, which has already figured as the man, the Caucasian, the Caucasian Caucasian, the perfect Christian, in servant's clothing, seen "through a glass darkly" (1 Corinthians 13:12), can now, after the passion and death of Stirner on the gallows and Szeliga's ascent to heaven in full glory, return to the simplest nomenclature and appear in the clouds of heaven endowed with great power and majesty.3 "And so it is said": what was previously "One" (see "Economy of the Old Testament") has become "ego"—the negative unity of realism and idealism, of the world of things and the world of spirit. Schelling calls this unity of realism and idealism "indifference" or, rendered in the Berlin dialect, "Jleich- jiltigkeit; in Hegel it becomes the negative unity in which the two moments are transcended. Saint Max who, being a proper German speculative philosopher, is still tormented by the "unity of oppo- sites", is not satisfied with this; he wants this unity to be visible to him in the form of a "corporeal individual", in a "whole fellow", and he is encouraged in this by Feuerbach's views expressed in the Anekdotah

and in the Philosophie der Zukunft. This "ego" of Stirner's which is the final outcome of the hitherto existing world is, therefore, not a "corporeal individual", but a category constructed on the Hegelian method and supported by appositions, the further "flea-jumps" of which we shall trace in the New Testament. Here we shall merely add that in the final analysis this ego comes into existence because it has the same illusions about the world of the Christian as the Christian has about the world of things. Just as the Christian takes possession of the world of things by "getting into his head" fantastic nonsense about them, so the "ego"takes possession of the Christian world, the world of thoughts, by means of a series of fantastic ideas about it. What the Christian imagines about his own relation to the world,

[^1]: a Cf. Matthew 24:30.— Ed.

[^2]: Ludwig Feuerbach, "Vorläufige Thesen zur Reformation der Philosophie".—Ed.



