---
Volume: 5
Document_Title: "1. The Economy of the New Testament "
Page_Range: "263-265"
---

# 1. The Economy of the New Testament 



**[p. 240]**

THE NEW TESTAMENT: "EGO"'

1. The Economy of the New Testament

Whereas in the Old Testament the object of our edification was "unique" logic in the framework of the past, we are now confronted by the present time in the framework of "unique" logic. We have already thrown sufficient light on the "unique" in his manifold antediluvian "refractions"—as man, Caucasian Caucasian, perfect Christian, truth of humane liberalism, negative unity of realism and idealism, etc., etc. Along with the historical construction of the "ego", the "ego" itself also collapses. This "ego", the end of the historical construction, is no "corporeal" ego, carnally procreated by man and woman, which needs no construction in order to exist; it is an "ego" spiritually created by two categories, "idealism" and "realism," a merely conceptual existence.

The New Testament, which has already been dissolved together with its premise, the Old Testament, possesses a domestic economy that is literally as wisely designed as that of the Old, namely the same "with various transformations", as can be seen from the following table:

I. Peculiarity=the ancients, child, Negro, etc., in their truth, i.e., development from the "world of things" to one's "own" outlook and taking possession of this world. Among the ancients this led to riddance of the world, among the moderns—riddance of spirit, among the liberals—-riddance of the individual, among the com- munists—riddance of property, among the • humane [liber- als]—riddance of God: hence it led in general to the category of riddance (freedom) as the goal. The negated category of riddance is peculiarity, which of course has no other content than this rid- dance. Peculiarity is the philosophically constructed quality of all the qualities of Stirner's individual.

II. The owner—as such Stirner has penetrated beyond the un- truthfulness of the world of things and the world of spirit; hence the moderns, the phase of Christianity within the logical develop- ment: youth, Mongol.—Just as the moderns divide into the triply determined free ones, so the owner falls into three further deter- minations:

1. My power, corresponding to political liberalism, where the truth of right is brought to light and right as the power of "man" is resolved in power as the right of the "ego". The struggle against the state as such.

2. My intercourse, corresponding to communism, whereby the truth of society is brought to light and society (in its forms of prison society, family, state, bourgeois society, etc.) as inter- course mediated by "man" is resolved in the intercourse of the "ego".

3. My self-enjoyment, corresponding to critical, humane liber- alism, in which the truth of criticism, the consumption, dissolu- tion and truth of absolute self-consciousness, comes to light as self-consumption, and criticism as dissolution in the interests of man is transformed into dissolution in the interests of the "ego". The peculiarity of the individuals was resolved, as we have seen, in the universal category of peculiarity, which was the negation of riddance, of freedom in general. A description of the special qualities of the individual, therefore, can again only consist in the negation of this "freedom" in its three "refrac- tions"; each of these negative freedoms is now converted by its negation into a positive quality. Obviously, just as in the Old Testament riddance of the world of things and the world of thoughts was already regarded as the acquisition of both these worlds, so here also it is a matter of course that this peculiarity or acquisition of things and thoughts is in its turn represented as perfect riddance. The "ego" with its property, its world, consisting of the qualities just "pointed out", is owner. As self-enjoying and self-consuming, it is the "ego" raised to the second power, the owner of the owner, it being as much rid of the owner as the owner belongs to it; the result is "absolute negativity" in its dual determination as indifference, "unconcern"3 and negative relation to itself, the owner. Its property in respect of the world and its riddance of the world is now transformed into this negative relation to itself, into this self-dissolution and self- ownership of the owner. The ego, thus determined, is—

III. The unique, who again, therefore, has no other content than that of owner plus the philosophical determination of the "negative relation to himself". The profound Jacques pretends that there is nothing to say about this unique, because it is a corpo- real, not constructed individual. But the matter here is rather the same as in the case of Hegel's absolute idea at the end of the Logik and of absolute personality at the end of the Encyklopädie, about which there is likewise nothing to say because the construction contains everything that can be said about such constructed per-

[^1]: In the manuscript the Berlin dialect form Jleichjiiltigkeit (unconcern) is used.—Ed,



