---
Volume: 5
Document_Title: "4. Peculiarity "
Page_Range: "324-338"
---

# 4. Peculiarity 



**[p. 301]**

Thus, "we appear at the bar of majority and are declared of age" (p. 86).

4. Peculiarity

"To create for oneself one's own world, that means building a heaven for oneself" (p. 89 of "the book").*

We have already "penetrated" into the innermost sanctuary of this heaven; now we shall try to learn "more things" about it. In the New Testament, however, we shall rediscover the same hypocrisy that permeated the Old Testament. Just as in the latter the historical data were only names for a few simple categories, so here in the New Testament, too, all worldly relations are only disguises, different designations, for the meagre content which we have assembled in the "Phenomenology" and "Logic". Under the appearance of speaking about the actual world, Saint Sancho always speaks only about these meagre categories.

"You do not want the freedom to have all these fine things You want to have them in actuality to possess them as your property You ought to be not only a free person, but also an owner" (p. 205).

One of the oldest formulas arrived at by the early social move- ment—the opposition between socialism in its most miserable form and liberalism—is here exalted into an utterance of the "egoist in agreement with himself". How old this opposition is even for Berlin, our holy man could have seen if only from the fact that it is mentioned with terror already in Ranke's Historisch-politische Zeitschrift, Berlin, 1831.a

[^1]: * [The following passage is crossed out in the manuscript:] Up to now freedom has been defined by philosophers in two ways; on the one hand, as power, as domination over the circumstances and conditions in which an individual lives — by all materialists; on the other hand, as self-determination, riddance of the real world, as merely imaginary freedom of the spirit — this definition was given by all idealists, especially the German idealists.

[^2]: Having seen in the "Phenomenology" above how Saint Max's true egoist seeks his egoism in dissolution, in achieving riddance, the idealist freedom, it seems strange that in the chapter on "Peculiarity" he puts forward against "riddance" the opposite definition, i.e., power over the circumstances which determine him, materialist freedom.

[^3]: Leopold Ranke's "Einleitung" in Historisch-politische Zeitschrift. I. Band, Ham- burg-, 1832 (the place and date of publication are cited incorrectly in the text).—F.d.





**[p. 302]**

The great dialectician can also reverse this and say: "How I utilise my peculiarity depends on my freedom."—Then he continues:

"Free—from what?" Here, therefore, by means of a dash freedom is already transformed into freedom from something and, per appos., from "everything". This time, however, the apposition is given in the form of a proposition that apparently provides a closer definition. Having thus achieved this great result, Sancho becomes sentimental.

"Oh, how much can be shaken off!" First, the "yoke of serfdom", then a whole series of other yokes, leading imperceptibly to the result that "the most perfect self-denial is nothing but freedom, freedom from one's own ego, and the urge towards freedom as something absolute has deprived us of our peculiarity."

By means of an extremely artless series of yokes, liberation from serfdom, which was the assertion of the individuality of the serfs and at the same time the abolition of a definite empirical barrier, is here equated with the much earlier Christian-idealist freedom of the Epistles to the Romans and Corinthians, thereby transforming freedom in general into self-denial. At this point we have already finished with freedom, since it is now indisputably the "holy". Saint Max transforms a definite historical act of self-liberation into the abstract category of "freedom", and this category is then defined more closely by means of a totally different historical phenomenon which can likewise be included under the general conception of "freedom". This is the whole trick by which the throwing off of the yoke of serfdom is transformed into self-denial.

To make his theory of freedom as clear as noonday to the German burgher, Sancho now begins to declaim in the burgher's own language, particularly that of the Berlin burgher:

O "clumsy" story-writer for townsman and villager! Not the "unfree sons of the wilds" but "educated people" "imagine" the savage freer than the educated man. That the "son of the wilds" (whom F. Halm brought on the stage3) is ignorant of the

[^1]: "But the freer I become, the larger does compulsion loom before my eyes, and the more powerless do I feel. The unfree son of the wilds is not yet aware of all the limitations that trouble an 'educated' man, he imagines himself freer than the latter. In proportion as I achieve freedom for myself I create new limits and new tasks for myself; no sooner have I invented railways than I again feel myself weak because I still cannot sail through the air like a bird, and I have no sooner solved a problem that was perplexing my mind than countless others await me," etc. (pp. 205, 206).

[^2]: Friedrich Halm, Der Sohn der Wildniss.— Ed.







**[p. 304]**

After the actual tearing down of restrictions—which is at the same time an extremely positive development of the productive forces, real energy and satisfaction of urgent requirements, and an expansion of the power of individuals—after the actual tearing down of restrictions has been transformed in the eyes of this passive and ignorant spectator into simple freedom from a restriction, which he can again logically make into a postulate of freedom from restriction as such—at the conclusion of the whole argument, we arrive at what was already presupposed at the beginning:

"To be free from something means only to be relieved of something, to be rid of something" (p. 206).

He at once gives an extremely unfortunate example: "He is free of headache is equivalent to saying: he is rid of it"; as though this "riddance" of headache were not equivalent to a wholly positive ability to dispose of my head, equivalent to ownership of my head, while as long as I had a headache I was the property of my sick head.

Hence our "consummate Christian", too, finds his peculiarity only in "riddance" from "thought", from "determination", from "vocation", from "law", from "constitution", etc., and invites his brothers in Christ to "feel happy only in dissolution", i.e., in accomplishing "riddance" and the " cons urn mate", "Christian freedom".

He continues:

Here "our egoist" (toujours et partout) "in agreement with

[^1]: "In 'riddance'—in riddance from sin, from God, from morality, etc.—we consummate the freedom that Christianity recommends" (p. 206).

[^2]: "Ought we, perhaps, to renounce freedom because it turns out to be a Christian ideal? No, nothing should be lost" (voilà notre conservateur tout trouvé3), "freedom too should not be lost, it should however become our own, and it cannot become our own in the form of freedom" (p. 207).

[^3]: There's the conservative all complete.— Ed. Always and everywhere.— Ed.



Having interpreted freedom as the state of being free from something, and this, in turn, as "riddance", and this as the Christian ideal of freedom, and hence as the freedom of "Man", our saint can, with the material thus prepared, carry through a practical course of his logic. The first, simplest antithesis reads:

Freedom of Man—My freedom,

where in the antithesis freedom ceases to exist "in the form of freedom". Or:

Riddance in the interests I / Riddance in my interests. of Man I )

Both these antitheses, with a numerous retinue of declamations, continually appear throughout the chapter on peculiarity, but with their help alone our world-conquering Sancho would attain very little, he would not even attain the island of Barataria. Earlier, when observing the behaviour of people from his "own world", from his "heaven", he set aside two factors of actual liberation in making his abstraction of freedom. The first factor was that individuals in their self-liberation satisfy a definite need actually experienced by them. As the result of setting aside this factor, "Man" has been substituted for actual individuals, and striving for a fantastic ideal—for freedom as such, for the "freedom of Man"—has been substituted for the satisfaction of actual needs.

The second factor was that an ability that has hitherto existed merely as a potentiality in the individuals who are freeing themselves begins to function as a real power, or that an already existing power becomes greater by removal of some restriction. The removal of the restriction, which is merely a consequence of the new creation of power, can of course be considered the main thing. But this illusion arises only if one takes politics as the basis of empirical history, or if, like Hegel, one wants everywhere to demonstrate the negation of negation, or finally if, after the new power has been created, one reflects, as an ignorant citizen of Berlin, on this new creation.

By setting aside this second factor for his own use, Saint Sancho acquires a determinateness that he can counterpose to the remain-



**[p. I]**

Or, even:

Freedom, repulsion of alien 1 i Peculiarity, possession of one's power ) \own power. To show the extent to which Saint Sancho has juggled his own "power", which he here counterposes to freedom, out of this same freedom and into himself, we do not intend to refer him to the materialists or communists, but merely to the Dictionnaire de l'académie, where he will find that the word liberté is most frequently used in the sense of puissance. If, however, Saint Sancho should maintain that he does not combat "liberté", but "freedom", then he ought to consult Hegel on negative and positive freedom.3 As a German petty bourgeois, he might enjoy the concluding remark in this chapter.

The antithesis can also be expressed as follows: Freedom, idealistic striving for \ J Peculiarity, actual riddance riddance and the struggle)—\ and pleasure in one's own against other-being j ' existence.

Having thus, by means of a cheap abstraction, distinguished peculiarity from freedom, Sancho pretends that he is only now beginning to analyse this difference and exclaims:

We shall see that, apart from the general antitheses, he has achieved nothing, and that peculiarity "in the ordinary sense" continues most amusingly to creep in side by side with this definition of peculiarity.

[^1]: "What a difference there is between freedom and peculiarity!" (p. 207).

[^2]: "In spite of the state of slavery, one can be inwardly free, although, again, only from various things, but not from everything; but the slave cannot be free from the whip, from the despotic mood, etc., of his master."

[^3]: "On the other hand, peculiarity is my whole essence and existence, it is I myself. I am free from that which I have got rid of; I am the owner of that which I have in my power or which I have mastered. I am my own at all times and under all circumstances, if only I know how to possess myself and do not abandon myself to others. I cannot truly want the state of being free, because I cannot achieve it; I can only wish for it and strive towards it, for it remains an ideal, a spectre. At every moment the fetters of actuality cut very deeply into my flesh. But I remain my own. Belonging as a feudal serf

[^4]: G.W.F. Hegel, Grundlinien der Philosophie des Rechts. Einleitung.—Ed.



Our Sancho, who here again acts the story-teller for the petty bourgeois and villagers, proves here that, despite the numerous drubbings he has already received in Cervantes, he has always remained "owner" of himself and that these blows belonged rather to his "peculiarity". He is "his own" "at all times and under all circumstances" provided he knows how to possess himself. Here, therefore, peculiarity is hypothetical and depends on his knowledge, by which term he understands a slavish casuistry. This knowledge later on becomes thinking as well, when he begins "to think" about himself and his "advantage"—this thinking and this imagined "advantage" being his imagined "property". It is further inter- preted in the sense that he endures the blows "for his own good", where peculiarity once again consists in the idea of "good", and where he "endures" the bad in order not to become the "owner" of "something worse". Subsequently, knowledge is revealed also as the "owner" of the reservation about "the first convenient opportunity", hence of a mere reservatio mentalis, and, finally, as the "crushing" of the "slave-owner", in the anticipation of the idea, in which case he is the "owner" of this anticipation, whereas at present the slave-owner actually tramples him underfoot. While, therefore, he identifies himself here with his consciousness, which endeavours to calm itself by means of all kinds of maxims of worldly wisdom, in the end he identifies himself with his body, so that he is wholly "his own", outwardly as well as inwardly, so long as he still retains a spark of life, even if it is merely unconscious life. Such phenomena as the cracking of his "bones", the twitching of his muscles, etc., are phenomena which, when translated from the language of unique natural science into the language of pathology, can be produced with the aid of galvanism on his corpse, when freshly cut down from the gallows on

At any rate, Saint Sancho "endures" his portion of blows with more dignity than actual slaves do. However often, in the interests of the slave-owners, missionaries may tell the slaves that they have to "endure" the blows "for their own good", the slaves are not taken in by such twaddle. They do not coldly and timidly reflect that they would otherwise "incur something worse", nor do they imagine that they "deceive the slave-owner by an appearance of patience". On the contrary, they scoff at their torturers, they jeer at the latter's impotence even to force them to humble themselves, and they suppress every "groan" and every sigh, as long as the physical pain permits them to do so. (See Charles Comte, Traité de législation.) They are therefore, neither "inwardly" nor "outwardly" their own "owners", but only the "owners" of their defiance, which could equally well be expressed by saying that they are neither "inwardly" nor "outwardly" "free", but are free only in one respect, namely that they are "inwardly" free from self-humiliation as they also show "outwardly". Insofar as "Stirner" suffers blows, he is the owner of the blows and thus free from being not beaten; and this freedom, this riddance, belongs to his peculiarity.

From the fact that Saint Sancho assumes that the reservation about running away at "the first convenient opportunity" is a special characteristic of peculiarity and sees in the "liberation" thus obtained "merely the consequence of his previous egoism" (of his own egoism, i.e., egoism in agreement with itself), it follows that he

[^1]: This volume, p. 273.— Ed.



In conclusion, Saint Sancho takes revenge for the blows he has received by the following address to the "owner" of his "peculiari- ty", the slave-owner:

"My leg is not 'free' from the blows of the master, but it is my leg, and it cannot be taken away. Let him tear it from me and see whether he has possession of my leg! He will find in his hands nothing but the corpse of my leg, which is as little my leg as a dead dog is a dog" (p. 208).

But let him—Sancho, who imagines here that the slave-owner wants to have his living leg, probably for his own use—let him "see" what he still retains of his leg which "cannot be taken away". He retains nothing but the loss of his leg and has become the one-legged owner of his torn-out leg. If he has to labour at a treadmill eight hours every dav, then it is he who in the course of time becomes an idiot, and idiocy will then be his "peculiarity". Let the judge who sentences him to this "see" whether he has still Sancho's brain "in his hands". But that will be of little help to poor Sancho.

"The first property, the first splendour has been won!" After our saint, by means of these examples, which are worthy of an ascetic, has revealed the difference between freedom and peculiarity, at a considerable belletristical production cost, he quite unexpectedly declares on page 209 that

This "deeper gulf" consists in the fact that the above definition of freedom is repeated with "manifold transformations" and "refrac- tions" and numerous "episodical insertions". From the definition of "freedom" as "riddance" the questions arise: from what should people be free (p. 209), etc., disputes concerning this "from what" (ibid.) (here, too, as a German petty bourgeois, he sees in the struggle of actual interests only wrangling about the definition of this "from what", in which connection, of course, it appears very strange to him that the "citizen" does not wish to be free "from citizenship", page 210). Then the proposition is repeated that the removal of a barrier is the establishment of a new barrier, in the form that "the striving

[^1]: "between peculiarity and freedom there lies a still deeper gulf than the simple verbal difference".





**[p. 310]**

In this connection it also turns out that the animal "takes very correct steps" (p. 213). We learn further that "freedom is silent about what should happen after I have become free" (p. 215). (See "Solomon's Song of Songs" .b) The exposition of the above- mentioned "deeper gulf" is closed by Saint Sancho repeating the scene with the blows and this time expressing himself somewhat more clearly about peculiarity:

Here, therefore, he counterposes himself and "freedom" as two persons, and peculiarity becomes mere existence, being present, and indeed the "most abject" presence. Peculiarity here is the simple registering of personal identity. Stirner, who in an earlier passage has already constituted himself the "secret police state", here sets himself up as the passport department. "By no means" should "anything be lost" from "the world of human beings!" (See "Solomon's Song of Songs".)

According to page 218, one can also "give up" one's peculiarity through "submissiveness", "submission", although, according to the preceding, peculiarity cannot cease so long as one is present at all, even in the most "abject" or "submissive" form. And is not the "most abject" slave the "most submissive"? According to one of the earlier descriptions of peculiarity, one can only "give up" one's peculiarity by giving up one's life.

[^1]: "Even when unfree, even bound by a thousand fetters, I nevertheless exist, and I exist not only just in the future, and in the hope, like freedom, but even as the most abject of slaves I am present" (p. 215).

[^2]: This volume, pp. 221-22.— Ed. This volume, p. 435.— Ed.





**[p. 311]**

"for the means that I employ are determined by what I am".

We have alreadv seen that among these means the absence of any means plays a major role, as was evident also from his proceedings against the moon (see above "Logic"3). Then, for a change, freedom is regarded as "self-liberation", "i.e., that I can only have as much freedom as I procure by my peculiarity", where the definition of freedom as self-determination, which occurs among all, and particular- ly German, ideologists, makes its appearance as peculiarity. This is then explained to us on the example of "sheep"; to whom it is of no "use" at all "if they are given freedom of speech" (p. 220). How- trivial is his conception here of peculiarity as self-liberation is evident if only from his repetition of the most hackneyed phrases about granted freedom, setting free, self-liberation, etc. (pp. 220, 221). The antithesis between freedom as riddance and peculiarity as the negation of this riddance is now also portrayed poetically:

"Freedom arouses your wrath against everything that you are not" (it is, therefore, wrathful peculiarity, or have choleric natures, e.g., Guizot, in Saint Sancho's opinion, no "peculiarity"? And do I not enjoy myself in wrath against others?), "egoism calls on you to rejoice over yourself, to delight in yourself" (hence egoism is freedom which rejoices; incidentally, we have already become acquainted with the joy and self-enjoyment of the egoist in agreement with himself). "Freedom is and remains a longing" (as though longing were not also a peculiarity, the self-enjoyment of individuals of a particular nature, especially of Christian-German individuals—and should this longing "be lost"?). "Peculiarity is a reality which of itself abolishes all the non-freedom which is an impediment and blocks your own path" (in which case, then, until non-freedom is abolished my peculiarity is a blocked peculiarity. It is characteristic again of the German petty bourgeois that for him all barriers and obstacles disappear "of themselves", since he never lifts a finger to achieve it, and by habit he turns those barriers which do not disappear "of themselves" into his peculiarity. It mav be remarked in passing that peculiarity appears here as an acting person, although it is later demoted to a mere description of its owner) (p. 215).

[^1]: This volume, p. 299.—Ed.

[^2]: 12—2086





**[p. 312]**

"As being your own, you are in actuality rid of everything, and what remains with you, you have yourself accepted, it is your choice and option. One who is his own is born free, one who is free on the other hand is only one who desires freedom."

Nevertheless Saint Sancho "admits" on page 252 "that each is born as a human being; hence in this respect the newborn children are equal".

What you as being your own have not "rid yourself of" is "your choice and option", as in the case of the beatings of the slave mentioned above.—Banal paraphrase!—Here, therefore, peculiarity is reduced to the fantastic idea that Saint Sancho has voluntarily accepted and retained everything from which he has not "rid" himself, e.g., hunger when he has no money. Apart from the many things, e.g., dialect, scrofula, haemorrhoids, poverty, one- leggedness, forced philosophising imposed on him by division of labour, etc., etc.—apart from the fact that it in no way depends on him whether he "accepts" these things or not; all the same, even if for an instant we accept his premises, he has only the choice between definite things which lie within his province and which are in no way posited by his peculiarity. As an Irish peasant, for example, he can only choose to eat potatoes or starve, and he is not always free to make even this choice. In the sentence quoted above one should note also the beautiful apposition, by which, just as in jurispru- dence, "acceptance" is directly identified with "choice" and "option". Incidentally, it is impossible to say what Saint Sancho means by one who is "born free", whether in the context or outside it.

And is not a feeling instilled into him, his feeling accepted by him? And do we not learn on pages 84, 85, that "instilled" feelings are not "one's own" feelings? For the rest, it turns out here, as we have already seen in connection with Klopstock3 (who is put forward here as an example), that "one's own" behaviour by no means coincides with individual behaviour, although for Klopstock Christianity seems to have been "quite right" and in no way to have "obstructively blocked his path".

Since one who is his own does not need to free himself, already as a child he works' to free himself, and all this because, as we have seen,

[^1]: "One who is his own does not need to free himself, because from the outset he rejects everything except himself Although he remains in the confines of childish reverence, he already works to 'free himself from this enthralment."

[^2]: a See this volume, p. 285.—Ed.



"Peculiarity works in the little egoist and secures him the desired 'freedom'."

It is not "Stirner" who lives, it is "peculiarity" that lives, "works" and "secures" in him. Here we learn that peculiarity is not a description of one who is his own, but that one who is his own is merely a paraphrase of peculiarity.

As we have seen, "riddance" at its climax was riddance from one's own self, self-denial. We saw also that on the other hand he put forward "peculiarity" as the assertion of self, as self-interestedness. But we have seen likewise that this self-interestedness itself was again self-denial.

For some time past we have been painfully aware that "the holy" was missing. But we rediscover it suddenly, on page 224, at the end of the section on peculiarity, where it stands quite bashfully and proves its identity by means of the following new turn of expression:

"My relation to something which I selfishly carry on" (or do not carry on at all) "is different from my relation to something which I unselfishly serve" (or which I carry on).

Here again Sancho reveals his "peculiar" "penetration" into the question of freedom of trade and protective tariffs. He is herewith given the "vocation" of pointing out just one single case where freedom of trade was regarded as "holy" 1) because it is a "freedom", and 2) "under all circumstances". The holy comes in useful for all purposes.

After peculiarity, by means of logical antitheses and the phenomenological "being-also-otherwise-determined", has been

[^1]: But Saint Max is not satisfied with this remarkable piece of tautology, which he "accepted" from "choice and option"; there suddenly reappears the long forgotten "one", in the shape of the night watchman who establishes the identity of the holy, and declares that he "could put forward the following distinguishing mark: against the former I can sin or commit a sin" (a remarkable tautology!), "the other I can only lose by my folly, push away from myself, deprive myself of it, i.e., do something stupid" (it follows that he can lose himself by his folly, can deprive himself of himself, can be deprived of himself—can be deprived of life). "Both these points of view are applicable to freedom of trade, because it" is partly taken for the holy and partly not so taken, or, as Sancho himself expresses it more circumstantially, "because it is partly regarded as a freedom which can be granted or withdrawn depending on circumstances, and partly as a freedom which should be regarded as holy under all circumstances" (pp. 224, 225).

[^2]: 12*





**[p. 314]**

"Peculiarity," it is stated on page 225, "is not at all an idea, such as freedom, etc., it is only a description—of the owner."

We shall see that this "description of the owner" consists in negating freedom in the three refractions which Saint Sancho ascribes to it—liberalism, communism and humanism—compre- hending it in its truth and then calling this process of thought, which is extremely simple according to advanced logic, the description of a real ego.

The entire chapter about peculiarity boils down to the most trivial self-embellishments by means of which the German petty bourgeois consoles himself for his own impotence. Exactly like Sancho, he thinks that in the struggle of bourgeois interests against the remnants of feudalism and absolute monarchy in other countries everything turns merely on a question of principles, on the question of from what "Man" should free himself. (See also above on political liberalism.3) Therefore in freedom of trade he sees only a freedom and, exactly like Sancho, expatiates with a great air of importance about whether "Man" ought to enjoy freedom of trade "under all circumstances" or not. And when, as is inevitable in such conditions, his aspirations for freedom suffer a miserable collapse, then, again like Sancho, he consoles himself that "Man", or he himseif, cannot "become free from everything", that freedom is a highly indefinite concept, and that even Metternich and Charles X were able to appeal to "true freedom" (p. 210 of "the book"; and it need only be remarked here that it is precisely the reactionaries, especially the Historical School and the Romanticists91 who—again just like Sancho—reduce true freedom to peculiarity, for instance, to the peculiarity of the Tyrolean peasants, and in general, to the peculiar development of individuals, and also of localities, provinces and estates).—The petty bourgeois also consoles himself that as a German, even if he is not free, he finds compensation for all

[^1]: a This volume, pp. 200-01.— Ed.



