---
Volume: 5
Document_Title: "A. Canonisation in General "
Page_Range: "338-342"
---

# A. Canonisation in General 

sufferings in his own indisputable peculiarity. Again like Sancho, he does not see in freedom a power that he is able to obtain and therefore declares his own impotence to be power.

What the ordinary German petty bourgeois whispers to himself as a consolation, in the quiet depths of his mind, the Berliner trumpets out loudly as an ingenious turn of thought. He is proud of his trashy peculiarity and his peculiar trashiness.

5. The Owner

For the way in which the "owner" is divided into three "refractions": "my power", "my intercourse" and "my self-enjoy- ment", see "The Economy of the New Testament". We shall pass directly to the first of these refractions.

A. My Power

The chapter on power has in its turn a trichotomous structure in that it treats of: 1) right, 2) law, and 3) crime. In order to conceal this trichotomy, Sancho resorts very frequently to the "episode". We give here the entire content in tabular form, with the necessary episodical insertions.

J. Right

A. Canonisation in General

Another example of the holy is right. Right is not ego

= not my right = alien right = existing right. All existing right = alien right = right of others J. The holy (not my right) = right given by others = (right, which one gives me, which is meted out to me) (pp. 244, 245). Note No. 1. The reader will wonder why the conclusion of equation No. 4 suddenly appears in equation No. 5 as the antecedent of the conclusion of equation No. 3, so that in the place of "right", "all existing right" suddenly appears as the antecedent. This is done to create the illusion that Saint Sancho is speaking of actual, existing



**[p. 316]**

Note No. 2. After right has been determined as "alien right", it can be given any names you like, such as "Sultan's right", "people's right", etc., depending on how Saint Sancho wishes to define the alien from whom he receives the right in question. This allows Sancho to go on to say that "alien right is given by nature, God, popular choice, etc." (p. 250), hence "not by me". What is naive is only the method by which our saint through the use of synonymy tries to give some semblance of development to the above simple equations.

"If some blockhead considers me right" (what if he himself is the blockhead who considers him right?\ "I begin to be mistrustful of my right" (it would be desirable in "Stirner's" interests that this were so). "But even if a wise man considers me right, this still does not mean that I am right. Whether I am right is quite independent of my being acknowledged right by fools or wise men. Nevertheless, up to now we have striven for this right. We seek right and to this end we appeal to the court But what do I seek from this court? I seek Sultan's right, not my right, I seek alien right before the high court of censorship I seek, therefore, the right of censorship" (pp. 244, 245).

One has to admire the cunning use of synonymy in this masterly proposition. Recognition of right in the ordinary conversational sense is identified with recognition of right in the juridical sense. Even more worthy of admiration is the faith capable of moving mountains in the idea that one "appeals to the court" for the sake of the pleasure of vindicating one's right—a faith which explains that courts are due to litigiousness.*

Notable, finally, is also the craftiness with which Sancho—as in the case of equation No. 5 above—smuggles in, in advance, the more

[^1]: * [The following passage is crossed out in the manuscript:] What idea Saint Jacques le bonhomme really has of a court can even be deduced from the fact that as an illustration he mentions the high court of censorship, which at best can only be regarded as a court according to Prussian notions; a court which can merely introduce administrative measures, but is unable either to inflict penalties or to settle civil suits. What does it matter to a saint who is always concerned with real individuals, that two completely different systems of production form the basis of the individuals where court and administration are separate, and where they are combined in a patriarchal way.

[^2]: The above equations are now transformed into the moral injunctions "vocation", "designation", and "task", which Saint Max shouts in a thunderous voice to his faithful servant Szeliga, who has an uneasy conscience. Like a Prussian non- commissioned officer (his own "gendarme" speaks through his mouth) Saint Max addresses Szeliga in the third person: he should see to it that his right to eat remains uncurtailed, etc. The right of the proletarians to eat has never been "curtailed", nevertheless it happens "of itself" that they are very often unable to "exercise" it.





**[p. 317]**

Alien right = not my right. My being right according to alien

right = not to be right = to have no right = to be rightless (p. 247). My right = not your right = your wrong. Your right = my wrong.

Note. "You desire to be in the right against others" (it should read: to be in your right). "You cannot be this, in relation to them you will always remain in the 'wrong', for they would not be your opponents if they were not also in 'their' right. They will always 'consider' you 'wrong' If you remain on the basis of right, then you remain on the basis of litigiousness" (pp. 248, 253).

"Let us in the meantime consider the subject from yet another aspect." Having thus given adequate evidence of his knowledge of right, Saint Sancho can now restrict himself to defining right once again as the holy, in this connection repeating some of the epithets previously given to the holy with the addition of the word "right".

"Is not right a religious concept, i.e., something holy?" (p. 247). "Who can ask about 'right' if he does not have a religious standpoint?" (ibid.).

Saint Sancho now expounds again what he already expounded in the Old Testament, viz., what a "fixed idea" is, with the only difference that here "right" crops up everywhere as "another example" of the "fixed idea".

[^1]: "Right 'in and for itself7. Therefore without relation to me? 'Absolute right'l There- fore separated from me.—Something 'being in and for itself I—An Absolute] An eternal right, like an eternal truth"—the holy (p. 270).

[^2]: "You recoil in horror before others because you imagine you see by their side the spectre of right !" (p. 253).

[^3]: "You creep about in order to win the apparition over to your side" (ibid.). "Right is a whimsy, dispensed by an apparition" (the synthesis of the two propositions given above) (p. 276).

[^4]: "Right is a fixed idea" (p. 270). "Right is spirit " (p. 244). "Because right can be dispensed only by a spirit" (p. 275).

[^5]: "Right is originally my thought, or it"a (!) "has its origin in me. But if ita has escaped from me" (in common parlance, absconded), "if the 'word' has been uttered, then it has become flesh" (and Saint Sancho can eat his fill of it), "a fixed idea"—for

[^6]: The German pronoun er, used in Stirner's book, refers to "my thought".—Ed.

[^7]: b Cf. John 1:14.—Ed.





**[p. 318]**

Having thus dragged right through all possible ordeals of sanctifi- cation by fire and water and canonised it, Saint Sancho has thereby destroyed it.

"With absolute right, right itself disappears, at the same time the domination of the concept of right" (hierarchy) "is wiped out. For one should not forget that concepts, ideas, and principles have up to now ruled over us and that among these rulers the concept of right or the concept of justice has played one of the most important parts" (p. 276).

That relations of right here once again appear as the domination of the concept of right and that Stirner kills right simply by declaring it a concept, and therefore the holy, is something to which we are already accustomed; on this see "Hierarchy"'.0 Right [according to Stirner J does not arise from the material relations of people and the resulting antagonism of people against one another, but from their struggle against their own concept, which they shouid "get out of their heads5. See 'Logic \c

This last form of the canonisation of right comprises also the fol- lowing three notes:

Note i.

Saint Sancho might ponder awhile over this proposition. Note 2.

According to this, Roman society from the very outset must have been corrupted Roman society, since egoistic interest is manifested in the Ten Tables92 even more sharply than in the "highly developed civil law" of the imperial epoch. In this unfortunate reminiscence

[^1]: "So long as this alien right coincides with mine, I shall, of course, find the latter also in it" (p. 245).

[^2]: "If once an egoistic interest crept in, then society was corrupted as is shown, for example, by the Roman society with its highly developed civil law" (p. 278).

[^3]: "" The words are from Chamisso's poem "Tragische Geschichte".— Ed.

[^4]: This volume, pp. 180, 183.— Ed. c This volume, pp. 282-84, 286-88.— Ed.



