---
Volume: 5
Document_Title: "B. Appropriation by Simple Antithesis "
Page_Range: "342-344"
---

# B. Appropriation by Simple Antithesis 



**[p. 319]**

"Although right is derived from the concept, nevertheless it only comes into existence because it serves men's needs."

So says Hegel (Rechtsphilosophie^ par 209, Addition) from whom our saint derived the hierarchy of concepts in the modern world. Hegel, therefore, explains the existence of right from the empirical needs of individuals, and rescues the concept only by means of a simple assertion. One can see how infinitely more materialistically Hegel proceeds than our "corporeal ego", Saint Sancho.

B. Appropriation by Simple Antithesis

a) The right of man — My right. b) Human right — Egoistic right. c) Alien right = to be I f My right = to be authorised authorised by others I I by myself. d) Right is that which man \ f Right is that which I con- considers right J \sider right.

Note 1.

This should read: I commit murder if I do not forbid myself to do so, if I am not afraid of murder. This whole proposition is a boastful expansion of the second equation in antithesis c, where the word "authorised" has lost its meaning.

Note 2.

Thus, according to his own statement on page 43, Saint Sancho has

[^1]: "This is egoistic right, i.e., I consider it right, therefore, it is right" (passin; the last sentence is on p. 251).

[^2]: "I am authorised by myself to commit murder if I do not forbid myself to do so, if I myself am not afraid of murder as a wrong" (p. 249).

[^3]: "I decide whether it is right within me; outside me, no right exists" (p. 249).—"Are we what is in us? No, no more than we are what is outside us Precisely because we are not the spirit which dwells in us. for that very reason we had to transfer it outside us think of it as existing outside us in the beyond" (p. 43).

[^4]: This volume, p. 354.— Ed. G.W.F. Hegel, Grundlinien der Philosophie des Rechts.—Ed.





**[p. 320]**

"Outside me no right exists. If I consider it right then it is right. It is possible that it is still not on that account right for others" (p. 249).

This should read: If I consider it right then it is right for me, but it is still not right for others. We have by now had sufficient examples of the sort of synonymical "flea-jumps" Saint Sancho makes with the word "right". The right and right, legal "right", moral "right", what he considers "right", etc.—all are used higgledy-piggledy, as it suits him. Let Saint Max attempt to translate his propositions about right into another language; his nonsense would then become fully apparent. Since this synonymy was dealt with exhaustively in "The Logic [of the New Wisdom]", we need here only refer to that section.6

The proposition mentioned above is also presented in the following three "transformations":

Egoistical right, on the other hand, is the right which / give myself or take.

However, "let us say in conclusion, it can be seen" that in Sancho's millennium egoistical right, about which people "came to terms'" with

[^1]: A. "Whether I am right or not, of that there can be no other judge than I myself. Others can judge and decide only whether they agree with my right and whether it exists as right also for them" (p. 246).

[^2]: B. "It is true that society wants each person to attain his right, but only right sanctioned by society, social right, and not actually his right" (it should read: "what is his"—"right" is a quite meaningless word here. And then he continues boastfully:) "I, however, give myself, or take for myself, right on my own authority Owner and creator of my right" ("creator" only insofar as he first declares right to be his thought and then asserts that he has taken this thought back into himself), "I recognise no other source of right but myself—neither God, nor the state, nor nature, nor man, neither divine nor human right" (p. 269).

[^3]: C. "Since human right is always something given, in reality it always amounts to the right which people give to, i.e., concede, one another" (p. 251).

[^4]: a Mark 9: 12.—Ed.

[^5]: b This volume, pp. 275-77.—Ed.



