---
Volume: 5
Document_Title: "C. Appropriation by Compound Antithesis "
Page_Range: "344-350"
---

# C. Appropriation by Compound Antithesis 



**[p. 321]**

"In conclusion, I have now still to take back the half-and-half mode of expression which I desired to use only while I was delving into the bowels of right and allowed at least the word to remain. In point of fact, however, together with the concept the word loses its meaning. What I called my right, is no longer right at all" (p. 275).

Everyone will see at a glance why Saint Sancho allowed the "word" right to remain in the above antitheses. For as he dees not speak at all about the content of right, let alone criticise it, he can only by retaining the word right make it appear that he is speaking about right. If the word right is left out of the antithesis, all that it contains is "I", "my" and the other grammatical forms of the first person pronoun. The content was always introduced only by means of examples which, however, as we have seen, were nothing but tautologies, such as: if I commit murder, then T commit murder, etc., and in which the words "right", "authorised", etc., were introduced only to conceal the simple tautology and give it some sort of connection with the antitheses. The synonymy, too, was intended to create the appearance of dealing with some sort of content. Incidentally, one can see at once what a rich source of bragging this empty chatter about right provides.

Thus, all the "delving into the bowels of right" amounted to this, that Saint Sancho "made use of a half-and-half mode of expression" and "allowed at least the word to remain", because he was unable to say anything about the subject itself. If the antithesis is to have any meaning, that is to say, if "Stirner" simply wanted to demonstrate in it his repugnance to right, then one must say rather that it was not he who "delved into the bowels of right", but that right "delved" into his bowels and that he merely recorded the fact that right is not to his liking. "Keep this right uncurtailed", Jacques le bonhomme!

To introduce some sort of content into this void, Saint Sancho has to undertake yet another logical manoeuvre, which with great "virtuosity" he thoroughly shuffles together with canonisation and the simple antithesis, and so completely masks with numerous episodes that the German public and German philosophers, at any rate, were unable to see through it.

C. Appropriation by Compound Antithesis

"Stirner" now has to introduce an empirical definition of right, which he can ascribe to the individual, i.e., he has to recognise something else in right besides holiness. In this connection, he could



**[p. 322]**

Thus Saint Sancho draws the definition of might from right and explains it as follows:

"We are in the habit of classifying states according to the various ways in which the 'supreme power' is divided hence, the supreme power! Power over whom? Over the individual The state uses force the behaviour of the state is exercise of force, and it calls its force right The collective as a whole has a power which is called rightful, i.e., which is right" (pp. 259, 260).

Through "our" "habit", our saint arrives at his longed-for power and can now "look after"3 himself.

Right, the might of man — might, my right. Intermediate equations:

To be authorised = to be empowered. To authorise oneself = to empower oneself.

Antithesis:

To be authorised by man — to be empowered by me. First antithesis:

Right, might of man — Might, my right now becomes converted into:

r>- L. r ( Might of me, Right of man — < . , 6 . J. 0 J \ My might, because in the thesis right and might are identical, and in the antithesis the "half-and-half mode of expression" has to be "taken back", since right, as we have seen, has "lost all meaning".

Note 1. Examples of bombastic and boastful paraphrases of the above antitheses and equations:

[^1]: "What you have the power to be, you have the right to be." "I derive all right and all authority from myself, I am authorised to do everything which I have the power to

[^2]: a In the German original a pun on the word pflegen, which can mean to be in the habit, to be accustomed to and to look after, to take care of.— Ed.



Note 2. Examples of the way in which Saint Sancho expounds might as the real basis of right:

"Thus, 'the communists' say" (how on earth does "Stirner" know what the communists say, since he has never set eyes on anything concerning them except the Bluntschli report,'1 Becker's Volksphilosophie and a few other things?): "Equal work gives people the right to equal enjoyment No, equal work does not give you this right, only equal enjoyment gives you the right to equal enjoyment. Enjoy, and you are entitled to enjoyment If you take enjoyment, then it is your right; if, on the other hand, you only yearn for it, without seizing it, it will remain as before the 'established right' of those who have the privilege of enjoyment. It is their right, just as it would become your right, by your seizing it" (p. 250).

Compare what is here put into the mouth of the communists with what was previously said about "communism". Saint Sancho again presents the proletarians here as a "closed society", which has only to take the decision of "seizing" in order the next day to put a summary end to the entire hitherto existing world order. But in reality the proletarians arrive at this unity only through a long process of development in which the appeal to their right also plays a part. Incidentally, this appeal to their right is only a means of making them take shape as "they", as a revolutionary, united mass.

As for the above proposition itself, from start to finish it is a brilliant example of tautology, as is at once clear if one omits both might and right, which can be done without any harm to the content. Secondly, Saint Sancho himself distinguishes between personal and material property," thereby making a distinction between enjoying and the power to enjoy. I may have great personal power (capacity) of enjoyment without necessarily having the corresponding material power (money, etc.). Thus my actual "enjoyment" still remains hypothetical.

In this example, the social relation in which the royal child stands to other children is regarded as the power and indeed as the

[^1]: "That the child of royalty sets himself above other children," continues our school-master, using examples suitable for a child's book, "is already his act. one which ensures his superiority, and that other children recognise and approve this act is their act, which makes them deserving of being subjects" (p. 250).

[^2]: Johann Caspar Bluntschli, "Die Kommunisten in der Schweiz nach den bei Weitling vorgefundenen Papieren".— Ed.

[^3]: In the original Vermögen, which can mean both ability, faculty, power and means, fortune, property.— Ed.





**[p. 324]**

"It is said" (i.e., Hegel said) "that punishment is the right of the criminal.3 But impunity is equally his right. If he succeeds in his undertakings, he gets his right, and if he fails it equally serves him right. If someone with reckless courage puts himself in danger and is killed, we say: it serves him right, he asked for it. But if he overcomes the danger, i.e., if his power is victorious, it appears he is also right. If a child plays with a knife and cuts himself, it serves him right; if he does not cut himself, that is also all right. Therefore it serves the criminal right if he suffers the penalty he risked; why did he take the risk, knowing the possible consequences?" (p. 255).

In the concluding words of the last sentence, where the criminal is asked why he took the risk, the school-masterish nonsense of the whole passage is latent. Whether it serves a criminal right if on burgling a house he falls down and breaks his leg, or a child who cuts himself—all these important questions, with which only a man like Saint Sancho is capable of occupying himself, yield only the result that here chance is declared to be my power. Thus, in the first example it was my action that was "my power", in the second example it was social relations independent of me, in the third it was chance. But we have already encountered these contradictory definitions in connection with peculiarity.

Between the above childish examples Sancho inserts the following amusing little intermezzo:

In the first part of this passage Saint Sancho sets himself in a relation of right to the tiger, but in the second part it occurs to him that basically no relation of right is involved at all. For that reason "right" appears to "be a humbug". The right of "Man" merges into the right of the "Tiger".

This concludes the criticism of right. Long after having learned from hundreds of earlier writers that right originated from force, we now learn from Saint Sancho that "right" is "the power of man". Thus he has successfully eliminated all questions about the connection between right and real people and their relations, and has established his antithesis. He restricts himself to abolishing right

[^1]: "For otherwise right would be a humbug. The tiger who attacks me is right and I, who kill it, am also right. I am protecting against it not my right, but myself" (p. 251).

[^2]: G.W.F. Hegel, Grundlinien der Philosophie des Rechts, I. Theil, 3. Abschnitt.— Ed.



This criticism of right is embellished with a host of episodes—all sorts of things which people are "in the habit" of discussing at Stehely's between two and four in the afternoon.

Episode 1. "The right of man" and "established right".

"When the revolution made 'equality' into a 'right', it [the revolution] fled into the religious sphere, into the domain of the holy, the ideal. Therefore a struggle has been waged ever since over the holy, inalienable rights of man. Quite naturally and with equal justification, the 'established right of the existing' is asserted against the eternal right of man; right against right, and of course each of these condemns the other as a wrong. Such has been the dispute over right since the revolution" (p. 248).

Here Saint Sancho first of all repeats that the rights of man are "the holy" and that t h ere fore a struggle over the rights of man has been waged ever since. Thereby he only proves that the material basis of this struggle is still, for him, holy, i.e., alien.

Since the "right of man" and "established right" are both "rights", they are "equally justified" and here in fact "justified" in the historical sense. Since both are "rights" in the legal sense, they are "equally justified" in the historical sense. In this way one can dispose of everything in the shortest space of time without knowing anything about the matter. Thus, for example, it can be said of the struggle over the Corn Laws in England: "quite naturally and with equal justification" rent, which is also profit (gain), is "asserted" against the profit (gain) [of the manufacturers], gain against gain, and "of course each of these decries the other. Such has been the struggle" over the Corn Laws in England since 1815.93

Incidentally, Stirner might have said from the outset: existing right is the right of man, human right. In certain circles one is also "in the habit" of calling it "established right". Where then is the difference between the "right of man" and "established right"?

We already know that alien, holy right is what is given to me by others. But since the rights of man are also called natural, innate rights, and since for Saint Sancho the name is the thing itself, it follows that they are rights which are mine by nature, i.e., by birth.

This is on pages 249, 250, where Babeuf is reproached for not having had this dialectical talent for dissolving differences. Since "under all circumstances", the "ego" is "also" man, as Saint Sancho later concedes, and therefore has the benefit "also" of what it has as man, just as the ego, for instance, as a Berliner has the benefit of the

[^1]: But "established rights amount to the same thing, namely to nature, which gives me a right, that is to birth and, furthermore, to inheritance", and so on. "I am born as a man is equivalent to saying: I am born as a king's son."





**[p. 326]**

For greater thoroughness Saint Sancho could have added the following new turn of expression: The right of man too is acquired, hence well acquired, and well-acquired [i.e., established] right is the human right possessed by men, the right of man.

That such concepts, if they are divorced from the empirical reality underlying them, can be turned inside-out like a gloveb has already been thoroughly enough proved by Hegel, whose use of this method, as against the abstract ideologists, was justified. Saint Sancho, therefore, has no need to make it appear ridiculous by his own "clumsy" "machinations".

So far established right and the right of man "have amounted to the same thing", so that Saint Sancho could reduce to nothing a struggle that exists outside his mind, in history. Now our saint proves that he is as keen-witted in drawing distinctions as he is all-powerful in heaping everything together, in order to be able to bring about a new terrible struggle in the "creative nothing" of his head.

(Does Stirner believe that the infant emerged from the mother's womb without any act of his own, an act by which he acquired the "right" to be outside the mother's womb; and does not every child from the very beginning reveal himself and act as a "unique" child?)

[^1]: " I am also ready to admit" (magnanimous Sancho) "that everyone is born as a human being" (hence, according to the above-mentioned reproach against Babeuf, also as a "king's son"), "hence, the newly born are in this respect equal to one another only because as yet they reveal themselves and act as nothing but mere children of men, naked little human beings." On the other hand, adults are the "children of their own creation". They "possess more than merely innate rights, they have acquired rights".

[^2]: a A park in Berlin.— Ed.

[^3]: Cf. William Shakespeare, Twelfth Night, Act III, Scene 1.—Ed.



