---
Volume: 5
Document_Title: "II. Law "
Page_Range: "350-359"
---

# II. Law 

What a battle of bearded men against babes! Incidentally, Sancho speaks against the rights of man only because "in recent times" it has again become "customary" to speak against them. In fact he has "acquired" these innate rights of man. In connection with peculiarity we already met the man who is "born free"a; there Sancho made peculiarity the innate right of man, because merely by being born he revealed himself as being free and acted as such. Furthermore: "Every ego is already from birth a criminal against the state", whereby a crime against the state becomes an innate right of man, and the child already commits a crime against something that does not yet exist for him, but for which he exists. Finally, "Stirner" speaks further on about "innately limited intellects", "born poets", "born musicians", etc. Since here the power (musical, poetic resp. limited ability) is innate, and right = power, one sees how "Stirner" claims for the "ego" the innate rights of man, although this time equality does not figure among these rights.

Episode 2. Privileges and equal rights. Our Sancho first of all transforms the struggle over privilege and equal right into a struggle over the mere "concepts'''' privileged and equal. In this way he saves himself the trouble of having to know anything about the medieval mode of production, the political expression of which was privilege, and the modern mode of production, of which right as such, equal right, is the expression, or about the relation of these two modes of production to the legal relations which correspond to them. He can even reduce the two above-mentioned "concepts" to the still simpler expression: equal and unequal, and prove that one and the same thing (e.g., other people, a dog, etc.) may, according to cir- cumstances, be a matter of indifference—i.e., of equanimity, equality, or it may not be a matter of indifference—i.e., it may be different, unequal, preferred, etc., etc.

Here we must disclose to the reader a great secret of our saint, viz., that he begins his whole treatise about right with a general explanation of right, which 'escapes" from him so long as he is

[^1]: "Let the brother of low degree rejoice in that he is exalted." (Saint-Jacques le bonhomme 1:9.)

[^2]: //. Law

[^3]: See this volume, p. 311.—Ed. James 1 : 9.—Ed.





**[p. 328]**

"Right is the spirit of society." (But society is the holy), "//society has a will, then this will is indeed right: society exists only thanks to right. But since it exists only thanks to the fact" (not thanks to right, but only thanks to the fact) "that it exercises its domination over individuals, so right is its dominant will" (p. 244).

That is to say: "right is has then indeed exists only since exists only thanks to the fact that so dominant will". This passage is Sancho in all his perfection.

This passage "escaped" at that time from our saint because it was not suitable for his theses, and has now been partially recaptured because it is now partially suitable again.

"States endure so long as there is a dominant will and this dominant will is regarded as equivalent to one's own will. The will of the ruler is law" (p. 256).

The dominant will of society = right, Dominant will = law— Right = law.

"Sometimes", i.e., as the trade mark of his "treatise" about law, there will still turn out to be a distinction between right and law, a distinction which— strange to say—has almost as little to do with his "treatise" about law as the definition of right which "escaped" from him has to do with the "treatise" about "right":

This proposition is a "clumsy" copy of Hegel:

What Saint Sancho calls "receiving verbal expression", Hegel also calls: "posited", "known", etc., Rechtsphilosophie, par. 211 et seq.

It is very easy to understand why Saint Sancho had to exclude right as the "will" or the "dominant will" of society from his "treatise" about right. Only to the extent that right was defined as man's power could he take it back into himself as his power. For the sake of his antithesis, therefore, he had to hold fast to the materialistic definition of "power" and let the idealistic definition of "will" "escape". Why, when speaking of "law", he now recaptures "will" we shall understand in connection with the antitheses about law.

[^1]: "But what is right, what is considered legitimate in a society is also given a verbal expression—in law" (p. 255)

[^2]: "That which is lawful is the source of the knowledge of what is right or, properly, what is legitimate."

[^3]: a Matthew 7 : 1.— Ed.







**[p. 330]**

Like right, so crime, i.e., the struggle of the isolated individual against the predominant relations, is not the result of pure arbitrariness. On the contrary, it depends on the same conditions as that domination. The same visionaries who see in right and law the domination of some independently existing general will can see in crime the mere violation of right and law. Hence the state does not exist owing to the dominant will, but the state, which arises from the material mode of life of individuals, has also the form of a dominant will. If the latter loses its domination, it means that not only the will has changed but also the material existence and life of the individuals, and only for that reason has their will changed. It is possible for rights and laws to be "inherited",3 but in that case they are no longer dominant, but nominal, of which striking examples are furnished by the historv of ancient Roman law and English law. We saw earlier how a theory and history of pure thought could arise among philosophers owing to the separation of ideas from the individuals and their empirical relations which serve as the basis of these ideas. In the same way, here too one can separate right from its real basis, whereby one obtains a "dominant will" which in different eras undergoes various modifications and has its own, independent history in its creations, the laws. On this account, political and civil history becomes ideologically merged in a history of the domination of successive laws. This is the specific illusion of lawyers and politicians, which Jacques le bonhomme adopts sans façon. He succumbs to the same illusion as, for example, Frederick William IV, who also regards laws as mere caprices of the dominant will and hence always finds that they come to grief against the "awkward something" of the world. Hardly [one] of his quite harmless whims reaches a further stage of realisation than cabinet decrees. Let him issue an order for a twenty-five million loan, i.e., for one hundred

[^1]: Paraphrase of a passage from Goethe's Faust, I. Teil, 2. "Studierzimmerszene", where Mephistopheles says: "Laws and rights are inherited like an eternal malady."—Ed.

[^2]: Paraphrase of a line from Goethe's Faust, I. Teil, 1. "Studierzimmerszene", where Mephistopheles says: "This something, this awkward world."—Ed.



"My brethren, count it all joy when ye fall into divers temptations" (Saint-Jacques le bonhomme 1:2).

Law

Antitheses:

State will, alien will Dominant will of the state

Subjects of the state, who sustain the law of the state

equations: A) B) C) D)

State will

My will

Will My will

E)

F)

To desire the non-state

Self-will State will

G) My lack of will

= Dominant will of the state, = state will.

My will, own will. My own will My self-will. ( "Subjects of themselves (unique ones), who bear their own law in themselves" (p. 268).

Not-my will. Not-state will. Desire. Non-desire of the state, Will against the state, 111 will towards the state.

Self-will. Not to desire the state. Negation of my will, My lack of will. Existence of state will.

[^1]: a James 1 : 2.— Ed.





**[p. 332]**

H) My lack of will = Existence of the state. I) The negation of my lack

of will = Non-existence of the state. K) Self-will = Negation of the state. L) My will = Non-existence of the state.

Note 1. According to the already quoted passage from page 256:

"States endure so long as the dominant will is regarded as equivalent to one's own will."

Note 2.

"He who in order to exist" (the conscience of the state is appealed to) "is compelled to count on the lack of will of others is a creation of those others, just as the master is a creation of the servant" (p. 257). (Equations F, G, H, I.)

Note 3.

"My own will is the corrupter of the state. Therefore, it is branded by the latter as self- will. One's own will and the state are powers that are mortal enemies, between whom eternal peace is impossible" (p. 257).—"Therefore it in fact watches everybody, it sees an egoist in everyone" (self-will), "and it fears the egoist" (p. 263). "The state op- poses the duel even a scuffle is punishable" (even if the police are not called in) (p. 245).

Note 4.

This can also be expressed rhetorically:

[^1]: "For it, for the state,it is absolutely essential that no one should have his own will; if anyone had such a will, the state would have to expel him" (imprison, banish); "if everyone had it" ("who is this person whom you call 'everyone'"?) "then they would abolish the state" (p. 257).

[^2]: "What is the use of your laws if no one obeys them, what is the use of your orders if everybody refuses to accept any orders?" (p. 256).*

[^3]: * [The following passage is crossed out in the manuscript:] Note 5. "People try to distinguish between law and the arbitrary command, or ordinance However, a law relating to human action is a declaration of will, hence a command (ordinance)" (p. 256) "Someone can, of course, declare what he is prepared to put up with and consequently forbid the opposite by a law, announcing that he will treat the transgres- sor as an enemy I am forced to put up with the fact that he treats me as his enemy, but I shall never permit him to treat me as if I were his creature and to make his rea- son or perhaps unreasonableness my guiding principle" (p. 256).—Thus Sancho raises no objections here against the law when it treats the transgressor as an enemy. His hostility towards the law is directed only against the form, not against the content. Any repressive law which threatens him with the gallows and the wheel is acceptable to him if he can consider it as a declaration of war. Saint Sancho is satisfied if one does him the honour of regarding him as an enemy, and not as a creature. In reality he is at best the enemy of "Man", but the creature of the conditions in Berlin.



The simple antithesis: "state will—my will" is given an apparent motivation in the following paragraph: "Even if one were to imagine a case where each individual in the nation had expressed the same will and thus a perfect collective will" (!) "had come into existence, things would still remain the same. Would I not today and later be bound by my will of yesterday? My creation, that is, a definite expression of will, would have become my master; but I the creator, would be hampered in my course and my dissolution Because yesterday I possessed will, I have today no will of my own; yesterday voluntary, today involuntary" (p. 258).

The old thesis, which has often been put forward both by revolutionaries and reactionaries, that in a democracy individuals only exercise their sovereignty for a moment and then at once relinquish their authority—this thesis Saint Sancho endeavours to appropriate here in a "clumsy" fashion by applying to it his phenomenological theory of creator and creation. But the theory of creator and creation deprives this thesis of all meaning. According to this theory of his, it is not that Saint Sancho has no will of his own today because he has changed his will of yesterday, i.e., has a differently defined will, so that the nonsense which yesterday he exalted into a law as the expression of his will, now weighs like a bond or fetter on his more enlightened will of today. On the contrary, according to his theory, his will of today must be the negation of his will of yesterday, because, as creator, he is in duty bound to dissolve his will of yesterday. Only as "one without will" is he creator, as one actually having will he is always the creation. (See "Phenomenolo- gy".3) In that case, however, it by no means follows that "because yesterday he possessed will", today he is "without will", but rather that he bears ill will to his will of yesterday, whether the latter has assumed the form of law or not. In both cases he can abolish it as he, in general, is accustomed to do, namely as his will. Thereby he has done full justice to egoism in agreement with itself. It is, therefore, a matter of complete indifference here whether his will of yesterday has assumed as law the form of something existing outside his head, particularly if we recall that earlier the "word which escaped from him" behaved likewise in a rebellious way towards him. In the above-mentioned thesis, moreover, Saint Sancho desires to preserve, not indeed his self-will, but his free will, freedom of will, freedom, which is a serious offence against the moral code of the egoist in agreement with himself. In committing this offence, Saint Sancho even goes so far as to proclaim that true peculiarity is the inner freedom that was so much condemned above, the freedom of bearing ill will.

[^1]: See this volume, pp. 257-58.—Ed.





**[p. 334]**

"However, they will bind me! No one can bind my will, and my ill will remains free!" (p. 258).

Drums and trumpets pay homage To his youthful splendour! a

Here Saint Sancho forgets "to make the simple reflection" that his "will" is indeed "bound" inasmuch as, against his will, it is "ill will".

The above proposition that the individual will is bound by the general will expressed through law completes, by the way, the idealistic conception of the state, according to which it is only a matter of the will, and which has led French and German writers to the most subtle philosophising.*

Incidentally, if it is merely a matter of "desiring" and not of "being able" and, at worst, merely of "ill will", then it is incomprehensible why Saint Sancho wants to abolish altogether an object so productive of "desiring" and "ill will" as state law.

"Law in general, etc.—that is the stage we have reached today" (p. 256).

The things Jacques le bonhomme believes!

[^1]: * [The following passage is crossed out in the manuscript:] Whether or not tomorrow the self-will of an individual will feel oppressed by the law which yesterday he helped to make, depends on whether new circumstances have arisen and whether his interests have changed to such an extent that yesterday's law no longer corresponds to his changed interests. If the new circumstances affect the interests of the ruling class as a whole, the class will alter the law; if they affect only a few individuals the majority will, of course, disregard their ill will.

[^2]: Equipped with this freedom of the ill will, Sancho can now re-establish the restriction imposed on the will of one person bv the will of the others; it is precisely this restriction which forms the basis of the above-mentioned idealist conception of the state.

[^3]: "Everything would be higgledy-piggledy if everyone could do what he liked.— But who says that everyone can do everything?" ("What he likes'' is here prudently omitted.)—

[^4]: "Every one of you should become an omnipotent ego!" declared the egoist in agreement with himself.

[^5]: "What do you exist for," he continues, "you who need not put up with everything? Defend yourself, then no one will harm you" (p. 259). And to remove the last semblance of a difference he lets "a few million" "stand as a protection" behind the one "you", so that the whole discussion can very well serve as a "clumsy" beginning of a political theory in the spirit of Rousseau.

[^6]: From Heine's poem "Berg-Idylle".—Ed.



State will, alien will—My will, own will, Dominant will of the state—My own will can also be summarised as follows:

Domination of alien will—Domination of one's own will. In this new antithesis, which incidentally all the time formed the concealed basis of his destruction of the state through his self-will, Stirner appropriates the political illusion about the domination of arbitrariness, of ideological will. He could also have expressed this as follows:

Arbitrariness of law—Law of arbitrariness. Saint Sancho, however, did not reach such simplicity of expression. In antithesis III we already have a "law within him", but he appropriates the law still more directly in the following antithesis:

Law, the state's declaration ) I Law, declaration of my will, of will my declaration of will.

This prohibition is necessarily accompanied by threats. The last antithesis is of importance for the section on crime.

Episodes. We are told on page 256 that there is no difference between "law" and "arbitrary command, ordinance" because both = "declaration of will", consequently "command".—On pages 254, 255, 260 and 263, while pretending to speak about "the State" Stirner substitutes the Prussian state and deals with questions that are of the greatest importance for the Vossische Zeitung, such as the constitutional state, removability of officials, bureaucratic arrogance and similar nonsense. The only important thing here is the discovery that the old French parliaments insisted on their right to register royal edicts because they wanted "to judge according to their own right". The registration of laws by the French parliaments came into being at the same time as the bourgeoisie and hence the acquisition of absolute power by the kings, for whom in face of both the feudal nobility and foreign states it became necessary to plead an alien will

[^1]: "Someone can, of course, cieclar what he is prepared to put up with, and consequently forbid the opposite by a law," etc. (p. 256).



