---
Volume: 5
Document_Title: "a. Crime ; "
Page_Range: "360-362"
---

# a. Crime ; 

Saint Sancho could have spared us this nerve-shattering surprise. In his case the words: "If you allow yourself to be judged right by someone else, then you must equally allow yourself to be judged wrong by him" have lost all meaning if they are intended to add a new definition; for one of his earlier equations already states: If you allow yourself to be judged right by someone else, then you allow yourself to be judged by alien right, hence your wrong.

A. Simple" Canonisation of Crime and Punishment

a) Crime

As regards crime, we have already seen that this is the name for a universal category of the egoist in agreement with himself, the negation of the holy, sin. In the previously given antitheses and equations concerning examples of the holy (state, right, law), the negative relation of the ego to these holies, or the copula, could also be called crime, just as about Hegelian logic, which is likewise an example of the holy, Saint Sancho can also say: I am not Hegelian logic, I am a sinner against Hegelian logic. Since he was speaking of right, state, etc., he should now have continued: another example of sin or crime are what are called juridical or political crimes. Instead of this, he again informs us in detail that these crimes are

sin against the holy,

the fixed idea, the spectre, "Man".

Note 1.

[^1]: "Criminals exist only against something holy" (p. 268).

[^2]: "Only owing to the holy does the criminal code exist" (p. 318). "Crimes arise from the fixed idea" (p. 269). "One sees here that it is again 'man' who also creates the concept of crime, of sin, and thereby also of right." (Previously it was the reverse.) "A man in whom I do not recognise man is a sinner" (p. 268).

[^3]: "Can I assume that someone commits a crime against me" (this is asserted in opposition to the French people in the revolution), "without also assuming that he ought to act as I consider right? And actions of this kind I ca//the right, the good, etc., those deviating from this—a crime. Accordingly I think that the others ought to aim with me at the same goal as beings who should obey some sort of 'rational' law" (Vocation! Designation! Task! The Holy!!!). "I lay down what man is and what it means



At the same time, he sheds an anxious tear at the grave of those "proper people" who in the epoch of terror were slaughtered by the sovereign people in the name of the holy. Further, by means of an example, he shows how the names of real crimes can be construed from this holy-point of view.

"If, as in the revolution, this spectre, man, is understood to mean the 'good citizen', then the familiar 'political transgressions and crimes' are brought about from this concept of man." (He should have said: this concept, etc., brings up the familiar crimes) (p. 268).

A brilliant example of the extent to which credulity is Sancho's predominant quality in the section on crime is furnished by his transformation of the sansculottes of the revolution into "good citizens" of Berlin through a synonymical abuse of the word citoyen. According to Saint Max, "good citizens and loyal officials" are inseparable. Hence "Robespierre, for example, Saint-Just, and so on" would be "loyal officials", whereas Danton was responsible for a cash deficit and squandered state money. Saint Sancho has made a good start for a history of the revolution for the Prussian townsman and villager.

Note 2. Having thus described for us political and juridical crime as an example of crime in general—namely his category of crime, sin, negation, enmity, insult, contempt for the holy, disreputable behaviour towards the holy—Saint Sancho can now confidently declare:

In this passage all the crimes hitherto committed are assigned to the credit of the egoist in agreement with himself, although sub- sequently we shall have to transfer a few of them to the debit side. Sancho imagines that hitherto crimes have been committed only in order to mock at "the holy" and to assert oneself not against things, but against the holy aspect of things. Because the theft committed by a poor devil who appropriates someone else's taler can be put in the category of a crime against the law, for that reason the poor devil committed the theft just because of a desire to break the law. In exactly the same way as in an earlier passage Jacques le bonhomme imagined that laws are issued only for the sake of the holy, and that thieves are sent to prison only for the sake of the holy.

[^1]: "In crime, the egoist has hitherto asserted himself and mocked the holy" (p. 319).



