---
Volume: 5
Document_Title: "b. Punishmen t "
Page_Range: "362-363"
---

# b. Punishmen t 

Since we are at present concerned with juridical and political crimes we discover in this connection that such crimes "in the ordinary sense" usually involve a punishment, or, as it is written, "the wages of sin is death".3 After what we have already learned about crime, it follows, of course, that punishment is the self-defence and resistance of the holy to those who desecrate it.

Note 1.

"Punishment has sense only when it is intended as expiation for violating something holy" (p. 316). In punishing, "we commit the folly of desiring to satisfy right, a spectre" (the holy). "The holy must" here "defend itself against man". (Saint Sancho here "commits the folly" of mistaking "Man" for "the unique ones", the "proper egos", etc.) (p. 318).

Note 2.

"Only owing to the holy does the criminal code exist and it disintegrates of itself when punishment is abandoned" (p. 318).

What Saint Sancho really wants to say is: Punishment falls into decay of itself if the criminal code is abandoned, i.e., punishment only exists owing to the criminal code. "But is not" a criminal code that only exists owing to punishment "all nonsense, and is not" punishment that exists only, owing to the criminal code "also nonsense"? (Sancho contra Hess, Wigand,b p. 186.) Sancho here mistakes the criminal code for a textbook of theological moralitv.

Note 3. As an example of how crime arises from the fixed idea, there is the following:

Frederick William IV, who thinks he is able to promulgate laws in accordance with the holy, and therefore is always at loggerheads with the whole world, can comfort himself with the thought that in our Sancho he has found at least one man imbued with faith in the state. Let Saint Sancho just compare the Prussian marriage law, which exists only in the head of its author, with the provisions of the Code civil, which are operative in practice, and he will be able to discover the difference between holy and worldly marriage laws. In the Prussian phantasmagoria, for reasons of state, the sanctity of marriage is supposed to be enforced both upon husband and wife; in

[^1]: "The sanctity of marriage is a fixed idea. From this sanctity it follows that infidelity is a crime, and therefore a certain law on marriage" (to the great annoyance of the "Glerman] Chambers" and of the "Emperor of all Rfussians]", not to speak of the "Emperor of Japan" and the "Emperor of China", and particularly the "Sultan") "imposes a shorter or longer term of punishment for that" (p. 269).

[^2]: a Romans 6 : 23.—Ed.

[^3]: Max Stirner, "Recensenten Stirners".—Ed.



