---
Volume: 5
Document_Title: "B. Appropriation o f Crime and Punishment Through Antithesis "
Page_Range: "363-366"
---

# B. Appropriation o f Crime and Punishment Through Antithesis 



**[p. I]**

B. Appropriation of Crime and Punishment Through Antithesis

Crime in the sense of man

Crime in my sense \ -

Violation of man's law (of the state's declaration of will, of state power), p. 259 et seq. Violation of my law (of my declaration of will, of my power), p. 256 and passim.

These two equations are countcrposed as antitheses and derive simply from the opposition of " m a n " and the "ego". They merely sum u p what has been said already.

— "I punish the 'ego'." I ( Hostility = crime against my [ \ law.

!

/ Enemy or opponent = criminal — | against the "ego", the cor- ( poreal. i | My self-defence = My punish- | | ment of the "ego". \ ( Satisfaction (vengeance) = My >— ] punishment of the "ego".

T h e holy punishes the "ego" Crime = hostility to Man's law

(the Holy). The criminal = the enemy or

opponent of the holy (the

Holy as a moral person). Punishment = self-defence of the holy against the "ego". Punishment = satisfaction (ven- geance) of man in relation to the "ego". ) V

In the last antithesis, satisfaction can also be called s£//-satisfaction, since it is the satisfaction of me, in opposition to the satisfaction of man.

If in the above antithetical equations only the first member is taken into account, then one obtains the following series of simple antitheses where the thesis always contains the holy, universal, alien name, while the rrn^'-thesis always contains the worldly, personal, appropriated name.

Crime — Criminal — Punishment —

Hostility. Enemy or opponent. My defence. f Satisfaction, vengeance, self-satisfaction. In an instant we shall say a few words about these equations and antitheses which are so simple that even a "born simpleton" (p. 434)

Punishment —



**[p. 341]**

"In relation to me you can never be a criminal but only an opponent" (p. 268),— and "enemy" in the same sense on p. 256.— Crime as the hostility of man is illustrated on page 268 by the example of the "enemies of the Fatherland".—"Punishment ought" (a moral postulate) "to be replaced by satisfaction, which again cannot aim at satisfying right or justice, but at giving us satisfaction" (p. 318).

Note 2. While Saint Sancho attacks the halo (the windmill) of existing power, he does not even understand this power, let alone come to grips with it; he only advances the moral demand that the relation of the ego to it should be formally changed. (See "Logic".a)

"I am forced to put up with the fact" (bombastic assurance) "that he" (viz., my enemy, who has a few million people behind him) "treats me as his enemy; but I shall never permit him to treat me as his creature or to make his reason or unreasonableness my guiding principle" (p. 256, where he allows the aforesaid Sancho a very restricted freedom, namely the choice between allowing himself to be (reared as his creature or of suffering the 3,300 lashes imposed by Merlin on his posti Uems. This freedom is allowed him by any criminal code which, it is true, does not first ask the aforesaid Sancho in what form it should declare its hostility to him).— "But even if you impress your opponent as a force" (being for him an "impressive force ) vou do not on that account become a sanctified authority; unless he is a wretch. He is not obliged to respect you and pay regard to you even if he has to be on his guard against you and your power" (p. 258).

H( u- Saint Sancho himself appears as a "wretch" when with the greatest seriousness he haggles0 about the difference between "to impress" and "to be respected", "to be on one's guard" and to "have regard for"—a difference of a sixteenth part at most. When Saint Sancho is "on his guard" against someone,

In the above equations, punishment, vengeance, satisfaction, etc., are depicted as coming only from me; inasmuch as Saint Sancho is the object of satisfaction, the antitheses can be turned round: then self-satisfaction is transformed into another-getting-satisfaction- with-regard-to-me or the prejudicing-of-my-satisfaction.

Note 3. The very same ideologists who could imagine that right, law, state, etc., arose from a general concept, in the final analysis perhaps the

[^1]: 'lie gives himself over to reflection, and he has an object which he has in view, which he respects and which inspires him with reverence and fear" (p. 115).

[^2]: a This volume, p. 286.—Ed. b In the original a pun on the word Schacher which Stirner uses in the passage quoted—Schacher means "wretch" or "robber", while schachern means "to barter" "to haggle".—Ed.





**[p. 342]**

In the above-mentioned antitheses, the canonised defini- tions—crime, punishment, etc.—are confronted with the name of another definition, which Saint Sancho in his favourite fashion extracts from these first definitions and appropriates for himself. This new definition, which, as we have said, appears here as a mere name, being worldly is supposed to contain the direct individual relation and express the factual relations. (See "Logic".) The history of right shows that in the earliest, most primitive epochs these individual, factual relations in their crudest form directly consti- tuted right. With the development of civil society, hence with the development of private interests into class interests, the relations of right underwent changes and acquired a civilised form. They were no longer regarded as individual, but as universal relations. At the same time, division of labour placed the protection of the conflicting interests of separate individuals into the hands of a few persons, whereby the barbaric enforcement of right also disappeared. Saint Sancho's entire criticism of right in the above-mentioned antitheses is limited to declaring the civilised form of* legal relations and the civilised division of labour to be the fruit of the "fixed idea", of the holy, and, on the other hand, to claiming for himself the barbaric expression of relations of right and the barbaric method of settling conflicts. For him it is all only a matter of names; he does not touch on the content itself, since he does not know the real relations on which these different forms of right are based, and in the juridical expression of class relations perceives only the idealised names of those barbaric relations. Thus, in Stirner's declaration of will, we rediscover the feud; in hostility, self-defence, etc.—a copy of club-law and practice of the old feudal mode of life; in satisfaction, vengeance, etc.—the jus talionis, the old German Gewere, compensatio, satisfactio—in short, the chief elements of the leges barbarorum and consuetudines feudorum,95 which Sancho has appropriated for himself and taken to his heart not from libraries, but from the tales of his former master about Amadis of Gaul. In the final analysis, therefore, Saint Sancho again arrives merely at an impotent moral injunction that everybody should himself obtain satisfaction and carry out

