---
Volume: 5
Document_Title: "[ I. Society] "
Page_Range: "369-371"
---

# [ I. Society] 



**[p. 346]**

Gines de Passamonte, the arch-thief, who in general was not very patient, shouted: "Are we then to do nothing but feel ashamed, be submissive, when a priest in the extraordinary sense 'admonishes' us?"

"He will be ashamed," continues Sancho, "that he did not despise you, together with what is yours, that he was too little of an egoist." (Sancho here applies an alien measure to the egoism of the criminal. In consequence, a general bellowing breaks out among the convicts; in some confusion, Sancho gives way, turning with a rhetorical gesture to the absent "good burghers".) "But you cannot speak to him egoistically, for you have not the stature of a criminal, you perpetrate nothing."

Gines again interrupts: "What credulity, my good man! Our prison warders perpetrate all kinds of crimes, they embezzle, they defraud, they commit rape [a]

[B. My Intercourse]

[] again he reveals only his credulity. The reactionaries knew already that by the constitution the bourgeoisie abolishes the naturally arisen state and establishes and makes its own state, that " le pouvoir constituant, qui était dans le temps" naturally "passa dans la volonté humaine",b that "this fabricated state was like a fabricated, painted tree",0 etc. See Fiévée's Correspondance politique et adminis- trative, Paris, 1815, Appel à la France contre la division des opinions, Le drapeau blanc by Sarran ainé,d the Gazette de France of the Resto- ration period, and the earlier works of Bonald, de Maistre, etc. The liberal bourgeois, in turn, reproach the old republicans—about

[^1]: [/. Society]99

[^2]: a Twelve pages of the manuscript are missing here.— Ed.

[^3]: "The constitutional power which had been shaped in the course of time had permeated the human will." Lourdoueix, "Appel à la France contre la division des opinions" (quoted from Karl Wilhelm Lancizolle's book Ueber Ursachen, Character und Folgen der Julitage).—Ed.

[^4]: Karl Wilhelm Lancizolle, op. cit.—Ed. Sarran the elder.—Ed.



"une passion factice envers un être abstrait, une idée générale"3 (Benj. Constant, De l'esprit de conquête, Paris, 1814, p. 48), whereas the reactionaries accused the bourgeois on the grounds that their polit- ical ideology is nothing but "une mystification que la classe aisée fait subir à celles qui ne le sont pas" (Gazette de France, 1831, Févrierb).

On page 295, Saint Sancho declares that the state is "an institution for making the nation Christian", and all he can say about the basis of the state is that it "is held together" with the "cement" of "respect for the law", or that the holy "is held together" by respect (the holy as link) for the holy (p. 314).

Note 4.

"If the state is holy, there must be censorship" (p. 316). "The French Government does not contest freedom of the press as a right of man, but it demands a guarantee from the individual that he is really a human being." (Quel bonhomme!0 Jacques le bonhomme is "called upon" to study the September Laws ) (p. 380). Note 5, in which we find the most profound explanations about the various forms of the state, which Jacques le bonhomme makes independent and in which he sees only different attempts to realise the true state.

He should have added that these propositions about forms of the state are merely a paraphrase of this "nothing", whose sole creation is the proposition given above: I am not the state. Saint Sancho, just like a German school-master, speaks here of "the republic," which is, of course, far older than constitutional monarchy, e.g., the Greek republics.

That in a democratic, representative state like North America class conflicts have already reached a form which the constitutional monarchies are only just being forced to approach—about this, of

[^1]: "The republic is nothing but absolute monarchy, for it makes no difference whether the monarch is called prince or people, since both are majesties" (the holy) "Constitutionalism is a step further than the republic, for it is the state in the process of dissolution."

[^2]: This dissolution is explained as follows: "In the constitutional state the government wants to be absolute, and the people wants to be absolute. These two absolutes" (i.e., holies) "will destroy one another" (p. 302). "I am not the state, I am the creative negation of the state"; "thereby all questions" (about the constitution, etc.) "sink into their true nothing" (p. 310).

[^3]: a "An artificial passion directed towards something abstract, a general idea."—Ed. b "A deception with which the wealthy class deludes those that are not wealthy." Quoted from Karl Wilhelm Lancizolle, op. cit.—Ed.

[^4]: c What a simpleton.—Ed.



