---
Volume: 5
Document_Title: "II. Rebellion "
Page_Range: "400-412"
---

# II. Rebellion 

II. Rebellion

The criticism of society brings to an end the criticism of the old, holy world. By means of rebellion we make a leap into the new, egoistical world.

We have already seen in "Logic"a what rebellion is in general; it is refusa1 to respect the holy. Here, however, rebellion acquires in addition a distinct practical character. Revolution = hoiy rebellion.

Rebellion = egoistical or wordly revolution. Revolution = transformation of existing conditions.

Rebellion = transformation of me. Revolution = a political or social act.

Rebellion = my egoistical act. Revolution = overthrow of the existing [state of affairs].

Rebellion = existence of overthrow. Etc., etc. Page 422 et seq. The method hitherto used by people to overthrow the world in which they found tnemselves had, of course, also to be declared holy, and a "peculiar' method of smashing the existing world had to be asserted against it.

Revolution "consists in a transformation of the existing conditions [Zustand*] or status, of the state or society; hence it is a political or social act". "Although the inevitable consequence" of rebellion "is a transformation of existing conditions, it is not this transformation that is its starting-point, but people's dissatisfaction with themselves". "It is an uprising of individuals, a rising without regard for the arrangements that develop out of it. Revolution aimed at new arrangements; rebellion leads to a position where we no longer allow others to arrange things for us, but arrange things for ourselves. It is not a struggle against what exists, for if it prospers what exists will collapse of itself; it is only the setting free of me from what exists. If I abandon what exists, then it is dead and putrefies. But since my aim is not to overthrow something that exists, but for me to rise above it, my aim and action are not political or social, but egoistical for they are directed solely towards me and my peculiarity" (pp. 421, 422).

Les beaux esprits se rencontrent.c That which was proclaimed by the voice crying in the wildernessd is now come about. The impious John the Baptist "Stirner" has found his holy Messiah in the shape of "Dr. Kuhlmann from Holstein'. Listen:

[^1]: "You should not tear down or destroy what stands in your way, but avoid it and abandon it. And when you have avoided and abandoned it, it will disappear of itself, for it will no longer find sustenance" (Dos Reich des Geistes,' etc., Genf, 1845, p. 116).

[^2]: See this volume, p. 300.—Ed. Zustand—state of affairs, conditions.—Ed. c Noble minds think alike.—Ed. d Mark 1:3.—Ed. e Georg Kuhlmann. Die Neue Welt oder das Reich des Geistes auf Erden.—Ed.

[^3]: 14*





**[p. 378]**

The depth of Saint Sancho's insight into "revolution" is shown in his statement:

This implies, by way of antithesis, that the starting-point of the revolution is "a transformation of existing conditions", i.e., that revolution originates in revolution. "The starting-point" of rebel- lion, on the other hand, is "people's dissatisfaction with themselves". This "dissatisfaction with oneself" fits admirably with the earlier phrases about peculiarity and the "egoist in agreement with himself", who is always able to go "his own way", who is always delighted with himself and who at every instant is what he can be. Dissatisfaction with oneself is either dissatisfaction with oneself within the framework of a definite condition which determines the whole personality, e.g., dissatisfaction with oneself as a worker, or it is moral dissatisfaction. In the first case, therefore, it is simultaneous- ly and mainly dissatisfaction with the existing relations; in the second case—an ideological expression of these relations them- selves, which does not at all go beyond them, but belongs wholly to them. The first case, as Sancho believes, leads to revolution; for rebellion there remains, therefore, only the second case—moral dissatisfaction with oneself. "What exists" is, as we know, "the holy";

[^1]: "Although the consequence of rebellion is a transformation of existing conditions, [] this transformation is not its starting-point."



We already know what meaning "going beyond the framework of what exists" has. It is the old fancy that the state collapses of itself as soon as all its members leave it and that money loses its validity if all the workers refuse to accept it. Even in a hypothetical form, this proposition reveals all the fantasy and impotence of pious desire. It is the old illusion that changing existing relations depends only on the good will of people, and that existing relations are ideas. The alteration of consciousness divorced from actual relations—a pursuit followed by philosophers as a profession, i.e., as a business—is itself a product of existing relations and inseparable from them. This imaginary rising above the world is the ideological expression of the impotence of philosophers in face of the world. Practical life every day gives the lie to their ideological bragging.

In any event, Sancho did not "rebel" against his own state of confusion when he wrote those lines. For him there is the "trans- formation of existing conditions" on one side, and "people"on the other side, and the two sides are entirely separate from each other. Sancho does not give the slightest thought to the fact that the "conditions" have always been the conditions of these people and it would never have been possible to transform them unless the people transformed themselves and, if it has to be expressed in this way, unless they became "dissatisfied with themselves" in the old conditions. He thinks he is dealing a mortal blow at revolution when he asserts that it aims at new arrangements, whereas rebellion leads to a position where we no longer allow others to arrange things for us, but arrange things for ourselves. But the very fact that "we" arrange things for "ourselves", that it is "we" who rebel, denotes Mat the individual, despite all Sancho's "repugnance", has to " illow" that "we" "arrange things" for him, and that therefore th< only difference between revolution and rebellion is that in the lormer this is known, whereas in the latter people harbour illusions about it. Next Sancho leaves it open whether the rebellion "prospers" or not. One cannot understand why it should not "prosper", and even less why it should prosper, since each rebel goes his own way. Worldly conditions would have to intervene to show the rebels the necessity of a joint act, one which



**[p. 380]**

"Revolution bids" (!) "us to create institutions, rebellion urges us to rise or rise up* Revolutionary minds were occupied with the choice of a constitution, and the entire political period teems with constitutional struggles and constitutional questions, just as socially-gifted persons revealed extraordinary inventiveness as regards social institutions (phalansteries and such-like). To be without a constitution is the endeavour of the rebel" (p. 422).

That the French Revolution brought institutions in its train is a fact; that Empörung is derived from the word emporb is also a fact; that during the revolution and after it people fought for constitutions is another fact, and equally so that various social systems were outlined; and it is no less a fact that Proudhon spoke about anarchy. From these five facts Sancho has concocted the above-quoted passage.

From the fact that the French Revolution led to "institutions", Sancho concludes that this is a "bidding" of revolution in general. From the fact that the political revolution was a political one in which the social transformation had also an official expression in the form of constitutional struggles, Sancho—faithfully following his history- broker0—deduces that in it people fought over the best constitution. To this discovery he links, by means of the words "just as", a mention of social systems. In the epoch of the bourgeoisie, people occupied themselves with constitutional questions, "just as" in recent times various social systems have been devised. This is the train of thought in the above-quoted passage.

It follows from what was said above against Feuerbach that pre- vious revolutions within the framework of division of labour were bound to lead to new political institutions; it likewise follows that the communist revolution, which removes the division of labour, ultimately abolishes political institutions0; and, finally, it follows also

[^1]: a Stirner uses three words which have a common root: Einrichtung—arrange- ment, institution—and the synonyms sich aufrichten and emporrichten—to stand up, to raise oneself, to rise.—Ed.

[^2]: Empörung—rising, rebellion; empor—up, upwards.—Ed. c An allusion to Bruno Bauer.—Ed. à See this volume, p. 53.—Ed.





**[p. 381]**

that the communist revolution will be guided not by the "social institutions of inventive socially-gifted persons", but by the produc- tive forces.

But "to be without a constitution is the endeavour of the rebel"! He who is "born free", who is from the outset rid of everything, endeavours at the end of time to get rid of the constitution.

It should be mentioned also that all sorts of earlier illusions of our bonhomme contributed to Sancho's concept of "rebellion". They include, among others, his belief that the individuals who make a revolution are linked by some ideal bond and that their "raising the standard of revolt" is limited to inscribing on it a new concept, fixed idea, spectre, or apparition—the holy. Sancho makes them get this ideal bond out of their heads, whereby in his imagination they become a disorderly mob which can now only "rebel". In addition, he has heard that competition is a war of all against all,3 and this proposition, mixed with his desanctified revolution, constitutes the main factor of his "rebellion".

"When, for the sake of clarity, I try to think of a comparison, there comes to my mind, against my expectation, the foundation of Christianity" (p. 423). '"Christ", we learn here, "was not a revolutionary but a rebel who rose. Therefore, he was concerned about one thing alone: 'be ye wise as serpents'" (ibid.).

In order to suit the "expectation" and the "alone" of Sancho the second half of the biblical text quoted (Matthew 10:16) "and harmless as doves" ought not to exist. Christ has to figure here for the second time as a historical person in order to play the same role as the Mongols and Negroes played above. Whether Christ is meant to clarify the rebellion or the rebellion to clarify Christ is not known. The Christian-German gullibility of our saint is concentrated in the statement that Christ "drained the sources of life of the entire heathen world, and without them" (this ought to read: without him) "the existing state was anyway bound to wither" (p. 424). A withered flower of pulpit eloquence! See above on the "ancients". For the rest, credo ut intelligamf or, in order to find a "comparison for the sake of clarity".

Countless examples have already shown us that everywhere nothing but sacred history comes into our saint's mind and, indeed, in precisely those passages where the reader "has not expected" it. "Against expectation" it occurs to him again even in the "Commen- tary", where Sancho on page 154 makes the "Judaic reviewers" in

[^1]: a Thomas Hobbes, Elementa philosophica. De cive [Praefatio ad lectores].— Ed. I believe in order to understand. The expression belongs to the medieval scholastic Anselm of Canterbury.—Ed.





**[p. 382]**

The philosophy of rebellion, which has just been presented to us in the form of bad antitheses and withered flowers of eloquence, is in the final analysis only a boastful apology for the parvenu system (parvenu, Emporkömmling, Emporgekommener, Empörer ). Every rebel in his "egoistical act" is faced by a particular existing realitv, over which he endeavours to rise, without regard to the general conditions. He strives to get rid of the existing world only insofar as it is a fetter, for the rest, he endeavours, on the contrary, to appropriate it. The weaver who "rises" to become a factory-owner thereby gets rid of his loom and abandons it; for the rest, the world goes on as before and our "prosperous" rebel offers to others only the hypocritical moral demand that they should become parvenus like himself.* Thus, all Stirner's belligerent rodomontades end in moral deductions from Gellert's fables and speculative interpreta- tions of middle-class wretchedness.

So far we have seen that rebellion is anything you like, except action. On page 342 we learn that

This should surely read: of egoists in agreement with one another, since otherwise seizure amounts to the uncivilised "procedure" of

[^1]: "the procedure of seizure is not contemptible, but expresses the pure action of the egoist in agreement with himself".

[^2]: * [The following passage is crossed out in the manuscript:] These are the traditional moral principles of the petty bourgeois, who believes that the world will be set to rights, if everyone by himself tries to get as far as possible and for the rest does not trouble his head about the course of the world.

[^3]: a God is love.— Ed. A pun on Stirner's synonymy: Emporkömmling (upstart), Emporgekommener (one who has raised himself up), and Empörer (rebel).—Ed.



We learn by the way what created the plebs, and we can be sure in advance that it was created by a "dogma", and faith in that dogma, in the holy, a faith which here for a change appears as consciousness of sin:

"Seizure is a sin, a crime—this is the dogma that alone creates a plebs the old consciousness of sin alone is to blame" (p. 342).

The belief that consciousness is to blame for everything is his dogma, which makes him a rebel and the plebs a sinner.

In contrast to this consciousness of sin, the egoist incites himself, respectively the plebs, to seizure as follows:

"I tell myself: where my power extends, that is my property, and I claim as my property everything that I feel strong enough to reach," etc. (p. 340).

Thus, Saint Sancho tells himself that he wants to tell himself something, calls on himself to have what he has, and formulates his real relation as a relation of power—a paraphrase which in general is the secret of all his rodomontades. (See "Logic".3) Then he—who at each instant is what he can be, and therefore has what he can have—distinguishes his realised, actual property, which he has in his capital account, from his possible property, his unrealised "feeling of strength", which he enters in his profit and loss account. This is a contribution to the science of book-keeping of property in the extraordinary sense.

The meaning of his solemn "telling" was revealed by Sancho in a passage already quoted:

Sancho continues:

How "empty" this "talk" is can be seen at once from the following example:

[^1]: "I tell myself then that is, properly speaking, empty talk."

[^2]: "Egoism" says "to the propertyless plebs" in order to "exterminate" it: "Seize and take what you need!" (p. 341).

[^3]: "1 as little regard the wealth of the banker as something alien, as Napoleon did the lands of the kings. We" ("I" is suddenly transformed into "we") "are not at all afraid to conquer this wealth, and we also seek the means to do so. Thus, we divest it of its alien character which we were afraid of" (p. 369).

[^4]: This volume, p. 300.—Ed.





**[p. 384]**

Having told himself what he wanted to tell himself, Sancho makes the rebellious plebs say what he has prompted it to say. The fact is that in case of a rebellion he has drawn up a proclamation together with instructions as to its use, which should be posted up in all village ale-houses and distributed throughout the countryside. The procla- mation claims a place in Der hinkende Botte110 and in the Duchy of Nassau's country almanac. For the time being Sancho's tendances incendiaires are limited to the countryside, to propaganda among agricultural labourers and dairy maids, not touching the towns, which is a further proof of the extent to which he has "divested" large-scale industry of its "alien character". Nevertheless we should like here to give as detailed an account as possible of this valuable document, which ought not to be lost, in order "to contribute to the spread of a well-deserved fame insofar as it lies in our power" (Wigand, p. 191).

The proclamation is printed on page 358 et seq. [of "the book"] and begins as follows:

First it is due to the fact that we refrain from attacking, i.e., to the fact that we use force against ourselves, and then to the fact that you use force against us. Cela va à merveille! Let us continue.

First the "rebels" want to sell their respect at an "acceptable price" and then they make "good value" the criterion of the price. First an arbitrary price, then a price determined independently of arbitrari- ness by commercial laws, by the costs of production and the relation between supply and demand.

[^1]: "But what is it due to that your property is safe, you privileged ones? It is due to the fact that we refrain from attacking, consequently, it is due to our protection It is due to the fact that you use force against us."

[^2]: "If you desire our respect, then buy it at a price acceptable to us We only want good value."



First we "leave" it to you, then we take it away from you and have to use "force", and finally we prefer taking nothing from you after all. We leave it to you in the event of your giving it up yourself; in a moment of enlightenment, the only one we have, we see that this "leaving" amounts to "helping oneself" and use of "force", but in the end we cannot be reproached with "taking" anything from you. And there the matter must rest.

"We toil for twelve hours in the sweat of our brows and you offer us a few pence for it. In that case you should take an equal amount for your work too No equality at all!"

The "rebellious" agricultural labourers reveal themselves as true Stirnerian ' ' creations ' '.

"You do not like that? You imagine that our work is more than adequately paid with those wages, but that yours, on the other hand, deserves a wage of several thousand. But if you did not put such a high value on your work and allowed us to realise a better value for ours, we would, if need be, achieve something more important than you do for many thousand taler, and if you received only such wages as ours, you would soon become more diligent in order to earn more. If you were to do something that appears to us to be ten and a hundred times more valuable than our own work, ah" (ah, you good and faithful servant!3) "then you should get a hundred times more for it; we, for our part, are also thinking of making you things for which you will pay us more than the usual daily wage."

First the rebels complain that they are paid too little for their work. At the end, however, they promise that only if they receive a higher daily wage, they will perform work for which it will be worth paying "more than the usual daily wage". Further, they believe they would achieve extraordinary things if only they were to receive better wages, although at the same time they expect extraordinary achievements from the capitalist only if his "wage" is reduced to the level of theirs. Finally, after having performed the economic feat of transforming profit—this necessary form of capital, without which they would perish together with the capitalist—into wages, they perform the miracle of paying "a hundred times more" than they receive for "their own work", i.e., a hundred times more than they earn. "This is the meaning" of the above phrase, if Stirner "means what he says". But if this is only a stylistic error on his part, if the rebels intend jointly to offer the capitalist a hundred times more

[^1]: a Matthew 25:21.— Ed.





**[p. 386]**

than each of them earns, then Stirner is only making them offer the capitalist what each capitalist already has nowadays. For it is clear that the work of the capitalist, in combination with his capital, is worth ten or a hundred times more than that of a single person who is merely a worker. Hence in this case, as always, Sancho ieaves everything as it was before.

"We shall get on with one another if only we agree that no one any longer needs to present anything to someone else. Then we shall presumably go as far as to pay a decent price even to cripples, the sick and the aged, to prevent them from dying of hunger and want, for if we wish them to live it is fitting that we should pay for the fulfilment of our desire. Ï say pay for, hence I do not mean any miserable alms."

This sentimental episode about cripples, etc., is intended to prove that Sancho's rebellious agricultural labourers have already "risen" to those heights of middle-class consciousness where they do not wish to present anything or be presented with anything, and where they consider that the dignity and interests of the two parties in a relation are assured as soon as this relation is turned into a purchase.

This thunderous proclamation of the people who, in Sancho's imagination, are in rebellion, is followed by directions for its use in the form of a dialogue between a landowner and his labourers, the master this time behaving like Szeliga and the labourers like Stirner. In these directions the English strikes and the French workers' coalitions are interpreted a priori in the Berlin manner.

[^1]: Spokesman of the labourers: "What have you got?"

[^2]: Landowner: "1 have an estate of 1.000 morgen.'"1

[^3]: Spokesman: "And I am your labourei, and henceforth I will only cultivate your land for a wage of a taler a day.".

[^4]: Landowner: "In that case I shall hire someone else." Spokesman: "You won't find anyone, for we labourers will not work in future on any other conditions, and if you find anyone who agrees to take less, let him beware of us. Even a servant-girl now demands as much, and you will no longer find anyone for a lower wage."

[^5]: Landowner: "Oh! Then I shall be ruined!" Labourers (in chorus): "Don't be in such a hurry! You are sure to get as much as we get. And if not, we'll deduct sufficient for you to live like us.—We are not talking of equality!"

[^6]: Landowner: "But I am accustomed to better living!" Labourers: "We have nothing against that, but that's iiot our concern; if you can save more, all right. Do we have to hire ourselves out at a reduced price so that you can live well?"

[^7]: Landowner: "But you uneducated people do not need so much!" Labourers: "Well, we shall take a little more so as to be able to get the education that we may, perhaps, need."

[^8]: Landowner: "But if you ruin the rich, who will support the arts and sciences?"

[^9]: a An old Germanic land measure of varying size in different parts of the country. The Prussian morgen for example was 0.63 acre.— Ed.



Landowner: "Oh, miserable equality!" Labourers: "No, dear worthy master, we are not talking of equality! We only want to be appraised according to our worth, and if you are worth more, then after all you will also be appraised more highly. We only want good value and intend to show ourselves worth the price you will pay."

At the end of this dramatic masterpiece Sancho admits that, of course, "unanimity of the labourers" will be "required". How this will come about we are not told. What we do learn is that the agricultural labourers have no intention of changing in any way the existing relations of production and intercourse, but merely want to force the landowner to yield them the amount by which his expenditure exceeds theirs. It is a matter of indifference to our well-meaning bonhomme that this excess of expenditure, if distrib- uted over the mass of the proletarians, would give each of them a mere trifle and not improve his position in the slightest. The stage of development of agriculture to which these heroic labourers belong becomes evident immediately after the conclusion of the drama, when they are transformed into "domestic servants". They are living, therefore, under patriarchal conditions in which division of labour is still very little developed, and in which, incidentally, the whole conspiracy "will reach its final goal" by the landowner taking the spokesman into a barn and giving him a thrashing, whereas in more civilised countries the capitalist ends the matter by closing his enterprise for a time and letting his workers go and "play". Sancho's highly practical way of constructing his work of art, his strict adherence to the limits of probability, is evident not only from his peculiar idea of arranging a turn-out3 of agricultural labourers, but especially from his coalition of "servant-girls". And how complacent to imagine that the price of corn on the world market will depend on the wage demands of these agricultural labourers from Further Pomerania and not on the relation between supply and demand! A real sensation is caused by the surprising discourse of the labourers about literature, the latest art exhibition and the fashionable dancer of the day, surprising even after the unexpected question of the landowner about art and science. They become quite friendly as soon as they touch on this literary subject and for a moment the harassed landowner even forgets his threatened ruin in order to demonstrate his dévoûment to art and science. Finally the rebels give him an assurance of their upright character and make the reassuring

[^1]: a Here and below the word is in English in the manuscript.— Ed.





**[p. 388]**

These rebels from Further Pomerania are so modest that despite their "unanimity", which gives them the power to do something very different, they prefer to remain servants with the "wage of a taler a day" as their highest desire. It is quite consistent, therefore, that they do not cross-examine the landowner, who is in their power, but he cross-examines them.

The "firm spirit" and "strong self-consciousness of the domestic servant" find expression also in the "firm", "strong" language in which he and his comrades speak. "Perhaps—well—our numbers must see to that—a good round sum—dear worthy master—after all." Previously we read in the proclamation: "If need be—ah—we are thinking of making—perhaps, maybe, etc." One would think that the agricultural labourers had also mounted the wonderful steed Clavileno.*

Our Sancho's whole noisy "rebellion", therefore, reduces itself in the final analysis to a turn-out, but a turn-out in the extraordinary sense, viz., a turn-out on Berlin lines. Whereas in civilised countries the real turn-out plays a smaller and smaller role in the labour movement, because the more widespread association of workers leads to other forms of action, Sancho tries to depict the petty- bourgeois caricature of a turn-out as the ultimate and highest form of the world-historic struggle.

The waves of rebellion now cast us on the shore of the promised land, flowing with milk and honey,3 where every true Israelite sits beneath his fig-tree and where the millennium of "agreement" has dawned.

[^1]: * [The following passage is crossed out in the manuscript:] France produces relatively more than Further Pomerania. According to Michel Chevalier [Cours d'Economie politique fait au Collège de France], the entire annual product of France uniformly distributed among its population amounts to 97 francs a head, this means per family

[^2]: a Exodus 3:8.— Ed.



