---
Volume: 5
Document_Title: "5. Rebellion "
Page_Range: "425-426"
---

# 5. Rebellion 



**[p. 402]**

"The agreement [] according to which everyone must sacrifice a part of his freedom" occurs "riot at a'i ior the sake of something universal or even for the sake of another person", on the contrary, "I only concluded it out of self-interest. As far as sacrificing is concerned, alter all 1 merely sacrifice what is not in my power, i. e., I sacrifice nothing at all" (p. 418).

Our corvée peasant in agreement with himself shares this quality with all other corvée peasants and, in general, with every individual who has ever lived on the earth. Compare also Godwin, Politica! Justice.

Incidentally, Sancho appears to possess the peculiarity of imagin- ing that according to Rousseau individuals concluded the contract for the sake of the universal, which never entered Rousseau's head.

One consolation, however, remains for him.

The whole difference, therefore, amounts to this, that the "union" is the actual modern state, and the "state" is Stirner's illusion about the Prussian state, which he confuses with the state in general.

Sancho quite rightly has so little faith in his subtle distinctions between state and union, holy and not holy, human and unique, peculiarity and freedom, etc., that in the end he takes refuge in the ultima ratio of the egoist in agreement with himself—in rebellion. This time, however, he rebels not against himself, as he earlier asserted, but against the union. Just as earlier Sancho sought to achieve clarity on all points in the union, so he does here, too, as regards rebellion.

[^1]: "The state is holy the union, however, is .. not holy." And herein lies the "great difference between the state and the union" (p. 411).

[^2]: 5. Rebellion

[^3]: Du Contrat social; ou, Principes du droit politique.—Ed. William Godwin, Enquiry Concerning Political Justice, and Its Influence on Morals and Happiness.—Ed.



