---
Volume: 5
Document_Title: "B. Wealth "
Page_Range: "430-431"
---

# B. Wealth 

B. Wealth

Page 216: "Let each of you become an omnipotent egol" Page 353: "Think about increasing your wealth!" Page 420: "Keep up the value of your gifts; "Keep up their price, "Do not allow yourself to be compelled to sell below the price, "Do not allow yourself to be persuaded that your commodity is not worth the price, "Do not make yourself ridiculous by a ridiculously low price,

"Follow the example of the courageous man',' etc.!

Page 420: "Increase the value of your property!" "Increase your value!"

These moral sayings, which Sancho learned from an Andalusian Jewish huckster who drew up rules of life and trade for his son, and which Sancho now pulls out of his knapsack, form the main wealth of the union. The basis of all these statements is the great proposition on page 351:

This proposition is either meaningless, i. e., mere tautology, or is nonsense. It is tautology if it means: what you are able to do, you are able to do. It is nonsense if Vermögen No. 2 is meant to denote wealth "in the ordinary sense", commercial wealth, and if the proposition is based, therefore, on the etymological similarity. The collision consists precisely in the fact that what is expected of my ability [Vermögen] is different from what it is capable of doing, e. g., it is demanded of my ability to write verses that it should make money out of these verses. My ability is expected to produce something quite different from the specific product of this special ability, viz., a product depending on extraneous conditions which are not subject to my ability. This difficulty is supposed to be resolved in the union by means of etymological synonymy. We see that our egoistical school-master hopes to occupy an important post in the

[^1]: "Everything that you are able to do [vermagst—inflected form of vermögen] is your wealth [Vermögen]."

[^2]: I '1—2086



