---
Volume: 5
Document_Title: "D. Religion "
Page_Range: "437-438"
---

# D. Religion 



**[p. 414]**

But whereas the utility theory had thus at least the advantage of indicating the connection of all existing relations with the economic foundations of society, in Sancho the theory has lost all positive content; it is divorced from all actual relations and is restricted to the mere illusion cherished by the isolated bourgeois about his "cleverness", by means of which he reckons to exploit the world. Incidentally, it is only in a few passages that Sancho deals with the theory of utility even in this diluted form; almost the entire "book" is taken up, as we have seen, with egoism in agreement with itself, i.e., with an illusion about this illusion of the petty bourgeois. Even these few passages are finally reduced by Sancho to mere vapour, as we shall see.

D. R e l i g i o n

"In this community" (namely with other people) "I perceive nothing at all but a multiplication of my power, and I retain it only for so long as it is my multiplied power" (p. 416).

"I no longer abase myself before any power, and recognise that all powers are only my power, which I have immediately to subdue if they threaten to become a power against me or over me; each of them is permitted to be only one of my means for achieving my purpose."

I "perceive", I "recognise", I "have to subdue", power "is permitted to be only one of my means". We have already been shown in connection with the "union" what these moral demands mean and how far they correspond to reality. This illusion about his power is closely connected with the other illusion: that in the union "sub- stance" is abolished (see "Humane Liberalism"3), and that the rela- tions of the union members never assume a rigid form in respect to separate individuals.

As regards the "natural bond", it exists, despite Sancho's "ill will", in the form of corvée peasant economy and organisation of labour, etc., in the union; likewise the "spiritual bond'"3 in Sancho's philosophy. For the rest we need only refer to what we have already

[^1]: "The union, the association, this eternally fluid association of everything that ex- ists Of course, society can arise also from union, but only as a fixed idea arises out of a thought If a union has crystallised into a society, ithasceasedtobean association, for association is the unceasing process of associating with one another; it has reached the state of being associated, it has become society, the corpse of the union or association Neither a natural nor a spiritual bond holds the union together" (pp. 294, 408, 416).

[^2]: See this volume, p. 235.—Ed. h

[^3]: Goethe, Faust, I. Teil, 2. "Studierzimmerszene".—Ed.



