---
Volume: 5
Document_Title: "E. Supplement to the Union "
Page_Range: "438-440"
---

# E. Supplement to the Union 

"In short, society is holy, the union is your own; society uses you, you use the union", etc. [p. 418].

E. S u p p l e m e n t to t h e U n i o n

Whereas hitherto we were shown no other possibility of reaching the "union" than through rebellion, now we learn from the "Com- mentary" that the "union of egoists" already exists in "hundreds of thousands" of cases as one of the aspects of existing bourgeois society and that it is accessible to us even without any rebellion and any "Stirner". Then Sancho shows us

"such unions in actual life. Faust is within such unions when he exclaims: Here I am a human being' (!), "here I dare to be one,a here Goethe states it even in black and white" ("but the holy person is called Humanus, see Goethe", cf. "the book") "If Hess were to look attentively at real life, he would see hundreds of thousands of such egoistical unions—some of short duration, some enduring."

Sancho then makes some "children" meet for a game in front of Hess' window, and makes "a few friends" take Hess to a tavern and lets him associate with his "beloved".

"Of course, Hess does not notice how full of significance these trivial examples are and how infinitely different they are from the holy societies and indeed from the fraternal, human society of holy socialists" (Sancho contra Hess, Wigand, pp. 193, 194).

In just the same way, on page 305 of "the book", "association for material aims and interests" is graciously accepted as a voluntary union of egoists.

Thus the union here is reduced, on the one hand, to bourgeois as- sociations and joint-stock companies and, on the other hand, to bourgeois clubs, picnics, etc. That the former belong wholly to the pre- sent epoch is well known, and that this equally applies to the latter is also well known. Let Sancho look at the "unions" of an earlier epoch, e.g., of feudal times, or those of other nations, e.g., of the Italians, English, etc., right down to the "unions" of children, in order to realise what the difference is. By this new interpretation of the union he confirms only his obdurate conservatism. Sancho, who incorporated the whole of bourgeois society, insofar as he liked it, into his allegedly new in- stitution, here by way of supplement only assures us that in his union people will also enjoy themselves and indeed in quite the tradition-

[^1]: a Goethe, Faust, I. Teil, "Osterspaziergang".—Ed. b From Goethe's unfinished poem "Die Geheimnisse" (Humanus—a character in this poem).—Ed.





**[p. 416]**

The idea of resolving the whole of society into voluntary groups— which is here, on the basis of hearsay accounts current in Berlin, turned into a Stirnerian idea—belongs to Fourier.3 But with Fourier this view presupposes a complete transformation of society and is based on a criticism of the existing "unions", so much admired by Sancho, and of their infinite tedium. Fourier describes these present-day attempts at amusement in their connection with the existing relations of production and intercourse, and wages a polemic against them; Sancho, far from criticising them, wants on the contrary to transplant them in their entirety into his new "mutual agreement" institution for promoting happiness; he thereby only proves once again how strongly he is held in thrall to existing bourgeois society.

Finally, Sancho delivers the following oratio pro domo, i.e., in defence of the "union".

"Is a union in which the majority allow themselves to be cheated in regard to their most natural and obvious interests, a union of egoists? Have egoists united where one is the slave or serf of another? Societies in which the needs of some are satisfied at the expense of others, in which, for example, some can satisfy the need for rest by others having to work to the point of exhaustion Hess identifies these'egoistical unions' of his with Stirner's union of egoists" ([Wigand,] pp. 192, 193).

Sancho, therefore, expresses the pious wish that in his union, based on mutual exploitation, all the members will be equally powerful, cunning, etc., etc., so that each can exploit the others to exactly the same extent as they exploit him, and so that no one will be "cheated" in regard to his "most natural and obvious interests" or be able to "satisfy his needs at the expense of others". We note here that Sancho recognises "natural and obvious interests" and "needs" of all—consequently, equal interests and needs. Further, we recall at once page 456 of the book, according to which "overreaching" is a "moral idea inculcated by the guild spirit", and for a man who has had a "wise education", it remains a "fixed idea from which no freedom of thought can give protection". Sancho "gets his thoughts from above and adheres to them" (ibid.). This equal power of all consists, according to his demand, in that everyone should become "omnipotent", i.e., all should become impotent in relation to one another, a perfectly consistent postulate that coincides with

[^1]: Charles Fourier, Theorie de l'unité universelle.—Ed.



