---
Volume: 5
Document_Title: "6. Solomon's Song of Songs or the Unique "
Page_Range: "450-467"
---

# 6. Solomon's Song of Songs or the Unique 

"Species is nothing species is only a conception" (spirit, spectre, etc.) (p. 239).

Ultimately, then, this "nothing' of Sancho's, which is identical with a "conception", means nothing, for Sancho himself is "the creative nothing", and the species, as we have seen, creates a great deal, and in doing so it can therefore very well be "nothing". Moreover Sancho tells us on page 456:

"Being justifies nothing at all; something imagined exists just as well as something not imagined."

Starting with page 448, Sancho spins out a yarn lasting thirty pages in order to strike "fire" out of thought and criticism of the egoist in agreement with himself. We have already experienced too many expressions of his thought and criticism to give the reader further "offence"3 with Sancho's beggar's broth. One spoonful of it will suffice.

"Do you believe that thoughts fly about freely for the taking, so that anyone can capture some of them and then put them forward against me as his inviolable property? Everything that flies about, all of it is—mine" (p. 457).

Here Sancho poaches snipe existing only in the mind. We have seen how many of the thoughts flying about he has captured for himself. He fancied that he could catch them as soon as he put the salt of the holy on their tails. This colossal contradiction between his actual property in regard to thoughts and his illusions on that score may serve as a classic and striking example of his entire property in the extraordinary sense. It is precisely this contrast that constitutes his self-enjoyment.

6. Solomon's Song of Songs

or The Unique

[^1]: Cessem do sabio Grego, e do Troiano, As navegaçoës grandes que fizeram; Calle-se de Alexandro, e de Trajano A fama das victorias que tiveram,

[^2]: Cesse tudo o que a Musa antigua canta, Que outro valor mais alto se alevanta.

[^3]: a A pun in the original: Anstoss geben—an expression frequently used by Stirner—can mean either "to give an impetus" or "to give offence".—Ed.





**[p. 428]**

Que o peito accende, e o cor ao gesto muda,a

give me, o nymphs of the Spree, a song worthy of the heroes who fight on your banks against Substance and Man, a song that will spread over the whole world and will be sung in all lands—for it is a matter here of the man whose deeds are

Mais do que promettia a força humana,c

greater than mere "human" power can perform, the man who

 edificâra Novo reino que tanto sublimâra, who has founded a new kingdom among a far-off people, viz., the "union"j—it is a matter here of being a

—tenro, e novo ramo florescente De huma arvore de Christo, mais amada,e

of the tender and young blossoming shoot of a tree especially loved by Christ, a tree which is nothing less than

certissima esperança Do augmento da pequena Christiandade,

[^1]: a Cease man of Troy, and cease thou sage of Greece, To boast of Navigations great ye made; Let the high Fame of Alexander cease, And Trajan's Banners in the East display'd:

[^2]: Cease All, whose Actions ancient Bards exprest: A brighter Valour arises in the West. And you (my Spree Nymphs) Give me a mighty Fury, Nor rude Reeds Or rustic Bag-Pipes sound, But such as War's Lowd Instrument (the noble Trumpet) breeds, Which fires the Breast, and stirs the blood to jars.

[^3]: (This and the following quotations are from Luis de Camöes, Lusiada.—Ed.) Marx and Engels substituted "Spree"—the river on which Berlin stands—for Tagus.—Ed.

[^4]: c Beyond what strength of human nature here.—Ed. acquir'd A modern Scepter which to Heaven aspired.—Ed. fair and tender Blossom of that Tree Belov'd by Him, who dy'd on one for Man.—Ed. certain Hope t'extend the Pale, One day, of narrow Christianitie.—Ed.



Everything that is to be found in this unprecedented song of songs about the unique was in existence earlier in the "book". We mention this chapter only for the sake of good order; so that we should be able to do it properly we have left the examination of some points until now and we shall briefly recapitulate others.

Sancho's "ego" has gone through the full gamut of soul migration. We already met it as the egoist in agreement with himself, as corvée

peasant, as trader in thoughts, as unfortunate competitor, as owner, as a slave who has had one of his legs torn out, as Sancho tossed into the air by the interaction between birth and circumstances, and in a hundred other shapes. Here it bids us farewell as an "inhuman being", under the same banner as that under which it made its entry into the New Testament.

"Only the inhuman being is the real man" (p. 232).

This is one of the thousand and one equations in which Sancho expounds his legend of the holy.

The concept "man" is not the real man. The concept "man"= Man.

Man = not the real man. The real man = the non-man,

= the inhuman being. "Only the inhuman being is the real man." Sancho tries to explain to himself the harmlessness of this proposition by means of the following transformations:

This passage is again based on our school-master's fantasy about the school-master who has created for himself an ideal of "Man" and "put it into the heads" of other people, a fantasy which forms the basic theme of "the book".

Sancho calls it a hypothesis that the concept and existence, the essence and appearance of "man" can be separated, as though the

[^1]: "It is not so difficult to express in a few plain words what an inhuman being is; it is a man [] who does not correspond to the concept of what is human. Logic calls this a nonsensical judgment. Would one have the right to pronounce this judgment that someone can be a man without being a man, if one did not admit the validity of the hypothesis that the concept of man can be separated from his existence, that the essence can be separated from the appearance? People say: so and so seems to be a man, but he is not a man. People have pronounced this nonsensical judgment throughout many centuries: moreover, during this long period of time there have only been inhuman beings. What individual did ever correspond to his concept?" (p. 232).

[^2]: * Cf. Camöes; Lusiadas, I, 1-17.





**[p. 430]**

The nonsensical judgment of the philosophers that the real man is not man is in the sphere of abstraction merely the most universal, all-embracing expression of the actually existing universal contradic- tion between the conditions and needs of people. The nonsensical form of the abstract proposition fully corresponds to the nonsensical character, carried to extreme lengths, of the relations of bourgeois society, just as Sancho's nonsensical judgment about his environ- ment—they are egoists and at the same time they are not egoists—corresponds to the actual contradiction between the exis- tence of the German petty bourgeois and the tasks which existing relations have imposed on them and which they themselves entertain in the form of pious wishes and desires. Incidentally, philosophers have declared people to be inhuman, not because they did not correspond to the concept of man, but because their concept of man did not correspond to the true concept of man, or because they had no true understanding of man. Tout comme chez nous,3 in "the book", where Sancho also declares that people are non-egoists for the sole reason that they have no true understanding of egoism.

In view of its extreme triviality and indisputable certainty, there should have been no need to mention the perfectly inoffensive proposition that the idea of man is not the real man, that the idea of a thing is not the thing itself—a proposition which is also applicable to a stone and to the idea of a stone, in accordance with which Sancho should have said that the real stone is non-stone. But Sancho's

[^1]: A modified phrase from Nolantde Fatouville's comedv Arlequin, empereur dans hi lune—"tout comme ici" (just as here) is the stock response made by the people listening to Harlequin's inventions about life on the moon.—Ed.



On page 185, Sancho raises the important question:

"But how to curb the inhuman being who dwells in each individual? How can one manage not to set free the inhuman being along with the human being? All liberalism has a mortal enemy, an invincible opponent, as God has the devil; at the side of the human being there is always the inhuman being, the egoist, the individual. State, society, mankind cannot master this devil."

In the form in which Sancho understands it, the question again becomes sheer nonsense. He imagines that people up to now have always formed a concept of man, and then won freedom for themselves to the extent that was necessary to realise this concept; that the measure of freedom that they achieved was determined each time by their idea of the ideal of man at the time; it was thus unavoidable that in each individual there remained a residue which did not correspond to this ideal and, hence, since it was "inhuman", was either not set free or only freed malgré eux.

In reality, of course, what happened was that people won freedom for themselves each time to the extent that was dictated and permitted not by their ideal of man, but by the existing productive forces. All emancipation carried through hitherto has been based, however, on restricted productive forces. The production which these productive forces could provide was insufficient for the whole of society and made development possible only if some persons

[^1]: "And when the thousand years are expired, Satan shall be loosed out of his prison, "And shall go out to deceive the nations which are in the four quarters of the earth, Gog and Magog, to gather them together to battle

[^2]: "And they went up on the breadth of the earth, and compassed the camp of the saints about, and the beloved city" (Revelation of St. John 20:7-9).





**[p. 432]**

For our saint, such world-historical struggles are reduced to a mere collision between Saint Bruno and "the mass". Cf. the whole criticism of humane liberalism, especially page 192 et seq.

Thus, our simple-minded Sancho with his naive little statement about the inhuman being and with his talk of getting-man-out-of- one's-head, thanks to which the inhuman being also disappears and there is no longer any measure for individuals, finally arrives at the following result. He regards the physical, intellectual and social crippling and enslavement which as a result of the existing relations afflict an individual, as the individuality and peculiarity of that individual; like an ordinary conservative he calmly recognises these relations once he has freed his mind of all worry by getting out of his head the philosophers' idea of these relations. Just as here he declares fortuitous features imposed on the individual to be

About the "inhuman" great result obtained by him Sancho sings in the following Kyrie eleison,h which he puts into the mouth of "the inhuman being":

"I was despicable because 1 sought my better self outside me; "I was the inhuman, because I dreamed of the human; "I was like the pious ones who hunger for their true ego and always remain poor sinners;

"I thought of myself only in comparison with someone else; "I was not all in all, I was not—unique. "Now, however, I cease to appear to myself as the inhuman; "I cease to measure myself by man and to let others measure me; "I cease to recognise anything above myself— "I was inhuman, but I am no longer inhuman, I am the uniquel" Hallelujah!

We shall not dwell further here on how "the inhuman"—which, it may be said in passing, put itself in the right frame of mind by "turning its back" "on itself and the critic", Saint Bruno—how "the inhuman" here "appears", or does not "appear" to itself. We shall only point out that the "unique" (it or he) is characterised here by his getting the holy out of his head for the nine-hundredth time, whereby, as we in our turn are compelled to repeat for the nine-hundredth time, everything remains as before, not to mention the fact that it is no more than a pious wish.

We have here, for the first time, the unique person, Sancho, who with the litany mentioned above has received the accolade of knighthood, now appropriates his new, noble name. Sancho arrives at his uniqueness by getting "Man" out of his head. He thereby ceases "to think of himself only in comparison with someone else" and "to recognise something above him". He becomes incompara- ble. This is again the same old fantasy of Sancho's that it is not the needs of individuals, but concepts, ideas, "the holy"—here in the shape of "Man"—that are the sole tertium comparationisand the sole bond between individuals.* He gets an idea out of his head and thereby becomes unique.

To become "unique" in his sense of the word he must above all prove to us his freedom from premises.

[^1]: * [The following passage is crossed out in the manuscript:] Sancho, who notices nothing but "the holy", need not bother about the fact that it is through their needs that individuals are linked together, and that the development of the productive forces up to now implies the domination of one section over the other.

[^2]: See this volume, pp. 278-81.—Ed. Lord, have mercy.— Ed.





**[p. 434]**

"We are prepared to allow" that Sancho does not think before he thinks, and that he and everyone else is in this respect a thinker without premises. Similarly we concede that he does not have any thought as the premise of his existence, i.e., that he was not created by thoughts. If for a moment Sancho abstracts from all his thoughts — which with his meagre assortment cannot be very difficult—there remains his real ego, but his real ego within the framework of the actual relations of the world that exist for it. In this way he has divested himself for a moment of all dogmatic premises, but now for the first time the real premises begin to come to light for him. And these real premises are also the premises of his dogmatic premises which, whether he likes it or not, will reappear to him to- gether with the real ones so long as he does not obtain different real premises, and with them also different dogmatic premises, or so long as he does not recognise in a materialistic way that the real premises are the premises of his thinking, and as a result his dogmatic ones will disappear altogether. Just as his development up to now and his Berlin environment have at present led to the dogmatic premise of egoism in agreement with itself, so, despite all imaginary freedom from premises, this premise will remain with him as long as he fails to overcome its real premises.

As a true school-master, Sancho still continues to strive for the famous Hegelian "premiseless thinking", i.e., thinking without dogmatic premises, which in Hegel too is only a pious wish. Sancho believed he could achieve this by a skilful leap and even surpass it by going in pursuit of the premiseless ego. But both the one and the other eluded his grasp.

Then Sancho tries his luck in another fashion:

[^1]: Pages 214, 215: "Make full use" of the demand for freedom! "Who shall become free? You, I, we. Free from what? From everything that is not you, not I, not we. I, therefore, am the core What remains if I become free from everything that is not I? Only I and nothing but I."

[^2]: So that was the poodle's core! A travelling scholar? The incident makes me laugh.3

[^3]: Goethe, Faust, I. Teil, 1. "Studierzimmerszene".—Ed.



If, however, Sancho were once to tackle the subject of "becoming free" with the desire of freeing himself not merely from categories, but from actual fetters, then such liberation would presuppose a change common to him and to a large mass of other people, and would produce a change in the state of the world which again would be common to him and others. Although his "ego" "remains" after liberation, it is hereafter a totally changed ego sharing with others a changed state of the world which is precisely the premise, common to him and others, of his and their freedom, and it follows that the uniqueness, incomparability and independence of his "ego" again come to nothing.

Sancho tries again in a third fashion:

[^1]: Page 237: "Their disgrace is not that they" (Jew and Christian) "excludeeach other but that this only half occurs. If they could be perfect egoists they would totally exclude each other."

[^2]: Page 273: "If one desires only to resolve the contradiction one grasps its meaning in too formal and feeble a way. The contradiction deserves rather to be sharp- ened."

[^3]: Page 274: "Only when you recognise your contradiction fully and when everyone asserts himself from head to foot as unique will you no longer simply conceal your contradiction The final and most decisive contradiction—that between one unique person and another—goes basically beyond the bounds of what is called contradic- tion As a unique person you have nothing more in common with the other and, for that reason, nothing that makes you separate from him or hostile to him Contradiction disappears in perfect separateness or uniqueness."

[^4]: Page 183: "I do not want to have or to be something special in relation to others; nor do I measure myself by others I want to be everything I can be, and to have everything I can have. What do I care whether others are or have something similar to me? They can neither be nor have something equal, the same. I do nothing detrimental to them any more than it is to the detriment of the cliff that I have the advantage of movement. If they could have it, they would have it. Doing nothing to the detriment of other people, that is the meaning of the demand to have no privileges One should not regard oneself as 'something special', e.g., Jew or Christian. Well, I regard myself not as something special but as unique. True, I have a resemblance to others; but this holds only for comparison or reflection; in fact, however, I am incomparable, unique. My flesh is not their flesh, my spirit is not their spirit. If you bring them under the general concept 'flesh', 'spirit', then those are your thoughts, which have nothing to do with my flesh, my spirit."



Page 180: "As though one individual will not always seek out another, and as thougn one person does not have to adapt himself to another, when he needs him. But the difference is that in this case the individual actually unites with another individual, whereas previously he was linked to him by a bond."

Page 178: "Only when you are unique can you in your intercourse with one another be what you actually are."

As regards Sancho's illusion about the intercourse of the unique ones "as what they actually are", about "the uniting of the individual with the individual", in short, about the "union", that has been completely dealt with. We shall merely point out: whereas in the union each regarded and treated the other merely as his object, his property (cf. page 167 and the theory of property and exploitation), in the "Commentary" (Wigand, p. 157), on the contrary, the governor of the island of Barataria realises and recognises that the other also belongs to himself, is his own, is unique, and in that capacity also becomes Sancho's object, although no longer Sancho's property. In his despair, he saves himself only by the unexpected idea that "because of this" he "forgets himself in sweet self-oblivion", a delight which he "affords himself a thousand times every hour" and which is still further sweetened by the sweet consciousness that nevertheless he has not "completely disap- peared". The result, therefore, is the old wisdom that each exists for himself and for others.

Let us now reduce Sancho's pompous statements to their actual modest content.

The bombastic phrases about "contradiction" which has to be sharpened and taken to extremes, and about the "something special", which Sancho does not want to have as his advantage, amount to one and the same thing. Sancho wants, or rather believes he wants, that intercourse between individuals should be purely personal, that their intercourse should not be mediated through some third thing (cf. competition). This third thing here is the "something special", or the special, not absolute, contradiction, i.e., the position of individuals in relation to one another determined by present-day social relations. Sancho does not want, for example, two individuals to be in "contradiction" to one another as bourgeois and proletarian; he protests against the "special" which forms the "advantage" of the bourgeois over the proletarian; he would like to have them enter into a purely personal relation, to associate with one another merely as individuals. He does not take into consideration that in the framework of division of labour personal relations

Even that which constitutes the advantage of an individual as such over other individuals, is in our day at the same time a product of society and in its realisation is bound to assert itself as privilege, as we have already shown Sancho in connection with competition. Further, the individual as such, regarded by himself, is subordinated to division of labour, which makes him one-sided, cripples and determines him.

What, at best, does Sancho's sharpening of contradiction and abolition of the special amount to? To this, that the mutual relations of individuals should be their behaviour to one another, while their mutual differences should be their self-distinctions (as one empirical self distinguishes itself from another). Both of these are either, as with Sancho, an ideological paraphrase of what exists, for the rela- tions of individuals under all circumstances can only be their mutual behaviour, while their differences can only be their self-distinctions. Or they are the pious wish that they should behave in such a way and differ from one another in such a way, that their behaviour does not acquire independent existence as a social relationship independent of them, and that their differences from one another should not assume the material character (independent of the person) which they have assumed and daily continue to assume.

Individuals have always and in all circumstances "proceeded from themselves", but since they were not unique in the sense of not needing any connections with one another, and since their needs, consequent- ly their nature, and the method of satisfying their needs, connected them with one another (relations between the sexes, exchange, division of labour), they had to enter into relations with one another. Moreover, since they entered into intercourse with one another not as pure egos, but as individuals at a definite stage of development of their productive forces and requirements, and since this intercourse, in its turn, determined production and needs, it was, therefore, precisely the personal, individual behaviour of indivi- duals, their behaviour to one another as individuals, that created the existing relations and daily reproduces them anew. They entered



**[p. 438]**

The transformation of the individual relationship into its opposite, a purely material relationship, the distinction of individuality and fortuity by the individuals themselves, is a historical process, as we have already shown,3 and at different stages of development it assumes different, ever sharper and more universal forms. In the present epoch, the domination of material relations over individuals, and the suppression of individuality by fortuitous circumstances, has assumed its sharpest and most universal form, thereby setting existing individuals a very definite task. It has set them the task of replacing the domination of circumstances and of chance over individuals by the domination of individuals over chance and circumstances. It has not, as Sancho imagines, put forward the demand that "I should develop myself", which up to now every individual has done without Sancho's good advice; it has on the contrary called for liberation from a quite definite mode of development. This task, dictated by present-day relations, coincides with the task of organising society in a communist way.

We have already shown above that the abolition of a state of affairs in which relations become independent of individuals, in which individuality is subservient to chance and the personal relations of individuals are subordinated to general class relations, etc.—that the abolition of this state of affairs is determined in the final analysis by the abolition of division of labour. We have also shown that the abolition of division of labour is determined by the development of intercourse and productive forces to such a degree

[^1]: a See this volume, pp. 75-81.—Ed.



Within communist society, the only society in which the genuine and free development of individuals ceases to be a mere phrase, this development is determined precisely by the connection of individu- als, a connection which consists partly in the economic prerequisites and partly in the necessary solidarity of the free development of all, and, finally, in the universal character of the activity of individuals on the basis of the existing productive forces. We are, therefore, here concerned with individuals at a definite historical stage of develop- ment and by no means merely with individuals chosen at random, even disregarding the indispensable communist revolution, which itself is a general condition for their free development. The individuals' consciousness of their mutual relations will, of course, likewise be completely changed, and, therefore, will no more be the "principle of love" or dévoûment than it will be egoism.

Thus, "uniqueness"—taken in the sense of genuine development and individual behaviour, as outlined above—presupposes not only things quite different from good will and right consciousness, but even the direct opposite of Sancho's fantasies. With him "unique- ness" is nothing more than an embellishment of existing conditions, a little drop of comforting balm for the poor, impotent soul that has become wretched through wretchedness.

As regards Sancho's "incomparability'", the situation is the same as with his "uniqueness". He himself will recall, if he is not completely "lost" in "sweet self-oblivion", that the organisation of labour in

[^1]: a See Chapter I of Volume I of The German Ideology.— Ed.

[^2]: 16—2086





**[p. 440]**

Incidentally, incomparability can have different meanings. The only meaning in question here, namely "uniqueness" in the sense of originality, presupposes that the activity of the incomparable individual in a definite sphere differs from the activity of his equals. Persiani is an incomparable singer precisely because she is a singer and is compared with other singers, and indeed by people who are able to recognise her incomparability through comparison based on normal hearing and musical training. Persiani's singing and the croaking of a frog are incomparable, although even here there could be a comparison, but it would be a comparison between a human being and a frog, and not between Persiani and a particular unique frog. Only in the first case is it possible to speak of a comparison between individuals, in the second it is a matter only of their properties as species or genus. A third type of incomparability—the incomparability of Persiani's singing with the tail of a comet—we leave to Sancho for his "self-en joy ment", since at any rate he finds pleasure in "nonsensical judgments", although even this absurd comparison has a real basis in the absurdity of present-day rela- tions. Money is the common measure for all, even the most hetero- geneous things.

Incidentally, Sancho's incomparability amounts to the same empty phrase as his uniqueness. Individuals are no longer to be measured by some tertium comparationis independent of them, but comparison should be transformed into their self-distinction, i.e., into the free

Incidentally, Sancho is acquainted only with the type of compari- son made by scribblers and ranters, which leads to the magnificent conclusion that Sancho is not Bruno and Bruno is not Sancho. On the other hand, he is, of course, unacquainted with the sciences which have made considerable advances just by comparing and establishing differences in the spheres of comparison and in which comparison acquires a character of universal importance—i.e., in comparative anatomy, botany, philology, etc.

Great nations—the French, North Americans, English—are con- stantly comparing themselves with one another both in practice and theory, in competition and in science. Petty shopkeepers and philistines, like the Germans, who are afraid of comparison and competition, hide behind the shield of incomparability supplied them by their manufacturer of philosophical labels. Not only in their interests, but also in his own, has Sancho refused to tolerate any comparison.

On page 415 Sancho says:

"There exists no one equal to me,"

and on page 408 association with "my equals" is depicted as the dissolution of society in intercourse:

However, Sancho sometimes uses "equal to me" and "equal" in general in the sense of "the same", e.g., the passage on page 183 quoted above:

Here he arrives at his final "new turn of expression", which he uses especially in the "Commentary".

The uniqueness, the originality, the "peculiar" development of individuals which, according to Sancho, does not for example occur in all "human works", although no one will deny that one stove-setter does not set a stove in the "same" way as another; the "unique" development of individuals which, in the opinion of this same Sancho, does not occur in religious, political, etc., spheres (see "Phenomenology"), although no one will deny that of all those who believe in Islam not one believes in it in the "same" way as another and to this extent each of them is "unique", just as among citizens not one has the "same" attitude to the state as another if only because it is a matter of his attitude, and not that of some-other—all

[^1]: "The child prefers intercourse with his equals to society."

[^2]: "They can neither be nor have something equal, the same."

[^3]: 16*





**[p. 442]**

On page 184 of the "Commentary" he relates with much unction and great self-enjoyment that he does not become replete when the Japanese Emperor eats, because his stomach and that of the Japanese Emperor are "unique", "incomparable stomachs", i.e., not the same stomachs. If Sancho believes that in this way he has abolished the social relations hitherto existing or even only the laws of nature, then his naïveté is excessively great and it springs merely from the fact that philosophers have not depicted social relations as the mutual relations of particular individuals identical with them- selves, and the laws of nature as the mutual connections of these particular bodies.

The classic expression which Leibniz gave to this old proposition (to be found on the first page of any physics textbook as the theory of the impenetrability of bodies) is well known:

Sancho's uniqueness is here reduced to a quality which he shares with every louse and every grain of sand.

The greatest disclaimer with which his philosophy could end is that it regards the realisation that Sancho is not Bruno, which is obvious to every country bumpkin and police sergeant, to be one of the greatest discoveries, and that it considers the fact of this difference to be a real miracle.

Thus the "critical hurrah" of our "virtuoso of thought" has become an uncritical miserere.

rushes out to meet him "joyfully". Her first enquiry is: how is the ass?

[^1]: "Opus tarnen est ut quaelibet monas différât ab alia quacunque, neque enim unquam dantur in natura duo entia, quorum unum exasse conveniat cum altero."a

[^2]: (Principia Philosophiae sen Theses, etc.)

[^3]: After all these adventures our "unique" squire again sails into the harbour of his native serf's cottage. "The title spectre of his book"b

[^4]: a "However, every monad necessarily differs from every other; for in nature there are never two things that exactly coincide with each other."—Ed.

[^5]: An allusion to Stirner's wife, Marie Dähnhardt (see this volume, p. 400).— Ed.



Better than his master, replies Sancho. Thanks be to God for so much goodness. But tell me now, my friend, what profit have you got out of your squiredom? What new dress have you brought me?

I have brought nothing like that, replies Sancho, but I have brought "the creative nothing, the nothing from which I myself as creator create everything". This means you will yet see me in the capacity of church father and archbishop of an island and, indeed, one of the best it is possible to find.

God grant it, my treasure, and may it be soon, for we sorely need it. But as regards the island you mention, I don't know what you mean.

Honey is not for the ass's mouth, replies Sancho. You will see it for yourself in due course, wife. But even now I can tell you that nothing is more pleasant in the world than the honour of seeking adventures as an egoist in agreement with himself and as the squire of the rueful countenance. True, most of these adventures do not "reach the final goal" so that "human requirement is satisfied" (tan como el hombre querrfaa), for ninety-nine adventures out of a hundred go awry and follow a tangled course. I know this from experience, for in some of them I was cheated and from others I went home soundly pounded and thrashed. But in spite of all that, it is a fine thing, for at any rate the "unique" requirement is always satisfied when one wanders through the whole of history, quoting all the books in the Berlin reading-room, getting an etymological night's lodging in all languages, falsifying political facts in all countries, boastfully throwing down gages to all dragons and ostriches, elfs, field hobgoblings and "spectres", exchanging blows with all church fathers and philosophers and yet, finally, paying for it only with your own body (cf. Cervantes, I, Chapter 52).

[^1]: a As the human being desires.— Ed.



