---
Volume: 5
Document_Title: "A. ' Communismus, Socialismus, Humanismus' "
Page_Range: "481-493"
---

# A. " Communismus, Socialismus, Humanismus" 



**[p. I]**

DIE RHEINISCHEN JAHRBÜCHER

OR

THE PHILOSOPHY OF TRUE SOCIALISM

A. "COMMUNISMUS, SOCIALISMUS, HUMANISMUS"3

RHEINISCHE JAHRBÜCHER, 1. BD., P. 167 ET SEQ.

We begin with this essay because it displays quite consciously and with great self-confidence the national German character of true socialism.

Page 168: "It seems that the French do not understand their own men of genius. At this point German science comes to their aid and in the shape of socialism presents the most reasonable social order, if one can speak of a superlative degree of reasonableness."

"German science" here, therefore, presents a social order, in fact "the most reasonable social order',' "in the shape of socialism". Socialism is reduced to a branch of that omnipotent, omniscient, all-embracing German science which is even able to set up a society. It is true that socialism is French in origin, but the French socialists were "essentially" Germans, for which reason the real Frenchmen "did not understand" them. Thus the writer can say:

After having transformed communism and socialism into two abstract theories, two principles, there is, of course, nothing easier than to excogitate at will any Hegelian unity of these two opposites and to give it any vague name one chooses. One has thereby not only

[^1]: "Communism is French, socialism is German; the French are lucky to possess so apt a social instinct, which will serve them one day as a substitute for scientific investigation. This result has been determined by the course of development of the two nations; the French arrived at communism by way of politics" (now it is clear, of course, how the French people came to communism); "the Germans arrived at socialism" (namely "true socialism") "by way of metaphysics, which eventually changed into anthropology. Ultimately both are resolved in humanism."

[^2]: The author of this article is Hermann Semmig.—Ed.



Incidentally, the sentence is copied more or less literally from Püttmann's Bürgerbuch, p. 43 and elsewhere3; the writer's "scientific investigation" of socialism is likewise limited to a reinterpretative reproduction of ideas contained in this book, in the Einundzwanzig Bogen and in other writings dating from the early days of German communism.

We will only give a few examples of the objections raised to communism in this essay:

Page 168: "Communism does not combine the atoms into an organic whole."

The demand that the "atoms" should be combined into an "organic whole" is no more realistic than the demand for the squaring of the circle.

"Communism, as it is actually advocated in France, its main centre, takes the form of crude opposition to the egoistical dissipation of the shopkeeper's state; it never transcends this political opposition; it never attains to unconditional, unqualified freedom" (ibid.).

Voilà the German ideological postulate of "unconditional, unqual- ified freedom", which is only the practical formula for "uncondition- al, unqualified thought". French communism is admittedly "crude" because it is the theoretical expression of a real opposition; however, according to the writer, French communism ought to have transcended this opposition by imagining it to be already overcome. Compare also Bürgerbuch, p. 43, etc.

Hapless species! "Species" and "tyranny" have hitherto existed simultaneously; but it is precisely because communism abolishes the "species" that it can allow "tyranny" to persist. And how, according to our true socialist, does communism set about abolishing the "species"? It "has the masses in view" (ibid.).

To appreciate the "scientific investigation" which has led our true socialist to this proposition, it is necessary to consider the following passage:

[^1]: "Tyranny can perfectly well persist within communism, since the latter refuses to permit the continuance of the species" (p. 168).

[^2]: "In communism man is not conscious of his essence his dependence is reduced by communism to the lowest, most brutal relationship, to dependence on crude matter—the separation of labour and enjoyment. Man does not attain to free moral activity."

[^3]: a This refers to the article "Ueber die Noth in unserer Gesellschaft und deren Abhülfe" by Moses Hess published in Deutsches Bürgerbuch für 1845.—Ed.





**[p. 460]**

That is to say, our true socialist is here reproaching the French for having a correct consciousness of their actual social conditions, whereas they ought to bring to light "Man's" consciousness of "his essence". All objections raised by these true socialists against the French amount to this, that they do not consider Feuerbach's philosophy to be the quintessence of their movement as a whole. The writer proceeds from the already existing proposition of the separation of labour and enjoyment. Instead of starting with this proposition, he ideologically turns the whole thing upside-down, begins with the missing consciousness of man, deduces from it "dependence on crude matter" and assumes this to be realised in the "separation of labour and enjoyment". Incidentally we shall see later on where our true socialist gets to with his independence "from crude matter".

In fact, all these gentlemen display a remarkable delicacy of feeling. Everything shocks them, especially matter; they complain everywhere of crudity. Earlier we have already had a "crude antithesis", now we have "the most brutal relationship" of "depend- ence on crude matter".

German philosophy in its socialist disguise appears, of course, to investigate "crude reality", but it always keeps at a respectable distance and, in hysterical irritation, cries: noli me tangere!b

After these scientific objections to French communism, we come to several historical arguments, which brilliantly demonstrate the "free moral activity" and the "scientific investigation" of our true socialist and his independence of crude matter.

On page 170 he arrives at the "result" that the only communism which "exists" is "crude French communism" (crude once again).

[^1]: With gaping jaws the German cries: Too crude love must not be Or you'll get an infirmity.3

[^2]: Modified quotation from Heine's poem "Sie sassen und tranken am Teetisch" in Lyrisches Intermezzo. The first line of Heine's poem reads: With gaping jaws the canon cries.—Ed.

[^3]: b Touch me not! (John 20:17).—Ed.



"There is no other communism, for what Weitling has produced is only an elaboration of Fourierist and communist ideas with which he became acquainted in Paris and Geneva."

"There is no" English communism, "for what Weitling", etc. Thomas More, the Levellers,124 Owen, Thompson, Watts, Holyoake, Harney, Morgan, Southwell, Goodwyn Barmby, Greaves, Edmonds, Hobson, Spence will be amazed, or turn in their graves, when they hear that they are no communists "for" Weitling went to Paris and Geneva.

Moreover, Weitling's communism does seem to be different in kind from the "crude French" variety, in vulgar parlance, from Babouvism, since it contains some of "Fourier's ideas" as well.

"The communists were particularly good at drawing up systems or even complete social orders (Cabet's Icarie, La Félicité,3 Weitling). All systems are, however, dogmatic and dictatorial" (p. 170).

By this verdict on systems in general true socialism has, of course, saved itself the trouble of acquainting itself at first hand with the communist systems. With one blow it has overthrown not only Icarie but also every philosophical system from Aristotle to Hegel, the Systeme de la naturel the botanical systems of Linné and Jussieu and even the solar system. Incidentally, as to the systems themselves they nearly all appeared in the early days of the communist movement and had at that time propaganda value as popular novels, which corresponded perfectly to the still undeveloped consciousness of the proletarians, who were then just beginning to play an active part. Cabet himself calls his Icarie a "roman philosophique" and he should on no account be judged by his system but rather by his polemical writings, in fact his whole activity as a party leader. In some of these novels, e.g., Fourier's system, there is a vein of true poetry; others, like the systems of Owen and Cabet, show not a shred of imagination and are written in a business-like calculating way or else with an eye to the views of the class to be influenced, in sly lawyer fashion. As the party develops, these systems lose all importance and are at best retained purely nominally as catchwords. Who in France believes in Icarie, who in England believes in the plans of Owen,

[^1]: Etienne Cabet, Voyage en Icarie; François de Chastellux, De la Félicité publique.—Ed.

[^2]: The author of this work is Paul Henri Holbach.—Ed.





**[p. 462]**

Démocratie pacifique show most clearly how little the real content of these systems lies in their systematic form; they are, for all their orthodoxy, doctrinaire bourgeois, the very antipodes of Fourier. All epoch-making systems have as their real content the needs of the time in which they arose. Each one of them is based on the whole of the antecedent development of a nation, on the historical growth of its class relations with their political, moral, philosophical and other consequences. The assertion that all systems are dogmatic and dictatorial gets us nowhere with regard to this basis and this content of the communist systems. Unlike the English and the French, the Germans did not encounter fully developed class relations. The German communists could, therefore, only base their system on the relations of the class from which they sprang. It is, therefore, perfectly natural that the only existing German communist system should be a reproduction of French ideas in terms of a mental outlook which was limited by the petty circumstances of the artisan.

"The madness of Cabet, who insists that everybody should subscribe to his Populaire", p. 168, is proof of the tyranny that persists within communism. If our friend first distorts the claims which a party leader makes on his party, impelled by particular cir- cumstances and the danger of failing to concentrate limited financial means, and then evaluates them in terms of the "essence of man", he is indeed bound to conclude that this party leader and all other party members are "mad" whereas purely disinterested figures, like himself and the "essence of man", are of sound intellect. But let him find out the true state of affairs from Cabet's Ma ligne droite.

The whole antithesis of our author, and of German true socialists and ideologists in general, to the real movements of other nations is finally epitomised in one classic sentence. The Germans judge everything sub specie aeterno (in terms of the essence of Man), foreigners view everything practically, in terms of actually existing men and circumstances. The thoughts and actions of the foreigner are concerned with temporariness, the thoughts and actions of the German with eternity. Our true socialist confesses this as follows:

[^1]: "The very name of communism, the contrary of competition, reveals its one-sidedness; but is this bias, which may very well have value now as a party name, to last for ever?"

[^2]: From the standpoint of eternity (cf. Benedict Spinoza, Ethica. Pars quinta).—Ed.



"Socialism establishes that anarchic system which is an essential characteristic of the human race and the universe" (p. 170) and for that very reason has hitherto never existed for "the human race".

Free competition is too "crude" to be regarded by our true socialist as an "anarchic system".

"Relying entirely on the moral core of mankind, socialism" decrees that "the union of the sexes is and should be merely the highest intensification of love; for only what is natural is true and what is true is moral" (p. 171).

The reason why "the union, etc., etc. is and should be," can be applied to everything. For example, "socialism, relying entirely on the moral core" of the apes, might just as well decree that the masturbation which occurs naturally among them "is, and should be, merely the highest intensification of" self-"love; for only what is natural is true and what is true is moral".

It would be hard to say by what standard socialism judges what is "natural".

"Activity and enjoyment coincide in the peculiar nature of man; they are determined by this and not by the products external to us."

"But since these products are indispensable for activity, that is to say, for true life, and since by reason of the common activity of mankind as a whole they have, so to speak, detached themselves from mankind, they are or should be the common substratum of further development for all (community of goods)."

The "results" reached above by our "Mongol" concerning "our Negroism" are the most perfect achievements which true socialism has, "so to speak, detached from itself, as a product indispensable for true life"; our Mongol, by reason of "the peculiar nature of man", believes that "mankind as a whole" is bound to "fall upon" them with "beastly voracity".

The four concepts—"rentiers", "proletarians", "mechanical" and "community of goods"—are for our Mongol at any rate "products external to him"; as far as they are concerned, his "activity" and his "enjoyment" consist in representing them simply as anticipated terms for the results of his own "mechanical labour".

Society, we learn, has relapsed into savagery and consequently the

[^1]: "Our present-day society has indeed relapsed into savagery to such an extent that some individuals fall upon the products of another's labour with beastly voracity and at the same time they indolently allow their own essence to decay (rentiers); as a necessary consequence, others are driven to mechanical labour; their property (their own human essence) has been stunted, not by idleness, but by exhausting exertion (proletarians) The two extremes of our society, rentiers and proletarians, are, however, at the same stage of development. Both are dependent upon things external to them" or are "Negroes", as Saint Max would say (pp. 169, 170).





**[p. 464]**

The two expressions, "stunted growth of their own human essence as a result of exhausting exertion" and "being driven to mechanical labour", are the second "necessary consequence" of the first result of the relapse into savagery. These two expressions are a "necessary consequence of the fact that the rentiers allow their own essence to decay", and are known in vulgar parlance, we learn, once more to our horror, as "proletarians".

The sentence, therefore, contains the following sequence of cause and effect: It is a fact that proletarians exist and that they work mechanically. Why are proletarians driven to "mechanical labour"? Because the rentiers "allow their own essence to decay". Why is it that the rentiers allow their own essence to decay? Because "our present-day society has relapsed into savagery to such an extent". Why has it relapsed into savagery? Ask thy Maker.

It is characteristic of our true socialist that he sees "the extremes of our society" in the opposition of rentiers and proletarians. This opposition has pretty well been present at all fairly advanced stages of society and has been belaboured by all moralists since time immemorial; it was resurrected right at the beginning of the proletarian movement, at a time when the proletariat still had interests in common with the industrial and petty bourgeoisie. Compare, for example, the writings of Cobbett and P. L. Courier or Saint-Simon, who originally numbered the industrial capitalists among the travailleurs3 as opposed to the oisifsh, the rentiers. Stating this trivial antithesis, which moreover it expresses, not in ordinary language, but in the sacred language of philosophy, presenting this childish discovery in abstract, sanctified and quite inappropriate terms—this is what here, as in all other cases, the thoroughness of that German science which has been perfected by

[^1]: Workers.—Ed. Idlers.—Ed.



Although he detests "dependence upon things external to him", our true socialist nevertheless admits that he is dependent upon them, "since products", i.e., these very things, "are indispensable for activity" and for "true life". He makes this shamefaced admission so that he can clear the road for a philosophical construction of the community of goods—a construction that lapses into pure nonsense so that we need merely draw the reader's attention to it.

We now come to the first of the passages quoted above. Here again, "independence from things" is claimed in respect of activity and enjoyment. Activity and enjoyment "are determined" by "the peculiar nature of man". Instead of tracing this peculiar nature in the activity and enjoyment of the men who surround him—in which case he would very soon have found how far the products external to us have a voice in the matter, too—he makes activity and enjoyment "coincide in the peculiar nature of man". Instead of visualising the peculiar nature of men in their activity and their manner of enjoyment, which is conditioned by their activity, he explains both by invoking "the peculiar nature of man", which cuts short any further discussion. He abandons the real behaviour of the individual and again takes refuge in his indescribable, inaccessible, peculiar nature. We see here, moreover, what the true socialists understand by "free activity". Our author imprudently reveals to us that free activity is activity which "is not determined by things external to us", i.e., actus purus, pure, absolute activity, which is nothing but activity and is in the last instance tantamount to the illusion of "pure thought". It naturally sullies the purity of this activity if it has a material basis and a material result; the true socialist deals only reluctantly with impure activity of this kind; he despises its product, which he terms "a mere refuse of man", and not "a result" (p. 169). The subject from whom this pure activity proceeds cannot, therefore, be a real sentient human being; it can only be the thinking mind. This "free activity", thus*translated into German, is nothing but the foregoing "uncondi- tional, unqualified freedom" expressed in a different way. Inciden- tally, that this talk of "free activity", which merely serves the true



**[p. 466]**

"This separation of the two principal parties of this age" (namely, French crude communism and German socialism) "is a result of the developments of the last two years, which started more particularly with Hess' Philosophie der That, in Herwegh's Einundzwanzig Bogen. Consequently it was high time to throw a little more light on the shibboleths of the social parties" (p. 173).

Here we have, on the one hand, the actually existing communist party in France with its literature and, on the other, a few German pseudo-scholars who are trying to comprehend the ideas of this literature philosophically. The latter are treated just as much as the former as a "principal party of this age", as a party, that is to say, of infinite importance not only to its immediate antithesis, the French communists, but also to the English Chartists and communists, the American national reformers 125 and indeed to every other party "of this age". It is unfortunate that none of these know of the existence of this "principal party". But it has for a considerable time been the fashion among German ideologists for each literary faction, particularly the one that thinks itself "most advanced", to proclaim itself not merely "one of the principal parties", but actually "the principal party of this age". We have among others, "the principal party" of critical criticism, the "principal party" of egoism in agreement with itself and now the "principal party" of the true socialists. In this fashion Germany can boast a whole horde of "principal parties", whose existence is known only in Germany and even there only among the small set of scholars, pseudo-scholars and literati. They all imagine that they are weaving the web of world history when, as a matter of fact, they are merely spinning the long yarn of their own imaginings.

This "principal party" of the true socialists is "a result of the developments of the last two years, which started more particularly with Hess' Philosophie". It is "a result", that is to say, of the developments "of the last two years" when our author first got entangled in socialism and found it was "high time" to enlighten himself "a little more", by means of a few "shibboleths", on what he considers to be "social parties".

Having thus dismissed communism and socialism, our author introduces us to the higher unity of the two, to humanism. Now we are entering the domain of "Man" and the entire true history of our true socialist will be enacted in Germany alone.

[^1]: "All quibbles about names are resolved in humanism; wherefore communists, wherefore socialists? We are human beings" (p. 172)—tous frères, tous amis.



Wherefore human beings, wherefore beasts, wherefore plants, wherefore stones? We are bodies!

There follows an historical discourse which is based upon German science and which "will one day help to replace the social instinct" of the French. Antiquity—naïveté, the Middle Ages—Romanticism, the Modern Age—Humanism. By means of these three trivialities, the writer has, of course, constructed his humanism historically and showed it to be the truth of the old Humaniora.126 Compare "Saint Max" in the first volume for constructions of this kind; he manufactures such wares in a much more artistic and less amateurish way.

On page 172 we are informed that

"the final result of scholasticism is that cleavage of life which was abolished by Hess".

Here then, the cause of the "cleavage of life" is shown to be theory. It is difficult to see why these true socialists mention society at all if they believe with the philosophers that all real cleavages are caused by conceptual cleavages. On the basis of this philosophical belief in the power of concepts to make or destroy the world, they can likewise imagine that some individual "abolished the cleavage of life" by "abolishing" concepts in some way or other. Like all German ideologists, the true socialists continually mix up literary history and real history as equipotential. This habit is, of course, very understandable among the Germans, who conceal the abject part -they have played and continue to play in real history by equating the illusions, in which they are so rich, with reality.

And now to the "last two years", during which German science has so thoroughly disposed of all problems that nothing remains to the other nations but to carry out its decrees.

[^1]: "Feuerbach only partially completed, or rather only began, the task of anthropology, the regaining by man of his estranged essence" (the essence of man or the essence of Feuerbach?); "he destroyed the religious illusion, the theoretical abstraction, the God-Man, whereas Hess annihilates the political illusion, the abstraction of his ability [Vermögen ], of his activity" (does this refer to Hess or to man?), "that is, he annihilates wealth. It was the work of Hess which freed man from the last of the forces external to him, and made him capable of moral activity—for all the unselfishness of earlier times" (before Hess) "was only an illusory unselfishness—and

[^2]: a From Heine's poem "Verkehrte Welt" in his verse cycle Zeitgedichte. —Ed.

[^3]: Vermögen can mean ability, faculty, power, or fortune, wealth, property.— Ed.



It is characteristic of all these high-sounding phrases about liberation, etc., that it is always "man" who is liberated. Although it would appear from the pronouncements made above that "wealth", "money", and so on, have ceased to exist, we nevertheless learn in the following sentence:

"Now that these illusions" (money, viewed sub specie aeterni, is, indeed, an illusion, l'or n'est qu'une chimère ) "have been destroyed, we can think about a new, human order of society" (ibid.).

But this is quite superfluous since

"the recognition of the essence of man has as a necessary and natural result a life which is truly human" (p. 172).

To arrive at communism or socialism by way of metaphysics or politics, etc., etc.—these phrases beloved of true socialists merely indicate that such and such a writer has adopted communist ideas (which have reached him from without and have arisen in circumstances quite different from his) translating them into the mode of expression corresponding to his former standpoint, and formulating them in accordance with this standpoint. Which of these points of view is predominant in a nation, whether its communist outlook has a political or metaphysical or any other tinge depends, of course, upon the whole development of the nation. The fact that the attitude of most French communists has a political complexion—this is, on the other hand, countered by the fact that very many French socialists have abstracted completely from politics—causes our author to infer that the French "have arrived at communism by way of politics", by way of their political development. This proposition, which has a very wide circulation in Germany, does not imply that the writer has any knowledge either of politics, particularly of French political developments, or of communism; it only shows that he considers politics to be an independent sphere of activity, which develops in its own independent way, a belief he shares with all ideologists.

Another catchword of the true socialists is "true property", "true, personal property", "real", "social", "living", "natural", etc., etc., property, whereas it is very typical that they refer to private property as "so-called property". The Saint-Simonists were the first to adopt

[^1]: Gold is but a chimera. From Giacomo Meyerbeer's opera Robert le Diable (libretto Eugène Scribe and Germain Delavigne), Act I, Scene 7.—Ed.





**[p. 469]**

If one takes the antithesis of communism to the world of private property in its crudest form, i.e., in the most abstract form in which the real conditions of that antithesis are ignored, then one is faced with the antithesis of property and lack of property. The abolition of this antithesis can be viewed as the abolition of either the one side or the other; either property is abolished, in which case universal lack of property or destitution results, or else the lack of property is abol- ished, which means the establishment of true property. In reality, the actual property-owners stand on one side and the propertyless communist proletarians on the other. This opposition becomes keener day by day and is rapidly driving to a crisis. If, then, the theo- retical representatives of the proletariat wish their literary activity to have any practical effect, they must first and foremost insist that all phrases are dropped which tend to dim the realisation of the sharpness of this opposition, all phrases which tend to conceal this opposition and may even give the bourgeois a chance to approach the communists for safety's sake on the strength of their philan- thropic enthusiasms. All these bad qualities are, however, to be found in the catchwords of the true socialists and particularly in "true property". Of course, we realise that the communist move- ment cannot be impaired by a few German phrase-mongers. But in a country like Germany—where philosophic phrases have for cen- turies exerted a certain power, and where, moreover, communist consciousness is anyhow less keen and determined because class contradictions do not exist in as acute a form as in other nations—it is, nevertheless, necessary to resist all phrases which obscure and dilute still further the realisation that communism is totally opposed to the existing world order.

This theory of true property conceives real private property, as it has hitherto existed, merely as a semblance, whereas it views the concept abstracted from this real property as the truth and reality of the semblance; it is therefore ideological all through. All it does is to give clearer and more precise expression to the ideas of the petty

[^1]: a See this volume, pp. 231-32.—Ed.



