---
Volume: 5
Document_Title: "1. Lettres d'un habitant de Genève à ses Contemporains "
Page_Range: "521-523"
---

# 1. Lettres d'un habitant de Genève à ses Contemporains 

We shall now pass to Griin's exposition of the doctrine of Saint-Simon.

a 1H3 1. LETTRES DUN HABITANT DE GENEVE A SES CONTEMPORAINS

Herr Grün did not gather clearly from Stein the connection between the plan for supporting the men of learning, outlined in the work quoted above, and the fantastic appendix to the brochure. He speaks of this work as if it treated mainly of a new organisation of society, and ends as follows:

"The spiritual power in the hands of the men of learning, the temporal power in the hands of the property-owners, the franchise for all" (p. 85, cf. Stein, p. 151, Reybaud, p. 83).

The sentence: "le pouvoir de nommer les individus appelés à remplir les fonctions des chefs de l'humanité entre les mains de tout le monde",b which Reybaud quotes from Saint-Simon (p. 47) and which Stein translates in the clumsiest fashion, is reduced by Herr Grün to "the franchise for all", which robs it of all meaning. Saint-Simon is referring to the election of the Newton Council,134

Herr Grün is referring to elections in general.

Long after dismissing the Lettres in four or five sentences copied from Stein and Reybaud, and having already spoken of the Nouveau christianisme, Herr Grün suddenly returns to the Lettres.

Herr Grün forgets that so far he has only mentioned the "franchise for all" and has not mentioned "everyone". But since he finds "tout le monde" in Stein and Reybaud, he puts "everyone" in inverted commas. He forgets, moreover, that he has not quoted the following passage from Stein's book, that is the passage which would justify the "for" in his own sentence:

[^1]: "But it is certainly not to be achieved by abstract learning." (Still less by concrete ignorance, as we observe.) "For from the standpoint of abstract science, there was still a cleavage between the 'property-owners' and 'everyone'" (p. 87).

[^2]: "He" (Saint-Simon) "makes a distinction, apart from the sages or the men of learning, between the propriétaires and tout le monde. It is true that as yet there is no

[^3]: a Letters of an Inhabitant of Geneva to his Contemporaries.—Ed.

[^4]: "The power of nominating the persons who are to act as leaders of humanity should be in the hands of everyone."—Ed.



clearly marked boundary between these two groups but nevertheless, there lies in that indefinite idea of 'tout le monde' the germ of that class towards the understanding and uplifting of which his theory was later directed, i.e. the classe la plies nombreuse et la

plus pauvre, and in reality, too, this section of the people was at that time only potentially present" (p. 154).

Stein stresses the fact that Saint-Simon already makes a distinction between propriétaires and tout le monde, but as yet a very vague one. Herr Grün twists this so that it gives the impression that Saint-Simon still makes this distinction. This is naturally a great mistake on the part of Saint-Simon and is only to be explained by the fact that his standpoint in the Lettres is that of abstract science. But unfortunately, in the passage in question, Saint-Simon speaks by no means about differences in a future order of society, as Herr Grün thinks. He appeals for subscriptions to mankind as a whole, which, as he finds it, appears to him to be divided into three classes; not, as Stein believes, into savants, propriétaires and tout le monde; but 1) savants and artistes and all people of liberal ideas; 2) the opponents of innovation, i.e., the propriétaires, insofar as they do not join the first class; 3) the surplus de l'humanité qui se rallie au mot: Egalité.13 These three classes

form tout le monde. Cf. Saint-Simon, Lettres, pp. 21, 22. Since moreover Saint-Simon says later that he considers his distribution of power advantageous to all classes, we may take it that in the place where he speaks of this distribution, p. 47, tout le monde obviously corresponds to the surplus which rallies around the slogan "equality", without, however, excluding the other classes/ Stein is roughly correct, although he pays no attention to the passage on pages 21 and 22. Herr Grün, who knows nothing of the original, clutches at Stein's slight error and succeeds in making sheer nonsense of his argument.

We soon come across an even more striking example. We learn unexpectedly on page 94, where Herr Grün is no longer speaking of Saint-Simon but of his school:

Of course, if in some work or other Saint-Simon had spoken of admitting and nominating women to some unknown position, these would indeed be "mysterious words". But the mystery exists only in the mind of Herr Grün. "One of Saint-Simon's books" is none other than the Lettres d'un habitant de Genève. In this work, after stating that

[^1]: "In one of his books, Saint-Simon utters the mysterious words: 'Women will be admitted, they may even be nominated.' From this almost barren seed, the whole gigantic uproar of the emancipation of women has sprung up."

[^2]: The most numerous and poorest class.—Ed.

[^3]: Rest of humanity which rallies around the slogan: Equality.—Ed. This sentence is omitted in the Westphälische Dampfboot.—Ed.



