---
Volume: 5
Document_Title: "2. Catéchisme politique des Industriels "
Page_Range: "523-526"
---

# 2. Catéchisme politique des Industriels 



**[p. 500]**

Here, etc., "are to be found the germs of his later opinions and even those of his school; and even the first idea of the emancipation of women" (p. 152).

I n a note Stein points out quite rightly that for polemical reasons Olinde Rodrigues printed this passage in large type in his 1832 edition, since it was the only reference to the emancipation of women in Saint-Simon's work. To hide his plagiarism, Grün shifts the passage from the book to which it belongs to his discussion of the school, makes the above nonsense of it, changes Stein's "germ" into a "seed" and childishly imagines that this passage is the origin of the doctrine of the emancipation of women.

Herr Grün ventures an opinion on the contradiction which, he believes, exists between the Lettres and the Catéchisme des industriels; it consists in the fact that in the Catéchisme the rights of the travailleurs

are asserted. He was bound to discover this difference, of course, because he derived his knowledge of the Lettres from Stein and Reybaud, and his knowledge of the Catéchisme similarly. Had he read Saint-Simon himself, he would have found in the Lettres not this contradiction, but a "seed" of the point of view developed among others in the Catéchisme. For example:

As Stein usually quotes this work as the Catéchisme des industriels, Herr Grün knows of no other title. But since he only devotes ten lines to this work when he comes to speak of it ex officio, one might have at least expected him to give its correct title.

[^1]: "Tous les hommes travailleront" (Lettres, p. 60). "Si sa cervelle" (the rich man's) "ne sera pas propre au travail, il sera bien obligé de faire travailler ses bras; car Newton ne laissera sûrement pas sur cette planète des ouvriers volontairement inutiles dans l'atelier"c (p. 64).

[^2]: 2. CATÉCHISME POLITIQUE DES INDUSTRIELS**

[^3]: "Women will be allowed to subscribe, it will be possible to nominate them."—Ed.

[^4]: "All men will work."—Ed. "If his brain" "is not fitted for labour, he will be compelled to work with his hands; for Newton will assuredly not permit on this planet workers who, intentionally, remain idle in the workshops."—Ed.

[^5]: Political Catechism of the Industrialists.—Ed.



Having copied from Stein the fact that in this work Saint-Simon wants labour to govern, he continues:

"He now divides the world into idlers and industrialists" (p. 85).

Herr Grün is wrong here. He attributes to the Catéchisme a distinction which he finds set out in Stein much later, in connection with the school of Saint-Simon.

Stein, page 206:

"Society consists at present only of idlers and workers" (Enfantin).

Instead of this alleged division, there is in the Catéchisme a division into three classes, the classes féodale, intermédiaire et industrielle; naturally, Herr Grün could not enlarge upon this without recourse to Stein, since he was not familiar with the Catéchisme itself.

Herr Grün then repeats once more that the content of the Catéchisme is the rule of labour and concludes his account of the work as follows:

"Just as republicanism proclaims: Everything for the people, everything through the people, Saint-Simon proclaims: Everything for industry, everything through industry" (ibid.).

Stein, page 165:

"Since industry is the source of everything, everything must serve industry."

Stein rightly states (page 160, note) that Saint-Simon's work L'industrie, printed as early as 1817, bears the motto: Tout par l'industrie, tout pour elle.a In his account of the Catéchisme, Herr Grün, therefore, not only commits the error mentioned above but also misquotes the motto of a much earlier work of which he has no knowledge whatever.

German thoroughness has in this way given an adequate criticism of the Catéchisme politique des industriels. We find however scattered throughout Grün's omnium gatherum isolated glosses which belong properly to this section. Chuckling over his own slyness, Herr Grün distributes the material which he finds in Stein's account of the work and elaborates it with commendable courage.

Herr Grün, page 87:

[^1]: "Free competition was an impure and confused concept, a concept which con- tained in itself a new world of conflict and misery, the struggle between capital and labour and the misery of the worker who has no.capital. Saint-Simon purified the concept of industry; he reduced it to the concept of the workers, he formulated the rights and grievances of the fourth estate, of the proletariat. He was forced to abolish the right of inheritance, since it had become an injustice towards the worker, towards the industrialist. This is the significance of his Catéchisme des industriels."

[^2]: 3 Everything through industry, everything for industry.—Ed.





**[p. 502]**

"It is, therefore, the true significance of Saint-Simon that he foresaw the inevitability of this contradiction" (between bourgeoisie and peuple).

This is the source of Herr Grün's idea of the "significance" of the Catéchisme.

Stein:

"He" (Saint-Simon in the Catéchisme) "begins with the concept of the industrial worker."

Herr Grün turns this into complete nonsense by asserting that Saint-Simon, who found free competition as an "impure concept", "purified the concept of industry and reduced it to the concept of the workers". Herr Grün shows everywhere that his concept of free competition and industry is a very "impure" and a very "confused" one indeed.

Not satisfied with this nonsense, Herr Grün risks a direct falsehood and states that Saint-Simon demanded the abolition of the right of inheritance.

On page 88 he tells us, still relying on his interpretation of Stein's version of the Catéchisme:

Despite his rhetorical maxim about one-sidedness, Herr Grün himself commits the one-sided error of understanding Stein to say that Saint-Simon wished to "raise" the real workers, the proletarians, "to a position of supreme power". Cf. page 102, where he says of Michel Chevalier:

Saint-Simon numbers among the industrialists not only the workers, but also the fabricants, the négociants, in short, all industrial capitalists; indeed, he addresses himself primarily to them. Herr Grün could have found this on the very first page of the

Catéchisme. But this shows how, without ever having seen the work, he concocts from hearsay fine phrases about it.

Discussing the Catéchisme, Stein says:

[^1]: "Saint-Simon established the rights of the proletariat. He already formulated the new watchword: the industrialists, the workers, shall be raised to a position of supreme power. This was one-sided, but every struggle involves one-sidedness; he who is not one-sided cannot wage a struggle."

[^2]: "M. Chevalier still refers with great sympathy to the industrialists But to the disciple, the industrialists are no longer, as they were for his master, the proletarians; he includes capitalists, entrepreneurs and workers in one concept, that is to say, he includes the idlers in a category which should only embrace the poorest and most numerous class."



