---
Volume: 5
Document_Title: "3. Nouveau christianisme "
Page_Range: "526-527"
---

# 3. Nouveau christianisme 

Stein himself is extremely vague when he speaks of a "political factor" in "the science of industry". But he shows that he is on the right track by adding that the history of the state is intimately connected with the history of national economy.

Let us see how Herr Grün later, in his discussion of the school of Saint-Simon, appropriates this fragment of Stein:

"Saint-Simon had attempted a history of industry in his Catéchisme des industriels stressing the political element in it. The master himself paved the way, therefore, for political economy" (p. 99).

Herr Grün "therefore" transforms the "political factor" of Stein into a "political element" and turns it into a meaningless phrase by omitting the details given by Stein. This "stone which the builders have rejected"3 has indeed become for Herr Grün the "cornerstone" of his Briefe und Studien.b But it has also become for him a stumbling-block.0 But that is not all. Whereas Stein says that Saint-Simon paved the way for a history of political economy by stressing the political factor in the science of industry, Herr Grün makes him the pioneer of political economy itself. Herr Grün argues something after this fashion: Economics existed already before Saint-Simon; but, as Stein relates, Saint-Simon stressed the political factor in industry, therefore he made economics political—political economics = political economy—hence Saint-Simon paved the way for political economy. In his conjectures Herr Grün undoubtedly displays a very genial spirit.

Just as he makes Saint-Simon the pioneer of political economy, he makes him the pioneer of scientific socialism:

With his customary brilliance, Herr Grün continues to give us extracts of extracts by Stein and Reybaud, to which he adds literary

[^1]: "It" (Saint-Simonism) "contains scientific socialism, for Saint-Simon spent his whole life searching for the new science"! (p. 82).

[^2]: 3. NOUVEAU CHRISTIANISME0

[^3]: a Cf. 1 Peter 2 : 7.—Ed.

[^4]: Letters and Studies is the sub-title of Griin's book, Die soziale Bewegung in Frankreich und Belgien.—Ed.

[^5]: A pun on the words Stein, which in German means stone, Eckstein—cornerstone, and Stein des Anstosses—stumbling-block.—Ed.

[^6]: New Christianity.—Ed.

[^7]: 18—2086



