---
Volume: 5
Document_Title: "4. The School of Saint- Simon "
Page_Range: "527-533"
---

# 4. The School of Saint- Simon 



**[p. 504]**

"For Saint-Simon it was a question of establishing a unified view of life, such as is suitable to organic periods of history, which he expressly opposes to the critical periods. According to him, we have been living since Luther in a critical period; he thought to initiate a new organic period. Hence the New Christianity" (p. 88).

At no time and in no place did Saint-Simon oppose organic to critical periods of history. This is a downright falsehood on the part of Herr Grün. Bazard was the first to make this distinction.' Herr Grün discovered from Stein and Reybaud that in Nouveau christianisme Saint-Simon commends the criticism of Luther, but finds his positive, dogmatic doctrine faulty. Herr Grün lumps that with what he remembers was said in the same sources about the school of Saint-Simon, and out of this he fabricates the above assertion.

After some florid comments on Saint-Simon's life and works produced by Herr Grün in the manner described earlier and based exclusively on Stein and the latter's primer, Reybaud, Herr Grün concludes by exclaiming:

"And those moral philistines, Herr Reybaud and the whole band of German parrots, thought that they had to defend Saint-Simon, by pronouncing with their usual wisdom that such a man, such a life, must not be measured by ordinary standards!—Tell me, are your standards made of wood? Tell the truth! We shall be quite pleased if they are made of good solid oak. Hand them over! We shall gratefully accept them as a precious gift. We shall not burn them, God forbid! We shall use them to measure the backs of the philistines" (p. 89).

It is. by affected bluster of this kind that Herr Grün attempts to prove his superiority over the men whom he has copied.

Since Herr Grün has read just as much of the school of Saint-Simon as he read of Saint-Simon himself, that is nothing whatsoever, he should at least have made a proper summary of Stein and Reybaud, he should have observed the chronological order, he should have given a connected account of the course of the events and he should have mentioned the essential points. He does the contrary. Led astray by his bad conscience, he mixes everything up as far as possible, omits the most essential matters and produces a confusion even greater than that which we saw in his exposition of Saint-Simon. We must be still more concise here, for it would take a volume as thick as Herr Grün's to record every plagiarism and every blunder.

[^1]: 4. THE SCHOOL OF SAINT-SIMON

[^2]: See Doctrine de Saint-Simon. Exposition. Premiere année.—Ed.



Herr Grün opens his discourse on the Saint-Simonists with these words:

"To each according to his capacity, to each capacity according to its works: that is the practical dogma of the Saint-Simonists."

Like Reybaud (p. 96), Herr Grün presents this sentence as a transition from Saint-Simon to the Saint-Simonists and continues:

"It derives directly from the last words of Saint-Simon: all men must be assured the freest development of their faculties."

In this case Herr Grün wished to be different from Reybaud, who links the "practical dogma" with the Nouveau christianisme. Herr Grün believes this to be an invention of Reybaud's and unceremoni- ously substitutes the last words of Saint-Simon for the Nouveau christianisme. He did not realise that Reybaud was only giving a literal extract from the Doctrine de Saint-Simon. Exposition. Première année, p. 70.

Herr Grün cannot understand why Reybaud, after giving several extracts concerning the religious hierarchy of Saint-Simonism, should suddenly introduce the "practical dogma". Herr Grün imagines that the hierarchy follows directly from this proposition. But in fact, the proposition can refer to a new hierarchy only when taken in conjunction with the religious ideas of the Nouveau christianisme, whereas apart from these ideas, it can demand at most a purely secular classification of society. He observes on page 91:

For in the above-mentioned extract from the Exposition quoted by Reybaud Herr Grün finds the following:

[^1]: "To each according to his capacity means to make the Catholic hierarchy the law of the social order. To each capacity according to its works means moreover to turn the workshop into a sacristy and the whole of civil life into a priestly preserve."

[^2]: "L'église vraiment universelle va paraître l'église universelle gouverne le temporel comme le spirituel la science est sainte, l'industrie est sainte et tout bien est bien d'église et toute profession est une fonction religieuse, un grade dans la hiérarchie sociale.—À chacun selon sa capacité, à chaque capacité selon ses œuvres."

[^3]: a 1830.—Ed. b "The truly universal Churcn shall appear the universal Church shall govern temporal as well as spiritual matters science shall be sacred, industry shall be sacred and all property shall be the property of the Church, every profession a religious function, a step in the social hierarchy.—To each according to his capacity, to each capacity according to its works."—Ed.

[^4]: 18*





**[p. 506]**

Grün's interpretation of Saint-Simonism assumes "so confused and tangled a form" that on page 90 he first derives a "spiritual proletariat" from the "practical dogma", then from the spiritual proletariat he produces a "hierarchy of minds". Finally, out of the hierarchy of minds he produces the apex of the hierarchy. Had he read even only the Exposition, he would have seen that the religious approach of the Nouveau christianisme, together with the problem of how to determine capacité, necessitates the hierarchy and its apex.

Herr Grün concludes his discussion and criticism of the Exposition of 1828-29 with the single sentence: "À chacun selon sa capacité, à chaque capacité selon ses œuvres." Apart from this he hardly even mentions the Producteur and the Organisateur. He glances at Reybaud and finds in the section "Third Epoch of Saint-Simonism", p. 126 (Stein, p. 205):

"et les jours suivants le Globe parut avec le sous-titre de Journal de la doctrine de Saint-Simon, laquelle était résumée ainsi sur la première page:

Religion Science Industrie

Herr Grün passes from the above to the year 1831, without a break, and improves upon Reybaud in the following terms (p. 91):

Herr Grün leaves out three sentences which are also to be found on the title-page of the Globe and which all relate to practical social reforms.135 They are given by both Stein and Reybaud. This enables him to change what is, so to speak, the mere window-dressing of a journal into an "outline" of the system. He conceals the fact that it appeared on the title-page of the Globe and so can criticise the whole of Saint-Simonism, as contained in the mutilated title of this

[^1]: Association universelle."*

[^2]: "The Saint-Simonists put forward the following outline of their system; the formulation was largely the work of Bazard:

[^3]: Religion

[^4]: Science Industry Universal Association."

[^5]: a " and during the following days the Globe appeared with the subtitle: Journal of the Saint-Simonian Doctrine, which was summarised as follows on the first page:

[^6]: Religion Science Industry Universal Association."—Ed.



It is difficult to say from where Herr Grün has obtained the new but important piece of information that the "formulation of the outline", four words in length, "was largely the work of Bazard".

Herr Grün now jumps from January 1831 back to October 1830:

"Shortly after the July Revolution, during the Bazard period" (where does this period come from?), "the Saint-Simonists addressed a short but comprehensive statement of their beliefs to the Chamber of Deputies, after Messrs. Dupin and Mauguin had accused them from the tribune of preaching community of goods and wives."

The Address follows, with the comment by Herr Grün:

"How reasonable and measured it all is still! The Address presented to the Chamber was edited by Bazard" (pp. 92-94).

To begin with the concluding remark, Stein says, p. 205:

"Judging from its form and its attitude, we should not hesitate to ascribe it" (the document), "as does Reybaud, to Bazard more than to Enfantin."

And Reybaud says, p. 123:

With characteristic ingenuity and audacity, Herr Grün turns Reybaud's conjecture that Bazard rather than Enfantin was behind the Address into the certainty that he edited it in its entirety. The passage introducing the Address is translated from Reybaud, p. 122:

Herr Grün merely leaves out the date given by Reybaud and writes instead: "shortly after the July Revolution". Altogether, chronology does not suit Herr Grün's method of emancipating himself from those who have trodden the ground before him. In contradistinction to Stein he inserts in the text what Stein relegates to a note, he omits the introduction to the Address, he translates fonds de production (productive capital) as ''basic capital" and classement social des individus (social classification of individuals) as "social order of individuals".

[^1]: "Aux formes, aux prétentions assez modérées de cet écrit il est facile de voir qu'il provenait plutôt de l'impulsion de M. Bazard que de celle de son collègue."a

[^2]: "MM. Dupin et Mauguin signalèrent du haut de la tribune une secte qui prêchait la communauté des biens et la communauté des femmes."

[^3]: a "From the form and the very moderate demands of this document, one can clearly see that it owes more to the initiative of M. Bazard than to that of his colleague."—Ed.

[^4]: "Messrs. Dupin and Mauguin drew attention from the tribune to a sect which was preaching community of goods and community of wives."—Ed.



The reader now has before him all that Herr Grün has to say of the Bazard period of Saint-Simonism, i.e., the period from the death of Saint-Simon to the first schism.136 Grün is now in a position to play an elegantly critical trump, and call Bazard a "poor dialectician". Then he continues:

"But so are the republicans. They only know how to die, Cato as much as Bazard; if they do not stab themselves to death, they die of a broken heart" (p. 95).

"A few months after this quarrel, his" (Bazard's) "heart was broken" (Stein, p. 210).

Such republicans as Levasseur, Carnot, Barere, Billaud-Varennes, Buonarroti, Teste, d'Argenson, etc., etc., show how correct Herr Grün's assertion is.

We are now offered a few commonplaces about Enfantin. Attention need only be drawn to the following discovery made by Herr Grün:

"Does this historical phenomenon not make it finally clear that religion is nothing but sensualism, that materialism can boldly claim the same origin as the sacred dogma itself?" (p. 97).

Herr Grün looks complacently about him: "Has anyone else ever thought of that}" He would never have "thought of that" if the Hallische Jahrbücher had not already "thought of it" in connection with the Romantics.3 One would have expected Herr Grün to have made some little intellectual progress since then.

We have seen that Herr Grün knows nothing of the whole economic criticism of the Saint-Simonists. Nevertheless, he manages to say something, with the help of Enfantin, about the economic consequences of Saint-Simon's theory, to which he has already made some airy references earlier. He finds in Reybaud (p. 129 et seq.) and in Stein (p. 206) extracts from Enfantin's Political Economyb but in this case, too, he falsifies the original; for the abolition of taxes on the most essential necessaries of life, which is correctly shown by Reybaud and Stein (who base their statements on Enfantin) to be a consequence of the proposals concerning the right of inheritance, is turned by Grün into an irrelevant, independent measure in addition to these proposals. He gives further proof of his originality by

[^1]: a This refers to Karl Rosenkranz's article "Ludwig Tieck und die romantische Schule".—Ed.

[^2]: Barthélemy-Prosper Enfantin, Economie politique et Politique.—Ed.



falsifying the chronological order; he refers first to the priest Enfantin and Ménilmontant and then to the economist Enfantin, whereas his predecessors deal with Enfantin's political economy during the Bazard period when they are discussing the Globe, for which it was written.137 Just as here he includes the Bazard period in the Ménilmontant period so later, when referring to economics and to M. Chevalier, he brings in the Ménilmontant period. The occasion for this is the Livre nouveau,1™ and as usual he turns Reybaud's conjecture that M. Chevalier was the author of this work into a categorical assertion.

Herr Grün has now described Saint-Simonism "in its totality" (p. 82). He has kept the promise he made "not to subject its literature to a critical scrutiny" (ibid.) and has therefore got mixed up, most uncritically, in quite a different "literature", that of Stein and Reybaud. He gives us by way of compensation a few particulars about M. Chevalier's economic lectures of 1841-42,a a time when the latter had long ceased to be a Saint-Simonist. For while writing about Saint-Simonism, Herr Grün had in front of him a review of these lectures in the Revue des deux Mondes. He has made use of it in the same way as he utilised Stein and Reybaud. Here is a sample of his critical acumen:

One can see that with these phrases about consumption and production which he has inherited from true socialism, Herr Grün is far superior to any economic work. Apart from the fact that any economist would tell him that supply also depends on demand, i.e., that production depends on consumption, there is actually in France a special economic school, that of Sismondi, which desires to make production dependent on consumption in a form different from that which obtains under free competition; it stands in sharp opposition to the economists attacked by Herr Grün. Not till later, however, do we see Herr Grün speculating successfully with the talentb entrusted to him—the unity of production and consumption.

To compensate the reader for the boredom he has suffered from these sketchy extracts from Stein and Reybaud, which are moreover falsified and adulterated with phrases, Herr Grün offers him the

[^1]: "In it he asserts that not enough is being produced. That is a statement worthy of the old economic school with its rusty prejudices As long as political economy does not understand that production is dependent upon consumption, this so-called science will not make any headway" (p. 102).

[^2]: a Michel Chevalier, Cours d'Economie politique fait au College de France.—Ed. b Cf. Matthew 25: 15-30 and Luke 19: 13-26.—Ed.



