---
Volume: 21
Document_Title: "1. K. Marx. The Fenian Prisoners at Manchester and the International Working Men's Association "
Page_Range: "36-38"
---

# 1. K. Marx. The Fenian Prisoners at Manchester and the International Working Men's Association 



**[p. 3]**

Karl Marx

THE FENIAN PRISONERS AT MANCHESTER AND THE INTERNATIONAL WORKING MEN'S ASSOCIATION1

At a special meeting of the General Council of the I.W.A. held at the office 16, Castle Street, East, W., on Wednesday evening3

the following memorial was adopted:

"Memorial of the General Council of the International Working Men's Association.

"To the Right Hon. Gathorne-Hardy, her Majesty's Secretary of State.

"The memorial of the undersigned, representing working men's associations in all parts of Europe, showeth:

"That the execution of the Irish prisoners condemned to death at Manchester will greatly impair the moral influence of England upon the European Continent. The Execution of the four prisonersb resting upon the same evidence and the same verdict which, by the free pardon of Maguire, have been officially declared, the one false, the other erroneous, will bear the stamp not of a judicial act, but of political revenge. But even if the verdict of the Manchester jury and the evidence it rests upon had not been tainted by the British Government itself, the latter would now have to choose between the blood-handed practices of old Europe and the magnanimous humanity of the young Transatlan- tic Republic.2

"The commutation of the sentence for which we pray will be an act not only of justice, but of political wisdom.

[^1]: a November 20, 1867.— JEd. b Edward Condon, Michael Larkin, William Philip Allen, Michael O'Brien.— Ed.





**[p. 4]**

"John Weston, Chairman R. Shaw, Secretary for America Eugene Dupont, Secretary for France

Karl Marx, Secretary for Germany Hermann Jung, Secretary for Switzerland

P. Lafargue, Secretary for Spain

Zabicki, Secretary for Poland Derkinderen, Secretary for Holland

Besson, Secretary for Belgium G. Eccarius, General Secretary."3

November 20, 1867

Reproduced from the copy of Adopted by the General Council on Marx's manuscript made by Marx's November 20, 1867 wife, Jenny Marx

First published in French in Le Courrier français, No. 163, November 24, 1867

[^1]: a In Le Courrier français the names of Hermann Jung and Anton Zabicki are omitted.— Ed.



