---
Volume: 21
Document_Title: "7. K. Marx. To the President and Executive Committee of the General Association of German Workers "
Page_Range: "43-44"
---

# 7. K. Marx. To the President and Executive Committee of the General Association of German Workers 



**[p. 10]**

Karl Marx

TO THE PRESIDENT AND EXECUTIVE COMMITTEE OF THE GENERAL ASSOCIATION OF GERMAN WORKERS9

London, August 18, 1868

In order to conclude preparations for the Brussels Congress a meeting of the Executive Committee of the General Council of the International Working Men's Association I0 has been called for August 22, and a plenary session of the General Council for August 25. As I have been given the task of making reports on both days I find that I am unable to accept the invitation,3 by which I am greatly honoured, to attend the Congress of the General Association of German Workers in Hamburg.

I am happy to see that the programme of your Congress0 lays down those points from which, in fact, any serious workers' movement must proceed: agitation for complete political freedom, regulation of the working day, and systematic international cooperation of the working class in the great, historical task which it has to accomplish for the whole of society. Good luck in your work!

With democratic greetings

Karl Marx

[^1]: First published in Der Social-Demokrat, Printed according to the news- No. 100, August 28, 1868 paper

[^2]: Published in English for the first time

[^3]: a J. B. Schweitzer, "An Herrn Carl Marx in London. Berlin, 6. Juli 1868", Der Social-Demokrat, No. 95, August 14, 1868.— Ed.

[^4]: b J. B. Schweitzer, "An die Mitglieder des Allgemeinen deutschen Arbeiter- Vereins", Der Social-Demokrat, No. 80, July 10, 1868.— Ed.



