---
Volume: 21
Document_Title: "11. F. Engels. On the Dissolution of the Lassallean Workers' Association , "
Page_Range: "53-57"
---

# 11. F. Engels. On the Dissolution of the Lassallean Workers' Association , 

Organ bet bentféen SSol Hpavtc L

No. 40. *ti$iit, Mn 3. ottob«. 1868.

Frederick Engels

ON THE DISSOLUTION OF THE LASSALLEAN WORKERS' ASSOCIATION

"The government knows, and the bourgeoisie knows too, that the whole German workers' movement today is only tolerated, only survives, for as long as the government chooses. For as long as it serves the government's purpose for this movement to exist and for the bourgeois opposition to be faced with new, independent opponents, thus long will it tolerate this movement. From the moment that this movement turns the workers into an indepen- dent force, and thereby becomes a danger to the government, there will be an abrupt end to it all. The whole manner in which the men-of-Progress agitation in the press, associations and assemblies has been put down, should serve as a warning to the workers. The same laws, edicts and measures which were applied in that case, can be applied against them at any time and deal a lethal blow to their agitation; and they will be so applied as soon as this agitation becomes dangerous. It is of the greatest importance that the workers should be clear about this point, and do not fall prey to the same illusion as the bourgeoisie in the New Era,31 when it was similarly only tolerated but imagined it was already in the saddle. And if anyone should imagine the present government would free the press, the right of association and the right of assembly from their present fetters, he is clearly among those to whom there is no point in talking. And unless there is freedom of the press, the right of association and the right of assembly, no workers' movement is possible."

These words may be found on pages 50 and 51 of a pamphlet, Die preussische Militärfrage und die deutsche Arbeiterpartei, by



**[p. 21]**

And what is the state of affairs today? "Universal, direct and equal suffrage" has existed for two years. Two parliaments have already been voted in. The workers, instead of sitting at the helm of state and decreeing "state aid" according to Lassalle's direc- tions, manage with the utmost difficulty to get half a dozen deputies elected into parliament. Bismarck is Federal" Chancellor, and the General Association of German Workers has been dissolved.

But why universal suffrage failed to bring the workers the promised millennium, they were already able to find out from Engels. In the above pamphlet it says on page 48c:

"And regarding universal direct suffrage itself, one has only to go to France to realise what tame elections it can give rise to, if one has only a large and ignorant rural population, a well- organised bureaucracy, a well-regimented press, associations suffi- ciently kept down by the police and no political meetings at all. How many workers' representatives does universal*1 suffrage send to the French chamber, then? And yet the French proletariat has the advantage over the German of far greater concentration and longer experience of struggle and organisation.

[^1]: a See present edition, Vol. 20, pp. 75-76 (Engels introduced some additional italics in quoting this passage in the present article).— Ed.

[^2]: b F. Lassalle, Offenes Antwortschreiben an das Central-Comité zur Berufung eines Allgemeinen deutschen Arbeiter-Congresses zu Leipzig, Zurich, 1863, p. 5.— Ed.

[^3]: c See present edition, Vol. 20, pp. 74-75.— Ed. à In Engels' pamphlet: "universal direct."—Ed.





**[p. 22]**

2/3 earn their living from agriculture and Vs from industry. And since in Germany the big landowner is the rule and the small peasant with his strips the exception, put another way that means: if Vs of the workers are at the beck and call of the capitalists, 2/3 are at the beck and call of the feudal lords. Let those who never stop railing at the capitalists but never utter a word in anger against the feudalists take that to heart! The feudalists exploit twice as many workers in Germany as the bourgeoisie But that is by no means all. The patriarchal economic system on the old feudal estates generates a hereditary dependence of the rural day labourer or cottager on 'his lordship', which makes it far more difficult for the agricultural proletarian to enter the urban workers' movement. The clergy, the systematic obscurantism in the country, the bad schooling and the remoteness of the people from the world at large do the rest. The agricultural proletariat is the section of the working class which has most difficulty in understanding its own interests and its own social situation and is the last to do so, in other words, it is the section which remains the longest an unconscious tool in the hands of the privileged class which is exploiting it. And which class is that? Not the bourgeoisie, in Germany, but the feudal aristocracy. Now even in France, where after all virtually all the peasants are free and own their land, and where the feudal aristocracy has long been deprived of all political power, universal suffrage has not put workers into the Chamber but has almost totally excluded them from it. What would be the consequence of universal suffrage in Germany, where the feudal aristocracy is still a real social and political power and where there are two agricultural day labourers for every industrial worker? The battle against feuda' and bureaucratic reaction — for the two are inseparable in our country—is in Germany identical with the struggle for the intellectual and political emancipation of the rural proletariat—and until such time as the rural proletariat is also swept along into the movement, the urban proletariat cannot and will not achieve anything at all in Germany and universala suffrage will not be a weapon for the proletariat but a snare.

"Perhaps this exceptionally candid but necessary analysis will encourage the feudalists to espouse the cause of universal direct suffrage. So much the better."

The General Association of German Workers has been dissolved

[^1]: a In Engels' pamphlet: "universal direct".— Ed.



It does the Association credit that it foundered precisely on this breach with narrow-minded Lassalleanism. Whatever may take its place will consequently be built on a far more general, principled basis than the few incessantly reiterated Lassallean phrases about state aid could offer. The moment the members of the dissolved Association started thinking instead of believing, the last obstacle in the way of an amalgamation of all German social-democratic workers into one big party disappeared.

[^1]: Written at the end of September 1868 Printed according to the news- paper First published in Demokratisches Wochen- blatt, No. 40, October 3, 1868 Published in English for the first time

[^2]: a "Die Generalversammlung des Allg. deutsch. Arbeiter-Vereins", Der Social- Demokrat, Nos. 100 and 102, August 28 and September 2, 1868.— Ed.



