---
Volume: 21
Document_Title: "13. K. Marx. Connections Between the International Working Men's Association and English Working Men's Organisations "
Page_Range: "58-61"
---

# 13. K. Marx. Connections Between the International Working Men's Association and English Working Men's Organisations 



**[p. 25]**

Karl Marx

[CONNECTIONS BETWEEN THE INTERNATIONAL

WORKING MEN'S ASSOCIATION AND ENGLISH WORKING MEN'S ORGANISATIONS]36

The unusual seriousness with which the English and particularly the London press treats the International Working Men's Association and its Brussels Congress (The Times alone devoted four leading articles to ita) has stirred up a real devil's sabbath in the German bourgeois press. It, the German press, takes the English press to task for its error in believing that such importance is attached to the International Working Men's Association in England! It has discovered that the English TRADES UNIONS, which, through the International Working Men's Associa- tion, have given considerable financial support to the Paris, Geneva and Belgian workers in their fight against capital,37 have absolutely no connection with that very same International Working Men's Association!

"Apparently all this is based," we have in writing from London, "on the assertion of a certain M. Hirsch* whom Schulze-Delitzsch sent specially to London to kick up such a fuss. M. Hirsch says so, and M. Hirsch is an honourable man! The honourable Hirsch

aroused the suspicions of London trade unionists because [he] bore no letters of recommendation from the International Working Men's Association. They simply made a fool of him. No wonder then that Hirsch got it all wrong. If he had been taken seriously, he could have been told, without being entrusted with

[^1]: * Reference is to Dr. Max Hirsch, the "famous" economist of the Duncker Volks-Zeitung. Until his voyage of discovery into the English unknown, apparen- tly no one in London had any idea of the existence of this new saviour of society.

[^2]: a The Times, Nos. 26225, 26228, 26230 and 26234, September 9, 12, 15 and 19, 1868.— Ed.





**[p. 26]**

"co-operative societies, which sent three delegates3 to the Brussels Congress, by Wim. Westonh and Williams; "the Reform League, by Dell, Cowell Stepney and Lucraft, all three are also on the Executive Committee of the Reform League;

"the National Reform Association,40 set up by the late agitator Bronterre O'Brien, by its President A. A. Walton and Milner;

"lastly, the atheist popular movement by its famous orator Mrs. Harriet Law and Mr. Copeland.

"It is clear that not one significant organisation of the British proletariat exists which is not directly, by its own leaders, represented on the General Council of the International Working Men's Association. Finally, there is The Bee-Hive, under George Potter's management, the official organ of the English TRADES UNIONS, which is at the same time the official organ of the General Council of the International Working Men's Association, on whose meetings it reports weekly.

"The discoveries of the honourable Hirsch and the subsequent jubilation in the German bourgeois press have provided just the right fodder for the London correspondent of the Weser-Zeitung and the London correspondent of the Augsburgerin,0 who signs himself A . This person — for one and the same person writes for

[^1]: a Frederick Dean (a smith), John Foster Sr (a carpenter) and John Foster Jr (a mechanic)—all three members of co-operative societies in Hull.— Ed.

[^2]: b John Weston is more likely the man meant here.— Ed. c The Augsburg Allgemeine Zeitung.—Ed.





**[p. 27]**

Written on October 4, 1868

First published in Demokratisches Wochen blatt, No. 42, October 17, 1868

Printed according to the news- paper

