---
Volume: 21
Document_Title: "17. K. Marx. The International Working Men's Association and the International Alliance of Socialist Democracy "
Page_Range: "67-70"
---

# 17. K. Marx. The International Working Men's Association and the International Alliance of Socialist Democracy 



**[p. 34]**

Karl Marx

THE INTERNATIONAL WORKING MEN'S ASSOCIATION

AND THE INTERNATIONAL ALLIANCE

OF SOCIALIST DEMOCRACY55

Just about a month ago a certain number of citizens formed in Geneva the Central Initiatory Committee of a new international society named The International Alliance of Socialist Democracy, stating that it was their "special mission to study political and philosophical questions on the basis of the grand principle of equality, etc."

The programme and rules printed by this Initiatory Committee3

were only communicated to the General Council of the International Working Men's Association at its meeting on December 15. According to these documents, the said "International Alliance is merged entirely in the International Working Men's Association", at the same time as it is established entirely outside this Association.

Besides the General Council of the International Association, elected at the Geneva, Lausanne and Brussels working men's congresses, there is to be, in line with the initiatory rules, another Central Council in Geneva, which is self-appointed. Besides the local groups of the International Association, there are to be local groups of the International Alliance, which "through their national bureaus", operating outside the national bureaus of the Interna- tional Association, "shall ask the Central Bureau of the Alliance to admit them into the International Working Men's Association"; the Alliance Central Committee thereby takes upon itself the right of admittance to the International Association. Lastly, the General Congress of the International Association will have its parallel in the

[^1]: a Programme et Règlement de l'Alliance Internationale de la Démocratie Socialiste, Genève [1868] (see this volume, pp. 207-09). Here and below Marx quotes this document.— Ed.





**[p. 35]**

"At the annual Working Men's Congress the delegation of the Alliance of Socialist Democracy, as a branch of the International Working Men's Association, shall hold public meetings in a separate building. "a

Considering, That the presence of a second international body operating within and outside the International Working Men's Association would be the infallible means of its disorganisation;

That every other group of individuals, residing anywhere at all, would have the right to imitate the Geneva initiatory group and, under more or less plausible excuses, to bring into the International Working Men's Association other international associations with other "special missions";

That the International Working Men's Association would thereby soon become a plaything for intriguers of all race and nationalityb;

That, moreover, the Rules of the International Working Men's Association admit only local and national branches into its ranks (see Article 1 and Article 6 of the Rules);

That sections of the International Association are forbidden to give themselves rules or administrative regulatipns contrary to the General Rules and Administrative Regulations of the International Association (see Article 12 of the Administrative Regulations^; That the Rules and Administrative Regulations of the Interna- tional Association can only be revised by the General Congress in the event of two-thirds of the delegates present voting in favour of such a revision (see Article 13 of the Administrative Regulations),'1

[^1]: '•' See this volume, p. 209.— Ed. b Les prétendues scissions dans l'Internationale by Marx and Engels (Genève, 1872, p. 7) has: "for intriguers of any nationality and any party".— Ed.

[^2]: c Rules of the International Working Men's Association. Founded September 28th, 1864, London [1867], pp. 4-5, 7.—Ed.

[^3]: d During discussion of the draft resolution at the General Council meeting on December 22, 1868, on Dupont's proposal an addition was made to this part of the resolution which was not recorded in full in the Minute Book. The text of this addition, edited apparently by Marx, was included in the final version of the circular (see K. Marx and F. Engels, Les prétendues scissions dans l'Internationale, Genève, 1872, p. 8) and reads as follows:

[^4]: "That this question was decided beforehand in the resolutions against the Peace League, unanimously passed at the General Congress in Brussels56;

[^5]: "That in its resolutions the Congress declared there was no justification for the Peace Leagues existence since, according to its recent declarations, its aim and principles were identical with those of the International Working Men's Association;

[^6]: "That a few members of the Geneva Initiatory group, as delegates to the Brussels Congress, had voted for these resolutions."—Ed.





**[p. 36]**

1) All articles of the Rules of the International Alliance of Socialist Democracy, defining its relations with the International Working Men's Association, are declared null and void;

2) The International Alliance of Socialist Democracy may not be admitted as a branch of the International Working Men's Association;

3) These resolutions be published in all countries where the International Working Men's Association exists.3

By order of the General Council of the International Working Men's Association London, December 22, 1868

Adopted by the General Council on December 22, 1868

First published in the pamphlet Les prétendues scissions dans l'Internationale, Genève, 1872

Printed according to the manu- script, checked with various copies and the pamphlet

Translated from the French

[^1]: a Point 3 was not included in the final text of the resolution. Neither was it included in the pamphlet Les prétendues scissions dans l'Internationale.— Ed.



