---
Volume: 21
Document_Title: "18. K. Marx. Resume of the Meetings of the General Council. International Working Men's Association to the Editor of ' The Bee- Hive' "
Page_Range: "70-72"
---

# 18. K. Marx. Resume of the Meetings of the General Council. International Working Men's Association to the Editor of " The Bee- Hive" 



**[p. 37]**

Karl Marx

[RESUME OF THE MEETINGS OF THE GENERAL COUNCIL]5

INTERNATIONAL WORKING MEN'S ASSOCIATION TO THE EDITOR OF THE BEE-HIVE

Sir,—At the meeting of this Association, held on the 5th inst., letters were read from Germany announcing the adhesion of 2,000 miners, from Lugau, in Saxony, and arrangements are in progress with two other bodies, of 7,000 miners each, with a view of their joining the International Working Men's Association.58

A democratic Working Men's Club has been formed at Berlin59; the members have joined the International Working Men's Association, and declared themselves opposed to the Prussian Government and to Schultze-Delitzsch. The trades' unions in Germany, on the model of the English ones, with some improvements suggested by the resolutions of the Geneva, Lausanne, and Brussels Working Men's Congresses, brought into existence by the efforts of the International Working Men's Association, number already 110,000 members.

The secretary for Switzerlandb stated that he had received information concerning some riband weavers of Basel, who had been locked out.61 The matter will come up again on Tuesday, when the Council will be in possession of the facts.

The secretary for Francec reported an agreement come to between the cotton masters of Rouen, the northern and some other departments of France, to reduce the workmen's wages, in

[^1]: The Belgian secretary3 stated that in Belgium they had sixty branches, and that they were getting new members at the rate of 1,000 per week.60

[^2]: a Marie Bernard.— Ed. b Hermann Jung.— Ed.

[^3]: c Eugène Dupont.— Ed.





**[p. 38]**

The following resolution, proposed by Citizen Applegarth, and seconded by Citizen Marx, was unanimously agreed to: —

Resolved—That in the opinion of this Council the attempt of the employers of Rouen, of the northern and other departments of France, to reduce the wages of their workpeople with the avowed object of underselling the manufacturers of England in their own markets is deserving the reprobation of the workmen and employers of all nations. That while recognising the right of free competition carried on by legitimate means, we utterly deprecate the extension of trade by reducing the wages of workpeople already underpaid.

Resolved—That the various societies be invited to send dele- gates to the next meeting of the Council, to be held on Tuesday 19 inst. at eight p. m., to devise the best means to frustrate the unwarrantable attempts of the French manufacturer, and to render to the workmen concerned such assistance as they may need.62

Hermann Jung,b Sec. pro. tern.

6th Jan. 1869

[^1]: First published in The Bee-Hive, No. 379, Reproduced from the newspaper January 16, 1869

[^2]: a See this volume, p. 388.— Ed. b The Bee-Hive has a mistake: "Henry Lang".— Ed.



