---
Volume: 21
Document_Title: "20. K. Marx. The General Council of the International Working Men's Association to the Central Bureau of the International Alliance of Socialist Democracy "
Page_Range: "78-80"
---

# 20. K. Marx. The General Council of the International Working Men's Association to the Central Bureau of the International Alliance of Socialist Democracy 



**[p. 45]**

Karl Marx

THE GENERAL COUNCIL OF THE INTERNATIONAL

WORKING MEN'S ASSOCIATION TO THE CENTRAL BUREAU OF THE INTERNATIONAL ALLIANCE

OF SOCIALIST DEMOCRACY65

London, 9 March, 1869

Citizens,

According to Article I of its3 Statutes, the Int. W. Ass.b admits "all working men's societies aiming at the same end, viz., the protection, advancement, and complete emancipation of the working classes".0

Since the various sections of working men in the same country, and the working classes in different countries, are placed under different circumstances and have attained to different degrees of development, it seems almost necessary that their theoretical notions, which reflect the real movement, should also diverge.

The community of action, however, called into life by the Intern. W. Ass., the exchange of ideas facilitated by the public organs of the different national sections, and the direct debates at the General Congresses, are sure by and by to engender a common theoretical programme.

Consequently, it belongs not to the functions of the General Council to subject the programme of the Alliance to a critical examination.d We have not to inquire whether, yes or no, it be a true scientific expression of the working-class movement." All we have to ask is whether its general tendency does not run against the

[^1]: a The clean copy in French has "our".— Ed. b Here and below in the French copy the name of the International is given in full.— Ed.

[^2]: c Rules of the International Working Men's Association, London [1867], p. 4.— Ed. d See this volume, pp. 207-10.—Ed e The clean copy in French has "an adequate expression of the proletarian movement" instead of "a true scientific expression of the working-class move- ment".— Ed.



One phrase in your programme lies open to this objection. It occurs [in] Article 2:

"Elle (l'Alliance) veut avant tout l'égalisation politique, économique et sociale des classes." ("The Alliance aims above all at the political, economical, and social equalisation of classes."66)

The "égalisation des classes", literally interpreted, comes to the "Harmony of Capital and Labour" ("l'harmonie du capital et du travail") so persistently preached by the bourgeois socialists. It is not the logically impossible "equalisation of classes", but the historically necessary, superseding "abolition of classes" (abolition des classes), this true secret of the proletarian movement, which forms the great aim of the Int. W. Ass.

Considering, however, the context, in which that phrase "égalisation des classes" occurs, it seems to be a mere slip of the pen, and the General Council feels confident that you will be anxious to remove from your programme an expression which offers such a dangerous misunderstanding.

It suits the principles of the Int. W. Ass. to let every section freely shape its own theoretical programme, except the single case of an infringement upon its general tendency. There exists, therefore, no obstacle to the transformation of the sections of the Alliance into sections of the Int. W. Ass.

The dissolution of the Alliance, and the entrance of its sections into the Int. W. Ass, once settled, it would, according to our Regulations, become necessary to inform the General Council of the residence and the numerical strength of each new section.b

[^1]: Adopted by the General Council on Reproduced from the English March 9, 1869 rough copy, checked with Marx's

[^2]: First published in the pamphlet Les prétendues scissions dans l'Internationale, Genève, 1872

[^3]: clean copy in French

[^4]: a The clean copy in French has "our".— Ed. b In the English manuscript the following text is crossed out: "It is self-understood that every section is bound to admit all workmen who accept the general statutes of the I. W. Association without adopting the special programme of the section."—Ed.



