---
Volume: 21
Document_Title: "21. K. Marx. The Belgian Massacres. To the Workmen of Europe and the United States "
Page_Range: "80-86"
---

# 21. K. Marx. The Belgian Massacres. To the Workmen of Europe and the United States 



**[p. 47]**

Karl Marx

THE BELGIAN MASSACRES

TO THE WORKMEN OF EUROPE AND THE UNITED STATES

There passes hardly a week in England without strikes—and strikes upon a grand scale. If, on such occasions, the Government was to let its soldiers loose upon the Working Class, this land of strikes would become a land of massacres, but not for many a week. After a few such physical force experiments, the powers that be would be nowhere. In the United States, too, the number and scale of strikes have continued to increase during the last few years, and even sometimes assumed a riotous character. But no blood was spilt. In some of the great military states of continental Europe, the era of strikes may be dated from the end of the American Civil War. But here, again, no blood was spilt. There exists but one country in the civilised world where every strike is eagerly and joyously turned into a pretext for the official massacre of the Working Class. That country of single blessedness is Belgium! the model state of continental constitutionalism, the snug, well-hedged, little paradise of the landlord, the capitalist, and the priest. The earth performs not more surely its yearly revolution than the Belgian Government its yearly Working Men's massacre. The massacre of this year does not differ from last year's massacre,3 but by the ghastlier number of its victims, the more hideous ferocity of an otherwise ridiculous army, the noiser jubilation of the clerical and capitalist press, and the intensified frivolity of the pretexts put forward by the Governmental butchers.

It is now proved, even by the involuntary evidence of the

[^1]: 11 Marx refers to the events in Charleroi (Belgium) in March 1868. See this volume, pp. 14-15.— Ed.





**[p. 48]**

Some politicians trace these incredible deeds to motives of a sublime patriotism. While just negotiating on some ticklish points with their French neighbour,70 the Belgian Government, they say, were bound in duty to show off the heroism of their army. Hence that scientific division of arms, displaying, first, the irresistible impetuosity of the Belgian cavalry at Seraing, and then the steady vigour of the Belgian infantry at Frameries. To frighten the foreigner, what means more infallible than such homely battles, which one does not know how to lose, and such domestic battlefields, where the hundreds of workmen killed, mutilated,

[^1]: a See "Moralités de l'affaire de Seraing" and "Episodes de troubles de Seraing et du Borinage", L'Internationale, Nos. 14 and 15, April 18 and 25, 1869.— Ed.





**[p. 49]**

Other politicians, on the contrary, suspect the Belgian ministers to be sold to the Tuileries, and to periodically enact these horrible scenes of a mock civil war, with the deliberate aim of affording Louis Bonaparte a pretext for saving society in Belgium as he has saved it in France. But was Ex-Governor Eyre ever accused of having organised the Negro massacre at Jamaica in order to wrest that island from England and place it into the hands of the United States?71 No doubt the Belgian ministers are excellent patriots of the Eyre pattern. As he was the unscrupulous tool of the West-Indian planter, they are the unscrupulous tools of the Belgian capitalist.

The Belgian capitalist has won fair fame in the world by his eccentric passion for, what he calls, the liberty of labour (la liberté du

travail). So fond is he of the liberty of his hands to labour for him all the hours of their life, without exemption of age or sex, that he has always indignantly repulsed any factory law encroaching upon that liberty. He shudders at the very idea that a common workman should be wicked enough to claim any higher destiny than that of enriching his master and natural superior. He wants his workman not only to remain a miserable drudge, overworked and under- paid, but, like every other slave-holder, he wants him to be a cringing, servile, broken-hearted, morally prostrate, religiously humble drudge. Hence his frantic fury at strikes. With him, a strike is a blasphemy, a slave's revolt, the signal of a social cataclysm. Put, now, into the hands of such men—cruel from sheer cowardice—the undivided, uncontrolled, absolute sway of the state power, as is actually the case in Belgium, and you will no longer wonder to find the s-abre, the bayonet, and the musket working in that country as legitimate and normal instruments for keeping wages down and screwing profits up. But, in point of fact, what other earthly purpose could a Belgian army serve? When, by the dictation of official Europe, Belgium was declared a neutral country,72 it ought, as a matter of course, have been forbidden the costly luxury of an army, save, perhaps," a handful of soldiers, just sufficient to mount the royal guard and parade at a royal puppet-show. Yet, within its 536 square leagues of territory, Belgium harbours an army greater than that of the United Kingdom or the United States. The field service of this neutralised army is fatally computed by the number of its razzias upon the working class.



**[p. 50]**



[^1]: a A reference to the speech of Jules Bara, the Belgian Minister of Justice, in the Chamber of Deputies on May 16, 1868, published in La Liberté, No. 47, May 17, 1868.— Ed.

[^2]: h "Arrestations et condamnations", L'Internationale, No. 16, May 2, 1869.— Ed.





**[p. 51]**

Perhaps, the Belgian Government flatters itself that having, after the revolutions of 1848-49, gained a respite of life by becoming the police agent of all the reactionary governments of the Continent, it may now again avert imminent danger by conspicuously playing the gendarme of capital against labour. This, however, is a serious mistake. Instead of delaying, they will thus only hasten the catastrophe. By making Belgium a byword and a nickname with the popular masses all over the world, they will remove the last obstacle in the way of the despots bent upon wiping that country's name off the map of Europe.

The General Council of the International Working Men's Associa- tion hereby calls upon the workmen of Europe and the United States to open monetary subscriptions for alleviating the sufferings ot the widows, wives, and children of the Belgian victims, and also for the expenses incident upon the legal defence of the arrested workmen, and the inquiry proposed by the Brussels Committee.

By order of the General Council of the International Working Men's Association,

R. Applegarth, Chairman R. Shaw, Secretary for America

Bernard, Secretary for Belgium Eugène Dupont, Secretary for France

Karl Marx, Secretary for Germany Jules Johannard, Secretary for Italy

A. Zabicki, Secretary for Poland H. Jung, Secretary for Switzerland

Cowell Stepney, Treasurer /. G. Eccarius, Secretary to the General Council London, May 4th, 1869

[^1]: * Liberty in travelling round the world has no need of passing through Belgium.75

[^2]: L'Internationale, No. 15, April 25, 1869.— Ed.





**[p. 52]**

Adopted by the General Council on May 4, Reproduced from the leaflet 1869

First published as a leaflet, The Belgian Massacres. To the Workmen of Europe and the United States, May 1869

