---
Volume: 21
Document_Title: "23. K. Marx. Preface to the Second Edition of The Eighteenth Brumaire of Louis Bonaparte "
Page_Range: "89-92"
---

# 23. K. Marx. Preface to the Second Edition of The Eighteenth Brumaire of Louis Bonaparte 



**[p. 56]**

Karl Marx

PREFACE [TO THE SECOND EDITION OF THE EIGHTEENTH BRUMAIRE OF LOUIS BONAPARTE]78

My friend Joseph Weydemeyer* who died so early, intended to publish a political weekly in New York starting from January 1, 1852. He invited me to provide a history of the coup d'état for it. Down to the middle of February, I accordingly wrote him weekly articles under the title: The Eighteenth Brumaire of Louis Bonaparte. Meanwhile Weydemeyer's original plan had failed. Instead, in the spring of 1852 he began to publish a monthly, Die Revolution, the first issue of which consists of my Eighteenth Brumaire.79 A few hundred copies of this found their way into Germany at that time, without, however, getting into the actual book trade. A German bookseller of extremely radical pretensions to whom I offered the sale of my book was most virtuously horrified at a "presumption" so "contrary to the times".80

It will be seen from the above that the present work was written under the immediate pressure of events and its historical material does not extend beyond the month of February (1852). Its republication now is due in part to the demand of the book trade, in part to the urgent requests of my friends in Germany.

Of the works on the same subject written at approximately the same time as mine, only two deserve notice: Victor Hugo's Napoléon le petit and Proudhon's Coup d'état?

Victor Hugo confines himself to bitter and witty invective against the responsible publisher of the coup d'état. The event itself

[^1]: * Military commandant of the St. Louis district during the American Civil War.

[^2]: a V. Hugo, Napoléon le petit, London, 1852; P. J. Proudhon, La Révolution sociale démontrée par le coup d'état du 2 décembre, Paris, 1852.— Ed.





**[p. 57]**

A revision of the present work would have robbed it of its specific colouring. Accordingly I have confined myself to mere correction of printer's errors and to striking out allusions now no longer intelligible.

The concluding words of my work3: "But when the imperial mantle finally falls on the shoulders of Louis Bonaparte, the bronze statue of Napoleon will crash from the top of the Vendôme Column81", have already been fulfilled.

Colonel Charras opened the attack on the Napoleon cult in his work on the campaign of 1815.b Subsequently, and particularly in the last few years, French literature made an end of the Napoleon legend with the weapons of historical research, of criticism, of satire and of wit. Outside France this violent breach with the traditional popular belief, this tremendous mental revolution, has been little noticed and still less understood.

Lastly, I hope that my work will contribute towards eliminating the school-taught phrase now current, particularly in Germany, of so-called Caesarism. In this superficial historical analogy the main point is forgotten, namely, that in ancient Rome the class struggle took place only within a privileged minority, between the free rich and the free poor, while the great productive mass of the population, the slaves, formed the purely passive pedestal for these combatants. People forget Sismondi's significant saying: The Roman proletariat lived at the expense of society, while modern society lives at the expense of the proletariat.0 With so complete a difference between the material, economic conditions of the ancient

[^1]: a See present edition, Vol. 11, p. 197.— Ed. h J. B. A. Charras, Histoire de la campagne de 1815. Waterloo, Brussels, 1857.— Ed.

[^2]: c J. C. L. Simonde de Sismondi, Etudes sur l'économie politique, t. 1, Paris, 1837, p. 24.— Ed.





**[p. 58]**

Karl Marx

London, June 23, 1869

First published in the second edition of Printed according to the text of Marx's Der Achtzehnte Brumaire des Louis the 1869 edition Bonaparte, Hamburg, July 1869

