---
Volume: 21
Document_Title: "27. K. Marx. Draft Resolution of the General Council on the Policy of the British Government Towards the Irish Prisoners "
Page_Range: "116-117"
---

# 27. K. Marx. Draft Resolution of the General Council on the Policy of the British Government Towards the Irish Prisoners 



**[p. 83]**

Karl Marx

[DRAFT RESOLUTION OF THE GENERAL COUNCIL

ON THE POLICY OF THE BRITISH GOVERNMENT TOWARDS

THE IRISH PRISONERS]115

Resolved,

that in his reply to the Irish demands for the release of the imprisoned Irish patriots—a reply contained in his letter to Mr. O'Shea etc., etc.3—Mr. Gladstone deliberately insults Irish Nation;

that he clogs political amnesty with conditions alike degrading to the victims of misgovernment and the people they belong to;

that having, in the teeth of his responsible position, publicly and enthusiastically cheered on the American slave-holders' Rebell- ion,116 he now steps in to preach to the Irish people the doctrine of passive obedience;

that his whole proceedings with reference to the Irish Amnesty question are the true and genuine offspring of that "policy of conquest" by the fiery denunciation of which Mr. Gladstone ousted his Tory rivals from office117;

that the General Council of the "International Working Men's Association" express their admiration of the spirited, firm and high-souled manner in which the Irish people carry on their Amnesty movement;

that these resolutions be communicated to all the branches of, and working men's bodies connected with, the "International Working Men's Association" in Europe and America.

[^1]: Introduced by Marx on November 16, Reproduced from the manuscript, 1869 checked with the Minute Book of the General Council Adopted by the General Council on November 30, 1869

[^2]: First published in Reynolds's Newspaper, No. 1006, November 21, 1869

[^3]: a In the Minute Book of the General Council this text in parentheses reads as follows: "in a reply contained in his letter to Mr. O'Shea d. d. Oct. 18, 1869, and to Mr. Isaac Butt d.d. Oct. 23, 1869" (see W. E. Gladstone, "The Government and the Fenians. Hawarden, Chester, Oct. 18" and "Hawarden, Chester, Oct. 23", The Times, Nos. 26579 and 26583, October 23 and 27, 1869).— Ed.



