---
Volume: 21
Document_Title: "28. K. Marx. The General Council to the Federal Council of Romance Switzerland "
Page_Range: "117-125"
---

# 28. K. Marx. The General Council to the Federal Council of Romance Switzerland 



**[p. 84]**

Karl Marx

THE GENERAL COUNCIL TO THE FEDERAL COUNCIL

OF ROMANCE SWITZERLAND118

At its extraordinary meeting on January 1, 1870, the General Council resolved:

1) We read in the Égalité of December 11, 1869:

"It is certain that it" (the General Council) "is neglecting extremely important matters We remind it of them" (the General Council's obligations) "with Article 1 of the Regulations, etc.: 'The General Council is commissioned to carry the resolutions of the Congress into effect' We could put enough questions to the General Council for its replies to make up quite a long report. They will come later Meanwhile etc." 3

The General Council does not know of any article, either in the Rules or in the Regulations, which would oblige it to enter into correspondence or into polemic with the Égalité or to provide "replies" to "questions" from newspapers. The Federal Council of Romance Switzerland alone represents the branches of Romance Switzerland vis-à-vis the General Council. When the Romance Federal Council addresses requests or reprimands to us through the only legitimate channel, that is to say through its secretary, the General Council will always be ready to reply. But the Romance Federal Council ^ has no right either to abdicate its functions in favour of the Égalité and the Progrès, or to let these newspapers usurp its functions. Generally speaking, the General Council's correspondence with the national and local committees cannot be published without greatly prejudicing the Association's general interests. Consequently, if other organs of the International were to follow the example of the Progrès and the Égalité, the General Council would be faced with the alternative of either discrediting

[^1]: a See "Réflexions", L'Égalité, No. 47, December 11, 1869.— Ed.





**[p. 85]**

The Égalité joins the Progrès (a paper which is not sent to the General Council) in inviting Le Travail (a Paris paper which has not hitherto declared itself an organ of the International, and which is also not sent to the General Council) to demand an explanation from the General Council.b That is almost a League of Public Welfare.119

2) Now, assuming that the questions put by the Egalité come from the Romance Federal Council, we shall answer them on condition that such questions do not reach us in such a manner in future.

3) Question of a Bulletin. In the resolutions of the Genevac

Congress, which are inserted in the regulations, it is laid down that the national committees shall send the General Council documents dealing with the proletarian movementd and that the General Council shall thereupon publish a bulletin in the different languages as often as its means permit ("As often as its means permit, the General Council shall publish a report, etc.").e

The General Council's obligation was thus made dependent on conditions that have never been fulfilled. Even the statistical inquiry provided for by the Rules, decided by consecutive General Congresses, and demanded yearly by the General Council, has never been made. No document has been presented to the General Council. As far as the means are concerned, the General Council would have long since ceased to exist had it not been for

[^1]: a In the manuscript, after the word "publicly", Marx had crossed out the words: "The Progrès (which is not sent to the General Council as it should be in accordance with resolutions thrice adopted by General Congresses) has taken the initiative in usurping the Federal Council's functions."—Ed.

[^2]: b The manuscript has the following passage crossed out: "The same people who last year, immediately after their tardy entry into our Association, formed the dangerous project of founding another international association within the International Working Men's Association, under their personal control and based in Geneva, have returned to their project and still believe in their special mission to usurp the supreme authority of the International Association. The General Council reminds the Romance Federal Council that it is responsible for the question of the newspapers L'Egalité and Le Progrès."—Ed.

[^3]: c The manuscript mistakenly has "Lausanne".— Ed. d Congrès ouvrier de l'Association Internationale des Travailleurs tenu à Genève du 3 au 8 septembre 1866, Geneva, 1866, pp. 13 and 26.— Ed. •

[^4]: e Rules of the International Working Men's Association. Founded September 28th, 1864, London [1867], p. 6. The sentence in brackets is given by Marx in English.— Ed.





**[p. 86]**

Thus, the Regulations passed at the Geneva'' Congress have remained a dead letter.b

As regards the Basle Congress, it did not discuss the fulfilment of these existing Regulations. It discussed the possibility of issuing a bulletin in good time and it did not pass any resolution (see the German report published in Basle under the eyes of the Cong- ressc).

For the rest, the General Council believes that the purpose of the bulletin is at the moment perfectly fulfilled by the different organs of the International published in the different languages and exchanged among them. It would be absurd to do by costly bulletins what is being done already without any expense. On the other hand, a bulletin which would print what is not contained in the organs of the International would only help our enemies to see behind the scenes.

4) Question of separating the General Council from the Federal Council for England.

Long before the foundation of the Egalité, this proposition was made periodically inside the General Council by one or two of its English members.12" It was always rejected almost unanimously.

Although' revolutionary initiative will probably come from France, England alone can serve as the lever for a serious economic Revolution. It is the only country where there are no more peasants and where landed property is concentrated in a few hands. It is the only country where the capitalist form, that is to say combined labour on a large scale under capitalist masters, embraces virtually the whole of production. It is the only country where the great majority of the population consists of WAGES-LABOURERS. It is the only country where the class struggle and the organisation of the working class by the TRADES UNIONS have acquired a certain degree of maturity and universality. It is the only country where, because of its domination on the world market, every revolution in economic matters must immediately affect the whole world. If landlordism and capitalism are classical features in England, on the other hand, the material conditions for their destruction are the most mature here. The General Council now being in the happy position of having its hand

[^1]: a The manuscript mistakenly has "Lausanne".— Ed. b In the manuscript, after the words "dead letter", the following is crossed out: "They were treated as such by the Basle Congress."—Ed.

[^2]: ' Verhandlungen des IV. Congresses des internationalen Arbeiterbundes in Basel, Nos. 1-7, 7-14, September 1869, p. 90.—Ed.



T h e English have all the material necessary for the social revolution. What they lack is the spirit of generalisation and revolutionary ardour. It is only the General Council that can provide them with this, that can thus accelerate the truly revolutionary movement in this country, and consequently everywhere. T h e great results we have already achieved in this respect are attested to by the most intelligent and influential of the newspapers of the ruling classes, as e.g. The Pall Mall Gazette, Saturday Review, The Spectator and The Fortnightly Review, to say nothing of the so-called radicals in the COMMONS and the LORDS who, a little while ago, still exerted a great influence on the leaders of the English workers. They accuse us publicly of having poisoned and almost extinguished the English spirit of the working class and of having pushed it into revolutionary socialism.

T h e only way to bring about this change is to act like the General Council of the International Association. As the General Council we can initiate measures (e.g., the founding of the Land and Labour Leaguev21) which later, in the process of their execution, will appear to the public as spontaneous movements of the English working class.

If a Federal Council were formed apart from the General Council, what would be the immediate results?

England cannot be treated simply as a country along with other countries. It must be treated as the metropolis of capital.

[^1]: Placed between the General Council and the General Council of 1 rades Unions',*22 the Federal Council would have no authority whatever. On the other hand, the General Council of the Internation- al would lose control of the great lever. If we had preferred the showman's chatter to serious and unostentatious work, we would perhaps have committed the mistake of replying publicly the Égalités question as to why the General Council permits "such a burdensome combination of functions".

[^2]: 5) Question of the General Council Resolution on the Irish Amnesty:' If England is the BULWARK of landlordism and European capitalism, the only point where official England can be struck a great blow is Ireland.

[^3]: In the first place, Ireland is the BULWARK of English landlordism. If it fell in Ireland, it would fall in England. In Ireland this is a h u n d r e d

[^4]: See this volume, p. 83.— F.d.





**[p. 88]**

In the second place, the English bourgeoisie has not only exploited Irish poverty to keep down the working class in England by forced immigration of poor Irishmen, but it has also divided the proletariat into two hostile camps. The revolutionary fire of the Celtic worker does not go well with the solid but slow nature of the Anglo-Saxon worker. On the contrary, in all the big industrial centres in England there is profound antagonism between the Irish proletarian and the English proletarian. The average English worker hates the Irish worker as a competitor who lowers wages and the STANDARD OF LIFE. He feels national and religious antipathies for him. He regards him somewhat like the POOR WHITES of the Southern States of North America regarded black slaves. This antagonism among the proletarians of England is artificially nourished and kept up by the bourgeoisie. It knows that this scission is the true secret of maintaining its power.

Moreover, this antagonism is reproduced on the other side of the Atlantic. The Irish, chased from their native soil by the bulls and the sheep, reassemble in North America where they constitute a huge, ever-growing section of the population. Their only thought, their only passion, is hatred for England. The English and American governments (that is to say, the classes they represent) play on these feelings in order to perpetuate the covert struggle between the United States and England. They thereby prevent a sincere and serious alliance between the working classes of both sides of the Atlantic, and, consequently, their common emancipation.

Furthermore, Ireland is the only pretext the English Govern- ment has for retaining a big standing army, which, if need be, as has happened before, can be used against the English workers after having had its drill in Ireland.

Lastly, England today is seeing a repetition of what happened

Thus, the position of the International Association with regard to the Irish question is very clear. Its first concern is to advance the social revolution in England. To this end a great blow must be struck in Ireland.3

The General Council's resolutions on the Irish amnestyb serve only as an introduction to other resolutions124 which will affirm that, quite apart from international justice, it is a precondition to the emancipation of the English working class to transform the present forced union (i.e., the enslavement of Ireland) into equal and free confederation if possible, into complete separation if need be.c

For the rest, the naïve doctrines of the Égalité and the Progrès about the CONNEXION, or rather, the NON-CONNEXION, between the social movement and the political movement have never, as far as we know, been recognised by any of our International congresses. They run counter to our Rules. The Rules say 125:

"That the economical emancipation of the working classes is therefore the great end to which every political movement ought to be subordinate as a means.,,d

The words "as a means"e were omitted in the French translation made in 1864 by the Paris Committee.1 When questioned by the General Council, the Paris Committee excused itself by the difficulties of its political situation.8

[^1]: a After the words "in Ireland" the manuscript has the following words crossed out: "and the Irish economic-national struggle must be exploited in all ways possible".— Éd.

[^2]: b See this volume, pp. 3-4 and 83.— Ed. 0 After "if need be" the following words are crossed out in the manuscript: "The difficulties and even personal dangers which face General Council members who take such a stand may be judged by the fact that The Bee-Hive in its reporting of our meetings not only omitted our resolutions but did not even mention the fact that the General Council is concerned with the Irish question. The General Council was thus obliged to print its resolutions and send them to all TRADES UNIONS separately. The oracles of L'Égalité are now at liberty to say that it is a 'local political movement', that, in their opinion, a Eederal Council should deal with such bagatelle, and that there is no need to 'better the existing governments'. LÉgalité might just as well have said that we intend to 'better the Belgian Government' by denouncing its massacres. "— Ed.

[^3]: d Here and below quotations from the Provisional Rules of the Association are given in English in the manuscript (see present edition, Vol. 20, p. 14).— Ed.

[^4]: e Marx uses the English phrase and gives the French equivalent "comme moyen" in parentheses.— Ed.

[^5]: f Congrès ouvrier. Association Internationale des Travailleurs. Règlement Provisoire [Paris, 1864], p. 1.— Ed.

[^6]: s The next five paragraphs were added by Marx on a separate sheet.— Ed.





**[p. 90]**

The Paris translation has "equal rights and duties", i.e., it reproduces a general phrase which may be found virtually in all democratic manifestoes of the last hundred years and which means different things in the mouth of different classes, but leaves out the concrete demand: "the abolition of all class rule"}

Further, in the second clause of the preamble to the Rules we read: "That the economical subjection of the man of labour to the monopoliser of the means of labour, that is, the sources of life, etc."

The Paris translation substitutes the word "capital" for "the means of labour, that is, the sources of life", an expression which includes the land as well as the other means of labour.

The original authentic text was, however, restored in the French translation published in pamphlet form in Brussels by the Rive Gauche (1866).126

6) Liebknecht-Schweitzer Question. The. Egalité writes:

"Both these groups belong to the International. " That is incorrect. The Eisenachers' group (which the Progrès and the Egalité would like to turn into Citizen Liebknecht's group) belongs to the International. Schweitzer's group does not belong to it.c

Schweitzer himself exp'ainëd at length in his newspaper (Social-Demokrat) why the Lassallean organisation could not join the International without destroying itself.d Without realising it, he was speaking the truth. His artificial sectarian organisation is opposed to the historical and spontaneous organisation of the working class.

The Progrès and the Egalité have summoned the General Council to state publicly its "opinion" on the personal differences between Liebknecht and Schweitzer. Since Citizen Johann Philipp

Becker (who is slandered as much as Liebknecht in Schweitzer's papere) is a member of the Égalité's editorial board, it seems most strange that its editors are not better informed about the facts. They should have known that Liebknecht, in the Demokratisches

[^1]: a See present edition, Vol. 20, p. 14.— Ed. b Marx uses the English phrase and gives the French equivalent in bracket», "l'abolition des classes".— Ed.

[^2]: c The rest of the text was inserted by Marx.— Ed. d Marx is referring to Schweitzer's leading article in Der Social-Demokrat, No. 82, July 16, 1869.— Ed.

[^3]: e Der Social-Demokrat, No. 24, February 24, 1869.— Ed.



For its part the General Council has employed all possible means to put an end to this scandal.d It instructed its Secretary for Germanye to correspond with Schweitzer; this has been done for two years, but all attempts by the Council have broken down in the face of Schweitzer's firm resolution to preserve at all cost his autocratic power together with the sectarian organisation. It is up to the General Council to determine the favourable moment when its public intervention in this quarrel will be more useful than damaging.

7) Since the Égalité's accusations are public and could be considered as emanating from the Romance Committee of Geneva, the General Council is to communicate this reply to all committees corresponding with it.

By order of the General Council

Written on about January 1, 1870 Printed according to the manu- script copy made by Marx's wife Approved by the General Council on a n d c h e c k e d b y t h e a u t h o r January 1, 1870

[^1]: Translated from the French Published in part in the pamphlet Les prétendues scissions dans l'Internationale, Genève, 1872

[^2]: a A mistake in the original: Volksstaat instead of Demokratisches Wochenblatt.—Ed. b W. Liebknecht, "Erklärung. Leipzig, 18. Februar 1869", Demokratisches Wochenblatt, No. 8, February 20, 1869.— Ed.

[^3]: c See Der Social-Demokrat, No. 24, February 24, 1869.— Ed. d The copy of the manuscript in Jung's handwriting further has: "which casts aspersions on the proletarian party in Germany".— Ed.

[^4]: e Karl Marx.— Ed.



