---
Volume: 21
Document_Title: "31. K. Marx. The English Government and the Fenian Prisoners "
Page_Range: "134-141"
---

# 31. K. Marx. The English Government and the Fenian Prisoners 



**[p. 101]**

Karl Marx

THE ENGLISH GOVERNMENT AND

THE FENIAN PRISONERS140

London, February 21, 1870

I

The silence which is observed in the European press concerning the disgraceful acts committed by this oligarchical bourgeois government is due to a variety of reasons. Firstly, the English Government is rich and the press, as you know, is immaculate. Moreover, the English Government is the model government, recognised as such by the landlords, by the capitalists on the Continent and even by Garibaldi (see his book3): consequently we should not revile this ideal government. Finally, the French Republicans are narrow-minded and selfish enough to reserve all their anger for the Empire. It would be an insult to free speech to inform their fellow countrymen that in the land of bourgeois freedom sentences of 20 years hard labour are given for offences which are punished by 6 months in prison in the land of barracks. The following details concerning the treatment of Fenian prison- ers have been taken from English journals:

Mulcahy, sub-editor of the newspaper The Irish Peopled sen- tenced for taking part in the Fenian conspiracy, was harnessed to a cart loaded with stones with an iron collar round his neck at Dartmoor.

O'Donovan Rossa, owner of The Irish People, was shut up for 35 days in a pitch-black dungeon with his hands chained behind his back day and night. They were not even unchained to allow him

[^1]: a G. Garibaldi, The Rule of the Monk, or Rome in the Nineteenth Century, London, 1870.— Ed.

[^2]: b The name of the newspaper is in English in the oiriginal, with the French translation in brackets.— Ed.





**[p. 102]**

Kickham, one of the editors of The Irish People, although he was unable to use his right arm because of an abscess, was forced to sit with his fellow prisoners on a heap of rubble in the November cold and fog and break up stones and bricks with his left hand. He returned to his cell at night and had nothing to eat but 6 ounces of bread and a pint of hot water.b

O'Leary, an old man of sixty or seventy kept in prison, was put on bread and water for three weeks because he would not renounce paganism (this, apparently, is what a jailer called free thinking) and become either Papist, Protestant, Presbyterian or even Quaker, or take up one of the many religions which the prison governor offered to the heathen Irish/

Martin H. Carey is incarcerated in a lunatic asylum at Millbank. The silence and the other bad treatment to which he was subjected have made him lose his reason/1

Colonel Richard Burke is in no better condition. One of his friends writes that his mind is affected, he has lost his memory and his behaviour, manners and speech are those of a madman.e

The political prisoners are dragged from one prison to the next as if they were wild animals. They are forced to keep company with the vilest knaves; they are obliged to clean the pans used by these wretches, to wear the shirts and flannels previously worn by these criminals, many of whom are suffering from the foulest diseases, and to wash in the same water. Before the arrival of the Fenians at Portland all the criminals were allowed to talk with their visitors. A visiting cage was installed for the Fenian prisoners. It consists of three compartments divided by partitions of thick iron bars; the jailer occupies the central compartment and the

[^1]: a See this volume, pp. 414-15, 417-19. See also The Irishman, No. 49, June 12, 1869, "O'Donovan Rossa. To the Editor of The Irishman; The Press on the Treatment of the Political Prisoners: The Treatment of O'Donovan Rossa"; The Irishman, No. 30, January 22, 1870, "The Political Prisoners — Misguided Men and Their Desires".— Ed.

[^2]: lj Report of the Commissioners on the Treatment of the Treason-Felony Convicts in the English Convict Prisons, London, 1867, p. 19. See also this volume, p. 422.— Ed.

[^3]: 1 The Irishman, No. 12, September 18, 1869, "The Irishman in Paris. John O'Mahony and Pagan O'Leary".— Ed.

[^4]: d The Irishman, No. 20, November 13, 1869, "Gladstone and His Victims. To the Editor of the Irishman".— FA.

[^5]: e The Irishman, No. 30, January 22, 1870, "The Irish Political Prisoners and Her Majesty's Government"; No. 27, January 1, 1870: "More Prison Horrors. Irish Political Prisoners Being Done to Death in English Prisons."—Ed.





**[p. 103]**

In the docks you can find prisoners who eat all sorts of slugs, and frogs are considered dainties at Chatham. General Thomas Burke said he was not surprised to find a dead mouse floating in the soup. The convicts say that it was a bad day for them when the Fenians were sent to the prisons. (The prison regime has become much more severe.)

I should like to add a few words to these extracts. Last year Mr. Bruce, the Home Secretary, a great liberal, great policeman and great mine owner in Wales who cruelly exploits his workers, was questioned on the bad treatment of Fenian prisoners and O'Donovan Rossa in particular.11 At first he denied everything, but was later compelled to confess.6 Following this Mr. Moore, an Irish member in the House of Commons, demanded an enquiry into the facts.c This was flatly refused by the radical ministry of which that demigod Mr. Gladstone (he has been compared to Jesus Christ publicly) is the head, and that old bourgeois demagogue, John Bright, is one of the most influential members.d

Recently, when rumours concerning the bad treatment of the Fenians were resumed, several members of Parliament requested Mr. Bruce for permission to visit the prisoners in order to be able to verify the falseness of these rumours." Mr. Bruce refused this permission on the grounds that the prison governors were afraid that the prisoners would be too excited by visit of this kind.'

Last week the Home Secretary was again submitted to question- ing. He was asked whether it was true that O'Donovan Rossa received corporal punishment (i. e., whipping)s after his election

[^1]: a J. Gray, Enquiry in the House of Gommons concerning the treatment of the Irish prisoners, The Irishman, No. 3, July 17, 1869.— Ed.

[^2]: b H. A. Bruce, Speech in the House of Gommons on June 4, 1869, The Irishman, No. 3, July 17, 1869.— Ed.

[^3]: c "Mr. G. H. Moore's Motion upon the Treatment, by England of Irish Political Prisoners", The Irishman, No. 1, July 3, 1869.— Ed.

[^4]: d See this volume, pp. 408, 415.— Ed. e Ph. Callan, "To the Right Hon. H. A. Bruce, Home Secretary. Reform Club, January 18", The Irishman, No. 32, February 5, 1870.— Ed.

[^5]: f H. A. Bruce, "To P. Callan, Esq., M.P., Home Office, January 19", The Irishman, No. 32, February 5, 1870.— Ed.

[^6]: g G. W. White, Speech in the House of Commons on February 18, 1870, Ehe Times, No. 26975, February 19, 1870.— Ed.





**[p. 104]**

(which is tantamount to admitting that the political prisoner had been given the whip over a period of two to three years).

I am also sending you extracts (which we are going to publish in our next issue) concerning the case of Michael Terbert, a Fenian sentenced as such to forced labour, serving his sentence at Spike Island Convict Prison in the county of Cork, Ireland. You will see that the CORONER0 himself C attributes this man's death to the torture which was inflicted on him. This investigation was held last week.d

In the course of two years more than twenty Fenian workers have died or gone insane thanks to the philanthropy of these good bourgeois souls, backed by these good landlords.

You are probably aware that the English press professes a chaste distaste for the dreadful general security laws which grace la belle France. Well, except for a few short intervals, it has been general security laws that formed the Irish Charter. Since 1793 the English Government has taken advantage of any pretext to suspend the Habeas Corpus Bill (a law guaranteeing the liberty of the individual)142 regularly and periodically, in fact all laws, except that of brute force. In this way thousands of people have been arrested in Ireland on suspicion of being suspected of Fenianism without ever having been tried, brought before a judge or court, or even charged. Not content with depriving them of their liberty, the English Government has had them tortured in the most savage way imaginable. The following is but one example.

One of the prisons where persons suspected of being Fenians were buried alive is Mountjoy Prison in Dublin. The prison inspector, Murray, is a despicable brute. He maltreated the prisoners so cruelly that some of them went mad. The prison doctor, an excellent man called M'Donnell (who also played a creditable part in the enquiry into Michael Terbert's death), spent several months writing letters of protest which he addressed in the first instance to Murray himself. As Murray did not reply, he sent accusing letters to higher authorities/ but being an expert jailer Murray intercepted these letters.

[^1]: a H. A. Bruce, Speech in the House of Commons on February 18, 1870, The Times, No. 26975, February 19, 1870.— Ed.

[^2]: b Marx uses the English term and gives the French equivalent in brackets.— Ed. c John Moore.— Ed. d "Inquest at Spike Island.—Condemnation of the Prison Treatment", The Irishman, No. 34, February 19, 1870.— Ed.

[^3]: e The Irishman, Nos. 7, 12 and 15, August 14, September 18 and October 9, 1869.— Ed.





**[p. 105]**

Then the so-called radical ministry of Gladstone came to power, the tender, unctuous, magnanimous Gladstone who had shed such warm, sincere tears before the eyes of the whole of Europe over the fate of Poerio and other members of the bourgeoisie who were badly treated by King Bomba.143 What did this idol of the progressive bourgeoisie do? While insulting the Irish by his insolent replies to their demands for an amnesty,1' he not only confirmed the monster Murray in his post, but endowed the position of the chief jailer with a nice fat sinecure as a token of his particular satisfaction!1 There's the apostle of bourgeois philan- thropy for you!

But something had to be done to pull the wool over the eyes of the public. It was essential to appear to be doing something for Ireland, and a law regulating the land question (LAND BILL) 144 was proclaimed with a great song and dance. All this is nothing but a pose with the ultimate aim of deceiving Europe, winning over the Irish judges and advocates with the prospect of endless disputes between landlords and farmers, conciliating the landlords with the promise of financial aid from the state and deluding the more prosperous farmers with a few mild concessions.

In the long introduction to his grandiloquent and confused speech Gladstone admits that even the "benevolent" laws which liberal England bestowed on Ireland over the last hundred years have always led to the country's further decline.d And after this naive confession the same man persists in torturing those who want to put an end to this harmful and stupid legislation.

[^1]: a Report of the Commissioners on the Treatment of the Treason-Felony Convicts in the English Convict Prisons, London, 1867. See also this volume, pp. 424, 426-28.— Ed.

[^2]: b See this volume, p. 83.— Ed. c The Irishman, No. 19, November 6, 1869.— Ed. d Marx refers to Gladstone's speech in the House of Commons on February 15, 1870, The Times, No. 26673, February 16, 1870.—Ed.





**[p. 106]**

The following is an account taken from an English newspaper of the results of an enquiry into the death of Michael Terbert,a a Fenian prisoner who died at Spike Island Prison due to the bad treatment which he had received.

On Thursday last1' Mr. John Moore, Coroner of the Middleton district, held an inquest at Spike Island Convict Prison,' on the body of a convict [] named Michael Terbert, who had died in hospital.

Peter Hay, governor of the prison, was called first. He deposed—The deceased, Michael Terbert, came to this prison in June, 1866; I can't say how his health was at the time; he had been convicted on the 12th of January, 1866, and his sentence was seven years' penal servitude; he appeared delicate for some time past, as will appear from one of the prison books, which states that he was removed on the recommendation of medical officers, as being unfit for cellular discipline. Witness then went into a detail of the frequent punishments inflicted on the deceased for breach of discipline, many of them for the use "of disrespectful language to the medical officer".01

Jeremiah Hubert Kelly deposed—I remember when Michael Terbert came here from Mountjoy Prison; it was then stated that he was unfit for cellular discipline—that means being always confined to a celle; certificate to the effect was signed by Dr. M'Donnel: [] I found him, however, to be in good health, and I sent him to work. I find by the recordf that he was in hospital from the 31st January, 1869, until the 6th February, 1869; he suffered then from increased affection of the heart, and from that time he did not work on the public works, but in-doors, at oakum; from the 19th March, 1869, until the 24th March,s 1869, he was in hospital, suffering from the same affection of heart; from the 24th April till the 5th May he was also in hospital from spitting of blood; from the 19th May till the 1st June he was in hospital for heart disease; from the 21st June till the 22nd June he was under hospital treatment for the same; he was also in hospital from the 22nd July till the 15th August, for the same — from 9th November till the 13th December for debility, and from 20th December to the 8th February, when he died from acute dropsy; on the 13th November he first appeared to suffer from dropsy, and it was then dissipated; I visit the cells every day, and I must have seen him when under punishment from time to time; it is my duty to remit, by recommendation, that punishment, if I consider the prisoner is not fit to bear it; I think I did so twice in his case.

[^1]: As a medical man, did you consider that five days on bread and water per day was excessive punishment for him, notwithstanding his state of health in Mountjoy and here? — I did not; the deceased had a good appetite; I don't think that the treatment induced acute dropsy, of which he died []

[^2]: a See The Irishman, No. 34, February 19, 1870.— Ed. b L'Internationale has "On Thursday, February 17".— Ed. c L'Internationale has "Spike-Island Prison".— Ed. d L'Internationale has no quotation marks here.— Ed. e The words "that means being always confined to a cell" are omitted in L 'Internationale.—Ed.

[^3]: f L'Internationale has "I remember".—M s L'Internationale has "March 26".— Ed.





**[p. 107]**

The jury returned the following verdict: "We find that Michael Terbert died in hospital at Spike Island Convict Prison, on the 8th of February, 1870, of dropsy; he was twenty-five years of age,a and unmarried. We have also to express in the strongest terms our total disapproval of the frequent punishment he suffered in cells on bread and water for several days in succession during his imprisonment in Spike Island, where he had been sent in June, 1866, from Mountjoy Prison, for the reason that in Dr. M'Donnell's opinion he was unfit for cellular discipline at Mountjoy; and we express our condemnation of such treatment."

Written on February 21, 1870 Printed according to the news- paper First published in the newspaper L'Inter- nationale, Nos. 59 and 60, February 27 Translated from the French and March 6, 1870 r , . . The account of the enquiry into Terbet's death is reproduced from

[^1]: The Irishman

[^2]: L'Internationale has "36 years of age".— Ed.



