---
Volume: 21
Document_Title: "32. K. Marx. Concerning the Conflict in the Lyons Section "
Page_Range: "141-143"
---

# 32. K. Marx. Concerning the Conflict in the Lyons Section 



**[p. 108]**

Karl Marx

[CONCERNING THE CONFLICT IN THE LYONS SECTION]145

Citizens! The Lyonese section of the International Working Men's Association, in virtue of a resolution passed at the Congress of Basle, 1869, to the effect that the General Council shall act as umpire in cases where differences arise between members of the Association,3 has appealed to the Council to decide between Albert Richard on one side and Schettel, Cormier, A. Blanc, Chanoz and Vindry on the other side, the latter being members of the old section of Lyons.

The General Council, having examined the documents sent by that section, declares the accusations made to be without the least foundation and confirms the verdict of the two special commis- sions appointed on that subject: the first at the Congress of Lausanne, 1867, and the second at Geneva, 1869, and maintains Albert Richard in the post of Corresponding Secretary of the International Working Men's Association conformably to the Rules and Regulations.

Considering also that the call made by the old members upon the radical burgesses to give a decision in this case which ought only to have been known to the members of the Association is contrary to the Rules, spirit, and interest of the Association and of a nature of profiting the enemies, the General Council censures energetically the conduct of the old members of the section.

The General Council takes advantage of the position in which it is placed by this misunderstanding to remind all the members of

[^1]: a Marx refers to the resolution of the Basle Congress adopted on September 9, 1869 (see Report of the Fourth Annual Congress of the International Working Men's Association, London [1869], p. 21).— Ed.





**[p. 109]**

Adopted by the General Council on Reproduced from the Minute March 8, 1870 Book of the General Council

First published in L'Internationale, No. 63, March 27, 1870, under the signature of Eugène Dupont

