---
Volume: 21
Document_Title: "33. K. Marx. The General Council of the International Working Men's Association to Committee Members of the Russian Section in Geneva "
Page_Range: "143-145"
---

# 33. K. Marx. The General Council of the International Working Men's Association to Committee Members of the Russian Section in Geneva 



**[p. 110]**

Karl Marx

THE GENERAL3 COUNCIL OF THE INTERNATIONAL WORKING MEN'S ASSOCIATION

TO COMMITTEE MEMBERS OF THE RUSSIAN SECTION IN GENEVA146

Citizens,

At its meeting of March 22, the General" Council declared by unanimous vote that your programme and rulesb accord with the general rules of the International Working Men's Association. It immediately admitted your section into the International. I am pleased to accept your proposal to take on the honourable duty of being your representative on the General2 Council.

You say in your programme:

You might add that Russia's violent conquest of Poland provides a pernicious support and real reason for the existence of a military regime in Germany, and, as a consequence, on the whole Continent. Therefore, in working on breaking Poland's chains, Russian socialists take on themselves the lofty task of destroying the military regime; that is essential as a precondition for the general emancipation of the European proletariat.

A few months ago I received from St. Petersburg Flerovsky's work The Condition of the Working Class in Russia.147 This is a real eye-opener for Europe. Russian optimism, which is spread over the Continent even by the so-called revolutionaries, is mercilessly exposed in this work. It will not retract from its worth if I say that in one or two places it does not fully satisfy criticism from the

[^1]: "that the imperial yoke oppressing Poland is a brake equally hampering the political and social emancipation of both nations—the Russian just as much as the Polish."

[^2]: a "Chief" in the Russian original.— Ed. b "Pervaya russkaya sektsiya. Programma", "Ustav russkoi sektsii", Narodnoye Dyelo, No. 1, April 15, 1870.— Ed.





**[p. 111]**

Such works as Flerovsky's and those of your teacher Cher- nyshevsky do real honour to Russia and prove that your country is also beginning to take part in the movement of our age.

Fraternal greetings,

Karl Marx London, March 24, 1870

Printed in Narodnoye Dyelo, No. 1, Gene- Printed according to the news- va, April 15, 1870 paper

Translated from the Russian

