---
Volume: 21
Document_Title: "45. K. Marx. Programme for the Mainz Congress of the International "
Page_Range: "176-178"
---

# 45. K. Marx. Programme for the Mainz Congress of the International 



**[p. 143]**

Karl Marx

PROGRAMME FOR THE MAINZ CONGRESS OF THE INTERNATIONAL182

1) On the need to abolish the public debt. Discussion of the right to equitable compensation.

3) Practical means of converting landed property into social property (see Note).

4) On the conversion of banks of issue into national banks.

5) Conditions of cooperative production on a national scale. 6) On the need for the working class to draw up general statistics of labour, in conformity with the Geneva Congress resolutions of 1866.a

7) Reconsideration by the Congress of the question of the means to do away with war.

Note to Point 3: The Belgian General Council has proposed this question:

[^1]: 2) Relationship between the political action and the social movement of the working class.183

[^2]: "The practical means of forming agricultural sections within the International and of establishing solidarity between agricultural proletarians and proletarians of other industries."

[^3]: a See The International Working Men's Association. Resolutions of the Congress of Geneva, 1866, and the Congress of Brussels, 1868, London [1869], p. 4.— Ed.





**[p. 144]**

Written on July 14, 1870

First published as a leaflet, The Fifth Annual Congress of the International Work- ing Men's Association, on July 12, 1870

Printed according to the manu- script

Translated from the French

