---
Volume: 21
Document_Title: "46. F. Engels. The History of Ireland "
Page_Range: "178-222"
---

# 46. F. Engels. The History of Ireland 

Frederick Engels

[THE HISTORY OF IRELAND]



[^1]: Written between May and the first half of Printed according to the manu- July 1870 script

[^2]: First published in Marx-Engels Archives, Russian edition, Vol. X, Moscow, 1948





**[p. 147]**

NATURAL CONDITIONS

The country whose history is to occupy us is situated in the north-western corner of Europe, an island of 1,530 German or 32,500 English square miles. But between Ireland and the rest of Europe another island lies transversally, three times the size, which we for brevity's sake usually refer to as England; it completely encloses Ireland from the north, east and south-east, only leaving it a clear view in the direction of Spain, Western France and America.

The channel between the two islands, 50-70 English miles wide at the narrowest points in the south, 13 miles wide at one place in the north and 22 miles at another, enabled the Irish Scots in the north to emigrate to the neighbouring island and found the Kingdom of Scotland even before the 5th century. In the south it was too wide for the boats of the Irish and the Britons and even posed a serious obstacle to the Romans' flat-bottomed coasting vessels. But when the Frisians, Angles and Saxons, and after them the Scandinavians, ventured out on to the high seas, out of sight of land, in their keeled vessels, this channel was no longer an obstacle. Ireland became the object of raids by the Scandinavians and easy prey for the English. As soon as the Normans had formed a strong, uniform government in England, the influence of the larger neighbouring island made itself felt—in those days this meant a war of conquest.185

Then, in the course of the war, there followed a period when England attained supremacy at sea, thus ruling out the possibility of successful foreign intervention.

Once the whole of the larger island was finally united in a single state, it was then bound to attempt the complete assimilation of Ireland, too.



**[p. 148]**

In order to understand the soil conditions of present-day Ireland, we must go back a long way, right back to the age when the so-called carboniferous system was formed.*

T h e centre of Ireland, north and south of the line from Dublin to Galway, forms a wide plain at an average height of 100-300 feet above sea-level. This plain, the ground-plan—as it were—of all Ireland, comprises the massive layer of limestone, which forms the middle stratum of the carboniferous system (CARBONIFEROUS LIMESTONE) and immediately on top of which lie the coal-bearing strata (the COAI MEASURES a proper) in England and elsewhere.

In the south, as in the north, this plain is surrounded by a mountain chain which mainly follows the coastline and almost exclusively consists of older rock formations, which have broken through the limestone: granite, mica-schist, Cambrian, Cambro- Silurian, Upper Silurian, Devonian and the argillaceous schist and sandstone, rich in copper and lead, belonging to the bottom layer of the carboniferous system and containing,in addition, some gold, silver, tin, zinc, iron, cobalt, antimony glance, and manganese.

Only in a few places is the limestone itself high enough to form mountains: in the centre of the plain, in Queen's County,186 rising to 600 feet, and in the west, on the southern shore of Galway Bay, rising to just over 1,000 feet (Burren Hills).

[^1]: * Unless otherwise stated, the geological data given here are taken from: J. Beete Jukes, The Student's Manual of Geology, New Edition, Edinburgh, 1862. Jukes was the local director of the geological survey of Ireland and is therefore the leading authority on this topic, which he treats in particular detail.

[^2]: a The terms in small caps are given in English in the manuscript after their German equivalents.— Ed



-j£.

^ W - y < V *•—*•« V " * -»••"^- ye** C**~*£L . -*^

^

f/^jf&u-:*, aj L^.z Zy/r A j^"P^^^p

[^1]: '.£- Ä .

[^2]: First page of Engels' History of Ireland







**[p. 151]**

"The escarpments in these widely separated tracts of coal-measures are so similar, and the beds composing them so precisely alike, that it is impossible to suppose otherwise than that they originally formed continuous sheets of rock, although they are now separated by sixty or eighty miles This belief is strongly confirmed by the fact, that there are often, between the two larger areas, several little outlying patches in which the coal-measures are found capping the summits of small hills [] and that wherever the undulation of the limestone is such as to b^ing its upper beds down beneath the level of the present surface of the ground, we invariably find some of the lower beds of the coal-measures coming in upon them" (Jukes, p. 286).a

Yet other factors, which would lead us into too much detail here and can be found in Jukes, pp. 286-89, leave no doubt that, as Jukes says, the entire central plain of Ireland is a result of denudation, so that, the coal-measures and the upper limestone deposits having been washed away—an average thickness of at least 2,000-3,000 feet, perhaps 5,000-6,000 feet of stone,—it is now principally the bottom layers of limestone that have emerged on the surface. Even on the highest ridge of the Burren Hills, County Clare, which consist of pure limestone and are 1,000 feet high, Jukes found (p. 513) yet another small outcrop of the coal-measures.

In fact, in the south of Ireland there are still some fairly significant tracts possessing coal-measures; but among them only isolated spots contain coal thick enough to make mining worth- while. Moreover, the coal itself is anthracitic, i.e. it contains little hydrogen and cannot be used for all industrial purposes without additives.

In the north of Ireland there are also several not very extensive coalfields whose coal is bituminous, i.e. ordinary pit-coal rich in hydrogen, and whose stratification does not entirely match that of the coal districts further south. It is, however, quite evident that the coal-measures were washed away here too: large pieces of coal, along with sandstone and blue clay from the same formation, have been found on the surface of a limestone valley to the south-east of one of these coalfields in the direction of Belturbet and Mohill. Large blocks of coal have frequently been found in the course of well-sinking in the drift of this area; and, in some cases, the

[^1]: a J. Beete Jukes, The Student's Manual of Geology, pp. 285-86.— Ed.





**[p. 152]**

It can be seen that Ireland's misfortune is ancient indeed: it commences immediately after the coal-measures were deposited. A country whose coal deposits have been washed away, situated right next to a larger country with plenty of coal, was for a long time condemned by nature, as it were, to play the part of a farming land vis-à-vis the future industrial country. This sentence, pro- nounced millions of years ago, was not carried out until this century. What is more, we shall see later how the English gave nature a helping hand by immediately and violently trampling underfoot almost any sign of burgeoning industry in Ireland.

More recent Secondary and Tertiary deposits187 occur almost solely in the north-east; among them of chief interest to us are the Keuper strata in the Belfast area, which contain more or less pure rock-salt to a thickness of up to 200 feet (Jukes, p. 554), and the chalk, which covers the whole of County Antrim, the chalk itself being overlaid with basalt. Generally speaking, the history of Ireland's geological development came to a halt from the end of the Carboniferous Period to the Ice Age.

It is known that after the end of the Tertiary Epoch there was a period when the lowlands of the middle latitudes of Europe were submerged beneath the sea and when such cold temperatures prevailed in Europe that the valleys of the islands of mountain still protruding were covered with glaciers right down to the sea. The icebergs, which detached themselves from these glaciers, carried large and small boulders from the mountains out to sea, until the ice melted and the boulders and other debris transported by the ice sank to the bottom—a process that still occurs daily along the coasts of the polar regions.

During the Ice Age Ireland, too, with the exception of the mountain tops, was submerged beneath the sea. The maximum extent of this submergence may not have been the same everywhere, but one may assume it to have been, on average, about 1,000 feet below the present level; the granite mountains to the south of Dublin must have been submerged by over 1,200 feet.

If Ireland were to sink only 500 feet, the mountain ranges alone would be left, forming two semi-circular groups of islands on either side of a broad sound stretching from Dublin to Galway. Were the land to sink even lower, these islands would shrink in size and in number until, at a drop of 2,000 feet, only the peaks of



**[p. 153]**

As this submersion slowly took place, the limestone plain and the mountainsides must have been cleared of a great deal of older rock that had overlain them; there then followed the deposition of the "drift" peculiar to the Ice Age over the entire area that was covered by water. The matter produced by the weathering of the mountain islands, and the finely ground particles of rock scraped out of the valleys by the slowly but powerfully moving glaciers— earth, sand, gravel, stones, smoothly polished blocks in the ice itself, sharp-edged ones on its surface—all this was carried out to sea by the icebergs as they detached themselves from the shore, and eventually sank to the bottom. Depending on the cir- cumstances, the layer thus formed consists of clay (deriving from argillaceous schist), sand (from quartz and granite), limestone gravel (from limestone mountains), marl (where finely ground limestone was mixed with clay) or of mixtures of all these components; in every case, however, it contains a quantity of stones, some large, some small, sometimes rounded, sometimes jagged, and some the size of those colossal erratic boulders which occur even more frequently in Ireland than on the North German Plain or between the Alps and the Jura.

When the land was subsequently raised up out of the sea once more, this newly formed surface acquired, more or less, its present-day composition. In Ireland little washing-away seems to have taken palace in the process; with few exceptions, the drift covers all the flat land in a layer of varying thickness, extends to the valleys in the mountains and is often found high up on the mountainsides, too. The rocks occurring in it are chiefly lime- stone; for this reason, the entire layer is commonly termed LIMESTONE GRAVEL3 here. Numerous large limestone boulders are also scattered over all the lowlying land, one or more in almost every field. Obviously, near the mountains besides the limestone, the local rocks originating there (particularly granite) are also found in large quantities. Granite from the northern shore of Galway Bay occurs in the plain to the south-east, in large quantities as far as the Galton Mountains, and in odd instances as far as Mallow (County Cork).

[^1]: * Of Ireland's 32,509 English square miles, 13,243 lie between sea-level and 250 feet; 11,797 are 251-500 feet above sea-level; 5,798 are 501-1,000 feet; 1,589 are 1,001-2,000 feet; 82 square miles are 2,001 feet or more above sea-level.

[^2]: a In the manuscript this term is given in English in brackets after the German equivalent.— Ed.





**[p. 154]**

The traces of the glacier on the mountainsides and the valley, floors in Ireland are very common and unmistakable, particularly in the south-west. Only in Oberhasli and here and there in Sweden do I recall having seen more distinct traces of ice of every kind than in Killarney (in the Black Valley and the Gap of Dunloe).

The elevation of the land during or after the Ice Age seems to have been so pronounced that Britain was for a while connected by dry land not only with the Continent but with Ireland as well. At least, this seems to be the only explanation for the similarity of the fauna of these countries. Of the extinct large mammals Ireland had the mammoth, the Irish giant stag, the cave-bear, a species of reindeer, and others in common with the Continent. In fact, an elevation of less than 240 feet above the present level would be sufficient to join Ireland and Scotland, and one of less than 360 feet to join Ireland and Wales with wide ridges of land.* The fact that at some time after the Ice Age Ireland occupied a higher level than at present is proved by the underwater peat bogs with upright treestumps and roots which occur all along the coast, and are identical in every respect with the lowest layers of the adjoining inland peat bogs.

Insofar as it is suitable for agriculture, the soil of Ireland is accordingly almost entirely composed of "drift" from the Ice Age; here, thanks to its schist and limestone origin, it is an extremely fertile light loam, unlike the barren sand with which the Scottish, Scandinavian and Finnish granites have covered such a large part of North Germany. The diversity of the rocks which have laid down their deposits on this soil—and continue to do so— provided it with a corresponding diversity of the mineral elements

[^1]: * See Map 15a in Stieler's schoo J-atlas,a 1868. This map, as well as No. 15d of Ireland in particular, gives a very clear picture of the nature of the terrain.

[^2]: a A. Stieler, Hand-Atlas über alle Theile der Erde und über das Weltgebäude, Gotha, 1864.— Ed





**[p. 155]**

"the same sandy reddish loam I have already described, incomparable land for tillage". From there, in the direction of Clonmel, "the whole way, through the same rich vein of red sandy loam I have so often mentioned. I examined it in several fields, and found it to be of an extraordinary fertility, and as fine turnip land as ever I saw".

Further:

"The rich land reaches from Charleville, at the foot of the mountains, to Tipperary," (the city), "by Kilfennan, a line of twenty-five miles, and across from Ardpatrick to within four miles of Limerick—sixteen miles."—"The richest land is the Corcasses on the Maag, near Adare, a tract of five miles long, and two broad, down to the Shannon When they break this land up, they sow first oats, and get twenty barrels an acre" (14 stone or 196 pounds per barrel), "or forty common barrels, and do not reckon that an extra crop; they take ten or twelve in succession [] till the crops grow poor, and then they sow one of horse beans, which refreshes the land enough to take ten crops of oats more; the beans are very good Were such barbarians ever heard of?"

Further, near Castle Oliver, County Limerick:

On the river Blackwater near Mallow

[^1]: "The finest soil in the country is upon the roots of mountains; it is a rich, mellow, crumbling, putrid, sandy loam, eighteen inches to three feet deep; the colour a reddish brown. It is dry, sound land, and would do for turnips exceedingly well, for carrots, for cabbages; and, in a word, for everything. I think upon the whole it is the richest soil I ever saw, arid such as is applicable to every purpose you can wish. It will fat the largest bullock, and at the same time do equally well for sheep, for tillage, for turnips, for wheat, for beans; and, in a word, for every crop []. You must examine into the soil before you will believe that a country, which has so beggarly an appearance, can be so rich and fertile."

[^2]: "there are tracts of flat lands, in some places one quarter of a mile broad; the grass everywhere remarkably fine. It- is the finest sandy land I have anywhere seen, of a reddish-brown colour; would yield the greatest arable crops in the world, if in tillage. It is five feet deep, and [] burns into good brick; yet it is a perfect sand. The banks of this river-^from its source to the sea—are equally remarkable for beauty of prospect, and fertility of soil."—"Friable, sandy loams, dry but fertile, are very common, and they form the best soils in the kingdom for tillage and sheep. Tipperary and Roscommon abound particularly in them. The most fertile of all are the bullock pastures of Limerick, and the banks of the Shannon, in Clare, called





**[p. 156]**

Young's verdict on the soil of Ireland is summarised in the following sentences:

"If I was to name the characteristics of an excellent soil, I should say that3 upon which you may fat an ox, and feed off a crop of turnips. By the way I recollect little or no such land in England, yet it is not uncommon in Ireland" (II, p. 271). "Natural fertility, acre for acre over the two kingdoms, is certainly in favour of Ireland" (II, Part 2, p. 3).—"As far as I can form a general idea of the soil of the two kingdoms, Ireland has much the advantage" (II, Part 2, p. 12).

In 1808-10, Edward Wakefield, another Englishman versed in agronomy, travelled around Ireland and presented the results of his observations in a most valuable work.** His comments are better arranged, more lucid and more complete than those in Young's travel book; on the whole, however, they are both accurate.

On the whole, Wakefield finds no great diversity of soil in Ireland. Sand only occurs on the shore (it is so rare inland that large quantities of sea-sand are transported to the interior in order to improve the peat and loam soil), chalky soil is unknown (the chalk in Antrim, as mentioned above, is covered by a layer of basalt, which after weathering produces an extremely fertile surface soil—chalk constitutes the poorest soil in England),

The Irish call any loamy soil CLAY0; there may be proper clay in Ireland, too, but in any case not on the surface as in some parts of England. There is limestone or calcareous gravel almost everywhere, he says.

Mountains and peat bogs do, of course, reduce the fertile surface considerably. In the north, he says, there is little fertile

[^1]: "and tenacious clays, such as those found in Oxfordshire, in some parts of Essex, and throughout High Suffolk, I could never meet with in Ireland".b

[^2]: "The former is a useful production, and is converted into a source of wealth that will always be employed with advantage."d

[^3]: * A Tour in Ireland by Arthur Young, 3 vols., London, 177 The above passages are in Vol. II, pp. 28, 135, 143, 154, 165 and Part 2, p. 4.188

[^4]: ** An Account of Ireland, Statistical and Political. By Edward Wakefield. London, 1812, 2 vols., in 4°.189

[^5]: a Author's italics.— Ed. b E. Wakefield, An Account of Ireland, Vol. I, Ch. Ill, p. 79.— Ed. c Engels gives this English word in brackets after the German equivalent.— Ed. d Ibid.— Ed.





**[p. 157]**

"A great portion of the soil of Ireland throws out a luxuriant herbage, springing up from a calcareous subsoil, without any considerable depth. I have seen bullocks of the weight of 180 stone, rapidly fattening on land incapable of receiving the print of a horse's foot, even in the wettest season, and where there were not many inches of soil. This is one species of the rich soil of Ireland, and is to be found throughout Roscommon, in some parts of Galway, Clare, and other districts. Some places exhibit the richest loam that I ever saw turned up by a plough; this is the case throughout Meath in particular. Where such soil occurs, its fertility is so conspicuous, that it appears as if nature had determined to counteract the bad effects produced by the clumsy system of its cultivators.—On the banks of the Fergus and Shannon, the land is of a different kind, but equally productive, though the surface presents the appearance of marsh. These districts are called 'the caucasses'" (thus writes Wakefield, differing with Young); "the substratum is a blue silt, deposited by the sea, which seems to partake of the qualities of the upper stratum; for this land can be injured by no depth of ploughing.—In the counties of Limerick and Tipperary there is another kind of rich land, consisting of a dark, friable, dry, sandy loam which, if preserved in a clean state, would throw out corn for several years in succession. It is equally well adapted to grazing and tillage, and I will venture to say, seldom experiences a season too wet, or a summer too dry. The richness of the land, in some of the vales, may be accounted for by the deposition of soil carried thither from the upper grounds by the rain. The subsoil is calcareous, so that the very richest manure is thus spread over the land below, without subjecting the farmer to any labour" (Vol. I, pp. 79, 80).

Where there is a thinnish layer of sticky loam immediately on top of the limestone, the land is no use for arable farming, yielding only miserable crops of corn; but it provides excellent sheep-walks, which go on improving it, producing a thick grass mixed with plenty of white clover anda (Vol. I, p. 80).

Dr. Beaufort*- writes that in the west, particularly in Mayo, there are a great many TURLOUGHS—flat areas of differing sizes which, though not perceptibly fed by any streams or rivers, are covered with water in winter which drains away in summer through underground fissures in the limestone, leaving behind a firm, fertile grazing land.

[^1]: "Independently of the caucasses," continues Wakefield, "the richest soil in Ireland is to be found in the counties of Tipperary, Limerick, Roscommon, Longford, and Meath. In Longford there is a farm called Granard Kill, which

[^2]: * Beaufort, Revd. Dr., Memoir of a Map of Ireland, 1792, pp. 75, 76. Quoted in Wakefield, Vol. I, p. 36.

[^3]: a Omission in the manuscript. Wakefield has: "and wild burnet".— Ed





**[p. 158]**

The last remark, which is aimed at Young, stems from a misunderstanding of the statement by Young quoted above.3

Young does not say that Ireland's soil is more productive than England's, taking them both in their present state of cultivation, which is naturally much higher in England; Young simply says that the natural fertility of the soil in Ireland is greater than in England, and Wakefield does not directly dispute this.

A Scottish agronomist, Mr. Caird, was sent to Ireland in 1849, after the last famine,b by Sirc Robert Peel to report on means of improving the agriculture there. In his report, published soon afterwards, on the West of Ireland, the worst hit part of the country except for the extreme north-west, he says:

"I was much surprised to find so great an extent of fine fertile land. The interior of the country is very level, and its general character stony and dry; the soil dry and friable. The humidity of the climate causes a very constant vegetation, which has both advantages and disadvantages. It is favourable for grass and green crops,* but renders it necessary to employ very vigorous and persevering efforts to extirpate weeds. The abundance of lime everywhere, both in the rock itself, and as sand and gravel beneath the surface, are of the greatest value."

Caird also confirms that the whole of County Westmeath consists of the finest pasture land. Of the region north of Lough Corrib (County Mayo) he writes:

[^1]: "The greater part of this farm" (a farm of 500 acres) "is the finest feeding land for sheep and cattle—dry, friable, undulating land, all on limestone. The fields of rich old grass are superior to anything we have, except in small patches, in any part of Scotland I at present remember. The best of it is too good for tillage, but about one half of it might be profitably brought under the plough The rapidity with which the land on this limestone subsoil recovers itself, and, without any seeds being sown, reverts to good pasture, is very remarkable."**

[^2]: * "GREEN CROPS" d include all cultivated fodder crops, root vegetables of all kinds and potatoes; everything but corn, grass and garden produce.

[^3]: ** Caird, The Plantation Scheme, or the West of Ireland as a field for investment, Edinburgh, 1850. The above passages are on pp. 6, 17-18, 121. In 1850-51, Mr. Caird wrote travel reports for The Times on the condition of agriculture in the main counties of England.

[^4]: a See this volume, pp. 156.— Ed. b That of 1846-47.— Ed. c At this point in the manuscript the word "Ministry" appears above the word "Sir".— Ed.

[^5]: d Engels gives these English words in brackets after the German equiva- lent.— Ed.





**[p. 159]**

"Of the two divisions of Ireland, that of the north-west, embracing a fourth of the island, and comprehending the province of Connaught, with the adjacent counties of Donegal, Clare and Kerry, resembles Wales, and even, in its worst parts, the Highlands of Scotland. Here again are two millions of unsightly hectares, the frightful aspect of which has given rise to the national proverb, 'Go to the devil or Connaught'**. The other, or south-east and much larger division, since it [] includes the provinces of Leinster, Ulster and Munster, equal to about six millions of hectares, is at least equal in natural fertility to England proper. It is not all, however, equally good; the amount of humidity there is still greater than in England. Extensive bogs cover about a tenth of the surface; more than another tenth is occupied with mountains and lakes. In fact, five only out of eight millions of hectares in Ireland are cultivated" (pp. 9, 10).—"Even the English admit that Ireland, in point of soil, is superior to England. [] Ireland contains eight millions of hectares. Rocks, lakes, and bogs occupy about two millions of these, and two millions more are indifferent land. The remainder—that is to say about half the country—is rich land, with calcareous subsoil. What better could be conceived?" (p. 343).

It is evident that all the authorities are agreed that the soil of Ireland contains all the elements of fertility to an unusual degree, with regard to both its chemical constituents and its physical composition. The extremes—sticky, impenetrable clay, which allows no water through, and loose sand, which does not retain it for an hour—are nowhere to be found. Yet Ireland has another disadvantage. While the mountains are mainly along the coast, the watersheds between the different river basins in the interior of the country are mostly very low-lying. The rivers are not able to drain off all the rainwater into the sea, and this gives rise to extensive peat bogs in the interior, particularly on the watersheds. In the plain alone 1,576,000 acres are covered by peat bogs. These are mostly depressions or hollows in the terrain, largely former shallow lake basins, which have gradually become overgrown with moss and bog plants and filled up with their decayed remains. Like our North German bogs they are no use except for peat-cutting. With the present system of agriculture their edges can only slowly be brought under cultivation. The floor of these former lake basins consists of marl everywhere which derives its limestone content (ranging from 5 to 90%) from the shells of the freshwater mussels in the lake. Thus, each one of these peat bogs contains within itself the material for its own reclamation and cultivation. In addition, most of them are rich in iron stone. Apart

[^1]: * Léonce de Lavergne, Rural Economy of England, Scotland and Ireland. Translated from the French. Edinburgh, 1855.

[^2]: ** As we shall see, this proverb owes its origin not to the dark mountains of Connaught but to the darkest period in the entire history of Ireland.190

[^3]: 7-733





**[p. 160]**

The climate of Ireland is determined by its position. The Gulf Stream and the prevailing south-west winds bring it warmth, making for mild winters and cool summers. In the south-west, summer lasts far into October, which, according to Wakefield (Vol. I, p. 221), is here considered the favourite month for sea-bathing. Frost is rare and does not last long; snow hardly ever lies on the ground for long on the plain. Around the bays of Kerry and Cork, which face south-west and are sheltered from the north, spring weather prevails all winter long; there, as in some other places, myrtle thrives in the open (Wakefield cites an example of a country estate with myrtle trees 16 feet high, the twigs of which were used to make stable brooms, Vol. I, p. 55), and laurel, arbutus and other evergreen plants grow into tall trees. Even in Wakefield's day the farmers in the south left their potatoes out all winter, without any being damaged by frost since 1740. On the other hand, Ireland does bear the brunt of the first heavy downpour from the heavy Atlantic rain clouds. The average rainfall in Ireland is at least 35 inches, considerably more than the average for England, but certainly less than that for Lancashire and Cheshire, and scarcely more than the average for the whole of the West of England. Nevertheless, the Irish climate is decidedly more pleasant than the English. The leaden skies which so often drip away unceasingly for days on end in England, are mainly



**[p. 161]**

"Beyond Britain lies Hibernia, almost equal to it in extent but otherwise similar; of a rather long shape, with skies adverse to the ripening seed; but abounding in grass not only luxuriant but also sweet, so that a small part of the day suffices for the cattle to eat their fill, and if they are not removed from the pasture they will go on grazing until they burst."

"Coeli ad maturanda semina iniqui, verum adeo luxuriosa herbis, nan laetis modo, sed etiam dulcibus!" Translated into modern English this passage may be found with others in a work by Mr. Goldwin Smith, sometime Professor of History at Oxford and now at Cornell University in America. He tells us that it is difficult to reap a wheat harvest in a large part of Ireland, and continues:

From Mela to Goldwin Smith and up to the present day how often the assertion has been made—particularly since 1846 191 by the noisy chorus of Irish landowners — that Ireland has been condemned by its climate not to supply the Irish with bread but to supply the English with meat and butter, and that consequently it is the vocation of the Irish people to be shipped over the ocean in order to make way for cows and sheep in Ireland!

It is clear that to establish the facts with regard to the Irish climate is to solve a political issue of great topicality. To be sure, the climate only concerns us here insofar as it is of importance for agriculture. The observations of natural scientists who have measured the rainfall are, given the present inadequate state of

[^1]: "Its'1 natural way to commercial prosperity seems to be to supply with the produce of its grazing and dairy farms the population of England." *

[^2]: * Goldwin Smith, Irish History and Irish Character, Oxford and London, 1861 [p. 3J.—-We know not what to admire more in this work, which sets out to justify English policy in Ireland under a mask of "objectivity", the ignorance of the professor of history or the hypocrisy of the liberal bourgeois. We shall meet with both again.1'

[^3]: 11 Engels has "Ireland's".— Ed. h Cf. this volume, p. 283.— Ed.

[^4]: 7*





**[p. 162]**

Arthur Young considers Ireland to be decidedly damper than England; hence the astonishing ability of the soil to produce grass. He speaks of cases where turnip and stubble fields, left unploughed, have yielded a plentiful hay harvest the following summer, something which is unknown in England. Further, he mentions that Irish wheat is much lighter than that of drier countries; the fields are full of grass and weeds even with the best management, and harvests are so wet and difficult to gather that the yield suffers greatly thereby (Young, Tour, Vol. II, p. 100).

At the same time, however, he draws attention to the fact that the soil of Ireland counteracts the wetness of the climate. The soil is stony everywhere and thus lets the water through more easily.

"Harsh, tenacious, stony, strong LOAMS, difficult to work,- are not uncommon in Ireland, but they are quite different from English CLAYS. If as much rain fell upon the clays of England (a soil very rarely met with in Ireland, and never without much stone) as falls upon the rocks of her sister island, those lands could not be cultivated. But the rocks here are clothed with verdure; those of limestone, with only a thin covering of mould, have the softest and most beautiful turf imaginable" (Vol. II, Part 2, pp. 3, 4).

The limestone is, as is well known, full of cracks and fissures which allow superfluous water to pass through rapidly.

gathering together all earlier observations up to his own time. Dr. Boate (Natural History of Ireland, 1645)I92 describes the winters as mild, 3-4 frosts per year, seldom lasting more than 2-3 days; the Liffey in Dublin scarcely freezing over once in 10-12 years. March is usually dry and fair, but this is followed by a lot of rain; there are rarely 2-3 consecutive days in summer that are completely dry; in late autumn the weather is fine again. Very dry summers are rare; scarcities are never due to drought but mostly caused by the wet. On the plains there is little snow, so that the cattle could stay outside all year round. Occasionally, though, there are snowy years, such as 1635, when people were hard put to find shelter for their cattle (Wakefield, Vol. I, p. 216 ff.).

At the beginning of the last century Dr. Rutty (Natural History of the County of Dublin)h started exact meteorological observations,

[^1]: Wakefield devotes a highly detailed chapter to the climate,3

[^2]: a E. Wakefield, An Account of Ireland, Vol. I, Chapter VI ("Climate").— Ed. b J. Rutty, An Essay towards a Natural History of the County of Dublin, Dublin, 1772.— Ed.





**[p. 163]**

At that time, Rutty was only able to compare the Irish climate with that of London, which, like the climate of the whole of Eastern England, is certainly drier. But if he had had access to material on the West and particularly the North-West of England, he would have found that his description of the Irish climate—the distribution of the winds over the year, the wet summers, in which sugar, salt, etc., spoil in unheated rooms—is entirely applicable to this area, except that the latter is colder in winter.

Rutty also kept lists of the meteorological character of the seasons.3 In the 50 years mentioned there were 16 cold, late or too dry springs; slightly more than in London. Further, 22 hot and dry, 24 wet, 4 changeable summers; somewhat damper than in London, where the number of dry or wet summers was the same; further, 16 fine, 12 wet and 22 changeable autumns, again somewhat wetter and more changeable than in London; and 13 frosty, 14 wet and 23 mild winters, which is considerably wetter and milder than in London.

According to rain measurements made in the Botanical Gardens in Dublin during the ten year period' 1802-11, the total monthly precipitation, in inches, was as follows: December, 27.31; July, 24.15; November, 23.49; August, 22.47; September, 22.27; January, 21.67; October, 20.12; May, 19.50; March, 14.69; April, 13.54; February, 12.32; June, 12.07; average per year, 23.36 (Wakefield, Vol. I, p. 191). These ten years were unusually dry; Kane (Industrial Resources, p. 73) gives the average for 6 years in

[^1]: ;> J. Rutty, An Essay, Vol. II, p. 471.— Ed.





**[p. 164]**

"The frequency of our showers, and not the amount of rainfall itself, has caused the popular notion about the wetness of our climate Sometimes, the spring sowing is a little delayed because of wet weather, but our springs are so frequently cold and late that early sowing is not always advisable. If frequent summer and autumn showers make our hay and corn harvests risky, then vigilance and diligence would be just as successful in such exigencies as they are for the English in their 'CATCHING' HARVESTSb, and improved cultivation would ensure that the seed-corn would aid the peasants' efforts."*

In Londonderry the number of rain-free days varied from 113 to 148 over the 10 years 1791-1802, averaging over 126. Belfast showed the same average. In Dublin, the figure varied from 168 to 205, averaging 179 (Patterson, ibid.).

According to Wakefield's report, harvests in Ireland occur as follows: wheat mostly in September, more rarely in August, seldom in October; barley usually somewhat later than wheat, and oats about a week later than barley, thus fairly frequently in October. After lengthy researches, Wakefield comes to the conclusion that the material for a scientific description of the Irish climate was far from sufficient, and nowhere expresses the opinion that there are any serious obstacles to corn production. Rather, he finds, as we shall see, that the losses suffered during wet harvest-times are due to entirely different factors, and says explicitly:

[^1]: "The soil of Ireland is so fertile, and the climate so favourable, that under a proper system of agriculture, the island will produce not only a sufficiency of corn for its own use, but a superabundance which may be ready at all times to relieve England when she may stand in need of assistance" (Vol. II, p. 61).

[^2]: * Dr. W. Patterson, An Essay on the Climate of Ireland, Dublin, 1804, p. 164.

[^3]: 11 G. }. Symons, British Rainfall over the British Isles, London, Stanford, 1862.—Ed

[^4]: b Engels gives the English words "catching harvests" in brackets after their German equivalent.— Ed.





**[p. 165]**

Corn has been grown in Ireland since ancient times. In the oldest Irish laws, written down long before the arrival of the English, the "sack of wheat" is already a fixed measure of value; in the tributes of subjects to tribal chiefs and other chieftains wheat, barley malt and oatmeal occur almost regularly in particular stipulated quantities.* After the English invasion the growing of corn decreased during the continuing struggles, though without ever ceasing entirely. From 1660 to 1725 it increased again, then falling off once more until about 1780; from 1780-1846 more corn was again sown, although the main crop was potatoes, and since 1846 both corn and potatoes have been steadily losing ground to cattle grazing. If the climate is not suited to the growing of corn, would it have persisted for more than a thousand years?

Admittedly there are parts of Ireland which are less suitable for growing wheat on account of the more frequent rains always found near the mountains—especially in the south and west. As well as good years, these areas often experience series of wet summers, as in 1860-1862, which inflict great harm on the wheat. But wheat is not Ireland's main cereal crop, and Wakefield even complains that too little of it is grown owing to lack of markets—there was no other market but the nearest mill. Similarly, barley was grown almost solely for the illicit stills (evading taxation). The main cereal in Ireland was and is oats. In 1810, at least ten times as much oats was grown as all the oilier cereal crops put together; and as the oats harvest is later than that of wheat and barley, it occurs more often in late September and in October, when the weather is generally fine, especially in the south. And anyway oats can tolerate a good deal of rain.

We have already seen above that, with regard to the amount

[^1]: * Ancient Laws and Institutes of Ireland—Senchus Mor, ï VOLS., DUBLIN, PRINTED FOR HER MAJESTY'S STATIONARY OFFICE, AND PUBLISHED BY ALEXANDER THOM (London, Longmans) 1865 and 1869.194 See Vol. II, pp. 239-51. The value of a sack of wheat was one screpall (denarius) of 20-24 grains of silver. The value of the srrepall has been established by Dr. Pétrie, in The Ecclesiastical Architecture of Ireland, anterior to the Anglo-Norman Invasion, Dublin, 1845, 4°, pp. 212-19.





**[p. 166]**

Looking at the matter impartially, undeterred by the interested outcry of the Irish landowners and the English bourgeoisie, we find that Ireland has areas which are more suited in their soil and climate to cattle-breeding, others more suited to arable farming, and yet others, the vast majority, which are equally suited to both, as is the tcase everywhere. Compared with England, Ireland is on the whole better for cattle-breeding; but compared with France, England itself is better for cattle-breeding. Does it follow that the whole of England should be turned into cattle pastures, that the entire farming population—with the exception of a few shepherds—should be sent to the factory towns or to America, in order to make room for cattle that is bound for France to pay for silks and wines? But that is exactly what the Irish landowners, wishing to raise their ground-rents, and the English bourgeoisie, wishing to depress wages, are demanding for Ireland; Goldwin Smith has said it plainly enough. And yet the social revolution entailed by such a transformation from arable land to pasturage would be far more violent in Ireland than in England. In England, where large-scale farming predominates and the farmhands have already been largely supplanted by machinery, it would mean uprooting a million at most; whereas in Ireland, where small-scale farming and even spade-farming predominate, it would mean



**[p. 167]**

It is evident that even facts of nature become national issues of contention between England and Ireland. But it is also evident that the public opinion of the ruling class in England—and this alone makes itself heard on the Continent—changes according to fashion and its own interests. Today England needs corn quickly and surely—and Ireland is just made for growing wheat; tomorrow England needs meat—Ireland is no good for anything but cattle pasture. The five million Irishmen are by their mere existence a slap in the face of all the laws of political economy. They must go, let them end up where they will!



**[p. 168]**

OLD IRELAND

The classical Greek and Ron-an authors and the fathers of the Church give very little information about Ireland.

However, there exists a native literature that is still comparative- ly rich despite the loss of many Irish writings in the wars of the 16th and 17th centuries. It consists of poems, grammars, glossaries, annals and other historical writings and law-books. With very few exceptions, however, this entire literature, covering the period at least from the 8th to the 17th centuries, exists in manuscript only. As far as the Irish language is concerned, printing has only been in existence for a few years, that is, only since the language began to die out. Thus, only a tiny part of this rich material is accessible.

Of the annals the most important are those by Abbot Tigernach (died 1088), those of Ulster, and particularly those of the Four Masters. The latter were compiled in 1632-36 under the supervi- sion of Michael O'Clery, a Franciscan monk, with the help of three other Seanchaidhes (students of antiquity), in the monastery of Donegal from materials which have nearly all been lost now. They were published from the extant original manuscript from Donegal in a critical edition with English translation by O'Donovan in 1856.* The earlier editions by Dr. Charles O'Conor (the first part of the Four Masters, the Annals of Ulster, etc.) are unreliable in text and translation.1917

Most of these annals begin with the mythical prehistory of Ireland, taking as their basis the old folk legends, which were spun out interminably by the bards of the 9th and 10th centuries and

[^1]: * Annala Rioghachta Eireann. Annals of the Kingdom of Ireland by the Four Masters.

[^2]: EDITED, WITH AN ENGLISH T R A N S L A T I O N , BY DR. J O H N O ' D O N O V A N . 2ND EDIT., Dublin, 1856, 7 vols, in 4°.





**[p. 169]**

Since the thirties of the present century, however, a far more critical spirit has come over Ireland, particularly through Pétrie and O'Donovan. The above-mentioned studies by Pétriea prove that there is complete agreement between the oldest preserved inscriptions from the 6th and 7th centuries and the annals, and

[^1]: * One of the most naive products of that time is The Chronicles of Eri, being the History of the Gaal Sciot Iber, or the Irish People, translated from the original manuscripts in the Phoenician dialect of the Scythian language by O'Connor, London, 1822, 2 vols. The Phoenician dialect of the Scythian language is, of course, Celtic Irish, and the original manuscript is just any verse chronicle. The publisher is Arthur O'Connor, an exile of 1798,196 uncle of the subsequent leader of the English Chartists, Feargus O'Connor, an alleged descendant of the old O'Connors, kings of Connaught, and, to a certain extent, pretender to the Irish throne. Before the title there is a portrait of him, a handsome, jovial, Irish face, with a striking resemblance to his nephew Feargus, grasping a crown in his right hand. Underneath it says: "O'CONNOR—CEAR-RIGE, HEAD OF HIS RACE, AND O'CONNOR, CHIEF OF THE PROSTRATE PEOPLE OF HIS NATION: 'Soumis, pas vaincus [Subjected but undefeated]'."

[^2]: :1 G. Pétrie, The Ecclesiastical Architecture of Ireland, anterior to the Anglo-Norman Invasion, Dublin, 1845.— Ed.





**[p. 170]**

These law-books, which are very numerous, are nearly all awaiting the moment when they will see the light of day. In 1852, on the insistence of Irish students of antiquity, the English Government approved the appointment of a commission for publishing the old laws and institutions of Ireland. But how? The commission consisted of three lords (who are never far away when there is public money to be expended), three lawyers of the highest rank, three Protestant clergymen, Dr. Pétrie, and an officer who is Head of the Irish Survey. Of all these gentlemen only Dr. Pétrie and two of the clergymen, Dr. Graves (now Protestant Bishop of Limerick) and Dr. Todd, could claim to understand anything of the commission's task; of these, Pétrie and Todd have since died. The commission was given the duty of arranging the copying, translation and publication of the old Irish manuscripts of a legal content and were authorised to employ the necessary people for the job. They employed the two best men available: Dr. O'Donovan and Professor O'Curry, who copied a good many manuscripts and made a rough translation; but before anything was ready for publication, both died. Their successors, Dr. Hancock and Professor O'Mahony, then took up the work. So far, the two volumes already mentioned, containing the Senchus Mor, have come out. The publishers admit that only two of the members of the commission, Graves and Todd, have taken part in the work, by making some notes in the proofs. The officer, Sir Th. Larcom, put the original maps of the survey of Ireland at the disposal of the publishers for the verification of place names; Dr. Pétrie soon died, and the other gentlemen restricted their activities to conscientiously drawing their salaries for 18 years.

This is the way public duties are carried out in England, and

[^1]: a J. O'Donovan, Annala Rioghachta Eireann. Annals of the Kingdom of Ireland by the Four Masters, from the earliest period to the year 1616, Dublin, 1856.— Ed.





**[p. 171]**

The Senchus Mor is to the present day our main source on conditions in old Ireland. It is a collection of ancient legal regulations which, according to the introduction (added later),3

was compiled at the behest of St. Patrick and on his advice brought into harmony with Christianity, which was rapidly spreading in Ireland. The High King of Ireland, Laeghaire (428-458, according to the Annals of the Four Masters); the Vice-Kings Core of Munster and Daire, probably a prince of Ulster; further, three bishops: St. Patrick, St. Benignus and St. Cairnech; and finally three law scholars, Dubthach, Fergus and Rossa; these are the men who are said to have composed the "commission" that compiled the book, and no doubt they worked harder for the money than the present commission, which only had to publish the work. The Four Masters gives the year of composition as 438.

The text itself is obviously based on ancient pagan material. The oldest legal formulae contained in it are all composed in verse, with a fixed metre and what is known as consonance, a kind of alliteration, or rather consonantal assonance, which is peculiar to Irish poetry and often leads into rhyme proper. Since it has been established that the old Irish law-books were translated in the 14th century from the so-called Fenian dialect (Bérla Feini), the language of the 5th century, into the Irish current at the time (Introduction [Vol. I], p. XXXVI et passim), it is understandable that in Senchus Mor as well the metre has been obliterated to a certain extent in many places; but it does emerge often enough, along with occasional rhymes and strongly "consonant" passages, in order to lend the text a certain rhythmic fall. It is generally enough simply to read the translation in order to uncover the

[^1]: * JOBBERY is the name given in England to the practice of exploiting government offices to one's own personal advantage, or to that of one's relations and friends; also using public money for indirect bribery to further the ends of a party. The individual act is called a JOB. The English colony in Ireland is the main hotbed of jobbery.

[^2]: a Ancient Laws of Ireland, Vol. I, London, 1865 (Introduction to Senchus Mor).— Ed.





**[p. 172]**

All the manuscripts (the oldest seem to date from the beginning of the 14th century or earlier) contain a number of mostly consistent glosses and longer commenting notes on the text. The glosses are wholly in the spirit of the old glossaries, with word-play deputising for etymology and the explanation of words. The notes are of very different value, often badly distorted and many of them incomprehensible, at least without some knowledge of the other law-books. The age of both is uncertain; but the greater part is probably younger than the English invasion. Since, for all that, they only show very few traces of any developments in law beyond the scope of the text, and even then only in the more precise establishment of detail, the larger, purely explicatory part can safely be used, with discretion, as a source for the older period, too.

The Senchus Mor contains: (1) the law of distraint, i.e. just about the whole legal procedure; (2) the law on hostages, which were handed over by people of different territories during disputes; (3) the law concerning Saerrath and Daerrath (see below)197; and (4) family law. From this book we derive a good deal of useful information on the social life of the age; but as long as many expressions remain unexplained and the other manuscripts are

• ot published, there is much that is still obscure. Apart from the literature, the architectural monuments, churches, round towers, fortifications and inscriptions give us an idea of the condition of the people before the English arrived.

Of the foreign sources, we need only mention a few passages on Ireland in the Scandinavian sagas and the life of St.Malachias by St. Bernard,3 which do not have much to offer; we then come straightway to the first Englishman to have written about Ireland from first-hand knowledge.

Sylvester Gerald Barry, called Giraldus Cambrensis, Archdeacon of Brecknock, was a grandson of the amorous Nesta, daughter of

[^1]: a St. Bernard, De Vita S. Malachiae.—Ed.





**[p. 173]**

The mythical prehistory of Ireland tells of a series of immigrations, taking place one after the other and mostly ending with the subjugation of the island by the new immigrants. The three last are: that of the Firbolgs, that of the Tuatha-de-Dananns, and that of the Milesians or Scots, who are supposed to have come from Spain. Popular Irish writing of history summarily turns the Firbolgs (fir = Irish fear, Latin vir, Gothic vair: man) into Belgians, the Tuatha-de-Dananns (tuatha = Irish people, region, Gothic thiuda) as necessary into Greek Danai or Germanic Danes. O'Donovan is

[^1]: * Giraldi Cambrensis Opera, ed. J. S. Brewer, London, Longmans, 1863.198 — A (weak) English translation of the historical works including the two works already mentioned (The Historical Works of Giraldus Cambrensis) was published in London by Bohn in 1863.





**[p. 174]**

It is beyond doubt that the Irish were a mixed people, even before the English settled among them in their masses. As today, in the 12th century the predominant type was already fair-haired. Giraldus (Top. Hib., Ill, 26) says of two strangers that they had long yellow hair, like the Irish. Nevertheless, there are still two completely different types of black-haired people, particularly in the west. One is tall and well-built with handsome features and curly hair, a type one feels one may have encountered before, in the Italian Alps or in Lombardy; this type occurs chiefly in the south-west. The other, thick-set and short in build, with coarse, straight black hair and a flat, almost negroid face, is more often found in Connaught. Huxley attributes this dark-haired element in the originally blond Celtic population to an Iberian (i.e. Basque) admixture,200 which is no doubt partly true, at least. By the time the Irish make their first definite appearance in history, though, they have become a homogeneous people with a Celtic language, and there is no longer any trace of alien elements apart from the (mostly Anglo-Saxon) slaves acquired through battle or barter.

The pronouncements of the ancient classical writers about this people do not sound very edifying. Diodor relates that the Britons who inhabit the island called Iris (or Irin? It is the accusative 'Ipiv) eat human beings.b Strabo goes into more detail:

[^1]: "Concerning this island" (lerne) "I have nothing certain to tell, except that its in- habitants are more savage than the Britons, since they are man-eaters as well as heavy eaters" (iro Xvcpci-yoi; according to another reading Tror\<pâ-yo C, cabbage-eaters), "and since, further, they count it an honourable thing, when their fathers die, to devour them, and openly to have intercourse, not only with other women, but also with their mothers and sisters."0

[^2]: a J. O'Donovan, op. cit., Vol. I, p. 95.— Ed. b Diodorus Siculus, Bibliothecae historicae, Vol. 5.— Ed. c The Geography of Strabo, with an English translation by Horace Leonard Jones, 8 volumes, London, 1917-32.— Ed.





**[p. 175]**

Berliners still subscribed to the same practical point of view a good thousand years later:

" ..aber Weleta'm. die in Germania sizzent. tie wir Wilzc heizen, die ne saunent si h nicht /e <hedenne da/ sie iro patentes mit niêren rente ezen sulîn, d a n n e die Winnie'"'1 i Notker, <|iioted in Jacob Grimm's Rechtsalte rthüm er}1 p. 488).

And under English rule, we shall see the consumption of human flesh in Ireland make its return more than once. As regards the "phairerogamia" (to borrow Fourier's phrase') with which the Irish are reproached, such things occurred among all uncivilised peoples, and even more so among the particularly amorous Celts. It is- interesting to note that even then the island bore its present native name: his, frin and jerne are identical with Eire, Erinn, and that Ptolemy already knew the present-day name of the capital, Dublin, Eblana (with the correct accent ''Eß\ai>tt).d This is all the more remarkable as the Irish Celts have since times immemorial called it by another name, Athciiath. and Duibhlinn — the black pool — is for them the name of a place on the River Li f fey.

Moreover we find in Pliny's Natural History, IV7, 16, the following passage:

[^1]: " T h e Britons travel there" (to Hibernia) "in boats of willow branches, over which animal hides have been sewn together."' And later Solinus says of the Irish themselves:

[^2]: "'They sail the sea between Hibernia nnd Britannia in boats of willow blanches which they (over with cowhides" (G. Jul. Solini Cosmographia, Ch. 25). In 1810, Wakefield found that all along the west coast of Ireland "no other boats occurred except ones which consisted of a wooden frame covered over with a horse- or oxhide". These boats

[^3]: •' "But the Weletabi who livt in Germany and whom we call Wilze are not ashamed to sav that they ha\e more right to eat their parents than the worms have."— F.d.

[^4]: '' }. Grimm, Deutsche Rechtsalterthümer, Groningen, 1828.— Ed. ' Cli, Fourier, le nouveau monde industriel et sociétaire, ou invention du procédé d'industrie attrayante et naturelle distribuée en séries passionnées, Paris, 1829, pp. 399-400.—f7/.

[^5]: (1 Glaudius l'tolemaeus, Geographia, Book II, Chapter 2, Lipsiae, 1845.— Ed. ' Bliny the Elder, Natural History. Lugduni Batavorum, 1635.— Ed. 8-733





**[p. 176]**

For the rest, however, some symptoms of progress soon become noticeable. Under King Cormac Ulfadha, who is thought to have ruled in the second half of the 3rd century, his son-in-law, Finn Mac Cumhal, is said to have reorganised the Irish militia, the Fianna Eirionn* probably after the model of the Roman legion, with a distinction between light troops and troops of the line; all later Irish armies of which we have details distinguish between kerne—light—and galloglas—heavy—infantry, or troops of the line. The heroic deeds of this Finn were celebrated in many old lays, some of which still exist; these, and perhaps a few Scottish-Gaelic traditions, form the basis of Macpherson's Ossian (Irish Oisin, son of Finn), in which Finn appears as Fingal and the scene has been switched to Scotland.201 In Irish folk-lore Finn lives on as Finn Mac-Caul, a giant to whom some miraculous feat of strength is attributed in almost every locality of the island.

Christianity must have found its way to Ireland quite early, at least on the east coast. Otherwise, there is no explanation for the fact that even long before St Patrick so many Irishmen played an important part in ecclesiastical history. Pelagius the Heretic is usually considered to have been a Welsh monk from Bangor; but there was also an ancient Irish monastery of Bangor, or rather Banchor, near Carrickfergus. And that he comes from here is proved by Hieronymus, who describes him as "stupid and heavy with Scottish gruel" ("scotorum pultibus praegravatus").3 It is the first

[^1]: * Feini, Fenians, is the name given to the Irish nation throughout the Senchus Mor. Feinechus, Fenchus, the law of the Fenians, often stands for Senchus or for some other, lost law-book. Feine, grad feine, is also the designation of the plebs, the lowest free class of people.

[^2]: a S. Eusebius Hieronymus, Commentariorum in Jeremiam Prophetam libri sex. Prologus. In: Patrologiae Series latina, 1865.— Ed.





**[p. 177]**

In all the writings of the early Middle Ages the Irish are called Scots, and the country Scotia. We find this term in Claudian, Isidor, Beda, the geographer of Ravenna, Eginhard and even in Alfred the Great: "Hibernia, which we call Scotland" ("Igbernia the ve Scotland hatadh").202 What is now Scotland was called Caledonia, a foreign name, or Alba, Albania, its native one; the transference of the name Scotia, Scotland, to the northern tip of the eastern island did not take place until the 11th century. The first great wave of emigration of Irish Scots to Alba is supposed to have occurred in the middle of the 3rd century; Ammianus Marcellinus knows of them there as early as A.D. 360.b The emigration took place by the shortest sea-route, from Antrim to the Kintyre peninsula; even Nennius mentions expressly that the Britons, who then occupied the entire Scottish lowlands as far as the Clyde and the Forth, had been attacked by the Scots from the west and by the Picts from the north.' The seventh of the old Welsh historical Triads20* also relates that the gwyddyl ffichti (see below) came from Ireland over the Norse Sea (Môr Llychlin) to Alba and settled on the shores of this sea. The fact that the sea between Scotland and the Hebrides is called "Norse" proves, by the way, that this Triad is more recent than the Norse conquest of the Hebrides. Around the year 500 larger bands of Scots came over. These gradually formed a kingdom of their own, independ- ent both of Ireland and of the Picts. In the 9th century under Kenneth Mac Alpin they finally subjugated the Picts and formed the state to which some 150 years later the name Scotland, Scotia, came to be applied, probably by the Norsemen, for the first time.

In the 5th and 6th centuries Old Welsh sources (Nennius, the Triads) mention raids by the gwyddyl ffichti or Gaelic Picts on Wales; these are generally interpreted as raids by Irish Scots. Gwyddyl is the Welsh form of gavidheal, as the Irish call

[^1]: a Gennadius, Illustrium virorum catalogus, Basiliae, 1529.— Ed. b Animianus Marcellinus, Rerurn gestarum, Lipsiae, 1773.— Ed. c Nennius, Historia Britonum, with an English version by Gunn, London, 1819, p. 15.— Ed. 8*





**[p. 178]**

In the second quarter of the 5th century Patricius (Irish Patrick, Patraic, as the Celts always pronounce the "c" as "k" in the fashion of the ancient Romans) established the domination of Christianity without any violent upheavals. Traffic with Britain, which,had long existed, now became more lively; master-builders and artisans came over and taught the Irish, who had only known dry stone building until then, the use of mortar. But from the 7th to the 12th century the latter was used only in church buildings, which is sufficient proof that its introduction is linked with that of Christianity, and further that from now on the clergy, the representative of foreign culture, was completely divorcing itself from the people in its intellectual development. While the social advance of the people was non-existent or extremely slow, the clergy soon developed a literary culture that was extraordinary for the time. It expressed itself chiefly in its zeal to convert the heathens and to found monasteries, as was the custom of the age. Columba converted the British Scots and the Picts; Gallus (the founder of St. Gallen) and Fridolin the Alemanni, Kilian the Franks of the Main, Virgilius the people of Salzburg; all five were Irish. Similarly, the Anglo-Saxons were converted to Christianity mainly by Irish missionaries. What is more, Ireland was considered all over Europe to be a nursery of learning, so much so that Charlemagne summoned an Irish monk, Albinus, to Pavia as teacher, whither he was later followed by another Irishman, Dungal. Of lthe large number of Irish scholars who were important in their day but are now mostly forgotten, the greatest was the "Father" or, as Erdmann calls him, the "Carolus Magnus3

of mediaeval philosophy"—Johannes Scotus Erigena^ "He was the first with whom from then on true philosophy began," Hegel says of him.c Of all the West Europeans of the 9th century he alone understood Greek, and through his translation of the writings attributed to Dionysius, the Areopagite, he harked back to the last offshoot of the old philosophy, the Alexandrian Neoplatonic school.204 His teaching was very daring for his time: he denied the eternity of damnation, even for the devil, and comes very close to pantheism. For this reason, contemporary orthodoxy did not shrink from slandering him. It was all of two centuries before the

[^1]: a Charlemagne.— Ed h John the Scot.— Ed. c G. W. F. Hegel, Vorlesungen über die Geschichte der Philosophie, Vol. 3, Berlin, 1836.— Ed.





**[p. 179]**

But before this development of higher culture could influence the people, it was interrupted by the raids of the Norsemen. These raids, which form the staple ingradients of Scandinavian — particularly Danish — patriotism, came too late and emanated from nations too small for them to culminate in conquest, colonisation and the formation, of states on any large scale, as had been the case with the earlier incursions of the Germanic tribes. As far as historical development is concerned, the advantages they be- queathed are quite imperceptible compared with the immense and—even for Scandinavia—fruitless disturbances they caused.

At the end of the 8th century, Ireland was far from being inhabited by a single nation. A supreme kingship over the whole island existed only for appearance, and even that was by no means permanent. The provincial kings, whose number and territory were continually changing, were constantly at war with one another, and the smaller local princes also had their private feuds. On the whole, however, certain rules seem to have prevailed in these internal struggles which kept the devastation within definite bounds, so that the country did not suffer too much. But things were about to change. In 795, a few years after the first raid on England by this same predatory people, Norsemen landed on the island of Rathlin, off the coast of Antrim, and burnt everything down. In 798, they landed near Dublin and after that they are mentioned almost every year in the annals as heathens, foreigners, and pirates, never without the addition of losccadh (burning down) of one or several places. Their settlements in the Orkneys, Shetlands and Hebrides (Southern Isles, Sudhreyjar of the Old Norse sagas) served them as a base for operations against Ireland, as well as against what was to be Scotland, and against England. In the middle of the 9th century they were in possession of Dublin,** which, according to

[^1]: * More about Erigena's doctrine and works in Erdmann, Grundriss der Geschichte der Philosophie, 2nd edition, Berlin, 1869, Vol. 1, pp. 241-47. Erigena, who was not, however, a clergyman, gives an early example of Irish wit. During a meal with Charles the Bald, King of France (who was sitting opposite him), he was asked by the King how great was the difference between a Scot and a sot, to which Erigena replied, "The width of a table."

[^2]: ** The claim bv Snorri in the Haraldsaga ' that the sons of Harald Fairhair—Thorgils and Frodi—were the first Norsemen to take possession of Dublin — that is, at least 50 years later than stated — is in direct contradiction with all the contemporary Irish sources, which for this period are unquestionably authentic. Snorri is obviously confusing Thorgils, son of Harald Fairhair, with the Thorgils mentioned below ( = Turgesius).





**[p. 180]**

Lodbrôk in the Snake Tower of King Ella of Northumberland, the Krâkumâl, composed about the year 1000.2<)b In this song, the old pagan savagery makes one final outburst, as it were. On the pretext of singing the heroic deeds of King Ragnar, the raids of the entire Norse people in their own land as well as all along the coasts from Dünamünde to Flanders, Scotland (here called Skotland, perhaps for the first time) and Ireland are briefly described. Of Ireland it is said:

By the first half of the 9th century a Norse Viking, Thorgils, called Turgesius by the Irish, managed to subjugate Ireland

[^1]: "We hew'd with our swords, heap'd high the slain, Glad was the wolf's brother of the furious battle's feast; Iron struck brass-shields; Ireland's ruler, Marsteinn, Did not starve the murder-wolf or eagle; In Vedhrafiördhr the raven was given a sacrifice.

[^2]: We hew'd with our swords, started a game at dawn, A merry battle against three kings at Lindiseyri; Not many could boast that they fled unhurt from there. Falcon fought wolf for flesh, the wolf's fury devoured many; The blood of the Irish flow'd in streams on the beach in the battle."*

[^3]: * "Hiuggu ver medh hiörvi, hverr lâthverr of annan; gladhr vardh géra brôdhir getu vidh sôknar laeti, let ei örn ne ylgi, sa er Irlandi styrdhi, (mot vardh malms ok rîtar) Marsteinn konungr fasta; vardh î Vedhra firdhi valtafn gefit hrafni.

[^4]: Hiuggu ver medh hiörvi, hâdhum sudhr at morni leik fyrir Lindiseyri vidh lofdhûnga threnna;





**[p. 181]**

In anticipation of the imminent decisive battle, the Norsemen who had settled in Ireland, and on whom Leinster was dependent (the King of Leinster, Maolmordha, had ascended to the throne with their help in 999 and had kept it ever since thanks to them), sent messengers to the Southern Islands, and the Orkneys, to Denmark and Norway to request reinforcements, which duly arrived in large numbers. Njâl's Saga207 tells how Jarl Sigurd Laudrisson prepared his departure in the Orkneys, how Thorstein Siduhallsoon, Hrafn the Red and Erlinger of Straumey went with him and how he arrived at Dublin (Durflin) on Palm Sunday with all his army:

"Brodhir and all his army came too. Brodhir tried to learn by means of sorcery how the battle would go; the answer he got was this: if the battle were to be fought on Friday, King Brian would win the victory but lose his life, and if the battle were to be fought earlier, all Brian's opponents would lose their lives. Then Brodhir said that they should not join battle before Friday."*1

[^1]: fârr âtti thvî fagna (fell margr î gyn ûlfi, haukr sleit hold medh vargi), at hann heill thadhan kaemi; Yra blôdh î oegi aerit fell um skaeru."a

[^2]: Vedhrafiördhr is, as we have said, Waterford; I do not know whether Lindiseyri has been located anywhere. At any rate, it does not mean Leinster, as Johnstone translates it*; the eyri (sandy spit of land, Danish ore) indicates a quite definite locality. Valtafn can also mean falcon feed, and is mostly so translated here, but as the raven is Odin's holy bird, the word obviously carries both meanings.

[^3]: a In his translation, Engels reproduces the old alliterative verse of the original.— Ed.

[^4]: h J. Johnstone, Lodbrokar-Quida; or, the Death-Song of Lodbroc, London, 1782.— Ed.

[^5]: c More precisely: 845.— Ed. d Apart from minor deviations reflecting Engels's rendering of the original text, the English translation here and below follows Njal's Saga, translated by Magnus Magnusson and Hermann Palsson, Penguin Books, 1960.— Ed.





**[p. 182]**

"King Brian had already reached the fortress" (Dublin) "with all his army. On Friday the army" (of the Norsemen) "came marching out of the fortress, and both armies drew up in battle array. Brodhir was on one flank and King Sigtrygg" (King of the Dublin Norsemen, according to the Annals of Inisfallen) "on the other. It should be said that King Brian did not wish to fight on Friday; so a wall of shields was formed round him, and his arm)' was drawn up in front of it. Ulf Hraeda was on the flank facing Brodhir, and on the other flank facing Sigtrygg were Ospak and King Brian's sons. In the centre was Kerthialfadh, with the banner aloft before him."

When the battle got underway, Brodhir was chased by Ulf Hraeda into a wood where he found shelter. Jar! Sigurd had a great deal of trouble with Kerthialfadh, who reached the standard and slew the standard-bearer as well as the next man to seize the standard. Then they all refused to bear the standard, and Jarl Sigurd took the standard off its staff and hid it under his clothes. Soon afterwards, he was pierced by a spear, and, at this point, his part of the army seems to have been defeated. Meanwhile, Ospak had attacked the Norsemen in the rear, turning Sigtrygg's flank after a hard struggle.

"And at this all his troops broke into flight. Thorstein Siduhallsson stopped running while the others were fleeing, and tied up his shoe-thong. Kerthialfadh asked him why he was not running like the others. 'Because,' said Thorstein, 'I cannot reach home tonight, for my home is out in Iceland.' Kerthialfadh spared his life."

Now Brodhir saw from his hiding-place that Brian's army was pursuing the fugitives, and that few men were left to man the wall of shields. Then he ran from the woods, broke through the wall of shields and slew the King (Brian, who was 88 years old, was obviously unable to take part in the battle and had stayed in the camp).

But the pursuers returned, surrounded Brodhir and took him alive.

According to the Annals of Inisfallen the Norse army was divided into three sections. The first consisted of the Dublin Norsemen and 1,000 Norwegian volunteers, who were all clad in

[^1]: "Then Brodhir shouted, 'Let the word go round that Brodhir has felled Brian.' "

[^2]: "Ulf Hraeda slit open his belly and led him round an oak tree so that his intestines wound round the trunk; and Brodhir did not die before they had all been pulled out of him. Brodhir's men were all slain."





**[p. IV]**

"A.D. 1013" (given instead of 1014 owing to a recurrent error). "The foreigners of all western Europe assembled against Brian and Maelseachlainn" (usually called Malachy, King of Meath under Brian's sovereignty) "and they brought with them ten hundred men in coats of mail. A fierce, furious, violent and bitter battle was fought between them, the like of which had never been seen in those days, at Cluaintarbh" (ox-meadow, now Clontarf) "on the very Friday before Easter. In this battle were slain Brian, 88 years old, Murchadh, his son, 63 years old, Conaing, his nephew, Toirdhealbhach, his grandson" (There follow a multitude of names.) "The" (enemy) "troops were finally driven back from the Tulcainn to Athcliath" (Dublin) "by Maelseachlainn by dint of heavy fighting, intrepidity and laying about the foreigners and the Lein Sterinen; and there fell Maelmordha, son of Murchadh, son of Finn, King of Leinster and there were also innumerable dead among the men of Leinster. Also slain were Dubhgall, son of Amhlanibh" (usually called Anlaf or Olaf) "and Gillaciarain, son of Gluniairn, two subordinate commanders (tanaisi) of the foreigners, Sichfrith, son of Lodar, Jarl of the Orkneys (iarla insi h Oirt), Brodar, leader of the men from Denmark, who was the man who slew Brian. The ten hundred men in coats of mail were cut to pieces, and at least 3,000 of the foreigners were slain there."a

Njârs Saga was written down in Iceland about a hundred years after the battle; the Irish annals are based, at least in part, on contemporary reports. The two sources are completely indepen- dent of each other; not only do they agree on the main points, but they also complement each other. We only learn from the Irish annals who Brodhir and Sigtrygg were. Sigurd Laudrisson is there called Sichfrith, son of Lodar; Sigfrith is, in fact, the correct Anglo-Saxon form of the Old Norse name Sigurd, and the Scandinavian names in Ireland — on coins as well as in the annals—mainly occur not in the Old Norse but in the Anglo- Saxon form. The names of Brian's subordinate commanders have been modified in Njâl's Saga to suit the Scandinavian tongue; one of them, Ulf Hraeda, is even wholly Old Norse, but it would be rash indeed to infer, as some do, from this that Brian, too, had Norsemen in his army. Ospak and also Kerthialfadh seem to be Celtic names; the latter perhaps distorted from the Toirdbeal-

[^1]: a Annales Magistrorum. In: Rerum Iliberniinrvm Saiptores, Vol. III. But kinghamiae, 1 820.— Ed.





**[p. 184]**

It is evident that our knowledge of this battle is fairly detailed and authentic, considering the barbarism of the times. There would not be many 11th-century battles about which we have such definite and consistent reports from both parties. This did not deter Professor Goldwin Smith from describing it as a "SHADOWY3 conflict" (loc. cit.,b p. 48). In the esteemed professor's head the most robust facts do, indeed, very often assume a "shadowy" form.

After the defeat at Clontarf the raids of the Norsemen became less frequent and less dangerous. The Dublin Norsemen soon came under the dominion of the neighbouring Irish princes and in a generation or two were assimilated by the native population. As the sole recompense for the havoc they had wreaked, the Scandinavians left the Irish three or four cities and the beginnings of a trading urban population.

The further back in history we go, the fainter are the characteristics distinguishing peoples of the same tribe one from the other. On the one hand, this is due to the nature of the sources, which become scantier the older they are, confining themselves to essentials; on the other hand, however, it is due to the development of the peoples themselves. The individual branches of the tribe were the closer to one another, were more alike, the smaller the distance separating them from the original stock. Jacob Grimm' quite rightly always treated all reports from the Roman historians describing the campaign of the Cimbri209 to Adam of Bremen and Saxo Grammaticus, all the literary

[^1]: a Engels gives this English word in brackets after the German equivalent.— Ed. b Irish History and Irish Character, Oxford and London, 1861.— Ed c J. Grimm, Deutsche Rechtsalterthümer, Göttingen, 1828.— Ed.





**[p. 185]**

and the sagas, all the law-books from the Leges barbarorum21 ] to the Old Danish and Old Swedish laws and the Germanic precedents, as equally valuable sources for the German national character, German customs and legal procedure. The specific character may only be of local significance, but the character reflected in it is common to the whole tribe; and the older the sources, the more these local differences tend to disappear.

Just as the Scandinavians and the Germans of the 7th and 8th centuries were less different than today, originally the Irish Celts and Gallic Celts must have been more alike than are the Irishmen and Frenchmen of today. We should not, then, be surprised to find a number of traits in Caesar's description of the Gaulsa which Giraldus twelve centuries later ascribes to the Irish, and which we find in the Irish national character even today, despite the admixture of so much Germanic blood212

[^1]: Gaius Julius Caesar, Commentarii de hello Galileo.— Ed.





FROM THE PREPARATORY MATERIALS



