---
Volume: 21
Document_Title: "2. K. Marx. Outline of a Report on the Irish Question Delivered to the German Workers' Educational Society in London on December 16, 1867 "
Page_Range: "227-240"
---

# 2. K. Marx. Outline of a Report on the Irish Question Delivered to the German Workers' Educational Society in London on December 16, 1867 



**[p. 194]**

Karl Marx

[OUTLINE OF A REPORT ON THE IRISH QUESTION DELIVERED TO THE GERMAN WORKERS'

EDUCATIONAL SOCIETY IN LONDON ON DECEMBER 16, 1867]228

I

What distinguishes Fenianism? Actually, it originates from the Irish Americans, Irishmen [living] in America. They are the initiators and LEADERS. But in Ireland itself the movement took root (and is still really rooted) only in the mass of the people, the LOWER ORDERS. That is what characterises it. In all earlier Irish movements the people only followed the aristocracy or MIDDLE-CLASS MEN, and always the Catholic churchmen. The Anglo-Irish chiefs and the priests during the rising against Cromwell; even James II, King of England, was at the head in the war against William III; the Protestant Republicans of Ulster (Wolfe Tone, Lord Fitzgerald) in the 1798 revolution,229 and, finally, in this century the BOURGEOIS O'Connell supported by the Catholic clergy, who also played a leading role in al Learlier movements excepting 1798. The Catholic clergy decreed a ban on Fenianism, which it did not lift until it realised that its attitude would deprive it of all influence on the Irish masses.

II

Here is what baffles the English: they find the present regime mild compared with England's former oppression of Ireland. So why this most determined and irreconcilable form of opposition now? What I want to show—and what even those Englishmen who side with the Irish and concede them the right to secession from England do not see—is that the [oppression] since 1846, though less barbarian in form, has been in effect destructive, leaving no alternative but Ireland's voluntary emancipation by England or life-and-death struggle.



**[p. III]**

Concerning past history the FACTS are available in any history book. Hence, I shall give only a few, firstly, to clarify the difference between the present epoch and the past and, secondly, to bring out a few points about the character of those who are now called the Irish people.

A) THE ENGLISH IN IRELAND BEFORE THE PROTESTANT REFORMATION

1172. Henry II. Conquered less than 1/3 of Ireland. NOMINAL CONQUEST. A gift from Pope Adrian IV (Englishman). Some 400 years later another Pope (under Elizabeth) (1576), Gregory XIII, took back the present from the English (Elizabeth).230 T h e "ENGLISH PALE".231 CAPITAL: Dublin. Mixing of English COMMON COLONISTS with Irish, and of ANGLO N o r m a n nobles with Irish chiefs. Otherwise, the war of conquest was conducted (originally) as against RED INDIANS. N O English reinforcements sent to Ireland until 1565 (Elizabeth).

Elizabeth. T h e plan was to exterminate the Irish at least u p to the RIVER Shannon, t o take their LAND and settle English colonists in their place, etc. In battles against Elizabeth the still Catholic Anglo-Irish fought with the NATIVES against the English. T h e avowed plan of the English. * Clearing the island of the natives, and stocking it with loyal Englishmen. They succeeded only to plant a landowning aristocracy. English Protestant "adventurers"232 (mer- chants, usurers), who obtained from the English crown the confiscated lands, and "gentlemen undertakers", who were to plant the ceded estates with native English families.

governed only the Pale. Persecution of Catholics.

* Elizabeth settled Munster, James I, Ulster, but Leinster and Connaught have not yet been purged. Charles I tried to purge Connaught.

[^1]: B)* PROTESTANT EPOCH.* ELIZABETH. JAMES I. CHARLES I. CROMWELL. COLONISATION PLAN (16TH AND 17TH CENTURIES)

[^2]: James I. Ulster. (Jacobite plantation, 1609-12.) British undertak- ers, "to stock the confiscated, stolen lands with Irish". *Not until 1613 are IRISH considered ENGLISH subjects; previously they were looked u p o n as "OUTLAWS- and ENFMIES- and the IRISH PARLIAMENT ~33





**[p. 196]**

Irish Revolution of 1641. August 1649 Cromwell landing in Dublin. (Followed by Ireton, Lambert, Fleetwood, Henry Crom- well.) In 1652 the 2nd complete conquest of Ireland completed. Division of spoils: the Government itself, the "adventurers" who had lent £360,000 for the 11 years of war, the officers and soldiers, by the Acts of the English Parliament, 12 August 1652, and 26 September 1653.'M Smite the Amalekites235 of the Irish Nation hip and thigh, and replant the re-devastated [land] with new colonies of brand-new Puritan English.* — Bloodshed, devastation, depopula- tion of entire counties, removal of their inhabitants to other regions, sale of many Irish into slavery in the West Indies.

By engaging in the conquest of Ireland, Cromwell put paid to the English Republic.

Thence the Irish mistrust of the English people's party.

*C) RESTORATION OF THE STUARTS. WILLIAM III. SECOND IRISH REVOLT, AND THE CAPITULATION ON TERMS.23''

1660—1692"*

The BRITISH were then more numerous in Ireland than at any other time. * Never higher than 3/11, never lower than 2/11 of the Irish population.

1684. Charles II begins to favour the Catholic interest of Ireland, and to enlist a Catholic army.

1685. James II gives full rein to the Catholics of Ireland. Catholic army increased and favoured. The Catholics soon began to declare that the Acts of Settlement must be repealed and the proprietors of 1641 re-established. James calls some Irish regi- ments to England.

1689. William III in England, 12 March 1689: James landed at Kinsale at the head of Irish soldiers. Limerick capitulates to William III, 1691. Shameful violation of the treaty, already under William III, still more under Anne.

a) All notions of "planting" the country with English and Scotch yeomen or tenant farmers were discarded.* Settling German and

[^1]: D) IRELAND DEFRAUDED AND HUMBLED TO THE DUST. 1692-JULY 4, 1776

[^2]: In the manuscript there follows "(1701) (Anne)".— Ed.





**[p. 197]**

* 1698. The Anglo-Irish Parliament (like obedient colonists) passed, on the command of the mother country, a prohibitory tax on Irish woollen goods export to foreign countries.

1698. In the same year, the English Parliament laid a heavy tax on the import of the home manufactures in England and Wales, and absolutely prohibited their export to other countries. She struck down the manufactures of Ireland, depopulated her cities, and threw the people back upon the land.

The Williamite (imported lords) absentees.237 Cry against absentee landlords since 1692.

Likewise legislation of England against Irish cattle.

1698: Molyneux pamphlet for the independence of the Irish Parliament (i.e. the English Colony in Ireland) against the English.3

Thus began the struggle of the English Colony in Ireland and the English Nation. Simultaneously, struggle between the Anglo-Irish Colony and the Irish Nation. William III resisted the shameful attempts of the English and Anglo-Irish Parliaments to violate the treaties of Limerick and Galway.

ß) Queen Anne. (1701-13; George until 1776). Penal Code239, built up by the Anglo-Irish Parliament with assent of the English Parliament. Most infamous means to make Protestant Proselytes amongst the Irish Catholics by regulations of "Property". A code for the transfer of "Property" from Catholics to Protestants, or to make "Anglicanism" a proprietary title. (Education. Personal disabilities.) (No Catholic able to be a private soldier.) To teach the Catholic religion was a transportable felony, to convert a Protestant to Catholicism an act of treason. To be a Catholic Archbishop—banishment, if returning from banishment—act of high treason; hanged, disembowelled alive, and afterwards quar- tered. Experiment to coerce the mass of the Irish nation into the Anglican religion. Catholics deprived of vote for members of Parlia- ment239

This Penal Code intensified the hold of the Catholic Priesthood upon the Irish people.

The poor people fell into habits of indolence. During the palmy days of Protestant ascendancy and Catholic degradation, the Protestants did not encroach upon the Catholics in numbers*

[^1]: a W. Molyneux, The Case of Ireland's Being Bound by Acts of Parliament in England Stated, Dublin, 1698.— Ed.





**[p. 198]**

a) Before dealing with this transition period, what was the result of English terrorism?

* English incomers absorbed into the Irish people and Catholicised. The towns founded by the English Irish. No English colony (except Ulster Scotch) but English landowners. The North American Revolution forms the first turning-point in Irish history.

ß) 1777 the British army surrendered at Saratoga Springs to the American "rebels". British cabinet forced to make concessions to the Nationalist (English) party in Ireland. 1778. Roman Catholic Relief Billa (passed by the Anglo-Irish Parliament).240 (Catholics were still excluded from acquiring by purchase, or as tenants, any freeholds241 interest.) 1779. Free trade with Great Britain. Almost all restraints put upon Irish industry swept away.

1782. T h e Penal Code still further released. T h e Roman Catholics allowed to acquire freehold property for life, or in fee simple, a n d — t o open schools.

1783. Equal rights of the Anglo-Irish Parliament!" Winter 1792-93. After the French Government had annexed Belgium, and England resolved upon French war, another portion of the Penal Code was released. Irish could become Colonels in Army, elective franchise for Irish Parliament etc. Rebellion of 1798.c Belfast Republicans (Wolfe Tone, Lord Fitzgerald). Irish peasants not ripe.

[^1]: Anglo-Irish House of Commons voted for the Act of Union passed in 1800.242 By the Legislature and Customs Union of Britain and Ireland closed the struggle between the Anglo-Irish and the English. T h e colony protested against the illegal Act of Union.*

[^2]: 1801-1846

[^3]: a) 1801-1831. At this time (after the end of the war243) a movement for emancipation of Catholics under way among Irish and English (1829).

[^4]: a The Bill for Relieving His Majesty's Roman Catholic Subjects from Certain Pains and Penalties Imposed on Them by an Act of King William.— Ed.

[^5]: b An Act for Removing and Preventing All Doubts Which Have Arisen, of Might Arise, Concerning the Exclusive Rights (The Renunciation Act, 1783).—Ed.

[^6]: c See this volume, p. 194.— Ed.





**[p. 199]**

Dublin

Master woollen manufacturers 1800 Hands employed Master woolcombers Hands employed Carpet manufacturers Hands employed Silk-loom weavers at work

91 1840 12 4,918 " 602 30 1834 5 230 " 66 13 1841 1 720 " 0 2,500 1840 250

Kilkenny

Blanket manufacturers 1800 Hands employed

56 3,000

1822 42 925

Balbriggan

Calico-looms at work 1799 2,500 1841 226

[^1]: Wicklow

[^2]: Handlooms at work 1800 1,000 1841

[^3]: Cork

[^4]: Braid weavers , 1800 1,000 Worsted weavers " 2,000 Hosiers " 300 Woolcombers " 700 Cottonweavers " 2,000

[^5]: 1834 40 90 28 110 220

[^6]: etc. The linen industry (Ulster) did not compensate for this.a

[^7]: " T h e cotton manufacture of Dublin, which employed 14,000 operatives, has been destroyed; the 3,400 silk looms have been destroyed; the s e r g e b manufacture, which employed 1,491 operatives, has been destroyed; the flannel manufacture of R a t h d r u m , ihe blanket manufacture of Kilkenny, the camlet' trade of Bandon, the worsted manufactures of Waterford, the ratteen and frieze manufactures of Carrick-on-Suir have been destroyed. O n e business alone survives! T h a t fortunate business — which the Union Act has not struck down — that favoured, and

[^8]: a This sentence is in German in the manuscript.— Ed, h Marx gives the G e r m a n equivalent Sersche in brackets.— Ed. ' Marx gives the German equivalent Camelot in brackets.— Ed.





**[p. 200]**

Every time Ireland was about to develop industrially, she was CRUSHED and reconverted into a purely AGRICULTURAL LAND. After the latest General Census of 1861: * Agricultural Population of Ireland

(including all cottiers244 and farm labourers with their families)* 4,286,019 In the 798 TOWNS (of which many were in fact small market towns) 1,512,948

5,798,967

Therefore (1861) approximately 4/5 purely agricultural, and actually perhaps 6/7 if market towns are also counted.

Ireland is therefore purely * agricultural: "Land is life" (Justice Blackburne). Land became the great object of pursuit. The people had now before them the choice between the occupation of land, at any rent, or starvation. System of rack-renting.

"The lord of the land was thus enabled to dictate his own terms, and therefore it has been that we have heard of the payment of £5, 6, 8, and even as much as £10 per acre. Enormous rents, low wages, farms of an enormous extent, let by rapacious and indolent proprietors to monopolising landjobbers, to be relet by intermediate oppressors, for five times their value, among the wretched starvers on potatoes and water."

State of popular starvation.*

Corn Laws in England245 create a monopoly to A CERTAIN EXTENT for the export of IRISH CORN to England. * The average export of grain in the first 3 years following the passage of the Act of Union about 300,000 qrs,

1820 over 1 million qrs, 1834 yearly average of 2V2 million qrs. Amount to pay rent to absentees, and interest to mortgagees (1834), over 30 million dollars (about 7 million pounds sterling). Middlemen accumulated fortunes that they would not invest in the improve- ment of land, and could not, under the system which prostrated manufactures, invest in machinery etc. All their accumulations were sent therefore to England for investment. An official document published by the British Government shows that the transfers of British securities from England to Ireland, i.e., the investment of Irish capital in England, in the 13 years following the adoption of free trade in 1821, amounted to as many millions of pounds sterling, and thus was Ireland forced to contribute

Many pigs and export of same.

1831-1841. Accretion of Ireland's population from 7,767,401 to 8,175,238

In 10 YEARS 407,837 In the same period there emigrated (somewhat more than 40,000 per YEAR) 450,873 The total being 858,710 * O'Connell. Repeal Movement, Lichfield-House Contract with Whigs.246 Partial famines. Insurrection Acts, Arms Acts, Coercion

Acts.**

IV

THE PERIOD OF THE LAST 20 YEARS (FROM 1846). * CLEARING OF THE ESTATE OF IRELAND*

Earlier, REPEATED CASES OF PARTIAL FAMINE. NOW GENERAL. This new period was ushered in by the potato blight (1846-47), starvation and the consequent exodus.

Over one million die, in part directly from hunger, in part from DISEASES, etc. (caused by hunger). In 9 years, 1847-55, 1,656,044 left the country.

The revolution of the old agricultural system was, originally, but a natural result of the barren fields. People fled. * (Families clubbed together to send away the youngest and most enterprising.) * Hence, of course, the pooling of small leaseholds and substitution of pasturage for crop farming.

However, soon circumstances arose whereby this became a conscious and deliberate system.

Firstly, the chief factor: Repeal of the Corn Laws was one of the direct consequences of the Irish disaster. As a result, Irish corn lost its monopoly on the English market in the ordinary years. Corn prices dropped. Rents could no longer be paid. In the meantime, the price of meat, wool and other animal products has been rising steadily in the last 20 years. Tremendous growth of the wool industry in England. Pig-raising was partly connected with

[^1]: a In an earlier passage in his manuscript, after the words "if market towns are also counted" (this section, pp. 199-200), Marx outlines this paragraph thus: "b) 1831-1847. O'Connel", after which the following words are crossed out: "REPEAL MOVEMENT. Lichfield-House Contract with Whigs. (Useless buildings etc.) Not to be forgotten that during the entire period successive INSURRECTION ACTS, ARMS ACTS, COERCION ACTS".— Ed.



Contributing circumstances that made this systematic:

Secondly: Reorganisation of agriculture in England. Caricature of same in Ireland.

Thirdly: The despairing flight of starving Irish to England filled basements, hovels, WORKHOUSES in Liverpool, Manchester, Birming- ham, Glasgow with *men, women, children in a state almost of starvation *.

Act of Parliament passed (1847-48) that Irish * landlords had to support their own paupers *. (The English Pauper Law is extended to Ireland.3) Hence, the Irish (especially English) landlords, mostly deep in debt, try *to get rid of the people and clear their estates*.

Fourthly: * Encumbered Estates Act (1853?)b:

"The landlord was ruined, for he could collect no rents, and he was at the same time liable for the payment of enormous taxes for the maintenance of his poor neighbours. His land was encumbered with mortgages and settlements, created when food was high, and he could pay no interest; and now a law was passed, by aid of which property could be summarily disposed of at a public sale, and the proceeds distributed among those who had legal claims upon it."*

ABSENTEE PROPRIETORS (English capitalists, INSURANCE SOCIETIES etc.) thereby multiplied, equally former MIDDLEMEN etc., who wanted to run their farms on modern economic lines.

Eviction of farmers partly by friendly agreement terminating tenure. - But much more EVICTION on a large scale (forcibly by CROWBAR BRIGADE, beginning with the destruction of roofs), forcible EJECTION. (Also used as political retribution.) This has continued since 1847 to this day. (Abercorn, Viceroy of Ireland.) African razzias * (razzias of the little African kings). (People driven from the land. The starving population of the towns largely increased.)

Let us now see how this system affected the land in Ireland, where conditions are quite different from those in England.

[^1]: "The tenantry are turned out of the cottages by scores at a time Land agents direct the operation. The work is done by a large force of police and soldiery. Under the protection of the latter, the 'crowbar brigade' advances to the devoted township, takes possession of the houses The sun that rose on a village sets on a desert." (Galway Paper, 1852.) (Abercorn.)*

[^2]: a An Act to Amend an Act of the Tenth Year of Her Present Majesty, for Amending the Laws Relating to the Removal of the Poor.— Ed.

[^3]: b An Act for Continuing and Amending the Act for Facilitating the Sale and Transfer of Encumbered Estates in Ireland.— Ed.





**[p. 1866]**

* Decrease in cereal crops Decrease in green crops*

1861-65 428,041 acres 107,984 acres 42,876 acres 20,077 acres

Total 470,917 128,061

DECREASE OF * YIELD PER STATUTE ACRE OF EVERY CROP 3

1847-1865 per cent: the exact decrease: oats 16.3, flax 47.9, turnips 36.1, potatoes 50. Some years would show a greater decrease, but on the whole it has been gradual since 1847.

Estimated Average Produce per Statute Acre

Wheat Potatoes Flax cwts tons stones (14 lbs.)

1851 12.5 5.1 38.6 7866 11.3 2.9 24.9*

Though Ireland exported considerable quantities of wheat in the past, it is now said to be good only for cultivating OATS'3 (the yield of which per acre also continuously decreases).

In fact: 1866 Ireland shipped out only 13,250 qrs of wheat against 48,589 qrs shipped in (that is, almost fourfold). Meanwhile, it shipped out approximately one million qrs of oats (for £1,201,737).

* Since the exodus, the land has been underfed and overworked, partly from the injudicious consolidation of farms, and partly because, under the corn-acre system,247 the farmer in a great measure trusted to his labourers to manure the land for him. Rents and profits (where the farmer is no peasant farmer) may increase, although the produce of the soil decreases. The total produce may diminish, and still greater part of it be converted into surplus produce, falling to the landlord and (great) farmer. And the price of the surplus produce has risen.*

Hence, sterilisation (gradual) of the land, as in Sicily by the ancient Romans (ditto in Egypt).

We shall speak of the livestock, but first about the population.

[^1]: a See this volume, p. 191.— Ed. b This English word is given in the manuscript in brackets after the German equivalent Hafer.— Ed.



1801: 5,319,867; 1841: 8,222,664; 1851: 6,515,794; 1861: 5,764,543. If the trend continues, there will be 5,300,000 "in 1871, that is, less than in 1801. I shall now show, however, that the population will be lower still in 1871, even though the emigration rate remains constant.

EMIGRATION

Emigration ACCOUNTS naturally for part of the decrease. In 1845-66 there emigrated 1,990,244, or approximately 2,000,000 IRISH. (Unheard of.) (About 2/5 of the TOTAL emigration from the UNITED KINGDOM in 1845-66 which was 4,657,588.) In 1831-41 emigration approximately equalled half the accretion of population during the decade, and after 1847 it was considerably higher than the accretion.

However, emigration alone *does not account for the decrease of the population since 1847*.

The accretion (annual) in 1831-41 was 1.1 per cent, or ABOUT 1 Vio P e r c e n t a year. If the population had increased in the same proportion in 1841-51, it would have been 9,074,514 in 1851. In fact, however, it was only 6,515,794. Consequently, the deficit was 2,558,720. Out of this figure, emigration accounted for 1,274,213. That leaves 1,284,507 unaccounted for. Over a million, but not the whole deficit of 1,284,507, died in the FAMINE. Hence, evidently, natural population growth decreased in 1841-51.

This is borne out by the decade of 1851-61. No FAMINE. The population decreased from 6,515,794 to 5,764,543. Absolute decrease: 751,251. Yet emigration in this period was over 1,210,000. Henoe there was an accretion of NEARLY 460,000 during the ten years. Because 751,251+460,000 = the number of emigrants= 1,211,251. Emigration claimed almost triple the accre- tion. The rate of accretion was 0.7 per cent per year, hence considerably lower than the 1.1 per cent of 1831-41.

The explanation is very simple. * The increase of a population by births must principally depend on the proportion which those between 20 and 35 bear to the rest of the community. Now the

[^1]: DECREASE OF THE NATURAL ANNUAL ACCRETION OF THE POPULATION



PHYSICAL DETERIORATION OF THE POPULATION

* In 1806, with a total population of 5,574,107, there was an excess of males over females by 50,469, whilst in 1867, with a total population of 5,557,196, there is an excess of the females over males.* At the same time not only a relative, but an absolute increase in the number *of deaf-mutes,3 blind, insane, idiotic, and decrepit inhabitants. Contrasting 1851 with 1861, whilst the population had decreased enormously, the number of deaf-mutes had increased by 473, on their former total of 5,180; the lame and decrepit by 225, on their former total of 4,375; the blind by 1,092, on their former total of 5,767; the lunatic and idiotic, by the immense number of 4,118, on their former total of 9,980; mounting up, in 1861, notwithstanding the decrease in the population, to 14,098.

Wages have not risen more than 20% since the potato famine. The price of potatoes has risen nearly 200%, and the rise* for essential foodstuffs has been 100% *on an average.

Professor Cliffe Leslie, i-n the Economist of February 9, 1867, says:

Partial famines, especially in Munster and Connaught.* Bankruptcy of SHOPKEEPERS PERMANENT. Market towns, etc., fall into decay.

In 1855-66, 1,032,694 Irishmen replaced by 996,859 head of LIVESTOCK (cattle, sheep and pigs). That, in fact, was the accretion of

[^1]: WAGES

[^2]: "After a loss of two-fifths of the population in 21 years, throughout most of the island, the rate of wages is now only Is. a day; a shilling does not go further than 6d. did 21 years ago. Owing to this rise in the ordinary food the labourer is worse off than he was ten years ago."

[^3]: THE RESULTS OE THIS PROCESS

[^4]: ;l After this English word Marx gives its German equivalent in brackets.— Ed.





**[p. 206]**

* c o \ s o i m vi ION oi i• \KMS*

From 1851 to 1861 the TOTAL DECREASE of EARMS was 120,000. (Though the number of 15-30 acre RKMS and EAKMS of .'50 acres and over increased.) Thus, the decrease affected particularly farms of one to under 15 acres.

In 1861 about 3/-, of the area (Ireland's total area: 20,3-19,924 acres) or 12 million acres was held by 569,844 tenants who worked plots of one up to less than 100 acres, arid about L7:> (8 million acres) by tenants with over 100 and 500 acres and over (31,927 tenants).

T h e process of consolidation in full gear. Ulster. (Cultivation of flax; Scottish Protestant tenants.)

The Times etc. officially congratulates Abercorn as Vicerouy on this system. He, too, is one of these DEVASTATORS. Lord Dufferin: over-population etc.'1

In sum, it is a question of life and death. Meagher, Hennessy, Irishman.

[^1]: DECREASE Ol '.RIME IN 1RE1AND

[^2]: Committed (Convicted for trial

[^3]: 1852 17,078 10,454 1866 4,32b' 2,4 US

[^4]: V UNITED STATES AND FENIANISM

[^5]: Writ ten on about December Hi, 181)7

[^6]: First published in: Marx and Engels, Works, Second Russian Edition, Vol. lb. Moscow, 1960

[^7]: Printed according to the manu- script

[^8]: See this volume, pp. 428, 43.5.— F.d.



