---
Volume: 21
Document_Title: "3. K. Marx. Remarks on the Programme and Rules of the International Alliance of Socialist Democracy "
Page_Range: "240-245"
---

# 3. K. Marx. Remarks on the Programme and Rules of the International Alliance of Socialist Democracy 



**[p. 207]**

Karl Marx

[REMARKS ON THE PROGRAMME AND RULES

OF THE INTERNATIONAL ALLIANCE

OF SOCIALIST DEMOCRACY]248

[PROGRAMME AND RULES OF THE ALLIANCE]3 [MARX'S REMARKS]

The socialist minority of the League of Peace and Freedom, having separated itself from the League as a result of the majority vote at the Berne Congress, the majority being formally opposed to the fundamental principle of all workers' associations—that of economic and social equalisation of classes and individuals—has thereby adhered to the principles proclaimed by the workers' con- gresses held in Geneva, Lausanne and Brussels. Several members of this minority, belonging to various nations, have suggested that we should form a new International Alliance of Socialist Democracy, merged entirely in the great International Working Men's Association, but having a special mission to study political and philosophical questions on the basis of the grand principle of the universal and genuine equality of all human beings on earth.

equality of classes!

merged in and established against!

So, the socialist democrats are not understood through the International

[^1]: Convinced, for our part, of the useful- ness of such an enterprise that would provide sincere socialist democratsb of Europe and America with the means of being understood and of affirming their ideas, without any pressure from the false socialism which bourgeois democracy finds necessary to apply these days, we consider it our duty, together with our friends, to take

[^2]: a Programme et Règlement de l'Alliance internationale de la Démocratie Socialiste, Geneva [1868].—Ed.

[^3]: b The words in bold type were underlined by Marx.— Ed.

[^4]: 9-733





**[p. 208]**

Therefore, we have constituted ourselves as the central section of the International Alliance of Socialist Democracy, and we publish today its Programme and Rules.

What modesty! They consti- tute themselves as the centr- al authority, clever lads!

PROGRAMME OF THE INTERNATIONAL ALLIANCE OF SOCIALIST DEMOCRACY

1) The Alliance declares itself atheist; it wants abolition of cults, substitution of sci- ence for faith, and human justice for divine justice.

2) It wants above all political, economic and social equalisation of classes and indi- viduals of both sexes, commencing with abolition of the right of inheritance, so that in future enjoyment be equal to each per- son's production, and so that, in conformity with the decision taken at the last workers' congress in Brussels", the land, instruments of labour, like all other capital, on becoming the collective property of the entire society, may be used only by the workers, that is, by agricultural and industrial associations.

As if one could declare—by decree—the abolition of faith! Hermaphrodite man! Just like the Russian commune! The old Saint Simon panacea!

Empty phrase!

If they are reducing them- selves they will not have to dissolve, but will disappear spontaneously.

[^1]: 3) It wants for all children of both sexes, from birth, equal conditions of development, that is, maintenance, education and training at all levels of science, industry and the arts, being convinced that this equality, at first only economic and social, will gradually lead to greater natural equality of individu- als, eliminating all kinds of artificial ine- qualities, historical products of a social or- ganisation as false as it is iniquitous.

[^2]: 4) Being the foe of all despotism, not recognising any political form other than republican, and rejecting completely any reactionary alliance, it also rejects any politi- cal action which does not have as its im- mediate and direct aim the triumph of the workers' cause against Capital.

[^3]: 5) It recognises that all the political and authoritarian states that exist at present and are more and more reducing their activities to simple administrative functions of public service in their respective countries, will have to dissolve into a universal union of free associations, both agricultural and industrial ones.



7) It wants the universal association of all local associations on the basis of Liberty.

There is rivalry and rivalry, my dear Russian!

RULES

1) The International Alliance of Socialist Democracy constitutes a branch of the Inter- national Working Men's Association and accepts all its general rules.

2) The Founder Members of the Alliance are organising provisionally a Central Bureau at Geneva.

3) Founder Members belonging to the same country constitute the national bureau of their country.

4) The national bureaus shall establish in all regions local groups of the Alliance of Socialist Democracy, which, through their respective national bureaus, shall ask the Central Bureau of the Alliance to admit them into the International Working Men's Associa- tion.

The International Associa- tion does not admit any "international branches". New Central Council!

The Rules of the Interna- tional do not recognise this "mediatory power".

New taxes absorbing our own contributions!

They want to compromise us under our own pat- ronage!

Asinus Asinorum! And Madame Bakunin!

[^1]: 5) All local groups shall form their bureaus according to the customary proce- dure accepted by the local sections of the International Working Men's Association.

[^2]: 6) All members of the Alliance shall pay a monthly contribution of ten centimes, half of which shall be retained for their own needs by each national group, and the other half shall go to the Central Bureau for its general requirements.

[^3]: In countries where this sum is judged to be too high, the national bureaus, in accord with the Central Bureau, shall have the power to reduce it.

[^4]: 7) At the annual Working Men's Con- gress the delegation of the Alliance of Socialist Democracy, as a branch of the International Working Men's Association, shall hold public meetings in a separate building.

[^5]: MEMBERS OF THE GENEVA INITIATORY GROUP

[^6]: J. Philipp Becker.— M. Bakunin.—Th. Rémy.—Antoine Lindegger.— Louis Nideg-

[^7]: 9*



and they have the cheek to announce in Switzerland that I shall contribute arti- cles to "La Révolution",249

without informing me!

[^1]: The Founder Members of the Internation- al Alliance of Socialist Democracy, having decided to start a paper.under the name La

[^2]: Révolution, tö be the press organ of this new Association, the provisional Central Bureau will begin publication as soon as 300 shares, of 10 francs each and payable in four instalments quarterly, from January 1, 1869, have been subscribed. Accordingly, the provi- sional Central Bureau is appealing to all national bureaus of the Alliance and inviting them to begin subscriptions in their own countries. As these subscriptions are consid- ered voluntary gifts which give no right to receipt of the paper, the national bureaus are also requested to compile a list of sub- scribers.

[^3]: The paper will appear once a week.

[^4]: Jules Johannard Eugene Dupont0

[^5]: a Barteneva.— Ed. b Bartenev.— Ed. c The names Johannard and Dupont are written in Jung's hand.— Ed.



one year six months On behalf of the Bureau:

6 fr. 3 fr. 50 provisional Central

Secretary, Jean Zagorsky

rue Montbrillant, 8. N. B. The national bureaus are requested to send the Central Bureau the money received for the shares and subscriptions before January 1.

Remarks made by Karl Marx on De- cember 15, 1868

First published, in Russian, in Generalny Sovet Pervogo Internatsionala. 1868-1870, Moscow, 1964

Printed according to the French leaflet containing Marx's remarks

Translated from the French

