---
Volume: 21
Document_Title: "I. From 1778 to 1782. Independence "
Page_Range: "245-263"
---

# I. From 1778 to 1782. Independence 



**[p. 212]**

Karl Marx

[IRELAND FROM THE AMERICAN REVOLUTION TO THE UNION OF 1801

EXTRACTS AND NOTES]250

I. FROM 1778 TO 1782. INDEPENDENCE

A) IRISH PARLIAMENT BEFORE 1782

Importance of the question for English working class, and working-class movement generally.

Until 1800 Ireland, although conquered, remained separate and federate kingdom. Title of King up to peace of Amiens251 "George III, King of Great Britain, France, and Ireland, defender of the faith etc."

The English usurpations in regard to the Parliament at Dublin principally calculated with view to mercantile monopoly on the one hand, and, on the other, to have the appelate jurisdiction in regard to the titles of landed estates in the last instance to be decided at London, only in English courts.

(It declared in fact the legislative supremacy of the British Parliament over Ireland.)

[^1]: Poynings' Law252

[^2]: A Statute of Henry VII, framed by his Attorney-General, Sir Edward Poynings, restrained the Irish Parliament from originating any law whatever, either in the Lords or Commons. Before any statute could be finally discussed, it was previously submitted to the Lord Lieutenant of Ireland and his Privy Council?5i for their consideration, who might at their pleasure reject it, or transmit it to England. The British Attorney-General and Privy Council were invested with a power either to suppress it altogether, or model it at their own will, and then return it to Ireland, with permission to the Irish Parliament to pass it into law. Already Molyneux etc. protested against this (17th century). Later, in the 18th century, Swift and Dr. Lucas.254

[^3]: Statute 6, George I255



^

t*U,

[^1]: Page of Marx's manuscript Ireland from the American Revolution to the Union

[^2]: of 1801





George I, Statute, to neutralise the Irish legislation altogether, and to establish an appellant jurisdiction to the British Lords, whereby every decree and judgment of the Irish superior courts, which would tend to affect or disturb the questionable or bad titles of the British adventurers or absentees'*56 to Irish estates or Irish property, might be reversed or rendered abortive in Great Britain by a vote of the Scotch and English nobility.

(This was re-enacted by the Union!)

Many British Peers and Commoners, through whose influence this Statute of George I had been enacted, had themselves been deeply interested in effecting that measure, to secure their own grants of Irish estates. Under the 1st clause of this law England assumed a despotic power "and declared her inherent right to bind Ireland by every Statute in which she should be expressly designated".

It was the success of that vicious precedent which had encouraged George III and his British Parliament to attempt to legislate for America. Cost them the North-American colonies.257

General Character of Irish Parliament in the 18th Century Until the Upheaving

Protestant Parliament. Only Protestants electors. In fact the Parliament of the Conquerors. A mere instrument, a mere serf in relation to the British Government. Compensated themselves by despotism against the Catholic mass of the Irish people. Penal Code against Catholics258 rigorously enforced. Only from time to time some efforts of that Parliament to resist the English commercial legislature ruining Irish industry and commerce, then principally carried on by the Protestant, Scotch-English part of the population.

As to the internal composition of this Parliament etc. more will be said by and by.

A new state of things opened with the American War of Independence and the disasters it brought upon England.



**[p. 216]**

TO LEGISLATIVE INDEPENDENCE

A) RELAXATION OF PENAL CODE AGAINST CATHOLICS

American (United States) Declaration of Independence proclaimed by Congress, 4 July I776.h

April 1777: Congress proclaims the Constitution (American) of American Republic.11

War between England and America. 6 February 1778: Treaties with France, by which independence of American Republic [was] recognised and France promised to support the Americans, until they had got rid of the English.259

Great fermentation produced by the American events in Ireland. Many Irish, mainly Presbyterians from Ulster, emigrate to America, enrol under the United States banners and fight against England on the other side of the Atlantic. The Catholics, who for a long time had in vain supplicated for a relaxation of the Penal Code, moved again in 1776, in louder tones.

1778: Irish Parliament relaxed the severity of the Penal Code, its worst features obliterated, Catholics were allowed to take leases of land.

Curran said afterwards (1792, in debate on Catholic Emancipa- tion):

[^1]: "What was the consequence even of a partial union with your countrymen? The united efforts of the two bodies restored that constitution which had been lost by their separation.[] Your Catholic brethren shared the danger of the conflict, but you had not justice or gratitude to let them share the fruits of the victory. You suffered them to relapse into their former insignificance and depression. And, let me ask you, has it not fared with you according to your deserts? Let me ask you if the Parliament of Ireland can boast of being now less at the feet of the British Minister, than at that period it was of the British Parliament?"

[^2]: "But you affect to think your property in danger, by admitting them into the state.[] Thirteen years ago you expressed the same fears, yet you made the experiment; you opened the door to landed property, and the fact has shown the fear to be without foundation."260 Then Protestant Ascendancy.261 Tithes and property of the Protestant Church in Ireland.

[^3]: a In the manuscript this section is marked II, though the preceding section is marked "A" and the following "C".— Ed.

[^4]: b "Declaration of Independence in Congress, July 4, 1776. The Unanimous Declaration of the Thirteen United States of America".— Ed.

[^5]: c "Articles of Confederation, and Perpetual Union".— Ed.



B) THE VOLUNTEER ORGANISATION.

THE FREE-TRADE MOVEMENT. FIRST CONCESSIONS OF ENGLAND

On 4 July 1776 the Americans had proclaimed their Declaration of Independence. In the same year the Irish Catholics, as seen, demanded (they had before supplicated for) relaxation of the Penal Code, redress.

In April 1777 Constitution of American Republic proclaimed. In 1778 first redress of the Catholic grievances etc. This enabled the Irish Protestants, till now considered by the English as their gaolers and bailiffs, to move.

To understand the movement from 1779-1782 (Legislative Independence), it becomes necessary briefly to allude to the state in which England found herself.

June 1778 commenced war between England and France.262 In 1780 France sent not only, as she had done till then, money subsidies and men-of-war to America, but also an auxiliary army. (6,000 men under the Marquis of Rochambeau.) The French army landed on 10 July 1780 in Rhode Island, surrendered to him by the English. September 1780 English colonel Ferguson defeated in the West of North Carolina. 19 October 1781, Cornwallis (General) included by Washington in York Town (Virginia) had to capitulate. (5-6,000 men, many English men-of-war etc. were captured.)

27 July 1778 sea-battle between French and English at Quessant. Undecided.

Summer 1779: King of Spain3 accedes as ally to United States and France. His navy united with the French one. The hostile fleets assailed the English coast in June, and only the dissension amongst the French and Spanish Admirals saved Plymouth (August 1779) from the destruction of its wharfs and arsenals.

In 1780 England was not defeated on the sea, but lost much in money and mercantile ships.

[^1]: a Charles III.— Ed





**[p. 218]**

On 30 November 1782 at Paris Preliminary Peace Treaty between United States and England.

* * *

1779. Great part of English army and navy consisted of Irishmen. In 1779 Ireland was left ungarrisoned, an invasion of Ireland by France threatened, English coast (Plymouth) menaced by united French and Spanish navy. Under these circumstances the Volunteers—the armed Protestantism of Ireland264—arose, partly for defence from the foreigner, partly for self-vindication. In less time than could have been supposed, from the commence- ment of these armed associations, the whole surface of the island was covered with a self-raised host of patriot soldiers.

* * =t At this place, it will be interesting to anticipate the whole of the history of this Volunteer force, because, in fact, it is the history of Ireland to the moment when, since 1795, on the one hand, the general popular, national and constitutional movement, represented by them, stripped off its merely national character and merged into a truly revolutionary movement, and, on the other hand, the British Government changed secret intrigue for brutal force intended to bring about, and succeeding in bringing about, the Union of 1800, i. e. the annihilation of Ireland as a nation, and its transformation into an out of the way country district of England.

There are 4 periods of the Volunteer movement. J Period. From 1779 to 1783: In its first formation the Volunteers, the armed Protestantism of Ireland, embrace all vital elements of all classes, noblemen, gentlemen, merchants, farmers, labourers. Their first object, emancipation from the commercial and industrial fetters which the mere mercantile jealousy of England had thrown around them. Then National Independence. Then Reform of Parliament and Catholic Emancipation as one of the conditions of National Resurrection! Their official organisation and the disasters of England give them new strength, but lay also

II Period. From 1783 to 1791 (October). Still important as pressure from without upon Irish Parliament, especially House of Commons, and as armed and popular support of the national and reforming Opposition (minority) of the House of Commons. The aristocratic element and reactionary part of the middle-class withdrew, the popular element prevailing.

The French Revolution (1789) finds both Catholic Committee

(principally composed of Catholic noblemen)

and Whig Club™5

(Reformers)

feeble and dispirited.266

From this moment, the movement of the Volunteers merges into that of the United Irishmen. The Catholic question became that of

[^1]: There was a steady decline of the Volunteer organisation, and of the strength of the Liberal Party until 1790.

[^2]: A different race of men from Whig Club orators or Catholic Lords now began to act on the public.

[^3]: In Dublin, John Keogh, a strong, rough-souled, sagacious merchant, and men of his stamp, sent the Catholic nobles flying in slavish dread.

[^4]: And in Belfast, Neilson, Russell, Mc Cracken etc., headed a Protestant Party, which advocated Reform, but began soon to think of Republicanism. The government rendered fearful by the Regency dispute,™'7 and desperate by the French Revolution, began to push corruption and the principles of the Union 3

[^5]: harder than ever.

[^6]: Theobald Wolfe Tone, the son of a man, half coachmaker and half farmer, a poor and briefless barrister, with a wife and a pack of children, resolved to redress the wrongs of the Catholics, restore representation in the Commons, and with these, or failing in them, to make his country an independent republic. Now he wrote a pamphlet in favour of the Catholic emancipation, called: "An Argument on Behalf of the Catholics of Ireland, by a Northern Whig, " and received every mark of gratitude from his new clients.

[^7]: In October, 1791, in Belfast he founded the first United Irish Society.

[^8]: a Probably a slip of the pen; in his "Memoir of John Ph. Curran" prefixed to The Speeches of Curran, Thomas Davis writes (p. XX): "to push corruption and the principles of disunion".— Ed.



III Period. From 1791 (October) to 1795 (after recall of Lord Fitzwilliam).

The movement of the Volunteers merged into that of the United Irishmen.

Public until 1794, when forced by the government measures to become secret. The United Irishmen increased in numbers, the Catholics in confidence, and the

Volunteer Corps began to restore their array, and improve their discipline.

Acme of their action:

15 February 1793: A Volunteer Convention at Dungannon passed resolutions in favour of Emancipation and Reform, and named a permanent Committee. The Relief Bill of April 1793 was carried by this pressure.268

But now, the Catholic higher classes secede from the movement; pitched against the ci-devanta Volunteers (merging into the Secret Societies of the United Irishmen) the aristocratic and stupidly, bigottedly middle-class yeomen.

The United Irishmen became a secret organisation. Recall of Fitzwilliam only left the decision to force.

IV Period. Volunteer movement merged into the revolutionary movement since 1795.

* * *

We now return to the development of the Volunteer Movement, 1779-83, and the Acts of Irish Parliament under this high popular pression. The Armed Associations, first provincial and local, strongest in the North (Ulster) and Dublin (Leinster). Only Protestants. First against Invasion. Protestant farmers rallied under this cry first. Catholics prohibited by statute from bearing arms in Ireland. However, they zealously assisted in forwarding those very associa-

[^1]: Coercive laws against military societies, drilling, and the whole machinery of the Volunteers passed on // March 1793, and the Alien Act, the Militia, Foreign Correspondence, Gunpowder and Convention Acts?69 in fact, a full code of coercion passed by the same Parliament, that had passed the Catholic Relief Bill.

[^2]: a Former.— Ed



The first object of the Irish Volunteers—after the defence against invasion—was to free themselves mercantilely and industrially, an interest then almost wholly in the hands of the Protestants, although by its very nature a national interest.

It was observed, that this British assumption of authority to legislate for Ireland, whatever colouring it might have received by the dissimulation or ingenuity of its supporters, had, in fact, for its real object the restraint of her commerce and the suppression of her manufactures, so far as they might interfere with the interests of England; because the management of the merely local concerns of Ireland, by her own Parliament, was altogether immaterial to Great Britain, unless where a commercial rivalship might be the probable consequence of successful industry and legislative encouragement.

Peers [showed] no public spirit; the measures of the Commons might be suppressed by an act of the Privy Council; hence determined co-operation of the whole people necessary.

The moment (the distress of England and the armed force of the Volunteers) was favourable.

England, notwithstanding [the fact that] she had in some instances suspended, and in others prohibited, the exportation of Irish manufactures, inundated the Irish markets with every species of her own; a combination of the great capitalists of England to destroy Irish manufacture by inundation of the Irish market.

Hence the Irish resolved to adopt a non-importation and non- consumption agreement throughout the whole kingdom, by exclud- ing not only the importation, but the consumption of any British manufacture in Ireland. No sooner was this measure publicly proposed, than it was universally adopted; it flew quicker than the wind throughout the whole nation. Meanwhile the Volunteer organisation spread; at length almost every independent Protes- tant enrolled as a patriot soldier. Self-formed, self-governed, no commissions from the Crown, no connexion whatever with the Government, [they] appointed their own officers etc. Yet subordi- nation complete. Their arms at first provided by themselves; but the extraordinary increase of their numbers rendered them at length unable to procure a sufficient- supply by purchase; they required arms from the Government; Government did not think it



**[p. 222]**

Many men who had served in the United States against the Americans became their drill sergeants. At the head of the corps noblemen etc. Important in this movement the familiar association of all ranks.

Under these circumstances: Sessions of the Irish Parliament 1779-80. After frivolous speech of the Lord Lieutenant (Harcourt?)3 in the House of Lords, and usual adulatory address moved in the Commons by Sir Robert Deane,h Grattan moved the following amendment:

"That we beseech Your Majesty to believe, that it is with the utmost reluctance we are constrained to approach you on the present occasion; but the constant drain to supply absentees, and the unfortunate prohibition of our trade, have caused such calamity, that the natural support of our country has decayed, and our manufacturers are dying for want: famine stalks hand in hand with hopeless wretchedness; and the only means left to support the expiring trade of this miserable part of Your Majesty's dominions, is to open a free export trade, and let your Irish subjects enjoy their natural birthright."0

Mr. Hussey Burgh, the Prime Sergeant (above the Attorney- General) moved the following amendment:

"That it is not by temporary expedients, that this nation is now to be saved from impending ruin.271

Unanimously carried. Volunteers attributed rightly this unexpected success to their movement. It greatly increased both the numbers and confidence in Volunteer associations.

Although even in both Houses of the British Parliament attention [was] called to the Irish distress and the dangerous state of that country, Lord North treated the whole [matter] with his usual superciliousness and frivolity. Nothing was done.

The non-importation and non-consumption movement became now general in Ireland. At length, a general meeting was convened by the High Sheriff of the city of Dublin, and resolutions then entered into by the whole metropolis, which finally confirmed and consummated that judicious measure, and at length convinced

[^1]: a George Nugent-Temple Grenville, the Marquis of Buckingham, was the Lord Lieutenant of Ireland at the time. See his speech at the opening of the session of the Irish Parliament on October 12, 1779, in H. Grattan, The Speeches, Vol. I, pp. 20-22.—Ed

[^2]: b Deane's address to George III on October 12, 1779, see H. Grattan, The Speeches, Vol. I, p. 22.— Ed.

[^3]: c See J. Mitchel, The History of Ireland.., Vol. I, p. 126.— Ed.



The appointment of the Duke of Leinster to the command of the Dublin Volunteers, was quickly followed by that of other district generals; and the organisation of 4 provincial armies was regularly proceeded on. The Ulster army appointed the Earl of Charlemont its commander-in-chief, the other armies proceeded rapidly in their organisation. Provincial reviews were adopted; and everything assumed the appearance of systematic movement. Soon General Commander-in-Chief [was appointed].

Affairs now approached fast towards a crisis; the freedom of commerce being the subject most familiar to the ideas of the people, was the first object of their solicitude. "A free trade" became the watchword of the Volunteers, and the cry of the Nation; the Dublin Volunteer Artillery appeared on parade, commanded by James Napper Tandy, with labels on the mouths of their cannon: "Free Trade or Speedy Revolution." Lord North got now frightened. America already lost. On 24th November 1781 speech from the throne wherein he [the King] called the immediate attention of his British Parliament to the situation of Ireland. Now in hot haste these blockheads acceded to the Irish claims. The British Parliament met on 25 November, and the first Bills of concessions received the royal assent on 21 December 1781. Now these dunderheads passed Bills, distinctly repealing all the Acts which their predeces- sors had declared absolutely essential to secure the prosperity of England from the dangerous industry of the Irish.

Messages sent over to Ireland, much fuss made of the liberality and justice of Great Britain. Meanwhile North tried to pass over the year 1782, by continuing to open the Committee on Irish affairs from time to time, now and then passing a resolution in favour of that country, and thus endeavouring to wear out the session.

Ireland at length perceived the duplicity of proceedings which, while they purported to extend benefits to Ireland?!, asserted the paramount authority of Great Britain, and converted its acts of concession into declaratory statutes of its own supremacy. 14 Irish Counties at once avowed to establish, at the risk of their lives and



**[p. 224]**

George III forced, from the throne (in his speech), to pass unqualified eulogiums on the Volunteer army, as expression of the loyalty and fidelity of the people.

The Army in Ireland had been under the regulations of a British Statute, and the hereditary revenue of the Crown, with the aid of a perpetual mutiny bill,272 enabled the British Government to com- mand at all times a standing army in Ireland, without the authority or the control of its Parliament. Volunteers became aware of this. Resolutions were entered into by almost every military corps, and every corporate body, that they would no longer obey any laws, save those enacted by the King, Lords and Commons of Ireland.

The salaries of the Judges of Ireland were then barely sufficient to keep them above want, and they held their offices only during the will of the British Minister, who might remove them at his pleasure: all Irish justice, therefore, was at his control. In all questions between the Crown and the people, the purity of the judge was consequently suspected.

The Irish Parliament, at this period, met but once in 2 years, and in the British Attorney-General was vested the superintendence of their proceedings and in the British Privy Council the alteration and rejection of their Statutes.

This resolution brought down the British Government to the feet of the Volunteers, and raised the Volunteers above the supremacy of Britain, by a direct Parliamentary approbation of self-armed, self-governed, and self-disciplined associations.

These Volunteers by this time exceeded in number the whole regular military force of the British Empire.

[^1]: 9 October 1781. Irish House of Commons. Irish Parliament opened, speech of the Viceroy3 etc., after address to His Majesty passed, Mr. O'Neill (House of Commons) moved a resolution of thanks to "all the Volunteers of Ireland, for their exertions and continuance". Unanimously voted, and directed to be circulated throughout all Ireland, and to be communicated by the Sheriffs of the counties to the corps within their bailiwicks.b

[^2]: Portugal Affair: By the resolutions of the British Legislature, Ireland had been admitted to export her linen and woollen manufactures to Portugal, agreeable to the provisions of the Treaty of Methuen?7^ from which liberty she had been previously and explicitly prohibited by express statutes. Irish manufacturers tried immediately to improve this. Portuguese Ministry (under orders of the British Ministers) peremptorily

[^3]: a Frederick Howard, Earl of Carlisle.— Ed. b H. Grattan, The Speeches, Vol. I, pp. 82-85; J. Mitchel, The History of Ireland, Vol. I, p. 135.— Ed.



House [did] not [have] the courage to pass it. Now [the] cry in the country, that their connection with England was only federative. This engrossed now almost the exclusive consideration of the armed associations of Ireland.

Want of protection for personal liberty in Ireland: No Habeas Corpus Act:274

Repeal of the English Statute of 6, George I asked by the armed Volunteers and corporate bodies3 etc. Catholic bodies now also entered the Volunteer army, officered by Protestants. Regular and public deliberative meetings of the armed Volunteers. The armed associations of Ulster first appointed delegates to declare the sentiments of their province, in a general assembly. Convention at Dungannon, 15 February 1782. Agreed upon the celebrated Declaration of Rights and Grievances.

They were delegates from 25,000 Ulster soldiers, backed by the voice of about 1 million inhabitants of that country.

Declaration of the Volunteers at the Dungannon Convention. 15 February 1782™

[^1]: "Whereas it has been asserted that Volunteers, as such, cannot with propriety debate or give their opinions on political subjects, or the conduct of Parliament, or public men, resolved unanimously: That a citizen, by learning the use of arms, does not abandon any of his civil rights. That a claim of any body of men, other than the King, Lords, and Commons of Ireland, to make laws to bind this Kingdom, is unconstitutional, illegal, and a grievance; \ "that the power exercised by the Privy Council of both Kingdoms, under the pretence of the law of Poynings,h is unconstitutional and a grievance;

[^2]: "that the independence of judges is equally essential to the impartial administration of justice in Ireland, as in England; and that the refusal or delay of this right to Ireland, makes a distinction where there should be no distinction; may excite jealousy where perfect union should prevail; and is in itself unconstitutional and a grievance; that it is our decided and unalterable determination to seek a redress of these grievances redress, speedy and effectual; that as men, and as Irishmen, as Christians, and as Protestants, we rejoice in the relaxation of the penal laws against our Roman Catholic fellow-subjects; and that we conceive the measure to be fraught with the happiest consequences to the union and prosperity of the inhabitants of Ireland."

[^3]: 4 members from each county of the province of Ulster were appointed to act as a committee for the Volunteer Corps, to call general meetings of the province. That

[^4]: a See this volume, p. 212.— Ed b Ibid., pp. 212, 215.— Ed.





**[p. 226]**

Earl of Bristol, Englishman by birth, British Peer and Protestant Bishop of Derrya

(uncle of George Robert Fitzgerald), openly declares for the Volunteers (ditto for full Catholic Emancipation).

In every Volunteer Corps of Ireland the Dungannon resolutions are accepted. About this time about 90,000 Volunteers are ready.

As soon as the Dungannon Volunteers had received the concurrence of the armed associations, the Irish House of Commons assumed new aspect. The proceedings of the people without now told on their representatives within. The whole House appeared forming into parties.

Their Sessions were biennial, and consequently their grants to Government were for 2 years at once; and till more money was required, their legislative [power] was inactive. They now deter- mined on granting supplies to the Crown for 6 months only, as a hint that they would grant no more till their grievances were redressed: this had its effect.

The proceedings of the Volunteers and municipal bodies became every day more serious and decisive, tone in House of Commons more menacing.

Impracticable to proceed with Lord North any longer. About April 1782 Marquis of Rockingham's Cabinet {James Fox etc.). Duke of Portland, nominated Lord Lieutenant of Ireland, arrived at Dublin 14 April 1782, had to meet the Irish Parliament on the 16th April.

Message of George HI to British Parliament, 18 April 1782.277

Stating:

British House of Commons in reply: express

The same words "final adjustment" were repeated, by the Irish Ministry, when a Union was proposed to the Irish Parliament in 1800.

[^1]: C) DECLARATIONS OF IRISH LEGISLATIVE INDEPENDENCE276

[^2]: "that mistrusts and jealousies had arisen in Ireland, and that it was highly necessary to take the same into immediate consideration, in order to [effect] a final adjustment."

[^3]: "their entire and cheerful concurrence in His Majesty's views of a final adjustment".

[^4]: Frederick Hervey.— Ed.



Hutchinson accompanied this message, and his statement of his own views on the subject, with a determination to support a declaration of "Irish rights" and constitutional "independence". Hutchinson declared at the same time, that he had simply to deliver the message; he was therefore silent to all details and pledged the Government to none. Ponsonby proposed a short address.

Grattan spoke: "America has shed much English blood, and America is to be free: Ireland has shed her own blood for England, and is Ireland to remain in fetters?" etc. Proposes Amendment to Ponsonby's "short address", etc. "to assure His Majesty that his subjects of Ireland are a free people, that the Crown of Ireland is an imperial crown, inseparably connected with the Crown of Great Britain but that the Kingdom of Ireland is a distinct kingdom, with a Parliament of her own the sole legislature thereof, that there is no body of men competent to make laws to bind the nation but the King, Lords, and Commons of Ireland, nor any Parliament which hath any authority or power of any sort whatever in this country, save only the Parliament of Ireland; to assure His Majesty that we humbly conceive that in this right the very essence of our liberty exists, a right which we, on the part of all the people of Ireland, do claim as their birth-right, and which we cannot yield but with our lives."

(1799. Portland openly avowed in 1799 that he had never considered this concession of England in 1782 as finale)

Shortly before and shortly after this scene very decided resolutions on the part of the Volunteer Corps. It was the unanimous firmness of the people, and not the abstract virtue of their delegates, which achieved this revolution.

(This true man of the Pitt-Castlereagh school!)

[^1]: Brownlow seconded. George Ponsonby stated "that he most willingly consented [on behalf of Portland] to the proposed amendment, and would answer that the noble lord who presided in the Government of Ireland, wished to do everything in his power etc." and "he (Portland) would use his utmost influence in obtaining the rights of Ireland, an object on which he had fixed his heart".

[^2]: Unanimously Grattan's Motion was passed.

[^3]: Fitzgibbon had declared [himself] a patriot; and Mr. John Scott, then Attorney-General, afterwards Lord Clonmel, even declared: "If the Parliament of Great Britain were determined to lord it over Ireland, he was resolved not to be their villain in executing their tyranny. That if matters should proceed to the extremity to which he feared they were verging, he should not be an insignificant subscriber to the fund for defending their common rights he had determined to throw his life and fortune into the scale."





**[p. 228]**

Parliament was meanwhile prorogued for 3 weeks, to wait for the King's Reply to their Declaration of Independence. Meanwhile reviews and discipline were continued with unremitting vigour by the Volunteer army, now about 124,000, of whom upwards of 100,000 effectives. Besides nearly V3 of the whole English army then Irish, ditto very many sailors Irish.

(Portland's conduct in 1782 a premeditated tissue of dissimulation!)

27 May 1782 Irish House of Commons met, pursuant to adjournment. Portland in his quasi throne speech: "King and British Parliament are united in a desire to gratify every wish expressed in your late Address to the Throne By the papers which, in obedience to His Majesty's commands, I have directed to be laid before you, you will receive the most convincing testimony of the cordial reception which your representations have met with from the Legislative of Great Britain, but His Majesty whose first and most anxious wish is to exercise his Royal Prerogative in such a manner as may be most conducive to the welfare of his faithful subjects, has further given it me in command to assure you of his gracious disposition to give his Royal assent to acts to prevent the suppression of Bills in the Privy Council of this Kingdom, and the alteration of them anywhere, and to limit the duration of the Act for the better Regulation and Accommodation of His Majesty's forces in this Kingdom, to the term of 2 years. The benevolent intentions of His Majesty unaccompanied by any stipulation or condition whatever. The good faith, the generosity, and the honour of this (the English) nation, afford them the surest pledge of a corresponding disposition, on your part etc."3

Grattan the fool rose at once:

and similar talk, and in particular

[^1]: "That as Great Britain had given up every claim to authority over Ireland, he had not the least idea that she should be also bound to make any declaration that she had formerly usurped that power. I move you to assure His Majesty of our unfeigned affection to His Royal Person and Government magnanimity of His Majesty, and the wisdom of the Parliament of Great Britain, that we conceive the resolution for an unqualified, unconditional repeal of the 6, George I, to be a measure of consummate wisdom and justice"

[^2]: "that no constitutional question between the two nations will any longer exist".

[^3]: Sir Samuel Broadstreet on the other hand declared: "The Irish Parliament actually sat at that moment under an English statute." Ditto Flood, David Walsh:

[^4]: "I repeat it, that until England declares unequivocally, by an Act of her own Legislature, that she had no right, in any instance, to make laws to bind Ireland, the usurped power of English Legislation never can be considered by us as relinquished we have the power to assert our rights as men, and accomplish our independence as a nation."

[^5]: 3 For Portland's speech in Parliament on May 27, 1782, see H. Grattan, The Speeches, Vol. I, p. 131.— Ed.



Beauchamp Bagenal proposed to appoint committee "to consider and report what sum the Irish Parliament should grant, to build a suitable mansion and purchase an estate for their deliverer" (i.e. Grattan).

The British Cabinet now frightened. Their intolerance degenerated into fear. They had already signed the capitulation, and thought it impossible to carry it too soon into execution. America already lost.

Bills to enact the concessions demanded by Ireland were, therefore, prepared with an expedition nearly bordering on precipitancy. The 6th of George I, declaratory of, and establishing the supremacy of England, and the eternal dependence of Ireland on the Parliament and Cabinet of Great Britain, was now hastily repealed, without debate, or any qualification by the British Legislature. This repeal obtained the royal assent, and a copy was instantly transmitted to the Irish Viceroy, and communicated by circulars to the Volunteer commanders.

Chap. Ill: An Act, to repeal an Act made in the 6th year of the reign of his late Majesty King George I, entitled, An Act for the better securing the dependency of the Kingdom of Ireland upon the Crown of Great Britain.

"Whereas, an Act was passed etc., may it please your excellent Majesty, that it may be enacted, and be it enacted, by the King's Most Excellent Majesty, by and with the advice and consent of the Lords spiritual and temporal, and Commons, in this present Parliament assembled, and by the authority of the same, that from and after the passing of this Act, the above-mentioned Act, and the several matters and things therein contained, shall be, and is, and are hereby repealed."

— the King's best Palace in Ireland.

The Viceroy of Ireland proposing, on behalf of the King of England, to Grattan to reward his services for having emancipated his country from the domination of Great Britain, was an incident as extraordinary as had ever occurred in any Government, and, emanating from that of England, told, in a single sentence, the whole history of her horrors, her jealousies, her shallow artifice and humbled arrogance. Was, of course, rejected by the Irish House of Commons. Grattan got £50,000 from that House.

[^1]: Irish House of Commons, 30 May 1782. Bagenal resumed the subject of reward to Grattan; proposed £100,000. Mr. Thomas Conolly declared that "the Duke of Portland felt with the Irish people he (the Lord Lieutenant) begged to offer, as a part of the intended grant to Mr. Grattan, the Viceregal Palace in the Phoenix Park"



