---
Volume: 21
Document_Title: "II. From 1782 ( after the Declaration of Independence) to j 1795 "
Page_Range: "263-285"
---

# II. From 1782 ( after the Declaration of Independence) to j 1795 



**[p. 230]**

General remark on this period: When Lord Westmoreland was removed from Ireland, in 1795, Ireland was in a most unexampled and progressive state of prosperity. Curran suggested even an intention to impeach Westmoreland for having permitted a part of 12,000 troops (which, according to stipulation, should always remain in Ireland) to be drafted out of that kingdom for foreign service.

A) FROM 1782 TO 1783. (THE FIASCO OF THE REFORM BILL AND THE GREAT DEFEAT OF THE VOLUNTEERS)

Irish House of Commons: Bills to ameliorate, by partial concession, the depressed state of the Catholics, and some reward for their zeal and patriotism, were introduced, and had arrived to their last stages in the House of Commons, without any effective opposition. Opposed by bigotism in their latter stages, the Castle powers stirring on. Those Bills relaxing the severity of the Penal Code passed however through both Houses. The concessions [though] very limited, still afforded great satisfaction to the Catholics, as the first growth of a tolerating principle. Grattan still believed in the Whigs. But at length Fox himself, wearied by a protracted course of slow deception, at once confirmed the opinions of the Irish people, and openly proc- laimed to Ireland the inadequacy of all the measures that had heretofore been adopted. He took occasion in the British Parliament, on the repeal of the 6th George I being there alluded to, to state

By that speech, the Irish delusion of a final adjustment was in a moment dissipated, the Viceroy's duplicity became indisputably proved.

Still Flood was feebly supported in Irish House of Commons, but [was supported] by the Volunteers.

[^1]: " that the repeal of that statute could not stand alone, but must be accompanied by a final adjustment, and by a solid basis of permanent connexion", that "some plans of that nature would be laid before the Irish Parliament by the Irish Ministers, and a treaty entered upon, which treaty, when proceeded on, might be adopted by both Parliaments, and finally become an irrevocable arrangement between the two countries".a

[^2]: 19 July 1782 Flood moved for leave to bring in a Bill "to affirm the sole exclusive right of the Irish Parliament, to make laws affecting that country, in all concerns external and internal whatsoever".1"

[^3]: a H. Grattan, The Speeches, Vol. I, pp. 148-51.— Ed. b Ibid., pp. 145-46.— Ed.



On the other hand [Parliament] passed [the] foolish motion of Grattan:

"that leave was refused to bring in Mr. Flood's bill, because the sole and exclusive right to legislate for Ireland in all cases whatsoever, internally and externally, had been asserted by the Parliament of Ireland, and had been fully, finally and irrevocably acknowledged by the British Parliament"a

(which was not true). (Fox himself had declared the contrary!) (Because of his scepticism Flood had been dismissed from his office of Vice- Treasurer. )

27 July 1782 the Parliament was prorogued. In the proroguing speech Portland stated amongst other things:

" Your claims were directed by the same spirit that gave rise and stability to the liberty of Great Britain, and could not fail of success, as soon as the councils of that Kingdom were influenced by the avowed friends of the Constitution.

"Convince the people in your several districts, as you are yourselves convinced, that every cause of past jealousies and discontents is finally removed; that both countries have pledged their good faith to each other, and their best security will be an inviolable adherence to that compact; that the implicit reliance which Great Britain has reposed on the honour, generosity, and candour of Ireland, engages your national character to a return of sentiments equally liberal and enlarged. Convince them that the two kingdoms are now one, indissolubly connected in unity of constitution, and unity of interests."15

Marquis of Rockingham died (1782). Fox and Lord North Coalition. Portland superseded by Earl Temple (who later became Marquis of Buckingham) (his Chief Secretary his brother Mr., afterwards Lord, Grenville) (15 September 1782-3 June 1783). Temple made small reforms. Though he obtained no credit from the body of the people, he made considerable progress amongst the aristocracy of the patriots (Charlemont, Grattan etc.).

The armed Volunteers had now assumed a deliberative capacity: Paraded as soldiers and debated as citizens. More than 150,000 Volunteers now appeared upon the regimental muster-rolls. Strong accession to them of Catholics. They resolved no longer to obey, or suffer to be obeyed, any statute or law theretofore enacted in England, and to oppose their execution with their lives and fortunes. The magistrates refused to act under them, the judges were greatly embarassed, no legal causes could be proceeded on, under the authority of British Statutes, though naming Ireland, no counsel would plead them, no juries would find for them, the

[^1]: a Ibid., p. 166.— Ed.

[^2]: b Ibid., pp. 170-72.— Ed.





**[p. 232]**

Parliament divided between Flood and Grattan, the latter (Whig spelt) always in the majority. This division of nation the British Administration wanted to foster. Baffled by the injudicious conduct of some Members of the British Parliament.

In the House of Commons (British) Sir George Young (Sinecure placeman in Ireland, although not Irish, viz. Vice-treasurer of Ireland) opposed the Bill of Concession to Ireland, and Repeal of 6, George I. Protested against the Power of King and Parliament to pass such bills. (He could not act against the will of the Ministers.)

Lord Mansfield, notwithstanding the repeal of 6, George I, proceeded to entertain, in the Court of King's Bench,278 at Westminster, an appeal from the King's Bench of Ireland, observing that "he knew of no law depriving the British Court of its vested jurisdiction". The interest of money 5% in England, 6% in Ireland. Mansfield had placed very large sums of Irish mortgages to gain the additional 1%. Felt that they were not likely to gain any additional facilities by the appelant jurisdiction being taken from the British courts and transferred to Ireland herself: hence his reluctance to part with it.

Lord Abingdon, in the House of Lords, totally denied the authority of King and Parliament of England to emancipate Ireland; he moved for leave to bring in a Declaratory Bill to re-assert the right of England to legislate externally in the concerns of Ireland.

The Volunteers beat to arms throughout the whole kingdom; above 120,000 paraded. All confidence in Great Britain dissipated. Flood gained much ground amongst the people. Now new panic of the British Ministry. Without waiting for further and peremptory remonstrances from Ireland, they passed the following Statute:

Anno vicessimo tertio (1783) Georgii HI. Regis*

[^1]: Ch. XXVIII. An Act for removing and preventing all doubts which have arisen, or might arise, concerning the exclusive rights of the Parliament and Courts of Ireland, in matters of legislation and judicature; and for preventing any writ of error or appeal from any of His Majesty's Courts in that Kingdom from being received, heard, and adjudged, in any of His Majesty's Courts in the Kingdom of Great Britain. Whereas doubts have arisen whether the provisions of the said (their last) Act are sufficient to secure to the people of Ireland the rights claimed by them, to be bound only by laws enacted by His Majesty and the Parliament of that Kingdom, in all cases whatever etc. etc. be it declared and enacted that the said right claimed by the people of Ireland, to be bound only by laws enacted by His Majesty and the Parliament of that Kingdom, in all cases whatever, and to have all actions and suits at law or in equity, which may be instituted in that Kingdom, decided in His Majesty's Courts therein finally, and

[^2]: a The twenty-third regnal year (1783) of King George III (J. Mitchel, The History of Ireland, Vol. I, p. 153).— Ed



And be it further enacted that no writ of error or appeal shall be received or adjudged, or any other proceeding be heard by or in any of His Majesty's Courts in this Kingdom, in any action or suit at law or in equity, instituted in any of His Majesty's Courts in the Kingdom of Ireland, etc. etc.

This measure brought into the British House of Commons by Mr. Townshend, passed through both Houses, and received the Royal assent without debate and with very little observation. In England held out a mere consequential declaratory part of a general constitutional arrangement entered into between the two nations. This measure came too late to satisfy the Irish people as to the purity of their own Parliament. It convinced them of either its inefficiency or corruption, or the Renunciation Act of the British Parliament would have been quite unnecessary. They had to secure their liberties. The Renunciation Act of Ireland had discredited the Irish Parliament with the Irish people.

Mr. Flood had become most prominent among the Irish patriots. Grattan his enemy. The discussion on the English Renunciation Act led to the conclusion of the necessity to reform their own Parliament, because, without its comprehensive Reform, there was no security against the instability of events and the duplicity of England.

Rotten borough system.279 Many members of the Irish House of Commons nominated by individuals (borough-mongers) and Peers, who in this way voted by proxy in the House of Commons. The King constitutionally nominated Peers, and the Peers created Commoners. The representation of the people in the Commons was purchased for money, and the exercise of that representation was sold for office. These purchases made by servants of the executive Government, in trust, for the uses and purposes of its ministers to carry measures. The Volunteers had the facts sifted. One Peer nominated 9 Commoners etc. Many individuals openly sold their patronage for money, to the best bidder, others returned members at the nomination of the Viceroy or his Secretary; and it appeared that the number of representatives elected freely by the people did not compose '/4 of the Irish Commons. The Volunteers at length determined to demand a reform of Parliament. Delegates from several Volunteer regiments again assembled at Dungannon, to consider the expediency and means of an immediate reform of Parliament. Flood [had] great influence now. 300 delegates, men of great influence, many of them members of the House of Lords and the Commons chosen by different corps.



**[p. 234]**

After much deliberation, a plan of reform, framed by Mr. Flood and approved by the Convention, was directed to be presented by him to Parliament forthwith, and the sittings of the Convention were made permanent till Parliament had decided the question. Mr. Flood obeyed his instructions, and moved for leave to bring in a Bill of reform of the Parliament. The Government knew that the triumph of the Parliament implied not only the destruction of the Convention, but of the Volunteers.

The Government refused leave to bring in Flood's Bill,a because it had originated from their (the Volunteers) deliberations. (Yelverton now Attorney-General.) (Furious speech of Fitzgibbon.)b

Unprecedentedly violent debate. Bill was rejected by 158 to 49; 158 of the majority were placemen and the very persons on whom the reform was intended to operate. Ditto 158 placemen who carried the Union Bill in 1800, which, if the Reform had succeeded, never could have been passed. An address to the King (moved by Conolly), offending against the Volunteers, carried.c Earl Charlemont, sup- pressing this news, told the Volunteers, he had received a note from the House of Commons, which left no hopes of a speedy decision, the Convention ought to adjourn till Monday,d then to decide upon ulterior measures, if the Bill should be rejected. He had secretly decided that they should meet no more. On the Monday morning he repaired to the Rotunda before the usual hour of sitting; only his own immediate partisans present. He ad- journed the Convention sine die. When the residue of the

[^1]: a "A Bill for the More Equal Representation of the People in Parliament, November 29, 1783." See H. Grattan, The Speeches, Vol. I, p. 191.— Ed.

[^2]: b H. Grattan, The Speeches, Vol. I, pp. 191-94.— Ed c J. Ph. Curran, The Speeches, p. 38.— Ed d December 1 1783— Ed



A Northern Corps, calling itself "Bill of Rights Battalion", says in Address to the Bishop among other things:

"The gloomy clouds of superstition and bigotry, those engines of disunion, being fled from the realm, the interests of Ireland can no longer suffer by a diversity of religious persuasions. All are united in the pursuit of one great object—the extermination of corruption from our Constitution; nor can your Lordship and your virtuous coadjutors, in promoting civil and religious liberty, be destitute of the aid of all professions."

Bishop answered in the same strain (dated 14 January 1784): in conclusion he said:

"The hour is now come when Ireland must necessarily avail herself of her whole internal force to ward off foreign encroachments, or once more acquiesce under those encroachments, the better to exercise anew the tyranny of a part of the community over the dearest and inalienable rights of others. For one million of divided Protestants can never, in the scale of Human Government, be a counterpoise against 3 millions of united Catholics. But, gentlemen of the Bill of Rights Battalion, I appeal to yourselves, and summon you to consistency— Tyranny is not Government, and Allegiance is only due to Protection."

The Government resolved (too impotent to act) to watch the progress of events. Many of the best patriots thought the Bishop's language too strong. The idea of coercing the Parliament very rapidly lost ground. No military language to Parliament etc.

The people were severed, but the Government remained compact; the Parliament was corrupted, the Volunteers were paralysed, and the high spirit of the Nation exhibited a rapid declension.

Weak ly foolish Charlemont, after the dissolution of the Convention, recommended a Reform Bill to be presented to Parliament, as emanating solely from civil bodies, unconnected with military character. Of course, the placemen, who had scouted the military Bill, because it was military, now rejected the civil Bill, because it was popular. Meetings of the Volunteers were suspended, their reviews continued, to amuse the languid vanity of their deluded general.

The temperate (bourgeois parliamentary) system now gained ground. The Volunteers of Ireland survived these blows for some years. The Whig orators (Grattan etc.) lost ground and influence.

December 1783. Pitt Minister. Duke of Rutland Viceroy (!)



**[p. 236]**

Pitt in England. Duke of Rutland (Lord Lieutenant) died October, 1787. Marquis of Buckingham (formerly Earl of Temple) second time Viceroy (16 December 1787-5 January 1790).

John Fane, Earl of Westmoreland [Lord Lieutenant] (Hobart, afterwards Earl of Buckinghamshire, Chief Secretary) from 5 January 1790 onwards (until 1795).

In Irish House of Commons repeated attempts at Reform (Flood, Grattan, Curran etc.) failed.

Place Bill, Pension Bill, Responsibility Bill, Inquiry into the Sale of Peerages and into the Police of Dublin the most material measures pressed by the Opposition during Westmoreland's Office, hence after the Revolution of 1789 in France.

{The Place, Pension and Responsibility Bills proposed by Mr. Grattan, acceded to by the Viceroy, passed into laws. Place Bill—a bill to vacate the seats of members accepting offices under Government, omitting the term of bona fide offices, thereby leaving the Minister a power of packing the Parliament; this Bill one of the instruments of Castlereagh for carrying the Union.}

[Up] to 1790 all these things as also Emancipation, Reform, Tithe questions failed.

Orde's Propositionsc and Regency Bills the things most important during this period as international questions between Ireland and

[^1]: There was a steady decline of the Volunteer organisation, and of the strength of the Liberal party to 1790. We have Tone's word that when the French Revolution broke out, both Catholic Committee and Whig Club280—the Emancipation and Reform parties — were feeble and dispirited.3

[^2]: Irish House of Commons. February 14, 1785. Militia against Volunteers. Gardiner {on behalf of the Minister, and, as Curran told him, "in hope of being rewarded, by being raised to a higher rank", became actually Lord Mountjoy by the Union} moved a grant of £20,000 for clothing the Militia. This motion was levelled at the Volunteers, and therefore violently debated. One of the reasons of its being carried—the fool-rogueb Grattan went with the Government. Fitzgibbon, the Attorney-General, said amongst other things against Curran, who opposed the Bill and defended the Volunteers: "he (Curran) poured forth a studied panegyric of the Volunteers I shall even entrust the defence of the country to gentlemen, with the King's commission in their pockets, rather than to his (Curran's) friends, the beggars in the streets."

[^3]: a See Davis' "Memoir" in J. Ph. Curran, The Speeches, p. XIX.— Ed. b "The fool-rogue" was inserted by Marx.— Ed. c Marx means Orde's propositions regarding the trade between Ireland and Great Britain made on February 11, 1785. See H. Grattan, The Speeches, Vol. I, pp. 214-17.— Ed



Renewed efforts for reform made in 1784. In consequence of a requisition, Henry Reilly, Sheriff of the County of Dublin, summoned his bailiwick to the court-house of Kilmainham for the 25 October 1784, to elect members to a national congress. For this Mr. Reilly was attached by the King's Bench, on a crown motion, and on the 24 February 1785 Mr. Brownlow moved a vote of censure on the judges of that court, for the attachment. Speech of Curran. Motion rejected by 143 to 71.'A

Shows still a great independent minority.

PENSIONS, DISFRANCHISEMENT OF EXCISE OFFICERS, GOVERNMENT CORRUPTION

The endeavour to regain by corruption what was surrendered to force, began in 1782, and increased greatly after the defeat of Orde's Propositions.281

Pensions

Pensions, 13 March 1786. Irish House of Commons. Bill of Forbes to limit the amount dj pensions. Defeated, i.e., adjournment ad Calendas Graecasb carried. As Curran said [the] object of the Bill [was] to "restrain the Crown from doing wrong by a physical necessity". "The Pension List, like charity, covers a multitude of sins coming home to the members of this House the Crown is laying a foundation for the independence of Parliament they" (the members of this House) "will have this security for their independence, that while any man in the kingdom has a shilling, they will not want one" (Curran).

[^1]: 12 March 1787. (Forbes renewed his Bill for limiting Pensions. Curran supported him. Orde, Secretary. Also failed.)

[^2]: "The King's authority" (here) "delegated first to a Viceroy, and next it falls to a Secretary, who can have no interest in the good of the people, no interest in future fame etc What responsibility can be found or hoped for in an Fnglish Secretary? A succession of men" (these Secretaries), "sometimes with heads, sometimes with hearts, oftener with neither" (Curran). "Where will you look for Orde's responsibility as a Minister? You will remember his Commercial Propositions" (Curran).

[^3]: "A right honourable member opposes the principle of the Bill, as being in restraint of the Royal Bounty A gross and general application of the people's money to the encouragement of every human vice, is a crying grievance The pension list, at the best of times, was a scandal to this country; but the present abuses of it have gone beyond all bounds" (Curran).

[^4]: "That unhappy list has been degraded by a new species of prostitution that was unknown before: the granting of honours and titles, to lay the foundation for the grant of a pension; the suffering any man to steal a dignity, for the purpose that a barren

[^5]: See Davis' commentary in J. Ph. Curran, The Speeches, p. 42.— Ed. Until the Greek calends.— Ed.





**[p. 238]**

11 February 1790. Irish House of Commons (government corruption and patriot opposition proceeded, the public daily being more convinced that nothing but a reform of the Commons could save the Constitution of 1782 from the foul policy of the Ministers). Forbes moved an address describing and censuring several recent pensions. Curran supported it. Motion rejected by 136 to 92.

Government Corruption

House of Commons. 21 April 1789. Disfranchisement of Excise Officers' Bill. Bill rejected by 148 to 93.

Curran's prophecy in his speech on that occasion was fulfilled. The English executive inflicted incompetent men and corrupt measures on Ireland, then took advantage of her own crime and our misfortunes to provincialise us, and now uses these very events as arguments against our independence. Curran said inter alia: "The opposition to this measure [] comes from the avowed servants of the crown and of every administration the men sent to grind us are, in general, the refuse of Great Britain Cart-loads of excise officers — revenue troops—collected from every corner of the nation, and taking possession of boroughs on the eve of an election" (Curran).

House of Commons. 25 April 1789. Dublin Police. Sir H. Cavendish moved two resolutions to the effect that the Dublin Police System was attended with waste, and useless patronage. Ministers opposed the Resolutions. Rejected by 132 to 78.

In his bold speech Curran alludes to the French Revolution.

[^1]: Curran in support said among other things: "Advantage had been taken of some disturbances in 1784, to enslave the capital by a police. A watch of old men, at 4d. per night, was naturally ineffectual."

[^2]: House of Commons. 4 February 1790. Stamp Officers' Salaries. {Curran proposes to regulate, cut them down etc. Rejected by 141 to 81.} (This was one means of government corruption.) Westmoreland Viceroy, Hobart his Secretary.

[^3]: Curran says inter alia: the Earl of Temple (afterwards Marquis of Buckingham) incensed because of his failure in the Regency Bill increased the Revenue Board, the Ordnance, £13,000 addition to the infamous Pension List; (Under Lord Harcourt compact [was] made that the Board of Accounts and the management of the stamps (stamp duties had been granted in Harcourt's times} should be executed by one board.) Buckingham separated them in order to make places for members of Parliament. "Two country members prying into stamps!" "In proportion as you rose by union, your tyrant became appalled: but when he divided, he sunk you, and you became debased." "I rise in an assembly of 300 persons, 100 of whom have places or pensions I am showing the danger that arises to our honour and our liberty, if we submit to have corruption let loose among us the people now are fairly told that it is lawful to rob them of their property, and divide the plunder among the honest gentlemen who sell them to the administration."

[^4]: House of Commons. February 12, 1791. Government Corruption. {New attempt of Curran to prove the impurities of Government.} Curran's principal theme: "Raising



"I have proof* that a contract has been entered into by the present ministers to raise to the peerage certain persons, on condition of their purchasing a certain number of seats in this House."

Curran states: "During the whole of last session" (1790) "we have, in the name of the people of Ireland, demanded from them the Constitution of Great Britain, and it has been uniformly denied. We would have passed a law to restrain the shameful profusion of a pension-list—it was refused by a majority. We would have passed a law to exclude persons, who must ever be the chattels of the government, from sitting in this House—it was refused by a majority. A bill to make some person, resident among you, and therefore amenable to public justice, responsible for the acts of your governors—has been refused to Ireland by a majority of gentlemen calling themselves her representatives [] This uniform denial proof to them" (the people) "that the imputation of corrupt practices is founded in fact."

The vain attempt—in 1790-91—of the Parliamentary Minority against government corruption proves on the one hand its increase, on the other the influence of French Revolution of 1789. It also-shows why, at last, foundation of United Irishmen [took place] in 1791, since all Parliamentary action proved futile, and the Majority of Parliament mere tool in the hands of the Government.

* * *

a) Orde's Commercial Propositions. (Duke of Rutland, Lord Lieutenant)2*2

(in fact, of English origin).

'placing England and Ireland on the same footing, to the ruin of the latter.}

[^1]: ATTKMPTS OF GOVERNMENT AGAINST IRISH INDEPENDENCE REPELLED

[^2]: ON OCCASION OF ORDE'S COMMERCIAL PROPOSITIONS

[^3]: AND THE REGENCY BILL

[^4]: In May, 1784, Griffith proposed in Irish House of Commons inquiry in the commercial intercourse between Britain and Ireland. He desired to show that Irish trade should be protected from English competition etc. Government took this proposal out of his hand.

[^5]: On 7 February 1785, Mr. Orde, the Chief Secretary, announced, and on 11 February moved the 11 propositions on trade, commonly called the Irish'A propositions

[^6]: There were 4 principles established in these propositions:

[^7]: 1) Taxes on all goods, foreign and domestic, passing between the 2 countries, should be equal

[^8]: a This word is underlined by Curran.— Ed

[^9]: 10-733





**[p. 240]**

3) That the regulations should be unalterable (thus abdicating legislation). 4) That the surplus of the hereditary revenue (hearth tax, and certain customs, and excises, over £656,000 a year) should be paid over to the English Treasury, for the support of the Imperial (English) navy.

Yet this plan was proffered as a boon, a reciprocity plan; Orde (in contrast to Flood) hurried the Commons on to seize upon it, because otherwise the jealousy of the English monopolists might be awakened. The thing was a favour—to be paid for by £140,000 of new taxes, asked and voted in return for it. On the 22nd of February 1785 Pitt moved the Resolution in British House of Commons which declared that Ireland should be allowed the advantages (i.e. competition) of British Commerce as soon as she had "irrevocably" granted to England an "aid" (i.e. tribute) for general defence. North and the Tories, Fox and the Whigs —

as a party manoeuvre—

saw in English jealousy to Ireland a sure resource against the "heaven born Minister". Fox obtained adjournments, and all England "spoke out", from Lancashire to London, from Gloucester to York. Pitt sounded a parley. He submitted to some of their terms; retained all that was adverse to the Irish Constitution, suffered the loss of all that could by any ingenuity be serviceable to Irish trade. Returned the Act thus approved of by him in the form of 20 English propositions.

The 11 propositions had been increased in England to 20, each addition a fresh injury. Half the globe, namely, all between Magellan and Good Hope, was (articles 3 and 9) interdicted to Ireland's ships: interdicts were also laid on certain goods. The ivhole customs legislation of Ireland was taken away by clauses which forced her (art. 4) to enact (register) all navigation laws passed or to be passed by England; (art. 5 and 8) to impose all the colonial duties that England did; (art. 6 and 7) to adopt the same system in custom-houses that England did; and finally (art. 17 and 18) to recognise all patents and copyrights granted to England.

Curran plainly threatened that the people would take revenge against the persons who, in a thin House, would accept the 20 propositions after the adjournment. He threatened that such a

[^1]: Irish House of Commons. 30 June 1785: Orde moves the adjournment of the House till Tuesday fortnight. Curran opposes this. Adjournment is carried. Curran says:

[^2]: "When we had the 11 propositions before us, we were charmed with them. Why?—because we did not understand them. Yes, the endearing word reciprocity rang at every corner of the streets."

[^3]: 23 July 1785. Orde moves new adjournment; Curran opposes; adjournment carried.

[^4]: 11 August 1785. Curran asks Orde what has become of the 11 propositions "as of them only that Parliament could treat". They were "proposed as a system, of final and permanent commercial adjustment between the 2 kingdoms". "As a compensation for the expected advantages of this system, we were called upon {and they did so!}

[^5]: to impose £140,000 a year on this exhausted country." "We submitted." "We have oppressed the people with a ioad of taxes, as a compensation for a commercial adjustment: we have not got that adjustment."



12 August 1785. Orde moved his Bill (the 20 propositions). Opposed by Grattan, Flood, Curran. Leave to bring in the Bill carried by 127 to 108 (=19 votes: this showed that the Bill would be rejected).

Curran: "The commercial part of it" (the Bill) "is out of the question: for this Bill portends a surrender of the Constitution and the liberties of Ireland I fear the British Minister is mistaken in the temper of Ireland, and judges of it by former times. Formerly the business here was carried on by purchase of majorities things have changed. The people are enlightened and strong, they will not bear a surrender of their rights, which would be the consequence, if they submitted to this Bill. It contains a covenant to enact such laws as England should think proper: they would annihilate the Parliament of Ireland. The people here must go to the bar of the English House of Commons for relief; and for a circuitous trade to England, we are accepting a circuitous constitution A power to bind externally, would involve a power to bind internally. This law gives the power to Great Britain, of judging what would be a breach of the compact, of construing it; in fact, of taxing us as she pleased; while it gives her new strength to enforce our obedience. In such an event we must either sink into utter slavery, or the people must wade to a re-assumption of their rights through blood, or be obliged to take refuge in a Union, which would be the annihilation of Ireland, and what, I suspect, the Minister is driving atb Civil war or a Union at best."

15 August 1785: Orde, on presenting the Bill, abandoned it for the session, and for ever. Thereupon Flood moved: "Resolved—That we hold ourselves bound not to enter into any engagement to give up the sole and exclusive right of the Parliament of Ireland to legislate for Ireland in all cases whatsoever, as well externally as commercially and internally. " Curran supported him. Flood withdrew his motion, the House adjourned, and Orde's Propositions merged in a secret design for the Union.

[^1]: b) Regency Bill (1789)283

[^2]: George III mad for some time, concealed, in the end of 1788 could no longer be hid. In the ministers' draft of the address in answer to the Lord Lieutenant (Buckingham) (he had again become Viceroy in December 1787), they praised themselves.

[^3]: Irish House of Commons. February 6, 1789. Grattan moved amendment, substituting a general expression of loyalty. Curran spoke in support. "Every man sees the change of public administration that is approaching. " (People thought that Fox would become Minister under the Prince of Wales.3)

[^4]: "It has been delayed and opposed by a party in another kingdom. Upon what principle of wisdom or justice can Ireland enlist herself in that opposition etc?" Grattan's amendment was carried without a division although he called Buckingham "a jobber in a mask"

[^5]: a This sentence is in German in the manuscript.— Ed. b The words "or be obliged to is driving at" are italicised by Curran.— Ed.

[^6]: 10*





**[p. 242]**

so prostrated was the Castle at the prospect of the Prince's Regency, with Fox as Premier.

February 11, 1789: Ministers tried to postpone the discussion on the Regency. Their avowed motive to have from England the Resolutions of the British Parliament, appointing the Prince Regent of Great Britain with limited powers. These resolutions passed on 23 January, accepted by Prince on 31st January, but had not reached the Irish Government. The postponement was refused by the House. Conolly then moved an address to be presented to Prince, as Prince Regent of Ireland with full kingly powers. Motion passed without a division.

February 12, 1789. Conolly moved the address. February 17 concurrence of Lords brought up and agreed.to. On 19 February presented to Buckingham. He refused to transmit it. February 20, 1789 agreed to transmit it by deputation. Vote of censure against Buckingham.

February 27, 1789. Deputation (Conolly, O'Neil, etc.) deliver a letter to the Commons with answer of Prince Regent, thanking "warmly" the Irish Parliament.

March 20, 1789. Still more fervent letter of the Prince Regent, announcing his father's recovery, read in the Irish House of Commons.

Pitt, to maintain his power, had defended and carried in England, the right of election of the Regent, hence the right to restrain his power.

The Irish in this case maintained the common Constitution against the oligarchic and ministerial encroachments of Pitt.

* * *

There are for this lapse of time two things still to be considered,

1) the Tithe Riots etc., showing the state of the Catholic Irish peasantry at that time, and

2) The Dublin Lord Mayor election, showing the influence of the French Revolution upon the (into the bargain Protestant) Irish middle-class.

1) Tithe Riots etc. English Riot Act Introduced in Ireland284

Towards the close of the 18 century (since end of 1791) political parties united themselves with the peasants (the republicans of the North).

[^1]: Irish House of Commons. January 19, 1787. Outrages in the South. Disturbances in the South caused by the misery of the people, Tithes, Rents, absenteeism,2^ bad tenures, harsh treatment etc.

[^2]: 1786.' In the Lord Lieutenant's Opening Speech, he referred to the "frequent outrages" ("Right Boys" of Kilkenny, who were bound amongst each other by



7 787 Viceroy's speech referred much more positively to the Southern outrages, and the debates on the Address in reply to it [were] violent. During this debate the government party (Fitzgibbon for instance) treated the disturbances as against the clergy, accused the landlords of grinding the people, and abetting the disturbances, and asked for fresh powers.

House of Commons. 19 January 1787. Fitzgibbon, in [his] speech (1787) said the disturbances commenced in Kerry, the people assembled in a mass-house, there took an oath to obey the laws of Captain Right. Soon spread through the province of

Munster. Their objects the tithes, then to regulate the price of lands, to raise the price of labour, and to opjmse the collection of hearth-money and other taxes. "I am very well acquainted with the province of Munster, and I know that it is impossible for human wretchedness to exceed that of the miserable peasantry in that province. I know that the unhappy tenantry are ground to pou'der by relentless landlords'1—far from being able to give the clergy their just dues, they have not food or raiment for themselves, the landlords grasp the whole; and not satisfied with the present extortion, some landlords have been so base as to instigate the insurgents to rob the clergy of their tithes, not in order to alleviate the distresses of the tenantry, but that they might add the clergy's share to the cruel rack-rents already paid The poor people of Munster live in a more abject state of poverty than human nature can be supposed able to bear—their miseries are intolerable, but they do not originate with the clergy: nor can the legislature stand by and see them take the redress into their own hands. Nothing can be done for their benefit while the country remains in a state of anarchy."

Longfield, a County Cork Gentleman, stated that the disturbances were exaggerated, though the distress was not. He accused the government of looking for a year at the disturbances, for a political purpose.

[^1]: Curran moved an amendment to the address (withdrawn without a division). Said inter alia:

[^2]: "Cease to utter idle complaints of inevitable effects, when you yourselves have been the causes the patience of the people has been totally exhausted; their grievances (have long) been the empty song of this House, but no productive effect has ever followed. The non-residence of the landholders, the tyranny of intermediate landlords. You denied the existence of the grievance, and refused redress No wonder that the peasantry should be ripe for rebellion and revolt Not a single man of property or consequence connected with the rebels

[^3]: "You were called on solemnly for a proper reformation in the representation of the people: did you grant it? No; and how does it at present stand? Why, Sir, seats in this House are bought and sold. They are set up to public sale; they have become an absolute article of commerce—a traffic of the constitution Saleable rotten boroughs. As they have bought the people for a sum of money, it is natural they should sell them The peasantry have formed hopes of relief People, when oppressed, [] though oppressed by law, will make reprisals; and these are the real causes of the disturbances. System of vile jobbing extends to commissions of the peace (24 commissions of the peace sent down to the County of Clare in one post) and to the sheriffs. You may talk of commerce expanding but what, in God's name, have they to do with the wretched peasantry?"

[^4]: House of Commons. 19 February 1787. "Right Boy Bill". One clause of the Government, [which was] abandoned, was directing magistrates to demolish mass-houses

[^5]: a The passage "to exceed that of relentless landlords" is italicised by Davis.— Ed.





**[p. 244]**

Curran: "The people are too much raised by a consciousness of their strength and consequence to be proper objects of so sanguinary a code as that now proposed" He alludes to pamphlet of Dr. Woodward, Bishop of Cloyne, in defence of tithes "tending manifestly to revive the dissensions from which we had so recently emerged, and to plunge us into the barbarism from which we were emerging, or, perhaps to imbrue us in the bloodshed of a religious war" (The Bill was committed by 192 to 31.)

20 February 1787. Discussion of the same Bill, by which a Riot Act passed. O'Neill moved to limit it to Cork, Kerry, Limerick, and Tipperary. (Limiting motion rejected by 176 to 43.) In the Bill Todesstrafe—capital punishment—for tendering an oath etc.

"I fear," said Curran, "that, as the coercion is so great, and as no means are taken for the relief of the poor, rebellion will go in the dark until the whole Kingdom set in a flame."

13 March 1787. Tithes. Grattan having moved a resolution that if tranquillity were restored, at the opening of the next session, the House would consider the Tithe Question. Motion lost, without a division. Curran supported Grattan's Motion. Curran: "A law of pains and penalties severe beyond all example of any former period The offence was local and partial the causes of such offence were universal The abject and miserable state of the peasantry of Ireland. The Secretary" (Englishman!) "declares he is a stranger to their distresses, and will not hold out any hope that they should be ever considered by the Parliament!" "The honourable gentlemen could not let the Riot Act pass without accompanying it with an express disavowal of all intention to alleviate, or even at any period, however distant, to listen to their complaints." "Who are to execute it" (that law)? "That very body of men in the class above the peasants, who have been represented as adverse to the rights of the clergy, and are said to have connived at these offences." "But whatever may be the idea of an English Secretary, this House must be too wise to say that inveterate evils can receive any sanction from any length of time."

2) Election of Lord Mayor of Dublin (1790)™

[^1]: Disputed election for the Mayoralty of Dublin, connected with the attempt of the English Government to govern or provincialise Ireland by corruption. Hence the burgesses of Dublin pledged themselves in their guilds not to return any one as Lord Mayor or Member of Parliament for the city, who held a place or pension from the Government Alderman James was a Police Commissioner. Under the old Corporation laws the Lord Mayor and Aldermen sat and voted in one chamber, the Sheriff and Common Councilmen in a second. 16 April 1790 the former chose Alderman James as mayor elect for the ensuing year, the Common Council rejected him. Seven other names afterwards sent down were similarly rejected. Then the Common Council elected Alderman Howison; Napper Tandy led the popular party. The Aldermen repeated their election of James. This dispute came before the Privy Council, where Curran pleaded for the Common Council. Privy Council decided for a new election. Aldermen re-elect James and Councilmen Howison. This whole process, with interference of the Privy Council, repeated several times.

[^2]: On 10 July 1790 Curran pleads for the Common Council before the Privy Council, presided by Fitzgibbon (became Lord Chancellor, and Lord Clare, in June 1789.)



Privy Council decided for James, he resigned, on 5th August 1790 Howison chosen by the Aldermen, approved by the Common Council and Privy Council Thus this struggle ended in utter defeat of the Government.

On 16 July, in the Common Council, Napper Tandy carried 17 Resolutions censuring the Privy Council, Aldermen, and summoned meeting of freemen and freeholders288 at the Exchange. This meeting held on 20 July, Hamilton Rowan in the chair, adjourned to 3d August, after appointing a committee to prepare a state of facts.

3d August that State of Facts read, and James's resignation was announced. Sir E. Newenham denounced Fitzgibbon, who on 24 July had in House of Peers made audacious speech, where he read a Resolution of the Whig Club'21*9 and attacked them, until Lords Charlemont and Moira avowed the Resolution. (Whig Club founded in Dublin, summer 1789.)

Whig Club, [which] met on 2d August, drew up a Report against Fitzgibbon. Fitzgibbon had become so unpopular, that the guild of merchants, who had, in the previous winter, voted him an address in a gold box, for services to their trading interests, expunged the resolutions on 13 July, 1790, as "disgraceful".

From the above-quoted "State of Facts", August 3, 1790. (Aggregate meeting of the citizens of Dublin, held at the Royal Exchange.) Among other things it said:

"That we do acknowledge, that for the last 10 or 11 years the citizens of Dublin did take an active part for the liberty of their country etc. etc.;

"that we do acknowledge [that] the freedom of the City of Dublin [was] refused to His Excellency etc. the Earl of Westmoreland etc.;

"that we do not deny that many among us did, on a former occasion, favour the scheme of Protective Duties etc.;

T h e Judges, dependent on the Crown, the Army independent of Parliament, the Legislature at the feet of the British Attorney- General, and the people bound by the laws of Scotch and English Delegates. {The two last points apply to the period before 1782.}

{From October 1791 to 4 January 1795. (Arrival of Fitzwilliam.) (Continuation of Lord Westmoreland's Government. (His Secretary Major Hobart.) }

[^1]: "that we do acknowledge to have expressed our approbation of the conduct of the minority of the late Parliament in the last session that those measures had no other view, meaning or object, save corruption only: that the nation was told by a very high authority (Fitzgibbon) that in order to defeat an opposition in Parliament, this nation had been, in the Administration of the Marquis of Townshend, bought in by the Government, and sold by the Members of Parliament for half a million, and that if opposition continued to the present Administration, this nation must be bought and sold again etc. etc."

[^2]: C) FROM OCTOBER 1791 TO COMMENCEMENT OF APRIL 1795

[^3]: (LORD FTTZWILLIAM'S RECALL AND REPLACEMENT BY LORD CAMDEN)





**[p. 246]**

1794. 18 May, Moreau and Souham won a total victory over the Duke of York at Tourcoing.

26 June 2nd battle of Fleurus (Jourdan). Belgium quickly conquered. The leaders of the English and Dutch troops were compelled to think only of the defence of the Netherlands.

October and November the Dutch lost all their frontier fortresses. October Jourdan compelled the Austrians to abandon the entire left bank of the Rhine up to Mainz, 26 October he entered Coblenz. On the entire left bank of the Rhine, only Mainz and Luxembourg remained in the hands of the allies.

27 December Pichegru in Holland.

1795. 20 January 1795 Pichegru's entry into Amsterdam.- Batavian Republic.

September Düsseldorf in Jourdan's hands, Mannheim in Picheg- ru's. The Austrians had to withdraw across the Main. Clairfait defeated the French army at Mainz on 29 October. Pichegru and Jourdan had to retreat. An armistice towards the end of the year. Moreau was given the command of the Rhine army.

At the beginning of 1795 a peace treaty with the leaders of the Vendée. (The Peace of La Mabilois.) Pitt landed an émigré army at Quiberon on 27 June 1795 etc. On 20 July it was crushed by Hoche etc.290

{February and March 1796 Stoff let, Charette etc. were court- martialled and executed by firing-squad. July 1796 he [Hoche] reported to the Directory that the civil war in the West had been brought to an end. }

1796. 1797. Bonaparte in Italy.

[^1]: :l The next passage, up to and including the words "1796, 1797. Bonaparte in Italy", is in German in the manuscript.— Ed.



Their avowed (and by the mass of the Societies alone wished for) objects were Union between Catholics and Protestants, perfect Emancipation for the Catholics (Belfast had proposed this already in 1783) and Popular Representation for the men of both creeds. (Tone and others of the leading men for independent Republic. Without the c ruelty of Government they would have been overruled by the Whigs, and outvoted in the Societies.)

The Belfast Society met publicly, as did all the United Irish Societies until 1794. The Catholics, on their part, were rapidly advancing in political spirit and information.

Keogh and the leading (not aristocratic and Whiggish) Catholics were United.

The Confederation extended to Dublin, received the support of the leading citizens, and of many of the Volunteer Corps. Its chief organ was The Northern Star: the first number of this paper, printed 4 January 1792 (manager Samuel Neilson), occupied itself chiefly with French politics. The Evening Star appeared in Dublin soon after, but The Press did not commence until 28 September 1797.

Returning now to Westmoreland's Administration, we remark that Catholic Emancipation and Parliamentary Reform were the two cries!

Irish House of Commons. 18 February 1792. Catholic Emancipation. These proceedings began by the presentation of a petition from the Protestants of County of Antrim for the Bill.

Some small thing was proposed by Grattan. (Rejected.)

[^1]: Curran. "At Cork, the present Viceroy was pleased to reject a most moderate and modest petition from the Catholics of that city. The next step was to create a division amongst the Catholics themselves: the next was to hold them up as a body formidable to the English Government, and to their Protestant fellow-subjects It is not a question merely of the sufferings or their relief—it is a question of your own preservation a partial liberty cannot long subsist alienation of 3 millions of our people, subserviency and corruption in a fourth the inevitable consequence would be an Union with Great Britain. And if any one desires to know what thai would be, I will tell him. It would be the emigration of every man of consequence from Ireland; it would be the participation of British taxes, without British trade; it would be the extinction of the Irish name as a people etc."

[^2]: The petition for the Catholics rejected with indignation, by 208 to 23. This rejection inflamed the Catholics.

[^3]: DOINGS OK CATHOLICS, UNITED IRISHMEN AND ADMINISTRATION UNTIL CATHOLIC RELIEE BILL

[^4]: OK 1793292

[^5]: In March, 1792, the Catholic Committee,29^ or rather Convention (for it was a body of delegates) met, and Tone was named its secretary. The agitation by means of these societies became most vigorous. The shining3 progress of the French

[^6]: •' In his "Memoir" Davis has "stirring". See J. Ph. Curran, The Speeches, p. XXL— Ed.





**[p. 248]**

7 December 1792. Government Proclamation against all seditious meetings: In this proclamation we read: "The first battalion of National Guards were to have paraded, clothed like Frenchmen etc." This proclamation answered by the United Irishmen.

16 December 1792, Rowan (of Dublin) Chairman, when the address was voted, Dr. Drennan wrote it.

The main content of this proclamation,3 on account of which Rowan and Drennan were prosecuted, was: 1) It called the Volunteers to arms:

"To your formation was owing the peace and protection of this island; to your relaxation has been owing its relapse into impotence and insignificance. 2) Elective franchise to the whole body of the people reform in representation. 3) Universal Emancipation and representative legislature, in these 4 words lies all our power We, therefore, wish for Catholic Emancipation without any modification, but still we consider this necessary enfranchisement as nearly the portal to the temple of national freedom The Catholic cause is subordinate to our cause, and included in it; for, as United Irishmen, we adhere to no sect, but to society—to no party, but the whole people, were it (Catholic Emancipation) obtained tomorrow, tomorrow would we go on as we do today, in the pursuit of that Reform, which would still be wanting to ratify their liberties as well as our own. 4) For both these purposes it appears necessary that provisional conventions should assemble preparatory to the convocation of the Protestant Convention (this then to communicate with the Catholic Committee or Convention in Dublin) If a Convention on the one part does not soon follow, and is not soon connected with that on the other, the common cause will split into the partial interest—the people will relapse into inattention and inertness—too probably, some local insurrections, instigated by the malignity of our common enemy, may commit the character, and risk the tranquillity of the island The 15th of February approaches,296 Let parochial meetings be held as soon as possible; let each parish return delegates; let the sense of Ulster be again declared from Dungannon Citizen Soldiers etc." (This address was issued in meeting at a fencing school, Dublin, several corps of Volunteers with their side-arms going there, as well as Napper Tandy etc.)

[^1]: In December 1792 Rowan was arrested on an information and admitted-to bail.b

[^2]: The prosecution of the "Northern Star" of Belfast for publishing the Declaration and Address of the "Irish Jacobins (name of the society) of Belfast" on 15 December 1792.

[^3]: The Declaration of the "Irish Jacobins" says among other things:

[^4]: ;1 Marx means the proclamation "The Society of United Irishmen at Dublin. To the Volunteers of Ireland" quoted according to Davis' commentary in J. Ph. Curran, The Speeches, pp. 154-55. The division of the text into points is by Marx.— Ed.

[^5]: '' The following two semences are in German in the manuscript.— Ed.



"1st) Resolved—That this Kingdom (meaning the Kingdom of Ireland) has no national government, inasmuch as the great mass of the people are not represented in Parliament. [] 3d) That the people of Ireland can never effectually constitute their own laws, without an extension of the elective franchise to all its citizens. 4th) That the elective franchise can never be obtained without a cordial, steady, and persevering union of all the Irish people of every denomination. 5) That the penal code of statutes which have for upwards of a century doomed our fellow-citizens, the Roman Catholics of this Kingdom, to a state little inferior to the unlettered African, is a disgrace to the land we live in. [] 7) That to obtain this most desirable end (natural rights of men) we entreat our fellow-citizens of every denomination in Ireland, England, and Scotland, to turn their thoughts to a National Convention, in order to collect the sense of the people as to the most effective means of obtaining a radical and complete Parliamentary reform, an object without which these kingdoms must for ever remain wretched etc."

"Address. The Irish Jacobins of Belfast to the Public"

Among other things: "Where the mode of government is not derived from all the people clearly expressed, that nation has no constitution; need we say this is the case with Ireland; it possesses only an acting government []: in such a government the supreme authority has more power to oppress the subject than to defend his rights Out of 5 millions of people (meaning the Irish people) 90 individuals actually return a majority of the House of Commons, who instead of representing the voice of the nation, are influenced by English interests, and that aristocracy whose baneful exertions have ever tended to sap the vital principles etc. of this unhappy and wretched country By unanimity and perseverance this divided land will be liberated from the shackles of tyranny It is by procuring a renovated representation that liberty will be established in this country; this can only be accomplished by a National Convention. The Roman Catholics are already convened; let the Protestants follow their peaceful example." 297

[^1]: 15 February 1793: Volunteer Convention, said to represent 1,250,000 people, met at Dunganaon, passed resolutions in favour of Emancipation and Reform, and named a permanent Committee. This, doubtless, assisted the carrying of the Relief Bill, but it made the Ministry resolve to crush the Protestants, while it conciliated the Catholics.

[^2]: Irish House of Commons. 10 January 1793. Lord Westmoreland opens Parliament [with a speech]. Complained of the discontent of Ireland, but said nothing of the corruption, extravagance, and alien policy of ministers. It complained of the invasion of Holland by France, but was silent of the European conspiracy against the Republic. It recommended a relaxation of Catholic fetters, but not the motives: English declaration of war against France, Custine had conquered the Rhine (21 October 1792), Dumouriez's battle of Jemappes (6 November 1792) and annexation of Belgium. The speech also stated that Government had increased the military establishment, and recommended the formation of a militia. This last was a stroke against the Volunteers. The Address moved was echo to the speech, Grattan moved a trivial amendment.

[^3]: Catholics had acquired spirit and organisation by Wolfe Tone, Keogh, Byrne, Todd Jones and M'Cormick. The Catholic Committee negotiated with the Government, the





**[p. 250]**

In opposition to the Catholic Committee and the United Irishmen, the Ministry stimulated Protestant bigotry and Catholic division. Out of doors they got the exclusive Corporation of Dublin to address the other Irish Corporations against Emancipation, and they intrigued with the Aristocracy (lay and clerical) of the Catholics. In Parliament they found the relics of the old exclusion Party.

11 January 1793: Curran supported Grattan's amendment which was carried. "Parliament has become unpopular in the country How could the credit of Parliament survive its independency? More than half of us have no connexion with the people The disunion of the people from this House raises from this—the people are not represented. And to restore the Union wanted a radical Reform of the Commons Without them (the Catholics) the country cannot be saved. Give them no qualified Emancipation A hated Government, an unpopular Parliament, a discontented people The Catholic Petition (1792) has been rejected by the influence of the Irish Administration."

Early in January 1793d Curran unsuccessfully resists the Attorney-General's motion for the committal of M'Donnell, the printer of the Hibernian Journal, for publishing that the House was not free and independent.

On January 14, 1793 (so persuasive were French victories) Grattan obtained a Committee of the Whole House on Parliamentary Representation, and moved resolutions [pointing out] among other things that of the 300 members only 84 [are] returned by counties, counties of towns and cities, together with the University, while the remaining 216 [are] returned by boroughs and manors. Finis: "Resolved—That the state of the representation of the people in Parliament requires amendment."

Curran supported this. He said: "The Catholic Question must precede a Reform. Their place in the state must be decided first Ireland feels, that without an immediate Reform her liberty is gone."

[^1]: Motion lost by 71 to 153. But the Opposition had already yielded to the Ministers Indemnity for their violent Proclamations against the Republican Volunteers: they had consented to the Militia and Gunpowder Bills, and therefore the Resolutions were resisted.

[^2]: 11 March 1793 another Government Proclamation, forbidding military societies, drilling, and the whole Machinery of the Volunteers, without naming them.

[^3]: April 1793: Relief Bill of the Catholics passed, admitting Catholics to the franchise, the bar, the University, and to all the rights of property; but excluding them from Parliament, from State Offices, and from all, indeed, that the Bill of 1829 conceded?^ The Bill of 1793 was brought in 10 days after the declaration of war against France.b

[^4]: The same Parliament which passed the Relief Bill, passed the Alien Act, the Military Foreign Correspondence, Gunpowder, and Convention Acts, in fact, a full code of coercion and a Secret Committee. It got 20,000 Regulars and 16,000 Militia.

[^5]: Convention Bill: "A law," says Curran, "not to restrain but to promote insurrection." The law declares that no body of men may delegate a power to any smaller number, to act, think, or petition for them.

[^6]: 11 According to Davis, on January 29, 1793. Cf. his commentary in J. Ph. Curran, The Speeches, p. 152.— Ed.

[^7]: b On February 21, 1793.— Ed



Thus armed, the Government commenced its crusade of prosecuting and persecuting, and obtained fresh laws from time to time, and, after the truce of 1795, drove the quarrel to an Insurrection and to the Union.

7 794. The agitation continued. (Government prosecutions against Volunteers, United Irishmen etc.) The United Irishmen Society was changed into a secret and secretly organised body. The Catholics still laboured; the French had conquered; their Government aroused by the Irish Jacobin Resolutions of Belfast, and the suggestions of some Irish patriots, bethought themselves to assist the discontented Irish to effect a separation. Rev. Jackson sent there as an agent, put himself in communication with Tone. Betrayed; arraigned for treason (after arrest), hanged.

29 January 1794, Curran as defender of Rowan: "But now, if any aggregate assembly meets, they are censured; if a printer publishes their resolutions, he is punished; rightly, to be sure, in both cases, for it has been lately done. If people say, let us not create tumult, but meet in delegation, they cannot do it the law of last session has for the first time declared such meetings to be a crime."

The informer system is flourishing.

4 January 1795, Lord Fitzwilliam, Whig, who had opposed Pitt,

But from papers published (correspondence between Fitzwilliam and Lord Carlisleh) [it is] evident that Pitt (this was, perhaps, second thought, when the King's and Beresford's influence prevailed) has

[^1]: FROM 4 JANUARY 1795 TO THE END OF MARCH 1795. LORD FITZWILLIAM

[^2]: [was] sent by him to Ireland, charged with the carrying of Catholic Emancipation (and Reform Bill), and pacification of Ireland. The apparent causes [were] the rapid progress of the United Irishmen and the French armies, who had driven the Spaniards behind the Pyrenees, the Austrians behind the Rhine, destroyed the Duke of York's army, and prepared the occupation of Holland in the winter 1794-95.a

[^3]: •' See Davis' commentary in J. Ph. Curran, The Speeches, p. 233.— Ed. b Marx refers to [Carlisle] "A Letter to Earl Fitzwilliam, in Reply to His Lordship's Two Letters" (London, 1795) and "A Letter from Earl Fitzwilliam to the Earl of Carlisle" (1795). Further on Marx cites facts according to Mitchel's History of Ireland.., Vol. I, pp. 218-19.—Ed.



