---
Volume: 21
Document_Title: "III "
Page_Range: "285-303"
---

# III 



**[p. 252]**

Fitzwilliam was one of the most indulgent landlords of Ireland and very popular. What Pitt wanted, was to raise the Catholics to the height of expectation, and by suddenly recalling Fitzwilliam, to drive them into commotions, which would throw the Protestants into the arms of England for protection, whilst the horrors would be aggravated by the mingled conflicts of parties, Royalists and Republicans.

Pitt had sent Fitzwilliam to Ireland with unlimited powers. The day Fitzwilliam arrived, peace was proclaimed throughout all Ireland. The day he quitted it, she prepared for insurrection.

Irish House of Commons. 22 January 1795 Fitzwilliam opens with plausible speech. Grattan outdid the Ministers in servile adulation3 (as to the Address). An Emancipation Bill300 was read a first time, but ample supplies were voted, £2 millions loan was voted, and Anti-Gallican frenzy got upon certain classes. Fitzwilliam recalled.

I l l

B) LORD CAMDEN'S ADMINISTRATION. APRIL 1795-END OF JULY 1798

Camden's arrival attended by almost insurrectionary outrages. The Beresfords assaulted, Clare (Lord Chancellor, i.e. Fitzgibbon) almost killed in his carriage.

Camden's Chief Secretary Mr. Pelham (Earl Chichester) afterwards replaced by his nephew Stewart (Lord Castlereagh).

Camden became extremely popular amongst the armed associations which were raised in Ireland under the title of Yeomen. He was considered the guardian of that Institution.

[^1]: Irish House of Commons. 4 May 1795. Second Reading of the Emancipation Bill. Rejected by 155 to 84.

[^2]: Fitzwilliam's recall was a triumph for the separation party. An Irish Republic now became the only object of the United Irish. The bulk of the Presbyterians of Down, Antrim, and Tyrone joined, as did multitudes of Protestants and Catholics in Leinster. At this time the Catholics of the North were Defenders or Ribbonmen.301 Both sides made ready for the worst.

[^3]: An Insurrection Act passed, making death for any one to take an oath of Association; another allowing the Lord Lieutenant to proclaim countries [in a state of siege], in which case no one could go out at night; and magistrates obtained the power of breaking into houses, and transporting to the navy all persons whom they suspected Other acts—granting indemnity for magistrates guilty of any illegality—giving the Lord

[^4]: a Davis wrote "he outdid ministers in loyalty". See J. Ph. Curran, The Speeches, p. 233.— Ed



The Yeomanry consisted of the Tory Gentry, and their dependants, undisciplined and unprincipled, legal banditti. No villainy but was perpetrated by them. Whipping, pitch-capping, half or whole hanging, sending to serve in the navy—as the leisure or facilities of the officer allowed.302

1795. Among the papers found by Jackson View of Ireland, by Tone:

"The Established Churchmen in Ireland have engrossed, besides the whole church patronage, all the profits and honours of the country exclusively, and a very great share of the landed property. Aristocrats, adverse to any change, decided enemies of the French Revolution. Dissenters Republicans []. Catholics, the great body of the people, in lowest degree of ignorance, ready for any change, because no change can make them worse. The whole peasantry of Ireland, the most oppressed and wretched in Europe, may be said to be Catholic. Within these 2 years [they] have received a certain degree of information, [] various insurrections, [] bold, hardy race, and make excellent soldiers. [] Defenders. [] They are so situated that they have but one way left to make their sentiments known, and that is by war. [] All Parliamentary, Grand Jury etc. Acts proceeding from aristocrats, whose interest is adverse to that of the people."

Defenders (in the North). The Lords' Committee of 1793 describes them

"as poor ignorant labouring men", [fighting] for Catholic cause, relieved from hearth-money, tithes, county cesses, lowering of their rents. First they appeared in County Louth, April 1793, several of them armed; assembled mostly in the night, forced into the houses of Protestants and took from them their arms. Spread soon through the counties of Meath, Cavan, Monaghan and other parts adjacent. The Secret Committee tried to connect them with Catholic Gentlemen, and the crown prosec Mtors tried to trace them to the United Irishmen Association and French gold. Before Drogheda, Spring Assizes, April 23, 1794, Drogheda Defenders, declared not guilty. Dublin Defenders,. December 22, 1795. James Weldon, connected with them, hanged.

[^1]: House of Commons. February 3d, 1796. Indemnity Bill. 25 February 1796. Insurrection Bill (it gave the right of arbitrary transportation to magistrates).

[^2]: Curran: "It is a Bill for the rich, and against the poor."'d "What is a Bill which puts the liberty of the poor man, who has no visible means of living but labour, in the discretion of the magistrates? [] In Ireland," where poverty [is] general, "it constitutes poverty a crime." "Let the rich men of Ireland, therefore, fear when they enact a law against poverty, lest poverty should enact a counter-law against riches." "Gentlemen have reasoned to prove that he who should be transported by this law would only be sent into an honourable retirement, where he might gain glory by fighting for his country from which his poverty had expelled him."

[^3]: Irish Flouse of Commons. 13 October 1796. French War. Camden opened [Parliament with the call:] resist invasion! (Hoche's force was just assembling at Brest,

[^4]: •' Here and below in this paragraph italics is by Curran.— Ed.



Curran. "Government encourages every attack upon the reputation of the Catholics, and the most wicked and groundless prosecutions against their lives." "Look at the scene that has been 'exhibited for 2 years in one of your counties, of robbery, and rape, and murder, and extermination" (of the Catholics). "Law can give them no protection under a hostile and implacable government."

Ponsonby's Amendment defeated by 149 to 12. Then the Attorney-General moved for leave to bring in a Bill, similar to such as have been enacted on like occasions in England, to empower the Lord Lieutenant, to take up and detain all such persons as were suspected of treasonable practices. Leave being given, the Bill was forthwith presented, read a first and second time, and committed for the morrow.

14 October 1796. Suspension of the Habeas Corpus Act. Leave to bring it in granted, read, 2 times, etc. all in a few minutes in the morning after midnight.

17 October 1796. Catholic Emancipation Bill. Rejected. 6 January 1797. Hoche's Expedition^ Secretary Pelham brought down a message from the Lord Lieutenant full of English palaver, in reference to France and especially the expedition of Hoche.

Curran. "You have already laid a shilling on the brogues of your beggar peasants; will you impose another shilling upon them? [] What wealth they have? Seven pence per day."

24 February 1797. Internal Defence. Sir Laurence Parsons moved an Address for an increase of the d< nestic army, especially the Yeomen infantry. Grattan supported, and the Ministers opposed, the Address. Neither party foresaw how the patriots of the Clubs would turn into the scourges of the People— traitors to their country and their oath, when under the bribe of payment, the compulsion of discipline, and the spirit of the army.

Since end of March 1796 whole counties of Ireland proclaimed (put in state of siege).

[^1]: Curran. "At this moment the gaols are crowded they3 make a demand of redress an act of treason."

[^2]: House of Commons. March 18, 1797: Disarming of Ulster. Message of Lord Camden. (Pelham is still Secretary.) General Lake—cowardly, infamous, cruel—was to disarm the inhabitants together with the magistrates. Lake's Proclamation. Belfast, 13 March 1797.

[^3]: 19 March 1797. Grattan: "The Lord Lieutenant attaints one entire province of Ireland of High Treason."b Amendment of Grattan.

[^4]: 20 March 1797. Amendment rejected by 127 to 16. Curran. "The North is deeply discontented. By what? Your own laws, your Convention Act, Gunpowder Act, Insurrection Act. The first denies the natural right of sufferers—the right of petition or complaint; the second, the power of self-defence the third, the defence of a jury against the attempts of power."

[^5]: May 15, 1797. Last speech of Curran in the House of Commons, secedes from it, ditto Grattan; the Opposition ceased to attend, and House adjourned on 3 July 1797. Castlereagh Chief Secretary.

[^6]: We have seen the decreasing minorities of the party who gallantly struggled to

[^7]: 3 The Commoners.— Ed. b Marx quotes Grattan probably according to J. Ph. Curran, The Speeches, p. 267; see also H. Grattan, The Speeches, Vol. Ill, p. 299.— Ed.



The Government and the United Irishmen now face to face. The Government strengthened itself by spies on the United Irishmen (such as Maguane and others), the "battalion of testimony" (Bird, Newell, O'Brien etc.), free quarters, prosecutions, patronage, and calumny.

Orr hanged 14 October 1797 for having (allegedly) administered the oath of the United Irish to a private soldier. The Oath is: first, to promote a brotherhood of affection among men of all religious distinctions; secondly, to labour for the attainment of Parliamentary Reform; 3dly, an obligation of secrecy, added to it when the Convention Law had made it criminal for any public delegation to meet for that purpose. The Insurrection Act makes the administering of such an oath felony of death.

The United Irish Society of 1791 formed in 1791, for the achievement of Catholic Emancipation and Parliamentary Reform. In 1792-93 it increased, retaining its original objects. In 1794, the views of Tone and Neilson, who both desired an independent republic, spread; but the formal objects were unchanged, when, on 10 May 1795, the organisation of Ulster was completed. The recall of Fitzwilliam, the consequent disappointment of the Catholics, the accumulation of coercive laws, the prospects of the French Alliance, and the natural progress of a quarrel, rapidly spread the influence, and altered the whole character of the Society. The test of the Society was made more decisive, and less constitutional. In the autumn of 1796 the organisation was made military in Ulster. Towards the middle of 1797, this system spread to Leinster. So far back as May 1796, the Executive had formally'"1 communicated with France, through Lord Edward Fitzgerald. Only on J9 February 1798 [it was] resolved "that they would not be diverted from their purpose by anything which could be done in Parliament".

[^1]: In the winter of 1796-97, the coming of the French was urged as a reason for immediate insurrection; but it did not prevail. In May, 1797, the order for the execution of the 4 soldiers of the Monaghan militia, was regarded by the militias as sufficient motive for action; but not so thought the Executive. In trie summer of 1797 the militia regiments sent a deputation, offering to seize the Castle. The Northern leaders were for an outbreak, so was Lord Edward. Still nothing was done. And again, in the beginning of 1798, the people subjected to free quarters, whipping, burnings, and transportation, pressed for insurrection. Lord Edward disposed to it. Emmet wanted to wait for France, and thus they were, when the sleek traitor Reynolds of Kilkee glided into their councils through Lord Edward's weakness. Arthur O'Connor was arrested at Maidstone, in the act of embarking for France; on 12 March, a meeting of Leinster delegates, including Oliver Bond, Mc Cann etc., were arrested at Oliver Bond's warehouse, Dublin. Mac Nevin, Thomas Emmet, Sampson were not taken for some days. Warrant against Lord Edward, he escaped and lay concealed. New Directory, John Sheares one of it. On 19 May, just 4 days before the rising was to take place, Lord Fitzgerald was pounced on, and on 21st the two Sheares.b Thus the insurrection began, without its designers to lead it, and without time to replace them.

[^2]: A The word "formally" is italicised by Davis.— Ed.

[^3]: h Henry and John.— Ed.





**[p. 256]**

Before the outbreak of the insurrection, trials took place in February and March 1798."

The insurgents during the struggle not treated as soldiers, but hanged. Burning every cottage, and torturing every cottager—the loyalists. Martial law proclaimed, and the courts of justice closed. No quarter on either side. Bills of attainder and all sorts of legal murder. Juries (packed) recorded the opinions given them by the judges.

25 July 1798 the state prisoners' negotiation with Government. Their lives secured [by] Mr. Cooke, on behalf of the Ministers. On the other hand, they were to describe the United Irish affairs, so far as they could, without implicating individuals. Byrne, however, was hanged: compact was finally settled on 29 July, at the Castle, by "deputies from the gaols". The Government broke the compact. They, not only in their press, but by their indemnity act, described the United Leaders as confessing guilt, and craving pardon, neither of which they did. Instead of allowing them to go abroad, they were kept in gaol here for a year, and then thrust into Fort George, from whence thev were not released, till the Treaty of Amiens,304 in 18()2.b

Within 12 days from the first rising, the people of Wexford had cleared their county, with the exception of Ross and Duncannon, two places unfit to resist a skilful attack. Similar successes attended the Kildare insurrection.

Antrim and Down did not rise for a fortnight, and there, after similar blunders, and a shorter struggle, the Presbyterians were ousted.

German and English troops were also employed in these affairs.

1784. Independence assailed by Pitt under colour of commercial

tariff. 1789. The Prince Regent's Question determined to extinguish the

Irish Legislature.

[^1]: The Wexford men protracted the war; partly from a vague hope for foreign assistance, but still more from despair, for they could not trust the faith of their persecutors; and not a few of these heroic men died in the plains of Meath, in an effort to force their way into Ulster.

[^2]: The soldier having done his own work, and that of the assassin and brigand, too, [it was the turn of] the bow-string of the Attorney-General. Courts-martial hanged those taken in battle, and courts-civil slaughtered the prisoners. Most unaccountably the insurgents did not retaliate. They besides spared females, the loyalists did not.

[^3]: PITT'S PLAN TO ENFORCE AND PROVOKE THE INSURRECTION

[^4]: •' This sentence is in German in the manuscript.— Ed. h J. Mitchel, The History of Ireland, Vol. II, pp. 15, 19. 26. Further, till the end of the section, there follow excerpts from Davis' "Memoir" in J. Ph. Curran, The Speeches, p. XXIV.—- Ed.



United Irish Societies known to Government.

Though it appeared, from public documents, that Government had full and accurate information of the United Irish Societies, and that their leaders and chiefs were fully known to the British Ministry, the Government did nothing to suppress, but everything to exasperate, the people.3

Under Camden's Administration: Earl of Carhampton, Commander-in-Chief of Ireland, first expressed his dissatisfaction of Pitt's inexplicable proceedings. Although martial law was not yet declared, Carhampton ordered his troops to intervene, wherever insurrectionary movements occurred.15 This was prohibited by Camden. Carhampton found that troops in the garrison of Dublin were daily corrupted by the United Irishmen; he therefore withdrew them and formed two distinct camps on the South and the North, some miles from the capital. This measure also refused by the Lord Lieutenant whom Carhampton refused to obey. The King's sign manual was at length procured, ordering him to break up his camps, and bring back the garrison; this he obeyed and marched his troops into Dublin barracks. He then resigned his command, and publicly declared, that some deep and insidious scheme of the Minister was in agitation; for, instead of suppressing, the Irish Government was obviously disposed to excite, an insurrection. Mr. Pitt counted on the expertness of the Irish Government to effect a premature explosion. Free quarters were now ordered,

{Free quarters rendered officers and soldiers despotic masters of the peasantry, their homes, food, property, and occasionally, their families. This measure was resorted to, with all its attendant horrors, throughout some of the best parts of Ireland, previous to the insurrection, and for the purpose of exciting it.}

[^1]: to irritate the Irish population; Slow Tortures0 were inflicted under the pretence of forcing confessions; the people were goaded and driven to madness.

[^2]: General Aberçromby, who succeeded as Commander-in-Chief, was not permitted to abate these enormities, and therefore resigned with disgust. {General Abercromby, in general orders, stated that the army placed under his command, from their state of

[^3]: a This paragraph and the text that follows it, till the end of the section, is Marx's rendering of the text from Mitchel's History of Ireland.. (Vol. I, pp. 261-62) which is close to the original.— Ed

[^4]: b This sentence and the one that follows it are in German in the manuscript.— Ed. c Italics by J. Mitchel.— Ed.





**[p. 258]**

Ireland was by those means reduced to a state of anarchy, and exposed to crime and cruelties to which no nation had ever been subject. The people could no longer bear their miseries. Pitt's object was now effected and an insurrection was excited

United Irishmen and Pitt. (Poland and Prussia)305

Until 1795 the United Irishmen were Protestants, of a minor division of the people. Many of them were Pitt's dupes. At the same time (1793 sqq) emissaries were sent from Berlin to Poland in order to form there Jacobinical Clubs, that they might offer a pretext for the introduction of new armies.306

Exorbitation of the People. Castlereagh's Boast

The Irish people were to be tormented, outraged, forced into actual rebellion. Recall of Lord Fitzwilliam involved the country in consternation and dismay. To this succeeded, to fret and exasperate, the Habeas Corpus Act Suspension Bill, the Searching for Arms Act, the Bill to transport persons not found at home from sunset to sunrise; further many persons were shot because, being terrified, they attempted to escape when challenged, or, being seized, they were consigned to Prussia. Ensor met some of them at Berlin, and the law indemnified the perpetrators of such prodigious deeds. Then the Yeomanry were raised: these committed dreadful outrages, particularly in the North; burning houses in open day, commanded by their officers, who were also magistrates. The Militia rivalled the Yeomanry. It is said that pitch-caps were invented by some bravos of the North Cork Militia. Still more ferocious the Dublin Corporation. The riding-house, in Marlborough Street, distinguished for Protestant loyalty, and torture was administered by the scourge and the triangle. Summary executions not uncommon in preparing the Irish for the Union; bodies of Irishmen, deluded by the British Ministry, irritated and inflamed, tortured, tormented, in phrensy and despair, grasped such arms as they could seize, and defied their enemies. This was called rebellion; and Castlereagh boasted that he had made the conspiracy explode. He charged that mine as well as fired it.

[^1]: PITT IN BRITISH PARLIAMENT DEFENDER OF THE UNION,

[^2]: IN ORDER TO PREVENT MEASURES OF PACIFICATION.

[^3]: CASTLEREAGH, 1797, IN IRISH PARLIAMENT

[^4]: Castlereagh had been reformer in Ireland as Pitt in England, till office made him explode. Declared 1792 for Irish Parliamentary Reform. Ditto 1793 for Grattan's motion for Parliamentary Reform. When, Io! the Ministry of Ireland was changed and Camden succeeded Lord Fitzwilliam. With the change of men Castlereagh's opinion of Reform was upset. In 1797, the serpent, the viper, and snake made



Pitt in British Parliament

The reign of terror (Pitt thundered against the French one) prepared the Union. Pitt, while talking of the prodigious wickedness of interfering with prerogative orders and ancient customs, meditated during years of such verbose, political prudery, the end and ruin of the fundamental constitution of Ireland. At the very time when this his machination was completing, he defended, with swollen rhetoric, the independence of Ireland's Parliament. In the debate on the recall of Lord Fitzwilliam, in 1795, "he deprecated the discussion as a manifest violation of the independence of the Irish Parliament".;1 Two years later, in 1797. when Fox proposed to address His Majesty on the best means to tranquillise Ireland, this W. Pitt objected "on the unconstitutionality, the impropriety, and the danger to be apprehended from the interference of the British Parliament in the affairs of Ireland". This flagitious impostor deprecated any means for Ireland's prosperity; for he proposed, through its agonies and confusion, to effect its incorporate Union with Great Britain.

LORD CORNWALLIS' ADMINISTRATION (AUGUST 1798 SQQ). CASTLEREAGH CHIEF SECRETARY.

THE UNION TRICK

(There he incorporated Tippoo Sahib for the East India Com- pany.)

In India Cornwallis had defeated Tippoo Sahib, but concluded a peace which only increased the necessity of future wars.307

19 October 1781, capitulation of Cornwallis by Yorktown.

[^1]: Then there was Lord Cornwallis, the man thrashed by the Americans, during their War of Independence. As a governor for India, he was further qualified for destroying a nation's rights.

[^2]: Cornwallis was the intermediate agent between Pitt and Robert Stewart, commonly called Lord Castlereagh.h

[^3]: Quietness was almost restored. Cornwallis affected impartiality, whilst he was deceiving both parties. He encouraged the United Irishmen, and he roused the Royalists; one day he destroyed, the next day he was merciful. His system, however, had not exactly the anticipated effect. Everything gave reason to expect a restoration of tranquillity, it was through the impression of horror alone that an Union could be effected, and he had no time to lose, lest the country might recover its reason.

[^4]: Fortunate accident for him: A portion of an armament, destined by France to aid the Irish insurgents, had escaped the Irish cruisers, and landed about a 1,000

[^5]: •' Elisor's italics in this sentence.— Ed. b G. Ensor, Anti-Union. Ireland as She ought to Be, Newry, 1831, pp. 87, 88.— Ed.





**[p. 260]**

A considerable part of the Louth and Kilkenny regiments (militia), not finding it convenient to retreat, joined the victors, and in. one hour were completely equipped as French riflemen. About 90 of these men were hanged by Cornwallis afterwards at Ballynamuck. The defeat of Castlebar, however, was a victory to the Viceroy; it revived all the horrors of rebellion, which had been subsiding, and the desertion of the militia regiments tended to impress the gentry with an idea, that England alone could protect the country.

Lord Cornwallis was supine, and the insurgents were active in profiting by this victory; 40,000 of them were prepared to assemble at the Crooked Wood, in Westmeath, only 42 miles from Dublin, ready to join the French and march upon the metropolis.

The French continued too long at Castlebar, and Lord Cornwallis at length collected 20,000 troops, with which he considered himself pretty certain of conquering 900 men. With above 20,000 men, he marched directly to the [Shannon]c to prevent the passage, but he was outmanoeuvred]: the insurgents had led the French to the source of that river, and it was ten days before Castlereagh, by the slowest possible marches, which tended purposely to increase the public terror, reached his enemy. After some skirmishes, in which the French [were] victorious, they capitulated at Ballynamuckd They were sent to Dublin and afterwards to France.

[^1]: Horrors now were everywhere recommenced; executions were multiplied. Cornwallis marched against the peasantry, still masters of Killala; and after a sanguinary conflict in the streets, the town was taken: some were slaughtered, many hanged, and the whole district was on the point of being reduced to subjection, when Cornwallis most unexpectedly proclaimed an armistice, and without any terms allowed the insurgents freely to disperse, and gave them 30 days, either to surrender their arms or be prepared for slaughter; leaving them to act, as they thought proper in the interval. This interval was terrific to the loyalists; the 30 days of armistice were 30 days of new horror, and the Government had now achieved the very climax of public terror, on which they so much counted for inducing Ireland to throw herself into the arms of the protecting country. And the first step of Pitt's project was fully consummated.

[^2]: a On August 22, 1798; then follow, up to the section "More about the Union", excerpts from J. Mitchel's History of Ireland, Vol. II, pp. 27-39, 43, 45, 47-51, 59-62, 76-77 and 79.— Ed.

[^3]: b On August 27, 1798.— Ed. c The manuscript is damaged here.— Ed. d On September 8, 1798.— Ed.





**[p. 261]**

Pitt now conceived that the moment had arrived to try the effect of his previous measures to promote a Legislative Union.

The Irish Peers, under Lord Clare's, Lord Chancellor's, despotism, [were] ready for anything. The lure of translation neutralised the scruples of Episcopacy. Single exceptions: Marly, Bishop of Waterford, and Dixon, Bishop of Down. The rebellion had commenced on 22 May 1798, and on 22 January 1799, an Union was proposed. 40,000 British troops were then in Ireland.308

Pitt now conceived the moment to have come to try the effect of his previous measures to promote a Legislative Union, and annihilate the Irish Legislature.

The measure first proposed indirectly by Speech from the Throne on 22 January 1799. Lord Cornwallis' unexpected warfare against 900 Frenchmen, evidently intended more for terror than for victory.

{ King's title was "George III, King of Great Britain, France, and Ireland, Defender of the Faith" etc. France was dropped on Amiens Peace.}

Clare's (Fitzgibbon's) only check [was] the bar, which he resolved to corrupt. He doubled the number of bankrupt commissioners, revived some offices, created others, and under pretence of furnishing each County with a local judge, in 2 months established 32 new offices, of £600-700 each.

First Parliamentary debate on 22 January 1799, lasted till 11 o'clock of 23 January (22 hours). Government obtained majority of 1 by open sale of a certain Fox, lawyer.

[^1]: 2nd debate on 5 o'clock of 23 January 1799, continued till late in the morning of the 24, Government defeated. In every debate upon that measure, it was insisted upon that Parliament was incompetent, even to entertain the question of the Union. In this sense spoke Saurin, since Attorney-General, Plunket, since Lord Chancellor, Sir John Parnell, then Chancellor of the Exchequer, Bushe, since Lord Chief Justice, Lord Oriel, the then Speaker of the Irish House of Commons.

[^2]: Sir Lawrence Parsons and others showed by irrefutable facts that the country had been worked upon by the English Minister, to terrify the Irish gentry into a resubmission to those shackles from which the spirit of the Volunteers and the nation had but a few years before released them. It was argued that the insurrection, first organised and fostered by Pitt, and protracted by Cornwallis, had been suppressed by the Irish Parliament; and that the introduction of foreign and mercenary Germans, to immolate the Irish, instead of extinguishing, had added fuel to the insurrection. Then great point: the incompetence of Parliament to betray its trust. Act of Union in itself a nullity ab initio,* and a fraud upon the then existing constitution.

[^3]: Act of 23 George III "recognising the unqualified independence of Ireland, and expressly stipulating and contracting that it should endure for ever".

[^4]: 24 January 1799 111 Members decided against Union, 105 for. Voted that night 216. Absent 84.

[^5]: House of Lords on 22 January 1799 in answer to the Viceroy's address voted for the Union.

[^6]: The Irish Lords lay prostrate before the Government, but the leaders were not inattentive to their own interest. The defeat of the Government in the Commons gave them

[^7]: 11 From the beginning.— Ed.





**[p. 262]**

Cornwallis coquetted with the persons, assuming to themselves the title of "Catholic Leaders". The Catholic Bishops were generally decieved into the most disgusting subserviency.

The members of the old opposition, who were returned to the new Parliament in 1797, did not exceed 50.

Strongest cause of division amongst the Members [was] the Catholic Question. Cornwallis flattered the Catholics promising certain emancipation; the priests bowed before him. Never yet did any clergy so retrograde as the Catholic Hierarchy, on that occasion. Corruptly deceived. In 1798 the Catholics were hanged, in 1799 caressed, in 1800 cajoled, in 1801 discarded.

Mr. Pitt, by private dispatch to Cornwallis, desired that the measure should not be then pressed, unless majority of 50 [was] certain. Clare, the Chancellor, overhauled this. Thousands of addresses and petitions against any further discussion. As a punishment for the rejoicings at Dublin over the rejection of the Union, soldiers were ordered to fire amongst the people, of whom a few [were] killed and some wounded.

It appears in full proof, that in proportion to their respective numbers, the British Commons, at the period of the Irish Union, [had] 1/4 more corrupted, corruptible, and influenced members than that of Ireland at any period.

5 and 6 February 1800. Union accepted by Irish House of Commons. Castlereagh compelled even felons in the gaols to sign Union petitions. English generals, who, at a moment when martial law existed, or a recollection of its execution was still fresh in every memory, could not fail to have their own influence over proclaimed districts and bleeding peasantry; tried to procure addresses to Parliament.

[^1]: Mr. Darby, High Sheriff of King's County,309 and Major Rogers of the artillery, had gone so far as to place 2 six-pounders towards the doors of the Court House, where the gentlemen and freeholders of the county were assembling to address as Anti-Unionists.

[^2]: In interval between old and new Parliament, the Parliamentary patrons had breathing-time after the preceding session, and began to tremble for their patronage and importance; some desperate step by Government became necessary to insure continuance of their support. Now unparalleled measure.

[^3]: Castlereagh publicly declared, first, that every nobleman, who returned Members to Parliament, should be paid, in cash, £15,000 for every Member so returned; secondly, that every Member who had purchased a seat in Parliament should have his purchase money repaid to him, by the Treasury in Ireland; thirdly, that all Members of Parliament, or others, who were losers by an Union, should be fully recompensed for their losses; and that £1,500,000 should be devoted to this service; in other terms, all who supported this measure were, under some pretence or other, to share in the bank of corruption. A declaration so flagitious and treasonable was never publicly made in any country; [it] had its effect; before the meeting of Parliament he had secured a small majority of 8 above a moiety of the members.

[^4]: After the debate on the Union in 1800, he performed his promise, and brought in a Bill to raise 1 V2 million of money upon the Irish people, nominally to compensate, but really to bribe their representatives, for betraying their honour and selling their country. George III gives his assent to a Bill to levy taxes for the compensation of Members of Parliament, for their loss of the opportunities of selling what it was criminal to sell or purchase.





**[p. 263]**

Lord Shannon received for his patronage in the Commons £45,000 The Marquis of Ely £45,000 Lord Clanmorris, beside a British peerage £23,000 Lord Belvidere, beside his douceur £15,000 Sir Hercules Langrishe £15,000

15 January 1800 Speech from the Throne, debate proceeded till past 10 o'clock on the 16th. (60 members absent. Not governmental ones.)

5 February next division. The Union propositions, as passed by the British Parliament, were, after a long speech, laid before the House of Commons by Castlereagh. After a debate of the entire night, at 11 the ensuing morning, the division took place.

Members 300, absent 27, rest 273. For Castlereagh's Motion 158, against 115, majority 43. (273 members present.)

The House was surrounded by military, under the pretence of keeping peace, in fact, to excite terror. (British Regiment.)

The Bishops Troy, Lanigan, and others, deluded by the Viceroy, sold their country, and basely betrayed their flocks, by promoting the Union. Rebellion had terrified the great body of Catholics who could not move. Besides the 1 V2 million Castlereagh also had unbounded secret service money from England. British clerks and officers were smuggled into the Irish Parliament to vote away the Constitution of the Country. By the subjugation of Ireland, England has gained nothing but an accumulation of debt, an accession of venality to her Parliament, an embarrassment in her councils and a progressive danger to the integrity of the empire. The name of Union has been acquired, but the attainment of the substance has been removed farther than ever. Castlereagh palpably purchased 25 Members before the second discussion in 1800, which made a difference of 50 votes in favour of Government. Thus Pitt and Castlereagh carried the Union.

* * *

More about the Union11

[^1]: The Irish Parliament were only delegates for a few years. How could they vote their own dissolution and extinction for ever? If the Irish Parliament was authorised to destroy the Constitution, why not the English? Why not pass a royal law? No appeal was made to the people. This was done in Scotland ; [they] did not dare doing it in Ireland. Even the rotten boroughs sickened at the sound.

[^2]: The Irish Parliament of 1800 elected in 1797 for 8 years. The Union carried during the reign of Martial Law\ On the other hand, Resolution of the English House of Commons in 1741: "that the presence of armed . soldiers, at the election of members of Parliament, is a high infringement of the liberty of the subject, and an open defiance of the laws and constitution1."

[^3]: Martial Law Bill in Ireland from commencement of the rebellion in 1798, renewed 1799, in 1800 revived, but in fact it was to be considered as a continuance of [the]

[^4]: a The heading is in German in the manuscript. This section is. Marx's rendering of a passage from Ensor's Anti-Union, p. 126.— Ed.





**[p. 264]**

The Act of the Union is an Act of Conquest (Ensor). Ireland's Union with England—Cromwell's scheme. It was among the delusions of Monk. The English Government had no object by the Union, which means the extinction of Irish Legislature, but to deprive Ireland of its political consequence and authority, and subject her property and people to the mercy of England.

The English Ministry, in guaranteeing Norway to Sweden, stipulated that Norway, by its union with Sweden, should enjoy an independent Parliament.311

Just as the Union of Ireland with England was declared necessary, so had Lord Grenville declared: "Hampshire ought to be no more dear to us than Hanover."

Popular Meetings (and Petitions) Despite Martial Law and the Suspension of All Guarantees for Popular Security. Ditto House of Commons during 1799A

Popular indignation universal. Though sheriffs were chosen to obstruct petitioning, though the military opposed their assembling, and dispersed them; yet they met and protested, as at Birr, where Major Rogers actually marched with cannon against a county meeting. They met in Dublin, as in 1759, on the mere rumour of a projected Union. The people assembled in the towns of Belfast, Limerick, Drogheda, Newry, Maryborough, Carrickfergus, Pontadown, etc.; in the Counties of Dublin, Cork, Limerick, Wexford, Cavan, Longford, Tipperary, Galway, Monaghan, Fermanagh, Kilkenny, Meath, Carlow, the King's and Queen's Counties, Leitrim, Kildare, Down, Westmeath, Armagh, Clare, Louth, Donegal, Mayo, Wicklow, Tyrone, Antrim, Waterford. Thus the population in towns, cities and counties petitioned against that fatal measure, in spite of all terrors and opposition.

Corruption etc. in 1800

[^1]: The Irish Commons coincided with them. Though a mere fictitious representa- tion, first by the borough system, and secondly by its election (a mere farce), for the annalist remarks: "through consternation of some, and hostility of others, it had little more than the formality of an election." Yet the House of Commons had in 1799 rejected the Union by 111 to 105!

[^2]: The English Government resumed the measure. Merciless profligacy. Vote with us or vacate your seat! Open, flagitious bribery! The bribe was administered in every form to wretches. Mr. Edgeworth relates that he was offered to vacate a seat, that a more convenient person might be elected in his place. Offices were granted simply, or divided among many; pensions added; endless promises. The Church afforded a great vent for the increase of prostitution; rectories and bishoprics were

[^3]: •' In this section and in the two sections that follow it Marx sets forth, very closely to the original, passages from Elisor's Anti-Union, pp. 94-97 and 110.— Ed.



So numerous were the superadded placemen alone in the Commons, that in the year of the Union 1800, 35 new writs were moved for the re-election of members, who had accepted places from England's Minister! The Lords, and the other boro[ughmong- ers],a of course, obtained a grand division of the Union-bribe—£622,000 was voted in the United Parliament, in 1801, [as] compensation for the borough-holdersl Only £622,000 paid, as a first instalment, by the borough-mongers of [England] to the borough-mongers of Ireland!

Yet, after this overwhelming corruption, prompt payment, and endless expectancy, the minority opposed to the Union, in the first [division], in a House of Commons, of whom 84 only returned for the counties, counties of cities, and the University, and 216 for [boroughs and manors]. A simple bribe disqualifies a member from sitting in Parliament; and shall not such bribery, a small part of the corruption, dismiss the Act of Union from the Statute-Book?

Just Punishment of the Traitorous Catholic Hierarchy and the Few Higher

Class Catholics Who Joined Them

Cornwallis (Pitt) had promised them full emancipation. Fulsome address from the Catholic clergy and Bishop Lanigan from Kilkenny to Cornwallis. Yet King George III, as will be seen from the following, accepted the Union as means to make no further concessions to the Catholics. Pitt in 1801 handed in his resignation, on pretext that King kept not his word as to Catholics. This [was] mere show. He wanted not to be minister during truce with Bonaparte.312 Re-entered afterwards the Ministry without stipulating any favour for Catholics.

On the Legality of the Union

[^1]: George III, in his letters, published by Lord Kenyon, declares that he was inclined to assent to the Union, believing that the Union would for ever preclude any further concessions to the Catholics.

[^2]: His words in his letter to Pitt, February 1, 1801, are: "When the Irish propositions were transmitted to me, by a joint message from both Houses of Parliament, I told the Lords and Gentlemen, sent on that occasion, that I would with pleasure, and without delay, forward them to Ireland; but that, as individuals, 1 could not help acquainting them, that my inclination to an Union with Ireland was principally founded on a trust, that the uniting the established churches of the 2 kingdoms would for ever shut the door to any further measures with respect to the Roman Catholics. " b

[^3]: Attorney-General's Scott's (afterwards Lord Clonmel, principal agent of Pitt etc.) declaration of resisting the usurpation of England, in 1782, was repeated in 1800, by 2 successive Attorney-Generals of Ireland. Mr. William Saurin, in his place in

[^4]: a The manuscript is damaged here.— Ed

[^5]: b G. Ensor, Anti-Union, p. 110.— Ed





**[p. 266]**

Mr. Plunket made the same declaration, but in rather stronger terms, as he vouched for his son as well as himself; and soon after became Attorney-General.

In every debate upon that measure, it was insisted upon that the Parliament was incompetent, even to entertain the question of the Union. So Saurin, Plunket (since Lord Chancellor), Sergeant Ball, the ablest lawyer of Ireland, Fitzgerald, Prime-Serjeant of Ireland, Moore, since a judge, Sir John Parnell, then Chancellor of the Exchequer, Bushe, since Chief Justice, Lord Oriel, the then Speaker of the (Irish) House of Commons.

January 1799. Irish House of Commons. Plunket (Solicitor-General for Ireland under Addington Cabinet) declared: "I tell [you] a that if, circumstanced as you are, you pass this Act, it will be a mere nullity, and that no man in Ireland will be bound to obey it." ''

7 May 1802 Forster declared in the United House of Commons 1802 that Castlereagh, in Ireland, had made use of public money [for the pur]pose of obtaining votes in favour of the Union.

Grey, May, 1806, House of Commons said that ''these votes for Union were purchased by corruption '•'.

"The ac[t of] a borough-mongers and placemen is irrevocable, against the Irish Nation!" (Ensor.)c

Opinions of English Liberals and Radicals on the Union

Cobbett. Political Register, 14 February 1807, in connection with the "Threshers" disturbances in West Ireland,313 lays the following ironical words in the mouth of an Irish exciseman:

[^1]: Lord Holland: The English were injured (by the Union) particularly by the means it affords to increased parliamentary corruption. This was foreseen by Lord Holland, who, in debating the Union preparatory to its enactment, said "that it was incompatible with the opinions of all those who wished for Parliamentary Reform". , {The Representative Irish Peers, thickening the ranks of the House of Lords, have strengthened the prerogative. The whole peerage of Ireland is a borough, of which the King is Patron X

[^2]: George Tierney said, speaking of the Union before it was enacted, that it would ruin Great Britain. It has ruined both England and Ireland. The subjugation of Ireland has made England's people a mere taxable commodity. Instead of the universal tranquillity, which Canning promised, when advocating the Union, the Union was followed by new and severe laws, extraordinary commissions, and unlimited agitation. Ireland is mocked with some of the minor forms of freedom.

[^3]: "Union of 1800 a ruin to the annexed, a torment to the annexing nation." (Barrington.)

[^4]: a The manuscript is damaged here.— Ed, b Cf. J. Mitchel, The History of Ireland, Vol. II, p. 77.—Ed. c G. Ensor, Anti-Union, pp. 97-98.— Ed.



In connection with the Irish Insurrection Bill of 1807, which was still in force in 1809:

Cobbett, Political Register, 9 December 1809: "Angry with the Irish; because — because what? Why, because their existence endangers our safety] Angry with them, because they are alive, and have a desire to enjoy life! Sad dogs those Irishmen must be to desire to keep alive, when to keep (dive may be dangerous to usl" "We may, as I before observed, be angry with the Irish, because about 5 millions of them continue to be alive, we may hate them and curse them; we may wish their island sunk to the bottom of the sea; but, still they live, and live they will" "It is, therefore, as useless to be angry with them as it would be to be angry with thunder and lightning."13

Cobbett. Political Register, 20 February 1811: "What an infamy to the English nation, who really seem to desire to be deceived with regard to Ireland; but, whose silly and base desire will be frustrated in spite of themselves; for hear and see and feel the truth they must. They may hide their heads in their hoods and cloaks as long as they will; they may, as long as they please, pay impostors to sooth their cowardly fears, but all will not do. Ireland! Ireland! Ireland! will, maugre all their miserable devices, present herself to them in her true and formidable shape."1

Ensor. "Ireland with its foundations is pressed downward by the accumu- lated burthens of England and her empire." (Pays 5 millions now for absentees etc. to England.)d

[^1]: Curran: She (Ireland) "thought the circulation of the political blood could be carried on only by the action of the heart within the body, and could not be maintained from without". "The instruments of our government have been almost simplified into the tax gatherer and the hangman." With the Union: "all semblance of national independence buried in that grave in which our legislation is interred, our property and our persons are disposed of, by laws made in another clime, and made like boots and shoes for exportation to fit the wearers as they may. It was, in fact, the real design of a rash, and arbitrary, and short-sighted projector, at once to deprive you of all power, as to your own taxation, and of another power of not very inferior importance, and which, indeed, is invariably connected with taxation, to rob you of all influence upon the vital question of peace and war; and to bring all within the control of an English minister. This very power, thus acquired by that detested Union, has been a millstone about the neck of England. From that hour to this she has been flaring away in her ruinous and wasteful war."e

[^2]: a Cobbett's Weekly Political Register, No. 7, February 14, 1807, Vol. XI, p. 255.— Ea\

[^3]: b Ibid., No. 23, December 9, 1809, Vol. XVI, pp. 866-74.— Ed. c Ibid., No. 15, February 20, 1811, Vol. XIX, pp. 420-21.— Ed d G. Ensor, Anti-Union, p. 118.— Ed e Marx quotes passages from Curran's speech made on October 17, 1812, at the General Election in Newry. See J. Ph. Curran, The Speeches, pp. 465-66, 468-69.—Ed.





**[p. 268]**

Morning Chronicle, 1828: "The hatred of the Union is the only point, we believe, as to which all Irishmen are agreed. It has been an unfortunate measure both for England and Ireland]"314

Petty said: "England has constantly -lost, these 500 years, by the meddling with Ireland." b

Loss to England315

Irish Members—access of venality and corruption to the House of Commons. Increase [of] ministerial usurpation.

"How the Irish Members precipitated themselves, when the Manchester Massacre was to be justified by Castlereagh, the manager of the Union! How they thronged to pass the 6 Acts!"316 (Ensor)

"The French war strengthened the royal prerogative in England, as it increased the means of expenditure, and the fonds of corruption. These effected the Union, and the Union multiplied every scheme of rapine and prodigality." (Ensor.)

Ireland—one of the pretexts of keeping a large standing army.

[^1]: By the Union, the military of one country, when transferred, are in effect foreign mercenaries. War service in time of peace.

[^2]: English House of Commons. "Increased members, and the increased and multiform business in the House of Commons, have lessened the attention of the great body of the members. The House of Commons, before the Union of Scotland and England, consisted of 513 members. At this period the business of the nation preceded application to private affairs. The legislature then met in the morning. The members were fined if they absented themselves when the Speaker took the Chair, and absence for a whole day was punished with an enhanced penalty. Now the House consists of 658 members, yet not a 10th are present when the Speaker takes the Chair on any day. Business is often transacted when there is, technically, no House." (Ensor.)

[^3]: "Every acquisition of a nation by a nation is injurious to the liberty of both. The accessory country is a lapsed inheritance, while the people who make the acquisition are submissive to their own rulers, lest they might countenance any disturbance in the superadded nation; they submit at home for a barren, often expensive, superiority abroad. [] This the whole story of the Roman history as the world fell before the Roman aristocracy, the Roman citizens were pauperised and enslaved. [] Every impeachment, of liberty in one country leads to its loss in another." (Ensor.)

[^4]: "Talk about revolutionary principles] The Duke of Clarence, afterwards William IV, called, in 1793, an effort to abolish the slave trade part of 'the levelling principles of the French Revolution'."

[^5]: a G. Ensor, Anti-Union, p. 11.— Ed b W. Petty, The Political Anatomy of Ireland, Dublin, 1769, p. 320 (quoted from G. Ensor, Anti-Union, p. 31).— Ed



Confiscations in Ireland511

Sir W. Petty says generally: "most of the lands of Ireland have been, within 150 years, forfeited"?

In fact, all Ireland has been confiscated, three times, again and again. On some occasions, such were the forfeitures, that the territory on sale, from the glut of the market, fell to V4 of its former annual value. Lawrence mentions, "that from 1654-1660, not only the adventurers318 and soldiers, but all persons who could command money, traded in land, and thereby obtained better estates in one year than by treble the sum they got ever before in 7 years' traffic".

This upsetting and dislocation of property, by force of arms, were aggravated by wicked inquisitions, and the practices of the crown lawyers. When the head of a clan died, if the descent followed the Irish custom, the land was forfeited: for this custom was repugnant to the English code. [Yet, if]b this land were distributed according to the English law, that was reputed irregular, for it should have been transmitted, said the lawyers, according to the Brehon /aw.319 Thus the land was forfeited either way, and the Crown became the sole heir. By these means, whether in peace or alleged insurrection, property was subjected to chicane, and the people were systematically robbed. Sometimes the people revolted, e.g. under Edward II and Charles /.32() Harris states the reasons of this last insurrection thus: "The preposterous rigour, and unreasonable severity—the covetous zeal and uncharitable fury of some men — and, lastly, the fear of utter extirpation."

Scotch Union with England

[^1]: Scotland and England parts of the same island. But the population differed from that in England. In Scotland at that time there was peace at home and abroad. There were only 3,000 troops in Scotland (Defoe)} Again, when the Parliament of Scotland was to be elected, the electors were apprised that they were to depute members to decide respecting the Union of the 2 countries. When Union [was] first proposed in the Scotch Parliament, 64 majority for Union. Scotland by

[^2]: •l W. Petty, op. cit., p. 359 (quoted from G. Ensor, Anti-Union, p. 51).— Ed. b The manuscript is damaged here.— Ed. 1 D. Defoe, The History of the Union of Great Britain, Edinburgh, 1709; quoted from G. Elisor, Anti-l Tnion.. . p. 5r>.— Ed.



