---
Volume: 21
Document_Title: "6. F. Engels. Varia on the History of the Irish Confiscations "
Page_Range: "330-340"
---

# 6. F. Engels. Varia on the History of the Irish Confiscations 



**[p. 297]**

F r e d e r i c k Engels

VARIA ON THE HISTORY OF THE IRISH CONFISCATIONS

16th Saeculum." Henry VIII

1536. Parliament in Dublin introduces the OATH OF SUPREMACY to the King and he is given the privilege of taking the first-fruits of all ECCLESIASTICAL LIVINGS. Quite different in the doing, however, and the subsequent insurrections were directed, among other things, against the Oath. Refusal to take the OATH OF SUPREMACY was high treason in Ireland just as in England (Murphy, p. 249).b

16th Saeculum. Edward VI and Mary

as was usual in Ireland.

This was the pattern for all subsequent confiscations under Elizabeth and James. The Irish were denied all rights against the

[^1]: Confiscations in Queen's and King's Counties. During the reign of Edward VI, the O'Moores of Leix and the O'Connors of Offaley carried on a feud with some lords of the Pale,c

[^2]: The government qualified this as rebellion. General Bellingham, later Lord Deputy, was sent against them and forced them to submit. They were advised to see the King and submit to him in person as O'Neill had done successfully in 1542.d

[^3]: O'Moore and O'Connor, unlike O'Neill, were imprisoned and their estates confiscated. But that was not the last of the clans. The inhabitants declared that the land belonged to the clans, not to the chiefs, who therefore could not forfeit it, and were, at most, liable to forfeiting their private domains. They declined to move out. The government sent troops, and had^ the land cleared after unintermittent fighting and extermination of the population (Murphy, p. 255).

[^4]: 11 Century.— Ed. b J. N. Murphy, Ireland, Industrial, Political, and Social, London, 1870, pp. 248, 249.— Ed.

[^5]: c Ibid., p. 254.— Ed. d In Murphy's book no date is given.— Ed.





**[p. 298]**

By Acts in the 3rd and 4th years of the reign of Philip and Mary, c. 1 and 2, the LORD DEPUTY, the Earl of Sussex,3 was endowed with "full power and authority [] to give and to grant to all and every Their Majesties' subjects, English or Irish [], at his election and pleasure, such estates in fee simple, fee tail,354 leases for term of years, life or lives" in these two counties "as for the more sure planting or strength of the countries with good subjects shall be thought unto his wisdom and discretion meet and convenient" (Murphy, p. 256).

16th Saeculum. Elizabeth

English policy under Elizabeth: to keep Ireland in a state of division and strife.

"Should we exert ourselves," the English Government averred, "in reducing Ireland to order and civility, it must soon acquire power, consequence and riches. The inhabitants will be thus alienated from England; they will cast themselves into the arms of some foreign power, or erect themselves into an independent and separate state. Let us rather connive at their disorders, for a weak and disordered people can never attempt to detach themselves from the Crown of England." Thus Sir Henry Sidney and Sir John Perrot, successive LORD DEPUTIES (the last-named the best that they ever had, held the post in 1584-87), describe this HORRID POLICY, against which they protest (Leland, Vol. II, p. 292 b and Murphy, p. 246). Perrot's intention of granting the Irish equal rights with the Anglo-Irish and obviating confiscations was blocked by the English party in Dublin.

(Yet he it was who had O'Donnell's sonc brought aboard a ship, filled with drink and borne away.)

See Holinshed, Chronicles0 (p. 460) on how Ireland was laid waste in this war. Half the population is said to have perished.

[^1]: Tyrone's rebellion, among other things, against religious persecution: "He and other lords of Ulster entered into a secret combination, about this time, that they would defend the Roman Catholic religion that they would suffer no sheriffs nor garrisons to be within the compass of their territories, and that they would [] jointly resist all invasions of the English" (Camden).355 The conduct of Deputy Mountjoy in this war is described by Camden: "He made incursions on all sides, spoiled the corn, burnt all the houses and villages that could be found, and did so gall the rebels, that, pent in with garrisons and streightened more and more every day, they were reduced to live like wild beasts, skulking up and down the woods and deserts" (Murphy, p. 251).

[^2]: a Thomas Radcliffe.— Ed. b Th. Leland, The History of Ireland from the Invasion of Henry II, Vols. I-III, London, 1773. Here and below quoted from Murphy.— Ed.

[^3]: c Hugh O'Donnell, "Red Hugh".— Ed. d Holinshed, Chronicles of England, Scotland, and Ireland, Vol. VI, London, 1807.— Ed.





**[p. 299]**

Desmond was deprived of his estates in all counties of Munster except Clare, and also in Dublin. They were worth £7,000 per annum. The Irish Parliament of 1586 expropriated 140 landowners by confiscation in Munster alone under the Act of the 28th year of Elizabeth's reign, c. 7 and 8. Mac Geoghegan lists the names of the GRANTEES of Desmond's ESTATES a; some of these families are still, and up to 1847 nearly all were, in possession.

(? probably cum grano salis).

The annual Crown rent on these ESTATES was 2d to 3d per acre, with no indigenous Irish admitted as TENANTS and the government undertaking to keep adequate garrisons.

Neither provision was observed. Some estates were abandoned by the GRANTEES and reoccupied by the Irish. Many of the UNDERTAKERS stayed in England and appointed AGENTS, "ignorant, negligent, and corrupt" (Leland, Vol. Ill, p. 311).

17th Saeculum. James I

Penal Laws against Catholics (Elizabeth, in the 2nd year of reign, 1560, c. 1, Irish [Statutes, Vol. I, p. 275])356 are applied more and more from the very beginning of the reign of James I, it becoming dangerous to practise [Catholicism].

This in 1605 (see "Chronology"360).

Carte says361 that all Irish settlers and the NATIVES who were allowed part of their land were exempted, but this was irrelevant

[^1]: Under Elizabeth 2 c. 1, the FINE of 12d was imposed for every NON-ATTENDANCE AT PROTESTANT CHURCH and, in 1605, under James, imprisonment was added by RO.YAL PROCLAMATION alone and, hence, unlawfully. This did not help. Besides, in 1605 all Catholic priests were ordered out of Ireland in 40 days on pain of death.

[^2]: SURRENDERS OF ESTATES AND REGRANTS (see Davies, 7b).357 These followed the pronouncement of TANISTRY and GAVELKIND358 as unlawful by the COURT OF KINGS BENCH 3 5 9 in the HILARY TERM in the third year of the reign of James I. A Royal Proclamation stipulated SURRENDER [of estates] and REGRANT under new valid titles. Most Irish chiefs came forward to receive incontestable title at last, but this was made conditional on their giving up the clan relationship in favour of the English LANDLORD-TENANT relationship (Murphy, p. 261).

[^3]: PLANTATION OF ULSTER.According to Leland, Irish UNDERTENANTS and SERVANTS were TACITLY EXEMPTED from the OATH OF SUPREMACY, whereas all the other planters were compelled to take it.

[^4]: •' Engels took the reference to Mac Geoghegan's History of Ireland (Dublin, 1844) from Murphy, pp. 257-58.— Ed.





**[p. 300]**

Carte estimates the number of English settlers in Ulster in 1641 at 20,000 and of Scottish settlers at 100,000 (Ormonde, Vol. I, p. I77).b

Sir Arthur Chichester, LORD DEPUTY, was rewarded for his services in this PLANTATION with the territory of Innoshowen (?) "and all the lands possessed by O'Dogherty, a tract of country far exceeding the allotments generally made to nothern undertakers" (Leland, Vol. II, p. 438). As early as 1633 these ESTATES were valued at £10,000 per annum (Strafford's State Letters? Vol. II, p. 294). Chichester was the ancestor of Marquis of Donegal, who would have had £300,000 per-annum for his Belfast estate alone, if one of his ancestors had not surrendered it to others under long LEASES (Murphy, p. 265).

T h e PLANTATION of Ulster culminated the first period, with a new means discovered for confiscation: DEFECTIVE TITLES. This is effective u n d e r James and Charles, until Cromwell renews the invasion. See extracts from Carte [Ormonde], 2 1 / b 3 6 2

Another nice pretext for confiscation was that

old Crown rents, long forgotten by Crown and landowners, were still due from many ESTATES. These were now pulled out and, wherever unpaid, the ESTATE was FORFEITED. Nor receipts existed, and that was enovigh (Murphy, p. 269).

[^1]: Concerning the attempt to confiscate Connaught (see "Chronol- ogy", and O'Conor, Catholics),363 recall James' dirty trick:

[^2]: when the people of Connaught SURRENDERED their titles to a specially appointed ROYAL COMMISSION in 1616 and had these RECONVEYED BY NEW PATENTS, THEY PAYING £3,000 FOR THEIR ENROLMENT IN CHANCERY, the titles were not registered. A new commission was named on this pretext in 1623 to declare them null and void by reason of deliberate default, an oversight that depended not on the landowners but the government. (See Carte, Ormonde, [Vol. I,] pp. 47 and 48.) In the meantime, James died.

[^3]: A COURT OF WARDS for Ireland was established in 1614; Carte avers in Ormonde, Vol. I, p. 517, that no lawful BASIS existed for it as for that in England. Meant to bring up Catholic heirs in the Protestant religion and English customs. Its president was the good d Sir William Parsons, who had helped plan it.e

[^4]: a In the manuscript the last two sentences are written in the right-hand, blank column, opposite the preceding sentence.— Ed.

[^5]: b Th. Carte, An History of the Life of James, Duke of Ormonde, from his Birth in 1610, to his Death in 1688, London, 1736. For quoting this work Engels made use of Murphy's book and of his own excerpts from it.— Ed.

[^6]: c Letters and Dispatches, with an Essay towards His Life by Sir G. Radcliffe, London, Vols. I-II, 1739.— Ed.

[^7]: d The word "good" does not occur in Murphy.— Ed. e Quoted according to Murphy, pp. 269-70 and 277-78.— Ed.



That the Irish insisted in the "GRACES" 3 6 4 that "three score years' possession" (of an ESTATE) "should conclude His Majesty's title" was quite understandable, for this was the "law of England" (Strafford, State Letters, Vol. I, p. 279) by the Act of the 21st year of James' reign (Murphy, p. 274).

Yet English law applied to the Irish only in so far as it suited the [English] Government.

Strafford wrote to the English Secretary of State on December 16, 1634, that in his Irish Parliament "the Protestants are the majority, and this may be of great use to confirm and settle His Majesty's title to the plantations of Connaught and Ormond; for this you may be sure of, all the Protestants are for plantations, all the others are against them; so as these, being the great number, you can want no help they can give you therein. Nay, in case there be no title to be made out to these countries in the crown, yet should not I despair, forth of reasons of state, and for the strength and security of the Kingdom, to have them passed to the King by an immediate Act of Parliament" (State Letters, Vol. I, p. 353).

Outside Connaught, too, money was extorted continuously on

p a i n of INQUIRY INTO TITLES.

The O'Byrnes of Wicklow, for example, twice paid £15,000 to preserve a portion of their ESTATES, while the City of London paid £70,000 to prevent confiscation of its PLANTATIONS in Colrain and Derry for alleged breach of covenant (Leland, Vol. Ill, p. 39).

[^1]: The COURT OF HIGH COMMISSION established by Wentworth in the year 1633, after the English model,365 "with the same formality and the same tremendous powers" (Leland, Vol. Ill, p. 29), and this naturally without Parliament's consent, in order-"to bring the people here to a conformity in religion, and, in the way to that, raise, perhaps, a good revenue to the Crown" (January 31, 1633, State Letters, Vol. I, p. 188). The Court saw to it that all newly-appointed officials, doctors, barristers, etc., and all those who "sued out livery of their estates" should take the OATH OF SUPREMACY,

[^2]: which, as Macaulay observed, was A RELIGIOUS INQUISITION where that of the STAR CHAMBER was political.

[^3]: Then the CASTLE CHAMBER, called STAR CHAMBER366 as in England, which, Lord Deputy Chichester said, was "the proper court to punish jurors who will not find a verdict for the King upon good evidence"

[^4]: (oft-quoted passage from Desiderata Curiosa Hibemiae, Vol. I, p. 262 a).

[^5]: It is said therein that the penalties there employed consisted in "imprisonment and loss of ears"; and "fines, pillory, boring through the tongue, marking on the forehead with an iron and other infamous punishments" were likewise applied, as is stated in the indictment of Strafford (Murphy, p. 279).

[^6]: When Strafford went to Connaught in 1635, he took with him 4,000 HORSE "as good lookers on, while the plantations were settling" (Strafford, State Letters, Vol. I,

[^7]: Quoted according to Murphy against p. 279.— Ed.





**[p. 302]**

By the 28th of Henry VIII, c. 5, 6 and 13, all recourse to the Pope's jurisdiction was prohibited and all Irish came under the Protestant ECCLESIASTICAL COURTS, whose verdict could be appealed against to the King alone. They took cognizance of all marriages, baptisms, burials, wills, and ADMINISTRATIONS, and punished RECUSANTS FOR NON-ATTENDANCE AT CHURCH under the 2nd of Elizabeth, c. 2, and also collected the tithes. Bishop Burnet (Life of Dr. Bedell, Bishop of Kilmore, p. 89)a said these courts "were often managed by a chancellor that bought his place, and so thought he had a right to all the profits he could make out of it. And their whole business seemed to be nothing but oppression and extortion The officers of the court thought they had a sort of right to oppress the natives, and that all was well got that was wrung from them they made it their business to draw people into trouble by vexatious suits, and to hold them so long in that, for 3d worth of the tithe of turf, they would be put to a £5 charge".

In the "GRACES", which never materialised,

Protestant clergymen were to have been forbidden "to keep private prisons of their own" for spiritual offences, so that offenders should be committed to the King's public gaols (Murphy, p. 281).

About the Protestant clergy see Spenser, excerpt 5a.367

Borlase and Parsons encouraged the rebellion everywhere. According to Lord Castlehaven's Memoirs,h they said: "The more rebels, the more confiscations." Leland (Vol. Ill, p. 161), too, observes that, as before, "extensive forfeitures were the favourite object of the chief governors and their friends".

— so that is where the Prussians lifted it from.

17th Saeculum. Cromwell

[^1]: By that time, the Irish Royalist army was to have been 50,000 strong through reinforcement from England and Scotland.

[^2]: See Carte, Ormonde, Vol. Ill, p. 61, for the instructions lo the army.368

[^3]: The motto of the Kilkenny Confederates36" was: Pro deo, pro rege, et patria Hibernia unanimes1' (Borlase, Irish Rebellion, p. 128)(1

[^4]: Drogheda MASSACRE.370 After a successful assault "quarter had been promised to all who should lay down their arms—a promise observed until all resistance was at an end. But at the moment that the city was completely reduced, Cromwell issued his fatal orders that the garrison should be put to the sword. His soldiers,

[^5]: a G. Burnet, The Life of William Bedell, Bishop of Kilmore in Ireland.., London, 1685. Quoted according to Murphy's book, p. 280.— Ed.

[^6]: h The Memoirs of James Touchet Earl of Castlehaven Quoted according to Murphy, p. 288.— Ed.

[^7]: c For God, King and Ireland unanimous.— Ed. d Ed. Borlase, The History of the Execrable Irish Rebellion, London, 1680. Quoted from Murphy, p. 289.— Ed.





**[p. 303]**

Petty (Political Anatomy, Dublin edition of Petty's tracts, pp. 312-15)a estimates that 112,000 British and 504,000 Irish inhabitants of Ireland died in the war of 1641-52. In 1653, SOLDIERS' DEBENTURES371 were sold at 4/- to 5/- in the pound, so that with 20/- being the price [nominal] of 2 acres of land, and there being 8 million acres of good land in Ireland, all Ireland was purchasable for £1 million, though in 1641 it was worth £8 million. Petty estimates the value of the livestock in Ireland in 1641 at £4 million, and in 1652 at less than £500,000 so that Dublin had to get meat from Wales. Corn was 12/- per BARREL in 1641 and 50/- in 1652. The houses of Ireland, worth £2 million in 1641, were worth less than £500,000 in 1653.h

Leland, too, admits in Vol. Ill, p. 166, that "the favourite idea of both the Irish Government and the English Parliament" (from 1642 onwards) "was the utter extermination of all the Catholics of Ireland".

See Lingard (Vol. VII, 4th ed., p. 102, note) on the transportation of Irish as slaves to the West Indies (figures vary from 6,000 to 100,000). Of the 1,000 boys and 1,000 girls to be sent to Jamaica, the commissioners wrote in 1655: "Although we must use force in taking them up, yet it is so much for their own good and likely to be of such great advantage to the public, that you may have such number of them as you shall think fit" (Thurloe, Vol. IV, p. 23).d

By the first ACT OF SETTLEMENT, the forfeiture of 2/3 of their estates had been pronounced against those who had borne arms against the Parliament and 1/3 of their estates against those who had resided in Ireland any time from October 1, 1649 to March 1, 1650 and had not manifested their CONSTANT GOOD AFFECTION to Parliament. The Parliament had power to give them, in lieu thereof, other lands to the proportion of value thereof. The second Act concerned resettlement

[^1]: (see Prendergast,e Excerpts, VII, 1 a372).

[^2]: Distribution of land to soldiers was limited to those who had served under Cromwell from 1649 (Murphy, p. 302).

[^3]: See Carte, Ormonde, Vol. II, p. 301, about some cases of land surveying, especially by ADVENTURERS.373

[^4]: According to Leland (Vol. Ill, p. 397), the Commissioners in Dublin and Athlone kept considerable domains for themselves.

[^5]: A PLANTATION ACRE=1 ACRE 2 ROODS 19 PERCHES 5 YARDS and 2 x/4 FEET IMPERIAL STATUTE measure, or 121 PLANTATION acres=196 STATUTE ACRES (Murphy, p. 302).

[^6]: a W. Petty, The Political Anatomy of Ireland In: Tracts; Chiefly Relating to Ireland, Dublin, 1769.— Ed.

[^7]: b The last two paragraphs are excerpts from Murphy's book, pp. 292-94.— Ed c J. Lingard, A History of England, from the First Invasion by the Romans, Vols. I-VIII, London, 1819-30.— Ed.

[^8]: d A Collection of the State Papers of John Thurloe, Esq.; Containing Authentic Memorials, Vols.I-VII, London, 1742. Quoted from Murphy's book, p. 298.— Ed.

[^9]: e J. P. Prendergast, The Cromwellian Settlement of Ireland, London, 1865.— Ed.

[^10]: 12-733





**[p. 304]**

A result of confiscations under Cromwell and Charles II.

The 7,708,238 STATUTE ACRES confiscated by Cromwell were distributed finally, by 1675, as follows:

STATUTE ACRES

1) To Englishmen

ADVENTURERS 787,326 SOLDIERS 2,385,915 "FORTY-NINE" OFFICERS 4 5 0 , 3 8 0 DUKE OF YORK 1 6 9 , 4 3 1 PROVISORS 477,873 DUKE OF ORMOND AND COLONEL BUTLER 2 5 7 , 5 1 6 BISHOPS'AUGMENTATIONS 3 1 , 5 9 6

4,560,037

2) To Irishmen

DECREES OF INNOCENCE 1,176,520 PROVISORS 491,001 KING'S LETTERS OF RESTITUTION 4 6 , 3 9 8 NOMINEES IN POSSESSION 6 8 , 3 6 0 TRANSPLANTATION 5 4 1 , 5 3 0

2,323,809

[^1]: Remaining still unappropriated in 1675, being part of towns or land possessed by English or Irish without title or DOUBTFUL 824,392 [Total in] Statute acres 7,708,238 On "Forty-Nine" officers see O'Conor and Notes.374

[^2]: THE DUKE OF YORK3 received a GRANT of all the lands handed over to the ATTAINTED REGICIDES.*3 "Provisors were persons in whose favour provisoes had been made by the Acts of Settlement [1662] and of Explanation. Nominees were the Catholics named by the King restored to their mansions and 2,000 acres contiguous."

[^3]: At that time the profitable lands of Ireland = 2/3 of all land, or 12,500,000 STATUTE ACRES. Of the rest, considerable tracts were occupied without title by soldiers and ADVENTURERS. In 1675, the 12 l/2 million ACRES of arable land were distributed as follows:

[^4]: "Granted to English Protestants of profitable land forfeited

[^5]: under the Commonwealth 4,560,037 Previously possessed by English Protestant Colonists and by

[^6]: the Church 3,900,000 Granted to the Irish 2,323,809

[^7]: a James Stuart, future James II.— Ed. b The reference is to those who were associated with the execution of Charles I.— Ed.





**[p. 305]**

STATUTE ACRES 12,208,237"

[This table] was compiled by Murphy3;

the figure of 3,900,000 acres was taken from the ACCOUNT PUBLISHED BY THE CROMWELLIAN PROPRIETORS and the rest on the basis of the Grace Manuscript quoted by Lingard and the REPORT OF THE COMMISSIONERS TO THE ENGLISH HOUSE OF COMMONS, December 15, 1699. It accords with Petty (Political Anatomy), who wrote: "Of the whole 7,500,000 plantation acres of good land (in Ireland) the English and Protestants and the Church have this Christmas (1672) 5,140,000 (=8,352,500 statute acres) and the Irish have near half as much" (Murphy, pp. 314 and 315).

(On the confiscations of William see p. 18.b)

17th Saeculum. William III375

By the ACTS OF SETTLEMENT AND EXPLANATION, 2,323,809 STATUTE ACRES were granted to the Irish, they having 600,000 previously in their possession, totalling 2,923,809

[^1]: STATUTE

[^2]: ACRES

[^3]: Of these lands, 1,060,792 PLANTATION ACRES were escheated under William worth £211,623 6s 3d. per annum (REPORT OF THE COMMISSIONERS OF THE HOUSE OF COMMONS 1699) 1,723,787

[^4]: STATUTE

[^5]: ACRES

[^6]: [There remain] 1,200,022 STATUTE ACRES

[^7]: or as Murphy calculated0 (he probably erred when 1,240,022 subtracting?) STATUTE

[^8]: ACRES

[^9]: a J. N. Murphy, op. cit., pp. 313-15.— Ed. b P. 17 in the manuscript; it contains only the heading "17. Saeculum, Charles II, James II".— Ed.

[^10]: c J. N. Murphy, op. cit., pp. 317-18.— Ed.

[^11]: 12*





**[p. 306]**

RESTITUTED BY SPECIAL FAVOUR OF THE KING ON PARDONING (65 persons) 125,000 STATUTE ACRES

the COURT OF CLAIMS RESTORED (792 persons) 388,500 STATUTE ACRES

[Total] 513,500 STATUTE ACRES

Making the total still in Irish hands 1,753,522 a

STATUTE ACRES

C o m p i l e d b y M u r p h y o n t h e basis of t h e REPORT OF THE

COMMISSIONERS OF THE HOUSE OF COMMONS (ENGLISH) i n DECEMBER 1 6 9 9 .

Written in March 1870 Printed according to the manu- script First published in Marx-Engels Archives, Russian edition, Vol. X, Moscow, 1948

[^1]: a Engels points out that Murphy may have erred in his calculation by 40,000 acres, in which case the total would have been 1,713,522.— Ed.



