---
Volume: 21
Document_Title: "2. Record of Marx's Speeches on Changing the Place of the Congress of the International in 1868. From Newspaper Reports of the General Council Meetings of May 26 and June 16, 1868 : "
Page_Range: "353-355"
---

# 2. Record of Marx's Speeches on Changing the Place of the Congress of the International in 1868. From Newspaper Reports of the General Council Meetings of May 26 and June 16, 1868 : 



**[p. 320]**

RECORD OF MARX'S SPEECHES ON CHANGING

THE PLACE OF THE CONGRESS OF THE INTERNATIONAL IN 1868

FROM NEWSPAPER REPORTS OF THE GENERAL COUNCIL MEETINGS

OF MAY 26 AND JUNE 16, 1868391

[May 26, 1868]

Notice of motion was given that a resolution should be moved on Tuesday next3 to cancel the resolution of the last congress15

appointing Brussels as the place of meeting for the next congress, and that London be appointed instead.0

The Council considers it incompatible with the honour and dignity of the Association to assemble a congress, surrounded, as it would be, by French spies, and in a country whose Government is capable of committing such wanton outrages as have been perpetrated against the half-starved miners of Charleroi.392

[June 16, 1868]

The mover of the resolutionsd then stated, that besides the foregoing assurances things had transpired since he had given notice which compelled the Council to abstain from revoking the vote of the Laussane Congress.393 The Belgian section had already taken action. M. Bara, the Minister of Justice, was reported to have said in the Chamber of Deputies, that he would not permit the Congress to assemblee; in a remonstrance signed by all the members of the Brussels committee and the executive of the Free

[^1]: a June 2.—Ed. b In Lausanne.— Ed. c For the text of the resolution, tabled by Marx, see this volume, p. 6.— Ed. d Karl Marx.— Ed. e J. Bara, Speech in the Chamber of Deputies on May 16, 1868, La Liberté, No. 47, May 17, 1868.— Ed.



First published in The Bee-Hive News- Reproduced from the newspaper paper, Nos. 346 and 349, May 30 and June 20, 1868

[^1]: a La Tribune du peuple, No. 5, May 24, 1868.— Ed. b The newspaper report further has: "which met with general approval, several members declaring that only the altered state of the case had changed their opinion".— Ed.



