---
Volume: 21
Document_Title: "4. Record of Marx's Speech on the Successes of the International in Germany and France. From the Newspaper Report of the General Council Meeting of July 21, 1868 "
Page_Range: "414-415"
---

# 4. Record of Marx's Speech on the Successes of the International in Germany and France. From the Newspaper Report of the General Council Meeting of July 21, 1868 



**[p. 381]**

RECORD OF MARX'S SPEECH ON THE SUCCESSES OF THE INTERNATIONAL IN GERMANY AND FRANCE

FROM THE NEWSPAPER REPORT OF THE GENERAL COUNCIL MEETING

OF JULY 21, 1868

A letter from Germany announced that the Working-Men's Unions of the Southern States of Germany446 are going to hold a Congress at Nürnberg in the first week of September. The first question to be decided by that Congress is the adhesion of the whole federation to the International Working-Men's Association. Attention was called to an article in Le Réveil, a new paper, published by the friends of Ledru-Rollin at Paris, in which the attitude of the members of the Paris Committee is approvingly commented upon, and the political sagacity and the superior moral conduct of the working classes of Europe, contrasted with the intriguing stupidity of the ruling classes. The article contains the following remarkable passage:

[^1]: "It is to the union of ideas and sentiments that prevails amongst the working men of the different countries of Europe that we trust for the maintenance of peace. In a few days the Congress of the International Association is going to assemble. All the countries of Europe will be represented there, perhaps with the exception of France, and will it be too much to say that by the wisdom of its resolutions this assembly of all the European delegates of labour may become the Amphitryonite council of Europe? Yes; if to-morrow, by mastering the immortal principles of the French revolution, and taking in hand the sacred interests of labour, which comprehend order, security, and liberty, this Congress decreed peace, the word would be received with enthusiasm by all Europe." 3

[^2]: First published in The Bee-Hive News- Reproduced from the newspaper paper, No. 353, July 25, 1868

[^3]: a Ch. Delescluze, "Le droit d'Association. Devant la justice", Le Réveil, No. 2, July 9, 1868.— Ed.



