---
Volume: 21
Document_Title: "7. Record of Marx's Speech on the Reduction of the Working Day. From the Minutes of the General Council Meeting of August 11, 1868 "
Page_Range: "420-421"
---

# 7. Record of Marx's Speech on the Reduction of the Working Day. From the Minutes of the General Council Meeting of August 11, 1868 



**[p. 387]**

RECORD OF MARX'S SPEECH ON THE REDUCTION OF THE WORKING DAY451

FROM THE MINUTES OF THE GENERAL COUNCIL MEETING OF AUGUST 11, 1868

Citizen Marx could not coincide with Milner,452 that it [the reduction of the hours of labour] would lead to a diminished production,3 because where the restrictions had been introduced, the instruments of production had been vastly more developed than in other trades. It had the effect of introducing more machinery, and made production on a small scale more and more impossible, which, however, was necessary to arrive at social production. The sanitary question was settled.453 But a reduction of the hours of labour was also indispensable to give the working class more time for mental culture. Legislative restrictions were the first step towards the mental and physical elevation and the ultimate emancipation of the working classes. Nobody denied, nowadays, that the State must interfere on behalf of the women and children; and a restriction of their hours led, in most instances, to a reduction of the working time of the men. England had taken the lead, other countries had been obliged to follow to some extent. The agitation had seriously commenced in Germany, and the London Council was looked to for taking the lead. The principle had been decided at former congresses; the time for action had arrived.

[^1]: First published in The Bee-Hive, No. 358, August 22, 1868

[^2]: Reproduced from the newspaper with corrections introduced into the Minute Book

[^3]: a The words "diminished production" are inserted in Eccarius' hand in place of the crossed-out words "an increased demand for labour".— Ed.



