---
Volume: 21
Document_Title: "9. Record of Marx's Speech on the Condition of the Coalminers in the Coalfields of Saxony. From the Newspaper Report of the General Council Meeting of February 23, 1869 "
Page_Range: "422-424"
---

# 9. Record of Marx's Speech on the Condition of the Coalminers in the Coalfields of Saxony. From the Newspaper Report of the General Council Meeting of February 23, 1869 



**[p. 389]**

RECORD OF MARX'S SPEECH ON THE CONDITION

OF THE COALMINERS IN THE COALFIELDS

OF SAXONY

FROM THE NEWSPAPER REPORT OF THE GENERAL COUNCIL MEETING

OF FEBRUARY 23, 1869 4M

The German secretary3 read a report on the condition of the coalminers in the kingdom of Saxony. Their wages vary from 6s. to 10s. 3d. a week, for twelve hours labour a day; boys' from 4s. to 5s. a week. Each colliery has a benefit club, to which the men are compelled to contribute, but they have no voice in the administra- tion of the funds; the funds are the lawful property of the coal owners, and the benefits are, without exception, dispensed by the head-managers of the collieries. Sick, relief and superannuation allowances rise in proportion to length of service, but any one leaving his employment, no matter for what reason, loses all claims upon the fund. Thus a man may have contributed to the fund for 30 or 40 years without receiving a farthing in his old age.

An agitation among the miners for better terms has led to the publication of a draft of rules for a united club for all the Saxon collieries. The draft is the work of a committee of colliers presided over by Mr. J. G. Dinter. The chief distinctive features are—

1. All clubs to be consolidated into one. 2. Members not to lose their rights so long as they reside anywhere in Germany and continue to pay their contributions.

3. A general meeting of all adult members to be the supreme authority to elect a general and an executive committee.

4. Masters' contributions to be equal to one-half of those of the men.

This draft, which does not represent the views of the most intelligent colliers, but rather of a section, which would fain to carry out reforms with the consent of the masters, carries on its

[^1]: a Marx.— Ed.





**[p. 390]**

First published in The Bee-Hive News- paper, No. 385, February 27, 1869

Reproduced from the newspaper

