---
Volume: 21
Document_Title: "12. Record of Marx's Speech on the Right to Inheritance. From the Minutes of the General Council Meeting of July 20, 1869 "
Page_Range: "427-431"
---

# 12. Record of Marx's Speech on the Right to Inheritance. From the Minutes of the General Council Meeting of July 20, 1869 



**[p. 394]**

RECORD OF MARX'S SPEECH ON THE RIGHT TO INHERITANCE459

FROM THE MINUTES OF THE GENERAL COUNCIL MEETING OF JULY 20, 1869

I

Cit. Marx opened the discussion on the question: The Right to Inheritance. He said the question had been put by the Alliance of Socialist Democrats of Geneva and the Council had accepted it for discussion.3 The Alliance of Geneva demanded above all the entire abolition of the Right to Inheritance.

There were two forms of inheritance. The testamentary right, or inheritance by will, had come from Rome and had been peculiar to Rome. The father of the Roman family had exercised absolute authority over everything belonging to his household. The Roman family-father must not be compared with the father of a family of the present day. The Roman household had included slaves and clients whose affairs and interestsb the head had been obliged to defend and maintain in public. There had been a superstition that when this man died his ghost remained as a watch in the house to see that things were done right or to torment if things were managed wrong. In the early times of Rome people had sacrificed to this house-god; even blood-feasts had been celebrated in his honour and to appease his wrath.c By and by it had become fashionable to compromise with this spirit by an heir-at-will. It had been the Roman immortality of the soul.d

The will of the deceased had been perpetuated by a testament, but this testament had not necessarily brought a fortune to the

[^1]: a Further the word "because" is crossed out in the Minute Book.— Ed. b The words "and interests" were inserted between the lines in the Minute Book.— Ed.

[^2]: c The words "and to appease his wrath" were inserted later.— Ed. d This sentence was inserted later. The following words are crossed out: "This contrivance had perpetuated."—Ed.





**[p. 395]**

T h e German right to inheritance was the intestate right, the family right, which treated an estate as a sort of co-proprietorship of which the father of the family was the manager. When this manager died the property fell to all the children. T h e Germans had known of no other hereditary rights; the Church of Rome had introduced the Roman right and the feudal system had falsified the German right, because feudal property bearing a military charge could not have been divided. T h e French Revolution had returned to the German right of inheritance. In England we had all sorts of nonsensical things; the individual had the most absolute right to will away his property, even to disinherit his own offspring, and by this rule long after he had ceased to exist.1 This right of will might be left for the middle class to deal with as it was a point which would work against the aristocracy. In Prussia only a little of a man's property could be willed away.

T h e working class who had nothing to inherit had no interest in the question.

T h e Democratic Alliance was going to commence the social revolution with the abolition of the right to inheritance. He asked would it be policy to do so?

As an economical measure it would avail nothing. It would cause so much irritation that it would be sure to raise an almost insurmountable opposition which would inevitably lead to reaction. If at the time of a revolution it was proclaimed, he did not believe that the general state of intelligence would warrant its being sustained. Besides, if the working class had sufficient power to abolish the right to inheritance, it would be powerful enough to

[^1]: T h e proposition was not new. St. Simon had proposed it in 1830.4<i0

[^2]: a The words "by law" were inserted later. The following words are then crossed out: "Upon this superstition was the right of will founded."—Ed.

[^3]: h The words "pagan" and "had been transmitted to Christian countries and" were inserted later.— Ed.

[^4]: c Further the following sentence is crossed out: "It was what kept the aristocracy in its present position and could be left to the middle class."—Ed.





**[p. 396]**

To abolish the right to the inheritance of land in England would involve the hereditary functions connected with the land, the House of Lords, etc., and 15,000 lords and 15,000 ladies would have to die before it became available. If, on the contrary, a working men's parliament decreed that the rent should be paid into the treasury instead of to the landlord, the Government would obtain a fund at oncea without any social disturbance, while by abolishing the right to inheritance everything would be disturbed and nothing got.

Our efforts must be directed to the end that no instruments of production should be private property. The private property in these things was a fiction, since the proprietors could not use them themselves; they only gave them dominion over them, by which they compelled other people to work for them. In a semi- barbarous state this might have been necessary, but it was no longer so. All the means of labour must be socialised, so that every man had a right and the means to exercise his labour power. If we had such a state of things the right to inheritance would be of no use. As long as we had not, the family right to inheritance could not be abolished. The chief aim of people in saving for their children was to ensure them the means of subsistence. If a man's children, were provided for after his death he would not care about leaving them wherewith to get a living, but as long as this was not the case it would only result in hardships, it would irritate and frighten people and do no good. Instead of the beginning it could only be the end of a social revolution. The beginning must be to get the means to socialise the means of labour.

The testamentary right to inheritance was obnoxious to the middle class; with this the state could safely interfere any time. We had legacy-duties already, all we had to do was to increase them and make them progressive, as well as the income-tax, leaving the smaller amounts, £50 for instance, free. Insofar only it was a working-class question.

All that was connected with the present state of things would have to be transformed, but if testaments were suppressed they would be avoided by gifts during life, therefore it would be better to tolerate them on certain conditions than do worse. First the

[^1]: a Further the words "by abolishing" are crossed out in the Minute Book.— Ed.





**[p. 397]**

ir

Cit. Marx replied: if the state had the power to appropriate the land, inheritance was gone. To declare the abolition of inheritance would be foolish. If a revolution occurred, expropriation could be carried; if there was no power to do that, the right to inheritance would not be abolished.

First published in Marx and Engels, Works, Second Russian Edition, Vol. 16, Moscow, 1960

Reproduced from the Minute Book of the General Council

[^1]: a Further, in the Minute Book, comes the record of speeches by Milner and Lucraft (the Chairman); after them Marx again took the floor.— Ed.



