---
Volume: 21
Document_Title: "13. RECORD OF MARX'S SPEECHES ON GENERAL EDUCATION "
Page_Range: "431-434"
---

# 13. RECORD OF MARX'S SPEECHES ON GENERAL EDUCATION 



**[p. 398]**

RECORD OF MARX'S SPEECHES ON GENERAL EDUCATION461

FROM THE MINUTES OF THE GENERAL COUNCIL MEETINGS OF AUGUST 10 AND 17, 1869

[I]

Cit. Marx said there was a peculiar difficulty connected with this question. On the one hand a change of social circumstances was required to establish a proper system of education, on the other hand a proper system of education was required to bring about a change of social circumstances; we must therefore commence where we were.

The question treated at the congresses was whether education was to be national or private.462 National education had been looked upon as governmental, but that was not necessarily the case. In Massachusetts every township was bound to provide schools for primary education for all the children. In towns of more than 5,000 inhabitants higher schools for technical education had to be provided, in larger towns still higher. The state contributed something but not much. In Massachusetts one-eighth of the local taxes went for education, in New York one-fifth. The school committees who administered the schools were local, they appointed the schoolmasters and selected the books. The fault of the American system was that it was too much localised, the education given depended upon the state of culture prevailing in each district. There was a cry for a central supervision. The taxation for schools was compulsory, but the attendance of children was not. Property had to pay the taxes and the people who paid the taxes wanted that the money was usefully applied.

Education might be national without being governmental. Government might appoint inspectors whose duty it was to see that the laws were obeyed, just as the factory inspectors looked after the observance of the factory acts, without any power of interfering with the course of education itself.



**[p. 399]**

The Proudhonists maintained that gratuitous education was nonsense, because the state had to pay for it; of course somebody had to pay, but not those who could least afford it. Was not in favour of gratuitous college education.

As Prussian education had been talked so much of he would conclude by observing that the Prussian system was only calculated to make good soldiers.

[II]

Cit. Marx said: upon certain points we were unanimous. The discussion had started with the proposition to reaffirm the Geneva resolution which demanded that mental education should be combined with bodily labour, with gymnastics and technological training3; nothing had been said against that.

The technological training advocated by proletarian writers was meant to compensate for the deficiencies occasioned by the division [of] labour which prevented apprentices from acquiring a thorough knowledge of their business. This had been taken hold of and misconstructed into what the middle class understood by technical education.

As to Mrs. Law's Church budget4W it would be good policy for the Congress to declare against the Church.

Cit. Milner's proposition464 was not suitable to be introduced in connection with the schools; it was a kind of education that the young must get from the adults in the everyday struggle of life. He could not accept Warren as a bible, it was a question upon which few could agree. We might add that such education cannot be given at school, but must be given by adults.

Nothing could be introduced either in primary or higher schools that admitted of party and class interpretation. Only subjects such as the physical sciences, grammar, etc., were fit matter for schools. The rules of grammar, for instance, could not differ, whether explained by a religious Tory or a free thinker. Subjects that admitted of different conclusions must be excluded and left for

[^1]: a The International Working Men's Association. Resolutions of the Congress of Geneva, 1866, and the Congress of Brussels, 1868, London [1869], pp. 5-7.— Ed.

[^2]: 15-733





**[p. 400]**

The abolition of the army465 had been resolved by the Brussels Congress.b

It was not advisable to bring it on again.

First published in full in Marx and Reproduced from the Minute Engels, Works, Second Russian Edition, Book of the General Council Vol. 16, Moscow, 1960

[^1]: a In the report of the General Council meeting of August 17, 1869 published in The Bee-Hive, No. 410, August 21, 1869 this part of Marx's speech is given as follows: "As to political economy, religion and other questions, they could not be admitted into the primary, nor even the higher schools; that was a kind of education which must rest with the adult, and must be left to the lecture room, to such schoolmasters as Mrs. Law."—Ed.

[^2]: b The International Working Men's Association. Resolutions of the Congress of Geneva, 1866, and the Congress of Brussels, 1868, London [1869], p. 14.— Ed.



