---
Volume: 21
Document_Title: "15. RECORD OF MARX'S SPEECH ON THE POLICY OF THE BRITISH GOVERNMENT WITH RESPECT TO THE IRISH PRISONERS"
Page_Range: "440-444"
---

# 15. RECORD OF MARX'S SPEECH ON THE POLICY OF THE BRITISH GOVERNMENT WITH RESPECT TO THE IRISH PRISONERS



**[p. 407]**

RECORD OF MARX'S SPEECH ON THE POLICY

OF THE BRITISH GOVERNMENT WITH RESPECT TO THE IRISH PRISONERS470

FROM IHK MINUTES OK THE GENERAI. COUNCIL MEETING OF NOVEMBER 16, 1869

Cit. Marx then opened the debate on the attitude of the British Government on the Irish question. He said political amnesty proceeds from two sources: 1. When a government is strong enough by force of arms and public opinion, when the enemy accepts the defeat, as was the case in America,4'1 then amnesty is given. 2. When misgovernment is the cause of quarrel and the opposition gains its point, as was the case in Austria and Hungary.4'2 Such ought to have been the case in Ireland.

Both Disrat T. and Gladstone have said that the government ought to do for Ireland what in other countries a revolution would do. Bright asserted repeatedly that Ireland would always be rife for revolution unless a radical change was made. During the election Gladstone justified the Fenian insurrection and said that every other nation would have revolted under similar cir- cumstances.'1 When taunted in the House he equivocated his fiery declarations against the "policy of conquest"'4'3 implied that "Ireland ought to be ruled according to Irish ideas".1' To put an end to the "policy of conquest" he ought to have begun like America and Austria by an amnesty as soon as he became minister. He did nothing. Then the amnesty movement in Ireland by the municipalities. When a deputation was about to start with a petition containing 200,000 signatures for the release of the prisoners he anticipated it by releasing some to prevent the appearance of giving way to Irish pressure. The petition came,' it was not got up by Fenians, but he gave no answer. Then it was mooted in the House that the prisoners were infamously treated.'1

[^1]: a See The Irishman, No. 4,'July 24, 1869.— Ed. h The Irishman, Nos. 7, 12 and 13, August 14, September 18 and 25, 1869.— Ed. <-' The Irishman, No. 4, July 24, 1869.— Ed.

[^2]: (l See J. Gray's inquiry in the House of Commons concerning the treatment of the Irish prisoners, The Irishman, No. 3, July 17, 1869.— Ed.





**[p. 408]**

After that Gladstone answered the Limerick memorial of August in a roundabout way.474 He says the proceedings varied much. There were loyal people and others who used bad language demanding as a right what could only be an act of clemency.

It is an act of presumption on the part of a paid public servant to teach a public meeting how to speak.

The next objection is that the prisoners have not abandoned their designs which were cut short by their imprisonment.

How does Gladstone know what their designs were and that they still entertain them Has he tortured them into a confession? He wants them to renounce their principles, to degrade them morally. Napoleon did [not] ask people- to renounce their republican principles before he gave an amnesty and Prussia attached no such conditions.

Then he says the conspiracy still exists in England and America. If it did, Scotland Yard would soon be down upon it. It is only "disaffection of 700 years' standing".4''' The Irish have declared they would receive unconditional freedom as an act of conciliation.

[^1]: :l H. A. Bruce. Speech in the House of Commons of June 4, 1869. Ibid.— Ed. h "Mr. G. H. Moore's Motion upon the Treatment by England of Irish Political Prisoners", The Irishman, No. I, July 3, 1869.— Ed.

[^2]: c The Irishman, No. 6, August 7, 1869.— Ed. d The Irishman, No. 16, October 16, 1869.— Ed. c- The Irishman, No. 17, October 23, 1869.—Erf.





**[p. 409]**

When Mountjoy was crowded with untried prisoners, Dr. M'Donnell wrote letter after letter to Joseph Murray about their treatment. Lord Mayo said afterwards that Murray had suppressed them. M'Donnell then wrote to the inspector of prisons, to a higher official.b He was afterwards dismissed and Murray was promoted.0

He then says: we have advised the minor offenders to be released; the principal leaders and organisers we could not set free.

This is a positive lie. There were two Americans amongst them who had 15 years each. It was fear for America that made him set them free. Carey was sentenced in 1865 to 5 years, he is in the lunatic asylum, his family wanted him home,d he could not upset the government.

He further says: to rise in revolt against the public order has ever been a crime in this country. Only in this country. Jefferson Davis's revolt was right because it was not against the English, the government.47' He continues, the administration can have no interest except the punishment of crimes.

The administration are the servants of the oppressors of Ireland. He wants the Irish to fall on their knees because an enlightened sovereign and Parliament have done a great act of justice.c They were the criminals before the Irish people. But the Irish was the only question upon which Gladstone and Bright could become ministers and catch the dissenters478 and give the Irish place-hunters an excuse of selling themselves. The church was only the badge of conquest. The badge is removed, but the servitude remains. He states that the government is resolved to continue to remove any grievance, but that they are determined to

[^1]: a Neu'-York Irish People.—Ed. h The Irishman, No. 7, August 14, 1869.—Ed. c The Irishman, No. 19, November 6, 1869.— Ed. d The Irishman, No. 20, November 13, 1869.— Ed. c An allusion to Gladstone who said in his reply to the Limerick memorial that "amnesty could only be an act of clemency on the part of the sovereign" (The Times, No. 26579, October 23, 1869).— Ed.





**[p. 410]**

Life and property are endangered by the English aristocracy. Canada makes her own laws479 without impairing the integrity of the empire, but the Irish know nothing of their own affairs, they must leave them to Parliament, the same power that has landed them where they are. It is the greatest stupidity to think that the prisoners out of prison could be more dangerous than insulting a whole nation. The old English leaven of the conqueror comes out in the statement: we will grant but you must ask.

In his letter to Isaac Butt he says:

"You remind me that I once pleaded for foreigners.'1 Can the two cases correspond? The Fenians were tried according to lawful custom and found guilty by a jury of their countrymen. The prisoners of Naples were arrested and not tried and when they were tried they were tried by exceptional tribunals and sentenced by judges who depended upon the government for bread."h

If a poacher is tried by a jury of country squires he is tried by his countrymen. It is notorious that the Irish juries are made up of purveyors to the castle whose bread depends upon their verdict. Oppression is always a lawful custom. In England the judges can be independent, in Ireland they cannot. Their promotion depends upon how they serve the government. Sullivan the prosecutor has been made master of the rolls.

To the Ancient Order of Foresters in Dublin he answered that he was not aware that he had given a pledge that Ireland was to be governed according to Irish ideas.480 And after all this he comes to Guild-Hail and complains that he is inadequate for the task/

The upshot is that all the tenant right meetings are broken up; they want the prisoners [released]. They have broken with the clerical party. They now demand that Ireland is to govern herself. Moore and Butt have declared for it.d Thev have resolved to liberate O'Donovan Rossa by electing him a member of Parlia- ment.0481

[^1]: First published in full in Marx and Reproduced from the Minute Engels, Works, Second Russian Edition, Book of the General Council Vol. 16, Moscow, I960

[^2]: a A reference to Gladstone's pamphlet Two Letters to the Earl of Aberdeen on the State Persecutions of the Neapolitan Government, published in London in 1851.— Ed.

[^3]: b The Times, No. 26583, October 27, 1869.— Ed. c The Irishman, No. 20, November 13, 1869.— Ed. d This sentence was inserted between the lines of the Minute Book.— Ed.

[^4]: e' The next sentence in the Minutes reads: "Cit. Marx ended by proposing the following resolution" (see this volume, p. 83).— Ed.



