---
Volume: 21
Document_Title: "16. RECORD OF MARX'S SPEECHES ON THE POLICY OF THE BRITISH GOVERNMENT WITH RESPECT TO THE IRISH PRISONERS"
Page_Range: "444-446"
---

# 16. RECORD OF MARX'S SPEECHES ON THE POLICY OF THE BRITISH GOVERNMENT WITH RESPECT TO THE IRISH PRISONERS



**[p. 411]**

RECORD OF MARX'S SPEECHES ON THE POLICY OF THE BRITISH GOVERNMENT WITH RESPECT

TO THE IRISH PRISONERS

FROM IHK MINUTES OF THE GENERAL COUNCIL MEETINGS

OF NOVEMBER 2.'i AND 30, 18(">9

[I]

Cit. Marx. Cit. Mottershead has given a history of Gladstone. I could give another, but that has nothing to do with the question before us. The petitions which were adopted at the meetings were quite civil, but he found fault with the speeches by which they were supported. Castlereagh was as good a man as Gladstone and I found today in the Political Register**2 that he used the same words against the Irish as Gladstone, and Cobbett made the same reply as I have done.

When the electoral tour commenced all the Irish candidates spouted about amnesty, but Gladstone did nothing till the Irish municipalities moved.

I have not spoken of the people killed abroad, because you cannot compare the Hungarian war with the Fenian insurrection. We might compare it with 1798'1*"' and then the comparison would not be favourable to the English.

I repeat that political prisoners are not treated anywhere so bad as in England.

Cit. Mottershead is not going to tell us his opinion of the Irish; if he wants to know what other people think of the English let him read Ledru-Rollin'1 and other Continental writers. I have always defended the English and do so still.

These resolutions'5 are not to be passed to release the prisoners, the Irish themselves have abandoned that.

It is a resolution of sympathy with the Irish and a review of the conduct of the government, it may bring the English and the Irish

[^1]: a A. A. Ledru-Rollin, The Decline of England, 2nd ed., London, 1850.— Ed. h See this volume, p. 83.— Ed.



Cit. Odger is right; if we wanted the prisoners released, this would not be the way to do it, but it is more important to make a concession to the Irish people than to Gladstone484

Cit. Marx had no objection to leave out the word "deliberately", as a prime minister must necessarily be considered to do everything deliberately.48D

[II]

Cit. Marx said if Odger's suggestions were followed the Council would put themselves on an English party standpoint.486 They could not do that. The Council must show the Irish that they understood the question and the Continent that they showed no favour to the British Government. The Council must treat the Irish like the English would treat the Polish.

[^1]: First published in full in Marx and Engels, Works, Second Russian Edition, Vol. 16, Moscow, 1960

[^2]: Reproduced from the Minute Book of the General Council



