---
Volume: 21
Document_Title: "I  "
Page_Range: "447-450"
---

# I  



**[p. 414]**

ARTICLES BY JENNY MARX ON THE IRISH QUESTION 48i

I

London, February 27, 1870

The Marseillaise for February 18 quotes an article from The Daily News''1 in which the English paper gives information to the French press concerning the election of O'Donovan Rossa. Since this information is somewhat confused and since partial explana- tions only serve to throw a false light on the things which they are claiming to elucidate, I should be grateful if you would kindly publish my comments on the article in question.

Firstly, The Daily News states that O'Donovan was sentenced by a jury, but it omits to add that in Ireland the juries are composed of minions more or less directly nominated by the government.

Then, in speaking with righteous horror of the TREASON-FELONY, the false liberals of The Daily News omit to say that this new category in the English Penal Code was expressly invented to identify the Irish patriots with the vilest of criminals.

Let us take then the case of O'Donovan Rossa. He was one of the editors of The Irish People. Like most of the Fenians he was sentenced for having written so-called seditious articles. Conse- quently the Marseillaise was not wrong in drawing an analogy between Rochefort and Rossa.489

Why does The Daily News, which aims at keeping France informed about the Fenian prisoners, remain silent about the appalling treatment of them? I trust that you will allow me to make up for this prudent silence.

Some time ago O'Donovan was put in a dark cell with his hands chained behind his back. His handcuffs were not removed night

[^1]: La Marseillaise, No. 60, February 18, 1870.— Ed.





**[p. 415]**

The government strongly opposed this request. Thus, Moore's motion was rejected by 171 votes to 36—a worthy supplement to the voting which crushed the right to suffrage.1

And this took place during the ministry of the sanctimonious Gladstone. As you can see the great Liberal leader knows how to mock humanity and justice. There are also Judases who do not wear glasses.

Here is another case which also does England credit. O'Leary, a Fenian prisoner aged between sixty and seventy, was put on bread and water for three weeks because—the reader of the Marseillaise would never guess why—because Leary called himself a "pagan" and refused to say he was Protestant, Presbyterian, Catholic or Quaker. He was given the choice of one of these religions or bread and water. Of these five evils, O'Leary, or "pagan O'Leary" as he is called, chose the one that he considered the least—bread and water.'1

Last Saturday a young Irishman called Gunner Hood left prison after four years in it. At the age of 19 he had joined the English army and served England in Canada. He was taken before a military tribunal in 1866 for having written seditious articles and sentenced to two years' hard labour. When the sentence was pronounced Hood took his cap and threw it into the air shouting,

[^1]: A few days ago after examining the body of a Fenian who died at Spike Island Prison the CORONER1 expressed his very strong disapproval of the manner in which the deceased man had been treated.1

[^2]: a The Irishman, No. 49, June 12, 1869, "O'Donovan Rossa. To the Editor of The Irishman; The Press on the Treatment of the Political Prisoners: The Treatment of O'Donovan Rossa".— Ed.

[^3]: b "Mr. G. H. Moore's Motion upon the Treatment by England of Irish Political Prisoners", The Irishman, No. 1, July 3, 1869.— Ed.

[^4]: c See this volume, pp. 442-43.— Ed. A Ibid., p. 102.—Ed. e Jenny Marx uses the English term and gives the explanation of it in brackets.— Ed.

[^5]: 1 See the article "Inquest at Spike Island. — Condemnation of the Prison Treatment", The Irishman, No. 34, February 19, 1870.— Ed.





**[p. 416]**

Mr. Carey, a journalist, is kept at present in the part of the prison intended for the insane, the silence and the other forms of torture to which he has been subjected having turned him into a mass of living flesh deprived of all reason.

The Fenian, Colonel Burke, a man who has distinguished himself not only by his military service in the American army but also as a writer and painter, has also been reduced to a pitiful state in which he can no longer recognise his closest relatives. I Could add many more names to this list of Irish martyrs. Suffice it to say that since 1866, when there was a raid on The Irish People's offices,490 20 Fenians have died or gone mad in the prisons of humanitarian England.

