---
Volume: 21
Document_Title: "II "
Page_Range: "450-453"
---

# II 



**[p. 417]**

II

London, March 5491

During the meeting of the House of Commons on March 3 Mr. Stacpoole questioned Mr. Gladstone on the treatment of Fenian prisoners. He said, among other things, that Dr. Lyons of Dublin had recently stated that

"the discipline, diet, personal restrictions and the other punishments were bound to cause permanent damage to the prisoners' health".a

After having expressed complete satisfaction with the way in which prisoners were treated, Mr. Gladstone crowned his little SPEECH with this brilliantly witty remark:

Whereupon a burst of Homeric laughter broke out from all sides of that noble assembly. Her last visit! Note that Mrs. O'Donovan Rossa had not only been separated from her husband for several years, but that she had travelled all over America earning money to feed her children by giving public lectures on English literature.

And bear in mind also that this same Mr. Gladstone, whose quips are so pointed, is the almost sacred author of Prayers, the Propagation of the Gospel, The Functions of Laymen in the Churchc and the recently published homily Ecce homo.

Is the profound satisfaction of the head jailer shared by his prisoners? Read the following extracts from a letter written by

[^1]: "As to the health of O'Donovan Rossa, I am glad to be able to say that during her last visit to her husband Mrs. O'Donovan Rossa congratulated him on looking better."

[^2]: •' W. Stacpoole, Speech in the House of Commons on March 3, 1870, The Times, No. 26689, March 4, 1870.— Ed.

[^3]: b W. E. Gladstone, Speech in the House of Commons on March 3, 1870, The Times, No. 26689, March 4, 1870.— Ed.

[^4]: ' The titles of Gladstone's books are given in English in the newspaper, with the French translations in brackets.— Ed.





**[p. 418]**

LEITER FROM ROSSA

I have already told you about the hypocrisy of these English masters who, after placing me in a position which forced me to get down on my knees and elbows to eat, are now depriving me of food and light and giving me chains and a Bible. I am not complaining of the penalties which my masters inflict on me — it is my job to suffer — but I insist that I have the right to inform the world of the treatment to which I am subjected, and that it is illegal to hold back my letters describing this treatment. The minute precautions taken by the prison authorities to prevent me writing letters are as disgusting as they are absurd. The most insulting method was to strip me once a day for several months and then examine my arms, legs and all other parts of my body. This took place at Mitlbnnk daily from February to May 1867. One day I refused, whereupon five prison officers arrived, beat me mercilessly and tore off my clothes.

Once I succeeded in getting a letter to the outside, for which I was rewarded by a visit from Messrs. Knox and Pollock, two POLICE MAGISIRAIES* How ironical to send two government employees to find out the truth about the English prisons. These gentlemen refused to take note of anything important which I had to tell them. When I touched upon a subject which was not to their liking, they stopped me by saying that prison discipline was not their concern. Isn't that so, Messrs. Pollock and Knox? When I told you that I had been forced to wash in water which had already been used by half a dozen English prisoners, did you not refuse to note my complaint?

At Chatham I was given a certain amount of tow to pull out and told that I would go without food if I did not finish the work by a certain time.

[^1]: "Perhaps you'll still punish me even if I do the job in time," I shouted: That's what happened to me at Millbank."

[^2]: "How could it?" asked the jailer. Then I told him that on July 4 I had finished my work ten minutes before the appointed time and picked up a book. The officer saw me do this, accused me of being lazy and I was put on bread and water and locked in a dark cell for forty-eight hours.

[^3]: One day I caught sight of my friend Edward Duffy. He was extremely pale. A little later I heard that Duffy was seriously ill and that he had expressed the wish to see me (we had been very close in Ireland). I begged the governor to give me permission to visit him. He refused point-blank. This was round about Christmas '67 — and a few weeks later a prisoner whispered to me through the bars of my cell: "Duffy is dead."

[^4]: How movingly this would have been described by the English if it had happened in Russia!

[^5]: If Mr. Gladstone had been present on such a sad occasion in Naples, what a touching picture he would have painted! Ah! ^weet Pharisees, trading in hypocrisy, with the Bible on their lips and the devil in their bellies.

[^6]: I must say a word in memory of John Lynch. In March 1866 I found myself together with him in the exercise yard. We were being watched so closely that he only managed to say to me, "The cold is killing me." But then what did the English do to us? They took us to London on Christmas Eve. When we arrived at

[^7]: a Jenny Marx uses the English term and gives its French equivalent in brackets.— Ed.





**[p. 419]**

The lies of our English oppressors exceed one's wildest imagination.

If I am to die in prison I entreat my family and my friends not to believe a word of what these people say. Let me not be suspected of personal rancour against those who persecuted me with their lies. I accuse only tyranny which makes the use of such methods necessary.

Many a time the circumstances have reminded me of Machiavelli's words: "that tyrants have a special interest in circulating the Bible so that the people understand its precepts and offer no resistance to being robbed by brigands".

So long as an enslaved people follows the sermons on morality and obedience preached to them by the priests, the tyrants have nothing to fear.

If this letter reaches my fellow countrymen I have the right to demand that they raise their voices to insist that justice be done for their suffering brothers. Let these words whip up the blood that is moving sluggishly in their veins!

I was harnessed to a cart with a rope tied round my neck. This knot was fastened to a long shaft and two English prisoners received orders to prevent the cart from bouncing. But they refrained from doing this, the shaft rose up into the air and the knot came undone. If it had tightened I would be dead.

I insist that they do not possess the right to put me in a situation where my life depends on the acts of other people.

A ray of light is penetrating through the bolts and bars of my prison. This is reminder of the day in New tow awards where I met Orangemen and Ribbonmen492

who had forgotten their bigotry!

[^1]: O'Donovan Rossa Political prisoner sentenced to hard labour'1

[^2]: a "O'Donovan Rossa. Letter from the Member for Tipperary", The Irishman, No. 32, February 5, 1870.— Ed.



