---
Volume: 21
Document_Title: "III "
Page_Range: "453-458"
---

# III 



**[p. 420]**

III

London, March 16, 1870

The main event of the past week has been O'Donovan Rossa's letter which I communicated to you in my last report.3

The Timesb printed the letter without comment, whereas The Daily News published a commentary without the letter.'

"As one might have expected," it says, "Mr. O'Donovan Rossa takes as his subject the prison rules to which he has been subjected FOR A WHILE."1

How atrocious this "for a while" is in speaking of a man who has already been imprisoned for five years and condemned to hard labour for lifel

Mr. O'Donovan Rossa complains among other things "of being harnessed to a cart with a rope tied round his neck" in such a way that his life depended on the movements of English convicts, his fellow prisoners.

After this brilliant piece of arguing, the pious casuist reproaches O'Donovan Rossa for not loving the BIBLE and preferring the IRISH PEOPLE, an opposition which is sure to delight its readers.

[^1]: But, exclaims The Daily News, "Is it really unjust to put a man in a situation where his life depends on the acts of others? When a person is in a car or on a steamer does not his life also depend on the acts of others?"

[^2]: "Mr. O'Donovan," it continues, "seems to imagine that prisoners serving sentences for seditious writing should be supplied with cigars and daily newspapers,

[^3]: •' See this volume, pp. 418-19.— Ed. b "The Fenian Convict O'Donovan Rossa", The Times, No. 26694, March 10, 1870.— Ed.

[^4]: c "The Marseillaise of Tuesday last was", The Daily News, No. 7445, March 11, 1870.— Ed.

[^5]: d In La Marseillaise the English expression "for a while" is given in brackets after the French equivalent.— Ed.





**[p. 421]**

Ho, ho, virtuous Pharisee! At last you have admitted that O'Donovan Rossa has been sentenced to hard labour for life for seditious writing and not for an attempted assassination of Queen Victoria, as you vilely insinuated in your first address to the French press.

"After all," this shameless newspaper concludes, "O'Donovan Rossa is simply being treated for what he is, that is, an ordinary convict."

After Mr. Gladstone's special newspaper, here is a different angle from the "liberal" press, The Daily Telegraph, which generally adopts a rougher manner/

"If we condescend," it says, "to take note of O'Donovan Rossa's letter, it is not because of the Fenians who are incorrigible, but exclusively for the well-being of France.

"Let it be known," it says, "that only a few days ago in the House of Commons Mr. Gladstone made a formal denunciation of all these outrageous lies, and there cannot be any intelligent Frenchmen of whatever party and class who would dare doubt the word of an English gentleman."

But if, contrary to expectation, there were parties or people in France perverse enough not to believe the word of an English gentleman such as Mr. Gladstone, France could not at least resist the well-meant advice of Mr. Levy who is not a gentleman and who addresses you in the following terms:

With Mr. Levy's permission, I will give you a new example of the value of the words of the gentlemen who make up Gladstone's Cabinet.

You will remember that in my first letter I mentioned Colonel Richard Burke, a Fenian prisoner who has gone insane thanks to the humanitarian methods of the English government.11 The Irishman was the first to publish this news,1 after which Mr. Underwood sent a letter to Mr. Bruce, the Home Secretary,li

asking him for an enquiry into the treatment of political prisoners.

Mr. Bruce replied in a letter which was published in the English press and which contained the following sentence:

[^1]: "We advise our neighbours, the Parisians, to treat all the stories of cruelties committed on political prisoners in England as, so many insolent lies."

[^2]: a The Daily Telegraph, No. 4598, March 11, 1870.— Ed. b See this volume, p. 416.— Ed. ' "More Prison Horrors. Irish Political Prisoners Being Done to Death in English Prisons", The Irishman, No. 27, January 1, 1870.— Ed.

[^3]: '' The letter was published in The Irisnman, No. 28, January 8, 1870.— Ed.





**[p. 422]**

This statement by Mr. Bruce is dated January 11, 1870. Now in one of its recent issues The Irishman has published the same Minister's reply to a letter from Mrs. Barry; Richard Burke's sister, who asked for news, about her brother's "alarming" condition.b

The ministerial reply of February 24 contains an official report dated January 11 in which the prison doctor and Burke's special guard state that he had become insane.c Thus, the very day when Mr. Bruce publicly declared the information published by The Irishman to be false and ill-founded, he was concealing the irrefutable official proof in his pocket! It should be mentioned incidentally that Mr. Moore, an Irish member in the House of Commons, is to question the Minister on the treatment of Colonel Burke.

The Echo, a recently founded newspaper, takes an even stronger liberal line than its companions. It has its own principle which consists of selling for one penny, whereas all the other newspapers cost twopence, fourpence or sixpence. This price of one penny forces it on the one hand to make pseudo-democratic professions of faith so as not to lose its proletarian subscribers, and on the other hand, to make constant reservations in order to win over respectable subscribers from its competitors.

In its long tirade on O'Donovan Rossa's letter it finished up by saying that "perhaps even those Fenians who have received an amnesty will refuse to believe the exaggerations of their compat- riots", as if Mr. Kickham, Mr. Costello and others had not already published information on their suffering in prison totally in accordance with Rossa's letter! But after all its subterfuge and senseless evasions The Echo touches on the sore point.

[^1]: The "publications by the Marseillaise," it says, "will cause a scandal and this scandal will spread all round the world. The continental mind is perhaps too limited to be able to discern the difference between the crimes of a Bomba'1 and the severity of a Gladstone! So it would be better to hold an enquiry", and so on.e

[^2]: a The Irishman, No. 30, January 22, 1870. The reply to Underwood's enquiry was made on behalf of Bruce by A.F.O. Liddell on January 11, 1870.— Ed.

[^3]: b Both Mrs. Barry's letter to Bruce of February 22, 1870 and Liddell's reply to it of February 24 were published in The Irishman, No. 37, March 12, 1870.— Ed.

[^4]: c J. Meyers, Official report on Richard Burke's state of health, dated January 11, 1870, The Irishman, No. 37, March 12, 1870.—Ed.

[^5]: d King Bomba, i. e. Ferdinand II.— Ed. e "O'Donovan Rossa's Woes", The Echo, No. 391, March 11, 1870.—Ed.





**[p. 423]**

"The Fenian O'Donovan Rossa does not appear to have suffered anything more than the ordinary sufferings of convicts, but we confess that we should like to see changes in this regime. It is very right and often most advisable to shoot rebels. It is also right to deprive them of their liberty as the most dangerous type of criminals. But it is neither right nor wise to degrade them." b

Well said, Solomon the Wise!

Finally we have The Standard, the main organ of the Tory party, the Conservatives. You will be aware that the English oligarchy is composed of two factions: the landed aristocracy and the plutocracy. If in their family quarrels one takes the side of the plutocrats against the aristocrats one is called a liberal or even radical. If, on the contrary, one sides with the aristocrats against the plutocrats one is called a Tory.

The Standard calls O'Donovan Rossa's letter an apocryphal story probably written by A. Dumas.

In the House of Commons a certain member once referred to the Tory party as the "STUPID PARTY".d Is it not a fact that The Standard well deserves its title as the main organ of the stupid party!

Before closing I must warn the French not to confuse the newspaper clamour with the voice of the English proletariat which, unfortunately for the two countries, Ireland and England, has no echo in the English press.

Let it suffice to say that more than 200,000 men, women and children of the English working class raised their voices in Hyde Park to demand freedom for their Irish brothers, and that the General Council of the International Working Men's Association,

[^1]: "Why," it says, "did the Marseillaise refrain from adding that Mr. Gladstone, the Archbishop of Canterbury and the Lord Mayor were present each morning while O'Donovan Rossa was being tortured?"0

[^2]: -' Jenny Marx paraphrases words from Voltaire's novel L'Enfant prodigue: Tous les genres sont bons, hors le genre ennuyeux" (The Prodigal Son: "Ail genres are good except the boring ones").— Ed.

[^3]: h The Spectator, No. 2176, March 12, 1870.— Ed. ' The Evening Standard, March 10, 1870.— Ed. d Jenny Marx uses the English words "stupid party" and gives the French translation in brackets.— Ed.





**[p. 424]**

P. S. As a result of the publicity given by the Marseillaise to O'Donovan Rossa's letter,3 Gladstone is afraid that he may be forced by public opinion to hold a parliamentary public enquiry into the treatment of political prisoners. In order to avoid this again (we know how many times his corrupt conscience has opposed it already) this diplomat has just produced an official, but anonymous denial of the facts quoted by Rossa.494

Let it be known in France that this denial is nothing more than a copy of the statements made by the prison jailer, police magistrates Knox and Pollock, etc., etc.b These gentlemen know full well that Rossa cannot reply to them. He will be kept under stricter supervision than ever, but I shall reply to them in my next letter with facts, the verification of which does not depend on the goodwill of jailers.

[^1]: a O'Donovan's letter of March 5, 1870, La Marseillaise, No. 79, March 9, 187D.— Ed,

[^2]: '' Report of the Commissioners on the Treatment of the Treason-Felony Convicts in the English Convict Prisons, London, 1867.— Ed.



