---
Volume: 21
Document_Title: "VI. Agrarian Outrages in Ireland "
Page_Range: "467-470"
---

# VI. Agrarian Outrages in Ireland 



**[p. 434]**

VI

AGRARIAN OUTRAGES IN IRELAND

London, April 2, 1870

In Ireland the plundering and even extermination of the tenant farmer and his family by the landlord is called the property right, whereas the desperate farmer's revolt against his ruthless ex- ecutioner is called an agrarian outrage. These AGRARIAN OUTRAGES, a

which are actually very few in number but are multiplied and exaggerated out of all proportion by the kaleidoscope of the English press in accordance with orders received, have, as you will know, provided the excuse for reviving the regime of white terror in Ireland. On the other hand, this regime of terror makes it possible for the landowners to redouble their oppression with impunity.

I have already mentioned that the Land Bill consolidates landlordism under the pretext of giving aid to the tenant farmers. Nevertheless, in order to pull the wool over people's eyes and clear his conscience, Gladstone was compelled to grant this new lease of life to landlord despotism subject to certain legal formalities. It should suffice to say that in the future, as in the past, the landlord's word will become law if he succeeds in imposing on his TENANTS AT win b the most fantastic rents which are impossible to pay or, in the case of land tenure agreements, makes his farmers sign contracts which will bind them to voluntary slavery.

And how the landlords are rejoicing! A Dublin newspaper, the Freeman, publishes a letter from Father P. Lavelle/ the author of The Irish Landlord since the Revolution, in which he says:

[^1]: a These two words are given in the newspaper in brackets after their French equivalents.— Ed.

[^2]: b This term is given in the newspaper in brackets after its French equivalent.— Ed.

[^3]: c P. Lavelle, "To the Tenants and Tenant-Farmers of Ireland", The Freeman's journal. March 29, 1870.— Ed.





**[p. 435]**

The Irishman on the other hand publishes the new tenure agreements dictated by Lord Dufferin,a the member of Gladstone's Cabinet who inspired the Land Bill and introduced the Coercion Bill in the House of Lords. Add the rapacious shrewdness of an expert moneylender and the despicable chicanery of the advocate to feudal insolence and you will have a rough idea of the new land tenure agreements invented by the noble Dufferin.

It is now easy to see that the rule of terror has arrived just in time to introduce the rule of the Land Bill! Let us suppose, for example, that in a certain Irish county the farmers refuse either to allow a 25% rent increase or to sign Dufferin's land tenure agreements! The county's landlords will then get their valets or the police to send them anonymous threatening letters, as they have in the past. This also counts as an "agrarian outrage". The landlords inform the Viceroy, Lord Spencer, accordingly. Lord Spencer then declares that the district is subject to the provisions of the Coercion Act which is then applied by the same landlords, in their capacity as magistrates, against their own tenants!

Journalists who are imprudent enough to protest will not only be prosecuted for sedition, but their printing presses will be confiscated without the semblance of legal proceedings!

It should, perhaps, now be obvious why the head of your executive b congratulated Gladstone on the improvements which he had introduced in Ireland, and why Gladstone returned the compliment by congratulating your executive on its constitutional concessions. "A Roland for an Olivier"0 those of your readers who know Shakespeare will say. But others who are more versed in the Moniteur than in Shakespeare will remember the letter sent by the head of your executive to the late Lord Palmerston containing the words "Let us not act like knaves!"

Now I shall return to the question of political prisoners, not without good cause.

[^1]: ;1 "Lord Dufferin's Lease.— Landlord Confiscation", The Irishman, No. 37, March 12, 1870.— Ed.

[^2]: b Napoleon III.— Ed. c Jenny Marx paraphrases Shakespeare's words; see King Henry the Sixth, Part 1, Act I, Scene 2.— Ed.





**[p. 436]**

The following dispatch was printed by all the newspapers in the United States:

"The Marseillaise says that O'Donovan Rossa was stripped naked once a day and examined, that he was starved, that he was locked in a dark cell, that he was harnessed to a cart, and that the death of his fellow prisoners was caused by the cold to which they were exposed."

The Irishman's New York correspondent says:

"The Rochefort Marseillaise has placed the suffering of the Fenian prisoners before the eyes of the American people. We owe a debt of gratitude to the Marseillaise which, I trust, will be promptly paid."b

Rossa's letter has also been published by the German press.c

From now onwards the English government will no longer be able to commit its outrages in silence. Mr. Gladstone will gain nothing from his attempt to silence the Irish press. Each journalist imprisoned in Ireland will be replaced by a hundred journalists in France, Germany and America.

What can Mr. Gladstone's narrow-minded, out-of-date policies do against the international spirit of the nineteenth century?

[^1]: a See this volume, pp. 418-19.— Ed. b "The Irishman in New York", The Irishman, No. 40, April 2, 1870.— Ed. c Der Volksstaat, No. 22, March 16, 1870.— Ed.



