---
Volume: 21
Document_Title: "19. Letter of the General Council to Robert William Hume in New York "
Page_Range: "475-477"
---

# 19. Letter of the General Council to Robert William Hume in New York 



**[p. 442]**

LETTER OF THE GENERAL COUNCIL TO ROBERT WILLIAM HUME IN NEW YORK

London, April 23, 1870

Dear Sir, in answer to yours of the 26th ult. I am directed by the Council to state that the International Association recognises no special national interests among the working men who may happen to have been born in different countries.

One of our aims is to eliminate whatever may yet remain of national antipathies and, perhaps, animosities, from the minds of working men. The Council cannot, therefore, endorse the kind of representation implied in your memorial. General Cluseret had his feelings outraged by the French police, which was probably the reason why the trade societies gave him credentials which induced him to institute a comparison between himself and the French ambassador at Washington.503 The French ambassador at Washing- ton has to vindicate the personal interests of a dynasty, and the property interests of the French traders. The Paris workmen have no such interests to be taken care of on the other side of the Atlantic, against the probable encroachments of the American working men. We consider the interests of the French workmen resident in the United States strictly identical with the interests of all the other working men of the United States.

To facilitate the inter-communication of such as may be separated by difference of language, and perhaps manners, we have correspondents, who are conversant with these things, and to them we trust for managing the rest.

The communication with the United States is distributed among the secretaries of the different nationalities of the General Council. General Cluseret and Mr. Pelletier are our French correspondents in America. They correspond with our Secretary



**[p. 443]**

Respecting the secret society movement, I am instructed to ask you to favour us at your convenience with your opinion as to the cause which has tended to bring about the necessity for secret action. We have been advised to persuade you and friend Jessup to publicly stand up against it, but we suppose there is a necessity for it, or else it would not have come into vogue and moreover it would be presumptuous on our part to offer advice in such a matter, but we wish to know the reasons, to bring them to the knowledge of the working men of the Old World, who have just emerged from conducting their agitation in secret.

Yours faithfully,

/. George Eccarius, General Secretary

[^1]: Read at the General Council meeting of May 24, 1870

[^2]: Reproduced from the newspaper clipping pasted into the Minute Book of the General Council

[^3]: a Eugene Dupont.— Ed. b Karl Marx.— Ed. c Johann Georg Eccarius.— Ed.



