---
Volume: 37
Document_Title: "II. Savings in Labour Conditions at the Expense of the Labourers. Coal Mines. Neglect of Indispensable Outlays "
Page_Range: "101-109"
---

# II. Savings in Labour Conditions at the Expense of the Labourers. Coal Mines. Neglect of Indispensable Outlays 



**[p. 91]**

employed capital, increases, this is primarily only a concentration of more capital in a single hand. Yet it is precisely this greater quantity applied by a single source — attended, as a rule, by an absolutely greater but relatively smaller amount of employed labour — which permits economy of constant capital. To take an individual capitalist, the volume of the necessary investment of capital, especially of its fixed portion, increases. But its value decreases relative to the mass of worked-up materials and exploited labour.

This is now to be briefly illustrated by a few examples. We shall begin at the end — the economy in the conditions of production, in so far as these also constitute the living conditions of the labourer.

II. SAVINGS IN LABOUR CONDITIONS AT THE EXPENSE OF THE LABOURERS

Coal mines. Neglect of indispensable outlays.

"Under the competition which exists among the coal-owners and coal-proprietors no more outlay is incurred than is sufficient to overcome the most obvious physical difficulties; and under that which prevails among the labouring colliers, who are ordi- narily more numerous than the work to be done requires, a large amount of danger and exposure to the most noxious influences will gladly be encountered for wages a little in advance of the agricultural population round them, in an occupation, in which they can moreover make a profitable use of their children. This double competition is quite sufficient to cause a large proportion of the pits to be worked with the most imperfect drainage and ventilation; often with ill-constructed shafts, bad gearing, incompetent engineers; and ill-constructed and ill-prepared bays and roadways; causing a destruction of life, and limb, and health, the statistics of which would present an appalling picture" (First Report on Children's Employment in Mines and Collieries, etc., April 21, 1829, p. 102).18

About 1860, a weekly average of 15 men lost their lives in the Eng- lish collieries. According to the report on Coal Mines Accidents (Feb- ruary 6, 1862), a total of 8,466 were killed in the ten years 1852-61.a

But the report admits that this number is far too low, because in the first few years, when the inspectors had just been installed and their districts were far too large, a great many accidents and deaths were not reported. The very fact that the number of accidents, though still very high, has decreased markedly since the inspection system was established, and this in spite of the limited powers and insufficient numbers of the inspectors, demonstrates the natural tendency of capi-

[^1]: a Cf. present edition, Vol. 30, p. 168.





**[p. 92]**

talist exploitation.— These human sacrifices are mostly due to the inordinate avarice of the mine owners. Very often they had only one shaft sunk, so that apart from the lack of effective ventilation there was no escape were this shaft to become obstructed.

Capitalist production, when considered in isolation from the process of circulation and the excesses of competition, is very econom- ical with the materialised labour objectified in commodities. Yet, more than any other mode of production, it squanders human lives, or living labour, and not only blood and flesh, but also nerve and brain. Indeed, it is only by dint of the most extravagant waste of indi- vidual development that the development of the human race is at all safeguarded and maintained in the epoch of history immediately preceding the conscious reorganisation of society. Since all of the economising here discussed arises from the social nature of labour, it is indeed just this directly social nature of labour which causes the waste of life and health. The following question suggested by factory inspector R. Baker is characteristic in this respect:

*"The whole question is one for serious consideration, and in what way this sacrifice of infant life occasioned by congregational labour can be best averted?"* (Reports of Insp. of Fact., October 1863, p. 157).

Factories. Here we have to deal with the disregard for every meas- ure aimed at ensuring the safety, convenience, and health of labour- ers also in the actual factories. It is to blame for a large portion of the casualty lists containing the wounded and killed of the industrial army (cf. the annual factory reports). Similarly, lack of space, venti- lation, etc.a

As far back as October 1855, Leonard Horner complained about the resistance of very many manufacturers to the legal requirements concerning safety devices on horizontal shafts, although the danger was continually emphasised by accidents, many of them fatal, and al- though these safety devices did not cost much and did not interfere with production (Reports of Insp. of Fact., October 1855, p. 6).b In their resistance against these and other legal requirements the manu- facturers were openly seconded by the unpaid justices of the peace, who were themselves mostly manufacturers or friends of manufactur- ers, and handed down their decisions accordingly. What sort of ver- dicts these gentlemen handed down was revealed by Superior Judge

[^1]: a Ibid., Vol. 33, pp. 152-53. - b Cf. present edition, Vol. 35, p. 430.



Campbell, who said with reference to one of them, against which an appeal had been made to him:

"It is not an interpretation of the Act of Parliament, it is a repeal of the Act of Par- liament" (1. c , p. 11).

Horner states in the same report that in many factories labourers are not warned when machinery is about to be started up. Since there is always something to be done about machinery even when it is not operating, fingers and hands are always occupied with it, and acci- dents happen continually due to the mere omission of a warning sig- nal (1. c , p. 44). The manufacturers had formed a TRADES-UNION at the time to oppose factory legislation, the so-called NATIONAL ASSOCIATION

FOR THE AMENDMENT OF THE FACTORY LAWS in Manchester, which in March 1855 collected more than £50,000 by assessing 2 shillings per horse- power, to pay for the court proceedings against its members started by factory inspectors, and to conduct the cases in the name of the union. It was a matter of proving that KILLING was NO MURDER ' 9 when it occurred for the sake of profit. A factory inspector for Scotland, Sir John Kincaid, tells about a certain firm in Glasgow which used the iron scrap at its factory to make protective shields for all its machine- ry, the cost amounting to £9 Is. Joining the manufacturers' union would have cost it an assessment of £11 for its 110 horse-power, which was more than the cost of all its protective appliances. But the NATIONAL ASSOCIATION had been organised in 1854 for the express pur- pose of opposing the law which prescribed such protection. The man- ufacturers had not paid the least heed to it during the whole period from 1844 to 1854. When the factory inspectors, at instructions from Palmerston, then informed the manufacturers that the law would be enforced in earnest, the manufacturers instantly founded their asso- ciation, many of whose most prominent members were themselves justices of the peace and in this capacity were supposed to enforce the law. When in April 1855 the new Home Secretary, Sir George Grey, offered a compromise under which the government would be content with practically nominal safety appliances the Association indignant- ly rejected even this. In various lawsuits the famous engineer William Fairbairn threw the weight of his reputation behind the principle of economy and in defence of the freedom of capital which had been vio- lated. The head of factory inspection, Leonard Horner, was persecut- ed and maligned by the manufacturers in every conceivable manner.

[^1]: But the manufacturers did not rest until they obtained a writ of the COURT OF QUEENS BENCH, 20 according to which the Law of 1844 did





**[p. 94]**

not prescribe protective devices for horizontal shafts installed more than 7 feet above the ground and, finally, in 1856 they succeeded in securing an Act of Parliament2 ' entirely satisfactory to them in the circumstances, through the services of the bigot Wilson Patten, one of those pious souls whose display of religion is always ready to do the dirty work for the knights of the money-bag. This Act practically de- prived the labourers of all special protection and referred them to the common courts for compensation in the event of industrial accidents (sheer mockery in view of the excessive cost of English lawsuits), while it made it almost impossible for the manufacturer to lose the lawsuit by providing in a finely-worded clause for expert testimony. The result was a rapid increase of accidents. In the six months from May to Octo- ber 1858, Inspector Baker reported that accidents increased by 2 1 % compared with the preceding half-year. In his opinion 36.7% of these accidents might have been avoided. It is true that the number of acci- dents in 1858 and 1859 was considerably below that of 1845 and 1846. It was actually 29% less although the number of labourers in the industries subject to inspection had increased 20%. But what was the reason for this? In so far as this issue has been settled now (1865), it was mainly accomplished through the introduction of new machin- ery already provided with safety devices to which the manufacturer did not object because they cost him no extra expense. Furthermore, a few labourers succeeded in securing heavy damages for their lost arms, and had this judgment upheld even by the highest courts (Re- ports of Insp. of Fact., April 30, 1861, p. 31, ditto April 1862, p. 17).

So much for economy in devices protecting the life and limbs of labourers (among whom many children) against the dangers of handling and operating machinery.

Work in enclosed places generally. It is well known to what extent eco- nomy of space, and thus of buildings, crowds labourers into close quarters. In addition, there is also economy in means of ventilation. Coupled with the long working hours, the two cause a large increase in diseases of the respiratory organs, and an attendant increase in mortality. The following illustrations have been taken from Reports on Public Health, 6th report, 1863. This report was compiled by Dr. John Simon, well known from our Book I.a

Just as combination and co-operation of labour permits large-scale employment of machinery, concentration of means of production,

[^1]: a See present edition, Vol. 35, p. 468.





**[p. 331]**

and economy in their use, it is this very working together en masse in enclosed places and under conditions rather determined by ease of manufacture than by health requirements — it is this mass concentra- tion in one and the same workshop that acts, on the one hand, as a source of greater profits for the capitalist and, on the other, unless counteracted by a reduced number of hours and special precautions, as the cause of the squandering of the lives and health of the labourers. Dr. Simon formulates the following rule and backs it up with abundant statistics:

"In proportion as the people of a district are attracted to any collective indoor oc- cupation, in such proportion, other things being equal, the district death rate by lung diseases will be increased" (p. 23). The cause is bad ventilation. "And probably in all England there is no exception to the rule, that, in every district which has a large indoor industry, the increased mortality of the workpeople is such as to colour the death return of the whole district with a marked excess of lung disease" (p. 23).

Mortality figures for industries carried on in enclosed places, collected by the Board of Health in 1860 and 1861, indicate that for the same number of men between the ages of 15 and 55, for which the death rate from consumption and other pulmonary diseases in Eng- lish agricultural districts is 100, the death rate in Coventry is 163, in Blackburn and Skipton 167, Congleton and Bradford 168, Leicester 171, Leek 182, Macclesfield 184, Bolton 190, Nottingham 192, Roch- dale 193, Derby 198, Salford and Ashton-under-Lyne 203, Leeds 218, Preston 220, and Manchester 263 (p. 24). The following table presents a still more striking illustration.

[^1]: District Chief industry

[^2]: Deaths from pulmonary diseases

[^3]: between the ages of 15 and 25, per 100,000 population Chief industry

[^4]: Men Women

[^5]: Berkhampstead Leighton Buzzard Newport Pagnell Towcester Yeovil Leek Conglcton Macclesfield Healthy country

[^6]: Berkhampstead Leighton Buzzard Newport Pagnell Towcester Yeovil Leek Conglcton Macclesfield Healthy country

[^7]: Berkhampstead Leighton Buzzard Newport Pagnell Towcester Yeovil Leek Conglcton Macclesfield Healthy country

[^8]: Lace manufacture (women) Lace manufacture (women) Manufacture of gloves (mainly women) Silk industry (predominantly women) . Silk industry (predominantly women) . Silk industry (predominantly women) .



It shows the death rate for pulmonary diseases separately for both sexes between the ages of 15 and 25 computed for every 100,000 population. In the districts selected only women are employed in industries carried on in enclosed places, while men work in all other possible lines.3

In the silk districts, where more men are employed in the factory, their mortality is also higher. The death rate from consumption, etc., for both sexes, reveals, as the report says,

"the ATROCIOUS b sanitary circumstances under which much of our silk industry is conducted".

And it is in this same silk industry that the manufacturers, pleading exceptionally favourable and sanitary conditions in their establish- ments, demanded by way of an exception, and partially obtained, long working hours for children under 13 years of age (Buch I, Kap. VIII, 6, S. 296/286c).

"Probably no industry which has yet been investigated has afforded a worse picture than that which Dr. Smith gives of tailoring: — 'Shops vary much in their sanitary conditions, but almost universally are overcrowded and ill-ventilated, and in a high degree unfavourable to health Such rooms are necessarily warm; but when the gas is lit, as during the day-time on foggy days, and at night during the winter, the heat increases to 80° and even to upwards of 90°' (Fahrenheit, = 27-33° C), 'causing pro- fuse perspiration, and condensation of vapour upon the panes of glass, so that it runs down in streams or drops from the roof, and the operatives are compelled to keep some windows open, at whatever risk to themselves of taking cold.' And he gives the follow- ing account of what he found in 16 of the most important West End shops.— 'The largest cubic space in these ill-ventilated rooms allowed to each operative is 270 feet, and the least 105 feet, and in the whole averages only 156 feet per man. In one room, with a gallery running round it, and lighted only from the roof, from 92 to upwards of 100 men are employed, where a large number of gaslights burn, and where the urinals are in the closest proximity, the cubic space does not exceed 150 feet per man. In another room, which can only be called a kennel in a yard, lighted from the roof, and ventilated by a small skylight opening, five to six men work in a space of 112 cubic feet per man.' Tailors, in those ATROCl OUSd workshops which Dr. Smith describes, work generally for about 12 or 13 hours a day, and at some times the work will be con- tinued for 15 or 16 hours" (pp. 25, 26, 28).

[^1]: a Cf. present edition, Vol. 33, pp. 475-76. - b In the 1894 German edition this English word is given in parentheses after its German equivalent. - ç English edition: Ch. X, 6 (see present edition, Vol. 35, pp. 297-98). - d In the 1894 German edition this English word is given in parentheses after its German equivalent.





**[p. 97]**

Number of persons Branches of industry and locality

Death rate per 100,000 between the ages of

employed

Branches of industry and locality

25-35 35-45 45-55

958,265

22,301 men and 1 12,377 women J 13,803

Agriculture, England and Wales

Tailoring, London

Type-setters and printers,

743

958

894

805

1,262

1,747

1,145

2,093

2,367

743

958

894

805

1,262

1,747

(p. 30). It must be noted, and has in fact been remarked by John Si- mon, chief of the Medical Department and author of the report, that the mortality rate for tailors, type-setters, and printers of London be- tween the ages of 25 and 35 was cited lower than the real figure, be- cause London employers in both lines of business have a large num- ber of young people (probably up to 30 years of age) from the country engaged as apprentices and "IMPROVERS", i. e., men getting additional training. These swell the number of hands for which the London in- dustrial death rates are computed. But they do not proportionally contribute to the number of deaths in London because their stay there is only temporary. If they fall ill during this period, they return to their homes in the country, where their death is registered if they die. This circumstance affects the earlier ages still more and renders the London death rates for these age groups completely valueless as indexes of the ill-effects of industry on health (p. 30). The case of the type-setters is similar to that of the tailors. In addi- tion to lack of ventilation, to poisoned air, etc., there is still nightwork to be mentioned. Their regular working time is 12 to 13 hours, sometimes 15 to 16.

[^1]: "Great heat and foulness which begin when the gas-jets are lit. It not infre- quently happens that fumes from a foundry, or foul odours from machinery or sinks, rise from the lower room, and aggravate the evils of the upper one. The heated air of the lower rooms always tends to heat the upper by warming the floor, and when the rooms are low, and the consumption of gas great, this is a serious evil, and one only surpassed in the case where the steam-boilers are placed in the lower room, and supply unwished- for heat to the whole house As a general expression, it may be stated that universally the ventilation is defective, and quite insufficient to remove the heat and the products of the combustion of gas in the evening and during^the night, and that in many offices, and particularly in those made from dwelling-houses, the condition is most deplorable. And in some offices (especially those of weekly newspapers) there will be work — work too, in which boys between 12 and 16 years of age take equal part — for almost uninterrupted periods of two days and a night at a time; — while, in other



printing-offices which lay themselves out for the doing of 'urgent' business, Sunday gives no relaxation to the workman, and his working days become seven instead of six in every week" (pp. 26, 28).

The MILLINERS and DRESSMAKERS8 have already attracted our atten- tion in Book I (Kap. VIII, 3, S. 249/241) b in respect to overwork. Their workshops are described in our report by Dr. Ord. Even if bet- ter during the day, they become overheated, FOUL, C and unhealthy during the hours in which gas is burned. Dr. Ord found in 34 shops of the better sort that the average number of cubic feet per worker was as follows:

" In four cases more than 500, in four other cases from 400 to 500, in seven others from 200 to 250, in four others from 150 to 200, and in nine others only from 100 to 150. The largest of these allowances would but be scanty for continuous work, unless the space were thoroughly well ventilated; and, except with extraordinary ventilation, its atmosphere could not be tolerably wholesome during gas-light."

And here is Dr. Ord's remark about one of the minor workshops which he visited, operated for the account of a MIDDLEMAN0:

"One room, area in cubical feet, 1,280; persons present, 14; area to each, in cubical feet, 91.5. The women here were weary-looking and squalid; their earnings were stated to be 7s. to 15s. a week, and their tea. Hours 8 a. m. to 8 p. m. The small room into which these 14 persons were crowded was ill-ventilated. There were two movable windows and a fire-place, but the latter was blocked up, and there was no special venti- lation of any kind" (p. 27).

The same report states with reference to the overwork of milliners and dressmakers:

[^1]: " The overwork of the young women in fashionable dressmaking establishments does not, for more than about four months of the year, prevail in that monstrous degree which has on many occasions excited momentary public surprise and indignation; but for the indoor hands during these months it will, as a rule, be of full 14 hours a day, and will, when there is pressure, be, for days together, of 17 or even 18 hours. At other times of the year the work of the indoor hands ranges probably from 10 to 14 hours; and uni- formly the hours for outdoor hands are 12 or 13. For mantle-makers, collar-makers, shirt-makers, and various other classes of needleworkers (including persons who work at the sewing-machine) the hours spent in the common workroom are fewer — general- ly not more than 10 to 12 hours; but, says Dr. Ord, the regular hours of work are sub- ject to considerable extension in certain houses at certain times, by the practice of work- ing extra hours for extra pay, and in other houses by the practice of taking work away

[^2]: a In the 1894 German edition these English words are given in parentheses after their German equivalents. - b English edition: Ch. X, 3 (see present edition, Vol. 35, pp. 261-62). - c In the 1894 German edition this English word is given in parentheses after its German equivalent.



