---
Volume: 37
Document_Title: "I. Fluctuations in the Price of Raw Materials, and Their Direct Effects on the Rate of Profit "
Page_Range: "116-122"
---

# I. Fluctuations in the Price of Raw Materials, and Their Direct Effects on the Rate of Profit 



**[p. 106]**

permits the savings derived from co-operative productive consump- tion. Finally, it is only the experience of the combined labourer which discovers and reveals the where and how of saving, the simplest methods of applying the discoveries, and the ways to overcome the practical frictions arising from carrying out the theory — in its application to the production process — etc.

Incidentally, a distinction should be made between universal labour and co-operative labour. Both kinds play their role in the process of production, both flow one into the other, but both are also differentiated. Universal labour is all scientific labour, all discovery and all invention. This labour depends partly on the co-operation of the living, and partly on the utilisation of the labours of those who have gone before. Co-operative labour, on the other hand, is the direct co-operation of individuals.

The foregoing is corroborated by frequent observation, to wit:

1 ) The great difference in the cost of the first model of a new ma- chine and that of its reproduction (regarding which, see Ure a and Babbageb).

2) The far greater cost of operating an ESTABLISHMENT based on a new invention as compared to later ESTABLISHMENTS arising out of their ruins, ex suis ossibus. This is so very true that the trail-blazers generally go bankrupt, and only those who later buy the buildings, machinery, etc., at a cheaper price, make money out of it. It is, there- fore, generally the most worthless and miserable sort of money capital- ists who draw the greatest profit out of all new developments of the universal labour of the human spirit and their social application through combined labour.

C h a p t e r VI

The assumption in this case, as in previous ones, is that no change takes place in the rate of surplus value. It is necessary to analyse

[^1]: THE EFFECT OF PRICE FLUCTUATIONS

[^2]: I. FLUCTUATIONS IN THE PRICE OF RAW MATERIALS, AND THEIR DIRECT EFFECTS ON THE RATE OF PROFIT

[^3]: a See this volume, p.84. - b Ch. Babbage, Traité sur l'économie des machines et des man- ufactures, Paris, 1833, pp. 377-78 (cf. present edition, Vol. 33, p. 350 and Vol. 35, p. 408).





**[p. 107]**

the case in its pure form. However, it might be possible for a specific capital, whose rate of surplus value remains unchanged, to employ an increasing or decreasing number of labourers, in consequence of contraction or EXPANSION caused by such fluctuations in the price of raw materials as we are to analyse here. In that case the quantity of surplus value might vary, while the rate of surplus value remains the same. Yet this should also be disregarded here as a side-issue. If improvements of machinery and changes in the price of raw materials simultaneously influence either the number of labourers employed by a definite capital, or the level of wages, one has but to put together 1) the effect caused by the variations of constant capital on the rate of profit, and 2) the effect caused by variations in wages on the rate of profit. The result is then obtained of itself.

But in general, it should be noted here, as in the previous case, that if variations take place, either due to savings in constant capital, or due to fluctuations in the price of raw materials, they always affect the rate of profit, even if they leave the wage, hence the rate and amount of surplus value, untouched. They change the magnitude of

V C in s 7, , and thus the value of the whole fraction. It is therefore immaterial, in this case as well — in contrast to what we found in our analysis of surplus value — in which sphere of production these variations occur; whether or not the production branches affected by them produce necessities for labourers, or constant capital for the production of such necessities. The deductions made here are equally valid for variations occurring in the production of luxury articles, and by luxury articles we here mean all production that does not serve the reproduction of labour power.

The raw materials here include auxiliary materials as well, such as indigo, coal, gas, etc. Furthermore, so far as machinery is concerned under this head, its own raw material consists of iron, wood, leather, etc. Its own price is therefore affected by fluctuations in the price of raw materials used in its construction. To the extent that its price is raised through fluctuations, either in the price of the raw materials of which it consists, or of the auxiliary materials consumed in its opera- tion, the rate of profit falls pro tanto. And vice versa.

In the following analysis we shall confine ourselves to fluctuations in the price of raw materials, not so far as they go to make up the raw materials of machinery serving as means of labour or as auxiliary materials applied in its operation, but in so far as they are raw mate-



**[p. C]**

rials entering the process in which commodities are produced. There is just one thing to be noted here: the natural wealth in iron, coal, wood, etc., which are the principal elements used in the construction and operation of machinery, presents itself here as a natural fertility of capital and is a factor determining the rate of profit irrespective of the high or low level of wages.

Since the rate of profit is ^r, or c_jrv~, it is evident that everything causing a variation in the magnitude of c, and thereby of C, must also bring about a variation in the rate of profit, even if s and v, and their mutual relation, remain unaltered. Now, raw materials are one of the principal components of constant capital. Even in industries which consume no actual raw materials, these enter the picture as auxiliary materials or components of machinery, etc., and their price fluctua- tions thus pro tanto influence the rate of profit. Should the price of

S S S raw material fall by an amount = d, then ^ , or c_pv , becomes ^— d , or ,—^ ,-,-, . Thus, the rate of profit rises. Conversely, if the price of raw material rises, then 77 > or -—r., ' becomes >-,V ; ' o r 1 T~J\ . " ' a n d

' c-t-v C + d (c + d ) + v the rate of profit falls. Other conditions being equal, the rate of profit, therefore, falls and rises inversely to the price of raw material. This shows, among other things, how important the low price of raw mate- rial is for industrial countries, even if fluctuations in the price of raw materials are not accompanied by variations in the sales sphere of the product, and thus quite aside from the relation of demand to supply. It follows furthermore that foreign trade influences the rate of profit, regardless of its influence on wages through the cheapening of the ne- cessities of life. The point is that it affects the prices of raw or auxiliary materials consumed in industry and agriculture. It is due to an as yet imperfect understanding of the nature of the rate of profit and of its specific difference from the rate of surplus value that, on the one hand, economists (like Torrensa) wrongly explain the marked influ- ence of the prices of raw material on the rate of profit, which they note through practical experience, and that, on the other, economists like Ricardo,b who cling to general principles, do not recognise the influence of, say, world trade on the rate of profit.

[^1]: a R. Torrens, An Essay on the Production of Wealth, London, 1821, p. 28 et seq. Cf. present edition, Vol. 32, pp. 262-63. - b D. Ricardo, On the Principles of Political Economy, and Taxation, Third edition, London, 1821, pp. 131-38. Cf. present edition, Vol. 32, pp. 71-72.





**[p. 109]**

This makes clear the great importance to industry of the elimina- tion or reduction of customs duties on raw materials. The rational de- velopment of the protective tariff system made the utmost reduction of import duties on raw materials one of its cardinal principles. This, and the abolition of the duty on corn,22 was the main object of the English FREE-TRADERS, who were primarily concerned with having the duty on cotton lifted as well.

The use of flour in the cotton industry may serve as an illustration of the importance of a price reduction for an article which is not strictly a raw material but an auxiliary and at the same time one of the principal elements of nourishment. As far back as 1837, R. H. Greg '3» calculated that the 100,000 power-looms and 250,000 hand-looms then operating in the cotton-mills of Great Britain an- nually consumed 41 million lbs of flour to smooth the warp. He add- ed a third of this quantity for bleaching and other processes, and es- timated the total annual value of the flour so consumed at £342,000 for the preceding 10 years. A comparison with flour prices on the con- tinent showed that the higher flour price forced upon manufacturers by corn tariffs alone amounted to £ 170,000 per year. Greg estimated the sum at a minimum of £200,000 for 1837 and cited a firm for which the flour price difference amounted to £1,000 annually. As a result,

The Corn Laws were repealed. So were the duties on cotton and other raw materials. But no sooner had this been accomplished than the opposition of the manufacturers to the Ten Hours' Bill2 3 became more violent than ever. And when the ten-hour factory day neverthe- less became a law soon after, the first result was a general attempt to reduce wages.

The value of raw and auxiliary materials passes entirely and all at one time into the value of the product in the manufacture of which they are consumed, while the elements of fixed capital transfer their value to the product only gradually in proportion to their wear and tear. It follows that the price of the product is influenced far more by the price of raw materials than by that of fixed capital, although the

[^1]: "great manufacturers, thoughtful, calculating men of business, have said that ten hours' labour would be quite sufficient, if the Corn Laws were repealed" (Reports of Insp. of Fact., Oct. 1848, p. 98).

[^2]: 13) The Factory Question and the Ten Hours' Bill by R. H. Greg, London, 1837, p. 115.





**[p. 110]**

rate of profit is determined by the total value of the capital applied no matter how much of it is consumed in the making of the product. But it is evident — although we merely mention it in passing, since we here still assume that commodities are sold at their values, so that price fluctuations caused by competition do not as yet concern us — that the expansion or contraction of the market depends on the price of the individual commodity and is inversely proportional to the rise or fall of this price. It actually develops, therefore, that the price of the finished product does not rise in proportion to that of the raw ma- terial, and that it does not fall in proportion to that of raw material. Consequently, the rate of profit falls lower in one instance, and rises higher in the other than would have been the case if commodities were sold at their value.

Further, the quantity and value of the employed machinery grows with the development of the productive power of labour but not in the same proportion as this productive power, i. e., not in the propor- tion in which this machinery increases its output. In those branches of industry, therefore, which do consume raw materials, i.e., in which the subject of labour is itself a product of previous labour, the grow- ing productive power of labour is expressed precisely in the propor- tion in which a larger quantity of raw material absorbs a definite quantity of labour, hence in the increasing amount of raw material converted in, say, one hour into products, or processed into commod- ities. The value of raw material, therefore, forms an ever-growing component of the value of the commodity product in proportion to the development of the productive power of labour, not only because it passes wholly into this latter value, but also because in every ali- quot part of the aggregate product the portion representing deprecia- tion of machinery and the portion formed by the newly added la- bour— both continually decrease. Owing to this falling tendency, the other portion of the value representing raw material increases pro- portionally, unless this increase is counterbalanced by a proportion- ate decrease in the value of the raw material arising from the growing productivity of the labour employed in its own production.

Further, raw and auxiliary materials, just like wages, form parts of the circulating capital and must, therefore, be continually replaced in their entirety through the sale of the product, while only the depre- ciation is to be renewed in the case of machinery, and first of all in the form of a reserve fund. It is, moreover, in no way essential for each individual sale to contribute its share to this reserve fund, so long as



**[p. 111]**

the total annual sales contribute their annual share. This shows again how a rise in the price of raw material can curtail or arrest the entire process of reproduction if the price realised by the sale of the commod- ities should not suffice to replace all the elements of these commodi- ties. Or, it may make it impossible to continue the process on the scale required by its technical basis, so that only a part of the machinery will remain in operation, or all the machinery will work for only a fraction of the usual time.

Finally, the expense incurred through waste varies in direct pro- portion to the price fluctuations of the raw material, rising when they rise and falling when they fall. But there is a limit here as well. In 1850 it was still maintained:

"One source of considerable loss arising from an advance in the price of the raw material would hardly occur to any one but a practical spinner, viz., that from waste. I am informed that when cotton advances, the cost to the spinner, of the lower qualities especially, is increased in a ratio beyond the advance actually paid, because the waste made in spinning coarse yarns is fully 15 per cent; and this rate, while it causes a loss of~2 d. per lb. on cotton at 3 2~d. per lb., brings up the loss to Id. per lb. when cotton advances to 7d" (Reports of Insp. of Fact., April 1850, p. 17).

But when, as a result of the American Civil War, the price of cotton rose to a level unequalled in almost 100 years, the report read dif- ferently:

[^1]: "The price now given for waste, and its re-introduction in the factory in the share of cotton waste, go some way to compensate for the difference in the loss by waste, between Surat cotton and American cotton, about 12 2 P e r cent.

[^2]: "The waste in working Surat cotton being 25 per cent, the cost of the cotton to the spinner is enhanced one-fourth before he has manufactured it. The loss by waste used not to be of much moment when American cotton was 5d. or 6d. per lb., for it did not

[^3]: 3 exceed 4 d. per lb., but it is now of great importance when upon every lb. of cotton which costs 2s. there is a loss by waste equal to 6d." 14' (Reports of Insp. of Fact., Oct. 1863, p. 106).

[^4]: I4) The report errs in the final sentence. Instead of 6d. it should be 3d. for loss through waste. This loss amounts to 25% in the case of Surat, and only 12'/' to 15% in the case of American cotton, and this latter is meant, the same percentage having been correctly calculated for the price of 5 to 6d. It is true, however, that also in the case of American cotton brought to Europe during the latter years of the Civil War the pro- portion of waste often rose considerably higher than before.— F. E.



