---
Volume: 37
Document_Title: "I. Causes Implying a Change in the Price of Production "
Page_Range: "212-214"
---

# I. Causes Implying a Change in the Price of Production 



**[p. 202]**

working day remains the same, and also the prices of all the necessary means of subsistence. In these circumstances a fall in wages is possible only if they stood higher than the normal price of labour, or if they are depressed below this price. The way in which the matter is modified if the rise or fall of wages is due to a change in value, and consequently the price of production of commodities usually consumed by the la- bourer, will be analysed at some length in the part dealing with ground rent. At this point, however, the following remarks are to be made once and for all:

Should the rise or fall in wages be due to a change in the value of the necessities of life, a modification of the foregoing findings can take place only to the extent that commodities, whose change of price raises or lowers the variable capital, also go into the constant capital as constituent elements and therefore affect more than just the wages alone. But if they affect only wages, the above analysis contains all that needs to be said.

In this entire chapter, the establishment of the general rate of profit and the average profit, and consequently, the transformation of val- ues into prices of production, are assumed as given. The question merely was, how a general rise or fall in wages affected the assumed prices of production of commodities. This is but a very secondary question compared with the other important points analysed in this part. But it is the only relevant question treated by Ricardo, and, as we shall see,32 he treated it one-sidedly and unsatisfactorily.

C h a p t e r XII

There are just two causes that can change the price of production of a commodity.

First. A change in the general rate of profit. This can solely be due to a change in the average rate of surplus value, or, if the average rate of surplus value remains the same, to a change in the ratio of the sum of the appropriated surplus values to the sum of the advanced total social capital.

If the change in the rate of surplus value is not due to a depression

[^1]: SUPPLEMENTARY REMARKS

[^2]: I. CAUSES IMPLYING A CHANGE IN THE PRICE OF PRODUCTION





**[p. 203]**

of wages below normal, or their rise above normal — and movements ofthat kind are to be regarded merely as oscillations — it can only oc- cur either through a rise, or fall, in the value of labour power, the one being just as impossible as the other unless there is a change in the productivity of the labour producing means of subsistence, i. e., in the value of commodities consumed by the labourer.

Or, through a change in the proportion of the sum of appropriated surplus values to the advanced total capital of society. Since the change in this case is not caused by the rate of surplus value, it must be caused by the total capital, or rather its constant part. The mass of this part, technically considered, increases or decreases in proportion to the quantity of labour power bought by the variable capital, and the mass of its value thus increases or decreases with the increase or decrease of its own mass. It also increases or decreases, therefore, proportionately to the mass of the value of the variable capital. If the same labour sets more constant capital in motion, it has become more productive. If the reverse, then less productive. Thus, there has been a change in the productivity of labour, and there must have occurred a change in the value of certain commodities.

The following law, then, applies to both cases: If the price of pro- duction of a commodity changes in consequence of a change in the general rate of profit, its own value may have remained unchanged. However, a change must have occurred in the value of other commod- ities.

Second. The general rate of profit remains unchanged. In this case the price of production of a commodity can change only if its own value has changed. This may be due to more, or less, labour being required to reproduce the commodity in question, either because of a change in the productivity of labour which produces this commod- ity in its final form, or of the labour which produces those commodi- ties that go into its production. The price of production of cotton yarn may fall, either because raw cotton is produced cheaper than before, or because the labour of spinning has become more productive due to improved machinery.

The price of production, as we have seen, = k + p, equal to cost price plus profit. This, however, = k-f-kp', in which k, the cost price, is a variable magnitude, which changes for different spheres of production and is everywhere equal to the value of the constant and variable capital consumed in the production of the commodity, and p' is the average rate of profit in percentage form. If k = 200,

