---
Volume: 37
Document_Title: "II. Price of Production of Commodities of Average Composition "
Page_Range: "214-215"
---

# II. Price of Production of Commodities of Average Composition 

and p' = 20%, the price of production k + kp' = 200 + + 200- ~7^. = 200 + 40 = 240. This price of production may clearly remain the same, in spite of a change in the value of the commodities. All changes in the price of production of commodities are reduced, in the last analysis, to changes in value. But not all changes in the value of commodities need express themselves in changes in the price of production. The price of production is not determined by the value of any one commodity alone, but by the aggregate value of all com- modities. A change in commodity A may therefore be balanced by an opposite change in commodity B, so that the general relation remains the same.

II. PRICE OF PRODUCTION OF COMMODITIES OF AVERAGE COMPOSITION

We have seen how a deviation in prices of production from values arises from:

1 ) adding the average profit instead of the surplus value contained in a commodity to its cost price;

2) the price of production, which so deviates from the value of a commodity, entering into the cost price of other commodities as one of its elements, so that the cost price of a commodity may already contain a deviation from the value of the means of production con- sumed by it, quite aside from a deviation of its own which may arise through a difference between the average profit and the surplus value.

It is therefore possible that even the cost price of commodities pro- duced by capitals of average composition may differ from the sum of the values of the elements which make up this component of their price of production. Suppose, the average composition is 80c + 20v. Now, it is possible that in the actual capitals of this composition 80c may be greater or smaller than the value of c, i. e., the constant capi- tal, because this c may be made up of commodities whose price of production differs from their value. In the same way, 20v might di- verge from its value if the consumption of the wage includes commod- ities whose price of production diverges from their value; in which case the labourer would work a longer, or shorter, time to buy them back (to replace them) and would thus perform more, or less, neces- sary labour than would be required if the price of production of such necessities of life coincided with their value.

