---
Volume: 37
Document_Title: "III. Cheapening of Elements of Constant Capital "
Page_Range: "244-245"
---

# III. Cheapening of Elements of Constant Capital 



**[p. 234]**

II. DEPRESSION OF WAGES BELOW THE VALUE OK LABOUR POWER

This is mentioned here only empirically, since, like many other things which might be enumerated, it has nothing to do with the gen- eral analysis of capital, but belongs in an analysis of competition, which is not presented in this work.l However, it is one of the most important factors checking the tendency of the rate of profit to fall.

III. CHEAPENING OF ELEMENTS OF CONSTANT CAPITAL

Everything said in Part I of this book about factors which raise the rate of profit while the rate of surplus value remains the same, or regardless of the rate of surplus value, belongs here. Hence also, with respect to the total capital, that the value of the constant capital does not increase in the same proportion as its material volume. For instance, the quantity of cotton worked up by a single European spin- ner in a modern factory has grown tremendously compared to the quantity formerly worked up by a European spinner with a spinning- wheel. Yet the value of the worked-up cotton has not grown in the same proportion as its mass. The same applies to machinery and oth- er fixed capital. In short, the same development which increases the mass of the constant capital in relation to the variable reduces the value of its elements as a result of the increased productivity of la- bour, and therefore prevents the value of constant capital, although it continually increases, from increasing at the same rate as its material volume, i.e., the material volume of the means of production set in motion by the same amount of labour power. In isolated cases the mass of the elements of constant capital may even increase, while its value remains the same, or even falls.

The foregoing is bound up with the depreciation of existing capital (that is, of its material elements), which occurs with the development of industry. This is another continually operating factor which checks the fall of the rate of profit, although it may under certain circum- stances encroach on the mass of profit by reducing the mass of the cap- ital yielding a profit. This again shows that the same influences which tend to make the rate of profit fall, also moderate the effects of this tendency.

