---
Volume: 37
Document_Title: "V. Foreign Trade "
Page_Range: "245-248"
---

# V. Foreign Trade 



**[p. 235]**

IV. RELATIVE OVERPOPULATION

Its propagation is inseparable from, and hastened by, the develop- ment of the productivity of labour as expressed by a fall in the rate of profit. The relative overpopulation becomes so much more apparent in a country, the more the capitalist mode of production is developed in it. This, again, is the reason why, on the one hand, the more or less imperfect subordination of labour to capital continues in many branches of production, and continues longer than seems at first glance compatible with the general stage of development. This is due to the cheapness and abundance of disposable or unemployed wage la- bourers, and to the greater resistance, which some branches of pro- duction, by their very nature, render to the transformation of manual work into machine production. On the other hand, new lines of pro- duction are opened up, especially for the production of luxuries, and it is these that take as their basis this relative overpopulation, often set free in other lines of production through the increase of their constant capital. These new lines start out predominantly with living labour, and by degrees pass through the same evolution as the other lines of production. In either case the variable capital makes up a considerable portion of the total capital and wages are below the average, so that both the rate and mass of surplus value in these lines of production are unusually high. Since the general rate of profit is formed by level- ling the rates of profit in the individual branches of production, how- ever, the same factor which brings about the tendency in the rate of profit to fall, again produces a counterbalance to this tendency and more or less paralyses its effects.

Since foreign trade partly cheapens the elements of constant capi- tal, and partly the necessities of life into which the variable capital is converted, it tends to raise the rate of profit by increasing the rate of surplus value and lowering the value of constant capital. It generally acts in this direction by permitting an expansion of the scale of pro- duction. It thereby hastens the process of accumulation, on the one hand, but causes the variable capital to shrink in relation to the con- stant capital, on the other, and thus hastens a fall in the rate of profit. In the same way, the expansion of foreign trade, although the basis of the capitalist mode of production in its infancy, has become its own

[^1]: V. FOREIGN TRADE





**[p. 236]**

product, however, with the further progress of the capitalist mode of production, through the innate necessity of this mode of production, its need for an ever-expanding market. Here we see once more the dual nature of this effect. (Ricardo has entirely overlooked this side of foreign trade.")

Another question — really beyond the scope of our analysis ' be- cause of its special nature — is this: Is the general rate of profit raised by the higher rate of profit produced by capital invested in foreign, and particularly colonial, trade?

Capitals invested in foreign trade can yield a higher rate of profit, because, in the first place, there is competition with commodities pro- duced in other countries with inferior production facilities, so that the more advanced country sells its commodities above their value even though cheaper than the competing countries. In so far as the labour of the more advanced country is here realised as labour of a higher specific weight, the rate of profit rises, because labour which has not been paid as being of a higher quality is sold as such. The same may obtain in relation to the country, to which commodities are exported and to that from which commodities are imported; namely, the latter may offer more objectified labour in natura than it receives, and yet thereby receive commodities cheaper than it could produce them. Just as a manufacturer who employs a new invention before it be- comes generally used, undersells his competitors and yet sells his com- modity above its individual value, that is, realises the specifically higher productiveness of the labour he employs as surplus labour. He thus secures a surplus profit. As concerns capitals invested in colonies, etc., on the other hand, they may yield higher rates of profit for the sim- ple reason that the rate of profit is higher there due to backward devel- opment, and likewise the exploitation of labour, because of the use of slaves, coolies, etc. It is hard to see why these higher rates of profit, real- ised by capitals invested in certain lines and sent home by them, should not, unless monopolies stand in the way, enter here into the equalisation of the general rate of profit and thus tend, pro tanto, to raise it.36) It is

[^1]: 361 Adam Smith b was right in this respect, contrary to Ricardo, who said: "They contend that the equality of profits will be brought about by the general rise of profits; and I am of the opinion that the profits of the favoured trade will speedily submit to the general level." [Works, ed. by Mac Culloch, p. 73.)

[^2]: a See D. Ricardo, On the Principles of Political Economy, and Taxation, 3rd edition, Ch. VII; cf. present edition, Vol. 32, pp. 73-74. - b An Inquiry into the Nature and Causes of the Wealth of Nations, Vol. I, London, 1776, Ch. 9.





**[p. 237]**

hard to see this in particular if these spheres of investment of capital are subject to the laws of'free competition. What Ricardo fancies, in contrast, is mainly this: with the higher prices realised abroad com- modities are bought there and sent home. These commodities are thus sold on the home market, so that the result can at best be but a temporary extra advantage for these favoured spheres of produc- tion over others. This illusion falls away as soon as it is divested of its money form. The favoured country recovers more labour in exchange for less labour, although this difference, this excess is pocketed, as in any exchange between labour and capital, by a certain class. Since the rate of profit is higher, therefore, because it is generally higher in a colonial country, it may, provided natural conditions are favourable, go hand in hand with low commodity prices. A lev- elling takes place but not a levelling to the old level, as Ricardo feels.

This same foreign trade develops the capitalist mode of production in the home country, which implies the decrease of variable capital in relation to constant, and, on the other hand, causes overproduction in respect to foreign markets, so that in the long run it again has an opposite effect.

We have thus seen in a general way that the same influences which produce a tendency in the general rate of profit to fall, also call forth countereffects, which hamper, retard, and partly paralyse this fall. The latter do not do away with the law, but impair its effect. Other- wise, it would not be the fall of the general rate of profit, but rather its relative slowness, that would be incomprehensible. Thus, the law acts only as a tendency. And it is only under certain circum- stances and only after long periods that its effects become strikingly pronounced.

Before we go on, in order to avoid misunderstandings, we should recall two, repeatedly treated, points.

First: The same process which brings about a cheapening of com- modities in the course of the development of the capitalist mode of production, causes a change in the organic composition of the social capital invested in the production of commodities, and consequently lowers the rate of profit. We must be careful, therefore, not to identify the reduction in the relative cost of an individual commodity, includ- ing that portion of it which represents wear and tear of machinery, with the rise in the value of the constant in relation to variable capi- tal, although, conversely, every reduction in the relative cost of the

