---
Volume: 37
Document_Title: "VI. The Increase of Stock Capital "
Page_Range: "248-249"
---

# VI. The Increase of Stock Capital 



**[p. 238]**

constant capital assuming the volume of its material elements remains the same, or increases, tends to raise the rate of profit, i. e., to reduce pro tanto the value of the constant capital in relation to the shrinking proportions of the employed variable capital.

Second: The fact that the newly added living labour contained in the individual commodities, which taken together make up the prod- uct of capital, decreases in relation to the materials they contain and the means of labour consumed by them; the fact, therefore, that an ever-decreasing quantity of newly added living labour is objectified in them, because their production requires less labour with the develop- ment of the social productiveness—this fact does not affect the ratio, in which the living labour contained in the commodities breaks up into paid and unpaid labour. Quite the contrary. Although the total quantity of newly added living labour contained in the commod- ities decreases, the unpaid portion increases in relation to the paid portion, either by an absolute or a relative shrinking of the paid por- tion; for the same mode of production which reduces the total quan- tity of newly added living labour in a commodity is accompanied by a rise in the absolute and relative surplus value. The tendency of the rate of profit to fall is bound up with a tendency of the rate of surplus value to rise, hence with a tendency for the rate of labour exploitation to rise. Nothing is more absurd, for this reason, than to explain the fall in the rate of profit by a rise in the rate of wages, although this may be the case by way of an exception.3 Statistics is not able to make actual analyses of the rates of wages in different epochs and countries, until the conditions which shape the rate of profit are thoroughly understood. The rate of profit does not fall because labour becomes less productive, but because it becomes more productive. Both the rise in the rate of surplus value and the fall in the rate of profit are but specific forms through which growing productivity of labour is ex- pressed under capitalism.

The foregoing five points may still be supplemented by the follow- ing, which, however, cannot be more fully treated for the present. With the progress of capitalist production, which goes hand in hand

[^1]: VI. THE INCREASE OF STOCK CAPITAL

[^2]: a See D. Ricardo, op. cit., pp. 120-21; cf. present edition, Vol. 32, p. 73.



