---
Volume: 37
Document_Title: "I. General "
Page_Range: "249-255"
---

# I. General 



**[p. 239]**

with accelerated accumulation, a portion of capital is calculated and applied only as interest-bearing capital. Not in the sense in which every capitalist who lends out capital is satisfied with interest, while the industrial capitalist pockets the investor's profit. This has no bear- ing on the level of the general rate of profit, because for the latter profit = interest + profit of all kinds + ground rent, the division into these particular categories being immaterial to it. But in the sense that these capitals, although invested in large productive enterprises, yield only large or small amounts of interest, so-called dividends, after all costs have been deducted. In railways, for instance. These do not therefore go into levelling the general rate of profit, because they yield a lower than average rate of profit. If they did enter into it, the general rate of profit would fall much lower. Theoretically, they may be included in the calculation, and the result would then be a lower rate of profit than the seemingly existing rate, which is decisive for the capitalists; it would be lower, because the constant capital particularly in these enterprises is largest in its relation to the variable capital.

C h a p t e r XV

We have seen in the first part of this book that the rate of profit expresses the rate of surplus value always lower than it actually is. We have just seen that even a rising rate of surplus value has a tendency to express itself in a falling rate of profit. The rate of profit would equal the rate of surplus value only if c = 0, i. e., if the total capital were paid out in wages. A falling rate of profit does not express a fall- ing rate of surplus value, unless the proportion of the value of the constant capital to the quantity of labour power which sets it in motion remains unchanged or the amount of labour power increases in relation to the value of the constant capital.

On the plea of analysing the rate of profit, Ricardo actually ana- lyses the rate of surplus value alone, and this only on the assumption

[^1]: EXPOSITION OF THE INTERNAL CONTRADICTIONS OF THE LAW

[^2]: I. GENERAL



that the working day is intensively and extensively a constant magni- tude/

A fall in the rate of profit and accelerated accumulation are differ- ent expressions of the same process only in so far as both reflect the development of the productive power. Accumulation, in turn, has- tens the fall of the rate of profit, inasmuch as it implies concentration of labour on a large scale, and thus a higher composition of capital. On the other hand, a fall in the rate of profit again hastens the con- centration of capital and its centralisation through expropriation of minor capitalists, the few direct producers who still have anything left to be expropriated. This accelerates accumulation with regard to mass, although the rate of accumulation falls with the rate of profit.

On the other hand, the rate of self-expansion of the total capital, the rate of profit, being the goad of capitalist production (just as self- expansion of capital is its only purpose), its fall checks the formation of new independent capitals and thus appears as a threat to the devel- opment of the capitalist production process. It breeds overproduc- tion, speculation, crises, and surplus capital alongside surplus popula- tion. Those economists, therefore, who, like Ricardo, regard the capi- talist mode of production as absolute, feel at this point that it creates a barrier to itself, and for this reason attribute the barrier to Nature (in the theory of rent), not to production. But the main thing about their horror of the falling rate of profit is the feeling that the capitalist mode of production meets in the development of its productive forces a barrier which has nothing to do with the production of wealth as such; and this peculiar barrier testifies to the limitations and to the merely historical, transitory character of the capitalist mode of pro- duction; testifies that for the production of wealth, it is not an absolute mode, moreover, that at a certain stage it rather conflicts with its further development.b

True, Ricardo and his school considered only industrial profit, which includes interest. But the rate of ground rent likewise has a ten- dency to fall, although its absolute mass increases, and may also in- crease proportionately more than industrial profit. (See Ed. West,' who developed the law of ground rent before Ricardo). If we consider the total social capital C, and use p, for the industrial profit that

[^1]: a Cf. present edition, Vol. 32, pp. 44, 51-52 and 60-67. - b Ibid., Vol. 33, p. 114. - c [E. West,] Essay on the Application of Capital to Land, London, 1815; cf. present edition, Vol. 31, pp. 344-45.





**[p. 241]**

remains after deducting interest and ground rent, i for interest, and r for ground rent, then -^ = -£ = -^—^—- = -Ç7 + -7, + -£ . We have seen that while s, the total amount of surplus value, is continually in- creasing in the course of capitalist development, — is just as steadily de- clining, because C grows still more rapidly than s. Therefore it is by no means a contradiction for p,, i, and r to be steadily increasing, each individually, while ^ = -£, as well as -j~, -^, and 7 , should each by itself be steadily shrinking, or that p, should increase in relation to i, or r in relation to p,, or to p, and i. With a rising total surplus value or profit s = p, and a simultaneously falling rate of profit 7; = 7?, the proportions of the parts p,, i, and r, which make up s = p, may change at will within the limits set by the total amount of s without thereby affecting the magnitude of s or -^.

The mutual variation of p,, i, and r is merely a varying distribution of s among different classes. Consequently, -—;, 7;, or ^ , the rate of individual industrial profit, the rate of interest, and the ratio of ground rent to the total capital, may rise in relation to one another, while •-;, the general rate of profit, falls. The only condition is that the sum of all three = -f;. If the rate of profit falls from 50% to 25%, because the composition of a certain capital with, say, a rate of sur- plus value = 100% has changed from 50c + 50v to 75c + 25v, then a capital of 1,000 will yield a profit of 500 in the first case, and in the sec- ond a capital of 4,000 will yield a profit of 1,000. We see that s or p have doubled, while p' has fallen by one-half. And if that 50% was formerly divided into 20 profit, 10 interest, and 20 rent, then -£ = 20%, -±r= 10%, and -£-= 20%. If the proportions had remained the same after the change from 50% to 25%, then -^ = 10%, -i = 5 % , and -jk = 10%. If, however,-77 should fall to 8% and -k to 4%, then -^ would rise to 13%. The relative magnitude of r would have risen as against Pj and i, while p' would have remained the same. Under both assumptions, the sum of p p i, and r would have increased, because produced by a capital four times as large. Furthermore, Ri- cardo's assumption that originally industrial profit (plus interest) con- tains the entire surplus value is historically and logically false." It

[^1]: * Ibid., Vol. 31, p. 265.





**[p. 242]**

is rather the progress of capitalist production which 1) gives the whole profit directly to the industrial and commercial capitalists for further distribution, and 2) reduces rent to the excess over the profit. On this capitalist basis, again, the rent grows, being a portion of profit (i. e., of the surplus value viewed as the product of the total capital), but not that specific portion of the product, which the capitalist pockets.

Given the necessary means of production, i. e., a sufficient accumu- lation of capital, the creation of surplus value is only limited by the labouring population if the rate of surplus value, i. e., the intensity of exploitation, is given; and no other limit but the intensity of exploita- tion if the labouring population is given. And the capitalist process of production consists essentially of the production of surplus value, rep- resented in the surplus product or the aliquot portion of the produced commodities in which unpaid labour is objectified. It must never be forgotten that the production of this surplus value — and the recon- version of a portion of it into capital, or the accumulation, forms an integrate part of this production of surplus value — is the immediate purpose and compelling motive of capitalist production. It will never do, therefore, to represent capitalist production as something which it is not, namely as production whose immediate purpose is enjoyment or the manufacture of the means of enjoyment for the capitalist. This would be overlooking its specific character, which is revealed in all its inner essence.3

The creation of this surplus value makes up the direct process of production, which, as we have said, has no other limits but those mentioned above. As soon as all the surplus labour it was possible to squeeze out has been objectified in commodities, surplus value has been produced. But this production of surplus value completes but the first act of the capitalist process of production — the direct pro- duction process. Capital has absorbed so and so much unpaid labour. With the development of the process, which expresses itself in a drop in the rate of profit, the mass of surplus value thus produced swells to immense dimensions. Now comes the second act of the process. The entire, mass of commodities, i. e., the total product, including the por- tion which replaces the constant and variable capital, and that repre- senting surplus value, must be sold. If this is not done, or done only in part, or only at prices below the prices of production, the labourer

[^1]: a Ibid., Vol. 28, pp. 339-40 and Vol. 32, p. 126.





**[p. 243]**

has been indeed exploited, but his exploitation is not realised as such for the capitalist, and this can be bound up with a total or partial fail- ure to realise the surplus value pressed out of him, indeed even with the partial or total loss of the capital. The conditions of direct exploi- tation, and those of realising it, are not identical. They diverge not only in place and time, but also logically. The first are only limited by the productive power of society, the latter by the proportional rela- tion of the various branches of production and the consumer power of society. But this last-named is not determined either by the absolute productive power, or by the absolute consumer power, but by the consumer power based on antagonistic conditions of distribution, which reduce the consumption of the bulk of society to a minimum varying within more or less narrow limits. It is furthermore restricted by the tendency to accumulate, the drive to expand capital and pro- duce surplus value on an extended scale. This is law for capitalist pro- duction, imposed by incessant revolutions in the methods of produc- tion themselves, by the depreciation of existing capital always bound up with them, by the general competitive struggle and the need to improve production and expand its scale merely as a means of self- preservation and under penalty of ruin. The market must, therefore, be continually extended, so that its interrelations and the conditions regulating them assume more and more the form of a natural law working independently of the producer, and become ever more uncontrollable. This internal contradiction seeks to resolve itself through expansion of the outlying field of production. But the more the productive power develops, the more it finds itself at variance with the narrow basis on which the conditions of consumption rest. It is no contradiction at all on this self-contradictory basis that there should be an excess of capital simultaneously with a growing surplus of population. For while a combination of these two would, indeed, increase the mass of produced surplus value, it would at the same time intensify the contradiction between the conditions under which this surplus value is produced and those under which it is realised. If a certain rate of profit is given, the mass of profit will always depend on the magnitude of the advanced capital. The accumula- tion, however, is then determined by that portion of this mass which is reconverted into capital. As for this portion, being equal to the pro- fit minus the revenue consumed by the capitalists, it will depend not merely on the value of this mass, but also on the cheapness of the com- modities which the capitalist can buy with it, commodities which



**[p. 244]**

pass partly into his consumption, his revenue, and partly into his constant capital. (Wages are here assumed to be given.)

The mass of capital set in motion by the labourer, whose value he preserves by his labour and reproduces in his product, is quite differ- ent from the value which he adds to it. If the mass of the capi- tal =1,000 and the added labour = 100, the reproduced capi- tal = 1,100. If the mass = 100 and the added labour = 20, the repro- duced capital = 120. In the first case the rate of profit = 10%, in the second = 20%. And yet more can be accumulated out of 100 than out of 20. And thus the river of capital rolls on (aside from its depre- ciation through increase of the productive power), or its accumula- tion does, not in proportion to the rate of profit, but in proportion to the impetus it already possesses. So far as it is based on a high rate of surplus value, a high rate of profit is possible when the working day is very long, although labour is not productive. It is possible, because the wants of the labourers are very small, hence average wages very low, although the labour itself is unproductive. The low wages will correspond to the labourer's lack of energy. Capital then accumulates slowly, in spite of the high rate of profit. Population is stagnant and the working time which the product costs, is great, while the wages paid to the labourer are small.a

The rate of profit does not sink because the labourer is exploited any less, but because generally less labour is employed in proportion to the employed capital.

If, as shown, a falling rate of profit is bound up with an increase in the mass of profit, a larger portion of the annual product of labour is appropriated by the capitalist under the category of capital (as a re- placement for consumed capital) and a relatively smaller portion under the category of profit. Hence the fantastic idea of priest Chal- mers,1' that the less of the annual product is expended by capitalists as capital, the greater the profits they pocket. In which case the state church comes to their assistance, to care for the consumption of the greater part of the surplus product, rather than having it used as capital. The preacher confounds cause with effect. Furthermore, the mass of profit increases in spite of its slower rate with the growth of the invested capital. However, this requires a simultaneous concentration

[^1]: a Ibid., Vol. 32, pp. 434-35. - b Th. Chalmers, On Political Economy in Connexion with the Moral State and Moral Prospects of Society, Second edition, Glasgow, 1832, pp. 88-92; cf. present edition, Vol. 32, pp. 434-35.



