---
Volume: 37
Document_Title: "II. Conflict Between Expansion of Production and Production of Surplus Value "
Page_Range: "255-259"
---

# II. Conflict Between Expansion of Production and Production of Surplus Value 



**[p. 245]**

of capital, since the conditions of production then demand employ- ment of capital on a larger scale. It also requires its centralisation, i. e., the swallowing up of the small capitalists by the big and their deprivation of capital. It is again but an instance of separat- ing— raised to the second power — the conditions of labour from the producers to whose number these small capitalists still belong, since their own labour continues to play a role in their case. The labour of a capitalist stands altogether in inverse proportion to the size of his capital, i. e., to the degree in which he is a capitalist. It is this same severance of the conditions of labour, on the one hand, from the pro- ducers, on the other, that forms the conception of capital. It begins with primitive accumulation (Buch I, Kap. X X I V ) , appears as a permanent process in the accumulation and concentration of capital, and expresses itself finally as centralisation of existing capitals in a few hands and a deprivation of many of their capital (to which expropria- tion is now changed). This process would soon bring about the collapse of capitalist production if it were not for counteracting tendencies, which have a continuous decentralising effect alongside the centripetal one.

The development of the social productive power of labour is mani- fested in two ways: First, in the magnitude of the already produced productive forces, the value and mass of the conditions of production under which new production is carried on, and in the absolute mag- nitude of the already accumulated productive capital; secondly, in the relative smallness of the portion of total capital laid out in wages, i. e., in the relatively small quantity of living labour required for the reproduction and self-expansion of a given capital, for mass production. This also implies concentration of capital.

In relation to employed labour power the development of the productive power again reveals itself in two ways: First, in the increase of surplus labour, i. e., the reduction of the necessary labour time required for the reproduction of labour power. Secondly, in the decrease of the quantity of labour power (the number of labourers) generally employed to set in motion a given capital.

[^1]: II. CONFLICT BETWEEN EXPANSION OF PRODUCTION AND PRODUCTION OF SURPLUS VALUE

[^2]: a Ibid., Vol. 35, Ch. XXVI-XXVII.





**[p. 246]**

The two movements not only go hand in hand, but mutually influence one another and are phenomena in which the same law expresses itself. Yet they affect the rate of profit in opposite ways. The total mass of profit is equal to the total mass of surplus value, the rate

r „ s surplus value _,, . , , of profit = £-= advan C(Td total capital. The surplus value, however, as a total, is determined first by its rate, and second by the mass of labour simultaneously employed at this rate, or, what amounts to the same, by the magnitude of the variable capital. One of these factors, the rate of surplus value, rises, and the other, the number of labourers, falls (relatively or absolutely). Inasmuch as the develop- ment of the productive power reduces the paid portion of employed labour, it raises the surplus value, because it raises its rate; but inas- much as it reduces the total mass of labour employed by a given capi- tal, it reduces the factor of the number by which the rate of surplus value is multiplied to obtain its mass. Two labourers, each working 12 hours daily, cannot produce the same mass of surplus value as 24 who work only 2 hours, even if they could live on air and hence did not have to work for themselves at all. In this respect, then, the compensation of the reduced number of labourers by intensifying the degree of exploitation has certain insurmountable limits. It may, for this reason, well check the fall in the rate of profit, but cannot prevent it altogether.3

With the development of the capitalist mode of production, there- fore, the rate of profit falls, while its mass increases with the growing mass of the capital employed. Given the rate, the absolute increase in the mass of capital depends on its existing magnitude. But, on the other hand, if this magnitude is given, the proportion of its growth, i.e., the rate of its increment, depends on the rate of profit. The in- crease in the productive power (which, moreover, we repeat, always goes hand in hand with a depreciation of the available capital) can directly only increase the value of the existing capital if by raising the rate of profit it increases that portion of the value of the annual prod- uct which is reconverted into capital. As concerns the productive power of labour, this can only occur (since this productive power has nothing direct to do with the value of the existing capital) by raising the relative surplus value, or reducing the value of the constant capi- tal, so that the commodities which enter either the reproduction of

[^1]: a Cf. present edition, Vol. 33, pp. 108-11.





**[p. 247]**

labour power, or the elements of constant capital, are cheapened. Both imply a depreciation of the existing capital, and both go hand in hand with a reduction of the variable capital in relation to the con- stant. Both cause a fall in the rate of profit, and both slow it down. Fur- thermore, inasmuch as an increased rate of profit causes a greater de- mand of labour, it tends to increase the working population and thus the material, whose exploitation makes real capital out of capital.

Indirectly, however, the development of the productive power of labour contributes to the increase of the value of the existing capital by increasing the mass and variety of use values in which the same ex- change value is represented and which form the material substance, i. e., the material elements of capital, the material objects making up the constant capital directly, and the variable capital at least indi- rectly. More products which may be converted into capital, whatever their exchange value, are created with the same capital and the same labour. These products may serve to absorb additional labour, hence also additional surplus labour, and therefore create additional capi- tal. The amount of labour which a capital can command does not de- pend on its value, but on the mass of raw and auxiliary materials, machinery and elements of fixed capital and necessities of life, all of which it comprises, whatever their value may be. As the mass of the labour employed, and thus of surplus labour increases, there is also a growth in the value of the reproduced capital and in the surplus value newly added to it.

These two elements embraced by the process of accumulation, how- ever, are not to be regarded merely as existing side by side in repose, as Ricardo does. They contain a contradiction which manifests itself in contradictory tendencies and phenomena/ These antagonistic agencies counteract each other simultaneously.

Alongside the stimulants of an actual increase of the labouring pop- ulation, which spring from the increase of the portion of the total social product serving as capital, there are agencies which create a merely relative overpopulation.

Alongside the fall in the rate of profit mass of capitals grows, and hand in hand with this there occurs a depreciation of existing capitals which checks the fall and gives an accelerating motion to the accu- mulation of capital values.

Alongside the development of productivity there develops a higher

[^1]: a Ibid., Vol. 32, pp. 167-74 and 158.





**[p. 248]**

composition of capital, i. e., the relative decrease of the ratio of vari- able to constant capital.

These different influences may at one time operate predominantly side by side in space, and at another succeed each other in time. From time to time the conflict of antagonistic agencies finds vent in crises. The crises are always but momentary and forcible solutions of the ex- isting contradictions. They are violent eruptions which for a time re- store the disturbed equilibrium.

The contradiction, to put it in a very general way, consists in that the capitalist mode of production involves a tendency towards abso- lute development of the productive forces, regardless of the value and surplus value it contains, and regardless of the social conditions under which capitalist production takes place; while, on the other hand, its aim is to preserve the value of the existing capital and promote its self-expansion to the highest limit (i. e., to promote an ever more rap- id growth of this value). The specific feature about it is that it uses the existing value of capital as a means of increasing this value to the ut- most. The methods by which it accomplishes this include the fall of the rate of profit, depreciation of existing capital, and development of the productive forces of labour at the expense of already created pro- ductive forces.

The periodical depreciation of existing capital — one of the means immanent in capitalist production to check the fall of the rate of prof- it and hasten accumulation of capital value through formation of new capital — disturbs the given conditions, within which the process of circulation and reproduction of capital takes place, and is therefore accompanied by sudden stoppages and crises in the production pro- cess.

The decrease of variable in relation to constant capital, which goes hand in hand with the development of the productive forces, stim- ulates the growth of the labouring population, while continually creating an artificial overpopulation. The accumulation of capital in terms of value is slowed down by the falling rate of profit, to hasten still more the accumulation of use values, while this, in its turn, adds new momentum to accumulation in terms of value.

Capitalist production seeks continually to overcome these imma- nent barriers, but overcomes them only by means which again place these barriers in its way and on a more formidable scale.

The real barrier of capitalist production is capital itself. It is that capi- tal and its self-expansion appear as the starting and the closing

