---
Volume: 37
Document_Title: "III. Excess Capital and Excess Population "
Page_Range: "259-268"
---

# III. Excess Capital and Excess Population 



**[p. 249]**

point, the motive and the purpose of production; that production is only production for capital and not vice versa, the means of produc- tion are not mere means for a constant expansion of the living process of the society of producers. The limits within which the preservation and self-expansion of the value of capital resting on the expropriation and pauperisation of the great mass of producers can alone move —these limits come continually into conflict with the methods of production employed by capital for its purposes, which drive towards unlimited extension of production, towards production as an end in itself, towards unconditional development of the social productivity of labour. The means — unconditional development of the produc- tive forces of society — comes continually into conflict with the limit- ed purpose, the self-expansion of the existing capital. The capitalist mode of production is, for this reason, a historical means of develop- ing the material forces of production and creating an appropriate world market and is, at the same time, a continual conflict between this its historical task and its corresponding social relations of produc- tion.3

A drop in the rate of profit is attended by a rise in the minimum cap- ital required by an individual capitalist for the productive employ- ment of labour; required both for its exploitation generally, and for making the consumed labour time suffice as the labour time necessary for the production of the commodities, so that it does not exceed the average social labour time required for the production of the com- modities. Concentration increases simultaneously, because beyond certain limits a large capital with a small rate of profit accumulates faster than a small capital with a large rate of profit. At a certain high point this increasing concentration in its turn causes a new fall in the rate of profit. The mass of small dispersed capitals is thereby driven along the adventurous road of speculation, credit frauds, stock swindles, and crises. The so-called plethora of capital always applies essentially to a plethora of the capital for which the fall in the rate of profit is not compensated through the mass of profitb — this is always

[^1]: III. EXCESS CAPITAL AND EXCESS POPULATION

[^2]: a Ibid., Vol. 28, p. 23 and Vol. 34, pp. 24-25. - b Ibid., Vol. 33, p. 112.





**[p. 250]**

true of newly developing fresh offshoots of capital — or to a plethora which places capitals incapable of action on their own at the disposal of the managers of large enterprises in the form of credit. This plethora of capital arises from the same causes as those which call forth relative overpopulation, and is, therefore, a phenomenon supplementing the latter, although they stand at opposite poles— unemployed capital at one pole, and unemployed worker population at the other.

Overproduction of capital, not of individual commodities — although overproduction of capital always includes overproduction of commodities — is therefore simply overaccumulation of capital. To appreciate what this overaccumulation is (its closer analysis follows later), one need only assume it to be absolute. When would overpro- duction of capital be absolute? Overproduction which would affect not just one or another, or a few important spheres of production, but would be absolute in its full scope, hence would extend to all fields of production?

There would be absolute overproduction of capital as soon as addi- tional capital for purposes of capitalist production = 0. The purpose of capitalist production, however, is self-expansion of capital, i. e., ap- propriation of surplus labour, production of surplus value, of profit. As soon as capital would, therefore, have grown in such a ratio to the labouring population that neither the absolute working time supplied by this population, nor the relative surplus working time, could be expanded any further (this last would not be feasible at any rate in the case when the demand for labour were so strong that there were a tendency for wages to rise); at a point, therefore, when the increased capital produced just as much, or even less, surplus value than it did before its increase, there would be absolute overproduction of capital; i. e., the increased capital C + AC would produce no more, or even less, profit than capital C before its expansion by AC. In both cases there would be a steep and sudden fall in the general rate of profit, but this time due to a change in the composition of capital not caused by the development of the productive power, but rather by a rise in the money value of the variable capital (because of increased wages) and the corresponding reduction in the proportion of surplus labour to necessary labour.

In reality, it would appear that a portion of the capital would lie completely or partially idle (because it would have to crowd out some of the active capital before it could expand its own value), and the oth- er portion would produce values at a lower rate of profit, owing to



**[p. 251]**

the pressure of unemployed or but partly employed capital. It would be immaterial in this respect if a part of the additional capital were to take the place of the old capital, and the latter were to take its posi- tion in the additional capital. We should still always have the old sum of capital on one side, and the sum of additional capital on the other. The fall in the rate of profit would then be accompanied by an abso- lute decrease in the mass of profit, since the mass of employed labour power could not be increased and the rate of surplus value raised under the conditions we had assumed, so that the mass of surplus val- ue could not be increased either. And the reduced mass of profit would have to be calculated on an increased total capital. But even if it is assumed that the employed capital continues to self-expand at the old rate of profit, and the mass of profit hence remains the same, this mass would still be calculated on an increased total capital, this likewise implying a fall in the rate of profit. If a total capital of 1,000 yielded a profit of 100, and after being increased to 1,500 still yielded 100, then, in the second case, 1,000 would yield only 66— . Self-ex- pansion of the old capital, in the absolute sense, would have been re- duced. The capital = 1,000 would yield no more under the new cir- cumstances than formerly a capital = 666 -j.

It is evident, however, that this actual depreciation of the old capi- tal could not occur without a struggle, and that the additional capital AC could not assume the functions of capital without a struggle. The rate of profit would not fall under the effect of competition due to overproduction of capital. It would rather be the reverse; it would be the competitive struggle which would begin because the fallen rate of profit and overproduction of capital originate from the same condi- tions. The part of AC in the hands of old functioning capitalists would be allowed to remain more or less idle to prevent a depreciation of their own original capital and not to narrow its place in the field of production. Or they would employ it, even at a momentary loss, to shift the need of keeping additional capital idle on newcomers and on their competitors in general.

That portion of AC which is in new hands would seek to assume a place for itself at the expense of the old capital, and would accom- plish this in part by forcing a portion of the old capital to lie idle. It would compel the old capital to give up its old place and withdraw to join completely or partially unemployed additional capital.

A portion of the old capital has to lie unused under all circumstances;



**[p. 252]**

it has to give up its characteristic quality as capital, so far as act- ing as such and producing value is concerned. The competitive strug- gle would decide what part of it would be particularly affected. So long as things go well, competition effects an operating fraternity of the capitalist class, as we have seen in the case of the equalisation of the general rate of profit, so that each shares in the common loot in proportion to the size of his respective investment. But as soon as it no longer is a question of sharing profits, but of sharing losses, everyone tries to reduce his own share to a minimum and to shove it off upon another. The class, as such, must inevitably lose. How much the individual capitalist must bear of the loss, i. e., to what extent he must share in it at all, is decided by strength and cunning, and competition then becomes a fight among hostile brothers. The antagonism between each individual capitalist's interests and those of the capitalist class as a whole, then comes to the surface, just as previously the identity of these interests operated in practice through competition.

How is this conflict settled and the conditions restored which cor- respond to the "sound" operation of capitalist production? The mode of settlement is already indicated in the very emergence of the conflict whose settlement is under discussion. It implies the withdrawal and even the partial destruction of capital amounting to the full value of additional capital AC, or at least a part of it. Although, as the de- scription of this conflict shows, the loss is by no means equally distrib- uted among individual capitals, its distribution being rather decid- ed through a competitive struggle in which the loss is distributed in very different proportions and forms, depending on special advan- tages or previously captured positions, so that one capital is left unused, another is destroyed, and a third suffers but a relative loss, or is just temporarily depreciated, etc.

But the equilibrium would be restored under all circumstances through the withdrawal or even the destruction of more or less capi- tal. This would extend partly to the material substance of capital, i. e., a part of the means of production, of fixed and circulating capi- tal, would not operate, not act as capital; some of the operating estab- lishments would then be brought to a standstill. Although, in this respect, time attacks and worsens all means of production (except land), the stoppage would in reality cause far greater damage to the means of production. However, the main effect in this case would be that these means of production would cease to function as such, that



**[p. 253]**

their function as means of production would be disturbed for a short- er or longer period.

The main damage, and that of the most acute nature, would occur in respect to capital, and in so far as the latter possesses the character- istic of value it would occur in respect to the values of capitals. That portion of the value of a capital which exists only in the form of claims on prospective shares of surplus value, i. e., profit, in fact in the form of promissory notes on production in various forms, is immediately depreciated by the reduction of the receipts on which it is calculated. A part of the gold and silver lies unused, i. e., does not function as capital. Part of the commodities on the market can complete their process of circulation and reproduction only through an immense con- traction of their prices, hence through a depreciation of the capi- tal which they represent. The elements of fixed capital are depreciat- ed to a greater or lesser degree in just the same way. It must be added that definite, presupposed, price relations govern the process of reproduction, so that the latter is halted and thrown into confusion by a general drop in prices. This confusion and stagnation paralyses the function of money as a medium of payment, whose development is geared to the development of capital and is based on those presup- posed price relations. The chain of payment obligations due at specif- ic dates is broken in a hundred places. The confusion is augmented by the attendant collapse of the credit system, which develops simul- taneously with capital, and leads to violent and acute crises, to sudden and forcible depreciations, to the actual stagnation and dis- ruption of the process of reproduction, and thus to a real falling off in reproduction/

But there would have been still other agencies at work at the same time. The stagnation of production would have laid off a part of the working class and would thereby have placed the employed part in a situation where it would have to submit to a reduction of wages even below the average. This has the very same effect on capital as an increase of the relative or absolute surplus value at average wages would have had. Prosperity would have led to more marriages among labourers and reduced the decimation of offspring. While implying a real increase in population, this does not signify an increase in the actual working population. But it affects the relations of the labourer

[^1]: a Cf. present edition, Vol. 32, pp. 127-28.



to capital in the same way as an increase of the number of actually working labourers would have affected them. On the other hand, the fall in prices and the competitive struggle would have driven every capitalist to lower the individual value of his total product below its general value by means of new machines, new and improved working methods, new combinations, i. e., to increase the productive farmer of a given quantity of labour, to lower the proportion of variable to con- stant capital, and thereby to release some labourers; in short, to create an artificial overpopulation. Ultimately, the depreciation of the elements of constant capital would itself tend to raise the rate of profit. The mass of employed constant capital would have increased in relation to variable, but its value could have fallen. The ensuing stagnation of production would have prepared — within capitalistic limits — a subsequent expansion of production.

And thus the cycle would run its course anew. Part of the capital, depreciated by its functional stagnation, would recover its old value. For the rest, the same vicious circle would be described once more under expanded conditions of production, with an expanded market and increased productive forces.

However, even under the extreme conditions assumed by us this absolute overproduction of capital is not absolute overproduction, not absolute overproduction of means of production. It is overpro- duction of means of production only in so far as the latter serve as capi- tal, and consequently include a self-expansion of value, must pro- duce an additional value in proportion to the increased mass.

Yet it would still be overproduction, because capital would be unable to exploit labour to the degree required by a "sound", "nor- mal" development of the process of capitalist production, to a degree which would at least increase the mass of profit along with the grow- ing mass of the employed capital; to a degree which would, therefore, prevent the rate of profit from falling as much as the capital grows, or even more rapidly.

Overproduction of capital is never anything more than overpro- duction of means of production — of means of labour and necessities of life — which may serve as capital, i. e., may serve to exploit labour at a given degree of exploitation; a fall in the intensity of exploitation below a certain point, however, calls forth disturbances, and stop- pages in the capitalist production process, crises, and destruction of capital. It is no contradiction that this overproduction of capital is ac- companied by more or less considerable relative overpopulation. The



**[p. 255]**

circumstances which increased the productive power of labour, aug- mented the mass of produced commodities, expanded markets, accelerated accumulation of capital both in terms of its mass and its value, and lowered the rate of profit — these same circumstances have also created, and continuously create, a relative overpopulation, an overpopulation of labourers not employed by the surplus capital owing to the low degree of exploitation at which alone they could be employed, or at least owing to the low rate of profit which they would yield at the given degree of exploitation.

If capital is sent abroad, this is not done because it absolutely could not be applied at home, but because it can be employed at a higher rate of profit in a foreign country. But such capital is absolute excess capital for the employed labouring population and for the home country in general. It exists as such alongside the relative overpopula- tion, and this is an illustration of how both of them exist side by side, and mutually influence one another.

On the other hand, a fall in the rate of profit connected with accu- mulation necessarily calls forth a competitive struggle. Compensation of a fall in the rate of profit by a rise in the mass of profit applies only to the total social capital and to the big, firmly placed capitalists. The new additional capital operating independently does not enjoy any such compensating conditions. It must still win them, and so it is that a fall in the rate of profit calls forth a competitive struggle among cap- italists, not vice versa. To be sure, the competitive struggle is accom- panied by a temporary rise in wages and a resultant further tempo- rary fall of the rate of profit. The same occurs when there is an over- production of commodities, when markets are overstocked. Since the aim of capital is not to minister to certain wants, but to produce pro- fit, and since it accomplishes this purpose by methods which adapt the mass of production to the scale of production, not vice versa, a rift must continually ensue between the limited dimensions of consump- tion under capitalism and a production which forever tends to exceed this immanent barrier. Furthermore, capital consists of commodities, and therefore overproduction of capital implies overproduction of com- modities. Hence the peculiar phenomenon of economists who deny overproduction of commodities, admitting overproduction of capital.a

To say that there is no general overproduction, but rather a dispropor- tion within the various branches of production, is no more than to say

[^1]: a Ibid., Vol. 32, pp. 132-35 and Vol. 33, pp. 113-14.



that under capitalist production the proportionality of the individual branches of production springs as a continual process from dispropor- tionality, because the cohesion of the aggregate production imposes itself as a blind law upon the agents of production, and not as a law which, being understood and hence controlled by their common mind, brings the production process under their joint control. It amounts furthermore to demanding that countries in which the capi- talist mode of production is not developed, should consume and pro- duce at a rate which suits the countries with the capitalist mode of production. If it is said that overproduction is only relative, this is quite correct; but the entire capitalist mode of production is only a rel- ative one, whose barriers are not absolute. They are absolute only for this mode, i. e., on its basis. How could there otherwise be a shortage of demand for the very commodities which the mass of the people lack, and how would it be possible for this demand to be sought abroad, in foreign markets, to pay the labourers at home the average amount of necessities of life? This is possible only because in this specif- ic capitalist interrelation the surplus product assumes a form in which its owner cannot offer it for consumption, unless it first recon- verts itself into capital for him. If it is finally said that the capitalists have only to exchange and consume their commodities among them- selves, then the entire nature of the capitalist mode of production is lost sight of; and also forgotten is the fact that it is a matter of expanding the value of the capital, not consuming it. In short, all these objections to the obvious phenomena of overproduction (phenomena which pay no heed to these objections) amount to the contention that the barriers of capitalist production are not barriers of production gener- ally, and therefore not barriers of this specific, capitalist mode of production. The contradiction of the capitalist mode of production, however, lies precisely in its tendency towards an absolute develop- ment of the productive forces, which continually comes into conflict with the specific conditions of production in which capital moves, and alone can move.

There are not too many necessities of life produced, in proportion to the existing population. Quite the reverse. Too little is produced to decently and humanely satisfy the wants of the great mass.

There are not too many means of production produced to employ the able-bodied portion of the population. Quite the reverse. In the first place, too large a portion of the produced population is not really capable of working, and is through force of circumstances made de-



**[p. 257]**

pendent on exploiting the labour of others, or on labour which can pass under this name only under a miserable mode of production. In the second place, not enough means of production are produced to permit the employment of the entire able-bodied population under the most productive conditions, so that their absolute working period could be shortened by the mass and effectiveness of the constant capi- tal employed during working hours.

On the other hand, too many means of labour and necessities of life are produced at times to permit of their serving as means for the ex- ploitation of labourers at a certain rate of profit. Too many commodi- ties are produced to permit of a realisation and conversion into new capital of the value and surplus value contained in them under the conditions of distribution and consumption peculiar to capitalist pro- duction, i.e., too many to permit of the continuation of this process without constantly recurring explosions.

Not too much wealth is produced. But at times too much wealth is produced in its capitalistic, self-contradictory forms.

The limitations of the capitalist mode of production come to the surface:

1) In that the development of the productive power of labour creates out of the falling rate of profit a law which at a certain point comes into antagonistic conflict with this development and must be overcome constantly through crises.

2) In that the expansion or contraction of production are deter- mined by the appropriation of unpaid labour and the proportion of this unpaid labour to objectified labour in general, or, to speak the language of the capitalists, by profit and the proportion of this profit to the employed capital, thus by a definite rate of profit, rather than by the relation of production to social requirements, i. e., to the require- ments of socially developed human beings. It is for this reason that the capitalist mode of production meets with barriers at a certain expanded stage of production which, if viewed from the other pre- miss, would reversely have been altogether inadequate. It comes to a standstill at a point fixed by the production and realisation of profit, and not by the satisfaction of requirements.

If the rate of profit falls, there follows, on the one hand, an exertion of capital in order that the individual capitalists, through improved methods, etc., may depress the value of their individual commodity below the social average value and thereby realise an extra profit at the prevailing market price. On the other hand, there appears swin-

