---
Volume: 37
Document_Title: "2. Transformation of Capital or Revenue into Money that Is Transformed into Loan Capital "
Page_Range: "510-512"
---

# 2. Transformation of Capital or Revenue into Money that Is Transformed into Loan Capital 

ter of the scale of production. //Of course, this holds true of England only for the time of its actual industrial monopoly; but it applies in general to the whole complex of countries with modern large-scale in- dustries, as long as the world market is still expanding.— F.E.jj

2. TRANSFORMATION OF CAPITAL OR REVENUE INTO MONEY THAT IS TRANSFORMED INTO LOAN CAPITAL

We will consider here the accumulation of money capital, in so far as it is not an expression either of a stoppage in the flow of commercial credit or of an economy — whether it be an economy in the actual circulating medium or in the reserve capital of the agents engaged in reproduction.

Aside from these two cases, an accumulation of money capital can arise through an unusual inflow of gold, as in 1852 and 1853 as a re- sult of the new Australian and Californian gold mines. This gold was deposited in the Bank of England. The depositors received notes for it, which they did not directly redeposit with bankers. By this means the circulating medium was unusually increased. (Testimony of Weguelin, Bank Committee, 1857, No. 1329.) The Bank strove to utilise these deposits by lowering its discount to 2%. The mass of gold accumulated in the Bank rose during six months of 1853 to 22-23 million.

The accumulation of all money-lending capitalists naturally al- ways takes place directly in money form, whereas we have seen that the actual accumulation of industrial capitalists is accomplished, as a rule, by an increase in the elements of reproductive capital itself. Hence, the development of the credit system and the enormous con- centration of the money-lending business in the hands of large banks must, by themselves alone, accelerate the accumulation of loanable capital, as a form distinct from actual accumulation. This rapid devel- opment of loan capital is, therefore, a result of actual accumulation, for it is a consequence of the development of the reproduction process, and the profit which forms the source of accumulation for these mon- ey capitalists is only a deduction from the surplus value which the reproductive ones filch (and it is at the same time the appropriation of a portion of the interest from the savings of others). Loan capital ac- cumulates at the expense of both the industrial and commercial capi- talists. We have seen that in the unfavourable phases of the industrial



**[p. 501]**

cycle the rate of interest may rise so high that it temporarily con- sumes the whole profit of some lines of business which are particularly handicapped. At the same time, prices of government and other secu- rities fall. It is at such times that the money capitalists buy this depre- ciated paper in huge quantities which in the later phases soon regains its former level and rises above it. It is then sold again and a portion of the money capital of the public is thus appropriated. That portion which is not sold yields a higher interest because it was bought below par. But the money capitalists convert all profits made, and recon- verted by them into capital, first into loanable money capital. The accumulation of the latter—as distinct from the actual accu- mulation, although its offshoot—thus takes place, even when we consider only the money capitalists, bankers, etc., by themselves, as an accumulation of this particular class of capitalists. And it must grow with every expansion of the credit system which accompanies the actual expansion of the reproduction process.

If the interest rate is low, this depreciation of the money capital falls principally upon the depositors, not upon the banks. Before the development of stock banks, -| of all the deposits in England lay in the banks without yielding interest. While interest is now paid on them, it amounts to at least 1% less than the current rate of interest.

As for the money accumulation of the other classes of capitalists, we desregard that portion of it which is invested in interest-bearing paper and accumulates in this form. We consider only that portion which is thrown upon the market as loanable money capital.

In the first place, we have here that portion of the profit which is not spent as revenue, but is set aside for accumulation — for which, however, the industrial capitalists have no use in their own business at the moment. This profit exists directly in commodity capital, a part of whose value it constitutes, and along with which it is realised in money. Now, if it is not reconverted into the production elements of commod- ity capital (we leave out of consideration for the present the mer- chant, whom we shall discuss separately), it must remain for a length of time in the form of money. This amount increases with the amount of capital itself, even when the rate of profit declines. That portion which is to be spent as revenue is gradually consumed, but, in the meantime, as deposits, it constitutes loan capital with the banker. Thus, even the growth ofthat portion of profit which is spent as reve- nue expresses itself as a gradual and continually repeated accumula- tion of loan capital. The same is true of the other portion, which is in-

