---
Volume: 37
Document_Title: "Chapter XXXVIII. Differential Rent: General Remarks "
Page_Range: "643-652"
---

# Chapter XXXVIII. Differential Rent: General Remarks 



**[p. 633]**

ly, this social character of his labour appears impressed upon his product through its pecuniary character and through its general exchangeability determined by its price.

Therefore, if, on the one hand, surplus value or, still more nar- rowly, the surplus product in general is explained instead of rent, the mistake is made, on the other hand, of ascribing exclusively to agri- cultural products a characteristic which belongs to all products in their capacity as commodities and values. This is vulgarised still more by those who pass from the general determination of value over to the realisation of the value of a specific commodity. Every commodity can realise its value only in the process of circulation, and whether it realises its value, or to what extent it does so, depends on prevailing market conditions.

It is not a singularity of ground rent, then, that agricultural products develop into, and as, values, i. e., that they confront other commodities as commodities, and that non-agricultural products con- front them as commodities; or that they develop as specific expres- sions of social labour. The singularity of ground rent is rather that together with the conditions in which agricultural products develop as values (commodities), and together with the conditions in which their values are realised, there also grows the power of landed prop- erty to appropriate an increasing portion of these values, which were created without its assistance; and so an increasing portion of surplus value is transformed into ground rent.

C h a p t e r XXXVIII

DIFFERENTIAL RENT. GENERAL REMARKS

In the analysis of ground rent we shall begin with the assumption that products paying such a rent, products in which a portion of the surplus value, and therefore also a portion of the total price, resolves itself into ground rent, i. e., that agricultural as well as mining prod- ucts are sold at their prices of production like all other commodities. (It suffices for our purposes to confine ourselves to agricultural and mining products.) In other words, their selling prices are made up of the elements of their cost (the value of consumed constant and variable capital) plus a profit determined by the general rate of prof- it and calculated on the total advanced capital, whether consumed or not. We assume, then, that average selling prices of these products

are equal to their prices of production. The question now arises how it is possible for ground rent to develop under these conditions, i. e., how it is possible for a portion of the profit to become transformed into ground rent, so that a portion of the commodity price falls to the landlord.

In order to demonstrate the general character of this form of ground rent, let us assume that most of the factories of a certain coun- try derive their power from steam-engines, while a smaller number derive it from natural waterfalls. Let us further assume that the price of production in the former amounts to 115 for a quantity of commod- ities which have consumed a capital of 100. The 15% profit is calcu- lated not solely on the consumed capital of 100, but on the total capi- tal employed in the production of this commodity value. We have previously showna that this price of production is not determined by the individual cost price of every single industrial producer, but by the average cost price of the commodity under average conditions of capital in the entire sphere of production. It is, in fact, the market price of production, the average market price as distinct from its oscil- lations. It is in general in the form of the market price, and, further- more, in the form of the regulating market price, or market price of production, that the nature of the value of commodities asserts itself, its determination not by the labour time necessary in the case of any individual producer for the production of a certain quantity of com- modities, or of some individual commodity, but by the socially neces- sary labour time; that is, by the labour time, required for the produc- tion of the socially necessary total quantity of commodity varieties on the market under the existing average conditions of social produc- tion.

As definite numerical proportions are immaterial in this case, we shall assume furthermore that the cost price in factories run on water power is only 90 instead of 100. Since the regulating market price of production of this quantity of commodities =115, with a profit of 15%, the manufacturers who operate their machines on water power will also sell their commodities at 115, i. e., the average price regulat- ing the market price. Their profit would then be 25 instead of 15; the regulating price of production would allow them a surplus profit of 10% not because they sell their commodities above the price of

[^1]: a See this volume, pp. 171-98.



production, but because they sell them at the price of production, because their commodities are produced, or their capital operates, under exceptionally favourable conditions, i. e., under conditions which are more favourable than the average prevailing in this sphere.

Two things become evident at once: First, the surplus profit of the producers who use a natural waterfall as motive power is, to begin with, in the same class with all surplus profit (and we have already analysed this category when discussing prices of production)" which is not the fortuitous result of transactions in the circulation process, of the fortuitous fluctuations in market prices. This surplus profit, then, is likewise equal to the difference between the individual price of production of these favoured produc- ers and the general social price of production regulating the market in this entire production sphere. This difference is equal to the excess of the general price of production of the commodities over their indi- vidual price of production. The two regulating limits of this excess are, on the one hand, the individual cost price, and thus the indi- vidual price of production, and, on the other hand, the general price of production. The value of commodities produced with water power is smaller because a smaller total quantity of labour is required for their production, i. e., less labour — in an objectified form — enters into the constant capital as part of the latter. The labour employed here is more productive, its individual productive power is greater than that employed in the majority of factories of the same kind. Its greater productive power is shown in the fact that in order to produce the same quantity of commodities, it requires a smaller quantity of constant capital, a smaller quantity of objectified labour, than the other. It also requires less living labour, because the water-wheel need not be heated. This greater individual productive power of employed la- bour reduces the value, but also the cost price and thereby the price of production of the commodity. For the industrial capitalist this ex- presses itself in a lower cost price for his commodities. He has to pay for less objectified labour, and also less wages for less living labour pow- er employed. Since the cost price of his commodities is lower, his in- dividual price of production is also lower. His cost price is 90 instead of 100. His individual price of production would therefore be only 103^ instead of 115 (100:115 = 90:103^ ). The difference between his individual price of production and the general price of production

[^1]: a See this volume, pp. 196-97.



is limited by the difference between his individual cost price and the general cost price. This is one of the magnitudes which form the limits to his surplus profit. The other is the magnitude of the general price of production into which the general rate of profit enters as one of the regulating factors. Were coal to become cheaper, the difference between his individual cost price and the general cost price would decrease, and with it his surplus profit. Should he be compelled to sell his commodities at their individual value, or at the price of produc- tion determined by their individual value, then the difference would disappear. It is, on the one hand, a result of the fact that the commod- ities are sold at their general market price, the price brought about by the equalisation of individual prices through competition, and, on the other, a result of the fact that the greater individual productive power of labour set in motion by him does not benefit the labourer, but the employer, as does all productive power of labour; that it appears as the productive power of capital.

Since the level of the general price of production is one of the limits of this surplus profit, the level of the general rate of profit being one of its factors, this surplus profit can only arise from the difference between the general and the individual price of production, and consequently from the difference between the general and the indi- vidual rate of profit. An excess above this difference presupposes the sale of products above, not at, the price of production regulated by the market.

Secondly, thus far, the surplus profit of the manufacturer using nat- ural water power instead of steam does not differ in any way from any other surplus profit. All normal surplus profit, that is, all surplus profit not due to fortuitous sales or market price fluctuations is deter- mined by the difference between the individual price of production of the commodities of a particular capital and the general price of pro- duction, which regulates the market prices of the commodities pro- duced by the capital in this sphere of production in general, or, in other words, the market prices of commodities of the total capital invested in this sphere of production.

But now we come to the difference. To what circumstance does the manufacturer in the present case owe his surplus profit, the surplus resulting for him personally from the price of production regulated by the general rate of profit?

He owes it in the first instance to a natural force — the motive pow- er of the waterfall — which is found readily available in Nature and



**[p. 637]**

is not itself a product of labour like the coal which transforms water into steam. The coal, therefore, has value, must be paid for by an equivalent, and has a cost. The waterfall is a natural production agent in the production of which no labour enters.

But this is not all. The manufacturer who operates with steam also employs natural forces which cost him nothing yet make the labour more productive and increase the surplus value and thereby the prof- it, inasmuch as they thus cheapen the manufacture of the means of subsistence required for the labourers. These natural forces are thus quite as much monopolised by capital as the social natural forces of labour arising from co-operation, division of labour, etc. The manu- facturer pays for coal, but not for the capacity of water to alter its physical state, to turn into steam, not for the elasticity of the steam, etc. This monopolisation of natural forces, that is, of the increase in labour power produced by them, is common to all capital operating with steam-engines. It may increase that portion of the product of la- bour which represents surplus value in relation to that portion which is transformed into wages. In so far as it does this, it raises the general rate of profit, but it does not create any surplus profit, for this consists precisely of the excess of individual profit over average profit. The fact that the application of a natural force, a waterfall, creates surplus profit in this case, cannot therefore be due solely to the circumstance that the increased productive power of labour here results from the application of a natural force. Other modifying circumstances are necessary.

Conversely. The mere application of natural forces in industry may influence the level of the general rate of profit because it affects the quantity of labour required to produce the necessary means of sub- sistence. But in itself it does not create any deviation from the general rate of profit, and this is precisely the point in which we are interested here. Furthermore, the surplus profit which some individual capital otherwise realises in a particular sphere of production — for devia- tions of the rates of profit in various spheres of production are con- tinually balanced out into an average rate — is due, aside from purely fortuitous deviations, to a reduction in cost price, in production costs. This reduction arises either from the fact that capital is used in great- er than average quantities, so that the faux fraisa of production are reduced, while the general causes increasing the productive power of

[^1]: a unproductive costs



labour (co-operation, division of labour, etc.) can become effective to a higher degree, with more intensity, because their field of activity has become larger; or it may arise from the fact that, aside from the amount of functioning capital, better methods of labour, new inven- tions, improved machinery, chemical manufacturing secrets, etc., in short, new and improved, better than average means of production and methods of production are used. The reduction in cost price and the surplus profit arising from it are here the result of the manner in which the functioning capital is invested. They result either from the fact that the capital is concentrated in the hands of one person in extraordinarily large quantities (a condition that is cancelled out as soon as equal magnitudes of capital are used on the average), or from the fact that a certain magnitude of capital functions in a particularly productive manner (a condition that disappears as soon as the excep- tional method of production becomes general or is surpassed by a still more developed one).

The cause of the surplus profit, then, arises here from the capital it- self (which includes the labour set in motion by it) whether it be due to the greater magnitude of capital employed or to its more efficient application; and, as a matter of fact, there is no particular reason why all capital in the same production sphere should not be invested in the same manner. On the contrary, the competition between capitals tends to cancel these differences more and more. The determination of value by the socially necessary labour time asserts itself through the cheapening of commodities and the compulsion to produce commod- ities under the same favourable conditions. But matters are different with the surplus profit of a manufacturer who makes use of the water- fall. The increased productive power of the labour used by him comes neither from the capital and labour itself, nor from the mere applica- tion of some natural force different from capital and labour but incor- porated in the capital. It arises from the greater natural productive power of labour bound up with the application of a force of Nature, but not a force of Nature that is at the command of all capital in the same sphere of production, as for example the elasticity of steam. In other words, its application is not to be taken for granted whenever capital is generally invested in this sphere of production. On the con- trary, it is a monopolisable force of Nature which, like the waterfall, is only at the command of those who have at their disposal particular portions of the earth and its appurtenances. It is by no means within the power of capital to call into existence this natural premise for a

greater productive power of labour in the same manner as any capital may transform water into steam. It is found only locally in Nature and, wherever it does not exist, it cannot be established by a definite investment of capital. It is not bound to goods which labour can pro- duce, such as machines and coal, but to specific natural conditions prevailing in certain portions of land. Those manufacturers who own waterfalls exclude those who do not from using this natural force, because land, and particularly land endowed with water power, is scarce. This does not prevent the amount of water power available for industrial purposes from being increased, even though the number of natural waterfalls in a given country is limited. The waterfall may be harnessed by man in order to fully exploit its motive force. If such exists, the water-wheel may be improved so as to make use of as much of the water power as possible; where the ordinary wheel is not suitable for the water supply, turbines may be used, etc. The posses- sion of this natural force constitutes a monopoly in the hands of its owner; it is a condition for an increase in the productive power of the invested capital that cannot be established by the production process of the capital itself33'; this natural force, which can be monopolised in this manner, is always bound to the land. Such a natural force does not belong to the general conditions of the sphere of production in question, nor to those conditions of the latter which may be generally established.

Now let us assume that the waterfalls, along with the land to which they belong, are held by individuals who are regarded as owners of these portions of the earth, i.e., who are landowners. These owners prevent the investment of capital in the waterfalls and their exploita- tion by capital. They can permit or forbid such utilisation. But a wa- terfall cannot be created by capital out of itself. Therefore, the surplus profit which arises from the employment of this waterfall is not due to capital, but to the utilisation of a natural force which can be monopo- lised, and has been monopolised, by capital. Under these circum- stances, the surplus profit is transformed into ground rent, that is, it falls into possession of the owner of a waterfall. If the manufacturer pays the owner of a waterfall £10 annually, then his profit is £15, that

[^1]: 33 Concerning extra profit, see the Inquiry (against Malthus).a

[^2]: a Reference to An Inquiry into Those Principles, Respecting the Nature of Demand and the Ne- cessity of Consumption, lately advocated by Mr. Malthus, London, 1821.



is, 15% on the £100 which then make up his cost of production; and he is just as well or possibly better off than all other capitalists in his sphere of production who operate with steam. It would not alter mat- ters one bit if the capitalist himself should be the owner of a waterfall. He would, in such a case, pocket as before the surplus profit of £10 in his capacity as waterfall owner, and not in his capacity as capitalist; and precisely because this surplus does not stem from his capital as such, but rather from the control of a limited natural force distinct from his capital which can be monopolised, is it transformed into ground rent.

First, it is evident that this rent is always a differential rent, for it does not enter as a determining factor into the general production price of commodities, but rather is based on it. It invariably arises from the difference between the individual production price of a par- ticular capital having command over the monopolised natural force and the general production price of the total capital invested in the sphere of production concerned.

Secondly, this ground rent does not arise from the absolute increase in the productive power of employed capital, or labour appropriated by it, since this can only reduce the value of commodities; it is due to the greater relative fruitfulness of specific separate capitals invested in a certain production sphere, as compared with investments of capital which are excluded from these exceptional and natural conditions fa- vouring productive power. For instance, if the use of steam should of- fer overwhelming advantages not offered by the use of water power, despite the fact that coal has value and the water power has not, and if these advantages more than compensated for the expense, then, the water power would not be used and could not produce any surplus profit, and therefore could not produce any rent.

Thirdly, the natural force is not the source of surplus profit, but on- ly its natural basis, because this natural basis permits an exceptional increase in the productive power of labour. In the same way, use va- lue is in general the bearer of exchange value, but not its cause. If the same use value could be obtained without labour, it would have no exchange value, yet it would retain, as before, the same natural usefulness as use value. On the other hand, nothing can have ex- change value unless it has use value, i. e., unless it is a natural bearer of labour. Were it not for the fact that the various values are averaged out into prices of production, and the various individual prices of pro- duction into a general price of production regulating the market, the



**[p. 641]**

mere increase in the productive power of labour through utilisation of the waterfall would merely lower the price of commodities produced with the aid of this waterfall, without increasing the share of profit contained in these commodities. Similarly, on the other hand, this increased productive power of labour itself would not be converted into surplus value were it not for the fact that capital appropriates the natural and social productive power of the labour used by it as its own.

Fourthly, the private ownership of the waterfall in itself has noth- ing to do with the creation of the surplus value (profit) portion, and therefore, of the price of the commodity in general, which is produced by means of the waterfall. This surplus profit would also exist if land- ed property did not exist; for instance, if the land on which the wa- terfall is situated were used by the manufacturer as unclaimed land. Hence landed property does not create the portion of value which is transformed into surplus profit, but merely enables the landowner, the owner of the waterfall, to coax this surplus profit out of the pocket of the manufacturer and into his own. It is not the cause of the crea- tion of such surplus profit, but is the cause of its transformation into the form of ground rent, and therefore of the appropriation of this portion of the profit, or commodity price, by the owner of the land or waterfall.

Fifthly, it is evident that the price of the waterfall, that is, the price which the landowner would receive were he to sell it to a third party or even to the manufacturer himself, does not immediately enter into the production price of the commodities, although it does enter into the individual cost price of the manufacturer; because the rent arises here from the price of production of similar commodities produced by steam machinery, and this price is regulated independently of the wa- terfall. Furthermore, this price of the waterfall on the whole is an irra- tional expression, but behind it is hidden a real economic relation- ship. The waterfall, like land in general, and like any natural force, has no value because it does not represent any objectified labour, and therefore, it has no price, which is normally no more than the expres- sion of value in money terms. Where there is no value, there is also eo ipso nothing to be expressed in money. This price is nothing more than the capitalised rent. Landed property enables the owner to ap- propriate the difference between the individual profit and average profit. The profit thus acquired, which is renewed every year, may be capitalised, and appears then as the price of the natural force itself.

