---
Volume: 37
Document_Title: "II. The Stock Exchange "
Page_Range: "904-911"
---

# II. The Stock Exchange 



**[p. II]**

It is large-scale industry, too, that thus finally conquers the domestic market for capital, puts an end to the small-scale production and nat- ural economy of the self-sufficient peasant family, eliminates direct exchange between small producers, and places the entire nation in the service of capital. Likewise, it equalises the profit rate of the differ- ent commercial and industrial branches of business into one general rate of profit, and finally ensures industry the position of power due to it in this equalisation by eliminating most of the obstacles formerly hindering the transfer of capital from one branch to another. There- by the conversion of values into production prices is accomplished for all exchange as a whole. This conversion therefore proceeds accord- ing to objective laws, without the consciousness or the intent of the participants. Theoretically there is no difficulty at all in the fact that competition reduces to the general level profits which exceed the gen- eral rate, thus again depriving the first industrial appropriator of the surplus value exceeding the average. All the more so in practice, however, for the spheres of production with excessive surplus value, with high variable and low constant capital, i. e., with low capital composition, are by their very nature the ones that are last and least completely subjected to capitalist production, especially agriculture. On the other hand, the rise of production prices above commodity values, which is required to raise the below-average surplus value, contained in the products of the spheres of high capital composition, to the level of the average rate of profit, appears to be extremely diffi- cult theoretically, but is soonest and most easily effected in practice, as we have seen. For when commodities of this class are first produced capitalistically and enter capitalist commerce, they compete with commodities of the same nature produced by precapitalist methods and hence dearer. Thus, even if the capitalist producer renounces a part of the surplus value, he can still obtain the rate of profit pre- vailing in his locality, which originally had no direct connection with surplus value because it had arisen from merchant capital long before there was any capitalist production at all, and therefore before an industrial rate of profit was possible.

1. The position of the stock exchange in capitalist production in

[^1]: THE STOCK EXCHANGE





**[p. 895]**

general is clear from Vol. Ill, Part 5, especially Chapter." But since 1865, when the book was written, a change has taken place which to- day assigns a considerably increased and constantly growing role to the stock exchange, and which, as it develops, tends to concentrate all production, industrial as well as agricultural, and all commerce, the means of communication as well as the functions of exchange, in the hands of stock exchange operators, so that the stock exchange be- comes the most prominent representative of capitalist production itself.

2. In 1865 the stock exchange was still a secondary element in the capitalist system. Government bonds represented the bulk of ex- change securities, and even their sum-total was still relatively small. Besides, there were joint-stock banks, predominant on the continent and in America, and just beginning to absorb the aristocratic private banks in England, but still relatively insignificant en masse. Railway shares were still relatively weak compared to the present time. There were still only few directly productive establishments in stock com- pany form — and, like the banks, most of all in the poorer countries: Germany, Austria, America, etc. The "minister's eye" was still an unconquered superstition.

At that time, the stock exchange was still a place where the capital- ists took away each other's accumulated capital, and which directly concerned the workers only as new proof of the demoralising general effect of capitalist economy and as confirmation of the Calvinist doctrine that predestination (alias chance) decides, even in this life, blessedness and damnation, wealth, i. e., enjoyment and power, and poverty, i. e., privation and servitude.

3. Now it is otherwise. Since the crisis of 1866 accumulation has proceeded with ever-increasing rapidity, so that in no industrial coun- try, least of all in England, could the expansion of production keep up with that of accumulation, or the accumulation of the individual capitalist be completely utilised in the enlargement of his own busi- ness; English cotton industry as early as 1845; the railway swindles. But with this accumulation the number of rentiers, people who were fed up with the regular tension in business and therefore wanted merely to amuse themselves or to follow a mild pursuit as directors or governors of companies, also rose. And third, in order to facilitate the investment of this mass floating around as money capital, new legal

[^1]: a In the MS., Engels left a blank for the chapter number to be entered. Chapter XXVII, "The Role of Credit in Capitalist Production", apparently was intended.



forms of limited liability companies were established wherever that had not yet been done, and the liability of the shareholder, formerly unlimited, was also reduced + a (joint-stock companies in Germany, 1890. Subscription 40 per cent!).

4. Thereafter, gradual conversion of industry into stock compa- nies. One branch after another suffers this fate. First iron, where giant plants are now necessary (before that, mines, where not already organised on shares). Then the chemical industry, likewise machinery plants. On the continent, the textile industry; in England, only in a few areas in Lancashire (Oldham Spinning Mill, Burnley Weaving Mill, etc., tailor co-operatives, but this is only a preliminary stage which will again fall into the MASTERS' hands at the next crisis), breweries (the American ones sold a few years ago to English capital, then Guinness, Bass, Allsopp). Then the trusts, which create gigantic enterprises under common management (such as United Alkali). The ordinary individual firm is + & + b only a preliminary stage to bring the business to the point where it is big enough to be "founded".

Likewise in trade: Leafs, Parsons, Morleys, Morrison, Dillon — all founded. The same in retail stores by now, and not merely under the cloak of co-operation à la "STORES".

Likewise banks and other credit establishments even in England. A tremendous number of new banks, all shares DELIMITED. Even old banks likec , etc., are converted, with seven private shareholders, into LIMITED companies.

5. The same in the field of agriculture. The enormously expanded banks, especially in Germany under all sorts of bureaucratic names, more and more the holders of mortgages; with their shares the actual higher ownership of landed property is transferred to the stock ex- change, and this is even more true when the farms fall into the credi- tors' hands. Here the agricultural revolution of prairie cultivation is very impressive; if it continues, the time can be foreseen when England's and France's land will also be in the hands of the stock exchange.

6. Now all foreign investments in the form of shares. To mention England alone: American railways, North and South (consult the STOCK-LIST), Goldberger, etc.

[^1]: a more or less - b more and more - c Illegible. It would seem to be "Glyn & Co."— the name of a bank.





**[p. 897]**

7. Then colonisation. Today this is purely a subsidiary of the stock exchange, in whose interests the European powers divided Africa a few years ago, and the French conquered Tunis and Tonkin. Africa leased directly to companies (Niger, South Africa, German South- West and East Africa), and Mashonaland and Natal seized by Rho- des for the stock exchange.



NOTES

AND INDEXES



