---
Volume: 47
Document_Title: "1883"
Page_Range: "32-102"
---

# 1883



**[p. 3]**

1883

l

ENGELS TO PYQTR LAVROV '

IN PARIS

London, 2 April 1883

My dear Lavrov,

I hasten to acknowledge receipt of your letter enclosing a postal order for 124.50 frs. I shall not be able to cash it until Wednesdaya at the earliest, as tomorrow I have to examine the manuscripts left by Marx. 2 On completion of the commission I shall announce the fact in the Sozialdemokrat of Zurich, and shall ask the editorial department to send you one or two copies ofthat particular number. It goes without saying that no mention will be made of Citizen Krantz'sb name. 3

I have found the manuscript of the Zirkulation des Kapitals11 and of the third book: Die Gestaltungen des Gesammtprozessesd — some 1,000 in-folio pages. 4 So far it's impossible for me to say whether the manu- script as it stands is in a fit condition to go to press. In any case I shall have to copy it out as it is in rough draft. Tomorrow I shall at last have time enough to devote several hours to going through all the manuscripts that Moor has left us, in particular an outline of dialect- ics which he had always intended to do. 5 But he always refrained from telling us how far his work had progressed, for he was aware that, once people realised something was ready, he would be pestered until he consented to its publication. All this is between you and me; I have no right to publish anything without Tussy who is my literary co-executrix.

[^1]: a 4 April - b a pen-name for Pyotr Lavrov -c Circulation of Capital -d The Pro- cess of Capitalist Production as a Whole





**[p. 4]**

Yours ever,

F. Engels

First published in: Marx and Engels, Printed according to the original Works, First Russian Edition, Vol. XXVII, Moscow, 1935 Translated from the French

Published in English in full for the first time

2

ENGELS T O LAURA LAFARGUE

London, 11 April 1883

My dear Laura,

I do indeed think, along with you, that Paul ought to go and see his mother and I have told him so many a time and many a year ago. As to the extra expense, that will not be much and I can soon find you that, if informed in time. Only, if things are as you describe, it will re- quire some considerable diplomacy on Paul's part, not to spoil his own game — that Christian sister of charity ought not to be made an enemy of 7—she is always there and Paul not, and if only her sus- picions are aroused, be sure she will never cease to beguile the old woman i«to a will as much in her favour as the law will permit. So that point I suppose is settled — you'll have to look after the execu- tion.

[^1]: IN PARIS

[^2]: We all of us have had a hearty laugh at your account of the Argen- teuil adventures. 8 It is so like him a from beginning to end. To-day it

[^3]: * Charles Longuet





**[p. 5]**

is a week that Tussy sent him a very categorical letter: when is the boya to come? Not a line in reply. // est toujours en train de réfléchir.b

Paul is sure of six months at least.9 He was awfully funky about it when here, and amused Liebknecht out of all measure with his horror carceris.c But if he does not now start in earnest to learn German, I shall consider him to be nothing but un enfant gâté.d Imagine he writes to me that he will learn it—'comme vous le dites très bien (!) il pourra (!) devenir nécessaire que je le sache pour des traductions!'.e As if the

perfection of his own accomplishments, bright as they are, did not en- tirely depend on his reading certain German things, published and unpublished! He rejoices in the prospect of the 2nd volume [of] Capi- tal being published, but will he ever be able to read it?

If M-me Gendre will translate the Manifestf into French and let me revise the translation (it's no child's play, you know) I will write her a preface sufficient to explain the historical circumstances, etc. ' ° But as I know nothing much of the lady, I am bound to say at present: no revision, no preface. A right to stop any proceedings of hers in that di- rection I have not. This notabene is for Paul. So is this: What speech of Giffen he writes about I don't know, nor where it was published.

Pumps is still 'expectant', or was so at least last night. Percy's mother told him the other day that really he ought to be a little better informed in a case like that.

Jollymeyer is here for a few days. Since then (as some days before he left 10 days ago) we have every evening a bobby promenading be- fore the house, when I let Carlo out about 12. The imbeciles evidently think we are manufacturing dynamite, when in reality we are discuss- ing whisky.

Kind regards from him and myself to both of you.

Yours affectionately,

F. Engels

[^1]: First published, in the language of the Reproduced from the original original (English), in: F. Engels, P. et L. Lafargue, Correspondance, t. I, Paris, 1956

[^2]: a Jean Longuet- b He is still thinking it over.-c fear of imprisonment- d a spoilt child - ' 'As you say very aptly (!) it may (!) prove necessary for me to know it for translations!' - f K. Marx and F. Engels, Manifesto of the Communist Party.





**[p. 3]**

ENGELS TO FERDINAND DOMELA NIEUWENHUIS »

IN THE HAGUE

London, 11 April 1883

122 Regent's Park Road, N.W.

Dear Comrade,

You must understand that, since the death of my old friend, I have been so taken up with correspondence, business matters, the perusal of his writings, etc., that I have been able to attend only to what was absolutely imperative.2 Today I have at last found a minute or two in which to thank you for your letter of condolence ' ' and for your excellent obituary in Recht voor Allen.a That obituary was un- doubtedly one of the best we have seen, and was unanimously ac- claimed as such among our circle of intimates here.

Many thanks, too, on behalf of his surviving daughtersb and of my- self, to the Dutch workers' party ' 2 for their participation, at least in spirit, in our friend's last rites. In this they were at one with our Ger- man, French, Spanish, Russian and American comrades.

Should fate or the urge to travel — in our case sadly curbed — bring me to Holland, I shall consider myself under an obligation to look you up, just as I would urge you to look me up should you come to England.

Marx has left a great wad of manuscript for the second part of Capi- tal, the whole of which I must first read (and what handwriting!) be- fore I can tell to what extent it is printable and to what extent it re- quires complementing from subsequent notebooks. 4 At all events, the main substance is there. Since I cannot as yet say anything more definite, however, I would ask you not to put anything in the papers about it just now, as this might lead to misunderstandings. Besides, Marx's youngest daughter Eleanor is my literary co-executrix, I can do noth- ing without her and the ladies, as you know, are sticklers for form.

[^1]: a F. D. Nieuwenhuis, 'Karl Marx', Recht voor Allen, No. 4, 24 March 1883.- b Laura Lafargue and Eleanor Marx





**[p. 7]**

Excuse me dat ik niet op hollandsch schrijf*; in recent years I have had no practice in the use of your language.

Very sincerely yours,

F. Engels

I enclose my photograph and beg you to send me yours. As soon as we have got new ones of Marx I shall send you one.

First published, in Russian, in Istorik- Printed according to the original marksist, No. 6, Moscow, 1934

Published in English in full for the first time

4

ENGELS TO EDUARD BERNSTEIN

London, 14 April 1883

Dear Mr Bernstein,

In great haste,

Yours,

F.E.

[^1]: IN ZURICH

[^2]: Dr Aveling, editor of Progress, wrote to The Republican with a view to purchasing the wood block of Marx's portrait which appeared in that paper. 13 Came the reply: THATBLOCK. HAS BEEN SENT TO GERMANY FOR THE Sozialdemokrat, so IT IS IMPOSSIBLE FOR YOU TO HAVE IT. Aveling now en- joins me to write forthwith, asking if he could have the block as soon as possible. If not, then perhaps a cliché of it. There may also be some misunderstanding, the block having, perhaps, gone to the Neue Welt. Please let me know at once by postcard. 14

[^3]: The report of the Congress ' 5 most edifying. ' 6

[^4]: a for not writing in Dutch





**[p. 8]**

The 2nd volume of Capital is there — but I can't tell you what a state it's in— 1,000 pages of ms. to go through. 17 However, don't put anything in the paper yet; as soon as I can say anything for sure, I'll let you have something authoritative.

First published, in Russian, in Marx- Printed according to the original Engels Archives, Book I, Moscow, 1924 „ , . , , . , ^ Published in English for the hrst time

ENGELS TO THOMAS JAMES KNOWLES 18

IN LONDON

[Draft]

[London,] 17 April 1883

Dear Sir,

There exists a manuscript — a critical résumé of Das Kapital by me a — among the papers of the late Dr Marx, but up to to-day we have been unable to find it amongst the mass of papers left by him.

However, even if found, I should hesitate to send it to you at least for the purpose you indicate. b I am not aware that it is usual, in the literature of this or any other country, for one author to lend his manu- scripts to another.

As to our experience of English review-writers it has not been very encouraging. With the exception of a few clergymen of the Church of England, they have invariably distorted our views and disfigured our actions. Their utter ignorance of our theory and practice has been equalled only by their presumption. The XIX Century I believe, in July 1878, published an article of George Howell on the International0

[^1]: a F. Engels, Synopsis of Volume One of 'Capital' by Karl Marx. -b See this volume, p. 12.-c G. Howell, 'The History of the International Association', The Nineteenth Century, No. XVII, July 1878.





**[p. 9]**

brimfull of untruths and inaccuracies. Marx sent you a replya

but you refused to insert it.

I am afraid, if you want to acquaint yourself with Marx's views you will have to read the German, Russian or French edition of Das Kapi- tal.

I know but one living Englishman capable of giving a correct ac- count of the contents of Das Kapital. It is a barrister in Manchester.b

If you desire I shall be glad to ask him whether he is willing to under- take the task for you.

Yours faithfully

Jos. Knowles Esq. the Hollies, Clapham Common

S.W.

First published in: Marx and Engels, Reproduced from the original Works, First Russian Edition, Vol. XXVII, Moscow, 1935 Published m English for the first time

6

London, 18 April 1883

Philipp Van Patten, 57 2nd Avenue, New York

Esteemed Comrade,

My statement in reply to your inquiry of the 2nd April as to Karl Marx's position with regard to the Anarchists in general and Johann Most in particular shall be short and clear.

[^1]: ENGELS TO PHILIPP VAN PATTEN 19

[^2]: IN NEW YORK

[^3]: [Draft]

[^4]: a K. Marx, 'Mr George Howell's History of the International Working-Men's Asso- ciation'.-b Samuel Moore





**[p. 10]**

The Anarchists reverse the matter. They say, that the Proletarian revolution has to begin by abolishing the political organisation of the State. But after the victory of the Proletariat, the only organisation the victorious working class finds ready-made for use, is that of the State. It may require adaptation to the new functions. b But to de- stroy that at such a moment, would be to destroy the only organism by means of which the victorious working class can exert its newly conquered power, keep down its capitalist enemies and carry out that economical revolution of society without which the whole victory must end in a defeat0 and in a massacre of the working class like that after the Paris Commune.

Does it require my express assertion, that Marx opposed these anarchist absurdities from the very first day that they were started in their present form by Bakunin? The whole internal history of the International Working Men's Association is there to prove it. The Anarchists tried to obtain the lead of the International, by the foulest means, ever since 1867 20 and the chief obstacle in their way was Marx. The result of the five years' struggle was the expulsion, at the Hague Congress, September 1872, of the Anarchists from the Inter- national, 2 ' and the man who did most to procure that expulsion was Marx. Our old friend F. A. Sorge of Hoboken, who was present as a delegate, can give you further particulars if you desire.

[^1]: a See present edition, Vol. 6, pp. 505-06. - b In Der Sozialdemokrat this sentence reads: 'This State may require very important changes before it can fulfil its new functions.'-0 In Der Sozialdemokrat: 'another defeat'.





**[p. 11]**

While still in Germany, Most published a 'popular' extract of Das Kapital.d Marx was requested to revise it for a second edition. I as- sisted Marx in that work. We found it impossible to eradicate more than the very worst mistakes, unless we re-wrote the whole thing from beginning to end, and Marx consented his corrections being insert- ed on the express condition only that his name was never in any way connected with even this revised form of Johann Most's produc- tion. e

You are perfectly at liberty to publish this letter in the Voice of the People,f if you like to do so.

Yours fraternally,

F. E.

[^1]: First published, slightly abridged, in Der Reproduced from the original, Sozialdemokrat, Nr. 21, 17 Mai 1883 and in checked with the newspaper full, in Russian, in Marx-Engels Archives, Vol. I (VI), Moscow, 1932

[^2]: a on 4 January 1879 - b The words 'since his new-fangled anarchism had burst forth in that paper' are omitted in Der Sozialdemokrat. - c See letters of K.Marx to J. Ph. Becker of 1 July 1879 and to F. A. Sorge of 19 September 1879, and of F. Engels

[^3]: to J. Ph. Becker of 1 April 1880 (present edition, Vols. 45, 46).- d J. Most, Kapi- tal und Arbeit. Ein populärer Auszug aus 'Das Kapital' von Karl Marx, Chemnitz [1873]. -' See this volume, p. 14.-f In Der Sozialdemokrat, the words 'in the Voice of the People' are omitted.





**[p. 12]**

ENGELS T O THOMAS JAMES KNOWLES 2 2

IN LONDON

[Draft]

[London,] 20 April 1883

Dear Sir,

If we do find the ms. in question I shall be glad and give you the re- fusal of it, on two self-understood conditions but which I may as well mention 1 ) that in case of refusal you do not communicate it to any- body else, and 2) that in case you print it, it appears as a separate ar- ticle out of all connection with any other.

Yours faithfully,

F. E.

Allow me to say that I am no 'Dr' but a retired cotton- spinner. 23

8

[London,] 23 April 1883

[^1]: First published in: Marx and Engels, Works, First Russian Edition, Vol. XXVII, Moscow, 1935

[^2]: Reproduced from the original

[^3]: Published in English for the first time

[^4]: ENGELS TO EDUARD BERNSTEIN 24

[^5]: IN ZURICH

[^6]: Herewith also the proofs.2 5 Your letter received; shall answer it this week with an article about Marx for the Sozialdemokrat. I still have all sorts of matters to deal with before I can finish it off proper- ly.26





**[p. 13]**

Yours,

F. E.

First published, in Russian, in Marx- Printed according to the original Engels Archives, Book I, Moscow, 1924

Published in English for the first time

9

ENGELS TO FRIEDRICH ADOLPH SORGE 2 7

IN HOBOKEN

London, 24 April 1883

Dear Sorge,

Enclosed a line or two for Gartman from his friend Brocher, a mud- dle-headed anarchist but a sterling chap. Perhaps you would be good enough to send it on.

The Volkszeitung has perpetrated follies enough, though still not as ma- ny as I expected. Nevertheless they have all contributed their share, Schewitsch, Cuno, Douai, Hepner. Here was a quartet performed by would-be know-alls who, JOINTLY AND SEVERALLY, knew damned little. However I felt impelled to write a line to the editors,a pointing out that they had printed my telegram to you b as though it had been addressed to them and had, in my second to them,c inserted a false state- ment to the effect that Marx had died in Argenteuil. d We did not, I told them, stand for that sort ofthing over here; as a result they had

[^1]: a F. Engels, 'To the Editors of the New Yorker Volkszeitung' (18 April 1883).-b of 14 March 1883-c F. Engels, 'To the New Yorker Volkszeitung' (16 March 1883).- d Marx died in London.





**[p. 14]**

At the Copenhagen Congress ' 5 it was resolved that Liebknecht's and Bebel's trip to America should take place next spring.29 It has to do with money for the election campaign in 1884-85. (All this is be- tween ourselves.) Liebknecht has proposed to Tussy that she should ac- company him as his secretary and she is very keen to go; so it might easily be that you see her there before long. Generally speaking we have not made any plans yet. The literary work (third edition, Volume I of Capital, editing of Volume II, the ms. of which has been found though as yet there is no knowing to what extent it is ready for printing or requires supplementing, ' 7 biography based on the enormous correspondence,30 etc.) takes up all my spare time, besides which Tussy has a mass of literary ENGAGEMENTS to get through.

You are, of course, fully entitled to print the passages on Henry George in Marx's letters.3 ' The question is, however, whether it might not be better to wait until I am able to sort out for you the marginal notes made by Marx in his copy of George's book and then do the whole lot at one go. Resumes of the kind Marx provides, theo- retically acute but brief and unaccompanied by examples, are surely still above the head of your average American and after all there is no hurry. I shall take a closer look at the things as soon as I have time. If, in the meanwhile, you send me a copy of the relevant passage in Marx's letter, it will make the job simpler. b

[^1]: See this volume, pp. 9-ll.- b Ibid., p. 42.





**[p. 15]**

His earlier translations were grammatically and stylistically quite un- printable; they would have made us look appalling asses and at the same time exposed the author to ridicule. Anyhow I should like to see a specimen.

Your

F. E.

First published abridged in Briefe und Printed according to the original Auszüge aus Briefen von Joh. Phil. Becker, Jos. Dietzgen, Friedrich Engels, Karl Marx u. A. an F.A. Sorge und Andere, Stuttgart, 1906 and in full in: Marx and Engels, Works, First Russian Edition, Vol. XXVII, Moscow, 1935

10

ENGELS TO EDUARD BERNSTEIN

London, 28 April 1883

Dear Bernstein,

(I think we should discard the boring 'Mr'.) The continuation of what follows will contain some correspondence, i. a. with Americans over Most.a

It is unforgivable that you are not returning via London,33 I had quite counted on it. Well, perhaps you'll come in summer and we'll take a swim in the sea together. You can always be sure of a bed at my home.

Mayall, the leading London photographer always to work for Marx, has the principle: WE DO NOT TAKE MONEY FROM EMINENT PEOPLE. SO we can't now press the man for copies (he is extremely muddled), ex- cept by a roundabout route. Hence we .have given him an order,

[^1]: IN ZURICH

[^2]: a Ibid., pp. 9-11.





**[p. 16]**

Yours,

F.E.

First published, in Russian, in Marx- Printed according to the original Engels Archives, Book I, Moscow, 1924 „ , . - , . • ^ ,• , r • r- Published in English for the first time

11

ENGELS TO AUGUST BEBEL

London, 30 April 1883

Dear Bebel,

There is a very simple answer to your question as to whether I might remove to Germany or Switzerland or somewhere else on the Continent, namely that I shall not go to any country from which one can be expelled. But that is something one can only be safe from in England and America. I should at most go to the latter country on a visit, unless otherwise compelled. Hence I shall remain here.

Moreover England has another great advantage. Since the demise of the International there has been no labour movement whatsoever here, save as an appendage to the bourgeoisie, the radicals and for the pursuit of limited aims within the capitalist system. Thus, only here does one have the peace one needs if one is to go on with one's theo- retical work. Everywhere else one would have had to take part in practical agitation and waste an enormous amount of time. As re- gards practical agitation, I should have achieved no more than any-

[^1]: IN BORSDORF NEAR LEIPZIG 3 4





**[p. 17]**

As regards a monument to Marx,36 I do not know what ought to be done. The family is against it. The simple headstone made for his wife, which now also bears his and his little grandson'sa names, would be desecrated in their eyes if replaced by a monument which, here in London, would be scarcely distinguishable from the pretentious phil- istine monuments surrounding it. A London cemetery of this kind looks quite different from a German one. The graves lie closely side by side, not room for a tree between them, and a monument is not al- lowed to exceed the length and breadth of the small plot that has been bought.

Liebknecht spoke of a complete edition of Marx's writings. All very well, but Dietz's plan for Volume II has made people forget that that Volume was long since promised to Meissner and that an edition of the other, shorter works would likewise have to be offered to Meissner first, and then could only appear abroad. After all, even before the Anti-Socialist Law 3 7 it was always said that not even the Communist

[^1]: a Henri Longuet





**[p. 18]**

The manuscript of Volume II was completed prior to 1873, prob- ably even prior to 1870.17 It is written in German script; after 1873 Marx never used anything but Latin characters.

It is too late for registration, so this letter must go off as it is; how- ever, I shall seal it with my seal.

A letter this evening to Liebknecht in Berlin.39

Your

F.E.

First published in: A. Bebel, Aus meinem Printed according to the original Leben, Th. Ill, Stuttgart, 1914 „ , , . . , . r ,• •_ c L r Published in English tor the hrst

12

ENGELS TO FRIEDRICH ADOLPH SORGE

London, 1 May 1883

Dear Sorge,

So as to obtain a good photograph of Marx, we have ordered from Mayall, the leading photographer here, who took the last ones of him,

1,000 cartes de visite r\2

i. e. approx. 3d. apiece;

You can have some of these at cost price— I have also offered them to Liebknecht and Bernstein in Zurich/ If the above quantity does not

[^1]: IN HOBOKEN

[^2]: 200 CABINET SIZE, 3/4 figure, à £8 i. e. approx. 9d. apiece of the last nice one.

[^3]: See this volume, pp. 15-16.





**[p. 19]**

Your

F. Engels

First published in: Marx and Engels, Printed according to the original Works, First Russian Edition, Vol. XXVII, „ , , . , , . . , , . , , , „ Moscow, 1935 Published in English for the first time

13

ENGELS TO WILHELM LIEBKNECHT

IN BORSDORF NEAR LEIPZIG 3 4

London, 10 May 1883

Dear Liebknecht,

If you carry on in this way, causing me unnecessary expenditure of ink by the schemes you keep hatching and the ill-considered ac- tions you perform off your own bat, our correspondence would assuredly cease.

All I asked you for originally was a reply, telling me what my legal position was in regard to Wigand. The 1845 contract envisages a 2nd edition and lays down the fee to be paid for it.40 Question:

1. Am / still bound by this? 2. If so, and if Wigand refuses to print a 2nd edition on the condi- tions of payment agreed, does that release me outright?

I have never been able to get an answer from you to these simple questions and, since you promised to obtain one for me, I can only describe it as 'neglect on your part'.

Never have I instructed you either personally or via a third party to act on my behalf, and I cannot conceive why, at this moment, you took it into your head to set such a thing in motion off your own bat and without even reflecting. / would expressly request that you



**[p. 20]**

Meissner has written today; makes no mention at all of publication instalments." The contract does not entitle us to interfere here. But if Dietz can show Meissner that it is to his own advantage, he may do it after all.

Lafargue's address: 66 Boulevard de Port-Royal, Paris (close to Ste-Pélagie, handy for a chap going to quod).9

Photographs will be delivered in batches and sent to Dietz as soon as possible.b

First published, in Russian, in Marx- Printed according to the original Engels Archives, Vol. I (VI), Moscow, _ , ,, . , . „ ,. . _ , „ .„S„ Published in English for the first time

14

London, 10-11 May 1883

Dear Bebel,

That you would sooner not sit in the Reichstag, I am ready to be- lieve. But you can see what your absence has made possible. Some years ago Bracke wrote to me saying: Bebel is, in fact, the only one of us possessed of real parliamentary tact.42 And I have found this con- stantly confirmed. So there's probably no alternative but for you to return to your post at the first opportunity and I should be delighted were you to be elected in Hamburg so that necessity relieved you of your doubts.43

Certainly, agitational and parliamentary work becomes very bor-

[^1]: ENGELS TO AUGUST BEBEL41

[^2]: IN BORSDORF NEAR LEIPZIG 3 4

[^3]: a This refers probably to the third German edition of Volume I of Capital. -b See this volume, pp. 15-16.





**[p. 21]**

Despite the way it was written, the report on the Copenhagen Con- gress ' 5 enabled me to read sufficiently between the lines to amend Liebknecht's, as always rosy, version of things.a At all events I per- ceived that the half-and-halfs 44 had suffered a severe defeat and this, I admit, led me to believe that they would now draw in their horns. Yet such does not seem to be the case, or not to that degree. We have never been under any illusions about these men. Neither Hasenclever nor, for that matter, Hasselmann, should ever have been admitted, but Liebknecht's undue haste over unification — against which, at the time, we protested for all we were worth — has landed us with a jackass and also, for a while, with a rascal.45 In his day, Bios was a lively, courageous chap but after his marriage, etc., the stuffing was soon knocked out of him by the difficulty of making both ends meet. Geiser always was an indolent, self-opinionated fellow and Kayser a big-mouthed commis-voyageur.h Even in 1848 Rittinghausen was a nonentity; he's only a socialist proforma, in order to enlist our help in achieving his direct government by the people. But we have better things to do.

What you say about Liebknecht is something you have doubtless long been thinking.46 We have known him for many years. Popu- larity is the very stuff of life to him. Hence he has got to conciliate and conceal in order to postpone the crisis. Besides, he's an optimist by nature and sees everything through rose-tinted spectacles. That's what keeps him so lively and is the main reason for his popularity, but it also has its disadvantages. So long as I corresponded only with him, not only did he report everything in accordance with his own rosy views, but also withheld everything that was unpleasant and, upon being questioned, replied in such an airy and off-hand way that, more than by anything else, one was unfailingly needled by the thought 'Can the man suppose us so stupid as to be taken in by it?'

[^1]: a Cf. this volume, pp. 7 and 32.-b commercial traveller





**[p. 22]**

Again, for all his valuable qualities, Liebknecht is a born school- master. If a working man in the Reichstag happens to say me instead of I, or pronounce a short Latin vowel as a long one, and the bour- geois laugh, he's in despair. Hence he has to have 'eddicated' men, like that weakling Viereck who, with a single speech, would make us look more foolish in the Reichstag than would two thousand wrong 'mes'. And then, he can't wait. A momentary success, even if it means the sacrifice of a subsequent, far greater one, takes precedence over everything else. You people will discover that in America, when you go there in the wake of Fritzsche and Viereck.47 Their mission was a blunder as great as the over-hasty unification with the Lassalleans who, six months later, would have come to you of their own accord — but as a disorganised gang without their bankrupt leaders.

As you see, I speak to you quite frankly — in confidence. But I also believe that you would do well firmly to resist Liebknecht's persuasive blandishments. Then he's bound to yield. If really confronted by a decision, he will certainly adopt the right course. But he would rather do so tomorrow than today, and in a year's time rather than tomorrow.

If a few deputies were in fact to vote for Bismarck's Bills, 48 thus planting a kiss on his backside in return for having theirs kicked, and if the parliamentary group 4 9 failed to expel these people, I too would, of course, be capable of publicly disassociating myself from a party prepared to tolerate such a thing. To the best of my knowledge, however, that would be impossible, having regard to existing party discipline whereby the minority has got to vote with the majority. But you are better informed than I.

Any split that took place while the Anti-Socialist Law is in opera-



**[p. 23]**

Bios, when he went to Bremen after being expelled from Hamburg, did indeed write me a very plaintive letter50 to which I sent a very firm reply.3 9 Now, my papers have for years been in the most shock- ing muddle, and finding this particular one would be a day's work. But some time I shall have to put them in order and, if needs be, shall send you the letter in the original.

Your view of the business conditions is being corroborated in Eng- land, France and America.5 ' It is an intermediate crisis like that of 1841-42, but on a much vaster scale. Generally speaking, it is only since 1847 (because of Californian and Australian gold production which resulted in the world market becoming fully established) that the ten-year cycle has clearly emerged. Now, when America, France and Germany are beginning to break England's monopoly of the world market and when, therefore, overproduction is beginning, as it did before 1847, to assert itself more rapidly, the quinquennial inter- mediate crises are also recurring. Proof of this is the complete exhaus- tion of the capitalist mode of production. The period of prosperity no longer reaches its full term; overproduction recurs after only 5 years and, even during those 5 years, things in general go downhill. Which, however, is very far from proving that, between 1884 and 1887, we shan't have a period of pretty brisk trade, as happened between 1844 and 1847. But then the great crash will quite surely come.

11 May. I had wanted to write and tell you more about the general state of trade, but meanwhile it is time for the registered mail. Till next time, then.

Your

F. E.

[^1]: First published abridged in: A. Bebel, Aus meinem Leben, Th. III, Stuttgart, 1914 and in full, in Russian, in Marx-Engels Archives, Vol. I (VI), Moscow, 1932

[^2]: Printed according to the original

[^3]: Published in English in full for the first time





**[p. 15]**

ENGELS TO ACHILLE LORIA 5 2

IN MANTUA

London, 20 May 1883

122 Regent's Park Road, N. W.

Dear Sir,

I have received your pamphlet on Karl Marx. You are entitled to subject his doctrines to the most stringent criticism, indeed to misun- derstand them; you are entitled to write a biography of Marx which is pure fiction. But what you are not entitled to do, and what I shall never permit anyone to do, is slander the character of my departed friend.

Already in a previous worka you took the liberty of accusing Marx of quoting in bad faith. When Marx read this he checked his and your quotations against the originals and he told me that his were all correct and that if there was any bad faith it was on your part. And seeing how you quote Marx, how you have the audacity to make Marx speak of profit when he speaks of Mehrwerth,b when he defends himself time and again against the error of identifying the two (some- thing which Mr Moore and I have repeated to you verbally here in London) I know whom to believe and where the bad faith lies.

This however is a trifle compared to your 'deep and firm convic- tion that conscious sophistry pervades them all' (Marx's doctrines); that Marx 'did not baulk at paralogisms, while knowing them to be such', that 'he was often a sophist who wished to arrive, at the expense of the truth, at a negation of present-day society' and that, as Lamartine says, 'il jouait avec les mensonges et les vérités comme les enfants avec les osselets'.0 53

In Italy, a country of ancient civilisation, this might perhaps be taken as a compliment, or it might be considered great praise among armchair socialists,54 seeing that these venerable professors could never produce their innumerable systems except 'at the expense of the truth'. We revolutionary communists see things differently. We re-

[^1]: a A. Loria, La teoria del valore negli economisti italiani. - b surplus value -c 'he played with lies and truth like children with marbles'





**[p. 25]**

In my opinion, it should have been your duty to make known to the public this famous 'conscious sophistry' which pervades all of Marx's doctrines. But I look for it in vain! Nagott!" What a tiny mind one must have to imagine that a man like Marx could have 'always threatened his critics' with a second volume which he 'had not the slightest intention of writing', and that this sec- ond volume was nothing but 'an ingenious pretext dreamed up by Marx in place of scientific arguments'. This second volume exists and it will shortly be published. Perhaps you will then learn to under- stand the difference between Mehrwerth and profit.

A German translation of this letter will be published in the next issue of the Zurich Sozialdemokrat.

I have the honour of saluting you with all the sentiments you de- serve.

F. E.

First published in Der Sozialdemokrat, Printed according to the original, Nr. 21, 17. Mai 1883 checked with the newspaper

16

London, 22 May 1883

Dear Old Man,

How can you suppose that / might somehow be able to find paid literary work for a young party memberb? After all, it is years since

[^1]: Translated from the Italian

[^2]: Published in English for the first time

[^3]: ENGELS T O JOHANN PHILIPP BECKER 5 5

[^4]: IN GENEVA

[^5]: a The following words were added in the newspaper: (Lombardic swear-word for: nothing at all).-b Ludwig Klopfer; see next letter.





**[p. 26]**

(on account of Capital), let alone with newspapers and peri- odicals. So what could I do? Even if the man could translate the other way round, from German into French or English, I should be unable to help him find work. You would certainly do better to ap- proach Liebknecht who after all has the Neue Z_eit and connections in plenty.

We shall be saddled with Marx's house until next March, so there is no need to be over-hasty about the removal or plans for the future. Moreover a tremendous amount of work is involved in getting these papers in order. What surprises me is that Marx has actually saved papers, letters and manuscripts from the period prior to 1848, splen- did material for the biography which I shall of course be writing and which, inter alia, will also be the history of the Neue Rheinische Leitung and of the movement of 1848-49 on the Lower Rhine, as well as the history of the rascally emigration in London between 1849 and 1852 and of the International.30 The first task is the editing of Vol- ume II of Capital4 and that is no joke. There are in existence 4 or 5 revisions of Book II, of which only the first is complete, the others having been merely started on " ; some labour when you're dealing with a man like Marx, who weighed every word. But to me it is a labour of love; after all I shall be back again with my old com- rade.

For the past few days I have been sorting letters from 1842-62. As I watched the old times pass before my eyes they really came to life again, as did all the fun we used to have at our adversaries' expense. Many of our early doings made me weep with laughter; they didn't, after all, ever succeed in banishing our sense of humour. But there were also many very serious moments in between whiles.

This is in confidence; mind you, don't let a word of it get into the papers. Such information as is ripe for imparting will be published by me from time to time in the Sozialdemokrat. Bernstein is getting on very well, he is eager to learn, is witty and has an open mind, can put up with criticism and is quite free of all petty-bourgeois moralisings. But our lads in Germany have also been truly magnificent, ever since the time that the Anti-Socialist Law 3 7 liberated them from the 'ed- dicated' gentlemen who, in their ignorant academic muddle- headedness, had attempted prior to 1878 to instruct the workers from on high, an attempt that was, alas, condoned by all too many of the



**[p. 27]**

'leaders'. This worthless lumber has not yet been entirely cleared away, but the movement has again taken a decidedly revolutionary turn. That is precisely what is so splendid about our lads, the fact that the masses are far better than almost any of the leaders; and now that the Anti-Socialist Law is compelling the masses to take care of the movement themselves, now that the influence of the leaders is reduced to a minimum, the movement is better than ever.

Your old friend

F. Engels

First published in: F. Engels, Vergessene Printed according to the original Briefe (Briefe Friedrich Engels' an Johann Philipp Becker), Berlin, 1920 Published in English in full for the first time

17

ENGELS TO LUDWIG KLOPFER

London, 22 May 1883

Dear Mr Klopfer,

I should be only too glad to help you if I possibly could. However I have absolutely no publishing or literary connections in Germany and should not know whom to approach. a The party, however, still has various periodicals, etc., in Germany, e. g. Liebknecht's and Kautsky's Neue £eit in Stuttgart (Dietz Verlag) ; you should get Becker to give you letters for them. If anything can be done for you, it is over there; we here are as cut off from everything as you are in Ge- neva.

Your letter of the 9th bears the Geneva postmark of the 13th. I hope that this will at least partly explain my delay in replying.

[^1]: IN GENEVA

[^2]: a See previous letter.





**[p. 28]**

Trusting that the adoption of the above course will enable you to achieve your object, I remain,

Yours truly,

F. Engels

First published in: Marx and Engels, Printed according to the original Works, Second Russian Edition, Vol. 39, Moscow, 1966 Published in English for the first time

18

ENGELS TO LAURA LAFARGUE

IN PARIS

London, 22 May 1883

My dear Laura,

I had not, as Paul suggests, forgotten his five pd. note, but having Sam Moore here, could not get a free moment when to get it ready and register the letter. Yesterday evening Sam returned to Manches- ter and the note would have left here to-day, but for Paul's letter which alters his directions to me. The cheque is enclosed, £ 10.-

So ce cher Paul is while I write this, a prisoner. 9 He has just (5.45) been debarred from receiving visitors and can now in all rest and peace discuss with Guesde the chances of la révolution révolutionnaire. We drank his health last Sundaya in a bowl of splendid Maitrankb

and wished him any amount of pluck and patience.

Well, for a long time I thought you might profit of Paul's involun- tary seclusion, to come over to London, and would have at once placed the whole of 122 Regent's Park Road at your disposal, but from all I learnt I was afraid I might hurt someone's feelings by such a proposal. Even Nim when she returned, never mentioned a word about it, that you had spoken of showing your bright face in this dull climate; and when Paul wrote he expected you to lunch with him

[^1]: 20 May- b Wine flavoured with sweet woodruff, May wine.





**[p. 29]**

every morning in St-Pélagie I lost heart altogether. Now however it is all right, and I hope to hear soon from you that you accept my invita- tion, to make this place your headquarters for a couple of months at least, which of course will not exclude trips to the sea-side, etc. If Paul has to be under lock and key, so much the more reason for you to look after your own health.

While Sam was here, we found out, through him, the very unpleas- ant fact that Mohr never had, nor have we, the right to stop unauth- orised translation of the Kapital. The right was lost as soon as the first year elapsed without a commencement of translation being published. So as there are several fellows in the field,56 we have to dodge and to use the unpublished 2nd volume as a means to bring them round.

The 2nd volume will give me an awful deal of work — at least the II book. 4 There is one complete text, of about 1868, but a mere brouillon.a Then there are at least three, if not four, Ueb er arbeitungen b

belonging to various later periods, but none of them completed. That will be a job to select from them a definitive text! The 3rd book is complete since 1869-70 and has never been touched since. But here, where the rent of land is treated, I shall have to compare his Russian extracts57 for notes, facts and instances. Maybe I shall be able to con- coct even a bit of a 3rd volume from the ms. of 1858-62 58 (the begin- ning of which appeared in Berlin [in] 1859c) and which at the end of every chapter contains the critical history of the theoretical points discussed in it.

Lately I have been occupied with sorting the correspondence. There is a large box full of most important letters [from] 1841 (nay 1837 from your grandfather Marxd) to 1862. It is nearly sorted, but it will take me some hours more to complete it. I can assure you it is great fun to me to stumble over these old things most of which con- cern me as much as they did Mohr and there is such a deal to laugh over. Nim helps me — awful lot of dusting required! and we have many a good laugh over old times. The correspondence since 1862 he has sorted, in a passable way, himself. But before we fathom all the mysteries of that garret full of boxes, packets, parcels, books, etc., some time must elapse. And I have to prepare for the 3rd edition sun- dry additions from the French translation 59 which I know Mohr in- tended inserting; and that must be done in 3-4 weeks.

[^1]: * draft-b revised versions-c K. Marx, A Contribution to the Critique of Political Economy. Part One.-d Heinrich Marx





**[p. 30]**

But now it's post-time and so good-bye for to-day.

Yours affectionately,

F. Engels

First published, in the language of the Reproduced from the original original (English), in: F. Engels, P. et L. Lafargue, Correspondance, t. I, Paris, 1956

19

ENGELS T O LAURA LAFARGUE

IN PARIS

London, 2 June 1883

My dear Laura,

Herewith cheque £ 10.- for Paul as desired. To judge from his let- ter, he seems to be pretty cheerful for his condition, but of course the grincement des clefs et des verrouxa must be something awful.9

What is comparative liberty by day when one is reduced to solitary confinement by night, and how is he to sing:

As Paul is going to work up his German in prison, you might give him that to translate.

[^1]: Singet nicht in Trauertönen Von der Einsamkeit der Nacht, Denn sie ist, o holde Schönen, Zur Geselligkeit gemacht.b

[^2]: Now, by this time the two heroic martyrs0 ought to be pretty well

[^3]: a clinking of keys and bolts b Sing no more in strains of sadness Of the loveliness of night! Darksome hours were made for gladness, Social joy, and love's delight.

[^4]: Goethe, Wilhelm Master's Apprenticeship, translated by R. Dillon Boylan, London, Henry Bohn, 1861. c Paul Lafargue and Jules Guesde





**[p. 31]**

settled down and don't you think you might come over, say by Thursday or Friday nexta? The fact is I expect Jollymeier to-night who will be able to stay here till Monday week, 11 th June, and he would so like to see you. Moreover, Tussy talks very much about your coming and seems very anxious to have you here and to consult you about the disposal of the things in the house, etc., etc., the sole respon- sibility seems to weigh very much upon her. So that your journey would be to some extent on business. If you will come and if you write at once, I shall send you the funds by return, I should have added them to the cheque to-day, only my balance is low and I have money to come in next week.

Among Mohr's papers I have found a whole lot of mss, our com- mon work, of before 1848.60 Some of these I shall soon publish.

There is one I shall read to you when you are here, you will crack your sides with laughing. I read it to Nim and Tussy, Nim said: jetzt weiss ich auch, warum Sie %wei damals in Brüssel des Nachts so gelacht haben, dass kein Mensch im Hause davor schlafen konnte. b We were bold devils then, Heine's poetry is childlike innocence compared wim our prose.

There is a chance of a translation of the Kapital being published by Kegan Paul and Co., they would be the best men. 5 6 Tussy is go- ing to see them on Monday0; if anything practicable comes of it, we shall then go together afterwards. S. Moore will translate, and I shall revise. There are other people at it, but if we can arrange the thing, they will soon be out of the field. S. Moore was here in Whitweek, and we settled the matter with him, as far as he is concerned. He is by far the best man, slightly heavy, but that can be mended. He has been of immense use to us as our legal adviser. Indeed I have still to write to him by first mail upon a legal question.

Pumps is going on very well and her two babies too, the boy is aw- fully big and fat, very near the size of his sister! at least so says the proud Mamma. If you are here next Sunday (to-morrow) week, we shall have a grand bowl of Maitrank,d it is just in its prime now, I mean the Waldmeister, we have had two bowls here on Sundays and two at Tussy's in the week, and plenty of Moselle left!

If you say you will come, the same day I shall write to Dublin for a case of the best and of the super best Claret which we will finish quietly betwixt us.

[^1]: a 7 or 8 June - b Now I know why you two laughed at night in Brussels at that time so that no one could sleep in the building. -c 4 June -d Wine flavoured with sweet woodruff, May wine.





**[p. 32]**

A few lines to Paul in a day or two. In the meantime affectionally yours,

F. Engels

First published, in the language of the Reproduced from the original original (English), in: F.Engels, P. et L. Lafargue, Correspondance, 1.1, Paris, 1956

20

ENGELS TO EDUARD BERNSTEIN 6 '

IN ZURICH

London, 12-13 June 1883

Dear Bernstein,

It is half past eleven at night and having just read the proof of the second sheet of the third edition oï Capital* (no small task), and sent it off, I shall try and utilise what is left of the evening at least to begin a letter to you.

As regards internal matters, I had more or less read between the lines of the official reportb and, soon after, also received a short exposé from Bebel. Some while previously I had written and told Bebel that there must ultimately be a break with the ninnies of the right wing,c

but that in my view it was not in our interests to force it before we were again in a position to consort directly with the masses; i. e. not so long as the Anti-Socialist Law remained operative.37 Should they force our hand, then we should see to it that it was they, not us, who rebelled against party discipline, in which case the game would already be ours. And they should be brought to do this if they refused to keep quiet. So far as Liebknecht is concerned, he will do everything in his

[^1]: a the third German edition of Volume I of Capital - b Protokoll über den Kongreß der deutschen Sozialdemokratie in Kopenhagen. See also this volume, p. 21.- c See Engels' letter to August Bebel of 21 June 1882 (present edition, Vol. 46).





**[p. 33]**

power to put off the crisis, but when it does come and he realises that it can no longer be postponed, he will be in the right place.

Let me briefly sum up what I have to do:

1 ) Put the papers in order 2; here almost everything has to be done by myself since no one except me knows about the old stuff, and there's an enormous pile of it in a fine state of disarray. Much is still missing and a lot of packages and boxes haven't even been opened yet.

2) See to the third edition, with sundry alterations and a few ad- denda from the French edition.59 On top ofthat, read the proofs.

3) Take advantage of an opportunity that has presented itself to bring out an English translation — in connection with which I today called on one of the big publishers here a—and then revise the trans- lation myself56 (Moore, who will be doing it, is first-rate, a friend of ours for twenty-six years, but slow).

4) Collate the 3 or 4 versions of the beginning of Volume II and prepare them for the press, besides making a fair copy of the whole of the second volume. ' 7

5) Spend a week every now and again tippling with Schorlemmer who returned to Manchester yesterday — he always brings some work with him, but o, jerum!h

The jackass in the Vossische (I've been sent the thingd four times) would certainly seem to have disseminated a lot of despondency in good old Germany respecting the despondent Marx. I might, some time when in really jolly mood, take a kick at him. Were these oafs to get the chance of reading the correspondence between Moor and my- self, they'd be speechless with rage. Heine's poetry is trifling by com- parison with our impudent, mocking prose. Moor was capable of be- coming furiously angry, but down-in-the-mouth—jamais!e I was convulsed when I reread the old stuff. This correspondence is, by the way, also historically memorable and, in so far as it is in my power, it will end up in the right hands. Unfortunately I only have the letters Marx wrote after 1849, but those are complete.

[^1]: Voilà la vie/c

[^2]: a Kegan Paul- b 0,jerum,jerum,jerum! O, quae mutatio rerum! (Oh, dear me, dear me, dear me. A crazy world. Lord, hear me!) —part of the refrain from a student song at- tributed to Eugen Höfling. -c That's life! -d 'Zur Beurteilung von Karl Marx', Königlich privilegirte Berlinische Leitung von Staats- und gelehrten Sachen, No. 235, 1st sup- plement, 24 May 1883.-e never!





**[p. 34]**

Herewith part of the original draft from the last part of the Commu- nist Manifesto which you want to keep as a memento. The first two lines were dictated, and were taken down by Mrs Marx. 6 2

I would have sent you the enclosed poem by Weerth in time for the feuilleton, had you not so contrived matters that your letter arrived twelve hours too late — as it was, I had to wait and see whether you printed the feuilleton tel quel* Anyhow, you can put it in some- where else.63 If only by contrast with the solemn Freiligrath, all of Weerth's stuff is ironical and humorous. Never any question of 'she- rioushness' here.

As regards the repeal of the Anti-Socialist Law, the chaps in Ger- many can never see beyond their own noses. By disappointing Russia (and things are far more acute there) with his proclamation in Mos- cow just as Frederick William IV disappointed the Prussians in 1841,64 Alexander III has done more towards that end than all your Geisers, Bloses and Co. could ever do with their lamentations. If, one fine morning, he is riddled with bullets—as he surely will be — Bismarck's internal régime won't be worth a brass farthing. Then they'll change their tune. Even if old Williamb merely (I don't mean Wilhelm Blosc) kicks the bucket, there will of necessity be changes. The men of today have never experienced, nor can they possibly imagine, what a crown prince,d grown up in what has in the meantime become a revolutionary situation, is capable of. And a fool, what's more, as vacillating and weak-willed as 'our Fritz'. Nor, for that matter, can the possibility be excluded that the crazy French government may fall foul of all the world in such a way as to incite violent action in Paris. Tunis, Egypt, Madagascar, Tonkin65 — and now they are actually seeking to contest England's possession of a few rocky islands, with barely 50 inhabitants, off the coast of Normandy. I only hope that nothing happens in Paris, for the stupidity that pre- vails among the masses there is exceeded only here, in London.

And on top of that the ingenuous Bismarck works for us like the very devil. His latest theory — that the imperial constitution is noth- ing but a contract made by governments for which they can substi- tute another one any old day, without consulting the Reichstag — is a real godsend to us. Just let him try. Add to which the manifest intention to bring about a conflict, his stupid, impertinent Bödi- kers & Co. in the Reichstag — all this is grist to our mill. True, this

[^1]: a as it stood - b William I -c In Engels' text the parenthesis was a footnote. In German 'merely' = bloss.-A Frederick William





**[p. 35]**

a phrase generally appropriate only for declamation (or, again, for a truly revolutionary situation). For it is precisely in this that the quirk of history — one operating in our favour—consists, namely that the dif- ferent elements of that feudal and bourgeois mass erode, fight with and devour one another, to our advantage and are, therefore, the very op- posite of that uniform mass which your lout imagines he can dismiss by dubbing the whole lot 'reactionary'. On the contrary. All these di- verse scoundrels must first mutually destroy, utterly ruin and discred- it each other, and pave the way for us by proving their ineptitude, each lot in turn. It was one of Lassalle's greatest mistakes, when engaged in agitation, wholly to lose sight of what little dialectics he had learned from Hegel. Thus, just like Liebknecht, he never saw more than one side and, since the former, for certain reasons, happened to see the right side, he ultimately proved superior to the great Lassalle after all.

The one regrettable thing about the present German bourgeois movement is precisely that the chaps constitute no more than 'one re- actionary mass', and this has got to stop. We can make no progress until at least part of the bourgeoisie has been forced over onto the side of a genuine movement, whether by internal or external events. That is why we have now had enough of Bismarck's regime in its present form, why he can only benefit us by provoking a conflict or resigning and also why the time will come for the Anti-Socialist Law to be done away with by semi-revolutionary or wholly revolutionary means. All those arguments as to whether the 'Lesser'67 alone should go, or the Law as a whole, or whether the ordinary penal law should be tight- ened up, seem to me like arguments about the virginity of Mary in partu and post partum* What is crucial is the wider political situation both at home and abroad; and this changes, does not remain as it is to- day. In Germany, by contrast, the case is discussed solely on the as- sumption that present conditions in Germany will persist eternally. And running parallel with this is an idea, related to that of one reac- tionary mass, namely that, with the subversion of the present state of affairs, we shall come to the helm. That is nonsense. A revolution is a lengthy process, cf. 1642-46 and 1789-9368; and in order that cir- cumstances should be ready for us and we for them, all the intermedi- ate parties must come to power in turn and destroy themselves. And

[^1]: a during and after parturition





**[p. 36]**

I have today despatched to 'Volksbuchhandlung, Hottingen-Zurich'',a

freight forward per CONTINENTAL PARCELS EXPRESS (correspondent of the German and Swiss parcel post), a parcel containing the photographs ordered,b invoice enclosed. Of the money you should retain the £\lj-credited to my account over there, against 4 frs for snifters trans- mitted by proxy, subscriptions, etc. (If, when remitting the balance, it would be more convenient to include a little more or a little less, that would, of course, be ALL RIGHT.) Over here 500 cartesc and 280 CABINETS are still available — first come, first served. Not that you have any competitors as yet, save for Dietz. Just how much is pushed on to me you will realise when I tell you that I have today had to attend, single-handed, to all the details of checking and repacking the photo- graphs for you and Dietz, and have likewise had to take them to the office (2 1I2 English miles from here). And then I'm expected to work!

Borde is a jackass whom we have known for years; at Marx's house there are a hundred or more of the notebooks he sent him, lying about unopened. Envoyez-le au diable.A

I shall not come to Switzerland until the continental routes are safer. After all, there was no certainty of Marx's being able to travel to, or through, France unscathed this summer. Once one has been expelled, that is that, unless one is prepared to take steps such as I should find impossible. Don't I know it!

You do not, by the way, bore me in the least with internal matters. Anyone who's abroad can never hear enough about the details of this sort of internal struggle in a workers' party which, despite everything, is the leading one in Europe. And that kind ofthing is withheld from me on principle by friend Liebknecht, all of whose reports are rosy red, dawn pink, sky-blue and green as the tender leaves of hope.

For the anniversary of the June battle of 1848, I am sending you a Neue Rheinische Reifung article by Marx,e who was the only man in

[^1]: a a Social Democratic publishing house- b See this volume, pp. 15-16.-c Cartes de vi- site; small photographic portraits mounted on a card. - d Consign him to the devil.- c 'The June Revolution'





**[p. 37]**

the whole of the European press to back up the insurgents after they had fallen.

Kindest regards,

Yours,

F.E.

13 June 1883

Do you think the time is ripe for the Sozialdemokrat % feuilleton to print an excessively impudent piece Marx and I wrote in 1847,69 in which the 'true socialists', who are now also members of the Reichs- tag, are pulled to pieces? The most impudent thing ever to have been written in the German language.

First published, in Russian, in Marx- Printed according to the original Engels Archives, Book I, Moscow, 1924

Published in English in full for the first time

21

ENGELS TO PASQUALE MARTIGNETTI

London, 19 June 1883

122 Regent's Park Road, N. W.

Dear Sir,

I was very pleased to receive your fine Italian translation of my So- cialism: Utopian and Scientific.70 I have been through it and I have suggested minor alterations in a number of places, although I am dif- fident and aware that my Italian is imperfect and that I am out of practice. I hope that despite this you can understand the translation (into Italian or French) of the additions to the first German edition which I have inserted at the corresponding points in your manu- script.

I am enclosing a copy of the recently published German edition, and a copy of the 2nd edition, which is going to press at the moment, will follow.25 I am sorry that the translation could not have been

[^1]: IN BENEVENTO





**[p. 38]**

Thank you for your kind offer to send me several copies of the translation; six, or at most a dozen, will be enough.

Yours respectfully,

Fred. Engels

I am sending by the midday post a registered parcel containing

1) your manuscript, 2) the copy of the German edition.

First published in La corrispondenza di Marx e Engels con italiani. 1848-1895, Milano, 1964

Printed according to the original

Translated from the Italian

Published in English for the first time

22

ENGELS TO EDUARD BERNSTEIN

London, 22 June 1883

Dear Bernstein,

When you go to Paris, you must certainly cross the water and spend a day or two here. The trip both ways will cost you less than the amount you would fritter away in Paris in that time. A room has already been prepared for you here. I can then also show you the im- pudent ms. I mentioned, as well as the other mss.69 Madame Lafargue will advise you about the best way to make the journey.

Yours,

Regards to Liebknecht.

F.E.

[^1]: IN ZURICH

[^2]: First published, in Russian, in Marx- Engels Archives, Book I, Moscow, 1924

[^3]: Printed according to the original

[^4]: Published in English for the first time





**[p. 23]**

ENGELS TO LAURA LAFARGUE

IN PARIS

London, 24 June 1883

My dear Laura,

When you spoke of your knowledge of what poor Moor's views and wishes had been at Vevey,7 ' it was in connection with dispositions of a more or less testamentary nature, and I therefore naturally con- cluded that you alluded to similar subjects. And as those might comprise wishes as to what should be done with some mementos of your Mama, etc., books and so forth, and as here we are bound to come to some conclusion or other, and Tussy moreover seems to shun respon- sibility of acting on her own hook, I thought it my clear duty to in- form you, so that, in case you had anything to communicate, it could be done in time.

After poor Mohr's death, on my inquiry, Tussy informed me that he had told her, she and I were to take possession of all his papers, and procure the publication of what was to be published, especially the 2nd volume" and the mathematical works.72 The 3rd German editionb is in hand, I am looking after that too. If you wish to have Mohr's exact words, Tussy will no doubt give them to you if you ask her to do so.

This matter was talked about here when Paul was here, and I am almost certain he is aware of it.

As to the expression, literary executors, I am alone responsible for it. I could not find another at the time, and if by it I have in any way offended you, I humbly ask your pardon.73

How the disposition itself can wound you, I cannot see. The work must be done here on the spot. The real work, that you know as well as Tussy does, will mostly have to be done by me. But as Mohr had one daughter living in London, I find it but natural that he should associ- ate her to me in such work as she could do. Had you been living here instead of in Paris, all the three of us would have been jointly ap- pointed, no doubt about that.

[^1]: a of Capital - b of the first volume of Capital





**[p. 40]**

Of the projects Mohr discussed with you at Vevey I was of course utterly ignorant and only regret you did not come over since the 14th March, when we should have known and complied with them as much as possible. But here is how the matter stands with regard to the English translation.a We find (from Sam. Moore as well as from Meissner) that we have no right to stop anyone from publishing an un- authorised translation. That right, in the best of cases, lasts but three years after first publication and lapsed finally in 1870. Now there were several people in the field and a well-meaning but poor and un- businesslike publisher, Reeves, the most undesirable man of all, told Radford he had found a translator and was going to publish his trans- lation. There was then no time to lose. We must find someone wil- ling and able to do the work — we could think of no one but Sam. Moore and of Kegan Paul and Co. as publishers. The two entered into correspondence, then Tussy saw Kegan Paul, then I. Nothing is concluded, but very probably we shall come to some agreement. The question is: would you, under the altered circumstances, have under- taken to do the translation and bind yourself to a given time, say 6 months?

As to the History of the International, I am perfectly willing, as far as / a m concerned, that all papers, etc., relating to the International be handed over to you for that purpose. But my plan was to write a full biography of Mohr,30 and if you take those papers, that falls to the ground. Mohr's life without the International would be a dia- mond ring with the diamond broken out.

I have said nothing to Tussy about your letter, as I do riot wish to interfere in any way between two sisters. Therefore, if you require any explanations from her, you will please write direct to her. But I think

[^1]: a Of the first volume of Capital; see this volume, p. 29.





**[p. 41]**

the best thing you could do, is to come over and have the matter mu- tually explained. You know very well there is on my part no other desire but to consider your wishes as much as possible and in every re- spect. And I am the same in the case with Tussy. If you wish to have your name associated to ours in the common work, and if you wish to share this work, and means can be found how, I for one shall only be glad ofthat. As it is we shall want your assistance often enough for in- formation, etc., and nothing could throw greater obstacles in our way than fresh unpleasantness between you and Tussy. What we all of us are desirous of seeing carried out, is a befitting monument to the memory of Mohr, the first portion of which will and must be the publica- tion of his posthumous works. Let us then all contribute what we can towards that end.

The only person to whom I have spoken about this matter is Nim and she is quite of the opinion expressed above.

As to our two martyrs,a they seem happy and contented enough, and even afraid of Grévy's putting an end to their prison-bliss on the 14th July.9 What a fine sentence that on Louise Michel!74 Fortu- nately nobody knows who will rule France a couple of years hence. A shell between the legs of Alexander III, and all prison doors in Europe and Asia fly open except — the Irish ones.

partly upon the French edition,59 which must be done quick so as not to give excuse for delay. So no more at present.

Ever yours affectionately,

F. Engels

[^1]: Now I must conclude. I have to read proof-sheets No. 4 of 3rd edi- tion1' which arrived here on Saturday0 and I have bound myself to re- turn them in 48 hours. Then I have to work at the alterations for 3rd edition (done up to page 404) partly upon an annotated copy,75

[^2]: First published in: Marx and Engels, Reproduced from the original Works, Second Russian Edition, Vol. 36, Moscow, 1964 Published in English for the first time

[^3]: a Paul Lafargue and Jules Guesde- b the third German edition of Volume I of Capi- tal- c 23 June





**[p. 24]**

ENGELS T O FRIEDRICH ADOLPH SORGE 7 6

IN HOBOKEN

London, 29 June 1883

Dear Sorge,

My evening's work has been disrupted by callers and this has given me a bit of spare time in which to write to you.

The critique of Henry George, which Marx sent you, is essentially a work of such extraordinary skill and stylistically so much all of a piece, that it would be a pity to tone it down by including the desul- tory marginal comments that appear in English in Marx's copy.a

These will always be to hand in case of need later on. Every word of the letter he sent you was written, as was usually Marx's custom on such occasions, with an eye to the subsequent publication of the text. So you will not be guilty of any indiscretion if you have it printed. If it is to come out in English, I will translate it for you, since the transla- tion of the Manifesto1" has again shown that there seems to be no one over there who can translate our German, at any rate, into literary, grammatical English.77 This calls for a writer with practice in both languages, practice, what's more, that is not merely confined to the daily press. Translating the Manifesto is awfully difficult; by far the best renderings I have seen are the Russian.78

The 3rd edition of Capita? is causing me a tremendous amount of work. We have one copy in which Marx follows the French edition59

when indicating the emendations and additions to be made,75 but all the detailed work remains to be done. I have got as far as 'Accu- mulation',d but here it is a case of revising almost completely the en- tire theoretical section. On top of that there is the responsibility. For to some extent the French translation lacks the depth of the German text; Marx would never have written in German in that way. More- over the publisher keeps pressing me.

Until I finish this there can be no question of my going on to Vol-

[^1]: a See this volume, p. 14.-b K. Marx and F. Engels, Manifesto of the Communist Party. -c the third German edition of Volume I of Capital -d i.e. Part VII of the first volume of Capital





**[p. 43]**

Practically everything has been saved from the period up to 1848. Not only virtually all of the mss he and I worked on at the time (in so far as they haven't been eaten by mice), but also the correspondence. Everything after 1849 is also complete, of course, and, from 1862 on, is actually in some sort of order. Also extensive written material on the International, sufficient, I imagine, for a full history, though I have not yet been able to take a closer look at it.

There are also 3 or 4 notebooks of mathematical studies. I once showed your Adolf3 an example of Marx's new explanation of differential calculus.79

Had it not been for the mass of American and Russian material80

(there are over two cubic metres of books of Russian statistics alone), Volume II would have long since been printed. These detailed stu- dies held him up for years. As always, everything had to be brought right up to date and now it has all come to nothing, apart from his ex- cerpts which will, I trust, include many of his customary critical com- mentaries for use as notes to Volume II.

The photographs are hereb; as soon as I can find time to pack them I shall send them to you. But how? BOOK POST precludes any stout packing, no parcel post exists as yet,.and to send a small package like this per parcels agency would cost a mint of money. Perhaps you would let me know how best to go about it.

I have already read five sheets of the final proof of the 3rd edition; the man has promised to send three sheets a week.

Your

F. Engels

I haven't possibly got time to answer little Hepner's many long let- ters just now. His reports are always of interest to me, intermingled though they are with a great deal of personal gossip and written with the sense of superiority of the newly disembarked. Meanwhile you had better convey my apologies to him.

[^1]: a Adolf Sorge jun.- h See this volume, p. 18.





**[p. 44]**

Nor will Most, who is, of course, bound to confirm everything I have said,b which is exactly what has made him so furious. I believe he will find support in sectarian America and sow confusion for a time. But it is precisely in the nature of the American movement that all mistakes must be experienced in practice. If America's energy and vitality were backed by Europe's theoretical clarity, you would get everything fixed up within ten years. But that is, after all, an his- torical impossibility.

First published in Briefe und Auszüge aus Printed according to the original Briefen von Jok. Phil. Becker, Jos. Dietzgen, Friedrich Engels, Karl Marx u. A. an Published in English in full for the F. A. Sorge und Andere, Stuttgart, 1906 f l r s t t l m e

25

ENGELS TO GABRIEL DEVILLE

London, 12 August 1883

122 Regent's Park Road, N.W.

Dear Citizen Deville,

There I shall have sufficient leisure to look over your work which will be returned to you as soon as possible.

Your manuscript arrived at an opportune moment. Only yesterday I completed the final editing of the 3rd German edition of Capi- tal," and have undertaken to begin editing the 2nd volume imme- diately on my return from the seaside. So your work reached me pre- cisely at the moment when I happened to have a short interval of time.

[^1]: IN PARIS

[^2]: I have received your letter and your manuscript, for which I thank you.81 Next week I shall be leaving London for a seaside resort.82

[^3]: See this volume, pp. 13-14 and 91.- b Ibid., p. 11.- c the first volume





**[p. 45]**

Yours ever,

F. Engels

First published, heavily abridged, in: Printed according to the original M. Dommanget, Karl Marx et Frédéric Engels, Paris, 1951 and in full in: Marx and Engels, Translated from the French Works, Second Russian Edition, Vol. 36, Moscow, 1964 Published in English for the first time

26

ENGELS TO LAURA LAFARGUE

Eastbourne, 19 August 1883 4 Cavendish Place

My dear Laura,

At last out of London.82 As soon as I saw my way clear, I sent Percy (last Wednesday") over here to look out for apartments. He did his business well, and found excellent accommodation, not with- out difficulty. Two doors from the Parade, facing the Pier, fine rooms, no sun more than is wanted, good sea-view, good cooking, the only thing we are sorry for is that it could not be arranged in time for you to go with us. On Friday we arrived here, Pumps, babies and girl, Nim, Jollymeier (who felt a little out of sorts again but has picked up here at once and will soon leave us) and myself. First-class Scotch mist on arrival, fine rain off and on all night, very encouraging! But next day splendid, so that we could take our walks under the trees and show Nim a little of the place. To-day, Sunday, fine morning but

[^1]: IN PARIS

[^2]: ' 15 August





**[p. 46]**

Emily Rosher's little avortorf died yesterday, best thing it could do. I wrote to Deville at once announcing arrival of his ms.b At the same time or a little after I got also Sam Moore's translation0 — so I shall have plenty to do here, besides working off my colossal arrears of correspondence.

The place is very full, but the style of the people seems to be more 'free and easy' than formerly. Even on Sunday morning the chimney- pot hat plays but a very poor part, and 'athletic' costumes run about pretty free.

Just now the whole party throng in again, awfully thirsty, Jolly- meier has to open the Pilsener, and you conceive that it is no use struggling against the difficulties crowding upon me and stopping not only rational but even irrational correspondence. The second bottle has just been opened, the little girl is crawling about my knees, and so I give it up in despair. The whole colony send their kindest regards to you and Paul whose half-term we shall celebrate the day after tomor- row 9 in an extra draft of Pilsener.

Nim wishes you, literally, 'to have a good look-out about her for- tune, as she expects it soon to come in'.84

And so, dear Laura,

Yours most affectionately,

F. Engels

[^1]: First published, in the language of the Reproduced from the original original (English), in: F. Engels, P. et L. Lafargue, Correspondance, t. I, Paris, 1956

[^2]: a abortion-b See previous letter.-0 Part of the English translation of the first volume of Capital (see Note 56).





**[p. 27]**

ENGELS TO WILHELM LIEBKNECHT

IN BORSDORF NEAR L E I P Z I G "

[Eastbourne,] 21 August 1883

Dear Liebknecht,

Your letter85 has remained unanswered because of final work on the 3rd edition,a after which I came to stay here at

4 Cavendish Place, Eastbourne, England where I intend to remain until about 12 September.82

Mrs Marx died on 2 December 1881, Jenny on 9 January 1883. Both deaths were reported in the Sozialdemokrat}1

The Paris Vorwärts! was a little sheet which is now being accorded more importance than it deserves; the editors were a dilatory lot. Marx's main concern was to keep it on the right lines and from time to time he also wrote polemical articles and reviews attacking the Prussians.0 Heine sent Marx some of the advance proofs of the Winter- märchen from Hamburg for publication in the Vorwärts! before the book appeared in Germany.86

I actually only set eyes on a few numbers and the little paper did not survive for long, so I cannot let you have any further de- tails.

Marx wrote quite a lot of things for the Deutsche-Brüsseler-Zeitung, including a polemical discourse against Heinzen.d

Bebel's letter safely received; will be answered from here6; along with all the other correspondence, have been unable to attend to it because of overwork. Tell Bebel that Schorlemmer, who is here, will be going to Darmstadt shortly and staying there until about the mid- dle of September. If Bebel is visiting those parts before then, Schor- lemmer would like him to let him know (Prof. Schorlemmer, Darm-

[^1]: a the third German edition of Volume I of Capital-h F. Engels, 'Jenny Marx, née von Westphalen'; 'Jenny Longuet, née Marx'.-c K. Marx, 'Critical Marginal Notes on the Article "The King of Prussia and Social Reform. By a Prussian" '; 'Illustrations of the Latest Exercise in Cabinet Style of Frederick William IV'.-d K. Marx, 'Mora- lising Criticism and Critical Morality. A Contribution -to German Cultural His- tory. Contra Karl Heinzen'.-e See this volume, pp. 52-55.





**[p. 48]**

Your

F.E.

First published, in Russian, in Marx- Printed according to the original Engels Archives, Vol. I (VI), Moscow, 1932

Published in English for the first time

28

ENGELS TO PASQUALE MARTIGNETTI

IN BENEVENTO

England, Eastbourne, 22 August 1883 4 Cavendish Place

Dear Citizen,

Please excuse my delay in replying to your letter of 25/6 and your postcard of 30/7.87 The need to finish in a short time the text of the 3rd German edition of Capital2' forced me to suspend all correspond- ence.

I do not know much about Ahn's method, and the dictionary you mention is entirely unknown to me. In order to learn a language the method I have always followed is this: I do not bother with grammar (except for declensions and conjugations, and pronouns) and I read, with a dictionary, the most difficult classical author I can find. Thus I began Italian with Dante, Petrarch and Ariosto, Spanish with Cervantes and Calderon, Russian with Pushkin. Then I read newspa- pers, etc. For German, I think the first part of Goethe's Faust might be suitable; it is written, for the most part, in a popular style, and the things which would seem difficult to you would also be difficult, with- out a commentary, for a German reader.

[^1]: a the first volume





**[p. 49]**

Thank you for the copies of the translation, which reached me in good condition, and also for kindly sending your photograph, in re- turn for which I enclose mine.

Yours with regards,

F. Engels

The normal London address is fine; I am here at the seaside for a few weeks.

First published in La corrispondenza di Marx Printed according to the original e Engels con italiani. 1848-1895, Milano,

1964 Translated from the Italian

Published in English for the first time

29

Eastbourne, 27 August 1883 4 Cavendish Place

Dear Bernstein,

Herewith money order for £4 for old Becker." I am still hoping that the news — and it wouldn't be the first time — is being exaggerated by his family. But he is, of course, very old, has been through a great deal and, or so I was told by Mme Lafargue, looked considerably older last year in Geneva by comparison with his hearty appearance at The Hague.89

I shall not be able to write a great deal today. The post leaves here at one o'clock in the afternoon and here beside me, for proof-reading, lies sheet 19 of Capital* which also has to go off.

[^1]: ENGELS T O EDUARD BERNSTEIN 8 8

[^2]: IN ZURICH

[^3]: a Johann Philipp Becker-1" of the third German edition of Volume I of Capital





**[p. 50]**

I am staying here until about 12 September,82 until when the above address holds good; then back to London.

Besides proofs and arrears of correspondence, I must, while here, attend to:

1) Deville's ms., French popularisation of Capital.®:1

2) Ms., part of the English translation,b both of them sorely in need of revision. So you see, no peace here either. Luckily I live right next to the sea and sit besides an open window through which the sea air comes wafting in.

I was very sorry that you didn't come over here. I had a number of things to discuss with you. We have in any case got to resign ourselves to the fact that some of Marx's unpublished works will have to appear abroad0 and you alone could give me practical information or sugges- tions relating to this; it is, however, something that has to be discussed verbally — by letter it would be endless. But please say nothing about this, otherwise it might arouse false hopes in the people who run the printing works out there; my experience of party presses is such that I would think twice before entrusting a major and important work to any of them.

I shall retain the money order here, it being expressly stated thereon that it is of no use to the recipient. I gave your address, 137 alte Landstraße Riesbach, from memory; if wrong, please put this right at the main post office in Zurich.

So long as the Anti-Socialist Law is in force,37 and the Sozialdemokrat is the only possible organ, it is imperative not to sow discord among the party merely for the sake of such secondary issues, and that is what would happen if one sought to make a 'question of principle' out of this issue.

[^1]: My suggestion about the impudent ms. was, as it were, a bad joke.d

[^2]: a fluent-b of the first volume of Capital (see Note 56)- c See this volume, p. 17.- d Ibid., p. 37.





**[p. 51]**

In the class struggle between proletariat and bourgeoisie, the Bo- napartist monarchy (the characteristics of which have been expound- ed by Marx in the Eighteenth Brumaire and by myself in The Housing Question, II, and elsewhere) adopted a role similar to that of the old absolute monarchy in the struggle between feudalism and bourgeoi- sie. But just as that struggle could not be fought out under the old, ab- solute monarchy but only under a constitutional one (England, France 1789-92 and 1815-30) so, too, that between bourgeoisie and proletariat can only be fought out in a republic. Inasmuch, then, as the French were helped by favourable conditions and revolutionary antecedents to overthrow Bonaparte and establish a bourgeois repub- lic,92 they have the advantage over us, who remain stuck in a farrago of semi-feudalism and Bonapartism, of already possessing the form in which the struggle must be fought out and which we must first master for ourselves. Politically they are a whole stage ahead of us. Hence, the inevitable consequence of a monarchist restoration in France would be that the struggle for the restoration of the bourgeois republic would again appear on the agenda; continuance of the republic, on the other hand, means mounting intensification of the direct, un- disguised class struggle between proletariat and bourgeoisie until a crisis is reached.

Similarly in our case the first, immediate result of the revolution can and must, so far as form is concerned, be nothing other than a bour- geois republic. But in this instance it will be no more than a brief, transitional period since fortunately we do not possess a purely repub- lican bourgeois party. A bourgeois republic with, perhaps, the Party of Progress 9 3 at the helm, will serve us at first to win over the great mass of the workers to revolutionary socialism — which will have been effected in a year or two — and will be conducive to the thorough erosion and self-destruction of all possible intermediate parties but not ours. Only then can we successfully take over.

The great mistake made by the Germans is to imagine the revolu- tion as something that can be achieved overnight. In fact it is a pro- cess of development on the part of the masses which takes several years even under conditions that tend to accelerate it. Every revolu- tion that has been achieved overnight has merely ousted a reaction-



**[p. 52]**

Yours,

F.E What do you think of this:

'The last so-called red number of the "Rheinische Zeitung"" (third edition) of 19 May 1849, which carried the Neue Rheinische ^eitung'% farewell message by Ferdinand Freiligrath at the top of its front page, was again confiscated by the police here not long ago. A second-hand dealer had bought as waste paper a number of copies of this last farewell issue of the sometime organ of democracy and was selling them at 10 pfennigs a piece. The police put a stop to this by confiscating such of the papers as the dealer still had left. If the confiscation was effected on the grounds that the sheet's wretched pale red print was bound to harm its readers' eyes, the public has cause to thank the police; today, the text would be most unlikely to inflame anyone's feelings.' b

First published abridged in Le Mouvement Printed according to the original socialiste, Paris, t. IV, No. 45, novembre 1,

1900 and in full, in Russian, in Marx- Published in English in full for the Engels Archives, Book I, Moscow, 1924 first t l m e

30

Eastbourne, 30 August 1883 4 Cavendish Place

Dear Bebel,

I am taking advantage of a moment's peace to write to you. In London numerous jobs, down here numerous interruptions (three grown-ups and two small children in one room!); on top ofthat proof- reading0 and the revision of an English specimen translation56 as also of a popularised French version of Capital.61 How's a chap to write letters!

I have corrected up to sheet 21 of the 3rd edition which contains

[^1]: ENGELS TO AUGUST BEBEL 94

[^2]: IN BORSDORF NEAR LEIPZIG 3 4

[^3]: * Neue Rheinische £eitung-b See Kölnische Leitung, No. 119, 20 July 1883. -c of the third German edition of Volume I of Capital





**[p. 53]**

As regards the photograph,b the head is quite excellent. The pose is stiff, as in all his photographs; he was a bad 'sitter'. It does not irritate me in any way but, because of the stiffness of the pose, I prefer the smaller one to the larger.

The election in Hamburg 9 6 has also created a great sensation ab- road. But then the behaviour of our chaps could not have been more exemplary. Such tenacity, perseverance, flexibility and ready wit, such waggish confidence of winning in the struggle with the greater and lesser miseries of the Germany of today, is unprecedented in recent German history. Especially splendid is the contrast it presents to the corruption, flabbiness and general decay of all other classes of German society. The very extent to which these classes demonstrate their inability to rule brings out in brilliant relief the ruling mission of the German proletariat, its ability to overturn the whole sordid old mess.

The 'jets of cold water' directed by Bismarck on Paris97 are be- coming ridiculous, even in the eyes of the French bourgeois. Even a paper as stupid as the Soir has discovered that nothing more is in- volved dian the new appropriations in the Reichstag for the military (this time the field artillery).0 As for his alliances (he has descended to Serbia, Romania and now Spain of all places98), all these are houses built of cards that will be blown down by a puff of wind. If he's lucky he won't need them and if he's unlucky they will land him in

[^1]: a draft-b of Marx- c Le Soir, 29 August 1883.





**[p. 54]**

The manifesto of the Democratic Federation in L o n d o n " has been issued by some 20-30 little societies which, under various names (always the same people), have been persistently trying to look im- portant for the past 20 years at least and always with the same lack of success. All that is important is that these people have now at last been compelled publicly to proclaim our theory as their own, a theory which, at the time of International, seemed to them to have been imposed upon them from outside, and further that a number of young people have lately emerged from amongst the bourgeoisie who, to the shame, be it said, of the English workers, understand these things better and embrace them more enthusiastically than do the workers. For even in the Democratic Federation the workers have accepted the new programme for the most part no more than reluc- tantly and outwardly. Hyndman, the head of the Democratic Fede- ration, is an ex-Conservative, an ambitious man, hopelessly jingoistic but not stupid. He behaved pretty shabbily b towards Marx (to whom he had been introduced by Rudolf Meyer), and for that reason has been personally ignored by us.100 On no account whatever allow yourself to be bamboozled into believing that a real proletarian move- ment is afoot here. I know that this is what Liebknecht would have himself and the rest of the world believe, but it is not so. The elements presently active might become important, now that they have accept- ed our theoretical programme and thus acquired a basis, but only if a spontaneous movement broke out amongst the workers here and they succeeded in gaining control of it. Until then they will continue to be so many isolated individuals with, behind them, an omnium- gatherum of muddle-headed sects, the remnants of the great move- ment of the forties, ' ° ' but nothing more. A really universal labour movement will come about here — barring the unexpected — only when the workers become sensible of the fact that England's world

[^1]: a Alexander III - b The words 'ziemlich schofel' ('pretty shabbily') were crossed out in the original and 'nicht schön' ('not nicely') written above them in an unknown handwriting.





**[p. 55]**

I asked Liebknecht to tell youa that, if you happened to be in the neighbourhood of Darmstadt between now and 12 September, you should advise Schorlemmer who is staying there, so that he can look you up somewhere in that region. It is probably too late now. Regards to Liebknecht.

Your

F. E.

31

London, 18 September 1883

Dear Mr Kautsky,

As regards the Geiser business, I do not believe the time has yet come for me to intervene.104 The chaps must first compromise them-

[^1]: First published, in Russian, in Marx- Printed according to the original Engels Archives, Vol. I (VI), Moscow, 1932 _ , ,. , , . „ ,. , . „ ,, „ Published in English in full for the first time

[^2]: ENGELS TO KARL KAUTSKY 1 0 3

[^3]: IN STUTTGART

[^4]: a See this volume, pp. 47-48.





**[p. 56]**

Lack of time precludes my engaging in further detailed discussion of the articles on marriage.105 In any case, primitive hetaerism is so remote in time and has been so much overlaid by later developments, whether progressive or otherwise, that nowadays we can nowhere ex- pect to find examples in their pristine form. But all subsequent forms lead back to those primitive origins. Of this much I am certain,— until you have completely dropped the element of jealousy as a deter- mining social factor (in primitive times), it will not be possible to give a correct account of the way things have developed.

Generally speaking, in the case of all those scientific researches which embrace so wide a field and such a mass of material, nothing can really be achieved except by dint of many years of study. Indivi- dual aspects that are both new and accurate — and these are, of course, to be found in your articles — present themselves more read- ily; but to survey the whole and to order it anew is something that can only be done after it has been fully explored. Otherwise there would be many more books like Capital. So I am glad to see that you have turned to themes — for immediate literary treatment — such as early biblical history0 and colonisation,01 which make it possible to achieve something without so exhaustive and detailed a study, and yet at the same time strike a topical note. I liked the colonisation arti- cle very much. Unfortunately almost all the material you've got is

[^1]: a See this volume, p. 64.-b Stuttgart-' K. Kautsky, 'Die Entstehung der bib- lischen Urgeschichte', Kosmos, Vol. XIII, June 1883. -d K. Kautsky, 'Auswan- derung und Kolonisation', Die Neue £eit, Nos. 8 and 9, 1883.





**[p. 57]**

Last week, at the TRADES UNIONS CONGRESS sitting at Nottingham, Adam Weiler's proposal to press for international factory legislation was thrown out by 26 votes to 2 on the motion of the 'Labour' parlia- mentarian Broadhurst.107 So much for Liebknecht's much-vaunted

TRADES UNIONS! ' ° 8

Why doesn't Fritz Denhardt write for the Meue £eit any more? 109

He had a very nice cheery style. The journal itself, of course, has to content with appalling difficulties: the censorship it has to impose upon itself is a thousand times worse than the old, official censor- ship used to be. You still have some pretty odd contributors and you yourself must often enough long for better ones. At all events, this business has for you the advantage of enabling you at the same time to pursue your scientific studies and let them come to gradual frui- tion.

Incidentally, Java provides proof of the fact that nowhere and at no time does a population increase so rapidly as under a not unduly oppressive system of bondage: 1755—2 mill.; 1826—5'/2 mill.; 1850—9 mill.; 1878—19 mill.; — an almost tenfold increase in 125 years—the only example of anything like Malthusian growth. Were they to send the Dutch blood-suckers packing the population would become fairly stable.

Adler turned up just as I was off to the seaside and likewise on my return; he is a man of some promise. He saw much here that might be of use to him.110

[^1]: a The Daily News, 12 September 1883.





**[p. 58]**

The 2nd volume of Capital will provide me with work and to spare. The bulk of the ms. dates back to before 1868 and is in. places no more than a brouillon}' ' 7 The second book will greatly disappoint the vulgar socialists, it contains virtually nothing but rigorously scien- tific, very minute examinations of things that take place within the capitalist class itself, and nothing at all out of which to fabricate catch-words and orations.

Pumps has already got two offspring. Tussy Marx has taken rooms near the British Museum. Lenchen is keeping house for me.

Kindest regards.

Yours,

F. E.

32

ENGELS TO LAURA LAFARGUE

London, 19 September 1883

My dear Laura,

At last returned from Eastbourne,82 where correspondence was rendered difficult and almost impossible by circumstances. When proof-sheetsc arrived — 3 times a week — my company left me to my

[^1]: First published, in Russian, in Marx- Printed according to the original Engels Archives, Vol. I (VI), Moscow, 1932 P u b i i s h e d i n English in full for the

[^2]: first time

[^3]: IN PARIS

[^4]: a See this volume, pp. 15-16.-b draft-0 of the third German edition of Vo- lume I of Capital





**[p. 59]**

work, but on the silent understanding that I was not to exact any- thing further — and how indeed could I have asked for peace and quietness in the one sitting room allotted to us all, especially when the thirst for Pilsener drove them in at certain times of the day?

I was besides busy with Sam Moore's specimen translation3 the greater part of which is very good and lively; the beginning — rather a difficult chapterb — wanted a deal of'look after', on account of his not having been exact enough in rendering the terminology, but that could be easily settled. I am certain from what I have seen that he will do the job well.

I also began revising Deville's pamphlet,81 it requires more work, especially in the beginning where great precision is necessary, but is wanting here and there. However I shall have no difficulty in setting that right, only it will take a week or a fortnight. I shall set to work ser- iously to-morrow. As far as I have gone, I am much pleased with his work, he has well understood everything (except small details) and it is written in a more lively style than I thought it would be.

As soon as that is shaken off I begin with the 2nd volume [of] Kapital.

I hope you received my post-card ' ' ' with the information you had asked me for. It was sent the day after I received your letter.

We came back last Friday,0 Pumps and Percy stayed here over Sunday, their house not being in order. Since then we had a thunder- storm and fearful rain in parts of London which flooded their back drawing-room. Otherwise they are flourishing. The little boy is get- ting on wonderfully well, he was five months yesterday, and is ex- tremely intelligent for his age.

Nim declares she must reduce her allowance of beer. She thinks she is getting too fat with it.

Tussy I have not seen yet, I believe she is not in town, I wrote her a line but she did not turn up on Sunday. As soon as Nim can get off she'll call on her.

[^1]: This morning Lopatin walks in, his adventures have ripened him considerably. ' ' 2 He will be here again directly and have dinner with us. He says he saw Paul lately and found him well and content, all things considered.9

[^2]: a the English translation of the first volume of Capital (see Note 56) - b the first chapter of Volume I of Capital — 'Commodities'.-' 14 September





**[p. 60]**

Of my little pamphlet Entwicklung etc. two editions are already sold, the third is in the press.25 That shows anyhow that it is not too difficult for the mass of the working people in Germany.

When this letter arrives, Paul will have 'done' 2/3rds of his time — I hope he will keep his pluck up for the two last and most trying months.

Of the 3rd edition [of] Kapital* I have read proofs up to page 448, so if they go on at this rate, the whole will be completed by Decem- ber. I am sorry Mohr has not lived to see how well this time the thing is done: no delay, no trouble with the printers, no trifling complaint but is at once set right, and excellent proofs with very few mistakes. Leipzig ' ' 3 seems at last, and at least in this one respect of printing, to become 'ein klein Paris'} High time it was.

So now I conclude this budget of miscellaneous news in order to set a few little jobs right before Lopatin drops in again. Kind regards for0

Paul and a hearty kiss for yourself from

Yours affectionately,

Le général pour rire d

33

ENGELS TO LAURA LAFARGUE

London, 3 October 1883

My dear Laura,

Herewith cheque for £14.- of which £4.- are your l/3 share of £12.- sent by Meissner on account of 2nd edition [of] Kapital,"

[^1]: First published, in the language of the Reproduced from the original original (English), in: F. Engels, P. et L. Lafargue, Correspondance, t. I, Paris, 1956

[^2]: IN PARIS

[^3]: " the third German edition of Volume I of Capital-b 'a little Paris'-' In the ori- ginal mistakenly: 'from'.-d The general, in a manner of speaking.-0 the second German edition of Volume I of Capital





**[p. 61]**

£4.- for Tussy and £4.- for Longuets children, which Tussy has banked for the present until a little more money accrues to them, when we can consider, along with you, what is to be done in their interest.

Jollymeier left here yesterday, highly enchanted with Paris. He says you will come over at Christmas — hope it will turn out true!

Today I sent to you, registered, pages 1-123 of Deville's ms.81

I cannot find his letter with his address. The defect of the thing is that many parts of it have been done rather too hurriedly. This is princi- pally the case with the descriptive portions (especially manufacture and grande industrie"). The points do not at all come out as they ought to do. It is not sufficient to express them, as much as possible, in Marx's own words; these cannot be torn from the context without giving rise to misinterpretation or leaving many things in comparative obscu- rity. Deville would do well to revise these two chapters throughout and to complete them by some of the exemplifications of the original without which they have become very abstract and to working- men-readers obscure. In the theoretical parts there are also many slight inaccuracies (some too, as his definition of marchandise^ very serious) and des choses faites à la hâte,c but these it was mostly not very difficult to set more or less right. Then many portions, of interest and importance for theoretical economic science, but without immediate portée d on the question between capital and labour, might be omitted. One or two I have indicated.

Now then I close. Though a good deal better I am ordered to lie down as much as possible quietly for a few days longer and so with kind regards to the prisoners 9 and sincere love from Nim and myself remain

Ever yours affectionately,

F. Engels

[^1]: First published, in the language of the Reproduced from the original original (English), in: F. Engels, P. et L. Lafargue, Correspondance, t. I, Paris, 1956

[^2]: Cf. this volume, p. 76.- b commodity-0 things done in haste-d bearing





**[p. 34]**

ENGELS TO LAURA LAFARGUE

IN PARIS

London, 15 October 1883

My dear Laura,

My last letter was awfully rough. But I was not allowed to sit long at the desk, and had to write — as you will allow — to Deville first.39

So I could only say a few words to you and these must have looked very unkind indeed. Pardon me.

Well, I have made up my mind d'en finir avec cette sacrée maladie chronique.* Since last Wednesday nightb I have stayed in bed, in order to do away with any excuse for the constant cause of all my relapses, want of rest and temptation for moving about. To-day I feel quite well, and inclined for a dance. But that is just the time when absolute rest is most needed, and therefore I shall not stir out of bed until bed will do me more harm than good. If nothing unexpected occurs, I think I shall be en pleine guérisonc before the week is out. So now, that will satisfy you I hope as far as my health is concerned.

I perfectly understand what Jollymeier meant by his letter to you. Gumpert had given him the note of warning — awfully exaggerated, though, for my case — but Gumpert could not interfere in my treat- ment by another doctor. Still I think Jollymeier might have found another way to save Gumpert's scruples as to medical étiquette with- out frighteningjo«. As it is, I have used your letter to stir up my doc- tors a bit, and with success. Ich hab' ihnen Beine gemacht? and energetic treatment is now all the rage.

But enough of that. All I am sorry for, and very sorry, is that I res- ponded in such an unkind way to your letter and to the kind feeling which had dictated it. It has weighed on my mind all the time, and yet I would not again write to you until I could indicate a decided improvement and good reasons for an approaching final cure.

Fortin has written, he wants a prefacee and asks about 20 questions which it would take a year to answer thoroughly. Tussy was here when his letter came, I read it to her and I wish you could have heard

[^1]: a to get rid of this accursed chronic ailment-b 10 October-1 fully fit -d I made them get a move o n - ' to the French edition of Marx's The Eighteenth Brumaire of Louis Bonaparte; see also this volume, p. 358.





**[p. 63]**

Read to-day proof-sheetb up to page 600. Tussy has promised to look up the American reports for Paul. ' ' 4

It is getting post-time and dinner-time too. But before concluding: Deville writes to say he has no time to recast the 3 chapters indicated by me.8 ' Please do, you and Paul, as much as you can, to get him to revise them as much as possible. Such as they are, they are not intelli- gible but to those who know the original. He says the publisher will give no time. But the whole cannot be printed at once!! A fortnight will do it and it will be a wonderful improvement.

Kind regards to the prisoner0 now soon to be free.

A kiss from Nim and from your affectionate

F. Engels

First published, in the language of the Reproduced from the original original (English), in: F. Engels, P. et L. Lafargue, Correspondance, t. I, Paris, 1956

35

ENGELS TO EDUARD BERNSTEIN

London, 8 November 1883

Dear Bernstein,

I have been keeping to my bed for the past few weeks in order to rid myself of a chronic ailment, mild in itself but tiresome and long neglected; I shall be up again in a few days. Hence my silence. Please accept my apologies and also convey them to Kautsky; I don't know whether he is still in Stuckert.d

[^1]: IN ZURICH

[^2]: a See Engels' letter to Laura Lafargue, 21 March 1887 (present edition, Vol. 48).- b of the third German edition of Volume I of Capital-' Paul Lafargue-d Stuttgart





**[p. 64]**

and I shall be perfectly willing as soon as it becomes necessary, but I think one should first let these gentlemen compromise themselves a little more; they ought first to formulate more precisely what they mean by it; one must never stop people from giving 'complete and full' expression to their nonsense; only then does one get something really tangible. I hope your article will commit the chaps to this course.

If the Germans in Paris have not had their eyes opened to Malon & Co. now, there's no helping them. Their open alliance with the trai- tors of the English labour movement, the official representatives of the

TRADES UNIONS, has earned them the applause of the entire English bourgeois press from The Times and The Daily News to The Stand- ard.115 A good thing that Guesde and Lafargue were doing time,9

thereby enabling this magnificent performance to be put on with no interruptions whatever!

Apropos. Do you know a Dr Moritzc Quarck (sic!) In Rudolstadt? This man, with whom I am totally unfamiliar, has referred me to a pamphlet,d with which I am equally unfamiliar, attacking one Fleischmanne with whom I am even less familiar, and wants to translate The Poverty of Philosophy into German/ I have my misgiv- ings.

Well, let me know sometime soon what is going on in the world. I have become so stupid, lolling about in bed, that I can no longer marshal my thoughts.

Yours,

F. E.

[^1]: First published, in Russian, in Marx- Printed according to the original Engels Archives, Book I, Moscow, 1924 „ , ,. , , . _ ,. , _ Published in English for the hrst time

[^2]: a [E. Bernstein,] 'Das Recht auf Arbeit', Der Sozialdemokrat, No. 44, 25 October 1883. - b See this volume, p. 56.- c A mistake; should be Max.- d [M. Quarck,] Kommerzienrath Adolf Fleischmann als Nationalökonom und die Thüringer Hausindustrie. - ' A. Fleischmann, Die Sonneberger Spielwaaren-Hausindustrie und ihr Handel. -r See this volume, pp. 66 and 67.





**[p. 36]**

ENGELS TO VERA ZASULICH

IN GENEVA

London, 13 November 1883 122 Regent's Park Road, N. W.

Dear Citizen,

I am not really in a position to answer the questions you have been so good as to put to me. ' ' 6 The publication of the second volume of Capital^ in the original text, continues to be delayed. Up till now I have had to confine my attention mainly to the 3rd edition of the first volume."

So far I have heard nothing at all from St Petersburg in regard to a Russian translation of the 2nd volume. Nor, for that matter, do I believe that, as things are now, there could be any question of pub- lishing a work of this kind in the Russian capital; no doubt they would first want to take a look at the German text.

On the other hand, the political situation in Russia is now so tense that a crisis might supervene any day. I even think it probable that the press will be free in Russia before it becomes so in Germany. And in that case the translator of the first volume, Tep Ma HT. Aona- THHT),b could, with some reason, claim the right to translate the se- cond.1 1?

I do not, therefore, believe that the time is yet ripe for an attempt to arrive at a final decision on this matter, but must thank you sin- cerely for your kind offer which I shall bear in mind. Perhaps we shall be able to see things more clearly in a month or two, and then we can renew our discussion on the subject.

It pleases me very much to hear that it is you who have under- taken to translate my Entwicklung etc.c; I look forward eagerly to seeing your work and fully appreciate the honour you have done me.

[^1]: in German- b (Russ.) Hermann Lopatin-c Socialism: Utopian and Scientific





**[p. 66]**

To Citizen Vera Zasulich

First published, in Russian, in Gruppa 'Osvobozhdeniye truda', No. 1, Moscow, 1924

Yours ever,

F. Engels

Printed according to the original

Translated from the French

Published in English for the first time

37

ENGELS TO MAX QUARCK

IN RUDOLSTADT

London, 13 November 1883

Dear Sir,

I have kept you waiting a long time for an answer.a Firstly because I had to keep to my bed on account of a mild but tedious indisposi- tion and, secondly, because you are not the first to have approached me about the matter in question. Hence, before I could reply to you, I had to make further inquiries.

The result is that Mr Eduard Bernstein of Zurich has now definitely expressed his intention of translating The Poverty etc. into German and has enlisted my support. ' ' 8 This I cannot possibly refuse, since he was the first to speak to me about the matter, his qualifications for the task are known to me, and immediate printing in Zurich is assured, should it become apparent that publication in Germany itself might meet with difficulties.

Under the circumstances, and in the knowledge that neither I nor anyone else is legally empowered to prevent you or others from pub- lishing a translation of that work, I have nothing further to say other

[^1]: a See this volume, p. 64.





**[p. 67]**

than to express my thanks to you for having thought fit to approach me in the first place.

I remain,

Yours very truly,

F. Engels

First published in: Marx and Engels, Printed according to the original Works, Second Russian Edition, Vol. 36, r. , i- i i • ^ , - i r • r Moscow, 1964 Published in English for the first time

38

ENGELS TO EDUARD BERNSTEIN

IN ZURICH

London, 13 November 1883

Dear Bernstein,

As to Quarck,b you have taken a load off my mind. ' ' 9 I have writ- ten telling him that you were the first to apply and that you would be translating The Poverty etc. ' ' 8 The man has thus been disposed of. His pamphlet0 is 'Quarck'.d Marx would wring my neck were I to agree to his being translated by this boastful Hohenzollern-wor- shipper and conservative state socialist.

But it behoves us to make a proper job of it. Nothing pedestrian; the thing is by no means so easy. You might, if you have got as far, send me the ms. of the first sheet; that would give us an opportunity to agree upon the whole modus operandi.

I have not been sent Plekhanov's pamphlet6; only the Manifesto and Wage Labour and Capital} From this I learn that it has appeared in a German edition.120 Why has no one deigned to send me and Marx's heirs a copy?

Nor have I ever received a copy of the new edition of the Manifesto

[^1]: Encl. for Vera Zasulich.a

[^2]: " See this volume, pp. 65-66. - b Ibid., p. 66.- c [M. Quarck,] Kommerzienrath Adolf Fleischmann als Nationalökonom-ä In German 'Quark'= curd or cottage cheese; fig. rubbish.-' G. V. Plekhanov, Cou,iam3~M& u nommuiecnasi 6opb6a (Socialism and Political Struggle).-r by Marx





**[p. 68]**

Of the portraits of me in existence there is only one that you have got; I don't imagine that the man (in Brighton) would quote a cheap price for prints in bulk, but I shall do what I can. So you see, / bear no grudge against your office,0 but their worships could well be a little less touchy about a bad joke, especially since they devote a full half column of every number to that kind of thing.

Beware of the Droit à la paresse.12 2 Parts of it were too much even for the French and it was much exploited by Malon and Brousse at Lafargue's expense. You must certainly see to it that the wailers123

are not provided with an easy excuse just now; even friend Bebel is still somewhat Germanic in this respect. Which reminds me of the poem about the 'arse'. If the author is responsible for all the heroic deeds enumerated therein, he is entitled to celebrate them in song. Besides, I am speaking of the sex organs, and it is difficult for me to enter into discussion with people who include their bottoms under that heading.

It certainly must have been hard for our friend Lavrov to have set his hand to a document saying that he and his Russians 'had definitive- ly broken with their anarchist traditions'.124 Not that he set much store by them, but all the same there was about them something at- tractively 'Russian'. Besides, he is a thoroughly honest old fellow who is, however, invariably the hen that hatches out ducks' eggs in the form of 'Russian youth' and watches aghast as the ducklings set out across the HORRIBLE water. This has happened to him umpteen times.

Yours,

F.E.

[^1]: Kautsky's visit ' 2 5 will give me much pleasure; I trust I shall be up to the mark again by then.

[^2]: First published, in Russian, in Marx- Engels Archives, Book I, Moscow, 1924

[^3]: Printed according to the original

[^4]: Published in English for the first time

[^5]: a K. Marx and F. Engels, Manifesto of the Communist Party. - b F. Engels, Socialism: Utopian and Scientific. -c i.e. Der Sozialdemokrat





**[p. 39]**

ENGELS TO JOHANN PHILIPP BECKER

IN GENEVA

London, 30 November 1883

Dear Old Man,

I can't tell you how glad I was to see your own handwriting again. Nowhere had I been able to learn anything definite about how you were getting on, and am now glad to know that you are at least to some extent back on your feet again.

I, too, have been in bed for a good month now, in order to rid myself of a mild but most tiresome and prolonged ailment, and can only write very briefly since any position but the horizontal is forbidden me. But no doubt I, too, will soon be up again and able to tackle the large accumulation of work.

As soon as I can resume the task of putting Marx's papers in order, I shall look out the things you want,126 but everything is still in the utmost disorder since I have to attend to everything myself. Mme La- fargue has been living in Paris for a year or more now, and the young- est sister" has furnished a couple of rooms nearby — nearby being half an hour's walk from here, and since it is I alone who must decide what is important and what is not among the vast mass of papers, etc., it is understandable that, considering her many literary activi- ties, she should leave the sorting out to me.

I, too, hope that I shall see you again, my old comrade-in-arms, somewhere some day — who knows whether it might not be, as once before, at Durlach and Vöhrenbach in mid-campaign ' 2 7? How won- derful that would be! And, after all, the present swindle can't go on for very much longer, provided Mr Bismarck does not again hold up or temporarily obstruct revolutionary developments by unleashing a general war, as is clearly his intention.

You will be getting from the post office a money order for £5 ster- ling.

[^1]: Eleanor Marx





**[p. 70]**

F. Engels

First published in: F. Engels, Vergessene Printed according to the original Briefe (Briefe Friedrick Engels' an Johann n , ,• , , • ^ , - , , - , i- T>L-,^^ r> / i D i- mon Published in English for the first Philipp Becker), Berlin, 1920 . &

40

ENGELS TO KARL KAUTSKY

IN L O N D O N ' 2 8

[London, 1 December 1883]

Dear Kautsky,

What can be the matter? Not a sign of you either at Tussy's or at my house!

Yours,

F.E.

41 ENGELS TO LAURA LAFARGUE

London, 13 December 1883

My dear Laura,

I did not intend to write to you until I should be able to inform you that I was 'up and doing' again. To-day it is eight weeks that I went

[^1]: First published in Aus der Frühzeit des Marx- Printed according to the original ismus. Engels Briefwechsel mit Kautsky, „ , , . , , • T, . - . , . , r- p 1Q35 Published in English for the first

[^2]: time

[^3]: IN PARIS





**[p. 71]**

to bed for good (or rather bad) and although I feel considerably bet- ter, and keep in bed more for safety's sake than anything else, I am still far from able to use my legs as I ought to. These poor 'lower ex- tremities' to use the language of respectability, are woefully shrunk, and what is quite as bad, have left scarcely anything 'behind them'. The worst is I am quite at ease only when laid flat on my back and writing has to be done in a constrained position and soon becomes a torture, so this must excuse my short and unfrequent letters.

Paul's article in Progress* I read with much pleasure, it hits more than one nail on the head. Let us hope the 'Blé' will come out soon af- ter the period of étrennes,h ' ' 4 and be followed soon by that novelc

which I am most anxious to see. Paul in Balzac's slippers it will be good! By the bye I have been reading scarcely anything but Balzac while laid up and enjoyed the grand old fellow thoroughly. There is the history of France from 1815 to 1848, far more than in all the Vaulabelles, Gapefigues, Louis Blancs and tutti quanti.d And what boldness! What a revolutionary dialectic in his poetical justice!

But alas, we always drop back from the blooming field of romance into the dreary sick-bed of reality. This bids fair to be a poor Christ- mas! In the best of cases I may be allowed to spend it on the first floor, with order to go to my bedroom when one ought to begin to enjoy oneself! And no tipple, or at all events wine to be taken by the spoon- ful, as medicine! Well it can't be helped.

Percy is now partner of 'Garman and Rosher, Chartered Accoun- tants' Walbrook House, E. C. Hope he will prosper. His father has at last forked out the needful and set him up though with the sourest face and in the unpleasantest way possible.

Tussy has got neuralgia again, she will call here to-night, but only after this letter has gone. The Jutas (he, she,e and Willa) arrived here last week, so Tussy will have plenty on her hands.

Kapital, 3rd editionf now fully printed, will be issued very soon; as soon as we get copies we shall send you one.

Pumps and Percy were in Manchester last week, say Jollymeier is not quite well yet. When we are all on our legs again, we must have a continuation of last summer's sprees, and you must then bring Paul

[^1]: a P. Lafargue, 'Socialism and Darwinism', Progress, Vol. 2, December 1883, pp. 343- 49.- b Christmas presents-' The novel which Lafargue was trying to write was en- titled Jugement de Paris. -A all the rest - c Johann Carl and Louise - ' the third German edition of Volume I of Capital





**[p. 72]**

Your affectionate

F. Engels

First published, in the language of the Reproduced from the original original (English), in: F. Engels, P. et L. Lafargue, Correspondance, t. I, Paris, 1956

42

ENGELS TO EDUARD BERNSTEIN 2 4

IN ZURICH

[London, 22 December 1883]

If you have still got The Labour Standard, will you please send it to Lafargue straight away; he gave Shipton's remarks a lambasting in the Cri du Peuple, and wants to have the original as the thing is creating a furore.129 I wouldn't be able to get hold of another copy before Monday, not to say Thursday3 (and perhaps not even then).

Have been up again since Saturday15 but still very wobbly. You gave von der Mark his deserts all right! The fool imagines peo- ple should take account of what he understands by 'State'! 13° Just as Rodbertus criticised Marx for supposing capital to be real capital, rather than Rodbertus' 'notion of capital'.131 German to the core.

Kautsky back?

Regards, yours,

F.E.

[^1]: First published, in Russian, in Marx- Printed according to the original Engels Archives, Book I, Moscow, 1924 , , , Published in English for the first time

[^2]: 24 and 27 December accordingly - b 15 December



