---
Volume: 47
Document_Title: "1. Engels to Pyotr Lavrov. 2 April "
Page_Range: "32-33"
---

# 1. Engels to Pyotr Lavrov. 2 April 



**[p. 3]**

1883

l

ENGELS TO PYQTR LAVROV '

IN PARIS

London, 2 April 1883

My dear Lavrov,

I hasten to acknowledge receipt of your letter enclosing a postal order for 124.50 frs. I shall not be able to cash it until Wednesdaya at the earliest, as tomorrow I have to examine the manuscripts left by Marx. 2 On completion of the commission I shall announce the fact in the Sozialdemokrat of Zurich, and shall ask the editorial department to send you one or two copies ofthat particular number. It goes without saying that no mention will be made of Citizen Krantz'sb name. 3

I have found the manuscript of the Zirkulation des Kapitals11 and of the third book: Die Gestaltungen des Gesammtprozessesd — some 1,000 in-folio pages. 4 So far it's impossible for me to say whether the manu- script as it stands is in a fit condition to go to press. In any case I shall have to copy it out as it is in rough draft. Tomorrow I shall at last have time enough to devote several hours to going through all the manuscripts that Moor has left us, in particular an outline of dialect- ics which he had always intended to do. 5 But he always refrained from telling us how far his work had progressed, for he was aware that, once people realised something was ready, he would be pestered until he consented to its publication. All this is between you and me; I have no right to publish anything without Tussy who is my literary co-executrix.

[^1]: a 4 April - b a pen-name for Pyotr Lavrov -c Circulation of Capital -d The Pro- cess of Capitalist Production as a Whole



