---
Volume: 47
Document_Title: "2. Engels to Laura Lafargue. 11 April "
Page_Range: "33-35"
---

# 2. Engels to Laura Lafargue. 11 April 



**[p. 4]**

Yours ever,

F. Engels

First published in: Marx and Engels, Printed according to the original Works, First Russian Edition, Vol. XXVII, Moscow, 1935 Translated from the French

Published in English in full for the first time

2

ENGELS T O LAURA LAFARGUE

London, 11 April 1883

My dear Laura,

I do indeed think, along with you, that Paul ought to go and see his mother and I have told him so many a time and many a year ago. As to the extra expense, that will not be much and I can soon find you that, if informed in time. Only, if things are as you describe, it will re- quire some considerable diplomacy on Paul's part, not to spoil his own game — that Christian sister of charity ought not to be made an enemy of 7—she is always there and Paul not, and if only her sus- picions are aroused, be sure she will never cease to beguile the old woman i«to a will as much in her favour as the law will permit. So that point I suppose is settled — you'll have to look after the execu- tion.

[^1]: IN PARIS

[^2]: We all of us have had a hearty laugh at your account of the Argen- teuil adventures. 8 It is so like him a from beginning to end. To-day it

[^3]: * Charles Longuet





**[p. 5]**

is a week that Tussy sent him a very categorical letter: when is the boya to come? Not a line in reply. // est toujours en train de réfléchir.b

Paul is sure of six months at least.9 He was awfully funky about it when here, and amused Liebknecht out of all measure with his horror carceris.c But if he does not now start in earnest to learn German, I shall consider him to be nothing but un enfant gâté.d Imagine he writes to me that he will learn it—'comme vous le dites très bien (!) il pourra (!) devenir nécessaire que je le sache pour des traductions!'.e As if the

perfection of his own accomplishments, bright as they are, did not en- tirely depend on his reading certain German things, published and unpublished! He rejoices in the prospect of the 2nd volume [of] Capi- tal being published, but will he ever be able to read it?

If M-me Gendre will translate the Manifestf into French and let me revise the translation (it's no child's play, you know) I will write her a preface sufficient to explain the historical circumstances, etc. ' ° But as I know nothing much of the lady, I am bound to say at present: no revision, no preface. A right to stop any proceedings of hers in that di- rection I have not. This notabene is for Paul. So is this: What speech of Giffen he writes about I don't know, nor where it was published.

Pumps is still 'expectant', or was so at least last night. Percy's mother told him the other day that really he ought to be a little better informed in a case like that.

Jollymeyer is here for a few days. Since then (as some days before he left 10 days ago) we have every evening a bobby promenading be- fore the house, when I let Carlo out about 12. The imbeciles evidently think we are manufacturing dynamite, when in reality we are discuss- ing whisky.

Kind regards from him and myself to both of you.

Yours affectionately,

F. Engels

[^1]: First published, in the language of the Reproduced from the original original (English), in: F. Engels, P. et L. Lafargue, Correspondance, t. I, Paris, 1956

[^2]: a Jean Longuet- b He is still thinking it over.-c fear of imprisonment- d a spoilt child - ' 'As you say very aptly (!) it may (!) prove necessary for me to know it for translations!' - f K. Marx and F. Engels, Manifesto of the Communist Party.



