---
Volume: 47
Document_Title: "3. Engels to Ferdinand Domela Nieuwenhuis. 11 April "
Page_Range: "35-36"
---

# 3. Engels to Ferdinand Domela Nieuwenhuis. 11 April 



**[p. 3]**

ENGELS TO FERDINAND DOMELA NIEUWENHUIS »

IN THE HAGUE

London, 11 April 1883

122 Regent's Park Road, N.W.

Dear Comrade,

You must understand that, since the death of my old friend, I have been so taken up with correspondence, business matters, the perusal of his writings, etc., that I have been able to attend only to what was absolutely imperative.2 Today I have at last found a minute or two in which to thank you for your letter of condolence ' ' and for your excellent obituary in Recht voor Allen.a That obituary was un- doubtedly one of the best we have seen, and was unanimously ac- claimed as such among our circle of intimates here.

Many thanks, too, on behalf of his surviving daughtersb and of my- self, to the Dutch workers' party ' 2 for their participation, at least in spirit, in our friend's last rites. In this they were at one with our Ger- man, French, Spanish, Russian and American comrades.

Should fate or the urge to travel — in our case sadly curbed — bring me to Holland, I shall consider myself under an obligation to look you up, just as I would urge you to look me up should you come to England.

Marx has left a great wad of manuscript for the second part of Capi- tal, the whole of which I must first read (and what handwriting!) be- fore I can tell to what extent it is printable and to what extent it re- quires complementing from subsequent notebooks. 4 At all events, the main substance is there. Since I cannot as yet say anything more definite, however, I would ask you not to put anything in the papers about it just now, as this might lead to misunderstandings. Besides, Marx's youngest daughter Eleanor is my literary co-executrix, I can do noth- ing without her and the ladies, as you know, are sticklers for form.

[^1]: a F. D. Nieuwenhuis, 'Karl Marx', Recht voor Allen, No. 4, 24 March 1883.- b Laura Lafargue and Eleanor Marx



