---
Volume: 47
Document_Title: "5. Engels to Thomas James Knöwles. 17 April "
Page_Range: "37-38"
---

# 5. Engels to Thomas James Knöwles. 17 April 



**[p. 8]**

The 2nd volume of Capital is there — but I can't tell you what a state it's in— 1,000 pages of ms. to go through. 17 However, don't put anything in the paper yet; as soon as I can say anything for sure, I'll let you have something authoritative.

First published, in Russian, in Marx- Printed according to the original Engels Archives, Book I, Moscow, 1924 „ , . , , . , ^ Published in English for the hrst time

ENGELS TO THOMAS JAMES KNOWLES 18

IN LONDON

[Draft]

[London,] 17 April 1883

Dear Sir,

There exists a manuscript — a critical résumé of Das Kapital by me a — among the papers of the late Dr Marx, but up to to-day we have been unable to find it amongst the mass of papers left by him.

However, even if found, I should hesitate to send it to you at least for the purpose you indicate. b I am not aware that it is usual, in the literature of this or any other country, for one author to lend his manu- scripts to another.

As to our experience of English review-writers it has not been very encouraging. With the exception of a few clergymen of the Church of England, they have invariably distorted our views and disfigured our actions. Their utter ignorance of our theory and practice has been equalled only by their presumption. The XIX Century I believe, in July 1878, published an article of George Howell on the International0

[^1]: a F. Engels, Synopsis of Volume One of 'Capital' by Karl Marx. -b See this volume, p. 12.-c G. Howell, 'The History of the International Association', The Nineteenth Century, No. XVII, July 1878.



