---
Volume: 47
Document_Title: "6. Engels to Philipp Van Patten. 18 April "
Page_Range: "38-41"
---

# 6. Engels to Philipp Van Patten. 18 April 



**[p. 9]**

brimfull of untruths and inaccuracies. Marx sent you a replya

but you refused to insert it.

I am afraid, if you want to acquaint yourself with Marx's views you will have to read the German, Russian or French edition of Das Kapi- tal.

I know but one living Englishman capable of giving a correct ac- count of the contents of Das Kapital. It is a barrister in Manchester.b

If you desire I shall be glad to ask him whether he is willing to under- take the task for you.

Yours faithfully

Jos. Knowles Esq. the Hollies, Clapham Common

S.W.

First published in: Marx and Engels, Reproduced from the original Works, First Russian Edition, Vol. XXVII, Moscow, 1935 Published m English for the first time

6

London, 18 April 1883

Philipp Van Patten, 57 2nd Avenue, New York

Esteemed Comrade,

My statement in reply to your inquiry of the 2nd April as to Karl Marx's position with regard to the Anarchists in general and Johann Most in particular shall be short and clear.

[^1]: ENGELS TO PHILIPP VAN PATTEN 19

[^2]: IN NEW YORK

[^3]: [Draft]

[^4]: a K. Marx, 'Mr George Howell's History of the International Working-Men's Asso- ciation'.-b Samuel Moore





**[p. 10]**

The Anarchists reverse the matter. They say, that the Proletarian revolution has to begin by abolishing the political organisation of the State. But after the victory of the Proletariat, the only organisation the victorious working class finds ready-made for use, is that of the State. It may require adaptation to the new functions. b But to de- stroy that at such a moment, would be to destroy the only organism by means of which the victorious working class can exert its newly conquered power, keep down its capitalist enemies and carry out that economical revolution of society without which the whole victory must end in a defeat0 and in a massacre of the working class like that after the Paris Commune.

Does it require my express assertion, that Marx opposed these anarchist absurdities from the very first day that they were started in their present form by Bakunin? The whole internal history of the International Working Men's Association is there to prove it. The Anarchists tried to obtain the lead of the International, by the foulest means, ever since 1867 20 and the chief obstacle in their way was Marx. The result of the five years' struggle was the expulsion, at the Hague Congress, September 1872, of the Anarchists from the Inter- national, 2 ' and the man who did most to procure that expulsion was Marx. Our old friend F. A. Sorge of Hoboken, who was present as a delegate, can give you further particulars if you desire.

[^1]: a See present edition, Vol. 6, pp. 505-06. - b In Der Sozialdemokrat this sentence reads: 'This State may require very important changes before it can fulfil its new functions.'-0 In Der Sozialdemokrat: 'another defeat'.





**[p. 11]**

While still in Germany, Most published a 'popular' extract of Das Kapital.d Marx was requested to revise it for a second edition. I as- sisted Marx in that work. We found it impossible to eradicate more than the very worst mistakes, unless we re-wrote the whole thing from beginning to end, and Marx consented his corrections being insert- ed on the express condition only that his name was never in any way connected with even this revised form of Johann Most's produc- tion. e

You are perfectly at liberty to publish this letter in the Voice of the People,f if you like to do so.

Yours fraternally,

F. E.

[^1]: First published, slightly abridged, in Der Reproduced from the original, Sozialdemokrat, Nr. 21, 17 Mai 1883 and in checked with the newspaper full, in Russian, in Marx-Engels Archives, Vol. I (VI), Moscow, 1932

[^2]: a on 4 January 1879 - b The words 'since his new-fangled anarchism had burst forth in that paper' are omitted in Der Sozialdemokrat. - c See letters of K.Marx to J. Ph. Becker of 1 July 1879 and to F. A. Sorge of 19 September 1879, and of F. Engels

[^3]: to J. Ph. Becker of 1 April 1880 (present edition, Vols. 45, 46).- d J. Most, Kapi- tal und Arbeit. Ein populärer Auszug aus 'Das Kapital' von Karl Marx, Chemnitz [1873]. -' See this volume, p. 14.-f In Der Sozialdemokrat, the words 'in the Voice of the People' are omitted.



