---
Volume: 47
Document_Title: "9. Engels to Friedrich Adolph Sorge. 24 April "
Page_Range: "42-44"
---

# 9. Engels to Friedrich Adolph Sorge. 24 April 



**[p. 13]**

Yours,

F. E.

First published, in Russian, in Marx- Printed according to the original Engels Archives, Book I, Moscow, 1924

Published in English for the first time

9

ENGELS TO FRIEDRICH ADOLPH SORGE 2 7

IN HOBOKEN

London, 24 April 1883

Dear Sorge,

Enclosed a line or two for Gartman from his friend Brocher, a mud- dle-headed anarchist but a sterling chap. Perhaps you would be good enough to send it on.

The Volkszeitung has perpetrated follies enough, though still not as ma- ny as I expected. Nevertheless they have all contributed their share, Schewitsch, Cuno, Douai, Hepner. Here was a quartet performed by would-be know-alls who, JOINTLY AND SEVERALLY, knew damned little. However I felt impelled to write a line to the editors,a pointing out that they had printed my telegram to you b as though it had been addressed to them and had, in my second to them,c inserted a false state- ment to the effect that Marx had died in Argenteuil. d We did not, I told them, stand for that sort ofthing over here; as a result they had

[^1]: a F. Engels, 'To the Editors of the New Yorker Volkszeitung' (18 April 1883).-b of 14 March 1883-c F. Engels, 'To the New Yorker Volkszeitung' (16 March 1883).- d Marx died in London.





**[p. 14]**

At the Copenhagen Congress ' 5 it was resolved that Liebknecht's and Bebel's trip to America should take place next spring.29 It has to do with money for the election campaign in 1884-85. (All this is be- tween ourselves.) Liebknecht has proposed to Tussy that she should ac- company him as his secretary and she is very keen to go; so it might easily be that you see her there before long. Generally speaking we have not made any plans yet. The literary work (third edition, Volume I of Capital, editing of Volume II, the ms. of which has been found though as yet there is no knowing to what extent it is ready for printing or requires supplementing, ' 7 biography based on the enormous correspondence,30 etc.) takes up all my spare time, besides which Tussy has a mass of literary ENGAGEMENTS to get through.

You are, of course, fully entitled to print the passages on Henry George in Marx's letters.3 ' The question is, however, whether it might not be better to wait until I am able to sort out for you the marginal notes made by Marx in his copy of George's book and then do the whole lot at one go. Resumes of the kind Marx provides, theo- retically acute but brief and unaccompanied by examples, are surely still above the head of your average American and after all there is no hurry. I shall take a closer look at the things as soon as I have time. If, in the meanwhile, you send me a copy of the relevant passage in Marx's letter, it will make the job simpler. b

[^1]: See this volume, pp. 9-ll.- b Ibid., p. 42.



