---
Volume: 47
Document_Title: "11. Engels to August Bebel. 30 April "
Page_Range: "45-47"
---

# 11. Engels to August Bebel. 30 April 



**[p. 16]**

Yours,

F.E.

First published, in Russian, in Marx- Printed according to the original Engels Archives, Book I, Moscow, 1924 „ , . - , . • ^ ,• , r • r- Published in English for the first time

11

ENGELS TO AUGUST BEBEL

London, 30 April 1883

Dear Bebel,

There is a very simple answer to your question as to whether I might remove to Germany or Switzerland or somewhere else on the Continent, namely that I shall not go to any country from which one can be expelled. But that is something one can only be safe from in England and America. I should at most go to the latter country on a visit, unless otherwise compelled. Hence I shall remain here.

Moreover England has another great advantage. Since the demise of the International there has been no labour movement whatsoever here, save as an appendage to the bourgeoisie, the radicals and for the pursuit of limited aims within the capitalist system. Thus, only here does one have the peace one needs if one is to go on with one's theo- retical work. Everywhere else one would have had to take part in practical agitation and waste an enormous amount of time. As re- gards practical agitation, I should have achieved no more than any-

[^1]: IN BORSDORF NEAR LEIPZIG 3 4





**[p. 17]**

As regards a monument to Marx,36 I do not know what ought to be done. The family is against it. The simple headstone made for his wife, which now also bears his and his little grandson'sa names, would be desecrated in their eyes if replaced by a monument which, here in London, would be scarcely distinguishable from the pretentious phil- istine monuments surrounding it. A London cemetery of this kind looks quite different from a German one. The graves lie closely side by side, not room for a tree between them, and a monument is not al- lowed to exceed the length and breadth of the small plot that has been bought.

Liebknecht spoke of a complete edition of Marx's writings. All very well, but Dietz's plan for Volume II has made people forget that that Volume was long since promised to Meissner and that an edition of the other, shorter works would likewise have to be offered to Meissner first, and then could only appear abroad. After all, even before the Anti-Socialist Law 3 7 it was always said that not even the Communist

[^1]: a Henri Longuet



