---
Volume: 47
Document_Title: "15. Engels to Achill e Loria. 20 May "
Page_Range: "53-54"
---

# 15. Engels to Achill e Loria. 20 May 



**[p. 15]**

ENGELS TO ACHILLE LORIA 5 2

IN MANTUA

London, 20 May 1883

122 Regent's Park Road, N. W.

Dear Sir,

I have received your pamphlet on Karl Marx. You are entitled to subject his doctrines to the most stringent criticism, indeed to misun- derstand them; you are entitled to write a biography of Marx which is pure fiction. But what you are not entitled to do, and what I shall never permit anyone to do, is slander the character of my departed friend.

Already in a previous worka you took the liberty of accusing Marx of quoting in bad faith. When Marx read this he checked his and your quotations against the originals and he told me that his were all correct and that if there was any bad faith it was on your part. And seeing how you quote Marx, how you have the audacity to make Marx speak of profit when he speaks of Mehrwerth,b when he defends himself time and again against the error of identifying the two (some- thing which Mr Moore and I have repeated to you verbally here in London) I know whom to believe and where the bad faith lies.

This however is a trifle compared to your 'deep and firm convic- tion that conscious sophistry pervades them all' (Marx's doctrines); that Marx 'did not baulk at paralogisms, while knowing them to be such', that 'he was often a sophist who wished to arrive, at the expense of the truth, at a negation of present-day society' and that, as Lamartine says, 'il jouait avec les mensonges et les vérités comme les enfants avec les osselets'.0 53

In Italy, a country of ancient civilisation, this might perhaps be taken as a compliment, or it might be considered great praise among armchair socialists,54 seeing that these venerable professors could never produce their innumerable systems except 'at the expense of the truth'. We revolutionary communists see things differently. We re-

[^1]: a A. Loria, La teoria del valore negli economisti italiani. - b surplus value -c 'he played with lies and truth like children with marbles'



