---
Volume: 47
Document_Title: "16. Engels to Johann Philipp Becker. 22 May "
Page_Range: "54-56"
---

# 16. Engels to Johann Philipp Becker. 22 May 



**[p. 25]**

In my opinion, it should have been your duty to make known to the public this famous 'conscious sophistry' which pervades all of Marx's doctrines. But I look for it in vain! Nagott!" What a tiny mind one must have to imagine that a man like Marx could have 'always threatened his critics' with a second volume which he 'had not the slightest intention of writing', and that this sec- ond volume was nothing but 'an ingenious pretext dreamed up by Marx in place of scientific arguments'. This second volume exists and it will shortly be published. Perhaps you will then learn to under- stand the difference between Mehrwerth and profit.

A German translation of this letter will be published in the next issue of the Zurich Sozialdemokrat.

I have the honour of saluting you with all the sentiments you de- serve.

F. E.

First published in Der Sozialdemokrat, Printed according to the original, Nr. 21, 17. Mai 1883 checked with the newspaper

16

London, 22 May 1883

Dear Old Man,

How can you suppose that / might somehow be able to find paid literary work for a young party memberb? After all, it is years since

[^1]: Translated from the Italian

[^2]: Published in English for the first time

[^3]: ENGELS T O JOHANN PHILIPP BECKER 5 5

[^4]: IN GENEVA

[^5]: a The following words were added in the newspaper: (Lombardic swear-word for: nothing at all).-b Ludwig Klopfer; see next letter.





**[p. 26]**

(on account of Capital), let alone with newspapers and peri- odicals. So what could I do? Even if the man could translate the other way round, from German into French or English, I should be unable to help him find work. You would certainly do better to ap- proach Liebknecht who after all has the Neue Z_eit and connections in plenty.

We shall be saddled with Marx's house until next March, so there is no need to be over-hasty about the removal or plans for the future. Moreover a tremendous amount of work is involved in getting these papers in order. What surprises me is that Marx has actually saved papers, letters and manuscripts from the period prior to 1848, splen- did material for the biography which I shall of course be writing and which, inter alia, will also be the history of the Neue Rheinische Leitung and of the movement of 1848-49 on the Lower Rhine, as well as the history of the rascally emigration in London between 1849 and 1852 and of the International.30 The first task is the editing of Vol- ume II of Capital4 and that is no joke. There are in existence 4 or 5 revisions of Book II, of which only the first is complete, the others having been merely started on " ; some labour when you're dealing with a man like Marx, who weighed every word. But to me it is a labour of love; after all I shall be back again with my old com- rade.

For the past few days I have been sorting letters from 1842-62. As I watched the old times pass before my eyes they really came to life again, as did all the fun we used to have at our adversaries' expense. Many of our early doings made me weep with laughter; they didn't, after all, ever succeed in banishing our sense of humour. But there were also many very serious moments in between whiles.

This is in confidence; mind you, don't let a word of it get into the papers. Such information as is ripe for imparting will be published by me from time to time in the Sozialdemokrat. Bernstein is getting on very well, he is eager to learn, is witty and has an open mind, can put up with criticism and is quite free of all petty-bourgeois moralisings. But our lads in Germany have also been truly magnificent, ever since the time that the Anti-Socialist Law 3 7 liberated them from the 'ed- dicated' gentlemen who, in their ignorant academic muddle- headedness, had attempted prior to 1878 to instruct the workers from on high, an attempt that was, alas, condoned by all too many of the

