---
Volume: 47
Document_Title: "17. Engels to Ludwig Klopfer. 22 May "
Page_Range: "56-57"
---

# 17. Engels to Ludwig Klopfer. 22 May 



**[p. 27]**

'leaders'. This worthless lumber has not yet been entirely cleared away, but the movement has again taken a decidedly revolutionary turn. That is precisely what is so splendid about our lads, the fact that the masses are far better than almost any of the leaders; and now that the Anti-Socialist Law is compelling the masses to take care of the movement themselves, now that the influence of the leaders is reduced to a minimum, the movement is better than ever.

Your old friend

F. Engels

First published in: F. Engels, Vergessene Printed according to the original Briefe (Briefe Friedrich Engels' an Johann Philipp Becker), Berlin, 1920 Published in English in full for the first time

17

ENGELS TO LUDWIG KLOPFER

London, 22 May 1883

Dear Mr Klopfer,

I should be only too glad to help you if I possibly could. However I have absolutely no publishing or literary connections in Germany and should not know whom to approach. a The party, however, still has various periodicals, etc., in Germany, e. g. Liebknecht's and Kautsky's Neue £eit in Stuttgart (Dietz Verlag) ; you should get Becker to give you letters for them. If anything can be done for you, it is over there; we here are as cut off from everything as you are in Ge- neva.

Your letter of the 9th bears the Geneva postmark of the 13th. I hope that this will at least partly explain my delay in replying.

[^1]: IN GENEVA

[^2]: a See previous letter.



