---
Volume: 47
Document_Title: "18. Engels to Laura Lafargue. 22 May "
Page_Range: "57-59"
---

# 18. Engels to Laura Lafargue. 22 May 



**[p. 28]**

Trusting that the adoption of the above course will enable you to achieve your object, I remain,

Yours truly,

F. Engels

First published in: Marx and Engels, Printed according to the original Works, Second Russian Edition, Vol. 39, Moscow, 1966 Published in English for the first time

18

ENGELS TO LAURA LAFARGUE

IN PARIS

London, 22 May 1883

My dear Laura,

I had not, as Paul suggests, forgotten his five pd. note, but having Sam Moore here, could not get a free moment when to get it ready and register the letter. Yesterday evening Sam returned to Manches- ter and the note would have left here to-day, but for Paul's letter which alters his directions to me. The cheque is enclosed, £ 10.-

So ce cher Paul is while I write this, a prisoner. 9 He has just (5.45) been debarred from receiving visitors and can now in all rest and peace discuss with Guesde the chances of la révolution révolutionnaire. We drank his health last Sundaya in a bowl of splendid Maitrankb

and wished him any amount of pluck and patience.

Well, for a long time I thought you might profit of Paul's involun- tary seclusion, to come over to London, and would have at once placed the whole of 122 Regent's Park Road at your disposal, but from all I learnt I was afraid I might hurt someone's feelings by such a proposal. Even Nim when she returned, never mentioned a word about it, that you had spoken of showing your bright face in this dull climate; and when Paul wrote he expected you to lunch with him

[^1]: 20 May- b Wine flavoured with sweet woodruff, May wine.





**[p. 29]**

every morning in St-Pélagie I lost heart altogether. Now however it is all right, and I hope to hear soon from you that you accept my invita- tion, to make this place your headquarters for a couple of months at least, which of course will not exclude trips to the sea-side, etc. If Paul has to be under lock and key, so much the more reason for you to look after your own health.

While Sam was here, we found out, through him, the very unpleas- ant fact that Mohr never had, nor have we, the right to stop unauth- orised translation of the Kapital. The right was lost as soon as the first year elapsed without a commencement of translation being published. So as there are several fellows in the field,56 we have to dodge and to use the unpublished 2nd volume as a means to bring them round.

The 2nd volume will give me an awful deal of work — at least the II book. 4 There is one complete text, of about 1868, but a mere brouillon.a Then there are at least three, if not four, Ueb er arbeitungen b

belonging to various later periods, but none of them completed. That will be a job to select from them a definitive text! The 3rd book is complete since 1869-70 and has never been touched since. But here, where the rent of land is treated, I shall have to compare his Russian extracts57 for notes, facts and instances. Maybe I shall be able to con- coct even a bit of a 3rd volume from the ms. of 1858-62 58 (the begin- ning of which appeared in Berlin [in] 1859c) and which at the end of every chapter contains the critical history of the theoretical points discussed in it.

Lately I have been occupied with sorting the correspondence. There is a large box full of most important letters [from] 1841 (nay 1837 from your grandfather Marxd) to 1862. It is nearly sorted, but it will take me some hours more to complete it. I can assure you it is great fun to me to stumble over these old things most of which con- cern me as much as they did Mohr and there is such a deal to laugh over. Nim helps me — awful lot of dusting required! and we have many a good laugh over old times. The correspondence since 1862 he has sorted, in a passable way, himself. But before we fathom all the mysteries of that garret full of boxes, packets, parcels, books, etc., some time must elapse. And I have to prepare for the 3rd edition sun- dry additions from the French translation 59 which I know Mohr in- tended inserting; and that must be done in 3-4 weeks.

[^1]: * draft-b revised versions-c K. Marx, A Contribution to the Critique of Political Economy. Part One.-d Heinrich Marx



