---
Volume: 47
Document_Title: "19. Engels to Laura Lafargue. 2 June "
Page_Range: "59-61"
---

# 19. Engels to Laura Lafargue. 2 June 



**[p. 30]**

But now it's post-time and so good-bye for to-day.

Yours affectionately,

F. Engels

First published, in the language of the Reproduced from the original original (English), in: F. Engels, P. et L. Lafargue, Correspondance, t. I, Paris, 1956

19

ENGELS T O LAURA LAFARGUE

IN PARIS

London, 2 June 1883

My dear Laura,

Herewith cheque £ 10.- for Paul as desired. To judge from his let- ter, he seems to be pretty cheerful for his condition, but of course the grincement des clefs et des verrouxa must be something awful.9

What is comparative liberty by day when one is reduced to solitary confinement by night, and how is he to sing:

As Paul is going to work up his German in prison, you might give him that to translate.

[^1]: Singet nicht in Trauertönen Von der Einsamkeit der Nacht, Denn sie ist, o holde Schönen, Zur Geselligkeit gemacht.b

[^2]: Now, by this time the two heroic martyrs0 ought to be pretty well

[^3]: a clinking of keys and bolts b Sing no more in strains of sadness Of the loveliness of night! Darksome hours were made for gladness, Social joy, and love's delight.

[^4]: Goethe, Wilhelm Master's Apprenticeship, translated by R. Dillon Boylan, London, Henry Bohn, 1861. c Paul Lafargue and Jules Guesde





**[p. 31]**

settled down and don't you think you might come over, say by Thursday or Friday nexta? The fact is I expect Jollymeier to-night who will be able to stay here till Monday week, 11 th June, and he would so like to see you. Moreover, Tussy talks very much about your coming and seems very anxious to have you here and to consult you about the disposal of the things in the house, etc., etc., the sole respon- sibility seems to weigh very much upon her. So that your journey would be to some extent on business. If you will come and if you write at once, I shall send you the funds by return, I should have added them to the cheque to-day, only my balance is low and I have money to come in next week.

Among Mohr's papers I have found a whole lot of mss, our com- mon work, of before 1848.60 Some of these I shall soon publish.

There is one I shall read to you when you are here, you will crack your sides with laughing. I read it to Nim and Tussy, Nim said: jetzt weiss ich auch, warum Sie %wei damals in Brüssel des Nachts so gelacht haben, dass kein Mensch im Hause davor schlafen konnte. b We were bold devils then, Heine's poetry is childlike innocence compared wim our prose.

There is a chance of a translation of the Kapital being published by Kegan Paul and Co., they would be the best men. 5 6 Tussy is go- ing to see them on Monday0; if anything practicable comes of it, we shall then go together afterwards. S. Moore will translate, and I shall revise. There are other people at it, but if we can arrange the thing, they will soon be out of the field. S. Moore was here in Whitweek, and we settled the matter with him, as far as he is concerned. He is by far the best man, slightly heavy, but that can be mended. He has been of immense use to us as our legal adviser. Indeed I have still to write to him by first mail upon a legal question.

Pumps is going on very well and her two babies too, the boy is aw- fully big and fat, very near the size of his sister! at least so says the proud Mamma. If you are here next Sunday (to-morrow) week, we shall have a grand bowl of Maitrank,d it is just in its prime now, I mean the Waldmeister, we have had two bowls here on Sundays and two at Tussy's in the week, and plenty of Moselle left!

If you say you will come, the same day I shall write to Dublin for a case of the best and of the super best Claret which we will finish quietly betwixt us.

[^1]: a 7 or 8 June - b Now I know why you two laughed at night in Brussels at that time so that no one could sleep in the building. -c 4 June -d Wine flavoured with sweet woodruff, May wine.



