---
Volume: 47
Document_Title: "23. Engels to Laura Lafargue. 24 June "
Page_Range: "68-71"
---

# 23. Engels to Laura Lafargue. 24 June 



**[p. 23]**

ENGELS TO LAURA LAFARGUE

IN PARIS

London, 24 June 1883

My dear Laura,

When you spoke of your knowledge of what poor Moor's views and wishes had been at Vevey,7 ' it was in connection with dispositions of a more or less testamentary nature, and I therefore naturally con- cluded that you alluded to similar subjects. And as those might comprise wishes as to what should be done with some mementos of your Mama, etc., books and so forth, and as here we are bound to come to some conclusion or other, and Tussy moreover seems to shun respon- sibility of acting on her own hook, I thought it my clear duty to in- form you, so that, in case you had anything to communicate, it could be done in time.

After poor Mohr's death, on my inquiry, Tussy informed me that he had told her, she and I were to take possession of all his papers, and procure the publication of what was to be published, especially the 2nd volume" and the mathematical works.72 The 3rd German editionb is in hand, I am looking after that too. If you wish to have Mohr's exact words, Tussy will no doubt give them to you if you ask her to do so.

This matter was talked about here when Paul was here, and I am almost certain he is aware of it.

As to the expression, literary executors, I am alone responsible for it. I could not find another at the time, and if by it I have in any way offended you, I humbly ask your pardon.73

How the disposition itself can wound you, I cannot see. The work must be done here on the spot. The real work, that you know as well as Tussy does, will mostly have to be done by me. But as Mohr had one daughter living in London, I find it but natural that he should associ- ate her to me in such work as she could do. Had you been living here instead of in Paris, all the three of us would have been jointly ap- pointed, no doubt about that.

[^1]: a of Capital - b of the first volume of Capital





**[p. 40]**

Of the projects Mohr discussed with you at Vevey I was of course utterly ignorant and only regret you did not come over since the 14th March, when we should have known and complied with them as much as possible. But here is how the matter stands with regard to the English translation.a We find (from Sam. Moore as well as from Meissner) that we have no right to stop anyone from publishing an un- authorised translation. That right, in the best of cases, lasts but three years after first publication and lapsed finally in 1870. Now there were several people in the field and a well-meaning but poor and un- businesslike publisher, Reeves, the most undesirable man of all, told Radford he had found a translator and was going to publish his trans- lation. There was then no time to lose. We must find someone wil- ling and able to do the work — we could think of no one but Sam. Moore and of Kegan Paul and Co. as publishers. The two entered into correspondence, then Tussy saw Kegan Paul, then I. Nothing is concluded, but very probably we shall come to some agreement. The question is: would you, under the altered circumstances, have under- taken to do the translation and bind yourself to a given time, say 6 months?

As to the History of the International, I am perfectly willing, as far as / a m concerned, that all papers, etc., relating to the International be handed over to you for that purpose. But my plan was to write a full biography of Mohr,30 and if you take those papers, that falls to the ground. Mohr's life without the International would be a dia- mond ring with the diamond broken out.

I have said nothing to Tussy about your letter, as I do riot wish to interfere in any way between two sisters. Therefore, if you require any explanations from her, you will please write direct to her. But I think

[^1]: a Of the first volume of Capital; see this volume, p. 29.





**[p. 41]**

the best thing you could do, is to come over and have the matter mu- tually explained. You know very well there is on my part no other desire but to consider your wishes as much as possible and in every re- spect. And I am the same in the case with Tussy. If you wish to have your name associated to ours in the common work, and if you wish to share this work, and means can be found how, I for one shall only be glad ofthat. As it is we shall want your assistance often enough for in- formation, etc., and nothing could throw greater obstacles in our way than fresh unpleasantness between you and Tussy. What we all of us are desirous of seeing carried out, is a befitting monument to the memory of Mohr, the first portion of which will and must be the publica- tion of his posthumous works. Let us then all contribute what we can towards that end.

The only person to whom I have spoken about this matter is Nim and she is quite of the opinion expressed above.

As to our two martyrs,a they seem happy and contented enough, and even afraid of Grévy's putting an end to their prison-bliss on the 14th July.9 What a fine sentence that on Louise Michel!74 Fortu- nately nobody knows who will rule France a couple of years hence. A shell between the legs of Alexander III, and all prison doors in Europe and Asia fly open except — the Irish ones.

partly upon the French edition,59 which must be done quick so as not to give excuse for delay. So no more at present.

Ever yours affectionately,

F. Engels

[^1]: Now I must conclude. I have to read proof-sheets No. 4 of 3rd edi- tion1' which arrived here on Saturday0 and I have bound myself to re- turn them in 48 hours. Then I have to work at the alterations for 3rd edition (done up to page 404) partly upon an annotated copy,75

[^2]: First published in: Marx and Engels, Reproduced from the original Works, Second Russian Edition, Vol. 36, Moscow, 1964 Published in English for the first time

[^3]: a Paul Lafargue and Jules Guesde- b the third German edition of Volume I of Capi- tal- c 23 June



