---
Volume: 47
Document_Title: "24. Engels to Friedrich Adolph Sorge. 29 June "
Page_Range: "71-73"
---

# 24. Engels to Friedrich Adolph Sorge. 29 June 



**[p. 24]**

ENGELS T O FRIEDRICH ADOLPH SORGE 7 6

IN HOBOKEN

London, 29 June 1883

Dear Sorge,

My evening's work has been disrupted by callers and this has given me a bit of spare time in which to write to you.

The critique of Henry George, which Marx sent you, is essentially a work of such extraordinary skill and stylistically so much all of a piece, that it would be a pity to tone it down by including the desul- tory marginal comments that appear in English in Marx's copy.a

These will always be to hand in case of need later on. Every word of the letter he sent you was written, as was usually Marx's custom on such occasions, with an eye to the subsequent publication of the text. So you will not be guilty of any indiscretion if you have it printed. If it is to come out in English, I will translate it for you, since the transla- tion of the Manifesto1" has again shown that there seems to be no one over there who can translate our German, at any rate, into literary, grammatical English.77 This calls for a writer with practice in both languages, practice, what's more, that is not merely confined to the daily press. Translating the Manifesto is awfully difficult; by far the best renderings I have seen are the Russian.78

The 3rd edition of Capita? is causing me a tremendous amount of work. We have one copy in which Marx follows the French edition59

when indicating the emendations and additions to be made,75 but all the detailed work remains to be done. I have got as far as 'Accu- mulation',d but here it is a case of revising almost completely the en- tire theoretical section. On top of that there is the responsibility. For to some extent the French translation lacks the depth of the German text; Marx would never have written in German in that way. More- over the publisher keeps pressing me.

Until I finish this there can be no question of my going on to Vol-

[^1]: a See this volume, p. 14.-b K. Marx and F. Engels, Manifesto of the Communist Party. -c the third German edition of Volume I of Capital -d i.e. Part VII of the first volume of Capital





**[p. 43]**

Practically everything has been saved from the period up to 1848. Not only virtually all of the mss he and I worked on at the time (in so far as they haven't been eaten by mice), but also the correspondence. Everything after 1849 is also complete, of course, and, from 1862 on, is actually in some sort of order. Also extensive written material on the International, sufficient, I imagine, for a full history, though I have not yet been able to take a closer look at it.

There are also 3 or 4 notebooks of mathematical studies. I once showed your Adolf3 an example of Marx's new explanation of differential calculus.79

Had it not been for the mass of American and Russian material80

(there are over two cubic metres of books of Russian statistics alone), Volume II would have long since been printed. These detailed stu- dies held him up for years. As always, everything had to be brought right up to date and now it has all come to nothing, apart from his ex- cerpts which will, I trust, include many of his customary critical com- mentaries for use as notes to Volume II.

The photographs are hereb; as soon as I can find time to pack them I shall send them to you. But how? BOOK POST precludes any stout packing, no parcel post exists as yet,.and to send a small package like this per parcels agency would cost a mint of money. Perhaps you would let me know how best to go about it.

I have already read five sheets of the final proof of the 3rd edition; the man has promised to send three sheets a week.

Your

F. Engels

I haven't possibly got time to answer little Hepner's many long let- ters just now. His reports are always of interest to me, intermingled though they are with a great deal of personal gossip and written with the sense of superiority of the newly disembarked. Meanwhile you had better convey my apologies to him.

[^1]: a Adolf Sorge jun.- h See this volume, p. 18.



