---
Volume: 47
Document_Title: "25. Engels to Gabriel Deville. 12 August "
Page_Range: "73-74"
---

# 25. Engels to Gabriel Deville. 12 August 



**[p. 44]**

Nor will Most, who is, of course, bound to confirm everything I have said,b which is exactly what has made him so furious. I believe he will find support in sectarian America and sow confusion for a time. But it is precisely in the nature of the American movement that all mistakes must be experienced in practice. If America's energy and vitality were backed by Europe's theoretical clarity, you would get everything fixed up within ten years. But that is, after all, an his- torical impossibility.

First published in Briefe und Auszüge aus Printed according to the original Briefen von Jok. Phil. Becker, Jos. Dietzgen, Friedrich Engels, Karl Marx u. A. an Published in English in full for the F. A. Sorge und Andere, Stuttgart, 1906 f l r s t t l m e

25

ENGELS TO GABRIEL DEVILLE

London, 12 August 1883

122 Regent's Park Road, N.W.

Dear Citizen Deville,

There I shall have sufficient leisure to look over your work which will be returned to you as soon as possible.

Your manuscript arrived at an opportune moment. Only yesterday I completed the final editing of the 3rd German edition of Capi- tal," and have undertaken to begin editing the 2nd volume imme- diately on my return from the seaside. So your work reached me pre- cisely at the moment when I happened to have a short interval of time.

[^1]: IN PARIS

[^2]: I have received your letter and your manuscript, for which I thank you.81 Next week I shall be leaving London for a seaside resort.82

[^3]: See this volume, pp. 13-14 and 91.- b Ibid., p. 11.- c the first volume



