---
Volume: 47
Document_Title: "26. Engels to Laura Lafargue. 19 August "
Page_Range: "74-76"
---

# 26. Engels to Laura Lafargue. 19 August 



**[p. 45]**

Yours ever,

F. Engels

First published, heavily abridged, in: Printed according to the original M. Dommanget, Karl Marx et Frédéric Engels, Paris, 1951 and in full in: Marx and Engels, Translated from the French Works, Second Russian Edition, Vol. 36, Moscow, 1964 Published in English for the first time

26

ENGELS TO LAURA LAFARGUE

Eastbourne, 19 August 1883 4 Cavendish Place

My dear Laura,

At last out of London.82 As soon as I saw my way clear, I sent Percy (last Wednesday") over here to look out for apartments. He did his business well, and found excellent accommodation, not with- out difficulty. Two doors from the Parade, facing the Pier, fine rooms, no sun more than is wanted, good sea-view, good cooking, the only thing we are sorry for is that it could not be arranged in time for you to go with us. On Friday we arrived here, Pumps, babies and girl, Nim, Jollymeier (who felt a little out of sorts again but has picked up here at once and will soon leave us) and myself. First-class Scotch mist on arrival, fine rain off and on all night, very encouraging! But next day splendid, so that we could take our walks under the trees and show Nim a little of the place. To-day, Sunday, fine morning but

[^1]: IN PARIS

[^2]: ' 15 August





**[p. 46]**

Emily Rosher's little avortorf died yesterday, best thing it could do. I wrote to Deville at once announcing arrival of his ms.b At the same time or a little after I got also Sam Moore's translation0 — so I shall have plenty to do here, besides working off my colossal arrears of correspondence.

The place is very full, but the style of the people seems to be more 'free and easy' than formerly. Even on Sunday morning the chimney- pot hat plays but a very poor part, and 'athletic' costumes run about pretty free.

Just now the whole party throng in again, awfully thirsty, Jolly- meier has to open the Pilsener, and you conceive that it is no use struggling against the difficulties crowding upon me and stopping not only rational but even irrational correspondence. The second bottle has just been opened, the little girl is crawling about my knees, and so I give it up in despair. The whole colony send their kindest regards to you and Paul whose half-term we shall celebrate the day after tomor- row 9 in an extra draft of Pilsener.

Nim wishes you, literally, 'to have a good look-out about her for- tune, as she expects it soon to come in'.84

And so, dear Laura,

Yours most affectionately,

F. Engels

[^1]: First published, in the language of the Reproduced from the original original (English), in: F. Engels, P. et L. Lafargue, Correspondance, t. I, Paris, 1956

[^2]: a abortion-b See previous letter.-0 Part of the English translation of the first volume of Capital (see Note 56).



