---
Volume: 47
Document_Title: "27. Engels to Wilhelm Liebknecht,. 21 August "
Page_Range: "76-77"
---

# 27. Engels to Wilhelm Liebknecht,. 21 August 



**[p. 27]**

ENGELS TO WILHELM LIEBKNECHT

IN BORSDORF NEAR L E I P Z I G "

[Eastbourne,] 21 August 1883

Dear Liebknecht,

Your letter85 has remained unanswered because of final work on the 3rd edition,a after which I came to stay here at

4 Cavendish Place, Eastbourne, England where I intend to remain until about 12 September.82

Mrs Marx died on 2 December 1881, Jenny on 9 January 1883. Both deaths were reported in the Sozialdemokrat}1

The Paris Vorwärts! was a little sheet which is now being accorded more importance than it deserves; the editors were a dilatory lot. Marx's main concern was to keep it on the right lines and from time to time he also wrote polemical articles and reviews attacking the Prussians.0 Heine sent Marx some of the advance proofs of the Winter- märchen from Hamburg for publication in the Vorwärts! before the book appeared in Germany.86

I actually only set eyes on a few numbers and the little paper did not survive for long, so I cannot let you have any further de- tails.

Marx wrote quite a lot of things for the Deutsche-Brüsseler-Zeitung, including a polemical discourse against Heinzen.d

Bebel's letter safely received; will be answered from here6; along with all the other correspondence, have been unable to attend to it because of overwork. Tell Bebel that Schorlemmer, who is here, will be going to Darmstadt shortly and staying there until about the mid- dle of September. If Bebel is visiting those parts before then, Schor- lemmer would like him to let him know (Prof. Schorlemmer, Darm-

[^1]: a the third German edition of Volume I of Capital-h F. Engels, 'Jenny Marx, née von Westphalen'; 'Jenny Longuet, née Marx'.-c K. Marx, 'Critical Marginal Notes on the Article "The King of Prussia and Social Reform. By a Prussian" '; 'Illustrations of the Latest Exercise in Cabinet Style of Frederick William IV'.-d K. Marx, 'Mora- lising Criticism and Critical Morality. A Contribution -to German Cultural His- tory. Contra Karl Heinzen'.-e See this volume, pp. 52-55.



