---
Volume: 47
Document_Title: "29. Engels to Eduard Bernstein. 27 August "
Page_Range: "78-81"
---

# 29. Engels to Eduard Bernstein. 27 August 



**[p. 49]**

Thank you for the copies of the translation, which reached me in good condition, and also for kindly sending your photograph, in re- turn for which I enclose mine.

Yours with regards,

F. Engels

The normal London address is fine; I am here at the seaside for a few weeks.

First published in La corrispondenza di Marx Printed according to the original e Engels con italiani. 1848-1895, Milano,

1964 Translated from the Italian

Published in English for the first time

29

Eastbourne, 27 August 1883 4 Cavendish Place

Dear Bernstein,

Herewith money order for £4 for old Becker." I am still hoping that the news — and it wouldn't be the first time — is being exaggerated by his family. But he is, of course, very old, has been through a great deal and, or so I was told by Mme Lafargue, looked considerably older last year in Geneva by comparison with his hearty appearance at The Hague.89

I shall not be able to write a great deal today. The post leaves here at one o'clock in the afternoon and here beside me, for proof-reading, lies sheet 19 of Capital* which also has to go off.

[^1]: ENGELS T O EDUARD BERNSTEIN 8 8

[^2]: IN ZURICH

[^3]: a Johann Philipp Becker-1" of the third German edition of Volume I of Capital





**[p. 50]**

I am staying here until about 12 September,82 until when the above address holds good; then back to London.

Besides proofs and arrears of correspondence, I must, while here, attend to:

1) Deville's ms., French popularisation of Capital.®:1

2) Ms., part of the English translation,b both of them sorely in need of revision. So you see, no peace here either. Luckily I live right next to the sea and sit besides an open window through which the sea air comes wafting in.

I was very sorry that you didn't come over here. I had a number of things to discuss with you. We have in any case got to resign ourselves to the fact that some of Marx's unpublished works will have to appear abroad0 and you alone could give me practical information or sugges- tions relating to this; it is, however, something that has to be discussed verbally — by letter it would be endless. But please say nothing about this, otherwise it might arouse false hopes in the people who run the printing works out there; my experience of party presses is such that I would think twice before entrusting a major and important work to any of them.

I shall retain the money order here, it being expressly stated thereon that it is of no use to the recipient. I gave your address, 137 alte Landstraße Riesbach, from memory; if wrong, please put this right at the main post office in Zurich.

So long as the Anti-Socialist Law is in force,37 and the Sozialdemokrat is the only possible organ, it is imperative not to sow discord among the party merely for the sake of such secondary issues, and that is what would happen if one sought to make a 'question of principle' out of this issue.

[^1]: My suggestion about the impudent ms. was, as it were, a bad joke.d

[^2]: a fluent-b of the first volume of Capital (see Note 56)- c See this volume, p. 17.- d Ibid., p. 37.





**[p. 51]**

In the class struggle between proletariat and bourgeoisie, the Bo- napartist monarchy (the characteristics of which have been expound- ed by Marx in the Eighteenth Brumaire and by myself in The Housing Question, II, and elsewhere) adopted a role similar to that of the old absolute monarchy in the struggle between feudalism and bourgeoi- sie. But just as that struggle could not be fought out under the old, ab- solute monarchy but only under a constitutional one (England, France 1789-92 and 1815-30) so, too, that between bourgeoisie and proletariat can only be fought out in a republic. Inasmuch, then, as the French were helped by favourable conditions and revolutionary antecedents to overthrow Bonaparte and establish a bourgeois repub- lic,92 they have the advantage over us, who remain stuck in a farrago of semi-feudalism and Bonapartism, of already possessing the form in which the struggle must be fought out and which we must first master for ourselves. Politically they are a whole stage ahead of us. Hence, the inevitable consequence of a monarchist restoration in France would be that the struggle for the restoration of the bourgeois republic would again appear on the agenda; continuance of the republic, on the other hand, means mounting intensification of the direct, un- disguised class struggle between proletariat and bourgeoisie until a crisis is reached.

Similarly in our case the first, immediate result of the revolution can and must, so far as form is concerned, be nothing other than a bour- geois republic. But in this instance it will be no more than a brief, transitional period since fortunately we do not possess a purely repub- lican bourgeois party. A bourgeois republic with, perhaps, the Party of Progress 9 3 at the helm, will serve us at first to win over the great mass of the workers to revolutionary socialism — which will have been effected in a year or two — and will be conducive to the thorough erosion and self-destruction of all possible intermediate parties but not ours. Only then can we successfully take over.

The great mistake made by the Germans is to imagine the revolu- tion as something that can be achieved overnight. In fact it is a pro- cess of development on the part of the masses which takes several years even under conditions that tend to accelerate it. Every revolu- tion that has been achieved overnight has merely ousted a reaction-

