---
Volume: 47
Document_Title: "30. Engels to August Bebel. 30 August "
Page_Range: "81-84"
---

# 30. Engels to August Bebel. 30 August 



**[p. 52]**

Yours,

F.E What do you think of this:

'The last so-called red number of the "Rheinische Zeitung"" (third edition) of 19 May 1849, which carried the Neue Rheinische ^eitung'% farewell message by Ferdinand Freiligrath at the top of its front page, was again confiscated by the police here not long ago. A second-hand dealer had bought as waste paper a number of copies of this last farewell issue of the sometime organ of democracy and was selling them at 10 pfennigs a piece. The police put a stop to this by confiscating such of the papers as the dealer still had left. If the confiscation was effected on the grounds that the sheet's wretched pale red print was bound to harm its readers' eyes, the public has cause to thank the police; today, the text would be most unlikely to inflame anyone's feelings.' b

First published abridged in Le Mouvement Printed according to the original socialiste, Paris, t. IV, No. 45, novembre 1,

1900 and in full, in Russian, in Marx- Published in English in full for the Engels Archives, Book I, Moscow, 1924 first t l m e

30

Eastbourne, 30 August 1883 4 Cavendish Place

Dear Bebel,

I am taking advantage of a moment's peace to write to you. In London numerous jobs, down here numerous interruptions (three grown-ups and two small children in one room!); on top ofthat proof- reading0 and the revision of an English specimen translation56 as also of a popularised French version of Capital.61 How's a chap to write letters!

I have corrected up to sheet 21 of the 3rd edition which contains

[^1]: ENGELS TO AUGUST BEBEL 94

[^2]: IN BORSDORF NEAR LEIPZIG 3 4

[^3]: * Neue Rheinische £eitung-b See Kölnische Leitung, No. 119, 20 July 1883. -c of the third German edition of Volume I of Capital





**[p. 53]**

As regards the photograph,b the head is quite excellent. The pose is stiff, as in all his photographs; he was a bad 'sitter'. It does not irritate me in any way but, because of the stiffness of the pose, I prefer the smaller one to the larger.

The election in Hamburg 9 6 has also created a great sensation ab- road. But then the behaviour of our chaps could not have been more exemplary. Such tenacity, perseverance, flexibility and ready wit, such waggish confidence of winning in the struggle with the greater and lesser miseries of the Germany of today, is unprecedented in recent German history. Especially splendid is the contrast it presents to the corruption, flabbiness and general decay of all other classes of German society. The very extent to which these classes demonstrate their inability to rule brings out in brilliant relief the ruling mission of the German proletariat, its ability to overturn the whole sordid old mess.

The 'jets of cold water' directed by Bismarck on Paris97 are be- coming ridiculous, even in the eyes of the French bourgeois. Even a paper as stupid as the Soir has discovered that nothing more is in- volved dian the new appropriations in the Reichstag for the military (this time the field artillery).0 As for his alliances (he has descended to Serbia, Romania and now Spain of all places98), all these are houses built of cards that will be blown down by a puff of wind. If he's lucky he won't need them and if he's unlucky they will land him in

[^1]: a draft-b of Marx- c Le Soir, 29 August 1883.





**[p. 54]**

The manifesto of the Democratic Federation in L o n d o n " has been issued by some 20-30 little societies which, under various names (always the same people), have been persistently trying to look im- portant for the past 20 years at least and always with the same lack of success. All that is important is that these people have now at last been compelled publicly to proclaim our theory as their own, a theory which, at the time of International, seemed to them to have been imposed upon them from outside, and further that a number of young people have lately emerged from amongst the bourgeoisie who, to the shame, be it said, of the English workers, understand these things better and embrace them more enthusiastically than do the workers. For even in the Democratic Federation the workers have accepted the new programme for the most part no more than reluc- tantly and outwardly. Hyndman, the head of the Democratic Fede- ration, is an ex-Conservative, an ambitious man, hopelessly jingoistic but not stupid. He behaved pretty shabbily b towards Marx (to whom he had been introduced by Rudolf Meyer), and for that reason has been personally ignored by us.100 On no account whatever allow yourself to be bamboozled into believing that a real proletarian move- ment is afoot here. I know that this is what Liebknecht would have himself and the rest of the world believe, but it is not so. The elements presently active might become important, now that they have accept- ed our theoretical programme and thus acquired a basis, but only if a spontaneous movement broke out amongst the workers here and they succeeded in gaining control of it. Until then they will continue to be so many isolated individuals with, behind them, an omnium- gatherum of muddle-headed sects, the remnants of the great move- ment of the forties, ' ° ' but nothing more. A really universal labour movement will come about here — barring the unexpected — only when the workers become sensible of the fact that England's world

[^1]: a Alexander III - b The words 'ziemlich schofel' ('pretty shabbily') were crossed out in the original and 'nicht schön' ('not nicely') written above them in an unknown handwriting.



