---
Volume: 47
Document_Title: "31. Engels to Karl Kautsky. 18 September "
Page_Range: "84-87"
---

# 31. Engels to Karl Kautsky. 18 September 



**[p. 55]**

I asked Liebknecht to tell youa that, if you happened to be in the neighbourhood of Darmstadt between now and 12 September, you should advise Schorlemmer who is staying there, so that he can look you up somewhere in that region. It is probably too late now. Regards to Liebknecht.

Your

F. E.

31

London, 18 September 1883

Dear Mr Kautsky,

As regards the Geiser business, I do not believe the time has yet come for me to intervene.104 The chaps must first compromise them-

[^1]: First published, in Russian, in Marx- Printed according to the original Engels Archives, Vol. I (VI), Moscow, 1932 _ , ,. , , . „ ,. , . „ ,, „ Published in English in full for the first time

[^2]: ENGELS TO KARL KAUTSKY 1 0 3

[^3]: IN STUTTGART

[^4]: a See this volume, pp. 47-48.





**[p. 56]**

Lack of time precludes my engaging in further detailed discussion of the articles on marriage.105 In any case, primitive hetaerism is so remote in time and has been so much overlaid by later developments, whether progressive or otherwise, that nowadays we can nowhere ex- pect to find examples in their pristine form. But all subsequent forms lead back to those primitive origins. Of this much I am certain,— until you have completely dropped the element of jealousy as a deter- mining social factor (in primitive times), it will not be possible to give a correct account of the way things have developed.

Generally speaking, in the case of all those scientific researches which embrace so wide a field and such a mass of material, nothing can really be achieved except by dint of many years of study. Indivi- dual aspects that are both new and accurate — and these are, of course, to be found in your articles — present themselves more read- ily; but to survey the whole and to order it anew is something that can only be done after it has been fully explored. Otherwise there would be many more books like Capital. So I am glad to see that you have turned to themes — for immediate literary treatment — such as early biblical history0 and colonisation,01 which make it possible to achieve something without so exhaustive and detailed a study, and yet at the same time strike a topical note. I liked the colonisation arti- cle very much. Unfortunately almost all the material you've got is

[^1]: a See this volume, p. 64.-b Stuttgart-' K. Kautsky, 'Die Entstehung der bib- lischen Urgeschichte', Kosmos, Vol. XIII, June 1883. -d K. Kautsky, 'Auswan- derung und Kolonisation', Die Neue £eit, Nos. 8 and 9, 1883.





**[p. 57]**

Last week, at the TRADES UNIONS CONGRESS sitting at Nottingham, Adam Weiler's proposal to press for international factory legislation was thrown out by 26 votes to 2 on the motion of the 'Labour' parlia- mentarian Broadhurst.107 So much for Liebknecht's much-vaunted

TRADES UNIONS! ' ° 8

Why doesn't Fritz Denhardt write for the Meue £eit any more? 109

He had a very nice cheery style. The journal itself, of course, has to content with appalling difficulties: the censorship it has to impose upon itself is a thousand times worse than the old, official censor- ship used to be. You still have some pretty odd contributors and you yourself must often enough long for better ones. At all events, this business has for you the advantage of enabling you at the same time to pursue your scientific studies and let them come to gradual frui- tion.

Incidentally, Java provides proof of the fact that nowhere and at no time does a population increase so rapidly as under a not unduly oppressive system of bondage: 1755—2 mill.; 1826—5'/2 mill.; 1850—9 mill.; 1878—19 mill.; — an almost tenfold increase in 125 years—the only example of anything like Malthusian growth. Were they to send the Dutch blood-suckers packing the population would become fairly stable.

Adler turned up just as I was off to the seaside and likewise on my return; he is a man of some promise. He saw much here that might be of use to him.110

[^1]: a The Daily News, 12 September 1883.



