---
Volume: 47
Document_Title: "32. Engels to Laura Lafargue. 19 September "
Page_Range: "87-89"
---

# 32. Engels to Laura Lafargue. 19 September 



**[p. 58]**

The 2nd volume of Capital will provide me with work and to spare. The bulk of the ms. dates back to before 1868 and is in. places no more than a brouillon}' ' 7 The second book will greatly disappoint the vulgar socialists, it contains virtually nothing but rigorously scien- tific, very minute examinations of things that take place within the capitalist class itself, and nothing at all out of which to fabricate catch-words and orations.

Pumps has already got two offspring. Tussy Marx has taken rooms near the British Museum. Lenchen is keeping house for me.

Kindest regards.

Yours,

F. E.

32

ENGELS TO LAURA LAFARGUE

London, 19 September 1883

My dear Laura,

At last returned from Eastbourne,82 where correspondence was rendered difficult and almost impossible by circumstances. When proof-sheetsc arrived — 3 times a week — my company left me to my

[^1]: First published, in Russian, in Marx- Printed according to the original Engels Archives, Vol. I (VI), Moscow, 1932 P u b i i s h e d i n English in full for the

[^2]: first time

[^3]: IN PARIS

[^4]: a See this volume, pp. 15-16.-b draft-0 of the third German edition of Vo- lume I of Capital





**[p. 59]**

work, but on the silent understanding that I was not to exact any- thing further — and how indeed could I have asked for peace and quietness in the one sitting room allotted to us all, especially when the thirst for Pilsener drove them in at certain times of the day?

I was besides busy with Sam Moore's specimen translation3 the greater part of which is very good and lively; the beginning — rather a difficult chapterb — wanted a deal of'look after', on account of his not having been exact enough in rendering the terminology, but that could be easily settled. I am certain from what I have seen that he will do the job well.

I also began revising Deville's pamphlet,81 it requires more work, especially in the beginning where great precision is necessary, but is wanting here and there. However I shall have no difficulty in setting that right, only it will take a week or a fortnight. I shall set to work ser- iously to-morrow. As far as I have gone, I am much pleased with his work, he has well understood everything (except small details) and it is written in a more lively style than I thought it would be.

As soon as that is shaken off I begin with the 2nd volume [of] Kapital.

I hope you received my post-card ' ' ' with the information you had asked me for. It was sent the day after I received your letter.

We came back last Friday,0 Pumps and Percy stayed here over Sunday, their house not being in order. Since then we had a thunder- storm and fearful rain in parts of London which flooded their back drawing-room. Otherwise they are flourishing. The little boy is get- ting on wonderfully well, he was five months yesterday, and is ex- tremely intelligent for his age.

Nim declares she must reduce her allowance of beer. She thinks she is getting too fat with it.

Tussy I have not seen yet, I believe she is not in town, I wrote her a line but she did not turn up on Sunday. As soon as Nim can get off she'll call on her.

[^1]: This morning Lopatin walks in, his adventures have ripened him considerably. ' ' 2 He will be here again directly and have dinner with us. He says he saw Paul lately and found him well and content, all things considered.9

[^2]: a the English translation of the first volume of Capital (see Note 56) - b the first chapter of Volume I of Capital — 'Commodities'.-' 14 September



