---
Volume: 47
Document_Title: "33. Engels to Laura Lafargue. 3 October "
Page_Range: "89-91"
---

# 33. Engels to Laura Lafargue. 3 October 



**[p. 60]**

Of my little pamphlet Entwicklung etc. two editions are already sold, the third is in the press.25 That shows anyhow that it is not too difficult for the mass of the working people in Germany.

When this letter arrives, Paul will have 'done' 2/3rds of his time — I hope he will keep his pluck up for the two last and most trying months.

Of the 3rd edition [of] Kapital* I have read proofs up to page 448, so if they go on at this rate, the whole will be completed by Decem- ber. I am sorry Mohr has not lived to see how well this time the thing is done: no delay, no trouble with the printers, no trifling complaint but is at once set right, and excellent proofs with very few mistakes. Leipzig ' ' 3 seems at last, and at least in this one respect of printing, to become 'ein klein Paris'} High time it was.

So now I conclude this budget of miscellaneous news in order to set a few little jobs right before Lopatin drops in again. Kind regards for0

Paul and a hearty kiss for yourself from

Yours affectionately,

Le général pour rire d

33

ENGELS TO LAURA LAFARGUE

London, 3 October 1883

My dear Laura,

Herewith cheque for £14.- of which £4.- are your l/3 share of £12.- sent by Meissner on account of 2nd edition [of] Kapital,"

[^1]: First published, in the language of the Reproduced from the original original (English), in: F. Engels, P. et L. Lafargue, Correspondance, t. I, Paris, 1956

[^2]: IN PARIS

[^3]: " the third German edition of Volume I of Capital-b 'a little Paris'-' In the ori- ginal mistakenly: 'from'.-d The general, in a manner of speaking.-0 the second German edition of Volume I of Capital





**[p. 61]**

£4.- for Tussy and £4.- for Longuets children, which Tussy has banked for the present until a little more money accrues to them, when we can consider, along with you, what is to be done in their interest.

Jollymeier left here yesterday, highly enchanted with Paris. He says you will come over at Christmas — hope it will turn out true!

Today I sent to you, registered, pages 1-123 of Deville's ms.81

I cannot find his letter with his address. The defect of the thing is that many parts of it have been done rather too hurriedly. This is princi- pally the case with the descriptive portions (especially manufacture and grande industrie"). The points do not at all come out as they ought to do. It is not sufficient to express them, as much as possible, in Marx's own words; these cannot be torn from the context without giving rise to misinterpretation or leaving many things in comparative obscu- rity. Deville would do well to revise these two chapters throughout and to complete them by some of the exemplifications of the original without which they have become very abstract and to working- men-readers obscure. In the theoretical parts there are also many slight inaccuracies (some too, as his definition of marchandise^ very serious) and des choses faites à la hâte,c but these it was mostly not very difficult to set more or less right. Then many portions, of interest and importance for theoretical economic science, but without immediate portée d on the question between capital and labour, might be omitted. One or two I have indicated.

Now then I close. Though a good deal better I am ordered to lie down as much as possible quietly for a few days longer and so with kind regards to the prisoners 9 and sincere love from Nim and myself remain

Ever yours affectionately,

F. Engels

[^1]: First published, in the language of the Reproduced from the original original (English), in: F. Engels, P. et L. Lafargue, Correspondance, t. I, Paris, 1956

[^2]: Cf. this volume, p. 76.- b commodity-0 things done in haste-d bearing



