---
Volume: 47
Document_Title: "34. Engels to Laura Lafargue. 15 October "
Page_Range: "91-92"
---

# 34. Engels to Laura Lafargue. 15 October 



**[p. 34]**

ENGELS TO LAURA LAFARGUE

IN PARIS

London, 15 October 1883

My dear Laura,

My last letter was awfully rough. But I was not allowed to sit long at the desk, and had to write — as you will allow — to Deville first.39

So I could only say a few words to you and these must have looked very unkind indeed. Pardon me.

Well, I have made up my mind d'en finir avec cette sacrée maladie chronique.* Since last Wednesday nightb I have stayed in bed, in order to do away with any excuse for the constant cause of all my relapses, want of rest and temptation for moving about. To-day I feel quite well, and inclined for a dance. But that is just the time when absolute rest is most needed, and therefore I shall not stir out of bed until bed will do me more harm than good. If nothing unexpected occurs, I think I shall be en pleine guérisonc before the week is out. So now, that will satisfy you I hope as far as my health is concerned.

I perfectly understand what Jollymeier meant by his letter to you. Gumpert had given him the note of warning — awfully exaggerated, though, for my case — but Gumpert could not interfere in my treat- ment by another doctor. Still I think Jollymeier might have found another way to save Gumpert's scruples as to medical étiquette with- out frighteningjo«. As it is, I have used your letter to stir up my doc- tors a bit, and with success. Ich hab' ihnen Beine gemacht? and energetic treatment is now all the rage.

But enough of that. All I am sorry for, and very sorry, is that I res- ponded in such an unkind way to your letter and to the kind feeling which had dictated it. It has weighed on my mind all the time, and yet I would not again write to you until I could indicate a decided improvement and good reasons for an approaching final cure.

Fortin has written, he wants a prefacee and asks about 20 questions which it would take a year to answer thoroughly. Tussy was here when his letter came, I read it to her and I wish you could have heard

[^1]: a to get rid of this accursed chronic ailment-b 10 October-1 fully fit -d I made them get a move o n - ' to the French edition of Marx's The Eighteenth Brumaire of Louis Bonaparte; see also this volume, p. 358.



