---
Volume: 47
Document_Title: "35. Engels to Eduard Bernstein. 8 November "
Page_Range: "92-94"
---

# 35. Engels to Eduard Bernstein. 8 November 



**[p. 63]**

Read to-day proof-sheetb up to page 600. Tussy has promised to look up the American reports for Paul. ' ' 4

It is getting post-time and dinner-time too. But before concluding: Deville writes to say he has no time to recast the 3 chapters indicated by me.8 ' Please do, you and Paul, as much as you can, to get him to revise them as much as possible. Such as they are, they are not intelli- gible but to those who know the original. He says the publisher will give no time. But the whole cannot be printed at once!! A fortnight will do it and it will be a wonderful improvement.

Kind regards to the prisoner0 now soon to be free.

A kiss from Nim and from your affectionate

F. Engels

First published, in the language of the Reproduced from the original original (English), in: F. Engels, P. et L. Lafargue, Correspondance, t. I, Paris, 1956

35

ENGELS TO EDUARD BERNSTEIN

London, 8 November 1883

Dear Bernstein,

I have been keeping to my bed for the past few weeks in order to rid myself of a chronic ailment, mild in itself but tiresome and long neglected; I shall be up again in a few days. Hence my silence. Please accept my apologies and also convey them to Kautsky; I don't know whether he is still in Stuckert.d

[^1]: IN ZURICH

[^2]: a See Engels' letter to Laura Lafargue, 21 March 1887 (present edition, Vol. 48).- b of the third German edition of Volume I of Capital-' Paul Lafargue-d Stuttgart





**[p. 64]**

and I shall be perfectly willing as soon as it becomes necessary, but I think one should first let these gentlemen compromise themselves a little more; they ought first to formulate more precisely what they mean by it; one must never stop people from giving 'complete and full' expression to their nonsense; only then does one get something really tangible. I hope your article will commit the chaps to this course.

If the Germans in Paris have not had their eyes opened to Malon & Co. now, there's no helping them. Their open alliance with the trai- tors of the English labour movement, the official representatives of the

TRADES UNIONS, has earned them the applause of the entire English bourgeois press from The Times and The Daily News to The Stand- ard.115 A good thing that Guesde and Lafargue were doing time,9

thereby enabling this magnificent performance to be put on with no interruptions whatever!

Apropos. Do you know a Dr Moritzc Quarck (sic!) In Rudolstadt? This man, with whom I am totally unfamiliar, has referred me to a pamphlet,d with which I am equally unfamiliar, attacking one Fleischmanne with whom I am even less familiar, and wants to translate The Poverty of Philosophy into German/ I have my misgiv- ings.

Well, let me know sometime soon what is going on in the world. I have become so stupid, lolling about in bed, that I can no longer marshal my thoughts.

Yours,

F. E.

[^1]: First published, in Russian, in Marx- Printed according to the original Engels Archives, Book I, Moscow, 1924 „ , ,. , , . _ ,. , _ Published in English for the hrst time

[^2]: a [E. Bernstein,] 'Das Recht auf Arbeit', Der Sozialdemokrat, No. 44, 25 October 1883. - b See this volume, p. 56.- c A mistake; should be Max.- d [M. Quarck,] Kommerzienrath Adolf Fleischmann als Nationalökonom und die Thüringer Hausindustrie. - ' A. Fleischmann, Die Sonneberger Spielwaaren-Hausindustrie und ihr Handel. -r See this volume, pp. 66 and 67.



