---
Volume: 47
Document_Title: "36. Engels to Vera Zasulich. 13 November "
Page_Range: "94-95"
---

# 36. Engels to Vera Zasulich. 13 November 



**[p. 36]**

ENGELS TO VERA ZASULICH

IN GENEVA

London, 13 November 1883 122 Regent's Park Road, N. W.

Dear Citizen,

I am not really in a position to answer the questions you have been so good as to put to me. ' ' 6 The publication of the second volume of Capital^ in the original text, continues to be delayed. Up till now I have had to confine my attention mainly to the 3rd edition of the first volume."

So far I have heard nothing at all from St Petersburg in regard to a Russian translation of the 2nd volume. Nor, for that matter, do I believe that, as things are now, there could be any question of pub- lishing a work of this kind in the Russian capital; no doubt they would first want to take a look at the German text.

On the other hand, the political situation in Russia is now so tense that a crisis might supervene any day. I even think it probable that the press will be free in Russia before it becomes so in Germany. And in that case the translator of the first volume, Tep Ma HT. Aona- THHT),b could, with some reason, claim the right to translate the se- cond.1 1?

I do not, therefore, believe that the time is yet ripe for an attempt to arrive at a final decision on this matter, but must thank you sin- cerely for your kind offer which I shall bear in mind. Perhaps we shall be able to see things more clearly in a month or two, and then we can renew our discussion on the subject.

It pleases me very much to hear that it is you who have under- taken to translate my Entwicklung etc.c; I look forward eagerly to seeing your work and fully appreciate the honour you have done me.

[^1]: in German- b (Russ.) Hermann Lopatin-c Socialism: Utopian and Scientific



