---
Volume: 47
Document_Title: "41. Engels to Laura Lafargue. 13 December "
Page_Range: "99-101"
---

# 41. Engels to Laura Lafargue. 13 December 



**[p. 70]**

F. Engels

First published in: F. Engels, Vergessene Printed according to the original Briefe (Briefe Friedrick Engels' an Johann n , ,• , , • ^ , - , , - , i- T>L-,^^ r> / i D i- mon Published in English for the first Philipp Becker), Berlin, 1920 . &

40

ENGELS TO KARL KAUTSKY

IN L O N D O N ' 2 8

[London, 1 December 1883]

Dear Kautsky,

What can be the matter? Not a sign of you either at Tussy's or at my house!

Yours,

F.E.

41 ENGELS TO LAURA LAFARGUE

London, 13 December 1883

My dear Laura,

I did not intend to write to you until I should be able to inform you that I was 'up and doing' again. To-day it is eight weeks that I went

[^1]: First published in Aus der Frühzeit des Marx- Printed according to the original ismus. Engels Briefwechsel mit Kautsky, „ , , . , , • T, . - . , . , r- p 1Q35 Published in English for the first

[^2]: time

[^3]: IN PARIS





**[p. 71]**

to bed for good (or rather bad) and although I feel considerably bet- ter, and keep in bed more for safety's sake than anything else, I am still far from able to use my legs as I ought to. These poor 'lower ex- tremities' to use the language of respectability, are woefully shrunk, and what is quite as bad, have left scarcely anything 'behind them'. The worst is I am quite at ease only when laid flat on my back and writing has to be done in a constrained position and soon becomes a torture, so this must excuse my short and unfrequent letters.

Paul's article in Progress* I read with much pleasure, it hits more than one nail on the head. Let us hope the 'Blé' will come out soon af- ter the period of étrennes,h ' ' 4 and be followed soon by that novelc

which I am most anxious to see. Paul in Balzac's slippers it will be good! By the bye I have been reading scarcely anything but Balzac while laid up and enjoyed the grand old fellow thoroughly. There is the history of France from 1815 to 1848, far more than in all the Vaulabelles, Gapefigues, Louis Blancs and tutti quanti.d And what boldness! What a revolutionary dialectic in his poetical justice!

But alas, we always drop back from the blooming field of romance into the dreary sick-bed of reality. This bids fair to be a poor Christ- mas! In the best of cases I may be allowed to spend it on the first floor, with order to go to my bedroom when one ought to begin to enjoy oneself! And no tipple, or at all events wine to be taken by the spoon- ful, as medicine! Well it can't be helped.

Percy is now partner of 'Garman and Rosher, Chartered Accoun- tants' Walbrook House, E. C. Hope he will prosper. His father has at last forked out the needful and set him up though with the sourest face and in the unpleasantest way possible.

Tussy has got neuralgia again, she will call here to-night, but only after this letter has gone. The Jutas (he, she,e and Willa) arrived here last week, so Tussy will have plenty on her hands.

Kapital, 3rd editionf now fully printed, will be issued very soon; as soon as we get copies we shall send you one.

Pumps and Percy were in Manchester last week, say Jollymeier is not quite well yet. When we are all on our legs again, we must have a continuation of last summer's sprees, and you must then bring Paul

[^1]: a P. Lafargue, 'Socialism and Darwinism', Progress, Vol. 2, December 1883, pp. 343- 49.- b Christmas presents-' The novel which Lafargue was trying to write was en- titled Jugement de Paris. -A all the rest - c Johann Carl and Louise - ' the third German edition of Volume I of Capital



