---
Volume: 47
Document_Title: "43. Engels to Eduard Bernstein. / January "
Page_Range: "102-104"
---

# 43. Engels to Eduard Bernstein. / January 



**[p. 73]**

1884

43

ENGELS TO EDUARD BERNSTEIN 9 4

IN ZURICH

London, 1 January 1884

Dear Bernstein,

First a Happy New Year to you, Kautsky and the whole newspa- per office.3

Then a request to send me last week's Sozialdemokrat. It should have arrived on Saturday, 29 December, but hasn't reached me yet.

A fortnight ago I was at last able to get up again, have improved steadily and hope to be fit for work in a week's time. And a damned good thing too!

I trust you were not too much infuriated by the number of amend- ments I made to your ms. ' ' 8 As I once said to Kautsky, while we can- not imitate Marx's style, our own ought to be such as not to be wholly out of keeping with Marx's. Provided you don't lose sight of this alto- gether, we may well produce a work that is presentable.

How true the passage on slavery was is still evident today: capitalist production in the cotton states is not prospering — through not hav- ing any coolies, Chinese or Indian, i. e. slaves disguised as free labour; whereas in Cuba, Mauritius, Réunion, etc., it flourishes in so far as, and only in so far as, it has coolies at its disposal.

[^1]: The note on American slavery b shall be done, and various others besides. I shall also be able to include a fair amount in the preface.0

[^2]: As regards your earlier inquiry about the passage from The Civil War in France in the preface to the Manifesto, ' 3 2 you will, no doubt,

[^3]: a Der Sozialdemokrat - b See present edition, Vol. 6, pp. 167-68.-c F. Engels, 'Marx and Rodbertus'.





**[p. 74]**

Apropos. You once spoke of Guesde's disreputable past, or some- thing of the sort. I know absolutely nothing about that. Un- doubtedly just a pack of lies on Malon's part, but I should be glad if you would enable me to clear the matter up.

I shall shortly be sending you one pound sterling from Schorlem- mer for his subscription, the balance for party purposes. It's too late to take out a money order today.

Has Tussy Marx sent you To-Day and the last numbers of Progress? If not I shall attend to this. These two are completely divorced from the TRADES UNIONS movement and are in fact run by a very motley so- ciety. Bax is very honest but still somewhat green, Aveling is good but has little time in which to familiarise himself with economics, a sub- ject utterly foreign to him. Joynes is an unreliable chap (once a schoolmaster at the big doss house at Eton, travelled to Ireland with Henry George, was arrested with him and lost his post; is therefore looking around to see what's doing) and Hyndman, an ambitious party leader in partibus infidelium,c provisionally in search of a party

[^1]: At last things have got moving again in Russia. The affair of the sledge and the Tsar is most suspect,'34 that of Sudeikin, on the other hand, crystal clear.135 We should like to send Alexander11 a telegram wishing him 'a happy holiday'.

[^2]: a See present edition, Vol. 22, pp. 328-3-c>. - b Alexander I I I - ' It means literally in parts inhabited by unbelievers; here: nominally.



