---
Volume: 47
Document_Title: "44. Engels to Karl Kautsky. 9 January "
Page_Range: "104-107"
---

# 44. Engels to Karl Kautsky. 9 January 



**[p. 75]**

Now basta. I haven't written a letter as long as this for the past three months. Schorlemmer and I send our cordial regards to all our friends.

Yours,

F.E.

First published, in Russian, in Marx- Printed according to the original Eneels Archives, Book I, Moscow, 1924 „ , ,. , . . _ . . . . „ ,. . , Published in English in lull lor the first time

44

ENGELS TO KARL KAUTSKY

Dear Kautsky,

(Why must we continue to bore each other with 'Mr'?) The news about the coronation scenery is absolutely typical and has aroused much mirth; at the same time we have taken care that it does not leak

[^1]: IN ZURICH

[^2]: London, 9 January 1884b

[^3]: a See this volume, p. 54.- b 1883 in the original





**[p. 76]**

Many thanks for Frankel's address. So far as purely theoretical matters are concerned, Deville's sum- marya is the best that has yet appeared. He has understood every- thing aright, though his use of terminology has been very lax and this I have amended in the manuscript. On the other hand the descriptive part is treated far too cursorily, with the result that some of it is to- tally incomprehensible to anyone unfamiliar with the original. Again; what would make for much greater ease of comprehension, particular- ly in a popular account, namely the historical emergence of manu- facture and large-scale industry as consecutive historical periods, is pushed much too much into the background. (We aren't even told that 'factory legislation' does not operate at all in France, but only in England!) And, finally, he gives a full summary of the entire contents, including stuff which Marx had had to bring in if his account of scien- tific developments was to be complete, but which is not necessary to an understanding of the theory of surplus value and its consequences (and this alone is what counts in the case of a popular summary). Si- milarly as regards the number of coins in circulation, etc.b

But then he also quotes verbatim from Marx's recapitulatory prop- ositions, having given no more than an incomplete account of the as- sumptions upon which they were based. Consequently these proposi- tions are frequently so distorted that in the course of my perusal I of- ten found myself wanting to contest a proposition of Marx's, the limi- tations of which are made plain in the original by what goes before; in Deville, however, they are accorded absolutely universal, and hence false, validity. I can't change this without redoing the whole ms.

Now as to your translation of this,137 my position vis-à-vis Meissner compels me to adopt an entirely neutral position. As soon as you write and tell me definitely that you will take the thing on, I propose, and I have already discussed this with Tussy who shares my view en- tirely, to act as follows: I shall write to Meissner saying that someone intends to publish Deville's piece (which I shall send Meissner) in German and that I can see nothing in this that might damage the sales of Capital—boost them, more likely; I shall then add that I can-

[^1]: a G. Deville, Le Capital de Karl Marx. Résumé et accompagné d'un aperçu sur le socialisme scientifique. - b See Capital, Vol. I, Part I, Ch. Ill, Sect. 2b (present edition, Vol. 35).





**[p. 1932]**

Seen in the abstract (i.e. disregarding Meissner), a new popular and short account [half the size of Deville) of the theory of surplus value is much needed, and Deville's work is, so far as theory goes, far better than the rest. What should be dropped are 1) detailed refer- ences to the individual chapters and subsections of Capital and, 2) any- thing that is not necessary to an understanding of the theory of sur- plus value. This will involve rewriting the descriptive part from the beginning, and also considerable abridgement. It would allay the worst of Meissner's misgivings, especially if we changed the title to e. g. Unpaid Labour and Its Transformation into Capital or something of the kind.

At worst the thing could be printed by Dietz and published in Switzerland, like Bebel's Frau.138

So give the matter some thought and drop me a line. I enclose the two photographs11 for you and Motteler. The business of the missing no. of the Sozialdemokrat has since been cleared up — the greatest success scored by Social Democracy to date is to have contrived to put 53 weeks into a year,139 —a. real miracle. Just let them carry on like that and we'll all live two per cent longer.

Kindest regards to Bernstein and yourself from

Yours,

F.E.

I had intended to enclose a one pound money order from Schorlem- mer but it is now too late; must do so in my next. When does Tussy's and my subscription expire? Up till yesterday she had not received her Sozialdemokrat either. Might it have been forgotten? Kindly look into it.

[^1]: First published, in Russian, in Marx- Engels Archives, Vol. I (VÏ), Moscow,

[^2]: Printed according to the original

[^3]: Published in English for the first time

[^4]: of Engels



