---
Volume: 47
Document_Title: "46. Engels to August Bebel. 18 January "
Page_Range: "109-112"
---

# 46. Engels to August Bebel. 18 January 



**[p. 80]**

Very affectionately yours,

F.E.

First published, in the language of the Reproduced from the original original (English), in: F. Engels, P. et L. Lafargue, Correspondance, t. I, Paris, 1956

46

ENGELS TO AUGUST BEBEL 94

IN BORSDORF NEAR LEIPZIG 3 4

London, 18 January 1884

Dear Bebel,

At last I have recovered sufficiently to spend at least a few hours a day at my desk and thus fulfil my obligations in regard to letter- writing. The thing was neither serious nor painful, but damned tedi- ous and gênant* and I shall have to take great care of myself for some little while yet.

You will have received my letter about Miss Issleib written in bed in pencil. Since I have heard nothing more, I can only suppose the matter has been dropped. ' 4 ' — I dictated to Kautsky, who happened to be on the spot, ' 2 5 a letter to Liebknecht39 which I hope he has re- ceived and shown to you as requested. From it you will have seen that I am under no illusions as to the American business,b nor was I in any way inclined to give you the impression that I regarded the thing as absolutely essential. But I still maintain that, if it is to succeed, you two must go and no one else. Whether you can do so, I have abso- lutely no idea — you will know best. But this much is certain — no amount of American money will make good the damage that will in- fallibly be done if, after the manner of Fritzsche and Viereck, the emissaries again water down the party's viewpoint into a semblance

[^1]: a inconvenient - b See this volume, p. 14.





**[p. 81]**

I was delighted by the good news you sent me about the move- ment's progress. The government could not, in fact, have hit on any better means of keeping the movement going and intensifying it than by everywhere involving our chaps in these violent local struggles with the police, particularly when the police in Germany is made up of such worthless characters that our lads can turn the enemy's own weapons against him and take the offensive. And if, on top ofthat,— as recently in Berlin — the police are confused by constantly chang- ing instructions from above, so much the better.

Should there be any repetition of the attempt to bring 'the right to work' back into fashion,142 I would write something about it in the Sozialdemokrat. I have discussed this with Kautskya; but first I should like Geiser and Co. to commit themselves a bit, to produce something tangible for us to go on, though Kautsky maintains that they won't. These ne'r-do-well students, shop assistants, etc., are the bane of the movement. They know less than nothing and are, for that very rea- son, reluctant to learn anything at all; their so-called socialism is npthing but philistine hot air.

Whether you will rid yourselves of the emergency article,67 I can- not say; there will always be the pretext that only in this way is it possible to protect the person of old William,b a phrase before which all Philistia will grovel on their bellies.

Many thanks for your book Die Frau. ' 3 8 I read it with great interest and there is much in it that is very good. What you say about the dev- elopment of industry in Germany is particularly good and clear. This is a matter to which I, too, have again been turning my atten- tion of late and I would, given the time, write something about it for the Sozialdemokrat. Odd, how the philistines fail to realise that the 'plague of vagabonds' they so lament is, in the present state of agri- culture and handicrafts in Germany, the inescapable consequence of the rise of large-scale industry, or that, because Germany is always the last to arrive on the scene, the development of this selfsame large- scale industry can only take place there under the constant pressure of poor business conditions. For the Germans are only able to com-

[^1]: a See this volume, p. 55.- b William I





**[p. 82]**

In this country, too, industry has taken on a different character. The ten-year cycle would seem to have been disrupted since 1870, when American and German competition began to destroy England's monopoly of the world market. Since 1868 business has been slack in the main branches, while production has been gradually increasing; and now, here and in America, we appear to be on the eve of another crisis which has not, in England, been preceded by a period of prosper- ity. That is the secret behind the sudden emergence of the socialist movement over here — sudden, although it has been slowly maturing for the past 3 years. Organised labour — TRADE UNIONS — has, as yet, no sort of connection with it; the movement proceeds under 'educated' elements of bourgeois origin, some of whom seek to make contact with the masses and occasionally succeed in so doing. Morally and in- tellectually, these elements vary considerably and it will be some time before they sort themselves out and the position becomes clear. But the thing is hardly likely to fizzle out again altogether. Henry George and his nationalisation of land 143 may well play a meteoric role be- cause this issue is of traditional significance over here — of real signifi- cance, too, owing to the vast dimensions of the big estates. But in the long run this by itself must cease to have any pull in what is the world's leading industrial country. Besides, George is a bourgeois born and bred, and his plan of meeting all state expenditure out of rent is merely a second edition of the Ricardian school's plan, i. e. purely bourgeois.

If you wish to study a model of state socialism, then take a look at Java. There the Dutch government has, on the basis of the old, com- munistic village communities, organised production as a whole along such nicely socialist lines, and so neatly assumed control of the sale of all produce that, apart from some 100 million marks for army and ci- vil service pay, there remains each year a clear profit of some 70 mil-

