---
Volume: 47
Document_Title: "47. Engels to August Bebel. 23 January "
Page_Range: "112-113"
---

# 47. Engels to August Bebel. 23 January 



**[p. 83]**

One way or another, we shall have a Russian constitution in the course of this year, and then the fun will begin.

Your

F.E.

First published, in Russian, in Marx- Printed according to the original Engels Archives, Vol. I (VI), Moscow, 1932 Published in English in full for the first time

47

ENGELS TO AUGUST BEBEL

IN BORSDORF NEAR LEIPZIG 3*

London, 23 January 1884

Dear Bebel,

Tussy will have written to you regarding a translation of Die Frau.1*5 It's unlikely that you'll get any royalties from it, though there's no harm in trying—at most 3 PENCE = 0.25 mark per copy sold; that is the usual form here. The actual book could, I believe, only fetch, say, 2 à 2.50 marks here, of which 30% at least would go to the retail booksellers. Moreover, the kind of publishers who deal in such books are very few and far between and also pauvres.d We our- selves shall have to invest something like £200 in cash in the English edition oïCapital,i6 and may also have to advance the translator's fee,

[^1]: I forgot to say in Saturday's letterb that you and Liebknecht should on no account order copies of the third edition of Capital0

[^2]: since we shall be sending one for each of you as soon as we get any. A third will go to the party archives in Zurich.144

[^3]: * See this volume, pp. 102-03. - b See previous letter.-0 the third German edition of Volume I of Capital -d poor



