---
Volume: 47
Document_Title: "49. Engels to Eduard Bernstein. 28 January "
Page_Range: "114-116"
---

# 49. Engels to Eduard Bernstein. 28 January 



**[p. 49]**

ENGELS TO EDUARD BERNSTEIN 9 4

IN ZURICH

London, 28 January 1884

Dear Bernstein,

You\will have got my letter of the 1st, as will Kautsky that of the 9th.a I am in some doubt about the latter, being unsure of the number of the house (38?); I also sent him the photographs he wanted.15

My inquiry today concerns the following: Various things among Marx's papers will be suitable for the party archives 144; just now I am in process of sorting his books, etc., and am glad to be again in a condition to do so. Besides these, however, there is a good deal of superfluous stuff which would be very useful to an editorial library for the party organc and is superfluous here, as we have in duplo.d Firstly dictionaries: 1) the big French-German Mozin-Peschier, 5 volumes quarto, binding very dilapidated, 2) the old Italian Jagemann, also very good, 3) Spanish, Dutch, Danish, perhaps even more. I can't yet be sure whether Tussy might not want to keep one thing or another; if not shall I send them to Zurich with the remainder? Besides these, one thing or another will continue to turn up and could be offered to you, once I know that you are in- terested.

Further, as regards Justice. This paper has suddenly been launched upon the world by Hyndman with insufficient financial and absolute- ly no literary preparation. To-Day might survive and within 6 to 12 months pave the way for a weekly. But as it is the two of them are bound to sap each other's strength. Hyndman, however, cannot wait and will probably burn his fingers yet again. They have asked me to contribute, but I refused on the grounds of lack of time. One can send stuff to To-Day without hesitation; but this won't do in the case of a weekly purporting to be a party organ until one knows the whys

[^1]: a See this volume, pp. 73-75 and 75-77. - b of Engels-0 i.e. Der Sozialdemok- rat-A duplicate copies





**[p. 86]**

In case Mr von der Mark or anyone else should again speak of our 'concessions' to the anarchists,130 the following passages prove that we had proclaimed the cessation [Aufhören] of the state before the anarchists even existed: Misere de la philosophie, page 177:

'La classe laborieuse substituera, dans son développement, à l'ancienne société civile une association qui excluera les classes et leur antagonisme, et il • n'y aura plus de pouvoir politique proprement dit, puisque le pouvoir politique est précisément le résumé officiel de V antagonisme dans la société civile.''2'

Manifesto, end of Section II: 'When, in the course of development, class distinctions have disap- peared the public power will lose its political character. Political power, properly so called, is merely the organised power of one class for op- pressing another.'' b

The last issue of the Sozialdemokrat" was again very good. Cheerful and plenty of meat in it. Admittedly this last does not always depend upon the editors. Your rendering of Lafargue is truly delightful; the German substitutions cheered me up enormously. ' 2 2

Regards to Kautsky.

Yours,

F.E.

[^1]: First published, in Russian, in Marx- Printed according to the original Engels Archives, Book I, Moscow, 1924 _ , ,. , , . „ ,. , . . „ _ Published in Lnghsh in full tor the first time

[^2]: a 'The working class, in the course of its development, will substitute for the old civil society an association which will exclude classes and their antagonism, and there will be no more political power properly so-called, since political, power is precisely the offi- cial expression of antagonism in civil society' (K. Marx, The Poverty of Philosophy, present edition, Vol. 6, p. 212).- b See present edition, Vol. 6, p. 505.- c No. 4, 24 Ja- nuary 1884.



