---
Volume: 47
Document_Title: "51. Engels to Pyotr Lavrov. 28 January "
Page_Range: "116-118"
---

# 51. Engels to Pyotr Lavrov. 28 January 



**[p. 50]**

ENGELS TO LUDWIK KRZYWICKI

IN BORSDORF NEAR L E I P Z I G "

[Draft]

London, 28 January 1884 122 Regent's Park Road, N.W.

Dear Comrade,

In reply to your kind note of the 23rd inst.,147 we shall be only too happy to welcome the appearance of a Polish translation of Karl Marx's Capital and are perfectly willing to assist, in so far as this lies in our power, in the removal of any obstacles that stand in the way of its publication.

Accordingly, in our capacity as the author's literary executors, wea

hereby give you our express permission to publish this translationb

and we wish you every success.

51

ENGELS TO PYOTR LAVROV '

London, 28 January 1884 122 Regent's Park Road, N.W.

My dear Lavrov,

Some three weeks ago I sent you a Standard containing an article I thought might be of interest to youc; I hope it reached you safely.

[^1]: First published in: Marx and Engels, Printed according to the original Works, First Russian Edition, Vol. XXVII, „ , ,. , , . _ .. , . , _ , , ,„„- Published in English tor the hrst Moscow, 1935 . &

[^2]: time

[^3]: IN PARIS

[^4]: a Frederick Engels and Eleanor Marx - b In the original the following words are de- leted: 'in so far as we are empowered to give such permission'.-c See this volume, p. 79.





**[p. 88]**

As for the second volume, I am at last beginning to see daylight. For the most important parts — i. e. the beginning and the end of the sec- ond book, Circulation of Capital,— we have a version dating from 1875 and later. To this nothing needs to be added save quotations in accordance with the indications supplied. For the middle section there are no fewer than four versions dating from before 1870, and therein lies the only difficulty. ' 7 The third volume, Capitalist Produc- tion as a Whole, exists in two versions dating from before 1869; subse- quent to that there is nothing but a few notes and a notebook full of equations, the purpose of which is to arrive at the many reasons why the Mehrwertsrate becomes the Prqfitrate.b149 But the extracts from books both on Russia and on the United States80 contain a vast amount of material and copious notes on land rent, while others relate to money capital, to credit and to paper money as an instrument of credit, etc. As yet I do not know what use I shall be able to make of this for the third book; it might perhaps be better to combine them in a separate

[^1]: a anew - b the rate of surplus value becomes the rate of profit



