---
Volume: 47
Document_Title: "53. Engels to Eduard Bernstein. 5 February "
Page_Range: "119-121"
---

# 53. Engels to Eduard Bernstein. 5 February 



**[p. 90]**

All other matters in a day or two.

Yours,

F.E.

First published, in Russian, in Marx- Printed according to the original Engels Archives, Vol. I (VI), Moscow, „ , , . , , . ^ •• , r • r • non Published in English for the lirst time

53

ENGELS T O EDUARD BERNSTEIN 6 1

London, 5 February 1884

Dear Bernstein,

You can set your mind at rest about one thing: I could wish for no better translator than you yourself. ' ' 8 In attempting, in the first sheet, to give an accurate and precise rendering of the sense, you have paid rather too little attention to the syntax, voilà tout." Moreover I wanted to incorporate Marx's idiosyncratic syntax which is unfami- liar to you; hence the many emendations.

If, having once put the sense into German, you go through the ms. again with an eye to readable syntax, at the same time bearing in mind that you should wherever possible avoid the wearisome syntax of the schoolroom which always puts the verb of the subordinate clause right at the end — and which was drummed into all of us—, you will have little difficulty and be perfectly capable of putting everything right yourself.

[^1]: IN ZURICH

[^2]: that's all





**[p. 91]**

a whole, 1, l'/2 or 2 printed sheets at a time. In which case I shall also supply the notes for it straight away. I should also like to see the proofs; many things look quite different in print.

Please send me the article on Proudhon in the old Social- Demokrat.Xi X I had overlooked it; the whole thing might have to go into the preface. You will get it back, of course.

As regards von der Mark and the Volkszeitung, I am entirely of your opinion.130 When Marx died, Schewitschyà/^«^ my telegram to Sorge and printed it as though it had been sent to the Volkszeitung. I protested.b He glossed over the falsification with the lie that the first word had been illegible — though he copied it correctlyl while the other he had 'considered necessary in the interests of the paper'! More- over he thought it 'petty' of me to have drawn his attention to it. Petty it certainly was not, magnanimous rather, considering the way those gentlemen took advantage of Marx's death to draw attention to themselves and proclaim their semi-alliance with Most. However, Schewitsch is the last Russian socialist aristocrat; such men must al- ways 'go further than anyone else' and are accustomed to use the world at large as a means to serve their own ends. The article on to- lerance was downright silly. ' 5 2 Russians have set about one another con amore,c as have the Irish.

I don't know whether you get the Travailleur, etc.; I receive a few copies from time to time and shall send them to you. Also two Sozial- demokrats with scorings by Marx which might interest you.

I shall keep Schorlemmer's pound here then; will you debit me with this, in return credit Schorlemmer with his annual subscription, and pay the balance (inserting an announcement to this effect in the Sozialdemokrat) into the election fund.d Similarly, will you debit me with Tussy's and my subscriptions, supposing that she doesn't decide to send you To-Day in exchange. Finally, will you alter Tussy's ad- dress and send items to Miss Marx, 32 Great Coram St., London, W. C. As to what is to be done with the money for Marx's memorial, I have absolutely no idea.e How much is there altogether? If you wish,

[^1]: a more or less-b F. Engels, 'To the Editors of the New Yorker Volkszeitung' (18 April 1883); see also this volume, pp. 13-14.-c Here: with a will.-d 'Allgemeiner Wahl- fonds', Der Sozialdemokrat, No. 9, 28 February 1884.-e See this volume, p. 17.



