---
Volume: 47
Document_Title: "54. Engels to Pyotr Lavrov. 5 February "
Page_Range: "121-123"
---

# 54. Engels to Pyotr Lavrov. 5 February 



**[p. 92]**

Meissner, then, will doubtless still have copies of the 18th Brumaire"1; his failure to push it is doubtless attributable to timidity. Marx sold him the entire edition, so there is nothing we can do.b

Tussy has taken the best of the dictionaries — French and Ita- lian — but there are still plenty left and I have made certain that you get one particularly nice item — the editorial copy of the Neue Rheini- sche Leitung. The parcel will go off in the course of this month.

I don't know of any poems — König Dampf, perhaps, from my Con- dition of the Working-Class0? A search is being made here for the En- glish original, but it seems to have fallen into oblivion, like the Serbian of Goethe's lament of Hassan Aga's noble wife, only still more so, since the latter does after all still exist in black and white.

What wouldn't Bismarck give to have the 'Viennese in Berlin', namely the anarchists! A perfect caricature of the Russians — though obviously bred by the policel I54

Yours,

F.E.

54

ENGELS TO PYOTR LAVROV-1

London, 5 February 1884

My dear Lavrov,

The 2nd volumee — ah! If you only knew, my old friend, how it

[^1]: First published, in Russian, in Marx- Printed according to the original Engels Archives, Book I, Moscow, 1924 „ , ,. , , . _ . . . . . ,, . Published m English in lull for the first time

[^2]: IN PARIS

[^3]: So I shall send you the books; that is agreed.d

[^4]: a K. Marx, The Eighteenth Brumaire of Louis Bonaparte.-b See Marx's letter to Engels of 29 January 1869 (present edition, Vol. 43, p. 211).-c E.P. Mead, 'The Steam- King'; see present edition, Vol. 4, pp. 474-77.-d See this volume, p. 88.-e of Marx's Capital





**[p. 93]**

The same difficulty applies to the publication of Marx's complete works, and that is only one of the many difficulties to be overcome. I have some 60 sheets (each of 16 printed pages) of old manuscripts by Marx and myself dating from between 1845 and 1848. Of this ma- terial only extracts could be published, but I shan't be able to get down to it until I have finished with the manuscript of the 2nd volume of Capital. So all we can do is wait.

[^1]: The article you speak of, ' 5 6 and which we no longer have here, will amount to between 3 and 5 printed sheets; it is a detailed summary of the political development of France from 24 February 1848 up till 1851. It is summed up in the 18th Brumaired but all the same it is worth translating. I myself am on the lookout for a complete set of the Neue Rheinische ^eitung Revue,' only 2/5ths of which are in my posses- sion.

[^2]: a (Russ.) Lopatin-b (Russ.) Vera Zasulich-C See this volume, p. 65. -d

[^3]: K. Marx, The Eighteenth Brumaire of Louis Bonaparte. -e Neue Rheinische Zeitung. Politisch-ökonomische Revue



