---
Volume: 47
Document_Title: "55. Engels to Laura Lafargue. 5 February "
Page_Range: "123-126"
---

# 55. Engels to Laura Lafargue. 5 February 



**[p. 94]**

Yours ever,

F. Engels

First published in: Marx and Engels, Printed according to the original Works, First Russian Edition, Vol. XXVII, Moscow, 1935 Translated from the French

Published in English in full for the first time

55

ENGELS TO LAURA LAFARGUE

London, 5 February 1884

My dear Laura,

I knew he a would turn up again. Received the Travailleur. Much amused that Paul and Guesde had 'manqué train'.b 157 Hope soon to receive good news about the children,0 Tussy is rather anxious about them; and hope you got over your cold. Nim has caught one just as bad as yours can be, I wanted her last night to take a hot whisky night-cap, but she declined, so you may think. Pumps is below, she called yesterday with Elsa, who looks as plain as ever (and quite as angular at the same time), they met Tussy and Aveling here, who called on business; Bradlaugh and Mrs Besant are furious at the new

[^1]: IN PARIS

[^2]: Paul Lafargue - b 'missed the train' - c Jean, Edgar, Marcel and Jenny Longuet





**[p. 95]**

I want to get him to come out a bit more, before I unmask my batteries.

Nim and I are now busy among the books at Maitland Park.159

There are a good many that would be uselessly heaped up in my place or at Tussy's, indeed there will be no room here for more than half. Now there is a lot of good French books and valuable, which we thought might be more useful in your and Paul's hands than any- where else, for instance:

Mably, Oeuvres complètes. Adam Smith in French (capital edition bound).3

Malthus — ditto.15

Guizot, Histoire de la civilisation en France. All the books about the French Revolution (Loustalot,c deux amis de la liberté,160 etc., etc.).

Now if you will have them we will send them to you free of charge. I cannot make out a complete list. Also if Paul wants any more Ame- rican official publications, there are lots — I shall require but a few. There are some other books of yours here {Old England Dramatists etc.) which can be sent same time.

Please let me know soon, as time becomes pressing and we are in an awful embarras de richesses.d The Russian books we have promised to Lavroff, he is I think positively entitled to them, being Danielson's next friend outside Russia. Another lot of duplicates, etc., we intend sending to Zurich — part for the Partei-Archiv,14.4 part for a biblio- thèque de rédaction. The Blue Books •6 ' mostly to Sam Moore for use with the translation.6 And a few 'popular* things to the Arbeiterve- rein here.162

Now if you or Paul should wish for any particular books besides, please say so, and we will forward everything not absolutely required here.

[^1]: a A. Smith, Recherches sur la nature et les causes de la richesse des nations. - b T. R. Malthus, Essai sur le principe de population - c Elisée Loustalot published a weekly Révolutions de Paris. - d difficulty over the sheer amount- 0 of the first vol- ume oî-Capital into English (see Note 56)





**[p. 96]**

Sorry I could not see much of citoyen Robelet — he came, was seen and vanished again.

What has become of the citoyenne Paule Mink 164? The last reports were 'qu'elle se multipliait dans le midi,c and, what after this is not so much to be wondered at, 'qu'elle développait son sujet'.d

The outcome??

Yours affectionately,

F. Engels

Would you please forward as soon as ever possible another copy of Deville's Capital? Kautsky is to translate it, but Meissner's permis- sion is necessary and I cannot expect to get it unless I send him the original.6

[^1]: Will Paul favour us with a few words about his mysterious adven- tures in la Province? ' 5 7

[^2]: a For Engels' reply see next letter.-b 'to introduce Mr Nonne to Mr and Mrs La- fargue' -c 'that she was being torn to pieces in the south'-d 'that she was elaborating her subject -c See this volume, p. 76.



