---
Volume: 47
Document_Title: "56. Engels to Heinrich Nonne. Between 9 and 21 February "
Page_Range: "126-127"
---

# 56. Engels to Heinrich Nonne. Between 9 and 21 February 



**[p. 97]**

First published, in the language of the Reproduced from the original original (English), in: F.Engels, P. et L. Lafargue, Correspondance, t. I, Paris, 1956

56

ENGELS TO HEINRICH NONNE 166

IN PARIS

[Draft]

[London, between 9 and 21 February 1884]

I cannot say anything definite about the plan outlined by you, so long as I do not know what persons are involved and what your in- tentions are. All I can say is that I could, in certain circumstances and provided they were worth the trouble, enter into a cartel, but never form an/ alliance, with people who have not comlpetely and unre- servedly adopted the revolutionary communist standpoint. Besides my time is completely taken up with work that it is absolutely imperative I Should do, and my international correspondence is, in any case, al- ready extensive enough. Clemenceau would certainly have to be in- duced to go considerably further before we could ally ourselves with him; whether, as the immediate ministerial candidate of the extreme Left, he would wish to be on more than ordinarily 'good terms' with us would seem to be debatable. One can remain thus on good terms with socialists of the most diverse shades of opinion until a difference of principle or tactics crops up, whereupon sympathy turns into anti- pathy. Accordingly, it is now for you to decide whether I am a man who would suit your book.

[^1]: First published in: Marx» and Engels, Printed according to the original Works, First Russian Edition, Vol. XXVII, _ , .. , , . _ ,. , . . _ , , ,„„, Published in English tor the first Moscow, 1935 . &' time



