---
Volume: 47
Document_Title: "58. Engels to Pyotr Lavrov. 14 February "
Page_Range: "129-130"
---

# 58. Engels to Pyotr Lavrov. 14 February 



**[p. 58]**

ENGELS TO PYOTR LAVROV

IN PARIS

London, 14 February 1884

My dear Lavrov,

I have noted what you say about the Russian translation of the 2nd volume of Capital. I shall revert to this at the appropriate mo- ment.168

As to the German edition, you will be aware that over there we are under threat from absolute despotism and that anything is liable to be suppressed. Marx never allowed himself to be inhibited by the legisla- tion of the day; he always spoke his mind and it would be truly mira- culous if the 2nd volume did not contain enough confiscable and sup- pressive material to fall foul of the law of 1878.37 But that is a risk we must run and, as for myself, I certainly have no intention of watering anything down.

When Tep Ma Hi) Aona-ra H-Ba was hereb he told me that Nikolai Da- nielson wanted me to return him a book entitled Tpydu Ko MUCciu djin u3CJihdoeam H XJIÜÖHOÜ npo Muiumu Hocmu es Pocciu.c I have now found sev- eral books on the marketing and production of grain: the title most closely resembling the one he quotes is Tpydu atccneduuiu, cmpnuce HHOu u Mnepamopc KUMu Bojib HUMh s KOHOMunec KUMb u Pycc KUMb zeozpacßmec KUMb o6yu,ecmea MU, ÖMH u3CJit>doea HW xmômû mopzoenu u npou3eodumem>HOcmu eh Pocciu,d Volume 2, 1870.

Might that be the book he is referring to? If so I shall return it to 27 Mo HKa,e St Petersburg as soon as I have your confirmation.

[^1]: I hope to send off your booksf next week; I have kept some of them.

[^2]: a (Russ.) Hermann Lopatin-b See' this volume, p. 59.- c Proceedings of the Com- mittee of Inquiry into Bakeries in Russia.-A (Russ.) Trudy (Papers of an Expedition Sponsored by the Imperial Free Economic and Russian Geographical Societies for Studying Grain Cultivation and the Grain Trade in Russia).- e (Russ.) Moika St.- f See this volume, p. 88.



