---
Volume: 47
Document_Title: "60. Engels to Laura Lafargue. 16 February "
Page_Range: "133-135"
---

# 60. Engels to Laura Lafargue. 16 February 



**[p. 60]**

ENGELS TO LAURA LAFARGUE

IN PARIS

London, 16 February 1884

My dear Laura,

To-morrow is Sunday and on Monday we shall have to rummage in Maitland Park again,159 so if I don't write to-day to you there is no telling how long it may be delayed. We have got the old 'Speicher'* at last cleared out, found a whole lot of things that have to be kept, but about half a ton of old newspapers that it is impossible to sort. I think next week we can begin to clear out and the week after sell up the remainder for what it will fetch. I was afraid at one time I should have to give it up again, but fortunately I am getting better every day, I can walk again for half an hour as fast as ever and with Nim's help get through two bottles of Pilsener and a fair allowance of claret every 24 hours.

Amongst the manuscripts there is the first version of the Kapital (1861-63) and there I find several hundred pages: Theorien über den Mehrwert ' 7 ' partly worked up into the text of the later versions, ' 7 6

but there will be quite enough left to swell the 2nd volume into a 2nd and a 3rd.

Bernstein is sending me an article of Mohr's on Proudhon, published in the Berlin Social-Demokrat of 1865. Very likely the whole of it will have to be translated for the French edition of the Misère.'65

By the bye Bernstein will be in Lyons to-morrow and may come to Paris while once on the road, and even extend his trip to London. If he does come to Paris, pray engage him to come here too, I want to see him about a good many things; he knows he finds a bed here ready to receive him and if he is a little short of cash, that should not stop him, we can arrange about that.177

but I don't believe in that sort ofthing, I have too much experience of publishers. I want to know by what time Oriol will require it, though I won't undertake that I shall deliver it to the day or even the week; but I ought to have some idea. The house in Maitland Park has to be

[^1]: Paul tells me I can take my time about the preface to the Misère '69

[^2]: a 'storehouse'





**[p. 105]**

What Paul thinks is an article of Mohr's on Proudhon's la propriété c'est le vol* is in the Heilige Familie which I have got.b

I cannot much share Paul's enthusiasm about the London Justice, I find the paper awfully dull. But what can you expect of a set of peo- ple who take in hand the task of instructing the world about matters of which they themselves are ignorant? There is not a single burning question which they know how to tackle; Hyndman combines inter- nationalist phraseology and jingo aspirations, Joynes is a muddled ig- noramus (I saw him a fortnight ago), Morris is all very well as far as he goes, but it is not far, poor Bax gets himself fast in German philos- ophy of a rather antiquated character—all that might do for a monthly where they have time to get themselves into harness, but for a weekly, with all sorts of questions d'actualité to be tackled, it is blamable.

Anyhow the new 'respectable' Socialist stir here does go on very nicely, the thing is becoming fashionable, but the working classes do not respond yet. Upon that everything depends. And this is why it was so stupid to hurry on the bringing out of Justice. Articles like these will never stir up the masses. Six months' intercourse with working people would have prepared a public and taught the writers how to write for it. But what's the use of grumbling? Les petits grands hommes veulent absolument faire leur petit bonhomme de chemin!"

I hope the children0 are better. Nim is rather anxious about them. Do please let us know how they are going on.

Best love from Nim and from

Your affectionate

F. Engels

[^1]: First published, in the language of the Reproduced from the original original (English), in: F.Engels, P. et L. Lafargue, Correspondance, t. I, Paris, 1956

[^2]: " property is theft-b K. Marx and F. Engels, The Holy Family, Ch. IV (see pre- sent edition, Vol. 4, pp. 23-54).-c Petty great people always want to follow their own path! -d Jean, Edgar, Marcel and Jenny Longuet



