---
Volume: 47
Document_Title: "62. Engels to Laura Lafargue. 21 February "
Page_Range: "135-137"
---

# 62. Engels to Laura Lafargue. 21 February 



**[p. 61]**

ENGELS TO JOHN DARBYSHIRE " 8

IN MANCHESTER

[Draft]

[London, not earlier than 17 February 1884]

Cannot do anything myself in that line, shall I hand their princi- ples to the Democratic Federation," to Justice or To-Day?

First published in: Marx and Engels, Reproduced from the original Works, Second Russian Edition, Vol. 36, _ , .. , . . „ ,. , n , ,. -.. ,„„. Published in English lor the first Moscow, 1964 . &

time

62

ENGELS TO LAURA LAFARGUE

IN PARIS

London, 21 February 1884

My dear Laura,

Your news about the children'sa health is more or less reassuring — except poor Wolfb who, however, seems the strongest of the lot and, we hope, will have got over the worst when you next give us some news.

As to what is to be done in case anything happens to Longuet, well, that will have to be considered if that event should occur; I do not see what much should be gained if we 'speculated' on that now — I mean speculating in the philosophical sense — at any rate I do not see either what we can do under present circumstances with such a pa- ternal father as Longuet, but if you do, I shall be most happy to hear from you on the subject.

We have arranged with Gittens about packing and forwarding the books, etc., for you and Lavroff0 and as they have not come for them for two days, Nim has gone to stir them up.

[^1]: "Jean, Edgar, Marcel and Jenny Longuet - b Edgar Longuet-c See this volume, p. 95.





**[p. 107]**

Paul's bon dieud is charming, so is the introduction to his confér- ence. ' 7 9 The exposé too is quite taking for his public and I am not as- tonished at his success. But he might now and then give them a new il- lustration from the Kapital besides the old quotation of Liebig about the size of recruitse; and not treat 1) la concurrence and 2) l'offre et la demande? which is but la concurrence over again. If I am strict with him, it's because I see it does him good and he improves considerably by hammering a bit now and then; his last performances certainly show great progress, and if he would only be a little more attentive to certain theoretical points (mostly of detail) he would be a great light in Paris, ville-lumière s as it is.

Now I must conclude. Nim has come back and we must make up book-packets for Russia and America, in time for registering. She says Gittens cannot come before Tuesday or Wednesday11—so she sends you a kiss, I the same, and une bonne poignée de main ' to Paul

From your affectionate

F. Engels

[^1]: First published, in the language of the Reproduced from the original original (English), in: F. Engels, P. et L. Lafargue, Correspondance, t. I, Paris, 1956

[^2]: a here you have a Prussian - b the Parisian taste - c Lower Empire (designation of the late Roman, or Byzantine Empire, and also of any empire on the decline); here, the Second Empire in France.-0 God- e K.Marx, Capital, Vol. I, Part III, Ch. X, Sect. 2 (see present edition, Vol. 35). -f 1) competition and 2) supply and demand- g illuminating city-h 26 or 27 February-1 a firm handshake



