---
Volume: 47
Document_Title: "63. Engels to Heinrich Nonne. About 26 February "
Page_Range: "137-138"
---

# 63. Engels to Heinrich Nonne. About 26 February 



**[p. 108]**

63

ENGELS TO HEINRICH NONNE

IN PARIS

[Draft]

[London, about 26 February 1884]

What I wrote and told you about Malon 39 are the simple facts of which I have been given proof and which are in no way altered by Paris gossip. Malon did indeed quit the Peace Congress 180 in com- pany with Bakunin and 15 others, and he was a co-founder of the sec- ret Alliance.20 The document of March 1870 has actually been in my possession ' 8 ' ; what the lies are that Malon has recently been concocting about the International are of no interest to me; I am un- likely so much as to look at them. In my view the fact that he is self- taught does not give him the right to falsify history. If he is fit to play a leading role among the French, I am sorry for the French prole- tariat.

1 ) the aims are so vague that I really cannot give up any time on the strength of your general prospects;

2) virtually all the people you mention are unknown to me (the only one I know at all well is precisely the one you fail to name). But one cannot be active in the international movement for 40 years without having everywhere old friends and allies to whom one is poli- tically and morally committed. I should therefore first have to obtain information from them about many of your people and about the at- titude of one side to the other. I cannot very well do that, however, without giving some inkling of your scheme;

3) but I cannot possibly embark on an alliance without having the least idea of where and into what further associations it will lead me. Some kind of central committee would presumably be set up in Paris, which would decide on the admission of new members and on possi-

[^1]: As regards your propagation of international relations,3

[^2]: " See this volume, p. 97.



