---
Volume: 47
Document_Title: "65. Engels to Pyotr Lavrov. 3 March "
Page_Range: "139-142"
---

# 65. Engels to Pyotr Lavrov. 3 March 



**[p. 110]**

Your

F. Engels

First published, in Russian, in Marx- Printed according to the original Eneels Archives, Vol. I (VI), Moscow, 1932 „ , , . , , . „ ,. , ,. Published m English for the first time

65

ENGELS TO PYOTR LAVROV 1 8 3

IN PARIS

[London,] 3 March 1884 122 Regent's Park Road [N. W.]

My dear Lavrov,

Last Friday" I sent you through the agency of Messrs Flageollet frères, 27 rue Paul Lelong, Paris a case containing the books you know about.b Carriage has been paid over here; if they charge you for it, let me know. In case of non-arrival you should make enquiries at the above address.

It was despatched from here per Messrs Gittens & Co.

Yours ever,

F. Engels

[^1]: First published in: Marx and Engels, Printed according to the original Works, First Russian Edition, Vol. XXVII, Moscow, 1935 Translated from the French

[^2]: Published in English for the first time

[^3]: a 28 February- b See this volume, p. 88.





**[p. 66]**

ENGELS TO VERA ZASULICH 184

IN GENEVA

London, 6 March 1884^ 122 Regent's Park Road, N.W.

Dear Citizen,

For me, as also for Marx's daughters, it will be a great day when the Russian translation of The Poverty of Philosophy appears.185 I need hardly say that I shall be glad to place at your disposal any material that might be useful to you. This is what I propose to do.

In addition to the German translation, a new French edition is at present being printed in Paris.165 For these two editions I am prepar- ing a few explanatory notes, the text of which I shall send you.

For the preface there is in existence an article by Marx on Proud- hon in the Berlin Social-Demokrat (1865), which contains virtually all that is necessary. It will be printed at the beginning of the two new French and German editions. The only copy in existence is in our party archives at Zurich 144; if a second one doesn't turn up amongst my own or Marx's papers (I shall know about this in a few weeks), you will easily be able to get hold of a copy of it through Bernstein.

For the German edition I shall have to do a separate prefacea re- butting the absurd contention by reactionary socialists 186 that in Ca- pital Marx plagiarised Rodbertus, and proving that, on the con- trary, Marx had produced his critique of Rodbertus in the Poverty be- fore Rodbertus wrote his Social Letters. ' 8 ' To my mind this is of no interest to a Russian public as yet unpenetrated by our pseudo- socialists. But you are the best judge; the thing is at your disposal should you think it suitable.

What you tell me about the increase in the study of books on social- ist theory in Russia gives me much pleasure. The theoretical and crit- ical spirit, which has virtually disappeared from our German schools, would indeed appear to have taken refuge in Russia. You ask me to suggest some books for translation. But you have already translated, or promised to translate, almost all of Marx's works and you have taken the best of mine. The remainder of our German books are ei-

[^1]: a F. Engels, 'Marx and Rodbertus'; see also this volume, pp. 101-02.





**[p. 112]**

It is true that, when I spoke of the situation in Russia," I was also thinking, inter alia, specifically of her finances — but not exclusively. For a government at bay, like the one in Petersburg, and a captive Tsar, like the hermit of Gatchina,b the situation cannot continue without becoming ever more tense.188 Nobility and peasantry both ruined, the army ruffled in its chauvinism and shocked by the daily spectacle of a rocy4api>.c who hides himself away; the necessity for an ex- ternal war as a safety-valve for 'evil passions' and for general discon- tent— at the same time the impossibility of embarking upon one for lack of money and of favourable political conjunctures; a powerful national intelligentsia impatient to break the fetters that bind it and^ on top of all this, a total absence of money and an authority with the knives of the AT>fl Te AHd at its throat 1 8 9—it seems to me that with every month the situation must become more impossible and that, were a bold and constitutionally minded grand duke to turn up, Rus- sian 'society' itself must see that a palace coup would be the best way out of this impasse. Will Bismarck and Bleichröder now come to the rescue of their new friends? ' 8 2 I doubt it. Rather, I wonder which of the two contracting parties will be cheated by the other.

Enclosed a manuscript of Marx's (copy) for you to use as you think fit. I no longer know whether it was in Cjioeo' or in Omeuecmee HHun 3anuc KUf that he found the article 'Karl Marx Before the Tribunal of Mr Zhukovsky'.8 This is the reply he wrote; it bears the stamp of a piece done for publication in Russia, but he never sent it to Peters-

[^1]: a See this volume, p. 65.- b Alexander III - c (Russ.) tsar-d (Russ.) acti- vists-' (Russ.) Slovo (The Word), a journal.- r (Russ.) Otechestvenniya ZApiski (Fa- therland's Notes), a journal. - g N. [K.] Mfikhailovsky}. 'Kap AT> Map KCb nepe^T. cy^OMt r. K). >Ky KOBCKaro', Omeuecmsen Hhin lanuc Ku, No. 10, October 1877.



