---
Volume: 47
Document_Title: "66. Engels to Vera Zasulich. 6 March Ill 67. Engels to Friedrich Adolph Sorge. 7 March "
Page_Range: "142-145"
---

# 66. Engels to Vera Zasulich. 6 March Ill 67. Engels to Friedrich Adolph Sorge. 7 March 



**[p. 113]**

Yours very sincerely,

F. Engels

Your translation of my pamphlet3 strikes me as excellent — what a beautiful language Russian is. All the advantages of German but without its ghastly coarseness.

First published, in Russian, in Gruppa Printed according to the original 'Osvobozhdeniyetruda', No. 1, Moscow, 1924 _ , . _ translated trom the trench

67

ENGELS TO FRIEDRICH ADOLPH SORGE >91

IN HOBOKEN

London, 7 March 1884

Dear Sorge,

After suffering continuously throughout the whole autumn and winter from a minor if very tiresome disorder, and spending 2 months resting in bed, I am at last sufficiently recovered to be able to work regularly and to pay off the letters I owe. I trust that you and your wife will also gradually get over the after-effects of your far more serious illness and then gradually resume your old way of life.

Since I am not yet completely mobile and my excursions are limit- ed to the immediate neighbourhood, and not having anyone to send out on errands, I carried out your commission in rather a different way. Your copy of Capital, 3rd edition,13 and likewise one of Deville's Le Capital, were despatched to you in 2 parcels per BOOK POST; I shall send the photographs in the same manner, having now found out how to pack them. No doubt you will be able to obtain the other 2 copies of Capital easily enough over there.

[^1]: a Socialism: Utopian and Scientific -b the third German edition of Volume I of Capital





**[p. 114]**

I shall hardly have time to enter into a debate with Stiebeling.193

Such little tin gods can safely be left to their own devices. In any case, it will be years before anything can be done to inhibit sectarianism in America. Thus the great Most will, no doubt, eventually end up as Karl Heinzen II. I get the Wochen-Volkszeitung,h but there's not much in it.

What the position is as regards Bebel's, Liebknecht's or anyone else's going to America, I don't know.29 When they asked me, I told the chaps that it probably wouldn't do to go tapping America for election funds every third year. In Germany, by the way, the position is very good. Our lads are conducting themselves really splendidly. Everywhere the Anti-Socialist Law 3 7 is involving them in local struggles with the police, to the accompaniment of all manner of jokes and dirty tricks, struggles which usually turn out in our favour and are a source of the best propaganda in the world. Every now and again one or other of the bourgeois papers vents a sigh about the enormous progress made by our people, and they all of them dread the coming elections.194 A fortnight ago one of my nephews from

[^1]: a It means literally: in parts inhabited by unbelievers; here: nominally.-15 Wochen- blatt der JV. T. Volkszeitung





**[p. 115]**

In France, too, things have been going better since Lafargue, Guesde and Dormoy were released from prison.9 They are very ac- tive, spend much time in the provinces where, luckily, their chief strength lies, possess little news-sheets in Rheims and St Pierre- les-Calais,a and will be holding a congress at Roubaix in a month's time.195 Every Sunday, what is more, they give a very well-attended lecture in Paris, when Lafargue speaks on the materialist view of his- tory, and Deville on Capital.17 9 I shall write and ask them to send you the things, all of which are printed. It's fortunate that they haven't got a daily in Paris just now, since it's much too early for that. A new edition of The Poverty of Philosophy is coming out in Paris.165

Likewise a German one in Zurich and a Russian in Geneva. I don't believe I have yet sent you a copy of my Entwicklung^ never having received more than one or two myself. (The oafs!) Now the thing has come out in a 3rd edition, as well as in French, Italian, Russian and Polish. Aveling wishes to translate it into English.0 He, too, is an ad- mirable young man, but he has TOO MANY IRONS IN THE FIRE and is cur- rently engaged in time-consuming strife with his former friend Brad- laugh; the socialist movement here is cutting the ground from under the latter's feet — and with it his livelihood. That means he must fight for it, but it isn't easy for that narrow-minded and rascally fellow.

So far, all is well with Tussy who generally comes here on Sundays. Lenchen is, as you know, keeping house for me. In a fortnight's time I shall be able to settle down in real earnest to Volume II of Capi- tal— another huge task, but I look forward to it.

You should read Morgan (Lewis H.), Ancient Society, published in America in 1877. A masterly exposé of primitive times and their com-

[^1]: " La Défense des travailleurs and Le Travailleur - b Socialism: Utopian and Scientific- c See this volume, p. 394.



