---
Volume: 47
Document_Title: "68. Engels to Paul Lafargue. // and 15 March "
Page_Range: "145-147"
---

# 68. Engels to Paul Lafargue. // and 15 March 



**[p. 116]**

Kindest regards to Adolf.a

Your

F. E.

First published in Briefe und Auszüge aus Briefen von Joh. Phil. Becker, Jos. Dietzgen, Friedrich Engels, Karl Marx u. A. an F.A. Sorge und Andere, Stuttgart, 1906

68

ENGELS TO PAUL LAFARGUE 196

IN PARIS

[London,] 11 and 15 March 1884

My dear Lafargue,

In complete agreement with almost all your alterations, 197 except for the following:

p. 6, wrong ideas about exchange value — you can't continue with an 'and'; what follows, his Utopian interpretation, is caused by those wrong ideas; that causation must be shown.

p. 6, bottom: he deafens us, etc., has been unduly shortened; what is lacking is the false or spurious science. You must try to stick closer to the original.

p. 7, same objections; and also: 'but who, having to forego some of his pretensions to originality' — this corrupts the text. Marx says: 'There is in addition the clumsy repugnant show of erudition of the self-taught, whose natural pride in his original reasoning has already been broken' b; he has, in fact, been an original thinker and is proud so to have been, but is so no longer, having discovered that what he be Printed according to the original

Published in English in full for the first time

[^1]: a Adolf Sorge jun. - b K. Marx, 'On Proudhon', present edition, Vol. 20, pp. 30-31; here and below Engels quotes Marx's article in German.





**[p. 117]**

ibid. Cabet. You have no right to make Marx say more than he ac- tually said: 'Cabet — worthy of respect for his practical attitude to- wards the French proletariat'.3 Marx says nothing of devotion, a word he abhorred, as you must know,— it might run: worthy of re- spect for the rôle he played amongst the French proletariat (or in the political movement of the French proletariat), etc., or something of the sort.

ibid. Can you say: to preach throughout all 3 volumes? Ibid, bottom, Thiers: if you abridge in the way you do, you ought to add what the original says: 'Thiers, by his reply opposing Proud- hon's proposals, which was then issued as a special booklet'.b This is, I think, the famous book De la propriété, but I am not sure.

p. 8, credit might accelerate — not credit, but the application thereof; you should therefore say: might serve to accelerate, or some such turn of phrase.

p. 9, displays the cynicism of a moron to the greater glory of the Tsar? 'For the greater glory of the tsar he expresses moronic cyni- cism'. c The extreme cynicism with which Proudhon addresses himself to the misfortunes of Poland pays court to the policy of the Tsar. 198

This is what needs to be brought out.

ibid, bottom. On the one hand, etc.— the two contradicting tendencies which govern the interests of the petty bourgeois, should not be omit- ted; your text appears to do away with them.

p. 10, rowdy would be better than scandalous.

15 March

Well, now! Try to be more faithful to the original; Marx isn't a man with whom one can afford to take liberties. I hope that Laura will insist upon the text's being well and faithfully rendered.

Herewith the £ 10. We have all the books and BOOKCASESd here and, for the past 3 days, have been busy amalgamating the two libraries and setting them in

[^1]: a Ibid., p. 31.- b Ibid.- c Ibid., p. 32.- d from Marx's library



