---
Volume: 47
Document_Title: "69. Engels to Eduard Bernstein. 24 March "
Page_Range: "147-149"
---

# 69. Engels to Eduard Bernstein. 24 March 



**[p. 118]**

FROM YOURS TRULY,

F.E.

First published in: Marx and Engels, Printed according to the original Works, First Russian Edition, Vol. XXVII, Moscow, 1935 Translated from the French

69

ENGELS T O EDUARD BERNSTEIN 9 4

IN ZURICH

London, 24 March 1884

Dear Ede,

In great haste, a bit of gossip. We have at last wound things up to- day at Maitland Park 159 and handed back the old house to its own- er. a I, on the other hand, am still in the throes of sorting out the books and papers nor, until this has been done, shall I be able to embark on any regular work.

The demonstration of the 16th ' " caused two people to make fools of themselves — Hyndman and Frohme.

Hyndman, without having actually given his assent, had been proposed as speaker—by, it is said, Rackow. Not being convinced of success, he declared in Justice that 'a working man' must speak and that as for him, he would merely listen.b The same issue of Justice con- tained an extremely impertinent notice on the last number of To- Day— amounting to a veiled declaration of war. 20° Hyndman next proceeded to intrigue against the despatch of delegates to the Roubaix congress, 195 alleging that those responsible were in a minority and that one ought not to go meddling in internal French dis- putes.201 But at a committee meeting of the DEMOCRATIC FEDERATION " the following Tuesday,c he was well and truly defeated; his most

[^1]: * Edwin Willis-b H.M. Hyndman, 'A Sad Anniversary. To the Editor of Justice', Justice, No. 8, 8 March 1884.-c 18 March





**[p. 119]**

trusty followers took the floor against him, nor could he confess the real motives for his intervention; it was enthusiastically resolved to participate in both demonstration and congress, and Hyndman, who would now have gladly spoken in Highgate, had cut off his own line of retreat, the invitation to speak having passed to Aveling and been gladly accepted. That's what invariably befalls these clever-clever cliquists — they are hoist with their own petard.

Frohme apparently spoke very well in Highgate and, by contrast, quite atrociously at the Society. 162 I am sending you the Deutsche Londoner Reifung in which the philistine reporter naively betrays his de- light at the way Frohme had, with his atrocious platitudes, voiced his inmost thoughts for him.a This, apparently, was altogether too much of a good thing and gave rise to a tremendous row in the Society; Frohme was given a dressing-down and is said to have declared that he hadn't met a single socialist, let alone a human being, in London. He's unlikely to reappear for some time to come. He has left me alone, I'm glad to say.

Many thanks for the Deutsches Tageblatt which I return herewith. To reply to Bernhard Becker's balderdash would be doing him too great an honour. What the ex-president of mankind 2 °2 writes and the Tageblatt prints is a matter of complete indifference, and even in Berlin it has long been forgotten. This kind of impotent malice chokes on its own bile. But what sort of press must it be to print such stuff? Even the Parisian Figaristes were more adept liars, albeit only during the period of general alarm immediately after the Commune.

All things considered, the March article was very good, with the right emphasis on essential points. So, too, was the one in the next issue, about the People's Party 203 man preaching to the peasants, its only fault being to invoke the 'concept' of democracy. b That concept changes according to the demos and hence does not get us one step fufther. What in my view should have been said is this: For the sei- zure of political power, democratic forms are also necessary to the pro- letariat for whom, however, like all political forms, they are only a means. But if, today, you want democracy as an end, you have to look for support to the peasants and petty bourgeoisie, i. e. to classes which are in decline and which, from the moment they try to preserve

[^1]: " 'Die Märzfeier in London', Londoner Leitung. Hermann, No. 1316, 22 March 1884. - b [E. Bernstein,] 'Zum Gedenktage der Märzkämpfe', Der Sozialdemokrat, No. 11, 13 March 1884 (leader); 'Zur Naturgeschichte der Volkspartei', Der Sozialdemokrat, No. 12, 20 March 1884 (leader).



