---
Volume: 47
Document_Title: "70. Engels to Karl Kautsky. 24 March "
Page_Range: "149-150"
---

# 70. Engels to Karl Kautsky. 24 March 



**[p. 120]**

their existence by factitious means, are reactionary in their relations with the proletariat. Another thing that should not be forgotten is that the logical form of bourgeois rule is, precisely, a democratic re- public which, however, has become too much of a risk only because of the progress already made by the proletariat, but which, as France and America go to show, is still feasible simply as bourgeois rule. Re- garded, therefore, as 'definite, historically evolved', the 'principle' of liberalism is really just an illogicality; a liberal constitutional monar- chy is an adequate form of bourgeois rule 1 ) at the beginning, when the bourgeoisie has not yet quite done with absolute monarchy, and 2) at the end, when the proletariat has already rendered a democratic republic too much of a risk. And yet a democratic republic is still the final form assumed by bourgeois rule, the form in which it comes to grief. And here I conclude this rigmarole.

Nim sends her regards. I didn't see Tussy yesterday.

Your

F.E.

First published, in Russian, in Marx- Printed according to the original Engels Archives, Book I, Moscow, 1924

70

ENGELS TO KARL KAUTSKY

London, 24 March 1884

Dear Kautsky,

You'd do best to order Morgan's book in America; the few copies printed for England in association with the firm of Mac Millan ap- pear to be sold out or unavailable — I got mine second-hand and then only with difficulty. I don't know the American publisher. Mine cost me 13/4d.

When I can find time I shall get out something on it for you for the

[^1]: Published in English in full for the first time

[^2]: IN ZURICH



