---
Volume: 47
Document_Title: "71. Engels to Laura Lafargue. 31 March "
Page_Range: "150-152"
---

# 71. Engels to Laura Lafargue. 31 March 



**[p. 121]**

Neue £eit, provided you are willing to print a separate copy in pam- phlet form (it would be approx. 3 sheets); actually I am indebted to Marx for it and can incorporate his notes. I 7 4

I have now agreed with Meissner that the 2nd book of Capital should appear separately at first; the 3rd,4 and the Theories of Surplus Value, 171 will then follow on as the second half of Volume II. This will get the thing moving more quickly. Time for the post.

Your

F.E.

The Morris affair is of no significance; they are a muddle-headed lot.204

First published, in Russian, in Marx- Printed according to the original Engels Archives, Vol. I (VI), Moscow, 1932

Published in English for the first time

71

ENGELS TO LAURA LAFARGUE

London, 31 March 1884

My dear Laura,

Even if it had not been for Paul's letter this morning, this afternoon was set apart for a letter to you. I am so bothered and pestered just now that not only my time, but also my room and my desk are not my own. On Monday lasta we got clear of 41 Maitland Park Road, paid Willis and gave him the key. ' 5 9 What furniture there was left, is in Gittens' hands, they offered £ 12.10.- but advised a sale — we are try- ing to get £ 15.- out of them to have done with it; this will be attend- ed to this week. Then I have been busy with the books, and was get- ting clear—two more days would have settled the heavy work — when lo! the landlord sends the painters to do the house outside, and

[^1]: IN PARIS

[^2]: 24 March





**[p. 122]**

here we are, three dawdling fellows in the house, all windows open, every room invaded at the most unexpected hours, and to crown all, a bleak east-wind blowing inside as well as outside. That I got as fine a specimen of rheumatism as could be wished for, was only natural. Fortunately, if the dawdlers keep possession of the house even now, the east-wind has left us and so has, more or less, the rheumatism; and I am promised possession of my room for to-day,— on condition of giving it up to-morrow. So let us enjoy the present while it lasts.

Nim says there is such a weight off her mind now since the old house is done with that she at last can sleep again, it was a nightmare for her which even an occasional nightcap of 'Irish' could not drive away. Our place has much changed, two of my book-cases have gone below, the piano is in the corner between the fire-place and folding door (in the front room), the other corner filled up by one of Mohr's book-cases, while his large book-case (that behind his sofa) now takes the place where the piano stood in the back room. As soon as the painters will have cleared out, I shall finish the sorting of the last heap of books, and then try and get off the last box of books, for you, there is a nice little lot of things relating to the French Revolution, Lousta- lot, Feuille Villageoise, Prisons de Paris pendant la Révolution,20* etc., etc.

I have settled with Meissner that the 2nd book {^irkulationsprozess des Kapitals*) is to be published first separately; as soon as the gross work is finished, I can begin. The 3rd book will follow, along with

Theorien über den Mehrwert, b a long critical work forming part of the first ms. of the Kapital (1862) which I have discovered. 171 The En- glish translation is going on slowly, Sam has too much law-work to attend to, and is too conscientious to hurry on with it, 'regardless of quality'. 56

The movement here is showing more and more of its emptiness every week. Justice drives me to despair by its utter incapacity of tack- ling even one single question. To-Day will live this next month en- tirely by Davitt and Paul who you will have been glad to learn from Justice is the first living authority on French peasant property. 206

These fellows cannot even give a man his due without trying to make him look ridiculous. Bax and Aveling are the only two, as far as I can see at present, of whom something can be made; but Bax has Kant on the brain and Aveling in order to live, has to keep a good many irons

[^1]: a The Process of Circulation of Capital - b Theories of Surplus Value



