---
Volume: 47
Document_Title: "72. Engels to Karl Kautsky. 11 April "
Page_Range: "152-154"
---

# 72. Engels to Karl Kautsky. 11 April 



**[p. 123]**

in the fire and is a perfect novice in everything relating to political economy. Paul will no doubt see Bax at Roubaix 195; he and a work- ingmana have been delegated by the Democratic Federation," much against Hyndman's will who has lately made several attempts at forcing his personal plans and dodges upon them, but was ignomin- iously defeated: so he opposed sending delegates to Roubaix as he wanted to keep open the chance of a connexion with Brousse and Co. That fellow will not go far: he cannot bide his time.

I am afraid Paul will be disappointed with regard to a German del- egate to Roubaix; unless Liebknecht does comeb; but as he has promised to do so, it is not likely. The others do not speak French, ex- cept perhaps Bernstein, and him the deputies are sure not to send, as they mostly hate him, and would replace him in Zurich if they could and dared. Thanks to the great accession of petit bourgeois — gebildete Schafsköpfe^ our 'leaders' in Germany have become a sorry lot. Anyhow I hope Roubaix will be a great success devant le public,d

it will help on enormously; in the meantime I enclose the cheque £ 10.- and send you plenty of kisses from Nim and your affectionate old cripple

F. Engels

72

ENGELS TO KARL KAUTSKY

London, 11 April 1884

Dear Kautsky,

Have got yours and Ede's letter. I hope to be done with Morgan next week 174; cannot do much at the moment as Schorlemmer and

[^1]: First published, in the language of the Reproduced from the original original (English), in: F.Engels, P. et L. Lafargue, Correspondance, t. I, Paris, 1956

[^2]: IN ZURICH

[^3]: a Harry Quelch- b See this volume, pp. 125 and 129.-° educated numbskulls - d in public





**[p. 124]**

Moore are here. This will be my last job for some time; it is no joke making a résumé of so meaty and ill-written a book. If Tussy can find the letter, I shall also include an assessment of Richard Wagner by Marx 2 0 7; what the connection is you must find out for yourselves.

Thereafter work will proceed uninterruptedly on Volume II a as well as on revisions of: 1) your Poverty, ' 1 8 2) notes and preface 169 to the French ditto, 165 3) revision of the English translation56 which ought now to forge ahead. Besides that, 4), more Diihring20B and whatever else may be sent me from France for revision.

Fabian has been going for me with a persistence he would be quick to drop if he knew how much entertainment we over here derive from it. Some years ago he had suggested that we should write for a period- ical to be founded by him and another great thinker, b and this on the basis of a philosophical programme they had laid down ready cut and dried and consisting in a crabbed and misconstrued fourth generation Kantianism. After that he went for my dialectical approach to math- ematics and complained to Marx that I had defamed -J —1.209 And now the fun is beginning all over again. Let him roam the world arm in arm with von der Mark; he will not be read by me.

The Condition of the Working-Class. The last news / had about it from Liebknecht was that Freytag had told him that I was still bound by my contract with Wigand. You can't go by what Liebknecht says, and what he has done in this matter amounts to nil.c I shall write to Frey tag myself; it is the only thing to do. 3 9

Whoever may have harboured any illusions on this point hitherto will doubtless now be rid of them, Bismarck having thrown in his last re- serve, that old jackass Lehmann, in order to preserve it. 2 ' °

How delicious that the parliamentary group should have forbidden Liebknecht to write for a paper. d2 ' ' That beats the old Prussian cen- sorship. Well, if Liebknecht stands for that, things have come to a pretty pass.

Rodbertus,e etc., received, many thanks; will be returned next week. The relevant note in Capital is in the 2nd edition, p. 552f and

[^1]: However much Geiser may abuse the atheists, Bismarck certainly won't do him the favour of repealing the Anti-Socialist Law. 3 7

[^2]: a of Capital-b Wilhelm Ludwig Rosenberg-1 See this volume, pp. 19-20 and 102.-d Berliner Volksblatt-' K. Rodbertus, Offener Brief an das Comité des Deutsch- en Arbeitervereins zu Leipzig--1 See K. Marx, Capital, Vol. I, Part V, Ch. XVIII (present edition, Vol. 35).



