---
Volume: 47
Document_Title: "73. Engels to Eduard Bernstein. 11 April "
Page_Range: "154-156"
---

# 73. Engels to Eduard Bernstein. 11 April 



**[p. 125]**

will, in the 3rd edition, be considerably qualified by me in an ad- dendum; kindly attend to this.

You must now excuse me, as I still have to write to Ede.

Your

F.E.

First published, in Russian, in Marx- Printed according to the original Engels Archives, Vol. I (VI), Moscow, 1932

Published in English for the first time

73

ENGELS TO EDUARD BERNSTEIN '

IN ZURICH

London, 11 April 1884

Dear Ede,

Like you, I think it would be better to allow Frohme's massive tomea to die a natural death.

As regards the Rodbertus stuff, you would do best to wait until you have my preface to the Poverty^; you can't possibly be aware of the most important works, namely those concerning England (alluded to

[^1]: A delegation to Roubaix would have done a great deal of harm at a moment when the Anti-Socialist Law 3'was under discussion. The wailers ' 2 3 would have apportioned the blame for its renewal — in any case inevitable — to that delegation alone; this had to be avoided. Congresses are demonstrations and an occasion for useful personal encounters, and as such are of secondary importance, nor should more weighty considerations be sacrificed to them. I shall try to make this clear to the Parisians. In the circumstances, the address was the only thing possible and quite adequate. ' 9 5 The very thought of an international congress in London 2 ' 2 appals me. I should go away.

[^2]: a K. Frohme, Die Entwicklung der Eigenthums-Verhältnisse.-h F.Engels, 'Marx and Rodbertus'.





**[p. 126]**

I look forward to seeing the ms. ' ' 8 Notabene, should you have dif- ficulty over the Hegelian expressions in the 2nd chapter, simply leave blanks in the ms. and I will fill them in; the German version must contain the terminology proper to that school, otherwise it will be in- comprehensible.

There were three copies of the 3rd edition.c I racked my brains a bit over the Diihring that came with them and then simply laid it on one side, imagining it had got in by accident. That it might be a hint about a 2nd edition never occurred to me. I am delighted to find that this is so, more especially since I have learnt from various sources that the thing has been more influential — particularly in Russia—than 1 would ever have expected. So after all the tedium of a polemic with an inconsiderable opponent has not prevented the attempt to present an encyclopaedic survey of our view of the problems pertaining to philosophy, natural science and history from taking effect. I shall make virtually no changes but stylistic ones and, perhaps, add some- thing to the section on natural science.— Its earlier publication in 2 parts was due to the way the thing came out (as a separate edition), otherwise there would have been absolutely no sense in it. 208

The cards for Nim you ask about have not yet turned up.

Your

F.E.

[^1]: First published, in Russian, in Marx- Printed according to the original Engels Archives, Book I, Moscow, 1924 „ , , . , . . ,, ,. . . „ ,, c , Published in English m lull tor the first time a A blank in the original. Apparently Engels had in mind pp. 49-50 of the first edit- ion of Marx's The Poverty of Philosophy (see present edition, Vol. 6, p. 138). - b See this volume, p. 101.- c of the first volume of Capital in German



