---
Volume: 47
Document_Title: "75. Engels to Paul Lafargue. 18 April "
Page_Range: "158-160"
---

# 75. Engels to Paul Lafargue. 18 April 



**[p. 129]**

ed with the gossiping reports of Bax and Joynes; for to tell you the truth I have no great faith in Aveling's present attempts.

Of Mohr's photographs there are about 450 small ones {cartes*) 24/-per 100 and 250 large ones (cabinets) 50/-per 100 cost price. I shall send you a good parcel of them if you like as soon as I shall have time to pack them. At present I have still heaps of books to stow away. Sam left on Wednesday, Schorlemmer is still here till Mon- day.11 He sends kindest regards by the million.

The copy [of the] 3rd editionc I sent to Danielson direct on 5th April, registered, and should be glad if Paul would mention this in his next letter to him. Lopatine had asked me to send it and given me the address.

Now I shall have to write to Paul. So until next time I remain

Your very affectionate

F. Engels

First published, in the language of the Reproduced from the original original (English), in: F. Engels, P. et L. Lafargue, Correspondance, t. I, Paris, 1956

75

London, 18 April 1884

My dear Paul,

A quarter to 5 — so must hurry! My congratulations on the success of your Congress, ' 9 5 a success that is evident from the different way in which the earlier and later meetings are reported in the Journal de Roubaix. The Germans did right in not sending a delegate, for had they done so it would have

[^1]: ENGELS TO PAUL LAFARGUE 196

[^2]: IN PARIS

[^3]: a Cartes de visite; small photographic portraits mounted on a card - b 21 April - c of the third German edition of Volume I of Capital





**[p. 130]**

unduly facilitated the further retention of the Exceptional Law 3 7 by the government and the bourgeoisie; the moderates in our party (very numerous among the leaders, very few among the masses, who are first-rate) would have exploited this; such a mistake would have been impermissible. In cases of this kind, demonstrations, even interna- tional ones, must be foregone.

When shall I get back the ms. of the translationa? This time you re- ally must try harder, I beg of you. It is essential that the thing should either be done well or not at all. And when will it be possible to begin printing? I ask this so that I can make arrangements to write a few notes and a short preface b—if you like you can do a preface and send it to me here. You asked that you be given precedence over the Ger- man edition; but I have got a complete ms. of the first part of the lat- ter and the Zurich people will begin printing the moment a manu- script reaches them.

What with this German text and the English Capital to revise,56

my hands are full, and accordingly I wish ho know how to arrange things so as to avoid unnecessary loss of time. For it's essential that I get down to the 2nd volumec— and now Zurich has to inform me of the need for a 2nd edition of my Anti-Diihring206 and a 4th of the Peasant War,2 ' 3 which means further revisions and further prefaces to be done! And that's what I — and Mr Bismarck — have gained from the banning of my books in Germany!

Old William d is more or less in extremist He no longer recognises those who come to see him, nor can he repeat the phrases he has been taught to say by rote in reply to deputations.

Nim has just come back from shopping, she sends you her 'amours' (LOVES) and as much as you want of them.

Yours ever,

F.E.

Twenty minutes past five.

[^1]: First published in: F. Engels, P. et L. Printed according to the original Lafargue, Correspondance, t. I, Paris, 1956

[^2]: Translated from the French

[^3]: a of the French translation of Marx's 'On Proudhon' - b for the second French edition of Marx's The Poverty of Philosophy (see Note 165)-c of Capital -d William I- e near death



