---
Volume: 47
Document_Title: "77. Engels to- Karl Kautsky. 26 April "
Page_Range: "160-162"
---

# 77. Engels to- Karl Kautsky. 26 April 



**[p. 76]**

ENGELS TO KARL KAUTSKY

IN ZURICH

London, 22 April 1884

Dear Kautsky,

Letters and ms. ' ' 8 received, similarly cards for Nim. More anon. Hard at work on Morgan,17 4 having been able to return to it only to- day.

The purpose of this is the following: Please inform the printers that I have very major revisions to make right at the beginning both of Anti-Diihring2 °8 and the Peasant War2 ' 3 and so must insist that no new edition is tackled before receipt of my manuscript. I shall write at further length to Ede as soon as he can get back,a i. e. in about a week, for he, after all, is the one who has to take care of these things.

So please see that not one line is set under any circumstances. I wouldn't be able to acknowledge it.

In haste,

Your

F. Engels

77

London, 26 April 1884

Dear Kautsky,

[^1]: First published in: Marx and Engels, Printed according to the original Works, Second Russian Edition, Vol. 50, Moscow 1981 Published in English for the first time

[^2]: ENGELS TO KARL KAUTSKY 8 8

[^3]: IN ZURICH

[^4]: I had made up my mind and told everyone here that I would play a trick on Bismarck and write something (Morgan) ' 7 4 that he would

[^5]: a See this volume, pp. 135-36.





**[p. 132]**

Nor would there be any point in the thing if I intended to write merely an 'objective' review and not deal with Morgan critically, if I did not try to evaluate the results recently achieved or present them in the light of our views and of what has already been achieved. Our workers would get nothing out of it. So — good and necessarily ban- ned, or — permitted and execrable. The latter I cannot do.

I shall probably (Schorlemmer is here again until Monday") be fin- ished next week. It will amount to a full 4 sheets or more. If you are then willing to risk publishing it in the Neue £eit (after you have read it) may any blood that is spilt as a result be on your own heads and don't blame me afterwards. If you are sensible, however, and do not wish to jeopardise the whole periodical for the sake of one article, you will do better to print it as a pamphlet either in Zurich or in the same way as Frau.138 But that is your own look-out.

I think the thing will have a particularly important bearing on our general view. Morgan enables us to present entirely new aspects by providing us, in the shape of prehistory, with a factual basis we have hitherto lacked. Whatever doubts you may still entertain about indi- vidual primitives and 'savages', with the gens the case has been large- ly resolved and prehistory elucidated. And that is why the thing should be thoroughly worked on, properly weighediip and presented as a coherent whole—but also dealt with without regard for the Anti- Socialist Law.

And there's another most important point: I must show how bril- liantly Fourier has anticipated Morgan in so many things. It is thanks to Morgan that for the first time the brilliance of Fourier's critique of civilisation really comes across. And that will mean a lot of work.b

I hope you got the letter I wrote on Monday on the subject of the

[^1]: a 28 April-b See present edition, Vol. 26, p. 276 (footnote).



