---
Volume: 47
Document_Title: "79. Engels to Paul Lafargue. 10 May "
Page_Range: "163-164"
---

# 79. Engels to Paul Lafargue. 10 May 



**[p. 134]**

Your

F. Engels

First published in: Marx and Engels, Printed according to the original Works, First Russian Edition, Vol. XXVII, U I . I - I . J - E v u r .u r . ' ,„„. ' ' Published in English tor the hrst Moscow, 1935 .- 5

' time

79

ENGELS TO PAUL LAFARGUE 196

IN PARIS

London, 10 May 1884

My dear Lafargue,

Herewith cheque for £14. Since I do not see any of the Paris papers, it is only from The Stand- ard and from yourself that I know what is going on; your electoral tactics are just what I myself would have recommended 2 ' 6 — these people will do themselves in if left to their own devices; GIVE THEM

I have only seen the first number of Vaillant's translation. It is good and accurate, save that he does not always appear to be con- versant with military terminology.

[^1]: PLENTY OF ROPE AND THEY ARE SURE TO HANG THEMSELVES. H o w e v e r , B e m S t e i n wrote and told me that you had put up a candidate" in opposition to Joffrin, and that he thought this ill-advised; let me know what the cir- cumstances are so that I can answer him.

[^2]: Thank you for the article — it is only the first one and I cannot now remember if I wrote the sequel.217

[^3]: Your lectures and those of Deville are excellent ' 7 9 but, at least for the published version, you should develop more exhaustively the con-

[^4]: Louis Simon Dereure; see this volume, p. 141.



