---
Volume: 47
Document_Title: "81. Engels to Eduard Bernstein and Karl Kautsky. 22 May "
Page_Range: "165-166"
---

# 81. Engels to Eduard Bernstein and Karl Kautsky. 22 May 



**[p. 136]**

Time for the post and a meal. Regards to Kautsky.

Your

F.E.

Amongst other vicissitudes, Pumps' little boy is very dangerously ill; I am very anxious about him.

First published, in Russian, in Marx- Printed according to the original Engels Archives, Book I, Moscow, 1924

Published in English for the first time

81

ENGELS TO EDUARD BERNSTEIN AND KARL KAUTSKY

London, 22 May 1884

My Dear Fellows,

Herewith the ms.a with the exception of the final chapter which still needs revising. You will find that it is not suitable for the open market in Germany, so consider whether it ought to be printed in Stuttgart under a false style or then and there in Zurich, and let me know in writing. Since the Prussian schnapps affair,218 everything bearing my name has been banned. If it goes to Stuttgart I shouldn't want it to be re- vealed beforehand to the Wise Men who hold sway there.219 In any case I must read the proof myself and would ask you for the sheets in duplicate, on good paper with a wide margin, otherwise one cannot make proper corrections. Perhaps you would be good enough to send a postcard acknowledging receipt. I shall answer your letters tonight or tomorrow; I have put everything on one side in order to

[^1]: IN ZURICH

[^2]: a F. Engels, The Origin of the Family, Private Property and the State.



