---
Volume: 47
Document_Title: "82. Engels to Karl Kautsky. 23 May "
Page_Range: "166-168"
---

# 82. Engels to Karl Kautsky. 23 May 



**[p. 137]**

Your old friend

F.E.

First published, in Russian, in Marx- Printed according to the original Engels Archives, Vol. I (VI), Moscow, 1932

Published in English for the first time

82

ENGELS TO KARL KAUTSKY '

IN ZURICH

[London,] 23 May 1884

Dear Kautsky,

I trust you will have received the ms. of chapters 1-8 b; it went off to you yesterday by registered mail. As I have already suggested, I think the best thing to do, if you want to use some of it for the Neue £eit, would be to take the chapter on the family with the exception of mo- nogamy.0 It anticipates the latter to the extent necessary to produce a fairly well rounded whole.

As to the ban, I have already written and told you that everything by me is banned on principled; 'Prussian Schnapps' was a personal in- sult to Bismarck and, now that Richter has used it to concoct a policy of his own for schnapps,220 the schnapps and wrapping-paper man will henceforward give me no rope at all. Anyhow all your argu- ments 2 2 ' fall to the ground with the successful endorsement of the Anti-Socialist Law 2 2 2 and with the banning of the Süddeutsche Post that immediately ensued.223 And the government can afford to be harsh when letting fly with its bans; proof of this is provided by the lib- eral press which is literally clamouring for vigorous action against us. You, as an Austrian, cannot possibly follow the reasoning that

[^1]: a 18 May- b of Engels' The Origin of the Family, Private Property and the Stale-" See this volume, p. 135.-d See previous letter.





**[p. 138]**

I have not yet heard anything further about the Diihrings that are stored here.a

I have Rodbertus' Kapital. Seems to be nothing in it. A repository of the most meagre material, endlessly repeated.

The things from the archives are being carefully looked after at my house and I shall be punctilious about returning them.224 As soon as I have polished off the final chapter and put various other things — books, etc.— in the house in order, I shall tackle the 2nd volume of Capital—in the daytime; in the evenings I shall first of all revise your Poverty of Philosophy 118 and do the notes and preface for it.b This ap- portionment is not only useful but absolutely essential, since one does not study Marx's handwriting by lamplight for any length of time un- less one is intent on going blind. Moreover my critique of Rodbertus will be confined in the main simply to the accusation of plagiarism 225

and all the rest — his social Salvationist Utopias, rent, mortgage relief for the landed aristocracy, etc., only mentioned in passing. So you will have sufficient material to administer a sound thrashing to this little Pomeranian exploiter of cottagers,2 2 6 who might have become a second-rate economist had he not been a Pomeranian. Now that the milksops, who cling to us on the one hand and to the armchair social- ists 54 on the other with the intention of protecting both their flanks, have, à la Freiarsch Thüringer,0 played off the 'greatd Rodbertus' against Marx, and now that Adolph Wagner and other Bismarckians have actually elevated the same to the rank of prophet of careerist so- cialism,227 we have absolutely no cause to spare this prodigy invent- ed by Rodbertus himself and loudly extolled by Meyer (who knows nothing about economics and, in the former, possessed his own secret oracle). The man achieved absolutely nothing in the field of econom- ics; he had much talent, but always remained a dilettante and, above all, an ignorant Pomeranian and arrogant Prussian. The most he ever

[^1]: a See this volume, p. 133. - b F. Engels, 'Marx and Rodbertus'.-0 Freiwald Thü- ringer (Max Quarck) -d In the original: 'graußen' (South-German dialect).



