---
Volume: 47
Document_Title: "83. Engels to Eduard Bernstein. 23 May "
Page_Range: "168-171"
---

# 83. Engels to Eduard Bernstein. 23 May 



**[p. 139]**

Your news from Germany about internal matters is always very welcome.

But now I must write to Ede.

Your

F.E.

First published, in Russian, in Marx- Printed according to the original Engels Archives, Vol. I (VI), Moscow, 1932

Published in English in full for the first time

83

ENGELS T O EDUARD BERNSTEIN 8 8

London, 23 May 1884

Dear Ede,

I trust your business trip was eventually crowned with success. All that is necessary to begin with, I think, is for the gentry to be thrown off the scent; once you have managed to do that, the old route, or parts of it, can again be made use of. The stupidity of the police will see to the rest.228

I ordered Rodbertus' Normal-Arbeitstag, but it was out of print. I should be grateful if you could let me have the thing — on loan, of course,— since it contains the only authentic version of his proposed labour reforms.— I am now returning the issues of the old Social- Demokrat by REGISTERED MAIL, 224 having discovered that Lessner pos- sesses them. The translation to be agreed with Lafargue is still pen- ding, a which is why I had to have the original here; now, of course, it can be returned.

[^1]: IN ZURICH

[^2]: " See this volume, pp. 116-17.





**[p. 140]**

pacts before the general election were not out of the question — you cede us that constituency and in return we cede you this one — but only, of course, if one can count on their being observed. What I con- sider inept is, in effect, the attempt by congresses to formulate in ad- vance universally valid rules for as yet non-existent tactical cases.

Au fond,a I am glad that the Anti-Socialist Law has been renewed and not repealed forthwith.222 The liberal philistine would have se- cured a tremendous electoral victory for the Conservatives230; in order to preserve the Anti-Socialist Law he would not only go through fire and water, but wade through the deepest of cess-pits. And it would only have resulted in another, more draconian law. As it now stands, it has probably been renewed for the last time and will, once old Wilm b succumbs to his nephritis, soon cease to exist in prac- tice. And the thorough discrediting of the German Free Thinkers 2 31

and of the Centre Party in the course of the division 232 is also of some value, though not as much as Bismarck's right to work. 233 Now that that addle-pate has taken this up there's a chance of our ridding our- selves of the wailers I23 à la Geiser. Come to that, no one but a Bis- marck could perpetrate such a blunder in the face of a workers' movement that cannot be kept down even by means of emergency laws. For the present our people are right to press for implementation and thus implicate him as deeply as possible; the moment the man has committed himself a bit more (though he is not likely to do so very soon), the whole imposture will resolve itself—into Prussian police

[^1]: a On the whole-b William I





**[p. 141]**

The right to work was Fourier's idea but realised in his case only in the phalanstère,2 3 4 and thus presupposes the adoption of the latter. The Fourierists — peace-loving philistines of Démocratie pacifique, as their paper was called — disseminated the slogan precisely because it sounded safe. The Parisian workers of 1848 swallowed it whole — it being something theoretically utterly unclear — because it seemed so practical, so non-utopian, so readily realisable. The govern- ment realised it — in the only way it could be realised in a capitalist society — in the form of preposterous national workshops.235

Similarly in this country, during the 1861-64 cotton crisis, the right to work was realised in Lancashire in the form of municipal work- shops. And in Germany it is likewise being realised in those hunger and cudgel workers' colonies about which your philistine is now enthusing. Advanced as a separate demand, the right to work cannot be realised in any other form. The demand for its realisation by capital- ist society can only be met by the latter within the terms of its own existence, but if the demand for the right to work be made of that so- ciety, then it is made on these specific terms and hence is a demand for national workshops, workhouses and [workers'] colonies. But if the demand for the right to work is to comprise indirectly the demand for the subversion of the capitalist mode of production, it is, in regard to the present state of the movement, a dastardly piece of tergiversa- tion, a concession to the Anti-Socialist Law, a slogan whose only pur- pose can be to bemuse and befuddle the workers as to the aims they ought to pursue and the only terms upon which they can attain them.

In the Paris municipal elections, our people have in fact pursued the tactics recommended by you, only putting up Dereure against Joffrin because there was at first no Opportunist236 standing against him, so that in this instance opposition was pretty well obligatory. Simoneau did not come upon the scene until later, whereupon Guesde immediately demanded that Dereure withdraw; but at this point Dereure's courage failed him and thus he suffered a resounding de- feat. Vaillant, on the other hand, triumphed over the Possibilists2 3 7

in his arrondissement, for Retiès was a tosspot [poivrard) of the worst repute and was deservedly defeated. And if Joffrin was defeated in the final ballot, it was not our people but his who were to blame. It will, by the way, be necessary to go on opposing the Possibilists until they

