---
Volume: 47
Document_Title: "84. Engels to Laura Lafargue. 26 May "
Page_Range: "171-173"
---

# 84. Engels to Laura Lafargue. 26 May 



**[p. 142]**

As regards Joffrin in particular, his programme was so lousy and lukewarm that even the Radicals refrained from putting up a rival candidate, Joffrin's programme being, in essence, their own\

Over here Justice gets more wretched by the week.

Your

F.E.

I shall also set to work on the Diihring. 208 When roughly do you want to start printing? Once I have begun, I shall be able to knock off some 6 to 8 sheets straight away, although it is precisely at the begin- ning that there is much revision to be done.

The Peasant War will be completely rewritten save for the account of military events.2 ' 3 I have learned a great deal about the subject in recent years and shall be including quite a lot of German history. This as soon as Diihring is ready!

84

ENGELS TO LAURA LAFARGUE

London, 26 May 1884

My dear Laura,

Since the receipt of your letter of the 15 th we have had sorrowful times. On the 18th Pumps' little boy died and was buried on the 22nd.

[^1]: First published abridged, in Russian, in Printed according to the original Marx-Ensels Archives, Book I, Moscow, _ , ,. , , . _ .. , . . ,, . , inn,! j - r n • n- D W r • J • L Published in English in lull tor the 1924 and in lull in Vie tirieje von tnednch . " Engels an Eduard Bernstein, Berlin, 1925

[^2]: IN PARIS

[^3]: * workers' party par excellence





**[p. 143]**

I am sorry you won't go in for the 'Akkumulationsprozess des Ka- pitals'. b Think it over again. I am afraid we cannot do without help from without, and to tell you the truth I have deuced little confidence in what assistance I may get here. Aveling has den besten Willen" but he is to translate strange matter aus einem ihm unbekannten Deutsch in ein ihm unbekanntes Englischd; if it was natural science it would be easy enough, but political economy and industrial facts where he is not ac- quainted even with the commonest terms. And Sam6 who is doing the first chapter far better than I expected, takes such a time over it. And yet it is daily becoming a greater necessity to have it out, and Kegan Paul and Co. with whom I expect to come to terms soon, are pressing, but unless I can promise the ms. by say November, com- plete, I cannot well conclude anything. You might try a few pages and see how you get on. A German-English dictionary would be use- less; the words you would have to look for, you would not find there; you could leave space for them, and I could fill them in, they will mostly be technical or philosophical terms.

Paul's conferences'" are a great success, 179 the New Yorker Volkszeit- ung brings them regular, their own translation, I believe. If the French had two or three people who could and would assimilate Ger- man publications in the same manner, it would help them on im- mensely. I foresee that when my Ursprung der Familie etc. g comes out, Paul will be mad after translating it, there are things in it just in his line,h but if he begins he will have to take the German words in their own sense and not in the sense he pleases to impart to them, because I shall have no time whatever to work at it. I shall now start with the 2nd volume [of] Kapital and work at it during daylight, the evenings

[^1]: a The Origin of the Family, Private Property and the State - b The reference is to Part VII of the first volume of Capital, see also this volume, p. 128 and Note 56.- c best intentions-11 from unfamiliar German into unfamiliar English--0 Samuel Moore- ' lectures-8 The Origin of the Family etc.-h See this volume, p. 293.



