---
Volume: 47
Document_Title: "85. Engels to Eduard Bernstein. 5 June "
Page_Range: "173-176"
---

# 85. Engels to Eduard Bernstein. 5 June 



**[p. 144]**

Now I must conclude, it is past eleven and Nim is moving for bed, she has got 'pains all over', id est slight muscular rheumatism in conse- quence of cold, and she must stand at the door while I post this letter, as Annie is in bed, so in order to keep Nim no longer from her much needed rest (she has slept a bit in her arm-chair already) I hope you will excuse the blank space at the foot of this.

By the way, it appears Liebknecht has been in Paris, the German papers tell the most extraordinary things about his mysterious pro- ceedings, 238 also that he spoke at a banquet together with that muff Lecler.a

Kisses from Nim and

From yours affectionately,

F. Engels^

85

ENGELS TO EDUARD BERNSTEIN

London, 5 June 1884

Dear Ede,

Have spent a week at the seaside.239 While there I got a nasty cut on my right index finger and hence can only write briefly and badly. So Kautsky will have to wait, the Sozialdemokrat being* more important

[^1]: First published, in the language of the Reproduced from the original original (English), in: F.Engels, P. et L. Lafargue, Correspondance, t. I, Paris, 1956

[^2]: IN ZURICH

[^3]: a Henri Leclère





**[p. 145]**

As regards the Sozialdemokrat, it is a rather different matter. Now that their worships, the wailers, ' 2 3 have formally combined into a party and constitute a majority in the parliamentary group, 49 now that they have recognised, and are exploiting, the power they have acquired thanks to the Anti-Socialist Law, 3 ' I consider it to be more than ever our duty to defend all our own vantage points to the utmost, especially our vantage point on the Sozialdemokrat, which is the most important of all.

These people live off the Anti-Socialist Law. Were there to be free discussion tomorrow, I should be all for letting fly at once, in which case they would soon come to grief. But so long as there is no free dis- cussion, so long as they control all the papers printed in Germany and their numbers (as the majority of the 'leaders') enable them to make the very most of gossip, intrigue, whispering campaigns, we, I believe, must steer clear of anything that might lead to a breach, or rather might lay the blame for that breach at our door. That is the universal rule when there is a struggle within one's own party, and now it applies more than ever. The breach must be so contrived that we continue to lead the old party while they either resign or are chucked out.

Then the timing. Just now everything is in their favour. We cannot, after the breach, stop them from slandering and reviling us in Ger- many, from posing as the representatives of the masses (for the masses do elect them after all!). We have only the Sozialdemokrat and the foreign press. They can gain a hearing, we can only do so with diffi- culty. So if we precipitate a breach at this moment, the great mass of the party will claim not without justification that we have sown dis- cord, have disorganised the party at the very time when, beset by dangers, it is laboriously reorganising itself. If we can avoid it, the breach ought to be postponed, and this is still my view, until some change in Germany gives us rather more elbow room.

If a breach becomes inevitable nevertheless, it must not be of the personal kind, it must not involve any rows (or what could be repre- sented as such) between e. g. you and the Stuttgarters 2 ' 9; rather the occasion for it must be a quite specific point of principle, i. e. in this



**[p. 146]**

The worst thing of all in such a case is impatience; decisions made on the spur of the moment and dictated by passion always seem to one- self tremendously noble and heroic, but they regularly lead to blun- ders, as I know only too well from a hundred examples from my own practical experience.

So: 1) postpone the breach for as long as possible, 2) if it becomes inevitable, make sure that it emanates from them, 3) get everything ready in the meantime, 4) do nothing without Bebel, for one, and poss- ibly also Liebknecht, who will again be good for something (possibly too good) once he sees that the thing is inevitable and, 5) defend your vantage point on the Sozialdemokrat envers et contre tous,a down to your last cartridge. That is my view.

You could certainly repay the 'condescension' of these gentlemen a thousand times over. You're certainly never at a loss for a ready an- swer in other respects and can certainly confront those jackasses with enough irony as well as disdain to make them rue this behaviour. There can be no serious discussion with ignoramuses like these who glory in their own ignorance; rather, they must be derided, hoist with their own petard, etc.

Don't forget either that, should things come to a head, my hands are very much tied by the vast amount of work ahead of me and I shan't be able to join in the fray to the extent I might wish to do.

I should also be grateful if, instead of general complaints about the philistines, you could give me a few details of what they object to and what they demand. Nota bene, the longer you negotiate with them, the greater the amount of self-incriminating material they must inevit- ably supply you with!

Write and tell me how far I ought to go into these matters when

[^1]: against all-comers



