---
Volume: 47
Document_Title: "86. Engels to August Bebel. 6 June "
Page_Range: "176-180"
---

# 86. Engels to August Bebel. 6 June 



**[p. 147]**

Your

F.E.

First published in Die Briefe von Friedrick Printed according to the original Engels an Eduard Bernstein, Berlin, 1925 „ , , . , , . ^ ,-, ,- • <- Published in English lor the nrst time

86

ENGELS TO AUGUST BEBEL88

IN BORSDORF NEAR L E I P Z I G "

London, 6 June 1884

Dear Bebel,

Have received your letter of the 4th inst. and shall attend to the en- closure. You do not say whether you got my registered letter of 21 April,3 9 in which I returned the envelope, its seal broken, of your letter of the 18th ofthat month. If it has been intercepted, then the Stiebe- rising of letters has been doubly proven.242

If everything were to go according to the wishes of the Conserva- tives 2 3 ° and Liberals,2 4 3 and likewise accord to the secret yearnings of the progressist philistines,93 there can be no doubt that the Anti- Socialist Law 3 7 would long since have been perpetuated as an insti- tution in Germany and that it would so remain. But that can only happen if nothing happens elsewhere in the world, and everything re- mains as it is now. Despite all these philistine desires, the Law was on the very brink of disaster when friend Bismarck applied his two last and most powerful levers — Lehmann's direct intervention210 and the threat of dissolution. 244 Hence it would not even require a par- ticularly violent convulsion of the present status quo, peaceful as it is, to put an end to the whole caboodle. And in my opinion this will surely happen before two years are out.



**[p. 148]**

At home, on the other hand — as you yourself say — a change of monarch is imminent and is bound to make everything totter. Here again it is as it was in 1840, before the death of old Frederick Wil- liam III. So many interests are bound up with the old familiar state of political stagnation that there is nothing the heart of Philistia as a whole desires more fervently than its perpetuation. But with the old monarch0 the keystone disappears and the whole artificial structure collapses. The afore-mentioned interests, faced with an entirely new situation, suddenly discover that the world of today looks completely different from that of yesterday, and that they will have to look round for new mainstays. The new monarch d and his new entourage have plans that have long been suppressed; the whole body of those who govern or are capable of governing expands and changes; officials are perplexed by the new conditions, and the insecurity of the future, the uncertainty about who will be at the helm tomorrow or the day after, causes the action of the entire government machine to falter. That, however, is all we require. But we shall get more. For in the first place we may be sure that while, at the start, the new government may have liberalising aspirations, it will soon become frightened at its own daring, will vacillate hither and thither and eventually grope its way hither and thither, living from hand to mouth, from instance to in- stance, each decision conflicting with the next. Aside from the general effect of this vacillation, what will become of the Anti-Socialist Law if it is administered under these conditions? The slightest attempt to ad- minister it 'fairly' would be enough to render it ineffective. Either it has to be operated as at present, purely at the whim of the police, or it

[^1]: a Alexander III - b Cf. this volume, pp. 256, 275.-c William I- d Crown Prince Frederick William





**[p. 149]**





**[p. 150]**

Sooner than I expected, friend Bismarck has lowered his trousers and shown the assembled people the posterior of his right to work 233 — an amalgam of the Poor Act of the 43rd year of the reign of Elizabeth and the Bastille amendment of 1834.246 What bliss for Bios, Geiser and Co. who have, after all, been riding the hobby-horse of the right to work for some time now a and who already seem to imag- ine that it was they who had roped in Bismarck! And, having once embarked on this topic, I feel impelled to tell you that the perfor- mance of these gentry, both in the Reichstag — in so far as one can judge from the inadequate newspaper reports — and in their own press, has increasingly convinced me that /, at least, do not even re- motely share their standpoint or have anything at all in common with them. These allegedly 'educated' but in fact utterly ignorant and ob- stinately ineducable philanthropists, who were not only admitted in the face of Marx's and my long and oft reiterated warnings, but were actually shepherded into the Reichstag, would seem to me to be be- coming increasingly aware that they are in a majority in the parlia- mentary group and that it is precisely they who, with their time- serving attitude towards every crumb of state socialism tossed to them by Bismarck, more than any one else, are concerned that the Anti- Socialist Law should remain in force and that it should be applied le- niently, if at all, to well-meaning persons like themselves — again something which only people like you and I prevent the government from doing, for if these, the afore-mentioned philanthropists, were rid of us it would be easy for them to prove that there was no call for an Anti-Socialist Law where they were concerned. Their abstention as well as their general performance in connection with the Dynamite Bill was likewise typical.247 But what's going to happen at the next election ' 9 4 if, as seems probable, the safest constituencies fall to these chaps?

It is a great pity that, during the next few critical months, you will be so far away; now, with the elections upon us, we should certainly have had occasion to tell each other a great deal. Could you not let me have an address from which my letters could be forwarded to you? I also hope you may sometimes be able to send me some interesting information about your trip.

[^1]: a See this volume, pp. 55-56.



