---
Volume: 47
Document_Title: "88. Engels to Karl Kautsky. 21- 22 June "
Page_Range: "182-184"
---

# 88. Engels to Karl Kautsky. 21- 22 June 



**[p. 88]**

ENGELS TO KARL KAUTSKY 2 4 9

IN ZURICH

London, 21-22 June 1884

Dear Kautsky,

I hope you are now back from your trip to Salzburg 2 ä ° and will soon be able to tell me something about the outcome of the Stuckerta- on-the-Neckar affair over the Neue £eit.240 According to what I hear from Ede and also from August,b something of a damper has since been put on the passions of the Wise Men.219 It is high time, too, that I heard something definite concerning the fate of my ms.c Ede dropped me a pencilled note and promised something more, but did = 0.

Your ms. ' ' 8 still reposes here and has not yet been attended to for the following reason. After having completed the ms.c I was like a cat on hot bricks until I could begin work on Volume II of Capital. I did so. Next, I proposed to set about revising your work, as also the En- glish translation (of the 1st volume of Capital) ,5 6 in the evenings. But I had reckoned without my host. I had been hard at it since Easter, often spending 8 or 10 hours at my desk and, as a result of the posture this involved, my former indisposition partially reappeared — this time in chronic, not in its previous sub-acute, form. So desk work was again forbidden, sauf quelques exceptions.d I therefore took the heroic step of engaging Eisengarten so that I might dictate the ms. to him and, since the beginning of the week, he and I have been slogging away from 10 to 5 every day, during which time I lie on the sofa, re- covering visibly (idiotic word — nothing to be seen, only felt) but, of course, slowly. The thing's going far better than expected. Eisengarten is intelligent and hard-working and puts his heart into the thing, the more so since he is just working his way through the 3rd edition of the 1st volume. But most of the mss. are such that I have to spend every evening going through what I have dictated if I am to produce a text that is even provisionally valid. At the moment this takes up all my available time. But I believe that things will improve, as we are

[^1]: * Stuttgart-11 Bebel-C The Origin of the Family, Private Property and the State- d save for a few exceptions





**[p. 154]**

For the rest, I shall not discuss in detail your complaints about the eddicated chaps; I have known these worthies in this guise or that for 40 years now and have already given Ede my opinion of them at some length.b The main thing is not to let oneself be browbeaten and, at the same time, retain one's composure.

The dynamiters have at long last discovered just what to do. They are concerned with striking at the root of the old social order, and now it transpires that the root in question is in fact the tail. This pro- found truth with which they are imbued eventually enabled them to discover how best to set about it, and they went and blew up a pis- soir.2 5 '

Which reminds me that the man behind the Geneva-Carouge Explosion is none other than the Italian mouchard,c Carlo Terzaghi, who had already been unmasked by us in The Alliance of Socialist Democracy.252

The expelled Austrian anarchists253 purport to be connected with the regular German charities which have long existed over here. One of them touched me for alms but was unmasked and, upon his return- ing today, was chucked out at top speed.

The 2nd book of Capital will give us even more headaches, at least to start off with, than the first one. But it contains quite admirable analyses that will, for the first time, show people what is money and what capital and much else.

But now it is time to lie down again. All things considered, and apart from the localised trouble, I'm as fit as a fiddle, and my brain is in first-class condition.

Regards to Ede.

Your

F. E.

[^1]: a F. Engels, 'Marx and Rodbertus'.-b See this volume, pp. 144-47. -c police spy



