---
Volume: 47
Document_Title: "89. Engels to Karl Kautsky. 26 June "
Page_Range: "184-186"
---

# 89. Engels to Karl Kautsky. 26 June 



**[p. 155]**

Postscript. Hyndman intends to buy up the whole of the little move- ment here. He has done everything he can think of to ruin To-Day. Bax, who advanced the money for the purpose, got his sums wrong and was soon cleaned out. Hyndman, who is rich and also has access to the resources of Morris, a very rich but politically inept art lover, will either take To-Day under his wing or let it perish. Either way, he believes, he will reign supreme. I am glad that I have remained aloof from the whole caboodle. Hyndman is shrewd and a good business man, but superficial and STOCK-JOHN-BULL; moreover his ambition far outruns his talents and achievements. Bax and Aveling have the best of intentions and are, besides, learning by degrees, but everything's at sixes and sevens, nor can these literati do anything on their own. The fact is that the masses are not yet going along with them. Once the chaps have sorted themselves out a bit it will be better.

First published, in Russian, in Marx- Printed according to the original Engels Archives, Vol. I (VI), Moscow, 1932

89

London, 26 June 1884

Dear Kautsky,

The anti-Rodbertus ms.254 goes back tomorrow by registered mail. I found little that called for comment and have made a few pencilled notes. Apart from these I would add the following:

1) Roman Law is the consummation of the law of simple, i.e. of precapitalist, commodity production, though the latter also embodies much of the legal system of the capitalist period. Exactly, that is, what our burghers needed at the time of their rise and, in accordance with local common law, did not get.

On p. 10 there are several things I object to: 1. Surplus value is

[^1]: ENGELS TO KARL KAUTSKY 184

[^2]: IN ZURICH





**[p. 156]**

2) As regards the means of production, the matter is not quite as you say. In all societies based on a division of labour that has evolved naturally, the product, and hence also to some extent the means of production, dominates the producer — on occasion at any rate — as did, in the Middle Ages, the soil the peasant who was simply an ap- purtenance of the land and the tool the guild handicraftsman. Divi- sion of labour is the direct domination of the instruments of labour over the worker, although not in the capitalist sense.

Much the same applies to the concluding bit on the means of pro- duction.

1) You should not separate agriculture any more than technology from political economy, as you do on pp. 21 and 22. Rotation of crops, artificial fertilisers, the steam engine, the power loom, cannot be separated from capitalist production any more than the tools of the savage and the barbarian from his production. The tools of the savage condition his society just as much as do more modern ones ca- pitalist society. What your view boils down to is that, while produc- tion does indeed determine the social institution today, it did not do so before capitalist production existed, because tools had not as yet been guilty of original sin.

The moment you say means of production, you say society and a society determined by, amongst other things, those means of produc- tion. Means of production as such, extraneous to society and without influence over it, exist no more than does capital as such.

But how the means of production, which, at earlier periods, includ- ing that of simple commodity production, exercised only a very mild domination compared with now, came to exercise their present de- spotic domination, is something that calls for proof and yours strikes me as inadequate, since it fails to mention one pole, namely the crea- tion of a class which no longer had any means of production of its own, or, therefore, any means of subsistence, and hence was compel- led to sell itself piecemeal.

In the case of Rodbertus' positive proposals, emphasis ought to be laid on his Proudhonism — after all he proclaimed himself Proud- hon I, the forerunner of the French Proudhon. Constituted value, in- vented by Rodbertus as early as 1842,255 is to be established. His proposals here are lamentably retrograde by comparison with Bray

