---
Volume: 47
Document_Title: "90. Engels to Evgenia Papritz. 26 June "
Page_Range: "186-188"
---

# 90. Engels to Evgenia Papritz. 26 June 



**[p. 157]**

Repose (physical) is suiting me splendidly; I get better every day and this time the cure will be complete. The dictation of the 2nd book of Capital is going ahead splendidly. We a have already reached Part II — but there are big gaps. The editing is only provisional, of course, but that too will get done. I can see my way ahead, cela suffit}

Ede's letter received with thanks. You will have to be patient with my letter-writing; I mustn't get run down again and a frightful amount of work and correspondence is piling up.

My regards to you both,

Your

F.E.

Wage Labour and Capital^ will go off as soon as the comparison is done, perhaps tomorrow/

First published, in Russian, in Marx- Printed according to the original Engels Archives, Vol. I (VI), Moscow, 1932

90

ENGELS T O EVGENIA PAPRITZ

[London,] 26 June 1884 122 Regent's Park Road, N.W.

Dear Madam,

The lithographed journal to which you have been so good as to draw my attention is already known to me by repute, although I have not yet been fortunate enough to see a copy of it.256

Are you not, perhaps, being a trifle unjust towards your compat- riots? Marx and I have not, for our part, found any cause for com- plaint in them. While certain schools may have been more noted for

[^1]: IN LONDON

[^2]: a Engels dictated Marx's ms. to Oskar Eisengarten; see this volume, p. 153.-b that's enough -c by Marx- d See this volume, p. 159.





**[p. 158]**

I am exceedingly flattered by your suggestion that a translation of my Outlines etc. might prove useful. Although still a little proud of this, my first work on social science, I am all too aware that it is now completely out of date and replete, not only with mistakes, but also with 'howlers'. The misapprehensions it could hardly fail to engender would, I fear, quite outbalance such good as it might do.

I shall be sending you by post a copy of Diihring's Revolution etc? As for our old newspaper articles, it would be difficult to lay hands on them just now. Most of them have little relevance today; as soon as the publication of the manuscripts left by Marx allows me sufficient leisure, I intend to bring them out as a collection with explanatory notes, etc. But that will not be for some time to come.

I am not quite sure what you mean by the manifesto addressed to English working men. Might it be THE CIVIL WAR IN FRANCE, the International's manifesto on the Paris Commune b? That I could send you.

If my health permitted, I should ask your permission to come and call on you; unfortunately I am not allowed to go out and about, though I feel reasonably well when at home.— Should you be willing

[^1]: a F. Engels, Anti-Dühring. Herr Eugen Dükring's Revolution in Science.- b K. Marx, The Civil War in France. Address of the General Council of the International Working Men's As- sociation.



