---
Volume: 47
Document_Title: "91. Engels to Eduard Bernstein. 29 June "
Page_Range: "188-190"
---

# 91. Engels to Eduard Bernstein. 29 June 



**[p. 159]**

to do me the honour of dropping in on me here, you would always find me at your service round about seven or eight o'clock in the evening.

I am, Madam,

Yours very truly,

F. Engels

First published in: Marx and Engels, Printed according to the original Works, First Russian Edition, Vol. XXVII, ^ , „ Moscow, 1935 Translated from the French

91

ENGELS T O EDUARD BERNSTEIN 6 1

IN ZURICH

London, 29 June 1884

Dear Ede,

1. I return Wage Labour and Capital* herewith. The Silesian edi- tion has certainly required a great deal of revision.258 I did not, it is true, have time to compare it with the original throughout, but only those passages that worried me most. However, you chaps have got it there and will be able to attend to that when correcting the proofs.

2. I shall get another portrait of Marx done by the same man who did mine, and let you have it. It is not a chalk drawing but an enlarged photograph. But how will a colour-print turn out if the chap has never seen Moor and his singularly dark complexion? 2 5 9

3. A parcel of 40 Revolutions* went off from here yesterday ad- dressed to Volksbuchhandlung, 3 Kasinostraße, Hottingen-Zurich, Switzerland, 'BOOKS, VALUE £3 CARRIAGE FORWARD' (i. e. not prepaid) per CONTINENTAL PARCELS Express, which is the correspondent of the Ger- man Imperial Post Office and of the Swiss Post Office, and likewise of the French parcels offices. The association stuff [Vereinssachen] from Zurich also comes here by the same route. There is no parcel post be-

[^1]: a by Marx - b F. Engels, Anti-Dühring. Herr Eugen Dühring's Revolution in Science; see this volume, p. 133.





**[p. 160]**

4. Schorlemmer writes to say that his brother Ludwig in Darm- stadt has not yet received a single number of the Sozialdemokrat despite the fact that receipt of his subscription was acknowledged in the paper. Is this an isolated misfortune or general one? Please look into it.

5. I can't get hold of any socialist poems specifically by Weerth. There are some in Moses Hess' old Gesellschaftsspiegel of 1845, but I believe you have already seen those. I once heard something about a collection of his verse but have never set eyes on it.260 In any case, he never published such a thing any more than we did.

6. The archivist will have to wait; I haven't the time to get my own things in order. If I do get round to it, you may be sure he won't be overlooked.261 But now the prime consideration is the completion of the 2nd volume of Capital. The thing's going swimmingly, the pre- liminary edition of about 1/3 having been done, and is progressing by something like l/2 a printed sheet a day, or a little under. As soon as we get to the last part ('The Circulation of the Aggregate Social Ca- pital'),3 Eisengarten can, with my help, copy out the existing ms. of 1878, " while I can get on with the final editing of what has already been done. In this way we shall finish before so very long, and then go on to the 3rd, most important book.

Only then will it be possible to consider putting the old pre-'48 mss. in order and preparing extracts thereof for the press. It's not that I am unwilling, but this requires work, i. e. time.

So you, too, have finally come round to the view that we shall end up by coping quite successfully with the 'Wise Men'.219 I sent for a few numbers of the Neue Welt, so as to meet the gentlemen chez eux b

for once. So far have only read the correspondence column. German schoolboy cheek which presupposes a very tame readership.

You should not, by the way, allow yourself to get worked up about pin-pricks; that is the golden rule in this struggle. And remember that

[^1]: a See K. Marx, Capital, Vol. II, Part III: 'The Reproduction and Circulation of the Aggregate Social Capital'.-b on their own ground



