---
Volume: 47
Document_Title: "94. Engels to Karl Kautsky. 11 July "
Page_Range: "191-193"
---

# 94. Engels to Karl Kautsky. 11 July 



**[p. 93]**

ENGELS TO GABRIEL DEVILLE

IN PARIS

London, 8 July 1884

My dear Citizen Deville,

Thank you for sending me your lectures ' 7 9 — the last one reached me yesterday and I have not yet had time to read it. I have no doubt that it is no less excellent than its predecessors. I shall suggest to our friends that they translate them into German and publish them in the same way as you are doing in Paris; it's precisely what we need for propaganda just now.

Would you be so kind as to pass on the enclosed note to Lafargue without Mme Lafargue's knowledge? He'll tell you the reason for this — perfectly innocent, by the way.

94

ENGELS TO KARL KAUTSKY

London, 11 July 1884

Dear Kautsky,

I trust Ede will get over his feverish attack; give him my regards and tell him that I, too, shall be drinking to his health.

To have let Auer have the Hamburg stuff is perfectly all right so far as I'm concerned. I suggested Bebel and Dietz merely because I had

Yours ever,

F. Engels

[^1]: First published abridged in: M. Dom- manget, L'introduction du marxisme en France, Lausanne, 1969 and in full in: Marx and Engels, Works, Second Russian Edition, Vol. 50, Moscow, 1981

[^2]: IN ZURICH

[^3]: Printed according to the original

[^4]: Translated from the French

[^5]: Published in English for the first time





**[p. 163]**

to tell the man to whom I intended to mention his name; needless to say this does not in any way restrict your freedom of action.

The matter of Dietz is becoming a bore. If he won't say either yes or no, then we can't go on waiting for him. My chief concern is that the thing" should come out and, secondly, that it should not be in- stantly confiscated en masse. I. e. two things that are to be had simulta- neously only in Switzerland. Printing in Austria should be considered only in case of need; 1) it would mean fresh delays and negotiations and 2) the thing would be banned all the same, you need be under no illusions as to thatb; and 3) not only could it be banned in Aus- tria, but also seized (remember the Viennese affair you told me about last autumn). So do get something positive done at last.

There must still be something peculiar going on in the Neue £eit, otherwise that wise man Schippel would certainly not have been allowed to talk of a 'Rodbertusian-Marxian theory', or of things that 'one has come to recognise since Rodbertus'; and without editorial com- ment at that.0 The Germans must have fallen low indeed if they have still not discovered that what Marx has in common with Rodbertus is nothing more than the application égalitaire de la théorie ricardienned

mentioned by Marx on p. 49 of the Poverty0 and which has been a commonplace among English socialists since 1827! But that is very far from being surplus value as defined by Marx and applied by him to every aspect of the science of economics. Which is why the good English, and likewise Rodbertus, for all their borrowings from Ricardo, have made no headway at all in the matter of economics; the first advance in this field was made by Marx, who demolished all previous political economy.

Incidentally, if I am to tackle Rodbertus properly, I must have his piece of 1842,f Zur Erkenntniss unsrer Zustände, or whatever it is called. You quoted from it.g Could you let me have it for a day or two or, better still, buy it for me? To judge by some of the quotations, it

[^1]: a F. Engels, The Origin of the Family, Private Property and the State. -b Cf. this volume, pp. 131-32.-c M. Schippel, 'H. M. Hyndman. The Historical Basis of Socialism in England, London, 1883', Die Neue £eit, No. 7, 1884.-d equalitarian application of Ricardian theory-8 See K. Marx, The Poverty of Philosophy, present edition, Vol. 6, p. 138. -' 1841 in the original.-8 K. Kautsky, 'Das Kapital von Rodber- tus', Die Mue Z'it, Nos. 8-9, 1884, pp.343, 389.



