---
Volume: 47
Document_Title: "95. Engels to Karl Kautsky. 19 July "
Page_Range: "193-195"
---

# 95. Engels to Karl Kautsky. 19 July 



**[p. 164]**

would seem to be the best, because the first thing that he wrote, his la- ter stuff being a mere rehash, hence increasingly flimsy.

Your

F.E.

First published, in Russian, in Marx- Printed according to the original Engels Archives, Vol. I (VI), Moscow, 1932 „ , , . , , • ^ i- • r • r * K ' Published in English for the first time

95

ENGELS TO KARL KAUTSKY 2 6 3

IN ZURICH

London, 19 July 1884

Dear Kautsky,

Did not get the letter from you and Ede until this morning, al- though postmarked Zurich 17/7.

I agree to your proposals, provided the thing now goes ahead. If our workers can read Roman just as easily as German characters, I would myself, of course, prefer Roman. Format about the same as Entwicklung" — Bebel's Frau 13B was too large. If you believe you can sell 5,000,1 am quite agreeable. So just get on with it and let me have the proofs soon. The arrangement with Schabelitz is also quite satis- factory.264

So the only reward we get for the consideration we have shown Dietz is his regarding us all as his enemies!

That the Neue £eit is to cease publication 2 6 5 is no misfortune for the party. It is becoming increasingly clear that the great majority of li- terary party men in Germany belong to the ranks of those opportunists and pussy-footers whom the Anti-Socialist Law,37 adversely though it may affect their pockets, has placed in exactly the right literary at- mosphere; they can express themselves uninhibitedly, whereas we are prevented from giving them a piece of our mind. Thus the very fact of having to fill up such a review every month demands considerable forbearance, and entails the gradual encroachment of philanthropy, humanism, sentimentality — in short all the anti-revolutionary vices

[^1]: a F. Engels, Socialism: Utopian and Scientific.





**[p. 165]**

of your Freiwalds,a Quarcks, Schippels, Rosusesb et al. People who re- fuse on principle to learn anything and who turn out nothing but lite- rature about literature and à propos of literature (9/10 of all German writing today consists of writing about other writing) will, needless to say, produce more sheets per year than those who mug up a subject and attempt to write about other books only when 1 ) they have mas- tered those other books, 2) the latter contain anything that is worth- while. The preponderance of these gentlemen in literature published in Germany, a preponderance created by the Anti-Socialist Law, is un- avoidable so long as that Law endures. On the other hand, we have a weapon of altogether different calibre in the shape of the literature appearing abroad.

It would be delightful if you were to come to this country. But I don't know whether you ought to count with such certainty on the New Yorkers. Over 3 months ago Aveling was taken on as London correspondent0 and, though he has written regularly, he has not yet had a penny. Here on the spot there's nothing to be earned. Neither Justice nor To-Day pay, and if there's anything to be picked up else- where in the press, everyone is on to it like a pack of wolves.

The clairvoyance in the Neue Welt2 6 6 is the best thing that could have happened. That sort of 'erudition' regularly degenerates into such-like nonsense. The cruder the better — it will be over all the sooner. I did so laugh when I got your postcard. A few more such au- dacious Geiseriads and the chap will have to pack his bags.

Hyndman's book,d like the man himself, is a pretentious, imperti- nent jumble in which he, too, continually tries to pick holes in Marx (for not being an Englishman; Hyndman is the most jingoistic John Bull imaginable) and yet is so ignorant of English history that it's all w r o n g except for what he has learnt from the Germans. But Hynd- man is about to come a cropper here; true he has, with his own and Morris' money, now bought up the entire movement, financially speaking (likewise To-Day which Bax is unable to carry on for want of resources, and which has now been transferred lock, stock and barrel to Hyndman), but his eagerness to play the dictator, his envy of all potential rivals and his persistent self-promotion, have rendered him suspect to even his surest friends, and his position in the DEMOCRATIC FEDERATION" is growing shaky. Cet homme n'ira pas loin, il ne sait pas

[^1]: " Freiwald Thüringer—pen-name of Max Quarck- b Robert Schweichel -c to the Mew Torker Volkszeitung-d H.M. Hyndman, The Historical Basis of Socialism in England.



