---
Volume: 47
Document_Title: "96. Engels to Laura Lafargue. 22 July "
Page_Range: "195-198"
---

# 96. Engels to Laura Lafargue. 22 July 



**[p. 166]**

attendre.*On top of that, Justice is becoming ever sillier, and I hope that this initial phase of the movement here will very soon be overb; it is becoming dreadfully unedifying.

With your bacillum, you have given Geiser an opening 267 which, however, he may with any luck be too stupid to exploit. Both forms, baculus and baculum, are current, hence either gender so far as the derivation is concerned. But bacillus has long since been exclusively adopted in biology.

As I shall probably be going to the seaside for a bit at the end of this or the beginning of next month, I should be grateful if I could have Rodbertus' %ur Erkenntniss now.c I shall return it immediately, along with the Normal-Arbeitstag, etc., but it is necessary for me to have seen the thing because he himself maintained in 1879 that Marx had made use of it without due acknowledgment.187 No such accusa- tion could ever be brought against Marx save by people without any idea of the hair-raising ignorance it requires so much as to assert any- thing of the kind. Anyone who has read Ricardo — and even in Adam Smith there are passages enough to this effect — must after all know what is the 'source' of surplus value without having to read the greatd Rodbertus first.

Your

F.E.

96

ENGELS TO LAURA LAFARGUE

London, 22 July 1884

My dear Laura,

'Za suite à demain.1, mais je l'attends encore, cette suitee which was to explain to me the many otherwise inexplicable things in your last let-

[^1]: First published, in Russian, in Marx- Printed according to the original Engels Archives, Vol. I (VI), Moscow, 1932 _ . ,. , , . „ ,. , . r „ r Published in English m full for the first time

[^2]: IN PARIS

[^3]: a This man will not go far; he does not know how to bide his time. - b See this volume, p. 236.-° Ibid., p. 163.-d In the original: 'graußen' (South German dialect).-' 'More tomorrow!' but I am still waiting for this continuation





**[p. 167]**

die Sterne sind am schönsten in Paris Wenn sie eines Winterabends Dort im Strassenkot sich spiegeln.8

Well, Nim and Jollymeier who came on Friday,b and myself have given this matter our most serious consideration and we have come to the unanimous, but so far not very satisfactory conclusion: that some- thing must be wrong somewhere.

Anyhow: As La Suite" won't come, I hope you will after all come yourself and let all these considerations go to the wind. If you wait for Paul's going to Bordeaux to start a paper, that may or may not come off these next 100 years. If he does not go, and it is absolutely neces- sary that you should move from 66 Boulevard de Port-Royal, well, then let him hunt for apartments and do the moving. So I do not see what should stop you from coming over — if only for 3 weeks say — and as soon as you tell me that you are coming, we will make the road as smooth for you as we can.

Tussy and Edward are off on honeymoon No. I, if not back already again — the grand honeymoon is to come off next Thursday.0 Of course, Nim, Jollymeier and I have been fully aware of what was go- ing on for a considerable time and had a good laugh at these poor in- nocents who thought all the time we had no eyes, and who did not approach the quart d'heure de Rabelais269 without a certain funk. However we soon got them over that. In fact had Tussy asked my ad- vice before she leaped, I might have considered it my duty to expati-

[^1]: ' The stars

[^2]: Are at their prettiest in Paris, When they are reflected in the street filth On a winter's evening. Engels quotes from memory Heine's Atta Troll, Ch. II.- b 18 July-C continuation- d 31 July





**[p. 168]**

Jollymeier is very well and lively now — while I work he takes long walks — he is off now on one of them. Pumps has at last got over her bronchitis, etc., and will move to-day into her new house in Kil- burn — beg pardon, 'West Hampstead' (I never knew Hampstead to reach as far as Edgware Road, but so it seems).

Nim is very well and lively — next week I suppose we shall have to move towards the sea, but where to? that grand question remains still to be solved. As to myself I am right enough on condition of keeping — for the present — within very narrow bounds both as to exercise, work and enjoyment—I hope the change of air will final- ly set me right.

And now for 7<z suite', and let it be a good one, a suite that brings you over!

Paul's Blé has arrived this morning. What a pity he does not fol- low the wise counsels of la rédaction du" Journal des économistes! 2 ' °

Very affectionately yours,

F.E

[^1]: First published, in the language of the original (English), in: F. Engels, P. et L. Lafargue, Correspondance, t. I, Paris, 1956

[^2]: Reproduced from the original

[^3]: the editorial board of



