---
Volume: 47
Document_Title: "97. Engels to Eduard Bernstein. Mot earlier than 25 July "
Page_Range: "198-199"
---

# 97. Engels to Eduard Bernstein. Mot earlier than 25 July 



**[p. 97]**

ENGELS TO EDUARD BERNSTEIN

IN ZURICH

[London, not earlier than 25 July 1884]

Dear Ede,

You may send the enclosed to Auer if you wish; I have contrived it with that in view.

As regards the apportionment of constituencies,271 I assure you that I, too, have often been annoyed about it, but it is due to the de- sire to proceed, in purely tactical matters, in accordance with general principles and this always happens at congresses where everything is made to look so nice and simple. Dual candidatures are, of course, useless as a rule; but if you reckon that in the doubtful constituencies the best people are more likely to get in than the others and you therefore put them up there, you must either tolerate dual candida- tures in their case or run the risk of their not being elected at all. So if you're totally opposed to dual candidatures, you must put up the best people in the safest constituencies. But then it is odd that this relega- tion to doubtful constituencies never happens to Liebknecht but only to Bebel, and that e. g. at the last election Liebknecht had, if I am not mistaken, two quite good constituencies.3 Enfinh such things cannot be avoided. Nor must one forget that a battle always has its ups and downs and hence not be put out if the downs sometimes tend to pre- dominate.

At all events, this much is certain: so long as we have the Sozialde- mokrat, their worships the opportunists may do as they wish; and even if they gained control of the parliamentary group (which is after all only possible if Bebel is not re-elected), they wouldn't have won, not by a long chalk. What are their intentions towards the masses? The latter keep pressing these same people onwards whether they like it or not. And if the Wise Men 2 ' 9 also succeeded in gaining command of the Sozialdemokrat, this would be of shorter duration than the Sozial- demokrafs first weak-kneed period which at the outset also met with

[^1]: a See Engels' letter to Bernstein of 30 November 1881 (present edition, Vol. 46).- b Well



