---
Volume: 47
Document_Title: "98. Engels to Laura Lafargue. 26 July "
Page_Range: "199-200"
---

# 98. Engels to Laura Lafargue. 26 July 



**[p. 170]**

As to the Vast Erudition of the celebrated non-atheist,272 I shall be highly delighted if it takes every possible, opportunity to parade itself. An equally mysterious savanta crops up in Paul de Kock's Amant de la lune; when, having gone to the utmost trouble, people finally get the measure of his erudition, they discover that it consists in a couple of conjuring tricks with corks. Think of all the trouble we went to be- fore this celebrated man finally consented to provide us with just a. few samples of his erudition! And how pretty they are! And he has actually got as far as clairvoyance.266 What more could we want? — cela marche!b

Regards to Karl Kautsky, also from Schorlemmer.

Your

F.E.

Tell Manz, who has written to me, that a portrait just like mine is now being done for him and that he shall have it as soon as it is ready0; in a sprawling city like London, however, I can't chase after things personally and must therefore depend on other people.

98

ENGELS TO LAURA LAFARGUE

London, 26 July 1884

My dear Laura,

La suite, la suite de la suite et la conclusion pard Paul Lafargue to hand. I have just sent my amanuensis" home and have a few minutes

[^1]: First published, in Russian, in Marx- Printed according to the original Engels Archives, Book I, Moscow, 1924 „ , , . , , • ^ ,• , r , Published in English for the first time

[^2]: IN PARIS

[^3]: a Saucissard - b He's doing well.-c See this volume, p. 159. -d The continuation, continuation of the continuation and the conclusion by; see this volume, pp. 166-68. - e secretary (Oskar Eisengarten)



