---
Volume: 47
Document_Title: "99. Engels to Hermann Schlüter. 28 July "
Page_Range: "200-201"
---

# 99. Engels to Hermann Schlüter. 28 July 



**[p. 171]**

It appears, then, that after all we shall have to do without you at the seaside.268 Well, I don't know — if this weather continues, whether France is not preferable. We have now, 5 p.m., hardly 17° Centigrade and plenty of rain so that poor Jollymeier has not been able to take his walk.

Pumps and Percy are just coming in for dinner so I must conclude. Love from all.

Yours affectionately,

F.E.

First published, in the language of the Reproduced from the original original (English), in: F. Engels, P. et L. Lafargue, Correspondance, t. I, Paris, 1956

99

ENGELS TO HERMANN SCHLÜTER

[London,] 28 July 1884

Dear Mr Schlüter,

Proofsb returned herewith. Shall continue to return them promptly. But I would ask you to be rather more indulgent with my spelling; I have no cause in my advancing years to let myself be either civilised or centralised, let alone cited.0 Supposedly 'consistent' spel- ling is usually far less consistent and far less historical than the good old casualness.

I am in full agreement with your suggestions. However these are things you know more about than I do.

[^1]: IN HOTTINGEN-ZURICH

[^2]: a P. Leroy-Beaulieu, Le Collectivisme. Examen critique du nouveau socialisme. - b F. Engels,

[^3]: The Origin of the Family, Private Property and the State.- c At that time zivilisieren, zentralisieren and zitieren were customarily spelt with a 'c'. In this letter Engels spells them with a V .



