---
Volume: 47
Document_Title: "101. Engels to Eduard Bernstein. July "
Page_Range: "202-203"
---

# 101. Engels to Eduard Bernstein. July 



**[p. 101]**

ENGELS TO EDUARD BERNSTEIN

IN ZURICH

[London, July 1884]274

[]a By way of self-sacrifice I looked through a few numbers of the Neue Welt. It was so deadly dull that it couldn't be done for long. As regards Mr Geiser, his 'erudition' is unassailable there. The very fact of a person's parading his erudition in a penny paper of this kind is proof enough that he has failed to take in anything at all. Even had he not invariably written cholera bamllus for bacillus, as though the word stemmed from bacca and not baculus. Besides, it's to be found in any Latin dictionary. The assertion that both materialism and ideal- ism are one-sided and must be synthesised in a higher entityb is a hoary one and ought not to worry you; again, that atheism merely expresses a negation is an argument we ourselves had already ad- vanced against the philosophers 40 years ago, only with the co- rollary that atheism, as the mere negation of, and referring only to, religion, would itself be nothing without it and is thus itself another religion. Typical of the-remaining erudition is an article by Bios on the Greek and German godsc in which alone I noted the following se- rious bloomers:

1. The Epistolae obscurorum virorum are said to be by Reuchlin. While they did originate from his entourage, he had less of a hand in them than Ulrich von Hütten.275

2. The Greek gods 'feast on nectar and quaff ambrosia'! 3^ 'Mead', alias 'Meed',d he explains in brackets, is 'beer', when every child knows that it is, and always has been, made, not with malt, but with honey.

gives them now in early Nordic, now in German. Alongside the early Nordic Odin whose German name (early Saxon Wodan, Old High German Wuotan) he doesn't know, we find the Old High German Ziu. Odin is also said to have a wife called Freia; but in early Nordic

[^1]: 4. Bios does not even know the names of the German gods; [he]e

[^2]: a The first part of the letter is missing.-b A reference to the article by Bruno Geiser, 'Das Innere der Erde', Die Neue Welt, Nos. 14 and 15, 1884.-c W. Bios, 'Die Götter in der Dichtung', Die Neue Welt, No. 10, 1884.-d In the original: 'Met', alias Meth.-C The manuscript is damaged here.



