---
Volume: 47
Document_Title: "105. Engels to Laura Lafargue. 6 August "
Page_Range: "207-208"
---

# 105. Engels to Laura Lafargue. 6 August 



**[p. 105]**

ENGELS TO LAURA LAFARGUE

IN PARIS

Worthing, 6 August 1884 48 Marine Parade

My dear Laura,

Here we are and here is our address in as primitive a place as the British sea-side will admit of277 — the first lodgings we took we had to leave because the old Madam objected to smoking!!

No Lager Beer as yet, but Percy is hunting some up at Brighton — as soon as that is to hand I will try whether I can digest Leroy- Beaulieu273; it is blazing hot but fine continental heat and sea- breeze, the Channel is right before our noses but at ebbtide about lji mile away. Pumps and Nim just come in for beer, they say it is so hot they cannot stand it outside any longer and the house is indeed cooler.

Why, after all ces pauvres parisiens* will be done out of their share of cholera! What a shame after all their preparations.

Nim just says she hopes she has come into a fortune on July 31st in that grand drawing in Paris., If so, you are to telegraph at once to the Baroness de Demuth at the above address, as she wants to come out with a grand treat.

I am lazy and have so many letters to write! So I hope I shall have good news from Paul, that is to say that the great Leroy-Beaulieu is not in such a hurry to pocket his thrashing.11

Anyhow, I must take beneficium caloris0 and conclude. The whole lot send any amount of loves, ditto

Yours affectionately,

F. E.

[^1]: First published, in the language of the Printed according to a photocopy original (English), in: F. Engels, P. et L. 0f the original Lafargue, Correspondance, t. I, Paris, 1956

[^2]: " those poor Parisians-b See this volume, pp. 174-75 and 179-83.- c beneficial heat



