---
Volume: 47
Document_Title: "107. Engels to Georg Heinrich von Vollmar. 13 August "
Page_Range: "213-214"
---

# 107. Engels to Georg Heinrich von Vollmar. 13 August 



**[p. 107]**

ENGELS TO GEORG HEINRICH VON VOLLMAR

IN MUNICH

Worthing, England, 13 August 1884 48 Marine Parade

Dear Comrade,

It was not till yesterday that your esteemed letter was sent on to me from London, hence my delay in replying.

The question you put to me 282 is difficult, or rather only to be an- swered in the negative. No science is so botched today as economics, and this at every university in the world. Not only is there no one anywhere who expounds the old classical economics along the lines of Ricardo and his school; it would actually be difficult to find any one who expounded common-or-garden free trade, i. e. so-called Man- chesterism à la Bastiat,283 in unadulterated form. In England and America, as in France and Germany, the pressure of the proletarian movement caused bourgeois economists, almost without exception, to acquire an armchair-socialist cum philanthropic complexion,54 while an uncritical, benevolent eclecticism is everywhere in evidence — a soft, elastic, gelatinous substance that can be compressed into any de- sired shape and, for that very reason, exudes an excellent nutrient fluid for the culture of careerists just as does real gelatine for the cul- ture of bacteria. The effect of this insubstantial, enervating, intellec- tual pap has made itself felt in Germany, at any rate, as also here and there among German Americans, even within the very confines of our party, while on the periphery it luxuriates unchecked.

Such being the case, I would find it difficult to discover any appre- ciable difference between the various universities. Independent and thoroughgoing study of classical economics, from the Physiocrats and Smith to Ricardo and his school, as also of the Utopians Saint-Simon, Fourier and Owen and, finally, of Marx, combined with the constant use of one's own judgment, would probably yield the best results. I am assuming that your friend would study the actual sources and not let herself be led astray by text-books and other secondary sources. In Capital Marx has indicated the most important sources of informa- tion on actual economic conditions. How the official statistics of

