---
Volume: 47
Document_Title: "108. Engels to Marya Jankowska ( S. Leonowicz). Mid- August . . "
Page_Range: "214-215"
---

# 108. Engels to Marya Jankowska ( S. Leonowicz). Mid- August . . 



**[p. 185]**

the various countries should be evaluated, and to what extent they are or are not useful, can best be learnt from an actual study and comparison of them. And in just the same way, one's individual stu- dies, the more advanced they become, provide the best guidance as to the ways and means of learning more, always supposing one has started off with genuinely classical texts and not with the most worth- less of all — German economic text-books and/or the lectures of their authors.

That is about all I can say on the subject. And I shall be delighted if Miss Kjellberg finds anything here that can be of use to her.

I look forward, by the way, to the general elections ' 9 4 and remain

Very sincerely yours,

F. Engels

First published, abridged, in: G. Mayer, Printed according to the original Friedrich Engels. Eine Biographie, Bd. II, _ , , , . , , . „ , . , _ W g , 1934 and in full in: Marx and ™ '" g

Engels, Works, Second Russian Edition, Vol. 36, Moscow, 1964

108

[Worthing, mid-August 1884]

Yes. The only condition I must impose on you — and this categorical- ly— is that you should publish nothing in Polish before the German edition has been completed. The work would be instantly banned in Germany and the least indiscretion or premature allusion could only result in alerting the German police and in hampering the circulation of the original, if not in causing a large part of the edition to be confis- cated. Perhaps you would be so kind, then, as to acknowledge receipt

[^1]: ENGELS T O MARYA JANKOWSKA (S. LEONOWICZ) 284

[^2]: IN GENEVA

[^3]: [Draft]



