---
Volume: 47
Document_Title: "110. Engels to Eduard Bernstein. 22 August "
Page_Range: "217-218"
---

# 110. Engels to Eduard Bernstein. 22 August 



**[p. 188]**

But now I must write to Ede. It is one o'clock and the post goes at two!

Your

F. E.

First published, in Russian, in Marx- Printed according to the original Ensels Archives, Vol. I (VI), Moscow, 1932 „ , .. , , . „ ,. , . „ ,, r . * ' Published in English in lull for the first time

110

ENGELS TO EDUARD BERNSTEIN '

IN ZURICH

[Worthing, 22 August 1884]

[]a index for Capital would be highly desirable.286 But why not all at one go when the whole thing is done? That will be next year for sure, provided I don't collapse, of which there is no prospect at pre- sent. For your own information, The History of Theory has also been largely completed. The ms. of A Contribution to the Critique of Political Economy of 1860-62 contains, as I think I showed you when you were here, approx. 500 quarto pages on Theories of Surplus Value, a great deal of which must, it is true, be deleted because it has since been re- written, but there will still be enough of it. ' 7 '

In his Schulze-Bastiat, Lassalle cited Rodbertus in a connection that might in anyone else's case have earned him intense hostility, i. e. as the authority for and/or discoverer of a trifle. The Briefeh may, it is true, have contributed to the Rodbertus cult. But what has done so more than anything else is, firstly, the desire among non-communists to set alongside Marx a rival who is himself a non-communist and, secondly, those people's unscientific confusion. To all those who loiter on the state socialist fringes of our party, make sympathetic speeches

[^1]: a The first part oî the letter is missing.- b The reference is probably to Rodbertus' Briefe und Socialpolitische Aufsaetze.



