---
Volume: 47
Document_Title: "111. Engels to Karl Kautsky. 30 August "
Page_Range: "218-219"
---

# 111. Engels to Karl Kautsky. 30 August 



**[p. 189]**

The move of the Neue £eit to Hamburg may after all be only the prelude to its end.265 Of course I know nothing about those presently in charge of the Hamburg office.

Last Tuesday2 we had a revolution here in Worthing. A shop be- longing to a Salvation Army fanatic was attacked and broken up; the man fired his revolver, wounding three people. Next day windows were smashed in the lock-up; that same evening 40 dragoons and 50 police moved in (the little place has about 10,000 inhabitants) to clear the streets, whereupon the good citizens, knowing themselves to be innocuous, refused to budge and in several instances received a merciless beating; now all is calm. Really, the tomfoolery one wit- nesses. Both sides, SALVATIONISTS and ANTI-SALVATIONISTS, are secretly in the pay of the bourgeoisie.

Your

F. E.

First published, in Russian, in Marx- Printed according to the original Engels Archives, Book I, Moscow, 1924

111

[Worthing, 30 August 1884]

and hope to finish it while still here. A good deal of the philosophical part needs to be translated into the appropriate Hegelian jargon.

There is no hurry about Bachofen's Antiquarische Briefe. Meleager

[^1]: Published in English in full for the first time

[^2]: ENGELS TO KARL KAUTSKY 2 8 7

[^3]: IN ZURICH

[^4]: Letters received. Have ordered G. Adler's little pamphlet: will doubtless be able to get hold of it in London.288 Thank you for the particulars. The man shall be dealt with. Am busy with the Poverty ' ' 8

[^5]: " 19 August



