---
Volume: 47
Document_Title: "112. Engels to Eduard Bernstein. 13- 15 September "
Page_Range: "219-222"
---

# 112. Engels to Eduard Bernstein. 13- 15 September 



**[p. 190]**

Over here 4 musicians, with the help of misleading music, are mak- ing propaganda for Bismarck by informing the English in a brand of Rhenish-Franconian totally incomprehensible, even to me, that they pledge their souls and bodies to live for thee alone, etc., and that Strasbourg is a city wondrous fair.b Regards to Ede.

Your

F. E.

Send things to London from now on. We go back on Tuesday.2 7 7

First published, in Russian, in Marx- Printed according to the original Engels Archives, Vol. I (VI), Moscow, 1932

Published in English for the first

112

E N Ö E L S T O E D U A R D B E R N S T E I N

IN ZURICH

London, 13-15 September 1884

Dear Ede,

[^1]: I have been back here a fortnight (all but). 2 7 7 During my ab- sence Eisengarten was supposed to be making a fair copy ofthat part of the ms. of Part II e that was ready. T h e great heat, however, led him, now to dawdle, now to write so beautifully, if so slowly and so little, that I dare not send what has been done to Meissner because I would not be able to follow it up quickly enough. So that puts paid for the present to early publication; what Meissner will do now, I don't know. In some respects I'm not sorry, for in this way I can be

[^2]: a See present edition, Vol. 26, p. 238.- b An allusion to two traditional German airs. - c the second volume of Capital





**[p. 191]**

What you say about the translation of my pamphlet" is all very well. But how does Lafargue translate? He consults neither his wife nor the dictionary; he does everything on his own, decrees that such and such a German word is so and so in French, and then, proud of his masterpiece, sends me the ms. I could do it just as well myself. He, of course, wants to set to at once — however, nous verrons ce que nous ver- rons^ As for an English version, Aveling has enough on his hands for the time being,0 and also proposes to translate my Entwicklung.^ But what publisher will pay for it? And in his position he can't do more un- paid work than he already does. Nor is there any particular hurry about this. Our prime concern must be to put Capital into English, and that will give us work and to spare.

I was greatly tickled by the way you took Bahr and Fabian, not to mention friend Gumbel, to task over the stock exchange taxes289 (I always know my Gumbel, whether he's vindicating his respectable toping companions, the Heilbronn philistines, or whatever). In Bahr and Fabian you have two fine examples of German 'erudition', some- thing I am always glad to see harshly taken to task. One aims at Bahr the blow intended for Geiser. What particularly pleased me, how- ever, was the way you struck home, putting emphasis on essential points, and also your verve.

Now I must break off; I can only spend a short time sitting at my desk. I took some cold sea-baths that did me more harm than good. Till tomorrow then.

14 September. I returned the ms. of Poverty ' ' 8 to you last week, 4 September, by registered post, together with my comments. I pre- sume you received it. When you [and Kautsky] compare my amend- ments with the original you will find that certain turns of speech had not, in fact, been correctly understood (in some cases I have made comments), but that is inevitable unless one has spent a good deal of time in the country concerned.

I have at last been able to get hold of a copy of my enlarged photo- graph for the artiste—I forget his name and have mislaid his letter —

[^1]: a Clearly The Origin of the Family, Private Property and the State.-b we shall see what we shall see-0 Aveling was translating into English the first volume of Ca- pital (see also Note 56).-d Socialism: Utopian and Scientific-' Karl Manz- Schäppi





**[p. 192]**

Since the present elections will have a major impact 1 9 4 we must all make an effort and so I am sending you herewith a money order for £25 for the election fund.

Sorge has sent me Gronlund's The Cooperative Commonwealth; his ex- posé of theory rather flat after Marx's, but comprehensible to philis- tines; the main object is, apparently, to present his model of the future as true GERMAN SOCIALISM, but I found it too boring to read. Marx is not quoted, the only reference to him being SUCH NOBLE JEWS AS MARX AND LASSALLEI Crikey!

Under Hyndman's direction To-Day gets worse and worse. To make it more interesting they accept anything and everything. The editor has written to me saying that the October issue will contain a critique of Capital\\,h and invites me to reply — which I refused with thanks.290 Thus a socialist organ has turned into an organ in which the pros and cons of socialism are discussed by every Tom, Dick and Harry.

I am sending you a Kölnische from which you may see what methods are used in Africa even by Stanley-Leopold of Belgium's humane, civilising Association Internationale.291 Then what may we not expect of the Portuguese and French,— not to speak of our flog 'em-and-shoot 'em Prussians — when they get going? Come to that, Bismarck has pulled off a thundering good electoral coup with that colonial racket of his.2 9 2 Not a philistine will be spared, they'll fall for it en masse. No doubt he will again succeed in obtaining a double majority of his own choosing—Conservatives230 + National liberals 243, or should the latter again prove peevish, Conservatives + the Centre.229 It's all one to us.

If I have the time, I shall enclose a line or two for Karl Kautsky.

Your

F. E.

15 September. No time, K. K. will have to wait a bit.

[^1]: First published, in Russian, in Marx- Printed according to the original Engels Archives, Book I, Moscow, 1924

[^2]: Published in English for the first time

[^3]: a See this volume, p. 170.- b Ph.H. Wicksteed, 'Das Kapital. A Criticism', To-Day, No. 10, October 1884.



