---
Volume: 47
Document_Title: "115. Engels to Hermann Schlüter. 3 October "
Page_Range: "225-226"
---

# 115. Engels to Hermann Schlüter. 3 October 



**[p. 114]**

ENGELS T O HERMANN SCHLÜTER 2 9 5

IN HOTTINGEN-ZURICH

[London, 1 October 1884]

Dear Mr Schlüter,

Proofs3 received with thanks and returned. I now only await clean proofs 8-9. Should they contain no mistakes to speak of, a list of print- ing errors will not be necessary.

Rodbertus' Erkenntniss etc.h is advertised by Fock of Leipzig à 4.20 marks. I should be glad to buy a copy at this price, if not less.

There does exist a French speech by Marx on the subject of free trade0 but none, so far as I am aware, on protective tariffs. It would hardly be suitable for translation as a book on its own, but if Ede wishes to use it as an appendix to the German Poverty,118 it wouldn't be a bad idea and I could send my copy.

Yours sincerely,

F. E.

115

[London,] 3 October 1884

Dear Mr Schlüter,

Everything gratefully received." Just the following misprints:

[^1]: First published in: Marx and Engels, Printed according to the original Works, First Russian Edition, Vol. XXVII, n i . i - i . j - i? i- u r i L c * , , , . _ r Published m English tor the hrst Moscow, 1935 . &

[^2]: time

[^3]: ENGELS TO HERMANN SCHLÜTER 2 9 6

[^4]: IN HOTTINGEN-ZURICH

[^5]: a F. Engels, The Origin of the Family, Private Property and the State.- b J.K. Rodbertus- Jagetzow, Zur Erkenntniss unsrer staatswirthschafllichen Zustände, Berlin, 1885.- c K. Marx, 'Speech on the Question of Free Trade'.



