---
Volume: 47
Document_Title: "117. Engels to Karl Kautsky. 13 October "
Page_Range: "229-230"
---

# 117. Engels to Karl Kautsky. 13 October 



**[p. 200]**

The more often you write and tell me about the situation in Ger- many, and in particular about industrial developments, the better pleased I am. If I do not always reply in detail it is because, in this in- stance, I am merely your pupil — the more gladly in that the only in- formation I can regard as wholly reliable is that provided by you. On the whole, German industry remains what it has always been: it man- ufactures those articles which the British consider too insignificant, and the French too common, but does so on a very large scale; Ger- man industry still depends for its subsistence on 1 ) the theft of pat- terns from abroad and 2) the free gift of ordinary surplus value to the purchasers, whereby it is alone enabled to compete, and the exaction of inordinate surplus value by forcing down wages, which alone en- ables it to exist. This means, however, that while the struggle between worker and capitalist may stagnate in some places (where abnormal wages have already become the norm), in most it is growing more acute by reason of ever-rising pressure. At all events, 1848 marked the beginning of an industrial revolution in Germany which will yet give the worthy bourgeois pause for thought. Goodbye for now.

Your old friend

F. E.

117

[London,] 13 October 1884

In great haste. The sheets have been returned to Dietz after resto- ration of h, tz and the botched foreign words.301 Wrote telling

[^1]: First published abridged in: F. Engels, Po- litisches Vermächtnis. Aus unveröffentlichten Briefen, Berlin, 1920 and in full, in Russian, in Marx-Engels Archives, Vol. I (VI), Moscow, 1932

[^2]: ENGELS TO KARL KAUTSKY 2 8 7

[^3]: IN ZURICH

[^4]: Printed according to the original

[^5]: Published in English in full for the first time



