---
Volume: 47
Document_Title: "118. Engels to Johann Philipp Becker. 15 October "
Page_Range: "230-232"
---

# 118. Engels to Johann Philipp Becker. 15 October 



**[p. 201]**

Do you really not wish to put your names on the title page as trans- lators? The title should in any case be so worded that I simply appear as the author of the notes and preface unless you expressly insist on the revision mentioned, though I consider this quite unnecessary.

Another whole day has been wasted thanks to these asininities. Right in the middle of election time,194 what's more.

Your

F. E.

First published, in Russian, in Marx- Printed according to the original Engels Archives, Vol. I (VI), Moscow, 1932

Published in English for the first time

118

ENGELS TO JOHANN PHILIPP BECKER

London, 15 October 1884

Dear Old Man,

I sent off to you yesterday my little book on the origin of the family, etc.,c and have today taken out a money order for five pounds. I trust you will get both very shortly.

I was glad to hear from you that Bebel had visited you during the summer. Your opinion of him is exactly the same as mine. There is no

[^1]: IN GENEVA

[^2]: a Karl Kautsky and Eduard Bernstein-b F.Engels, 'Marx and Rodbertus'.- c The Origin of the Family, Private Property and the State





**[p. 202]**

Don't worry about my health; it is a localised and sometimes troublesome complaint but there are no general after-effects what- ever and it is not even necessarily incurable; at worst it renders me unfit for active service though I may be able to mount a horse again in a few years' time. Having been incapable of writing for the past 4 months I have dictated instead, and am now pretty well done with the 2nd book of Capital; have also gone through the English transla- tion (as far as it has got — about 3/8ths of the whole) of the 1st book.56

Moreover I have now discovered a device which is helping me to get more or less back on my feet again and I hope to make still further progress before long. Rather, my misfortune is that since we lost Marx I have been supposed to represent him. I have spent a lifetime doing what I was fitted for, namely playing second fiddle, and indeed I believe I acquitted myself reasonably well. And I was happy to have so splendid a first fiddle as Marx. But now that I am suddenly expected to take Marx's place in matters of theory and play first fid- dle, there will inevitably be blunders and no one is more aware ofthat than I. And not until the times get somewhat more turbulent shall we really be aware of what we have lost in Marx. Not one of us possesses the breadth of vision that enabled him, at the very moment when ra- pid action was called for, invariably to hit upon the right solution and at once get to the heart of the matter. In more peaceful times it could happen that events proved me right and him wrong, but at a revolu- tionary juncture his judgment was virtually infallible.

Marx's youngest daughterb has married a really excellent Irish- man, Dr Aveling; they come here every Sunday. The other daughter/ whom you know, is also with me just now and sends you her kindest regards. She still talks a lot and fondly about the day she spent with you in Geneva.

I trust your health is still progressing satisfactorily. But if anything should happen to you again, you must let me know at once, on the

[^1]: " Cf. this volume, pp. 199-200.-b Eleanor-c Laura Lafargue



