---
Volume: 47
Document_Title: "119. Engels to Karl Kautsky. 15 October "
Page_Range: "232-234"
---

# 119. Engels to Karl Kautsky. 15 October 



**[p. 203]**

I shall hunt out your letters, etc.,126 as soon as I can really get at the papers. Since May I have been physically incapable of doing so and just now there is so much urgent work to be attended to that I can't even consider it. There are over 6 large boxfuls to be sorted out and not even the books are arranged in such a way as to enable me to make full use of them.

Well, take care of your health (there's no need to tell you to keep your chin up) and be assured of the good wishes

Of your old friend

F. Engels

Borkheim sends his regards. He wrote to me a week ago — it's al- ways the same old story with him. No change.

First published abridged in Prosveshcheniye, Printed according to the original Nos. 7-8, St Petersburg, 1913 and in full in Der Kampf, Nr. 12, Wien, 1913 Published in English for the first time

119

ENGELS T O KARL KAUTSKY

London, 15 October" 1884

Dear Kautsky,

You will have got my postcard.b If possible I shall set to work on the preface0 tomorrow; there are interruptions every day; today, for example, the whole of my time will be spent on correspondence and I'm still not allowed to sit for too long at my desk. Once I settle down to it I shall be done in a day or two.

[^1]: IN ZURICH

[^2]: a August in the original.- b See this volume, pp. 200-01.- c F. Engels, 'Marx and Rodbertus'





**[p. 204]**

Having protested to Dietz 39 about Geiserianism so categorically, I cannot now submit to it in the Neue Ze^—nor y e t where the print- ing of the preface is concerned. Elsewhere I have no objections, of course.

For Ede: Wehner writes to say that the person did not demand the money on behalf of our people, he having sent it of his own free will; however the said person says that they had accepted it. This amounts to the same thing.

I have not read Rodbertus' Creditnotha either; however it can only contain what we know already, namely that mortgages are not re- deemable, not repayable in capital, but merely intended to establish a claim to 'rent', i. e. regular payments of interest; if these payments are not forthcoming, an order may be made for the sale of the prop- erty; the mortgagee has no further claim. This is Rodbertus' 'princi- ple of rent', intended to enable the Junkers to produce, bourgeois- fashion, 5,000 talers per annum and expend, aristo-fashion, 10,000 talers and still not ruin themselves. How it's done remains a mystery. I had to laugh when I saw Schramm trying to find something signific- ant in it.b

Marx's photograph went off to Manz today.c I understand he wants to know about the colour. You will be able to help him there of course. As swarthy as any southern European might be, not much red about the cheeks (when you saw Marx he was already a very sickly yellow; that wasn't normal), moustache jet black, streaked with white but without a trace of brown; save for grizzled hairs, hair and beard snow white. The picture — a retouched photographic en- largement— is a speaking likeness, and he will get it per the Swiss post office.

Apart from the Polish translation of the Origin, Vera Zasulich has applied to do the Russian and Anderfuhren (from Meiringen), a law

[^1]: a [J.K.] Rodbertus-Jagetzow, Zur Erklärung und Abhülfe der heutigen Creditnoth des Grundbesitzes.- h C. A. Sfchramm], 'K. Kautsky und Rodbertus', Die Neue £eit, No. 11, 1884.- c See this volume, pp. 191-92.



