---
Volume: 47
Document_Title: "121. Engels to Karl Kautsky. 20 October "
Page_Range: "235-237"
---

# 121. Engels to Karl Kautsky. 20 October 



**[p. 206]**

Your

F. E.

First published, in Russian, in Marx- Printed according to the original Engels Archives, Vol. I (VI), Moscow, 1932 „ , , . , , . », ,• , r Published m English lor the first time

121

ENGELS TO KARL KAUTSKY 2 6 3

London, 20 Octp Jber 1884

Dear Kautsky,

Have sent you by registered mail proofs and pp. 49-96 of the Poverty ms.301 I did no more than skim through them, nor was I able to com- pare them with the ms. Please get this done at once. I am asking Dietz to send the remainder to you and only the proofs oî the preface* to me; I should have begun this today had I not again been robbed of my best working time by the afore-mentioned proof-correcting. But to- morrow I shall get down to it; my preface will, I think, come first, then Marx's article from the old Social-Demokrat as locum tenens for his preface. ' 5 '

I was on the point of asking you about Nonne, Mme Lafargue being anxious to know something about this neighbour whom they regard-

[^1]: IN ZURICH

[^2]: a F. Engels, 'Marx and Rodbertus'.-b |J. K.] Rodbertus-Jagetzow, %ur Erkenntniss unsrer staatswirthschaftlichen Zustände.





**[p. 207]**

Everyone is astonished that the Prussians should have appointed and paid (?) such a clumsy brute.

Joynes of To-Day has just been to see me. They have been wanting for some time to publish an English version of the Entwicklung,3 the rights to translate which I had long since conceded to Aveling.b They don't want him, however, he and Hyndman being + c rivals, and tried to insist upon my accepting Shaw, who does not know German and proposes to translate from the French. This I took the liberty of declining and referred him to Aveling whom, in any case, I like better every day. These little literary intrigues make up the greater part of the internal history of the movement in this country. Nor is this their only trouble. A week ago last Tuesdayd Mme Lafargue attended a meeting of the COUNCIL of the SOCIAL DEMOCRATIC FEDERATION 300 dur- ing which they were bickering about some trifle or other to such good purpose that the air was buzzing with cries of DAMNED LIAR. Great fun, it seems. The only men in whom I have any confidence are Bax and Aveling, both thoroughly good chaps, intelligent and sincere, but in need of a great deal of help. I don't give much for the others, in so far as I have had the opportunity to judge them.

I have now also got Mr Mommsen just where I want him. In his Römische Forschungen he wrote a lot of nonsense about enuptio gentise; I went into the matter and have now extracted all the relevant pas- sages/ If anyone of the Mommsen school should try to fault me in regard to Roman history (quite possible in regard to form, but not substance), I shall be able to oblige.

Hirsch has sent me the Frankfurter Leitung with a feuilleton on Lip- pert's Geschichte der Familie? The book is obviously barefaced plagiar- ism from Morgan and Bachofen, with a few trimmings from other easily discoverable sources.

Warmest regards to Ede.

Your

F. E.

[^1]: a F. Engels, Socialism: Utopian and Scientific.-* See this volume, p. 400.- c more or less-d 14 October-' exogamy-r See F. Engels, The Origin of the Family, Private Property and the State (present edition, Vol. 26, pp. 225-28).-g H. Kaltenboeck, 'Familie und Ehe', Frankfurter Leitung und Handelsblatt, No. 278, 4 October 1884 (morning edition).



