---
Volume: 47
Document_Title: "122. Engels to Eduard Bernstein. 22 October "
Page_Range: "237-238"
---

# 122. Engels to Eduard Bernstein. 22 October 



**[p. 208]**

First published, in Russian, in Marx- Printed according to the original Engels Archives, Vol. I (VI), Moscow, 1932

Published in English in full for the first time

122

ENGELS TO EDUARD BERNSTEIN

IN ZURICH

London, 22 October 1884

Dear Ede,

I am laying aside my preface13 to inform you:

1. That I am sending you herewith, by registered mail, Marx's 'Speech on the Question of Free Trade'. This irreplaceable copy, ac- quired with much difficulty at second-hand, must be returned to me after use.

2. That I consider it necessary to print in the form of an appendix at the end of the Poverty the passage from A Contribution to the Critique of Political Economy concerning John Gray, the first precursor of Proudhon and Rodbertus, from p. 61, 'the theory that labour time', etc., up to the end of the section on p. 64.301 Would you be so kind as to send it to Stuttgart forthwith? I refer to this appendix in the preface. Between us we shall have completely demolished the whole of this aspect of petty-bourgeois socialism and disposed at the same time of the reply to Rodbertus' Utopia, for I shall use the preface to make good any other deficiencies.

Whether or not you use the 'libre échange'c as an appendix is for you to decide; I can't think where else to put it, and can hardly ima- gine it would be effective simply as a pamphlet — as to which you are better judges than I.

If Dietz should raise any difficulties regarding the Gray appendix, it might be included after the preface and the article on Proudhon

[^1]: a K. Kautsky, 'Aus dem Nachlasse von Carl Marx', Frankfurter Zeitung und Handels- blatt, No. 263, 19 September 1884 (morning edition).-b F.Engels, 'Marx and Rodbertus'.- c 'free trade'; Engels is referring to Marx's 'Speech on the Question of Free Trade'.



