---
Volume: 47
Document_Title: "123. Engels to Eduard Bernstein. 23 October "
Page_Range: "238-239"
---

# 123. Engels to Eduard Bernstein. 23 October 



**[p. 209]**

Your

F. E.

First published, in Russian, in Marx- Printed according to the original Engels Archives, Book I, Moscow, 1924 _ , ,. , , . „ , . , , . Published m English lor the hrst time

123

ENGELS TO EDUARD BERNSTEIN

IN ZURICH

London, 23 October 1884

Dear Ede,

Herewith the preface.3 If you are going to add the 'libre échange'b

I have also taken out a money order for £ 1 in your favour, this be- ing Schorlemmer's contribution to the election fund. You are prob- ably already aware that Schorlemmer was charged in Darmstadt. When the arrest was made at Haug's house in Freiburg, they also found a copy of the Sozialdemokrat addressed to his brotherd—ergo domiciliary search, resulting in the discovery of letters from Schor- lemmer which contained indifferent jokes about Bismarck — resulting in further inquiries about him at his mother's house and at Höchst where he then happened to be. To spare his mother unpleasantness he took his departure. Caused a great furore in Darmstadt.304

At Bebel's suggestion I have sent Schumacher some information about Rittinghausen in 1848.

What has by now, alas, become a very lengthy preface does not see. the end of Mr Rodbertus; in the preface to the 2nd book of Capi- tal'' I shall mount another attack on his 'discoveries' about surplus

[^1]: to it, include what I have appended on the last page, otherwise alter it.c

[^2]: a F. Engels, 'Marx and Rodbertus'.- b 'free trade' - c See previous letter.- d Lud- wig Schorlemmer - e See present edition, Vol. 36.



