---
Volume: 47
Document_Title: "124. Engels to August Bebel. 29 October "
Page_Range: "239-241"
---

# 124. Engels to August Bebel. 29 October 



**[p. 210]**

Your

F. E.

Should Dietz send the manuscript and proofs of the preface to Zurich, kindly send them on here.

First published, in Russian, in Marx- Printed according to the original Eneels Archives, Book I, Moscow, 1924 _ , ,. , . . „ .. . r . .. Published in English tor the farst time

124

ENGELS TO AUGUST BEBEL 3 0 5

IN PLAUEN NEAR DRESDEN

London, 29 October 1884

Dear Bebel,

It is more than I expected. I am less concerned just now with the number of seats that will eventually be won; the obligatory fifteen are assured307 and the main thing is the proof that the movement is marching ahead at a pace that is as rapid as it is sure, that consti- tuency after constituency has been carried away by it and has ceased to be a safe seat for the other parties. But what is also splendid is the way our workers have run the affair, the tenacity, determination and, above all, humour with which they have captured position after posi- tion and set at naught all the dodges, threats and bullying on the part of government and bourgeoisie. What Germany could damned well

[^1]: Your telegram arrived here a minute or two after six and was hailed with cries of delight.306 I at once sent off postcards to people here and in the provinces to make its contents known and also advised Paris39 where the first news they hear of anything is inva- riably garbled and contradictory. Very many thanks for sparing me a thought in the midst of the electoral hurly-burly. I have also informed 3 9 the Society. ' 6 2





**[p. 211]**

The effect on Europe and America will be enormous. I have hopes that in France it will provide fresh impetus for our party. Over there people are still suffering from the aftermath of the Commune. Great though its influence on Europe may have been, it has also seriously set back the French proletariat. To have been in power for three months — and in Paris at that — and not to have radically altered the world but rather have come to grief through their own incompetence (such being the biassed fashion in which the matter is understood to- day) — is proof that the party is not viable. That is the specious argu- ment usually advanced by people who fail to realise that, while the Commune was the grave of early specifically French socialism, it was, for France, also and at the same time the cradle of a new interna- tional communism. And this last will be duly set on its feet by the German victories. Mme Lafargue, who is here and sends you her warm regards, is also of this opinion.

Similarly the news will make a strong impact on the English- speaking proletariat in America.

You will have received my registered letter39 as also my post- card ' " o f the day before yesterday.

My main worry just now is whether you yourself have pulled it off in your doubtful constituencies.308 In view of the many new elements who are in any case joining the parliamentary group, it is precisely at the beginning that you are so urgently needed, lest you find yourself subsequently presented with, faits accomplis in which you had no part. I also know you are not in the best of health and you must at all costs conserve yourself for the party and the more critical times that lie ahead of it. But no doubt everything will work out satisfactorily.

I wanted to tell you more about the Rodbertus business, but it's no longer possible this evening. As for Schramm himself, he will already have had an adequate dressing-down from Karl Kautsky.a In the preface to the Poverty"01 have already clarified Rodbertus' attitude to- wards us and this will, I think, suffice until I am able to deal with him more thoroughly in the preface to Capital, Book II.c Should it prove

[^1]: a See this volume, pp. 193-95.- h F. Engels, 'Marx and Rodbertus'.- c See present edition, Vol. 36.



