---
Volume: 47
Document_Title: "126. Engels to Pasquale Martignetti. 8 November "
Page_Range: "244-245"
---

# 126. Engels to Pasquale Martignetti. 8 November 



**[p. 05]**

Your

F. E.

First published, in Russian, in Marx- Printed according to the original Engels Archives, Vol. I (VI), Moscow, 1932 n i . i - i . j - T- I- . • c .. c Published in English m full for the first time

126

ENGELS TO PASQUALE MARTIGNETTI

IN BENEVENTO

London, 8 November 1884 122 Regent's Park Road, N. W.

Dear Sir,

I congratulate you on the splendid progress you have made in your study of the German language. I entrust you with the Italian transla- tion of The Origin with pleasure and confidence. I have received in the meantime an earlier and similar offer from another quarter,b which I have not yet accepted. In order to reject it definitively, it would be useful for me to know whether you have at your disposal a publisher who will print and publish your translation without delay.314

I remain with respect your devoted

F. Engels

[^1]: On receiving your kind letter of 27th last3 ' 3 I sent you a copy of my pamphlet The Origin etc.,3" and I would have sent it sooner had I known for certain that your last address was still valid.

[^2]: First published in La corrispondenza di Marx Printed according to the original e Eneels con italiani. 1848-1895, Milano, _ . , r , T .. .„„, translated trom the Italian

[^3]: Published in English for the first time

[^4]: * The Origin of the Family, Private Property and the State.- b See this volume, pp. 204-



