---
Volume: 47
Document_Title: "128. Engels to Hermann Engels. // November "
Page_Range: "247-249"
---

# 128. Engels to Hermann Engels. // November 



**[p. 218]**

Whatever becomes of the Anti-Socialist Law, the papera and the press in Zurich must, in my view, continue to operate. They will never restore freedom to us, even of the pre-1878 variety. Your Geisers and Vierecks will be allowed complete freedom and they in turn will trot out the pretty excuse that they went as far as they could. But in our case, the requisite freedom of the press is only to be had abroad. Come to that, it is even possible that attempts will be made to curtail universal suffrage; cowardliness makes people stupid and the philis- tine is capable de tout}1 Admittedly we shall receive compliments from left, right and centre and they won't in every case fall on stony ground. For friend Singer might feel inclined to show proof that, de- spite or because of his paunch, he is no ogre.

Karl Kautsky will have received my letter of yesterday.0

Your

F. E.

First published, in Russian, in Marx- Printed according to the original Engels Archives, Book I, Moscow, 1924 _ . ,. , , . _ .. , . , _ s ' Published in English for the first time

128

ENGELS TO HERMANN ENGELS 3 '5

London, 11 November 1884

Dear Hermann,

The sad news of Emil's d illness brought to me by your letter of 25 September did not come as a complete surprise. He himself had writ- ten to me from time to time about the state of his health and about the necessity he was in of spending the winter in the south; moreover

[^1]: IN BARMEN

[^2]: a Der Sozialdemokrat-b capable of anything-0 See this volume, pp. 212-15.- d Emil Engels, Frederick Engels' brother





**[p. 219]**

I should have written to you sooner had not Hermann'sb wedding intervened, at which time I wasn't absolutely sure where you were; since then there have been numerous interruptions and, on top of that, I have been up to my eyes in work. Moreover, for the past 18 months I, in my own person, have been sharply reminded of the frailty of the human body. What was actually wrong I shall probably never discover, but suffice it to say that the thing now seems to be righting itself and developing into some kind of hernial trouble (what is involved is not the prolapse of a piece of gut, but water in the abdo- men). Besides, I have found a very efficient bandage-maker who has treated many cases of this kind, which are pretty rare as a rule, and has constructed a highly practical but in no way uncomfortable ap- pliance for it. After lengthy experiments I can now manage it pretty well and am at last able to move about again and, what had hitherto proved a virtual impossibility, work at my desk. If things carry on like this, I shall be content; apart from relaxed muscles and ligaments, which is only natural after one has lain motionless on a sofa for so long, I no longer feel anything and am gradually becoming my old self again.

I trust you are all keeping well otherwise. Rudolf0 would also seem to be on the mend again. He seems to have inherited father's constitu- tion in many respects, for he too had constant trouble with his sto- mach until his forties but was then perfectly all right and would doubtless still be alive had not typhoid reft him away.

[^1]: a See 'Lübeck-Büchenbahn', Kölnische Leitung, No. 314, 11 November 1884 (sec- ond edition).- b Hermann Friedrich Theodor Engels-0 Rudolf Engels



