---
Volume: 47
Document_Title: "129. Engels to August Bebel. 18 November "
Page_Range: "249-253"
---

# 129. Engels to August Bebel. 18 November 



**[p. 220]**

Fondest regards to all of you, brothers, sisters, Emma,b your child- ren and you yourself.

Your

Friedrich

First published in Deutsche Revue, Jg. 46, Printed according to the original Bd. 3, Stuttgart-Leipzig, 1921 Published in English for the first time

129

ENGELS TO AUGUST BEBEL 3 1 6

IN PLAUEN NEAR DRESDEN

London, 18 November 1884

Dear Bebel,

I had meant to write to you about the Rodbertus business but, now that my preface to The Poverty of Philosophyc is to appear in the Neue Zeit, you will find the essentials set forth better there than could be done in a letter. The rest will follow later, in the preface to Capital, Book IL d

There is, however, another point about which I should like to give you my opinion, and which seems to me more urgent.

Such is the respect we have inspired in liberal philistines generally that they all exclaim with one voice: 'All right, only let the Social Democrats place themselves on a legal footing and abjure revolu- tion— then we shall support the immediate repeal of the Anti- Socialist Law. 3 7' Hence there can be no doubt that this insolent proposal will be put to you forthwith in the Reichstag. The reply you make is of importance, not so much to Germany where our stalwart lads have already given it at the polling booths, as to other countries.

[^1]: a Hedwig Boelling, née Engels - b Emma Engels -c F. Engels, 'Marx and Rod- bertus'.- d See present edition, Vol. 36.





**[p. 221]**

As I see it, the case is as follows: The political situation now obtaining throughout Europe is the re- sult of revolutions. Everywhere the fundamental laws, historical laws, legitimacy, have been infringed a thousand times over, if not actually subverted. It is, however, in the nature of all parties and/or classes that have come to power by revolutionary means to demand that the fundamental laws newly created by the revolution be unconditionally recognised and held sacrosanct. The right to revolution has existed — otherwise those who now rule would, after all, not be entitled to do so — but from now on it is to cease to exist.

In Germany the present situation is based on the revolution that began in 1848 and ended in 1866. 1866 saw a complete revolution. Just as Prussia became what it is only by betraying and making war on the German Empire in alliance with other countries (1740, 1756, 1795 3 1 7), so, too, it was only by the forcible subversion of the Ger- man Confederation and by civil war that it brought into being the Prusso-German Empire. 3 1 8 Its assertion that it was the others who broke the federal treaty in no way alters the fact. The others maintain the contrary. No revolution has ever yet lacked a pretext of legal- ity— vide France in 1830 when Kinga and bourgeoisie each claimed to be in the right. In short, Prussia fomented civil war and, with it, rev- olution. After its victory, it overthrew three thrones 'by the grace of God' and annexed their territories, together with the once free city of Frankfurt.319 If that was not revolutionary, then I don't know what the word means. Not content with that, it confiscated the private property of the princes it had driven out. That this was not legal, hence revolutionary, it admitted when it induced an assembly — the Reichstag — to approve the deed in retrospect, though the said as- sembly had no more right than the government to dispose of those funds.320

The Prusso-German Empire, as the consummation of the North German Confederation forcibly created by the events of 1867, b 3 2 ' is a wholly revolutionary creation. I am not complaining about that. What I do reproach the chaps for—the ones responsible for it—is for having been no more than pusillanimous revolutionaries, for not hav-

[^1]: a Louis Philippe-b 1866 in the original.





**[p. 222]**

Not long since, it was officially stated that the imperial constitution was not a compact between the princes and the people, but only a compact between the princes and the free cities for which a new one could at any time be substituted. Thus, the government organs that expounded this were demanding for the governments the right to sub- vert the imperial constitution. They were not subjected to an emergency law, nor were they prosecuted. Very well — neither do we demand for ourselves, in the most extreme case, more than is demanded for the governments in this one.

The Duke of Cumberland is the rightful, undisputed heir to the throne of Brunswick. The King of Prussia has no more right to reign in Berlin than is claimed by Cumberland in Brunswick. Anything else that is wanted of him can only be laid claim to after Cumberland has taken possession of his rightful, legitimate throne. This the revolu- tionary German imperial government is forcibly preventing him from doing. Yet another revolutionary act.

And what is the position as regards the parties? In November 1848 the Conservative Party did not hesitate to in- fringe the legality constituted in March of that year.322 In any case, it accords only provisional recognition to the present consti- tutional state of affairs and would joyfully acclaim any feudal and ab- solutist coup d'état.

The Liberal Party of all shades participated in the revolution from 1848 to 1866, nor would it today allow anyone to deny it the right to counter the forcible subversion of the constitution with force.

The Centre 2 2 9 recognises the Church as the supreme power trans- cending the state; a power, that is, which might, in certain circum- stances, make revolution a duty.

And these are the parties which demand of us that we and we alone out of all the rest should declare that we would in no circumstances re- sort to force, would submit to any pressure, any outrage, not only when these have a veneer of legality — are legal in our opponents' view — but also when they are downright illegal.



**[p. I]**

But once the debate begins to turn on the circumstances in which a party may reserve that right, the game is already won. The whole thing becomes progressively more nonsensical. Particularly in the case of a party that has been declared illegal and is thus actually re- duced by higher authority to resorting to revolution. And such a de- claration of illegality, having been made once already, might recur any day. To demand an unconditional statement of this kind from such a party is utterly preposterous.

Nor, for that matter, have the gentlemen anything to worry about. The military position being what it now is, we shall not go into action so long as we have a military power against us. We can bide our time until that military power ceases to be a power against us. Any revolution prior to that, even a victorious one, would bring to power, not our- selves, but the most radical elements of the bourgeoisie and/or petty bourgeoisie.

In any case, the elections have shown that we can expect to gain nothing by submissiveness, i. e. concessions to our opponents. It is only defiant resistance that has gained us their respect and turned us into a power. Only power is respected and only so long as we remain a power will your philistine respect us. Anyone who makes conces- sions and is therefore no longer a power, he will despise. You can let them feel the iron fist in the velvet glove, indeed you must. The Ger- man proletariat has become a powerful party — may its représenta tives be worthy of it!

Your

F. E.

(Time for the post.)

[^1]: First published abridged in: F. Engels, Politisches Vermächtnis. Aus unveröffentlichten Briefen, Berlin, 1920 and in full, in Russian, in Marx-Engels Archives, Vol. (VI), Moscow, 1932

[^2]: Printed according to the original

[^3]: Published in English in full for the first time



