---
Volume: 47
Document_Title: "131. Engels to John Lincoln Mahon. 28 November "
Page_Range: "256-257"
---

# 131. Engels to John Lincoln Mahon. 28 November 



**[p. 227]**

Clemenceau seems to be going down morally while going up politi- cally— this appears unavoidable in French bourgeois politics. His vis- it to Gladstone and the rubbish he talked there is one symptom, the other is his silence in the chamber with regard to the Socialistenhetzea

and the atrocious judgments of Lyon, Montluçon, etc.

As to Paul's wish to have an Irish paper, there is none that can be recommended. Besides if the Egalité writes up every murder, be it ever so stupid, as une exécution, Havas' telegrams are quite sufficient. For other things the Daily News Irish correspondence will be found sufficient.

If Paul sees that the Egalité is regularly forwarded to the Sozial- demokrat at Zurich, that paper will be duly sent in return, but I shall write to Bernstein to send it to your address, so that you get it, and not those that do not understand it.

Kind regards to Paul.

Yours very affectionately,

F. E.

131

[London,] 28 November 1884 122 Regent's Park Road, N.W.

Dear Sir,

I received your note only this morning owing to the No. being stated wrong on the address (132 instead of 122).

[^1]: First published, in the language of the Reproduced from the original original (English), in: F. Engels, P. et L. Lafargue, Correspondance, t. I, Paris, 1956

[^2]: ENGELS T O JOHN LINCOLN MAHON 3 2 7

[^3]: IN LONDON

[^4]: a persecution of socialists



