---
Volume: 47
Document_Title: "134. Engels to August Bebel. 11- 12 December . "
Page_Range: "260-264"
---

# 134. Engels to August Bebel. 11- 12 December . 



**[p. 134]**

ENGELS TO AUGUST BEBEL 316; 331

[IN BERLIN]

London, 11-12 December 1884

Dear Bebel,

The point of my last letter3 was as follows: Among the newly elected members some were known to me, who, by education and temperament, would throw in their weight with the right, bourgeois wing of the parliamentary group. In view of the tremendous blandishments suddenly extended to us after our victo- ries by all the other parties, it seemed to me not impossible that the said gentlemen might fall for the bait and be prepared to make a statement such as that demanded of us by, for instance, the Kölnische Reifung as a condition of the repeal of the Anti-Socialist Law 3 ' ' — a statement would only have to go a hair's breadth further to the right in surrendering the party's revolutionary character than did, for in- stance, Geiser's speech during the Anti-Socialist Law debate, which Grillenberger printed alongside yours.332 The gentlemen of the Lib- eral Party are soft and would be content with very little; a small con- cession on our part would have satisfied them, and it was that small concession I feared since it would have discredited us beyond all measure abroad. I knew, of course, that it would not be made by you. But you, i. e. we, might have been outvoted. Indeed, the least sign of a split — in speeches — would have done enormous harm. That is the reason — and the only reason — I thought it my duty to provide you with support against such an occasion by supplying you with a few handy historical arguments which, perhaps, might not be so fresh in your mind as in mine. And so that you might show the letter to others if you thought fit, I omitted all allusions to those for whom it was, ul- timately, intended.

Nobody is gladder than I that my fears have proved unfounded and that the power of the movement should have been such as to carry away even the bourgeois elements of the party and that the par- liamentary group had kept abreast of the electorate. And I must con-

[^1]: a See this volume, pp. 220-23.





**[p. 232]**

I have never been mistaken about our proletarian masses. The progress of their movement — assured, confident of victory and, for that very reason, cheerful and good-humoured — is exemplary and beyond compare. No European proletariat could have stood the test of the Anti-Socialist Law so splendidly nor, after six years of oppres- sion, have responded by demonstrating how greatly its power had in- creased and its organisation been consolidated. None could have brought that organisation into being, as was done here, without any pretence at conspiracy. And, now that I have seen the electoral mani- festos of Darmstadt and Hanover,325 I have ceased to worry about the possibility of having to make concessions in the new districts (con- stituencies). If, in both those towns, they could speak in such revolu- tionary and proletarian terms, then all is won.

It is greatly to our advantage that in Germany the industrial revo- lution should not really have got going until now, whereas in France and England it is for the most part complete. In those countries, the division into town and country, industrial districts and agricultural districts, is complete to the extent that such further change as there is will be very gradual. The bulk of the people grow up in the condi- tions in which they will subsequently have to live; they are so used to them that even fluctuations and crises come to be regarded almost as a matter of course. Added to which is the memory of earlier, unsuc- cessful movements. In Germany, by contrast, everything is still in a state of flux. What remains of the old, self-sufficient rural industrial production is being superseded by capitalist cottage industries, while elsewhere capitalist cottage industries are in their turn making way for the machine. And it is the very nature of our industry, lagging as it does far behind all the rest, that makes the revolution b such a fun- damental one. Since large mass-produced articles, for the popular as well as the luxury trades, are already monopolised by the British and French, pretty well all that is left for our export industry is the insigni- ficant stuff which, however, also runs into very large quantities, and is first manufactured by cottage industries, not being machine-made

[^1]: a 7 December-6 Altered in an unknown hand to 'social revolution'.





**[p. 233]**

Furthermore, the fact that the worker in a cottage industry usually goes in for a bit of agriculture makes it possible to depress wages to an extent unknown elsewhere. What used to b.e the small man's good fortune — the combination of agriculture and industry — has now become the most effective means of capitalist exploitation. The po- tato plot, the cow, the little bit of husbandry, makes feasible the sale of labour power below its proper price, indeed necessitates this because it binds the worker to the soil which, after all, provides part of his nourishment. Hence, in Germany, industry becomes capable of ex- porting because the customer, more often than not, is presented with the entire surplus value, while the capitalist's profits derive from deduc- tions made from the normal working wage. This applies to pretty well all rural cottage industries, more so in Germany than anywhere else.

Moreover, our industrial revolution, set in train by the revolution of 1848 and its bourgeois advances (puny though these were), was enormously speeded up 1) by the removal, between 1866 and 1870, of internal obstaclesd and 2) by the French milliards, destined as these were for capitalist investment.333 In this way we have achieved an industrial revolution that is more thoroughgoing and fundamen- tal, more extensive and comprehensive than in any other country; we have done so with a completely fresh, intact proletariat, undemoral- ised by defeat and, finally — thanks to Marx — with an insight into the causes of economic and political developments and into the prere- quisites for the impending revolution such as none of our predecessors possessed. But for that very reason we are under an obligation to win.

As regards pure democracy and its future role, I am not of your opinion. That it plays a far more subordinate role in Germany than in countries long since industrialised, goes without saying. But that will not prevent it qua extreme bourgeois party — which, after all, it

[^1]: a Old Bavaria: Upper and Lower Bavaria and Upper Palatinate. - b 'industrially' in- serted in an unknown hand- c 'hence,' inserted in an unknown hand- d See this volume, pp. 221-22.





**[p. 234]**

Now in Germany matters might take a different course, and this for military reasons. As things are at present, an impulse from without would be unlikely to come from anywhere but Russia. Should it fail to come, and the impulse emanate from Germany, the revolution could only emanate from the army. An unarmed population confronted by a modern army is militarily an altogether infinitesimal quantity. In that event — when our reserves of 20- or 25-year-olds, who do not vote, but train, would go into action — pure democracy might be given a miss. But here again the question is, at present, still academic although I, as representative, so to speak, of the party's Great General Staff, am obliged to bear it in mind. At all events, on the crucial day and the day after that, our only adversary will be collective reaction centred round pure democracy and this, I think, ought never to be lost from view.

[^1]: a Napoleon III



