---
Volume: 47
Document_Title: "139. Engels to Pasquale Martignetti. 30 December "
Page_Range: "272-273"
---

# 139. Engels to Pasquale Martignetti. 30 December 

point. I trust that the change in your business affairs344 will above all be beneficial to your health. With all good wishes to you and your family for the New Year.

Your

F.E.

That there won't be enough money is clear as day. And another thing I told Singer was that anyone who votes for it must, if he is to be consistent, also vote for colonies. As regards the point about money, see my letter to Liebknecht.a

First published abridged in: F. Engels, Printed according to the original Politisches Vermächtnis. Aus unveröffentlichten

r, • r TJ i. mon A • e n • D • Published in English in lull for the Uriejen, Berlin, 19/U and in full, in Russian, . a

in Marx-Engels Archives, Vol. I (VI), Moscow, 1932

first time

139

ENGELS TO PASQJJALE MARTIGNETTI

London, 30 December 1884

Dear Sir,

My Peasant War is a pamphlet which is only of interest to Germany. Besides, I must prepare a completely reworked edition,2 ' 3 and I can- not begin before February or March. The book would be published around July (I know what to expect from our party press). Finally, what it deals with has nothing to do with the subject of The Origin etc. b

I think therefore that it will be better to publish the latter separately; as for the way in which it is published, I leave the decision entirely in your hands.

[^1]: IN BENEVENTO

[^2]: Unfortunately it is not till now that your latest letter dated 18 No- vember has received a reply from me. 3 4 5 Please excuse me; I am overwhelmed with work and things to be done.

[^3]: a See previous letter. - h F. Engels, The Origin of the Family, Private Property and the State.



