---
Volume: 47
Document_Title: "140. Engels to Friedrich Adolph Sorge. 31 December "
Page_Range: "273-275"
---

# 140. Engels to Friedrich Adolph Sorge. 31 December 



**[p. 244]**

As soon as The Peasant War is published, I shall be honoured to send you a copy. You can then judge whether it is worth the trouble of translating. I doubt it.

I remain with respect your devoted

F. Engels

First published in La corrispondenza di Marx Printed according to the original e Engels con ilaliani. 1848-1895, Milano, _ , , . . T ,. ,qfi. Translated from the Italian Published in English for the first time

140

ENGELS TO FRIEDRICH ADOLPH SORGE 2 6 3

IN HOBOKEN

London, 31 December 1884

Dear Sorge,

I trust that your health has improved, as mine has, although I am not yet quite my old self again^—very nearly, however.

Capital, Book II (some 600 pages of print) will go to press in Janu- ary. The editing will have been completed in about 10 days' time, af- ter which all that will remain to be done is the revision of the fair copy. It's been quite a task — there were 2 complete and 6 partial texts! 17

Finally, Book IV, Theories of Surplus Value, from the earliest manu- script of 1856-61. ' 7 ' It is still in limbo and cannot be taken in hand until everything else has been completed. There are about 1,000 closely written quarto sheets.

[^1]: Then, as soon as I have attended to a few urgent intermediate jobs, it will be the turn of Book III. a There are 2 complete texts and a notebook of calculations b; this, too, will run to some 600 or 700 pages.

[^2]: I am completely revising my Peasant War2 ' 3 and making it the

[^3]: a See this volume, pp. 88-89.-b See present edition, Vol. 37 (Engels' Preface).





**[p. 245]**

pivot for my whole history of Germany. It will be some task. But the preliminary studies are as good as finished.

T h e English translation of Capital is coming along slowly, more than half having been finished. Tussy's husband, Aveling, is helping with it, but doesn't do it as thoroughly as Sam Moore, who is doing the main p a r t . 5 6

This summer Schorlemmer was subjected to a domiciliary search in Darmstadt for suspected distribution of the Sozialdemokrat.304

Great uproar amongst the philistines has earned us some 500 votes.

O n Saturday the DEMOCRATIC FEDERATION here was disrupted. 3 0° Hyndman, an adventurer who had gained control of the whole affair, was unmasked as a fomenter of strife between the members, a with- holder of correspondence intended for the COUNCIL and a founder of BOGUS BRANCHES in the provinces so that meetings and congresses might be packed with his own creatures. Though a vote of censure was passed on him, the majority resigned, mainly on the grounds that the whole organisation was simply a racket. And it's true. They haven't got 400 paid-up members, and their readers consist of sentimental bourgeois. They now intend to start a new organisation (Morris, Bax, Aveling, etc.) 3 4 6 and leave Justice and To-Day to H y n d m a n and his lot (Fitzgerald, Champion, Burrows, etc.), while they themselves, having at last recognised the weakness of their own effectives, will start off with a little MONTHLY. a As the capitalists who provided the money have also resigned (they, more than anyone else, were sensible of their exploitation by Hyndman) he, Hyndman, will either have to pay for his own unprofitable papers himself or else sell the entire party, in so far as it adheres to him (this will transpire in a week's time), to the highest bidder. And, being intent on getting into Parlia- ment at the next elections, he will have to hurry.

Petty-bourgeois prejudice of every kind is to be found among the German deputies, as, for instance, the desire of the majority to vote for the steamship subsidies 'in the interests of industry'. 3 4 2 Which pro- vides me with correspondence and to spare. Luckily we have Bebel there who invariably gets hold of the right end of the stick, and I therefore hope that the whole thing will go off without our being dis- credited. Ever since I have conducted the 'official' correspondence with Bebel instead of with Liebknecht, not only does all go smoothly, but something actually comes of it, and my views are presented to the

[^1]: a The Commonweal



