---
Volume: 47
Document_Title: "141. Engels to Joseph Dietzgen. 31 December "
Page_Range: "275-276"
---

# 141. Engels to Joseph Dietzgen. 31 December 



**[p. 246]**

chaps in their entirety. Bebel is a really splendid fellow and I hope he won't ruin his health which is none too good.

But now here's to a Happy New Year and an improvement in your own health — regards to Adolf.a

Your

F.E.

Thank you for the Volkszeitung in which the wise man expresses his reservations about the abolition of the state. If I were to try and reply to such doubts, I would simply have to shelve my other work. Apro- pos, the Volkszeitung is no longer sending me its weekly edition.b So if there's anything interesting in it, I should be obliged if you could possibly let me have it.

First published in Briefe und Auszüge aus Printed according to the original Briefen von loh. Phil. Becker, Jos. Dietzsen, _ , ,. . , . „ ,. , . „ ,, r .

E • . • . r i t- i » / A Published in English in full for the bnedncn Engels, Karl Marx u. A. an ° F.A.Sorge und Andere, Stuttgart, 1906

141

[London, 31 December 1884]

So for the time being I can hold out no prospect of being able to contribute to your paper. But should I happen to take a holiday, and should something then turn up, or if events were to take place which would render my assistance of real use, it goes without saying that I should at once make myself available.

[^1]: ENGELS TO JOSEPH DIETZGEN 3 4 7

[^2]: IN NEW YORK

[^3]: [Excerpt]

[^4]: First published in Der Sozialist, Nr. 4, Printed according to the newspaper New York, 24. Januar 1885 „ ,,. , , . „ .. , . , _ Published in hngush lor the hrst time

[^5]: * Adolf Sorge jun. - b Wochenblatt der M. T. Volkszeitung



