---
Volume: 47
Document_Title: "142. Engels to Laura Lafargue. / January "
Page_Range: "276-277"
---

# 142. Engels to Laura Lafargue. / January 



**[p. 247]**

1885

142

ENGELS TO LAURA LAFARGUE

IN PARIS

London, 1 January 1885

My dear Laura,

In all haste a few lines. Moore and Jollymeyer are off to Tussy's and so I have profited of the occasion to shake off a lot of business let- ters— a few moments remain before 5.30.

I had paid for your Justice up to 31 December, but as I had no proper receipt, could not do much — besides every letter of mine to anybody at that office was followed by an application from them for an article of mine, so that I really could not write to them even on business. However Edward says he pays to the Modern Press and so I have sent the money today for both you and myself for 6 months' Justice and To-Day and hope you will get it. What we can get of back numbers you shall also have, but there is not much in it worth your notice, the leaning towards the Possibilists is of quite recent date and not at all pronounced, except last No. [with] a letter from Adolphe Smith. 3 4 8 Now however it's sure to bloom out.

Last night we were at Pumps', she is uncommonly well but over- does it a little — the baby all right.

I am sorry the crisis in the Social Democratic Federationa could not be retarded a little longer; Hyndman would have got deeper into the mud, and the personal element would have been thrown more into the background. However it could not be helped. The reason why the majority, instead of following up their victory, resigned, and starts a new organisation346 was this chiefly, as Morris said to me:

[^1]: a See this volume, p. 245.



