---
Volume: 47
Document_Title: "143. Engels to Hermann Schlüter. / January "
Page_Range: "277-279"
---

# 143. Engels to Hermann Schlüter. / January 



**[p. 248]**

Well we'll see what they will make. There is this to be said in their favour: that three more unpractical men for a political organisation than Aveling, Bax and Morris are not to be found in all England. But they are sincere.

Again Happy New Year to both of you and to the poor little onesa

at Argenteuil when you see them, from Nim and myself.

Your

F.E.

First published in: Marx and Engels, Reproduced from the original Works, Second Russian Edition, Vol. 36, _ , . . , , . ~ ,. , r , ,- , , , „ c . Published m English tor the hrst Moscow, 1964 . &

time

143

ENGELS TO HERMANN SCHLÜTER

London, 1 January 1885

Dear Mr Schlüter,

The Condition of the Working-Class has not as yet been en- tirely prised out of Wigand's hands. From what Freytag the lawyer said, the old contract, which envisaged a second edition, was still in force about 10 years ago. 4 0 Since then I have on several occasions tried to find out from Freytag how I stood with Wigand under Sax- on law but have never received an answer. So long as I remain in

[^1]: IN HOTTINGEN-ZURICH

[^2]: I have received your esteemed note of the 10th as well as Mrs Kel- ley-Wischnewetzky's ms. 3 4 9:1 have advised her of its receipt and told her I hope to be able to revise it next week.

[^3]: a the Longuets' children





**[p. 249]**

However a new edition would not be possible without various notes by me, which in turn would involve consulting sundry works of refer- ence and, in places, call for study and this I cannot take on at the mo- ment as I have more than enough to do. I might consider it towards the middle of the year. So I think the best thing would be simply to let the matter rest till then.

Now, however, Ede tells me that my Anti-Dilhring ought to be reprinted.20B After considerable thought I have decided that it should be brought out unaltered. I owe this to my opponent and shall simply provide a new preface,a also appendices to some of the chapters, which can go together at the end. Then a new preface. This, too, I shall find time for. So if you want work for the press, I would suggest you start with that. Besides, the thing is not particularly urgent and can therefore be printed at your con- venience.

I hope to finish Marx's Capital, Book II, in January and then pro- ceed at once to rewrite the Peasant War. 2 ' 3 That will take a good 6 weeks. But I must be quit of it so as to get on with Capital, Book III. To begin with, this will be a purely daytime occupation, leaving my evenings to some extent free, when I can attend to the Condition of the Working-Class — if, that is, the revision of sundry translations, at- tending to proofs, etc., leaves me time for it.

So think the matter over and let me know what you have decided. I shall gladly do all I can to help you.

Kindest regards and a Happy New Year to the colony at large.

Yours,

F. Engels

[^1]: First published in: Marx and Engels,

[^2]: Works, First Russian Edition, Vol. XXVII, Moscow, 1935

[^3]: Printed according to the original

[^4]: Published in English for the first time

[^5]: " See present edition, Vol. 25, pp. 8-15.



