---
Volume: 47
Document_Title: "145. Engels to Hermann Schlüter. 13 January "
Page_Range: "280-281"
---

# 145. Engels to Hermann Schlüter. 13 January 



**[p. 145]**

ENGELS TO HERMANN SCHLÜTER

IN HOTTINGEN-ZURICH

London, 13 January 1885

Dear Mr Schlüter,

By all means start with the Anti-Diihring as soon as convenient.208

I have not read the philistine's reply,a nor do I wish to do so. Reply he cannot and he's welcome to lay about him with as much insolent verbiage as he wishes.

I have long been searching in vain for the Rheinische Leitung Revue. I only have numbers 3, 5 and 6; 1, 2 and 4 are missing.3 5 2 There are virtually no articles in them worth reprinting. Numbers 1-4 contain Marx's history of the French Revolution from 1848 to 1850b

(comprised in the 18th Brumaire) and my account of events in May 1849 in the Rhineland and Baden-Palatinate.c Then the Peasant Ward

(5 and 6) and short critical essays, as also a review of daily events.6

The right to work is not touched on other than very briefly in, I think, Number If; Marx wasn't much interested in catchphrases.

It would be quite a good idea for you to inquire from Wigand in your own name about a new edition of the Condition etc., 40 but that won't get us very much further. I have got to know how I stand with him in law and shall inquire again from Freytag. N. B. I am assuming that, as soon as the matter is sufficiently advanced, you will come to an understanding with Dietz, as he does in fact have, or might assert, a prior claim.

Regards to Ede.

Yours faithfully,

F. Engels

[^1]: First published in: Marx and Engels, Printed according to the original Works, First Russian Edition, Vol. XXVII, Published in English for the first Moscow, 1935 f:_-

[^2]: a E. Dühring, Kritische Geschichte der Nationalökonomie und des Socialismus. b K. Marx, The Class Struggles in France, 1848 to 1850. - c F. Engels, The Campaign for the German Imperial Constitution. - d F. Engels, The Peasant War in Germany. - c K. Marx and F. Engels, 'Review, January-February 1850'; 'Review, March-April 1850'; 'Review, May to October 1850'. - r See K. Marx, The Class Struggles in France, 1848 to 1850 (present edition, Vol. 10, pp. 55-56).



