---
Volume: 47
Document_Title: "146. Engels to Hermann Schlüter. 17 January "
Page_Range: "281-282"
---

# 146. Engels to Hermann Schlüter. 17 January 



**[p. 146]**

ENGELS TO HERMANN SCHLÜTER

IN HOTTINGEN-ZURICH

London, 17 January 1885

Dear Mr Schlüter,

As regards the Anti-Dühring, I would further advise you that 1) the old preface is followed by another to the 2nd edition which, however, I can't really do as yet; so doubtless you will, as usual, begin with the actual text and leave preface and title to the last; 2) such additions as there are will appear as an appendix.3

I have heard from Bonnb that the Origin of the Family etc. is not ob- tainable in the bookshops; according to the booksellers they have had word from Switzerland — from the publisher — that the book has been banned and various friends have been bombarding me with in- quiries as to where the book may be obtained. Since there has, to my knowledge, been no public ban, while a secret ban would be nonsensi- cal, and since the assumption that Zurich has been spreading rumours of a ban is even more nonsensical, I find the matter puzzling. Could it be that the government, to spare itself the ridicule that would come of a public ban, has persuaded Schabelitz's agents in Leipzig to spread such things about and thus make sales more difficult? Perhaps you would be good enough to start inquiries over there and let me know the result; I shall also try to find out whether the same tactics are be- ing pursued elsewhere.

What is Ede doing? I have had neither sight nor sound of him.

Yours faithfully,

F. Engels

[^1]: First published in: Marx and Engels,

[^2]: Works, First Russian Edition, Vol. XXVII, Moscow, 1935

[^3]: Printed according to the original

[^4]: Published in English for the first time

[^5]: See present edition, Vol. 25, pp. 630-42. - b in a letter Hagen wrote to Engels



