---
Volume: 47
Document_Title: "147. Engels to August Bebel. 19 January . .Ł "
Page_Range: "282-284"
---

# 147. Engels to August Bebel. 19 January . .Ł 



**[p. 147]**

ENGELS TO AUGUST BEBEL

IN BERLIN

London, 19 January 1885

Dear Bebel,

I hope you have had my last registered letter concerning the mat- ter of the Steamship Bill (of 30 or 31 December).3 Today I must trou- ble you with an inquiry. Mr Franz Mehring has now written to me for the second time asking me to place at his disposal material for a biography, etc., of Marx and, amongst other things, has the nerve to presume that I send him 'on loan' to Berlin irreplaceable editions of ours which he is unable to procure over there! I shall not reply, but send a message via Hirsch. But if I am to strike the right note, I ought to know something more definite about his past and present and about his attitude towards the party. Generally speaking, all I know is that, some time before 1878, he was pretty roundly taken to task in the Volksstaat and the Vorwärts for being a reptile3 5 3 and a defector from the party and, from the few writings of his which have fallen into my hands, I have seen that he was making literary use of such in- timate knowledge as he had of the movement to dole out liberal portions of 'truth and fiction'b about it to your philistine, and to pass himself off as an authority in such matters. If he has done anything especially underhand that might single him out from the rest of the literary rabble, it would be most helpful for me to know it.354

Then there's another thing. I am being strongly urged to bring out a new edition of my Condition of the Working-Class. I can do absolutely nothing about it before finding out what my legal position is in regard to Wigand, the previous publisher.40 I have asked Liebknecht about this umpteen times, and on each occasion he has undertaken to ob- tain the information for me from Freytag, but none has ever been forthcoming. And who was the first to express surprise that nothing had been settled? Why, Liebknecht, of course. Now since it would be

[^1]: a See this volume, pp. 240-43. - b 'Wahrheit und Dichtung' in the original, which is a paraphrase of the title of Goethe's autobiographical book Dichtung und Wahrheit, 'Dichtung' meaning 'poetry, fiction'.





**[p. 254]**

To return to Germany's industrial position, I readily concede that enormous progress has been made since 1866, and more especially since 1871. But the contrast with other countries still remains, none- theless. England had had the monopoly of mass-produced articles and France that of the finer luxury and fashion goods, and in this re- spect there has not, after all, been any change worth mentioning. In iron, it is true, Germany is, together with America, second only to England; but she is very far from attaining the level of English mass- production and can only hope to compete by selling at a loss. In cot- ton, Germany manufactures only subsidiary articles for the world market. The massive quantities of yarn and other woven goods (SHIRT- INGS and other mass-produced articles) for the Indian and Chinese market are still an English monopoly, and such competition as there may be in this sphere comes, not from Germany but from America. In woollen goods, too, England still dominates the world market, ditto in linen (Ireland). Birmingham is still the centre for hardware for domestic use, etc., as Sheffield is for cutlery, and the great- est threat of competition is still posed by America, not Germany. Machinery (with the exception of locomotives), England and America.

In the matter of fashion goods, France has lost a lot of ground. Here, too, fashion has changed considerably, and this certainly ap-- plies to Germany also. Both countries, however, and Germany in par- ticular, produce in the main 2nd, 3rd and 4th class goods and still to a large extent depend on the Paris fashions. Meanwhile it is obvious that, in the case of buyers who consist almost exclusively of parvenus, 2nd and 3rd class articles play a considerable role and can be sold to these boors as "ist class goods.

One thing, however, is certain: the large bulk of German exports is composed of a mass of what, seen individually, are more or less in- significant articles, the manufacture of which, in so far as fashion comes into it, depends largely on the theft of Parisian patterns — e.g. the women's coat trade in Berlin — as is openly admitted in the Kölnische Reifung. Moreover, foreign cloth is largely used for the purpose.

