---
Volume: 47
Document_Title: "148. Engels to Paul Lafargue. About 25 January "
Page_Range: "284-286"
---

# 148. Engels to Paul Lafargue. About 25 January 



**[p. 255]**

N. B. That worthy citizen Mehring is the author of the 'leading ar- ticles' in the Demokratische Blätter, which he sends me as an earnest of his principles.

Your

F.E.

148

[London, about 25 January 1885]

You know what efforts the Russian government has been making for years past to wrest from England and France — but from England

[^1]: First published abridged in: Th. Höhle, Printed according to the original Franz Mehring, Berlin, 1956 and in full in: Marx and Engels, Works, Second Russian Published in English for the first Edition, Vol. 36, Moscow, 1964 t l m e

[^2]: ENGELS TO PAUL LAFARGUE 196;355

[^3]: IN PARIS

[^4]: [Excerpt]





**[p. 256]**

Now, The Pall Mall Gazette of 15 January contained an article by Mme Novikov, devil's advocate of tsarism, appealing yet again to England to desist from giving asylum to the Gartmans, the Stepnyaks and all those who 'organise assassination in Russia'.8 The English, she goes on, are now threatened with similar chemical attacks; the refuge they afford to the Russian dynamiters is likewise afforded by America to the Irish dynamiters. What England is asking of America is pre- cisely what Russia is asking of England.

All this is plain enough. But there is better to come. On the morn- ing of 24 January all the newspapers carried the text of an agreement, concluded through diplomatic channels, between St Petersburg and Berlin whereby the extradition of political offenders was to be ex- tended to Germany and thence to the rest of Europe.357

And on the afternoon of that same day, the 24th of January, London was terrorised by a threefold explosion, one in the House of Commons, directed against the legislature, one in Westminster Hall directed against the judiciary, and one in the Tower, directed against the executive. This time it was no longer a matter of blow- ing up public lavatories or of frightening travellers on the under- ground railway.358 Rather it was a concerted attack upon the three great powers of state, symbolised by the buildings in which they as- semble.

Is this no more than an act perpetrated by a handful of Fenian hotheads? Might it not rather be the great coup tsarism needed to bring off if it was to compel England to join the ranks of its anti- revolutionary league? If the dynamite was of Russian origin, and handled by Russian agents, could it, I ask, have exploded,at a time better calculated to prostrate a terrified and repentant John Bull at the feet of Alexander III?

[^1]: First published in Cri du Peuple, No. 461, Printed according to the newspaper Paris, 31 janvier 1885

[^2]: Translated from the French

[^3]: a O. Novikova, 'The Russification of England'.



