---
Volume: 47
Document_Title: "149. Engels to Florence Kelley- Wischnewetzky. 4 February. "
Page_Range: "286-287"
---

# 149. Engels to Florence Kelley- Wischnewetzky. 4 February. 



**[p. 149]**

ENGELS TO FLORENCE KELLEY-WISCHNEWETZKY

IN HEIDELBERG

London, 4 February 1885 122 Regent's Park Road, N.W.

Dear Madam,

I hope you have received the letter I wrote to you about the time of the New Year.39

I now forward to you, registered, the ms. you sent to me, and only regret that press of work prevented my returning it earlier.349 I have looked it over carefully, and entered some corrections and suggestions in pencil, in order to show you how I should like it translated. Here and there you may find that my suggestions, taken together with the rest of the sentence, will not turn out to be correct English; in these cases I left it to you to set that right.

As for the technical terms, if you will be good enough to forward me from time to time a list of them with the pages on which they oc- cur, I shall be glad to give you the English equivalents.

I would, in your place, leave out entirely. They contain nothing of interest now. The first part of the preface refers to a phase of intellec- tual development in Germany and elsewhere which is now almost forgotten, and the second part is in our days superfluous.

As to translations of my other writings you will understand as a matter of course that I cannot now take any positive engagements. There are people here who wish to translate one thing or another, and I have consented conditionally, that is to say if they find a pub- lisher and really undertake the work.

The English preface I shall write 360 when things are a little more advanced.

In the meantime I remain

Yours very truly,

F. Engels

[^1]: The German preface (as well as the English dedication) 359

[^2]: First published, in the language of the orig- Reproduced ' from the original inal (English), in Briefe und Auszüge aus Briefen von Joh. Phil. Becker, Jos. Dietzgen, Friedrich Engels, Karl Marx u. A. an F. A. Sorge und Andere, Stuttgart, 1906



