---
Volume: 47
Document_Title: "151. Engels to Florence Kelley- Wischnewetzky. 10 February . . . "
Page_Range: "288-289"
---

# 151. Engels to Florence Kelley- Wischnewetzky. 10 February . . . 



**[p. 151]**

ENGELS T O FLORENCE KELLEY-WISCHNEWETZKY

IN HEIDELBERG

London, 10 February 1885 122 Regent's Park Road, N.W.

Dear Madam,

I herewith return Mr Putnam's letter — of course it would be a splendid success if we could secure publication" by that firm — but I am afraid Mr Putnam will stick to his objections, the great strength of which, from a publisher's standpoint, I fully recognise. Perhaps the fact that a new German edition of my work is in actual preparation, may shake him a little. My friends in Germany say that the book is important to them just now because it describes a state of things which is almost exactly reproduced at the present moment in Ger- many; and, as the development of manufacturing industry, steam and machinery and their social outcrop in the creation of a proletari- ate, in America corresponds at the present moment as nearly as possi- ble to the English status of 1844 (though your go-ahead people are sure to outstrip the old world in the next 15-20 years altogether) the comparison of industrial England of 1844 with industrial America of 1885 might have its interest too.

Of course in the new preface to the English translation360 I shall refer as fully as space will permit to the changes in the condition of the British working class which have taken place in the interval; to the improved position of a more or less privileged minority, to the cer- tainly not alleviated misery of the great body, and especially to the impending change for the worse which must necessarily follow from the break-down of the industrial monopoly of England in conse- quence of the increasing competition in the markets of the world, of Continental Europe and especially of America.

Very sincerely yours,

F. Engels

[^1]: First published, in the language of the ori- Reproduced from the original ginal (English), in Briefe und Auszüge aus Briefen von Joh. Phil. Becker, Jos. Dietzgen, Friedrich Engels, Karl Marx u. A. an F.A. Sorge und Andere, Stuttgart, 1906

[^2]: a of Engels' The Condition of the Working-Class in England



