---
Volume: 47
Document_Title: "158. Engels to Johann Philip p Becker. 2 April "
Page_Range: "296-298"
---

# 158. Engels to Johann Philip p Becker. 2 April 



**[p. 267]**

First published in: Marx and Engels, Printed according to the original Works, First Russian Edition, Vol. XXVII, . Moscow, 1935 Published in English for the first time

158

ENGELS TO JOHANN PHILIPP BECKER •

IN GENEVA

London, 2 April 1885

Dear Old Man,

So that you shouldn't think you had been forgotten, I have taken out a money order for five pounds for you and trust you will get the money at once. So far I am pretty well, though not, it is true, as yet fit for active service, nor am I likely ever to be able to mount a horse again, but I am still perky enough for peacetime work. 2/3 of the sec- ond volume of Capital have been printed and the book will be ap- pearing in some 2 months' time, while work on the third volume is well advanced. This last, which contains the final conclusions and, indeed, some quite brilliant stuff, will revolutionise economics once and for all and create a tremendous sensation.

In the meantime things are beginning to liven up again. Ferry's fall372 opened the proceedings, now it's Gladstone's turn, and Bis- marck's will follow as soon as that jackass Williamb kicks the bucket.

[^1]: a See [A. Schäffle,] Die Quintessenz des Socialismus, Gotha, 1875, p. 5; see also Engels' letter to Eduard Bernstein of 12 March 1881 (present edition, Vol. 46, p. 74). - b William I





**[p. 268]**

As was inevitable in the circumstances of the Anti-Socialist Law,37

a number of thoroughgoing philistines have been returned to the Reichstag by our people and are beginning to give themselves airs because they constitute a majority in the parliamentary group. 3 7 3

We shall now have to wait and see how far they go; they can be toler- ated for a time if in tow, but not when in the lead. They know that they haven't got the masses behind them, but they also know that, at the moment, the hands of the masses are very much tied. Of one thing we may be certain. If they gain the upper hand, I shall continue to cooperate up to a certain point, but beyond that it will be bonjour, mes- sieurs. a Being overwhelmed with work, I cannot unfortunately go into the attack as I should like to do, but perhaps it is a good thing to al- low these gentlemen a little latitude. The matter of the Steamship Subsidies342 went off pretty smoothly on the whole, after several of them had made real fools of themselves. Now they are out for the blood of the Zurich Sozialdemokrat,3 7 4 which is rather more serious. For it's bad enough to be made to look a fool in the eyes of the gen- tlemen in the Reichstag, but in the eyes of the whole of Europe — that really is a bit thick! If Bebel were in good health, none of this would matter a great deal, but he is nervy and debilitated, on top of which he has to work himself to the bone on his family's ac- count.

But everything will come right when old William pegs out. The Crown Princeb is a weak, irresolute fellow, as if destined for decapita- tion, his wife0 ambitious, with a clique of her own — in short, there will be all manner of changes that will play havoc with the existing order of things and bemuse and unsettle the civil service, while the bourgeoisie will at last be compelled to clear away some of the old lumber and play a political role — as it damned well ought. Only let the political scene at home come to life again and we shall need noth- ing more. But the rotten bourgeoisie has so greatly deteriorated that

[^1]: a good day, gentlemen - b Frederick William -c Victoria



