---
Volume: 47
Document_Title: "159. Engels to August Bebel. 4 April "
Page_Range: "298-301"
---

# 159. Engels to August Bebel. 4 April 



**[p. 269]**

From your old friend

F.E.

First published in: F. Engels, Vergessene Printed according to the original Briefe (Briefe Friedrich Engels' an Johann **,,-, , • T* I- . • r ,. r . D» •,-.. • ; , D i- mon rubhshed in hnghsn in mil tor the Philipp Becker), Berlin, 1920 _ . ö

first time

159

ENGELS TO AUGUST BEBEL

London, 4 April 1885

Dear Bebel,

Since you happen to be at home now and I, too, am granting my- self a bit of a holiday, I shall take advantage of the opportunity to re- mind you of my existence.

So those gentlemen who form the majority of the parliamentary group are intent on setting themselves up as a 'power' to judge by their statement in today's Sozialdemokrat.374 The endeavour as such is feeble, and is basically an admission of their own ineptitude. 'We are,' they say, 'annoyed by the paper's attitude; it conflicts with ours, we are to be held responsible for an opinion that is the opposite of our own, and we really don't know what to do about it. Are we not to be pitied?' But it is their first step towards the establishment of the petty

[^1]: IN PLAUEN NEAR DRESDEN





**[p. 270]**

For the rest, things in general are going very well. The year 1885 has got off to an excellent start. In France, Ferry topples, colonial pol- icy, dictated by stock-market speculators, collapses,372 new elections in the offing consequent upon new electoral legislation.375 In Paris, what's more, a state of ferment, provoked by the rapacity and ineffi- ciency of the ruling middle class and exacerbated by the infamies of the police (everything they do, however base, is condoned, provided they keep the masses at bay); we can only hope that things won't come to a head there in the form of attempted coups. If they take a peaceful course, radicalism — i. e. Clemenceau — is bound to come to the helm before very long. Should he come to power peacefully and not as the result of rioting, and thus be compelled to keep his promises and put his radical panacée into practice, the Parisian workers will quickly be cured of their belief in radicalism. In addition, there will be the new elections consequent upon the new electoral legislation, and thus stagnation will again give way to activity.

In England, with her thoroughly effete government, 376 there will also be new elections consequent upon the new electoral legisla- tion. 2 " And in Germany, a change of monarch that may occur any day now and which, in a country as chockful of traditions as Prussia- Germany, always ushers in a new period of activity; in short, things will begin to liven up everywhere, and this on the economic basis of universal and incurable overproduction, a state of affairs that is gradually leading up to an acute crisis.

Kautsky has just arrived with a long letter from Ede about his con- flict with the parliamentary group. I have told Kautsky that in my view it was in fact Ede's duty to let the party at large have their say in the paper, and that the parliamentary group has no right to prevent this. If he adopts this standpoint, the group won't be able to touch



**[p. 271]**

The matter would, in my view, take a smoother course were the So- zialdemokrat to discard the official character that has been attached to it. Though not undesirable at one time, this no longer serves any purpose. Whether and how such a thing can be done, you will know better than I.

25 sheets (out of 38) of Capital, Book II have been printed. Book III is in hand. It is quite extraordinarily brilliant. This com- plete reversal of all previous economics is truly astounding. Our the- ory is thereby provided for the first time with an unassailable basis while we ourselves are enabled to hold our own successfully against all comers. Directly it appears, the philistines in the party will again be dealt a blow that will give them something to think about. For it will again bring general economic questions to the forefront of the controversy.

and, perhaps, no longer find you at home. My warm regards, then, and mind you keep well and look after yourself; we don't just need a Bebel, but a Bebel sound in wind and limb.

Your

F.E.

[^1]: Time for the post. Unless I send this off, it won't leave till Mondaya

[^2]: First published, in Russian, in Marx- Engels Archives, Vol. I (VI), Moscow, 1932

[^3]: Printed according to the original Published in English for the first time

[^4]: a 6 April



