---
Volume: 47
Document_Title: "165. Engels to Vera Zasulich. 23 April "
Page_Range: "308-311"
---

# 165. Engels to Vera Zasulich. 23 April 



**[p. 165]**

ENGELS TO VERA ZASULICH 316; 382

IN GENEVA

London, 23 April 1885

Dear Citizen,

I still owe you an answer to your letter of 14 February. Below you will find the reasons for my tardiness, which can certainly not be at- tributed to idleness on my part.

You ask me to give you my opinion of Plekhanov's book Hauiu pa.3- Hoejiacin.a To do this I should have to have read it. I find little diffi- culty in reading Russian when I have spent a week devoting myself to it, but six months or more may go by without my having any oppor- tunity to do so; then, having lost the habit of it, I am compelled to learn the language all over again, as it were. And that is what has happened with the Pamozjiacin,. Marx's manuscripts, which I dictate to a secretary,b take up the whole of my day; in the evening people come to call who cannot, after all, simply be shown the door. Also there are proofs to be read, a great deal of correspondence and, fi- nally, translations (into the Italian, Danish, etc.) of my Origin etc.,c

which I am asked to look over and whose revision sometimes turns out to be neither easy nor superfluous. Well, all these interruptions have prevented my progressing further than page 60 of the Pa,3Hozjia- cin. If only I could have three days to myself, the job would be done and, what is more, I should have brushed up my Russian.

However, the little I have read is, I think, enough to put me more or less au fait with the disputed in question.

To begin with, let me repeat how proud I am to know that there exists among the younger generation in Russia a party which frankly and unreservedly accepts the great economic and historical theories evolved by Marx, and which has broken for good with all the anar- chic and to some extent Slavophil traditions of its predecessors.383

And Marx himself, had he lived a little longer, would have been no less proud than I. It marks a step forward which will be of the utmost

[^1]: a See this volume, p. 264. - b Oskar Eisengarten - c The Origin of the Family, Private Property and the State; see also this volume, pp. 264 and 272. - d Crossed out in the draft: 'between your group and the Narodnaya Volya members356'.





**[p. 280]**

But to do so demands familiarity with those conditions, and I, for my part, am too ignorant of the present situation in Russia to suppose myself competent to assess in detail the tactics that might be required at any given moment. Again, the internal and intimate history of the Russian revolutionary party, in particular that of the last few years, is to me a closed book. My friends among the Narodnaya Volya mem- bers have never discussed it with me. Yet this is an element which, if one is to form an opinion, cannot be ignored.

What I know, or believe I know, of the situation in Russia leads me to think that that country is nearing its 1789. Revolution is bound to break out some time or other; it may break out any day. In conditions such as these the country is like a charged mine, all that is needed is to apply the match. Especially after what happened on 13 March. 188 It is one of those special cases where it is possible for a handful of men to effect a revolution, that is, to bring about at one stroke the collapse of an entire system whose equilibrium is more than labile (to use Ple- khanov's metaphora),384 and to release, by a single and intrinsically insignificant act, explosive forces which later become uncontrollable. Well, if ever Blanquism, the fantasy of subverting the whole of a so- ciety through action by a small group of conspirators, had any ra- tional foundation, it would assuredly be in St Petersburg. b Once the match has been applied to the powder, once the forces have been un- leashed and the national energy has been converted from potential to kinetic (another of Plekhanov's favourite and, indeed, excellent met- aphors) 385 — the men who have sprung the mine will be swept off their feet by an explosion a thousand times more powerful than they themselves, one which will seek whatever outlet it may find in accor- dance with the prevailing economic forces and resistances.

Suppose that these men imagine they will be able to seize power, what of it? Providing they make the hole which causes the dam to col- lapse, the resulting torrent of water will soon put paid to their illusions. But what if those illusions succeeded in endowing them with an ex-

[^1]: " The draft had 'pet metaphor'. - b Crossed out in the draft: 'I do not say "in Russia" because in the provinces, far from the administrative centre, it [such action] is not necessary.'





**[p. 281]**

What, in my view, is important in Russia is that the impulse should be given, that revolution should break out. Whether it is this or that group that gives the signal, whether it be under this flag or that, is of little concern to me. Even if it wered a palace plot, its instigators would be swept away on the morrow. In a place where the situation is so tense, where revolutionary elements have accumulated to such a degree, where the economic situation of the vast mass of the people becomes daily more impossible, where every degree of social develop- ment is represented, from the primitive commune to modern big industry and high finance, and where all these contradictions are forci- bly pent up by an unheard-of despotism — a despotism increasingly unacceptable to a younger generation in which are combined the na- tion's intelligence and dignity — in such a place 1789, once launched, will before long be followed by 1793.

I say 'good-bye', dear Citizen. It is half past two in the morning. Tomorrow before the departure of the courier I will hardly have time to add anything. If you prefer, do write to me in Russian, but please bear in mind that Russian handwriting is something I do not read every day.

Your devoted

F. Engels

[^1]: First published, in Russian, in Gruppa Printed according to the original, 'Osvobozhdeniye truda', No. 3, Moscow, checked with the draft 1925

[^2]: Translated from the French

[^3]: Published in English in full for the first time

[^4]: a (Russ.) Here: figures. - b Crossed out in the draft: 'Maybe the same thing will hap- pen to us all.' - c Alexander III - d Crossed out in the draft: 'a clique of the nobles or of money-bags — well, all the best until'.



