---
Volume: 47
Document_Title: "166. Engels to Richard Stegemann. 5 May "
Page_Range: "311-312"
---

# 166. Engels to Richard Stegemann. 5 May 



**[p. 166]**

ENGELS TO RICHARD STEGEMANN

IN TÜBINGEN

[Draft]

[London,] 5 May 1885

Dear Sir,

Mature reflection has shown that I cannot possibly comply with your request.387

Either the work you want must be short, in which case it could contain nothing but asseverations on my part, and thus merely be assertive and belletristic.

Or I should have to supply documentary evidence, in which case it would turn into a book, and that would not suit your purpose; more- over, I could not write it in so off-hand and casual a manner, for which my material is far too abundant.

A further consideration is that I should be more or less committing myself to co-editing a work about which I know nothing save the brief account provided by you.

In addition, the thing would — within the limits prescribed — be utterly useless. However vigorous my protestations, they would utter- ly fail to move the semi-educated vulgarian whose prejudices you wish to combat. People who say that Marx 'died friendless' must, pre- sumably, harbour the belief that I do not exist at all. In which case, what magical effect could asseverations on my part be expected to have?

The old fairy-tales invented by the vulgar democratic emigra- tion of 1850-59, and further elaborated by Bonaparte's paid agent, Karl Vogt,— il lui a été remis en 1859a 40,000 frs, according to the Tuileries papers,388 may perhaps be more in vogue in your district than elsewhere because the Swabian People's Party 2 0 3 is the direct descendant of that same democratic emigration, certain of its leaders having been on intimate terms with the afore-mentioned Vogt. Since all this was dealt with by Marx in Herr Vogt, there would seem to be

[^1]: in 1859 he was paid



