---
Volume: 47
Document_Title: "168. Engels to Hermann Schlüter. 15 May "
Page_Range: "315-317"
---

# 168. Engels to Hermann Schlüter. 15 May 



**[p. 286]**

Your

F. E.

First published, in Russian, in Marx- Printed according to the original Engels Archives, Book I, Moscow, 1924 . „ , . , . Published m English for the first time

168

ENGELS TO HERMANN SCHLÜTER 3 9 2

IN HOTTINGEN-ZURICH

London, 15 May 1885

Dear Mr Schlüter,

As regards the poems393: The Marseillaise of the Peasants' War was Ein feste Burg ist unser Gott39* and, vainglorious though its words and tune may be, it nei- ther should nor need be taken in the same spirit today. Other songs of that time are to be found in anthologies of folk songs, Des Knaben

Wunderhorn* etc. You might perhaps find something there. But even at that time the Landsknecht^ exercised a virtual monopoly over our popular poetry.

Of foreign songs, the only one I know is the beautiful old Danish song about Herr Tidmann, which I translated for the Berlin Social- Demokrat in 1865.c

There were all kinds of Chartist songs, but they are now no longer to be had. One began:

[^1]: * Britannia's Sons, though slaves you be, God your creator made you free; To all he life and freedom gave, But never, never made a slave.*

[^2]: a compiled by L. A. von Arnim and C. Brentano - b mercenary soldier - c See present edition, Vol. 20, pp. 34-35.





**[p. 287]**

I don't know how it goes on. All that stuff has been forgotten and in any case wasn't up to much as poetry.

In 1848 two popular songs were current and were sung to the same tune.

1) Schleswig-Holstein. 2) The Hecker song395:

Hecker, may thy name resound Up and down the German Rhine, Thy generous heart nay, e'en thy look Inspired confidence in mind. Hecker, a German man and free Who'd give his life for liberty.

That, I think, suffices. Then there's another version:

Hecker, Struve, Blenker, Zitz and Blum Slay the German princes.

In general, the poetry of past revolutions (always excepting the Marseillaise396) seldom has much revolutionary impact later on because, if it is to influence the masses, it must reflect the mass preju- dices of the day — hence the religious nonsense found even in the Chartists.

Now as to Marx's shorter pieces, this is a matter upon which others beside myself have to decide, while I for my own part must make quite sure that nothing is done that might interfere with the proposed edition of the Complete Works. The things appertaining to the Inter- national, the Inaugural Address, Civil War, Hague Report,3 etc., like the Manifesto^1 I do not regard as forming part of these, though I should like to reserve the right to provide a few words of introduction. As re- gards the articles from the Neue Rheinische Reifung, you must first find out which were written by Marx. For instance, only one, an out- standing article on the June insurrection was by Marx,0 while the account of the struggle, etc., was entirely mine.d Likewise the anti- Bakunin and anti-Pan-Slavism articles.e The things Marx and I wrote at that time are on the whole almost indistinguishable owing to our systematic division of labour.

[^1]: a K. Marx, Report of the General Council to the Fifth Annual Congress - b K. Marx and F. Engels, Manifesto of the Communist Party. - c K. Marx, 'The June Revolution'. - d F. Engels, 'Details about the 23rd of June'; 'The 23rd of June'; 'The 24th of June'; 'The 25th of June'; 'The June Revolution (The Course of the Paris Uprising)'. - c F. Engels, 'Democratic Pan-Slavism'.



