---
Volume: 47
Document_Title: "169. Engels to Paul Lafargue. 19 May "
Page_Range: "317-320"
---

# 169. Engels to Paul Lafargue. 19 May 



**[p. 288]**

Apropos, my intention is that the chapter 'Theoretical' from the section Socialism should be printed according to the revised text of So- cialism: Utopian and Scientific. When it has got to that stage I shall send you what is necessary. This is merely to notify you in advance.

For the rest, warm regards from

169

ENGELS TO PAUL LAFARGUE

London, 19 May 1885

My dear Lafargue,

The Lissagaray affair pleased me greatly and I trust he will be chucked out of the Bataille.39"' The irony of history is without mercy, even to revolutionary stink-bugs.

Yours,

F. Engels

[^1]: First published abridged in Die Neue £eit, Bd. l,Nr. 11, Stuttgart, 1918 and in full in: Marx and Engels, Works, First Russian Edition, Vol. XXVII, Moscow, 1935

[^2]: IN PARIS

[^3]: a K. Marx, Revelations Concerning the Communist Trial in Cologne. - b F. Engels, 'On the History of the Communist League'. - c F. Engels, Anti-Dühring.

[^4]: Printed according to the original

[^5]: Published in English in full for the first time





**[p. 289]**

I must repent, must repent me, Where my sins were most committed*

as good king Don Rodrigo said while snakes devoured his vital parts. Brousse at the head of a daily paper would be too comical, he would never last. It would be all he needed to cut his own throat.

The idea that life is simply the normal mode of existence of albu- minous bodies and that as a result the protein of the future, if the chemists ever contrive to manufacture it, must display signs of life, appears in my anti-Dühring book where it is developed to some extent on page 60, etc.b By assuming responsibility for it Schorlemmer did a bold thing, for if it falls flat, the blame will be his, whereas if it catches on, he will be the first to give me the credit.398 Moreover your Grimaux must be an imbecile if he really said that

'we have nothing to show us how this initial movement is acquired whereby an al- buminoid is organised into a living cell' .c

So the good man appears to be unaware that there is a whole army of living things which are still very far removed from the organisation of a cell, being no more than 'plasson', as Haeckel has it,d albumi- noids that have no trace of organisation, yet are alive — for example protamoebas, siphonales, etc. The poor albuminoid has probably worked for millions of years in order to organise itself into a cell. But your Grimaux doesn't even see the point at issue. Moreover he betrays his ignorance of physiology still further by comparing with a primitive protoplasm, the source of all life on earth, a product as specialised as the egg of a vertebrate.

We have had poor Harney here for the past 10 days. He suffers badly from chronic rheumatoid arthritis of a + e gouty nature. Nim has had her work cut out looking after him. If the weather improves he hopes to set off for Macclesfield on Saturday/On that same Satur- day we are expecting Sam Moore with his translation g— alas, as yet uncompleted.

The 2nd volume has been printed with the exception of my pre- face, the proofs of which should arrive any day. The consignments sent to Danielson have so far all arrived and 7 sheets have been trans- lated.361 I have dictated more than half of the 3rd volume, but two

[^1]: * Engels quotes in Spanish. - b F. Engels, Anti-Dühring, present edition, Vol. 25, pp. 15-11. - c E. Grimaux, 'Les substances colloïdales et la coagulation', Revue scientifique, No. 16, 18 April 1885, p. 500. - A E. Haeckel, Die Perigenesis der Plas- tidule, Berlin, 1876, pp. 76, 77. - c more or less - f 23 May; see also this volume, p. 292. - g of the first volume of Capital (see Note 56)





**[p. 290]**

The storm in a teacup that has disrupted our ranks in Germany 374

will doubtless calm down for the time being. Now that the Reichstag has been sent about its business, the gents of the 'socialist group' have dispersed. The Social Democrats have won a moral victory over the 'group'. But that is not the end of the matter and there may be a re- currence. Were it not for the Anti-Socialist Law,37 I should have been in favour of an outright split. But so long as it is in force, it de- prives us of all our weapons while enabling the party's petit-bourgeois section to reap all the benefit. And, in any case, it is not our business to provoke it. The thing was inevitable; it was bound to come sooner or later. But it would have come either later or under circumstances more favourable to ourselves had it not been for the incredible stupid- ities of Liebknecht, who has not only wavered between the two sec- tions and invariably protected the petit bourgeois, but has also been prepared on more than one occasion to sacrifice the proletarian na- ture of the party for a simulacrum of unity that is credible to no one. It would appear that his own protégés, the representatives of the pe- tit-bourgeois side, have now had enough of his double dealing. Lieb- knecht always believes what he says when he is saying it, but believes something quite different whenever he speaks to someone else. Over here he is all for revolution, over there all for circumspection. That won't prevent his being on our side on the crucial day and telling us: Didn't I always tell you so! This is between ourselves. A kiss for Laura.

Yours ever,

F. E.

[^1]: First published in: Marx and Engels, Printed according to the original Works, Second Russian Edition, Vol. 36, Moscow, 1964 Translated from the French Published in English for the first time



