---
Volume: 47
Document_Title: "170. Engels to Pasquale Martignetti. 19 May "
Page_Range: "320-321"
---

# 170. Engels to Pasquale Martignetti. 19 May 



**[p. 170]**

ENGELS TO PASQUALE MARTIGNETTI 4 0 0

IN BENEVENTO

[Draft]

[London, 19 May 1885]

Dear Citizen,

on the etc. I sent you, by registered mail, the translation3 with my comments. I am very sorry that my limited practice of Italian has not enabled me to do them better, but I hope they will be intelligible nonetheless. I am amazed that, without having lived in Germany and learned the language there, you have been able to render my thoughts so well. I only found a few abbreviated, idiomatic and proverbial expressions where there was an error; and even these are impossible to understand properly for someone who has not spoken the everyday language and even the dialects of the country--things which are not to be found in grammars and dictionaries. And in sev- eral cases when you have understood the meaning well, I think you could be a little freer and more adventurous.

I fear that the note about 'Mark' is not very clear. It is the only note which I think should be printed. The others are for your infor- mation only. If therefore you have any doubts about that note, please let me know and I shall try and rewrite it.401

Please excuse the long time it has taken me to do the revision. But my days are taken up with dictating Marx's manuscripts, and my evenings are not always free. In addition, I have had a Danish trans- lation b to check at the same time, not to mention the English transla- tion of Capital.56

Thanking you again for the considerable work you have done on my behalf, I remain

Your devoted

[^1]: Printed according to the original

[^2]: Translated from the Italian

[^3]: Published in English for the first time

[^4]: a the Italian translation of Engels' The Origin of the Family, Private Property and the State - b of The Origin of the Family, Private Property and the State

[^5]: First published in: Marx and Engels, Works, First Russian Edition, Vol. XXVII, Moscow, 1935



