---
Volume: 47
Document_Title: "173. Engels to Friedrich Adolph Sorge. 3 June "
Page_Range: "324-327"
---

# 173. Engels to Friedrich Adolph Sorge. 3 June 



**[p. 173]**

ENGELS TO FRIEDRICH ADOLPH SORGE 4 0 7

IN HOBOKEN

London, 3 June 1885

Dear Sorge,

I was sorry to hear that you have been incapable of writing and trust that the thing has subsided. The Gronlunds and Elys,a as also the newspapers, gratefully received. Ely is a well-meaning philistine and does at least take more trouble than his German fellow-sufferers and fellow-blockheads which, after all, deserves recognition. Gron- lund, on the other hand, strikes me as being speculative: his boosting of our stuff, in so far as he does or does not understand it, is clearly aimed at palming off his own Utopian fiddle-faddle as REAL LIVE GERMAN SOCIALISM. A symptom at any rate.

As regards To-Days and Commonweals, I am sending you the former from March onwards and the latter from the beginning.b

However their administrative side is not particularly efficient; should the paper [The Commonweal) fail to reach the Sozialist regularly, I should be very grateful if you would advise me so that I can provide proof of inefficiency, this being invariably denied by the secretary, though it undoubtedly exists.

You have had the same correct presentiment about the Reichstag laddies as I have — the case of the Steamship Subsidies342 has re- vealed the immensity of their philistine aspirations. It almost came to a split, which would not be desirable at present, so long as the Anti- Socialist Law 37 remains in force. As soon as we get a bit more ELBOW- ROOM in Germany, the split will doubtless come and can then only do

[^1]: You would do best to ignore Fabian completely; the man feels a need to get himself talked about and there is no necessity to en- courage that.c His chief grievance against me is that I maliciously defamed V — 1 in the Anti-Diihring, a point on which he complained to Marx by letter. 209

[^2]: a L. Gronlund, The Cooperative Commonwealth in Its Outlines; R. T. Ely, French and Ger- man Socialism in Modern Times (see also this volume, p. 192). - b See this volume, pp. 298, 312. - c Ibid., p. 124.





**[p. 296]**

You in America also suffer from various great savants of the kind possessed by Germany's philistine socialists in the persons of Geiser, Frohme, Bios, etc. The historical digressions in the Sozialist by your Stiebelings, Douais, etc., on the subject of Völkerwanderunga

amused me greatly, for these people have studied the whole thing far better and far more thoroughly than I have. Douai, in particular, gives himself colossal airs. For instance in No. 13 of the Sozialist, apropos the German conquests in Italy, etc., he tells us that the King acquired '/3 of the land and the officers and soldiers 2/3, of which 2/3 passed in turn to the former slaves, etc. ' This we learn from Jornandes and Cas- siodorus.' 40Q When I read that I was completely bowled over. 'Pre- cisely similar accounts,' he goes on, 'are provided about the Visigoths. Nor was it otherwise in France.' Well, the whole thing is an invention from start to finish and you won't find a word of it either in Jornandes or in Cas- siodorus or in any other contemporary source. It reveals at once colossal ig- norance and impudence to confront me with such utter rubbish and to say that I am 'demonstrably in the wrong'. The sources, and I know practically all of them, state precisely the opposite. I have let it pass this time, as it was written in America where one can hardly make an issue of that kind of thing. But Monsieur Douai had better watch out in future; I might well lose patience some day.

The 2nd volume of Capital will be out shortly; all I am awaiting is the last half proof-sheet of the preface where Rodbertus receives a further broadside. The 3rd book is going ahead merrily, but will take a long time. Not that that matters, as the 2nd volume must be di- gested first. The 2nd volume will cause great disappointment, being a purely scientific work with little in the way of agitation. By contrast the third volume will again have the effect of a thunderbolt, since the

[^1]: II G. C. Stiebeling, 'Reform oder Revolution', Der Sozialist, No. 7, 14 February 1885; A. Douai, 'Eine Entgegnung auf Dr. Stiebeling's Artikel', Der Sozialist, No. 13, 28 March 1885.





**[p. 297]**

All is well with Tussy so far. The two of thema are very happy to- gether, though unfortunately they are not always in good health. Lafargue must now do another 4 months on account of the same old fine and costs.402 The police were intent on fomenting a riot in Paris on 24 May, but nothing came of it and the ministers took fright.404 So the Victor Hugo business went off quietly after all, and that is just as well. As there is no Garde Nationale, no weapons are to be had and any attempted coup would inevitably be crushed. One just has to adapt one's tactics to the circumstances. Regards to Dietzgen and Adolf.b

Your

F. E.

[^1]: First published in Briefe und Auszüge aus Briefen von Joh. Phil. Becker, Jos. Dietzgen, Friedrich Engels, Karl Marx u. A. an F.A. Sorge und Andere, Stuttgart, 1906

[^2]: Printed according to the original

[^3]: Published in English in full for the first time

[^4]: Eleanor Marx-Aveling and Edward Aveling - b Adolf Sorge jun.



