---
Volume: 47
Document_Title: "176. Engels to Johann Philipp Becker. 15 June "
Page_Range: "328-330"
---

# 176. Engels to Johann Philipp Becker. 15 June 



**[p. 1848]**

Your devoted

F. Engels

I am also sending you a copy of the Manifesto of the Communist Party of 1847 (by Marx and Engels).b Old as it is, I believe it still deserves to be read.

First published in La corrispondenza di Marx Printed according to the original e Ensels con italiani. l S48-1895.Mil3.no, 1964 „ , , „ , T ,. translated from the Italian Published in English for the first time

176

London, 15 June 1885

My Dear Old Fellow,

I was delighted to get your letter; it is indeed a damned shame that we should be so far apart. However the time will doubtless come when the likes of us will again be able to travel about untroubled by too great a pressure of work or the harassments of the continental po- lice. Then I shall pack my bags and pay you a visit.

Meanwhile the world goes very gently on its way, though it may well speed up a bit shortly. Old William0 would long since have kicked the bucket had he not been informed from on high that the angels' drill still left something to be desired and, in particular, that when or- dered to goose-step they were still failing to throw their legs in the air as prescribed in the regulations. Accordingly he could not yet be re-

[^1]: ENGELS TO JOHANN PHILIPP BECKER 2 6 3

[^2]: IN GENEVA

[^3]: a See this volume, p. 291. - b written in December 1847-January - c William I





**[p. 300]**

You are quite right, radicalism in France is rapidly becoming more and more threadbare. There is only one man left who has yet to be- come so and that is Clemenceau. If he gets in he'll shed a whole mass of illusions, above all the illusion that nowadays a bourgeois republic can govern in France without thieving and causing others to thieve. It is just possible that he will then go further. But that is not neces- sary. All that is necessary is that this last sheet-anchor of the bour- geoisie should show what he is capable of— which, given his present point of view, is nothing.

Here in England the cause is progressing pretty well, even if not in the form that is customary at home. Since 1848 the English parlia- ment has unquestionably been the most revolutionary body in the world and the next elections will mark the beginning of a new epoch, even though it may not necessarily manifest itself as quickly as all that.a Workers will appear in Parliament in growing numbers, each one worse than the last. But that is necessary over here. All the scoun- drels who at the time of the International played at being bourgeois- radical philistines must appear in Parliament for what they are. Whereupon the masses will become socialist here too. Industrial over- production will do the rest.

The rumpus in the German party came as no surprise to me. 3 7 4 In a philistine country like Germany the party must also have a philis- tine 'educated' right wing3 7 3 which it will shed when the time comes. In Germany philistine socialism dates back to 1844 and was criticised in the Communist Manifesto. It is as immortal as your German philis- tine himself. So long as the Anti-Socialist Law 3 7 remains in force, I am not in favour of our provoking a split, since there is no parity of weapons. Should these gentlemen, however, themselves bring about a split by attempting to suppress the proletarian nature of the party and replace it with a crudely aesthetic form of sentimental philanthropy

[^1]: a See this volume, p. 367.



