---
Volume: 47
Document_Title: "177. Engels to Eduard Bernstein. 16 June "
Page_Range: "330-331"
---

# 177. Engels to Eduard Bernstein. 16 June 



**[p. 301]**

I am still engaged in dictating the third volume of Capital. It is a magnificent book and as a work of science puts even the first one in the shade. As soon as I have it in a ms. other people can also read, I shall be able to devote some time to sorting the papers. I shall then look out your things. 126 Until that time — round about the autumn — I shall have absolutely no chance to turn my hand to anything else. The second volume has been printed and I shall probably be able to send you a copy in a fortnight or so.

Marx's daughters have been keeping well so far. Mme Lafargue's husband is back in jail for another 4 months (for non-payment of a fine),402 while Mrs Aveling is working hard at propaganda over here, though it may be some time before there is any great success.

I have taken out another five pound money order for you, of which you have doubtless already been advised. I trust it will prove wel- come. Well then, take care of your health so that you can join in the litüe bit of fun that is bound to come pretty soon. I have been keeping well so far, though the doctors say I'm unlikely to be able to mount a horse again — hence unfit for active service, dammit!

For the rest I remain

Ever your old friend

F. Engels

177

ENGELS TO EDUARD BERNSTEIN

London, 16 June 1885

Dear Ede,

Last week I returned to you by registered mail Rodbertus' two pam- phlets from the archives, which I trust you have received.a Yesterday

[^1]: First published abridged in: F. Engels, Vergessene Briefe (Briefe Friedrich Engels' an Johann Philipp Becker), Berlin, 1920 and in full in: Marx and Engels, Works, First Rus- sian Edition, Vol. XXVII, Moscow, 1935

[^2]: IN ZURICH

[^3]: * One of these was apparently Rodbertus' Briefe und Socialpolitische Aufsaetze which Engels asked to be sent in a letter to Bernstein of 8 February 1883 (see present edition, Vol. 46, pp. 431-34).

[^4]: Printed according to the original

[^5]: Published in English in full for the first time



