---
Volume: 47
Document_Title: "178. Engels to Laura Lafargue. 16 June "
Page_Range: "331-333"
---

# 178. Engels to Laura Lafargue. 16 June 



**[p. 302]**

Today Frederick Charles inspected the heavenly host and grum- bled about the slovenliness of their goose-step.4 ' '

Your

F. E.

First published, in Russian, in Marx- Printed according to the original Engels Archives, Book I, Moscow, 1924 _ . ,. . , . _ ,. , . Published in English for the first time

178

ENGELS TO LAURA LAFARGUE

London, 16 June 1885

My dear Laura,

Well, you have the same troubles as I have myself! Visitors, on the whole agreeable in themselves, but damned in the way when you have more work to do than they. Here I have been settling down every evening for the last week to write to you, and either visitors or urgent business correspondence steps in. And even now, at half past one in the morning, I have to snatch a few moments to write to you a few lines which will cut a sorry figure alongside of your amiable and lively letters! Well it cannot be helped and you must put up with my scrimmage.

The particulars about Lawroff s dead man might be found out, I think, without much difficulty. But what am I to do in the matter?

[^1]: IN PARIS





**[p. 303]**

Tussy was not here last Sundayb — theyc went on the river some- where with a chap who has a boat and a tent and they both want as much fresh air as they can get. The British Museum is a nice place enough but not to live opposite to. So I shall not see them before next Sunday.

Kautsky has received and translated Paul's article about le coeur du coeur du monde, qui vient de cesser de battre {coeur No. 1 I mean).d

Very glad the Germans send some money for the French elections. Though I am sorry that it is the Hamburgers who have done it; be- cause this is intended as a bribe for Liebknecht, to induce him to take their side (the kleinbürgerliche Seite*) in the present storm in a — pot now going on amongst the German parliamentarians.413 I believe this storm will blow over, for the present at least, but it's a symptom. If the Socialist Law 37 was abolished and we had elbow-room, and if the 3rd book of the Kapital was finished I should not care a bit to have it out at once. As it is, I am for a temporising policy. But the split will come some day, and then we shall give the Spiessbürgerf the necessary kick. By the bye I see also from the New York Sozialist that there too money has been collected for the French elections.

Poor Paul! I am afraid he will have to pass la belle saisons in quod. Once nailed,402 I do not see how anything but an acte de grâce of old Grévy could get him out. At all events he has now had about one month of it and his elasticity must carry him over the rest.

From Petersburg I hear that the whole of the proof-sheets have ar- rived and that 18 sheets out of 33 are already translated.361 This work is almost too quick to be good.

You have no idea how comfortable John Bull feels under his minis- terial crisis.414 Not a bit of excitement. Evening papers, special edi- tions, etc., do not sell at all. The Grand Old Man, as they call Glad- stone, disappears from the political foreground quite unnoticed. The ingratitude of this world is shocking indeed. The fact is, Whigs and Radicals have found out, just before the new elections by a revolu-

[^1]: a See this volume, p. 273. - b 14 June - c Eleanor Marx-Aveling and Edward Aveling - d the heart of hearts of the world which has ceased to beat (the heart); see P. Lafargue's obituary on the death of Victor Hugo published anonymously in Die Neue Zgit, No. 8, 1885. - c petty-bourgeois side - f philistines - 8 the fine season



