---
Volume: 47
Document_Title: "179. Engels to Hermann Schlüter. 16 June "
Page_Range: "333-335"
---

# 179. Engels to Hermann Schlüter. 16 June 



**[p. 304]**

Today there is a grand review in heaven. Frederick Charles is in- specting the hosts of the Lord of hosts.41 ' I am afraid he will find very great fault with their Parademarsch^ and send word to old William0

that they are not yet fit to parade before him. If the Archangel Michael could only have been sent to do duty for a few years with the Prussian Guards!

Nim complains of rheumatism and threatened to drop beer but I told her that was rubbish, and I think she will believe me. Pumps and her children are very well. Percy has the usual rows with his par- ents. The cheque £10.- is enclosed. And herewith — sur ce—I re- main your old affectionate

F. Engels

First published in: Marx and Engels, Reproduced from the original Works, Second Russian Edition, Vol. 36, _ . , . . , . _ ,. , r , r , , ,„„. Published in hnglisn tor the hrst Moscow, 1964 . s

179

ENGELS TO HERMANN SCHLÜTER

London, 16 June 1885

Dear Mr Schlüter,

1 ) The two trials at Assizes — that of the Neue Rheinische Leitung and that of the democratic committee — of 1849 both appeared at the time as %wei politische Prozesse and were based on the newspaper re- port. If you wish to republish one or both, it could be quite effective, and I should write you a foreword to it.416

[^1]: time

[^2]: IN HOTTINGEN-ZURICH

[^3]: See this volume, p. 317. - goose-step - c Will





**[p. 305]**

time and, for another, the proceedings of the Prussians did, in fact, even then set the pattern for what the Anti-Socialist Law 37 has now made the norm. A prefacec will be available for this as well, the mo- ment printing is actually in progress; unfortunately my time does not permit me to work in advance and Qn spec. Again, I haven't got a copy of the Leipzig edition with Marx's later notes.d It is typical of the way they used then to conduct their affairs that neither Marx nor I should ever have been sent a copy!

Do you have in your archives Stieber and Wermuth, Die Communis- ten-Ver schwörungen des 19. Jahrhunderts1" (Berlin, Hayn, 1853, 2 parts) — the so-called 'black book'? It contains two addresses from the Central Committee to the Leaguef which you might print as an appendix.

3) If I understand you aright, you are thinking of publishing the series of articles from the Neue Rheinische Leitung on the Paris battle in June 1848.g 41 ' It's not a bad idea. I could arrange the relevant pas- sages for you, interspersed with a few notes to provide a context, and also whatever is needed from Marx's article in the Revue der Neuen Rheinischen Zeitung^ etc. Being the only contemporary account of the Paris proletariat's battle to take the side of the June fighters, the thing has a certain importance. Nor can the masses be reminded too often of the event. But it's a task that would take at least a week, and I cannot embark on it until the autumn.

4) Various other things from the Neue Rheinische Zeitung might fol- low, but just now I simply haven't got the time to look them out; if you could make some suggestions, we might be able to see. The same applies to other, lesser works of that period by Marx and myself. As soon as the rough ms. of the 3rd volume of Capital has been trans- posed into a legible one — in the autumn, that is — I shall have to put

[^1]: a K. Marx, Revelations Concerning the Communist Trial in Cologne. - b Ferdinand Las- salle - c F. Engels, 'On the History of the Communist League'. - d K. Marx, 'Epi- logue to Revelations Concerning the Communist Trial in Cologne'. - e Wermuth/Stieber, Die Communisten-Verschwbrungen des neunzehnten Jahrhunderts. - r K. Marx and F. Engels, 'Address of the Central Authority to the League, March 1850'; 'Address of the Central Authority to the League, June 1850'. - s 1849 in the original. - h K. Marx, The Class Struggles in France, 1848 to 1850.



