---
Volume: 47
Document_Title: "181. Engels to Hermann Schlüter. 1 July "
Page_Range: "338-339"
---

# 181. Engels to Hermann Schlüter. 1 July 



**[p. 309]**

23 June. Too late to register this today, so won't go off till tomor- row.

24 June. Berlin papers received with thanks.

First published, in Russian, in Marx- Printed according to the original Engels Archives, Vol. I (VI), Moscow, 1932 _, , , . _ ,. , . Published in English m full lor the first time

181

ENGELS TO HERMANN SCHLÜTER

IN HOTTINGEN-ZURICH

London, 1 July 1885

Dear Mr Schlüter,

Herewith the preface to the Trial.* I have made a note of the other items. It is unlikely that I can do a preface b and notes for the Communist Trialc before the beginning of September. In July I shall not have a moment to spare and in August I must relax at the seaside for a while.

I should be delighted to see the Schlesische Milliarde republished. In addition, you should reprint my biographical note on Wolff from the Neue Welt (about 1873 I think), to which I should also do an in- troduction.418

I am still waiting for Volume II of Capital. I can't really do any- thing for you where Meissner is concerned; I have no right to meddle in these matters, and the chap is meticulous.419

There are still several hundred portraits of Marx available, in both sizes.

On the whole, everything is going quite well in Germany; our working men will see to it that everything turns out all right.

Yours sincerely,

F. E.

[^1]: After which I shall also be able to tackle the June Insurrection.*17

[^2]: " F. Engels, 'Preface to the Pamphlet Karl Marx Before the Cologne Jury'. - b F. Engels, 'On the History of the Communist League'. - c K. Marx, Revelations Concerning the Communist Trial in Cologne.



