---
Volume: 47
Document_Title: "182. Engels to Laura Lafargue. 4 July "
Page_Range: "339-340"
---

# 182. Engels to Laura Lafargue. 4 July 



**[p. 310]**

Please let me have clean sheets of the Diihring208 so that I can draw up a list of printer's errors. I would also ask that in future you let me have 2 clean proofs, as is customary and, indeed, essential.

If you wish to call the things 'From the Neue Rheinische Leitung', Vols. I, II, etc., I am quite agreeable, of course.

First published in: Marx and Engels, Printed according to the original Works, First Russian Edition, Vol. XXVII, Moscow, 1935 Published in English for the first time

182

ENGELS TO LAURA LAFARGUE

IN PARIS

London, 4 July 1885

My dear Laura,

Herewith the cheque £ 15.- as desired by Paul who I hope does not suffer too much from the heat which ought to be rather trying in Ste Pélagie402 by this time.

Your adventure with the Russians vividly recalled to me the times when one was never sure that Dupont would not drop in about half past one in the morning with one or two citoyensa (something in a lightly elevated state) whom he then and there deposited for the night.

Justice announces, as you may have seen, that Reeves (a rather im- pecunious small man of Fleet St.) is going to publish a translation of Deville's extract of the Capital in 'numbers'. This is a dodge against our translation.420 If it comes out I shall have to declare that Devil- le's extract is anything but faithful or rather too faithful in the second half, giving all the conclusions and leaving out most of the premises and all the qualifications.

Fortin of Beauvais sends me the beginning of his translation of The 18th Brumaire} I have not yet had time to look at it.

comes first the sorting of the letters, etc. (and also of the books), and

[^1]: I have nearly done dictating of the 3rd volume0—what can be dic- tated. Then, after my return from the seaside (end of August)421

[^2]: a citizens - b See this volume, pp. 62-63. - c of Capital



