---
Volume: 47
Document_Title: "183. Engels to Gertrud Guillaume- Schack. About 5 July "
Page_Range: "340-341"
---

# 183. Engels to Gertrud Guillaume- Schack. About 5 July 



**[p. 311]**

then the real work with the 3rd volume. Of the 2nd volume no news. If it does not come next week I shall write. These publishers always have some business pretext why a thing should not be brought out at once.

Mohr's trial at Colognea is being reprinted in Zurich. Of the Russian translation [of] 2nd volume 18 sheets out of 33 are already done.361

Now I must go to town on urgent private affairs (cash), so no more today from

Yours ever affectionately,

F. Engels

First published in: Marx and Engels, Reproduced from the original Works, Second Russian Edition, Vol. 36, n i . i i . j - r v i- r .i_ r t . , , „ . , Published m hnehsh tor the hrst Moscow, 1964 . &

time

183

ENGELS TO GERTRUD GUILLAUME-SCHACK 184

[London, about 5 July 1885]

Dear Madam,

In reply to your inquiry, I can only say that I am not entitled to provide any information ultimately intended for publication with re- gard to Marx's and my collaboration on those political writings which we were asked to do in confidence. Nor can I accept any respon- sibility, either in my own or Marx's name, for the French programme as a whole b the very nature of which meant thatc we were at most act- ing in an advisory capacity. I can, however, tell you in confidence, that the Preamble of the programme of the Parti ouvrier, of the Roanne trend, originated with Marx.422

If the French are less inclined than the Germans to demand the li-

[^1]: IN BEUTHEN

[^2]: [Draft]

[^3]: a Karl Marx vor den Kölner Geschwornen. Prozeß gegen den Ausschuß der rheinischen Demo- kraten - b 'Programme electoral des travailleurs socialistes', L'Egalité, No. 24, 30 June 1880. - c Crossed out in the draft: 'we were only represented as advisers'.



