---
Volume: 47
Document_Title: "184. Engels to John Lincoln Mahon. Not earlier than 11 July . . . "
Page_Range: "341-342"
---

# 184. Engels to John Lincoln Mahon. Not earlier than 11 July . . . 



**[p. 312]**

mitation of female labour, this is because in French industry, more especially in Paris, female labour plays a comparatively subordinate role. Equal wages for equal work regardless of sex are, so far as I know, demanded by all socialists until such time as wages are totally abolished. That the working woman, because of her particular phys- iological functions, requires special protection against capitalist ex- ploitation seems clear to me. Those Englishwomen who championed a women's formal right to allow themselves to be as thoroughly ex- ploited by capitalists as men are, have, for the most part, a direct or indirect interest in the capitalist exploitation of both sexes." As for myself, I must confess that I am more interested in the health of the coming generation than in absolute, formal equality between the sexes during the final years of the capitalist mode of production. True equality between men and women can, or so I am convinced, become a reality only when b the exploitation of both by capital has been abolished, and private work in the home been transformed into a public industry.

First published in: Marx and Engels, Printed according to the original Works, First Russian Edition, Vol. XXVII, Moscow, 1935

184

[London, not earlier than 11 July 1885]

6d. stamps enclosed. Will feel obliged if you send the one copy to America as per address herewith:

F. A. Sorge 1 copy 'Commonweal' Hoboken, N. J. from July lst.c

U. S. America

[^1]: ENGELS TO JOHN LINCOLN MAHON 4 2 3

[^2]: IN LONDON

[^3]: [Draft]

[^4]: Published for the first time Reproduced from a copy of the draft

[^5]: a This refers to members of the National Society for Women's Suffrage. - b Crossed out in the draft: 'capital that has evolved on the basis of male predominance'. - c See this volume, p. 298.



