---
Volume: 47
Document_Title: "186. Engels to August Bebel. 24 July "
Page_Range: "344-347"
---

# 186. Engels to August Bebel. 24 July 



**[p. 315]**

Love from Nim and Jollymeier.

Yours affectionately,

F. Engels

First published in: Marx and Engels, Reproduced from the original Works, Second Russian Edition, Vol. 36, r, ,,. , , . r ,. , c , r , , , _ _ . ' rubhshed in English tor the hrst Moscow, 1964 . &

time

186

ENGELS TO AUGUST BEBEL 2 6 3

IN ZURICH

London, 24 July 1885

Dear Bebel,

I shall try and see whether this letter finds you in Zurich on the 26th, as you lead me to suppose.

So far as I can see from here, the row in the party is taking just the course we wanted. Frohme has got his comrades into as nasty a fix as possible, which cannot but please us, but luckily Liebknecht is there to save their bacon; he has notified the Society over here that he will now go to Frankfurt and put everything to rights 425 but that should this fail, Frohme will have to be thrown out. The part being played by Liebknecht in all this business is the entertaining one of the hen that has hatched out ducklings: he had thought he was rearing 'eddi- cated' socialists and lo! what emerged from the eggs but a clutch of cits and philistines! And now the worthy hen would have us believe that it's chickens after all, and not ducks, swimming about out there in bourgeois waters. Not that there's anything we can do except take him for what he is, illusions and all, but at Offenbach, if one is to be- lieve the newspaper account, he really has gone a bit too far.426 Well, little will come of the whole affair save the party's awareness that it harbours two tendencies, one of which determines the course taken by the masses, the other that taken by the majority of the self-styled



**[p. 316]**

You have put your finger unerringly on Kautsky's principal weak- ness. His youthful tendency to make hasty pronouncements has been further reinforced by the lousy methods of teaching history at univer- sities— particularly those in Austria. There, students are systemati- cally taught to produce historical papers with material which they know to be inadequate but are expected to treat as adequate, i. e. to write things they themselves must be aware are wrong but yet are supposed to regard as right. Kautsky, of course, began by doing this with consid- erable brashness. Then came literary life — writing for money, and copiously at that. So that he had absolutely no idea what is meant by really learned work. He thus burnt his fingers badly on a couple of oc- casions, first with his demographic thing and later with his articles on marriage in primitive times. Indeed in the friendliest possible manner and without mincing my words, I told him as much, nor do I spare him in this regard, mercilessly criticising all his stuff from that point of view.427 Luckily I am able to add by way of consolation that in my callow youth I did exactly the same thing, and that it was only from Marx that I learnt how one ought to work. In fact, it would already seem to have helped quite a lot.

The articles in the Berlin Leitung are undoubtedly by Mehring; I, for one, don't know of anyone else in Berlin who writes so well.428

The chap has a great deal of talent and a lucid brain, but he's a cal- culating scoundrel and a born traitor. I hope you will bear this in mind should he return to our midst, as he surely will the moment times have changed.354

Walther and his wife came to see me, bringing with them papers with news of the row in the party. They are coming again on Sunday."

I sent off Capital II to you in Dresden as soon as it arrived. I have finished dictating the manuscript of III in so far as this was possible, and in the autumn, as soon as I have had a bit of a holiday and attend- ed to all manner of other urgent work, I shall embark on the final editing. However, my mind is at rest, the ms. is now available in a leg- ible hand and can, if the worst comes to the worst, be printed as it stands, even if I were to kick the bucket in the meantime. Until this

26 July



**[p. 317]**

had been done I was constantly on tenterhooks. Not that the editing of 3 very important parts, i. e. 2/3 of the whole, won't involve a hell of a lot of work. But it will all come right in the end, and I look forward to the hullaballoo it will create when it appears. In the autumn we shall see two peaceful revolutions — the elections in France and over here.

In France, the scrutin de liste375 invented by the out-and-out Republicans and introduced by the Gambettists so as to make sure of remaining perpetually in power by means of the enforced election of lawyers and journalists, especially Parisians, will probably lead to the wholesale ejection of the Gambettists and will almost certainly bring Clemenceau and the Radicals429 to power, if not immediately, then in the near future. Of the bourgeois parties that now exist, they are the only remaining possibility. Clemenceau's panacea is departmental and communal self-government, i. e. decentralisation of the administra- tion and abolition of bureaucracy. The very fact of embarking on this would, in France, be a revolution greater than any that has happened since 1800. But government by the Radicals in France means above all the emancipation of the proletariat from the old revolutionary tradition and a direct struggle between proletariat and bourgeoisie, i.e. the establishment of an ultimate, unequivocal state of hostilities.

In this country the new suffrage 2 " will completely upset the old state of the parties. The alliance between Whigs and Tories430 to form one big Conservative party, having for its basis landed property as a single whole rather than divided into two camps as hitherto, and comprising all the conservative elements of the bourgeoisie — banks, high finance, trade and some of the industries; alongside this, on the other hand, the radical bourgeoisie, i. e. the bulk of large-scale indus- try, the petty bourgeoisie and the proletariat as a tail for the time be- ing, awakening once more to political life — that is a revolutionary starting-point such as England has not seen since 1689.431

And on top of all that, old William,3 now on his last legs. It prom- ises great things. You'll see.

Your

F. E.

[^1]: First published, in Russian, in Marx- Engels Archives, Vol. I (VI), Moscow, 1932

[^2]: Printed according to the original

[^3]: Published in English in full for the first time

[^4]: a William I



