---
Volume: 47
Document_Title: "189. Engels to Laura Lafargue. 8 August "
Page_Range: "348-350"
---

# 189. Engels to Laura Lafargue. 8 August 

If you consider that it will be better not to refer to Rodbertus at all, then I would propose that you leave out the whole of the second part of the preface. As an exposition of the author'sa place in the history of economical science, it is far too incomplete, unless justified by the spe- cial circumstances under which it was written, viz. the attacks of the Rodbertus clique. This clique is extremely influential in Germany, makes a deal of noise, and will no doubt soon also be heard of in Rus- sia. It is such a very cheap and convenient way of settling the whole question, to say that our author merely copied Rodbertus,225 that it is sure to be repeated everywhere where our author is read and dis- cussed. But of all these matters you are the best judge, and so I leave the matter entirely in your own hands, the more so as I have not the remotest idea what your censorship would allow to pass and what not.

There are some favourable rumours spread here about our mutual friend302; can you give me any news?

Yours faithfully,

P.W. Rosher 3 6 3

First published, in Russian, in Minuvshiye Reproduced from the original eody, No. 2, St Petersburg, 1908 _ , ,. , , . „ ,. . . r ,, r , s J' &' Published in English in full for the

189

ENGELS TO LAURA LAFARGUE

London, 8 August 1885

My dear Laura,

To my astonishment I find that in all copiesb I can lay my hands on, the index has been omitted in the binding. I have at once written to Meissner for explanations and shall send you a copy as soon as received.

[^1]: first time

[^2]: IN PARIS

[^3]: Marx's - b of the second volume of Capital



Your letter reminds me that indeed Deville's publisher can stop the translation for one year after publication of the original. 435 But that year has passed, as it is now two years since I had the manuscript at Eastbourne,a after which time it was brought out almost immediate- ly. The man who is to bring out the translation is William Reeves, 185 Fleet St., but we cannot either procure a copy or hear anything more about it.

Tussy and Edward were to leave yesterday for Deal, but I have not yet had a note from them with their address. They intend staying from 10-14 days. The Kautskys have gone to Eastbourne. The mother Kautsky is a singularly unaffected woman for a German au- thoress. I have read one of her novels,b it is not at all bad. However I advised her to study Balzac and she has taken a few volumes, but will her French be up to that sort of reading?

The scrutin de liste3 7 5 is no doubt at first against our people, but that does not matter so long as our people are not more numerous. If they succeed in making a decent show in Paris and some great pro- vincial centres, there will be a necessity for the Radicals next time to make a combined list with them in some places, and then some may get in; besides by that time, they will be a good deal stronger, and a good many of the outside sects, Possibilists,237 etc., will be broken up. If this next electionc brings Clemenceau into office, I shall be quite satisfied. He is the last man, as far as I can see, that the bour- geoisie has to put forward. After him le déluge. 4 3 6 And at the same time the elections here with an entirely new electorate 2 " which must be the beginning of the end; and old Williamd on his last legs (he fell upstairs again yesterday at Gastein) —we shall see what we shall see.

After the elections here — which will, I hope, carry all the Potters, Cremers and other faux frèrese into Parliament — the basis for a so-

[^1]: a See this volume, p. 46. - b M. Kautsky, Stefan vom Grillenhof. - c See this volume, p. 330. - d William I - e false brothers



