---
Volume: 47
Document_Title: "193. Engels to Karl Kautsky. 6 September "
Page_Range: "352-353"
---

# 193. Engels to Karl Kautsky. 6 September 



**[p. 323]**

skys and Avelings were also away so there was no one there capable of sending on the large quantity of incoming printed matter in some semblance of order. It was not until Monday that Mrs Aveling ar- rived at my house and posted me the sheets. These went back to you corrected yesterday, Wednesday. A lot of words had been inserted that do not appear in the original and they completely distort the sense. And on sheet 17 in particular the pages are in a complete mud- dle: 257, 262, 263, 258, 259, 264, etc., which is totally inadmissible in this, the most important chapter of the book, and that is why I have taken the precaution of writing to you.

I shall be staying here for another fortnight.421 After Saturday, 3 September everything had best be sent to London again.— We' are literally stifling here during the present spell of fine weather, for the lack of rain has led to a serious water shortage on this pretty little is- land. I neither see nor hear anything of the party, which, if the latest storm in the parliamentary tea cup 374 is anything to go by, is no calamity. Kindest regards to Ede.

Yours,

F.E.

193

ENGELS TO KARL KAUTSKY

[Jersey,] 6 September 1885

Dear Kautsky,

[^1]: First published in: Marx and Engels, Printed according to the original Works, First Russian Edition. Vol. XXVII, _ , ,. , , . „ ,. , „ , _ v, IQ^S rubhsned in Lnglish tor the tirst ' time

[^2]: IN LONDON

[^3]: We leave herea on Thursday b and therefore hope to see you both at our house on Sunday as usual. The Volks-^eitung and • c received

[^4]: a See this volume, p. 325.- b 10 September-' This may refer to one of Louis Viereck's articles (Viereck = square in German).



