---
Volume: 47
Document_Title: "194. Engels to Hermann Schlüter. 9 September "
Page_Range: "353-354"
---

# 194. Engels to Hermann Schlüter. 9 September 



**[p. 324]**

The latter, however, has better things to do. Not content with having created a French republic in 1870, 92 he must now do his utmost to create a Spanish one. 4 4 1 I hope he succeeds. What jackasses these great men are!

Kindest regards to your wife and yourself from all of us.

Your

F.E.

First published, in Russian, in Marx- Printed according to the original Engels Archives, Vol. I (VI), Moscow, 1932 „ , , - , , . x, ,• , r ru bushed in English tor the first time

194

ENGELS TO HERMANN SCHLÜTER 4 3 9

IN HOTTINGEN-ZURICH

Jersey, 9 September 1885

Final Duhring proof received yesterday.2 °8 I shall be going home tomorrow421 and hence can do nothing with it here, especially as sheet 18 is in London, still to be corrected. The re-direction to this address of stuff sent to London has been handled very badly this year, hence the delay. My first task will be to see to these correc- tions as well as the preface.a The rest has been taken note of and will follow. Please send the Wolff biography from the Neue Welt to London straight away; it, too, will then be promptly dealt with. 4 1 8 Kindest regards.

Yours,

F. Engels

[^1]: First published in: Marx and Engels, Printed according to the original Works, First Russian Edition, Vol. XXVII, „ , , . , , . „ , - , , , „ Moscow, 1935 Published in English for the first time

[^2]: a F. Engels, 'On the History of the Prussian Peasants. Introduction to Wilhelm Wolffs Pamphlet The Silesian Milliard'.



