---
Volume: 47
Document_Title: "196. Engels to Laura Lafargue. 22 September "
Page_Range: "354-356"
---

# 196. Engels to Laura Lafargue. 22 September 



**[p. 195]**

ENGELS TO KARL KAUTSKY

IN LONDON

[Jersey,] Thursday [10 September 1885]

Dear Kautsky,

We are still here thanks to a violent storm and while it lasts I can- not be responsible for allowing the children to sail. Nor is it likely that we shall be able to leave tomorrow. 42 ' So that puts paid to the pros- pect of seeing you both again at my home on Sunday.a Kindest regards to your wife.

Your

F.E.

First published, in Russian, in Marx- Printed according to the original Engels Archives, Vol. I (VI), Moscow, 1932 „ , . . „ ,. , . , ,. Published in English tor the iirst time

196

ENGELS TO LAURA LAFARGUE

London, 22 September 1885

My dear Laura,

Yesterday when I was going to write to you, people came in and made one miss the post. So I can only today send you the cheque £ 10. - which is all I can spare until I get some more money in which I hope won't be long. I have not heard from Schorlemmer but sup-

[^1]: IN PARIS

[^2]: 13 September; see also this volume, p. 323.





**[p. 326]**

While you had a fine row in Paris last Sunday,4 4 2 Tussy and Aveling had one here in the East End, I will forward you The Daily News which has the best report and a leading article.443 They were here this morning, my opinion is that unless they can. get the Radi- cals 4 ' 5 who are very eager, apparently, on their side, to take the mat- ter up, le jeu ne vaut pas la chandelle.* The Socialists are nowhere, the Radicals are a power. If the question can be made one for which a dozen Radicals will have themselves arrested, the government will give way — if only in view of the elections.b If only Socialists are the victims, they will go to prison without any effect.

I like the systematic and theoretically correct way in which the French go about working the scrutin de liste.3 7 5 Each party makes a complete list of its own. The consequence will be that everywhere the relatively strongest party will get all their own men in, the rest none. But at the same time each party will count itself and know its strength. And at the next elections, the necessary result will come out: that the parties nearest to each other will combine for a joint list ac- cording to their relative strength — unless indeed this is not already done now on the eve of the voting. Scrutin de liste compels Radicals429 and Socialists to have a joint list, as it will gradually compel Opportunists and Monarchists to join in a common list, at least in sundry departments. But it is characteristic of the génie françaisc

that this can only come out as the result of actual experience. It is this ideological, absolute character which gives to French political history its classical form, as compared to the muddled politics of other na- tions.

I am overwhelmed with proof-sheets, revisions, prefaces to write, etc., etc., so that I have not had the time yet to look seriously at your translation of the Manifest. 4 4 4 As soon as the most urgent business is off, end of this week I hope, I shall go at it and then we can discuss the matter here. I am glad you are at last taking the bushel off your light and helping us to get some good things translated into French, our own native Frenchmen being apparently unable to understand Ger-

[^1]: a The game is not worth the candle. - b See this volume, p. 361. - c French mind



