---
Volume: 47
Document_Title: "197. Engels to Hermann Schlüter. 23 September "
Page_Range: "356-358"
---

# 197. Engels to Hermann Schlüter. 23 September 



**[p. 327]**

Now the post-time is up and so good-bye until we see you here when I hope you will bring the rest of your translation.

Nim sends her love.

Yours affectionately,

F. Engels

First published in: Marx and Engels, Reproduced from the original Works, Second Russian Edition, Vol. 36, « , , . , , • ^ •• i r- , r- Moscow 1964 Published in English for the first ' time

197

ENGELS TO HERMANN SCHLÜTER

IN HOTTINGEN-ZURICH

London, 23 September 1885

Dear Mr Schlüter,

I. You will have received all the proofs of the Diihring.20S They were sent off from here on the 13 th and 14th. If anything is mis- sing kindly let me know; the type-setting was such that there could be absolutely no question of its being printed unless corrected by me.

The last clean proof to arrive here was No. 14. I await the remaind- er for the list of printing errors. Enclosed a provisional list which corrects a great deal of nonsense, much of which I myself had doubt- less allowed to stand. However I shall go through the whole thing once again.

Herewith also and at long last the preface2 which caused me much toil and sweat. In the first place there were numerous interruptions. But then again my knowledge of natural science was very rusty and there was much I had to look up.

[^1]: a Engels' preface to the second edition of Anti-Dühring.





**[p. 328]**

III. 'Preface',15 etc., to the Communist Trial" will follow this week provided there are no interruptions.

IV. Immediately after that I shall put Lupus'd biography to rights for the Schlesische Milliarde as well as anything else appertaining to it. 4 ' 8 This will follow in a few days.

Please send me clean proofs of everything as well as proofs of my prefaces, etc. Also 12 copies of each of the above.

I am also seeing to Marx's photograph. Then I shall get on with re-writing the Peasant War2 ' 3 as soon as I have got the revision of the French 4 4 4 and English translations6 off my back.

Now that I am back home421 the correction of proofs will be attend- ed to speedily and punctually.

I have had a good few bones to pick with Mr Meissner about the get-up of the 2nd volume of Capital. In the preface and text the type is all jumbled up, although I had already gone a long way towards sorting this out in the proofs, so far as it was possible to do so. No ex- cuse for that. Moreover, there are 500 copies with no index at all. I enclose one copy for the archives. 144

With best wishes,

Yours,

F. Engels

[^1]: D f is incorrigible.8 His appeal to his papa is touching440; the old man will take a stick to him.

[^2]: First published in: Marx and Engels, Printed according to the original Works, First Russian Edition, Vol. XXVII, „ , , . , , . „ , . , r , ,- Moscow, 1935 Published in English for the first time

[^3]: a Karl Marx vor den Kölner Geschwornen - b F. Engels, 'On the History of the Com- munist League'. - c K. Marx, Revelations Concerning the Communist Trial in Cologne. - d Wilhelm Wolffs - ' of the first volume of Capital (see also Note 56) - f Louis Viereck (Viereck = square in German) - g See this volume, pp. 323-24.



