---
Volume: 47
Document_Title: "198. Engels to Eduard Bernstein. 8 October "
Page_Range: "358-360"
---

# 198. Engels to Eduard Bernstein. 8 October 



**[p. 198]**

ENGELS TO EDUARD BERNSTEIN

IN ZURICH

London, 8 October 1885

Dear Ede,

I enclose herewith the introductiona to the Revelations Concerning the Trial in Cologne.b If you want to print it initially as a feuilleton in the Sozialdemokrat, I should have no objection. Only you must come to some arrangement with Schlüter, who is probably awaiting it anx- iously. Tell him he will be getting the notes and the proofs of Marx's text tomorrow, as also instructions about what to print of the enclo- sures c from Stieber.d

Karl Kautsky will be sending you a few Kölnische ^eitungs contain- ing the first rational report on events in Bulgaria.445 The correspon- dent is in Belgrade and is well-informed, and since as yet Bismarck's interests have not provoked a hushing-up order, the report can, in fact, be regarded as an honest one. So the Russians have fallen into their own trap. They forgot that, as a lieutenant in the Prussian Guards, Alexander Battenberg is rightly relying on his 'comrade' William.e

You worry too much about someone 'succeeding' you on the Sozialdemokrat. But the best of it is that they couldn't really put anyone in your place; any attempt on the part of those gentry to put one of their milksops would fail because 1 ) no one ofthat ilk would voluntar- ily go into exile, 2) the party would soon put a stop to it, nor would they continue to support such a paper. If you go, the Sozialdemokrat goes with you, and this coincidence is all to the good. Augustf is likewise of the opinion that the Zurich establishments8 should in all circum- stances remain in our hands, as indeed they probably will, since they would only be a burden to others. It is up to you, I believe, to ensure that we retain the press and bookshop, in which case the matter of the

[^1]: a F. Engels, 'On the History of the Communist League'. - b K. Marx, Revelations Concerning the Communist Trial in Cologne. - c K. Marx and F. Engels, 'Address of the Central Authority to the League, March 1850' and 'Address of the Central Authority to the League, June 1850'. - d Wermuth/Stieber, Die Communisten-Ver schworungen des neunzehnten Jahrhunderts. - c William I - f Bebel - g the editorial board, bookshop and the press of the newspaper Der Sozialdemokrat





**[p. 330]**

The acquittal in Chemnitz is splendid.446 So it was too much of a good thing even for a Saxon judiciary.

The French elections mark a great advance. As I had previously said," the scrutin de liste315 has eliminated the Opportunists. 447 But that it would eliminate them so thoroughly, that the upper, middle and part of the lower middle classes would take refuge with the Mon- archists, and do so en masse, was something that could not have been foreseen — not, at any rate, outside France. The Opportunists played at being a 'Directory' and such was their corruption that it far out- stripped even that of the Second Empire. But they didn't guarantee your bourgeois the peace and quiet that would be guaranteed him by a monarchy. The relapse into monarchism, here dubbed Orleanism, was all the more natural in that the entire Centre gaucheb (Ribot, Jour- nal des Débats, etc.) are simply Orleanists disguised as Republicans; so that people prefer genuine Orleanists, and are even content, if there is no other alternative, with Bonapartists and Legitimists. The second ballots may already witness a setback, the bourgeois having taken fright at his own electoral victory, and hence a swing to radical- ism. If not there will soon be a set-to.448

This much, at any rate, has been won— the ousting of the parties of the Centre, Monarchists versus Radicals, the few Centre Party depu- ties compelled to choose between joining one or the other. The situa- tion is thus a revolutionary one. No one in France seriously believes in the monarchy as such, if only because of the vast number of Pretend- ers. But there is some possibility of the Orleanists attempting a coup, in which case there would be a show-down. At all events, this is how the question is presented: either la république en danger,c or the set- ting up of a 'radical' republic. There would seem to be every proba- bility that the latter will prevail. But then the Radicals429 will not only have to abide by their promisesa and replace Napoleon's central- ised administration with the kind of self-government exercised by the departments and communes between 1792 and 1798; they will also have to rely on the support of the Socialists. We could wish for no more favourable situation. France remains faithful to her own logico- dialectical course of development. Contradictions are never sup-

[^1]: a Cf. this volume, p. 317. - b left centre - c Here: endanger the Republic.



