---
Volume: 47
Document_Title: "199. Engels to Hermann Schlüter. 9 October "
Page_Range: "360-362"
---

# 199. Engels to Hermann Schlüter. 9 October 



**[p. 331]**

That the Socialists have so few votes (a source of considerable chagrin to Lafargue) is perfectly natural. 449 The French working man does not chuck away his ballot paper. And since in France there are still living parties and not, as in Germany, only dead or dying ones, it is far from politic to vote for a Socialist who has no prospects, if by so doing one puts a Radical in the minority and an Opportunist in the majority. The fact is that there are considerable drawbacks to the practice of nominating candidates as a measure of strength in France, as there may be in some parts of Germany as soon as life re- turns to the political scene there. When once the course of things in France enables the Socialists to become a political opposition, i. e. when Clemenceau finally comes to the helm, we shall instantly gain millions of votes. But one shouldn't try and insist upon the French developing along German lines, although that is what many of our best men in Germany are doing.

A final verdict will not, of course, be possible until the second ballot is over.

Your

F.E.

199

ENGELS TO HERMANN SCHLÜTER

London, 9 October 1885

Dear Mr Schlüter,

Yesterday I sent the introductiona to the Cologne Trialb to Ede in case he wished to print it beforehand in the Sozialdemokrat, in which

[^1]: First published, in Russian, in Marx- Printed according to the original Engels Archives, Book I, Moscow, 1924 ,. . Published in English lor the first time

[^2]: IN HOTTINGEN-ZURICH

[^3]: a F. Engels, 'On the History of the Communist League'. - b K. Marx, Revelations Con- cerning the Communist Trial in Cologne.





**[p. 332]**

The thing has got badly behindhand — through no fault of my own. La bravoure, c'est dans le ventre,d as Marshal Davout once said to his host, Marx's father-in-law,e when the latter congratulated him on his appetite. L'esprit, c'est dans le ventre1 is what I say, after discover- ing to what depths of stupidity and incapacity one can be reduced by catarrh of the stomach. To sweat away for five hours at one page and then furiously consign what one has written to the flames — WELL, it's all over now, not to return for a very long time, or so I hope.

Tomorrow I shall tackle the introduction to the Schlesische Mil- liarde.''18

As regards the June battle, however, there's nothing doing yet. I have become convinced that the things from the Neue Rheinische Lei- tung can't be printed on their own without a real history of events. 4 ' 7 But this would call for specialised studies which can't be done until I have sorted out the piles of Marx's pamphlets, because only then shall I know what stuff I have yet to procure for the pur- pose. And only then could I embark on my studies. So for the time being this will have to be shelved.

With kindest regards,

Yours,

F. Engels

[^1]: First published in: Marx and Engels, Printed according to the original Works, First Russian Edition, Vol. XXVII, „ , , . , , . „ ,. , r , ,- Moscow, 1935 Published in English for the first time

[^2]: a See this volume, p. 329. - b K. Marx and F. Engels, 'Address of the Central Authority to the League, March 1850'; 'Address of the Central Authority to the League, June 1850'. - c 'Proposal from the London District of the Communist League to the Central Authority in Cologne'. - d Bravery begins in the stomach. - e Ludwig von Westphalen - r Thinking begins in the stomach.



