---
Volume: 47
Document_Title: "201. Engels to Karl Kautsky. 14 October "
Page_Range: "363-366"
---

# 201. Engels to Karl Kautsky. 14 October 



**[p. 334]**

Well here's to your health and success, after the Manifest anything you may tackle will appear child's play!

Dinner bell — so good-bye,

Yours ever,

F.E.

First published in: Marx and Engels, Reproduced from the original Works, Second Russian Edition, Vol. 36, „ , , - , , • ^ >• . r- < r- , , ,„„. Published in English tor the hrst Moscow, 1964 . &

time

201

ENGELS TO KARL KAUTSKY

IN LONDON

[London, 14 October 1885]

The latest act is called: * 'The Factory and Workshops Act, 1878, 41. Victoria, Chapter 16'* — and is obtainable from

* P. S. King & Son Canada Building King St., Westminster. * Published with commentary in: * 'The Factory & Workshops Act 1878'—by Alex Redgrave, Her Majesty's Inspector of Factories. 2nd ed., London, Shaw & Sons, Fet- ter Lane and Crane Court, Law Printers and Publishers. * 1879. 238 pages small octavo. 5 shillings.

The act itself costs a shilling at most.

Your

F.E.

[^1]: First published in Aus der Frühzeit des Printed according to the original Marxismus. Engels Briefwechsel mit Kaut- _, , ,. , , . ^ , . , , . , sky Pras 1935 Published in English for the first J' ë ' time



Das Kapital.

Kritik der politischen Oekonomie.

Von

K a r l M a r x .

Zweiter Band.

Buch II: Der Cirkulationsprocess des Kapitals.

< W . 6 ? f xr^. fr,. *uo«rrutf> 9 ^ * . C^&^t^

[^1]: Herausgegeben von Friedrich Engels,

[^2]: halten. Das Recht der Uebersetzunj ist vorbehalten

[^3]: Hamburg Verlag von Otto Meissner.

[^4]: 1885.

[^5]: >/>+>.<*—

[^6]: Title page of the first edition of Marx's Capital, Volume II, with Engels'

[^7]: dedication to Pyotr Lavrov





