---
Volume: 47
Document_Title: "203. Engels to Salo Faerber. 22 October "
Page_Range: "366-369"
---

# 203. Engels to Salo Faerber. 22 October 



**[p. 202]**

ENGELS TO PYOTR LAVROV 4 5 1

IN PARIS

[London,] 20 October 1885

My dear Lavrov,

Greatly to my annoyance I am unable to help you with sources for a history of Chartism. 452 All my papers, books, journals, etc., which date back to that period went astray during the upheavals of 1848-49. The chief source, The Northern Star, is nowhere to be found, even in the north of England (Harney, its former editor-in-chief, is seeking in vain to get hold of a set). What the bourgeois have written on the sub- ject is for the most part false; nor have I ever concerned myself with such literature. It's unfortunate, for if Harney doesn't write his memoirs, the history of the first great workers' party will be lost for ever. 4 5 3

Yours ever and with regret,

F.E.

203

ENGELS TO SALO FAERBER

London, 22 October 1885

Dear Sir,

[^1]: First published in: Marx and Engels, Printed according to the original Works, First Russian Edition, Vol. XXVII, Moscow, 1935 Translated from the French

[^2]: Published in English for the first time

[^3]: IN BRESLAU

[^4]: I have received your esteemed note of the 15th,454 though the seal was badly damaged; this I enclose herewith to the greater glory of Mr Stephan. 455





**[p. 338]**

So whether the Russians are to get any more money depends pri- marily on Bismarck and, if he consents, the financial philistines of Germany will be only too delighted to fall into the trap set for them. The fact that they will lose their money in the process concerns me not at all; on the contrary, it will serve them right, nor will the so- called German national capital suffer much in the process, since the portion we are interested in consists of ironworks, factories and other instruments of production, which can hardly be loaned to the Rus- sians. The so-called money capital that is being lent is to a great ex- tent bogus capital, lines of credit, and this is of little consequence. What would be of far greater consequence would be to make it diffi- cult, if not impossible, for the Russians to obtain credit, but on this score your typical German punter has more faith in Bismarck than in us. At the moment it's quite impossible for me to spend time on an at- tempt to reduce the question of Russian state credits to the size it de- serves; a work ofthat kind, however timely and worthwhile, would ne- vertheless call for a study of Russian conditions from Russian sources. As regards the actual financial side, a table showing the Russian



**[p. 339]**

national debt for the past few years together with lists of stock market prices would suffice, but in the case of economic conditions within the country itself a great deal of study would be necessary if one was to form an accurate opinion. One of the main works is a survey carried out by the Russian War Ministry under the title Boenno- cmamucmimec Kiü cöopnu Kb IV. Poccin,* St Petersburg, 1871.

Also: A. CKpe OHLj Kift, Kpecmb RHCKoe dbiio eh u,apcmeoeauie MMnepamopa Ajie Kctmdpa II,b Bonn, 1862-68, 4 volumes, about 5,000 pages in all.

Also the cöop HHKH CTa THCTH^ec KHXi. CBT>,zi,T>Hiäc of the individual gouvernements,d in particular Moscow and Tver, and ÜHCOHI>, Cpaeuumenb Ha R cmamucmu Ka Pocciu u sanadm-eeponeüc Kuxb eocydapcmeb,e St Pe- tersburg, 1880, several volumes.

The Russian budgets aren't worth the paper they are written on. Sheer lies and invention, more so even than those presented in Prussia prior to 1848.

As to an evaluation of the armies now reorganised along Prussian lines, this is a sheer impossibility. We do know, however, that Austria and, to an even greater extent, Russia, lack the large educated class which alone can supply an adequate number of officers suitable for employment in armies of this size, and that, according to the account of their own General Kuropatkin,r the Russians' conduct of opera- tions in 1878 in Turkey was inferior to that of the Prussians in 1806.456

I am, Sir,

Your obedient servant,

F. Engels

[^1]: Liebknecht's letter returned herewith.457

[^2]: First published in: Marx and Engels, Printed according to the original Works, First Russian Edition, Vol. XXVII, _. , ,. , , . _ ,. , . , _ , . inoc Published in English lor the hrst Moscow, 19.55 B

[^3]: time ° Military Statistical Miscellany IV. Russia - b A. Skrebitsky, Peasants' Question dur- ing the Reign of Emperor Alexander II.-' statistical miscellanies -d gubernias-'' Yanson, Russia and West European States: Comparative Statistics. - ' [Kuropatkin] A. Kypona TKHHb, Jloena, Ilneena u llleüuoeo. [Mu ucmopiu pycc Ko-mypeu/coü eoünu 1877—1878 il.) (Lovech, Pleven and Sheinovo. (From the History of the Russo-Turkish War of 1877-78)); idem, /Jbùcmein ompndoeb leuepajia Cxoôeneea 6b pycc Ko-mypeufiym eoituy 1877—1878 lodoeb. Jloeua u lljieena (Actions of General Skobelev's Detachments during the Russo-Turkish War of 1877-78. Lovech and Pleven).



