---
Volume: 47
Document_Title: "205. Engels to Laura Lafargue. 7 November "
Page_Range: "373-375"
---

# 205. Engels to Laura Lafargue. 7 November 



**[p. 344]**

fact is that the English and the French have long since forgotten their pre-revolutionary state of virginity, whereas we Germans, not having had a revolution of our own, are still trailing around with this some- times very awkward encumbrance. Both conditions have their ad- vantages and disadvantages; but it would be most unjust to use the same one-sided standard in assessing the varying attitudes of the wor- kers in those three countries.

Kautsky has given me Adler's very superficial booka which is largely based on Stieber. b I shall help him write the review.0

Won't you come over here some time? Should business take you to the Rhine, you could be here in no time.

Your

F.E.

First published, in Russian, in Marx- Printed according to the original Engels Archives, Vol. I (VI), Moscow, 1932 _ , ,. , , . „ ,. , . r „ „ , Published in English in full for the first time

205

ENGELS TO LAURA LAFARGUE

London, 7 November 1885 My dear Laura,

I have no objection whatever to write a short introduction to the Manifesto. But in order to enable me to do so, I ought to know what passages in the old preface d would appear objectionable to the deli- cate ears of your Parisian public. I confess I cannot find them out, un- less it is one about the Commune which was put in by Mohr himself and on which he particularly insisted. 464 Although in my opinion our Paris friends give way by far too much to these susceptibilities, which ought to be put down as much as possible, I am quite willing

[^1]: IN PARIS

[^2]: a G. Adler, Die Geschichte der ersten sozialpolitischen Arbeiterbewegung in Deutschland - b Wermuth/Stieber, Die Communisten-Verschwörungen des neunzehnten Jahrhunderts. - c See this volume, p. 362. - d K. Marx and F. Engels, 'Preface to the 1872 German Edition of the Manifesto of the Communist Party.



'Mr Broadhouse' has actually had the impudence of having Aveling asked — through Reeves, the publisher — whether I would not collaborate with him in the translation of the Capital'.b I suppose you have received the last No. of the Commonweal? If you will let me know what Nos. you are short of, I'll see that you get them.

Nim is as jolly as ever, we have just had a bottle of Pilsener to- gether. She was last night at the Lyceum with Pumps to see 'Olivia',465 says it is a regular Rührstück,c Irving no great shakes, Ellen Terry very good.

Lavigne says he sent his translation of the 18 Brumaire to Paul but nothing came of it, what was the reason? I have the thing here, but as I am under an engagement with Fortin,d dare not look at it, other- wise I might be accused of having made undue use of it, so I cannot form a judgment as to its merits. 4 6 6

Next week the grand political spree begins. On the 10th the French Chambers, on the 19th or thereabouts the German Reichstag, and a week later the elections here.e Whatever they may turn out in the shape of a Parliament,, two things are certain: the Irish will command the whole by their 80-90 votes, and the Great Liberal Party will come, at last, to an end by the separation of the Whigs from the Radi- cals and the preparation if not the completion, of the Union between Whigs and Tories. 4 ' 5

Kind regards to Paul (11,500 votes)467 which I hope have not quite crushed him. He'll have better luck next year.

Yours affectionately,

F. Engels

[^1]: First published in: Marx and Engels,

[^2]: Works, Second Russian Edition, Vol. 36, Moscow, 1964

[^3]: Reproduced from the original

[^4]: Published in English for the first time

[^5]: a for the sake of peace - b See this volume, p. 313. - c melodrama -d See this volume, pp. 358-59. - e Ibid., p. 361.



