---
Volume: 47
Document_Title: "206. Engels to Hermann Schlüter. 11 November "
Page_Range: "375-376"
---

# 206. Engels to Hermann Schlüter. 11 November 



**[p. 206]**

ENGELS TO HERMANN SCHLÜTER

IN HOTTINGEN-ZURICH

London, 11 November 1885

Dear Mr Schlüter,

Have received clean sheets oîDùhring up to 20 inch 208; ending and prefaces are still to come. As soon as these arrive you will be sent the list of printing errors.

The introduction to the Schlesische Milliarde418 is in hand and would have been finished long ago but for a series of interruptions of all kinds. It has been lying heavily on my conscience, so you may be sure that it will not be held up for a moment longer than is absolutely necessary.

You will have received the corrected proofs of the Communist League.a

You might be good enough to tell Ede that I had already received via Kautsky the book by a sparrow calling itself'Adler',b and had de- liberately not mentioned it because it, too, draws on Stieber0 as the fi- nal authority. The passage about Buttermilch-Born was worded in that way precisely because the book left me in no doubt that Born had surreptitiously poured out some buttermilkd for Adler but had refused (see preface) to allow his name to appear. 4 6 8 Hence he had to be given a kick or two in the pants.

Dietz has written to Kautsky saying he wants to take over publica- tion of my Origin' now and asking whether I would have any objec- tion. I have told him I have no objection provided he comes to an agreement with you and Schabelitz. So you should act in whatever way you think best. All being well, Dietz promises to place the work in the bookshops, which would of course be most acceptable to us, but then, too, Zurichf is also entitled to a say now that it has been circulating for

[^1]: a F. Engels, 'On the History of the Communist League'. - b Adler = eagle in Ger- man; this refers to G. Adler, Die Geschichte der ersten sozialpolitischen Arbeiterbewegung in Deutschland; see also this volume, p. 344. - c Wermuth/Stieber, Die Communisten-

[^2]: Ver schwörungen des neunzehnten Jahrhunderts. - d Born's real name was Butter- milch = buttermilk in German, - e The Origin of the Family, Private Property and the State - The editorial board and the press of Der Sozialdemokrat were located in Zurich, as well as the bookshop (Volksbuchhandlung).



