---
Volume: 47
Document_Title: "207. Engels to Nikolai Danielson. 13 November "
Page_Range: "376-379"
---

# 207. Engels to Nikolai Danielson. 13 November 



**[p. 347]**

I have found another whole mass of printing errors in the Diihring — all of which I myself had allowed to stand. I have become so accustomed to correcting two proofs — one for the meaning, the other for individual errors—that when there isn't an opportunity of doing so I allow utter nonsense to stand. Hence most of them were in the first 11 sheets which were, moreover, corrected in difficult circum- stances.

Kindest regards.

Yours,

F.E.

First published in: Marx and Engels, Printed according to the original Works, First Russian Edition, Vol. XXVII, D , ,. , , • r ,. , f ., r , ' ' Published in English tor the hrst Moscow, 1935 . 6

207

ENGELS TO NIKOLAI DANIELSON

London, 13 November 1885

Dear Sir,

I received your two letters 6/18 and 9/21 August while I was in Jer- sey2 and immediately sent you the letter you desired for the Cbeep Huü encm HUKb. 438 Since then I have been prevented by press of work from replying more fully to these letters as well as that of the 25 August/5 September.

[^1]: IN ST PETERSBURG

[^2]: a See this volume, p. 322.





**[p. 348]**

Of that 3rd volume, I have completed the first transcript from the original into a legible manuscript. Three-fourths of it are almost fit for publication as they are; but the last fourth, or perhaps third, will require a great deal of work: the first section (relation of Mehrwertsrate to Profitrate1) and then the subsequent sections on credit and partly also on Grundrente^; besides certain portions of almost all the other sec- tions. For the last two months I have been compelled to attend to a good deal of other work which had been neglected by my exclusive attention to the 2nd and 3rd volumes.4 This will continue for some time yet, and then, maybe, the revision of the English translation of Volume I 56 which is nearly completed, will occupy me for a month longer, but then I shall start with the 3rd volume and carry it out to the end. Maybe it will be published in 2 sections, as it will contain about 1,000 pages.

I thank you very much for your extracts from the author's letters from 1879 to 1881. 4 7 0 I could not read them without a sorrowful

[^1]: a oi Capital - b vulgar economists - c state socialism - d the irony of world history - e of Capital - ' rate of surplus value to rate of profit - g ground rent (or rent of land)





**[p. 349]**

smile. Alas, we are so used to these excuses for the non-completion of the work! Whenever the state of his health made it impossible for him to go on with it, this impossibility preyed heavily upon his mind, and he was only too glad if he could only find out some theoretical excuse why the work should not then be completed. All these arguments he has at the time made use of vis-à-vis de moi"; they seemed to ease his conscience.

After completing the 3rd volume and selecting from the other ms. the portions fit for publication, I shall very likely try to collect such of the author's correspondence as is scientifically important, and there his letters to you rank amongst the first. When that time comes, I shall therefore avail myself of your kind offer of placing at my dis- posal copies of these letters.

I am often in the case of forwarding to you pamphlets, etc.— republications of the author's and my own writings, etc., but do not know whether it would be safe to send them direct to you. I should be much obliged if you would tell me what to do.

I hope our mutual friend's15 health is improving, notwithstanding the bad prognosis of his doctors.362 Any news with regard to him will always be welcome.

That crisis of which the author speaks in his letter, was indeed an exceptional one. 4 7 ' The fact is it continues still, all Europe and Amer- ica suffer under it to this day. The absence of the financial crash is one cause of it. But the principal cause is undoubtedly the totally changed state of the Weltmarkt.c Since 1870, Germany and espe- cially America have become England's rivals in modern industry, while most other European countries have so far developed their own manufactures as to cease to be dependent on England. The conse- quence has been the spreading of the process of overproduction over a far larger area than when it was mainly confined to England, and has taken — up to now—a chronic instead of an acute character. By thus delaying the thunderstorm which formerly cleared the atmos- phere every ten years, this continued chronic depression must pre- pare a crash of a violence and extent such as we have never known before. And the more so as the agricultural crisis of which the author speaks, has also continued up to now, has been extended to almost all

[^1]: a myself - b Hermann Lopatin's - c world market



