---
Volume: 47
Document_Title: "210. Engels to Minna Kautsky. 26 November "
Page_Range: "384-387"
---

# 210. Engels to Minna Kautsky. 26 November 



**[p. 210]**

ENGELS TO MINNA KAUTSKY 4 7 9

IN VIENNA

London, 26 November 1885

Dear Mrs Kautsky,

(You will, I hope, permit me to use this simple form of address, for why should two people like ourselves continue to stand on ceremo- ny?) First of all, very many thanks for your kind references to my- self. 480 I was very sorry not to have been able to spend more time with you while you were here; it gave me infinite pleasure, I do assure you, to meet for once a German authoress who had also remained a simple woman — in this respect it has been my misfortune to meet only affected, 'eddicated'a Berlin ladies of the kind one would not urge to take up the kitchen spoon again, if only because they would eventually wreak more havoc with it than with the pen. So I hope that it won't be too long before you cross the Narrow Seas again, when you and I shall be able to ramble gently round London and its purlieus, exchanging light-hearted banter lest our conversation should become altogether too serious.

That London didn't please you, I can readily believe. Some years ago I used to feel much the same. It is difficult to accustom oneself to the gloomy atmosphere and, for the most part, gloomy people, to the reserve, the class distinctions in social life, to living shut up indoors as the climate demands. One has to temper somewhat the animal spirits imported from the Continent and let the barometer of joie de vivre fall from, say, 760 to 750 millimetres, until one finally becomes acclima- tised. Then one gradually reconciles oneself to the whole thing, dis- covering that the place has its good points, that people are on the whole more straightforward and reliable than elsewhere, that no city is bet- ter suited to the writing of learned works than London, and that the absence of harassment by the police makes up for a great deal. I know and love Paris but, given the choice, I would rather settle perma- nently in London than there. Paris can only be enjoyed properly if you become a Parisian yourself, with all the prejudices of a Parisian, if

[^1]: a In the original 'jebildete' (Berlin dialect).





**[p. 356]**

Apropos Berlin. I am glad to hear that that wretched place is at last succeeding in becoming a metropolis. But as Rahel Varnhagen said as much as 70 years ago: In Berlin everything becomes shabby, so that Berlin would seem to be trying to show the rest of the world just how shabby a metropolis can be. Only poison all eddicated Berliners, conjure up at least tolerable surroundings there, and rebuild the whole place from the foundations up, and something decent might be made of it. But not, I think, so long as that dialect continues to be spoken there.

I have now also read Die Alten und die Neuen* for which many thanks. The descriptions of the life of the salt miners are as masterly as were those of the peasants in Stefan. b Again, your descriptions of life in Viennese society are also very good on the whole. Vienna is, after all, the only German city that has a society, whereas Berlin has only 'certain circles' and even more uncertain ones, which is why it is productive only of novels about literati, civil servants and actors. Whether the action in this part of your book does not move rather too rapidly in places you are better able to judge than I; much that ap- pears to do so to the likes of us, may seem perfectly natural to you in Vienna because ofthat city's peculiarly international character with its admixture of southern and east European elements. In both spheres, too, I find your customary clear-cut individualisation; each character is a type but at the same time a definite individual, a 'This One' as old Hegel puts it, and that is how it ought to be. But now, if only for the sake of impartiality, I really must find something to criti- cise, and this brings me to Arnold. The latter is indeed altogether too well-behaved and, when he is finally killed in a landslide, one can only reconcile it with poetic justice by telling oneself, for instance, that he was too good for this world. It is always a bad thing, however,

[^1]: a a novel by Minna Kautsky-b M. Kautsky, Stefan vom Grillenhof.





**[p. 357]**

The source of this failing, however, may be discovered in the novel itself. In this book you obviously felt impelled to take sides openly, to testify to your convictions before the whole world. Now that you have done so, it is something you can put behind you and have no need to repeat again in the same form. I am not at all opposed to tendentious poetry as such. The father of tragedy, Aeschylus, and the father of comedy, Aristophanes, were both strongly tendentious poets, as were Dante and Cervantes, and the best thing about Schiller's Kabale und Liebe is that it was the first politically tendentious drama in Germany. The Russians and Norwegians of today, who are producing first-rate novels, are all tendentious writers. But I believe that the tendency should spring from the situation and action as such, without its being expressly alluded to, nor is there any need for the writer to present the reader with the future historical solution to the social conflicts he de- scribes. Furthermore, in present circumstances, the novel is mainly directed at readers in bourgeois — i.e. not our own immediate — circles and, such being the case, it is my belief that the novel of social- ist tendency wholly fulfils its mission if, by providing a faithful ac- count of actual conditions, it destroys the prevailing conventional il- lusions on the subject, shakes the optimism of the bourgeois world and inexorably calls in question the permanent validity of things as they are, even though it may not proffer a solution or, indeed, in cer- tain circumstances, appear to take sides. Your detailed knowledge and your wonderfully true-to-life descriptions, both of the Austrian peasantry and of Viennese 'society', provide ample material for this, and you have already shown in Stefan that you are also capable of handling your protagonists with a nice irony which testifies to the command an author has over his creatures.

But now I must desist, otherwise you'll think me altogether too pro- lix. Over here everything goes on much as usual; Karl and his wife a are learning physiology at Aveling's evening classes and are also busily engaged in other respects; I, too, am up to my eyes in work; Lenchen, Pumps and her husbandb are going to the theatre tonight to see a melodrama and meanwhile old Europe is beginning to bestir herself

[^1]: a Karl and Louise Kautsky - b Percy White Rosher



