---
Volume: 47
Document_Title: "211. Engels to Paul Lavigne. 1 December "
Page_Range: "387-388"
---

# 211. Engels to Paul Lavigne. 1 December 



**[p. 358]**

Assuring you of my cordial feelings and sincere regard, I remain, Madam,

Yours,

F. Engels

First published, in Russian, in Marx- Printed according to the original Engels Archives, Vol. I (VI), Moscow, 1932

Published in English in full for the first time

211

ENGELS TO PAUL LAVIGNE 4 8 1

IN PARIS

[Draft]

[London,] 1 December 1885

Citizen,

When I received your letter of 8 August,466 together with your manuscript, I was on the point of leaving for Jersey, whence I did not return until 14 September. 42 ' Since then I have had so much urgent work to deal with that I was unable to revert to the French transla- tion of the 18th Brumaire. Now, having at last had time to come back to it, I find myself placed between two rival mss. 482

To begin with, it is impossible for me to set myself up as judge in a dispute when I am unable to make a careful investigation either of its causes or of its substance. All I know is that Fortin had been in cor- respondence with Marx for a number of years prior to the death of the latter, 4 8 3 that he asked me to revise his translation, that I prom- ised him I would do so and that I have already attended to the revi- sion of part of his ms. Accordingly I feel I am committed to him. Such being the position, I do not consider that I have the right to use your work in any way. I shall take good care not to read a single page, for were it to prove better than Fortin's, I should be unable to prevent

