---
Volume: 47
Document_Title: "212. Engels to Wilhelm Liebknecht. / December "
Page_Range: "388-391"
---

# 212. Engels to Wilhelm Liebknecht. / December 



**[p. 359]**

I am holding the ms. at your disposal. The translation of the 2nd volume of Capital is an extremely diffi- cult business. Moreover it will be absolutely impossible for me to undertake any revision at all next year. And then there are still many other things to consider. At the moment I cannot commit myself to anyone; that must lie in the future.

Yours sincerely

First published in: Marx and Engels, Printed according to the original Works, First Russian Edition, Vol. XXVII, Moscow 1935 Translated from the French

Published in English for the first time

212

London, 1 December 1885

Dear Liebknecht,

As regards Russia's finances,485 see Kolb's Statistik, 1875 ed.,a

p. 499 et seq. The last loan shown therein is that of November 1873 for 15 million pounds. After that a further loan of 15 million pounds was raised with great difficulty in 1875, but the Russians were also ad- vised by the bankers that this would be the last time, failing a guar- antee by a representative assembly. For after provisional arrange- ments had been made in 1869 in respect of the funds appropriated for railway purposes, there were further borrowings:

[^1]: ENGELS TO WILHELM LIEBKNECHT 4 8 4

[^2]: IN BERLIN

[^3]: a G. Fr. Kolb, Handbuch der vergleichenden Statistik — der Völkerzustands- und Statenkunde.





**[p. 360]**

i. e between 1870 and 1875, six years, 69 million pounds = 1,380 mil- lion marks. They now had to think up some new dodges. Hence, 1 ) an internal loan. Though this was in fact a forced loan, it proved an almost complete flop. For there was little capital available in the coun- try and the government was therefore compelled to lend its own money (paper money) to itself so as to give the impression that the loan had nevertheless been over-subscribed. 2) The Transcaucasian Railway Loan of £8,904,200. This was raised (1880 or 1881?) abroad on the security of the Poti to Baku line, but most of it had to be expended on the construction of the line itself; hence the financial straits persisted. Throughout this time repeated approaches were made to the bankers, all of them in vain. Finally the Minister for Fi- nance2 set off for the West in person — Paris, Berlin, Amsterdam; London was omitted from the itinerary as being quite hopeless. Everywhere he met with a rebuff; even Mendelssohn, the court banker in Berlin, is said to have asked for a parliamentary guarantee point-blank; in any case he, too, turned him away. The only remain- ing question was whether the Russian Duma ought to be convoked a year sooner or a year later; there was no other way out. Giers then visited Friedrichsruh and abased himself, whereupon Bismarck got hold of 15 million pounds for him in Germany, thereby postponing the evil day a little longer. 182

(One of the conclusions we may draw from the above is that Russia won't be able to start a war without Bismarck's permission, for it can only raise money under his protection and the 15 million have long since been frittered away. So if it starts a war after all, or seriously threatens to do so, Bismarck will be directly responsible.)

I don't read The Economist, nor do I know where a run of them is to be found, for the many clubs have been the ruin of nearly all the read- ing-rooms here. I shall ask Kautsky to try and see if he can lay his hands on the Economist, Statist, Bullionist and Money Market Review and make extracts for you.

[^1]: a Nikolai Bunge





**[p. 361]**

Your speech at the first budget reading was sent to me by Bebel from Dresden. It was very good; I'm only surprised that you had so few interruptions. After all, you did elicit the obligatory call to order. 486

Your

F.E.

The seal on this letter is a count's coronet and the monogram JC intertwined.

The elections here are going very nicely. 487 For the first time the Irish in England have voted en masse for one side, to wit the Tories. In doing so they have shown the Liberals to what extent they can tip the scales, even in England. The 80 or 85 HOME RULERS over here — one of them has actually been elected in Liverpool! — correspond to the Centre 229 in the Reichstag and are capable of rendering any govern- ment powerless. Parnell must now show what he is worth.

Incidentally, the new 'Manchesterism' is also proving victorious, in other words the theory of retaliatory tariffs, which is, of course, even more senseless in this country than in Germany, but has been taken up by the new generation of manufacturers after eight years of rotten trade. 488 Next there is Gladstone's opportunist weakness and then, too, Chamberlain's inept manner, first aggressive, then ingratiating, which evoked the cry THE CHURCH IN DANGER! 4 8 9 Lastly Gladstone's de- plorable foreign policy. The Liberals would have us believe that the new COUNTY VOTERS will vote liberal. These are of course an unknown quantity but, if the Liberals are to obtain an absolute majority, they will have to win more than 180 of the 300 seats still to be decided and there's no likelihood ofthat. Parnell will almost certainly become dic- tator of Great Britain and Ireland.

[^1]: First published, in Russian, in Marx- Engels Archives, Vol. I (VI), Moscow, 1932

[^2]: Printed according to the original

[^3]: Published in English in full for the first time



