---
Volume: 47
Document_Title: "214. Engels to Johann Philipp Becker. 5 December "
Page_Range: "392-394"
---

# 214. Engels to Johann Philipp Becker. 5 December 



**[p. 214]**

ENGELS TO JOHANN PHILIPP BECKER 4 8 4

IN GENEVA

London, 5 December 1885

Dear Old Man,

As it's so long since I heard from you, I am reminding you of my existence by advising you of the despatch of a £5 money order which I hope will arrive at the same time as this letter and perhaps help to lighten the transition from the old year to the new. I trust you are still in the best of health and that you will send me a line or two before long acknowledging receipt.

I have been slogging away hard of late, as no doubt you will learn from the Zurich booksellers' publishing side, and in particular have seized the opportunity of reviving various pieces from the golden days of our youth in 1848-49. 4 9 3 This is damned important, for the younger ge- neration, which has forgotten all about it, if indeed it ever knew, is be- ginning to want to find out what went on at that time and, in view of the many inaccurate sources and accounts, it's important to provide them with as much accurate information as possible. What is abso- lutely vital is that you should finish your memoirs; years ago the Neue

Welt published some really charming pieces.a You're a wonderfully skilful narrator and on top ofthat your memory goes back at least 10 or 15 years further than mine and embraces the period 1830-40, which is also very important where later developments are con- cerned. Some money might also be made out of it, and that's not to be sneezed at.

I still have to revise the Peasant War2 ' 3 which is badly in need of it and shall then go on to Volume III of Capital, this having now been dictated in the rough from the original draft and set down in a legible hand. It will be the devil of a task, but a splendid one. Unfortunately a mass of translations into French, English, Italian and Danish keep intervening, which I have to go over—all too necessary in most

[^1]: a J. Ph. Becker, 'Abgerissene Bilder aus meinem Leben', Die Neue Welt, Nos. 17-20, 23, 24, 26, 28 and 29; 22 and 29 April, 6 and 13 May, 3, 10 and 24 June, 8 and 15 July 1876.





**[p. 364]**

I hope the wretched business in the Balkans445 will pass off peace- fully. We are making such splendid progress everywhere that a world war would be inopportune just now—too late or too early. But ulti- mately it would also work in our favour by putting an end to milita- rism once and for all — at the cost of the massacre of l'/s million men and the squandering of 1,000 billion francs. After that there could be no more war.

The elections in France have provided the Radicals with the imme- diate prospect of coming to power and have thus been of considerable help to us, too. 447 The elections over here have temporarily made the Irish masters of England and Scotland; without them neither party can govern.487 There are still about 100 results to come in, but they'll make little difference to the outcome. Thus the Irish question will at last be settled — if not at once, at any rate in the immediate fu- ture and then the decks will be cleared over here as well. Some 8 or 10 working men have likewise been elected — some of them bought by the bourgeoisie, others trade unionists pure and simple — who will doubtless make thorough fools of themselves and be of enormous as- sistance in the creation of an independent labour party by banishing the inherited self-deceit of the workers. History moves slowly over here, but move it does.

Warm regards.

Your old friend

F. Engels

[^1]: First published in: F. Engels, Vergessene Printed according to the original Briefe (Briefe Friedrich Engels' an Johann Philipp Becker), Berlin, 1920 Published in English in full for the first time



