---
Volume: 47
Document_Title: "216. Engels to Eduard Bernstein. 7 December "
Page_Range: "395-397"
---

# 216. Engels to Eduard Bernstein. 7 December 



**[p. 366]**

Your

F.E.

First published, in Russian, in Marx- Printed according to the original Engels Archives, Vol. I (VI), Moscow, 1932

Published in English for the first time

216

ENGELS TO EDUARD BERNSTEIN 4 9 5

IN ZURICH

London, 7 December 1885

Dear Ede,

Here too we've had a storm in our socialist tea-cup. Kautsky will already have written and told you something about it; 2 Echoes (Lib- eral) enclosed herewith. Also some other stuff, and a document (letter from Bland, based on the minutes of the Executive of the SOCIAL DEMO- CRATIC FEDERATION, sent you by Aveling), which will give you the sub- stance. 496

This time Hyndman has given himself the coup de grâce. He took money from the Tories for socialist candidatures in order to filch votes from the Liberals. He has admitted to taking £340, but since the official expenses of the 3 candidatures amounted to about £600, it must have been something in the region of £1,000, if not more.

Taking money from another party may, in certain circumstances and by way of an exception, be admissible if, 1) the money is given unconditionally and 2) the transaction does not do more harm than good. In this instance the very opposite was the case. 1) The condi- tion was that socialist candidates be put up in districts where they could only be made to look ridiculous — as, indeed, happened: Wil-



**[p. 367]**

Well, not content with this heroic deed, Hyndman already saw himself as a second Parnell holding the scales between the two parties, though forgetting that, unlike Parnell, he does not command 80 votes in Parliament and 200,000 Irish votes in the elections in England and Scotland.487 He got the Executive of the Federation to empower him to go to Birmingham with Champion and call on Chamberlain, the leader of the Radicals.4 ' 5 With Tory money in his pocket, he offered the latter his support if he, Chamberlain, would cede him a seat in Birmingham, assure him of Liberal votes and agree to introduce an Eight Hours' Bill. Not being such a mug as the Tories, Chamberlain showed him the door.

In the meantime the affair, arranged on the qt by the Federation's Executive, became known in the branches and caused a great furore. Of which more in Bland's letter; it was written for publication, but you should not mention the fact that it is based on the minutes. A gen- eral meeting is to be called and whether the Federation will survive it seems doubtful; not, at any rate, as a viable organisation.

It was written with Hyndman's connivance, yet he had to let the expression 'ILL-ADVISED', used of himself, stand. By contrast, Wil- liams' statement in The Echo 496 is nothing less than a slap in the face, its attitude being, and not without reason, one of outright hostility to all socialist MIDDLE-CLASS MEN. SO that's what Mr Hyndman has brought about with his pushfulness. The man is nothing but a caricature of Lassalle, totally indifferent to the nature of the means even when not conducive to the end, provided Hyndman himself gets something out of it; add to that his perpetual craving for instantaneous success, so that he kills the goose that lays the golden egg; and finally, the way he considers himself the centre of the universe, being utterly incapable of seeing the facts in any light other than that which is gratifying to him.

[^1]: Herewith Hunter Watts' statement in The Pall Mall Gazette.498



