---
Volume: 47
Document_Title: "217. Engels to Paul Lafargue. 7 December "
Page_Range: "397-400"
---

# 217. Engels to Paul Lafargue. 7 December 



**[p. 368]**

What do things look like in your parliamentary tea-cup?

Your

F.E.

First published, in Russian, in Marx- Printed according to the original Engels Archives, Book I, Moscow, 1924

Published in English in full for the first time

217

ENGELS TO PAUL LAFARGUE 4 9 9

IN PARIS

London, 7 December 1885

My dear Lafargue,

I shall speak to Tussy about Davitt. She may be able to get you what you want.

In opposition to your Social Studies Group 179 the good Malon and the no less celebrated Elie May have just set up a Republican Social Economy Society with ready-made rules.500 Let's hope this 'research group' will be confined to Malon who will do his research in May's bosom, and to May who will do his research in Malon's heart. They are petty panjandrums whom you_ would be well ad- vised to ignore completely; that would infuriate them most of all. It's Karl Blind to the life.

Why are you making such a splash in the Socialiste with Williams and the Social Democratic Federation? 501 You ought to know what attitude to take with respect to Hyndman, and this time you have fallen into a fine old trap. In the first place, Hyndman has contrived to make his party a laughing-stock second to none. Williams collected 27 votes out of 10,000, Fielding in North Kensington 32 out of 10,000,

[^1]: proper





**[p. 369]**

Burns in Nottingham 598 out of 11,000.a Whereupon the liberal press kicked up an almighty fuss, alleging that the money needed for these foolish candidatures had been provided by the TORIES, and that the socialists had so lowered themselves as to do that party's dirty work for it. Williams then wrote to The Echo on 5 December496 saying that all this had been arranged while he was in Liverpool, that they had recalled him by telegram without giving details, that he had been treated by the leaders as a mere tool and that he now saw

* 'that we cannot trust the middle class men of our movement any longer. I am not prepared to be made the tool of middle class men. I call upon my fellow wage-slaves to meet me as soon as possible and to say good-bye to the middle class men and to shut them out from what must be a real working men's organisation', * etc.

— in short he has now adopted a stance directly opposed to Hyndman, Champion, etc.

Now for what has been happening in the SOCIAL DEMOCRATIC FEDERA- TION (by the same post you will be getting a lettter via Aveling from Bland, one of its members). Hyndman was given money by the TORIES to put up candidates against the Liberals — £340 has been admitted. But it must have been in the region of £1,000, since the official ex- penses of the 3 candidates amounted to more than £600.— With the exception of Burrows, the Executive Committee sanctioned Hynd- man's action. However opposition arose within the main body of the federation. But before this could make itself felt, Hyndman, already seeing himself in the role of political arbitrator à la Parnell, left with Champion for Liverpool to offer his services to — Chamberlain, the Radical leader415! The proposal they made the latter was that they would support the Liberals if Chamberlain was prepared to with- draw a Liberal candidate in Birmingham in favour of Hyndman and thus secure him the Liberal vote. Chamberlain showed them the door.

Opposition within the federation is increasing. At the last Com- mittee meeting, at which many other members of the federation were present, the correspondence relating to the Tory money was read out, despite opposition from Hyndman who wished to suppress it. Great rumpus. Why had the sections not been consulted on so vital a mat-

[^1]: a Cf. the relevant figures in the previous letter.





**[p. 370]**

Obviously one may accept money from another party if that money is given unconditionally and if it does not do more harm than good. But Hyndman has acted like an idiot. In the first place he ought to have known that his candidatures couldn't help but manifest the ridiculous weakness of socialism in England. Again, he ought to have known that, by accepting money from the TORIES, he has damned himself once and for all in the eyes of the radical working men who form the vast majority and to whom alone socialism can look for support. In short, if one does such things, one advertises them, one boasts about them, but one doesn't make a secret of them. Hyndman, however, is a caricature of Lassalle; to him all means are good, even if not conducive to an end. He is in such a hurry to play the political panjandrum that he has no time to consider his real position. He combines all the bad qualities of your English PROFESSIONAL POLITI- CIAN— your ADVENTURER — with a quality common enough in France but rare over here, of seeing facts not as they are but as he would like them to be.

All this has come so soon after his infamous behaviour towards Aveling502 that he has not yet been forgiven — even within his own party — and he is bound to have a pretty hard time of it if he is to survive the affair. In any case, if the Social Democratic Federation continues, it will no longer have any substance.

A kiss for Laura.

Yours ever,

F.E.

[^1]: First published in: Marx and Engels, Printed according to the original Works, Second Russian Edition, Vol. 36, M , n c , translated from the trench oscow, 19o4

[^2]: Published in English for the first time



