---
Volume: 47
Document_Title: "218. Engels to Hermann Schlüter. 7 December "
Page_Range: "400-401"
---

# 218. Engels to Hermann Schlüter. 7 December 



**[p. 218]**

ENGELS TO HERMANN SCHLÜTER

IN HOTTINGEN-ZURICH

London, 7 December 1885

Dear Mr Schlüter,

My best thanks for the 2 copies of Diihring. 208 If I can have 20 copies all told, that will do for the time being. Please also send me 4 copies of the Peasant War, 3rd edition. I haven't a single copy left and so cannot get to work on the new edi- tion. 213

I have no connections whatever with Eccarius and neither can nor wish to renew them. I shall see if the address is obtainable through Lessner. But I would at most advise you simply to reprint without al- terations, etc.— for, having gone completely to the dogs, Eccarius is in fact unlikely to make any; moreover, in view of his bad conscience, any such addenda would most likely be used by him to introduce ex- tenuating circumstances for the many ill-deeds he has perpetrated since 1873, and thus materially impair the book which was written with much prompting by and help from Marx (towards the end, en- tire pages were literally written by Marx), if not render it completely useless for our propaganda. I would even advise you to insist on print- ing it as it stands.503

In my Dühring I continue to suffer at the printer's hands even in the list of misprints where I find hopeless 'error' [Verirrung] for 'confu- sion' [Verwirrung].

Kind regards.

Yours,

F.E.

[^1]: You will have had the bill for the photographs.a

[^2]: First published in: Marx and Engels, Works, First Russian Edition, Vol. XXVII, Moscow, 1935

[^3]: Printed according to the original

[^4]: Published in English for the first time

[^5]: " of Marx (see this volume, p. 309)



