---
Volume: 47
Document_Title: "221. Engels to Hermann Schlüter. 21 December "
Page_Range: "402-404"
---

# 221. Engels to Hermann Schlüter. 21 December 



**[p. 220]**

E N G E L S T O P A S Q U A L E M A R T I G N E T T I

IN BENEVENTO

London, 21 December 1885

Dear Citizen,

I should be very pleased if you would undertake the translation of Marx's work Wage Labour and Capital. The information in the Social- iste 5 ° 5 will barely suffice for the biography and I have therefore asked our friends in Zurich to send you a copy of the Brunswick Kalen- der, a which contains a more complete biography written by myself.b

Yours truly,

F. Engels

I shall of course be happy to carry out the revision, should you so desire.

First published in La corrispondenza di Marx e Engels con italiani. 1848-1895, Milano, 1964

221

E N G E L S T O H E R M A N N S C H L Ü T E R

IN HOTTINGEN-ZURICH

London, 21 December 1885

Dear M r Schlüter,

Printed according to the original Translated from the Italian

Published in English for the first time

[^1]: 20 Dührings (in all) and 4 of the Peasant War received with thanks. c

[^2]: Kindly tell Mrs Wischnewetzky that, as agreed, I shall be prepared to go over the ms. of her translation 34 9 and write the preface d as soon

[^3]: a See this volume, p. 374. - b F. Engels, 'Karl Marx', Volks-Kalender, Brunswick, 1878. - c See this volume, p. 371. - d F. Engels, 'The Labor Movement in America. Preface to the American Edition of The Condition of the Working Class in England.





**[p. 374]**

I shan't be able to turn my mind to a new German edition3 until I have shed considerable part of my present load of work. In January I have to revise the English translation of Capital, negotiate with the publishers, etc. After that there's the Peasant War 2 ' 3 and numerous other incidental jobs. Then comes the very urgent matter of the Capi- tal, Volume III. Once I've cleared the decks to that extent, I'll be able to turn my mind to the old book."

I cannot recall the pamphlet mentioned by Bucher. 506 Peel died in 1850. Marx's PAMPHLETS b appeared in 1855. Nor is it likely that Palmer- ston would have given some writer or other 100 guineas and a cask of sherry to provide proof that Palmerston was a Russian agent. It is possible that Tucker, when alluding to the earlier piece, suggested the same title for one of Marx's PAMPHLETS; that would explain everything. Nor were there any woodcuts in Marx's PAMPHLETS.

Kindest regards.

Yours,

F. Engels

Martignetti wants to translate Wage Labour and Capital' into Italian along with a biography of Marx which he hasn't got, as the few scrappy items in the Socialiste505 are inadequate. Could you send him Bracke's Volks-Kalender containing my biography of Marxd? I think it's in the 1878 volume, but you'll find it easily enough. The address is

Paoloc Martignetti Benevento, Italia.

[^1]: First published in: Marx and Engels, Works, First Russian Edition, Vol. XXVII, Moscow, 1934

[^2]: a F. Engels, The Condition of the Working-Class in England. - b Lord Palmerston - ' by Marx - d F. Engels, 'Karl Marx'. - '' Should be Pasquale; see also this volume, p. 421.

[^3]: Printed according to the original

[^4]: Published in English for the first time



