---
Volume: 47
Document_Title: "225. Engels to Wilhelm Liebknecht. 2 January "
Page_Range: "409-411"
---

# 225. Engels to Wilhelm Liebknecht. 2 January 



**[p. 380]**

1886

225

ENGELS T O WILHELM LIEBKNECHT

[IN BORSDORF NEAR LEIPZIG34]

London, 2 January 1886

Dear Liebknecht,3 ' '

Borkheim's wife died some 8 years ago. No great loss to him — she drank. His son,a aged 19, is a clerk in Dunkirk. To begin with he him- self was in business in Liverpool; during the Crimean War a specula- tive trip to Balaklava with a load of bits and pieces earned him .£15,000 all at one go, which, however, he lost because he did the same thing again and peace supervened 5 ' 2; became a wine merchant and discovered that his palate for Bordeaux was probably the finest in London; became the agent of a Bordeaux house, built up a clientèle for them, but was insufficiently circumspect and, when he sought a partnership, was given the push — they no longer needed him. No wiser for the experience, he tried to repeat this brilliant performance with another house, the result being the same, hence had to start from the beginning once more. Again promptly discovered two good con- nexions, lived like a lord as always, while at Badenweiler had an apoplectic fit (about 10 years ago), which completely paralysed his left side, whereupon it transpired that, rather than possessing money, he had been borrowing from his friends in order to support his madly extravagant mode of life. But in spite of it all he was so much liked that people calmly put up with their losses, while the two houses for which he had worked paid him a pension to live on. His housemaid, with whom there had undoubtedly been some highly intimate goings- on, looked after him up till his death — she was able to furnish

[^1]: a F. Borkheim





**[p. 381]**

You are on the wrong track with your suppositions about the secret insinuations concerning you that have come to my ears. The only good friend who might possibly have managed to find some fault with you, the one 'who told you' this, 'who told you' that? — is called Wil- helm Liebknecht15 and his insinuations have appeared in writing in his letters and in print in the Sozialdemokrat and any number of Ger- man newspapers. Thanks to this source I have known for years that you have a pleasing and insuperable weakness for all the 'eddicated' elements that hover round the fringes of the party and that you wish to win them over, even though 95 per cent of them can only do us harm. I further understand from this source that last year you only noticed personal differences within the parliamentary group 49 where- as now you are already discovering 'backsliders'. I am also indebted to the above source for the knowledge that this same Wilhelm Lieb- knecht is on occasion inclined to forget what has been written if, at that moment, it doesn't suit his book and that he hopes others will be good-natured enough to do him a similar favour. Which is not, unfor- tunately, always possible. But as to your passion for picking up 'eddi- cated' elements and glossing over all differences, one must put up with such things and does so fairly readily for their being unavoid- able. But don't ask that they be overlooked. And their inevitability causes me all the less concern because I know, and shall say as much

[^1]: a care of - b See this volume, p. 387.



