---
Volume: 47
Document_Title: "227. Engels to Wilhelm Liebknecht. 7 January "
Page_Range: "412-413"
---

# 227. Engels to Wilhelm Liebknecht. 7 January 



**[p. 227]**

ENGELS TO WILHELM LIEBKNECHT

IN BERLIN

London, 7 January 1886

Dear Liebknecht,

Your conjecture re 'Bios'a 5 ' 5 merely provides me with further proof that the 'nervousness'you complain of is once again entirely of your own making. Still, as you say, NEVER MIND.

Borkheim was born in Glogau in 1825, studied at Greifswald and Berlin, was a three-year artillery volunteer in Glogau in 1848, came under investigation as a result of democratic meetings and bolt- ed; subsequently spent some time in Berlin, fled, I believe, after the storming of the arsenal516 and went, if I'm not mistaken, to Swit- zerland, whence he returned with Struve. I don't remember thf exact details.

If you and Bebel, both of you, go to America together, you will cer- tainly be able to raise money; should either of you not go or be re- placed by someone else, that would make a difference of 25%-30% in the money you would receive. 518 Besides, you yourself will be par- ticularly needed, since at least one of you will, from time to time, have to make a speech in English.

As regards the Baltic Canal I'm all for its being at least 8 metres deep. 5 ' 9 The size and draught of merchant STEAMERS are constantly increasing (5,500 tons is already quite usual), and new docks are be- ing increasingly taken to a depth of 9 or 10 metres, so that a shall- ower canal would become obsolete within a few years, just like the Eider Canal now, which became completely so 30 years ago (as to some extent it always had been).

Your trip might be brought forward by a dissolution occasioned by the dissolution of old Williamc which may happen at any moment.

[^1]: I shall be writing about the biographical note.5 ' 7

[^2]: Tussy will be given your message on Sunday.b

[^3]: a Bloß in the original.-b 10 January- 0 William I



