---
Volume: 47
Document_Title: "228. Engels to Laura Lafargue. 17 January "
Page_Range: "413-415"
---

# 228. Engels to Laura Lafargue. 17 January 



**[p. 384]**

Schorlemmer is still with us and sends his best wishes. Otherwise everything is going well, but not for the SOCIAL DEMOCRA- TIC FEDERATION 3 ° ° which Mr Hyndman would seem to have ruined good and proper this time.a Though he may win a spurious victory at his PACKED GENERAL MEETING next Sunday, he's done for in the provinces, and here all he's left with is a steadily dwindling number of supporters.

Kindest regards.

Your old friend

F.E.

First published, in Russian, in Marx- Printed according to the original Engels Archives, Vol. I (VI), Moscow, 1932 „ , , . , , . ^ ,• , r , r Published in English lor the hrst time

228

ENGELS TO LAURA LAFARGUE

London, 17 January 1886

My dear Laura,

Glad the dictionaries have arrived at last. b They were promised to be sent from here more than a week before Christmas.

Yesterday I received a post-card from Dr Max Quarck informing me that as a good extract from the Capital is wanted, he intends to translate Deville V:

the great Quarck has offered it to Meissner and desires me to favour him with a preface.

[^1]: IN PARIS

[^2]: 'Herr Deville hat mir nun eben auf mein Nachsuchen die alleinige Autorisation zur Übersetzung seines Auszuges ins Deutsche gegeberi A\

[^3]: a See this volume, pp. 366-70. - b Ibid., p. 375. -c G. Qeville, Le Capital de Karl Marx. Résumé -d '/« reply to my request Mr Deville has just granted me the unreserved right to translate his brief exposition into German.'



Now if Deville has really done so, I cannot but consider that he has acted very unwisely and moreover contrary to all the international obligations practically existing amongst the lot of us. How in the world could he commit himself with a man of whom he knew noth- ing? This Quarck is one of half a dozen young literati who hover about the boundary land between our party and the Katheder- Sozialismus, 54 take jolly good care to keep clear of all the risks in- volved by being connected with our party, and yet expect to reap all the benefits that may accrue from such connection. They make a live- ly propaganda for das soziale Kaisertum der Hohenzol- lern* (which Quarck has dithyrambically celebrated), for Rod- bertus against Marx (Quarck had the cheek to write to me that he honoured the Capital by placing it in his library neben die Werke des grossen Rodbertush) and especially for each other. The fellow is so utterly impotent that even Liebknecht who has a certain tender- ness for these fellows, has agreed with Kautsky that he is not fit to write in the Neue £eü. 52°

This moment Kautsky enters with Paul's letter,c according to that Deville has not replied and Quarck lies. I should be very glad if this was so, because then I should have that little scamp completely on the hip.

But now as to the translation itself. First of all, an extract from the Capital for our German workmen must be done from the German original, not from the French edition.59 Secondly Deville's book is too big for the working men, and would in the translation, especially of the second half, be as difficult as the original, as it is composed as much as possible of literal extracts.81 It does well enough for France where most of the terms are not Fremdwörter,d and where there is a large public, not exactly working men, who all the same wish to have some knowledge — of easy access — of the subject, without reading the big book. That public, in Germany, ought to read the original book. — Thirdly, and chiefly, if Deville's book appears in German, I do not see how I can consistently with, my duty towards Mohr let it pass un- challenged as a faithful résumé. I have held my tongue while it was published only in French, although I had distinctly protested against the whole second half of it, before publication.e But if it comes to be put before the German public that is quite a different thing. I cannot allow, in Germany, Mohr to be perverted — in his very words. If there

[^1]: a the social empire of the Hohenzollerns - b beside the works of great Rodbertus- c Lafargue's letter to Engels of 10 January 1886-d foreign words-' See this volume, pp. 61, 63.



