---
Volume: 47
Document_Title: "229. Engels to August Bebel. 20- 23 January "
Page_Range: "415-421"
---

# 229. Engels to August Bebel. 20- 23 January 



**[p. 386]**

I cannot this moment ask Kautsky about his intentions as to Deville's book, because all the people for Sunday's dinner have come in, and I must conclude. Kautsky must write himself. As far as I know Kautsky and Bernstein intend making a fresh extract themselves which would be decidedly the best thing to do, and where they may make use of Deville's work and acknowledge it with thanks. 137

Tussy, Edward, the Pumps' and Kautskys, all send their loves, kind regards and kisses and I don't know what more, ditto Johnny 3

and the other little ones.

Yours affectionately but hungry,

F.E.

First published, in the language of the Reproduced from the original original (English), in: F. Engels, P. et L. Lafargue, Correspondance, t. I, Paris, 1956

229

London, 20-23 January 1886

Dear Bebel,

So the great bolt has been fired. Schramm did me the honour of sending me a copy of the magnum opus b; but it is, I must say, a very pauvre" affair and the prompt reference to it in the Sozialdemokrat did him too signal an honour. Ede will undoubtedly give him a good

[^1]: ENGELS TO AUGUST BEBEL 5 2 1

[^2]: IN BERLIN

[^3]: a Jean Longuet-b C. A. S[chramm], Rodbertus, Marx, Lassalle. Sozialwissenschaf- tliche Studie.-' miserable-d 'Zur Aufklärung', Der Sozialdemokrat, No. 50, 10 Decem- ber 1885.





**[p. 387]**

dressing-down; I have, through Kautsky, drawn his attention to a number of points — the essentials can safely be left to him. 5 2 2

For Kautsky this controversy with Schramm has been salutory in every way. 5 2 3 Schramm, being unable to say anything about the ac- tual matter in hand, is skilful enough to pick on all the errors of form perpetrated by Kautsky, partly out of youthful impetuosity, partly out of the habits acquired at university and in literary practice, and this has been a very salutory lesson to him. In this respect Ede already has a considerable advantage over Kautsky because, though neither a university man nor a professional littérateur, he is, through being on the Sozialdemokrat, always in the thick of the fray, besides which he's a business man and, last but not least, a Jew. For after all it's only in war that you learn the art of war.

What you tell me about the parliamentary group's frame of mind is most encouraging. Provided the party remains sound — and here the petty bourgeoisie will surely not gain the upper hand — the blunders of the deputy gentlemen can only serve to give these last a rude les- son. As you yourself say — and this is also my opinion — we shall never get the right kind of people into the Reichstag in time of peace and here the help afforded us by the party through bringing pressure to bear on the deputy gentlemen is absolutely invaluable; it shows that they must avoid any serious conflict, and the knowledge that this is so might, at a crucial moment, be of the utmost importance, since it would enable us to make a resolute stand in the certainty that we should emerge unscathed.

Of late Liebknecht has been positively bombarding me with letters asking for information about this and that. I took the opportunity of telling him, briefly and unequivocally, if in an altogether friendly way, just what I thought of his inconsistent conduct; and when, as usual, he tried to attribute this to some piece of gossip I must have heard, I told him that there was only one person who could harm him in my eyes, and that was Wilhelm Liebknecht who was for ever for- getting what he had said in his letters and published in the press. However that might be, I went on, we should simply have to put up with his foibles, and would do so all the more readily for the knowl- edge that, when things really came to a head, he would be found in the right place. a Whereupon, contrary to his usual customary insis- tence upon having the last word, he calmed down again.

[^1]: a See this volume, pp. 381-82.





**[p. 388]**

As regards my proposal for productive cooperatives on state-owned land, b its sole purpose was to show the majority — which was, after all, then in favour of the Steamship Subsidies342 — how they could de- cently vote against it and thus emerge from the impasse in which they found themselves. But in my view, the principle of the thing was alto- gether correct. It is perfectly true that, when we propose something positive, our proposals should always be practicable. But practicable as such, regardless of whether the present government can implement them. I would go even further and say that, if we propose socialist measures conducive to the downfall of capitalist production (as these are), we should restrict them to such as are essentially feasible, but could not be implemented by this government. For this government would tamper with and ruin any such measure, and put it through merely with a view to sabotaging it. This particular proposal, how- ever, would not be implemented by any Junker or bourgeois govern- ment. To point the way for the rural proletariat in the Baltic prov- inces, if not set it upon the path that would enable it to put an end to exploitation by the Junkers and big farmers — to attract into the move- ment the very people whose servitude and stultification supplies the regiments upon which Prussia entirely depends, in short, to destroy Prussia from within, from the root up, is something that would never occur to them. The measure for which we must press, come what may, so long as big estates continue to exist there, and which we must ourselves put into practice the moment we come to the helm, is as fol-

[^1]: a See this volume, p. 383.- b Ibid., pp. 239, 240.





**[p. 389]**

The matter has nothing whatever to do either with Schulze- Delitzsch or with Lassalle. Both supported small cooperatives, in one case with, in the other without, state aid; but in neither were the co- operatives to take possession of the already extant means of production; rather they were to introduce new cooperative production alongside already extant capitalist production. My proposal envisages the in- troduction of cooperatives into existing production. They are to be given land which would otherwise be exploited along capitalist lines; just as the Paris Commune demanded that the workers should manage coop- eratively the factories closed down by the manufacturers.a Therein lies the great distinction. Nor have Marx and I ever doubted that, in the course of transition to a wholly communist economy, widespread use would have to be made of cooperative management as an in- termediate stage.b Only it will mean so organising things that so- ciety, i. e. initially the State, retains ownership of the means of pro- duction and thus prevents the particular interests of the coopera- tives from taking precedence over those of society as a whole. The fact that the Empire is not a land-owner is neither here nor there; you will find some formula, just as you did in the Polish debate, for here again the expulsions were no immediate concern of the Empire's.524

Precisely because the government cannot envisage anything of the sort, there would be no harm in demanding the grant I propose as a counterpart to the steamship grant. Had there been any possibility of the government's assenting to it, you would, of course, have been right.

[^1]: The disintegration of the German Free Thinkers 231 in the sphere of economics tallies exactly with what is happening among the Eng- lish Radicals. 4 ' 5 The old Manchester School men à la John Bright are dying off and, just like the Berliners, the younger generation is

[^2]: a See K.Marx, The Civil War in France (present edition, Vol. 22, pp. 328-35).-b See Resolutions of the Congress of Geneva, 1866 4. Co-operative labour.





**[p. 390]**

Six weeks ago there were said to be indications that business was looking up here. Now all that is over and done with; poverty is worse than ever before, as is the mood of hopelessness and, on top of that, the winter is an exceptionally severe one. This is already the eighth year in which overproduction has exerted pressure on the markets and, instead of improving, the situation is getting steadily worse, nor can there be any doubt that it is essentially different from what it used to be. Since the appearance of serious rivals to Britain on the world market, the era of crises, in the old sense of the term, has come to an end. If, from being acute, the crises become chronic yet lose nothing of their intensity, what is likely to happen? There is bound to be another, if brief, period of prosperity after the vast stocks of goods have been run down, but I am curious to see what will come of it all. Of two things, however, we may be sure: We have entered a period which poses a far greater threat to the existence of the old state of so- ciety than did the period of ten-year crises; and, secondly, prosperity, if it comes, will affect Britain to a much lesser extent than before, when it alone used to skim the cream off the world market. The day when this is clearly realised in this country will be the day when the socialist movement will begin here in real earnest — and not before.

I shall have to leave the composition of the English Liberals to



**[p. 391]**

This morning I received from Dresden the debate on the Polish mo- tion (1st day). No doubt the 2nd day will follow shortly.a It is all the more essential for me to be sent these things now that I see only the weekly edition of the Kölnische Leitung which contains only brief ex- cerpts from the debates. How are the short-hand reports sold? I will gladly pay for those of all debates in which our people take a serious part.

Whatever happens, it's essential that you should also go on the American tour.5 ' 8 On the one hand, its success greatly depends on your presence. On the other, the party will not be properly represent- ed unless you are there. If you don't go, the first-comer will be sent along with Liebknecht, and who knows what might not happen then. Thirdly, you should not miss the opportunity of seeing with your own eyes the most progressive country in the world. Life in Germany exerts an oppressive and constricting influence on anyone, even the best, as I know from my own experience, and one ought to get out of the place — from time to time at any rate. And in that case we might also see you over here again. Had I been able to get away from my work, I should long since have slipped across to America, as I was al- ways hoping to do with Marx. Anyway, to people abroad, you and Liebknecht represent the party and there is no substitute for either of you. Should you not go, it will mean a loss of anything between 5,000 and 10,000 marks, if not more.

It might, in fact, be a very pleasant experience. For Tussy and Aveling have been corresponding with American free-thinkers about the possibility of a trip to that country, and would like to combine it with yours. They expect to hear within the next 3 or 4 weeks. If it comes off, the four of you would make agreeable travelling compan- ions.

But now, good-bye for the present. Apropos, Ede exceeded my ex- pectations in his first anti-Schramm article.522 Absolutely splendid.

[^1]: a Stenographische Berichte über die Verhandlungen des Reichstags. VI. Legislaturperiode. II. Session 1885186, Vol. I. 25th sitting on 15 January 1886, 26th sitting on 16 January 1886.



