---
Volume: 47
Document_Title: "230. Engels to Edward Pease. 27 January "
Page_Range: "421-422"
---

# 230. Engels to Edward Pease. 27 January 

Your

F. E.

First published abridged in: F. Engels, Printed according to the original Politisches Vermächtnis. Aus unveröffentlichten Published in English in full for the Briefen, Berlin, 1920 and in full, in Russian, jj r s t t ; m e in Marx-Engels Archives, Vol. I (VI), Moscow, 1932

230

ENGELS TO EDWARD PEASE 5 2 5

IN LONDON

[Draft]

[London,] 27 January 1886

Dear Sir,

In answer to your kind note of yesterday I regret to say that my time is so entirely taken up by urgent work on hand, that I cannot possibly for at least a year to come undertake any fresh engagements whatever.

Having said this much, I need not enter upon other considerations which might stand in the way of my writing the article you desire. But I may state at all events that the party to which I belong, has no fixed ready-made proposals to submit. Our views as to the points of difference between a future, non-capitalistic society and that of to- day, are strict conclusions from existing historical facts and develop- ments, and of no value—theoretical or practical — unless presented in connection with these facts and developments. The economical aspect of these points of difference I have tried to establish and to explain in my book Herrn E.D. Umwälzung der Wissenschaft 2nd ed. p. 253 to 271 ; reprinted in my pamphlet Die Entwicklung des Sozialismus etc. 3rd ed. p. 28-48.a Shorter I cannot possibly do even this partial

[^1]: a The reference is to Engels' Anti-Dühring and Socialism: Utopian and Scientific (see present edition, Vol. 25, pp. 254-71 and Vol. 24, pp. 306-25).



