---
Volume: 47
Document_Title: "231. Engels to Friedrich Adolph Sorge. 29 January "
Page_Range: "422-424"
---

# 231. Engels to Friedrich Adolph Sorge. 29 January 



**[p. 393]**

I am yours faithfully

First published in: Marx and Engels, Reproduced from the original Works, First Russian Edition, Vol. XXVII, Moscow 1935 Published in English for the first time

231

ENGELS T O FRIEDRICH ADOLPH SORGE 5 2 1

IN HOBOKEN

London, 29 January 1886

Dear Sorge,

At last I have some time to spare and hence shall hasten to write to you before anything else comes to claim it.

I hope your Adolf has made a success of his new business. For he understands it and is a hard worker; besides, it's not a particularly speculative business — a great danger, in America as here — so I don't see why all should not be well. I therefore wish him every suc- cess.

I should greatly like to have Marx's comments re an English trans- lation. 526 At last I have with me, here under my roof, the complete ms. of the English translation upon which I shall set to work next week. As soon as I know approximately how long the revision is going to take, and can thus determine the date when printing may begin, I shall make definite arrangements with the publisher. You will have seen (in To-Day) how Mr Hyndman, alias Broadhouse, endeavoured to put a spoke in my wheel.527 This has forced me to get a move-on so as not further to impair my position vis-à-vis the publisher, but otherwise no harm has been done.

[^1]: An American womanb has translated my book on the working

[^2]: Adolf Sorge jun. - b Florence Kelley-Wischnewetzky



I further have in hand — to mention only revisions: 1) The Eight- eenth Brumaire, b French — about lj3 already done. 2) Wage Labour and Capital by Marx — Italian. 3) The Origin of the Family — Danish. 4) Manifesto'1 and Socialism: Utopian and Scientific, etc., Danish; diese two already in print but stiff with mistakes. 5) The Origin of the Family, F r e n c h . 4 0 3 6) Socialism: Utopian and Scientific, English. 5 2 8 PLENTY

MORE LOOMING IN THE DISTANCE. As you can see, I'm turning into a mere schoolmaster correcting exercise-books. It's lucky that my knowledge of languages is not more extensive, for if it were, they'd be piling Rus- sian, Polish, Swedish, etc., stuff on to me as well. But it is work of which one easily tires — in any case all these nice little bits and pieces (at any rate Nos. 2 to 5) will have to give way before Volume III of Capital which I have finished dictating from the ms., though the editing of some of the most important chapters will involve a great deal of work, these consisting in little more than an assemblage of building blocks. T h a t is the only task to which I look forward.

I have not yet had the New Torker Volkszeitung. I shall, if possible, send off To-Day, September, by the same post as this. You've no idea how difficult these things are to get hold of here — the slovenliness of the publishers is quite disgraceful.

will be morally defunct. H y n d m a n must be mad to act as he does. You will have read all about his insane attack on Aveling, and will also have seen the relevant documents in Justice and Commonweal.502

Unfortunately, none of the other leaders of the FEDERATION are worth much more than he, being literati and political speculators. Indeed, the movement in this country has hitherto been quite bogus, but should it prove possible to educate within the SOCIALIST LEAGUE 3 4 6 a nucleus with an understanding of theoretical matters, considerable progress will have been made towards the eruption, which cannot be long in coming, of a genuine mass movement.

[^1]: If you haven't yet seen it, get Dietzgen to give you Hubert Bland's piece on Hyndman's simultaneous machinations with the Tories and Liberals over the elections. 4 9 6 It is absolutely true. After this, and provided it doesn't disintegrate, the SOCIAL DEMOCRATIC FEDERATION300

[^2]: 3 F. Engels, The Condition of the Working Class in England in 1844. - h K. Marx, The Eighteenth Brumaire of Louis Bonaparte. - ' K. Marx and F. Engels, Manifesto of the Com- munist Party.



