---
Volume: 47
Document_Title: "232. Engels to Florence Kelley- Wischnewetzky. 3 February"
Page_Range: "424-426"
---

# 232. Engels to Florence Kelley- Wischnewetzky. 3 February



**[p. 395]**

I trust your health is completely restored. I'm pretty well on the whole, otherwise I should never get through my work.

I've been working on Bebel with a view to his visiting the States with Liebknecht.3 Tussy and Aveling might go too. But that remains to be decided.

My kindest regards to Adolf.

Your

First published abridged in Briefe und Auszüge aus Briefen von Joh. Phil. Becker, Jos. Dietzgen, Friedrich Engels, Karl Marx u. A.an F.A.Sorge und Andere, Stuttgart, 1906 and in full in: Marx and Engels, Works, First Russian Edition, Vol. XXVII, Moscow, 1935

F. Engels

Printed according to the original

Published in English in full for the first time

232

London, 3 February 1886

My dear Mrs Wischnewetzky,

To-day I forwarded to you, registered, the first portion of the ms. up to your page 70, incl. I am sorry I could not possibly send it sooner. But I had a job on hand which must be finished before I could start with your ms. Now I shall go on swimmingly; as I proceed I find we get better acquainted with each other, you with my peculiar,

[^1]: ENGELS TO FLORENCE KELLEY-WISCHNEWETZKY 5 3 0

[^2]: IN ZURICH

[^3]: See this volume, p. 391.



I do not know whether this portion of the ms. will arrive in time to reach Miss Foster before her sailing, but I hope you will not be put to any particular inconvenience through my delay which was indeed unavoidable. I cannot be grateful enough to all the friends who wish to translate both Marx's and my writings into the various civilised languages and who show their confidence in me by asking me to look over their translations. And I am willing enough to do it, but for me as well as for others the day has but 24 hours, and so I cannot possibly always arrange to please everybody and to chime in with all arrange- ments made.

If I am not too often interrupted in the evenings I hope to be able to send you the remainder of the ms. and possibly also the introduc- tion in a fortnight. This latter may be printed either as a prefaceb or as an appendix." As to the length of it, I am utterly incapable of giv- ing you any idea. I shall try to make it as short as possible, especially as it will be useless for me to try to combat arguments of the Ameri- can press with which I am not even superficially acquainted. Of course if American workingmen will not read their own States' La- bour Reports,514 but trust to politicians' extracts, nobody can help them. But it strikes me that the present chronic depression which seems endless so far, will tell its tale in America as well as in England. America will smash up England's industrial monopoly — whatever there is left of it — but America cannot herself succeed to mat monop- oly. And unless one country has the monopoly of the markets of the world, at least in the decisive branches of trade, the conditions — relatively favourable — which existed here in England from 1848 to 1870, cannot anywhere be reproduced, and even in America the con- dition of the working class must gradually sink lower and lower. For if there are three countries (say England, America and Germany) com- peting on comparatively equal terms for the possession of the Welt-

[^1]: a experiment upon one's own worthless body - b F. Engels, 'The Labor Movement in America. Preface to the American Edition of The Condition of the Working Class in England.-c F. Engels, 'Appendix to the American Edition of The Condition of the Working Class in England.



