---
Volume: 47
Document_Title: "233. Engels to Ferdinand Domela Nieuwenhuis. 4 February . . . "
Page_Range: "426-428"
---

# 233. Engels to Ferdinand Domela Nieuwenhuis. 4 February . . . 



**[p. 397]**

Yours very truly,

F. Engels

First published, in the language of the orig- Reproduced from the original inal (English), in Briefe und Auszüge aus Briefen von Joh. Phil. Becker, Jos. Dietzgen, Friedrich Engels, Karl Marx u. A. an F. A. Sorge und Andere, Stuttgart, 1906

233

IN THE HAGUE

London, 4 February 1886

Dear Comrade,

I am reading your work Hoe ons land geregeerd wordt with great pleasure, firstly because I am relearning a great deal of conversa- tional Dutch therefrom and secondly because I am learning so much about the internal administration of Holland. Along with England and Switzerland, Holland is the only West European country not to have had absolute monarchy in the period between the 16th and 18th centuries, and in consequence enjoys a number of advantages, nota- bly a residue of local and provincial self-government and an absence of any real bureaucracy in the French or Prussian sense. This is a great advantage both as regards the development of a national char- acter and as regards the future; for only a few changes will have to be

[^1]: ENGELS TO FERDINAND DOMELA NIEUWENHUIS 5 3 1

[^2]: a world market





**[p. 398]**

Your translation of my pamphletb places me most deeply in your debt. In this instance it will not be so easy to employ popular lan- guage throughout, as in your little opus, but this should present no problem to someone with so good a command of both languages as yourself.

'Gewanne'' are the strips of land of roughly the same quality into which common agricultural and pasture land is first divided; maybe ten or twenty in all. Then each commoner with full rights is given an equal share of each strip. Thus, if there are ten strips and a hundred commoners, there will be 1,000 parcels of land all told, each com- moner getting 10 parcels, one in each strip. Subsequently commoners may often swap parcels so that though they may have fewer indivi- dual plots, their holdings are more compact. The same thing was still happening until quite lately in Ireland in the 'RUNDALE' 532 villages, and in the Highlands of Scotland (cf. Fortnightly Review, November 1885, an article on VILLAGE COMMUNITIES in Scotland0).

G. L. Maurer has written:

1 ) Einleitung in die Geschichte der Mark-, Hof-, Dorf- und Städteverfas- sung in Deutschland.

2) Geschichte der Markenverfassung in Deutschland. 3) Geschichte der Hofverfassung " " 4 vols. 4) ditto " Städteverfassung " " 2 " 5) ditto " Dorf Verfassung " " 2 " Nos. 1 and 2 are the most important, but the others are not without importance either, particularly as regards German history. Repeti- tiveness, poor style and lack of method make these otherwise excel- lent books difficult to study. On n'est pas Allemand pour rien! d

The best works on the great French Revolution are indubitably those of Georges Avenel who died round about 1875. Lundis révolu- tionnaires, a collection of feuilletons which came out in the République

[^1]: a The manuscript is damaged here. - b F. Engels, De ontwikkeling van het socialisme van utopie tot wetenschap. - c J. Rae, 'The Scotch Village Community', The Fort- nightly Review, Vol. XXXVIII, No. CCXXVII, 1 November 1885.- d One's not a German for nothing.



