---
Volume: 47
Document_Title: "235. Engels to Nikolai Danielson. 8 February "
Page_Range: "429-431"
---

# 235. Engels to Nikolai Danielson. 8 February 



**[p. 400]**

Yours ever,

F.E.

BHre Abca b

First published in: Marx and Engels, Printed according to the original Works, First Russian Edition, Vol. XXVII, Moscow, 1935 Translated from the French

Published in English for the first time

235

ENGELS TO NIKOLAI DANIELSON

London, 8 February 1886

My dear Sir,

I have received your kind letters 18/30 November, 19/31 Decem- ber, 26 [December]/7 January and 8/20 January; also the four copies of the translationc one of which has gone to the British Museum, another to the Coloneld and a third to a lady well knowne who has also translated several works of the Authorf into your language. If you would be good enough to send another copy to Mr Otto Meissner, Hamburg, our German publisher, you would very much oblige me.

[^1]: IN ST PETERSBURG

[^2]: I have read your excellent preface53* with much pleasure, and

[^3]: a of Capital-h (Russ., gen. case) Engels-0 into Russian of the second volume of Capital - d Pyotr Lavrov - e Vera Zasulich - f Karl Marx





**[p. 401]**

I thank you very much for your observations on the economical condition of your country.5 3 5 Anything of this class is always of the highest interest to me. The last 30 years have shown, all over the world, in how little time the immense productive powers of modern industry can be implanted and take a firm root even in countries hitherto purely agricultural. And the phenomena accompanying this process repeat themselves everywhere. What you tell me about pay- ments in coupons not yet due occurred all over Germany ten or fif- teen years ago and may occasionally occur still; but especially before the introduction of the new coinage the complaints about the circula- tion of such coupons, not yet due, and originally given in payment of wages were universal. The rapid development of German manufactu- res has now passed beyond that stage, and if it still occurs it will be an exception; but fifteen years ago it was the rule, especially in Saxony and Thuringia. But that your economists should consider this as a proof of a deficiency of circulating medium, and that in the face of a paper currency depreciated by over-issue at least 36%, that is on a level with the views of the American greenbackers 536 who demanded, too, an increased issue of paper money because that paper money was no longer depreciated and therefore evidently under-issued!

I am glad to learn that our friend b is recommended a change of cli- mate— I suppose it will be about the same where the doctors sent him to before and which seemed to agree well enough with his state of health. At all events this is proof to me that all danger of a sudden crisis in his malady is now over.362

[^1]: I have now at last the whole manuscript of the English translation of Volume I c in my hands and shall go into the revision of it next week, and when I may have an idea how soon I can finish, conclude at once with a publisher. 56 There are two translators, the one a bar- rister and old friend of ours d (you and he are the two men living who know the book most thoroughly) but his professional occupations do

[^2]: s that the variable part of capital value, too - b Hermann Lopatin -c of Cap- ital -d Samuel Moore



