---
Volume: 47
Document_Title: "237. Engels to Laura Lafargue. 9 February "
Page_Range: "432-435"
---

# 237. Engels to Laura Lafargue. 9 February 

Volkszeitung, weekly edition3 of 23 January, but nothing else. You should also have had the September number of To-Day.

Yesterday the gentlemen of the SOCIAL DEMOCRATIC FEDERATION were yet again responsible for a fearful public gaff—as you will already have heard by telegraph.538 With any luck they will now be played out.

How is Adolfb getting along with his business?

Your

F.E.

First published abridged in Briefe und Printed according to the original Auszüge aus Briefen von Joh. Phil. Becker, Jos. Dietzgen, Friedrich Engels, Karl Marx u. A.an F.A.Sorge und Andere, Stuttgart, 1906 and in full in: Marx and Engels, Works, First Russian Edition, Vol. XXVII, Moscow, 1935

237

ENGELS TO LAURA LAFARGUE

London, 9 February 1886

My dear Laura,

Our clever folk of the Social Democratic Federation300 scorn to rest on their laurels. Yesterday they must needs interfere in a meeting of the unemployed — who count now by hundreds of thousands — in order to preach La Révolution — revolution in general, and ask the mass to hold up their hands, those who were ready to follow Mr Champion to—well to what he does not know himself. Hyndman who can only overcome his personal cowardice by deafening himself by his own shouts, went on in the same strain.538 Of course you know what a meeting at 3 p. m. in Trafalgar Square consists of: numbers of the poor devils of the East End who vegetate in the borderland be- tween working class and lumpen proletariat, and a sufficient admix-

[^1]: IN PARIS

[^2]: a Wochenblatt der N. T. Volkszeitung - b Adolf Sorge jun.



ture of roughs and 'Arrys to leaven the whole into a mass ready for any 'lark' up to a wild riot à propos de rien.3 Well just at the time when this element was getting the upper hand (Kautsky who was there 539

says das eigentliche Meeting war vorbei; die Keilerei ging los und so ging ich wegh) the wiseacres above-named took these roughs in procession through Pall Mall and Piccadilly to Hyde Park for another and a truly revolutionary meeting. But on the road the roughs took mat- ters into their own hands, smashed club windows and shop fronts, plundered first wine-stores and baker's shops, and then some jewel- lers' shops also, so that in Hyde Park our revolutionary swells had to preach 'le calme et la modération"! While they were soft-sawdering, the wrecking and plundering went on outside in Audley St. and even as far as Oxford Street where at last the police interfered.

The absence of the police shows that the row was wanted, but that Hyndman and Co. donnaient dans le pièged is impardonable and brands them finally as not only helpless fools but also as scamps. They wanted to wash off the disgrace of their electoral manoeuvres496 and now they have done an irreparable damage to the movement here. To make a revolution — and that à propos de rien,e when and where they liked — they thought nothing else was required but the paltry tricks sufficient to 'boss' an agitation for any vile fad, packing meet- ings, lying in the press, and then, with five and twenty men seemed to back them up, appealing to the masses to 'rise' somehow, as best they might, against nobody in particular and everything in general, and trust to luck for the result. Well I don't know whether they will get over it so easily this time. I should not wonder if they were arres- ted before the week is out. English law is very definite in this respect: you may spout as long as you like, so long as nothing follows; but as soon as any 'overt acts' of rioting ensue, you are held responsible for them, and many a poor devil of a Chartist, Harney and Jones and others, got two years for less. 540 Besides, n'est pas Louise Michel qui veut.Cy*

[^1]: At last I have got nearly the whole of the ms. of the English transla- tion of Volume I s in my hands, the small remnant Edward has promised for Sunday. h 56 I shall go at it this week — the only thing that keeps me from it is the revision of a translation (English) of my old book on

[^2]: a over nothing-b the meeting proper was over; the fight started, so I went away- c calmness and moderation-11 fell into the trap- e for nothing-r not ev- eryone who wishes to can be Louise Michel-8 of Capital-11 14 February



the English working class" by an American ladyb who has also found a publisher for it in America — strange to say! This I do in the eve- nings and shall — unless much interrupted — finish this week. As soon as I see my way to fix a date for the printing to begin, I shall go and see Kegan Paul, and if we do not come to terms with him, go somewhere else, we have hints and offers from more than one. Our position in this respect is much improved. After that,— Volume III, c

and no more interruptions tolerated.

We thought it very strange that Bernstein should have recommend- ed a fellow like Quarck d and asked him. Here is his reply which I give you literally so that there can be no mistake:

'Von einer Quarck-Empfehlung bin ich mir gar nichts bewusst, wie sollte ich einen Mann empfehlen den ich gar nicht kenne? Es ist möglich dass ich auf eine Anfrage einmal geantwortet, der Mann sei kein Parteigenosse, aber es liege nichts gegen ihn vor, aber auch nur möglich Sollte da nicht eine Verwechslung vorliegen? Ich selbst kenne Quarck gar nicht, habe auch noch nie mit ihm korrespondiert. Also wie gesagt, ich bestreite nicht absolut, über Quarck einmal Auskunft erteilt zu haben, aber empfohlen habe ich ihn nicht.c

Pardon me that I bother you again with this affair, but I wish to have this extract forwarded to Paris in the original German. As to the rest I write to Paul about it. Otherwise I wish Deville every happiness in his new ménage1 and hope it will not interfere too much with his regularity of habits. If once settled down in a new routine, he prom- ises to be the best and happiest of husbands.

The people here go on much as usual. Edward has taken a hall in Tottenham Court Road where he preaches twice every Sunday to an attentive and on the whole reasonably well paying audience — it interferes rather with his after-dinner port, but it's a good thing for him as it defeats Bradlaugh's plan to ruin him as a public lecturer, he also goes now and then to provincial towns for 3 lectures on a Sun- day! and one the Saturday evening. Bax is something like Paul, writes

[^1]: a The Condition of the Working-Class in England -h Florence Kelley-Wisch- newetzky -c of Capital-6 See this volume, pp. 384-85. - c 'I am totally in the dark about Quarck's recommendation. How could I give a recommendation to a person of whom I know nothing at alt? It is possible that I could have answered a query to the effect that the man is not a party member, but nothing can be held against him, but this is only a possibility Hasn't there been a mix-up? I myself do not know Quarck at all and have never corresponded with him. So, as I've already said, I can- not say for certain that I haven't given some information about Quarck, but I have ne- ver recommended him.' - r marriage



