---
Volume: 47
Document_Title: "238. Engels to August Bebel. 15 February "
Page_Range: "435-439"
---

# 238. Engels to August Bebel. 15 February 



**[p. 406]**

charming articles often enough in The Commonweal, but utterly unac- countable when an idea runs away with him. For practical agitation poor Bax is most dangerous, being utterly inexperienced; throws the ideas of the study, quite raw, into the meeting-room; has the feeling that something must be done to set the ball rolling, and does not know what; withal very nice, very intelligent, very industrious, so that we may hope he will outlive his zeal.

Yours affectionately,

F. E.

First published, in the language of the Reproduced from the original original (English), in: F. Engels, P. et L. Lafargue, Correspondance, t. I, Paris, 1956

238

ENGELS T O AUGUST BEBEL541

London, 15 February 1886

Dear Bebel,

Your letter could not have arrived at a more opportune moment; I was in any case about to send you some further gladsome news to- day— of which more below.

Now as to the rumpus on the 8th inst. a

Despite publicity to the contrary, the SOCIAL DEMOCRATIC FEDERATION is an exceedingly weak organisation which comprises some good ele- ments but is led by literary and political adventurers who, by a stroke of genius, had brought it to the very verge of dissolution on the occa- sion of the November elections. 496 At the time, Hyndman (pronounc- ed Heindman), head of the society, had accepted money from the Tories (Conservatives) and used it to put up Social Democratic can- didates in two London boroughs. Since they had not a single adher- ent in either constituency, the consequent debacle might have been foreseen (one of them got 27 and the other 32 votes, each out of

[^1]: IN BERLIN

[^2]: See this volume, pp. 403-04.





**[p. 407]**

a possible 4-5,000!). But hardly had Hyndman touched the Tories' money than his head began to swell inordinately, and he departed forthwith for Birmingham where he called on Chamberlain, now a Minister, and offered him his 'support' (amounting, for the whole of England, to barely 1,000 votes) if he, Chamberlain, would secure him, Hyndman, a constituency in Birmingham with the help of the Liberals, and also introduce an Eight Hours' Bill. Chamberlain, be- ing no fool, showed him the door. Despite all attempts to hush up the matter, there was a great rumpus about it in the Federation, and dissolution was imminent. So something had to be done to get things going again.

In the meantime unemployment was steadily rising. As a result of the collapse of Britain's monopoly of the world market, a state of crisis has persisted uninterruptedly since 1878 and is growing worse rather than better. Poverty, particularly in London's East End, is appalling. The winter which, since January, has been exceptionally severe, com- bined with the abysmal indifference of the propertied classes, has giv- en rise to great unrest among the mass of the unemployed. As al- ways, political wire-pullers have sought to exploit that unrest for their own ends. The Conservatives, recently deprived of office,542 blamed unemployment on foreign competition (rightly) and foreign protec- tive tariffs (for the most part wrongly), and advocated 'FAIRTRADE', i. e. retaliatory tariffs. There is also a labour organisation which is predom- inantly in favour of such tariffs.543 This last called the meeting of the 8th inst. in Trafalgar Square.538 Meanwhile the SOCIAL DEMOCRAT- IC FEDERATION had not been idle; having already demonstrated in a minor way, they now sought to take advantage of the afore- mentioned meeting. Thus two meetings took place, that of the reta- liatory tariffs men, round Nelson's Column, the other addressed by the SOCIAL DEMOCRATIC FEDERATION men from a street next to the NA- TIONAL GALLERY, some 25 feet above the north side of the square. Kautsky was present539; he left before the rumpus began and told me that practically all the genuine working men attended the other meeting, while Hyndman & Co. had a mixed audience who were out for a lark, and in some cases were already half seas over. If this was evi- dent to Kautsky who has been here barely a year, it must have been even more so to the gentlemen of the Federation. Nevertheless, when things seemed to be already subsiding, they put into practice an idea long cherished by Hyndman, namely a procession of 'unemployed' along Pall Mall, the street of the great political, aristocratic and



**[p. 408]**

ultra-capitalist clubs which are the hubs of political intrigue in Brit- ain. The unemployed who followed them to another meeting in Hyde Park were mostly of the kind who do not wish to work — barrow-boys, idlers, police spies and rogues. Jeered at by the aristo- crats from the club windows, they smashed the latter, likewise shop windows, and looted wineshops, the better to set up an impromptu consumers' club in the street so that, once in Hyde Park, Hyndman and Co. had hastily to swallow their bloodthirsty slogans and preach moderation. But by now the thing had gathered momentum. During the procession and this further little meeting as well as after it, most of the lumpen proletariat Hyndman had taken for unemployed poured along several of the grander streets nearby, looting jewellers' and other shops, and using the loaves of bread and legs of mutton thus looted solely for the purpose of smashing windows until eventually they scattered without encountering any resistance. Only a few stragglers were dispersed in Oxford Street by four (sic!) policemen.

Otherwise the police were nowhere to be seen, and so conspicuous were they by their absence that it was not only we who believed it to have been intentional. Evidently the chiefs of police are Conserva- tives and not averse to seeing a bit of a rumpus in these days of Liberal rule. However, the government immediately set up a Committee of Inquiry and this may cost more than one of these gentry his position.

In addition, very half-hearted proceedings have been instituted against Hyndman & Co. which, to all appearances, will be allowed to peter out, although English law provides for very stiff sentences the moment inflammatory speeches give way to overt acts. True, the gen- tlemen talked a lot of bunkum about social revolution which, having regard to their audience and in the absence of any organised support amongst the masses, was sheer lunacy, but I can hardly believe that the government would be so stupid as to make martyrs of them. These socialist gents are determined to conjure up overnight a move- ment which, here as elsewhere, necessarily calls for years of work,— though, once it has got going and has been imposed on the masses by historical events, it will admittedly advance far more rapidly here than on the Continent. But men of this type cannot wait — hence these childish pranks such as we are otherwise wont to see only among the anarchists.

The alarm of the philistines lasted four days and has now finally abated. One good thing about it is that the existence of poverty, which the Liberals simply denied and the Conservatives tried to ex-



**[p. 409]**

Now for France. Last week saw an event of an epoch-making kind, namely the constitution of a workers' party in the Chamber. It has only three members, and two Radicals besides,429 but a start has been made and the split is definitive.

Basly (pronounced Bali), a miner and then a landlord (because dis- ciplined) from Anzin, carried out an investigation on the spot of the killing of the infamous pit manager Watrin in Decazeville. 545 On his return, he first communicated his findings to a big meeting held on the 7 th in Paris, in the course of which the Radicals from the Cham- ber came off very badly. b On Thursday in the Chamber he made a really splendid speech when he questioned the Ministry.c He was left in the lurch by the whole of the extreme Left. The only ones to speak in support of him were the two other working men, Boyer (of Mar- seilles, ex-anarchist) and Camélinat (ex-Proudhonist, Communard refugee), besides which he was applauded by Clovis Hugues and Planteau, while the other extreme Radicals were as if thunderstruck by this first bold, independent move on the part of the French prole- tariat in the Chamber.

(Between ourselves, Basly is completely under the influence of our men, Lafargue, Guesde, etc., of whose theoretical advice he is greatly in need and which he gladly accepts.)

I am sending you the Cri du Peuple with a full account of this histor- ic sitting which I suggest you study. It's well worth the trouble. The importance of the rupture has been confirmed by Longuet who has just been over here and who, as Clemenceau's friend and fellow- editor, spoke with some disapproval of this unparliamentary behav- iour on the part of the workers.

[^1]: a 13 February-b See E.J.Basly's speech at a meeting in Théâtre du Château d'Eau on 7 February 1886 (Le Socialiste, No. 25, 13 February 1886). -c See Basly's speech in the Chamber of Deputies on 11 February 1886 (Le Cri du Peuple, No. 837, 12 February 1886).



