---
Volume: 47
Document_Title: "239. Engels to Paul Lafargue. 16 February "
Page_Range: "439-443"
---

# 239. Engels to Paul Lafargue. 16 February 

The best part of it is that the Radicals proposed these chaps in the hope of being able to manipulate them, and now their trouble has been for nothing. I, too, felt very doubtful about Camélinat as a former Proudhonist, but a point in his favour was that, when he came here as a refugee, he immediately sought work in Birmingham (he is one of the best engravers) and had nothing to do with refugee politics.

Time for the post.

Your

F.E.

First published, in Russian, in Marx- Printed according to the original Engels Archives, Vol. I (VI), Moscow, 1932 „ , ,. , , . _ ,. , . . ,, . ' Published in English m full for the first time

239

[London,] 16 February 1886

My dear Lafargue,

My congratulations. The sitting of the French Chamber on the 11 th was an historical event. a The ice — the parliamentary omnipotence of the Radicals 4 2 9—has been broken and it matters little whether those who dared to break it numbered three or thirty. And it was this superstition amongst the Parisian working men — this belief that by going further than the Radicals they would endanger the Republic or

[^1]: ENGELS TO PAUL LAFARGUE 5 4 6

[^2]: IN PARIS

[^3]: [Excerpt]

[^4]: See previous letter.





[^1]: ^ay- $?<f Cfemp* . foi Tïj OUrrujf

[^2]: Miners on strike in Decazeville, January 1£





This is the definitive defeat of Utopian socialism in France. For the Radicals were all 'socialists' in the old sense of the term. What sur- vived of Louis Blanc's and Proudhon's dieses served them as socialist trappings; they represent French Utopian socialism stripped of the Utopias and hence reduced to a phrase pure and simple. On 11 Feb- ruary this antiquated French socialism was crushed by the interna- tional socialism of today. The Poverty of Philosophy!

So far as your propaganda in Paris and in France generally is con- cerned, this is an event of prime importance. The effect will be felt very quickly. The Radicals — whether they make a clean break with the workers or whether they temporise by granting them more or less sterile concessions — will lose their influence over the masses and, along with that influence, such little potency as is left in traditional socialism will be lost, and people's minds will become more receptive to a new order of ideas

Za has left me in no doubt that Clemenceau and the rest of his gang, embroiled as they are in ministerial intrigues, have caught the parliamentary disease, that they no longer see clearly what is going on outside the Palais Bourbon and the Luxembourg, that it is here that, for them, the pivot of the movement lies and that, in their eyes, extra-parliamentary France is of no more than secondary impor- tance. All this has given me the measure of these gentlemen.

In short I have seen thatflectere si nequeo superos, Acheronta moveboh

is not to their taste. Their backsides are seated on the same chute as that down which Ranc, Gambetta & Co. once slid. What frightens them is the proletarian Acheron.

I told Z: So long as the Radicals allow themselves to be fright- ened, as for example at the inconclusive elections, by the cry 'The Republic is in danger', they will be nothing more than the servants of the Opportunists, will act as their cat's paw. But give each work- man a gun and 50 cartridges and the Republic will never again be in danger!

[^1]: First published in Le Socialiste, No. 115, Printed according to the newspaper Paris, 24 novembre 1900 ,_ , , ,. _ , 1 ranslated Irom the r rench

[^2]: * Presumably Charles Longuet. - b If Heaven be inflexible, Hell shall be unleashed (Virgil, Aeneid, VII, 312).



