---
Volume: 47
Document_Title: "240. Engels to Eduard Bernstein. 24 February "
Page_Range: "443-444"
---

# 240. Engels to Eduard Bernstein. 24 February 



**[p. 240]**

ENGELS TO EDUARD BERNSTEIN 5 4 7

IN HOTTINGEN-ZURICH

[London, 24 February 1886]

Dear Ede,

Your articles3 on the subject of C. A. Schrammb were very nice and caused us much glee. The man's pretty well done for.

The new turn things have taken in France is most significant. See Cri du Peuple. On the 7th, Château d'Eau meeting0 at which Basly disassociated himself from the Radicals.429 On the 11th, in the Chamber, Basly's interpellation re Decazeville,d seconded by Camé- linat and Boyer, applauded by Clovis Hugues and Planteau — separation from the Radicals, formation of parliamentary workers' party.e

Splendid entrée en scène. Great chagrin of the Radicals over these highly unparliamentary goings-on. The three working men are to be punished by a vote of no confidence on the part of the bourgeois constituents. Meeting called at Château d'Eau for 21 inst, but can- celled upon the three declaring their intention to attend. Instead a meeting du commercent the Château d'Eau announced, to discuss pub- lic works for the benefit of the unemployed, in fact for the purpose of obtaining a vote of censure against the 3. But instead a great victory for the working men, Basly in the chair, the bourgeois walk out, brilliant speech by Guesde. See Cri du Peuple of 23rd inst. g

The French parliamentary workers' party is a great historic event and a great stroke of luck for Germany. Will make certain persons in

[^1]: a [E.Bernstein,] 'Ein moralischer Kritiker und seine kritische Moral', Der Sozial- demokrat, Nos. 4-7, 21 and 28 January, 5 and 12 February 1886.- b G A.S[chramm], Rodbertus, Marx, Lassalle. - c See E. J. Basly's speech at a meeting in Théâtre du Château d'Eau on 7 February 1886 {Le Socialiste, No. 25, 13 February 1886). -d See Basly's speech in the Chamber of Deputies on 11 February 1886 (Le Cri du Peuple, No. 837, 12 February 1886).- e See this volume, p. 409.- r of business people- 8 J. Guesde's speech at a meeting of business people (Le Cri du Peuple, No. 848, 23 February 1886).



