---
Volume: 47
Document_Title: "241. Engels to Florence Kelley- Wischnewetzky. 25 February . . . "
Page_Range: "444-446"
---

# 241. Engels to Florence Kelley- Wischnewetzky. 25 February . . . 

Your

F.E.

First published, in Russian, in Marx- Printed according to the original Engels Archives, Book I Moscow, 1924 „ , , . , , . „ , . , , . Published in tnghsh for the first time

241

ENGELS TO FLORENCE KELLEY-WISCHNEWETZKY 5 4 8

IN ZURICH

London, 25 February 1886

Dear Mrs Wischnewetzky,

To-day mailed to you, registered, the rest of the ms. with my — introduction or postscript3 6 ° — according to where it may suit you to place it. I believe the title had better be a simple translation: The ' Condition of the Working Class in England in 1844, etc.

I am glad that all obstacles to publication have been successfully overcome. Only I am sorry that Miss Foster has applied to the Execu- tive of the Sozialistische Arbeiterpartei in New York,549 as appears from their report of meeting in Der Sozialist, New York, 13th Febru- ary. Neither Marx nor myself have ever committed the least act which might be interpreted into asking any Working Organisation to do us any personal favour—and this was necessary not only for the sake of our own independence but also on account of the constant bourgeois denunciations of 'demagogues who coax the workmen out of their hard-earned pennies in order to spend them for their own purposes'. I shall therefore be compelled to inform that Executive that this application was made entirely without my knowledge or au- thority. Miss Foster no doubt acted in what she thought the best way, and this step of hers is in itself no doubt perfectly admissible; still, if I could have foreseen it, I should have been compelled to do every- thing in my power to prevent it. 5 5 0

The semi-Hegelian language of a good many passages of my old book is not only untranslatable but has lost the greater part of its meaning even in German. I have therefore modernised it as much as possible.

Yours very truly,

F. Engels

[^1]: First published, in the language of the orig- Reproduced from the original inal (English), in Briefe und Auszüge aus Briefen von Joh. Phil. Becker, Jos. Dietzgen, Friedrich Engels, Karl Marx u. A. an F.A. Sorge und Andere, Stuttgart, 1906

[^2]: Wage Labour and Capital-b Socialism: Utopian and Scientific



