---
Volume: 47
Document_Title: "242. Engels to Wilhelm Liebknecht. 25 February "
Page_Range: "446-447"
---

# 242. Engels to Wilhelm Liebknecht. 25 February 



**[p. 242]**

ENGELS TO WILHELM LIEBKNECHT

IN BORSDORF NEAR LEIPZIG 3 4

London, 25 February 1886

Dear Liebknecht,

It's really quite impossible to do anything about getting your Rus- sian speecha 5 5 ' published in this country for, as you know, the big newspapers are barred to us and the monthly Commonweal is too small to take on that sort of thing. You will have to see to the matter yourselves, e. g. by getting in touch with the Standard correspondent as Longuet, for instance, did in Paris with Mother Crawford, the Daily News correspondent. Knowing that the Reichstag has no real sa^y in anything, the British press very rarely mentions it, save for quite short telegrams. If you had not virtually confined yourself to Faerber's view of the harm suffered by German capitalists,15 but had introduced the present eastern imbroglio445 and blamed it on Bis- marck as the man who, because of the loan, has the Russians eating out of his hand, your speech could not have been passed over in complete silence. But what you say about the worthlessness of Russian paper is common knowledge even in this country.

Now as regards those charming German literati who infest the neutral border zone between ourselves and the armchair54 and state socialists, and want to pocket all the advantages to be derived from our party while carefully shielding themselves against any disadvan- tage arising out of intercourse with us— I've just had another demon- stration of what shits the said literati are. An importunate fellow by the name of Max Quarck — nomen est omenc—wrote to me saying that Deville in Paris had given him exclusive rights to translate his abridg- ment of Capital, and asking me to recommend him to Meissner and write a. preface for him.d It was all a lie, a fact of which I have received confirmation from Paris and as he himself informed Kautsky in a let- ter the selfsame day. And now the wretch has the effrontery to suggest

[^1]: * Liebknecht's speech in the Reichstag on 8 February 1886 (Stenographische Berichte über die Verhandlungen des Reichstags. VI. Legislaturperiode. II. Session 1885186, Vol. II).- b See this volume, p. 338.- c the name tells all (Quark = curd or cottage cheese in German; fig. rubbish) -d See this volume, pp. 384-85 and 405.



