---
Volume: 47
Document_Title: "243. Engels to Hermann Schlüter. 3 March "
Page_Range: "447-448"
---

# 243. Engels to Hermann Schlüter. 3 March 



**[p. 418]**

You people will find you have competitors in France. The three working men, Basly, Boyer and Camélinat, since joined by Clovis Hugues, have set themselves up in the Chamber as a socialist labour groupa in opposition to the Radicals,429 and when, at a meeting last Sunday, the Radicals tried to inveigle the constituents into passing a vote of no confidence, they met with a resounding defeat — so much so that at the meeting they themselves had convened, the Radicals did not dare to open their mouths.b These three French working men will make more of an impact in Europe than your 25 because they sit in a Chamber which, unlike the Reichstag, is not a debating society, and because they have shaken themselves free of the milk-and-water petty-bourgeois following which hangs like a millstone round your necks. Clemenceau is now faced with a last crucial decision, but we can be almost sure that he will not hesitate to join the bourgeois camp, in which case, though he will indeed become a minister, he will be done for.

Your

F.E.

243

ENGELS TO HERMANN SCHLÜTER

[London,] 3 March 1886

Dear Sir,

Would you kindly send Williams & Norgate, 14 Henrietta St., Covent Garden, London—1 copy of Socialism: Utopian etc. together

[^1]: First published, in Russian, in Marx- Printed according to the original Ensels Archives, Vol. I (VI), Moscow, 1932 n i . i - i . j - r i- u r .u r . * \ i' > Published in English for the first time

[^2]: IN HOTTINGEN-ZURICH

[^3]: See this volume, pp. 409-10. -h Ibid., p. 414.



