---
Volume: 47
Document_Title: "244. Engels to Florence Kelley- Wischnewetzky. 12 March . . . . "
Page_Range: "448-449"
---

# 244. Engels to Florence Kelley- Wischnewetzky. 12 March . . . . 



**[p. 419]**

with bill (incl. postage) in a wrapper—these people applied to me (they are my booksellers and, incidentally, publishers, a big firm) and I wrote and told them that my things are always to be had from the Volksbuchhandlung."

Mrs Wischnewetzky played you a rotten trick with her ms.349 For upon her insisting it was a matter of life and death, I had to buckle to straight away, and now the English translation of Capital has got to be done without delay, competition having cropped up (see To- Day) 527 in a menacing form. So if all is not to be lost, I must forge ahead and drop everything else, including the Peasant War.213 The rival translation is, by the way, quite shocking, but so much the worse if it's not elbowed out forthwith.

Kindest regards,

Yours,

F.E.

First published in: Marx and Engels, Printed according to the original Works, First Russian Edition, Vol. ™ . .• , , • T, ,-. r . w , r T T , , .„„, Published in English lor the hrst XXVII, Moscow, 1935 5

244

London, 12 March 1886

Dear Mrs Wischnewetzky,

Deep buried as I am in the English Capital,56 I have only the time to write a few lines in haste. It did not require all your exposition of the circumstances to convince me that you were perfectly innocent of what had been done in America with your translation.11 The thing is done and can't be helped, though we both are convinced that it was a mistake.0

[^1]: time

[^2]: ENGELS T O FLORENCE KELLEY-WISCHNEWETZKY 2 7

[^3]: IN ZURICH

[^4]: * a Social Democratic bookshop in Zurich - b the English translation of Engels' The Condition of the Working-Class in England-' See this volume, pp. 415-16.



