---
Volume: 47
Document_Title: "245. Engels to Pasquale Martignetti. 12 March "
Page_Range: "449-450"
---

# 245. Engels to Pasquale Martignetti. 12 March 



**[p. 420]**

I thank you for pointing out to me a passage in the appendix 552

which indeed is far from clear. The gradation from the Polish Jew to the Hamburger, and from the Hamburger again to the Manchester merchant does not at all come out to the front. So I have tried to alter it in a way which may meet both your and my own objection to it and hope I have succeeded.

And now I cannot conclude without expressing to you my most sincere thanks to you for the very great trouble you have taken to re- vive, in English, a book of mine which is half-forgotten in the original German.

Ever at your service as far as my time and powers allow, believe me, dear Mrs Wischnewetzky

Yours very faithfully,

F. Engels

The dedication to the English working men should be left out.359

It has no meaning to-day.

First published abridged, in the language Reproduced from the original of the original (English), in Briefe und Aus- züge aus Briefen von Joh. Phil. Becker, Jos. Dietzgen, Friedrich Engels, Karl Marx u.A. an F.A. Sorge und Andere, Stuttgart, 1906 and in full in: Marx and Engels, Works, First Russian Edition, Vol. XXVII, Moscow, 1935

245

ENGELS TO PASQJJALE MARTIGNETTI

London, 12 March 1886

Dear Citizen,

Please excuse the belated reply. I have received your kind letter of 8 February and the manuscript,a

which I shall deal with as soon as possible. But at the moment I am

[^1]: IN BENEVENTO

[^2]: of the Italian translation of Marx's Wage Labour and Capital



