---
Volume: 47
Document_Title: "246. Engels to Hermann Schlüter. 12 March "
Page_Range: "450-452"
---

# 246. Engels to Hermann Schlüter. 12 March 



**[p. 421]**

obliged before anything else to check through the English translation of Capital, Volume I, which is most pressing and must be printed without delay 5 6; it is no easy task. When I have a free moment I shall devote it to your work.

I have also received, and I thank you for them, the 6 copies of the Origin etc.302

I am sorry that my error 'Paolo' caused you inconvenience. 5 5 3

I shall not repeat it.

I must get hold of the calendar in order to restore the passage that was stuck and illegible 5 5 4; I hope to find it here in London at a friend's house; this is another cause of delay.

I am sorry I cannot do better and more quickly than this, but the English Capital must take precedence; in any case I am committed by a deadline to the publisher. a

With respect I remain

F. Engels

I hope to spare some time in April on Wage Labour and Capital.

Printed according to the book

Translated from the Italian

Published in English for the first time

246

ENGELS TO HERMANN SCHLÜTER

IN HOTTINGEN-ZURICH

Dear M r Schlüter,

If I a m to send you a speedy reply, I shall have to be brief.

First published in La corrispondenza di Marx e Engels con italiani. 1848-1895, Milano,

1964

[^1]: London, 12 M a r c h b 1886

[^2]: 1) T h e m a n with the money has not yet turned up. 2) We have Lexis 0 here. Thanks for the hint.

[^3]: a William Swan Sonnenschein -b May in the original. - c W. Lexis, 'Die Marx'sche Kapital théorie', Jahrbücher für Nationalökonomie und Statistik, Vol. 11, Jena, 1885.





**[p. 422]**

4) Reports of the International.556 I was in Manchester at the time and can't really remember the details. The General Council did, at any rate, send a MESSAGE to all the congresses, but Marx's papers and pamphlets are all of them still in the unsorted state they were in when I lugged them over here and it will take about 6 weeks to put them in order. However I've asked Kautsky to make in- quiries from Lessner; I should be very surprised if he hasn't collected everything.

5) Stephens' Speech. 557 Yes, the thing is by Weerth. As to the introduction, I shall be glad to go through your ms. But here too there are few sources and the bourgeois have been responsi- ble for some serious falsification. Last year Harney scoured the whole of Yorkshire, Lancashire and London for one copy of The Northern Star, the paper which he had edited and which had had a circulation of 100,000 copies. In vain. Evanescence — such is the curse that af- flicts all proletarian literature not included in official literature. Thus Owen's works are nowhere to be had and the BRITISH MUSEUM would pay a great deal of money for a complete collection. A genuine ac- count will therefore be difficult. The Brentanos and Co. know nothing. The Charter ' ° ' was drawn up in 1835, not 1838, and O'Connelb was also involved if I'm not mistaken. What Brentano says about the peti- tion is utter nonsensec; after 10 April the bourgeois of both parties stuck together and in such a case lies are always disseminated, it being impossible to refute them either in Parliament or in the press. Even if a House of Commons Committee did scrutinise the petition (which I very much doubt), it would have been quite in- capable of distinguishing the genuine from the bogus. 558 But in the spring of 1848, no one was able to take much interest in such dirty

[^1]: a F. Engels, The Origin of the Family, Private Property and the State. - b O'Connell in the original.-0 L.Brentano, 'Die englische Chartistenbewegung', Preußische Jahr- bücher, Nos. 5, 6, Berlin, 1874.



