---
Volume: 47
Document_Title: "247. Engels to Laura Lafargue. 15- 16 March "
Page_Range: "452-455"
---

# 247. Engels to Laura Lafargue. 15- 16 March 

goings-on; there were other things to do. Besides, we weren't in England.

With kindest regards,

Yours,

F. Engels

First published in: Marx and Engels, Printed according to the original Works, First Russian Edition, Vol. XXVII, „ , , . , , . „ , . , , . , ,. Moscow, 1935 Published in English for the first time

247

ENGELS T O LAURA LAFARGUE

IN PARIS

London, 15-16 March 1886

My dear Laura,

You complain of the weather, and you are in Paris! Look at us here — nothing above freezing-point for the last ten days, a cutting east wind, of which you don't know which is the worst, the north-east or the south-east,— and to-night a fresh couche de neige3' on streets and roofs. Nim is at her second cold, but it's getting better, I had one too, Pumps and Percy are in the same boat too, fortunately the children are well. However there must be an end to this some time, only I wish it would come.

The English Capital is at last getting into shape and form.56

T have the whole ms. here and begun revising. Saving the 1st chapter which will require a severe overhauling, the first 200 pages of the orig- inal German are ready to go to press. I saw Kegan Paul last week, declined his proposals of two years ago and submitted mine. They were accepted in principle. This, with a man like Kegan Paul who is on all hands described as extremely slipping, means very little, and I expect there will be a tussle with him yet. But that matters nothing at all, because our position in the market has improved wonderfully and we have at least one other good firm who will be glad to take it on

[^1]: " cover of snow



very favourable terms. As soon as the thing is concluded I will let you know.

The book will be published end of September so as not to come out in the dead season, and this gives me time to do the revising work thor- oughly. Practically 300 pages of the original are revised, but the last 500 I have not as yet looked at, and there are some very difficult chapters there. And it would never do to hurry over them.

Broadhouse-Hyndman goes on translating 'from the original Ger- man' in To-Day.527 He has in the sixth monthly number just finished Chapter I. But his 'original German' is the French translation now, and he insists on proving that with French he can play ducks and drakes quite as much as with German. The thing does so little harm, so far, that Kegan Paul never even mentioned it. But it "has done this good that I have got Moore and Edward to finish their work. You have no idea how difficult it is to get hold of this To-Day. I have paid in advance but have to dun them almost every month for my copy, moreover it comes out at all times of the next month. Tussy last year went and paid for a copy to be sent to you but as far as I have heard it was never sent! However there is nothing whatever in it except — Christian Socialism!

You will have seen from Justice— that at least you do receive in ex- change for the Socialiste — how Hyndman keeps up his alliance with Brousse and even ignores the new proletarian party in the Cham- ber. 559

To me, this appearance of a. parti ouvriera in the Palais Bourbon, is the great event of the year. The ice is now broken with which the Radi- cals429 had so far succeeded to cover the working masses of France. These Radicals are now forced to come out in their true colours, or else follow the lead of Basly. The latter they will not do for long, nor willingly. Whatever they do, they must alienate the masses and drive them to us, and that quick. Events move rapidly, the Decazeville af- fair could not come more opportunely than it has done.545 C'est coup sur coup!0 And a very good thing it is that this takes place not in Paris but in one of the darkest and most reactionary and clerical corners of la province. I am exceedingly curious to learn how the affair has ter- minated to-day in the Chamber." But whatever is done, must turn out to our benefit.

[^1]: a workers' party- b One follows upon another. -c See this volume, p. 428.



The reappearance of France on the scene of the proletarian move- ment 'comme grande puissance'a will have a tremendous effect every- where, especially in Germany and America; in Germany I have done my best to let them know the full importance of the event, and sent Basly's speechb to Bebel; Camélinatc will follow as soon as I get it back from Kautsky. How furious Longuet must be that his old friend and as he believed protege Camélinat has turned his back upon him!

At the same time, our Paris friends have done whatever they could to pave the way so that the event, when it came, found a terrain préparé? Their action since the elections has been perfectly correct — their attempt to rally all revolutionary proletarian elements, their forbearance towards the Possibilists,237 their limiting their attacks to those points and facts which showed Brousse and Co. as simple ob- stacles to union — all this was just what it should have been. And they are now reaping the fruits: Brousse has been driven into a position where he must find fault with Basly and Co. and thereby sever the last bond which still united him to the movement of the masses. Savoir attendre"—that is what our friends have learnt at last, and that will carry them through. Paul will be, if he likes, in the Palais Bourbon be- fore Longuet.

A citoyen Hermann has applied to me for an addressed adhesion to what I suppose is your meeting on the 18th.560 I send itr to you here- with 1 ) to be sure that it falls into the proper hands and 2) that you and Paul may look over and mend my rickety French.

Now good night, it's one o'clock and I must look over some papers yet to get them out of the way of to-morrow. Kind regards to Paul.

Yours most affectionately,

F. Engels

It sounds rather different to all previous ordres du jour voted under similar circumstances. It is a decided victory for us, and Freycinet too

[^1]: 16th March. Just seen the ordre dujours adopted by the Chamber.11

[^2]: a 'as a great power'- b E.J. Basly's speech in the Chamber of Deputies on 11 February 1886 {Le Cri du Peuple, No. 837, 12 February 1886).-f Z.R. Ca- mélinat's speech in the Chamber of Deputies on 11 March 1886 (Le Cri du Peuple, No. 866, 13 March 1886).-d fertilised soil-c To be able to wait-1 F. Engels, 'On the Anniversary of the Paris Commune'.- 8 Order of the Day- h 'Règle- ment de l'ordre du jour', Le Cri du Peuple, No. 867, 14 March 1886.



