---
Volume: 47
Document_Title: "248. Engels to August Bebel. 18 March "
Page_Range: "455-459"
---

# 248. Engels to August Bebel. 18 March 



**[p. 426]**

pfeift aus einem andern Loch als früher? La situation devient sérieuse pour MM. les Radicaux.h

First published, in the language of the Reproduced from the original original (English), in: F. Engels, P. et L. Lafargue, Correspondance, t. I, Paris, 1956

248

ENGELS TO AUGUST BEBEL521

IN PLAUEN NEAR DRESDEN

London, 18 March 1886

Dear Bebel,

I am up to my eyes in the revision of the English translation of Cap- ital, Volume I, which is at last on the point of coming out,56 but since the business of Liebknecht's fund is urgent, I shall have to take a moment or two so as to be able to answer your letter quickly. Here- with, then my contribution,— a cheque for £10 on the UNION BANK OF London.561

Many thanks for the Anti-Socialist Law and spirits monopoly de- bates c and the Bürger-Leitung.

It is indeed striking how faithfully the Anti-Socialist Law debate reflects the mood of the majority in the parliamentary group. Unable, presumably, to do as they wished they had, willy-nilly, to voice rela- tively correct opinions, and the impression made by the debate is, on the whole, very good, particularly since Singer was compelled by the Ihring case562 to speak pretty sharply. In general these people, not excepting even Frohme, are not too bad when they have to come out against the police, either in their own interests or in those of their con- stituents and hence keep the worthy citizen well out of sight, for one of their besetting sins is this very worthiness which seeks to convince an opponent rather than fight him because 'our cause is, after all, so noble and so just' that any other worthy citizen is bound to come over

[^1]: " sings another tune than before-1' The situation is getting grave for Messrs the Radicals. -c See Berliner Volksblatt, Nos. 42, 43, 54-56; 19 and 20 February and 5-7 March 1886 (Supplement).





**[p. 427]**

to us if only he can be made to understand it aright. This appeal to worthy sentiments, which neither recognises nor wishes to recognise the interests by which those sentiments are unconsciously motivated, is one of the chief characteristics of the philistinism which is peculiar to Germany and would be impossible over here or in France, either in parliament or in literature.

Never have I come across anything so tedious as the spirits debate; even Bamberger's jokes were as bad as ever, if not worse. So what matter if, after that, Schumacher also spoke tediously, proceeding to make what amounted to a naked appeal for 'étatisation" [Verstaat- lichungs]. Richter's speech, based on statistics, was quite the best.

I would not venture to pass judgment on Liebknecht's speech as re- ported in the Bürger-Leitung. So much depends on nuances and the manner in which something is said and, in a summarised report, all that gets lost.563

I have not seen the account by Kautsky of which you speak. But as regards Hyndman, his behaviour in Trafalgar Square and Hyde Park on 8 February did far more harm than good.538 Revolutionary rant- ing, which in France would be seen as the outmoded rubbish it is and do no harm, is sheer folly over here, where the masses are totally un- prepared; it puts off the proletariat, encouraging only the worthless elements and, in this country, lends itself to but one interpretation, namely incitement to looting which in fact ensued, so that we shall be lastingly discredited over here, even in the eyes of the working class. As for its having drawn attention to socialism, you over there cannot know the extent to which, after centuries of freedom of the press and of assembly and its accompanying publicity, the public has become completely impervious to such methods. True, the initial alarm of the middle classes was quite funny, and brought in a subscription of some £40,000 for the unemployed — in all about £70,000 — but that has already been spent, nothing else is forthcoming and poverty is as be- fore. What has been achieved is to equate socialism with looting in the minds of the bourgeois public and, while this may not have made matters much worse, it has certainly got us no further. You might think that Hyndman showed great courage and so it might seem. But Hyndman, as I have learnt from Morris and others, is a coward and has behaved as such on crucial occasions. This doesn't prevent him, having once got himself into a dangerous fix, from drowning his cowardice in his own clamour and giving vent to the most bloodthirsty utterances. But this only makes him all the more of a menace to his



**[p. 428]**

colleagues — for no one, neither he nor they, can tell beforehand what he is going to do. Fortunately the whole business has been pretty well forgotten over here.

I wholly agree with your view that periods of prosperity of over 6 months will cease to recur. The only prospect of a reactivation of trade — directly where iron, at any rate, is concerned and otherwise indirectly — lies in the possible opening up of China to railway con- struction and hence the destruction of the only remaining closed and self-sufficient civilisation based on a combination of agriculture and handicrafts. But 6 months will be enough to discount that, after which we shall, perhaps, experience yet another acute crisis. Apart from destroying Britain's monopoly of the world market, the new methods of communication— the electric telegraph, the railways, the Suez Canal and the supplanting of sail by steam — have gone some way towards breaking down the ten-year industrial cycle. If China is opened up, not only will overproduction risk losing its last safety- valve, but emigration from China will assume such massive propor- tions that this alone will suffice to revolutionise conditions of produc- tion throughout America, Australia and India, even to the extent of affecting Europe — if it lasts itself till then.

Bismarck's folly is indeed becoming excessive. But it has one recur- ring theme — more moneyl His craziest schemes always and infallibly involve the voting of subsidies, and the National-Liberal gents243

seem to have a positive passion for providing him with yet more cash.

The rights of Labour—it's absolutely unheard-of! And as if that was not enough, a decision unfavourable to the company which is wholly dependent on a state concession and now sees the terms of that concession turned against itself. All this, of course, is still on paper,

[^1]: Another victory in France. Camélinat's question3 about Deca- zeville545 provoked a three-day debate, while on Saturday,13 7 mo- tions to proceed to the Order of the Day were thrown out, until finally the government and the Radical gents429 agreed a resolu- tion c unprecedented in French parliamentary history and which was passed on Monday 5 6 4: That this Chamber proceed to the Order of the Day, confident that the Government will move all the necessary amendments to mining legislation and that its conduct in Decazeville will be dictated by the rights of the State and the interests of Labour.

[^2]: a See Z. R. Camélinat's speech in the Chamber of Deputies on 11 March 1886 (Le Cri du Peuple, No. 866, 13 March 1886). - b 13 March - c 'Règlement de l'ordre du jour', Le Cri du Peuple, No. 867, 14 March 1886.





**[p. 429]**

but for a first step it's enough. The whole political situation in France has been revolutionised by the initiative of the three working men. The Radicals, who also call themselves socialists and who are, in fact, the representatives of French national socialism, of what survives of Proudhon and Louis Blanc, but who, as ministerial candidates, must make sure of keeping in with the republican bourgeoisie, are now compelled to show themselves in their true colours. The cool, almost hostile attitude they adopted from the outset towards the labour deputies, has shown the mass of the workers what is what; suddenly the latter see, alongside the 'eddicated' Radicals, genuine working-class so- cialists whom they joyously acclaim. The Radicals, incl. Clemenceau, must either temporarily renounce their ministerial aspirations and follow in Basly's and Camélinat's footsteps, or jeopardise their re- election. All of a sudden the question of capital and labour is included in the agenda, albeit as yet in very elementary form (rates of pay, the right to strike and, possibly, mining on a cooperative basis), but nevertheless it's there and there to stay. Since the workers of France, however, had received such a first-rate grounding from their history and from the altogether outstanding behaviour of our people during the past 2 years, nothing more was required to spark off the explosion but an event such as the Decazeville strike, combined with the stupid- ity of the Radicals in including 3 working men in their list of candi- dates. Now things will move fast in France. You'll have seen how afraid the Radicals are from the resolutions taken by the municipal councils of Paris, Lyons, etc., to vote money for the Decazeville strik- ers^ This again is unprecedented.

Time for the post, too late for registration. Please send me a post- card acknowledging receipt of the cheque.

Your

F.E.

[^1]: If that's the state your voice is in, don't go to America.5 ' 8 The de- mands made on the vocal chords by what is universal practice there far exceed anything you can imagine. But anyway we shall look for- ward to seeing you over here in the autumn.

[^2]: First published, in Russian, in Marx- Engels Archives, Vol. I (VI), Moscow, 1932

[^3]: Printed according to the original

[^4]: Published in English in full for the first time

[^5]: a See Le Socialiste, Nos. 28 and 29, 6 and 13 March 1886.



