---
Volume: 47
Document_Title: "251. Engels to August Bebel. 12 April "
Page_Range: "462-465"
---

# 251. Engels to August Bebel. 12 April 



**[p. 433]**

Please accept my apologies for the inconvenience caused by my clumsiness.

Yours sincerely,

F. Engels

First published, in Russian, in Gruppa Printed according to the original 'Osvobozhdeniye truda', No. 1, Moscow, 1924

Translated from the French

Published in English for the first time

251

ENGELS TO AUGUST BEBEL

IN LEIPZIG

London, 12 April 1886 Dear Bebel,

Thank you for the debate on the Anti-Socialist Law—it pleased me tremendously.571 Here again we have something that does credit to the movement and this is the impression it gives from beginning to end. Even Liebknecht was quite his old self again; competition from the French seems to have had a good effect on him.a I like the spec- tacle of the whole gang—or pack of dogs ramer—crowding round you barking and snapping, only to be beaten off by the lash of a whip. What a mercy that, apart from you and Liebknecht, only Vollmar spoke a word or two, and that Singer, the victim of a concerted at- tack, was compelled to hit back hard, while the tractable majority held their tongues.

The gentlemen's fears about regicide are too ludicrous. Surely they or their fathers have all of them sung:

[^1]: Has ever man had such hard luck As our poor Burgomaster Tschech, He shot at Fatty two paces away And yet his bullet went astray.

[^2]: a See this volume, pp. 424-25.





**[p. 434]**

True, the German bourgeoisie still had some vitality in those days; another example of the difference is that 1844 saw the appearance of Das Lied von Freifrau von Droste-Vischering,572 whereas now the Kultur- kampf162 is being waged with the most humdrum weapons wielded by the most flaccid hands.

The socialists here have been acquitted.538 I am sending you to- day's copy of the highly Conservative Standard (also a Cri du Peuple) containing an account of the final hearing." You will be able to see from it how a judge goes about his business in England (though ad- mittedly not in Ireland}.). Translated from legal jargon, what he said was: The law on seditious speeches applies to the accused, but the law is outdated and invalid in practice. Otherwise you would have to convict every radical spokesman and minister. All you have to ask yourselves, therefore, is this: Was it, or was it not, the intention of the accused that there should be looting on 8 February?b And Cave is one of England's 16 principal judges.

The verdict is a fine advertisement for Hyndman, but it has come too late. He has contrived to ruin his organisation beyond hope of re- pair; in London it's fizzling out, while in the provinces the various or- ganisations have adopted a neutral, wait-and-see attitude to the rifts down here. Summa summarum the two organisations—FEDERATION and LEAGUE 346—have a combined paid-up membership of less than 2,000 and their papers0 a combined readership of less than 5,000—the majority being sympathisers in the persons of bourgeois, priests, literati, etc. As things are now, it is truly fortunate that these im- mature elements are failing to penetrate the masses. They must first complete the process of fermentation, after which all may be well.

For the rest, one might almost be back in the days of the Interna- tional. Only this morning a whole stack of German, French, Spanish and Belgian papers arrived and are taking up time I ought to be de- voting to the English translation of Capital.56 I only hope there isn't a bust-up before I've managed to finish the 3rd volume—after that it can come, so far as I'm concerned.

Things are going splendidly in Decazeville.545 You will see from the report (Cri du Peuple) of last Sunday's meetingd (a week ago yes-

[^1]: a Le Cri du Peuple, No. 888, 4 April 1886. - b See this volume, pp. 403-04, 406- 08. -c Justice and The Commonweal-6 Le Cri du Peuple, No. 888, 4 April 1886.





**[p. 435]**

Bismarck, who appears to have been in a frightful rage, though ob- viously speaking for the benefit of the Crown Prince,a will doubtless get a reply from Laura and Tussy to the ludicrous insinuations he made about Marx.573 Of the other speeches, Hänel'sb was the best from a legal viewpoint; he came out with the absurd demand that a citizen should conform to the law not only outwardly but also in- wardly—that such a thing should be called for, that the mere intention and the public expression thereof, could be held punishable by depri- vation of rights shows how debased all middle-class concepts of legal- ity have become in Germany—not that they have ever prevailed over there save in the case of the oppositional bourgeoisie; what has, in fact, always prevailed is the illegality of a police state, which in other countries (always excepting Ireland) could only assert itself shamefacedly and in the guise of a coup de main.

Must close because registration time (5 o'clock) draws near.

Your

F.E.

[^1]: First published, in Russian, in Marx- Engels Archives, Vol. I (VI), Moscow, 1932

[^2]: Printed according to the original

[^3]: Published in English for the first time

[^4]: a Frederick William-b A. Hand's speech in the Reichstag on 31 March 1886 (Ste- nographische Berichte über die Verhandlungen des Reichstags. VI. Legislaturperiode. II. Session 1885/86, Vol. III, Berlin, 1886, pp. 1766-1770).



