---
Volume: 47
Document_Title: "253. Engels to Laura Lafargue. 28 April "
Page_Range: "465-468"
---

# 253. Engels to Laura Lafargue. 28 April 



**[p. 252]**

ENGELS TQ PHILIPP VICTOR PAULI 3

IN RHEINAU

London, 12 April 1886

Heartiest congratulations on Clara's engagement.

Friedrich Engels

First published in: Marx and Engels, Printed according to the original Works, Second Russian Edition, Vol. 50, Moscow 1981 Published in English for the first

253

ENGELS TO LAURA LAFARGUE

London, 28 April 1886

My dear Laura,

translate. Then I revise and enter suggestions in pencil. Then it goes back to them. Then conference for settlement of doubtful points. Then I have to go through the whole again, to see that everything is made ready for the press, stylistically and technically, and all the quotations, which Tussy has looked up in the English originals, fitted in properly. So far I have finished 300 pages of the German, and shall soon have about 100 more. But then there is another hitch. Edward has missed translating some 50 pages of his share, and these I hope to get by the end of the week. As soon as I have got these, I shall stir up

[^1]: IN PARIS

[^2]: The English translation of Capital is awful work.56 First theyb

[^3]: a Written on Engels' visiting card. - b Samuel Moore and Edward Aveling





**[p. 437]**

This must serve as an excuse for my last short letter39 and the de- lay that has taken place since. The fact is we must begin to print by middle of May so as to be ready to publish by end of September. And that we can, though it will keep me hard at work till far into June at least.

Your billet-doux to Bismarck573 is making great stir in Germany. Bebel writesb:

'Die Erklärung von Laura und Eleanor Marx ist famos, der grösste Teil der deut- schen Presse nimmt davon Notiz, hütet sich selbstverständlich sie abzudrucken. Otto wird wütend sein, für dergleichen Angriffe ist er sehr empfindlich.'0

The effect of the new departure in France 5 7 4 is plainly visible in the debate on the Socialist Law in Berlin.57 ' Library d would hardly have ventured to come out so strongly again in his best old manner, had it not been that events in Paris and Decazeville 545 had stirred him up again a bit. This competition is invaluable for our people in Germany. The split and dissensions in Paris gave the philistine sec- tion amongst them a pretext for looking down, de haut en bas, upon the French, as if they, themselves, had not wallowed for years in splits, quarrels and dissensions; and they began to talk as if they, the Ger- man kleinbürgerliche" section of the party, were the leaders of the universal movement. That precious bit of chauvinism has now been effectually knocked on the head. Unfortunately the Socialist Law has this one effect that it excludes pretty effectually the circula- tion of such papers as the Socialiste and Cri du Peuple, and that the daily, current information about France has to be taken from the vile

[^1]: a See this volume, p. 423. - b in his letter to Engels of 23 April 1886-c 'Laura and Eleanor Marx's statement is excellent. The greater part of the German press have published notices about it but understandably take care not to reprint it. Otto [Bismarck] will be furious, for he is sensitive to such attacks.' - d Wilhelm Liebknecht's nickname given to him by Marx's daughters. -c pet- ty-bourgeois



It strikes me as very curious that I see nothing of the Villefranche judgment being appealed against.575 As far as I know there is a double appeal 1) on account of the alleged incompetency of the court, 2) against the judgment as such; and then a final pourvoi en cassation* on both these issues. It seems to me well worth while to go in for that, if only to expose the infamy of the courts and keep the thing before the public.

I scarcely dare hope that Roche will get in next Sunday.576 Not having read any Cris for about a week, I do not know what other can- didates besides Gaulier are in the field. But anyhow the poll will show a great progress and be enough to frighten the Radicals429 still more.

Here all is muddle. Bax and Morris are getting deeper and deeper into the hands of a few anarchist phraseurs, and write nonsense with in- creasing intensity. The turning of The Commonweal into a 'weekly' — absurd in every respect — has given Edward a chance of getting out of his responsibility for this now incalculable organ.577 Bax à la re- cherche^ by means of half-digested Hegelian dialectic, of extreme and paradox propositions, and Morris going head foremost, bull fashion, against 'parliamentarism', will have to learn by experience what sort of people their anarchist friends are. It would be ridiculous to expect the working class to take the slightest notice of these various vagaries of what is by courtesy called English Socialism, and it is very fortu- nate that it is so: These gentlemen have quite enough to do to set their own brains in order.

Schorlemmer who is here, and Nim have taken little Lily to the Zoo, Pumps is going to Manchester for a few days. In our evening chats we talk a good deal of your promised coming over to London. When is that to be? Schorlemmer says you had mentioned something about Paul coming over at the same time. That would be all the bet- ter. Anyhow it is getting time that these good intentions set about de- veloping into more or less tangible plans and projects, the season for execution is not too long in this blessed climate.

Did you see in last Sozialdemokrat the affair about Kalle and the Weibergemeinschqft578? That fellow was nicely caught. He is a great

[^1]: appeal - b in search



