---
Volume: 47
Document_Title: "254. Engels to Friedrich Adolph Sorge. 29 April "
Page_Range: "468-473"
---

# 254. Engels to Friedrich Adolph Sorge. 29 April 



**[p. 439]**

Love from Schorlemmer and Nim and yours affectionately,

F. Engels

Paul I hope will excuse if I do not write to him as often as I should like.

First published in: Marx and Engels, Reproduced from the original Works, Second Russian Edition, Vol. 36, Moscow, 1964 Published in English for the first time

254

ENGELS TO FRIEDRICH ADOLPH SORGE 5 2 1

IN HOBOKEN

London, 29 April 1886

Dear Sorge,

Have received your letters of 15 and 28 February and 8 March, and postcard of 21 March.

In most cases the notes contained in the ms. are the same as those Marx made in his copy for the 3rd edition.526 In the case of those which provide for more insertions from the French, I would not com- mit myself unequivocally 1 ) because the work done for the 3rd edition is of much later date and hence, for me, more authoritative, 2) because, in respect of a translation to be made in America, i. e. outside his own orbit, Marx might have preferred some of the passages to be translated correctly from the simplified French version rather than incorrectly from the German — a consideration which no longer applies. Nevertheless, it has provided nie with very useful tips which will, in due course, also come in handy for the 4th German edition. As soon as I have finished with it I shall return it to you by regis- tered post.



**[p. 440]**

Broadhouse (Hyndman)'s translation of Capital is a complete farce.527 The 1st chapter was from the German, full of mistakes to the point of absurdity.a Now he's translating from the French, and mak- ing the same mistakes. At the rate it's now going, the thing won't be finished before 1900.

Thanks for the Kalender. I certainly had no idea that Douai was so grossly neglected a great man.579 May he take with him to the grave the knowledge of his greatness as of its total neglect, without first see- ing it compressed into a sugar mould. But he was the right man for America and, had he remained an ordinary Democrat, I should have wished him the best of luck. As it was, however, he went whoring af- ter false gods.

As for the purist who quibbles about our style and our punctuation he doesn't know either German or English, otherwise he could not discover Anglicisms where there aren't any.580 The German of which he's so enamoured and which was drummed into us at school, with its frightful periodic structure whereby the verb is put right at the end and is separated from its subject by ten miles of subclauses, is a Ger- man which it has taken me thirty years to unlearn. This bureaucratic, pedagogical German, which completely ignores the fact that Lessing ever existed, is now on its last legs even in Germany. What would this worthy say were he to hear our people speaking in the Reichstag? Having done away with this horrible syntax because forever getting bogged down in it, they expressed themselves in that place like Jews b: 'Faced with this dilemma, Bismarck chose to kiss the pope's behind rather than the lips of the revolution', etc. Little Lasker was respon- sible for this improvement and it's the only good thing he ever did. Were the purist gent to go to Germany with his pedagogical German, he would be told that he spoke American. 'You know how petty your educated German philistine is' — especially so in America, it would seem. German syntax and punctuation, as taught at school 40 or 50

[^1]: a See this volume, p. 424. -1' Engels is referring to the more straightforward German syntax frequently employed by Jews, as exemplified in the sentence he then proceeds to quote.





**[p. 441]**

years ago, are fit only for the scrap-heap to which, in Germany, they're being well and truly consigned.

I think I wrote and told you that an American ladya married to a Russianb has taken it into her head to translate my old book.c

I have looked over the translation and this entailed a lot of work. But she had written to say that publication was assured and that I must do it at once, so I had to buckle to. It now transpires that she had en- trusted the negotiations to a Miss Foster, secretary of a WOMEN'S RIGHTS society, who had been foolish enough to give the thing to the Socialist Labor Party.550 I told the translator what I thought of this,d

but the damage had been done. For the rest, I am glad that these folk aren't translating anything of mine — a fine mess they'd make of it. Their German is bad enough, let alone their English!

The Volkszeitung people must be pleased with themselves. They have gained complete control over the movement amongst the Ger- mans, and business must be flourishing. That a man like Dietzgen should go to the wall is understandable enough.529 Playing around with the boycott and minor STRIKES is, of course, far more important than theoretical guidance. But despite all this, the cause is making enormous strides in America. For the first time there is a real mass movement amongst the English-speaking population. That it should still be feeling its way, awkwardly, at random and in ignorance, is inevi- table. But all this will right itself; the movement must and will evolve by learning from its own mistakes. Theoretical ignorance is an at- tribute of all young nations, but so is speedy practical development. In America as in England no amount of exhortation will help until the need is really there. And in America it is there, as is a growing aware- ness of it. The entry of the indigenous working masses into the move- ment in America is for me one of the great events of 1886.581 As for the Germans over there, let the presently prosperous kind gradually assimilate with the Americans — they'll still be a step or two ahead of the latter and a nucleus will nevertheless remain which will still retain a theoretical grasp of the nature and progress of the movement as a whole, will keep the process of fermentation going and, eventually, rise to the top again.

The second great event of 1886 is the formation of a workers' party in the French Chamber by Basly and Gamelinat, two working-class deputies who, for appearances' sake, were included in the list and given a leg up by the Radicals,429 but failed to play the game and, in-

[^1]: " Florence Kelley-Wischnewetzky -b Lazar Wischnewetzky -c The Condition of the Working-Class in England; see this volume, pp. 393-94. -d See this volume, p. 415.





**[p. 442]**

stead of becoming the servants of the Radical gents, took the floor as working men. The Decazeville STRIKE545 brought to a head the split between them — they were joined by "5 other deputies — and the Rad- icals.3 The latter were thus forced to spell out their policy to the workers and, since it is only thanks to the Radicals that the govern- ment exists, this was highly distasteful, for it meant that they were rightly held responsible by the workers for everything done by the government. In short, the Radicals, Clemenceau et al, behaved con- temptibly, with a result which no amount of exhortation had hitherto succeeded in bringing about, namely the defection of the French workers from the Radicals. And a further result was the uniting of all socialist groups for the purpose of joint action. Only the miserable Possibil- ists2 3 7 held aloof, in consequence of which they are steadily going to pieces. This NEW DEPARTURE has been tremendously helped along by the government's foolishness, notably its attempt to raise a loan of 900 million frs for which purpose it needed the big financiers, while the latter, being also shareholders in Decazeville, refused their money un- less the government broke the STRIKE. Hence the arrest of Due and Roche 575; the workers' riposte was to put up Roche in Paris as a can- didate (for the Chamber) in next Sunday's elections and Due (Quercy) as a candidate for the municipal council, where he is certain to get in.576 In short, France can again boast a splendid movement, and this is making spanking progress but, best of all, our men, Guesde, Lafargue and Deville, are its theoretical leaders.

Nor has it been without repercussions in Germany. The revolution- ary language and actions of the French have shown how lacklustre are the jeremiads of your Geisers, Vierecks, Auers & Co., which is why, in the recent Anti-Socialist Law debate, only Bebel and Lieb- knecht spoke, and very well too.57 ' After this debate we can show our faces in' decent company again, which is something we can by no means do after all of them. On the whole, it's a good thing that Ger- man pre-eminence should not remain altogether unchallenged, espe- cially now that so many philistine elements have been elected (inevi- table though this may have been). In Germany, when times are quiet, there is a general tendency to philistinism, and then the spur of French competition is absolutely indispensable. Nor will it be lacking. From being a sect, French socialism has suddenly become a party and

[^1]: See this volume, p. 409.





**[p. 443]**

only now and because of this has it become possible for the workers to join en masse, for the latter are sick to the teeth of sectarianism, which explains why they adhered to the extreme bourgeois party, the Radi- cals. Next Sunday's elections should already see a great step forward, although we can hardly expect Roche to get in.

I believe that the printing of the English translation of Capital, Volume I, will begin in 2 or 3 weeks' time. I haven't nearly finished revising it, but 300 pages are completely ready for the press, and another 200 very nearly so.

One more thing. Not long ago a Mr J. T. Mc Ennis interviewed me for the purpose of seeking my advice on labour legislation, osten- sibly on behalf of the State of Missouri. I soon smelt a journalistic rat and, indeed, he admitted working for THE LEADING DEMOCRATIC PAPER OF St Louis," but promised on his word of honour that he would first sub- mit the whole thing to me for revision. The fellow was sent to see me by a Russian, Stepnyak. That was nearly a fortnight ago and I am afraid he may not have kept his word. I have forgotten the name of the St Louis paper, but if anything should appear about the interview, I would ask you to insert the following statement13 in the Sozial- ist, the Volkszeitung and anywhere else you think fit. If, however, the fellow comes back after all and abides by his word, I.shall nat- urally let you know at once, and then you can tear up the state- ment.

Luckily the movement in this country has come to a complete stand- still. Hyndman & Co. are political careerists who wreck everything and in the SOCIALIST LEAGUE346 the anarchists are making enormous strides. Morris and Bax — the former as a sentimental socialist, the latter as a searcher after philosophical paradoxes—are presently as clay in their hands and must now find this out in corpore vili.c

From the next Commonweal you will see that, thanks largely to Tussy's ei Forts, Aveling will no longer be responsible for this simulacrum, which is a good thing. 5" And it's these addlepates who propose to

[^1]: a Missouri Republican - b F. Engels, 'A Statement to the Editorial Board of the New Yorker Volkszeitung'. - c in their own persons



