---
Volume: 47
Document_Title: "255. Engels to Paul Lafargue. 7 May "
Page_Range: "473-474"
---

# 255. Engels to Paul Lafargue. 7 May 



**[p. 444]**

lead the British working class! Fortunately the latter refuse to have anything to do with them. Kindest regards,

Your

F.E.

First published in Briefe und Auszüge aus Printed according to the original Briefen von Joh. Phil. Becker, Jos. Dietzgen, Friedrich Engels, Karl Marx u. A. Published in English in full for the an F. A. Sorge und Andere, Stuttgart, 1906 first time

255

ENGELS TO PAUL LAFARGUE 196

IN PARIS

[Excerpt]

[London,] 7 May 1886

What idiots those Radicals are! But it is the fatal idiocy that seizes hold of any bourgeois party as soon as it finds itself on the threshold of power and thus loses the characteristics of an opposition party. They are impatient to take over the administration, although they know that the moment has not yet come; they play at running a shadow government, but nevertheless become responsible for the follies and faults of the government of the day. At the same time they are con- fronted by the Workers' Party 20 ' growing from day to day as a result of the follies of the government the responsibility for which they can only partially disclaim. The Workers' Party will no longer accept fine words and promises; it will call upon them to act and this they can- not do. While wanting to retain it, they are compelled to act against it. Being not, as yet, in power and finding that the masses are desert- ing them in increasing numbers, they are reduced to pointing a finger at the monarchist conspirators, to representing them as a real danger, to uttering the cry: Let us unite to save the Republic, in short, to becoming Opportunists.2 3 6

[^1]: I congratulate you on Sunday's victory which has indeed confirm- ed the severance of the Parisian working man from radicalism.576



