---
Volume: 47
Document_Title: "256. Engels to Wilhelm Liebknecht. 12 May "
Page_Range: "474-476"
---

# 256. Engels to Wilhelm Liebknecht. 12 May 



**[p. 445]**

Any party is lost if tries to assume power before the time is ripe for the imple- mentation of its own programme. But the impatience of the bourgeois par- ties to arrive is such that all founder prematurely on this rock. That gives us even less time in which to develop.

On the other hand our movement in Paris has entered a phase in which even a blunder would do it no great harm. There can be no doubt that the rate of progress in the future will largely depend upon the group leaders. But once the masses are on the move, they will be like a healthy body that is strong enough to eliminate traces of dis- ease and even a modicum of poison.

First published in Le Socialiste, No. 115, Printed according to the newspaper Paris, 24 novembre 1900 Translated from the French

256

ENGELS TO WILHELM LIEBKNECHT 5 2 1

London, 12 May 1886

Dear Liebknecht,

The French papers (of which I have sent at least 3 parcels) were simply intended to give you an opportunity of reading at first hand some of the news about the brilliant turn things have taken in France. Since you take the Cri du Peuple, I need only send you the Intran- sigeant, etc. Lafargue sends me one now and again, when something happens, and I thought that in this way they could be turned to further account.

As regards Clemenceau, the moment may very well come when you would do better to drop La Justice. He is being pushed over onto the conservative, markedly bourgeois, side by, on the one hand, the immediate prospect of a ministerial post, and, on the other, by the to him unexpectedly rapid growth of the Workers' Party.2 ° ' Even from his own point of view he is behaving stupidly. But that's how all these bourgeois are, even the most progressive. Longuet will soon have to choose, if he doesn't want to ruin himself utterly. Gaulier's candida- ture, supported solely by the press unaided by the comités radicaux- socialistes, cost the Radicals429 50,000 voters who have come over to

[^1]: [IN BORSDORF NEAR LEIPZIG 3 4]





**[p. 446]**

us and are now the loudest in their denunciation of their one-time chiefs. 576 In the absence of colossal blunders — the movement is al- ready strong enough now to absorb minor errors without damage to itself—we shall obtain between lj4 and l/3 of the seats at the next elections in Paris. And, now that they have something real to do, our people are behaving in quite exemplary fashion.

But to write for Justice without being paid is stupid. The paper is perfectly well able to pay; after all, its chief editors — deputies — are paid by the State.

Bebel has written to say that his voice is apt to give out after several days of exertion, and needless to say I told him that for an American STUMP tour the very first prerequisite was a voice that is proof against anything.a Whether he's not making too much of the business, I na- turally cannot say, but it would in any case be quite a risk; once you're over there, you yourself will discover soon enough what the Yan- kees demand in return for their good money. If he doesn't go, you must at any rate make sure that no one of the tame, petty-bourgeois breed is sent with you. 518

No doubt the Chicago affair582 will put paid to the anarchist farce in America. The chaps can shout their heads off if they want, but pointless rowdyism is something the Americans refuse to put up with, now they have become an industrial nation.

There's nothing favourable to report of the so-called 'movement' over here. Hyndman loses more ground every day, having completely forfeited the confidence of his own people, and the LEAGUE346 is in- creasingly coming under anarchist leadership. Since The Common- weal became a weekly — without adequate supplies either of money or talent — Aveling has had to resign his (honorary) editorship in fa- vour of Bax who, like Morris, is strongly influenced by the anar- chists.577 The two gentlemen will have to learn in corpore vileh\ they'll soon be sick of it and it's a real stroke of luck that these teeth- ing troubles will have been left behind before the masses join the movement, which at present they obstinately refuse to do. It's just as it was in France; a really big working class cannot be got moving by ex- hortation, but when things have reached the right stage, the least im- pulse is enough to precipitate an avalanche. And that's what will happen over here as well, and soon. Most probably it will be the fi- nancial collapse of the big TRADES UNIONS under the pressure of chronic

[^1]: * See this volume, p. 429. - b from bitter experience



