---
Volume: 47
Document_Title: "257. Engels to F. H. Nestler & Melle's Verlag. 13 May "
Page_Range: "476-477"
---

# 257. Engels to F. H. Nestler & Melle's Verlag. 13 May 

overproduction that will mark the moment when the eyes of the En- glish are opened to the inadequacy of 'self-help' and of Radicalism. So [see you] here this autumn!

Your

F.E.

Tomorrow week Mrs Pfänder will be sailing for America to stay with her brother-in-law in New Ulm, Minnesota.

First published, in Russian, in Marx- Printed according to the original Engels Archives, Vol. I (VI), Moscow, 1932 „ ,,. , , • *, ,. , • r » *• , Published in English in lull tor the first time

257

ENGELS T O F.H. NESTLER & MELLE'S VERLAG 5 8 3

IN HAMBURG

[London,] 13 May 1886

Dear Sirs,

Greatly flattered though I am by the offer you made me in your kind note of the 10th inst., I regret that I must nevertheless decline it on the grounds that I cannot spare the time.

I am responsible for editing the mss. left by Marx and for turning to account all the other papers he left. It is a responsibility that will occupy my time for several years to come and must take precedence over everything else.

In addition, I am responsible for revising the translations of our works into foreign languages — an essential task in the majority of cases. Not only is there the English translation of Capital, which I must now finish and which goes to the printers next month,56 but also a constant influx of mss. of the kind that call for revision, transla- tions of shorter works into French, Italian, Danish, Dutch, etc.,a and these take up all that remains of my spare time.

[^1]: [Draft]

[^2]: See this volume, p. 394.



