---
Volume: 47
Document_Title: "258. Engels to Eduard Bernstein. 22 May "
Page_Range: "477-479"
---

# 258. Engels to Eduard Bernstein. 22 May 



**[p. 448]**

But once I have put all this behind me, I shall, assuming I live so long, first have to turn my mind to the completion, once and for all, of my own independent works which have been totally neglected for the past three years.

Among those whose views correspond to my own, my friend Karl Kautsky would no doubt be suitable for such a position, especially as he now lives here, and I should be glad to give him all the help I could. Moreover the relevant English literature, most of it quite un- known, is obtainable nowhere save in the BRITISH MUSEUM. Yesterday, fherefore, I took the liberty of informing him of your proposal. But his commitments — apart from editing the Neue £eit—are so many and extend so far ahead that he was unable to authorise my suggesting him to you as a candidate.

I am, as you can see, most interested in your scheme and hence am all the sorrier for being unable to participate in its execution. Mean- while I would thank you for honouring me with your proposal, and remain

Yours faithfully

258

London, 22 May 1886

Dear Ede,

I am sending you the (Daily News) report of Thursday's parlia- mentary debate on the Irish Arms Bill584: Restrictions on the right to carry or possess arms, hitherto aimed at the Nationalists in Ireland, are now to be extended to the Protestant braggarts in Ulster; rebellion is

[^1]: First published in: Marx and Engels, Printed according to the original Works, First Russian Edition, Vol. XXVII, Published in English in full for the Moscow, 1935 first t i m e

[^2]: ENGELS TO EDUARD BERNSTEIN 4 8 4

[^3]: IN ZURICH





**[p. 449]**

brother of the Duke of Marlborough, democratising Tory, Secretary for India in the last Tory Cabinet, and as such a life member of the PRIVY COUNCIL. In view of our petty-bourgeois socialists' insipid and pusillanimous protests and assurances to the effect that, whatever the circumstances, they will pursue their objectives by peaceful means, this is surely the moment to point out that English ministers — Althorp, Peel, Morley, and even Gladstone—are advocating the right to revolt as a theory consistent with the Constitution, though admittedly only for such time as they remain in opposition, as Gladstone's subsequent vapourings have borne out,b though in none of them did he dare deny that right as such — and especially, too, because this emanates from England, the land of legality par excellence. Our Vierecks could hardly have had shorter shrift.

I'm glad to see from the Sozialdemokrat's renewed verve that you are in good shape again.

I'm up to my eyes in the English translation of Capital. Aveling fixed up everything with the publishers mis morning and the contract will be signed in a day or two, after which comes the printing, 5 sheets a week minimum.56 Unfortunately I haven't finished revising it, but pp. 1-450 of the original are ready for the press; ditto, almost, pp. 450-640. But please don't make any announcement yet, as nothing has been signed so far.

Our Frenchmen are doing splendidly. Over here, on the other hand, everyone is playing about like a bunch of amateurs. The anar- chist follies in America 582 may prove advantageous; it is undesirable that the American workers, given their present wholly bourgeois level of thinking — high wages and short hours — should win victories too quickly. That might unduly reinforce the biassed TRADES UNION spirit.

The most powerful TRADES UNION over here, the AMALGAMATED ENGI- NEERS, had to allocate from its reserve funds more than £43,000 for its unemployed members, bringing the reserves down from ap- prox. £165,000 to approx. £122,000. Not until this fund is exhaust- ed, and only then, will it be possible to do something with those chaps.

Your

F.E.

[^1]: a R. Churchill's speech in the House of Commons on 20 May 1886 (The Daily News, No. 12515, 21 May 1886). - b W. E. Gladstone's speech in the House of Commons on 20 May 1886 (The Daily News, No. 12515, 21 May 1886).



