---
Volume: 47
Document_Title: "259. Engels to Laura Lafargue. 23 May "
Page_Range: "479-480"
---

# 259. Engels to Laura Lafargue. 23 May 

First published, in Russian, in Marx- Printed according to the original Engels Archives, Book I, Moscow, 1924 _ , ,. , . . _ . . . . „ „ r , Published in English in full for the first time

259

ENGELS TO LAURA LAFARGUE

IN PARIS

London, 23 May 1886

My dear Laura,

I think I can to-day announce to you that the affair about the En- glish edition of the Kapital is at last settled.56 With Kegan Paul and Co. it was impossible to come to a satisfactory conclusion, so we ar- ranged terms with Swan Sonnenschein and Co. I saw Swan Sonnen- schein yesterday, with Edward, and there is now only the agreement to be signed formally and then the ms. will go to press at once. Swan Sonnenschein and Co. pay us 10% of gross selling price first 500 copies sold and I2ll2% all following copies. First edition to be a library one, at 32/- in 2 volumes: the type to be clichéd at once but so that al- terations for 2nd edition can be made within certain limits; then sec- ond edition in one volume say from 7/6 to 10/-, and this plan will suit us much better than Kegan Paul's who would have kept the price up at 28/- and thus excluded the book from general circulation.

As I have 450 pages (of the original German) ready to go to press, and about 200 more that can be got ready in 14 days, and all the rest done in the rough, there is no reason why we should not print 5 sheets a week and have done altogether by middle of August, and the book to be brought out 1st October.

I think Paul does not quite see why they wanted a letter from him on the Paris election for The Commonweal. The people here do not want directly to attack Justice and moreover their assertion would not go half as far as an authoritative statement from Paris. 585 But it's no

