---
Volume: 47
Document_Title: "265. Engels to Johann Philipp Becker. 9 July "
Page_Range: "485-487"
---

# 265. Engels to Johann Philipp Becker. 9 July 



**[p. 265]**

ENGELS TO JOHANN PHILIPP BECKER

IN GENEVA

London, 9 July 1886

Dear Old Comrade,

I put off answering your letter for a few days as I wanted to wait and see whether I could find some way of entering into your Paris scheme.593 I couldn't, alas, if only because

1) I am tied down in England through having to attend to the proof-correction and publication of the English translation of Capital which is now printing 56; nor could I leave this to anyone else even if I were not bound by my contract.

2) For the past 3 months, however, I have again become an in- valid, 200 or 300 paces being the most I can manage, and am depen- dent on all sorts of medical persons; the business is just gênant,a no more, but at any moment complications might set in if I didn't take things easy, so there can be no question of a long journey. And even if, as I hope, I am more mobile this autumn, I really must do my ut- most this time to rid myself for good of this old trouble by which I have been crippled off and on during the past three years, and that means doing nothing that might bring about a relapse. I simply must get to the stage of being able to walk for 2 or 3 hours on end, other- wise I shall be done for and unable to do any sustained work. I had thought that, during the past fortnight, I might get to the stage of being able to register a positive improvement, but it's taking longer than I imagined.

Well, with luck we might be able to make some other arrangement. For once in Paris, you might just as well cross the Channel and spend a little while here. I would gladly bear the cost, and your stay over here wouldn't cost you a penny. In August I am being sent to the sea- side to recuperate and in September I shall have visitors from the provinces, from Germany and most likely also the Lafargues from Paris and, since I only have one spare room, putting up all these people will

[^1]: a inconvenient





**[p. 457]**

So make up your mind. By October, too, my urgent work will be so far advanced that I shall be able to shelve everything else; I also hope to have made sufficient progress to tipple again. If, by the by, you would rather come here in September, let me know; either way, I'm sure it can be managed. There are all sorts of things that still remain to be discussed and, above all, you have so much information — known, as you say, to no one else — about the historical origins of the movement to pass on to me, that it would be a crying shame if we didn't do our utmost to foregather once again and get all this off our chests.

I haven't yet had a chance to put Marx's papers in order, a job that would take me at least a month. Perhaps I shall get round to it in the autumn, for done it has got to be, and done before the days grow too short.

I am taking out another five pound money order for you which I hope will reach you soon after, or at the same time as, this letter.

So do make up your mind. I look forward immensely to seeing you again and discussing things with you face to face. If I were as steady on my pins as you, I should come to Geneva — but as it is! Well, I expect you to do it in my stead, and come over here.

Your old friend

F. Engels

[^1]: First published in: F. Engels, Vergessene Briefe (Briefe Friedrich Engels' an Johann Philipp Becker), Berlin, 1920

[^2]: Printed according to the original

[^3]: Published in English for the first time



