---
Volume: 47
Document_Title: "266. Engels to Karl Kautsky. 26 July "
Page_Range: "487-488"
---

# 266. Engels to Karl Kautsky. 26 July 



**[p. 266]**

ENGELS TO KARL KAUTSKY

IN D E A L 5 9 4

London, 26 July 1886

Dear Baron,

I have today sent you a Volkszeitung and shall tomorrow send off the one that arrived today; also Deutsche Worte, wherein the first in- stalment of an article on Gustav Cohn 5 9 5—so far quite delightful. You really must get hold of the chapa for the Neue £eit.

Yesterday we were more or less on our own — Tussy was ill as well so that Aveling had to leave early — it's nothing much, but neverthe- less troublesome. On top ofthat it was raining cats and dogs — I hope you are having better weather down in the south-east where the cli- mate is more continental than anywhere else in England.

So Dilke has providentially gone into political exile — requiescat in pace! b That's what comes of protestant hypocrisy. None of this busi- ness could ever have happened in a Catholic country — either in Vienna or in Rome or in Paris — nor yet in Petersburg; such whited sepulchres are possible only in two centres — London and Berlin. In fact, if Berlin is becoming a metropolis, this is only because London is increasingly deteriorating into a Berlin. What could be more typical of Berlin than gallant Captain Forster escorting his lady-friend to a brothel? 396

No other news to speak of—Schorlemmer has gone to Germany; I am getting better every day. Nim has just finished reading Märtyrer der Phantasie0 aloud (end has come!!) and is knitting stockings. Kind- est regards to you and your wife from us both.

Your

F.E.

If there should be anything you want doing at home, I have once more reached the stage at which I can perfectly well walk as far as

[^1]: a Julius Platter - b may he rest in peace -c The Martyrs of Imagination



