---
Volume: 47
Document_Title: "269. Engels to Karl Kautsky. 6 August "
Page_Range: "489-491"
---

# 269. Engels to Karl Kautsky. 6 August 



**[p. 268]**

ENGELS TO FRIEDRICH ADOLPH SORGE

IN MOUNT D E S E R T 5 9 7

[London,] 3 August 1886

Interview598 received with thanks; amused me greatly. Of course the idiota puts into my mouth all the silly things he himself'said. Com- monweal, 1 May-17 July, will follow in 2 parcels tomorrow. I now get them through Lessner at intervals, but complete. To-Day will follow as soon as I have got the July no. which is still missing.

Translation of ms. b will be finished the day after tomorrow and last part handed over to publishers.0 320 pages have been printed, almost the same as 3rd German edition. Hope it will be finished by end of September and published in October. Am also going to the seaside this Saturday,d hope it will do us both and also your wife good.

Your

F.E.

269

ENGELS TO KARL KAUTSKY

London, 6 August 1886

Dear Kautsky,

We leave tomorrow for Eastbourne.5" Address 4 Cavendish Place, as before.

[^1]: First published in Briefe und Auszüge aus Briefen von Joh. Phil. Becker, Jos. Dietzgen, Friedrich Engels, Karl Marx u. A. an F. A. Sorge und Andere, Stuttgart, 1906

[^2]: IN D E A L 5 9 4

[^3]: a John T. Mc Ennis-b the English translation of the first volume of Capital (see Note 56) -' William Swan Sonnenschein-d 7 August

[^4]: Printed according to the original

[^5]: Published in English for the first time





**[p. 461]**

You will find your MONEY ORDER here in an addressed envelope. Also sundry American Sozialists for yourself and sundry American Volks- Zeitungs along with the Missouri Republican containing the outrageous interview5 9 8 — please keep these Volkszeitungs and the Republican for me.

Will you please — when you get back — continue to forward my letters, etc., at regular intervals, i.e. at most every other day, but as a rule twice a week, just as you did before?

The translation of the ms.a was finally completed yesterday; 23 sheets have been set up and the proofs are in hand.

Liebknecht is sailing from Liverpool on 4 September, the Avelings on 31 August.60 ' We shall be staying here until 28 August for certain and if possible a week longer; it depends on Liebknecht's arrival and other possible visitors.

You will have read about the sentences in Freibergb — 6 months for Dietz, Heinzel and Müller, 9 for the others.602 Typically German.

Thank you for your news from Vienna. 6 0 3 Otherwise all is tran- quil while the world takes a breather, the one exception being the Russians who are surreptitiously intriguing away for all they are worth. Giers evidently intends to wangle something worthwhile out of Bismarck this year, but I don't imagine he will succeed.

Kindest regards to your wife.

Your

F.E.

[^1]: First published, in Russian, in Marx- Engels Archives, Vol. I (VI), Moscow, 1932

[^2]: Printed according to the original

[^3]: Published in English for the first time

[^4]: a the English translation of the first volume of Capital (see Note 56) - b Freiburg in the original.



