---
Volume: 47
Document_Title: "272. Engels to Eduard Bernstein. 14 August "
Page_Range: "495-497"
---

# 272. Engels to Eduard Bernstein. 14 August 



**[p. 466]**

before the mass of the American working people will begin to read so- cialist literature. And for those that do read and will read, there is matter enough being provided, and least of all will Der Ursprung be missed by them. With the Anglo-Saxon mind, and especially with the eminently practical development it has taken in America, theory counts for nothing until imposed by dire necessity, and I count above all things upon the teaching our friends will receive by the con- sequences of their own blunders, to prepare them for theoretical schooling.

Yours very sincerely,

F. Engels

I shall be in this place until 27th inst.5"; after that, in London.

First published, in the language of the orig- Reproduced from the original inal (English), in Briefe und Auszüge aus Briefen von Joh. Phil. Becker, Jos. Dietzgen, Friedrich Engels, Karl Marx u. A. an F. A. Sorge und Andere, Stuttgart, 1906

272

Eastbourne, 14 August 1886 4 Cavendish Place

Dear Ede,

A fortnight ago I sent you a Standard containing a Bulgarian report on Russian intrigues in the Balkans which was very important.a

[^1]: ENGELS TO EDUARD BERNSTEIN 6 0 7

[^2]: IN ZURICH

[^3]: a 'Russia and Bulgaria', The Standard, No. 19359, 30 July 1886.





**[p. 467]**

Meanwhile the situation has been getting more and more critical, for Alexander III is in need of a success after his many setbacks and, in view of the multifarious intrigues, it might well happen that matters get beyond the gentlemen's control and war breaks out. In this con- nection I wanted to pass on to you the story sent in by the Daily News correspondent in St Petersburg, which he insists is true despite all disclaimers, that between the 18th and the end of this month six Russian army corps, opposed by six ditto, will be engaged on ma- noeuvres in the neighbourhood of Vilna, i. e. close to the Prussian border; an assemblage, that is, of 12 army corps (the whole German army has only 18 of them) or, at a very modest estimate, 240,000 men. We may be sure that the vast sum of money involved isn't being chucked down die drain out of sheer bravado. Moreover Alexander III has forbidden all foreign officers to attend, even Werder, the Prussian. While these 240,000 men are concentrated on the border, Mr Giers will arrive in Germany to negotiate with Bismarck. It is a very bold stratagem, especially having regard to old William," for he is being tackled precisely on this, his most sensitive flank. So things may go wrong and war break out. It may equally well be settled on the quiet, for we may be sure that Giers will not willingly be a party to such out- rageous pranks. However I thought it as well to draw your attention to this curious business.

Tell Schlüter that I shall attend to his piece 5 5 7 as soon as I get back to London. I may possibly see old Harney before that, in which case I shall be able to glean a good deal of information that will be of interest to him.

Kindest regards. Back in London on the 28th of this month. 5 "

Your

F.E.

[^1]: First published, in Russian, in Marx- Engels Archives, Book I, Moscow, 1924

[^2]: Printed according to the original

[^3]: Published in English for the first time

[^4]: a William I



