---
Volume: 47
Document_Title: "274. Engels to Karl Kautsky. 20 August "
Page_Range: "501-502"
---

# 274. Engels to Karl Kautsky. 20 August 



**[p. 274]**

ENGELS TO KARL KAUTSKY 6 ' •

IN LONDON

Eastbourne, 20 August 1886 4 Cavendish Place

Dear Baron,

I return Dietz's letter herewith.6 ' 2 Provided you are given an as- surance that Bios will not be allowed to put in anything whatever un- less previously sanctioned by you, the mechanics could be left to him. If the worst came to the worst you might slip over to Stuttgart for a day or two and settle the matter. Anyhow that would be preferable to an attempt to spend 6 months there which would end in your being expelled after only 3 weeks, whereupon Mr Bios would have a com- pletely free hand. But one thing you yourself should do is to exercise somewhat stricter censorship throughout that period, so that Bios should have no pretext for introducing anything slipshod.

It goes without saying that you may mention me in the prospectus as a contributor. Similarly, I will gladly let you have the introduction to the English translation of The Condition of the Working-Class'1 as soon as I myself have got it. It is not long. I am not at present in a position to promise you anything definite, particularly since the en- terprising Schlüter wishes to republish The Housing Question which will require revision and an introduction11; also Borkheim's Mord- spatrioten, for which I shall have to write a biographical note on Bor- kheim.c So you see, I need not bother about finding work; others do the bothering for me.

Your plan to settle into a house is a very sensible one, but in the long run you would find that the evening trains to Harrow leave too early and I would advise you to look round somewhere else. But it is more or less the same everywhere.

The sudden spate of prosecutions is clearly'due to the impending demise of old William.d For the gang now in power it will usher in

[^1]: a See present edition, Vol. 26, pp. 399-405.-b F. Engels, 'Preface to the Second Edition of The Housing Question'.-c F. Engels, 'Introduction to Si- gismund Borkheim's Pamphlet In Memory of the German Blood-and-Thunder Patriots. 1806- 1S07'.-" William I



