---
Volume: 47
Document_Title: "276. Engels to Hermann Schlüter. 20 August "
Page_Range: "503-505"
---

# 276. Engels to Hermann Schlüter. 20 August 



**[p. 474]**

Your

F.E.

First published, in Russian, in Marx- Printed according to the original Engels Archives, Book I, Moscow, 1924 _ , ,. , , . „ .. , . , _ Published in English lor the first time

276

ENGELS TO HERMANN SCHLÜTER

Eastbourne, 20 August 1886 4 Cavendish Place

Dear Mr Schlüter,

Now it's your turn at last. I had to give up writing letters until the English ms.c had been finished.

Firstly, therefore, your letter of 10 March.

2) Have read Lexis.e The man is far from stupid, but he's an out- and-out rascal and knows it.

3) The Origin*—Dietz's way of going about things gave me fresh proof of how arbitrarily he behaves in business matters and I shall be guided by this in future dealings with him. Apart from that, the out-

[^1]: IN HOTTINGEN-ZURICH

[^2]: 1) Funds received at last. Receipt made out in duplicate.11

[^3]: a See this volume, p. 467.-b Karl Kautsky-0 of the first volume of Capital

[^4]: (see Note 56)- d See this volume, pp. 418-19. -c W. Lexis, 'Die Marx'sche Kapitaltheorie', Jahrbücher für Nationalökonomie und Statistik, Vol. 11, Jena, 1885. - r F. Engels, The Origin of the Family, Private Property and the State.





**[p. 475]**

4) General Council's Addresses. Whether I have them all I shall only know when my friends give me sufficient time to put Marx's letters, etc., in order. So until then I shan't be able to help you.615

5) Chartist ms.557 will be finished as soon as I get back to London after the 28th.599 I shall probably have a chance to consult our old friend Harney about doubtful points; he is sure to be in London now. The article in the Rheinische Jahrbücher is by Weerth and you may name him.3

Postcard of 8/6.— You might send me the letters from the late Heß' papers when convenient, though they're unlikely to amount to more than tittle-tattle. After 1848 the good Moses ceased to be connected with any real movement and merely did a bit of Lassalling for a time under Schweitzer.

Letter 16/8.— I shall be glad to look over The Housing Question; the thing can be reprinted pretty well as it stands (so far as I am able to judge from memory). A word or two will be necessary by way of intro- duction.0

A re-issue of the Mordspatrioten would certainly be a very good idea. The thing is by Borkheim and I would write a short biographical notec to go with it. But as I have only one copy, likewise of The Housing Question, and as both of them will probably call for notes, I should be grateful if you would send me one copy of each (to Lon- don).

Would you kindly give the enclosed line to Ede.

Yours,

F. Engels

[^1]: First published in: Marx and Engels, Printed according to the original Works, First Russian Edition, Vol. XXVII, „ i i. i , • T^ I-I r , r- \/t 1Qoc Published in English lor the first JVloscow, IJOD

[^2]: time

[^3]: a G. W[eerth], 'Joseph Rayner Stephens', Rheinische Jahrbücher zur gesellschaf- tlichen Reform, Vol. II, 1846.-b F. Engels, 'Preface to the Second Edition of The Housing Question'.-' F. Engels, 'Introduction to Sigismund Borkheim's Pamphlet In Memory of the German Blood-and-Thunder Patriots. 1806-180T.



