---
Volume: 47
Document_Title: "283. Engels to F. H. Nestler & Melle's Verlag. About 11 September . "
Page_Range: "510-511"
---

# 283. Engels to F. H. Nestler & Melle's Verlag. About 11 September . 



**[p. 283]**

ENGELS TO F. H. NESTLER & MELLE'S VERLAG

IN HAMBURG

[Draft]

[London, about 11 September 1886]

Dear Sirs,

I must categorically reject the insinuation in your favour of the 9th inst.623

Even had it occurred to Kautsky and, via him, to Dietz, to bring out a similar collection of excerpts simply as a result of the proposal you made me, you could have no cause for complaint, since in your postcard of 15 May you told me:

'We must frankly admit that w i t h o u t you we shall n o t be able to bring our idea to fruition.'

When you withdrew, they were fully entitled to step in. And why I should be considered in any way blameworthy in this matter is utterly incomprehensible to me.

However the above assumption is not even correct. The need for such a collection has long been discussed in socialist circles and pre- parations to bring one into being have often been all but completed. I know that Dietz, in particular, has had this in mind ever since he started his firm. When I spoke to Kautsky about your proposal, one of the reasons he gave for his refusing was that he was already corre- sponding witii Dietz about a very similar offer and had committed him- self to Dietz to the extent of being unable to entertain any proposition of a similar nature from elsewhere. I intimated as much when replying to you,a in so far as it was permissible for me to do so; I was not entitled to say more. In fact the matter had by then progressed so far that, at the time you wrote to me, Kautsky had already been engaged for several weeks in finishing off the first instalments (on Marx) 137 and hence needed no prompting from you.

Moreover, the appearance of Dietz's advertisement at this precise moment is in no way the result of your letter to me, of which Dietz, so

[^1]: " See this volume, pp. 447-48.



