---
Volume: 47
Document_Title: "284. Engels to Laura Lafargue. 13 September "
Page_Range: "511-514"
---

# 284. Engels to Laura Lafargue. 13 September 



**[p. 482]**

When I was in business I grew accustomed to hearing overhasty criticisms based on insufficient information. It is one of those philis- tine German customs which make it virtually impossible for Germans to play a really prominent role in the world of business. But I must confess I am somewhat surprised that a firm of your repute could be capable of this sort of thing.

Yours faithfully

First published in: Marx and Engels, Printed according to the original Works, First Russian Edition, Vol. XXVII, „ , ,. , , • ^ ,., r -t, .„». Published in English lor the first ' time

284

ENGELS TO LAURA LAFARGUE

London, 13 September 1886

My dear Laura,

Here we are again in London 5 " — it's the same thing over and over again, jobs of all sorts. The last week I had to revise a German extract of the Kapital by Kautsky,137 and it wanted revising very much. Two other mss. are in my desk and have been there for more than six months. Hope to clear them off this week. Fortunately for me, proof-sheetsa have been few and far between, else it would have been but a poor holiday for me. Anyhow I shall now cut this sort of work completely, else I should never get to my chief work.

Tussy and Edward's ship the City of Chicago arrived in New York on the 10th, and Liebknecht's, the Servia, must be there by this time too, as she sailed 4th September. They will have a severe job to go

[^1]: IN PARIS

[^2]: a of the English translation of the first volume of Capital (see Note 56)



I wrote to you that I had a postcard from Schorlemmer about 18th August from the Lake of Como,b since then I have not heard from him. Anyhow he is now soon due in Paris whence he has sworn to bring you, and if possible Paul too, over to London. I sincerely trust that he will succeed, Nim is already busying her mind with the few necessary arrangements which indeed will not require great exer- tions. Paul's trial will not I hope prevent him from coming over,624

the old shop where he likes to buy drawers at l/6d. a pair is still there if that is an inducement. And if he cannot get off, surely you are bound to take a holiday too and see your old friends in London once more. You know what Meyer said: 'wenn sie im £immer kommt, ist es als wenn die Sonne aufginge'c — so do let the sun rise once more over London!

Nim has had her photograph taken in Eastbourne, it was very good and is paid for, this is perhaps the reason why the copies are not yet sent.

Please thank Paul for his letter on the wine manufacture — it not only confirmed, but also completed what I had heard from other sources. It is very satisfactory to know that in these latter days of ca- pitalist production the phylloxera has smashed up the Château La- ffite, Lagrange and other grands crus,d as we that know how to appre- ciate them, do not get them, and the Jews and parvenus that get them, do not know [how] to appreciate them. Having thus no lon- ger a mission to fulfil, they may as well go to smash, our successors will soon restore them when they are wanted for grand popular holidays.

What Mohr said in the Circular to the International in 1870,e that the annexation of Alsace, etc., had made Russia l'arbitre de l'Europe, is now at last becoming evident. Bismarck has had to cave in comple- tely, and the will of Russia has to be done.625 The dream of the Ger-

[^1]: a 'everything is going swimmingly'- b See this volume, p. 478. - c 'when she comes into the room, it is as if the sun rises' -d famous vineyards - e K. Marx, 'Second Address of the General Council of the International Working Men's Association on the Franco-Prussian War'.



Had several visits from Bax and one from Morris lately — Bax sees the impasse he has got himself into, and would get out if he could do so without a direct recantation, and no doubt will find some way or other. Morris is a settled sentimental socialist, he would be easily managed if one saw him regularly a couple of times a week, but who has the time to do it, and if you drop him for a month, he is sure to lose himself again. And is he worth all that trouble even if one had the time? In the meantime Hyndman fortifies his position more and more, because he has a definite programme and a definite line of po- litical action, to both of which Morris seems to object, his ideal is a debating club uniting all shades. In all this confusion I expect the principal help from the English Kapital/ 23 sheets are printed and revised, but there is something wrong with the printer, I do not re- ceive any fresh proofs and cannot get any information as Sonnen- schein is away for his holiday and nobody can or will tell where the hitch lies.

[^1]: a Alexander III - b 'the fifth wheel in the European waggon'-c come what may- d William I -c of Capital -r the first volume



