---
Volume: 47
Document_Title: "288. Engels to Laura Lafargue. 24 September "
Page_Range: "523-524"
---

# 288. Engels to Laura Lafargue. 24 September 

Yours very sincerely,

F.E.

First published, in the language of the orig- Printed according to the original inal (Germai Marx e Eng Milano, 1964

inal (German), in La comspondenza di „ , , . , , . T, ,• , r i r , . ~ , . . . . ,„.„ ,„„,- Published in English tor the first Marx e angels con italiam. 184ö-lo95, ° time

288

ENGELS TO LAURA LAFARGUE

IN PARIS

London, 24 September 1886

My dear Laura,

I suppose you are at this moment at the Assize Court watching Paul's trial,624 I hope it will end in an acquittal. In the meantime I have a bit of agreeable news for you. Meissner sends this morning account for last seasons sales, and the result is a profit of 2,600 marks or about £130 for us, after deducting all expenses of the second vol- umea; so your share will be above £40-. I have told him to remit the money, and as soon as received I shall send you a cheque for your share. There were sold 320 copies of Volume I and 1,260 of Volume II.

The English edition b will hardly be out before the New Year.56 It looks as if Sonnenschein had more pressing things on hand, and in the hands of the same printer, by which our book was pushed back. The thing is proceeding, but rather slowly.

I had a letter from Tussy on her arrival in New York,601 she had a very pleasant voyage, but w.as rather disappointed at the live American bourgeois she met on board, it rather dampened her en- thusiasm for America, but prepared her for the realities of American

[^1]: " of Capital - b of the first volume of Capital



