---
Volume: 47
Document_Title: "289. Engels to Natalie Liebknecht. 25 September "
Page_Range: "524-525"
---

# 289. Engels to Natalie Liebknecht. 25 September 

Old Beckera has been with me this last week, he is very jolly but getting rather rickety in body. He will leave for Paris next Tuesdayb

and hopes to see you there.628 He is a splendid old chap, seventy-eight and still quite abreast of the movement.

No news from Schorlemmer here. How about your journey to Lon- don? You will be able to come to a resolution, if that be still necessary, after to-day's verdict. But even if Paul should be sent to Pélagie again, 4 °2 that is not so pressing, surely they will give him a few weeks leave and so you and he might still come over for a bit.

Ever yours affectionately,

F. Engels

First published, in the language of the Reproduced from the original original (English), in: F. Engels, P. et L. Lafargue, Correspondance, t. I, Paris, 1956

289

ENGELS TO NATALIE LIEBKNECHT

London, 25 September 1886 122 Regent's Park Road

Dear Mrs Liebknecht,

At Liebknecht's behest, I am sending you herewith an Imperial bank-note for 100 marks, No. 1236179d, Berlin, 3 September 1883, which he left with me on his departure. He also gave me reason to hope that you might come over in December, to welcome him here at my house. We should all be delighted if this were to happen, in which case I trust you will share our humble board and look upon my house as your own.

[^1]: IN BORSDORF NEAR LEIPZIG 3 4

[^2]: a Johann Philipp Becker - b 28 September



