---
Volume: 47
Document_Title: "292. Engels to Eduard Bernstein. 9 October "
Page_Range: "529-533"
---

# 292. Engels to Eduard Bernstein. 9 October 



**[p. 500]**

It was in fact my intention to write to Ede first about the bookselling aspect of the matter, because there would have been much I could have discussed in a more positive vein after receiving his reply, but that damned Freiberg verdict602 may put paid to my plans at any moment and that is why I am approaching you straight away. If you take a favourable view of the matter, perhaps you would tell me whom I should deal with while you are in retreat, so that I can pursue this further — the old chap is somewhat mistrustful of Lieb- knecht, nor do I feel he is the right man, though I shall discuss it with him on his return; but the very fact of his being absent means that someone else will now have to deal with the business.

I must now close if this letter is to go off. I shan't forgive the court for depriving me of your visit and you of your trip to Paris. But could you, perhaps, come over here next summer before the elections and accompany me on a visit to the seaside so as to build up your strength for the campaign? Will it be more or less possible to contact you while you're in prison?

Liebknecht and the Avelings have been given a fairly, indeed un- expectedly, decent reception by the Anglo-American press.600

Kindest regards.

Your

F. E.

292

ENGELS TO EDUARD BERNSTEIN

London, 9 October 1886

Dear Ede,

Having perused with some perplexity your 3 pages of painstaking argument633—perplexity as to what you could actually be driving

[^1]: First published, in Russian, in Marx- Printed according to the original Engels Archives, Vol. I (VI), Moscow, 1932 „ , , . , , . „ ,. , Published in English in full for the first time

[^2]: IN ZURICH





**[p. 501]**

But it is already four o'clock and my letter must go off before 5.30, so now to business.

Old Becker has been here 6 2 8 and there was much talk about the necessity of his recording his reminiscences and experiences. It is something I and, he says, others as well, had often proposed to him, but how is he to do it? In order to live, he contributes to Schneeber- ger's Korrespondenz in Vienna 6 3 1 in return for 25 frs a week, and for this he must laboriously collect material. The toll on his strength and eyesight is such that he is able to do nothing else.632 It is therefore es- sential that he be put in a position which will enable him to live while devoting all his time to the thing. Now van Kol, if I remember aright, gives him 25 frs a month and another friend the same amount. That makes 600 frs a year. I have undertaken to send him £ 5 = 125 frs a quarter. Total 1,100 frs. In my view, it is up to the party to supply the remainder, provided it has the means which, according to what Liebknecht told me, it does have. In fact, it ought really to provide wholly for the old veteran out of its pension fund. But I don't suppose there would be much difficulty about raising from well-to-do party comrades the few hundred francs still required, and this would mean that the party would merely act as intermediary for the regular pay- ments.

The memoirs as such would be a highly valuable addition to the Volksbuchhandlung'sc list, a new source on our party's antecedents (the revolutionary movement from 1827 to 1860) and its history

[^1]: a Regina Schattner - b nuptial bed-0 a Social Democratic bookshop in Zurich





**[p. 502]**

I wrote to Augustb about this yesterday; I had meant to write to you first and find out what you people at the publishing end thought about it, but since he is shortly due to go into jug, 6 0 2 there was no time to waste. I myself consider the thing to be of the utmost impor- tance. An account of what happened by an active participant,— indeed the only survivor from the thirties whose standpoint is the same as our own — is an absolute necessity; it will cast a new light on the whole of the period between 1827 and 1840 and, unless done by Becker, will be lost forever. Or else it will be undertaken by people who are hostile to us — members of the People's Party 203 and other vulgar democrats, and that would serve no good purpose. It is an opportunity such as will never again present itself and to miss it would, I believe, be a crime.

I told August it would be best — once matters have got to that stage — if the details regarding the balance to be paid and the mode of publication were to be arranged personally between yourself and Becker. And in this connection there's another point which I thought it unnecessary to raise with August at this juncture, namely that the balance should be regarded simply as a pension and not as an advance on the fee. This last might be suggested by some of the 'leaders' but would be an exceedingly shabby way to treat the old warrior. Hence my proposal that as much of the balance as possible be raised by private subscription, when any such suggestion would be automatically precluded.

If all this should be settled and you enter into negotiations with Becker re publication, you should take no notice of his ideas about sales, etc., prospectus, and so forth. So far as his ideas about the sale of banned books are concerned, he might still be living in the '40s,

[^1]: a J. Ph. Becker, 'Abgerissene Bilder aus meinem Leben', Die Neue Welt, Nos. 17-20, 23, 24, 26, 28 and 29; 22 and 29 April, 6 and 13 May, 3, 10 and 24 June, 8 and 15 July 1876. - b August Bebel; see previous letter.





**[p. 503]**

and he has no inkling of the way this has now changed into a big in- dustry.

So consider the matter and let me know what you think. So far the Bulgarians have indeed done unexpectedly well and, if they hold out another 8 or 10 days, either they will win through or, should the Russians march against them, it will be only at the risk of a European war. 634 This they owe to the circumstances of having been so long subject to the Turks, who were content to preserve what remained of their gentile institutions, while only preventing— through the depredations of the pashas — the rise of the middle classes. The Serbs, on the other hand, who had been free of the Turks for 80 years, wrecked their old gentile institutions by introducing Austrian legislation and an Austrian-trained bureaucracy, hence their inevitable drubbing at the hands of the Bulgarians. Give the Bulgarians 60 years of bourgeois evolution — when they would certainly accomplish nothing — and of bureaucratic rule, and they would go to wrack and ruin just as the Serbs have done. It would have been infinitely better for the Bulgarians as for us had they remained Turkish until the European revolution; their gentile institutions would have provided a first-rate point of departure for their further evolution along communist lines, just as would the Russian mir,a

which is now likewise being destroyed under our very noses.

As things are now I take the view that:

1) The southern Slavs should be supported if, and for as long as, they oppose Russia, for then they will go along with the European re- volutionary movement.

2) If, however, they oppose the Turks, i. e. demand the annexation à tout prix b of the few Turkish Serbs and Bulgarians that still remain, then they will, consciously or unconsciously, be doing Russia's work for it, and we cannot go along with them. This could only be achieved at the risk of a European war, and isn't worth the candle. The chaps will have to wait, just like the Alsatians and the Lorrainers, the Trentini, etc. Moreover, the result of any renewed attack on the Turks could — in present circumstances — only be that the victorious small nationalities — victorious solely thanks to Russia — would come directly under the Russian yoke, or — cf. the linguistic map of the peninsula — become hopelessly embroiled with one another.

3) As soon as revolution breaks out in Russia, however, the chaps

[^1]: a village commune-11 whatever the cost



