---
Volume: 47
Document_Title: "293. Engels to Eduard Bernstein. 22 October "
Page_Range: "533-535"
---

# 293. Engels to Eduard Bernstein. 22 October 



**[p. 504]**

Your

F.E.

First published, in Russian, in Marx- Printed according to the original Eneels Archives, Book I, Moscow, 1924 T» , ,• , , • -r. , i <• . <- Published in Lnghsh tor the hrst time

293

ENGELS TO EDUARD BERNSTEIN

IN ZURICH

London, 22 October 1886

Dear Ede,

This is to inform you that our friend Belfort Bax will probably be visiting you towards the end of this month. He is a thoroughly good sort, very erudite, especially in German philosophy, and speaks Ger- man, though in all political matters he's of a childlike innocence that can drive one to despair and is also much in evidence in The Common- weal. But among the 'eddicated' here he and Aveling are the only ones who not only are in earnest where the cause is concerned, but also devote some study to it.

Kautsky will have informed you about the legal niceties involved in getting married over here; I hope it can be arranged.

As regards Becker,3 August writes635 to say he has asked you to clarify matters with the old man. I trust you have already written to him — the old man—, as it is something he has very much at heart. August says that Becker is already getting an annual allowance of 200 frs from the party — I know I had omitted one item from the amounts I had stated b; this was it. I merely raise the point lest the impression

[^1]: a Johann Philipp Becker-1" See this volume, p. 501.





**[p. 505]**

should have been given that Becker had concealed it from me, which was not the case.

If the stories put about by the Zankovists in Sofia are true 6 3 6

Alexander III can safely recall his discredited Kaulbars,634 for he will then have everything he wants. It will be an improved version of the treaty of Unkiar-Skelessi 637 (1839, see Louis Blanc, Dix ans," where it is set out in the last volume). The Black Sea will then belong to him and Constantinople will be his for the asking. This would be the result of the appropriation of parts of Turkey, namely Bosnia and Egypt, by Austria and Britain respectively, who thus revealed themselves in Constantinople as Russia's equals when it came to plun- dering Turkey. That was why the peace-loving Gladstone had to bombard Alexandria and wage war in the Sudan.638—However the story is being contested and it is probable that no formal agreement has yet been concluded; but at all events we must watch out for further news of the affair. For even ^it were true, Austria in particular would try to hush it up lest it be compelled to attack before the Russians really showed signs of occupying the Dardanelles, i. e. when it was too late.

Meanwhile Alexander seems to have gone really insane — he is said to have taken one of his aides-de-camp for a Nihilist356 and shot him—, while old William b is going rapidly downhill. The Russian revolution — be it ushered in by a palace revolution — is becoming more necessary than ever and would at once help to clear up the whole wretched business.

Your

F.E.

[^1]: First published, in Russian, in Marx- Engels Archives, Book I, Moscow, 1924

[^2]: Printed according to the original

[^3]: Published in English for the first time

[^4]: a L. Blanc, Histoire de dix ans. 1830-1840, in 5 volumes. - b William I



