---
Volume: 47
Document_Title: "296. Engels to Paul Lafargue. 25- 26 October "
Page_Range: "541-550"
---

# 296. Engels to Paul Lafargue. 25- 26 October 



**[p. 512]**

Your

F.E.

First published, in Russian, in Marx- Printed according to the original Engels Archives, Vol. I (VI), Moscow, 1932 „ , , - , , - r- i- i c , r Published m English for the first time

296

ENGELS TO PAUL LAFARGUE 6 4 5

IN PARIS

London, 25-26 October 1886

My dear Lafargue,

The Eastern affair is rather lengthy, and I shall be obliged to enter into a mass of detail in view of the absurdities which the French press, including the Cri,a has been disseminating on the subject, under the Russian patriotic influence.

In the winter of 1878 b Disraeli sent 4 ironclads into the Bosphorus, this being sufficient to halt the Russian advance on Constantinople and to tear up the Treaty of San Stefano.6 4 6 For a time the Treaty of Berlin stabilised the situation in the Orient. Bismarck succeeded in ef- fecting a settlement between the Russians and the Austrians, in ac- cordance with which Austria was tacitly given dominion over Serbia, while Bulgaria and Eastern Roumelia were to be left exposed to the predominant influence of Russia. In other words, if the Russians were later permitted to take Constantinople, Austria would get Salonika and Macedonia.

But on top of that, Bosnia was allotted to Austria, just as the great- er part of Poland proper had been handed over to the Prussians and Austrians by Russia in 1794, only to be taken back by the latter in 1814. 647 Bosnia represented a constant drain on Austria, a bone of

[^1]: a Cri du Peuple - b 1879 in the original



contention between Hungary and Western Austria and, in particu- lar—proof, where Turkey was concerned, that the fate awaiting it at the hands of Austria no less than at those of Russia, would be that suffered by Poland. Henceforward there could be no question of mutual trust between Turkey and Austria — a tremendous victory, this, for Russia.

Though Serbia's sympathies were Slavophil and, consequently, Russophil it had, since its emancipation, looked to Austria for all its means of bourgeois development. Its young men went to university in Austria, its bureaucratic system, its statute books, its judicial pro- cedure and its schools all conformed to the Austrian model, as was only natural. But Russia thought it necessary to prevent the same thing happening in Bulgaria and, besides, had no desire to act as Austria's cat's paw there. Thus, from the very outset, Bulgaria was organised along the lines of a Russian satrapy. The administration was Russian, as were the officers and non-commissioned officers in the ar- my, the whole body of government officials and, indeed, the entire system, while Battenberg, imposed upon it as satrap, was a cousin of Alexander Ill's.

Russian domination, direct at first, then indirect, succeeded in stif- ling, within less than 4 years, all the sympathy Bulgaria had once felt for Russia, whole-hearted and enthusiastic though that sympathy had been. The people increasingly jibbed at the insolence of their 'li- berators', so that even Battenberg, a man of weak character and de- void of political ideas, who asked nothing better than to serve the Tsar on condition that he himself was accorded some measure of re- spect— even Battenberg was becoming increasingly rebellious.

In the meantime things were taking their course in Russia. The government had succeeded, by draconian measures, in temporarily dispersing and disorganising the Nihilists. 356 But this could not last forever; what was needed was to gain the support of public opinion and to distract people's minds from social and political miseries at home — in other words, a bit of chauvinist phantasmagoria. And just as, under Louis Napoleon, the left bank of the Rhine had served to divert revolutionary fervour to foreign policy matters, so, too, in Russia the image of a Constantinople subdued, of oppressed Turkish Slavs 'libe- rated' to form part of a great federation under Russian leadership, was conjured up before the eyes of the anxious and restive people. But merely to evoke that phantasmagoria was not enough; something would have to be done to make it enter the domain of reality.

Circumstances were favourable. The annexation of Alsace-



**[p. 514]**

The revolt of the Bulgarians against Russian domination provided the pretext for instituting a campaign. In the summer of 1885 a carrot was dangled before the Bulgarians of North and South — the possibil- ity of unification, as pledged by the Peace of San Stefano and revoked by the Treaty of Berlin. They were told that, if they again entrusted themselves to the liberating arms of Russia, that country would ac- complish her mission by accomplishing the said unification, but the Bulgarians, for their part, must first rid themselves of Battenberg. Duly forewarned, the latter reacted with unwonted promptitude and vigour. Off his own bat and on his own account he effected the unifi- cation which the Russians had intended to bring about in his despite. From that moment it was implacable war between him and Russia.

To begin with, that war was conducted covertly and by indirect means. The small Balkan states were reminded of Louis Bonaparte's splendid doctrine which held that, when a nation hitherto disunit- ed— say Italy or Germany—constituted itself a nation, other pow- ers— say France — were entitled to territorial compensation. Serbia swallowed the bait and went to war with Bulgaria. Russia's tri- umph was the greater in that the war, instigated by her in her own interests, appeared to the rest of the world to be taking place under the auspices of Austria, which had failed to prevent it for fear this should bring the Russian party to power in Serbia.— Russia, for her



**[p. 515]**

But contrary to all expectations the Bulgarians, deprived of Rus- sian officers and with two men to the enemy's three, inflicted a re- sounding defeat on the Serbs and won the respect and admiration of an astonished Europe. 4 7 8 For those victories there were two reasons. In the first place Alexander Battenberg, though a weak politician, was a good soldier who waged war as he had learned to do in the Prussian school, whereas the Serbs, in both strategy and tactics, turned to Austria for their model. Secondly, the Serbs had lived for 60 years under a bureaucratic Austrian regime which, while failing to give them a strong middle class and an independent peasantry (by now all their property was mortgaged), had succeeded in undermin- ing and disorganising what remained of the gentile communism which had lent them strength in their struggles against the Turks. In Bulgaria, on the other hand, these more or less communist institu- tions had been left intact by the Turks, and this is the explanation for their superior courage.

So Russia was foiled again and had to make a fresh start. And the Slavophil chauvinism which had been encouraged in the hope that it would counterbalance the revolutionary element, continued to grow day by day and had already begun to pose a threat to the govern- ment. So the Tsar betook himself to the Crimea3 where, or so the Russian press maintained, he would achieve great things. He attempt- ed to entice the Sultan b there so as to involve him in an alliance by demonstrating that his erstwhile allies — Austria and England — were traitors and robbers and that France was in tow to, and at the mercy of, Russia. But the Sultan did not come and, for the time be- ing, there was no employment for the vast armaments Russia had ac- cumulated in the west and the south.

The Tsar returned (last June) from the Crimea,0 but in the mean- time the tide of chauvinism had continued to rise and the govern- ment, far from controlling this upward surge, found itself increasingly carried away by it. So much so that, on the Tsar's return to Moscow, there was no preventing the mayor,d in his address,e of speaking loud

[^1]: " on 1 April 1886 - b Abdul-Hamid II -' Alexander III returned to Gatchina (near St Petersburg) on 30 May 1886 (see flpaeumeÄbcmee HHuü etcmnu Kb, No. 108, 20 May (1 June) 1886). -d Nikolai Alexeyev-' See Hoeoe speun, No. 3666, 15 (27) May 1886.



All this was compounded by a shortage of cash. No one was willing to lend money to a government which between 1870 and 1875 had borrowed 70 million pounds sterling (1,750 million frs) in London and was posing a threat to the peace of Europe. Only three years be- fore, in Germany, Bismarck had raised a loan of 375 million frs on its behalf, but that had been frittered away long since; and without Bismarck's signature the Germans wouldn't give another farthing. But that signature was no longer to be had save at the cost of humiliating conditions. At home, the government paper-mill had already been producing to excess; the rouble in silver was worth 3 fr. 80, but in pa- per-money only 2 fr. 20. And armaments were diabolically expensive.

Finally action became imperative. Either a successful move against Constantinople, or revolution. Which is why Giers went to call on Bismarck to explain the situation to him. And Bismarck understood him perfectly. He would have restrained the Russians, first because of their insatiability and secondly out of consideration for Austria. But revolution in Russia might involve the fall of Bismarck's régime in Ger- many. Without the large reserves of the reactionary army, the rule of the cabbage Junkers in Prussia would not last a day. Revolution in Russia would, at a stroke, change the situation in Germany; it would put an end to that blind faith in Bismarck's omnipotence which had rallied to his standard all the propertied classes; it would foment revo- lution in Germany.

Bismarck, who had no illusions but that the existence of tsarism in Russia was the base upon which the whole of his system rested, understood very well; he hastened to Vienna to tell his Austrian friends that, in the face of such a danger, it would not be opportune either for him or for them to place undue insistence on questions of amour-propre; that the Russians must be allowed at least a semblance of victory, and that it was in their own interests that Germany and Austria should bow the knee before the Tsar. Moreover, were his es- teemed friends the Austrians to insist on meddling in Bulgarian af- fairs, he would wash his hands of them and then they'd see what



**[p. 517]**

There followed the kidnapping of Battenberg by military conspira- tors in circumstances which could not but shock any monarchically- minded conservative, in particular those princes who had armies of their own. But at this point Bismarck proceeded to the next item on the agenda, glad to have got off at so little cost.

Unfortunately, the Bulgarians gave evidence of a political aptitude and an energy which, in the circumstances, were highly inopportune, not to say intolerable in a Slav nation 'liberated' by Holy Russia. They arrested the conspirators and nominated an efficient govern- ment, energetic and — incorruptible (a quality wholly intolerable in a nation as yet barely emancipated!) which reinstated Battenberg. The latter thereupon proceeded to exert all his weakness by taking to his heels. But the Bulgarians proved incorrigible. Battenberg or no Battenberg, they resisted the supreme orders of the Tsar and forced even the heroic Kaulbars to make an ass of himself in the eyes of all Europe. 6 3 4

Imagine the fury of the Tsar! Having curbed Bismarck, having broken the resistance of Austria, to find oneself brought up short by this runt of a nation, weaned only yesterday, which owes its 'inde- pendence' to oneself or to one's father a and fails to see that the afore- said independence means nothing more than blind obedience to the 'liberator'! The Greeks and Serbs have not shown themselves wanting in ingratitude, but the Bulgarians exceed all possible bounds. Taking their independence seriously — has such a thing ever been heard of before?

To save himself from revolution, the hapless Tsar was compelled to take another step forward. But with every new step the peril in- creased, for it brought closer the risk of European war—something Rus- sian diplomacy had always been at pains to avoid. There could be no doubt that, if Russia intervened in Bulgaria, and if such intervention subsequently led to complications, the moment would come when the mutually inimical interests of Russia and Austria would lead to an open clash. And this time there could be no question of localising the affair. There would be general war. And, given the rascals who were at that juncture governing Europe, there was no foreseeing what the

[^1]: a Alexander II



While waiting for the spring — for before April the Russians can- not embark on a major war on the Danube — they did everything they could to lure Turkey into their snare, and Austria and England, by their treachery towards Turkey, furthered this ploy. Their object was to gain the right to occupy the Dardanelles, thus turning the Black Sea into a Russian lake, an unassailable haven for the organisa- tion of powerful fleets which would sail out of it to dominate the French lake, as Napoleon called the Mediterranean. But in this they never succeeded, even though the cat had been let out of the bag by the few adherents they had in Sofia.

Such was the situation. To avoid revolution in Russia, the Tsar must have Constantinople. And Bismarck prevaricated, wishing to find some way of avoiding one or the other eventuality. And what of France?

For those Frenchmen whose thoughts, for 16 years, had centred sole- ly on revenge, it would seem natural enough to seize on what might be a possible opportunity. But for our party it is not so simple, nor yet even for Messrs the chauvinists. War against Germany in alliance with Russia might lead to either revolution or counter-revolution in France. If a revolution were to bring the socialists to power, the al- liance with Russia would collapse. In the first place, the Russians would immediately conclude peace with Bismarck so that they might together fall upon revolutionary France. And in the second, France would not put the socialists in power so that they might fight to prevent revolution in Russia. But such an eventuality is unlikely to arise. What is far more likely is a monarchist counter-revolution, promoted by the Russian al- liance. You know how greatly the Tsar desires the restoration of the house of Orleans, and that this alone would enable him to conclude a good, stable alliance with France. Well, the war once embarked upon, good use would be made of the monarchist officers in the army who would help pave the way for the said restoration. For any partial defeat, however slight — and such there would be — they would



**[p. 519]**

Is it true, by the bye, that General Boulanger is saying to anyone who chooses to hear that war is to France a necessity, in that it is the only way to kill social revolution? If so, let it be a warning to you. The good Boulanger has a swashbuckling air, excusable perhaps in a sol- dier, but which gives me a low opinion of his political nous. It is not he who will save the Republic. If he had to choose between the social- ists and the house of Orleans he would, if needs be, come to terms with the latter, especially if it secured the Russian alliance for him. Whatever the case, the bourgeois republicans in France are in the same boat as the Tsar in Russia; they see before them the spectre of revolution and can see only one means of salvation: war.

In France as is Germany things are going so well for us that all we can wish for is the continuation of the status quo. And if revolution were to break out in Russia it would create a combination of circum- stances which could hardly be more favourable. Whereas if there were to be general war, we should find ourselves back in the realm of uncertainty and of unpredictable events. Revolution in Russia and France would be averted, our party's splendid development in Ger- many would be violently interrupted, and the monarchy would prob- ably be restored in France. Doubtless all this would eventually re- dound in our favour, but what a waste of time, what sacrifices, what fresh obstacles to be overcome!

[^1]: a Louis Philippe Albert d'Orléans





**[p. 520]**

As for myself, I believe we must take for granted the fact that the war, if w^r there be, will be conducted simply with a view to prevent- ing revolution: in Russia, to forestall common action by all malcon- tents— Slavophils, Constitutionals, Nihilists356 and peasants; in Germany to keep Bismarck in power; in France to stem the victorious progress of the socialists and (or so all the big bourgeoisie hopes) to re-establish the monarchy. Hence I am for 'peace at any price', seeing that it is not we who will pay that price.

Yours ever,

F.E.

I return La France Juive. b What a tiresome book!

26 October, Tuesday, 3.30 p. m.

So this letter will reach you tomorrow morning.

[^1]: First published in: F. Engels, P. et L. Printed according to the original Lafargue, Correspondance, t. I, Paris, 1956

[^2]: translated from the trench

[^3]: a William I - b É. Drumont, La France Juive. Essai d'histoire contemporaine.



