---
Volume: 47
Document_Title: "297. Engels to Laura Lafargue. 2 November "
Page_Range: "550-551"
---

# 297. Engels to Laura Lafargue. 2 November 



**[p. 297]**

ENGELS TO LAURA LAFARGUE

IN PARIS

London, 2 November 1886

My dear Laura,

I am sorry you gave yourself the trouble to copy out the Menger balderdash.651 The fellow is a simple Streber* who knows that, the thicker he lays it on, the better will be his chance of promotion. We have got the book here and I shall give Kautsky notes enough to en- able him to smash the cheeky devil up. The position he takes is so ut- terly ridiculous that it will nowhere be accepted unless in national- liberal newspapers, and there we must expect to have it served up again and again, but that is of the utmost indifference. The Rod- bertus scare was far more serious and that we have already smashed up so completely that it is quite forgotten by this time. b

I don't think even Hyndman will venture to make capital out of this, except perhaps in a very small way.

Now I must begin writing my preface,c as Swan Sonnenschein and Co. are asking for it, so this looks like coming to a conclusion!

Very affectionately yours,

F.E.

[^1]: First published, in the language of the Reproduced from the original original (English), in: F. Engels, P. et L. Lafargue, Correspondance, t. I, Paris, 1956

[^2]: a pusher-b See F. Engels, 'Marx and Rodbertus'; F. Engels, Preface to the first Ger- man edition of Volume II of Capital. -c Preface to the English edition of Volume I of Capital



