---
Volume: 47
Document_Title: "298. Engels to Nikolai Danielson. 9 November "
Page_Range: "551-553"
---

# 298. Engels to Nikolai Danielson. 9 November 



**[p. 298]**

ENGELS TO NIKOLAI DANIELSON

IN ST PETERSBURG

London, 9 November 1886

Dear Sir,

All this time I have been busy with the English translation of Vol- ume 1 5 6 which I hope will now be finished in a few weeks as I have read the first proof-sheets of the whole and only now have to read 2nd and 3rd corrections of the last 10 sheets. It was very hard work, as af- ter all I shall be held responsible for the text. I have not been able to do anything else during that time, and thus a heap of other little mat- ters have accumulated which I now shall clear off and then return to the 3rd volume. This, as I believe I told you, I have dictated from the original ms. into a legible handwriting,a and the greater part of it will not require much revision, but the chapter on the transformation of the rate of surplus value into the rate of profit, and that on banking capital, and to some extent — also that on the rent of land 6 5 2 will take a deal of working out yet. I hope to bring the whole out next year, but shall not send anything off to the printer until the whole is completed.

As soon as the English translation is out, I shall forward you a copy.

The reviews of Volume II in the German press have been exceed- ingly stupid. One, by a Dr Gross in Vienna, was very decent,b but the man is an idiot. Another by Professor Lexis in Breslau" is very clever in its way, the man understands the book perfectly, and knows that nothing can be said against it; but he is a 'Streber''d and therefore disguises himself as a Vulgärökonom. It is in Hildebrand's Jahrbücher für Nationalökonomie und Statistik, XL Band, 1885, 5tes Heft (5 De- zember 1885).

[^1]: The sale of Volume II up to March 1886 was 1,300 copies.4

[^2]: a See this volume, p. 348. - b G. Groß, 'Marx, Karl: Das Kapital. Kritik der politischen Oeko- nomie. Zweiter Band, Buch II', Jahrbuch für Gesetzgebung, Verwaltung und Volkswirts- chaft im Deutschen Reich, No. 2, 1886. -c W. Lexis, 'Die Marx'sche Kapital- theorie'. -d 'pusher'





**[p. 523]**

Yours faithfully,

P.W.Rosher 3 6 3

First published, in Russian, in Minuvshiye Reproduced from the original gody, No. 2, St Petersburg, 1908

Published in English for the first time

299

ENGELS TO E.T. 6 5 3

IN LONDON

[London, about 13 November 1886]

In answer to above I have got a translator for the pamphlet in question,528 and as it is rather difficult to translate, I should certainly not like any translation to be published without my first having re- vised it.

Yours faithfully,

F. Engels

[^1]: First published in The Commonweal, Vol. 2, Reproduced from the magazine No. 44, 13 November 1886



