---
Volume: 47
Document_Title: "301. Engels to Laur a Lafargue. 24 November "
Page_Range: "553-557"
---

# 301. Engels to Laur a Lafargue. 24 November 



**[p. 300]**

ENGELS TO LAURA LAFARGUE

IN PARIS

London, 23 November 1886

My dear Laura,

I intended to write to you today but had to write to Edward 39 first to catch the steamer, and that has taken me till now 5 p. m. So I must delay till to-morrow.

Prefaces, etc., 6 5 4 corrected in 14 proofs, so by end of week my share of the work will probably be done. Damned glad, it has worried me more than a little. How soon Swan Sonnenschein & Co. will now bring it out I cannot tell.

In the meantime I enclose the two American letters 655 I have just replied to.

Thanks for 'Fergus'656 — they do decline then to take his name? Cyon has orders to start a large French paper (or to buy an existing one) in Paris in the interest of Russia, that was what he went home and brought the money for.

Yours affectionately,

F.E.

301

ENGELS TO LAURA LAFARGUE

London, 24 November 1886

My dear Laura,

I hope you have received the American letters I sent you yester- day, 655 to-day I can keep my word and write. Our people have in-

[^1]: First published in: Marx and Engels, Reproduced from the original Works, Second Russian Edition, Vol. 36, Moscow 1964 Published in English for the first time

[^2]: IN PARIS



From America to Russia il n'y a qu'un pas.a Tussy told me last sum- mer that Lawroff had asked her to write something about Lopatine, and to ask me to do the same, as he was to publish something about him. I told her that as far as I knew, Lopatine was still awaiting his trial,362 and that surely under those circumstances Lawroff would not publish anything to aggravate his position; would she therefore again write to Lawroff to know how this was (for it led me almost to conclude Lawroff must have been informed that Lopatine was dead) and what he desired me to say about him. Since then I have not heard anything more with respect to this matter. I now see in the pa- pers that a fresh Nihilist356 trial is coming on in Petersburg, and from the way it is worded, it looks likely that this concerns Lopatine too if he be still alive. Would you be good enough to ask Lawroff next time

[^1]: a is but a step





**[p. 526]**

Thanks to the stupidity of all its rivals and opponents, the Social Democratic Federation 3 0 0 is beginning to become a power. The gov- ernment saved them from a, four* by forbidding their procession on Lord Mayor's Day, and prepared them a nominal triumph by allow- ing them to hold what they called a meeting the same afternoon on Trafalgar Square. And when after that, the Social Democratic Fede- ration called a meeting for last Sunday on Trafalgar Square, 6 5 8 the same government made it a real triumph by first announcing that ar- tillery should be brought out to St. James Park in readiness to act, and then countermanding this ridiculous plan. So the meeting—the first where the Social Democratic Federation had announced they would proceed orderly and peaceably — was puffed by the govern- ment into a great event, and when it did come off orderly and peace- ably, the bourgeois and Spiessbiirgerh found that whatever the strength of the Social Democratic Federation itself might be, it had a very powerful tail behind it. The fact is that as the Socialist League346 is too deeply engaged in discussing its own rules and regulations with its anarchist members, to have a moment to spare for events outside No. 18 Farringdon Road, and as the Radical Clubs of the East End659

take no initiative whatever with regard to the unemployed, the Social Democratic Federation have no competitor, are alone in the field, and work this question, which springs up afresh as soon as winter comes on, entirely to their own liking. And they have certainly of late been far more sensible in their doings — of late, that is to say for the last fortnight. How long that will last, of course nobody can tell. Hyndman est capable de tout.c

That Professor Menger who seems to have frightened people all over the continent by his brazen impudence, is a vulgar Streber6 who as- pires to the Ministry of Justice. I have given Kautsky the necessary ma- terials and partly worked them out myself as far as necessary, and if we can manage it, bekommt er sein Fett schon in der ersten Nr. de j V. £. Ja-

[^1]: * failure-h philistines-1 is capable of anything-d pusher





**[p. 527]**

nuar 87.a Of course the Liberal papers have made an awful fuss about his discoveries, just as they did about Vogt's. Only times have changed and we can hit back now, and with effect. The conspiracy of the bourgeois press in 1859 against us 6 6 0 was 1,000 times more effective than Bismarck's contemptible Socialist Law. 3 7

You have no idea how glad I am that the bookb is at last through the press. It was impossible to do anything else while it was going on. The arrangements were of necessity very complicated, proofs being sent to Edward, Moore, and myself, which naturally caused delay and constant pegging on the part of Swan Sonnenschein and Co. Then, as I only lately found out, the book was printed in — Perth1. And considerable neglect of business in Swan Sonnenschein and Co.'s office through which everything had to pass. Finally, the usual course of things: neglect and delay, on the part of the printers, in summer, then, towards end of September, hurry and worry, just over that part of the ms. which wanted most careful final révisai, and constant at- tempts to saddle the delay on us. 5 6 Grosse Industrie" in the publishing trade is all very well for periodicals, novels and Tagesliteratur,d but for works like this it won't do, unless your ms. is perfect to the dot on every i; otherwise, woe to the Author!

Well now, and how about your journey to London, you and Paul? Tussy will sail from New York 25 December, X-mas day, which brings her here about 6th January. But that is no reason why you should stay away so long, on the contrary we hope to have you here on Christmas day. And Paul this time has no excuse and I won't take any either, everything in France is nice and quiet, no trials, no prison, no great meetings, no excitement, and perfectly hopeless to get any during la saison des étrennes.e And you, as you have let the summer and autumn pass, you will have to face the fogs — don't you feel a little home-sick for them? — which fogs by the way so far treat us very well, for we have it clear and bright, while since Mondayr not only the City but even Kilburn are benighted and murky. So please make your minds and let us be knowing how many days before Christ- mas you will make your appearance here. Nim is getting very impa-

[^1]: a he'll get it hot already in the first number of Die Neue £eit, in January 1887 (see Note 651)- b the English edition of the first volume of Capital-1 big industry-*1 topical literature-1' the holidays - ' 23 November



