---
Volume: 47
Document_Title: "302. Engels to Hermann Schlüter. 26 November "
Page_Range: "557-559"
---

# 302. Engels to Hermann Schlüter. 26 November 



**[p. 528]**

tient and quite capable of going over to fetch you if there is any further delay. And herewith

Yours affectionately,

F. Engels

First published, in the language of the Reproduced from the original original (English), in: F.Engels, P. et L. Lafargue, Correspondance, t. I, Paris, 1956

302

ENGELS TO HERMANN SCHLÜTER 6 6 1

IN HOTTINGEN-ZURICH

London, 26 November 1886

Dear Mr Schlüter,

Very many thanks for your communication re J. Ph. Becker.662 As to his moving to Zurich, that is a matter I would rather leave to you to deal with direct. You say that the need for it is perfectly obvious; to you in Zurich that may seem entirely right, but to me here in London, where I am less able to weigh up the pros and cons, the case looks dif- ferent. And for that reason I cannot possibly persuade him to move, at the drop of a hat, to Zurich from Geneva to which, after forty years, he has grown accustomed, having become, so to speak, part and par- cel of the place. Accordingly I have so far said not a word about the matter.

The English translationa is all but done and once I have paid off my most pressing debts in the shape of letters owed to correspondents, I shall at last be able to attend to the items in suspense reposing in my desk. In order of seniority these are as follows:

1) Italian translation of Wage Labour and Capital^ 10 months old, 2) French ditto of the 18th Brumaire, 482 8 months old, 3) your Chartist m s . , 5 " 4) and 5) my Housing Question, etc., and the Mordspatrioten.c To these you have now added 6) and 7).

[^1]: a of the first volume of Capital (see Note 56)- b by Marx-C F. Engels, 'Introduction to Sigismund Borkheim's Pamphlet In Memory of the German Blood-and-Thunder Patriots. 1806-1807'.





**[p. 529]**

6) Theory of Force.663 You are welcome to go ahead, but what do you mean by 'correspondingly altered'? T h e purely positive part amounts to no more than a few pages while the anti-Dühring polemic is itself positive and indispensable both factually and technically. However if you simply mean the deletion of individual passages hav- ing no particular relevance to the question of force and merely serv- ing to link together the rest of the text, then I agree. This will amount to about 25 pages and is rather little. In my view the 2 chapters, M o - rality and Law: Eternal Truths and Equality, could be similarly re- vised and added on, since these also revolve round the materi- alist-economic view of history, in which case the whole could be enti- tled On Law and Force in World History or something of the kind.

7) On Social Relations in Russia.664 If you reprint the little pamph- let as it stands I have no objection; a preface to it would mean my embarking on further Russian studies, for which I have absolutely no time; a preface without further studies would provide nothing new and would therefore best be omitted. T h e articles relating to it in the

Volksstaat would also best be omitted. No. 3 was an attack on Lavrov who since then has given us no cause to bring up the old business again and, like the beginning of No. 4 (attacking Tkachov), 3 it con- tains nothing, save for one or two perhaps tolerable jokes, that could be of any interest today, let alone have any effect as propaganda.

CIAL DEMOCRATIC FEDERATION is beginning to be something of a power, since the masses have absolutely no other organisation to which they can rally. T h e facts should therefore be recorded impartially, in parti- cular the most important fact of all, namely that a genuinely socialist labour movement has come into being over here. But one must be very careful to draw a distinction between the masses and their tem-

[^1]: If Ede is not wholly engrossed in the Eternal Feminine, b kindly tell him that in my view the SOCIAL DEMOCRATIC FEDERATION300 ought now to be handled somewhat differently. The stupidity of the government, the inaction of the working men's Radical C l u b s 6 5 9 vis-à-vis the enormous growth in the number of 'unemployed' and, finally, the wisdom of the SOCIALIST LEAGUE, 3 4 6 whose constant preoccupation with its own rules and regulations leaves it time for nothing else, have provided the SOCIAL DEMOCRATIC FEDERATION with so splendid a pitch that not even H y n d m a n & Co. have yet managed to queer it. T h e SO-

[^2]: In the original mistakenly articles Nos. 1 and 2.- b See this volume, p. 501.



