---
Volume: 47
Document_Title: "303. Engels to Karl Kautsky. 29 November "
Page_Range: "559-560"
---

# 303. Engels to Karl Kautsky. 29 November 

porary leaders and, in particular, make sure you don't identify your- selves with the latter in any way, for it is virtually certain that before very long these political adventurers will, with the impatience that is born of ambition, again commit the most appalling blunders. As soon as the movement has acquired substance, either it will keep these gen- tlemen in check or they will destroy themselves. Hitherto the irrita- tion felt by the majority has simply taken the form of dull, uncon- scious dissatisfaction, but it is in this way that the ground has been prepared for sowing.

In America, apart from New York, the real movement is running ahead of the Germans. The Americans' real organisation is the KNIGHTS OF LABOR 609 which is as muddle-headed as the masses them- selves. But it is from this chaos that the movement will evolve, not from the German sections — the Germans, that is, who, for the past 20 years, have proved incapable of extracting from their theory what America needs.549 But this is just the moment when the Germans might exert a very enlightening influence — if only they had learnt English!

Kindest regards to everyone.

Yours,

F. Engels

303

ENGELS TO KARL KAUTSKY

London, 29 November 1886

Dear Kautsky,

This morning a letter from Mrs Liebknecht wherein, on her hus- band's advice, she informs me that she will be arriving day after to-

[^1]: First published in: Marx and Engels, Printed according to the original Works, First Russian Edition, Vol. XXVII, Moscow 1935 Published in English in full for the first time

[^2]: IN LONDON



