---
Volume: 47
Document_Title: "304. Engels to Friedrich Adolph Sorge. 29 November "
Page_Range: "560-564"
---

# 304. Engels to Friedrich Adolph Sorge. 29 November 



**[p. 531]**

morrow at Victoria Station via Flushing. As this question cropped up yesterday, I hasten to let you know and leave it to you to decide whether, as the only person acquainted with her, you are under any compulsion to go and meet her at the station in the middle of the night. Far be it from me to put any kind of pressure on you — I me- rely thought fit to acquaint you with this weighty Victorian fact.

We have got some more beer in, if only I were allowed to drink it! Regards to your wife.

Your

F.E.

First published in Friedrich Engels' Brief- Printed according to the original Wechsel mit Karl Kautsky, Wien, 1955

Published in English for the first time

304

ENGELS TO FRIEDRICH ADOLPH SORGE 6 6 5

London, 29 November 1886

Dear Sorge,

Today I have delivered the last corrected proofs of the Prefacea to the publishers, thus finally ridding myself of this incubus. I hope to be able to send you a copy of the translation in a fortnight's time. Mrs Liebknecht arrives here the day after tomorrow to await her hus- band who left New York only the day before yesterday.600

The Henry George boom 6 5 7 naturally brought a vast amount of dirty business to light, and I'm glad I wasn't there. Nevertheless, it was an epoch-making day. The Germans simply have not realised how they can use their theory as a lever that will set the American masses in motion; they themselves do not for the most part under- stand the theory and treat it in doctrinaire and dogmatic fashion as something which, having once been learnt by rote, is sufficient as it

[^1]: IN HOBOKEN

[^2]: F. Engels, Preface to the English edition of Volume I of Capital.





**[p. 532]**

Stands for any and every need. To them it is a credo, not a guide to action. Besides which, they refuse to learn English on principle. Hence the American masses have had to find a way of their own and would appear to have done so for the time being in the KNIGHTS OF LA- BOR609 whose muddle-headed principles and ridiculous organisation would seem to match their own muddle-headedness. From all that I hear, the KNIGHTS OF LABOR are a real power, particularly in New En- gland and the West, and are daily becoming more so as a result of the brutality of the capitalist opposition. It is, I believe, necessary to work in their midst, to form, within this still fairly malleable mass, a nucleus of men who know the movement and its aims and will thus au- tomatically take over the leadership of at least some part of it when, as is inevitable, the present 'Order' disintegrates. The worst aspect of the KNIGHTS OF LABOR is their political neutrality whose only result is the sharp practice of the Powderlys, etc. But this last has had its sting drawn by the response of the masses in the November elections, more especially in New York. In a country that has newly entered the movement, the first really crucial step is the formation by the workers of an independent political party, no matter how, so long as it is distin- guishable as a labour party. And this step has been taken far sooner than we might have expected, and that's the main thing. That the first programme of this party should still be muddle-headed and ex- tremely inadequate,3 that it should have picked Henry George for its figurehead, are unavoidable if merely transitory evils. The masses must have the time and the opportunity to evolve; and they will not get that opportunity until they have a movement of their own — no matter what its form, providing it is their own movement — in which they are impelled onwards by their own mistakes and learn by bitter experience.

The movement in America is at the same stage as it was at home before 1848; the really intelligent chaps will at first play the same role over there as did the Communist League before 1848 among the working men's associations.13 Save that in America things will move infinitely faster; for it is completely unprecedented for a movement to achieve such electoral successes after an existence of barely eight months. And what is still lacking, the bourgeois will make good; no- where else irt the world do they behave so outrageously and tyranically

[^1]: a See Der Sozialist, No. 40, 2 October 1886.-b See F. Engels, 'Preface to the 1888 English Edition of the Manifesto of Ike Communist Party'.





**[p. 533]**

as there, and your judges knock Bismarck's imperial pettifoggers into a cocked hat. When the struggle is conducted by the bourgeois with weapons such as these, it will rapidly come quickly to a head and, un- less we in Europe bestir ourselves, the Americans will soon steal a march on us. But just now it is doubly necessary to have a few chaps on our side who are thoroughly versed in theory and in well-tried tactics and who can also speak and write English, since the Ameri- cans, for good historical reasons, lag far behind in all theoretical mat- ters; true, they did not bring with them from Europe any medieval in- stitutions, but instead a mass of medieval traditions—religion, En- glish common (feudal) law, superstition, spiritualism — in short, every kind of balderdash that was not immediately harmful to busi- ness and now comes in very handy for the stultification of the masses. And if people are available whose clear grasp of theory enables them to tell the Americans what the consequences of their mistakes are like- ly to be, and make them see that any movement which does not constantly bear in mind that the ultimate goal is the destruction of the wage system, must necessarily go astray and come to nothing, then much silliness can be avoided and the process be considerably curtailed. But it must be done in English, the specifically German character must be sloughed off, and this the gentlemen of the Sozial- ist are hardly qualified to do, while those of the Volkszeitung may be shrewder, but only in regard to business.

The American elections this month made a tremendous impact on Europe. The absence up till now of a labour movement in England, and more especially in America, has been the great trump card of radical Republicans everywhere, notably in France. Now these chaps are utterly dumbfounded — Mr Clemenceau in particular who, on 2 November, witnessed the collapse of all that his policy was based on. 'Just look at America,' he never tired of saying, 'that's a real re- public for you — no poverty and no labour movement!' And it's the same with the men of Progress93 and 'democrats' in Germany and over here — where they are just experiencing an incipient movement of their own. What has completely stunned these people is the fact that the movement is so strongly accentuated as a labour movement, and that it has sprung up so suddenly and with such force.

Over here it was the absence of all competition on the one hand and the stupidity of the government on the other that enabled the gentlemen of the SOCIAL DEMOCRATIC FEDERATION 300 to assume a posi- tion to which they would never have ventured to aspire 3 months ago.



**[p. 534]**

The hoo-hah that was created about the plan — never seriously con- templated — to form a procession behind the LORD MAYOR'S a Show on 9 November, and the similar hoo-hah later on, about the Trafalgar Square meeting of 21 November b when, despite talk of bringing u p the artillery, the government eventually had to back down — all this at long last compelled the gents of the SOCIAL DEMOCRATIC FEDERATION to hold a quite ordinary meeting on the 21st, without any hollow rhodo- montade or pseudo-revolutionary demonstrations with their obbli- gato plebeian accompaniment,— and all of a sudden the philistines began to feel respect for the men who had stirred up so much dust and yet behaved so reputably. 6 5 8 And, since no one except the SOCIAL

DEMOCRATIC FEDERATION bother about the UNEMPLOYED whose numbers, in these days of chronic stagnation of trade, increase substantially every winter and who suffer extreme want, the SOCIAL DEMOCRATIC FE- DERATION can hardly fail to win. In this country we now have the be- ginnings of a labour movement, AND NO MISTAKE, and if the SOCIAL DEMOCRATIC FEDERATION is the first to reap the reward, this will be due to the cowardice of the Radicals and the stupidity of the SOCIALIST LEAGUE 3 4 6 which is bickering with the anarchists, is unable to shake them off and hence has no time to spare for the real live movement that is taking place there under its very nose. How long, for that matter, H y n d m a n & Co. will continue to act in this relatively rational way remains to be seen. I anticipate that, being in too much of a hurry, they will before long again perpetrate the most colossal blunders, whereupon they'll discover that, in a serious movement, this simply won't do.

In Germany things are getting nicer and nicer — sentences in Leipzig of up to 4 years' hard labour for 'insurrection'! 6 6 6 They are absolutely determined to provoke a rumpus.

Your old friend

F . E .

[^1]: I now have 7 lesser jobs in my desk—Italian and French transla- tions, prefaces, new editions, etc. 0—and then inexorably on to Volume III. d

[^2]: First published in Briefe und Auszüge aus Printed according to the original Briefen von Joh. Phil. Becker, Jos. Dietzgen, Friedrich Engels, Karl Marx u. A. an F. A.Sorge und Andere, Stuttgart, 1906

[^3]: a John Staples-b 31 November in the original; see also this volume, p. 526. - c See this volume, p. 528. - d of Capital



