---
Volume: 47
Document_Title: "308. Engels to Emil Engels Jun. 22 December "
Page_Range: "567-569"
---

# 308. Engels to Emil Engels Jun. 22 December 



**[p. 538]**

across again next spring and live and die in England! Poor fellow — when the Chartist movement broke down he found himself adrift and the glorious time of free-trade prosperity in England was indeed enough to drive a fellow to despair. Then he went to Boston, only to find there, in an exaggerated form and ruling supreme, those very things and qualities he had hated most in England. And now when a real movement begins on both sides of the Atlantic amongst the En- glish speaking nations, he is too old, too decrepit, too much an out- sider, and — too patriotic to follow it. All he has learnt in America is British chauvinism!

Now Nim comes and brings me the out-of-the-way stamps to affix to this uncommon heavy letter, while Anni is getting the dinner things into shape and so I must conclude. Nim sends her love to both of you. As to Paul you will perhaps after all succeed in bringing him with you on the 23rd, what in the name of dickens is he going to mopse in Paris in Christmas week, not even the chambers sitting?

Ever affectionately yours,

F. Engels

First published, in the language of the Reproduced from the original original (English), in: F. Engels, P. et L. Lafargue, Correspondance, t. I, Paris, 1956

308

ENGELS TO EMIL ENGELS Jun.

London, 22 December 1886

Dear Emil,

I was very pleased to hear from you again and through you from your mother3 and all the others.

As to your request, it occurs to me that it would be considered gross inconsistency on my part if/wished to contribute 150 marks to the Protestant Institute in Barmen because the aims it pursued were, as

[^1]: IN ENGELSKIRCHEN

[^2]: " Charlotte Engels



a rule, generally worthy. I believe your father-in-lawa would likewise think it inconsistent were he to make a donation to an avowedly So- cial Democratic workers' fund on account of its generally worthy aims. But where there's a will there's a way and since in any case it al- ways strikes me as somewhat comical whenever I see myself listed in the books as a shareholder of the Protestant Institute, I hereby pre- sentyou with both the shares to do with as you please. I enclose a note for Hermann*3 who will, I trust, attend to the matter.

I am glad to hear that you are all well and especially that your mother's solicitude for her children and grandchildren is giving her a new lease of life. All of you will indeed miss your father0 for a long time to come, both in the family and in the business. He was every inch a man and such a one will never be replaced in the family and only with difficulty in the business. However it will be a great help to you young people to step into positions of responsibility early on; un- fortunately it was rare enough in Germany in my day, yet it is absolute- ly essential to the formation of the mind and particularly of the cha- racter. So let the elderly gentlemen amuse themselves in Barmen and in summer use Engelskirchen more for recuperation than for business. If you can run the firm on your own, so much the better; it will give you self-confidence.

But now I must close; Schorlemmer will be arriving from Manches- ter in a few minutes and tomorrow I expect more visitors from Paris d; we shall therefore have a full house and that will put paid to my work and also to my correspondence. However I was anxious to settle the matter of the shares beforehand and have used my last free moment for this purpose.

From your Uncle

Friedrich

And in particular a very Merry Christmas and prosperous New Year to you all.

[^1]: So my particularly fond regards to your mother and to your wife,e

[^2]: your boy,f Hermanns8 and Moritzh and regards to yourself

[^3]: First published in Deutsche Revue, Jg. 46, Printed according to the original

[^4]: ' ° Published in English for the first time

[^5]: a Friedrich Wilhelm Röhrig - b Hermann Engels jun. - c Emil Engels sen. - d Laura and Paul Lafargue - e Johanna Klara Engels - f Emil Engels - g Her- mann Engels sen. and his son Hermann - h Rudolf Moritz Engels



