---
Volume: 47
Document_Title: "309. Engels to Florence Kelley- Wischnewetzky. 28 December . . . "
Page_Range: "569-572"
---

# 309. Engels to Florence Kelley- Wischnewetzky. 28 December . . . 



**[p. 309]**

ENGELS TO FLORENCE KELLEY-WISCHNEWETZKY

IN NEW YORK

London, 28 December 1886 122 Regent's Park Road, N.W.

Dear Mrs Wischnewetzky,

Your letter of November 13th never reached me, of which I am very sorry; it would have suited me much better to write a preface then, and moreover would have left me more time.671

But let me first congratulate you on the happy family event in which you have been the principal actor and add my best wishes for your own health and that of the little one newly arrived.

Of course the appendix2 is now a little out-of-date, and as I antici- pated something of the kind, proposed that it should be written when the book was ready through the press. Now a preface will be much wanted, and I will write you one; but before, I must await the return of the Avelings60 ' to have a full report of the state of things in Ame- rica; and it seems to me that my preface will not be exactly what you desire.

First you seem to me to treat New York a little as the Paris of Ame- rica, and to overrate the importance, for the country at large, of the local New York movement with its local features. No doubt it has a great importance, but then the North-West with its background of a numerous farming population and its independent movement will hardly accept blindly the George theory.

Secondly the preface of this book is hardly the place for a thorough- going criticism of that theory, and offers even not the necessary space for it.

Thirdly I should have to study thoroughly Henry George's various writings and speeches672 (most of which I have not got) so as to render impossible all replies based on subterfuges and side-issues.

My preface will of course turn entirely on the immense stride made by the American working-men in the last ten months, and naturally

[^1]: a F. Engels, 'Appendix to the American Edition of The Condition of the Working Class in Englant T.





**[p. 541]**



[^1]: a the only saving dogma - b actual -c 'in the movement of the present to represent the future of the movement'.





**[p. 542]**

I did not wire 'yes' because I could not exactly make out what you might make out that 'yes' to mean.

As to the title: /cannot omit the 1844, because the omission would give an entirely false idea of what the reader has to expect. And as I, by the preface and appendix, take a certain responsibility, I cannot consent to its being left out. You may add: 'With preface and appen- dix by the Author', if you think proper.

The proofs I return corrected by same mail.

Yours very faithfully,

F. Engels

[^1]: First published abridged, in the language Reproduced from the original of the original (English), in Briefe und Aus- , ,. , . T, r , , D n » , -, Published in English in full tor the Zuge aus t Sriejen von Joh. Phil. Becker, Jos. . &

[^2]: Dietzgen, Friedrich Engels, Karl Marx u. A. an F. A. Sorge und Andere, Stuttgart, 1906



