---
Volume: 47
Document_Title: "310. Engels to Eleanor Marx- Aveling. 25 March 1886 "
Page_Range: "572-576"
---

# 310. Engels to Eleanor Marx- Aveling. 25 March 1886 



**[p. 310]**

ENGELS TO ELEANOR MARX-AVELING 6 7 4

[IN LONDON]

[London,] 25 March 1886 122 Regent's Park Road, N.W.

My dear Tussy,

You know I would do anything in my forces to please our friend Donkin, but I am afraid I cannot do so in this case.

The work I have had in hand for the last few years is so urgent and of such dimensions 675 that I have had to give up, once for all, attend- ing meetings and societies and taking part in discussions or preparing for such. If I am to accomplish my work, I cannot break through this rule, and the less so, as having given way once, I could not plead the same reason again for refusing in other cases.

Moreover the subject I am asked to discuss, has been lost sights of by me for more than a year,676 and I should therefore be compelled to read it up again and to look at whatever has been published since with respect to it, which would take me more than a week to be exclu- sively devoted to that purpose, and that week, I am sorry to say, I cannot spare.

And therefore, highly flattered as I feel by the invitation, I very much regret that circumstances will not allow me to avail myself of it.

Yours affectionately,

F. Engels

Kindest regards to Dr Donkin!

[^1]: First published in Die Wahrheit, Nr. 39, Reproduced from the original 1./2. Oktober 1988 „ , , . „ r . . Published in English tor the first time





APPENDIX



