---
Volume: 38
Document_Title: "12. Marx to Heinrich Heine. 24 March "
Page_Range: "67-68"
---

# 12. Marx to Heinrich Heine. 24 March 

the most paltry concession to my bigoted and despotic old man. But as it is, my mother is making herself ill with her constant fretting, and every time she gets particularly upset about me, she is afflicted with headaches for a week. It's more than I can bear, I must get away, and hardly know how I shall be able to stand the few remaining weeks here.42 But they'll pass somehow.

Otherwise there's nothing new here. The bourgeoisie talk politics and go to church; what the proletariat does we know not and indeed could hardly know. The address to which you sent your last letter is still safe for the time being. This evening I hope to obtain the money, and Köttgen has just assured me that, as soon as he has more time—in a few days—he will be able to scrape up some more. But I don't altogether credit this; Köttgen is ready and willing if he has a chance to shine, but otherwise is good for nothing and does nothing. Adios.

Your E.

First published in extracts in Aus dem Printed according to the original literarischen Narhlass von Karl Marx, Fried- rich Engels und Ferdinand Lassalle, Bd. 2, Stuttgart, 1902 and in full in MEGA, Abt. Ill, Bd. 1, 1929

12

Brussels, [24 March 1845] rue Pachecho vis-à-vis de l'hôpital St. Jean, No. 35

Dear Heine,

If I write you no more than a few lines today, you must excuse me on the grounds of the multifarious vexations I have had with the Customs.

Püttmann in Cologne has requested me to ask you if you couldn't possibly send a few poems (perhaps also your German

[^1]: MARX TO HEINRICH HEINE43

[^2]: IN PARIS



