---
Volume: 38
Document_Title: "13. Marx to Zacharius Löwenthal. 9 May "
Page_Range: "68-69"
---

# 13. Marx to Zacharius Löwenthal. 9 May 



**[p. 31]**

fleet?)a for the Jahrbuchh in Darmstadt, a periodical not subject to censorship. You can address the material to me. The latest date—but you'll probably have something immediately to hand— is 3 weeks hence. My wife sends her cordial regards to yourself and your wife.0 The day before yesterdayd I went to the local Administration de la sûreté publique,6 where I had to state in writing that here in Belgium I would publish nothing about current politics.

Renouard and Börnstein have had your Wintermärchen printed in Paris, New York being given as the place of publication, and have offered it for sale here in Brussels. This pirated edition is said, in addition, to be teeming with printer's errors. More another time.

Yours

Marx

First published in Archiv für die Geschichte Printed according to the original des Sozialismus und der Arbeiterbewegung, Jg. 9, Leipzig, 1921

13

MARX TO ZACHARIUS LÖWENTHAL

Brussels, 9 May [1845] rue de l'Alliance, hors de la porte de Louvain, No. 5 c/o: M. Reinhard

Dear Sir,

I would request you to send forthwith, in my name and at my expense—you may again draw a bill on me, including therein the postage on this letter—3 copies of the Holy Family to Paris, to Mr Herwegh, rue Barbet-Jouy, Faub. St. Germain, Mr Heine, rue du Faub. Poissonnière No. 46, and to Mr Bernays, 12, rue de Navarin. I have had letters from various quarters complaining that no copies are to be had in Paris.

Yours faithfully

Dr Marx

[^1]: IN FRANKFURT AM MAIN

[^2]: a H. Heine, 'Unsere Marine'. - b Rheinische Jahrbücher- c Mathilde - d 22 March 1845 - <' police headquarters



