---
Volume: 38
Document_Title: "15. Engels to Julius Campe. 14 October "
Page_Range: "71-72"
---

# 15. Engels to Julius Campe. 14 October 



**[p. 34]**

Well, I hope I shall soon receive a letter from Mrs Blank, for I expect Mrs Blank to take just as much interest in me as did Miss Engels. At all events I hope that, after a happy wedding and a happy honeymoon, I shall see you both this summer at Ostend or in England, and till then, once again farewell! Warmest regards to everyone

Your devoted

Friedrich

First published in Deutsche Revue, Jg. 45, Printed according to the original Bd. 4, Stuttgart und Leipzig, 1920

15

ENGELS TO JULIUS CAMPE28

IN HAMBURG

Brussels, 14 October 1845 7, rue de l'Alliance

Dear Sir,

From your esteemed letter44 I perceive that there is some misapprehension on your part as regards the line we would take in the work we proposed to you for publication.45 We have no intention of defending protective tariffs any more than free trade, but rather of criticising both systems from our own standpoint. Ours is the communist standpoint, which we have advocated in the Deutsch-Französische Jahrbücher, the Holy Family, the Rheinische Jahrbücher, etc.,a and from which, too, my book The Condition of the

Working-Class in England is written. As you will appreciate, this altogether precludes the submission of our work to the censor, and hence we cannot agree to the same. Should you, however, desist from this and be otherwise inclined to accept the work, we would beg you to be so good as to let us know before we enter into other commitments.

Yours very truly

[^1]: F. Engels First published in: Marx and Engels, Printed according to the typescript Works, First Russian Edition, Vol. XXV, Moscow, 1934

[^2]: a The journals mentioned carried Marx's 'On the Jewish Question' and 'Contribu- tion to the Critique of Hegel's Philosophy of Law. Introduction' and Engels' 'Outlines of a Critique of Political Economy' and 'The Condition of England. Past and Present by Thomas Carhie'.



