---
Volume: 38
Document_Title: "17. Engels to Emil Blank. 3 April ; "
Page_Range: "73-74"
---

# 17. Engels to Emil Blank. 3 April ; 

twelve, which is much worse, is some consolation and I can but assure you that I shall be as diligent as possible in the performance of my duties (of which I am totally ignorant) as uncle, provided you think it worth your while to explain them to me in detail beforehand. As I have seven more fellow-sufferers, co-aunts and co-uncles,a the one-eighth of the duties devolving upon myself will not in any case prove so very onerous and that is a further consolation. I am happy you are well and that I am too, and hope to see you in Ostend this summer at the latest. I am truly curious to observe you as a mama and to see what effect the earnestness of life, to which as 'wife and mother' you are now obliged to pay heed, has had on you. Lest that effect should become too great, I have written in as jovial a manner as possible. But I would ask you for a reply, a reply, what's more, that gives some hint of the earnestness of life, of the wife and mother, of the painstaking materfamilias or, as the Dutch would say, welgeliefde Echtgenoot.b So now it is your turn to write when you have the opportunity.

Love to Mother, Emil and Hermann.

Your

Friedrich

17

ENGELS TO EMIL BLANK

Brussels, 3 April 1846 7, rue de l'Alliance, St. Josse-ten-Noode

Dear Emil,

Be so kind as to send me £6—or approx. 150 fr.—by return of post. I shall let you have it back in a week or two. My old man isn't sending the money I was expecting on 1 April; apparently he

[^1]: First published in: Friedrich Engels, 1820- Printed according to the original 1895. Leben und Werk. Eine Ausstellung der Stadt Wuppertal bearbeitet von Dieter Dome, Published in English for the first Bonn-Bad-Godesberg, 1970 t l m e

[^2]: IN LONDON

[^3]: a There were eight children in the Engels family—Frederick, Hermann, Emil,. Rudolf, Anna, Hedwig, Elise and Marie. - b dearly beloved spouse



