---
Volume: 38
Document_Title: "18. Marx to Heinrich Heine. Beginning of April "
Page_Range: "74-75"
---

# 18. Marx to Heinrich Heine. Beginning of April 



**[p. 37]**

intends to bring it with him when he comes for your child's3

christening. But I've now got 150 fr. worth of things in pawn which I must redeem before my people arrive and therefore must have that amount at once. The whole mess is due to the fact that throughout this winter I have hardly earned a farthing from my writing and hence my wifeb and I have had to live almost exclusively on the money I was receiving from home, and that wasn't so very much.47 Since I now have a fair number of manuscripts either half or completely finished, this isn't very likely to happen to me again. So send me the money and, as soon as I've had my remittance from home, I'll return it.

Your brother Fritz was here these few days and went home yesterday morning. In conclusion I would again enjoin discretion sur le contenu de cette lettre?

With regards,

Your

F.

First published in: Marx and Engels, Printed according to the original Works, First Russian Edition, Vol. XXV, Moscow 1934 Published in English for the first time

18

Brussels, [beginning of April 1846]

rue de l'Alliance, 5, hors de la porte de Louvain

My dear Heine,

I am taking advantage of the passage through here of Mr Annenkov, a most engaging and cultured Russian and the bearer of this note, to convey my kindest regards to you.

[^1]: MARX TO HEINRICH HEINE48

[^2]: IN PARIS

[^3]: a Friedrich - b Mary Burns - c concerning the contents of this letter



