---
Volume: 38
Document_Title: "20. Marx to Karl Ludwig Bernays. 7 May "
Page_Range: "77-78"
---

# 20. Marx to Karl Ludwig Bernays. 7 May 



**[p. 40]**

with pompous and arrogant phrases but all he does is make himself ridiculous with his gibberish. Moreover this man is dangerous. He abuses the connection he has built up, thanks to his impertinence, with authors of renown in order to create a pedestal for himself and compromise them in the eyes of the German public. In his book on 'French socialists'a he has the audacity to describe himself as tutor (Privatdozent, a German academic title) to Proudhon, claims to have revealed to him the important axioms of German science and makes fun of his writings. Beware of this parasite. Later on I may perhaps have something more to say about this individual.

[From Gigot]

It is with pleasure that I take advantage of the opportunity offered by this letter to assure you how glad I am to enter into relations with a man as distinguished as yourself. Meanwhile, believe me,

Yours most sincerely

Philippe Gigot

[From Engels]

For my part, I can only hope, Mr Proudhon, that you will approve of the scheme we have just put to you and that you will be kind enough not to deny us your cooperation. Assuring you of the deep respect your writings have inspired in me, I remain,

Yours very sincerely

Frederick Engels

20

MARX TO KARL LUDWIG BERNAYS

Brussels, 7 May [1846]

Dear Mr Bernays,

The fee due to you for your manuscript—500 fr.—will be paid at the end of the month.54 In accordance with the contract with

[^1]: First published in Die Gesellschaft, Jg. IV, Printed according to the original H. 9, Berlin, 1927

[^2]: Translated from the French

[^3]: Published in English in full for the first time

[^4]: IN SARCELLES

[^5]: a K. Grün, Die soziale Bewegung in Frankreich und Belgien.



