---
Volume: 38
Document_Title: "29. Engels to Marx. 18 September "
Page_Range: "104-110"
---

# 29. Engels to Marx. 18 September 



**[p. 67]**

signal de l'émancipation du genre humain; la tête de cette émancipation serait la philosophie et son cœur le prolétariat. Lorsque tout sera préparé, le coq gaulois sonnera la résurrection germanique Marx dit qu'il faut créer en Allemagne un prolétariat universel (!!) afin de réaliser la pensée philosophique du Com- munisme'.a Signed T. F. (mort depuis).b

That was his last work. The previous issue carried an equally comical review of my book.c The September number contains an article on Julius which I have not yet read.d

[On the back of the letter] Monsieur Charles Marx au Bois Sauvage, Plaine Ste Gudule, Bruxelles

First published abridged in Der Briefwechsel Printed according to the original zwischen F. Engels und K. Marx, Bd. 1, Stuttgart, 1913 and in full in MEGA, Abt. Published in English for the first III, Bd. 1, 1929 time

29

ENGELS TO MARX92

[Paris,] 18 September 1846 11, rue [de l'arbre sec] Dear Marx,

A whole lot of things I wanted to write about privately have found their way into the business letter because that was the one I wrote first.6 No matter if the others read the rubbish for once.

[^1]: IN BRUSSELS

[^2]: a 'Mr. Marx is a cobbler, as another German communist, Weiding, is a tailor. The former (M[ar]x) has no great respect for French communism (!) which he has been fortunate enough to study on the spot. For that matter, neither does M. proceed beyond' (do you not recognise Mr Fix in this Alsatian expression?) 'abstract formulas, and he takes the greatest care to avoid broaching any truly practical question. According to him' (note the nonsense) 'the emancipation of the German people will be the signal for the emancipation of the human race; philosophy would be the head of this emancipation, the proletariat its heart. When all has been prepared, the Gallic cock will herald the Teutonic resurrection Marx says that a universal proletariat must be created in Germany (!!) in order to realise the philosophical concept of communism.' - b since deceased - c F. Engels, The Condition of the Working-Class in England (an anonymous review in the Journal des Économistes, Vol. 14, No. 56, July 1846). - d The review of G. Julius, 'Bankwesen. Ein neues Gespenst in Deutschland', in the Journal des Economistes, Vol. 15, No. 58. September 1846 was also written by Th. Fix which Engels did not know then. - e See this volume, pp. 60-67.



Hitherto I have rather dreaded setting to work on the extracts from Feuerbach. Here in Paris the stuff strikes one as utterly insipid. But now that I've got the booka at home, I shall apply myself to it at the earliest opportunity. Weydemeyer's sweet nonsense is touching. The fellow first declares that he wants to draft a manifesto in which he pronounces us blackguards and then expresses the hope that this won't give rise to personal diffe- rences. Even in Germany such a thing would only be possible on the Hanoverian-Prussian border.

That you should still be in financial straits is abominable. I know of no publisher for our manuscripts'3 other than Leske who, while negotiations are proceeding, must be kept in the dark about our criticism of his firm. Löwenthal will certainly not take it. He has turned down, on all manner of rotten pretexts, a very good proposition from Bernays (a life of the old man herec in 2 volumes, the first to be printed forthwith and issued the moment the old man dies, the second to follow immediately afterwards). He's also a coward and maintains he might be expelled from Frankfurt. Bernays has a prospect of acceptance by Brockhaus, who believes, of course, that the book is written in a bourgeois spirit.

Have the Westphaliansd sent the manuscripts to Daniels? And have you had any further details about the Cologne scheme? Hess wrote about it, you know.93

But Lüning's rubbish is the most ludicrous of all. One can almost visualise the fellow as he daringly looses a hypocritical turd into his trousers. If we criticise them for their general baseness," the noble fellow declares this to be 'se Z/^criticism'.94 But soon these chaps will experience in their own persons the truth of the saying:

And Westphalia seems gradually to be coming to realise that it has no bum or, in Moses'8 parlance, no 'material basis' for its communism. *

Püttmann was not so wrong, where J am concerned, when he said that the people in Brussels were collaborating on Prometheus. Hear how cunningly this good-for-nothing set about it. Being also

[^1]: 'And if the noble fellow has no bum, on what does he propose to sit?'

[^2]: a L. Feuerbach, Das Wesen der Religion. - •> The reference is to the manuscripts for the quarterly, including that of Marx and Engels' The German Ideology. - c Louis Philippe - d J. Meyer and R. Rempel - e K. Marx and F. Engels, 'Circular Against Kriege'. - f J. W. Goethe, 'Totalität'. - i Moses Hess





**[p. 69]**

in need of money, I wrote to him suggesting that at last he fork out the fee he had owed me for so long.95 The fellow answered that as to the fee for the first essay which he had printed in the

Bürgerbuch,* he had instructed Leske to pay it to me (naturally not yet to hand), but so far as the one for the second essay in the second of the Rheinische Jahrbücherb was concerned,—he had already received it from the publisher but, since the German soi-disantc communists had left him, big P, together with his other big P, Prometheus, most shamefully in the lurch—he, P No. 1, had been compelled to use the fees (including those due to Ewerbeck, etc.) for the printing of P No. 2 and would not be able to pay us same for another x weeks. Fine fellows, if you don't give them a manuscript, they keep the money. In such a manner does one become one of the Prometheus collaborators and shareholders.

Yesterday evening, when I was with the workers here, I read the 'London Address' already in print.96 Trash. They address them- selves to the 'people', i.e. the presumed proletarians in Schleswig- Holstein which is haunted exclusively by loutish, Low-German peasants and guildish Straubingers.86 They have learnt from the English this nonsense, this total disregard for actual circumstances, this inability to comprehend an historical development. Instead of answering the question, they want the 'people'—who,in their sense of the word, don't exist at all there—to disregard it and behave peacefully and passively; it doesn't occur to them that the bourgeoisie continues to do as it likes. Except for the denigration of the bourgeoisie, which is somewhat superfluous and entirely at odds with their conclusions (and for which FREE-TRADE catchwords could equally well be substituted), the thing could have been the work of London's FREE-TRADE PRESS, which does not want to see Schleswig-Holstein enter the Customs Union.97 ••

who was so delighted with his noble works, according to d'Ester, will be pleased when he hears of it.

A propos Schleswig-Holstein, the day before yesterday the Coach- mane wrote to Ewerbeck in 3 lines that caution should now be exercised in the matter of letters, since everything is being opened by the Danes. He believes that it could come to armed action.

[^1]: That Julius is in the pay of the Prussians and writes for Rother has already been hinted at in the German papers.98 Bourgeois,d

[^2]: a F. Engels, 'Description of Recently Founded Communist Colonies Still in Existence'. - b F. Engels, 'The Festival of Nations in London'. - c so-called - d Heinrich Burgers - e Georg Weber





**[p. 70]**

Dubito* but it's good that the old Daneb should so rudely harry the Schleswig-Holsteiners." By the way, did you read the famous poem 'Schleswig-Holstein, Sea-girt Land', in the Rheinischer Beobachter"? I can't possibly remember the words, but it goes something like this:

Schleswig-Holstein, of like stock sprung, Schleswig-Holstein,

sea-girt land, Schleswig-Holstein, German tongue,—Schleswig-Holstein

German strand, Schleswig-Holstein, to action stung, Schleswig-Holstein,

fiery brand, Schleswig-Holstein, hardly wrung, Schleswig-Holstein, make

a stand, Schleswig-Holstein, lustily sung, 'Schleswig-Holstein, may

Danes be banned.' Schleswig-Holstein, loudly rung, 'Schleswig-Holstein',

throughout th' land! Schleswig-Holstein, strong of lung, Schleswig-Holstein,

weak of hand, Schleswig-Holstein, loutish young, Schleswig-Holstein,

beastly band.

Schleswig-Holstein, of like stock sprung; Keep troth, O Father- land, is how the drivel ends. It's a ghastly song, worthy of being sung by the Dithmarschen,100 who in turn are worthy of being besung by Püttmann.

The Cologne bourgeois are bestirring themselves. They have issued a protest"1 against the gentlemen of the Ministry, which is the most a German citizen can do.101 The poor Berlin pulpit- drubbere! He's at loggerheads with every municipal council in his kingdom; first the Berlin theological controversy,102 then the Breslau' ditto, now the Cologne business. The rascal, by the way, is the spitting image of James I of England, whom he really seems to have taken for his model. No doubt, like the latter, he too will shortly start burning witches.

I did Proudhon a really crying injustice in my business letter. Since there was no room in this last letter, I must make amends here. For I believed he had perpetrated a trifling nonsense, a nonsense within the bounds of sense. Yesterday the matter came up again and was discussed at great length, and it was then I

[^1]: a I doubt it. - b Christian VIII - c M. F. Chemnitz, 'Schleswig-Holsteinische Bun- deslied' (music by Bellmann), Rheinischer Beobachter, No. 259, 16 September 1846. Below Engels parodies the song. - d Kölnische Zeitung, No. 253, 10 September 1846. - e Frederick William IV - f Polish name: Wroclaw.





**[p. 71]**

learned that this new nonsense is in truth wholly unbounded nonsense. Imagine: Proletarians are to save in the form of small shares. This will enable the initial building (needless to say no start can be made with fewer than 10,000-20,000 workers) of one or more workshops devoted to one or more trades, some of the shareholders to be occupied there and the products to be sold, 1) to the shareholders (who thus have no profit to pay for) at the price of the raw material plus labour, and 2) any surplus to be sold on the world market at the current price. As the association's capital is increased by new shareholders joining or by new savings of the old ones, this will be used for building new workshops and factories and so on and so forth, until all the proletarians are employed, all the country's productive forces have been bought up, thereby depriving the capital still in bourgeois hands of the power to command labour and produce profit! Thus capital is abolished by 'finding an authority under which capital, i.e. the interest system' (Grünification of the erstwhile droit d'aubaine,m

brought somewhat closer to the light of day) 'so to speak disappears.' In this sentence, repeated countless times by Papa Eisermann, hence learned by rote from Grün, you will readily discern a glimmering of the original Proudhonian flourishes. By dint of proletarian savings, and by waiving the profit and interest on their capital, these people intend, for the present, to buy up the whole of France, no more nor less, and later, perhaps, the rest of the world as well. Was ever more splendid plan devised, and if you want to perform a tour de force? what quicker way than to coin five franc pieces out of silver moonshine? And the workers here, fools that they are—the Germans, I mean—believe this rubbish, they, who can't keep six sous in their pockets to visit a marchand de vin on the evenings of their meetings, propose to buy up toute la belle France' with their savings. Rothschild and company are mere dabblers compared with these mighty accapareurs.6 It's enough to make anyone throw a fit. Grün has so confused the fellows that the most nonsensical platitude makes more sense to them than the simplest fact adduced for the purpose of economic argument. It is disgraceful that one should still have to pit oneself against such barbaric nonsense. But one must be patient, and I shall not let the fellows go until I have driven Grün from the field and have swept the cobwebs from their brains. The only fellow clear-headed enough to see through the whole nonsense is our Junge who was in Brussels. Ewerbeck, too, has crammed the fellows' heads with

[^1]: a feat of strength - b wineshop - c the whole of beautiful France - d buyers-up





**[p. 72]**

the most crackbrained stuff. You've no idea what desperate confusion the fellow is in; at times he verges on madness, being unable to tell you today what he saw with his own eyes, let alone heard, yesterday. To show to what extent he has been under Grün's thumb, it need only be said that when last winter Walthr, of Trier,104 was complaining to all and sundry about the censors, Grün represented him as a martyr to the censorship, one who was waging the noblest and bravest of battles, etc., and induced Ewerbeck and the workers to draw up and sign a highly pompous address to this jackass, Walthr, thanking him for his heroism in the struggle for freedom of speech!!!! Ewerbeck is hanging his head in shame and is furiously angry with himself; but the stupidity has been done, and now it's a question of knocking out of him and the workers the few platitudes he has dinned into his own head with toil and sweat before drumming same into the workers with no less toil and sweat. For he understands nothing until he has learnt it by rote and even then usually misunderstands it. If he were not so tremendously well-intentioned, besides being such an amiable chap—more so now than ever before,—there would be absolutely nothing doing with him. I can't help wondering how I manage to get on with him; sometimes he makes quite apposite remarks, only to relapse at once into some colossal inanity—as, for instance, in his divinely inspired lectures on German history, whose every word is so beset with howlers and follies that it's difficult not to burst out laughing. But, as already mentioned, tremendous zeal and remarkable readiness to join in everything with imperturbable good humour and self-mockery. I like the fellow better than ever, in spite of his silliness.

There is little to be said about Bernays. I have been out there several times and he here once. Coming here probably this winter, only short of money. Westphaliansa sent him 200 francs by way of a bribe; he accepted the money, but naturally did nothing further about it. Weydemeyer had offered him the money previously; he writes to say he must have 2,000 francs, otherwise it won't be any use to him. I told him what the Westphalians' answer would be—that they were unable to turn anything into LIQUID cash etc., and so it literally was. In token of his gratitude he is keeping the 200 francs. He is living quite happily, makes no secret to anyone of his whole calamitous story, is on quite happy terms with other people, lives like a peasant, works in the garden, eats well, sleeps, I suspect, with a peasant girl, and has also ceased to parade his

[^1]: a Presumably J. Meyer and R. Rempel



