---
Volume: 38
Document_Title: "30. Engels to Marx. After 18 September "
Page_Range: "110-112"
---

# 30. Engels to Marx. After 18 September 

sorrows. He is even coming to entertain more lucid and sensible views about party disputes, although, whenever something of the kind occurs, he likes to imagine himself more or less in the role of a Camille Desmoulins, and is generally unsuited to be a party man; there's no arguing with him about his legal opinions because he always tries to break off with the objection that economy, indus- try, etc., is not his subject and, on the rare occasions we meet, no proper discussion takes place. I think, however, that I have already succeeded in partly breaching his defences and, if he comes here, I shall probably be able to cure him finally of his misapprehensions. What is everyone doing there?

Your E. QUERY: Ought not the people in London3 to be told the story of the Tolstoy affair,b which is absolutely correct} If he continues to play the same role among the Germans, they might at some time dreadfully compromise one or two Poles. And supposing the fellow were to cite you?

Bernays has written a pamphlet as part of the Rothschild controversy105; a German editionc is appearing in Switzerland and a French oned here in a few days' time.

30

[Paris, after 18 September 1846]

7. they should change the §§ on the sharing of dividends into §§ on the sharing of losses, for, failing all this, they would go bankrupt already as a result of the celebrated principle of bearing

[^1]: First published slightly abridged in Der Printed according to the original Briefwechsel zwischen F. Engels und K. Marx, Bd. 1, Stuttgart, 1913 and in Published in English in full for the full in MEGA, Abt. Ill, Bd. 1, 1929 h r s t t i m e

[^2]: ENGELS TO MARX106

[^3]: IN BRUSSELS

[^4]: a The London leaders of the League of the Just (K. Schapper, J. Moll and H. Bauer). - b See this volume, p. 64. - c [K. L. Bernays,] Rothschild. Ein Ur- theilsspruch vom menschlichen Standpunkte aus. - d [K. L. Bernays,] Jugement rendu contre J. Rothschild et Georges Dairnvaell, auteur de l'Histoire de Rothschild 1 " par le Tribunal de la Seine.





**[p. 74]**

the whole loss but sharing the profit. They would therefore have to do twice as much business as any other publisher in order to keep going—but the fact remains that hitherto all publishers dealing exclusively, or merely for preference, in banned works— Fröbel, Wigand, Leske—have, in the long run, been ruined: 1. by confiscation, 2. by being excluded from markets, which ± always happens, 3. by sharp practice on the part of commission agents and retail dealers, 4. by police threats, prosecution, etc., 5. by competition from publishers who only occasionally print some- thing objectionable, who are therefore less subject to police interference and who, moreover, also have a better chance of obtaining manuscripts that will appeal, whereas the above- mentioned stereotypes are left holding the rubbish and books that do not appeal. The book trade's struggle with the police can be waged with profit only if large numbers of publishers take part in it; it is essentiellement guerrilla warfare, and one can only make money if one seldom takes such a risk. The market is not large enough to make a spécialité of the article.

For the rest it makes no difference whether the company is ruined, for ruined it will be no matter what kind of start it makes; but where there's a guarantee, it will be ruined too quickly, a high fever being induced with three crises, of which the third is cer- tainly fatal. In view of the not over-copious supply of manuscripts to be expected, a mild consumption would be more appropriate. It's only regrettable that too big a hole is made in its capital if it does its own printing. It ought to have sufficient to enable it to print for about 1 V2 years; for supposing a capital of 3,000 talers ex- pended in the first year, the Eastertide settlement would, given prof- itable trading, produce approx. 2ls, or a minimum of 2,000 talers.

Hence for the second year it ought to have at least 1,000 talers over and above those 3,000 talers. Thus V3-V4 of the capital is permanently tied up in remainders, bad payers, etc. It might be possible to raise this amount by inducing the shareholders to sub- scribe an additional loan repayable over a period. It is essential, by the way, to consult a publisher first, in order to find out exactly how much of the capital employed remains tied up at the end of the first year, or how much time it takes to turn the total capital over once. I am not sure about it myself, but I have reason to believe that in the above calculations I have underestimated rather than overestimated the capital permanently tied up. With his 20 per cent of the profits the manager will grow rich. Even if 10 per cent of any losses are passed to the reserve fund, there will be a handsome deficit.

