---
Volume: 38
Document_Title: "34. Engels to Marx. 2 November "
Page_Range: "125-126"
---

# 34. Engels to Marx. 2 November 



**[p. 88]**

A few days ago I wrote to Harney, gently attacking the pacific nature of the FRATERNAL DEMOCRATS 122 and told him, by the way, that he should continue to correspond with you.

Your E.

[On the back of the letter]

Monsieur Charles Marx 42 rue d'Orléans Faubourg de Namur Affranchi. Bruxelles

First published in Der Briefwechsel zwischen Printed according to the original F. Engels und K. Marx, Bd. 1, Stuttgart, D I . I I . J - ^ i- u • r n r .u . „ . „ " ° Published in English in tull for the first time

34

ENGELS TO MARX123

[Paris], 2 November [1846] 23, rue de Lille

Where is the long letter you promised so long ago? Make sure you send Bernays the manuscript, he only needs what you have124

since he still has the printed stuff. He has sent nothing to America; whatever may have* appeared there was printed without his knowledge or consent." However a lot of copies were printed, and some may have gone as presents from Leske to all points of the compass. We shall investigate the matter. Perhaps through Grün or Börnstein. I have written to Switzerland about the manuscripts,b but it would seem that the curc has no intention of replying.125 Apart from him, there's no one but Jenni; I've played a prank on him and would rather not write, enclose a short note for the fellow in your next. I shall send it on, but it's only for form's sake, the fellow's almost certain to refuse. The first man I

[^1]: IN BRUSSELS

[^2]: 3 [K. L. Bernays,] 'Das entschleierte Geheimniss der Criminal-Justiz. Eine kommunistische Anschauungsweise', Der Volks-Tribun, Nos. 26 and 27, 27 June and 4 July 1846. - b A reference to K. Marx and F. Engels, The German Ideology. - c J. M. Schläpter.



