---
Volume: 38
Document_Title: "39. Engels to Marx. 9 March Ill 40. Marx to Engels. 15 May "
Page_Range: "154-155"
---

# 39. Engels to Marx. 9 March Ill 40. Marx to Engels. 15 May 



**[p. 40]**

MARX TO ENGELS

IN PARIS

[Brussels,] 15 May [1847]

Dear Engels,

As you know, Vogler has been under arrest in Aachen since the beginning of May.a This has for the time being precluded the possibility of getting the pamphletb you sent here into print. The first V3 of it T liked very much. The other 2 will in any case need some alteration. Something more specific on this point in my next.

I enclose the print of your cartoon. I sent it to the B rüsseler-Zeitung. '53

As for the truly nauseous article by Grün or his associates in the Trier'sche Zeitung," it is of course now too late; it would have been good if at the outset you had published a two-line counter- statement in the same rag.

I cannot go to London, not having sufficient funds. But we hope to send Wolff over. And then it will be enough that the two of you are there.154

Voce6 money: You will remember that Hess owes me and my brother-in-law Edgar6 money from the Gesellschaftsspiegel So I am drawing a bill on him from here, payable 30 days at sight. Bernays likewise has owed me 150 fr. since May of last year. So he too will also be presented with a bill.

I would therefore ask you to do the following: 1. First send me the addresses of both; 2. Inform both of them of the facts and tell the jackasses 3. that if they believe they will be unable to pay the respective sums by 15 June, they are nevertheless to accept the bills. I shall then arrange for cover in Paris. Naturally you will only inform the jackasses of the latter if absolutely unavoidable.

At the moment I'm in such financial straits that I have had to have recourse to drawing bills, and after all I don't intend to make

[^1]: a The original is inaccurate: Vogler was arrested at the beginning of April 1847 and returned to Brussels on 17 June. - b F. Engels, The Constitutional Question in Germany. - c Reference to a report from Paris of 13 April published in the section 'Frankreich' of the Trier'sche Zeitung, No. 107, 17 April 1847. - d as regards - e Edgar von Westphalen



