---
Volume: 38
Document_Title: "41. Marx to Georg Herwegh. 27 July "
Page_Range: "155-156"
---

# 41. Marx to Georg Herwegh. 27 July 



**[p. 118]**

the two jackasses a present of anything. Should the asses only feign acceptance of the bills, I must, of course, know at once.

Since the matter is very pressing, I expect you not to let a day go by before setting everything in order and informing me.

Here in Brussels I have managed to hunt out an escompteur.* I cannot write to you at any greater lengths About 12 days ago Breyer let a vein, but in my right arm instead of the left. Since I went on working as though nothing had happened, the wound festered instead of closing. The thing could have been dangerous and cost me my arm. Now it's as good as healed. But the arm's still weak. Mustn't be overtaxed.

Your

Marx

[From Gigot]

My dear Fritzchen,

I am just in the middle of reading your pamphlet—so far it has amused me greatly—and feel really happy that I ain't no German. May God or Reason or Race preserve us from the petty bourgeoisie!

Avec laquelle j'ai l'honneur d'être P

YOURS MOST TRULY

41

MARX TO GEORG HERWEGH

Brussels, 27 July [1847] Faubourg d'Ixelles, rue d'Orléans 42

Dear Herwegh,

whence he has brought the following anecdote; I should be glad if you would elucidate it at the earliest opportunity.

[^1]: Philippe

[^2]: P.S. Do drop me un demi motc sometime.

[^3]: First published abridged in Der Briefwech- Printed according to the original sei zwischen F. Engels und K. Marx, Bd. 1, Stuttgart, 1913 and in full in MEGA, Published in English for the first Abt. Ill, Bd. 1, 1929 t l m e

[^4]: IN PARIS

[^5]: Engels has just arrived here for a few weeks from Paris,155

[^6]: a a bill discounter - h With which I have the honour to be - c a few words



