---
Volume: 38
Document_Title: "43. Marx to Moses Hess. 2 September "
Page_Range: "158-159"
---

# 43. Marx to Moses Hess. 2 September 



**[p. 121]**

nothing at all. One will long have to atone for having been horn a Teuton.

Farewell. Warm regards to your wife" and yourself from my wife and me.

In Paris you'll find an additional list of errata for my French scrawl.b Without it some passages are unintelligible.

As soon as you have an hour to spare and nothing better to do, write to your

Marx

[Postscript from Jenny Marx to Emma and Georg Herwegh]

I take advantage of this little space to send you, dear Mrs Herwegh, and your dear husband my hearty greetings. How are you and your two youngsters? They came a little en retardc compared to my three. We only need a girl to make three couples. My girlsd are wonderful, but the boy, the boy!!e Un petit monstre.1 Our best greetings, remember sometimes

Your

Jenny Marx

First published in: 1848. Briefe von und an Georg Herwegh, Munich, 1896

Printed according to the original

Published in English in full for the first time

43

MARX TO MOSES HESS

[Brussels,] 2 September [1847]

Dear Hess,

Present yourself today in the Chaussee d'Etterbeck, in the Grand Salon, also known as Palais royal.

Marx

[^1]: IN BRUSSELS

[^2]: First published in: Marx and Engels,

[^3]: Works, First Russian Edition, Vol. XXV, Moscow, 1934

[^4]: Printed according to the original

[^5]: Published in English for the first time

[^6]: a Emma - b K. Marx. The Poverty of Philosophy. - c late - d Jenny and Laura e Edgar - f A little monster.



