---
Volume: 38
Document_Title: "46. Engels to Lucien- Léopold Jottrand. 30 September "
Page_Range: "169-170"
---

# 46. Engels to Lucien- Léopold Jottrand. 30 September 



**[p. 132]**

as into the modern movement generally, only by elucidating in the first place the relations of production and examining and appraising the other spheres of social existence in connection with them.

An exact statement of income and expenditure would be rendered annually. The number of shares amounts to two hundred.167

When you reply kindly do so to the following address: A Mr Charles Marx, Bruxelles, Fbg Namur, Rue d'Orléans 42.

I am only here in Holland for a few days on a family matter and am staying with my uncle.a

Yours faithfully

Karl Marx

Have you heard anything of Edgarb?

First published in the Neues Deutschland, Printed according to the original No. 107, 5 May 1976

Published in English for the first time

46

ENGELS TO LUCIEN-LÉOPOLD JOTTRAND

[Brussels, 30 September 1847]

Dear Sir,

Being obliged to leave Brussels for several months', I find myself unable to carry out the functions which the meeting of 27 September saw fit to entrust to me.159

I therefore request you to call on a German democrat resident in Brussels to participate in the work of the committee charged with organising a universal democratic society.

I would take the liberty of proposing to you one of the Ger- man democrats in Brussels whom the meeting, had he been

[^1]: IN BRUSSELS

[^2]: a Leon Philips - b Edgar von Westphalen



