---
Volume: 38
Document_Title: "47. Engels to Marx. 25- 26 October "
Page_Range: "170-177"
---

# 47. Engels to Marx. 25- 26 October 



**[p. 133]**

able to attend it, would have nominated for the office which, in his absence, it honoured me by conferring upon myself. I mean Mr Marx, who, I am firmly convinced, has the best claim to represent German democracy on the committee. Hence it would not be Mr Marx who would be replacing me there, but rather I who, at the meeting, replaced Mr Marx.

Assuring you, Sir, of my profound esteem, I am,

Yours very sincerely

Frederick Engels

Mr Marx, who was absent from Brussels at the time of the meeting, lives at 42, rue d'Orléans, Faubourg de Namur.

First published slightly abridged in Der Briefwechsel zwischen F. Engels und K. Marx, Bd. 1, Stuttgart, 1913 and in full in: Marx and Engels, Works, First Russian Edition, Vol. XXV, Moscow, 1934

47

ENGELS TO MARX

Paris, [25-]26 October 1847

Dear Bartholomäus,

Only today am I able to write to you because it was only today that I managed to see little Louis Blanc—after terrible tussles with the portière. As a result of my long conversation with him, the little man is prepared to do anything. He was courtesy and friendliness itself, and seems to have no more urgent wish than to associate with us as closely as possible. There is none of the French national patronage about him. I had written to tell him that I was coming with a mandat formel to him from the London, Brussels and Rhineland democrats, and also as a CHARTIST AGENT.168 He asked for details about everything; I described the condition of our party to him in the most glowing terms, spoke about Switzerland, Jacoby, the Badeners as allies 169 etc., etc.

Printed according to the original

Translated from the French

Published in English for the first time

[^1]: IN BRUSSELS





**[p. 134]**

You, I said, were the chief: Vous pouvez regarder M. Marx comme le chef de notre parti (i.e. de la fraction la plus avancée de la démocratie allemande, que je représentais vis-à-vis de lui) et son récent livre contre M. Proudhona comme notre programme."3 Of this he took most careful note. Then finally he promised to comment on your book in the Réforme. He told me a great deal about the

mouvement souterrain,0 that is now going on among the workers; he also said that the workers had printed 3,000 copies of his Organisation du travail cheaply and that at the end of a fortnight a further edition of 3,000 copies had been needed—he said the workers were more revolutionary than ever, but had learned to bide their time, no riots, only major coups that would be sure to succeed, etc., etc. By the way he too would seem to have got out of the habit of patronising the workers.

'Quand je vois des choses comme ce nouveau programme de M. de Lamartine, cela me fait rire! Pour bien juger de l'état actuel de la société française, il faut être dans une position qui vous permet de voir un peu de tout, d'aller le matin chez un ministre, l'après-diner chez un négociant, et le soir chez un ouvrier.'

The coming revolution, he went on, would be quite different from, and much more drastic than, all previous ones, and it would be sheer bêtise" to keep on thundering only against kings, etc., etc.

He spoke of you with great sympathy and said he was sorry that you and he had parted rather froidement^ ect., etc. He still has a special hankering after a German and French review to be published in Paris. Might come in useful later.

As to Ruge, after whom he inquired, I warned him; il s'est fait le panégyriste de la diète prussienne, et cela même après que la diète s'était

[^1]: By and large, he was very well-behaved and perfectly cordial. You see, the man is ALL RIGHT, il a les meilleures dispositions du monde1

[^2]: a K. Marx, The Poverty of Philosophy. - b You can regard Mr Marx as the head of our party (i. e. of the most advanced section of German democracy, which I was representing vis-à-vis him) and his recent book against Mr Proudhon as our programme. - c underground movement - d 'When I see such things as M. de Lamartine's new programme, I can't help laughing! In order to assess the present state of French society properly you have to be in a position which enables you to see a little of everything, to visit a minister in the morning, a merchant in the afternoon, and a working man in the evening.' - e stupidity - f he has the best intentions in the world - s coldly





**[p. 135]**

séparée sans résultat.110—Donc il a fait un pas en arrière3?—Yes, indeed.

With père Flocon I am hitting it off well. I first approached him as if I were an Englishman and asked him in Harney's name why he so ignored the Star.h Well, yes, he said, he was sorry, he'd be only too glad to mention it, only there was no one on the editorial staff who understood English! I offered to write a weekly article for him m which he accepted de grand coeur.c When I told him I was the Star's correspondent, he seemed quite moved.172 If things go on like this we shall have won over this whole trend in four weeks. Flocon wishes me to write an essay on Chartism for his personal benefit, he hasn't the vaguest idea about it. I shall call on him presently and ensnare him further in our net. I shall tell him that the Atelier is making approaches to me (which is true; I am going there this evening), and that, if he behaves decently, I shall turn them down. That will touch his worthy heart.

When I've been here a little longer and have grown more accustomed to writing French, I'll make a start on the Revue

indépendante.

I quite forgot to ask L. Blanc why he hadn't accepted your Congress article.173 I shall tax him with it when he next comes to see me. By the way I doubt whether he has, in fact, received your book. He was quite unable to remember having done so today. And before I went away he spoke in very uncertain terms about it. I shall find out within a day or two. If he hasn't got it, I shall give him my copy.

Just imagine, little Bernays, who trots round here and plays the 'martyr'—one betrayed by everybody, one 'who has helped everybody with money or good advice' (littéralement)—this crea- ture has a HORSE AND GIG! It's Bernstein's, of course, but no matter. This same chap who makes himself out to be an oppressed, penniless martyr one day, boasts the next that he is the only one who knows how to earn money. He has been plodding away at 21 sheets (!) on the Praslin affair174 which are coming out in Switzerland."1 The nub of the matter is this: not la duchesse but le duc is the martyr! My response to his prating about martyrdom was to remind him that he has long owed me 60 fr. He is becoming every inch the industrialist and brags about it. In any case he's cracked.—Even Ewerbeck is furious with him.

[^1]: a he has appointed himself panegyrist of the Prussian Diet, and this even after the Diet had dispersed without a result. So he's taken a step back? (A reference to A. Ruge's 'Adresse an die Opposition des Vereinigten Landtages in Berlin' on 11 June 1847.) - b The Northern Star- c wholeheartedly - d K. Bernays, Die Ermordung der Herzogin von Praslin.





**[p. 136]**

I have not yet seen Cabet. He is happy, it seems, to be leaving, having noticed that things are showing signs of disintegrating here. Flocon wants to commence the attack, not so L. Blanc, and rightly, although L. Blanc has a finger in all manner of pies and looks forward with glee to seeing the bourgeoisie jolted out of their security by the sudden onset of revolution.

I have been to see père Flocon. The good man was cordiality itself, and the honest frankness with which I told him about my affair with the Atelier nearly brought tears to his eyes. From the Atelier I went on to talk about the National: 'Lorsque à Bruxelles nous discutions la question à quelle fraction de la démocratie française on s'adresserait, nous étions unanimement d'accord que dès le premier abord on se mettrait en rapport avec la Réforme ; car à l'étranger il existe de fortes et de bien fondées préventions contre le National. D'abord les préjugés nationaux de cette feuille empêchent tout rapprochement'—'oui, oui, c'est vrai,' said Flocon 'et ceci était même la raison pour laquelle la Réforme fut fondée; nous avons déclaré dès le premier jour que nous ne voulons pas des conquêtes'—'et puis,' I went on, 'si je peux en croire mes prédécesseurs, car moi je n'ai jamais été au National, ces messieurs se donnent toujours l'air de vouloir protéger les étrangers, ce qui au reste est parfaitement d'accord avec leurs préjugés nationaux; et nous autres, nous n'avons pas besoin de leur protection, nous ne voulons pas de protecteurs, nous voulons des alliés.'—'Ah oui, mais c'est tout à fait différent avec nous, nous n'y pensons pas.'—'C'est vrai, aussi n'ai-je qu'à me louer des procédés des Messieurs de la Réforme'.3

But how helpful it was that I reminded little Blanc of our affairs. Your Congress speech had, à ce qu'il paraît? been mislaid;

[^1]: a When in Brussels we were discussing the question of which faction of French democracy to approach, we were unanimously agreed that our very first move should be to make contact with the Réforme, there being a strong and well-founded bias against the National abroad. In the first place this paper's national prejudices prevent any rapprochement'—'yes, yes, that's true,' said Flocon, 'and this was precisely why the Réforme was founded; we declared from the very outset that we were not out for conquests'—'and then,' I went on, 'if I am to believe my predecessors, for I myself have never been to the National, those gentlemen always give the impression of wanting to patronise foreigners, which for that matter is perfectly consistent with their national prejudices; we for our part have no need of their patronage; it is not patrons we want, but allies.'—'Ah, yes, but we're not at all like that; it would never occur to us!—'True, and I have nothing but praise for the way the gentlemen of the Réforme proceed.' - b it appears





**[p. 137]**

today he hastened to look for it and send it to Flocon with a very urgent note requesting him to print it forthwith. I explained the thing to Flocon; the man was unable to understand the cur, quomodo, quando* because Blanc had sent it to him without any further explanation. Flocon greatly regretted that the thing had become so outdated; while parfaitement d'accordh with it, he thought it was now too late. Nevertheless he would see whether it could not be included in an article. He would, he said, do his very best.

The article in the Réforme on Lamartine's pious intentions was by L. Blanc,c as you will have seen. It isn't bad, and in all respects a thousand times better than perpetual Flocon. Undoubtedly he would attack Lamartine very harshly, did he not happen to be his rival just now.

People, you see, are as well-disposed as one could wish. My relations with them are already ten times better than Ewerbeck's ever were. I shall now utterly forbid the latter to write for the

Réforme. He can relieve himself in the National and there compete with Venedey & Co.; he'll do no harm there, and anyway nothing of his will be published.

Afterwards I again visited the Atelier. I took with me an amendment to an article in the last issue on English working men d

which will also be included. The fellows were very well-behaved; I told them un tas d'anecdotes" about English workers, etc. They requested me most urgently to collaborate, which I shall only do, however, if needs must. Just imagine, the rédacteur en chef thought it would be a good idea if the English workers were to dispatch an address to their French counterparts, calling on them to oppose the libre-échange1 movement and champion the cause of travail nationalhl Quel héroïque dévouement!' But in this he failed even where his own people were concerned.

By the way, I was not compelled to make any concessions to these people. I told L. Blanc que nous étions d'accord avec eux sur toutes les questions pratiques et d'actualité, et que dans les questions purement théoriques nous marchions vers le même but; que les principes énoncés dans son premier volume' s'accordaient sous beaucoup de rapports avec les nôtres, et que pour le reste il en

[^1]: a why, how and when - b entirely in agreement - c L. Blanc, 'Programme de M. Lamartine', La Réforme, 27 October 1847. - d F. Engels, 'The Masters and the Workers in England' written in reply to the article 'Les maîtres et les ouvriers en Angleterre' in L'Atelier, No. 1, October 1847. - e a lot of anecdotes - f editor-in- chief - s free trade - h national labour - • What heroic devotion! - i L. Blanc, Histoire de la révolution française, t. 1.





**[p. 138]**

trouverait de plus amples développements dans ton livre. Quant à la question religieuse, nous la considérions comme tout-à-fait subor- donnée, comme une question qui jamais ne devrait former le prétexte d'une querelle entre les hommes du même parti.3 For ail that, I went on, a friendly discussion of theoretical questions was perfectly feasible and indeed desirable, with which he was parfaitement d'accord.

Lupus was perfectly right in assuming that I would very soon meet the management.175 Barely three days after my arrival here I ran into Seiler in the Boulevard des Italiens. You will long since have heard that he has done a bolt and has no intention of returning. He is going the rounds of the French correspondence bureaux in search of a berth. Since then I have repeatedly failed to find him and don't know how his affairs are going. If he meddles with the Réforme we shall have to disown him.

Ask that accursed Bornstedt what he means by not sending me his paper.b I cannot forever be chasing after the Straubingers86 for it. Should he feign ignorance of my address, give it to him, 5, rue Neuve Saint-Martin. I'll send him a few articles as soon as ever I can.

Hellish confusion among the Straubingers. In the days im- mediately preceding my arrival, the last of the Griinians were thrown out, an entire community of whom, however, half will return. We are now only thirty strong. I at once set up a propaganda community and I rush round speechifying. I was immediately elected to the districtc and have been entrusted with the correspondence. Some 20-30 candidates have been put up for admission. We shall soon grow stronger again. Strictly between ourselves, I've played an infernal trick on Mosi.d He had actually put through a delightfully amended confession of faith.176 Last Fridaye at the district I dealt with this, point by point, and was not yet half way through when the lads declared themselves satisfaits.

Completely unopposed, I got them to entrust me with the task of

[^1]: a that we were in agreement with them on all practical and current questions and that on purely theoretical questions we were marching towards the same goal; that the principles propounded in his first volume agreed in many respects with our own and that, regarding the rest, he would find it more fully developed in your book. As for the religious question, we regarded this as altogether secondary, as a question which should never be allowed to become a pretext for strife between men of the same party. - b Deutsche-Brüsseler-Zeitung - c Paris District Committee of the Communist League - d Moses Hess - e 22 October 1847





**[p. 139]**

drafting a new one" which will be discussed next Friday by the district and will be sent to London behind the backs of the communities. Naturally not a soul must know about this, otherwise we shall all be unseated and there'll be the deuce of a row.

Born will be coming to see you in Brussels; he is going to London.177 He may arrive before this letter. He will be travelling, somewhat rashly, down the Rhine through Prussia, always provided they don't cop him. Drum something more into him when he arrives; the fellow is the most receptive of all to our ideas and with a little preparation will be able to do good service in London.

Great heavens, I was on the point of forgetting all that avalanche of trash unloosed upon me from the heights of the Alps by the great Heinzen .b It is truly fortunate that it should all have been packed into one issue; nobody will plough his way through it. I myself had to break off several times. What a blockhead! Having first maintained that he can't write, I now find myself compelled to add that he can't read either, nor does he seem particularly conversant with the four rules of arithmetic. The ass ought to read F. O'Connor's letter in the last Star, addressed to the radical newspapers, which begins with YOU RUFFIANS' and ends with YOU RUFFIANS.C then he would see what a miserable duffer he is in the matter of invective. Well, you will be duly hauling this low, stupid lout over the coals.d I'm very glad that you intend to keep your answer quite brief. I could never answer such an attack, simply couldn't bring myself to—save perhaps with a box on the ears.

Tuesday

My article' has appeared in the Réforme. Curiously enough Flocon hasn't altered one syllable, which greatly surprises me.

I have not yet called on père Heine. As you can well imagine, with all this business, I've had a devilish lot to do and a fearsome amount of running about and writing.

[^1]: a F. Engels, 'Principles of Communism'.- b K. Heinzen, 'Ein "Repräsentant" der Kommunisten', Deutsche-Brüsseler-Zeitung, No. 84, 21 October 1847 (written in reply to Engels' polemical article 'The Communists and Karl Heinzen'). - c F. O'Connor, 'To the Editors of the Nottingham Mercury, the Nonconformist, the Dispatch, the Globe, the Manchester Examiner and Lloyds' Trash', The Northern Star, No. 522, 23 October 1847. - d K. Marx, 'Moralising Criticism and Critical Morality'. - e F. Engels,'The Commercial Crisis in England.—The Chartist Movement.—Ireland'.



