---
Volume: 38
Document_Title: "48. Engels to Georg Herwegh. 26 October "
Page_Range: "177-179"
---

# 48. Engels to Georg Herwegh. 26 October 



**[p. 140]**

I have written to Elberfeld about the FREE TRADE-protective tariff business and am daily expecting a reply.178 Write again soon. My regards to your wife and children.3

Your

Engels

You really should read O'Connor's article in the last Star attacking the six radical newspapers; it's a masterpiece of inspired abuse, in many places better than Cobbett and approaching Shakespeare.

Quelle mouche a donc piqué ce pauvre Moses qu'il ne cesse pas d'exposer dans le journal ses fantaisies sur les suites d'une révolution du prolétariatb?

First published in Der Briefwechsel zwischen Printed according to the original F. Engels und K. Marx, Bd. 1, Stuttgart, j g i3 Published in English for the first time

48

MARX TO GEORG HERWEGH

IN PARIS

Brussels, 26 October [1847] rue d'Orléans, 42, Faubourg Namur

Dear Herwegh,

I wanted to give Engels a letter to bring you, but there was so much pressing business on the day of his departure that this was lost sight of and forgotten.

I had further been asked by Countess Hatzfeldt to write you a few lines of introduction for her. I imagine that by now you will already have made her acquaintance. For a German woman, she has developed great vigour sparring with her husband.179

Here in Brussels we have founded two public democratic societies.

[^1]: a Jenny and Laura - b What bug can have bitten poor Moses to make him thus perpetually air in the newspaper his fantasies on the consequences of a revolution by the proletariat? (A reference to M. Hess, 'Die Folgen einer Revolution des Proletariats', Deutsche-Brüsseler-Zeitung, Nos. 82, 87, 89 and 90, 14 and 31 October, 7 and 11 November 1847.)





**[p. 141]**

1. A German Workers' Society158 which already has about 100 members. Besides debates of quite a parliamentary nature, there is also social entertainment with singing, recitation, theatricals and the like.

2. A smaller cosmopolitan-democratic society to which Belgians, French, Poles, Swiss and Germans belong.159

If you come up here again you'll find that even in little Belgium more can be done by way of direct propaganda than in big France. Moreover, I believe that, however minor it may be, public activity is infinitely refreshing for everyone.

It is possible, there being now a liberal ministry at the helm," that we shall run into some trouble with the police, for liberals always remain liberals.

But we shall be able to deal with them. Here it is not as in Paris, where foreigners confront the government in isolation.

Since it is impossible in present circumstances to make any use of the book trade in Germany, I have agreed with Germans from Germany to produce a review—monthly—supported by subscrip- tions to shares.167 In the Rhine Province and Baden a number of shares have already been bought up. We intend to make a start as soon as there's enough money to last 3 months.

If subscriptions in any way permitted, we would establish our own type-setting room here, which could also be used for printing separate works.

Now I should like you to tell me:

1. Whether you, for your part, would also be prepared to drum up a few subscriptions for shares (25 talers per share).

2. Whether you are prepared to collaborate and to figure as a collaborator on the tide page.

But I would ask you, since you have in any case long owed me a letter, to overcome for once your aversion to writing and to reply soon. I also wanted to request you to ask Bakunin by what route, to what address and by what means a letter can be conveyed to Tolstoy.

My wife sends her warm regards to you and your wife. The strange business of the Prussian Embassy in Paris180 is certainly indicative of our sovereign'sb mounting and impotent rage.

Farewell.

Your

Marx

[^1]: a formed in August 1847 - b Frederick William IV of Prussia



