---
Volume: 38
Document_Title: "49. Engels to Marx. 14- 15 November "
Page_Range: "179-183"
---

# 49. Engels to Marx. 14- 15 November 



**[p. 142]**

[The address written by Jenny Marx on the fourth page of the letter]

Dr Gottschalk, General Practitioner in Cologne.

[Beneath it Karl Marx has written]

Dear Herwegh, Due to an oversight, the above wrong address nearly appeared on this letter.

First published in: 1848. Briefe von und an Printed according to the original Georg Herwegh, Munich, 1898

Published in English for the first time

49

ENGELS TO MARX

IN BRUSSELS

Paris, [14-J15 November 1847

Dear Marx,

Yesterday, having sent friend Reinhardt several times to see Frank about your book,3 I learned, suddenly and at last, that that cur, Frank, had begun by sending several of the free copies to Frenchmen, in every case demanding 15 sous expenses, and in every case getting the copies back again.181 Thereupon he calmly hung on, not only to those he had got back, but also to such as had not yet been sent out, and it was not until a few days ago that he sent them to the addressees without demanding 15 sous. The conspiration de silence was thus of Mr Frank's making! I at once hurried along to L. Blanc, whom a few days previously I had again failed to find in because he was en garde (le petit bonhomme en

bonnet à poil!)h; this time I did find him in and the copy had still not arrived! I have at last got my own copy back, which may be of help in case of need. Today, Sunday, nothing can be done. I have arranged to meet Reinhardt tomorrow, whereupon he will go with me to see Frank, which should have happened earlier but did not happen through negligence on Reinhardts part. He must intro-

[^1]: a K. Marx, The Poverty of Philosophy.- b on guard (the little mannikin in a busby)





**[p. 143]**

duce me to Frank, since I have no other means of establishing my bona fides with the fellow. I shall get him to give me the copy for L. Blanc and take it along with me. But what an ass Flocon is! L. Blanc told me yesterday that Flocon had objected to your libre-échange3 article173 qu'il était un peu confusb!H! The muddle- headed creature! I naturally objected, oh, said the litde man, ce n'est pas moi qui ai trouvé cela, tout au contraire, l'article m'a beaucoup plu, et en effet, je ne sais pas ce que M. Flocon mais enfinc (with a somewhat equivocal grimace intended for Flocon), c'est ce qu'il m'a di(.d All in all the editorial board of the Réforme is tout ce qu'il y a de plus* wretchedly constituted. The article on the English crisis and all economic topics en général are churned out by a poor, worthy PENNY-A-LINER whose schooling appears to have been confined to the financial articles of a correspondence bureau, and who sees everything through the eyes of a third-rate Parisian clerk in a fourth-rate bank, and judges it with the infallibility peculiar to such an EMPIRIC, as the English say. Flocon understands nothing of the matter and seems to me to grow more ignorant day by day. C'est tout au plus un homme de bonne volonté.1 Indeed, L. Blanc also makes no secret of his contempt for him.

Monday

I did not find the accursed Reinhardt at home. I shall go there again this evening. Come what may, I must get the whole business cleared up by tomorrow.. If I don't write to you again at once, it means that everything's in order.

Yesterday evening the election of delegates took place.182 After an extremely muddled session I was elected with a 2/3 [majority]. This time I had engaged in no intrigues whatsoever, there had been little opportunity for any. The opposition was merely a fiction; a working man was proposed for appearances' sake, but those who proposed him voted for me.

The money is coming in. Write and tell me whether you and Tedesco are going. If that proves impossible, I can hardly go there and 'congress' on my own, that wouldn't make sense. If neither of you can go, the whole business will fall through and will have to

[^1]: a free-trade - b which was a trifle muddled - c it's not I who thought that, quite the contrary, I liked the article very much, and indeed I don't know what Mr Flocon but anyway - d that's what he told me - e quite the most - f At best he's a man of good will.





**[p. 144]**

be postponed for a few months. Should this be the case, write and tell London, so that all can be advised in good time.

Flocon had further told L. Blanc that if your article was to be accepted it would need altering a little, precisely to make it 'clearer'. L. Blanc asked m e once again to remind Flocon de sa

part1 about the article; but in the circumstances I think it would be far better to let the matter drop. For Flocon to make the article clearer—that would be the last straw! Such block-headed stubborn- ness is beyond my comprehension and, as I have mentioned, Blanc plus ou moinsb apologised to m e for his colleague. But what can be done in such a case? I shall let Flocon do what he wants, have litüe to d o with him and deal mainly with L. Blanc, who is the most reasonable of the lot. There's absolutely nothing one can d o with the National, it's becoming more narrow-minded every day and is increasingly allying itself with Barrot and Thiers, WITNESS THE LILLE BANQUET.183

Seiler will have written to tell you that your book's going very badly here. That's not true. Frank has told Reinhardt that he is pretty well satisfied with the sales. Despite his preposterous behaviour he has, I believe, disposed of some 40 copies. More about this shortly. Seiler—he called on me recently, met with a very cool reception and did not come again—maintains that he has left sufficient in the way of bedding, furniture, paper, etc., etc., to cover Wolff's and Heilberg's needs. See to it, si cela est,c

that Lupus, at least, isn't swindled again, this time by Heilberg. But no doubt it's all so much hot air.

Rothschild has made a profit of 10 million francs on the new loan—4 per cent net.

I shall not be able to pass through Brussels on my way to London, since money is too short. We shall have to arrange to meet in O s t e n d — o n the evening of the 27th (Saturday), and cross over on Sunday so that we can make a start on Monday. O n that day, the 29th, the Polish anniversary, there may be something FRATERNALLY democratic going on, in which case we shall have to attend. T h a t would be quite a good thing. You make a French speech in London and then we print it in the Réforme.184 T h e Germans absolutely must do something to hold their own with the French. A single speech would be of more help than ten articles or a hundred visits.

You'll have seen in The Northern Star, 2 October, the demand put forward by Harney and the FRATERNALS for a democratic

[^1]: a on his behalf - b more or less - c if that is so





**[p. 145]**

congress." Do lend it your support, as I shall do among the French. We could try and hold it if possible next year in London, perhaps at the same time as our own. Should it come about, it might have a very salutary effect on the French and humble them somewhat. Should it fail to materialise, the fault will lie with the French and they will at least be compelled to declare themselves. It would be even better if Brussels could be the venue185; in London Feargusb might get up to some kind of foolishness.

Otherwise nothing new. Give the enclosed to Bornstedtc and write soon telling me whether you are going to London.

Your E.

Write to the painter's0 address if you still have it. It is better. Heine sends his regards. Is extremely weak and somewhat languid. Who actually sent your article to L. Blanc? He says the name at the foot of the letter was quite unknown. That could well be the reason why he allowed the matter to hang fire.

[On the back of the letter]

Monsieur Charles Marx, 42, rue d'Orléans, Faubourg d'lxelles, Bruxelles

[^1]: First published in Der Briefwechsel zwischen Printed according to the original F. Engels und K. Marx, Bd. 1, Stuttgart, jgjg Published in English for the first time

[^2]: a Manifesto of the Fraternal Democrats. To the Democracy of Europe, from 22 September 1847, The Northern Star, No. 519, 2 October 1847. - b O'Connor - c This seems to refer to Engels' second article in German Socialism in Verse and Prose; the first one was published in the Deutsche-Brüseller-Zeitung, 21 November 1847. - d A. F. Körner



