---
Volume: 38
Document_Title: "50. Engels to Marx. 23- 24 November "
Page_Range: "183-187"
---

# 50. Engels to Marx. 23- 24 November 



**[p. 50]**

ENGELS TO MARX186

IN BRUSSELS

[Paris, 23-24 November 1847]

Dear Marx,

Not until this evening was it decided that I should be coming. Saturday evening," then, in Ostend, Hôtel de la Couronne, just opposite the railway station beside the harbour, AND SUNDAY MORNING ACROSS THE WATER. If you take the train that leaves between 4 and 5, you'll arrive at about the same time as I do.

If, contrary to expectations, there is no packet-boat to Dover on Sundays, write and^ell me by return. I. e., since you will receive this letter on Thursday morning, you must make inquiries at once and, should a letter be necessary, it must be posted the same evening—before five o'clock, I think—at the main post office. So if you want to make any changes as regards the meeting place there is still time. If I haven't heard by Friday morning I shall count on meeting you and Tedesco on Saturday evening at the Couronne. We shall then have time enough to talk things over; this congress must be a decisive one, AS THIS TIME WE SHALL HAVE IT ALL

I expect to see L. Blanc again tomorrow. If not, I shall in any case see him the day after tomorrow. If I have nothing to add at the end of this letter, you will hear the sequel on Saturday.

By die way, Reinhardt talked nonsense to me about the number of copies soldc—not 37, but 96 had been sold a week ago today. That same day I myself took your book to L. Blanc. All the copies had been despatched save to Lamartine (not here), L. Blanc and

[^1]: OUR OWN WAY. For a long time now I have been completely at a loss to understand why you have not put a stop to Moses' gossip.b It's been giving rise to the most devilish confusion for me here and the most tedious contradictory speeches to the workers. Entire district sittings have been wasted over it, nor is there any possibility of effectively combating this 'vapid' nonsense in the communities; particularly before the elections there could be no question of it.

[^2]: a 27 November 1847 - b Probably a series of articles by Moses Hess. - c K. Marx, The Poverty of Philosophy.



• - ^ ' i ; " ^ ' j - ' ^ * 5s,- .i* Ï-A,,^R„„ „ s Ä

•••;•; •. :±'i& M-* • • vi- • ' -' & -m-

[^1]: A page from Engels letter to Marx of 23-24 November 1847







**[p. 149]**

Vidal, whose address cannot be found. I have had it taken to the

Presse.

By the way, Frank's despatch arrangements have been truly appalling.

At least see that Moses doesn't get up to any nonsense during our absence! Au revoir, then!

Your E.

Tuesday evening Vertea

Give a little thought to the Confession of Faith. I think we would do best to abandon the catachetical form and call the thing Communist Manifesto!' Since a certain amount of history has to be narrated in it, the form hitherto adopted is quite unsuitable. I shall be bringing with me the one from here, which I didc; it is in simple narrative form, but wretchedly worded, in a tearing hurry. I start off by asking: What is communism? and then straight on to the proletariat—the history of its origins, how it differs from earlier workers, development of the antithesis between the proletariat and the bourgeoisie, crises, conclusions. In between, all kinds of secondary matter and, finally, the communists' party policy, in so far as it should be made public. The one here has not yet been submitted in its entirety for endorsement but, save for a few quite minor points, I think I can get it through in such a form that at least there is nothing in it which conflicts with our views.

Wednesday morning

Have just received your letter187 to which the above is an answer. I went to see L. Blanc. I'm remarkably unlucky with him—il est en voyage, il reviendra peut-être aujourd'hui.6 I shall go there again tomorrow and, if necessary, the day after.

I can't be in Ostend by Friday everiing because the money won't have been got together until Friday.

This morning your cousin Philips came to see me. Born should make quite a good speech if you drum something into him. It's good that the Germans are represented by a working man.188 But Lupus must be purged of all trace of his excessive

[^1]: a PTO - b Cf. K. Marx and F. Engels, Manifesto of the Communist Party. - c F. Engels, 'Principles of Communism'. - d he's travelling and will perhaps be back today.



