---
Volume: 38
Document_Title: "52. Engels to Marx. 14 January "
Page_Range: "189-192"
---

# 52. Engels to Marx. 14 January 



**[p. 1848]**

52

ENGELS TO MARX191

IN BRUSSELS

Paris, 14 January 1848

Dear Marx,

If I haven't written to you it was because I have as yet still not been able to get hold of that accursed Louis Blanc. Décidément il y

met de la mauvaise volonté.* But I'm determined to catch him— every day I go to him or lie in wait for him at the café. Père Flocon, on the other hand, is proving more amenable. He is delighted at the way the Brüsseler-Zeitung and The Northern Star defended the Réforme against the National}1 Not even the blâme against L. Blanc and Ledru-Rollin have succeeded in flustering him, any more than my announcement that we have now decided in London to come out openly as communists. He, of course, made some capital assertions: vous tendez au despotisme, vous tuerez la révolution en France, nous avons onze millions de petits paysans qui sont en même temps les propriétaires les plus enragés,c etc., etc., although he also abused the peasants,— but enfin, dit-il, nos principes sont trop rapprochés les uns des autres pour que nous ne devions pas marcher ensemble; quant à nous nous vous appuyerons autant que sera dans notre pouvoir,d etc., etc.

[^1]: a Decidedly, he is showing bad will. - b Reference to Engels' articles published in The Northern Star in November 1847 and January 1848, among them 'Split in the Camp.—The Réforme and the National.— March of Democracy', 'Reform Move- ment in France.—Banquet of Dijon', 'The "Satisfied" Majority' (the last two criticised the nationalist tendencies of Louis Blanc and Ledru-Rollin) and his article 'The Réforme and the National' in the Deubche-Brüsseler-Zeitung, No. 104, 30 December 1847. - c you are tending towards despotism, you will kill the revolution in France, we have eleven million small peasants who at the same time are the most fanatical property owners. - d after all, he said, our principles are too similar for us not to march together; as for us, we will give you all the support in our power.





**[p. 153]**

I was enormously tickled by the Mosia business, although annoyed that it should have come to light. Apart from you, no one in Brussels knew of it save Gigot and Lupus—and Born, whom I told about it in Paris once when I was in my cups. Enfin, c'est égal}

Moses brandishing his pistols, parading his horns before the whole of Brussels, and before Bornstedt into the bargain!!, must have been exquisite. Ferdinand Wolff's inventiveness over the minutes m'a fait crever de rire"—and Moses believes that! If, by the by, the jackass should persist in his preposterous lie about rape, I can provide him with enough earlier, concurrent, and later details to send him reeling. For only last July here in Paris this Balaam's she-assd made me, in optima forma," a declaration of love mingled with resignation, and confided to me the most intimate nocturnal secrets of her ménage! Her rage with me is unrequited love, pure and simple. For that matter, Moses came only second in my thoughts at Valenciennes, my first desire being to revenge myself for all the dirty tricks they had played on Mary.'

The strong wine proves to be no more than a '/a bottle of Bordeaux. It is only to be regretted that the horned Siegfried R did not have his unhappy lot publicly minuted by the Workers' Society.158 He is perfectly at liberty, by the way, to avenge himself on all my present, past and future mistresses, and for that purpose I commend to him 1) the Flemish giantess who lives at my former lodgings, 87 chaussée d'lxelles au premier^ and whose name is Mademoiselle Joséphine, and 2) a Frenchwoman, Mademoiselle Félicie1 who, on Sunday, the 23rd of this month, will be arriving in Brussels by the first train from Cologne on her way to Paris. It would be bad luck if he were to succeed with neither. Kindly pass on this information to him in order that he may appreciate my honourable intentions. I WILL GIVE HIM FAIR PLAY.

It is nearly all up with Heine. I visited him. a fortnight ago and he was in bed, having had a nervous fit. Yesterday he was up but extremely ill. He can hardly manage three steps now; supporting himself against the wall, he crawls from armchair to bed and vice versa. On top of that, the noise in his house, cabinet-making, hammering, etc., is driving him mad. Intellectually he is also somewhat spent. Heinzen desired to see him but was not admitted. -

[^1]: a Moses Hess - b Well, no matter. - c made me split my sides with laughter - d Sibylle Hess - e in due form - f Mary Burns - t An allusion to Hess with a pun on the word gehörnte, which, when used to describe Siegfried, the hero of German epic literature, means 'invulnerable', but in other contexts means 'cuckold'. - h on the first floor - ' Félicité André

[^2]: 7-1543





**[p. 154]**

I was also at Herwegh's yesterday. Along with the rest of his family he has influenza and is much visited by old women. He told me that L. Blanc's 2nd volume3 has been quite eclipsed by the enormous success of Michelet's 2nd volume.*1 I have not yet read either because shortage of money has prevented me from subscribing to the reading room. By the way, Michelet's success can only be attributed to his suspension 192 and his civic spirit.

Things are going wretchedly with the League0 here. Never have I encountered such sluggishness and petty jealousy as there is among these fellows. Weitlingianism and Proudhonism are truly the exact expression of these jackasses' way of life and hence nothing can be done. Some are genuine Straubingers,86 ageing boors, others aspiring petty bourgeois. A class which lives, Irish-fashion, by depressing the wages of the French, is utterly- useless. T am now making one last attempt, si cela ne réussit pas, je me retire de cette espèce de propagande? I hope that the London papers' will arrive soon and help to liven things up somewhat again; then I shall strike while the iron is hot. Not yet having seen any results from the Congress, the fellows are naturally growing completely supine. I am in contact with several new workers introduced to me by Stumpf and Neubeck but as yet there is no knowing what can be made of them.

Tell Bornstedt: 1) In the matter of his subscriptions,' his attitude towards the workers here should not be so rigorously commercial, otherwise he'll lose them all; 2) the agent procured for him by Moses is a feeble Jeremiah and very conceited, but the only one who still will and can attend to the thing, so he had better not rub him up the wrong way; the fellow has, moreover, gone to great pains, but he can't put in money—which, for that matter, he has done already. Out of the money coming in to him he has to cover the expenses correspondence, etc. involves for him; 3) if he is sending separate issues, he should never send more than 10-15 at most of [] one issue, and these as opportunity offers. The parcels go through Duchâtel's ministry, whence they have to be fetched at considerable expenditure in time and where the ministry exacts a fearsome postal charge in order to ruin this traffic. A parcel of this kind costs 6-8 francs, and what can one do if that's what they ask? Esselens in Liège wanted to appoint a garde

[^1]: a L. Blanc, Histoire de la revolution française, t. 2. - b J. Michel«, Histoire de la révolution française, t. 2. - c the Communist League - d if that doesn't succeed, I shall give up this kind of propaganda. - e i. e. documents of the Second Congress of the Communist League - f to the Deutsche-Brüsseler-Zeitung



