---
Volume: 38
Document_Title: "53. Engels to Marx. 21 January "
Page_Range: "192-195"
---

# 53. Engels to Marx. 21 January 



**[p. 155]**

de convoi* to deliver it. Write to Liège and tell them this will be arranged. 4) The issues that were still here have been sent by third party to South Germany. Should occasion offer, Bornstedt should send us a few more issues to be used as propaganda in cafés, etc., etc. 5) Within the next few days Bornstedt will be receiving an articleb and the thing about the Prussian finances. But you must again cast an eye over the part about the committees of 1843193

and alter it where necessary, since my memory of the subject was very hazy at the time of writing.

If the Mosi business eventually leads to your attacking him in the Brüsseler-Zeitung, I shall be delighted. How the fellow can still remain in Brussels, I fail to understand. En voilà encore une occasion pour l'exiler à Verviers! The matter of the Réforme will be attended to.d

Your E.

[On the back of the letter]

Monsieur Philipp Gigot 8.-Rue Bodenbroeck, Bruxelles

53

ENGELS TO MARX

Paris, Friday evening, 21 January 1848

Dear Marx,

At last I have run L. Blanc to earth and at the same time found out why I could never get hold of him. Ecoute plutôt—ce petit grand-seigneur littéraire ne reçoit que les jeudis! et encore l'après-midi

[^1]: First published abridged in Der Briefwech- Printed according to the original sei zwischen F. Engels und K. Marx, Bd. 1, . Stuttgart, 1913 and in full in MEGA. Published in English for the first Abt. III, Bd. 1, Berlin, 1929 u m e

[^2]: IN BRUSSELS

[^3]: a courier - b F. Engels, 'The Movements of 1847'. - c Here's another opportunity to send him into exile at Verviers. - d See this volume, p. 156.





**[p. 156]**

seulement!* Of this he never informed me, either directly or through his doorkeeper. I found him, of course, surrounded by a crowd of jackasses, amongst whom Ramon de La Sagra, who gave me a pamphlet which I shall send on to you.b I have not yet read it. However I was finally able to have a few minutes' talk with him about our affairs. He reluctantly admitted that he had not yet had time to read your bookc je l'ai feuilleté et j'ai vu que M. Proudhon y est assez vivement attaqué Eh bien, I asked, alors serez vous en mesure de faire l'article pour la 'Réforme' que vous m'aviez promis?—Un article, ah mon Dieu, non, je suis si obsédé par mes éditeurs—mais voilà ce qu'il faut faire: faites l'article vous-même et je le ferai passer à la 'Réforme'.0 This was then agreed. Au fond" you'll lose nothing by it. At least I'll present our views more correctly than he would have done. I shall draw a direct parallel between these and his own—that is the most that can be done: naturally a conclusion detrimental to the Réforme cannot be drawn in the Réforme itself. I shall see to this forthwith.194

Why didn't you tell Bornstedt not to write to the Réforme about your thing? My article was finished when Bornstedt's appeared in the Réforme along with the Chartist thingsf whose publication I was awaiting before taking mine in. It was appreciably longer than the brief notice in which, to boot, your name is distorted/ I told Flocon he must correct the printer's error; he had not done so yesterday and I haven't seen today's Réforme. It is of little moment anyhow. As soon as your speech h appears, send me 4-5 copies for the Réforme, L. Blanc, de La Sagra (for the Démocratie pacifique), etc.; I can now make a longer article of it as the notice was so abominably brief.

[^1]: a Just listen—this little literary lord receives visitors only on Thursdays! and then only in the afternoon! - b R. de La Sagra, Organisation du travail. - c K. Marx, The Poverty of Philosophy. - d I have leafed through it and seen that M. Proudhon is attacked with some acerbity.—Well then, will you be able to write the article for the Réforme you promised us?—An article, good gracious no, I'm so hard pressed by my publishers—but I'll tell you what to do: write the article yourself and I'll see that it appears in the Réforme. - e After all - ' What is meant is an item about Marx's speech at the meeting of the Brussels Democratic Association on 9 January 1848. It was published in La Réforme on 19 January, along with Engels' report 'The Chartist Movement' (his previous report on the subject was published on 10 January). - S 'Man' instead of 'Marx' - h K. Marx, 'Speech on the Question of Free Trade'.





**[p. 157]**

As for L. Blanc, he deserves to be castigated. Write a review of his Révolution* for the Deutsche-Brüsseler-Zeitung and prove to him in practice how far above him we are; the form amicable, but the content leaving no doubt as to our superiority. On lui fera parvenir cela} The petty sultan must be made to quake a little. The theoretical aspect, alas, is for the time being our only strength, but this carries much weight in the eyes of these champions of science sociale, of the loi de la production suffisante? etc. Comical, these fellows, with their chasing after this unknown loi. They wish to find a law by which they will increase production tenfold. Like the waggoner in the fable, they seek a Hercules who will drag the social waggon out of the mire for them. Yet there Hercules is, in their own hands. The loi de la production suffisante consists in one's ability to produce suffisamment. If they cannot do so, no magic formula will avail. Inventors who take out a brevetd do more for production suffisante than the whole of L. Blanc with his profound, high-flying aspirations to la science.

I wrote Bernays a very ironical letter in reply to his last, expressing regret that his impartiality should have robbed me of the ultimate consolation—that of being a beautiful soul misunder- stood— à la Praslin.e Raising his eyebrows reproachfully, he returns me the note,195 observing that this marks the end of our correspondence. Sela.{

Otherwise nothing new. Write soon.

Your E.

Mr Karl Marx in the German Workers' Society, Brussels

[^1]: [On the back of the letter]

[^2]: First publshed in Der Briefwechsel zwischen F. Engels und K. Marx, Bd. 1, Stuttgart, 1913

[^3]: Printed according to the original

[^4]: Published in English for the first time

[^5]: a L. Blanc, Histoire de la révolution française. - b We'll see that it reaches him. - c law of sufficient production - d patent - e An allusion to K. L. Bernays, Die Ermordung der Herzogin von Praslin. - f The end.



