---
Volume: 38
Document_Title: "56. Marx to Engels. 16 March "
Page_Range: "198-200"
---

# 56. Marx to Engels. 16 March 



**[p. 161]**

Thursday

Nothing new—I saw your article in the Réforme3—so there's a rumpus going on in England as well, tant mieux}1

If you haven't written by the time this arrives, do write at once. Ironically enough, my baggage has just arrived from Paris— costing me 50 fr.! with customs, etc., etc.

Adieu.

Your

Engels

It would seem that the Deputy Inspector of Police who came to your house has already been dismissed. The affair has aroused great indignation among the petty bourgeois here.

[On the back of the letter]

Monsieur Charles Marx aux soins de Madame Gsell, 75, Boulevard Beaumarchais, Paris.

First published abridged in Der Briefwech- Printed according to the original sei zwischen F. Ensels und K. Marx, Bd. 1, „ , , - , , „ , • , , u r56

[Paris,] 16 March 1848

Dear Engels,

I never have a minute these days to write at any length. I confine myself to essentials.

Flocon is very well disposed towards you. The Straubingers86 here are all more or less furious with you (set-to with Sch.,c etc.).

[^1]: e . „ . . „ , , , • r ,1 • , , , . „ , Published in English tor the tirst Stuttgart, 191.1 and in full in A1EGA, ö

[^2]: Abt. III, Bd. 1, 1929

[^3]: time

[^4]: MARX TO ENGELS204

[^5]: IN BRUSSELS

[^6]: a K. Marx, 'To the Editor of La Reforme'. - b so much the better - c apparently reference to Scherzer





**[p. 162]**

As regards the money, tell Cassel he must give you the bill if he won't pay it. Then perhaps Baillut will pay it.

Get Gigot to settle accounts and at least give you the balance. As regards Breyer, you must go to see him again and point out what a shabby trick it would be if he made use of my ill-fortune to avoid payment. He must hand over at least part to you. The revolution hasn't cost him a sou.

The bourgeoisie here are again becoming atrociously uppish and reactionary, mais elle verrai

Bornstedt and Herwegh are behaving like scoundrels. They have founded a black, red and gold association205 contre nous? The former is to be expelled from the Leagued today.

Your M.

At the moment I am unable to find the feuille de route" and this letter must go off.

Dismiss Gigot if he doesn't begin to show signs of activity. Just now the fellow ought to be more energetic.

My warmest regards to Maynz; also to Jottrand. I have received the latest Débat social.

Farewell.

[^1]: My regards to Vogler likewise. I shall write at length to Maynz and Jottrand.206

[^2]: First published in Der Briefwechsel zwischen F. Engels und K. Marx, Bd. 1, Stuttgart, 1913

[^3]: Printed according to the original

[^4]: Published in English in full for the first time.

[^5]: a probably August Schnee - h but they'll see - c in opposition to us - d the Communist League - c way-bill



