---
Volume: 38
Document_Title: "58. Engels to Emil Blank. 26 March "
Page_Range: "202-204"
---

# 58. Engels to Emil Blank. 26 March 



**[p. 165]**

In Germany things are going very well indeed, riots everywhere and the Prussians aren't giving way. Tant mieux." I hope we shan't have to remain very long in Paris.

How excellent that you are throwing out Bornstedt.b The fellow has proved so unreliable that his expulsion from the League is essential. He and Weerth are now allied and Weerth is running round here as a fanatical republican.

Lamartine is becoming daily more depraved. In all his speeches the man addresses himself exclusively to the bourgeoisie and seeks to pacify them. Even the Provisional Government's Electoral Pro- clamation0 is directed wholly at the bourgeoisie in order to reas- sure them. Small wonder that the creatures are becoming uppish.

Adios, au revoir.

F. E.

All letters to be sent here to the address I have given; en mon absence0 Bloss will give them to Gigot.

[On the back of the letter]

M. Marx Rue neuve Ménilmontant

58

ENGELS TO EMIL BLANK

Paris, 26 March 1848

Dear Emil,

After the glorious February revolution and Belgium's stillborn March revolution, I came back here last week. I wrote to Mother asking for money so that within a few days I could return to

[^1]: First published in Der Briefwechsel zwischen Printed according to the original F. Engels und K. Marx, Bd. 1, Stuttgart, , , , ,. , , , iqis Published in English tor the hrst time

[^2]: IN LONDON

[^3]: a So much the better. - b See this volume, p. 162. - c 'Instruction du Gouvernement provisoire pour l'exécution du décret du 5 mars 1848, relatif aux élections générales', Le Moniteur universel, No. 70, 10 March 1848. - d in my absence





**[p. 210]**

'How I can be expected to send you the money, I really don't know, since a few days ago Fould notified Father that he was doing no more business, and since several good bills sent him by Father came back and were protested. Write and tell me, then, how I can be expected to let you have the money.'

The simplest thing would be for you to send me 20 pounds in banknotes, these being highly regarded here, and at once arrange with my old man to reimburse you. In this way I shall get my money quickly and be able to leave, whereas I would otherwise be stuck here for another week before getting money from Barmen, let alone Engelskirchen. I am therefore writing to Barmen this very day for them to repay you the £20, and I would ask you to arrange matters in the way I have just said, since bills are no longer any good.

You can send half of the bisected banknotes to me today, addressed to 19ter rue de la Victoire, Paris, and the remainder next day to Mlle Félicité André, same street and No. This will foil letter thieves.

Here things are going very well,20a i.e. the bourgeoisie, who were beaten on 24 February and 17 March,b are once more raising their heads and railing horribly against the Republic. But the only result of this will be that a thunderstorm quite unlike anything they have known before will very soon break over them. If the fellows persist in their insolence, some of them will very soon be strung up by the people. In the provisional government they have a certain party, namely Lamartine, the soft-soaper, whose life will also soon be forfeit. The workers here, 200,000-300,000 strong, will hear of no one but Ledru-Rollin, and they are right. He is the most resolute and radical of all. Flocon, too, is very good; I've been to see him once or twice and am about to do so again; he's a thoroughly honest fellow.

We have nothing to do with the great crusade which is departing from here to set up the German republic by force of

[^1]: arms.

[^2]: a Neue Rheinische Zeitung- b See this volume, p. 168.



