---
Volume: 38
Document_Title: "61. Engels to Emil Blank. 15 April "
Page_Range: "207-208"
---

# 61. Engels to Emil Blank. 15 April 



**[p. 170]**

offices3 so crowded with people that our all too limited time prevented us from taking our turn and waiting. We therefore regret that we have to leave without having had one last interview with you.

Mr Ewerbeck, who will be delivering this, will take it upon himself to inform us of the address we should use when writing to

915 you.

We do not doubt for one instant that we shall shortly be able to give you favourable news of the progress of the communist movement in Germany.

Meanwhile, please accept our respectful greetings.

Yours very sincerely

K. Marx, F. Engels

First published in English in the journal Printed according to Engels' manu- Science and Society, Vol. IV, No. 2, 1940 script

Translated from the French

61

ENGELS TO EMIL BLANK

Barmen, 15 April 1848

Dear Emil,

I am safely back here again.216 The whole of Barmen is waiting to see what I shall do. They believe I'm going to proclaim the republic forthwith. The philistines are trembling with vague fear—what of, they themselves don't really know. At any rate, it is believed that, now I am here, much will speedily resolve itself. C. and A. Ermen were quaking visibly when I walked into their office today. I, of course, am not meddling in anything but waiting quietly to see what happens.

The panic here is ineffable. The bourgeoisie are calling for confidence but confidence has gone. Most of them are fighting for existence, as they themselves put it. This doesn't fill the workers' bellies, however, and from time to time they rebel a little. General dissolution, ruin, anarchy, despair, fear, rage, constitutional

[^1]: IN LONDON

[^2]: a editorial offices of Le Populaire



