---
Volume: 38
Document_Title: "62. Marx to Engels. About 24 April "
Page_Range: "208-209"
---

# 62. Marx to Engels. About 24 April 



**[p. 171]**

enthusiasm, hatred of the Republic, etc., are rampant, and the fact is, for the time being, the richest people are the most tormented and frightened. And the exaggerations, the lies, the ranting and the railing, are enough to drive one out of one's mind. The most placid of citizens is a real enragé."

But they're in for a surprise when once the Chartists make a start. The business of the procession was a mere bagatelle. In a couple of months, my friend, G. Julian Harney, to whom pray address the enclosed letter, 9 Queen Street, Brompton, will be in Palmerston's shoes.217 I'LL BET YOU TWOPENCE AND IN FACT ANY SUM.

All is well with your mother and mine. They are expecting your brother Hermann; Anna is in Hamm. My regards to Marieb and the children. À bientôt.

Your F.

Printed according to the original

Published in English for the first time

62

MARX TO ENGELS

Cologne [about. 24 April 1848] Apostelnstrasse Nr. 7

Dear Engels,

A good many have already been subscribed for here, and we shall probably soon be able to make a start.218 But now you must without fail make demands on your old man and in general declare definitively what is to be done in Barmen and Elberfeld.

A prospectus (written by Bürgers),c etc., has been sent from here to Hecker in Elberfeld.

First published in: Marx and Engels,

Works, First Russian Edition, Vol. XXV, Moscow, 1934

[^1]: IN BARMEN

[^2]: !> madman (ironically comparing the German citizens with the men of the most radical trend during the French Revolution) - b Anna and Marie are Engels' sisters. - ' H. Bürgers, 'Prospectus for the Founding of the Neue Rheinische Zeitung (see present edition, Vol. 7, pp. 539-41), later published in Das Westphälische Dampfboot, No. 12, 17 May 1848.



