---
Volume: 38
Document_Title: "70. Marx to Engels. 29 November "
Page_Range: "218-219"
---

# 70. Marx to Engels. 29 November 



**[p. 70]**

MARX TO ENGELS

IN BERNE

Cologne, 29 November [1848]

Dear Engels,

The papers have been sent to you. If this was not done sooner the tault lies with that jackass Korff who, because I was overworked, a circumstance aggravated by repeated summonses, has so far failed to carry out my orders.

In the meantime remain in Berne. I shall write to you as soon as you can come. Seal your letters better. One of them had been opened, as 1 indicated in the paper, without, of course, mentioning your name.3

Write in detail about Proudhon and, since your geography is good, about the dirty business in Hungary (nations swarming like bees).b Don't forget me c in the piece on Proudhon, since our articles are reprinted by a great many French newspapers.

Write something, too, attacking the Federal Republic, to which end Switzerland provides the best opportunity.4

Our paper continues to stand by the principle of émeute,1 but despite all my summonses in court, it has succeeded in sailing clear of the Code pénal}4* It is now very much en vogue. We are also issuing posters daily.242. La révolution marche? Write diligently.

I have devised an infallible plan for extracting money from your old man, as we now have none. Write me a begging letter (as crude as possible), in which you retail your past vicissitudes, but in such a way that I can pass it on to your mother. The old man's beginning to get the wind up.

I hope to see you again soon. Your

[^1]: K. Heinzen has published his old trashy piece attacking us.e

[^2]: Marx First published abridged in Der Briefwech- Printed according to the original sei zwischen F. Engels und K. Marx, Bd. 1, Stuttgart, 1913 and in full in MEGA, Published in English for the first Abt. Ill, Bd. 1, 1929 t i m e

[^3]: a K. Marx ['Letters Opened']. - b In compliance with this request Engels wrote the articles '[Proudhon]' and 'The Magyar Struggle'. - c Marx means his book The Poverty of Philosophy. - d F. Engels, 'The National Council'. - e K. Heinzen, Die Helden des teutschen Kommunismus, Bern, 1848. - f uprising - s The revolution is on the march.



