---
Volume: 38
Document_Title: "71. Mar x to Eduard von Müller- Tellering. 5 December "
Page_Range: "219-220"
---

# 71. Mar x to Eduard von Müller- Tellering. 5 December 



**[p. 71]**

MARX TO EDUARD von MÜLLER-TELLERING

IN VIENNA

[Cologne, 5 December 1848]

My dear Teilering,

You would already have had the missing issues/ but most of them are missing. Hence I am still busily trying to get hold of the copies you lack.

As regards your feuilleton, you must excuse me for not having read it through yet, owing to my being overworked. If it is not suitable for our newspaper you shall have it back.

Regarding the addresses, all your letters have arrived. As a precaution, write to Herr Werres, Unter Huthmacher 17. The address is wholly above suspicion.

Just now our newspaper is 5am sou.h But the subscribers []c

The jackasses are at last beginning to feel that our prophecies have invariably been right; unless we're suppressed by the government we shall have surmounted our troubles by the beginning of January, and then I shall do everything in my power to reward you in accordance with your services. Your articles are incontestably the best we receive, completely in line with our own tendency, and since they have been reprinted from our paper by French, Italian and English periodicals, you are contributing a great deal to the enlightenment of the European public 24S

I cannot describe to you what sacrifices in terms of money and patience I have had to make to keep the newspaper going. The Germans are crack-brained jackasses.

Give my kindest regards to your wifed and rest assured of my constant friendship.

Yours

K. Marx

[^1]: First published in the Volksstimme, Frank- Printed according to the original furt a. M., No. 247, 22 October 1897

[^2]: Published in Englisn for the first time

[^3]: a Neue Rheinische Zeitung - b penniless - c word indecipherable (probably träumen— dream) - d Amalie



