---
Volume: 38
Document_Title: "73. Marx to Wilhelm Stieber. About 29 December "
Page_Range: "220-222"
---

# 73. Marx to Wilhelm Stieber. About 29 December 



**[p. 72]**

ENGELS TO MARX

IN COLOGNE

Berne, 28 December [1848]

Dear Marx,

How are things? Now that Gottschalk and Anneke have been acquitted,244 shan't I be able to come back soon? The Prussian curs must surely soon tire of meddling with juries. As I have said, if there are sufficient grounds for believing that I shall not be detained for questioning, I shall come at once. After that they may, so far as I'm concerned, place me before 10,000 juries, but when you're arrested for questioning you're not allowed to smoke, and I won't let myself in for that.

In any case the whole September affair245 is crumbling away to nothing. One after another they're going back. So write.

Apropos, some money would come in very handy towards the middle of January. By then you should receive plenty.

Your E.

73

[Draft] [Cologne, about 29 December 1848]

The editorial department is in receipt of your letter and accepts the correction dated Frankfurt.3 As to your threat of a libel action, this only reveals your ignorance of the Code pénal, whose paragraph relating to libel does not apply to the report appearing

[^1]: First published in Der Briefwechsel zwischen Printed according to the original F. Engels und K. Marx, Bd. 1, Stuttgart, . , , , <•• jgjg Published in English for the first time

[^2]: MARX TO WILHELM STIEBER246

[^3]: IN BERLIN

[^4]: a 'Stieber', Neue Rheinische Zeitung, No. 182, 30 December 1848, supplement.





**[p. 184]**

in No. 177.24' Moreover, to set your mind at rest be it said that this report was sent to us by a Frankfurt Deputy3 before the Neue

Preussische Zeitung divulged the same news. Your earlier activities in Silesia did not seem to us to belie the contents of the said report, although we did, on the other hand, think it strange that you should exchange your more remunerative and honourable post in Berlin for one which, albeit legal, is precarious and equivocal. m

As to your protestations regarding your activities in Silesia,b we shall endeavour to place material at your disposal, either publicly or in private, as you wish.

On the grounds of their novelty, we shall excuse the lectures on democracy and democratic organs contained in your letter.

First published in: Marx and Engels,

Works, First Russian Edition, Vol. XXV, Moscow, 1934

Printed according to the original

Published in English for the first time

[^1]: Probably Friedrich Wilhelm Schloff el, 'Dr Stieber', Neue Rheinische Zeitung, No. 177, 24 December 1848. - b Neue Preussische Zeitung, No. 148, 20 December 1848.



