---
Volume: 38
Document_Title: "1849"
Page_Range: "222-260"
---

# 1849



**[p. 1849]**

74

ENGELS TO MARX

IN COLOGNE

Berne, 7[-8] January 1849

Dear Marx,

Having recovered, after several weeks of sinful living, from my exertions and adventures,233 I feel, firstly, a need to get down to work again (striking proof of this being the enclosed Magyar-Slav articlea), and, secondly, a need for money. The hitter is the more urgent and if by the time this arrives, you haven't yet sent me anything, do so forthwith, for I've been sans le souh these past few days, and it's impossible to touch anyone in this rotten town.

If only something worth writing about happened in this rotten country. But it's all local rubbish of the rotteniest kind. However I'll shortly be sending a few general articles0 about it. If I have to stay abroad much longer I shall go to Lugano, particularly if something blows up in Italy, as seems likely.

But I keep thinking that I shall soon be able to return. This lazing about in foreign parts, where you can't really do anything and are completely outside the movement, is truly unbearable. I am rapidly coming to the conclusion that detention for question- ing in Cologne is better than life in free Switzerland. So do write and tell me if there isn't some chance of my being treated as favourably as Bürgers, Becker,d etc., etc.248

[^1]: a F. Engels, 'The Magyar Struggle'. - b penniless - c F. Engels, 'Herr Müller.— Radetzky's Chicanery towards Tessin.—The Federal Council.—Lohbauer', 'The Swiss Press', 'Protectionist Agitation.—Recruiting into the Neapolitan Army', 'Müller.—The Freiburg Government.—Ochsenbein: - d Hermann Becker

[^2]: 8-1543





**[p. 186]**

Raveaux is right: even in grace and favour Prussia249 one is freer than in free Switzerland. Every little nonentity here is at one and the same time a police spy and an assommeur.* I saw an example of this on New Year's Eve.

Who the devil was responsible for inserting recently that boring religio-inoral article from Heidelbergb on the March Associa- tion250? To my pleasure I have also noticed that Henricus occasionally exhales an article—witness the sighs extending over 2 issues on the subject of the Ladenberg circular.0

Our newspaper is now much quoted in Switzerland, the Berner Zeitung borrows a lot as does the National-Zeitung,d and this then goes the rounds of all the other papers. Also much quoted, more so than the Kölnische, according to the National, etc., etc., in Swiss papers in the French language.

You'll have included the advertisement.6 Herewith a copy of ours in the Berner Zeitung. Greetings to the whole company.

Your E.

Missed the post yesterday. Today, then, I'll merely add that since 1 January the Neue Rheinische Zeitung has no longer been arriving here. Do ascertain whether it's being regularly dispatched. I've looked into the question of a subscription, but it's no good. I'd have to subscribe for a l/2 year; I shan't be staying as long as that and anyway I haven't any money. As I said, it's important it should arrive here, not simply on my own account, but mainly because the Berner Zeitung, which is well disposed towards us and edited by a communist,1 is doing everything to make it en vogue here.

[^1]: First published in Der Briefwechsel zwischen Printed according to the original F. Engels und K. Marx, Bd. 1, Stuttgart, jgj3 Published in English for the first time

[^2]: a assassin - b 'Ein Aktenstück des Märzvereins', Neue Rheinische Zeitung, No. 181, 29 December 1848. - c [H. Bürgers,] 'Hr. v. Ladenberg und die Volksschullehrer', Neue Rheinische Zeitung, No. 182, 30 December 1848. The planned continuation of this article did not appear in the newspaper. - d Schweizerische National-Zeitung - e This seems to refer to the advertisement about the daily publication of the Berner Zeitung as from 1 January 1849 printed in the Neue Rheinische Zeitung, Nos. 185, 187 and 189, 3, 5, and 7 January. - f Niklaus Niggeler





[^1]: A cartoon of Frederick William IV and the Prussian bourgeoisie drawn by Engels on the back of E. Voswinkel's letter to Marx (22 January-beginning of February) about

[^2]: the elections to the Prussian Diet (1849)







**[p. 75]**

MARX TO EDUARD von MÜLLER-TELLERING

IN RATIBOR

Cologne, 15 January [1849]

Dear Teilering,

You always calculate your posting days wrongly because you imagine that the post from Austria and Berlin arrives here regularly. But it's always 1-2 days late and is exceedingly irregular. I got your first letter from Vienna on the evening of the 10th. On the 11th I promptly sent a post-restante letter to Oderberg? enclosing 50 talers in money orders.251 Hence you'll have to return to Oderberg in any case, so as to pick up the money.

You will receive the newspapers, provided you write and tell me, immediately you get back from Oderberg, whereabouts you intend to live in the interim.

Despite Geiger's malevolence, I hope to see the matter of your passport finally settled within 2-3 days. But you must also tell me where our Berlin friend is to send your passport to.

If you have to keep away from Vienna—which would be an irreparable loss to the paperh and would mean your appointing a deputy responsible for day-to-day information—Breslau0 would seem to me to be the most suitable place to stay. I frequently think sorrowfully of your wife,d who deserves a more comfortable lot.

I am enclosing an issue of the 'Neue Rheinische Zeitung', which will, I trust, be of interest to you on account of the leading article on the Magyars."

Write to me as soon as you possibly can. In France the fun will begin anew in the spring. The bourgeois republic's infamy has advanced too rapidly towards the 'heyday of its transgressions'.'

Yours

K. Marx

[^1]: First published in: Marx and Engels, Printed according to the original Works, First Russian Edition, Vol. XXIX, , . , .. Moscow, 1946 Published in English for the first time

[^2]: a Polish name: Bohumin - b Neue Rheinische Zeitung - c Polish name: Wroclaw - d Amalie - e F. Engels, 'The Magyar Struggle'. - f Shakespeare, Hamlet, Act I, Scene 5.





**[p. 76]**

MARX TO ERNST DRONKE

IN PARIS

Cologne, 3 February [1849]

Dear Dronke,

Your letter, .passed on to me by Engels, I shall answer briefly as follows:

1. As regards your coming here: When I wrote 'Don't come to Germany until I write to you', Kratz had told me that your case was not yet quite settled.252

2. Later I wrote to Kapp instead of to you because Kapp was bombarding me with threatening letters. The draft I gave Kapp wasn't honoured by Korff. In the meantime I had declared at the shareholders' meeting that either Korff or I must resign from the paper.3 Moreover, during this period Plasman had again sequestered the postage money, and the paper, as Engels discovered on his arrival, was expecting to announce its insolvency any day.

3. As regards the Meyerbeer business, I know nothing whatever about it. You will appreciate that in a situation in which the compositors were daily rebelling over a few talers, I would hardly have spurned 150 talers.

4. As regards my letter about Kapp, I was justified in writing it. During the most ghastly period of all, Kapp was threatening to attack us publicly. If you put yourself in our situation at that time, you will understand my vexation. As regards Weerth's comment (which, by the by, referred not to you, but to Imandt, who was writing to us incessantly), this is the first I have heard of it.

5. As regards the 25 talers remitted on 14 January, these were dispatched to you in the presence of witnesses via Ewerbeck's address. The Post Office here will provide information about this tomorrow. Nota bene: Kapp received 15 talers from me at the same time.

6. As regards my not answering, Lupus will testify that I wrote to "you frequently.

7. If the tone of one of my letters was waspish, this was, a) because I was going through an atrociously bad patch with the

[^1]: a Neue Rheinische Zeitung





**[p. 191]**

paper and was under attack from all the paper's correspondents and creditors, b) because, in a letter to Freiligrath, Imandt depicted you, Kapp, etc., as complaining bitterly about me, while the precious Beust, I think it is Beust (I am not quite sure), was sending similar letters here.

Within a few days the paper must either go under or else consolidate itself, in which case we shall immediately send you more money of which, at the moment, there is a complete lack. However the business of the 25 talers must be cleared up.

That I have constantly regarded you as co-editor of the paper is apparent not only from the new announcement in the various papers," but also from the fact that I placed your article about the expulsion of the Frankfurt refugee6 under 'Cologne'.0

Your

Marx

[From Wilhelm Wolff]

In entire agreement with the above

77

ENGELS TO DANIEL FENNER von FENNEBERG

Cologne, 1 March 1849

Dear Sir,

I would have replied to you before now had I not first had to consult various other people about your matter. I do not think it advisable for you to make any sort of public appearance here; out

Your

Lupus

[^1]: First published in: Marx and Engels,

[^2]: Works, First Russian Edition, Vol. XXV, Moscow, 1934

[^3]: IN FRANKFURT AM MAIN

[^4]: a 'Bestellungen auf die Neu« Rheinische Zeitung für das nächste Quartal, Januar bis März 1849'. - b F. Wiedecker - c [E. Dronke,] 'Allianz der europäischen Polizei', Neue Rheinische Zeitung, No. 192, 11 January 1849.

[^5]: Printed according to the original

[^6]: Published in English for the first time





**[p. 192]**

of craving for advancement, the chief of police3 here is capable de

tout,b as we have experienced only today in the unjustified expulsion of a local Polish refugee. I would further advise you, should your passport not be absolutely impeccable, to choose any route to Paris other than via Cologne and Brussels. You would get through Cologne well enough, but you would undoubtedly be arrested at the Belgian border and transported by prison van to the French border, after having, perhaps, spent several days in prison. I myself experienced this 5 months ago,233 and every day fresh reports reach us of these infamies perpetrated against the refugees by the Belgians. You even run the risk of having all your money taken from you by the scoundrels and not getting a farthing back, as happened to the refugee, von Hochstetter.

If I can be of service to you in any other way, it would be a pleasure.

Yours faithfully

F. Engels

First published in: Marx and Engels, Printed according to the original Works, Second Russian Edition, Vol. 27, , . ,. Moscow 1962 Published in English for the first time

78

MARX TO COLONEL ENGELS

Cologne, 3 March [1849]

To Colonel Engels, Deputy Commandant Sir,

The day before yesterday two non-commissioned officers0 of the 8th Company, 16th Infantry Regiment, came to my rooms to speak to me privately. I had left for Düsseldorf. They were

[^1]: IN COLOGNE

[^2]: [Draft]

[^3]: a W. A. Geiger - b capable of anything - c Dust and Hover





**[p. 193]**

therefore turned away. Yesterday afternoon two of these gentle- men again presented themselves and demanded a private inter- view.

I had them shown into a room where I joined them almost immediately. I invited the gentlemen to sit down and asked them what they wanted. They told me they wanted to know the name of the writer of the article (No. 233 of the Neue Rheinische Zeitung of 28 February) against Captain von Uttenhoven.253 I replied to these gentlemen, 1) that the article in question had nothing to do with me since it had appeared below the line and was therefore an advertisement; 2) that they were at liberty to insert a refutation gratis; 3) that they were at liberty to sue the paper. Upon the gentlemen's remarking that the whole of the 8th Company felt themselves to be insulted by the advertisement, I returned that nothing but the signatures of all the members of the 8th Company would convince me of the accuracy of that statement, which in any case was irrelevant.

The non-commissioned officers thereupon declared that if I failed to name, to 'deliver up' the 'man', they would 'no longer be able to restrain their men', and 'evil would result'.

I told the gentlemen that little or nothing was to be achieved by trying to threaten or intimidate me. They then withdrew muttering under their breath.

Relaxation of discipline must have gone very far and all sense of law and order must have ceased if, like a robber band, a Company can send delegates to an individual citizen and attempt with threats to extort this or that confession from him. In particular, I fail to understand the meaning of the sentence: 'We can no longer restrain our men'.

Are these 'men', perhaps, to exercise jurisdiction on their own initiative, do these 'men' have other than legal resources at their command?

I must beg you, Sir, to institute an inquiry into this incident and to give me an explanation for this singular presumption. I would be sorry to be obliged to have recourse to publicity.

[^1]: First published in: Marx and Engels, Printed according to the original Works, First Russian Edition, Vol. XXV, , , . , . . x, ,.. r . ,- Moscow, 1934 Published in English for the first time





**[p. 79]**

MARX TO COLONEL ENGELS

IN COLOGNE

[Draft]

[Cologne, before 15 April 1849]

To Colonel Engels, Commandant Sir,

Being convinced that Royal Prussian non-commissioned officers" would not deny words spoken in private, I did not call in any witnesses to the conversation in question.b As to my alleged remark that 'the courts, as has recently been seen, can do nothing to me',254 even my political opponents will concede that, were I to harbour such a foolish thought, I would not express it before a third party. And do not the non-commissioned officers themselves admit that I explained to them that things below the line are no concern of mine and that in any case I am responsible only for the section of the paper signed by me? Hence there was absolutely no reason to speak of my position vis-à-vis the courts.

I am all the happier to refrain from pressing for a further inquiry as it was my concern, not that the non-commissioned officers should be punished, but simply that they should be reminded, from the lips of their superiors, of the limits of their duties.

As for the kind remark with which you conclude, the Neue Rheinische Zeitung has demonstrated, by its silence over the recent friction among the military themselves, how great is its considera- tion for the prevailing mood of unrest.

[^1]: First published in: Marx and Engels, Printed according to the original Works, First Russian Edition, Vol. XXV, , , . Moscow 1934 Published in English for the first time

[^2]: a Dust and Hover - b The words 'although a co-editor of the Neue Rheinische Zeitung happened to be in my rooms at the time' are deleted in the original.





**[p. 80]**

MARX TO ENGELS

IN COLOGNE

[Cologne, before 15 April 1849]

Dear Engels,

Leave out the article on B. Dietz until the facts have been ascertained. We shall ourselves write to Brussels on the subject.

By the way, try to find out the name of the printer's apprentice who reported the matter to Dietz without authority.

Your

Marx

[On the back of the letter]

Herr Engels, local

First published in: Marx and Engels, Printed according to the original Works, First Russian Edition, Vol. XXI, Moscow, 1929 and in MEGA, Abt. Ill, Published in English for the first Bd. 1, 1929 t l m e

81

MARX TO ENGELS

Hamburg, 23 April [1849]

Dear Engels,

Your letter didn't reach me till today,255 as I had already left Bremen on Wednesday3 morning. Nothing doing in Bremen. Rösing went bankrupt a year ago and is now living solely on the interest from what remains of his wife's capital. Hence nothing doing.

On the other hand I shall certainly be able to make shift here. As for the signature, cannot Werres sign?

[^1]: IN COLOGNE

[^2]: 18 April 1849





**[p. 196]**

As for interim money arrangements, as long as I'm away the following should be noted: before I left, Plasmann solemnly promised to make whatever advances were necessary. Perhaps St. Naut feels some scruple about resorting to this source. If necessary, do so yourself.

All this week the paper3 has been very skimpy, which assorts ill with my present mission.

Warmest regards to my wife and the others. Write by return whatever happens, and keep your chin up. Les choses marcheront!'

Your

K. Marx

[Inside the envelope]

Address: Rohde, Merchant, Bleichenbrücke.

First published in Der Briefwechsel zwischen F. Engels und K. Marx, Bd. 1, Stuttgart,

1913

Printed according to the original

Published in English for the first time

Yours very truly

Karl Marx

82

MARX TO HERMANN BREHMER

Harburg, 6 May [1849]

I warmly recommend to you the bearer of these lines, Mr Bruhn, whose name you will still recall from the events in Southern Germany last year.256

[^1]: First published in: G. Becker, 'Neue Dokumente von Karl Marx aus dem Jahre 1849', Zeitschrift für Geschichtswis- senschaft, 1974, Heft 4

[^2]: Printed according to the original

[^3]: Published in English for the first time

[^4]: IN BRESLAU

[^5]: To Mr Brehmer in Breslauc

[^6]: a Neue Rheinische Zeitung- b Things will go all right. - c Polish name: Wroclaw





**[p. 83]**

MARX TO EDUARD von MÜLLER-TELLERING

IN BRESLAU

Harburg, 6 May 1849

Dear Teilering,

I warmly recommend to you the bearer, Mr. Bruhn, who is one of our principal agitators in Germany.

Yours very truly

Dr Karl Marx

First published in: G. Becker, 'Neue Printed according to the original Dokumente von Karl Marx aus dem . Jahre 1849', Zeitschrift für Geschichtswis- Published in English for the first senschafl, 1974, Heft 4 time

84 MARX TO ANDREAS STIFFT

Harburg, 6 May [1849] To Dr. Stifft in Vienna

Dear Stifft,

Post tot discrimina rerum,* I am glad to have an opportunity of reminding you of my existence. Each new number of the Vienna paperb gives me the real satisfaction of knowing beyond doubt that you have not been swallowed up by the counter-revolutionary monster.257 I trust that we shall yet find ourselves seated side by side at a convention.

The bearer, Bruhn, is one of my best friends and a proficient, active revolutionary. I recommend him to you most highly.

Yours

K. Marx

[^1]: IN VIENNA

[^2]: First published in: G. Becker, 'Neue Printed according to the original Dokumente von Karl Marx aus dem Jahre 1849', Zeitschrift für Geschichtswis- Published in English for the first senschaft, 1974, Heft 4 t l m e

[^3]: a After so many vicissitudes (Virgil, Aeneid, I). - b Der Radikale





**[p. 85]**

MARX TO JOSEPH WEYDEMEYER258

IN FRANKFURT AM MAIN

[Bingen, 1 June 1849]

Dear Weydemeyer,

I beg you in my own and Freiligrath's names to take the printer of Freiligrath's poem3 to court for piracy and sue him for damages.

My general attorney is St. A. Naut in Cologne, and I should be much obliged if you would write to him about this matter.

Vale faveque.h

K. Marx

First published in: Marx and Engels, Printed according to the original Works, First Russian Edition, Vol. XXV. Moscow 1934 Published in English for the first time

86

Paris, 7 June [1849] 45, rue de Lille

Dear Engels,

I am not writing to you at any great length in this letter. First I want you to tell me in your reply whether it arrives intact. I believe that letters are again being opened con amore.c

[^1]: MARX TO ENGELS259

[^2]: IN KAISERSLAUTERN

[^3]: a Reference to F. Freiligrath's 'Abschiedswort der Neuen Rheinischen Zeitung' published in the newspaper's last number (No. 301, 19 May 1849) printed in red ink. - b Good-bye and farewell. - c enthusiastically





**[p. 199]**

As for the Palatinate-Baden envoys here, Blind, alarmed by a real or pretended attack of cholera, has moved into the country some hours away from Paris.

Quant ab Schütz, the following should be noted:

1. The Provisional Government has placed him in a false position by failing to keep him informed. The French demand des faitsc and where can he get them from if not a soul writes to him? Dispatches must reach him as often as possible. It is clear that at this moment he can achieve nothing. All that can be done is to throw dust in the eyes of the Prussian Government by enabling him to have frequent meetings with the leaders of the Montag- nards.260

2. A second, unpardonable mistake on the part of the Gouverne- ment provisoire du Palatinatd is their entrusting a crowd of rotten Germans with this or that mission behind the back of the official envoy. This will have to cease once and for all if Schütz is to maintain at least the prestige of his position vis-à-vis the Montagnards and just now—vis-à-vis Prussia—that is the whole point of his mission.

Apart from that, .it goes without saying that he doesn't learn very much, since he consorts only with a few official Montag- nards. I shall, incidentally, keep him always au courant*

For my part I must ask you to write to me at least twice a week regularly and immediately every time anything important happens.

The Kölnische Zeitung feuilleton on the Palatinate movement, dated Dürkheim an der Haardt, states among other things:

[^1]: 'Some anger has been aroused by Mr Marx, editor of the Rheinische Zeitung. He is said to have told the Provisional Government that since his time had not yet come, he intended temporarily to retire.'8

[^2]: a dreary - b As for - c facts - d provisional government of the Palatinate - e informed - f Neue Rheinische Zeitung - 8 'Briefe aus Baden und der Pfalz. IV. Dürkheim a. d. Haardt, 1. Juni', Kölnische Zeitung, No. 136, 6 June 1849.



How does that fit in? The miserable Germans here, with whom, by the way, I avoid any meeting, will seek to proclaim this throughout the whole of Paris. I therefore think it advisable for you to see that an item appears in the Karlsruher Zeitung or the

Mannheimer Abendzeitung stating expressly that I am in Paris as the representative of the democratic Central Committee. Another reason why I think this would be useful is that for the time being, as no immediate results are to be obtained here, the Prussians must be made to believe that the most frightful intrigues are going on here. 77 faut faire peur aux Aristocrates."

Rüge is a complete nonentity here. What is Dronke doing? You must, by the way, see that you raise money for me somewhere. You know that I spent the latest sums received pour faire honneur aux obligations de la 'Nouvelle Gazette Rhénane',,b and, in the present circonstances,1" I cannot live a completely retired life, still less get into financial difficulties.

If at all possible let me have an article in French in which you sum up the whole Hungarian affair.261

Show this letter to d'Ester, to whom my best regards. If I am to write to a different address, let me have it.

M.

Write to me at the following address: M. Ramboz, 45 rue de Lille

Herrn Fr. Engels, inquire at Dr d'Ester's.

[^1]: [On the back of the letter]

[^2]: First published abridged in Der Briefwech- sel zwischen F. Engels und K. Marx, Bd. 1, Stuttgart, 1913 and in full in MEGA, Abt. III, Bd. 1, 1929

[^3]: Printed according to the original

[^4]: Published in English for the first time

[^5]: a We must frighten the aristocrats. - b to honour the obligations of the Neue Rheinische Zeitung. - c circumstances





**[p. 87]**

MARX TO JOSEPH WEYDEMEYER

IN FRANKFURT AM MAIN

Paris, 13 July [1849] 45, rue de Lille Address: M. Ramboz

Dear Weydemeyer,

Dronke will already have written to tell you that you must sell the red newspapers at any price.262

I am here with my famille, sans le sou.*263 And yet an opportunity has come my way of making 3,000-4,000 fr. in a few weeks. For my pamphlet against Proudhon,b which he has done everything in his power to suppress, is beginning to sell here, and it is up to me to infiltrate reviews of it into the more important papers, thus necessitating a second edition. But for this to be of any help I would have to buy up the copies still available in Brussels and Paris in order to become sole propriétaire.

300-400 talers would enable me to carry out this operation and at the same time maintain myself here during the early days. You might, perhaps, be able to help me in this.

Namely, as follows: A lady in Rheda—Liming is also in touch with her—sent 1,000 talers to Carl Post for the Neue Rheinische Zeitung, but recovered the money when that paper went under. Might she not, perhaps, be persuaded by your intervention to make me this advance? My claim to such an advance is, I believe, all the greater as I contributed more than 7,000 talers to the Neue Rheinische Zeitung which, after all, was a party enterprise.

If at all possible, pursue this matter, but without mentioning it to anybody. I tell you that, unless help is forthcoming from one quarter or another, I shall be perdu" since my family is also here and the last piece of my wife's jewellery has already found its way to the pawnbrokers.

I await your reply by return. Your

K. Marx

[^1]: First published in: Marx and Engels,

[^2]: Works, First Russian Edition, Vol. XXV, Moscow, 1934

[^3]: Printed according to the original

[^4]: Published in English for the first time

[^5]: a family, penniless - b K. Marx, The Poverty of Philosophy. - c lost





**[p. 88]**

MARX TO CAROLINE SCHÖLER3

IN COLOGNE

Paris, 14 July 1849 45, rue de Lille

Dear Lina,

Would you be so kind, when you write to my wife, as to enclose a note to the red Orlando furiosob? You must help me a little in the act I am putting on.

Yours very sincerely

K. Marx

First published in MEGA2, Abt. Ill, Printed according to the original Bd. 3, Berlin, 1981 , r Published in English for the first time

89

Vevey, Vaud Canton, 25 July 1849 Dear Mrs Marx,

You as well as Marx will be wondering why you have not heard from me for so long. En voici les causes? On the same day as I wrote to Marx (from Kaiserslautern) there came news that the Prussians had occupied Homburg, thereby cutting off communica- tions with Paris. So I couldn't send the letter off and went to join Willich. In Kaiserslautern I had completely disassociated myself from the soi-disantd revolution; but when the Prussians arrived, I

[^1]: ENGELS TO JENNY MARX264

[^2]: IN PARIS

[^3]: a Appended to Jenny Marx's letter to the same addressee (see this volume, pp. 546-48). - b Ferdinand Wolff (red Wolff) is compared to the title character of L. Ariosto's poem. - c Here are the reasons. - d so-called





**[p. 203]**

couldn't resist the urge to take part in the war. Willich being the only officer who was any good, I joined him and became his adjutant. I was in four engagements, two of them fairly important, particularly the one at Rastatt,265 and discovered that the much-vaunted bravery under fire is quite the most ordinary quality one can possess. The whistle of bullets is really quite a trivial matter, and though, throughout the campaign, a great deal of cowardice was in evidence, I did not see as many as a dozen men whose conduct was cowardly in battle. But all the more 'brave stupidity'. Enfin,3 I came through the whole thing unscathed, and au bout du compte,13 it was as well that one member of the Neue Rheinische Zeitung was present, since the entire pack of democratic blackguards were in Baden and the Palatinate, and are now bragging about the heroic deeds they never performed. It would have been said again that the gentlemen of the Neue Rheinische Zeitung were too cowardly to fight. But of all the democratic gentry, the only ones to fight were myself and Kinkel. The latter joined our corps as a musketeer and did pretty well; in the first engagement in which he took part, his head was grazed by a bullet and he was taken prisoner.

Having covered the withdrawal of the Baden army, our corps entered Switzerland 24 hours later than everyone else, and yesterday we arrived here in Vevey. During the campaign and the march through Switzerland it was quite impossible for me to write so much as a line. But now I hasten to send some news, and write to you with all the more dispatch for having heard—somewhere in Baden—that Marx had been arrested in Paris. Since we never received any newspapers, we learnt nothing. Whether or not it is true, I have never been able to find out. You can imagine the state of anxiety I am in as a result, and I beg you most urgently to set my mind at rest and to put an end to my doubts about Marx's fate. Since I have had no confirmation of this rumour of Marx's arrest, I still hope it is false. But that Dronke and Schapper are in jug, I can hardly doubt. Enough—if Marx is still at liberty send him this letter with the request that he write to me immediately. If he should not feel safe in Paris, he will be completely safe here in the Vaud Canton. The government describes itself as red and partisane de la révolution permanente." In Geneva likewise. Schily from Trier is there; he held a command in the Mainz corps.

If I get any money from home, I shall probably go to Lausanne

[^1]: a In short - b as it turns out - c supporter of permanent revolution





**[p. 204]**

If only I could be sure that Marx is at liberty! I have often thought that, in the midst of the Prussian bullets, my post was much less dangerous than that of others in Germany and especially Marx's in Paris. So dispel my uncertainty soon.

Tout à vousc

Engels

Address: F. Engels, réfugié allemand, Vevey, Suisse (If possible under cover as far as Thionville or Metz.)

First published in Der Briefwechsel zwischen Printed according to the original F. Engeb und K. Marx, Bd. 1, Stuttgart, Published in English in full for the XV1D first time

90

MARX TO FERDINAND FREILIGRATH

[Paris,] 31 July [1849]

Dear Freiligrath,

I must confess that I am much astonished by Lassalle's behaviour. I had approached him personally and, since I myself had at one time made the countess d a loan and was, besides, aware of Lassalle's liking for me, it would never have occurred to me that he would compromise me in this way. On the contrary, I had impressed upon him the need for the utmost discretion. The direst straits are better than public begging. I have written to him on the subject.266

[^1]: IN COLOGNE

[^2]: a more or less - b meaning: follower of philosophical idealism - c Yours ever - d Sophie von Hatzfeldt





**[p. 205]**

But most important of all just now is England. We must have no illusions about the so-called Peace Party,269 of which Cobden is the acknowledged leader. Nor should we have any illusions about the 'unselfish enthusiasm' of the English for Hungary, which has resulted in the organisation of meetings throughout the country.

The Peace Party is simply a cloak for the FREE-TRADE Party. The same content, the same object, the same leaders. Just as, at home, the Free Traders attacked the aristocracy in its material basis with the repeal of the Corn and Navigation Laws,270 so now in their foreign policy, they are attacking it in its European connections and ramifications—by seeking to break the Holy Alliance.271 The English Free Traders are radical bourgeois who wish to break radically with the aristocracy in order to rule without let or hindrance. What they overlook is the fact that they are thus, malgré eux,d bringing the people onto the stage and into power. Exploitation of the peoples, not by means of medieval warfare but solely by means of trade warfare—that's your Peace Party. Cobden's behaviour in the Hungarian affair had an immedi- ately practical nexus. Russia is now seeking to negotiate a loan. Cobden, the representative of the industrial bourgeoisie, forbids

[^1]: a Let us talk politics - b Louis Philipp Albert - c duties, taxes - d willy-nilly.



Cobden's attack on Russia has been more formidable than any of either Dembinski or Görgey.a He revealed how pitiable was the condition of her finances. She is, he says, the MOST WRETCHED NATION. Each year the Siberian mines bring the State no more than £700,000: the duty on spirits brings it 10 times as much. True, the gold and silver reserve in the vaults of the Bank of Petersburg amounts to £14,000,000, but it serves as a metallic reserve for a paper circulation of £80,000,000. Hence, if the Tsar b dips into the vaults of the Bank, he will depreciate the paper money, and thus bring about a revolution in Russia herself. Consequently, the proud English bourgeois exclaims, the absolutist colossus cannot stir unless we make him a loan, and this we shall not do. Once again we are waging, by purely bourgeois means, the bourgeoisie's war against feudal absolutism. The golden calf is mightier than all the calves on the thrones in the world. Of course the English FREE TRADERS also have a direct interest where Hungary is concerned. Instead of Austrian trade barriers, as hitherto, a trade agreement and some sort of FREE TRADE with Hungary. The money, which they are now without doubt secretly remitting to the Hungarians, they will assuredly get back 'with profit and interest' in retour0 by way of trade.

The English bourgeoisie's attitude to continental despotism is a reversal of the campaign they conducted against the French from 1793 to 1815. The importance of this development cannot be overrated.

Your

K. Marx

[^1]: Kindest regards to you and your wifed from me and my wife.

[^2]: First published in part in Die Neue Zeit, Ergänzungshefte No. 12, 1911-12 and in full in: Marx and Engels, Works, First Russian Edition, Vol. XXV, Moscow, 1934

[^3]: Printed according to the original

[^4]: Published in English in full for the first time

[^5]: a Reference to Cobden's speech at a meeting held on 23 July 1849 in support of Hungary, see The Times, No. 20236, 24 July 1849 and The Northern Star, No. 614, 28 July 1849.- b Nicholas I - c return - d Ida





**[p. 91]**

MARX TO ENGELS

IN VEVEY

[Paris, end of July 1849]

Dear Engels,

I have suffered a great deal of anxiety on your account and was truly delighted when yesterday I received a letter in your own hand.a I had got Dronke (who is here) to write to your brother-in-law0 asking for news of you. He, of course, knew nothing.

My whole family is here26'; the government wanted to banish me to Morbihan, the Pontine marshes of Brittany.272 So far I have frustrated their intention. But if I am to write to you in greater detail, both about my own circumstances here and about affairs in general, you must let me have a safer address, for things are really appalling here.

You now have the best opportunity to write a history of or a pamphlet on the Baden-Palatinate revolution.273 Had you not taken part in the actual fighting, we couldn't have put forward our views about that frolic. It would be a splendid chance for you to define the position of the Neue Rheinische Zeitung vis-à-vis the democratic party generally. I am positive that the thing will sell and bring you money.

I have embarked on negotiations with a view to starting a politico-economic (monthly) periodical in Berlin which would have to be largely written by us two.274

Lupusc is also in Switzerland, I believe in Berne. Weerth was here yesterday; he is setting up an agency in Liverpool. Red Wolffd is living here with me. Finances are, of course, in a state of chaos.

Freiligrath is in Cologne now as heretofore. If my wife were not in an état par trop intéressant," I would gladly leave Paris as soon as it was financially possible to do so.

[^1]: a See this volume, pp. 202-04. - b Emil Blank - c Wilhelm Wolff - d Ferdinand Wolff - e all too interesting condition (on the birth of Marx's son, see this volume, p. 220)



Farewell. Convey my kindest regards to Willich and write by return to the address: M. Ramboz, rue de Lille, 45.

Your

K. M.

First published in Der Briefwechsel zwischen Printed according to the original F. Engels und K. Marx, Bd. 1, Stuttgart, 1913

92

MARX TO JOSEPH WEYDEMEYER275

IN FRANKFURT AM MAIN

[Paris, end of July 1849]

Dear Weydemeyer,

I have heard from Dronke that it's no go with the Westphalian lady.a Well, it can't be helped.

Now I should appreciate your advice as to how best to publish pamphlets.

I should like to start with the pamphlet on wages of Which only the beginning appeared in the Neue Rheinische Zeitung}" I would write a short political foreword to it on the present status quo. Do you think that, e.g., Leske would be agreeable? But he would have to pay, as soon as he had the manuscript in his hands, and pay well, since I know that this pamphlet will attract and will find a mass of subscribers in advance. My present financial état" will not permit me to settle my outstanding compte6, with Leske.276

Were Leske then to find that the thing is well received, we could continue in this way.

Yesterday I had a letter from Engelsc; he is in Switzerland and, as Willich's adjutant, has taken part in four encounters.

The sword of Damocles still hangs over my head; my expulsion' has neither been rescinded nor, for the moment, is it being enforced.

[^1]: a See this volume, p. 201. - b K. Marx, Wage Labour and Capital. - c condition - d account - e See this volume, pp. 202-04. - f ibid., pp. 207, 211, 212.



Awkward though the present state of affairs may be for our personal circumstances, I am nevertheless among the satisfaits. Les choses marchent très bien3 and the Waterloo suffered by official democracy may be regarded as a victory.277 'Governments by grace of God' are taking it upon themselves to avenge us on the bourgeoisie, and to chastise them.

One of these days I may perhaps send you a short article for your paperb on the state of affairs in England.278 Just now I find it too boring, having already discussed the matter in a number of private letters.

Write to me direct and to my own address: 45, rue de Lille, Monsieur Ramboz.

My best regards to your wifec and yourself from my wife and me. The former is très souffrante, conséquence naturelle de son état par trop intéressant.

Adieu, mon cher,d and reply soon.

Your

K. M.

First published in Die Gesellschaft, Printed according to the original Jg. VII, Bd. 2, Berlin, 1930

93

MARX TO JOSEPH WEYDEMEYER

[Paris, mid-August 1849]

Dear Weydemeyer,

I will gladly fall in with Riihl's suggestion279 if he agrees to take over the whole of the business side, at which I am no good and for which he will be paid a commission.

1) But I have no publisher on hand to make the necessary advances,

[^1]: Published in English in full for the first time

[^2]: IN FRANKFURT AM MAIN

[^3]: a satisfied. Things are going very well - b Neue Deutsche Zeitung - c Louise - d very poorly, the natural consequence of her all too interesting condition. Good-bye, my friend (on the birth of Marx's son, see this volume, p. 220).





**[p. 210]**

2) the subscription lists seem to me superfluous. Announce- ments in the Westdeutsche and other papers in the Rhineland and elsewhere would achieve the same purpose. The thing should be advertised particularly in the Berlin, Hamburg, Leipzig and Breslau3 papers.

The news about your paperb is very bad. I shall at once write and inform Naut, the trusty old business manager of the Neue Rheinische Zeitung, and acquaint you with the result.280

You would already have had my article' but for the fact that the illness of my wife and all the children has meant that I have been a kind of male nurse for the past week- Best regards to your wife.

Your

K. M.

I hope for a reply as soon as possible.

First published in: Marx and Engels, Printed according to the original Works, First Russian Edition, Vol. XXV, . Moscow 1934 Published in English tor the first time

94

Paris, 17 August [1849] Dear Engels,

I don't know whether my first letter—in reply to the first one you sent my wifed—arrived safely, since your address was very uncertain. I would have already replied to your second281 had I not been prevented by the fact that the whole of my family here was ill. Let me repeat once again how anxious my wife and I were on your account and what a delightful surprise it was to have definite news of you.

You will see from the date that, as a result of my protest, the Ministry of the Interior has for the time being left me unmolested here in Paris. The Morbihan département, to which I had been

[^1]: MARX TO ENGELS228

[^2]: IN VEVEY

[^3]: a Wroclaw - b Neue Deutsche Zeitung - c See this volume, p. 209. - d ibid., pp. 202-04 and 207-08.





**[p. 211]**

directed, is lethal at this time of year—the Pontine marshes of Brittany.282 It would not be prudent just now to write about the 13 June affair.260 I don't believe, or at least don't know whether secrecy of the mails is being observed.

The general situation here may be summed up in a couple of words: the majority disintegrating into its original, mutually hostile elements, Bonapartism hopelessly compromised, ill-will among the peasants because of the retention of the 45 centimes, the wine- growers furious at the threatened retention of the tax on drink,268

the current of public opinion once again anti-reactionary, in the Chamber, now prorogued, and in the Ministry, reaction, growing exclusive and concerned with expelling the Barrot-Dufaure clique from the Cabinet.283 As soon as this comes about you can look for an early revolutionary resurrection.

I don't know whether in Switzerland you have any chance of following the English movement. The English have taken it up again at exactly the same juncture at which it was broken off by the February revolution. As you are aware, the Peace Party269 is nothing but the FREE-TRADE party under a new guise. But this time the industrial bourgeoisie is acting in a manner even more revolutionary than during the ANTI-CORN LEAGUE AGITATION.270 In two ways: 1) the aristocracy, whose roots have been attacked at home by the repeal of the Corn Laws and the Navigation Acts, is further to be ruined in the sphere of foreign policy, in its European ramifications. Reversal of Pitt's policy. Anti-Russian-Austrian- Prussian, in a word, pro Italy and Hungary. Cobden has formally threatened to proscribe bankers who make loans to Russia, has unleashed a veritable campaign against Russian finances. 2) Agitation for universal suffrage, in order to effect the total political severance of the TENANTS from the landed aristocracy, to give the towns an absolute majority in Parliament, to nullify the House of Lords. Financial reform, in order to curb the Church and cut off the political revenues of the aristocracy.

Chartists and Free Traders have joined hands in these two propaganda campaigns. Harney and Palmerston apparently friends. At the last meeting held in London, O'Connor and Colonel Thompson both of one mind.284

Consequences of this economic campaign against feudalism and Holy Alliance incalculable.

Hungary splendid. But this rotten Prussia? Qu'en dis-tu?* The pallid canailleb are now being fattened in Saxony, Baden, the

[^1]: a What do you think of it? - b H. Heine, Deutschland. Ein Wintermärchen, Kapit VIII.





**[p. 212]**

Palatinate. If they send an army to the aid of the Austrians, it will be so contrived that they themselves remain in Bohemia and wax fat there. But wretched Prussia—I only fear that it's too craven — perdu* as soon as it participates in the Hungarian affair, which in any case is turning into a guerre universelle.

Maintenant, mon cher, que faire de notre part? Il faut nous lancer dans une entreprise littéraire et mercantile, j'attends tes propositions.0

Red Lupus is here, in the same house as myself; Dronke in Paris likewise, mais c'est un tout petit homme de l'école de E. Meyen." Lupus' is in Zurich. Address: Dr. Lüning. You don't need to write separately to M. Ramboz. C'est mon pseudonyme?

So the address is simply: Monsieur Ramboz, 45, rue de Lille. Salut!

Ch. M.

First published abridged in Der Briefwech- Printed according to the original sei zwischen F. Engels und K. Marx, Bd. 1, Stuttgart, 1913 and in full in MEGA, Published in English m full for the Abt. Ill, Bd. 1, 1929 f i r s t t l m e

95

[Paris,] 23 August [1849]

Dear Engels,

I am being banished to the Morbihan département, the Pontine marshes of Brittany.272 I need hardly say that I shall not consent to this veiled attempt on my life. So I am leaving France.285

They won't give me a passport for Switzerland, hence I must go to London, and that tomorrow. In any case, Switzerland will soon be hermetically sealed and the mice would be trapped all at one go-

[^1]: MARX TO ENGELS43

[^2]: IN LAUSANNE

[^3]: •n lost - b general war - c Now, my dear friend, what should we for our part do? We must launch out into a literary and commercial venture, I await your pro- posals. - d Ferdinand Wolff - e but he.'s an insignificant little chap of the school of E. Meyen. - f Wilhelm Wolff - S It's my pseudonym.



Besides, in London there is a positive prospect of my being able to start a German newspaper.3 I am assured of part of the funds.

So you must leave for London at once. In any case your safety demands it. The Prussians would shoot you twice over: 1) because of Baden, 2) because of Elberfeld.286 And why stay in a Switzerland where you can do nothing?

You will have no difficulty in coming to London, whether under the name of Engels or under the name of Mayer. As soon as you say you want to go to England, you will receive a one-way passport to London from the French Embassy.

I count on this absolutely. You cannot stay in Switzerland. In London we shall get down to business.

For the time being my wife will remain here. Continue to write to her at the same address: 45, rue de Lille, M. Ramboz.

But once again, I confidently count on you not to leave me in the lurch.

Your

K. M. Lupusb is at Dr Lüning's, Zurich. Write and tell him also about my plan.

96

Lausanne, 23 August 1849 8, Place de la Palud

Dear Weydemeyer,

Post tot discrimina rerumc—after umpteen arrests in Hesse and the Palatinate,288 after 3 weeks of sybaritic living in Kaiserslautern, after a glorious 4 weeks' campaign in which, for a change, I buckled on my sword-belt and acted as Willich's adjutant, after 4

[^1]: First published abridged in Der Briefwech- Printed according to the original sei zwischen F. Engels und K. Marx, Bd. 1, Stuttgart, 1913 and in full in MEGA, Abt. III, Bd. 1, 1929

[^2]: ENGELS TO JOSEPH WEYDEMEYER287

[^3]: IN FRANKFURT AM MAIN

[^4]: a Neu« Rheinische Zeitung. Politisch-ökonomische Revue - b Wilhelm Wolff - c After so many vicissitudes (Virgil, Aeneid, I).





**[p. 214]**

weeks of tedious cantoning with the refugee detachment in the Vaud Canton, I am at last finding my feet here in Lausanne. The very first thing I shall do is sit down and compose a merry tale of the whole Palatinate-Baden frolic.3 But since I no longer have any contact with Germany and do not even know which towns are or are not under martial law, I don't know what publisher to approach. I'm no longer acquainted with such folk. You are on the spot and hence will be better able to say which are the right publishers with whom to negotiate something of this kind; it will, of course, be quite innocuous and will not involve any risk of confiscation or prosecution. There might be such a one in Frankfurt. But he must have money. Please be good enough to write to me about this, if possible by return, so that I can take the necessary steps at once.

I recently saw your red Becker,b very jaunty, in Geneva; he was tippling with the popular man, Esselen, and other easy-going diis minorum gentium0 in the country.

Warm regards to your wife and all our acquaintances

from your

Engels

97

ENGELS TO JAKOB LUKAS SCHABELITZ

Lausanne, 24 August 1849 8, Place de la Palud

Dear Schabelitz,

I am most obliged to you for promptly forwarding a letter to me. Since I cannot have my letters sent direct and knew of no other address, I was compelled to put you to this trouble. You

[^1]: First published in: Marx and Engels. Printed according to the original Works, First Russian Edition, Vol. XXV. Published in English in full for

[^2]: IN BASLE

[^3]: a F. Engels, The Campaign for the German Imperial Constitution. - b Max Joseph Becker - c second-rate luminaries (literally: gods of minor peoples)





**[p. 215]**

may be receiving one or two more for me and would, perhaps, be kind enough to send these on to me also.

I am at present stuck in Lausanne where I am writing my reminiscences of the farcical Palatinate-Baden revolution.3 You know me too well to credit me with political participation in this affair which was lost before it began. In Karlsruhe and Kaisers- lautern I poked quiet fun at the provisional government's blunders and lack of resolution, I refused all posts, and it was not until the Prussians arrived that I joined Willich at Offenbach and took part in the campaign as his adjutant. Now at headquarters, now in the face of the enemy, the whole time in correspon- dence with the High Command, in constant touch with d'Ester, who, as 'red camarilla', was spurring on the government, in various engagements and, finally, at the battle of Rastatt,265 I had the opportunity of seeing a great deal and learning a great deal. As you know, I am sufficiently critical not to share the illusions of the run-of-the-mill, vociferous republicans and to detect the desponden- cy lurking beneath the bravado of the leaders.

As befits the Neue Rheinische Zeitung, the thing will take a view of the affair different from that of other prospective accounts. It will disclose many a shabby trick and, in particular, will contain much that is new concerning the goings-on in the Palatinate, about which hitherto virtually nothing has been known. It won't be big—about 4-6 sheets.

Up till now I have not had leisure enough to look round for a publisher. I would not care to send the manuscript to Germany, there is a danger of its being intercepted in the post. Since I am largely unfamiliar with the book trade in Switzerland, I thought I would write and ask you whether your old manb might be the kind of publisher who would accept such work and—NB—pay for it, for I need money, il faut que l'on vive? That the thing will be pleasant to read goes without saying, and my name is guarantee enough that it will be bought in Germany (it won't be liable to confiscation, le sujet n'y prête pasd). If, then, your worthy papa is prepared to do business, I shall rely on you, if not, it can't be helped. In that case you will not, at any rate, refuse to advise me about other possible German publishers, since I am very much in the dark in regard to the German book trade as well.

[^1]: a F. Engels, The Campaign for the German Imperial Constitution. - b Jacob Christian Schabelitz - c one has to live - d the subject doesn't lend itself thereto



Write and tell me about this if possible by return. Best regards

from your

F. Engels

First published in: Marx and Engels, Printed according to the original Works, First Russian Edition, Vol. XXV, Moscow 1934 Published in English for the first time

98

MARX TO FERDINAND FREILIGRATH43

IN COLOGNE

London, 5 September [1849]

Dear Freiligrath, Address: Karl Blind, 18 Roberts Street, Peterson's Coffeehouse, Grosvenor Square; therein the letter to me under cover.

I can only write a word or two since I have had a kind of cholerine for the past 4-5 days and feel dreadfully listless.

My wife has written and asked me to acknowledge receipt of your letter enclosing 100 fr. Just imagine what blackguards the Paris police are; they have even been harassing my wife and it was only with difficulty that she succeeded in obtaining permission to remain in Paris until 15 September. We had rented our lodgings there up to that date.

I am now in a really difficult situation. My wife is in an advanced state of pregnancy,3 she is obliged to leave Paris on the 15th and I don't know how I am to raise the money for her journey and for settling her in here.289

On the other hand there are excellent prospects of my being able to start a monthly reviewb here; but I am pressed for time and the first weeks constitute the real difficulty.

Lassalle seems to have been offended by my letter to you and another I wrote to him.c This was certainly very far from my

[^1]: a See this volume, p. 220. - b Neue Rheinische Zeitung. Politisch-ökonomische Revue - c See this volume, p. 204.





**[p. 217]**

intention, and I should already have written to him, if my present condition did not make letter-writing a real burden to me.

Once I am more or less on my feet again I shall write to you in greater detail about politics. I look forward to a few lines from you soon. Best regards to your wife,a Daniels, etc.

Your

K. Marx

First published in: Fr. Mehring, 'Freilig- Printed according to the original rath und Marx in ihrem Briefwechsel',

Die Neue Zeit, Ergänzungsheft, No. 12, 12 April 1912, Stuttgart

99

ENGELS TO GEORGE JULIAN HARNEY290

IN LONDON

My dear Harney,

You will have got the few lines I sent you through Colonel Willich.291 This is to inform you, and by you Marx, that I am this morning arrived here in Genova, and that, wind and weather favourable, I am going under sail for London to-morrow morning on board the English schooner Cornish Diamond, Capt-n Stevens. My journey will be of about 4 or 5 weeks so that by the middle of November I shall be in London.

I am very happy to have found so soon an opportunity of leaving this damned police atmosphere—indeed I never saw it so organised as here in Piedmont.

Ever truly thine

F. Engels

[^1]: Genova,b 5 October 1849

[^2]: First published in: Marx and Engels, Reproduced from the original Works, First Russian Edition, Vol. XXV, Moscow, 1934

[^3]: a Ida - h Genoa

[^4]: 9-1543





**[p. 100]**

MARX TO LOUIS BAUER

IN LONDON

[Draft J

London, 30 November [1849]

Sir,

In view of the inimical relations now obtaining between the two societies to' which we belong—in view of your direct attacks upon the refugee committee here,292 at any rate upon my friends and colleagues in the same—we must break off social relations if we are not mutually to expose ourselves to equivocal interpretations. Yesterday evening I thought it unseemly, in the presence of my wife, to express my views on this collision.

While expressing my utmost obligation to you for your medical assistance, I would beg you to send me your account.

Yours truly

Dr K. Marx

101

London, 19 December [1849] 4 Anderson Street, Kings Road, Chelsea

Dear Weydemeyer,

An unconscionable time has elapsed since I last wrote to you. Civil vexations of every kind, all manner of business and, finally, the general difficulty I have in bringing myself to write a letter, will explain to you my long silence. I have at last, post tot discrimina

[^1]: First published in: Marx and Engels, Printed according to the original Works, First Russian Edition, Vol. XXV, Moscow 1934 Published in English for the first time

[^2]: MARX TO JOSEPH WEYDEMEYER293

[^3]: IN FRANKFURT AM MAIN



rerum? succeeded in giving reality to my Revue? that is to say, I have a printer and a distributor in Hamburg.0 Otherwise we do everything at our own expense. The worst of it is that in Germany so much time is always lost before one can get to the point of publication. I have little dqubt that by the time 3, or maybe 2, monthly issues have appeared, a world conflagration will intervene and the opportunity of temporarily finishing with political economy will be gone.294

As you live in the heart of Germany and hence are more familiar with the details than we are, you might perhaps find time to describe, for our Revue, briefly and concisely in a few main features, the present condition of South Germany and everything connected with it.295

I would further request you to insert the following announce- ment in your paperd but not until you have seen the announce- ment in the Kölnische Zeitung for which the bookseller in Hamburg will be responsible. Perhaps you could send a copy to Westphalia. For you will see from the announcement that, besides our circulation through the book trade, we want to establish another by asking our party comrades to draw up subscription lists and send them to us here. For the time being we shall have to keep the price fairly high and the number of sheets low. Should our resources increase as a result of a wider circulation, this defect will be remedied.

Willich sends you his regards, and likewise Engels, red Wolf F and Weerth.

Here in England the most important movement is probably taking place at this moment. On the one hand, protectionist agitation supported by the fanaticised rural population—the consequences of the free CORN TRADE are now beginning to be felt in the form I predicted years agof—on the other, the Free Traders who, as FINANCIAL AND PARLIAMENTARY REFORMERS,284 are extending the wider political and economic logic of their system to home affairs and, as PEACE PARTY,269 to foreign affairs; finally, the Chartists who, while acting in concert with the

[^1]: What do you think of the row between Proudhon, Blanc and Pierre Leroux?296

[^2]: a after so many vicissitudes (Virgil, Aeneid, I) - b Neue Rheinische Zeitung. Politisch- ökonomische Revue - c J. E. M. Köhler and J. Schuberth - d K. Marx and F. Engels, 'Announcement of the Neue Rheinische Zeitung. Politisch-ökonomische Revue' was published in the Neue Deutsche Zeitung (edited by Weydemeyer), Nos. 14, 23 and 31, 16 and 26 January and 5 February 1850. - e Ferdinand Wolff - * K. Marx, 'Speech on the Question of Free Trade'.

[^3]: 9*



bourgeoisie against the aristocracy, have at the same time resumed with increased vigour their own party activity against the bourgeois.297 The conflict between these parties will be tremendous and the outward form of agitation will become more tempestuous- ly revolutionary if, as I hope—and not without good reason—the Tories come to power in place of the Whigs. Another événement," as yet imperceptible on the Continent, is the mighty industrial, agricultural and commercial crisis now looming up. Were the Continent to postpone its revolution until after the onset of this crisis, England might from the start have to be an ally, albeit an unpopular one, of the revolutionary Continent. An earlier outbreak of revolution—unless directly motivated by Russian intervention—would in my view be a malheurh since at this particular time, with trade still en ascendant? the mass of the workers in France, Germany, etc., as well as the entire strata of tradesmen, etc., though perhaps revolutionary in words, are certainly not so en réalité.6

You know that my wife has made the world richer by one citizene? She sends her warm regards to you and your wife/ My best regards to the latter also.

Write soon.

Your

K. Marx

Apropos, can you find out Citizen Hentze's address for me? You will have seen friend Heinzen's inane bragging in the newspapers.8 This fellow, who was done for by the revolution in Germany—before that his things enjoyed a certain vogue parce que le petit bourgeois et le commis-voyageur s'amusèrent à lire imprimées en pleins caractères les bêtises et les rodomontades qu'ils débitaient eux-mêmes mystérieusement chez le marchand de vin entre le fromage et le biscuit?1—is endeavouring to rehabilitate himself by compromising the other refugees in Switzerland and England—those who have really worked—in the eyes of those countries' governments,298 by

[^1]: a event - b misfortune - c on the up and up - d in reality - e Heinrich Guido (Fawksy) - f Louise - % K. Heinzen, 'Lehren der Revolution', Deutsche Londoner Zeitung, Nos. 241 and 242, 9 and 16 November 1849. - h because the petty bourgeois and the commercial traveller liked to see printed in black and white the idiocies and rodomontades they themselves served mysteriously between the cheese and the biscuits at the wine-shop.



First published in: Marx and Engels, Printed according to the original Works, First Russian Edition, Vol. XXV, Moscow 1934 Published in English in full for the first time

102

ENGELS TO JAKOB LUKAS SCHABELITZ

IN BASLE

London, 22 December 1849 6 Macclesfield Street, Dean Street, Soho

Dear Schabelitz,

I received your letter and, if I failed to answer it from Lausanne, it was for a variety of reasons, but more especially my great circumnavigation of the globe from Genoa to London, which kept me 5 weeks afloat. The reason I didn't let Bamberger have my manuscriptb was because I wanted to have it published either as a pamphlet of my own or, failing that, in the Revue which we already had in mind at the time. This Revue has now come into being and in January the first issue will appear in Germany—as you will have already seen from a somewhat premature announce- ment in the Berner Zeitung.0 We should be very pleased if you or your old mand would make yourselves more or less responsible for sales in Switzerland and open an account direct with us. The copies would reach you through our Hamburg commission agent,e

and you might perhaps be able to take over some kind of general agency for Switzerland, since we prefer in any case to work only with sound houses and I don't know the fellow who put his name to the announcement in Berne.' You might tell me some time whether the man's any good. Consider, then, how this might be arranged and let me know on what terms. At all events, these would have to provide for quarterly accounts and payments, at

[^1]: a luncheon - b The Campaign for the German Imperial Constitution - c Berner Zeitung, No. 361, 27 December 1849 - A Jacob Christian Schabelitz - c Julius Schuberth - f Davoine



Kindly have the enclosed announcement inserted in the National-Zeitungb and, should you from time to time require a fill-in, use this one for preference.

Besides the general introduction (by Marx), the first issue will contain a first article by me on the campaign for an imperial constitution, an article by little Wolffc on the last days of the Frankfurt and Stuttgart parliaments, a survey of events by Marx and myselfd and, if feasible, the first of a series of lectures on economics which Marx is giving at the Workers' Society here.299

Also miscellanea, perhaps something more by red Wolff.e The latter, Marx, Weerth and I, are now here and Lupus will, if at all possible, be joining us shortly.

AH in all, things are going quite well here. Struve and Heinzen are intriguing with all and sundry against the Workers' Society and ourselves, but without success. They, together with some wailers of moderate persuasion who have been thrown out of our society, form a select club at which Heinzen airs his grievances about the noxious doctrines of the communists.300

Write to me as soon as possible on the business question.

Your

F. Engels

Happy New Year in advance.

Be so kind as to send me forthwith a parcel containing Mieroslawski's 'Rapports sur la campagne en Bade', Daul's 'Tagebuch eines pp.', the Becker-Esselen screed/ and anything else of importance that has appeared on the Baden business, i.e. that contains facts and not hot air. You can either draw the amount on me, or charge it to the account of the Neue Rheinische Zeitung against future business transactions.

[^1]: First published in: Marx and Engels, Printed according to the original Works, First Russian Edition, Vol. XXV, Moscow 1934 Published in English for the first time

[^2]: a Theodor Hagen - b K. Marx and F. Engels, 'Announcement of the Neue Rheinische Zeitung. Politisch-ökonomische Revue' published in the Schweizerische National-Zeitung, No. 8, 10 January 1850. - c Wilhelm Wolff - d K. Marx and F. Engels, 'Review [January-February 1850]'.- e Ferdinand Wolff - f A. Daul, Tagebuch eines politischen Flüchtlings während des Freiheitskampfes in der Rheinpfalz und Baden; J. Pli. Becker and Ch. Esselen, Geschichte der süddeutschen Mai-Revolution des Jahres 1849.



