---
Volume: 38
Document_Title: "74. Engels to Marx. 7- 8 January "
Page_Range: "222-226"
---

# 74. Engels to Marx. 7- 8 January 



**[p. 1849]**

74

ENGELS TO MARX

IN COLOGNE

Berne, 7[-8] January 1849

Dear Marx,

Having recovered, after several weeks of sinful living, from my exertions and adventures,233 I feel, firstly, a need to get down to work again (striking proof of this being the enclosed Magyar-Slav articlea), and, secondly, a need for money. The hitter is the more urgent and if by the time this arrives, you haven't yet sent me anything, do so forthwith, for I've been sans le souh these past few days, and it's impossible to touch anyone in this rotten town.

If only something worth writing about happened in this rotten country. But it's all local rubbish of the rotteniest kind. However I'll shortly be sending a few general articles0 about it. If I have to stay abroad much longer I shall go to Lugano, particularly if something blows up in Italy, as seems likely.

But I keep thinking that I shall soon be able to return. This lazing about in foreign parts, where you can't really do anything and are completely outside the movement, is truly unbearable. I am rapidly coming to the conclusion that detention for question- ing in Cologne is better than life in free Switzerland. So do write and tell me if there isn't some chance of my being treated as favourably as Bürgers, Becker,d etc., etc.248

[^1]: a F. Engels, 'The Magyar Struggle'. - b penniless - c F. Engels, 'Herr Müller.— Radetzky's Chicanery towards Tessin.—The Federal Council.—Lohbauer', 'The Swiss Press', 'Protectionist Agitation.—Recruiting into the Neapolitan Army', 'Müller.—The Freiburg Government.—Ochsenbein: - d Hermann Becker

[^2]: 8-1543





**[p. 186]**

Raveaux is right: even in grace and favour Prussia249 one is freer than in free Switzerland. Every little nonentity here is at one and the same time a police spy and an assommeur.* I saw an example of this on New Year's Eve.

Who the devil was responsible for inserting recently that boring religio-inoral article from Heidelbergb on the March Associa- tion250? To my pleasure I have also noticed that Henricus occasionally exhales an article—witness the sighs extending over 2 issues on the subject of the Ladenberg circular.0

Our newspaper is now much quoted in Switzerland, the Berner Zeitung borrows a lot as does the National-Zeitung,d and this then goes the rounds of all the other papers. Also much quoted, more so than the Kölnische, according to the National, etc., etc., in Swiss papers in the French language.

You'll have included the advertisement.6 Herewith a copy of ours in the Berner Zeitung. Greetings to the whole company.

Your E.

Missed the post yesterday. Today, then, I'll merely add that since 1 January the Neue Rheinische Zeitung has no longer been arriving here. Do ascertain whether it's being regularly dispatched. I've looked into the question of a subscription, but it's no good. I'd have to subscribe for a l/2 year; I shan't be staying as long as that and anyway I haven't any money. As I said, it's important it should arrive here, not simply on my own account, but mainly because the Berner Zeitung, which is well disposed towards us and edited by a communist,1 is doing everything to make it en vogue here.

[^1]: First published in Der Briefwechsel zwischen Printed according to the original F. Engels und K. Marx, Bd. 1, Stuttgart, jgj3 Published in English for the first time

[^2]: a assassin - b 'Ein Aktenstück des Märzvereins', Neue Rheinische Zeitung, No. 181, 29 December 1848. - c [H. Bürgers,] 'Hr. v. Ladenberg und die Volksschullehrer', Neue Rheinische Zeitung, No. 182, 30 December 1848. The planned continuation of this article did not appear in the newspaper. - d Schweizerische National-Zeitung - e This seems to refer to the advertisement about the daily publication of the Berner Zeitung as from 1 January 1849 printed in the Neue Rheinische Zeitung, Nos. 185, 187 and 189, 3, 5, and 7 January. - f Niklaus Niggeler





[^1]: A cartoon of Frederick William IV and the Prussian bourgeoisie drawn by Engels on the back of E. Voswinkel's letter to Marx (22 January-beginning of February) about

[^2]: the elections to the Prussian Diet (1849)





