---
Volume: 38
Document_Title: "75. Mar x to Eduard von Müller- Tellering. 15 January "
Page_Range: "226-227"
---

# 75. Mar x to Eduard von Müller- Tellering. 15 January 



**[p. 75]**

MARX TO EDUARD von MÜLLER-TELLERING

IN RATIBOR

Cologne, 15 January [1849]

Dear Teilering,

You always calculate your posting days wrongly because you imagine that the post from Austria and Berlin arrives here regularly. But it's always 1-2 days late and is exceedingly irregular. I got your first letter from Vienna on the evening of the 10th. On the 11th I promptly sent a post-restante letter to Oderberg? enclosing 50 talers in money orders.251 Hence you'll have to return to Oderberg in any case, so as to pick up the money.

You will receive the newspapers, provided you write and tell me, immediately you get back from Oderberg, whereabouts you intend to live in the interim.

Despite Geiger's malevolence, I hope to see the matter of your passport finally settled within 2-3 days. But you must also tell me where our Berlin friend is to send your passport to.

If you have to keep away from Vienna—which would be an irreparable loss to the paperh and would mean your appointing a deputy responsible for day-to-day information—Breslau0 would seem to me to be the most suitable place to stay. I frequently think sorrowfully of your wife,d who deserves a more comfortable lot.

I am enclosing an issue of the 'Neue Rheinische Zeitung', which will, I trust, be of interest to you on account of the leading article on the Magyars."

Write to me as soon as you possibly can. In France the fun will begin anew in the spring. The bourgeois republic's infamy has advanced too rapidly towards the 'heyday of its transgressions'.'

Yours

K. Marx

[^1]: First published in: Marx and Engels, Printed according to the original Works, First Russian Edition, Vol. XXIX, , . , .. Moscow, 1946 Published in English for the first time

[^2]: a Polish name: Bohumin - b Neue Rheinische Zeitung - c Polish name: Wroclaw - d Amalie - e F. Engels, 'The Magyar Struggle'. - f Shakespeare, Hamlet, Act I, Scene 5.



