---
Volume: 38
Document_Title: "77. Engel s to Daniel Fenner von Fenneberg. 1 March "
Page_Range: "228-229"
---

# 77. Engel s to Daniel Fenner von Fenneberg. 1 March 



**[p. 191]**

paper and was under attack from all the paper's correspondents and creditors, b) because, in a letter to Freiligrath, Imandt depicted you, Kapp, etc., as complaining bitterly about me, while the precious Beust, I think it is Beust (I am not quite sure), was sending similar letters here.

Within a few days the paper must either go under or else consolidate itself, in which case we shall immediately send you more money of which, at the moment, there is a complete lack. However the business of the 25 talers must be cleared up.

That I have constantly regarded you as co-editor of the paper is apparent not only from the new announcement in the various papers," but also from the fact that I placed your article about the expulsion of the Frankfurt refugee6 under 'Cologne'.0

Your

Marx

[From Wilhelm Wolff]

In entire agreement with the above

77

ENGELS TO DANIEL FENNER von FENNEBERG

Cologne, 1 March 1849

Dear Sir,

I would have replied to you before now had I not first had to consult various other people about your matter. I do not think it advisable for you to make any sort of public appearance here; out

Your

Lupus

[^1]: First published in: Marx and Engels,

[^2]: Works, First Russian Edition, Vol. XXV, Moscow, 1934

[^3]: IN FRANKFURT AM MAIN

[^4]: a 'Bestellungen auf die Neu« Rheinische Zeitung für das nächste Quartal, Januar bis März 1849'. - b F. Wiedecker - c [E. Dronke,] 'Allianz der europäischen Polizei', Neue Rheinische Zeitung, No. 192, 11 January 1849.

[^5]: Printed according to the original

[^6]: Published in English for the first time



