---
Volume: 38
Document_Title: "78. Marx to Colonel Engels. 3 March "
Page_Range: "229-231"
---

# 78. Marx to Colonel Engels. 3 March 



**[p. 192]**

of craving for advancement, the chief of police3 here is capable de

tout,b as we have experienced only today in the unjustified expulsion of a local Polish refugee. I would further advise you, should your passport not be absolutely impeccable, to choose any route to Paris other than via Cologne and Brussels. You would get through Cologne well enough, but you would undoubtedly be arrested at the Belgian border and transported by prison van to the French border, after having, perhaps, spent several days in prison. I myself experienced this 5 months ago,233 and every day fresh reports reach us of these infamies perpetrated against the refugees by the Belgians. You even run the risk of having all your money taken from you by the scoundrels and not getting a farthing back, as happened to the refugee, von Hochstetter.

If I can be of service to you in any other way, it would be a pleasure.

Yours faithfully

F. Engels

First published in: Marx and Engels, Printed according to the original Works, Second Russian Edition, Vol. 27, , . ,. Moscow 1962 Published in English for the first time

78

MARX TO COLONEL ENGELS

Cologne, 3 March [1849]

To Colonel Engels, Deputy Commandant Sir,

The day before yesterday two non-commissioned officers0 of the 8th Company, 16th Infantry Regiment, came to my rooms to speak to me privately. I had left for Düsseldorf. They were

[^1]: IN COLOGNE

[^2]: [Draft]

[^3]: a W. A. Geiger - b capable of anything - c Dust and Hover





**[p. 193]**

therefore turned away. Yesterday afternoon two of these gentle- men again presented themselves and demanded a private inter- view.

I had them shown into a room where I joined them almost immediately. I invited the gentlemen to sit down and asked them what they wanted. They told me they wanted to know the name of the writer of the article (No. 233 of the Neue Rheinische Zeitung of 28 February) against Captain von Uttenhoven.253 I replied to these gentlemen, 1) that the article in question had nothing to do with me since it had appeared below the line and was therefore an advertisement; 2) that they were at liberty to insert a refutation gratis; 3) that they were at liberty to sue the paper. Upon the gentlemen's remarking that the whole of the 8th Company felt themselves to be insulted by the advertisement, I returned that nothing but the signatures of all the members of the 8th Company would convince me of the accuracy of that statement, which in any case was irrelevant.

The non-commissioned officers thereupon declared that if I failed to name, to 'deliver up' the 'man', they would 'no longer be able to restrain their men', and 'evil would result'.

I told the gentlemen that little or nothing was to be achieved by trying to threaten or intimidate me. They then withdrew muttering under their breath.

Relaxation of discipline must have gone very far and all sense of law and order must have ceased if, like a robber band, a Company can send delegates to an individual citizen and attempt with threats to extort this or that confession from him. In particular, I fail to understand the meaning of the sentence: 'We can no longer restrain our men'.

Are these 'men', perhaps, to exercise jurisdiction on their own initiative, do these 'men' have other than legal resources at their command?

I must beg you, Sir, to institute an inquiry into this incident and to give me an explanation for this singular presumption. I would be sorry to be obliged to have recourse to publicity.

[^1]: First published in: Marx and Engels, Printed according to the original Works, First Russian Edition, Vol. XXV, , , . , . . x, ,.. r . ,- Moscow, 1934 Published in English for the first time



