---
Volume: 38
Document_Title: "79. Marx to Colonel Engels. Before 15 April "
Page_Range: "231-232"
---

# 79. Marx to Colonel Engels. Before 15 April 



**[p. 79]**

MARX TO COLONEL ENGELS

IN COLOGNE

[Draft]

[Cologne, before 15 April 1849]

To Colonel Engels, Commandant Sir,

Being convinced that Royal Prussian non-commissioned officers" would not deny words spoken in private, I did not call in any witnesses to the conversation in question.b As to my alleged remark that 'the courts, as has recently been seen, can do nothing to me',254 even my political opponents will concede that, were I to harbour such a foolish thought, I would not express it before a third party. And do not the non-commissioned officers themselves admit that I explained to them that things below the line are no concern of mine and that in any case I am responsible only for the section of the paper signed by me? Hence there was absolutely no reason to speak of my position vis-à-vis the courts.

I am all the happier to refrain from pressing for a further inquiry as it was my concern, not that the non-commissioned officers should be punished, but simply that they should be reminded, from the lips of their superiors, of the limits of their duties.

As for the kind remark with which you conclude, the Neue Rheinische Zeitung has demonstrated, by its silence over the recent friction among the military themselves, how great is its considera- tion for the prevailing mood of unrest.

[^1]: First published in: Marx and Engels, Printed according to the original Works, First Russian Edition, Vol. XXV, , , . Moscow 1934 Published in English for the first time

[^2]: a Dust and Hover - b The words 'although a co-editor of the Neue Rheinische Zeitung happened to be in my rooms at the time' are deleted in the original.



