---
Volume: 38
Document_Title: "86. Marx to Engels. 7 June "
Page_Range: "235-238"
---

# 86. Marx to Engels. 7 June 



**[p. 85]**

MARX TO JOSEPH WEYDEMEYER258

IN FRANKFURT AM MAIN

[Bingen, 1 June 1849]

Dear Weydemeyer,

I beg you in my own and Freiligrath's names to take the printer of Freiligrath's poem3 to court for piracy and sue him for damages.

My general attorney is St. A. Naut in Cologne, and I should be much obliged if you would write to him about this matter.

Vale faveque.h

K. Marx

First published in: Marx and Engels, Printed according to the original Works, First Russian Edition, Vol. XXV. Moscow 1934 Published in English for the first time

86

Paris, 7 June [1849] 45, rue de Lille

Dear Engels,

I am not writing to you at any great length in this letter. First I want you to tell me in your reply whether it arrives intact. I believe that letters are again being opened con amore.c

[^1]: MARX TO ENGELS259

[^2]: IN KAISERSLAUTERN

[^3]: a Reference to F. Freiligrath's 'Abschiedswort der Neuen Rheinischen Zeitung' published in the newspaper's last number (No. 301, 19 May 1849) printed in red ink. - b Good-bye and farewell. - c enthusiastically





**[p. 199]**

As for the Palatinate-Baden envoys here, Blind, alarmed by a real or pretended attack of cholera, has moved into the country some hours away from Paris.

Quant ab Schütz, the following should be noted:

1. The Provisional Government has placed him in a false position by failing to keep him informed. The French demand des faitsc and where can he get them from if not a soul writes to him? Dispatches must reach him as often as possible. It is clear that at this moment he can achieve nothing. All that can be done is to throw dust in the eyes of the Prussian Government by enabling him to have frequent meetings with the leaders of the Montag- nards.260

2. A second, unpardonable mistake on the part of the Gouverne- ment provisoire du Palatinatd is their entrusting a crowd of rotten Germans with this or that mission behind the back of the official envoy. This will have to cease once and for all if Schütz is to maintain at least the prestige of his position vis-à-vis the Montagnards and just now—vis-à-vis Prussia—that is the whole point of his mission.

Apart from that, .it goes without saying that he doesn't learn very much, since he consorts only with a few official Montag- nards. I shall, incidentally, keep him always au courant*

For my part I must ask you to write to me at least twice a week regularly and immediately every time anything important happens.

The Kölnische Zeitung feuilleton on the Palatinate movement, dated Dürkheim an der Haardt, states among other things:

[^1]: 'Some anger has been aroused by Mr Marx, editor of the Rheinische Zeitung. He is said to have told the Provisional Government that since his time had not yet come, he intended temporarily to retire.'8

[^2]: a dreary - b As for - c facts - d provisional government of the Palatinate - e informed - f Neue Rheinische Zeitung - 8 'Briefe aus Baden und der Pfalz. IV. Dürkheim a. d. Haardt, 1. Juni', Kölnische Zeitung, No. 136, 6 June 1849.



How does that fit in? The miserable Germans here, with whom, by the way, I avoid any meeting, will seek to proclaim this throughout the whole of Paris. I therefore think it advisable for you to see that an item appears in the Karlsruher Zeitung or the

Mannheimer Abendzeitung stating expressly that I am in Paris as the representative of the democratic Central Committee. Another reason why I think this would be useful is that for the time being, as no immediate results are to be obtained here, the Prussians must be made to believe that the most frightful intrigues are going on here. 77 faut faire peur aux Aristocrates."

Rüge is a complete nonentity here. What is Dronke doing? You must, by the way, see that you raise money for me somewhere. You know that I spent the latest sums received pour faire honneur aux obligations de la 'Nouvelle Gazette Rhénane',,b and, in the present circonstances,1" I cannot live a completely retired life, still less get into financial difficulties.

If at all possible let me have an article in French in which you sum up the whole Hungarian affair.261

Show this letter to d'Ester, to whom my best regards. If I am to write to a different address, let me have it.

M.

Write to me at the following address: M. Ramboz, 45 rue de Lille

Herrn Fr. Engels, inquire at Dr d'Ester's.

[^1]: [On the back of the letter]

[^2]: First published abridged in Der Briefwech- sel zwischen F. Engels und K. Marx, Bd. 1, Stuttgart, 1913 and in full in MEGA, Abt. III, Bd. 1, 1929

[^3]: Printed according to the original

[^4]: Published in English for the first time

[^5]: a We must frighten the aristocrats. - b to honour the obligations of the Neue Rheinische Zeitung. - c circumstances



