---
Volume: 38
Document_Title: "87. Marx to Joseph Weydemeyer. 13 July "
Page_Range: "238-239"
---

# 87. Marx to Joseph Weydemeyer. 13 July 



**[p. 87]**

MARX TO JOSEPH WEYDEMEYER

IN FRANKFURT AM MAIN

Paris, 13 July [1849] 45, rue de Lille Address: M. Ramboz

Dear Weydemeyer,

Dronke will already have written to tell you that you must sell the red newspapers at any price.262

I am here with my famille, sans le sou.*263 And yet an opportunity has come my way of making 3,000-4,000 fr. in a few weeks. For my pamphlet against Proudhon,b which he has done everything in his power to suppress, is beginning to sell here, and it is up to me to infiltrate reviews of it into the more important papers, thus necessitating a second edition. But for this to be of any help I would have to buy up the copies still available in Brussels and Paris in order to become sole propriétaire.

300-400 talers would enable me to carry out this operation and at the same time maintain myself here during the early days. You might, perhaps, be able to help me in this.

Namely, as follows: A lady in Rheda—Liming is also in touch with her—sent 1,000 talers to Carl Post for the Neue Rheinische Zeitung, but recovered the money when that paper went under. Might she not, perhaps, be persuaded by your intervention to make me this advance? My claim to such an advance is, I believe, all the greater as I contributed more than 7,000 talers to the Neue Rheinische Zeitung which, after all, was a party enterprise.

If at all possible, pursue this matter, but without mentioning it to anybody. I tell you that, unless help is forthcoming from one quarter or another, I shall be perdu" since my family is also here and the last piece of my wife's jewellery has already found its way to the pawnbrokers.

I await your reply by return. Your

K. Marx

[^1]: First published in: Marx and Engels,

[^2]: Works, First Russian Edition, Vol. XXV, Moscow, 1934

[^3]: Printed according to the original

[^4]: Published in English for the first time

[^5]: a family, penniless - b K. Marx, The Poverty of Philosophy. - c lost



