---
Volume: 38
Document_Title: "89. Engels to Jenny Marx. 25 July "
Page_Range: "239-241"
---

# 89. Engels to Jenny Marx. 25 July 



**[p. 88]**

MARX TO CAROLINE SCHÖLER3

IN COLOGNE

Paris, 14 July 1849 45, rue de Lille

Dear Lina,

Would you be so kind, when you write to my wife, as to enclose a note to the red Orlando furiosob? You must help me a little in the act I am putting on.

Yours very sincerely

K. Marx

First published in MEGA2, Abt. Ill, Printed according to the original Bd. 3, Berlin, 1981 , r Published in English for the first time

89

Vevey, Vaud Canton, 25 July 1849 Dear Mrs Marx,

You as well as Marx will be wondering why you have not heard from me for so long. En voici les causes? On the same day as I wrote to Marx (from Kaiserslautern) there came news that the Prussians had occupied Homburg, thereby cutting off communica- tions with Paris. So I couldn't send the letter off and went to join Willich. In Kaiserslautern I had completely disassociated myself from the soi-disantd revolution; but when the Prussians arrived, I

[^1]: ENGELS TO JENNY MARX264

[^2]: IN PARIS

[^3]: a Appended to Jenny Marx's letter to the same addressee (see this volume, pp. 546-48). - b Ferdinand Wolff (red Wolff) is compared to the title character of L. Ariosto's poem. - c Here are the reasons. - d so-called





**[p. 203]**

couldn't resist the urge to take part in the war. Willich being the only officer who was any good, I joined him and became his adjutant. I was in four engagements, two of them fairly important, particularly the one at Rastatt,265 and discovered that the much-vaunted bravery under fire is quite the most ordinary quality one can possess. The whistle of bullets is really quite a trivial matter, and though, throughout the campaign, a great deal of cowardice was in evidence, I did not see as many as a dozen men whose conduct was cowardly in battle. But all the more 'brave stupidity'. Enfin,3 I came through the whole thing unscathed, and au bout du compte,13 it was as well that one member of the Neue Rheinische Zeitung was present, since the entire pack of democratic blackguards were in Baden and the Palatinate, and are now bragging about the heroic deeds they never performed. It would have been said again that the gentlemen of the Neue Rheinische Zeitung were too cowardly to fight. But of all the democratic gentry, the only ones to fight were myself and Kinkel. The latter joined our corps as a musketeer and did pretty well; in the first engagement in which he took part, his head was grazed by a bullet and he was taken prisoner.

Having covered the withdrawal of the Baden army, our corps entered Switzerland 24 hours later than everyone else, and yesterday we arrived here in Vevey. During the campaign and the march through Switzerland it was quite impossible for me to write so much as a line. But now I hasten to send some news, and write to you with all the more dispatch for having heard—somewhere in Baden—that Marx had been arrested in Paris. Since we never received any newspapers, we learnt nothing. Whether or not it is true, I have never been able to find out. You can imagine the state of anxiety I am in as a result, and I beg you most urgently to set my mind at rest and to put an end to my doubts about Marx's fate. Since I have had no confirmation of this rumour of Marx's arrest, I still hope it is false. But that Dronke and Schapper are in jug, I can hardly doubt. Enough—if Marx is still at liberty send him this letter with the request that he write to me immediately. If he should not feel safe in Paris, he will be completely safe here in the Vaud Canton. The government describes itself as red and partisane de la révolution permanente." In Geneva likewise. Schily from Trier is there; he held a command in the Mainz corps.

If I get any money from home, I shall probably go to Lausanne

[^1]: a In short - b as it turns out - c supporter of permanent revolution



