---
Volume: 38
Document_Title: "90. Marx to Ferdinand Freiligrath. 31 July —"
Page_Range: "241-244"
---

# 90. Marx to Ferdinand Freiligrath. 31 July —



**[p. 204]**

If only I could be sure that Marx is at liberty! I have often thought that, in the midst of the Prussian bullets, my post was much less dangerous than that of others in Germany and especially Marx's in Paris. So dispel my uncertainty soon.

Tout à vousc

Engels

Address: F. Engels, réfugié allemand, Vevey, Suisse (If possible under cover as far as Thionville or Metz.)

First published in Der Briefwechsel zwischen Printed according to the original F. Engeb und K. Marx, Bd. 1, Stuttgart, Published in English in full for the XV1D first time

90

MARX TO FERDINAND FREILIGRATH

[Paris,] 31 July [1849]

Dear Freiligrath,

I must confess that I am much astonished by Lassalle's behaviour. I had approached him personally and, since I myself had at one time made the countess d a loan and was, besides, aware of Lassalle's liking for me, it would never have occurred to me that he would compromise me in this way. On the contrary, I had impressed upon him the need for the utmost discretion. The direst straits are better than public begging. I have written to him on the subject.266

[^1]: IN COLOGNE

[^2]: a more or less - b meaning: follower of philosophical idealism - c Yours ever - d Sophie von Hatzfeldt





**[p. 205]**

But most important of all just now is England. We must have no illusions about the so-called Peace Party,269 of which Cobden is the acknowledged leader. Nor should we have any illusions about the 'unselfish enthusiasm' of the English for Hungary, which has resulted in the organisation of meetings throughout the country.

The Peace Party is simply a cloak for the FREE-TRADE Party. The same content, the same object, the same leaders. Just as, at home, the Free Traders attacked the aristocracy in its material basis with the repeal of the Corn and Navigation Laws,270 so now in their foreign policy, they are attacking it in its European connections and ramifications—by seeking to break the Holy Alliance.271 The English Free Traders are radical bourgeois who wish to break radically with the aristocracy in order to rule without let or hindrance. What they overlook is the fact that they are thus, malgré eux,d bringing the people onto the stage and into power. Exploitation of the peoples, not by means of medieval warfare but solely by means of trade warfare—that's your Peace Party. Cobden's behaviour in the Hungarian affair had an immedi- ately practical nexus. Russia is now seeking to negotiate a loan. Cobden, the representative of the industrial bourgeoisie, forbids

[^1]: a Let us talk politics - b Louis Philipp Albert - c duties, taxes - d willy-nilly.



Cobden's attack on Russia has been more formidable than any of either Dembinski or Görgey.a He revealed how pitiable was the condition of her finances. She is, he says, the MOST WRETCHED NATION. Each year the Siberian mines bring the State no more than £700,000: the duty on spirits brings it 10 times as much. True, the gold and silver reserve in the vaults of the Bank of Petersburg amounts to £14,000,000, but it serves as a metallic reserve for a paper circulation of £80,000,000. Hence, if the Tsar b dips into the vaults of the Bank, he will depreciate the paper money, and thus bring about a revolution in Russia herself. Consequently, the proud English bourgeois exclaims, the absolutist colossus cannot stir unless we make him a loan, and this we shall not do. Once again we are waging, by purely bourgeois means, the bourgeoisie's war against feudal absolutism. The golden calf is mightier than all the calves on the thrones in the world. Of course the English FREE TRADERS also have a direct interest where Hungary is concerned. Instead of Austrian trade barriers, as hitherto, a trade agreement and some sort of FREE TRADE with Hungary. The money, which they are now without doubt secretly remitting to the Hungarians, they will assuredly get back 'with profit and interest' in retour0 by way of trade.

The English bourgeoisie's attitude to continental despotism is a reversal of the campaign they conducted against the French from 1793 to 1815. The importance of this development cannot be overrated.

Your

K. Marx

[^1]: Kindest regards to you and your wifed from me and my wife.

[^2]: First published in part in Die Neue Zeit, Ergänzungshefte No. 12, 1911-12 and in full in: Marx and Engels, Works, First Russian Edition, Vol. XXV, Moscow, 1934

[^3]: Printed according to the original

[^4]: Published in English in full for the first time

[^5]: a Reference to Cobden's speech at a meeting held on 23 July 1849 in support of Hungary, see The Times, No. 20236, 24 July 1849 and The Northern Star, No. 614, 28 July 1849.- b Nicholas I - c return - d Ida



