---
Volume: 38
Document_Title: "91. Marx to Engels. End of July "
Page_Range: "244-245"
---

# 91. Marx to Engels. End of July 



**[p. 91]**

MARX TO ENGELS

IN VEVEY

[Paris, end of July 1849]

Dear Engels,

I have suffered a great deal of anxiety on your account and was truly delighted when yesterday I received a letter in your own hand.a I had got Dronke (who is here) to write to your brother-in-law0 asking for news of you. He, of course, knew nothing.

My whole family is here26'; the government wanted to banish me to Morbihan, the Pontine marshes of Brittany.272 So far I have frustrated their intention. But if I am to write to you in greater detail, both about my own circumstances here and about affairs in general, you must let me have a safer address, for things are really appalling here.

You now have the best opportunity to write a history of or a pamphlet on the Baden-Palatinate revolution.273 Had you not taken part in the actual fighting, we couldn't have put forward our views about that frolic. It would be a splendid chance for you to define the position of the Neue Rheinische Zeitung vis-à-vis the democratic party generally. I am positive that the thing will sell and bring you money.

I have embarked on negotiations with a view to starting a politico-economic (monthly) periodical in Berlin which would have to be largely written by us two.274

Lupusc is also in Switzerland, I believe in Berne. Weerth was here yesterday; he is setting up an agency in Liverpool. Red Wolffd is living here with me. Finances are, of course, in a state of chaos.

Freiligrath is in Cologne now as heretofore. If my wife were not in an état par trop intéressant," I would gladly leave Paris as soon as it was financially possible to do so.

[^1]: a See this volume, pp. 202-04. - b Emil Blank - c Wilhelm Wolff - d Ferdinand Wolff - e all too interesting condition (on the birth of Marx's son, see this volume, p. 220)



