---
Volume: 38
Document_Title: "92. Marx to Joseph Weydemeyer. End of July "
Page_Range: "245-246"
---

# 92. Marx to Joseph Weydemeyer. End of July 

Farewell. Convey my kindest regards to Willich and write by return to the address: M. Ramboz, rue de Lille, 45.

Your

K. M.

First published in Der Briefwechsel zwischen Printed according to the original F. Engels und K. Marx, Bd. 1, Stuttgart, 1913

92

MARX TO JOSEPH WEYDEMEYER275

IN FRANKFURT AM MAIN

[Paris, end of July 1849]

Dear Weydemeyer,

I have heard from Dronke that it's no go with the Westphalian lady.a Well, it can't be helped.

Now I should appreciate your advice as to how best to publish pamphlets.

I should like to start with the pamphlet on wages of Which only the beginning appeared in the Neue Rheinische Zeitung}" I would write a short political foreword to it on the present status quo. Do you think that, e.g., Leske would be agreeable? But he would have to pay, as soon as he had the manuscript in his hands, and pay well, since I know that this pamphlet will attract and will find a mass of subscribers in advance. My present financial état" will not permit me to settle my outstanding compte6, with Leske.276

Were Leske then to find that the thing is well received, we could continue in this way.

Yesterday I had a letter from Engelsc; he is in Switzerland and, as Willich's adjutant, has taken part in four encounters.

The sword of Damocles still hangs over my head; my expulsion' has neither been rescinded nor, for the moment, is it being enforced.

[^1]: a See this volume, p. 201. - b K. Marx, Wage Labour and Capital. - c condition - d account - e See this volume, pp. 202-04. - f ibid., pp. 207, 211, 212.



