---
Volume: 38
Document_Title: "93. Marx to Joseph Weydemeyer. Mid- August "
Page_Range: "246-247"
---

# 93. Marx to Joseph Weydemeyer. Mid- August 

Awkward though the present state of affairs may be for our personal circumstances, I am nevertheless among the satisfaits. Les choses marchent très bien3 and the Waterloo suffered by official democracy may be regarded as a victory.277 'Governments by grace of God' are taking it upon themselves to avenge us on the bourgeoisie, and to chastise them.

One of these days I may perhaps send you a short article for your paperb on the state of affairs in England.278 Just now I find it too boring, having already discussed the matter in a number of private letters.

Write to me direct and to my own address: 45, rue de Lille, Monsieur Ramboz.

My best regards to your wifec and yourself from my wife and me. The former is très souffrante, conséquence naturelle de son état par trop intéressant.

Adieu, mon cher,d and reply soon.

Your

K. M.

First published in Die Gesellschaft, Printed according to the original Jg. VII, Bd. 2, Berlin, 1930

93

MARX TO JOSEPH WEYDEMEYER

[Paris, mid-August 1849]

Dear Weydemeyer,

I will gladly fall in with Riihl's suggestion279 if he agrees to take over the whole of the business side, at which I am no good and for which he will be paid a commission.

1) But I have no publisher on hand to make the necessary advances,

[^1]: Published in English in full for the first time

[^2]: IN FRANKFURT AM MAIN

[^3]: a satisfied. Things are going very well - b Neue Deutsche Zeitung - c Louise - d very poorly, the natural consequence of her all too interesting condition. Good-bye, my friend (on the birth of Marx's son, see this volume, p. 220).



