---
Volume: 38
Document_Title: "94. Marx to Engels. 17 August "
Page_Range: "247-249"
---

# 94. Marx to Engels. 17 August 



**[p. 210]**

2) the subscription lists seem to me superfluous. Announce- ments in the Westdeutsche and other papers in the Rhineland and elsewhere would achieve the same purpose. The thing should be advertised particularly in the Berlin, Hamburg, Leipzig and Breslau3 papers.

The news about your paperb is very bad. I shall at once write and inform Naut, the trusty old business manager of the Neue Rheinische Zeitung, and acquaint you with the result.280

You would already have had my article' but for the fact that the illness of my wife and all the children has meant that I have been a kind of male nurse for the past week- Best regards to your wife.

Your

K. M.

I hope for a reply as soon as possible.

First published in: Marx and Engels, Printed according to the original Works, First Russian Edition, Vol. XXV, . Moscow 1934 Published in English tor the first time

94

Paris, 17 August [1849] Dear Engels,

I don't know whether my first letter—in reply to the first one you sent my wifed—arrived safely, since your address was very uncertain. I would have already replied to your second281 had I not been prevented by the fact that the whole of my family here was ill. Let me repeat once again how anxious my wife and I were on your account and what a delightful surprise it was to have definite news of you.

You will see from the date that, as a result of my protest, the Ministry of the Interior has for the time being left me unmolested here in Paris. The Morbihan département, to which I had been

[^1]: MARX TO ENGELS228

[^2]: IN VEVEY

[^3]: a Wroclaw - b Neue Deutsche Zeitung - c See this volume, p. 209. - d ibid., pp. 202-04 and 207-08.





**[p. 211]**

directed, is lethal at this time of year—the Pontine marshes of Brittany.282 It would not be prudent just now to write about the 13 June affair.260 I don't believe, or at least don't know whether secrecy of the mails is being observed.

The general situation here may be summed up in a couple of words: the majority disintegrating into its original, mutually hostile elements, Bonapartism hopelessly compromised, ill-will among the peasants because of the retention of the 45 centimes, the wine- growers furious at the threatened retention of the tax on drink,268

the current of public opinion once again anti-reactionary, in the Chamber, now prorogued, and in the Ministry, reaction, growing exclusive and concerned with expelling the Barrot-Dufaure clique from the Cabinet.283 As soon as this comes about you can look for an early revolutionary resurrection.

I don't know whether in Switzerland you have any chance of following the English movement. The English have taken it up again at exactly the same juncture at which it was broken off by the February revolution. As you are aware, the Peace Party269 is nothing but the FREE-TRADE party under a new guise. But this time the industrial bourgeoisie is acting in a manner even more revolutionary than during the ANTI-CORN LEAGUE AGITATION.270 In two ways: 1) the aristocracy, whose roots have been attacked at home by the repeal of the Corn Laws and the Navigation Acts, is further to be ruined in the sphere of foreign policy, in its European ramifications. Reversal of Pitt's policy. Anti-Russian-Austrian- Prussian, in a word, pro Italy and Hungary. Cobden has formally threatened to proscribe bankers who make loans to Russia, has unleashed a veritable campaign against Russian finances. 2) Agitation for universal suffrage, in order to effect the total political severance of the TENANTS from the landed aristocracy, to give the towns an absolute majority in Parliament, to nullify the House of Lords. Financial reform, in order to curb the Church and cut off the political revenues of the aristocracy.

Chartists and Free Traders have joined hands in these two propaganda campaigns. Harney and Palmerston apparently friends. At the last meeting held in London, O'Connor and Colonel Thompson both of one mind.284

Consequences of this economic campaign against feudalism and Holy Alliance incalculable.

Hungary splendid. But this rotten Prussia? Qu'en dis-tu?* The pallid canailleb are now being fattened in Saxony, Baden, the

[^1]: a What do you think of it? - b H. Heine, Deutschland. Ein Wintermärchen, Kapit VIII.



