---
Volume: 38
Document_Title: "95. Marx to Engels. 23 August "
Page_Range: "249-250"
---

# 95. Marx to Engels. 23 August 



**[p. 212]**

Palatinate. If they send an army to the aid of the Austrians, it will be so contrived that they themselves remain in Bohemia and wax fat there. But wretched Prussia—I only fear that it's too craven — perdu* as soon as it participates in the Hungarian affair, which in any case is turning into a guerre universelle.

Maintenant, mon cher, que faire de notre part? Il faut nous lancer dans une entreprise littéraire et mercantile, j'attends tes propositions.0

Red Lupus is here, in the same house as myself; Dronke in Paris likewise, mais c'est un tout petit homme de l'école de E. Meyen." Lupus' is in Zurich. Address: Dr. Lüning. You don't need to write separately to M. Ramboz. C'est mon pseudonyme?

So the address is simply: Monsieur Ramboz, 45, rue de Lille. Salut!

Ch. M.

First published abridged in Der Briefwech- Printed according to the original sei zwischen F. Engels und K. Marx, Bd. 1, Stuttgart, 1913 and in full in MEGA, Published in English m full for the Abt. Ill, Bd. 1, 1929 f i r s t t l m e

95

[Paris,] 23 August [1849]

Dear Engels,

I am being banished to the Morbihan département, the Pontine marshes of Brittany.272 I need hardly say that I shall not consent to this veiled attempt on my life. So I am leaving France.285

They won't give me a passport for Switzerland, hence I must go to London, and that tomorrow. In any case, Switzerland will soon be hermetically sealed and the mice would be trapped all at one go-

[^1]: MARX TO ENGELS43

[^2]: IN LAUSANNE

[^3]: •n lost - b general war - c Now, my dear friend, what should we for our part do? We must launch out into a literary and commercial venture, I await your pro- posals. - d Ferdinand Wolff - e but he.'s an insignificant little chap of the school of E. Meyen. - f Wilhelm Wolff - S It's my pseudonym.



