---
Volume: 38
Document_Title: "96. Engels to Joseph Weydemeyer. 23 August "
Page_Range: "250-251"
---

# 96. Engels to Joseph Weydemeyer. 23 August 

Besides, in London there is a positive prospect of my being able to start a German newspaper.3 I am assured of part of the funds.

So you must leave for London at once. In any case your safety demands it. The Prussians would shoot you twice over: 1) because of Baden, 2) because of Elberfeld.286 And why stay in a Switzerland where you can do nothing?

You will have no difficulty in coming to London, whether under the name of Engels or under the name of Mayer. As soon as you say you want to go to England, you will receive a one-way passport to London from the French Embassy.

I count on this absolutely. You cannot stay in Switzerland. In London we shall get down to business.

For the time being my wife will remain here. Continue to write to her at the same address: 45, rue de Lille, M. Ramboz.

But once again, I confidently count on you not to leave me in the lurch.

Your

K. M. Lupusb is at Dr Lüning's, Zurich. Write and tell him also about my plan.

96

Lausanne, 23 August 1849 8, Place de la Palud

Dear Weydemeyer,

Post tot discrimina rerumc—after umpteen arrests in Hesse and the Palatinate,288 after 3 weeks of sybaritic living in Kaiserslautern, after a glorious 4 weeks' campaign in which, for a change, I buckled on my sword-belt and acted as Willich's adjutant, after 4

[^1]: First published abridged in Der Briefwech- Printed according to the original sei zwischen F. Engels und K. Marx, Bd. 1, Stuttgart, 1913 and in full in MEGA, Abt. III, Bd. 1, 1929

[^2]: ENGELS TO JOSEPH WEYDEMEYER287

[^3]: IN FRANKFURT AM MAIN

[^4]: a Neu« Rheinische Zeitung. Politisch-ökonomische Revue - b Wilhelm Wolff - c After so many vicissitudes (Virgil, Aeneid, I).



