---
Volume: 38
Document_Title: "97. Engels to Jakob Lukas Schabelitz. 24 August "
Page_Range: "251-253"
---

# 97. Engels to Jakob Lukas Schabelitz. 24 August 



**[p. 214]**

weeks of tedious cantoning with the refugee detachment in the Vaud Canton, I am at last finding my feet here in Lausanne. The very first thing I shall do is sit down and compose a merry tale of the whole Palatinate-Baden frolic.3 But since I no longer have any contact with Germany and do not even know which towns are or are not under martial law, I don't know what publisher to approach. I'm no longer acquainted with such folk. You are on the spot and hence will be better able to say which are the right publishers with whom to negotiate something of this kind; it will, of course, be quite innocuous and will not involve any risk of confiscation or prosecution. There might be such a one in Frankfurt. But he must have money. Please be good enough to write to me about this, if possible by return, so that I can take the necessary steps at once.

I recently saw your red Becker,b very jaunty, in Geneva; he was tippling with the popular man, Esselen, and other easy-going diis minorum gentium0 in the country.

Warm regards to your wife and all our acquaintances

from your

Engels

97

ENGELS TO JAKOB LUKAS SCHABELITZ

Lausanne, 24 August 1849 8, Place de la Palud

Dear Schabelitz,

I am most obliged to you for promptly forwarding a letter to me. Since I cannot have my letters sent direct and knew of no other address, I was compelled to put you to this trouble. You

[^1]: First published in: Marx and Engels. Printed according to the original Works, First Russian Edition, Vol. XXV. Published in English in full for

[^2]: IN BASLE

[^3]: a F. Engels, The Campaign for the German Imperial Constitution. - b Max Joseph Becker - c second-rate luminaries (literally: gods of minor peoples)





**[p. 215]**

may be receiving one or two more for me and would, perhaps, be kind enough to send these on to me also.

I am at present stuck in Lausanne where I am writing my reminiscences of the farcical Palatinate-Baden revolution.3 You know me too well to credit me with political participation in this affair which was lost before it began. In Karlsruhe and Kaisers- lautern I poked quiet fun at the provisional government's blunders and lack of resolution, I refused all posts, and it was not until the Prussians arrived that I joined Willich at Offenbach and took part in the campaign as his adjutant. Now at headquarters, now in the face of the enemy, the whole time in correspon- dence with the High Command, in constant touch with d'Ester, who, as 'red camarilla', was spurring on the government, in various engagements and, finally, at the battle of Rastatt,265 I had the opportunity of seeing a great deal and learning a great deal. As you know, I am sufficiently critical not to share the illusions of the run-of-the-mill, vociferous republicans and to detect the desponden- cy lurking beneath the bravado of the leaders.

As befits the Neue Rheinische Zeitung, the thing will take a view of the affair different from that of other prospective accounts. It will disclose many a shabby trick and, in particular, will contain much that is new concerning the goings-on in the Palatinate, about which hitherto virtually nothing has been known. It won't be big—about 4-6 sheets.

Up till now I have not had leisure enough to look round for a publisher. I would not care to send the manuscript to Germany, there is a danger of its being intercepted in the post. Since I am largely unfamiliar with the book trade in Switzerland, I thought I would write and ask you whether your old manb might be the kind of publisher who would accept such work and—NB—pay for it, for I need money, il faut que l'on vive? That the thing will be pleasant to read goes without saying, and my name is guarantee enough that it will be bought in Germany (it won't be liable to confiscation, le sujet n'y prête pasd). If, then, your worthy papa is prepared to do business, I shall rely on you, if not, it can't be helped. In that case you will not, at any rate, refuse to advise me about other possible German publishers, since I am very much in the dark in regard to the German book trade as well.

[^1]: a F. Engels, The Campaign for the German Imperial Constitution. - b Jacob Christian Schabelitz - c one has to live - d the subject doesn't lend itself thereto



