---
Volume: 38
Document_Title: "98. Marx to Ferdinand Freiligrath. 5 September "
Page_Range: "253-254"
---

# 98. Marx to Ferdinand Freiligrath. 5 September 

Write and tell me about this if possible by return. Best regards

from your

F. Engels

First published in: Marx and Engels, Printed according to the original Works, First Russian Edition, Vol. XXV, Moscow 1934 Published in English for the first time

98

MARX TO FERDINAND FREILIGRATH43

IN COLOGNE

London, 5 September [1849]

Dear Freiligrath, Address: Karl Blind, 18 Roberts Street, Peterson's Coffeehouse, Grosvenor Square; therein the letter to me under cover.

I can only write a word or two since I have had a kind of cholerine for the past 4-5 days and feel dreadfully listless.

My wife has written and asked me to acknowledge receipt of your letter enclosing 100 fr. Just imagine what blackguards the Paris police are; they have even been harassing my wife and it was only with difficulty that she succeeded in obtaining permission to remain in Paris until 15 September. We had rented our lodgings there up to that date.

I am now in a really difficult situation. My wife is in an advanced state of pregnancy,3 she is obliged to leave Paris on the 15th and I don't know how I am to raise the money for her journey and for settling her in here.289

On the other hand there are excellent prospects of my being able to start a monthly reviewb here; but I am pressed for time and the first weeks constitute the real difficulty.

Lassalle seems to have been offended by my letter to you and another I wrote to him.c This was certainly very far from my

[^1]: a See this volume, p. 220. - b Neue Rheinische Zeitung. Politisch-ökonomische Revue - c See this volume, p. 204.



