---
Volume: 38
Document_Title: "99. Engels to George Julian Harney. 5 October "
Page_Range: "254-255"
---

# 99. Engels to George Julian Harney. 5 October 



**[p. 217]**

intention, and I should already have written to him, if my present condition did not make letter-writing a real burden to me.

Once I am more or less on my feet again I shall write to you in greater detail about politics. I look forward to a few lines from you soon. Best regards to your wife,a Daniels, etc.

Your

K. Marx

First published in: Fr. Mehring, 'Freilig- Printed according to the original rath und Marx in ihrem Briefwechsel',

Die Neue Zeit, Ergänzungsheft, No. 12, 12 April 1912, Stuttgart

99

ENGELS TO GEORGE JULIAN HARNEY290

IN LONDON

My dear Harney,

You will have got the few lines I sent you through Colonel Willich.291 This is to inform you, and by you Marx, that I am this morning arrived here in Genova, and that, wind and weather favourable, I am going under sail for London to-morrow morning on board the English schooner Cornish Diamond, Capt-n Stevens. My journey will be of about 4 or 5 weeks so that by the middle of November I shall be in London.

I am very happy to have found so soon an opportunity of leaving this damned police atmosphere—indeed I never saw it so organised as here in Piedmont.

Ever truly thine

F. Engels

[^1]: Genova,b 5 October 1849

[^2]: First published in: Marx and Engels, Reproduced from the original Works, First Russian Edition, Vol. XXV, Moscow, 1934

[^3]: a Ida - h Genoa

[^4]: 9-1543



