---
Volume: 38
Document_Title: "101. Marx to Joseph Weydemeyer. 19 December "
Page_Range: "255-258"
---

# 101. Marx to Joseph Weydemeyer. 19 December 



**[p. 100]**

MARX TO LOUIS BAUER

IN LONDON

[Draft J

London, 30 November [1849]

Sir,

In view of the inimical relations now obtaining between the two societies to' which we belong—in view of your direct attacks upon the refugee committee here,292 at any rate upon my friends and colleagues in the same—we must break off social relations if we are not mutually to expose ourselves to equivocal interpretations. Yesterday evening I thought it unseemly, in the presence of my wife, to express my views on this collision.

While expressing my utmost obligation to you for your medical assistance, I would beg you to send me your account.

Yours truly

Dr K. Marx

101

London, 19 December [1849] 4 Anderson Street, Kings Road, Chelsea

Dear Weydemeyer,

An unconscionable time has elapsed since I last wrote to you. Civil vexations of every kind, all manner of business and, finally, the general difficulty I have in bringing myself to write a letter, will explain to you my long silence. I have at last, post tot discrimina

[^1]: First published in: Marx and Engels, Printed according to the original Works, First Russian Edition, Vol. XXV, Moscow 1934 Published in English for the first time

[^2]: MARX TO JOSEPH WEYDEMEYER293

[^3]: IN FRANKFURT AM MAIN



rerum? succeeded in giving reality to my Revue? that is to say, I have a printer and a distributor in Hamburg.0 Otherwise we do everything at our own expense. The worst of it is that in Germany so much time is always lost before one can get to the point of publication. I have little dqubt that by the time 3, or maybe 2, monthly issues have appeared, a world conflagration will intervene and the opportunity of temporarily finishing with political economy will be gone.294

As you live in the heart of Germany and hence are more familiar with the details than we are, you might perhaps find time to describe, for our Revue, briefly and concisely in a few main features, the present condition of South Germany and everything connected with it.295

I would further request you to insert the following announce- ment in your paperd but not until you have seen the announce- ment in the Kölnische Zeitung for which the bookseller in Hamburg will be responsible. Perhaps you could send a copy to Westphalia. For you will see from the announcement that, besides our circulation through the book trade, we want to establish another by asking our party comrades to draw up subscription lists and send them to us here. For the time being we shall have to keep the price fairly high and the number of sheets low. Should our resources increase as a result of a wider circulation, this defect will be remedied.

Willich sends you his regards, and likewise Engels, red Wolf F and Weerth.

Here in England the most important movement is probably taking place at this moment. On the one hand, protectionist agitation supported by the fanaticised rural population—the consequences of the free CORN TRADE are now beginning to be felt in the form I predicted years agof—on the other, the Free Traders who, as FINANCIAL AND PARLIAMENTARY REFORMERS,284 are extending the wider political and economic logic of their system to home affairs and, as PEACE PARTY,269 to foreign affairs; finally, the Chartists who, while acting in concert with the

[^1]: What do you think of the row between Proudhon, Blanc and Pierre Leroux?296

[^2]: a after so many vicissitudes (Virgil, Aeneid, I) - b Neue Rheinische Zeitung. Politisch- ökonomische Revue - c J. E. M. Köhler and J. Schuberth - d K. Marx and F. Engels, 'Announcement of the Neue Rheinische Zeitung. Politisch-ökonomische Revue' was published in the Neue Deutsche Zeitung (edited by Weydemeyer), Nos. 14, 23 and 31, 16 and 26 January and 5 February 1850. - e Ferdinand Wolff - * K. Marx, 'Speech on the Question of Free Trade'.

[^3]: 9*



bourgeoisie against the aristocracy, have at the same time resumed with increased vigour their own party activity against the bourgeois.297 The conflict between these parties will be tremendous and the outward form of agitation will become more tempestuous- ly revolutionary if, as I hope—and not without good reason—the Tories come to power in place of the Whigs. Another événement," as yet imperceptible on the Continent, is the mighty industrial, agricultural and commercial crisis now looming up. Were the Continent to postpone its revolution until after the onset of this crisis, England might from the start have to be an ally, albeit an unpopular one, of the revolutionary Continent. An earlier outbreak of revolution—unless directly motivated by Russian intervention—would in my view be a malheurh since at this particular time, with trade still en ascendant? the mass of the workers in France, Germany, etc., as well as the entire strata of tradesmen, etc., though perhaps revolutionary in words, are certainly not so en réalité.6

You know that my wife has made the world richer by one citizene? She sends her warm regards to you and your wife/ My best regards to the latter also.

Write soon.

Your

K. Marx

Apropos, can you find out Citizen Hentze's address for me? You will have seen friend Heinzen's inane bragging in the newspapers.8 This fellow, who was done for by the revolution in Germany—before that his things enjoyed a certain vogue parce que le petit bourgeois et le commis-voyageur s'amusèrent à lire imprimées en pleins caractères les bêtises et les rodomontades qu'ils débitaient eux-mêmes mystérieusement chez le marchand de vin entre le fromage et le biscuit?1—is endeavouring to rehabilitate himself by compromising the other refugees in Switzerland and England—those who have really worked—in the eyes of those countries' governments,298 by

[^1]: a event - b misfortune - c on the up and up - d in reality - e Heinrich Guido (Fawksy) - f Louise - % K. Heinzen, 'Lehren der Revolution', Deutsche Londoner Zeitung, Nos. 241 and 242, 9 and 16 November 1849. - h because the petty bourgeois and the commercial traveller liked to see printed in black and white the idiocies and rodomontades they themselves served mysteriously between the cheese and the biscuits at the wine-shop.



