---
Volume: 38
Document_Title: "1850"
Page_Range: "260-294"
---

# 1850



**[p. 1850]**

103

MARX TO EDUARD von MÜLLER-TELLERING

IN LONDON

[Copy]

[London,] 1 January 1850

Dear Teilering,

Engels, Seiler, Weerth, Willich and I shall not be appearing at the meeting arranged for 3 January,301 for the following reasons amongst others:

1. The list of political refugees invited has been arbitrarily compiled. Thus, for example, C. Schramm and F. Wolff are not included.

2. Not one of the workers, who for years have been in the vanguard of German democracy in London, has been invited.

Your

K. Marx

[^1]: First published in: Marx and Engels,

[^2]: Works, First Russian Edition, Vol. XXV, Moscow, 1934

[^3]: Printed according to a copy by Engels

[^4]: Published in English for the first time





**[p. 104]**

MARX TO JOSEPH WEYDEMEYER "

IN FRANKFURT AM MAIN

London, 8 January 1850

Dear Weydemeyer,

I [enclose] the pawn-ticket herewith. Would you be so kind as to renew it and to deduct the cost [from the] subscriptions.b Kindest regards to your wifec from mine, likewise to yourself.

K. Marx

First published in: Marx and Engels, Printed according to the original Works, Second Russian Edition, Vol. 27, Moscow 1962 Published in English for the first time

105

MARX TO FERDINAND FREILIGRATH

London, 11 January [1850]

Dear Freiligrath,

Today I am writing you just a couple of lines on an urgent matter.

Both for our Revue and for its gradual transformation into a fortnightly and weekly and, if circumstances permit, back into a daily newspaper—and also for our other propagandist interests— we need money. Money is to be had only in America, where all the semi-revolutionaries—e.g. a certain Anneke who did an ignomini- ous bunk in the Palatinate, thereby proving that he's not even a soldier—are now plucking the golden apples.

[^1]: IN COLOGNE

[^2]: a This is a postscript by Marx to Conrad Schramm's letter to Joseph Weydemeyer of 8 January 1850 (see this volume, p. 548-50). - b To the Neue Rheinische Zeitung. Politisch-ökonomische Revue. - c Louise



We have therefore decided to send C. Schramm to America forthwith, as our emissary. For the lengthy journey we have in mind we need at least 150 talers. While requesting you to collect contributions to that end with the utmost possible dispatch, we would at the same time request you to send by return letters of introduction for C. Schramm, manager of the N.Rh.Z. (restored to our party as a result of his daring escape from the Wesel fortress).

I have also written to G. Jung about the money matter.302

Awaiting an early reply.

Your

K. Marx

The Chartists and French réfugiés here are also giving mandates to our emissary.

This is a League3 matter.

It is essential, my dear Freiligrath, that in your letter of introduction, you leave no doubt about the position of the N.Rh.Z. in Germany and its revolutionär significance.

First published in: Marx and Engels, Printed according to the original Works, First Russian Edition, Vol. XXV, Moscow. 1934 Published in English for the first time

106

MARX TO JOSEPH WEYDEMEYER

London, 4 February 1850

Dear Weydemeyer,

The reason for your getting such a late reply to your letter is that I was seriously ill for a fortnight.

The Revue will be appearing next week. Your article will be in it. We are awaiting the continuation.295

The publication of the periodical was delayed through my illness. Actually we had arranged it so that two issues should

[^1]: IN FRANKFURT AM MAIN

[^2]: a the Communist League





**[p. 226]**

appear simultaneously but the publisher3 was opposed to this out of commercial considerations which we thought correct. So a further change was necessary and this happened to coincide with my unlucky illness.

You will receive 100 copies from Cologne. Please send two of them to C. Biringer in Höchst near Frankfurt. He ordered them from here. You will probably undertake to get payment for them.

I have passed on your message to Teilering. The fellow is quite unsuited to be an English correspondent. In Vienna it was alright for him to bluster. Here you have to study matters. More another time.

Your

K. Marx

Best regards to your wifeb from my wife and self. In Hamburg about 1,500 copies have already been ordered.

First published in: Marx and Engels, Printed according to the original Works, First Russian Edition, Vol. XXV, Moscow 1934 Published in English for the first time

107

MARX TO LOUIS BAUER

[London,] 5 February [1850] 20 Queen's Road

I am only now answering your letter of 30 January because I am not inclined to let you prescribe 'time limits' for what I do. In reply to your letter the following:

1. When Schramm wrote that my debt to you was not yet 'due', it only meant that one cannot be sued for a SURGEON'S bills until six months have elapsed, certainly not that the debt does not exist.

2. Far from having conceded to Mr Heidemann that your bill was not 'too steep', I told him the contrary, as he himself admitted

[^1]: IN LONDON

[^2]: [Rough copy]

[^3]: a Julius Schuberth - b Louise



on 22 January in the letter to my wife. Nevertheless I informed him that I was willing to pay. As I told him, I hoped that by January I should be in possession of the necessary amount although I could not guarantee this. The impertinence of Mr Heidemann in sending a woman a demand for payment under a black seal, which she mistook for the announcement of a death, moved me to have him informed in writing that I wished to have no further contact with him.

3. As to your bill, I now insist that you itemize it. I fail to understand how you could have disbursed £1 on my behalf. You travelled out to me in Chelsea at my express request on only three occasions, once by cab. As to the confinement,3 accoucheurs over here (except in the case of the bourgeois) charge for 9 days—while you attended my wife on only 4 days out of the 9, as Willich can testify—one GUINEA. Where, then, do you get £4.10 from? By the way, I am told that, immediately upon receipt of my letter,b you held a confabulation with Heidemann and decided 'to fleece' me. So first of all an itemized bill, which I shall then pay.

K. Marx

108

ENGELS TO EDUARD von MÜLLER-TELLERING

[London, 7 February 1850] Thursday morning

Dear Tellering,

Your note303 arrived so late that, even with the best will in the world, it would have been difficult to get you a ticket for today's ball. Since moreover you have failed, even though accepted by the society as a member, either to take out your card or to attend any

[^1]: First published in: Marx and Engels, Printed according to the original Works, Second Russian Edition, Vol. 50, , , . , , . ^ ,-, , , r- Moscow, 1981 Published in English for the first time

[^2]: IN LONDON

[^3]: [Copy]

[^4]: a for the birth of Heinrich Guido - b See this volume, p. 218.





**[p. 228]**

Tout à vous*

Engels

First published in: Tellering, Vorge- Printed according to a copy by schmack in die künftige deutsche Diktatur Tellering von Marx und Engels, Cologne, 1850

Published in English for the first time

109

ENGELS TO JULIUS SCHUBERTH

IN HAMBURG

AND THEODOR HAGEN AND STEPHAN

ADOLPH NAUT

[London,] 4 March 1850

1. Schuberth. Letter answered. The 2nd issueb must, as promised, not cost more than the first. As regards the 450 copies, no change can now be made for the first quarter. For the 2nd he should put forward proposals. The arrangement for Köhler's payment has nothing to do with this.

What Schuberth says about success contradicts his earlier information and our reports.

In future nothing to be set aside without asking us. For the 3rd issue 'To Die for the Republic'c can stand.

2. Hagen. Same as Schuberth. Should organise proper supervi- sion of the printer" and also obtain from the latter a certificate re

[^1]: IN COLOGNE

[^2]: [Draft]

[^3]: 50 copies to be sent here. The correspondence from South Germanyd no longer to be used.295

[^4]: d Yours ever - b Neue Rheinische Zeitung. Politisch-ökonomische Revue. - c F. Engels,

[^5]: The Campaign, for the German Imperial Constitution, IV. - d by Joseph Weydemeyer - e H. G. Voigt



number of copies.304 The correspondence from South Germany no longer to be used.

He should vigorously oppose the censor's presumption and place his name on the title page as the responsible editor.305

Should section IV of The Campaign for the German Imperial Constitution create difficulties, this should be reported at once.

3. Naut. Terms for printer—price as in Hamburg; for Eisen: 25 per cent for Cologne, 50 per cent for all other copies, incl. all expenses, excepting, perhaps, postage from London and advertise- ments ordered by us.

The printer must deliver 5 sheets in 10 days and fix penalty for breach of contract.

First published in: Marx and Engels, Printed according to the original Works, First Russian Edition, Vol. XXV, Moscow 1934 Published in English for the first time

110

MARX TO EDUARD von MÜLLER-TELLERING43

London, 12 March 1850

For the letter you wrote yesterday to the Workers' Society, I would send you a challenge, were you still capable of giving satisfaction after your disgraceful calumnies against Engels and after the well-founded sentence of expulsion pronounced by the Workers' Society executive committee.306 I await you on a different field to strip you of the hypocritical mask of revolutionary fanaticism behind which you have so far skilfully contrived to hide your petty interests, your envy, your unassuaged vanity and your angry discontent over the world's lack of appreciation for your great genius—a lack of appreciation that began with your failure to pass your examination.

Had you reflected a little, you would have been obliged to assume that if, as a witness, I was compelled to report a fact detrimental to yourself, I for my part would do everything in my power to avoid a scandal which must doubly compromise me: in the eyes of the Workers' Society, to which you were recommended

[^1]: IN LONDON

[^2]: [Rough copy]





**[p. 230]**

by me, and in the eyes of the public, for whom you exist only in as much as you were a contributor to my newspaper.3

Your letters to me, and they are available for publication, prove that you did all you could to foist upon me the role of 'democratic Dalai Lama and incumbent of the future'. What proof have you that I ever accepted that absurd role? The only thing you could reproach me with is that I did not immediately break with you or denounce you to the others after the Klapka affair, on the compromising nature of which I forthwith bluntly expressed my views to you in the presence of witnesses.307 I admit my weakness. Only Becker'sb statement that, 4 weeks prior to the appearance of your glib pamphlet attacking the Westdeutsche Zeitung," you again offered to collaborate on that paper, a statement supported by the testimony of Freiligrath and Hagen, only your wholly unsubstantiated calumnies against Engels convinced me that what I had regarded as an isolated instance of precipitancy was the connecting link of an entire system. It was, by the way, wise of you not after all to appear yesterday at the final appointment which Willich had yet again arranged for you at your request. You knew what was to be expected from a confrontation with me.

K. Marx

111

MARX TO JOSEPH WEYDEMEYER

London, 9 April [1850J 4 Anderson Street, King's Road, Chelsea

Dear Weydemeyer,

I should be greatly obliged if you would write and tell me 631 return how the sales of the N.Rh.Z.d are going and whether we

[^1]: First published in: Marx and Engels, Printed according to the original Works, First Russian Edition, Vol. XXV, Moscow, 1934

[^2]: IN FRANKFURT AM MAIN

[^3]: a Neue Rheinische Zeitung - b Hermann Becker - c E. Teilering, Westdeutscher Zeitungsjammer - d Neue Rheinische Zeitung. Politisch-ökonomische Revue



may not soon receive some money. You people in little Germany have no conception of what things are like here.

The 3rd issue is coming out on the 10th of this month. The chap in Hamburg3—why, we don't yet really know—has been frightfully dilatory over the thing. This will now be put a stop to.

I have also been requested by the Refugee Committee to appeal to your committee.308 We now have 60 refugees on our hands; several hundred, who have been expelled from Switzerland, have already been announced. Hence our refugee fund will soon be down to its last monaco,h and then the people will be out on the street again.

Warm regards to your wife,

Your

K. Marx

First published in Die Geselbchaft, Jg. VII, Printed according to the original Bd. 2, Berlin, 1930

Published in English for the first time

112

ENGELS T O JULIUS SCHUBERTH

[London, about 11 April 1850]

Attention Schuberth

1. Following dispatch of the 3rd issue,0 we now await at the earliest possible date the statement concerning the sales of the 3 issues and an adjustment of the balance, and if this cannot be done before 15 April, he is to write and tell us. But at all events, to advise by return how many copies of the 3rd issue have been run off and what proportion of these are against firm orders. Only a few hundred in excess of firm orders are to be run off.

2. Since Schuberth does not consider it necessary for Mr Hagen

[^1]: IN HAMBURG

[^2]: [Draft]

[^3]: a Julius Schuberth - b a small copper coin current in the Principality of Monaco - c Neue Rheinische Zeitung. Politisch-ökonomische Revue



to act as responsible editor, he is in no circumstances to alter a single word of the manuscript. We hereby inform him that, should this none the less occur, we must forthwith sever our connection with him. Hagen is instructed to ensure that nothing is altered.

3. Since, contrary to our instructions, Schuberth sent Naut 300 copies instead of 450, Naut is to take such copies as he needs from the 150 which Schuberth sent to Eisen. We further expect that the dispatch of copies to Naut will, in future, always be made at the same time as those to Eisen. Should we receive further complaints, we shall have to take other measures. Similarly we expect that in future the 50 copies for London will be dispatched by the first steamer after the issue is ready.

(A letter to be written to Hagen and enclosed with Schuberth's.)

First published in: Marx and Engels, Printed according to the original Works, First Russian Edition, Vol. XXV, Moscow 1934 Published in English for the first time

113

ENGELS TO JOSEPH WEYDEMEYER

London, 22 April 1850 6 Macclesfield Street, Soho

Dear Weydemeyer,

Could you insert the statement overleaf3 in the Neue Deutsche Zeitung. The attempts of the 'great men' here to regain a position for themselves at the expense of the refugees, and their attempted manoeuvrings to that end in the press at large, are discouraging people from sending money here.309 We have now received and distributed some £120-130 for the refugees, and the others have raised summa summarum0 £2.15 s., and now they are trying to make themselves out to be the champions of the 'helpless' refugees. Unless we get some money now, our 50-60 refugees will, within a week, be out on the street and without a penny. This

[^1]: IN FRANKFURT AM MAIN

[^2]: '" K. Marx and F. Engels, 'Statement. 20 April 1850'. - b all in all





**[p. 233]**

evening the bigwigs intend to hold a refugee meeting to see what they can devise. We'll leave them to it. Naturally there will again be big words and vast schemes, but no money for the refugees. Anyway, they're likely to fail, even though none of us will be going.

Marx is waiting anxiously for your reply to his last letter, which went off to you about a fortnight ago.3

Best regards to your wifeb and to Lüning's also from

Your

F. Engels

First published in Die Gesellschaft, Jg. VII, Printed according to the original Bd. 2, Berlin, 1930

Published in English for the first time

114

ENGELS TO JOSEPH WEYDEMEYER310

London, 25 April 1850

Dear Weydemeyer,

Your letter to Marx arrived today, together with £5 for the refugee fund and an enclosure for me. You will meanwhile have received two lettersc containing the Refugee Committee's state- ments, its appeal, and its record of accounts.0 Get these printed as quickly as possible and do whatever you can in the vicinity to collect funds for the refugees. How things are in general, you will see from the enclosed letter to Dronke.31' Perhaps something could be raised in Franconia, Nuremberg, Bayreuth, etc., etc. The N.Rh.Ztg. has a very large circulation there. If you have an address in Munich, write there likewise. You will realise that now, when those jackasses, Struve and Company, are trying, on the eve

[^1]: IN FRANKFURT AM MAIN

[^2]: •' See this volume, pp. 230-31. - b Louise - c See this volume, p. 232 (the second letter has not survived). - d K. Marx and F. Engels, 'Statement. 20 April 1850'; Accounts of the Social-Democratic Refugee Committee in London. 23 April 1850; and the appeal may be the Appeal for Support for German Political Refugees. 20 September 1849.



of the revolution, to make use of the refugees to get their names into the papers again, it becomes a matter of honour for us to go on supporting at least our own refugees, and not to let the best of the new arrivals fall in their turn into the clutches of those jackasses.

We believed that the two following issues of the Revue had been in your hands, the 2nd for 5 weeks, and the 3rd for several days at the least. So that jackass, Naut, never sent them to you! A rude letter has already gone off to him today, telling him to send them to you forthwith.312 He must have had the 3rd issue for a week. But wait till you've also got the 3rd issue, which brings the first series of articles3 to a definitive close, before writing a critique of it.

Adieu, your

F. E.

We have just heard that those wretches, Struve, Tellering, Schramm, Bauerb (of Stolpe), etc., etc., have put it about in sundry German papers that our committee0 is itself swallowing up the refugee funds. This infamy is also being spread by letter. You cannot have read of it anywhere, otherwise you would have entered the lists long ago on our behalf. You know that the re- volution has cost all of us money and has never brought us in a centime. Not even the Neue Preussische Zeitung, etc., have ever dared to reproach us with such things. The rotten democrats, the impotent 'great men' of the petty bourgeoisie, alone were vicious enough to stoop to such baseness. Our committee has now rendered accounts on 3 occasions,"1 on each of which the donors were invited [to appoint] representatives to verify the books and receipts. What other committee has done that much? A receipt is to hand for every centime. Not one committee member has ever received a centime from the funds, nor would he ever ask for one, however much he was down on his luck. Not one of our best friends has ever received more than the least of the refugees;

[^1]: a F. Engels, The Campaign for the German Imperial Constitution. - b Rudolf Schramm, Louis Bauer - r the Social-Democratic Refugee Committee - d Accounts of the Committee of Support for German Refugees in London. 3 December 1849; Accounts of the Social-Democratic Refugee Committee in London. Beginning of March 1850; Accounts of the Social-Democratic Refugee Committee in London. 23 April 1850.



no one who had a source of income received so much as a sou. If Dronke is no longer there, open his letter, read it, and send it on to him.

First published in Die Gesellschaft, Jg. VII, Printed according to the original Bd. 2, Berlin, 1930

115

ENGELS AND MARX TO FRANÇOIS PARDIGON

IN LONDON

[Rough copy]

London, 6 May 1850

Dear Pardigon,

We have just this minute heard that it is intended to submit your programme on behalf of your society to the German Society in Greek Street and to ask them whether or not they will give it their support.313

After our conversation on Saturday,3 we don't believe it; but if you or your society were to denounce an individual or a number of different individuals to us as a mere bad lot, we should simply show them the door without asking whether they were willing to adhere to our programme.

We have denounced the ringleaders of this society to you as charlatans and swindlers. Swindlers and charlatans will sign anything. They would probably have signed our manifesto had we been prepared to accept their repeated proposals of union and concord.

It will be clear to you that, were a similar proposal to be adopted by your society, we should be honour bound to sever forthwith all connections with the members of Rathbone Place.

Greeting and Fraternity

F. Engels K. Marx

[^1]: Printed according to the original

[^2]: Translated from the French

[^3]: Published in English for the first time

[^4]: a 1 May 1850

[^5]: First published in: Marx and Engels,

[^6]: Works, First Russian Edition, Vol. XXV, Moscow, 1934





**[p. 116]**

ENGELS TO THEODOR SCHUSTER

IN FRANKFURT AM MAIN

London, 13 May 1850

Mr Th. Schuster in Frankfurt a. M.

Through Mr Weydemeyer of that city we have received for the account of the Refugee Committee there308 £10.0s.0d. n/ca on Mr Stiebel here, of receipt and due entry of which we herewith gratefully advise you.

Should it be possible to send us further donations from there or the vicinity for the refugees here, we should be most grateful to you. The number of refugees grows daily, and the above £10 is barely sufficient to meet the most pressing day-to-day require- ments for a week. Funds are beginning to come in less plentifully, while on the other hand the refugees now in need of assistance almost exclusively belong to occupations offering little if any prospect of employment here.

Greeting and Fraternity

The Social-Democratic Refugee Committee F[oreign] Department]

F. Engels Secretary

It is requested that all donations be sent through Mr Weydemeyer to Mr Marx or Mr C. Pfänder, 21 King Street, Soho Square, London.

[^1]: First published in Die Gesellschaft, Jg. VII, Bd. 2, Berlin, 1930

[^2]: Printed according to the original

[^3]: Published in English for the first time

[^4]: 3 not specified





**[p. 117]**

MARX TO JOSEPH WEYDEMEYER

IN FRANKFURT AM MAIN

[London,] 8 June a [1850] 64 Dean Street, Soho

Dear Weydemeyer,

How are things with our Revue} The money, especially? The question is becoming all the more urgent as the Prussians are making every effort to induce the British Government to expel me from England too.314 Were I not stuck here sans le soub I should already have withdrawn into the heart of England and the Government would have lost sight of me.

How are things with the 'red issue'c?262 We have orders for it from America. How much of it has been sold? How many copies have you left?

Your paperd seems to have joined the rest to form a conspiration du silence in regard to our Revue. However, I realise that, to the readers of the Neue Deutsche Zeitung, Raveaux must be more interesting.

Your

K. M.

[London, 25 June 1850]

[] the Cologne people, including Daniels, were as usual much taken up with being wise after the event []

[^1]: Regards to Dronke and to your wife.e

[^2]: First published in Die Gesellschaft, Jg. VII, Printed according to the original Bd. 2, Berlin, 1930 , . , „ Published in English for the first

[^3]: time

[^4]: 118 MARX TO HEINRICH BÜRGERS315

[^5]: IN COLOGNE

[^6]: a A slip of the pen in the original: May. - b without a penny - c Neue Rheinische Zeitung, No. 301, 19 May 1849. - d Neue Deutsche Zeitung- <•' Louise





**[p. 238]**

[] Like any other place Cologne can, if it so wishes, declare itself a Centre of any kind. Indeed it would conform better than any other place to Spinoza's dictum whereby the periphery coincides with the centre [•••]"

Published for the first time Printed according to Daniels' letter to Marx of 28 June 1850 and that of the Cologne leading district to the Communist League Central Authority of 10 July 1850

119

MARX TO JOSEPH WEYDEMEYER316

Dear Weydemeyer,

and our situation here is so extraordinarily wretched that an outburst of impatience is excusable.

Lüning's critique—I have seen 1 and 2e—shows that he doesn't understand what lie is trying to criticise. Maybe I shall explain a few things to him in our Revue.S17

This is an important day. There is a possibility that today the Ministry may fall.318 Then a truly revolutionary movement will get

[^1]: IN FRANKFURT AM MAIN

[^2]: London, 27 June b [1850] 64 Dean Street, Soho Square

[^3]: Send the money to Naut. The fellow's not a bad old jackass. I shall explain the matter to you some other time. Pray do not be offended by my wife's agitated letters.c She is nursing her child,d

[^4]: a Marx may have had in mind Spinoza's letter to Walter Tschirnhaus of January 1673. - b A slip of the pen in the original: July. - c See this volume, pp. 555, 559. d Heinrich Guido - e O. Lüning's review of the Neue Rheinische Zeitung. Politisch- ökonomische Revue in the Neue Deutsche Zeitung, Nos. 148 and 149, 22 and 23 June 1850. The end of the review was published in Nos. 150 and 151, 25 and 26 June.





**[p. 239]**

under way here. We ourselves may be the Tories' first victims. Then our long-intended expulsion might actually come about.

Your

K. Marx

First published in: Marx and Engels, Printed according to the original Works, First Russian Edition, Vol. XXV, . . Moscow 1934 Published in English in full for the first time

120

MARX TO KARL BLIND

IN PARIS

[Rough copy]

London, 17 July 1850 64 Dean Street, Soho

Dear Blind,

Our long silence was due to a misunderstanding. For we believed that the Central Authority's second circular3 had been brought you 6 weeks or 2 months ago [by] our emissary, Klein, and we were waiting for your answer. [Now] it transpires that Klein has [brought] back nothing of the kind to Brussels.

Write to me as soon as possible and in a special enclosure to the [Central Authority], We are thinking of convening a congress here in a few (8) weeks' time.319 What do you [make] of the Holstein business?320 We shall shortly be dispatching an emissary [who] worked there for two years and knows [exactly] who is who and what is what.b

Concerning my own fortunes and the manifold vicissitudes which I [] in, some other time.

I am approaching you this time about a private matter [], that, if at all possible, you will not refuse me your assistance. I had arranged with my family that I would settle my financial affairs with my uncle Philips in Holland [] weeks, [for which] purpose I was to visit Holland in person. An [] illness of my wife constantly

[^1]: a K. Marx and F. Engels, 'Address of the Central Authority to the League, June 1850'. - b This seems to refer to C. Schramm.



rendered my departure impossible. And now I shall not be able to go there for several weeks, because two of my uncle's daughters are being married, one after the other, from his house, so th[at] business matters cannot be settled till several weeks later.

With this affair in mind, I meanwhile drew a bill for £20 (500 fr.) with a [merchant] firm3 here in London on the strength of this arrangement. The bill matures on Monday or Wednesday.b If I were unable to pay it, I would lay myself open to a public [] which, given the present state of the parties here, and [my] relations with the Prussian Embassy and the English Ministry, [could] have most disagreeable consequences.

Now I hear that Goegg in Paris has a considerable amount of capital available just now. Would you write to him immediately, explaining the circumstances to him and inquiring whether he could advance me the money on a promissory note or a bill. Periculum in mora.c

Pending the arrangement in Holland I am, in the literal sense of the word, dépourvu? save for my last shilling.

I rely on you to do your utmost.

Your

K. Marx

121

London, 29 October 1850 64 Dean Street, Soho

Dear Weydemeyer,

I beg you to carry out the following transaction for me: Borrow from Schuster or somebody else the money necessary to redeem my silver from the Frankfurt pawnbroker's,321 then sell the

[^1]: First published in German in International Printed according to the original Review for Social History, Vol. IV, Leiden, jggg Published in English for the first time

[^2]: MARX TO JOSEPH WEYDEMEYER43

[^3]: IN FRANKFURT AM MAIN

[^4]: a Probably a firm headed by Simon Bamberger. - b i. e. 19 or 21 July - c Delay spells danger (Titus Livius, ab urbe condita libri). - d destitute





**[p. 241]**

silver to a goldsmith or wherever it can be sold in Frankfurt, repay the man who loaned you the money for redeeming the silver, and send the balance to me here.

Neither you nor the other man will be incurring any risk for, should you not be able to sell the stuff at a higher price, all you have to do is take it back to the pawnbroker's.

On the other hand my present circumstances are such that I must at all costs raise some money, even to be able to continue working.

The only items I would ask you to return to the pawnbroker's, since they have no saleable value, are 1) a small silver mug, 2) a silver plate, 3) a small knife and fork in a case—all belonging to little Jenny.3

I very much approve of your plan for a popular work on political economy and only hope that you will soon make a start on it.322 Warm regards to your wifeb from my wife and self.

Your

K. Marx

First published in: Marx and Engels, Printed according to the original Works, First Russian Edition, Vol. XXV, Moscow, 1934

122

[London,] 19 November 1850

Dear Engels,

Just a line or two to let you know that our little gunpowder- plotter, Fawksy,324 died at ten o'clock this morning. Suddenly, from one of the convulsions he had often had. A few minutes before, he was still laughing and joking. The thing happened quite unexpectedly. You can imagine what it is like here. Your absence at this particular moment makes us feel very lonely.

[^1]: MARX TO ENGELS323

[^2]: IN MANCHESTER

[^3]: a Marx's eldest daughter - b Louise





**[p. 242]**

In my next letter I shall tell you something about Harney from which you will see what an ominous situation he's in.

Your

K. Marx

If you happen to feel so inclined, drop a few lines to my wife. She is quite distracted.

First published in Der Briefwechsel zwischen Printed according to the original F. Engels und K. Marx, Bd. 1, Stuttgart, 1913

123

MARX TO ENGELS

IN MANCHESTER

London, 23 November 1850

Dear Engels,

Your letter did my wife a great deal of good.325 She's in a really dangerous state of excitation and exhaustion. She had nursed the child* herself and had fought for its existence under the most difficult circumstances and at the greatest sacrifice. And on top of this, the thought that the poor child was a victim of bourgeois

misère, although it never wanted for any particular care.

Mr Schrammb is thoroughly beseileredc and is just now at his most loathsome. For two whole days, 19 and 20 November, he never showed his face in our house, then came for a moment and immediately disappeared again after one or two fatuous remarks. He had volunteered to accompany us on the day of the funeral; he arrived a minute or two before the appointed hour, said not a word about the funeral, but told my wife that he had to hurry away so as not to be late for a meal with his brother/ With my wife in such an irritable state, you can imagine how offensive was the conduct of this person, to whom so much friendship has been extended in our house.

[^1]: a Heinrich Guido - b Conrad Schramm - c Marx coins a verb from the name Seiler - d Rudolf Schramm





**[p. 243]**

Jones has explained Harney's true situation to me. He is sous le coup de la justice* The entire contents of his paperb are such as to make it liable to stamp duty.326 The government is merely waiting for its circulation to increase in order to nab him. The proceedings against Dickens have been instituted solely as a precedent in respect of Harney.327 If he is arrested he may, besides the actual sentence, have to serve 20 years through being unable to produce SECURITIES.

Bauerc and Pfänder have won their case.328 Their counsel was Roberts.

Your

K. M.

First published abridged in Der Briefwech- Printed according to the original sei zwischen F. Engels und K. Marx, Bd. 1, Stuttgart, 1913 and in full in MEGA, Published in English for the first Abt. HI, Bd. 1, 1929 t l m e

124

ENGELS T O MARX

[Manchester,] 25 November 1850

Dear Marx,

I am writing today just to tell you that I am unfortunately still not in a position to send you the £2 I promised you for today in my last letter.329 Ermen d has gone away for a few days and, since no proxy has been authorised with the bank, we are unable to make any remittances and have to content ourselves with the lew small payments that happen to come in. The total amount in the cash box is only about £4 and you will therefore realise that I must wait a while. As soon as Ermen returns I shall at once send you the money. I trust the first remittance arrived safely.

[^1]: IN LONDON

[^2]: a threatened with prosecution - b The Red Republican - c Heinrich Bauer - d Peter Ermen





**[p. 1850]**

So the outraged Schramm, to judge by Mr Seiler's begging letter, would seem to be again on the best of terms with his brother0 and even showing him some égardsd\

I hope your wife is feeling better. Warm regards to her and the rest of your family from your

F. E.

In the course of this week I shall send your wife a parcel of COTTON THREAD which I hope she will find to her liking.

[On the back of the letter] Charles Marx Esq. 64 Dean Street. Soho Square. London

125

MARX TO ENGELS

London, 2 December [1850] 64 Dean Street, Soho

Dear Engels,

For several days I have been seriously unwell and hence this letter, together with advice of receipt of the two POST OFFICE ORDERS, will reach you later than I would have wished. I have remitted

[^1]: First published abridged in Der Briefwech- Printed according to the original sei zwischen F. Engels und K. Marx, Bd. 1, Stuttgart, 1913 and in full in MEGA, Published in English for the first Abt. Ill, Bd. 1, 1929 t , m e

[^2]: IN MANCHESTER

[^3]: a Conrad Schramm; see this volume, p. 242. - b The Red Republican, to avoid persecution, in December changed its name to The Friend of the People. - c Rudolf Schramm - d consideration





**[p. 245]**

7/6d to Seiler. As regards the Indépendance* we neither of us owe him anything for the time being, as he opportunely got himself thrown out by his landlord, leaving behind in return for the £10 he owed him nothing but unsold copies of the Indépendance, personal effects to the value of 18 pence, and 2 or 3 books which he had borrowed from myself and others. Truly, he possesses IN A HIGH DEGREE the ability to liquidate, American-fashion, the excess of his expenditure over his revenue.

The great Heilberg has arrived here with a young wife, soi-disan Lb I have not yet had the honour of seeing the legendary Tuck, who has been cast back across the ocean, considerably aggrandised, of course—a dangerous rival for Seiler. He com- pletely monopolises Bamberger, calling him 'little brother', and the old Amschel, 'auntie'.

As yet I have neither seen nor heard anything of our Revue.0 I am negotiating with Cologne about the publication of the quarterly.11

Partly because of ill-health, partly on purpose, I never foregather with the others at the Pulteney Stores330 except on the official days. Since these gentlemen have so extensively debated whether or not this company is ennuyante? I, of course, am leaving them to agree amongst themselves upon the solace to be derived from their discourse. I, however, make myself scarce. As we have both of us experienced, one loses these people's esteem to the same extent that one is liberal with them. Moreover, I'm tired of them and wish to employ my time as productively as possible. Friend Schramm,' who for several weeks has been playing the malcontent and has finally come to the conviction that no one is in the least inclined to place obstacles in the way of the natural course of his emotional ups and downs, is gradually readapting himself to the type of humour compatible with the MODEL-LODGINGAt the Great Windmill considerable annoyance reigns over the loss of £16 as a result of a court ruling.331 Lehmann, in particular, is seething. His rage will not abate until Bauer and Pfänder are publicly branded as thieves and miscreants by every newspaper in Europe. Now, of course, little Bauer maintains with suppressed moral fury that the payment of a single penny, whether to the Great Windmill or to a public poor box, would be an unpardona-

[^1]: HOUSE.

[^2]: a L'Indépendance belge -b so-called - c Neue Rheinische Zeitung. Politisch-ökonomische

[^3]: Revu«, No. 5-6. - d See this volume, pp. 251-52. - e dull - f Conrad Schramm





**[p. 246]**

ble affront to the English courts and 'recognition of the bourgeoisie'.

Meanwhile the great men of Great Windmill Street have experienced a triumph, as the following3 shows:

'Aux démocrates de toutes les nations!

Citoyens! Proscrits Réfugiés en Angleterre et mieux placés par cela même pour juger des mouvements politiques du Continent, nous' (note well! An out-and-out solecism in this single phrase which they have daringly tacked on to subject, copula and predicate, and should in any case read: et ainsi mieux placés que vous autres pour) 'avons pu suivre et surveiller activement toutes les combinaisons des Puissances coalisées se préparant à une nouvelle invasion de la France, où' (very naice!) 'les Cosaques du Nord sont attendus par leurs complices, pour' (yet again attendus pour) 'éteindre dans son foyer même' (the birthplace of Barthélémy and Pottier) 'le volcan de la Révolution Universelle.— Les Rois et les aristocrates de l'Europe ont compris qu'il était temps d'élever des digues pour arrêter la marée populaire' (should read: le marasme populaire) 'qui menace d'engloutir leurs trônes ébranlés.—Des troupes nombreuses levées en Russie, en Autriche, en Prusse, en Bavière, dans le Hanovre, dans le Wurtemberg, en Saxe et enfin dans tous les états de l'Allemagne, sont déjà réunies.' (Des troupes sont déjà réunies!) 'En Italie

130 000 hommes menacent la frontière suisse. Le Vorarlberg est occupé par 80 000 hommes. Le Haut Rhin est couvert par 80 000 hommes, Würtembergeois, Bedois et Prussiens. Le Main est gardé par 80 000 Bavarois et Autrichiens. Tandis que 370 000 hommes occupent les points que nous venons d'indiquer, la Prusse a mobilisé 200 000 soldats qu'elle tient disponible' (sic) 'pour être lancé sur les frontières de la Belgique et de la France: la Hollande et la Belgique, contraintes par les coalitions, soutiendront le mouvement d'invasion avec une armée forte de

[^1]: 150 000 hommes. En Bohême 150 000 hommes se tiennent prêts et n'attendent qu'un ordre pour se réunir à l'armée du Main, qui serait alors forte de 230 000 hommes. Autour de Vienne sont concentrés 80 000 hommes. 300 000 Russes campent en Pologne, et 80 000 dans les environs de St. Petersbourg: ces armées réunies composent une force d'un million trois cents trente mille combattants, qui n'attendent que le signal de l'attaque. Derrière ces troupes se tiennent aussi (!) prêts 180 000 Autrichiens, 200 000 Prussiens, 100 000 hommes fournis par les principautés de l'Allemagne, et 220 000 Russes. Ces armées forment ensemble, comme troupes de réserve 700 000 hommes; sans compter les hordes innombra- bles' (sic) 'de Barbares que l'Attila Moscovite ferait surgir du fond de l'Asie, pour lancer, comme autrefois (!) sur la civilisation Européenne. Des journaux allemands' (here a note is appended with a piffling sentence from the Neue Deutsche Zeitung to put Lüning in a good mood) 'et nos renseignements particuliers nous font connaître les secrètes intentions des Puissances dont les Plénipotentiaires se sont réunis à Varsovie le 25 Octobre dernier.332 Il a été décidé, dans la (!) conférence, qu'une guerre feinte' (My God! what diplomats!) 'entre la Prusse et l'Autriche, servirait de prétexte au mouvement des soldats que la volonté du Czar transforme en instruments aveugles et en sicaires féroces contre les défenseurs de la liberté.' (Bravo!) 'En présence de ces faits, il n'est plus possible de douter: on organise en ce moment le massacre, déjà commencé (!!) de tous les Républicains. Les journées de Juin 1848 avec leurs exécutions sanglantes et les proscriptions que les ont suivies—la Hongrie dévastée

[^2]: •' Published in Le Constitutionnel, 18 December 1850.





**[p. 247]**

et asservie par l'Autriche—l'Italie livrée au Pape et aux Jésuites, après regorge- ment de la République Romaine par les soldats du Gouvernement de la France n'ont point assouvi la rage de nos ennemis: ils rêvent l'asservissement de tous les peuples qui combattent pour le triomphe de la liberté commune. Si la démocratie n'y prend garde, la Pologne, la Hongrie, l'Allemagne, l'Italie et la France seront bientôt encore vouées aux fureurs de la soldatesque sauvage de Nicolas qui, pour exciter les Barbares au combat leur promet la dévastation et le pillage de l'Europe.

Devant ce danger qui nous menace, debout! Debout! Républicains Français, Allemands, Italiens, Polonais, et Hongrois, sortons de cet engourdissement' (Toping Schapper and Willich!) 'qui énerve nos forces et prépare une victoire facile à nos oppresseurs. Debout! Aux jours de repos et de honte du présent, faisons succéder les jours de fatigue et de gloire, que nous prépare la guerre sainte de la liberté! En examinant ces dangers que nous vous signalons, vous comprendrez, comme nous, qu'il y aurait folie d'attendre plus longtemps l'attaque de l'ennemi commun; nous devons tout préparer et aller au devant du péril qui nous environne.' (Just try au devant d'une chose qui vous environne!) 'Citoyens Démocrates Socialistes, notre salut n'est qu'en nous mêmes: nous ne devons compter que sur nos propres efforts; et éclairés des exemples du passé, nous devons nous prémunir contre les trahisons de l'avenir. Évitons, évitons surtout le piège qui nous est tendu par les serpens (!) de la diplomatie. Les émules des Metternich et des Talleyrand méditent en ce moment d'éteindre le flambeau de la Révolution, en suscitant à la France, par l'invasion qu'ils préparent, une guerre nationale dans laquelle les peuples s'égorgeraient au profit des ennemis de leur affranchissement. Non, Citoyens! plus de guerre nationale! Les barrières que les despotes avaient élevées entre les nations qu'ils s'étaient partagées, sont désormais tombées pour nous, et les peuples confondus' (really: confondus) 'n'ont plus qu'un drapeau, sur lequel nous avons écrit avec le sang fécond de nos martyrs: République Universelle Démocratique et Sociale.'

[^1]: Pour Leurs Sociétés: 'Les membres du comité de la société des proscrits Démocrates Socialistes Français à Londres: Adam (Cambreur), Barthélémy (Emmanuel), Caperon (Paulin), Fanon, Goûté, Thierry, Vidil (Jules); les délégués de la commission permanente de la section de la démocratie polonaise à Londres: Sawaszkiewicz, Warskiroski; les membres du comité démocrate socialiste des réfugiés allemands et de la société ouvrière allemande: Dietz (Oswald), Gebert (A.), Mayer (Adolphe), Schärttner (A.), Schapper (Charles), Willich (Auguste). Les délégués de la société démocratique hongroise à Londres: Molikoy, Simonyi. Londres le 16. Novembre 1850.'a333

[^2]: •' 'To the democrats of all nations! Citizens! Proscribed refugees in England who, for that very reason, are in a better position (o judge the political movements on the Continent, we' (note well! An out-and-out solecism in this single phrase which they have daringly tacked on to subject, copula and predicate, and should in any case read: and hence in a better position than the rest of you to) have been able actively to keep track of and observe all the combinations of the coalition powers preparing for a fresh invasion of France, where' (very naice!) 'the Cossacks of the North are awaited by their accomplices to' (yet again 'awaited to') 'extinguish at its very centre' (the birthplace of Barthélémy and Pottier) 'the volcano of the Universal Revolution.—The kings and aristocrats of Europe have realised that it was time to put up dykes to arrest the popular tide' (should read: popular stagnation) 'which is threatening to engulf





**[p. 248]**

their tottering thrones.—Large numbers of troops raised in Russia, in Austria, in Prussia, in Bavaria, in Hanover, in Württemberg, in Saxony and, in short, in all the states of Germany, have already mustered' (troops have already mustered!). 'In Italy 130,000 men are threatening the Swiss frontier. The Vorarlberg is occupied by 80,000 men. The Upper Rhine is covered by 80,000 men, Württembergers, Badeners and Prussians. The Main is guarded by 80,000 Bavarians and Austrians. While 370,000 men occupy the localities indicated above, Prussia has mobilised 200,000 soldiers which she is holding available' (sic) 'for launching against the frontiers of Belgium and France. Holland and Belgium, constrained by the coalitions, will support the invasion move with an army 150,000 strong. In Bohemia 150,000 men are holding themselves ready and only await the order to join up with the army of the Main, which will thus be 230,000 strong. 80,000 men are concentrated round Vienna. 300,000 Russians are encamped in Poland, and 80,000 in the neighbourhood of St. Petersburg: all together these armies make up a force of one million three hundred and thirty thousand combatants who are only awaiting the signal to attack. Behind these troops and also (!) holding themselves ready are 180,000 Austrians, 200,000 Prussians, 100,000 men provided by the German principalities, and 220,000 Russians. Taken together these armies form a reserve of 700,000 men; not counting the innumerable' (sic) 'hordes of barbarians which the Muscovite Attila will unleash from the heart of Asia to be launched, as of yore (!), against European civilisation. From German newspapers' (here a note is appended with a piffling sentence from the Neue Deutsche Zeitung to put Lüning in a good mood) 'and from our own sources of information we learn the secret intentions of the Powers whose Plenipotentiaries foregathered in Warsaw on 25 October last. /( was decided, in the (!) conference, that a feint war' (My God! what diplomats!) 'between Prussia and Austria would serve as a pretext for the movement of troops whom the will of the Czar is transforming into blind instruments and ferocious bravoes to combat the defenders of liberty.' (Bravo!) 'In the face of these facts, there can no longer be any possible doubt: at this moment they are organising the massacre, already begun (!!), of all republicans. The days of June 1848, with their bloody executions and the proscriptions that followed them — Hungary devastated and enslaved by Austria— Italy delivered up to the Pope and the Jesuits, after the Roman Republic had been butchered by the soldiers of the French Government, have in no way assuaged the fury of our enemies: they dream of the enslavement of all those people who are fighting for the victory of common liberty. If democracy is not on its guard, Poland, Hungary, Germany, Italy and France will soon again fall victim to the fury of the brutal soldiery of Nicholas who whets the barbarians' appetite for battle with the promise that they may devastate and pillage Europe.

[^1]: In the face of this danger by which we are threatened, arise! Arise French, German, Italian, Polish and Hungarian republicans, let us emerge from this torpor' (Toping Schapper and Willich!) 'which debilitates our strength and paves the way for an easy victory for our oppressors. Arise! Let us ensure that the present days of inactivity and shame are succeeded by the days of fatigue and glory which await us with the holy war of liberty! On examining these dangers we have poin- ted out to you, you will realise, like us that it would be folly to wait any long- er for our common enemy to attack; we must make every preparation and go out to face the peril which surrounds us.' (Just try going out to face something which surrounds you!) 'Citizens, Socialist Democrats, our salvation lies only with our- selves: we cannot count on anything but our own efforts; and, enlightened by the examples of the past, we must provide against the betrayals of the future. Let us avoid, let us avoid above all, the trap that has been laid for us by the serpents (!)



If that's not champion drivel, then I really don't know what is.a

Having read the Rollin, Mazzini, Ruge, etc. manifesto addressed to the Germans,15 wherein they are invited to sing the Bardief and reminded that their forbears were called 'Franks', and wherein the King of Prussiad had already agreed to be whacked by Austria, I thought I had plumbed the depths of stupidity. Mais non! For here is the Fanon-Caperon-Gouté manifesto, as the Patrie calls it,e of the dii minorum gentium1 with, as it rightly remarks, the same content but devoid of chic, devoid of style, with the most pathetic rhetorical flourishes such as serpents and sicairesg and égorgementsï' The

Indépendance, quoting a few sentences from this masterpiece, relates that it was composed by the soldats les plus obscurs de la Démocratie' and that these poor devils had sent it to the London correspondent of that paper, despite the latter's conservatism. Such was their longing to appear in print. In retribution it names no names, and similarly the Patrie names only the three mentioned above. To compound the misère they gave one of the Straubingers86 here (yesterday this same person told Pfänder the sorry tale) 50 copies to take to France. Just off Boulogne he hurled 49 of them into the sea; on reaching Boulogne Brother

[^1]: of diplomacy. The emulators of the Metternichs and the Talleyrands are at this moment contemplating how they may extinguish the torch of the Revolution by instigating in France, through the invasion they are preparing, a national war in which the peoples will butcher each other for the benefit of the enemies of their liberation. Nay, Citizens! No more national war! For us the barriers, set up by despots between the nations they had shared out among them, are henceforward fallen, and the peoples, confounded,' (really: confounded), 'have only one flag upon which, with the fertile blood of our martyrs, we have written: Universal Democratic and Social Republic'

[^2]: On behalf of Their Societies: 'The members of the Committee of the Society of Exiled French Socialist Democrats in London: Adam (Cambreur), Barthélé- my (Emmanuel), Caperon (Paulin), Fanon, Goûté, Thierry, Vidil (Jules); the delega- tes of the Permanent Commission of the Polish Democracy Section in Lon- don: Sawaszkiewicz, Warskiroski; the members of the Socialist Democratic Com- mittee of German Refugees and the German Workers' Society: Dietz (Oswald), Geben (A.), Mayer (Adolphe), Schärttner (A.), Schapper (Karl), Willich (August). The delegates of the Hungarian Democratic Society in London: Molikoy, Simonyi. London, 16 November 1850.' a Marx adapts here a saying current in the Mark. - b 'Le Comité central démocratique européen, aux Allemands, 13 novembre 1850' published in La Voix du Proscrit, No. 4, 17 November 1850 and other papers. - c Teutonic war song - d Frederick William IV - e G. de Molinari, 'Un nouveau manifeste rouge', La Patrie, 28 November 1850. - f second-rate luminaries (literally: gods of minor nations) - s assassins - h butchery - ' the most obscure soldiers of Democracy (L'Indépendance belge, No. 323, 19 November 1850); the newspaper has: 'soldats de la démagogie'.

[^3]: 10-1543





**[p. 250]**

Straubinger was sent back to London for lack of a passport, and declares 'that he is now off to Boston'. Farewell and write by return.

Your

K.Marx

Apropos! Do write sometime to the worthy Dronke telling him to reply about League matters and not to write only in the case of begging letters. The gentlemen in Cologne11 have sent no news. 'Haude', who is now back, having lost all his worldly goods in Germany,334 is described by Weydemeyer as an 'otherwise stout lad'.

You must seriously consider what you are going to write about.335 England won't do, there being 2 articles on the subject already,b perhaps 3 with Eccarius.c Nor is there a great deal to say about France. Could you not perhaps, in conjunction with Mazzini's latest things, tackle the rotten Italians along with their revolution? (His Republic and Monarchy etc., as well as his religion, the Pope, etc.)d

[^1]: [From Jenny Marx]

[^2]: Dear Mr Engels,

[^3]: Your kind sympathy over the heavy blow dealt us by fate through the loss of our little darling, my poor little child of sorrow,e has been a great comfort to me, the more so as, in the last few sorrowful days, I have found cause for the most bitter complaint in our friend Schramm. My husband and all the rest of us have missed you sorely and have often longed to see you. However, I am very glad that you have left and are well on the way to becoming a great COTTON LORD. See that you entrench yourself firmly between the two warring brothers'; their tussle is bound to place you in a position of indispensability vis-à-vis your respected Papa, and in my mind's eye I already see you as Friedrich Engels JUNIOR and partner of the SENIOR. But of course the best thing about it is that, notwithstanding the COTTON TRADE and all the rest, you are still the same old Fritze and, in the words of those three arch-democrats, Frederick William the First.S Kinkel and Mazzini,

[^4]: a members of the Cologne Central Authority of the Communist League - b F. Engels, 'The English Ten Hours' Bill' and K. Marx and F. Engels, 'Review. May to October [1850]'. - c J. G. Eccarius, 'Die Schneiderei in London oder der Kampf des grossen und des kleinen Capitals', Neue Rheinische Zeitung. Politisch- ökonomische Revue, No. 5-6, 1850. - d J. Mazzini, Republic and Royalty in Italy published in several issues of The Red Republican in June-November 1850; G. Mazzini, Le Pape au dix-neuvième siècle. - c Heinrich Guido - f Gottfried and Peter Ermen - s August Willich





**[p. 251]**

you will not become 'estranged from the sacred cause of freedom'. Karl has told you something about the mummery here. I might add some nouaa That obese ruffian, Haude, shed all his fat during his muckraking tour of the German provinces and trips over his own legs whenever he sees anyone. It would seem that a little hippopotamus of dubious origin has joined the dictator hippopotamus,*1 and that the Great Windmill Knight, Hohenzoller Willich, has reinforced his guard of nobles with a few qualified footpads and blackguards. Our own people dawdle along from one day to the next with the help of a few borrowed pence. Rings is now earning something as a claqueur with the Duke of Brunswick, who is once more loudly pontificating before the courts.

The last Polish banquet, at which were foregathered the French, German, Hungarian and Polish crapauds0 (Willich, Fieschi, Adam, etc.),336 ended up in a free-for-all. Apart from that we've heard nothing of the crew. Last night we attended Ernest Jones' first lecture on the history of the papacy. His lecture was marvellous and, by English standards, advanced, though not quite à la hauteurä for us Germans who have run the gauntlet of Hegel, Feuerbach, etc. Poor Harney was dangerously ill of an abscess of the windpipe. He is not allowed to speak. An English doctor has made two incisions without finding the affected spot. His Red [Republican] has turned into The Friend of the People. Well, enough for today. The children chatter a great deal about Uncle Angels and, thanks to your estimable tuition, dear Mr Engels, little Tille now gives a splendid rendering of the song about the 'journeyman's pelt and the nimble broom'.

I hope we shall see you at Christmas.

Yours

Jenny Marx

126

MARX TO HERMANN BECKER

London, 2 December [1850] 64 Dean Street, Soho

Dear Becker,

I know that you felt greatly offended by a letter I wrote to Bürgers.' However, in this letter, which was written under very try- ing circumstances, I had no intention of offending you any more

[^1]: First published abridged in Der Briefwech- Printed according to the original sei zwischen F. Engels und K. Marx, Bd. 1, Stuttgart, 1913 and in full in MEGA, Published in English for the first Abt. Ill, Bd. 1, 1929 t l m e

[^2]: IN COLOGNE

[^3]: a news - b Karl Schapper - c philistines - d up to the mark - e Edgar Marx - f Presumably Marx's letter to Bürgers of 25 June 1850 (see this volume, pp. 237-38).

[^4]: 10*





**[p. 252]**

than my other friends in Cologne. I believe that this explanation will satisfy you and that, without harking back to the past, I can proceed straight to the proposals I have to make to you.

1. You know how wretchedly Mr Schuberth has managed our Revue. I believe that in a few days' time he will have brought out the last two issues. I wish to continue the enterprise as a quarterly (from February onwards), 20 sheets every quarter. The increased size would allow the inclusion of more varied material. Can you undertake publication, and on what terms?

2. A friend of mine" has translated my anti-Proudhon pieceb

from the French into German and has written his own introduc- tion to it.33 I would put the same question to you as above.

3. I have devised a scheme by which socialist literature consisting of a series of small pamphlets could be launched on the public in successive publications. A start could not be made until March. Should you be willing to undertake something of this kind, the things would be got ready in the meantime. I believe that, after its recent cheering experience of haute politique, the German public will BY AND BY find itself obliged to turn its urgent attention to the real content of present-day struggles. I beg you to reply soon.

Your

K. Marx

127

ENGELS TO EMIL BLANK

Manchester, 3 December 1850

Dear Emil,

I have received your parcel and thank you for your prompt dispatch of the cigars, which have found general acclaim. The underpants are also fine.

[^1]: First published in: Marx and Engels, Printed according to the original Works, First Russian Edition, Vol. XXIX, , . Moscow 1946 Published in English for the first time

[^2]: IN BARMEN

[^3]: a Probably Wilhelm Pieper - b K. Marx, The Poverty of Philosophy.





**[p. 253]**

Father wrote to me a few days ago. His preference is for Gottfried Ermen, with whom he would prefer to continue in case of a rupture; under no circumstances will he remain with Peter any longer than necessary. I shall collect all the notes available on Ermen Bros' business. That they have done extensive business is certain, the average profit, Gottfried Ermen maintains, being £600 a year, and more in recent years. In this business it is difficult to lose money in an average year; they possess and need little capital, and the article—low quality sewing and knitting yarn—also goes better compared with the fine qualities, which are falling off considerably.

The balance for the year 1849/50 has not yet been struck; debits and credits are still in the most splendid confusion. Father would seem to have been pressing them again, so I hear, and tomorrow they will set about putting this in order.

Accordingly Mr Peter arrived here this morning or yesterday evening! He sent for old Hill—he is living in an hotel two doors away from our office—was very nice, inquired about indifferent matters, but so far, at any rate, has failed to put in an appearance at the office. If his intention is to plague me, he has chosen the wrong man. Father does not wish to intervene in the brothers' squabbles, nor will I do so. But Gottfried is in such a fix that he has to keep in with me; he will tell me everything without my having to ask him about it.

If Peter Ermen takes over the management of the office, which very probably will happen in the end, this will greatly interfere with my examination of the books. Hitherto I have only been able to do this 4 days a week in DINNER-HOURS, when I was on my own, but it's precisely during DINNER-HOURS that he is accustomed to go sniffing about the office. I have abstracted the essentials, however, and little remains save the very involved task of comparing the prices at which Ermen Bros have been selling to us with the current prices on each occasion, and a search through old in- voices, etc., etc., so as to see whether one may not perhaps light upon this or that. In a few days' time I shall send Father Ermen Bros' complete accounts for 1849/50, duly classified and set out, as also those of Ermens' bleaching concern, so that he may see how these gentlemen carry on business with his capital.

Debit Father with the cost of the cigars, that would be the simplest.

My love to Marie, Hermann and the children.

Your

Frederick

First published in: Marx and Engels, Printed according to the original Works, First Russian Edition, Vol. XXV, , , . , , . * , , . , , • ,• Moscow, 1934 Published m English for the first time

128

ENGELS TO MARX

IN LONDON

Manchester, 17 December 1850

Dear Marx,

I have been exceptionally busy of late and have had other interruptions which have forced me out of my customary routine and prevented me from writing. Hence my belated reply.

The Fanon-Caperon-Gouté manifesto3 is truly a masterpiece, both in form and content. Crânerieb has found its ultimate expression, and Monsieur Barthélémy has at last given the world an example of ce que c'est que de parler carrément!1 The military dispositions of the homme de marbred are equally funny; the

bonhomme' has counted most of the Austrian army corps twice over, as the most cursory REFERENCE to the newspapers will show. Incidentally, it's really taking effrontery too far after all the fiascos since 1848, and with all the nations, crapauds1 first and foremost, in their present easy-going mood, to speak of a marée populaire qui

menace d'engloutir des trônes.8 The collection of names at the bottom is undoubtedly the finest FEATURE of the whole. No such European congress has ever been seen before. Ledru-Rollin, Mazzini and Co. actually acquire a certain importance from this puerile affair. For that matter, I'd like to know in what way that milksop Sawaszkiewicz, who appears at the bottom, differs from Ledru-

[^1]: a See this volume, pp. 246-47. - b Swagger - c what blunt speaking is - d man of marble (iron) - e chap - f philistines - s a popular tide which is threatening to engulf thrones





**[p. C]**

Rollin's Polack Darasz, and to what extent the two Hungarians, who appear at the bottom, are to be preferred to Mazzini. True, Schapper and Ruge are more or less equally matched and, unless the cockroach Dietz tips the scales heavily in favour of the new European committee, these gentry will hardly be able to compete with their prototype. 3 3 8

Recently I went to see John Watts; the fellow seems skilled in sharp practice and now has a much larger SHOP in Deansgate, somewhat further u p . H e has become a consummate radical mediocrity, is concerned with nothing but the EDUCATIONAL MOVEMENT. raves about MORAL FORCE339 and has accepted Mr P r o u d h o n as his lord and master. He has translated the Contradictions économiques* and some other stuff and has lost a great deal of money at it, since English workers have not yet sufficient 'education' to enable them to understand these marvellous things. From a few instances h e gave me, it transpired that he knows very well how to boost his tailoring business by parading his bourgeois liberalism. On the EDUCATIONAL COMMITTEES he sits fraternally alongside his once inveter- ate foes, the dissenting ministers,340 from time to time accepting their vote of thanks FOR THE VERY ABLE ADDRESS HE DELIVERED ON THAT EVENING It seemed to m e that the fellow has lost all his wits in the metamorphosis and I have not been to see him since. For people hereabouts who are thus transmuted into a state of bourgeois respectability, Proudhon is, of course, heaven sent; though seemingly going further than anyone else, further even than Owen, he is nevertheless FULLY RESPECTABLE.

I have n o objection to writing about Mr Mazzini and the Italian business. Only—save for the thing in The Red [Republican]h—I haven't got a single one of Mazzini's writings. However I shan't be able to do anything before Christmas since I shall be in London a week hence. I shall then bring back with me what I need. But perhaps by that time something else will have occurred to us.

Very many thanks to your wife for her amiable note.c As for the COTTON LORD, it hasn't come to that yet; my old man doesn't seem at all inclined to keep me here any longer than is absolutely necessary. Cependant nous verrons.0 Peter Ermen is going round in circles like a fox that has left its brush in a trap, and is trying to

[^1]: a P. J. Proudhon, Système des contradictions économiques, ou Philosophie de la misère. - b J. Mazzini, Republic and Royalty in Italy. - c See this volume, pp. 250-51. - d However, we shall see.





**[p. 256]**

make things too hot for me here—the stupid devil imagines he could annoy me!

Dronke has been written to.341

My regards to your wife and children.

Your

F. E.

First published abridged in Der Briefwech- sel zwischen F. Engels und K. Marx, Bd. 1, Stuttgart, 1913 and in full in MEGA, Abt. III, Bd. 1, 1929

Printed according to the original

Published in English for the first time

