---
Volume: 38
Document_Title: "106. Marx to Joseph Weydemeyer. 4 February "
Page_Range: "262-263"
---

# 106. Marx to Joseph Weydemeyer. 4 February 

We have therefore decided to send C. Schramm to America forthwith, as our emissary. For the lengthy journey we have in mind we need at least 150 talers. While requesting you to collect contributions to that end with the utmost possible dispatch, we would at the same time request you to send by return letters of introduction for C. Schramm, manager of the N.Rh.Z. (restored to our party as a result of his daring escape from the Wesel fortress).

I have also written to G. Jung about the money matter.302

Awaiting an early reply.

Your

K. Marx

The Chartists and French réfugiés here are also giving mandates to our emissary.

This is a League3 matter.

It is essential, my dear Freiligrath, that in your letter of introduction, you leave no doubt about the position of the N.Rh.Z. in Germany and its revolutionär significance.

First published in: Marx and Engels, Printed according to the original Works, First Russian Edition, Vol. XXV, Moscow. 1934 Published in English for the first time

106

MARX TO JOSEPH WEYDEMEYER

London, 4 February 1850

Dear Weydemeyer,

The reason for your getting such a late reply to your letter is that I was seriously ill for a fortnight.

The Revue will be appearing next week. Your article will be in it. We are awaiting the continuation.295

The publication of the periodical was delayed through my illness. Actually we had arranged it so that two issues should

[^1]: IN FRANKFURT AM MAIN

[^2]: a the Communist League



