---
Volume: 38
Document_Title: "107. Marx to Louis Bauer. 5 February "
Page_Range: "263-264"
---

# 107. Marx to Louis Bauer. 5 February 



**[p. 226]**

appear simultaneously but the publisher3 was opposed to this out of commercial considerations which we thought correct. So a further change was necessary and this happened to coincide with my unlucky illness.

You will receive 100 copies from Cologne. Please send two of them to C. Biringer in Höchst near Frankfurt. He ordered them from here. You will probably undertake to get payment for them.

I have passed on your message to Teilering. The fellow is quite unsuited to be an English correspondent. In Vienna it was alright for him to bluster. Here you have to study matters. More another time.

Your

K. Marx

Best regards to your wifeb from my wife and self. In Hamburg about 1,500 copies have already been ordered.

First published in: Marx and Engels, Printed according to the original Works, First Russian Edition, Vol. XXV, Moscow 1934 Published in English for the first time

107

MARX TO LOUIS BAUER

[London,] 5 February [1850] 20 Queen's Road

I am only now answering your letter of 30 January because I am not inclined to let you prescribe 'time limits' for what I do. In reply to your letter the following:

1. When Schramm wrote that my debt to you was not yet 'due', it only meant that one cannot be sued for a SURGEON'S bills until six months have elapsed, certainly not that the debt does not exist.

2. Far from having conceded to Mr Heidemann that your bill was not 'too steep', I told him the contrary, as he himself admitted

[^1]: IN LONDON

[^2]: [Rough copy]

[^3]: a Julius Schuberth - b Louise



