---
Volume: 38
Document_Title: "108. Engel s to Eduard von Müller- Tellering. 7 February "
Page_Range: "264-265"
---

# 108. Engel s to Eduard von Müller- Tellering. 7 February 

on 22 January in the letter to my wife. Nevertheless I informed him that I was willing to pay. As I told him, I hoped that by January I should be in possession of the necessary amount although I could not guarantee this. The impertinence of Mr Heidemann in sending a woman a demand for payment under a black seal, which she mistook for the announcement of a death, moved me to have him informed in writing that I wished to have no further contact with him.

3. As to your bill, I now insist that you itemize it. I fail to understand how you could have disbursed £1 on my behalf. You travelled out to me in Chelsea at my express request on only three occasions, once by cab. As to the confinement,3 accoucheurs over here (except in the case of the bourgeois) charge for 9 days—while you attended my wife on only 4 days out of the 9, as Willich can testify—one GUINEA. Where, then, do you get £4.10 from? By the way, I am told that, immediately upon receipt of my letter,b you held a confabulation with Heidemann and decided 'to fleece' me. So first of all an itemized bill, which I shall then pay.

K. Marx

108

ENGELS TO EDUARD von MÜLLER-TELLERING

[London, 7 February 1850] Thursday morning

Dear Tellering,

Your note303 arrived so late that, even with the best will in the world, it would have been difficult to get you a ticket for today's ball. Since moreover you have failed, even though accepted by the society as a member, either to take out your card or to attend any

[^1]: First published in: Marx and Engels, Printed according to the original Works, Second Russian Edition, Vol. 50, , , . , , . ^ ,-, , , r- Moscow, 1981 Published in English for the first time

[^2]: IN LONDON

[^3]: [Copy]

[^4]: a for the birth of Heinrich Guido - b See this volume, p. 218.



