---
Volume: 38
Document_Title: "109. Engels to Julius Schuberth, Theodor Hagen and Stephan Adolph Naut. 4 March "
Page_Range: "265-266"
---

# 109. Engels to Julius Schuberth, Theodor Hagen and Stephan Adolph Naut. 4 March 



**[p. 228]**

Tout à vous*

Engels

First published in: Tellering, Vorge- Printed according to a copy by schmack in die künftige deutsche Diktatur Tellering von Marx und Engels, Cologne, 1850

Published in English for the first time

109

ENGELS TO JULIUS SCHUBERTH

IN HAMBURG

AND THEODOR HAGEN AND STEPHAN

ADOLPH NAUT

[London,] 4 March 1850

1. Schuberth. Letter answered. The 2nd issueb must, as promised, not cost more than the first. As regards the 450 copies, no change can now be made for the first quarter. For the 2nd he should put forward proposals. The arrangement for Köhler's payment has nothing to do with this.

What Schuberth says about success contradicts his earlier information and our reports.

In future nothing to be set aside without asking us. For the 3rd issue 'To Die for the Republic'c can stand.

2. Hagen. Same as Schuberth. Should organise proper supervi- sion of the printer" and also obtain from the latter a certificate re

[^1]: IN COLOGNE

[^2]: [Draft]

[^3]: 50 copies to be sent here. The correspondence from South Germanyd no longer to be used.295

[^4]: d Yours ever - b Neue Rheinische Zeitung. Politisch-ökonomische Revue. - c F. Engels,

[^5]: The Campaign, for the German Imperial Constitution, IV. - d by Joseph Weydemeyer - e H. G. Voigt



