---
Volume: 38
Document_Title: "111. Marx to Joseph Weydemeyer. 9 April "
Page_Range: "267-268"
---

# 111. Marx to Joseph Weydemeyer. 9 April 



**[p. 230]**

by me, and in the eyes of the public, for whom you exist only in as much as you were a contributor to my newspaper.3

Your letters to me, and they are available for publication, prove that you did all you could to foist upon me the role of 'democratic Dalai Lama and incumbent of the future'. What proof have you that I ever accepted that absurd role? The only thing you could reproach me with is that I did not immediately break with you or denounce you to the others after the Klapka affair, on the compromising nature of which I forthwith bluntly expressed my views to you in the presence of witnesses.307 I admit my weakness. Only Becker'sb statement that, 4 weeks prior to the appearance of your glib pamphlet attacking the Westdeutsche Zeitung," you again offered to collaborate on that paper, a statement supported by the testimony of Freiligrath and Hagen, only your wholly unsubstantiated calumnies against Engels convinced me that what I had regarded as an isolated instance of precipitancy was the connecting link of an entire system. It was, by the way, wise of you not after all to appear yesterday at the final appointment which Willich had yet again arranged for you at your request. You knew what was to be expected from a confrontation with me.

K. Marx

111

MARX TO JOSEPH WEYDEMEYER

London, 9 April [1850J 4 Anderson Street, King's Road, Chelsea

Dear Weydemeyer,

I should be greatly obliged if you would write and tell me 631 return how the sales of the N.Rh.Z.d are going and whether we

[^1]: First published in: Marx and Engels, Printed according to the original Works, First Russian Edition, Vol. XXV, Moscow, 1934

[^2]: IN FRANKFURT AM MAIN

[^3]: a Neue Rheinische Zeitung - b Hermann Becker - c E. Teilering, Westdeutscher Zeitungsjammer - d Neue Rheinische Zeitung. Politisch-ökonomische Revue



