---
Volume: 38
Document_Title: "112. Engels to Julius Schuberth. About 11 April "
Page_Range: "268-269"
---

# 112. Engels to Julius Schuberth. About 11 April 

may not soon receive some money. You people in little Germany have no conception of what things are like here.

The 3rd issue is coming out on the 10th of this month. The chap in Hamburg3—why, we don't yet really know—has been frightfully dilatory over the thing. This will now be put a stop to.

I have also been requested by the Refugee Committee to appeal to your committee.308 We now have 60 refugees on our hands; several hundred, who have been expelled from Switzerland, have already been announced. Hence our refugee fund will soon be down to its last monaco,h and then the people will be out on the street again.

Warm regards to your wife,

Your

K. Marx

First published in Die Geselbchaft, Jg. VII, Printed according to the original Bd. 2, Berlin, 1930

Published in English for the first time

112

ENGELS T O JULIUS SCHUBERTH

[London, about 11 April 1850]

Attention Schuberth

1. Following dispatch of the 3rd issue,0 we now await at the earliest possible date the statement concerning the sales of the 3 issues and an adjustment of the balance, and if this cannot be done before 15 April, he is to write and tell us. But at all events, to advise by return how many copies of the 3rd issue have been run off and what proportion of these are against firm orders. Only a few hundred in excess of firm orders are to be run off.

2. Since Schuberth does not consider it necessary for Mr Hagen

[^1]: IN HAMBURG

[^2]: [Draft]

[^3]: a Julius Schuberth - b a small copper coin current in the Principality of Monaco - c Neue Rheinische Zeitung. Politisch-ökonomische Revue



