---
Volume: 38
Document_Title: "113. Engels to Joseph Weydemeyer. 22 April "
Page_Range: "269-270"
---

# 113. Engels to Joseph Weydemeyer. 22 April 

to act as responsible editor, he is in no circumstances to alter a single word of the manuscript. We hereby inform him that, should this none the less occur, we must forthwith sever our connection with him. Hagen is instructed to ensure that nothing is altered.

3. Since, contrary to our instructions, Schuberth sent Naut 300 copies instead of 450, Naut is to take such copies as he needs from the 150 which Schuberth sent to Eisen. We further expect that the dispatch of copies to Naut will, in future, always be made at the same time as those to Eisen. Should we receive further complaints, we shall have to take other measures. Similarly we expect that in future the 50 copies for London will be dispatched by the first steamer after the issue is ready.

(A letter to be written to Hagen and enclosed with Schuberth's.)

First published in: Marx and Engels, Printed according to the original Works, First Russian Edition, Vol. XXV, Moscow 1934 Published in English for the first time

113

ENGELS TO JOSEPH WEYDEMEYER

London, 22 April 1850 6 Macclesfield Street, Soho

Dear Weydemeyer,

Could you insert the statement overleaf3 in the Neue Deutsche Zeitung. The attempts of the 'great men' here to regain a position for themselves at the expense of the refugees, and their attempted manoeuvrings to that end in the press at large, are discouraging people from sending money here.309 We have now received and distributed some £120-130 for the refugees, and the others have raised summa summarum0 £2.15 s., and now they are trying to make themselves out to be the champions of the 'helpless' refugees. Unless we get some money now, our 50-60 refugees will, within a week, be out on the street and without a penny. This

[^1]: IN FRANKFURT AM MAIN

[^2]: '" K. Marx and F. Engels, 'Statement. 20 April 1850'. - b all in all



