---
Volume: 38
Document_Title: "115. Engels and Marx to François Pardigon. 6 May "
Page_Range: "272-273"
---

# 115. Engels and Marx to François Pardigon. 6 May 

no one who had a source of income received so much as a sou. If Dronke is no longer there, open his letter, read it, and send it on to him.

First published in Die Gesellschaft, Jg. VII, Printed according to the original Bd. 2, Berlin, 1930

115

ENGELS AND MARX TO FRANÇOIS PARDIGON

IN LONDON

[Rough copy]

London, 6 May 1850

Dear Pardigon,

We have just this minute heard that it is intended to submit your programme on behalf of your society to the German Society in Greek Street and to ask them whether or not they will give it their support.313

After our conversation on Saturday,3 we don't believe it; but if you or your society were to denounce an individual or a number of different individuals to us as a mere bad lot, we should simply show them the door without asking whether they were willing to adhere to our programme.

We have denounced the ringleaders of this society to you as charlatans and swindlers. Swindlers and charlatans will sign anything. They would probably have signed our manifesto had we been prepared to accept their repeated proposals of union and concord.

It will be clear to you that, were a similar proposal to be adopted by your society, we should be honour bound to sever forthwith all connections with the members of Rathbone Place.

Greeting and Fraternity

F. Engels K. Marx

[^1]: Printed according to the original

[^2]: Translated from the French

[^3]: Published in English for the first time

[^4]: a 1 May 1850

[^5]: First published in: Marx and Engels,

[^6]: Works, First Russian Edition, Vol. XXV, Moscow, 1934



