---
Volume: 38
Document_Title: "118. Marx to Heinrich Bürgers. 25 June "
Page_Range: "274-275"
---

# 118. Marx to Heinrich Bürgers. 25 June 



**[p. 117]**

MARX TO JOSEPH WEYDEMEYER

IN FRANKFURT AM MAIN

[London,] 8 June a [1850] 64 Dean Street, Soho

Dear Weydemeyer,

How are things with our Revue} The money, especially? The question is becoming all the more urgent as the Prussians are making every effort to induce the British Government to expel me from England too.314 Were I not stuck here sans le soub I should already have withdrawn into the heart of England and the Government would have lost sight of me.

How are things with the 'red issue'c?262 We have orders for it from America. How much of it has been sold? How many copies have you left?

Your paperd seems to have joined the rest to form a conspiration du silence in regard to our Revue. However, I realise that, to the readers of the Neue Deutsche Zeitung, Raveaux must be more interesting.

Your

K. M.

[London, 25 June 1850]

[] the Cologne people, including Daniels, were as usual much taken up with being wise after the event []

[^1]: Regards to Dronke and to your wife.e

[^2]: First published in Die Gesellschaft, Jg. VII, Printed according to the original Bd. 2, Berlin, 1930 , . , „ Published in English for the first

[^3]: time

[^4]: 118 MARX TO HEINRICH BÜRGERS315

[^5]: IN COLOGNE

[^6]: a A slip of the pen in the original: May. - b without a penny - c Neue Rheinische Zeitung, No. 301, 19 May 1849. - d Neue Deutsche Zeitung- <•' Louise



