---
Volume: 38
Document_Title: "119. Marx to Joseph Weydemeyer. 27 June "
Page_Range: "275-276"
---

# 119. Marx to Joseph Weydemeyer. 27 June 



**[p. 238]**

[] Like any other place Cologne can, if it so wishes, declare itself a Centre of any kind. Indeed it would conform better than any other place to Spinoza's dictum whereby the periphery coincides with the centre [•••]"

Published for the first time Printed according to Daniels' letter to Marx of 28 June 1850 and that of the Cologne leading district to the Communist League Central Authority of 10 July 1850

119

MARX TO JOSEPH WEYDEMEYER316

Dear Weydemeyer,

and our situation here is so extraordinarily wretched that an outburst of impatience is excusable.

Lüning's critique—I have seen 1 and 2e—shows that he doesn't understand what lie is trying to criticise. Maybe I shall explain a few things to him in our Revue.S17

This is an important day. There is a possibility that today the Ministry may fall.318 Then a truly revolutionary movement will get

[^1]: IN FRANKFURT AM MAIN

[^2]: London, 27 June b [1850] 64 Dean Street, Soho Square

[^3]: Send the money to Naut. The fellow's not a bad old jackass. I shall explain the matter to you some other time. Pray do not be offended by my wife's agitated letters.c She is nursing her child,d

[^4]: a Marx may have had in mind Spinoza's letter to Walter Tschirnhaus of January 1673. - b A slip of the pen in the original: July. - c See this volume, pp. 555, 559. d Heinrich Guido - e O. Lüning's review of the Neue Rheinische Zeitung. Politisch- ökonomische Revue in the Neue Deutsche Zeitung, Nos. 148 and 149, 22 and 23 June 1850. The end of the review was published in Nos. 150 and 151, 25 and 26 June.



