---
Volume: 38
Document_Title: "120. Marx to Karl Blind. 17 July "
Page_Range: "276-277"
---

# 120. Marx to Karl Blind. 17 July 



**[p. 239]**

under way here. We ourselves may be the Tories' first victims. Then our long-intended expulsion might actually come about.

Your

K. Marx

First published in: Marx and Engels, Printed according to the original Works, First Russian Edition, Vol. XXV, . . Moscow 1934 Published in English in full for the first time

120

MARX TO KARL BLIND

IN PARIS

[Rough copy]

London, 17 July 1850 64 Dean Street, Soho

Dear Blind,

Our long silence was due to a misunderstanding. For we believed that the Central Authority's second circular3 had been brought you 6 weeks or 2 months ago [by] our emissary, Klein, and we were waiting for your answer. [Now] it transpires that Klein has [brought] back nothing of the kind to Brussels.

Write to me as soon as possible and in a special enclosure to the [Central Authority], We are thinking of convening a congress here in a few (8) weeks' time.319 What do you [make] of the Holstein business?320 We shall shortly be dispatching an emissary [who] worked there for two years and knows [exactly] who is who and what is what.b

Concerning my own fortunes and the manifold vicissitudes which I [] in, some other time.

I am approaching you this time about a private matter [], that, if at all possible, you will not refuse me your assistance. I had arranged with my family that I would settle my financial affairs with my uncle Philips in Holland [] weeks, [for which] purpose I was to visit Holland in person. An [] illness of my wife constantly

[^1]: a K. Marx and F. Engels, 'Address of the Central Authority to the League, June 1850'. - b This seems to refer to C. Schramm.



