---
Volume: 38
Document_Title: "121. Marx to Joseph Weydemeyer. 29 October "
Page_Range: "277-278"
---

# 121. Marx to Joseph Weydemeyer. 29 October 

rendered my departure impossible. And now I shall not be able to go there for several weeks, because two of my uncle's daughters are being married, one after the other, from his house, so th[at] business matters cannot be settled till several weeks later.

With this affair in mind, I meanwhile drew a bill for £20 (500 fr.) with a [merchant] firm3 here in London on the strength of this arrangement. The bill matures on Monday or Wednesday.b If I were unable to pay it, I would lay myself open to a public [] which, given the present state of the parties here, and [my] relations with the Prussian Embassy and the English Ministry, [could] have most disagreeable consequences.

Now I hear that Goegg in Paris has a considerable amount of capital available just now. Would you write to him immediately, explaining the circumstances to him and inquiring whether he could advance me the money on a promissory note or a bill. Periculum in mora.c

Pending the arrangement in Holland I am, in the literal sense of the word, dépourvu? save for my last shilling.

I rely on you to do your utmost.

Your

K. Marx

121

London, 29 October 1850 64 Dean Street, Soho

Dear Weydemeyer,

I beg you to carry out the following transaction for me: Borrow from Schuster or somebody else the money necessary to redeem my silver from the Frankfurt pawnbroker's,321 then sell the

[^1]: First published in German in International Printed according to the original Review for Social History, Vol. IV, Leiden, jggg Published in English for the first time

[^2]: MARX TO JOSEPH WEYDEMEYER43

[^3]: IN FRANKFURT AM MAIN

[^4]: a Probably a firm headed by Simon Bamberger. - b i. e. 19 or 21 July - c Delay spells danger (Titus Livius, ab urbe condita libri). - d destitute



