---
Volume: 38
Document_Title: "122. Marx to Engels. 19 November "
Page_Range: "278-279"
---

# 122. Marx to Engels. 19 November 



**[p. 241]**

silver to a goldsmith or wherever it can be sold in Frankfurt, repay the man who loaned you the money for redeeming the silver, and send the balance to me here.

Neither you nor the other man will be incurring any risk for, should you not be able to sell the stuff at a higher price, all you have to do is take it back to the pawnbroker's.

On the other hand my present circumstances are such that I must at all costs raise some money, even to be able to continue working.

The only items I would ask you to return to the pawnbroker's, since they have no saleable value, are 1) a small silver mug, 2) a silver plate, 3) a small knife and fork in a case—all belonging to little Jenny.3

I very much approve of your plan for a popular work on political economy and only hope that you will soon make a start on it.322 Warm regards to your wifeb from my wife and self.

Your

K. Marx

First published in: Marx and Engels, Printed according to the original Works, First Russian Edition, Vol. XXV, Moscow, 1934

122

[London,] 19 November 1850

Dear Engels,

Just a line or two to let you know that our little gunpowder- plotter, Fawksy,324 died at ten o'clock this morning. Suddenly, from one of the convulsions he had often had. A few minutes before, he was still laughing and joking. The thing happened quite unexpectedly. You can imagine what it is like here. Your absence at this particular moment makes us feel very lonely.

[^1]: MARX TO ENGELS323

[^2]: IN MANCHESTER

[^3]: a Marx's eldest daughter - b Louise



