---
Volume: 38
Document_Title: "123. Marx to Engels. 23 November "
Page_Range: "279-280"
---

# 123. Marx to Engels. 23 November 



**[p. 242]**

In my next letter I shall tell you something about Harney from which you will see what an ominous situation he's in.

Your

K. Marx

If you happen to feel so inclined, drop a few lines to my wife. She is quite distracted.

First published in Der Briefwechsel zwischen Printed according to the original F. Engels und K. Marx, Bd. 1, Stuttgart, 1913

123

MARX TO ENGELS

IN MANCHESTER

London, 23 November 1850

Dear Engels,

Your letter did my wife a great deal of good.325 She's in a really dangerous state of excitation and exhaustion. She had nursed the child* herself and had fought for its existence under the most difficult circumstances and at the greatest sacrifice. And on top of this, the thought that the poor child was a victim of bourgeois

misère, although it never wanted for any particular care.

Mr Schrammb is thoroughly beseileredc and is just now at his most loathsome. For two whole days, 19 and 20 November, he never showed his face in our house, then came for a moment and immediately disappeared again after one or two fatuous remarks. He had volunteered to accompany us on the day of the funeral; he arrived a minute or two before the appointed hour, said not a word about the funeral, but told my wife that he had to hurry away so as not to be late for a meal with his brother/ With my wife in such an irritable state, you can imagine how offensive was the conduct of this person, to whom so much friendship has been extended in our house.

[^1]: a Heinrich Guido - b Conrad Schramm - c Marx coins a verb from the name Seiler - d Rudolf Schramm



