---
Volume: 38
Document_Title: "124. Engels to Marx. 25 November "
Page_Range: "280-281"
---

# 124. Engels to Marx. 25 November 



**[p. 243]**

Jones has explained Harney's true situation to me. He is sous le coup de la justice* The entire contents of his paperb are such as to make it liable to stamp duty.326 The government is merely waiting for its circulation to increase in order to nab him. The proceedings against Dickens have been instituted solely as a precedent in respect of Harney.327 If he is arrested he may, besides the actual sentence, have to serve 20 years through being unable to produce SECURITIES.

Bauerc and Pfänder have won their case.328 Their counsel was Roberts.

Your

K. M.

First published abridged in Der Briefwech- Printed according to the original sei zwischen F. Engels und K. Marx, Bd. 1, Stuttgart, 1913 and in full in MEGA, Published in English for the first Abt. HI, Bd. 1, 1929 t l m e

124

ENGELS T O MARX

[Manchester,] 25 November 1850

Dear Marx,

I am writing today just to tell you that I am unfortunately still not in a position to send you the £2 I promised you for today in my last letter.329 Ermen d has gone away for a few days and, since no proxy has been authorised with the bank, we are unable to make any remittances and have to content ourselves with the lew small payments that happen to come in. The total amount in the cash box is only about £4 and you will therefore realise that I must wait a while. As soon as Ermen returns I shall at once send you the money. I trust the first remittance arrived safely.

[^1]: IN LONDON

[^2]: a threatened with prosecution - b The Red Republican - c Heinrich Bauer - d Peter Ermen



