---
Volume: 38
Document_Title: "125. Marx to Engels. 2 December "
Page_Range: "281-288"
---

# 125. Marx to Engels. 2 December 



**[p. 1850]**

So the outraged Schramm, to judge by Mr Seiler's begging letter, would seem to be again on the best of terms with his brother0 and even showing him some égardsd\

I hope your wife is feeling better. Warm regards to her and the rest of your family from your

F. E.

In the course of this week I shall send your wife a parcel of COTTON THREAD which I hope she will find to her liking.

[On the back of the letter] Charles Marx Esq. 64 Dean Street. Soho Square. London

125

MARX TO ENGELS

London, 2 December [1850] 64 Dean Street, Soho

Dear Engels,

For several days I have been seriously unwell and hence this letter, together with advice of receipt of the two POST OFFICE ORDERS, will reach you later than I would have wished. I have remitted

[^1]: First published abridged in Der Briefwech- Printed according to the original sei zwischen F. Engels und K. Marx, Bd. 1, Stuttgart, 1913 and in full in MEGA, Published in English for the first Abt. Ill, Bd. 1, 1929 t , m e

[^2]: IN MANCHESTER

[^3]: a Conrad Schramm; see this volume, p. 242. - b The Red Republican, to avoid persecution, in December changed its name to The Friend of the People. - c Rudolf Schramm - d consideration





**[p. 245]**

7/6d to Seiler. As regards the Indépendance* we neither of us owe him anything for the time being, as he opportunely got himself thrown out by his landlord, leaving behind in return for the £10 he owed him nothing but unsold copies of the Indépendance, personal effects to the value of 18 pence, and 2 or 3 books which he had borrowed from myself and others. Truly, he possesses IN A HIGH DEGREE the ability to liquidate, American-fashion, the excess of his expenditure over his revenue.

The great Heilberg has arrived here with a young wife, soi-disan Lb I have not yet had the honour of seeing the legendary Tuck, who has been cast back across the ocean, considerably aggrandised, of course—a dangerous rival for Seiler. He com- pletely monopolises Bamberger, calling him 'little brother', and the old Amschel, 'auntie'.

As yet I have neither seen nor heard anything of our Revue.0 I am negotiating with Cologne about the publication of the quarterly.11

Partly because of ill-health, partly on purpose, I never foregather with the others at the Pulteney Stores330 except on the official days. Since these gentlemen have so extensively debated whether or not this company is ennuyante? I, of course, am leaving them to agree amongst themselves upon the solace to be derived from their discourse. I, however, make myself scarce. As we have both of us experienced, one loses these people's esteem to the same extent that one is liberal with them. Moreover, I'm tired of them and wish to employ my time as productively as possible. Friend Schramm,' who for several weeks has been playing the malcontent and has finally come to the conviction that no one is in the least inclined to place obstacles in the way of the natural course of his emotional ups and downs, is gradually readapting himself to the type of humour compatible with the MODEL-LODGINGAt the Great Windmill considerable annoyance reigns over the loss of £16 as a result of a court ruling.331 Lehmann, in particular, is seething. His rage will not abate until Bauer and Pfänder are publicly branded as thieves and miscreants by every newspaper in Europe. Now, of course, little Bauer maintains with suppressed moral fury that the payment of a single penny, whether to the Great Windmill or to a public poor box, would be an unpardona-

[^1]: HOUSE.

[^2]: a L'Indépendance belge -b so-called - c Neue Rheinische Zeitung. Politisch-ökonomische

[^3]: Revu«, No. 5-6. - d See this volume, pp. 251-52. - e dull - f Conrad Schramm





**[p. 246]**

ble affront to the English courts and 'recognition of the bourgeoisie'.

Meanwhile the great men of Great Windmill Street have experienced a triumph, as the following3 shows:

'Aux démocrates de toutes les nations!

Citoyens! Proscrits Réfugiés en Angleterre et mieux placés par cela même pour juger des mouvements politiques du Continent, nous' (note well! An out-and-out solecism in this single phrase which they have daringly tacked on to subject, copula and predicate, and should in any case read: et ainsi mieux placés que vous autres pour) 'avons pu suivre et surveiller activement toutes les combinaisons des Puissances coalisées se préparant à une nouvelle invasion de la France, où' (very naice!) 'les Cosaques du Nord sont attendus par leurs complices, pour' (yet again attendus pour) 'éteindre dans son foyer même' (the birthplace of Barthélémy and Pottier) 'le volcan de la Révolution Universelle.— Les Rois et les aristocrates de l'Europe ont compris qu'il était temps d'élever des digues pour arrêter la marée populaire' (should read: le marasme populaire) 'qui menace d'engloutir leurs trônes ébranlés.—Des troupes nombreuses levées en Russie, en Autriche, en Prusse, en Bavière, dans le Hanovre, dans le Wurtemberg, en Saxe et enfin dans tous les états de l'Allemagne, sont déjà réunies.' (Des troupes sont déjà réunies!) 'En Italie

130 000 hommes menacent la frontière suisse. Le Vorarlberg est occupé par 80 000 hommes. Le Haut Rhin est couvert par 80 000 hommes, Würtembergeois, Bedois et Prussiens. Le Main est gardé par 80 000 Bavarois et Autrichiens. Tandis que 370 000 hommes occupent les points que nous venons d'indiquer, la Prusse a mobilisé 200 000 soldats qu'elle tient disponible' (sic) 'pour être lancé sur les frontières de la Belgique et de la France: la Hollande et la Belgique, contraintes par les coalitions, soutiendront le mouvement d'invasion avec une armée forte de

[^1]: 150 000 hommes. En Bohême 150 000 hommes se tiennent prêts et n'attendent qu'un ordre pour se réunir à l'armée du Main, qui serait alors forte de 230 000 hommes. Autour de Vienne sont concentrés 80 000 hommes. 300 000 Russes campent en Pologne, et 80 000 dans les environs de St. Petersbourg: ces armées réunies composent une force d'un million trois cents trente mille combattants, qui n'attendent que le signal de l'attaque. Derrière ces troupes se tiennent aussi (!) prêts 180 000 Autrichiens, 200 000 Prussiens, 100 000 hommes fournis par les principautés de l'Allemagne, et 220 000 Russes. Ces armées forment ensemble, comme troupes de réserve 700 000 hommes; sans compter les hordes innombra- bles' (sic) 'de Barbares que l'Attila Moscovite ferait surgir du fond de l'Asie, pour lancer, comme autrefois (!) sur la civilisation Européenne. Des journaux allemands' (here a note is appended with a piffling sentence from the Neue Deutsche Zeitung to put Lüning in a good mood) 'et nos renseignements particuliers nous font connaître les secrètes intentions des Puissances dont les Plénipotentiaires se sont réunis à Varsovie le 25 Octobre dernier.332 Il a été décidé, dans la (!) conférence, qu'une guerre feinte' (My God! what diplomats!) 'entre la Prusse et l'Autriche, servirait de prétexte au mouvement des soldats que la volonté du Czar transforme en instruments aveugles et en sicaires féroces contre les défenseurs de la liberté.' (Bravo!) 'En présence de ces faits, il n'est plus possible de douter: on organise en ce moment le massacre, déjà commencé (!!) de tous les Républicains. Les journées de Juin 1848 avec leurs exécutions sanglantes et les proscriptions que les ont suivies—la Hongrie dévastée

[^2]: •' Published in Le Constitutionnel, 18 December 1850.





**[p. 247]**

et asservie par l'Autriche—l'Italie livrée au Pape et aux Jésuites, après regorge- ment de la République Romaine par les soldats du Gouvernement de la France n'ont point assouvi la rage de nos ennemis: ils rêvent l'asservissement de tous les peuples qui combattent pour le triomphe de la liberté commune. Si la démocratie n'y prend garde, la Pologne, la Hongrie, l'Allemagne, l'Italie et la France seront bientôt encore vouées aux fureurs de la soldatesque sauvage de Nicolas qui, pour exciter les Barbares au combat leur promet la dévastation et le pillage de l'Europe.

Devant ce danger qui nous menace, debout! Debout! Républicains Français, Allemands, Italiens, Polonais, et Hongrois, sortons de cet engourdissement' (Toping Schapper and Willich!) 'qui énerve nos forces et prépare une victoire facile à nos oppresseurs. Debout! Aux jours de repos et de honte du présent, faisons succéder les jours de fatigue et de gloire, que nous prépare la guerre sainte de la liberté! En examinant ces dangers que nous vous signalons, vous comprendrez, comme nous, qu'il y aurait folie d'attendre plus longtemps l'attaque de l'ennemi commun; nous devons tout préparer et aller au devant du péril qui nous environne.' (Just try au devant d'une chose qui vous environne!) 'Citoyens Démocrates Socialistes, notre salut n'est qu'en nous mêmes: nous ne devons compter que sur nos propres efforts; et éclairés des exemples du passé, nous devons nous prémunir contre les trahisons de l'avenir. Évitons, évitons surtout le piège qui nous est tendu par les serpens (!) de la diplomatie. Les émules des Metternich et des Talleyrand méditent en ce moment d'éteindre le flambeau de la Révolution, en suscitant à la France, par l'invasion qu'ils préparent, une guerre nationale dans laquelle les peuples s'égorgeraient au profit des ennemis de leur affranchissement. Non, Citoyens! plus de guerre nationale! Les barrières que les despotes avaient élevées entre les nations qu'ils s'étaient partagées, sont désormais tombées pour nous, et les peuples confondus' (really: confondus) 'n'ont plus qu'un drapeau, sur lequel nous avons écrit avec le sang fécond de nos martyrs: République Universelle Démocratique et Sociale.'

[^1]: Pour Leurs Sociétés: 'Les membres du comité de la société des proscrits Démocrates Socialistes Français à Londres: Adam (Cambreur), Barthélémy (Emmanuel), Caperon (Paulin), Fanon, Goûté, Thierry, Vidil (Jules); les délégués de la commission permanente de la section de la démocratie polonaise à Londres: Sawaszkiewicz, Warskiroski; les membres du comité démocrate socialiste des réfugiés allemands et de la société ouvrière allemande: Dietz (Oswald), Gebert (A.), Mayer (Adolphe), Schärttner (A.), Schapper (Charles), Willich (Auguste). Les délégués de la société démocratique hongroise à Londres: Molikoy, Simonyi. Londres le 16. Novembre 1850.'a333

[^2]: •' 'To the democrats of all nations! Citizens! Proscribed refugees in England who, for that very reason, are in a better position (o judge the political movements on the Continent, we' (note well! An out-and-out solecism in this single phrase which they have daringly tacked on to subject, copula and predicate, and should in any case read: and hence in a better position than the rest of you to) have been able actively to keep track of and observe all the combinations of the coalition powers preparing for a fresh invasion of France, where' (very naice!) 'the Cossacks of the North are awaited by their accomplices to' (yet again 'awaited to') 'extinguish at its very centre' (the birthplace of Barthélémy and Pottier) 'the volcano of the Universal Revolution.—The kings and aristocrats of Europe have realised that it was time to put up dykes to arrest the popular tide' (should read: popular stagnation) 'which is threatening to engulf





**[p. 248]**

their tottering thrones.—Large numbers of troops raised in Russia, in Austria, in Prussia, in Bavaria, in Hanover, in Württemberg, in Saxony and, in short, in all the states of Germany, have already mustered' (troops have already mustered!). 'In Italy 130,000 men are threatening the Swiss frontier. The Vorarlberg is occupied by 80,000 men. The Upper Rhine is covered by 80,000 men, Württembergers, Badeners and Prussians. The Main is guarded by 80,000 Bavarians and Austrians. While 370,000 men occupy the localities indicated above, Prussia has mobilised 200,000 soldiers which she is holding available' (sic) 'for launching against the frontiers of Belgium and France. Holland and Belgium, constrained by the coalitions, will support the invasion move with an army 150,000 strong. In Bohemia 150,000 men are holding themselves ready and only await the order to join up with the army of the Main, which will thus be 230,000 strong. 80,000 men are concentrated round Vienna. 300,000 Russians are encamped in Poland, and 80,000 in the neighbourhood of St. Petersburg: all together these armies make up a force of one million three hundred and thirty thousand combatants who are only awaiting the signal to attack. Behind these troops and also (!) holding themselves ready are 180,000 Austrians, 200,000 Prussians, 100,000 men provided by the German principalities, and 220,000 Russians. Taken together these armies form a reserve of 700,000 men; not counting the innumerable' (sic) 'hordes of barbarians which the Muscovite Attila will unleash from the heart of Asia to be launched, as of yore (!), against European civilisation. From German newspapers' (here a note is appended with a piffling sentence from the Neue Deutsche Zeitung to put Lüning in a good mood) 'and from our own sources of information we learn the secret intentions of the Powers whose Plenipotentiaries foregathered in Warsaw on 25 October last. /( was decided, in the (!) conference, that a feint war' (My God! what diplomats!) 'between Prussia and Austria would serve as a pretext for the movement of troops whom the will of the Czar is transforming into blind instruments and ferocious bravoes to combat the defenders of liberty.' (Bravo!) 'In the face of these facts, there can no longer be any possible doubt: at this moment they are organising the massacre, already begun (!!), of all republicans. The days of June 1848, with their bloody executions and the proscriptions that followed them — Hungary devastated and enslaved by Austria— Italy delivered up to the Pope and the Jesuits, after the Roman Republic had been butchered by the soldiers of the French Government, have in no way assuaged the fury of our enemies: they dream of the enslavement of all those people who are fighting for the victory of common liberty. If democracy is not on its guard, Poland, Hungary, Germany, Italy and France will soon again fall victim to the fury of the brutal soldiery of Nicholas who whets the barbarians' appetite for battle with the promise that they may devastate and pillage Europe.

[^1]: In the face of this danger by which we are threatened, arise! Arise French, German, Italian, Polish and Hungarian republicans, let us emerge from this torpor' (Toping Schapper and Willich!) 'which debilitates our strength and paves the way for an easy victory for our oppressors. Arise! Let us ensure that the present days of inactivity and shame are succeeded by the days of fatigue and glory which await us with the holy war of liberty! On examining these dangers we have poin- ted out to you, you will realise, like us that it would be folly to wait any long- er for our common enemy to attack; we must make every preparation and go out to face the peril which surrounds us.' (Just try going out to face something which surrounds you!) 'Citizens, Socialist Democrats, our salvation lies only with our- selves: we cannot count on anything but our own efforts; and, enlightened by the examples of the past, we must provide against the betrayals of the future. Let us avoid, let us avoid above all, the trap that has been laid for us by the serpents (!)



If that's not champion drivel, then I really don't know what is.a

Having read the Rollin, Mazzini, Ruge, etc. manifesto addressed to the Germans,15 wherein they are invited to sing the Bardief and reminded that their forbears were called 'Franks', and wherein the King of Prussiad had already agreed to be whacked by Austria, I thought I had plumbed the depths of stupidity. Mais non! For here is the Fanon-Caperon-Gouté manifesto, as the Patrie calls it,e of the dii minorum gentium1 with, as it rightly remarks, the same content but devoid of chic, devoid of style, with the most pathetic rhetorical flourishes such as serpents and sicairesg and égorgementsï' The

Indépendance, quoting a few sentences from this masterpiece, relates that it was composed by the soldats les plus obscurs de la Démocratie' and that these poor devils had sent it to the London correspondent of that paper, despite the latter's conservatism. Such was their longing to appear in print. In retribution it names no names, and similarly the Patrie names only the three mentioned above. To compound the misère they gave one of the Straubingers86 here (yesterday this same person told Pfänder the sorry tale) 50 copies to take to France. Just off Boulogne he hurled 49 of them into the sea; on reaching Boulogne Brother

[^1]: of diplomacy. The emulators of the Metternichs and the Talleyrands are at this moment contemplating how they may extinguish the torch of the Revolution by instigating in France, through the invasion they are preparing, a national war in which the peoples will butcher each other for the benefit of the enemies of their liberation. Nay, Citizens! No more national war! For us the barriers, set up by despots between the nations they had shared out among them, are henceforward fallen, and the peoples, confounded,' (really: confounded), 'have only one flag upon which, with the fertile blood of our martyrs, we have written: Universal Democratic and Social Republic'

[^2]: On behalf of Their Societies: 'The members of the Committee of the Society of Exiled French Socialist Democrats in London: Adam (Cambreur), Barthélé- my (Emmanuel), Caperon (Paulin), Fanon, Goûté, Thierry, Vidil (Jules); the delega- tes of the Permanent Commission of the Polish Democracy Section in Lon- don: Sawaszkiewicz, Warskiroski; the members of the Socialist Democratic Com- mittee of German Refugees and the German Workers' Society: Dietz (Oswald), Geben (A.), Mayer (Adolphe), Schärttner (A.), Schapper (Karl), Willich (August). The delegates of the Hungarian Democratic Society in London: Molikoy, Simonyi. London, 16 November 1850.' a Marx adapts here a saying current in the Mark. - b 'Le Comité central démocratique européen, aux Allemands, 13 novembre 1850' published in La Voix du Proscrit, No. 4, 17 November 1850 and other papers. - c Teutonic war song - d Frederick William IV - e G. de Molinari, 'Un nouveau manifeste rouge', La Patrie, 28 November 1850. - f second-rate luminaries (literally: gods of minor nations) - s assassins - h butchery - ' the most obscure soldiers of Democracy (L'Indépendance belge, No. 323, 19 November 1850); the newspaper has: 'soldats de la démagogie'.

[^3]: 10-1543





**[p. 250]**

Straubinger was sent back to London for lack of a passport, and declares 'that he is now off to Boston'. Farewell and write by return.

Your

K.Marx

Apropos! Do write sometime to the worthy Dronke telling him to reply about League matters and not to write only in the case of begging letters. The gentlemen in Cologne11 have sent no news. 'Haude', who is now back, having lost all his worldly goods in Germany,334 is described by Weydemeyer as an 'otherwise stout lad'.

You must seriously consider what you are going to write about.335 England won't do, there being 2 articles on the subject already,b perhaps 3 with Eccarius.c Nor is there a great deal to say about France. Could you not perhaps, in conjunction with Mazzini's latest things, tackle the rotten Italians along with their revolution? (His Republic and Monarchy etc., as well as his religion, the Pope, etc.)d

[^1]: [From Jenny Marx]

[^2]: Dear Mr Engels,

[^3]: Your kind sympathy over the heavy blow dealt us by fate through the loss of our little darling, my poor little child of sorrow,e has been a great comfort to me, the more so as, in the last few sorrowful days, I have found cause for the most bitter complaint in our friend Schramm. My husband and all the rest of us have missed you sorely and have often longed to see you. However, I am very glad that you have left and are well on the way to becoming a great COTTON LORD. See that you entrench yourself firmly between the two warring brothers'; their tussle is bound to place you in a position of indispensability vis-à-vis your respected Papa, and in my mind's eye I already see you as Friedrich Engels JUNIOR and partner of the SENIOR. But of course the best thing about it is that, notwithstanding the COTTON TRADE and all the rest, you are still the same old Fritze and, in the words of those three arch-democrats, Frederick William the First.S Kinkel and Mazzini,

[^4]: a members of the Cologne Central Authority of the Communist League - b F. Engels, 'The English Ten Hours' Bill' and K. Marx and F. Engels, 'Review. May to October [1850]'. - c J. G. Eccarius, 'Die Schneiderei in London oder der Kampf des grossen und des kleinen Capitals', Neue Rheinische Zeitung. Politisch- ökonomische Revue, No. 5-6, 1850. - d J. Mazzini, Republic and Royalty in Italy published in several issues of The Red Republican in June-November 1850; G. Mazzini, Le Pape au dix-neuvième siècle. - c Heinrich Guido - f Gottfried and Peter Ermen - s August Willich



