---
Volume: 38
Document_Title: "126. Marx to Hermann Becker. 2 December "
Page_Range: "288-289"
---

# 126. Marx to Hermann Becker. 2 December 



**[p. 251]**

you will not become 'estranged from the sacred cause of freedom'. Karl has told you something about the mummery here. I might add some nouaa That obese ruffian, Haude, shed all his fat during his muckraking tour of the German provinces and trips over his own legs whenever he sees anyone. It would seem that a little hippopotamus of dubious origin has joined the dictator hippopotamus,*1 and that the Great Windmill Knight, Hohenzoller Willich, has reinforced his guard of nobles with a few qualified footpads and blackguards. Our own people dawdle along from one day to the next with the help of a few borrowed pence. Rings is now earning something as a claqueur with the Duke of Brunswick, who is once more loudly pontificating before the courts.

The last Polish banquet, at which were foregathered the French, German, Hungarian and Polish crapauds0 (Willich, Fieschi, Adam, etc.),336 ended up in a free-for-all. Apart from that we've heard nothing of the crew. Last night we attended Ernest Jones' first lecture on the history of the papacy. His lecture was marvellous and, by English standards, advanced, though not quite à la hauteurä for us Germans who have run the gauntlet of Hegel, Feuerbach, etc. Poor Harney was dangerously ill of an abscess of the windpipe. He is not allowed to speak. An English doctor has made two incisions without finding the affected spot. His Red [Republican] has turned into The Friend of the People. Well, enough for today. The children chatter a great deal about Uncle Angels and, thanks to your estimable tuition, dear Mr Engels, little Tille now gives a splendid rendering of the song about the 'journeyman's pelt and the nimble broom'.

I hope we shall see you at Christmas.

Yours

Jenny Marx

126

MARX TO HERMANN BECKER

London, 2 December [1850] 64 Dean Street, Soho

Dear Becker,

I know that you felt greatly offended by a letter I wrote to Bürgers.' However, in this letter, which was written under very try- ing circumstances, I had no intention of offending you any more

[^1]: First published abridged in Der Briefwech- Printed according to the original sei zwischen F. Engels und K. Marx, Bd. 1, Stuttgart, 1913 and in full in MEGA, Published in English for the first Abt. Ill, Bd. 1, 1929 t l m e

[^2]: IN COLOGNE

[^3]: a news - b Karl Schapper - c philistines - d up to the mark - e Edgar Marx - f Presumably Marx's letter to Bürgers of 25 June 1850 (see this volume, pp. 237-38).

[^4]: 10*



