---
Volume: 38
Document_Title: "131. Engels to Marx. 8 January "
Page_Range: "300-302"
---

# 131. Engels to Marx. 8 January 



**[p. 263]**

gros? Tellering II in nuce!1 These Coblenzers are all alike!c Send the things back to me with, if you have the time and the inclination, a line or two for Drönke.

Your

K. M.

First published in Der Briefwechsel zwischen Printed according to the original F. Engels und K. Marx, Bd. 1, Stuttgart, jgjg Published m English in full for the first time

131

ENGELS T O MARX

IN LONDON

Manchester, 8 January 1851

Dear Marx,

Herewith POST OFFICE ORDER for £1, PARTICULARS as before. My buyerd—our clerk—having apparently paid out a great deal of late, seems anxious not to take too much money from the firm all at once. He is rather reluctant—I don't press him overmuch, cela se conçoit." I myself have been involved in very heavy outlays as a result of my trip to London,345 otherwise I would gladly send you the whole amount; as it is, I must for today confine myself to fulfilling the obligation of an ordinary CONSIGNEE and send you half the amount in part payment. The second half will follow—at the latest—in the early part of February, perhaps sooner; as soon, that is, as the firm sends my old man a letter containing the payments made to me.

Jones was up here and bearded his opponents at a PUBLIC MEETING in their own den.346 Leach and Donovan opposed him. The debate, however, wasn't quite what I had expected. Petty stratagems on both sides; much chronique scandaleusef which partly made up for the absence of some of London's amenities. On

[^1]: a Pun on the French words grand (great) and gros (big). - b in miniature - c Probably an allusion to the fact that Müller-Tellering came from Coblenz. - d This presumably concerns the Historischer und geographischer Atlas von Europa belonging to Marx, who had instructed Engels to sell it. - e as is understandable - f tittle-tattle



The success of Jones' performance here was all that could be expected; he put forward as the point to be decided between himself and the Manchester CHARTIST COUNCIL the question of recognising the Executive in London; the votes were evenly divided, although Leach and Co. had had about 3 hours in which to fetch their people to the meeting and a crowd of them had duly turned up. At the beginning, when the company was simply a random gathering (Leach had counted on Jones' not arriving before 9 o'clock but, much to the former's chagrin, he was there as early as 8), Jones was given an enthusiastic reception.

When in the company of Chartists whom he wishes to win over or attach more closely to his person, Jones is by no means as naive as he is with us. HE IS VERY WIDE AWAKE. Perhaps a little too much so—at least, the likes of us 'notice the design'.b

One of Harney's friends here is a boring Scotsman of infinite sensibilities and hence interminable speeches; a second is a small, resolute, aggressive lad, about whose intellectual capacity I have not yet made up my mind; a third, a man whom Harney did not mention to me, one Robertson, seems to me to be far and away the most intelligent. I shall try to start up a small club with these fellows, or organise regular meetings to discuss the Manifesto0 with them. Harney and Jones have a host of friends here, and O'Connor a host of hidden enemies but, until he makes a downright fool of himself in public, it won't be possible to bring about his—official—downfall here. At the meeting, by the way,

[^1]: a Neue Rheinische Zeitung. Politisch-ökonomische Revue - b Goethe, Torquato Tasso, 3. Auszug, 1. Austritt. - c K. Marx and F. Engeis, Manifesto of the Communist Party.



