---
Volume: 38
Document_Title: "132. Marx to Engels. 22 January "
Page_Range: "302-303"
---

# 132. Marx to Engels. 22 January 



**[p. 265]**

Recently my brother-in-law" told me some good news concern- ing myself: my prospective American partner was in London and from a conversation between the two of them it transpired that I was not the man to be of use to his firm. Thus America is put off pretty well indefinitely, since no fresh plan can now be hatched without my consent.

Best regards to your wife and children.

Your

F. E.

First published in Der Briefwechsel zwischen Printed according to the original F. Engels und K. Marx, Bd. 1, Stuttgart, jgj3 Published in English for the first time

132

MARX TO ENGELS

[London,] 22 January 1851

Dear Engels,

You are taciturne comme la mort!' Enclosed I send you 1) a statement by Oswald Dietz in the Basle National-Zeitung against Pfänder and Bauer,c 2) a tattling article against us concocted by Mr A. Ruge in company with Struve and Willich.d You must return the garbage to me within two days at the latest, telling me what action you think we should take against No. 2. If you would like to draft some sort of statement, send it along as well.

C. Schramm is going to issue his own statement. What do you think of this coup de maître' by Atta Troll* and, entrenched behind him, that 'outstanding, resolute man, Struve',

[^1]: IN MANCHESTER

[^2]: a Emil Blank - b silent as the grave - c O. Diet/- 'An die deutschen Arbeiter-Verein', Schweizerische National-Zeitung, No. 5, 7 January 1851 (on the alleged appropriation of Educational Society funds by Heinrich Bauer and Carl Pfänder see this volume, pp. 245-46). - d A. Ruge, 'London, 13 January', Bremer Tages-Chronik, No. 474, 17 January 1851. - e master stroke - f Title character of Heine's satirical poem. Here meaning Arnold Ruge.



