---
Volume: 38
Document_Title: "133. Engels to Marx. 25 January "
Page_Range: "303-305"
---

# 133. Engels to Marx. 25 January 

Bauer and Pfänder naturally won't answer and silence would, indeed, seem to be the most advisable course for them just now.

I have as yet had no news, either from Schabelitz, who wished to take over our Revueh or from Becker, who was going to see to the publication of my essays.347 None of my approaches to Mr Schuberth have so far been of any avail. If Haupt can find a lawyer who will take over the case, he will bring an action against him.348

What are Mary and Lizzyc doing? And above all you yourself? Harney was here one evening with Pieper, Eccarius, etc., and very gay, until his 'dear spouse'd—'half drew she him, half sank he in'e—carried him off almost by force.

Your

K. M.

First published abridged in Der Briefwech- Printed according to the original sei zwischen F. Engels und K. Marx, Bd. 1, Stuttgart, 1913 and in full in MEGA, Published in English for the first Abt. Ill, Bd. 1, 1929 t l m e

133

ENGELS TO MARX

[Manchester,] Saturday [25 January 1851]

Dear Marx,

Je te trouve joli en me disant que je suis taciturne comme la mort! However, I'll refrain from making any further riposte.

The perfidy of that Pomeranian blackguard, Ruge, is crude beyond all measure.g It would be the simplest if you were to draft

[^1]: IN LONDON

[^2]: a It's a bit too much. The words quoted are from Ruge's article. - b Neue Rheinische Zeitung. Politisch-ökonomische Revue - c Sisters Mary and Lizzy Burns - d Mary - e Goethe, 'Der Fischer'. - f You're a fine one to tell me I'm silent as the grave. - s See this volume, p. 265.





**[p. 267]**

a statement to be signed by us both.a A few personal remarks could, if necessary, be appended in the form of notes and signed separately by each of us. I don't know whether I should add something on my own account, if only to say that, in my commercial employment, I have maintained complete indepen- dence and hence do not have to let myself be ordered by my 'principals', as Mr Ruge was by his superior Mazzini, despite all his earlier atheistic boasting,349 to append my signature to moving appeals to the bon dieu0; and that I have adopted this LINE SO as not to fall into the necessity, congenial enough to other worthy gents held up to us as an example by Mr Ruge, namely, of living on democratic charity—or some such. Tell me if you think this is necessary.

The article, by the way, with its moral indignation and its monumental lies, provides splendid stuff for ridicule. It im- mediately puts one on the track of Ruge's intrigues. It's very natural that Mr Ruge and Mazzini's European Committee should be as incense in the nostrils of the worthy Reverend Dulon, and that Mazzini's sublime manifestos should find their only fertile soil in Germany among those wailing North German, Lower-Saxon democrats swimming in Bremen-concocted, belletristic, drivel- sauce. These gentlemen's Friendship of Light350 was bound to find desirable allies in Ronge-Mazzini and in the now once more god-fearing Ruge, while the honour of officially corresponding as the 'German Committee' with the greatest men of respectable European democracy must inevitably have made that malleable parson Dulon receptive to the worst scurrilities levelled against the 'frivolous' and godless folk of the Neue Rheinische Zeitung. Ruge, too, has only plucked up courage since coming to believe that the Revue is dead. But I think he is mistaken and will shortly bring down a pretty thunderstorm upon his ludicrous cranium.

Would it not be a good idea—since we cannot possibly raise a real shindy about this article or reply to it anywhere save in the Tages-Chronikc—to have the aforesaid Dulon secretly worked upon by his friend, red Beckerd? After these scurrilities we can't even be sure that our reply will be accepted.

But it is clear as day that it was only Schramm's' fatuous manner and the ill-considered prating which, to judge by this article, he indulged in at his brother's,' that inspired these

[^1]: a K. Marx and F. Engels, 'Statement. 27 January 1851.' - b Good Lord - c Bremer Tages-Chronik - d Hermann Becker - e Conrad Schramm - f Rudolf Schramm



