---
Volume: 38
Document_Title: "134. Marx to Engels. 27 January "
Page_Range: "305-307"
---

# 134. Marx to Engels. 27 January 

jackasses with sufficient courage to vent themselves so vulgarly against us, the 'isolated and forsaken by all'. The fellow will now himself realise how base are the machinations whose tool he has become, and he must also realise that his stupidity harms himself more than others. The great Ruge doesn't even pay him the half-hearted court he pays to Tellering. 'C. Schramm, not to be confused!'3 What's the fellow up to now? Cette affaire est de peu d'importance.b Trumped-up and misconstrued tittle-tattle, clumsy and incomprehensible insinuations and moral bombast—nous avons soutenu, Dieu merci, de bien autres charges !c The only unpleasantness is that the thing will upset your wife so much, which, as things are now, is undesirable.351

Next week in The Friend of the People I shall duly take the European Committee to task and have already notified Harney.352

I must stop now, as the office is just closing and it's nearly time for the post. More anon.

Your

F. E.

First published in MEGA, Abt. Ill, Bd. 1, P r j n t e d a c c o r d i n g t o t h e o rjg i n al

134

MARX TO ENGELS

[London,] 27 January 1851

Dear Engels,

Enclosed you will find the statement for signature.d There can be no question of sending it to Dulon, for Ruge has made himself co-proprietor of the Bremer Chronik.e It must be sent to the

[^1]: Published in English for the first time

[^2]: IN MANCHESTER

[^3]: a Ruge's article has: 'Conrad Schramm (not to be confused with the Berlin deputy Rudolf Schramm)' - b The affair's of small significance. - c We have, God be praised, survived far worse accusations. - d K. Marx and F. Engels, 'Statement. 27 January 1851'. - e Bremer Tages-Chronik





**[p. 269]**

Now, as it's nearly time for the post, no more than the following:

1. Did you forward to Weerth the letter354 which my wife sent with a few lines for youa?

2. Did you get my letter in which I sent you Dr Magnus Gross' scrawl, etc., and to which I wanted to know your answerb? If you haven't received it, I beg you to complain to the Post Office at once. I sent you this letter the day after I had received yours—about a fortnight ago, that is.

Write soon and tell me whether you approve of the statement.

Your

K. M.

I think it would be superfluous to add any special notes to the statement.

P.S. You mustn't forget, either, to tell the Bremen editors, i.e. the editors of the Weser-Zeitung, to make sure they observe the right sequence, putting Schramm's0 statement after, and not before purs. Apropos! If you have really not received the 2 letters, write to me in English, after you yourself have made inquiries in Manchester, telling me how I should write to the Post-Master General. In my letter of a fortnight ago I apprised you of a new viewpoint about land rent d on which I must have your opinion.

Your

K. M.

[^1]: [From Wilhelm Pieper]

[^2]: Dear Engels, I must inform you in haste that Marx is highly indignant at your complete silence on the subject of his new theory of land rent about which he recently wrote to you. Marx leads a very retired life, his only friends being John

[^3]: a See this volume, pp. 561-62. - b ibid., pp. 262-63. - c Conrad Schramm - d See this volume, pp. 258-63.



