---
Volume: 38
Document_Title: "137. Marx to Engels. 3 February "
Page_Range: "310-315"
---

# 137. Marx to Engels. 3 February 



**[p. 136]**

MARX TO HERMANN BECKER357

IN COLOGNE

[London, about 1 February 1851]

You would very greatly oblige me by sending me Willich's letters.3 Partly because we here by the rivers of Babylonb should also be vouchsafed a share of your Homeric laughter. And on the other hand because the man is exploiting the 'alleged' connection in order to brag in front of foreigners and, at the same time, make denunciations. Finally I feel it necessary that you should convey a note to him, either through me or direct, in which you most politely decline further correspondence on the grounds that, while humour may not greatly endanger him in London, for you in Cologne—and not for you alone but, by way of repercussion, for our party comrades in Germany—its effects may be dire. And what could be more ominous and at the same time more absurd than to be nailed to the cross as a result of a trick played through some mere whim of the 'carpenter's'358

137

MARX T O ENGELS

[London,] 3 February 1851

Dear Engels,

Is it on Maryc you're studying physiology, or elsewhere? If the first, I can understand that this n'est pas de l'hébreux? nor even Russian.

[^1]: First published in Anklageschrift gegen Printed according to Anklage- P. G. Roeser, J. H. G. Bürgers, P. Nothjung, schrift W. J. Ret//, H. H. Becker, R. Daniels, C. W. Otto, A. Jacobi, J. J. Klein, F. Freilig- Published in English for the first rath, Cologne, 1852 o m e

[^2]: IN MANCHESTER

[^3]: a See this volume, pp. 282, 284. - b Psalms 137:1 - c Mary Burns - d isn't Hebrew





**[p. 274]**

U p till now all that my new theory of rent has yielded is the commendable state of mind to which every worthy man necessarily aspires. However, I am at least satisfied that you should be satisfied with it. An inverse relationship of the fertility of the soil to human fertility must needs deeply affect a strong-loined paterfamilias like myself, the more so since mon manage est plus productif que mon industrie:1

I shall now submit to you just one illustration of the CURRENCY theory, my study of which might be described by Hegelians as a study of 'otherness', of the 'alien', in short of the 'holy'.

T h e theory of Mr Loyd and tutti frutti,h from Ricardo onwards, consists in the following:

Let us assume that we have a purely metallic CURRENCY. If there were too much of it here, prices would rise and hence the export of commodities decrease. Their import from abroad into this country would increase. T h u s IMPORTS would rise above EXPORTS. Hence an unfavourable balance of trade. An unfavourable rate of exchange. Hard cash would be exported, the CURRENCY would shrink, the prices of commodities would fall, IMPORTS decrease, EXPORTS increase, money flow back again; in short, the SITUATION would attain its former equilibrium.

What I wish to elucidate here goes to the basic principles of the matter. For my contention is that, even with a purely metallic CURRENCY, the quantity thereof, its expansion or contraction, has nothing to do with the outflow and inflow of precious metals, with the favourable or

[^1]: In the converse case likewise, mutatis mutandis. T h e moral of this: since paper money must imitate the movement of METALLIC CURRENCY, and since artificial regulation must here take the place of what, in the other case, is natural law, the Bank of England must increase its paper issues if BULLION flows in (e.g. by the purchase of GOVERNMENT SECURITIES. EXCHEQUER BILLS, etc.) and reduce it by the reduction of discounts, or by the sale of government paper, if BULLION decreases. However I contend that the Bank should take the opposite course and increase its discounts if BULLION decreases and let them take their normal course if it increases. Upon pain of unnecessarily intensifying the impending commercial crisis. However, more of that une autre fois.c

[^2]: a my marriage is more productive than my industry. - b all sorts of others - c some other time





**[p. 275]**

unfavourable balance of trade, with the favourable or unfavourable rate of exchange, except in the most extreme cases, which practically never occur but are theoretically determinable. The same conten- tion is made by Tooke, but I have found no proof of it in his History of Prices for 1843-47.

As you can see, it's an important matter. Firstly, the whole theory of circulation is denied in its very fundamentals. Secondly, it is shown that the progress of crises, even though the credit system be a condition of the same, is concerned with CURRENCY only in so far as crackbrained meddling by the authorities in its regulation may aggravate an existing crisis, as in 1847.

Note that in the following illustration it is assumed: The inflow of BULLION goes hand in hand with flourishing trade, prices not yet high but rising, a surplus of capital, excess of EXPORTS over IMPORTS. The outflow of gold vice versa, mutatis mutandis. Now this is the assumption of those against whom the polemic is directed. They cannot gainsay it. In reality there may be 1,001 cases in which there is an outflow of gold, although the prices of other commodities in the country exporting it are far lower than in those to which the gold is being sent, e.g. as in England in 1809-11 and 1812, etc., etc. Yet the general assumption is, firstly, right in

abstracto and, secondly, accepted by the CURRENCY chaps.359 Hence not to be debated here for the time being.

Let us assume, then, that a purely metallic CURRENCY is in circulation in England. But that does not presuppose that the credit system has ceased. Rather, the Bank of England would turn itself into both a deposit and lending bank. Save that its' loans would consist simply in cash. If this assumption were to be rejected, what appears here as a DEPOSIT of the Bank of England would appear as HOARDS of private individuals and the loans of the Bank as loans of private individuals. Thus, in this context, the term Bank of England DEPOSITS is simply an abbreviation, to present the process, not in fragmented form, but concentrated in a FOCUS.

Case I. Influx of BULLION. Here the matter is very simple. A great deal of idle capital, hence increase in deposits. In order to make use of them the Bank would lower its rate of interest. Hence, expansion of business in the country. The circulation would only rise if business increased to the extent that additional CURRENCY was required to conduct it. Otherwise the surplus CURRENCY issued would flow back into the Bank as DEPOSITS,, etc., as a result of maturing bills, etc. Thus CURRENCY does not act here as a cause. Its increase is ultimately the consequence of a greater amount of capital put to use, not vice versa. (Hence, in the case under discussion, the first



**[p. 276]**

Case II. This is where the matter really begins. EXPORT of BULLION is assumed. Beginning of a period of PRESSURE. Unfavourable rate of exchange. At the same time a poor harvest, etc. (or else dearer raw materials for industry) necessitate ever larger imports of commodities. Suppose that the accounts of the Bank of England at the beginning of such a period appear as follows:

a) CAPITAL £14,500,000 GOVERNMENT SECURITIES £10,000,000 REST £ 3,500,000 BILLS or EXCHANGE £12,000,000 DEPOSITS £12,000,000 BULLION OR COIN £ 8,000,000

£30,000,000 £30,000,000

T h e Bank is in debt, since it has been assumed that n o notes exist, only the 12 millions of DEPOSITS. According to its principle (in common with the DEPOSIT and circulation banks, only a third of its LIABILITIES have to be IN CASH), its 8 millions of BULLION is too large by half. T o make more profit it lowers the interest rate and raises its DISCOUNTS, e.g. by 4 millions, which are exported for corn, etc. T h e Bank's accounts then appear as follows:

£30,000,000 £30,000,000

From these FIGURES it follows that: Merchants, as soon as they have to export gold, act first upon the Bank's BULLION RESERVE. T h e gold thus exported diminishes its (the Bank's) reserve without having the slightest effect on the CURRENCY. Whether the 4 millions are in its cellars or aboard a ship bound for H a m b u r g is all the same so far as the CURRENCY is concerned. It finally becomes evident that a significant DRAIN of BULLION, in this case £4 millions sterling, can take place without in any way affecting either the CURRENCY or the business of the country in general. T h r o u g h o u t the whole period, that is, during which the BULLION RESERVE, which was too large in relation to LIABILITIES, is being reduced to n o more than its DUE PROPORTION to the same.

c) But let us suppose that the circumstances which necessitated the DRAIN of 4 millions continue, shortage of corn, rise in the price of raw cotton, etc. T h e Bank grows concerned about its security. It

[^1]: b) CAPITAL £14,500,000 GOVERNMENT SECURITIES £10,000,000 REST £ 3,500,000 BILLS OF EXCHANGE £16,000,000 DEPOSITS £12,000,000 BULLION OR COIN £ 4,000,000





**[p. 277]**

raises the interest rate and limits its DISCOUNTS. Hence, PRESSURE in the world of commerce. What effect does this PRESSURE have? Withdraw- als are made from the Bank's DEPOSITS, its BULLION falls proportion- ately. Should the DEPOSITS fall to 9 millions, i.e. be reduced by 3 millions, those 3 millions must come from the Bank's BULLION reserve. This would therefore fall (4 millions — 3 millions) to 1 million against DEPOSITS of 9 millions, a proportion which would be dangerous to the Bank, If, then, the Bank wishes to maintain its BULLION RESERVE at one third of the DEPOSITS, it will diminish its DISCOUNTS by 2 millions.

T h e accounts would then appear as follows:

CAPITAL £14,500,000 GOVERNMENT SECURITIES £10,000,000 REST £ 3,500,000 BILLS UNDER DISCOUNT £14,000,000 DEPOSITS £ 9,000,000 BULLION OR COIN £ 3,000,000

£27,000,000 £27,000,000

It follows that, as soon as the DRAIN becomes so great that the BULLION RESERVE reaches its DUE PROPORTION in relation to DEPOSITS, the Bank will raise the interest rate and reduce the DISCOUNTS. But then the DEPOSITS begin to be affected and, as a result of their decrease, the BULLION RESERVE decreases but so, to an even greater extent, does the DISCOUNT of BILLS. T h e CURRENCY is not in the least affected. A portion of the BULLION and DEPOSITS withdrawn fills the vacuum which the contraction of the Bank's accommodation creates in the circulation at home, while another portion finds its way abroad.

d) Supposing that imports of corn, etc., continue and the DEPOSITS sink to 4,500,000, the Bank, in order to maintain the necessary reserve against its LIABILITIES, would reduce its DISCOUNTS by a further 3 millions, and the accounts would appear as follows:

O n this assumption the Bank would have reduced its DISCOUNTS from 16 to 11 millions, that is, by 5 millions. T h e necessary requirements of the circulation replaced by the DEPOSITS withdrawn. But simultaneously shortage of capital, rise in the price of raw materials, decrease of demand, hence of business activity, hence

[^1]: CAPITAL £14,500,000 GOVERNMENT SECURITIES £10,000,000 REST £ 3,500,000 BILLS UNDER DISCOUNT £11,000,000 DEPOSITS £ 4,500,000 BULLIONORCOIN £ 1,500,000

[^2]: £22,500,000 £22,500,000



