---
Volume: 38
Document_Title: "139. Marx to Hermann Becker. 8 February "
Page_Range: "319-320"
---

# 139. Marx to Hermann Becker. 8 February 



**[p. 139]**

MARX TO HERMANN BECKER357

IN COLOGNE

[London,] 8 February 1851

apropos! Willich and Schapper in company with Barthélémy, etc., have, by monstrous bragging about their influence in Germany and by monstrous calumnies against ourselves, at long last succeeded in bamboozling Louis Blanc to such an extent that he has combined with this 'scum' to arrange a banquet for February and, in concert with same, has issued a programme of festivities along with a kind of manifesto. The little man walked into the trap out of vanity, so as to show Ledru-Rollin that he, too, could wag a German-French-Polish-Hungarian tail. Now the business is en pleine déroute'1 again and the little man suspects that he has compromised himself for nothing and has committed a fruitless piece of perfidy against ourselves who, since 1843, have maintained a kind of lukewarm alliance with him.

But do you know what Willich impresses strangersb by most? His tremendous influence in Cologne. Hence it is all the more necessary for you to send me the letters/ so that a dyke can be thrown up against the 'carpenter's'358 machinations. Adieu

[^1]: First published in Anklageschrift gegen P. G. Roeser, J. H. G. Bürgers, P. Nothfung, W. J. Reiff, H. H. Becker, R. Daniels, C. W. Otto, A. Jacobi, J. J. Klein, F. Freilig- rath, Cologne, 1852

[^2]: a in utter disarray - b The indictment has Freunden (friends) instead of Fremden (strangers). Later Becker himself expressed the opinion that this change had been made arbitrarily by those who drew up the indictment. - c See this volume, pp. 273, 284.

[^3]: Printed according to Anklageschrift

[^4]: Published in English for the first time



