---
Volume: 38
Document_Title: "141. Marx to Engels. 11 February "
Page_Range: "322-323"
---

# 141. Marx to Engels. 11 February 



**[p. 141]**

MARX TO ENGELS43

IN MANCHESTER

[London,] 11 February 1851

Dear Engels, Iterum Crispinus!3

I have just learned that there was a meeting earlier this evening in the Tottenham Court Road in honour of the late Bern. On the platform were: Chairman Schapper, etc., Louis Blanc and the remaining members of the new League of Peoples Committee. In one of the front rows of the auditorium sat Harney and wife. The bulk of those present were from Great Windmill Street.331

Applause greeted Schapper's inevitable speech, WAR TO THE KNIFE-, delivered in English. Louis Blanc spoke no better. Vive la guerre!h

Tausenau, also present, spoke about Bern. Harney delivered a long and, they say, good harangue in which he finally hailed Blanqui, Barbes and, last of all, Louis Blanc, as the socialist Messiah.

Suppose you attended a meeting presided over by Th. Clark Esq., and it was your presence and your speeches alone that lent any real weight to the meeting, would friend Harney regard that as loyal?

Not content, then, with boosting Ruge in his Friend of the People, he must needs indirectly boost Schapper-Willich as well.

Last Sunday he sent for me. The purpose being to persuade Jones to accept the title, 'Friend of the People'. I didn't go. If that's what he wants, let him turn to L. Blanc, Landolphe, Schapper or Willich. I am fatigué6 of this public incense so tirelessly used by Harney to fill the nostrils of les petits grands

hommes."

Apart from this accident, namely, that you, too, Brutus (Harney), if you don't take sides against us at least play the neutral, while Engels does his best for you in Manchester, Eccariusf writes for your paper363 and I occasionally work on

[^1]: Qu'en dis-tu?c

[^2]: a Ecce iterum Crispinus (Behold, this Crispinus again). Juvenal, Satiraes, IV, 1 (figuratively: the same again) - b Hurrah for war! - c What do you say to that? - d tired - e the petty panjandrums - f Johann Georg Eccarius



