---
Volume: 38
Document_Title: "149. Engels to Marx. 26 February "
Page_Range: "342-343"
---

# 149. Engels to Marx. 26 February 



**[p. 305]**

If today's letter hasn't been stamped, you must excuse me. It is too late to go out for STAMPS, and it is essential that the letter be posted this evening.

Your

K. Marx

First published in Der Briefwechsel zwischen Printed according to the original F. Engels und K. Marx, Bd. 1, Stuttgart, jgjg Published in English for the first time

149

ENGELS TO MARX

IN LONDON

[Manchester,] Wednesday [26 February 1851]

Dear Marx,

I have just come upon your 2nd letter. I at once wrote another one to Harney: if you approve of it, send it on to him forthwith." This infamous affair is altogether too much, and he's got to be made aware of the fact. If he allies himself with the others, tant pis

Your

F. E.

Having no STAMPS, I shan't be able to put any on this letter as I am now going out to post it.

[^1]: p OUr lui,h I CARE THE DEVH.. Enclosed a letter which looks very odd to me.376 What's behind the whole business? I don't know to what extent red Wolffc is his own master. Besides, there's so much that's crack-brained about the letter that I can't reply to it without having further information. So let me know at once what kind of a DODGE this is and return the piffle to me. One o'clock in the morning.

[^2]: First published abridged in Der Briefwech- Printed according to the original sei zwischen F. Engels und K. Marx, Bd. 1, Stuttgart, 1913 and in full in MEGA, Published in English for the first Abt. Ill, Bd. 1, 1929 t , m e

[^3]: •' See this volume, pp. 306, 311. - b so much the worse for him. - c Ferdinand Wolff



