---
Volume: 38
Document_Title: "152. Marx to Hermann Becker. 28 February "
Page_Range: "345-348"
---

# 152. Marx to Hermann Becker. 28 February 



**[p. 308]**

the intention of making trouble, etc., don't you think that ultimately this would impress the public more than Schramm's and Pieper's statement? A great scandal could be made of the business, but then Schramm would risk having part of the scandal rebound on him in the form of insinuations.

And again, one sure consequence of such a scandal would be the introduction of a new Aliens Bill380 to protect the honest reactionaries coming over from the Continent for the Exhibition.

But when given the cold shoulder by Landolphe, why the devil didn't Schramm go straight to Harney pour le mettre ei

cause?"

Just time for the post. Adieu.

Your

F. E.

First published abridged in Der Briefwech- sel zwischen F. Engels und K. Marx, Bd. 1, Stuttgart, 1913 and in full in MEGA, Abt. III, Bd. 1, 1929

Printed according to the original

Published in English for the first time

152

[London,] 28 February [1851J

Dear Becker,

I trust you have received the Rh.Z.h I cannot understand your silence. Had you sent me Willich's letters for which I asked you,c I would not have had to report the abominations related below. I must again insist on your sending these letters forthwith The

[^1]: MARX TO HERMANN BECKER357

[^2]: IN COLOGNE

[^3]: a to call him to account - b Neue Rheinische Zeitung. Politisch-ökonomische Revue this volume, pp. 273, 282.

[^4]: See





**[p. 309]**

following report is to be read out to all our friends, who must make it known throughout the whole of Germany.

It concerns the banquet held in London on 24 February, at which two of our friends and party comrades" were publicly 'haynaued'372 under the chairmanship of the bold Chevalier de Willich. To help you understand what follows, a few preliminary remarks:

The French emigres, like all the others, had split up into various factions. Thereupon they combined to found an association in Church Street.362 It was to be of a philanthropic nature, for the assistance of refugees. Politics were excluded. Thus all shades of French émigré opinion were provided with a neutral terrain. In this way, then, Ledru-Rollin and Louis Blanc, Montagnards260

and Cabetists, Blanquists, etc., happened to be here at the same time.

24 February was approaching. As you know, when presented with such a chance of appearing important, the French prepare for it, discuss it, examine its every aspect as long in advance as they would do a woman's impending lying-in. Accordingly, the Church Street association convened a general meeting in order to arrange the celebration of this 'glorious' day. L. Blanc and Ledru-Rollin were present. Little Blanc—NB he cannot improvise but writes his speeches and learns them by heart in front of a looking-glass—rose and made a cleverly couched, elaborate, Jesuitical speech in which he sought to prove that this association, being of a philanthropic nature, could not stage a political banquet and hence could not celebrate the February Revolution. Ledru- Rollin replied. In the heat of replying, little Blanc blurted out that, since Ledru and Mazzini had not included him in the European Central Committee,3is he would not partake of any banquet with them. He was told that it was not the European Central Committee which was giving the banquet, but the Church Street association, comprising all shades of French émigré opinion.

The following day that association received a letter from L. Blanc in which he notified them that he intended to stage a rival monster banquet

So L. Blanc secured Harney and with him part of his following, for his banquet. The English foundations had been laid. But the

[^1]: a Conrad Schramm and Wilhelm Pieper - b In the indictment the following is written over a passage omitted here: 'The following describes how L. Blanc won over his friend Harney with the progressive faction of the Chartists for his banquet.'



Continental background, which was also to have all the colours of a European central rainbow, was still missing. To that end Louis Blanc ran a knowledgeable eye over the caricature of Mazzini's committee — the Willich-Schapper-Barthélemy-Vidil-Peter and Paul committee.

Just a few words about the origins and nature of this committee and its various hangers-on from the respective associations.

When Willich and Schapper, along with their association, were thrown out of the League," they joined up with Vidil and Barthélémy and the dregs of the Polish, Hungarian and Italian émigrés, by which rabble they had themselves dubbed European Central Committee Schapper and Willich, who could reasonably hope that, from a distance, this dirty, tasteless and paltry piece of mosaic might be taken for a work of art, also had the par- ticular aim of showing the German communists that it was themselves, not we, who had the European émigrés behind them and that, whether Germany liked it or not, they were determined to take over her government at the earliest oppor- tunity

In order to conduct his intrigue against Church Street, L. Blanc was not above associating himself with this gang he so despised. They, of course, were delighted. At last they were to attain a position. Although these gentlemen wish to exclude all writers, they welcome with open arms any writer of repute who places himself at their disposal. Schapper and Willich saw their day of triumph approaching when the German communists would assuredly not be able to resist, and would repentantly return to seek shelter beneath their wings

The banquet took place in Islington on 24 February. Two of our friends, Schramm and Pieper attended Addresses were read out. L. Blanc read an address from his delegates, Landolphe one from Deputy Greppo (no other was to be had from Paris), a Pole an address from a few fellow thinkers in Paris, and the great Willich, who presided, one from La Chaux-de- Fonds. They had been unable to get hold of any from Ger- many1'

Now it is up to you to do everything in your power to brand

[^1]: a The Communist League - b In the indictment the following is written over a passage omitted here: 'When, following this, the ill-treatment inflicted on these their friends, who both, according to the above, belonged to the League, has been described, the whole ends thus:'



