---
Volume: 38
Document_Title: "153. Marx to Engels. 1 March "
Page_Range: "348-350"
---

# 153. Marx to Engels. 1 March 



**[p. 311]**

these cowardly, calumnious, infamous assassins before the German proletariat, and wherever else this can be done.

To that end it is essential that you send us Willich's letters forthwith

First published in Anklageschrift gegen Printed according to Anhlage- P. G. Roeser, ]. H. G. Bürgers, P. Nothjung, schrift W. J. Reiff, H. H. Becker, R. Daniels, C. W. Otto, A. Jacobi, J. J. Klein, F. Freilig- Published in English for the first rath, Cologne, 1852 t i m e

153

MARX TO ENGELS

IN MANCHESTER

[London,] Saturday, 1 March 1851

Dear Engels,

You must have the most singular post-horses, seeing that all my letters reach you too late.

As you will very well know, if you have given due attention to the letters you have received, everything you advise has already happened, with the exception of the box on the ears for Landolphe, which I do not consider a proper remedy. If anybody is to be done an injury, it must be the little HIPHIPHIPHURRAH Scots- man, George Julian Harney, and no other, and then it is Harney who will have to practise shooting.

With both your letters to Harney in front of me," I sent the first, because in my opinion it was better written and more apt than the second, amended, edition.

Both Harney and Landolphe have been sufficiently threatened with legal proceedings. Your fear that Landolphe would testify against Schramm unfounded. Rather, he will swear that he, as a committee member, was approached by Schramm before the scandal and asked to keep order among the gang.

Since, then, the 'threat' of legal proceedings is of no avail, que faireh except quietly swallow blows, 'spy', and Schapper-Willich triumph!

All your fears concerning scandal justified. But we, too, will

[^1]: a See this volume, p. 306. - b what can be done





**[p. 312]**

have a SHARP advocate on our side. A little disrepute, whether more or less, can be of no moment to Schramm. But if he lets the matter drop, now that the Church Street362 Frenchmen have become embroiled in it, he will be perdu" unless he either obtains public satisfaction from the Chartists or takes the matter to court. One thing or the other.

Jones, as I told you in my letter, wasn't at Monday's meeting. I had arranged a meeting with him at my house, but as early as Tuesday rushed round to see him, didn't find him in, left a note asking him to come without fail on Wednesday. Didn't come. Went there on Thursday. Was turned away. Left a note of invitation. Didn't come. Thursday evening I wrote him a lengthy letter381

calmly, simply and clearly setting forth the whole dirty business from the beginning, placing, for his benefit, the repulsive consequences in their perspective, demanding public satisfaction, and finally requesting him to call on me and discuss matters. Didn't come, although he was in town, nor yet any written reply from him. So Jones has clearly been worked upon by that little Scottish intriguer, who is afraid of leaving him alone with rne. You see, then, no prospect of public satisfaction from the Chartists. There only remains legal proceedings. Adviendra que pourrai The only drawback being that Pieper will lose his job as a result and that we may well have plus ou moinsc the whole of the Chartist mob at our heels.

The introduction of an Aliens Billis0 would be the most fortunate event so far as we are concerned. Where would those jackasses be without a public demonstration every day?

There's only one other way of settling the matter without creating an almighty scandal, and that is for you to come down, immediately and without delay.382 You could stay with me, as I have now rented two additional rooms. There is, I definitely assure you, no other way. Letters confuse, delay and achieve nothing.

Your

K. M.

[^1]: First published slightly abridged in Der Briefwechsel zwischen F. Engels und K. Marx, Bd. 1, Stuttgart, 1913 and in full in MEGA, Abt. III, Bd. 1, 1929

[^2]: Printed according to the original

[^3]: Published in English for the first time

[^4]: ;l lost - b Come what may. - c more or less



