---
Volume: 38
Document_Title: "154. Marx to Engels. 8 March "
Page_Range: "350-351"
---

# 154. Marx to Engels. 8 March 



**[p. 154]**

MARX TO ENGELS

IN MANCHESTER

[London,] 8 Marcha 1851

Dear Engels,

No more than a MATTER OF FACT line or two today. As you will have seen, The Times didn't accept the stuff.b Mais ça ne nous regarde plus.c

Harney had already written to Schramm the day before yesterday morning. That idle jackass went out at 9 in the morning and didn't return home until one o'clock at night. So he did not find the letter till yesterday.

Harney is publishing his statement.*1 Has written a satisfactory introduction to it. Addresses Schramm as 'DEAR Schramm' and reminds him that he too must abide by his obligations and not have recourse to the POLICE COURT—this document is aimed at the French.

Yesterday the Patrie* (and today the Constitutionnel) carried a statement by Messrs Blanc, Barthélémy, Schapper, Willich and all the rest of the committee, in which these gentlemen declare that Blanqui had not sent the toast to any member of the committee. The Patries comment is that it had not wished to print the statement without first making inquiries. Whereupon it had been informed by Mr Antoine—Blanqui's brother-in-law—that the toast had been dispatched to Barthélémy, one of the co- signatories, who had acknowledged receipt of same. You can imagine the lamentations in that camp!

Yesterday morning, then, Wolff8 sent Wdloff, in company with a real live Englishman, to see Landolphe. The fellow behaved like a discountenanced Grec,h first lamenting, declaiming, vapouring, expostulating, arms and legs all over the place, and then relapsing into a state of total and ineffectual pusillanimity. Will be placed on

[^1]: Mais ce n'est pas tout.1

[^2]: a A slip of the pen in the original: February. - b F. Engels, 'To the Editor of The Times'. - c But that no longer concerns us. - d C. Schramm, 'To the Editor of The Friend of the People', The Friend of the People, No. 14, 15 March 1851 (a protest against the insulting attitude to him and Pieper at the meeting on 24 February 1851). - e La Patrie, No. 66, 7 March 1851. - f But that's not all. - s Ferdinand Wolff - h Greek (here: cheat)

[^3]: 12-1543



