---
Volume: 38
Document_Title: "155. Engels to Marx. 10 March "
Page_Range: "351-352"
---

# 155. Engels to Marx. 10 March 



**[p. 314]**

Finally, bad news from my mater. She has made everything dependent on Bommel.b I shall probably have to hazard a coup de désespoir!"

Your

K. Marx

I have received Willich's letters from Becker.d You will get them on Tuesday.

First published in Der Briefwechsel zwischen Printed according to the original F. Engels und K. Marx, Bd. 1, Stuttgart, , , . , , . „ , . , r 10,13 Published in English for the first time

155

ENGELS TO MARX

[Manchester,] Monday, 10 March 1851

D. M.,

This morning I received the enclosed letter from Weerth and am at once sending it on to you. So the business between Schrammc and Harney is now settled. If you can inveigle that idle fellow into doing it, get him to send Harney a copy of the translation of Blanqui's toast; cela fera son effet.1 It would be an altogether good idea if, now that he is again on the best of terms with Harney, he was to maintain the connection—after all, Harney has a paper.8 A copy of the article that was sent to The Timesh might also be sent to Blanqui in Belle-Isle. Schramm

[^1]: IN LONDON

[^2]: a philistines - b probably Marx's uncle Lion Philips of Zalt-Bommel - c desperate act - d Hermann Becker; see this volume, pp. 273, 282, 308. - e Conrad Schramm - f it will have its effect (the reference is to the English translation of L. A. Blanqui's toast 'A vies ou people') - S The Friend of the People - h F. Engels, 'To the Editor of The Times' (with an English translation of L. A. Blanqui's toast).



