---
Volume: 38
Document_Title: "156. Engels to Marx. 17 March "
Page_Range: "352-353"
---

# 156. Engels to Marx. 17 March 



**[p. 315]**

shouldn't be too lackadaisical in this matter—for he would thereby secure his rear in various directions. Money tomorrow.

Your

F. E.

Barthélémy has made a prize ass of himself—that's one consolation.

Tell Schramm to put the whole story down on paper for Harney. Then we shall have GIVEN NOTICE, and that's always something that may later carry weight.

First published in Der Briefwechsel zwischen Printed according to the original F. Engels und K. Marx, Bd. 1, Stuttgart, iyig Published in English for the first time

156

ENGELS TO MARX

[Manchester,] 17 March 1851

Dear Marx,

I have had a very tiresome attack of influenza, which has rendered me incapable of anything, whether sensible or otherwise, hence my silence. All I could do last week was send you a POST OFFICE ORDER—which you'll have received. The 5 shillings are for Lenchen, who happened to be out when I left your house. If at all possible, I will send you the £2 for HIPHIPHURRAH3 if not this week, then next week at the latest. Schramm can take it to him. Not having heard anything from you up to the present—since sending you Weerth's letter—I, of course, am completely in the dark and am, moreover, still awaiting Willich's precious letters.b I have not seen The Friend of the People containing Schramm's statementc; the thing arrives here at very irregular intervals. Ask Schramm to send me a copy sous bande6; he should be able to get

[^1]: IN LONDON

[^2]: a Harney - b See this volume, p. 314. - c C. Schramm, 'To the Editor of The Friend of the People', The Friend of the People, No. 14, 15 March 1851.



