---
Volume: 38
Document_Title: "157. Marx to Engels. 17 March "
Page_Range: "353-356"
---

# 157. Marx to Engels. 17 March 



**[p. 316]**

I am dreadfully irritated by the stupidity of the arrangements here, which make regular and uninterrupted swotting virtually impossible. I have no access to one of the libraries, and in the other, public one, things of immediate interest to me are only to be found sporadically, and the hours are inconvenient, hence all I have to fall back on is the wretched Athenaeum, where nothing is to be had and whose library is in the most frightful disorder. For instance, I have again been vainly pursuing the Napier,3 and it always takes 2-3 weeks before one can get hold of the next volume. In despair I have taken out Cicero's Letters* which I have been using to study the règne de Louis Philippe and the corruption of the Directoire. A very jolly chronique scandaleuse. Cicero is really priceless; Professor Krug and Sebastian Seiler rolled into one. Since the world began the ranks of respectability have been able to boast no more infamous canaille than this fellow. I shall duly take excerpts from this charming little volume. No more for today.

Your

F. Engels

157

MARX TO ENGELS

London, 17 March 1851

Dear Engels,

I haven't written for a week. For one thing, I too had influenza, out of elective affinity. For another, was criblé de petites misères,c all of which came to a head this fateful week.

[^1]: First published in Der Briefwechsel zwischen Printed according to the original F. Engels und K. Marx, Bd. 1, Stuttgart, 1913 Published in English for the first time

[^2]: IN MANCHESTER

[^3]: a W. F. P. Napier, History of the War in the Peninsula and in the South of Francejrom the Year 1807 to the Year 1814. - b Marcus Tullius Cicero, Epistolae. - c riddled with minor ailments





**[p. 317]**

Enclosed you will find the Chevalier de Willich's hilarious letters.3

Heinzen's disgusting rag b contains what purports to be a letter from Paris, concocted here in London, in which, I need hardly say, we two are attacked first, and then Rudolf Schramm, the deputy, because 'he did not scruple to fritter away his wife's money', and then the 'half-men Tausenau, Julius and Bücher'; finally, and with much bitterness, the great Kinkel. Heinzen will never, ever, forgive him for competing with him in the begging business. Praise is meted out only to the great Ruge and Struve. In this letter from Paris, Ruge lets it be said that he made a one-day excursion from Brighton to London. This scandal- mongering article derived from gossip in a private letter from Ruge and a private letter from Bamberger, i.e. two diametrically opposed accusations, thrown together and edited by Heinzen.

The great banquet, where Ruge performed the part of the 'Infinite Dullard'—Wolffc and Liebknecht heard him with their own ears—was not attended by deputies from either Berlin or Frankfurt.*1 They don't want a Ruge-Struve hegemony.383 The R. Schramm, Count Reichenbach (the Frankfurt Reichenbach, not the party's beard),e and Oppenheim, Bucher clique and, finally, Julius off his own bat, have all resumed their intrigues against the deities of dullness. Of course for noble reasons. Je vous dis, de la merde, la merde tout pure, toute cette canaille-là.1

At the banquet Kinkel, who is publishing the scandalous allegations about us, adopted his best red morocco manner, to speak wistfully of conciliation, 'from the simple champion of the Constitution even unto the red republican.'

All the jackasses, while sighing for a republic, and Kinkel even on occasion for a red republic, paid the most abject homage to the English Constitution, a contradiction to which even the innocent Morning Chronicle deigned to draw their attention as being short on logic.

Nothing further about Landolphe. As befits an homme d'hon- neur^ he goes his way unruffled by the knowledge of being a Grech

unmasked.

[^1]: a See this volume, p. 314. - b Deutsche Schnellpost- c Ferdinand Wolff - d i.e. deputies of the Prussian National Assembly of 1848 and the All-German National Assembly of 1848-49 in Frankfurt am Main - e i.e. Oskar Reichenbach, not Eduard Reichenbach - f Shits, I tell you, shits pure and simple, all this canaille. - S man of honour - h Greek (here: cheat)





**[p. 318]**

saying that he had received the toast but had not informed the others; he thus reveals himself to be a threefold liar. Beneath this letter, the Patrie appended the remark that it would accept nothing more from these jackasses. Its introductory comment was as follows:

'Nous nous sommes demandés souvent—et la question est difficile à résoudre— qui l'emportait chez les démagogues, de la vantardise ou de la stupidité? Une quatrième lettre de Londres augmente encore notre perplexité à cet égard. Ils sont là nous ne savons combien de pauvres diables, tourmentés à tel point de la rage d'écrire et de voir leurs noms cités dans les journaux réactionnaires, qu'ils ne reculent pas même devant la perspective d'une confusion et d'une dépréciation sans borne. Peu leur importe la risée et l'indignation publiques: le 'Journal des Débats', 'l'Assemblée nationale' et la 'Patrie', inséreront leur prose; pour obtenir ce bonheur, rien ne coûte à la Démocratie cosmopolite etc. Nous accueillons donc au nom de la commisération littéraire, la lettre suivante du citoyen Barthélémy C'est une nouvelle, et nous l'espérons bien, une dernière preuve à l'appui du trop célèbre toast Blanqui, qu'ils ont tous nié d'abord, et pour l'affirmation duquel ils se prennent maintenant aux cheveux.'d

Is that not SUPERB? I received your POST OFFICE ORDER. If you pay such rates of

[^1]: a former captain - b La Patrie, No. 69, 10 March 1851. - c La Patrie, No. 71, 12 March 1851. On the statement of Blanqui and others see this volume, p. 313. - A 'We have often asked ourselves, and it is a difficult question to answer, whether the demagogues are notable more for their beastfulness or their stupidity. A fourth letter from London has increased our perplexity. There they are, we do not know how many poor wretches, who are so tormented by the longing to write and to see their names published in the reactionary press that they are undeterred even by the prospect of infinite humiliation and mortification. What do they care for the laughter and the indignation of the public—the Journal des Débats, the Assemblée nationale and the Patrie will publish their stylistic exercises; to achieve this no cost to the cause of cosmopolitan democracy can be too high In the name of literary commiseration we therefore include the following letter from "citizen" Bar- thélémy—it is a novel, and, we hope, the last proof of the authenticity of Blanqui's famous toast whose existence they first all denied and now fight among themselves for the right to acknowledge.' P. Mayer, [Comments on Barthélemy's letter,] La Patrie, No. 71, 12 March 1851.



