---
Volume: 38
Document_Title: "158. Engels to Marx. 19 March "
Page_Range: "356-358"
---

# 158. Engels to Marx. 19 March 



**[p. 319]**

interest in your business, either your profits or your losses must be vast.

Don't forget to write to Dronke. Galeer is dead. Hence enclosed to be sent to Th. Schuster in Frankfurt.

Your

K. Marx

First published in Der Briefwechsel zwischen Printed according to the original F. Engels und K. Marx, Bd. 1, Stuttgart, . lnjg Published in English for the first time

158

ENGELS TO MARX

IN LONDON

[Manchester,] Wednesday, 19 March 1851

Dear Marx,

The business of Blanqui's toast is coming on very nicely indeed. Vidil's statement" with regard to Louis Blanc is priceless— the fellow branded a common liar in the eyes of France and England. Barthélémy has got himself wonderfully embroiled.— There's part of your letter I don't understand: Vidil declares: 'The committee had consisted of 13 persons, not 6 He had been among the 6.' Who are the 6? The signatories of the first statement or, perhaps, the faction which voted in favour of reading out Blanqui's toast?384

The tittle-tattle among the Germans also makes agreeable reading. I saw the account of the banquet in the Daily Newsb—since the thing was respectable it was an occasion which even Mr Mazzini felt able to attend without embarrassment. 'General Haug IN THE CHAIR!' That fellow shows promise of becoming a caricature of General Dubourg as he was in 1830. To judge by the advertisement in The Times, Göhringer's Golden Star TAVERN is now very RESPECTABLE. Since I must collect together all the tittle-tattle, it might not be a bad idea to send out a patrol to

[^1]: a La Patrie, No. 69, 10 March 1851. - b The banquet held on 13 March 1851 to celebrate the anniversary of the revolution in Vienna on 13 March 1848 (The Daily News, 14 March 1851).



LAST—BUT NOT LEAST—the Willichianab did a great deal to enliven my breakfast this morning. What a numskull! How he could regard Schramm's0 letter as an answer to his first one, I really cannot conceive. But the chance of a military dictatorship in the Rhine province, without a press to plague him, sapristi,A that would be quite enough to turn the dense oaf's head. Capitaine d'armes" and sergeant, no more nor less! Social revolution by means of providing paupers' victuals for Landwehr585 families; statistics reduced to a register of 'rations, livestock, vehicles, and troops'! This plan for revolution knocks into a cocked hat the earlier one for conquering Germany with 5,000 men. If that doesn't make sense to the Landwehr, one can only despair of humankind. 'I would take a few men with me and call upon others'—and do you know what the fellow's intention was? 'Citizen Karl Marx is called upon to present himself in Cologne within 48 hours and to take charge of public finance and social reforms under the supervision and control of Citizen Gebert. Failure to comply with this order and any contrariness or argument, as also unseemly jokes, will be punishable with death. Citizen Marx will be provided with a guard of one corporal and six men.'—And now, hearken to what this fellow says of Schapper: 'Nous ne voulons plus de jouisseurs!'1 So even the spartan POT HALF AND HALF and the fat pig's unresisting inamorata count for sybaritism with this self-sufficient sergeant who tipples gratis. Indeed, who knows whether, if Cologne were to be besieged, the fat pig would not imitate the conduct of the noble Palafox at Saragossa who, throughout the whole of the second (the real) siege of Saragossa,386 never put in an appearance because, together with 3-4 dissolute fellows and a crowd of whores, he was busying himself among the wine barrels in the bomb-proof cellar of a convent, and didn't show his nose until the time came to conclude the capitulation.

But to what is Willich replying in the third, jubilant letter which betrays a certainty of victory and a lack of nothing but funds? Had Schramm written him a second one, or had Becker replied to Willich's 2nd letter? Explique-moi celag and let me know whether you need the things back yet; I'd like to keep them here for the present so that I can occasionally make what notes I want.

[^1]: a there's sure to be someone prepared to nose about in that muck, even at the risk of being thrown out - b i.e. Willich's letters to Hermann Becker, see this volume, p. 314. - c Conrad Schramm - d great heavens - e Master-at-arms - f We will no longer tolerate sybarites. - s Explain that to me



