---
Volume: 38
Document_Title: "159. Marx to Engels. 22 March "
Page_Range: "358-359"
---

# 159. Marx to Engels. 22 March 



**[p. 321]**

Speculation in railways is again reaching dazzling heights—since 1 January most shares have risen by 40 per cent, and the worst ones more than any. Ça promet!3

Your

F. Engels

First published in Der Briefwechsel zwischen Printed according to the original F. Engels und K. Marx, Bd. 1, Stuttgart, igj3 Published in English for the first time

159

MARX TO ENGELS387

IN MANCHESTER

[London, 22 March 1851]

Dear Engels,

Above you will find the splendid document which I got Pieper to copy out for you. On the pretext of having guaranteed Mazzini's loan, Ruge is calling for money to be converted into 'public opinion'. Among the 'Prussians' here, Bücher, Eisner, Zimmermann, etc., there is great indignation at these 'vigorous provisionals'.

As for the 'six' who have caused you so much TROUBLE.13 those 6 were Landolphe and Blanc, Willich and Schapper, Barthélémy and Vidil, in a word, the 6 matadors; Hungarians, Poles, etc., the unconsulted mob, did not figure.

In the 3rd letter Willich is replying to nothing but the expression of his own thoughts. N'a reçu ni lettre ni rien de la part des Becker et des Schramm? Today will be an agreeable day for the lad. About a fortnight ago Wolffd encountered him in a whores' coffee house at 2 o'clock in the morning and loudly exclaimed: 'What? The virtuous Willich here?' Whereupon the virtuous one sloped off.

[^1]: The actual CONTRIVER of the German central DODGE6 is the tireless,

[^2]: a That's promising! - b See this volume, p. 319. - c Has received neither letter nor anything else from the Beckers and the Schramms. - à Ferdinand Wolff - e the Committee for German Affairs



