---
Volume: 38
Document_Title: "161. Marx to Engels. 2 April "
Page_Range: "362-363"
---

# 161. Marx to Engels. 2 April 



**[p. 161]**

MARX TO ENGELS220

IN MANCHESTER

[London,] 2 Aprila 1851

Dear Engels,

I return herewith the cover of the letter I received from you today. Might it have been opened by Pitt Ermen? You must

éclaircirh this matter.

Your post office order arrived most opportunely. And this time celerity has increased the capital tenfold, like Signore Proudhon's railway revenues.391

As you can imagine, I'm not being idle. And with the avances* you are making, I hope to collect what is wanting from various parts of the world.

I'm not writing to you about the mystère since, coûte que coûte? I shall be coming in any case to see you at the end of April. I must get away from here for a week.392

The worst of it is that I now suddenly find myself hampered in my work at the library. I am so far advanced that I will have finished with the whole economic stuff in 5 weeks' time. Et cela fait? I shall complete the political economy at home and apply myself to another branch of learning at the Museum.' Ça commence à m'ennuyer. Au fond,9 this science has made no progress since A. Smith and D. Ricardo, however much has been done in the way of individual research, often extremely discerning.

Send me an answer to the question I put to you in my last letter. As you are now devoting yourself to military science, couldn't you embark on a fresh study of the Hungarian campaigns with the help of the Neue Rheinische Zeitung, Palmerston's Blue Book,h etc.? Ça serait très utile.' Sooner or later I shall be bringing out 2 volumes of 60 sheets, and that would fit in splendidly.393 If you wish to find out any details about intrigues, battles, personalities, all you have to do is send me the inquiries in unsealed letters addressed to Baroness von Beck. I have established contact with her. She was a spy for Kossuth. And she's a veritable chronicler of

[^1]: a The original has March. - b clear up - c advance payments - d cost what it may - e And having done that - f British Museum - t It's beginning to bore me. Basically - h 'Correspondence Relative to the Affairs of Hungary 1847-49' - ' It would be most useful.



