---
Volume: 38
Document_Title: "163. Marx to Hermann Becker. 9 April "
Page_Range: "368-369"
---

# 163. Marx to Hermann Becker. 9 April 



**[p. 331]**

alone could cost some 15-20 talers. I would arrange for Weydemeyer to look for one. Apropos, do you know his address? I'd like to ask him about the military ABC books on organisation and tactics, since I can't get that sort of stuff here. You might also see if you can get any books on Hungary out of the Beck woman, or else through her. I shall also need the Decker, which you still have.a

Your

F. E.

First published in Der Briefwechsel zwischen Printed according to the original F. Engels und K. Marx, Bd. 1, Stuttgart, . ,gj3 Published in English for the first time

163

MARX TO HERMANN BECKER357

IN COLOGNE

[London,] 9 April 1851

Dear Becker,

Herewith the jolly scribble from the School of Kinkel. 15 shillings have accumulated here for the League."3 10 shillings are still outstanding, having been promised but not yet collected. I shall proceed in the manner you indicate. So debit me with £1. For, owing to the reduced circumstances of the member who should pay it, five shillings cannot be collected

[^1]: First published in Anklageschrift gegen Printed according to Anklage- P. G. Roeser, J. H. G. Bürgers, P. Nothjung, schrift W. ]. Reiff, H. H. Becker, R. Daniels, C. W. Otto, A. Jacobi, J. ]. Klein, F. Freilig- Published in English for the first rath, Cologne, 1852 time

[^2]: a C. von Decker, La Petite guerre, ou Traité des opérations secondaires de la guerre (see this volume, pp. 405-06). - b Communist League



