---
Volume: 38
Document_Title: "165. Marx to Engels. 15 April "
Page_Range: "370-372"
---

# 165. Marx to Engels. 15 April 

oeuvres, but made it exceedingly difficult for the French to employ their manoeuvres against himself. He never made a single mistake, unless compelled by political considerations; on the other hand I have never discovered the least evidence of his having ever betrayed so much as a spark of genius. Napier himself3 says of him that, on occasions when a stroke of genius would have been decisive, no such thing ever entered his mind. So far as I can learn, he never knew how to exploit such an opportunity. He is great in his own way, as great, that is, as it is possible to be without ceasing to be mediocre. He has all the qualities of the soldier, all of them equally developed and in remarkable harmony one with the other; but it is precisely this harmony which prevents any one individual quality from evolving to the point of genius. Tel soldat, tel politique? Peel, his political bosom friend, is to some extent his replica. Both represent a Toryism which has enough bon sens decently to surrender one position after another and to merge with the bourgeoisie. It is the retreat to Torres Vedras.398 Voilà Wellington.

Your

F. E.

165

MARX TO ENGELS

[London,] 15 April 1851

Dear Engels,

You have not had a letter and are getting no more than these few lines now, because FROM DAY TO DAY I have been awaiting your letter—the one you promised. Enclosed a letter from Lupus. I wrote to him 4 days ago, but didn't answer the questions addressed to you.399

[^1]: First published in Der Briefwechsel zwischen Printed according to the original F. Engels und K. Marx, Bd. 1, Stuttgart, JQ.Q Published in English for the first time

[^2]: IN MANCHESTER

[^3]: a W. F. P. Napier, History of the War in the Peninsula - b As the soldier is, so are his politics.



I shall send you a letter from Rothacker in my next. That jackass, too, is an editor in America. From his letter it transpires that, from the extreme FAR WEST to the east we are being loudly inveighed against, both in speech and in print. In his rag Weitling published an article said to be from Paris but in fact by Willich, attacking me and you.3 Schnauffer, on the other hand, has attacked the great Willich.

As for Struve, no sooner had he made himself answerable for the 10 millions, than he distributed a leaflet in the City begging for money to help him emigrate to America, together with Amalia.b In this he was successful. Last Friday he pushed off, still with Amalia.

Willich, with Göhringer for mentor, is said to have become very devoted to the TRICKER. Incidentally, for a fortnight after receiving the latest reply from pseudo-Becker, enclosing the toast, he suffered from a bilious fever. For 2 weeks never left the chapel, i.e. the barracks. And on his return to the Windmill,331 he brought up for discussion the question of the toast and the introductory comment,' presumably so as to equip himself with a testimonium paupertatis.d

Schapper has framed a constitution for England since, after mature consideration and lengthy discussion in that same Wind- mill, they decided that England had no written constitution and must therefore be given one. And Schapper-Gebert will provide her with this constitution. It's already written.

Schimmelpfennig has been travelling round Germany and has everywhere been busily engaged in intrigues against us, in the common interest of Willich-Schapper, Ruge-Kinkel, Becker e-Sigel. Especially at the seats of Kinkel-mania, and more particularly in Westphalia, Osnabrück, Bielefeld, etc., where they've never been well-disposed towards us, there is no end to the tittle-tattle.

Your

K. M.

[^1]: First published abridged in Der Briefwech- Printed according to the original sei zwischen F. Engels und K. Marx, Bd. 1, Stuttgart, 1913 and in full in MEGA, Published in English for the first Abt. Ill, Bd. 1, 1929 t l m e

[^2]: a 'Paris, 2. Januar 1851', Die Republik der Arbeiter, No. 2, February 1851. - b Amalie Struve - c See K. Marx and F. Engels, 'Introduction to the Leaflet of L. A. Blanqui's Toast Sent to the Refugee Committee'. - d certificate of poverty - e Johann Philipp Becker



