---
Volume: 38
Document_Title: "166. Engels to Marx. 15 April "
Page_Range: "372-373"
---

# 166. Engels to Marx. 15 April 



**[p. 166]**

ENGELS T O MARX

IN LONDON

Manchester, Tuesday, 15 April [1851]

Dear Marx,

Herewith POST OFFICE ORDER for £ 5 . If your wife's state of health and your other circumstances permit, come u p the day after tomorrow, Thursday. 3 9 2 T h e r e are three trains for you to choose from: 1. at half past six in the morning, arriving here at 2 o'clock (has 2nd class); 2. the PARLIAMENTARY TRAIN 4 0 0 at seven in the morning (2nd and 3rd class), arriving at half past six in the evening; 3. at 12 o'clock midday, arriving at 9 in the evening (2nd class). T h e n , from Friday to Monday we could make a t o u r of the neighbourhood.

Anyway, write and tell me by return whether you're coming and by which train; I shall then be at the station. If you can't come u p on Thursday, although sous beaucoup de rapports3 that would be preferable, then come u p on Friday. At any rate, let me know at once how and when.

All else I'll leave for verbal discussion, since I'd better go and get the POST OFFICE ORDER straight away. My regards to your wife and children.

Your

F. E.

Once again the Post Office was too crowded—enclosed half a five-pound note—the other half by the next post.

[^1]: First published in: Marx and Engels,

[^2]: Works, First Russian Edition, Vol. XXII, Moscow, 1929

[^3]: Printed according to the original

[^4]: Published in English for the first time

[^5]: a in many respects



