---
Volume: 38
Document_Title: "168. Engels to Wilhelm Wolff. 1 May "
Page_Range: "376-379"
---

# 168. Engels to Wilhelm Wolff. 1 May 



**[p. 339]**

When you write to Cologne, it would be a good idea to press them for Lupus' fare—you know what these Cologne peopleb are!

First published slightly abridged in Der Printed according to the original Briefwechsel zwischen F. Engels und K. Marx, Bd. 1, Stuttgart, 1913 and in Published in English for the first full in MEGA, Abt. Ill, Bd. 1, 1929 t i m e

168

ENGELS T O WILHELM WOLFF

IN ZURICH

[Manchester, 1 May 1851]

Dear Lupus,

From the date on your letter which Marx brought me when he visited me here in Manchester a few days ago, I am horrified to see that it is nearly a month old. However Marx tells me that he wrote to you at once.c

As to your American plans,404 dismiss them from your mind. They are superfluous and you'll find something in London straight away, since you know English and there is a demand for people as well-grounded as yourself in ancient languages, especial- ly if you have your testimonials with you. After all, quite insignificant persons have been given the most excellent positions. The American journald affair is nothing but humbug; do you imagine that if there were anything in it, the fellow" would write to Europe for an editor and wait so long? Who knows what is really the case and what has happened in the meantime? You might have to wait till doomsday before being advanced the money for your trip. Moreover at best the thing isn't such as to warrant your going to Chicago on the strength of it; 4 dol-

[^1]: a See this volume, pp. 339-41. - b i.e. members of the Central Authority of the Communist League in Cologne - c See this volume, p. 333. - d Illinois Staats-Zeitung - e Bernhard Höffgen





**[p. 340]**

[] I hope that you'll have it by now and, as soon as it is in your possession, pack your bags, obtain a passport to London and up anchor. I see that newspapers on the Continent are implying that the British Government are not admitting any more refugees. Stuff! Don't let anything put you off, not even, say, a directive from the police that you must have a visa from the British Ambassador in Berne. You need nothing of the kind. All you need is a visa enabling you to cross France, i.e. from the French Embassy, which the Swiss will procure for you. You simply pass through the country and cross over here. Even should the French—and they're quite capable of this—direct you to Le Havre and thence to America, all you have to do at Le Havre is board the steamer for Southampton or London. You know that no one is ever stopped at a port of entry here, and despite all the empty chatter in the reactionary press, I hope to see you in London for the Exhibition.3 As I have told you, don't let anything put you off but, whatever happens, insist on going to London. Should you experience difficulties over transit with the French Government, and if funds permit, it might even be preferable to take the route I took405 [] write Lorenzo Chiozza [] very nice letter saying you have been given his address by a compatriot of his, and would be much obliged if he would advise you whether any vessels and which, bound for England, are lying there (sailing vessels, there are also steamers) and approximately when they are due to sail. Ask him, too, for the names of the captains. Then you can either communicate with these captains by letter (addressed to them aboard their vessels), or go to them direct. My passage, including food, cost me six pounds (150 French fr.). You might get one cheaper. The trip to Genoa isn't expensive provided you do as much as possible of the journey to Turin on foot—up to that point the country is wonderful—via Geneva and Mont Cenis or, more direct, via the Great St Bernhard (Martigny-Ivrea). From Turin you have the railway almost to the foot of the Apennines. Or by footpath (even more direct) via the Reuss Valley, the Furka, the Simplon, straight to Alessandria. These are all very beautiful trips, the weather is now splendid for a sea voyage (easterlies

[^1]: a Great Exhibition in 1851





**[p. 341]**

As regards the fares from England to New York, they are devilish high—'tween-deck passengers often come off very badly, one such case being still before Parliament—1st class cabin usually costs £15-20; this we discovered when we ourselves were proposing to press on further.406 2nd class on the Southampton steamers is good and cheap; there are also a few screw-steamers aboard which you could travel 2nd class quickly and cheaply if you chanced on one. But whatever the case, I hope that you will come here and stay here. You would have more opportunities here than in America and it's not so easy, once you're there, to come back again. It's frightful in America where the greatest man is Heinzen and where, too, the prolix Struve is now about to inundate the whole country with his piddle. The devil take the public there. Sooner a galley-slave in Turkey than a journalist in America.

Send us word soon and come soon yourself.

Your

F. E.

F. Engels Address: Ermen & Engels, Manchester

[^1]: First published in: Marx and Engels,

[^2]: Works, First Russian Edition, Vol. XXV, Moscow, 1934

[^3]: Printed according to the original

[^4]: Published in English for the first time

[^5]: a members of the Central Authority of the Communist League in Cologne - b See this volume, p. 339.



