---
Volume: 38
Document_Title: "171. Engels to Marx. About 6 May "
Page_Range: "383-385"
---

# 171. Engels to Marx. About 6 May 

Your

K. M.

Jones gave a truly splendid lecture yesterday in which he attacked the COOPERATIVE MOVEMENT and assailed his own public de front? He told me that nothing was likely to come of producing a newspaper with Harney, since the latter's wife b made it impossible to transact business. For the time being he intends to publish a magazine on his own.'09

Printed according to the original

Published in English for the first time.

171

ENGELS TO MARX

[Manchester, about 6 May 1851]

Dear Marx,

You will get the POST OFFICE ORDER tomorrow or the day after. Today our bookkeeper is again without CASH.

Since when have you been using the enclosed beautiful seal on your letters—or has there been a mishap?

Il paraît doncc that the whole of the Neue Rheinische Zeitung will foregather in London this summer, minus, perhaps, Freiligrath410

and the honorariusd Bürgers. I am delighted to hear that Lupus is definitely coming; incidentally, I know for certain that the ALIEN-OFFICES here are far less strict than before and hence all

First published in Der Briefwechsel zwischen F. Engels und K. Marx, Bd. 1, Stuttgart, 1913

[^1]: IN LONDON

[^2]: a head on - b Mary - c It would seem, then - d honourable





**[p. 347]**

that to-do about the ban on sending refugees here is sheer humbug.

The mandrake's signature to the Geneva address is strange indeed—une bévue inconcevable*—further proof that one must maintain A SHARP LOOKOUT AFTER THESE YOUNG MEN and that they must be kept on a tight rein. It can only be a bévue; the little chap's letters were over-zealous and he may have believed that what he was doing was a wonderful stroke of genius. He must be rigorously questioned, upbraided and told, surtout pas de zèle!b

I shall shortly tell you of an economic treatise written by Welling- ton in 1811 on FREE TRADE and monopoly in colonial trade. It's a curious thing and, since it relates to the Spanish and not the English colonies, he can play at being a FREETRADER although right at the outset he rails at merchants like the dyed-in-the-wool soldier and aristocrat he is. It never occurred to him that he would later have to help apply these principles in the English colonies. But that's the irony of it. In return for his undeserved victory over Napoleon, the old Irishman subsequently had to yield to Cobden and, en économie politique,c to pass under the Caudine yoke " of FREE-TRADE. World history does indeed give occasion for a great many pleasing reflections!

The dissolution of the Democratic Provisional Government fo Germany in London'1 fills me with sorrow. Such a fine opportunit for the jackasses to hold themselves up to public ridicule will no readily recur. On the other hand the great Franz Raveaux has reopened his cliquish polemic in the Kölnische Zeitung with Mr Paul Franck and other jackasses. He is again ripe for election to some national mad-house in which to declare: 'Gentlemen, this is a very great day for the city of Cologne!' The oaf is now in Brussels. Our friend Engels, the Commandant, has become General and First Commandant, and the philistines gave a dinner for him at which 'our Stupp' proposed his health. So you see, you can still get somewhere, even if your name is Engels. And, in returning thanks, that fat old swine, once a lieutenant under Napoleon, expressed his pleasure at the specifically Prussian spirit both of the celebration and of the city of Cologne.'

[^1]: a an inconceivable blunder (reference to Dronke's signature to the address sent from Geneva to the organisers of the 'banquet of the equal' on 24 February, see this volume, p. 342) - b above all no zeal! (words ascribed to Talleyrand) - c in political economy - d i.e. the Committee for German Affairs (see this volume, p. 342) - e This sentence is in a local dialect in the original - ' 'Köln, 2. Mai', Kölnische Zeitung, No. 106, 3 May 1851.

[^2]: IS*



