---
Volume: 38
Document_Title: "172. Engels to Marx. 8 May "
Page_Range: "385-387"
---

# 172. Engels to Marx. 8 May 

I am, by the way, morally convinced that Willich and Co. are hatching an ambitious plan for the revolutionisation of England during the Exhibition, although it's equally certain that they won't raise a finger. It won't be the first or last time.

The 2nd ST^MP on my letters is for late posting. The STAMP enables me to get the letter off by the same train 11/i hours after the ordinary post office has closed. In any case it's the firm that pays.

Your

F. E.

First published in Der Briefwechsel zwischen F. Engels und K. Marx, Bd. 1, Stuttgart, 1913

Printed according to the original

Published in English for the first time

172

ENGELS TO MARX

IN LONDON

[Manchester,] Thursday, 8 Maya [1851] 10 o'clock at night

Dear Marx,

I sent you today by the first post a POST OFFICE ORDER for £5, which I hope you have received.

Something's décidément amiss with the English mails. First, the letter that arrived at your place open. Then your letter to me of the day before yesterday, with the defaced seal, which I returned to you. Now, today, Thursday the 8th, at 7 in the evening, I get your letter of the 5th, i. e. Monday, the one about the electricity business. This letter has three London postmarks dated the 6th (Tuesday), two of which prove that it was posted on Tuesday morning before 10 o'clock. Also a Manchester postmark dated the 7th (yesterday) and, finally, two others of today's date. In addition a defaced, badly patched up, unfamiliar seal which I return herewith for your inspection. I am sending the envelope straight

[^1]: 3 The original has: June. - b decidedly





**[p. 349]**

The fact that something untoward befell the letter is also evident from a mark they have made on it. In the address there is a cross before and after the word Manchester, thus:

x Manchester x

only with thicker strokes than mine.

Keep any seals I return to you; we may perhaps need them. Tomorrow I'll write to you about the other points you raised; now I shall go straight out and post this letter and the one to the postmaster. My kindest regards to your wife.

Your

F. E.

The letter has been so clumsily opened that the outline of the original, larger seal is still plainly visible. Sealing-wax is of little avail if, underneath, there's no wafer to secure all four sides of the envelope. As it happens I have none here and, since I want this letter to reach you unopened, I have no alternative but to send it to Schramm,b who lives closer to you than Pieper, and through whom you at least have a chance of getting it quickly.

Le tout considéré? it would, perhaps, be better to send it to Pieper, which I shall do.

[^1]: First published in MEGA, Abt. Ill, Bd. 1, 1929

[^2]: Printed according to the original

[^3]: Published in English for the first time

[^4]: a 'The Debate in the First Chamber; Germany. Prussia. Berlin, 4 May', The Daily News, 8 May 1851. - '' Conrad Schramm - •" All things considered



