---
Volume: 38
Document_Title: "174. Engels to Marx. 15 May "
Page_Range: "390-391"
---

# 174. Engels to Marx. 15 May 

and pays 2,000 zwanzigers a month in taxes. He asked me straight out when the fun was going to begin, since in Lecco—the only place where I'm popular—they had come to the conclusion that I must know the exact day and hour.

Tomorrow Wellington, whom these fellows have kept me from.

Your

F. E.

This letter is sealed with sealing-wax and our firm's seal, E. & E. So you'll be able to see if it's been opened.

First published in Der Briefwechsel zwischen Printed according to the original F. Engels und K. Marx, Bd. 1, Stuttgart, jgj3 ' Published in English for the first time

174

ENGELS TO MARX

[Manchester,] Thursday [15 May 1851]

Dear Marx,

Last week I sent off a whole SHIPLOAD of letters to you, among them 1 containing money and 1 through Pieper. Then last Tuesday, yet another, to which I was expecting an answer at least today. Pas une ligne? I can only suppose that all the letters went astray, since I had at least expected an answer to the one sent through Pieper; its failure to arrive has put me in an awkward position vis-à-vis the postmaster here. Or else there's been some mishap, in which case, too, deux motsh would be welcome since I'm

considérablement worried by the business and, unless I hear from you tomorrow, or the day after tomorrow at the latest, I shan't know what's the matter, or how I should arrange for letters to reach you without going astray.

[^1]: IN LONDON

[^2]: a Not a line. - b a couple of words



