---
Volume: 38
Document_Title: "175. Marx to Engels. 16 May "
Page_Range: "391-393"
---

# 175. Marx to Engels. 16 May 

The postmaster here has asked that in future you should not address your letters as up till now, but like this: at the top, the name, beneath it, number and street and, right at the bottom, Manchester. He blames this for the fact that a recent letter of yours made the return journey to London and then back here again. An answer by return, then.

Your

F. E.

First published in: Marx and Engels, Printed according to the original Works, First Russian Edition, Vol. XXII, Moscow 1929 Published in English for the first time

175

MARX TO ENGELS

IN MANCHESTER

London, 16 May 1851

Dear Engels,

too late for me to answer. I was, as it happens, already at the Museuma by the time the POSTMAN arrived, and didn't return home until 7 o'clock in the evening. Even with the best will in the world I couldn't have written to you yesterday since I had such severe abdominal trouble that I felt as though my head would burst like the negro's drum in Freiligrath's poem.b

The earlier confusion was due simply to the fact that I immediately gave one of the two idlers (Schramm)c a note to post off to you in answer to your first letter. He missed the post, and still had the note in his pocket-book yesterday.415

As for the ELECTRICITY, the account appeared in The Economist of 1845d and contains, besides what I passed on to you, nothing save the statement that the experiment was carried out with great success in Scotland. Even the FARMER is named.

[^1]: I received your letter, which arrived the day before yesterday,414

[^2]: a British Museum - b F. Freiligrath, 'Der Mohrenfürst'. - c Conrad Schramm - d The Economist, Vol. Ill, Nos. 17 and 18, 26 April and 3 May, 1845.





**[p. 355]**

Did you see how the impertinent Kinkel got his wife to deny in the Kölnische Zeitung that he had any connection with the manifesto of the bold 'Provisionals'?0 and how, in order to titillate the interest of the German philistine, he purports to have a 'serious disease'?

As a result of intervention by my worthy brother-in-law-cum- minister,d the printing of my things, as of the Revue? has again come to a standstill.347 It would seem that Becker' has run into difficulties in Verviers.

In France Cavaignac appears to be making spanking progress. While his election would be the rational solution,416 it would postpone the revolution for years to come. The meeting between Nicholas, Frederick William and Habsburg417 is neither more nor less significant than that between General Haug, Ruge and Ronge. Incidentally, to tax incomes was at that particular moment the shrewdest thing the Prussians could do.

Now a look at the émigrés here. Led by a fellow (a German) whose name I don't know, or rather, along with this fellow, the immortal Faucher, the inevitable E. Meyen, now also here, etc., undertook the editing of the German article for the London (DAILY) Illustrated News. As none of the chaps knows English, they asked that a German-Englishman should supervise the editing. The superior allotted to them was an old woman who was last in Germany 20 years ago and speaks broken German. Her deletions equalled old Dolleschal Fs, notably E. Meyen's profound article 'Skulptur'. What this idiot was doing was to reproduce here in London the asinine artistic concoctions that appeared 10 years ago in a Berlin literary gossip sheet.g

Faucher was also unmercifully blue-pencilled. And a few days ago the editor summoned these louts, who humbly, if reluctantly, suffer the old woman's domination, and told the gentlemen that

[^1]: a is incomprehensible - '' See this volume, p. 349. - c The reference is to the manifesto 'To the Germans' issued by the Committee for German Affairs (see this volume, p. 342). An excerpt from Johanna Kinkel's letter about Gottfried Kinkel having nothing to do with the manifesto was published in the Kölnische Zeitung, No. 114, 13 May 1851. - d Ferdinand von Westphalen - e K. Marx, 'Gesammelte Aufsätze' and the Neue Rheinische Zeitung. Politisch-ökonomische Revue. - ' Hermann Becker - 8 Athenäum



