---
Volume: 38
Document_Title: "176. Engels to Marx. 19 May "
Page_Range: "393-396"
---

# 176. Engels to Marx. 19 May 



**[p. 356]**

What is more, Mr Faucher was unceremoniously jettisoned by the Kölnische Zeitung weeks ago on the grounds that the public found his articles boring.

What is your view of the Portuguese revolution?418

Mr A. Goegg is here, was immediately taken in tow by Willich & Co., and gives lectures in Windmill Street.331 Hurrah!

Maintenant, mon cher,3 farewell. From now on our correspon- dence will get properly back on the rails again.

Your

K. M.

First published slightly abridged in Der Printed according to the original Briefwechsel zwischen F. Engels und K. Marx, Bd. 1, Stuttgart, 1913 and in Published in English for the first full in MEGA, Abt. Ill, Bd. 1, 1929 t l n n e

176

ENGELS TO MARX

Manchester, Monday, 19 May 1851

Dear Marx,

I'm glad that nothing untoward happened to the letters, it's always better thus. The postmaster here also gave me a satisfactory explanation for the late arrival of the letter. In future, when writing the address, put street and number above the name of the town, so that 'Manchester' is right at the bottom. It's what the post office clerks are used to and, because the name of the street was at

[^1]: IN LONDON

[^2]: a Now, dear friend





**[p. 357]**

the bottom they overlooked the 'Manchester' in that particular letter and ent it back to London s as a local London letter. The latest is that you have been utterly worsted. You believe you have discovered the correct theory-of land rent. You believe you are the first to demolish Ricardo'^ theory. Malheureux que tu es,* you have been outflanked, destroyed, beaten, overwhelmed, the whole foundation of your monumentum aere perenniusb has crum- bled away. Hearken: Mr Rodbertus has just brought out the third volume of his Sociale Briefe an v. Kirchmann—18 sheets. This volume contains a 'complete refutation of Ricardo's doctrine of land rent and the exposition of a new theory of rent'—last week's Leipzig Illustrierte Zeitung^ That's cooked your goose for you!

The great Kinkel's efforts to extricate himself from the disreputable society known as the European Committee without getting into bad odour are most entertaining.*1 You'll have seen in Saturday's Sune that a handful of wailing democrats have succeeded in organising a meeting and some little RIOTS near Elberfeld, at which they distributed these proclamations. This was made possible through German-Catholic connections419 of Ronge's. Neither Kinkel nor any other member of the chorus would have done anything there.

The Cavaignac business is unfortunate in all respects; if Girardin regards him as having the best prospects, it must be true. Besides, the fellows are coming increasingly to realise that a revision420 is impossible—by legal means. And, if illegal, it would be a coup d'état, and whoever first embarks on coups d'état will be crushed, the Débats1 declares. Napoleon is beginning to grow horriblement threadbare. Changarnier's done for, permanently pensioned off; however nice coalition may be, it can have no immediate practical results—il n'y a que Cavaignac? Whether or not the fellow postpones the revolution would after all be of no great moment; a few years of determined industrial development, a crisis surmounted and a new era of prosperity could do no harm at all, particularly if accompanied by bourgeois reforms in France, etc. But in France Cavaignac and bourgeois reform mean tariff reform and an alliance with England and, at the first opportunity, war against the Holy Alliance,271 with English help, with due time

[^1]: a Wretch that you are - b memorial more enduring than bronze (Horace, Carmina, III, 30, 1) - c Illustrierte Zeitung, No. 410, 10 May 1851. - d See this volume, p. 309. - e The Sun, 17 May 1851. - f 'France. Paris, 15 May', Journal des Débats politiques et littéraires, 16 May 1851. - S there's no one but Cavaignac





**[p. 358]**

to arm, with a long prepared invasion of Germany, and that might cost us the Rhine frontier which is, in any case, the best means of quieting crapaud" socialism with a part-payment in gloire.h

The Débats, by the way, has fallen so low that it sees no salvation for society except in upholding the new electoral law.421

The Faucher and Meyen affair is truly splendid. All I have seen of the German Illustrated London News is the front page of the first number in a SHOP window, so I was RATHER curious to know who the 'leading German writers' of this pompous nonsense might be.

The Frankfurter Journal purports to have heard from Cologne1

that things are now tolerable for the refugees in London, with the exception of those in the barracks, amongst whom is Willich. The Augsburg Allgemeine actually believes that the ALIENS BILL380 is still in force and pictures the refugees—those Wandering Jews of the nineteenth century—creeping round London in mortal terror of this Bill.

I'll say nothing about the Portuguese revolution.418 Except how remarkable it is that, as a purely individual insurgent, as ôte-toi de là, Costa Cabrai, que je m'y mettef Saldanha should have achieved absolutely nothing, but that from the moment he was compelled to ally himself with the liberal bourgeoisie of Oporto and bring to his side an omnipotent representative of this bourgeois power in the person of Manuelc Passos, the whole army should then have rallied to him. The position accorded to Passos, and what happens next, will show whether or not Saldanha and the Queenf will immediately set about trying to cheat the bourgeoisie again. Lisbon is nothing, Oporto being the centre of the constitutional bourgeoisie, of Portugal's MANCHESTER SCHOOL422

You can thank your stars that Mr Goegg didn't call on you. Le diable emporte toutes ces médiocrités gonflées^

Your

F. E.

[^1]: First published in Der Briefwechsel zwischen Printed according to the original F. Engels und K. Marx, Bd. 1, Stuttgart, 2gj3 Published in English for the first

[^2]: a philistine - b glory - c 'Cologne, 8 May', Frankfurter Journal, No. I l l , second supplement, 9 May 1851. - d get out, Costa Cabrai, so I can take your place (Saint-Simon, Catéchisme politique des industriels) - e The original has: José. - f Maria II da Gloria - K Devil take all these inflated mediocrities.



