---
Volume: 38
Document_Title: "179. Engels to Marx. 27 May "
Page_Range: "402-403"
---

# 179. Engels to Marx. 27 May 



**[p. 365]**

Give my regards to Freiligrath when you see him, and also to your family, not forgetting Citizen Musch.a I shall be coming to London about a week later than I thought, the thing being dependent on a host of trifling matters.423

Apropos, not a word yet from Cologne. Have you written? Unless I get the letter soon, it will be no good to me.b I don't know why Daniels shouldn't oblige me. Couldn't you write again? Daniels could dash off a line or two and let me have it by return. Otherwise I might find myself in the deuce of a predicament.

Your

F. E.

First published in Der Briefwechsel zwischen Printed according to the original F. Engels und K. Marx, Bd. 1, Stuttgart, jgj3 Published in English in full for the first time

179

ENGELS TO MARX

[Manchester,] Tuesday [27 May 1851]

D. M.,

I shall be coming to London on Saturday if nothing inter My fears for the people in Cologne have all too soon been realised; the arrests of red Becker0 and Röser on charges of high treason and attempts to subvert the state system, and the attempt- ed arrest of silent Heinrichd are clearly not unconnected with the business of the League.' Fortunately no papers whatever, according to the Frankfurter Journal,1 were found on the two who

[^1]: IN LONDON

[^2]: 423 venes.

[^3]: a Edgar Marx - b See this volume, p. 341. - c Hermann Becker - d Heinrich Bürgers - e the Communist League - f 'Cologne, 20 May', Frankfurter Journal, No. 123. 23 Mav 1851.



