---
Volume: 38
Document_Title: "183. Engels to Joseph Weydemeyer. 19 June "
Page_Range: "407-410"
---

# 183. Engels to Joseph Weydemeyer. 19 June 



**[p. 183]**

ENGELS TO JOSEPH WEYDEMEYER435

IN FRANKFURT AM MAIN

Manchester, 19 June 1851

Dear Hans,

Marx has just communicated to me a letter of yours from which I at last find a definite address for you, which I have been seeking for some time past. For I wish to consult you about the following matter:

Since arriving in Manchestera I have been swotting up military affairs, on which—at least to start off with—I found fairly adequate material here. I was prompted to do this by the immense importance which must attach to the partie militaireh in the next movement, combined with a long-standing inclination on my part, my articles on the Hungarian campaign in the days of the newspaper0 and finally my glorious exploits in Baden,264 and I would like to take it at least far enough to be able to join in theoretical discussion without making too much of a fool of myself. Now the material available to me here—-on the Napoleonic and, to some extent, revolutionary campaigns—presupposes a mass of detail, my knowledge of which is non-existent or very superficial, and about which only superficial, if any, information can be obtained by dint of laborious research. Autodidacticism, however, is sheer foolishness and, unless one devotes oneself systematically to the thing, one achieves nothing worthwhile. What I now actually need, you will better understand if I remind you that—disregarding, of course, my promotion in Baden—I never rose higher than a Royal Prussian Bombardier in the Landwehr436

and consequently my comprehension of the details of the campaigns—and indeed as regards the various arms of the service—is hampered by the absence of the middle link which, in Prussia, is provided by the subalterns' examination. I am not concerned, of course, with the tedious minutiae of military drill, etc., which would be of little use to me since my eye trouble, as I have now found out once and for all, renders me completely unfit for active service of any sort; rather, I am concerned with an

[^1]: a since mid-November 1850 - b military aspect - c Neue Rheinische Zeitung (see present edition, vols. 8 and 9)





**[p. 371]**

I would ask you to indicate sources on all these elementary matters and this in such a way that I can immediately get hold of the things. Indeed, what I would like best of all would be things from which I could see, on the one hand, the present general average state of individual branches .and, on the other, the differences existing between the various modern armies. For instance, the different construction of field-piece carriages, etc., the different methods of sub-dividing and organising divisions, army corps, etc. Again I should be particularly interested in learning about the organisation of armies, commissariat, hospitals, about every aspect of the matériel necessary to any given army.

From this you will be able to gauge approximately what I need and which books you should recommend to me. I would suppose that as regards such manuals German military literature contains more useful matter than does the French or the English. I need hardly say that I am concerned with the knowledge of what is practical and really exists rather than with the systems or quirks of some unrecognised genius. As regards artillery Bem's manualb

would no doubt be the best.

Anything I am able to find here on more recent military history—earlier periods are of relatively little interest to me and I've got old Montecucculic for those—is naturally in French and English. Among the latter more especially Lieutenant-General William Napier's history of the Peninsular War—by far the best

[^1]: a detached forts - b J. Bern, Erfahrungen über die Congrevschen Brand-Raketen - c This seems to refer to R. Montecucculi's main work Memorie delta guerra ed istruzione

[^2]: d'un generale.





**[p. 372]**

In addition can you recommend some good, specialised maps of Germany, not too expensive but adequate for the study of the campaigns since 1792 (in particular maps of Württemberg, Bavaria, Austria for 1801-1809, Saxony, Thuringia, Prussia for 1806/7 and 1813, North-East France for 1814, Lombardy, Hungary, Schleswig-Holstein, Belgium). I have the large Stieler" here, which, however, is far from adequate. Though I have here batde-plans for the period 1792-1814 in the atlas to Alison's History of Europe*" since the French Revolution, I have discovered that several of them are inaccurate. Are there similar collections in Germany which, without being too dear, are nevertheless reliable?

Do you know Monsieur Jomini, of whom the French make such a fuss? I know of him only through Mr Thiers who, as everyone is aware, plagiarised him outrageously.0 This litde Thiers is one of the most bare-faced liars in existence; there is not one batde in which the relative strengths are correcdy given. Since, however, Mr Jomini later made off to Russia, it may be supposed that he must have had motives for cutting down the exploits de la bravoure française6 to something less than the super-human dimensions vouchsafed them by Mr Thiers, according to whom 1 Frenchman always whacks 2 foes.

Voilà a whole heap of questions. I hope, by the way, that the present persecution of Jews in Germany will spread no further.437

However, I find Daniels' arrest disquieting. It would seem that they want to make searches here in order to implicate us; that would be no easy matte», however, and would fail dismally since they would find nothing.

[^1]: a Stieler's Handatlas über alle Theile der Erde - h A. Alison, History of Europe from the Commencement of the French Revolution - c A. Thiers, Histoire du Consulat et de l'Emjiire. - d exploits of Fiencli bravery



