---
Volume: 38
Document_Title: "184. Engels to Marx. 27 June "
Page_Range: "410-412"
---

# 184. Engels to Marx. 27 June 

Marx will no doubt be writing to you about the scheme for organising from London a lithographic bureau for America.* But if this sort of thing is done properly, it rapidly runs into great expense here, and most of the American papers are by no means sound financially. Lupus is in London and Freiligrath likewise; at the beginning of this month I, too, was there for a fortnight.423

Since, by all accounts, you will also be arriving here soon, it would be best for you to come to some arrangement with one or more papers or periodicals to act as correspondent, etc. That sort of thing is very profitable in London, though admittedly most of the best-paying newspapers are already provided for. Another question is what the press is like in Germany just now.

Capitano Willich continues to live in, on, and with his barracks. What do you say to our erecting a magnificent counterpart to it?

Write soon to your

F. E.

Address: Ermen & Engels, Manchester

184

ENGELS TO MARX

[Manchester,] 27 June 1851

Dear Marx,

It is very bonasseh of the good Saxon police actually to inform us themselves of what we did not previously know or could not have discovered. Bürgers' didactically dignified circular letter with the

[^1]: First published slightly abridged in Die Neue Zeit, Bd. 2, Nr. 28,1906-07 and in full in: Marx and Engels, Works, First Russian Edition, Vol. XXV, Moscow, 1934

[^2]: IN LONDON

[^3]: Printed according to the original

[^4]: Published in English in full for the first time

[^5]: :l See this volume, pp. 489-90. - b kindly





**[p. 374]**

familiar clair-obscur* of its reasoning must have cost them much fruitless brain-racking438; they even picked out all the wrong passages for printing in bold. A pretty figure the great Windmil- lers b cut now, thrown out of their own party before the eyes of the whole world, the great Willich bracketed with Haude, Gebert and other such unknown rabble, with a certain 'Schopper' (derived from 'Schoppen')c whose rare services are so little known that even in Cologne they can't print his name correctly! So FAR ALL RIGHT. But Article 1 of the Rules bodes ill for the arrested men: 'all methods of revolutionary activity', or however it goes.439 It removes the business from the sphere of mere prohibited association to that of high treason. To judge, by the way, from an allusion in the Kölnische Zeitung, I would seem to be right in supposing that the intention is to arraign the whole company in Berlin before the State tribunal which is to be brought into being specifically for this grandiose occasion.

The utter failure of the government's attempt to make a bogy out of the great Dresden disclosure augurs well for the mood of the bourgeoisie. So little terror does the red spectre now hold for the bourgeois that he refuses to listen to talk of a big communist plot and is already beginning to fear that the system of house searches will ere long be extended to himself.

Not a single paper has taken the bait and the government's frantic endeavour to discover further machinations in gymnastic societies, 'free communities'350 and among democratically-min- ded master tailors proves, on the one hand, how much it is vexed by the indifference of the bourgeoisie whose curiosity it is seeking to whet, and, on the other, how little the Rules and the circular letter have led to further disclosures. It would seem that Miquel's house also was searched in vain.

Your

F. E.

[^1]: Qu'y a-t-il de nouveau à Londres?0

[^2]: First published in Der Briefwechsel zwischen Printed according to the original F. Engels und K. Marx, Bd. 1, Stuttgart,

[^3]: J9J3 Published in English for the first time

[^4]: a half-light - b members of the London German Workers' Educational Society - c 'Der communistische Bund', Kölnische Zeitung, No. 150, 24 June 1851. Instead of 'Schapper' the paper had 'Schopper', on which Engels made a pun by deriving it from 'Schoppen'—'a pint pot'. - d What's new in London?



