---
Volume: 38
Document_Title: "190. Engels to Marx. 17 July: "
Page_Range: "426-429"
---

# 190. Engels to Marx. 17 July: 



**[p. 190]**

ENGELS TO MARX220

IN LONDON

Manchester, 17 July 1851

Dear Marx,

I'll write to Klose this very day445—I'm glad you included his address, which I hadn't got.

That you're in a pretty tight corner, I can readily conceive, and this is all the more vexatious as I shan't be able to lay my hands on another centime until the beginning of next month. If you can't wait so long, could it not be arranged for Weerth to advance you something until then? I can repay £5 on 1 August, and another £5 on 1 September, and that is as safe as cash.

The newspaper subscriptions here are at last in order again, and thus I have at last set eyes on our old document* in the Kölnische Zeitung. By the way, in an otherwise apparently well-informed article entitled 'Dresden', the Augsburg paper relates that, as a result of browbeating during interrogation, Nothjung eventually made the most sweeping confessions.15 However, I think it more than probable that skilled interrogators can soon corner him and get him embroiled in the wildest contradictions. A Prussian official is said to have gone there to squeeze still more out of him. Apparently the King of Hanoverc has refused to engage in persecution in his domains, at least in the crude manner usual in Prussia, Hamburg, etc., etc. Miquel's letter seems to bear this out. As you know, Martens has been arrested in Hamburg.446

Incidentally, nowhere has the stupidity of the Prussians been more in evidence than during the house search at Carl am Rhein's, who was also suspected of belonging to the Communist League, and was found to have only letters from Raveaux!

The only passage in the old document that could harm the arrested men is the one about 'excesses',447 all the rest is directed against the democrats and would aggravate their position only if they were to appear before a semi-democratic jury; but it seems

[^1]: a K. Marx and F. Engels, 'Address of the Central Authority to the League, March 1850'. - b 'Noch umfassendere Haussuchungen in Aussicht. Umfassende Geständnis- se des Schneiders Nothjung', Allgemeine Zeitung, No. 189, 8 July 1851 (a report from Leipzig with reference to the Dresdner Journal und Anzeiger). - c Ernst August





**[p. 390]**

Moreover, so madly and recklessly is feudal reaction galloping into the fray that the bogy that had been raised is not having the slightest effect on the bourgeoisie. It is too amusing to see how the

Kölnische Zeitung daily preaches that il faut passer par la mer rougeh

and admits all the mistakes made by the Constitutionalists of 1848. But in truth, with a Kleist-Retzow as Oberpräsident in Coblenz and with the impertinent Kreuz-Zeitung sc flat jokes and doggerel becoming ever more insulting, what can the cultured and sober constitutional opposition do? It's a pity we don't have the

Kreuz-Zeitung over here. I see sundry excerpts from it. You can have no conception of the excessively vulgar, guttersnipish, cretinously Prussian manner in which that rag is now belabouring the decent, well-to-do and respectable constitutional bigwigs. If fellows such as Beckerath and Co. possessed even so much as an ounce of self-respect and resilience, they would be bound to prefer the maltreatment and abuse of a Père Duchesne, in the rude Rhenish manner and the entire terreur rouge,d to the treatment they have to endure daily at the hands of the Junkers and the

Kreuz-Zeitung.

—such are the witty verses with which the Kreuz-Zeitung is now bespattering each of the great constitutional figures seriatim and

[^1]: Then spake the donkey: 'Furthermore Wesel has a councillor. And were I not a moke,' quoth he, 'A Wesel councillor I'd be' e

[^2]: a indeed, there could be no mistake about it - b the Red Sea must be crossed (see Exodus 13:18; 15:22). - c Neue Preussische Zeitung - d red terror- e 'Kreistags-Lieder, II', Neue Preussische Zeitung, No. 137, 17 June 1851. (In the original the rhyme is based on the words 'Esel' (donkey) and 'Wesel', the name of the councillor.)





**[p. 391]**

the fellows meekly put up with it. But it serves these dogs right, who once decried the best articles in the Neue Rheinische Zeitung as 'vulgar abuse', to have the difference knocked into their cowardly skulls. They will look back nostalgically to what was, by compari- son, the infinitely Attic raillery of the N.Rh.Z. The Willich business3 is like a ray of sunshine on a cloudy day. So the 'most popular of men' has reached the zenith of his popularity and may now, as unrecognised saviour of humanity, console himself for the world's ingratitude with a pot of beer and Schapper's friendship. I can imagine his distress, now that the army of the future, the 'nucleus' round which the whole of Europe was to gather, has been destroyed. Where will the noble fellow find his new 'men of principle'?

I can't quite make sense of the Fickler business.b Why did Lupus go straight to Fickler instead of first getting Liebknecht to take soundings, puisque celui-ce n'aurait compromis que lui-même"! It looks as though they were trying to win Fickler over. And then, after Lupus had been there, his letter was altogether too brutal. Either it was not worth taking any trouble at all with Fickler, or—after Ruge had been set up as a kind of lumen6 during the actual conversation that took place between Fickler and Goegg—it would have been enough to break with him without doing it so thoroughly and brutally. It was a mean trick on Fickler's part, c'est clair,e but should it not have been assumed from the outset that South German worthies are capable of such things? And he had certainly made no secret of his respect for Ruge. Ruge's importunity is, of course, unspeakable. But these ever new variations are in themselves proof enough that not one of them can have any appeal whatsoever, and that the 'comité allemand'1 to which Mazzini sends his Roman Epistlesg is still no more than a figment of Ruge's imagination.

See to it that Weerth comes here, and write again soon.

Your

F. E.

[^1]: First published in Der Briefwechsel zwischen Printed according to the original F. Engels und K. Marx, Bd. 1, Stuttgart, ,qj3 Published in English in full for the first time

[^2]: a See this volume, p. 385. - b ibid. - c since the latter would have compromised no one but himself - d luminary - e that's clear - f the German Committee (i.e. the Committee for German Affairs) - s An ironical comparison of Mazzini's appeal to the Epistle of Paul the Apostle to the Romans (New Testament).



