---
Volume: 38
Document_Title: "194. Engels to Marx. About 1 August "
Page_Range: "436-438"
---

# 194. Engels to Marx. About 1 August 

Heinzen and Rüge are still thundering in the New York Schnellpost against the communists and against ourselves in particular. But the stuff's so abysmally stupid that it's impossible to deal with it other than by selecting, at some opportune moment, the funniest bits in Ruge's concoctions and thereby revealing to the Germans by whom, malgré eux' they are ruled.

Have you by any chance read Proudhon's latest bookb? Weydemeyer has written to me from Zurich. Karstens0 is jailed in Mainz. He made an unsuccessful attempt to escape.461

Vale faveque?

Your

K. M.

It would, by the by, be a very good idea if you were to write a signed article for Jones. He is making progress with his paper. He is learning. Ce n'est pas un Harney.6 The Notes to the People is, accordingly, on the up and up, while The Friend of the People is going to pot.

First published abridged in Der Briefwech- Printed according to the original sei zwischen F. Engels und K. Marx, Bd. 1, Stuttgart, 1913 and in full in MEGA, Published in English in full for the Abt. Ill, Bd. 1, 1929 f i r s t t l m e

194

ENGELS TO MARX

[Manchester, about 1 August 1851]

Dear Marx,

Enclosed the 2nd half of the 5 pound note.

I didn't know that Schramm had gone off to Paris.' You had told me nothing about it. Hence it was with the utmost astonishment that I read in the Kölnische Zeitung that he had been drowned—it can't, alas, be true. The cur is very obtrusive—we

[^1]: IN LONDON

[^2]: a against their will - b P. J. Proudhon, Idée générale de la Révolution au XIX' siècle. - ç Friedrich Lessner - d Good-bye and farewell - e He's not a Harney. - f Reference to Conrad Schramm (see this volume, p. 397).



So Weydemeyer's going to America to see whether he can take over the New York Arbeiterzeitung presently being run by Fenner von Fenneberg. If he can stay in New York he will be more useful to us there than in London, where the embarras^ would only be made worse. A reliable chap like him is just what we've been wanting in New York and after all, New York isn't the back of beyond and with Weydemeyer one can be sure that, le cas échéant,c

he would immediately be to hand.

The lithographic correspondenced scheme is quite a good one. Only you must keep it completely under your hat. Should little Bamberger6 and others ever get hold of the idea, they would immediately steal a march on you. As soon as the initial arrangements have been made I should, if I were you, advertise in the German-American papers and, indeed, sign the thing myself, as director, to give it appeal. If it can be done on your responsibility and you think it might help in some way to name me as collaborator, you are, of course, entirely at liberty to do so. If, however, you want to keep your name out of the affair, although I see absolutely no need for this, car enfin' why shouldn't you, too, be entitled to set up an industrial firm and carry on the Neue Rheinische Zeitung in lithograph—the man to set up the firm is Lupus. In this connection Weydemeyer could be of great service to you in New York, especially as regards the collection of money, which is the main thing. I'm convinced the thing will have enormous appeal and that the many American correspondents in London, etc., will soon become aware of it.

If you name yourself as a director there can be no question but that the thing will attract more custom, and this right from the outset; if you choose to name only Lupus, there's no longer any moral responsibility, and his Silesian tirades à la Luther, which are very well suited to the German Americans,—better than your style, which compels them to think—can be given free rein.452 In

[^1]: a it's as good a way as any other of getting oneself talked about - b confusion - c should the occasion arise - d See this volume, pp. 373, 489-90. - e Louis Bamberger - f for after all



