---
Volume: 38
Document_Title: "196. Engels to Wilhelm Wolff. 6 August "
Page_Range: "441-442"
---

# 196. Engels to Wilhelm Wolff. 6 August 



**[p. 404]**

the volume that does it; and that's what these weaklings also say: it's the volume that will do it. The cement, by the by, which has kneaded this dough together, is hatred of the 'Neue Rheinische Zeitung clique', and in particular of myself. When there's a dozen of them together, they're proper fellows.

If you don't become master of the Arbeiterzeitung in New York—which would undoubtedly be best—if, that is, you are compelled to negotiate with the Staatszeitung, beware of your friend Kapp, who's always in and out of the place. We have proof to hand that this individual—for what reason I know not—is one of the main intriguers against us.

Adieu mon cher.

First published slightly abridged in Die Printed according to the original Neue Zeit, Bd. 2, No. 28, 1906-07 and in full in: Marx and Engels, Works, First Russian Edition, Vol. XXV, Moscow, 1934

196

ENGELS TO WILHELM WOLFF

Manchester, 6 August 1851

Dear Lupus,

I shall make inquiries here about Mr Kendall this very day, and let you know tomorrow what I find out about him. Were I to approach him myself at this stage, before he has given you an answer, and some indication that he is considering you, the only result would be that he would dismiss me very coolly and with inadequate information. These GENTLEMEN are extremely formal. Not long ago Hain also applied to this same Kendall for a post and promptly mentioned my name, yet Kendall did not think it worth the trouble to approach me for information about him—if, after this incident, I were to importune Kendall, this could only do you harm. As soon as you have an answer from Kendall, let me know and tell me what he writes; I'll then at once go to him and find out everything I can, and shall do my best to make him well

[^1]: IN LONDON



