---
Volume: 38
Document_Title: "198. Marx to Engels. 8 August "
Page_Range: "445-454"
---

# 198. Marx to Engels. 8 August 



**[p. 408]**

name of the vessel on which you are sailing—I can see from the papers here when it is due in New York. Once in New York, let us have your address straight away.— Marx's is 28 Dean Street, Soho Square, London. All my regards,

Your

F. Engels

Have you heard anything of Dronke? He's stuck in Geneva; Schuster will have given you his address.

First published slightly abridged in Die Printed according to the original Neue Zeit, Bd. 2, No. 28, 1906-07 and in full in: Marx and Engels, Works, First Published m English in full for the Russian Edition, Vol. XXV, Moscow, f l r s t t l m e

1934

198

MARX TO ENGELS

[London,] 8 August 1851 28 Dean Street, Soho

Dear Engels,

You'll excuse me for not having written sooner, and at the same time acknowledging receipt of the £5. So great was the PRESSURE FROM WITHOUT this week that I didn't get round to writing. For the time being I've saved myself from being thrown out of the house by signing a BILL on the LANDLORD

I enclose herewith a copy of the Schnellpost in which you'll be able to see how infamously inane are the doings and chatterings of that bunch of old women, Ruge & Co. As soon as you've read the muck, sent it back. About the letter from which the boorish Heinzen cites extracts—and which in any case, originates from Fickler—a word of explanation: for some 2-3 weeks the jackas- ses— the émigrés—have been holding MEETINGS in order to 'settle their differences', constitute themselves a round 'dozen' and mutually 'set each other up' as the great men of the future. Today they held their definitive sitting. I shall be hearing the result and

[^1]: IN MANCHESTER





**[p. 409]**

shall inform you of it.' But already the seed of dissension has grown so prolific that Mr Sigel has sent me a message through Schabelitz, who is here for the Exhibition,h saying he would call on me.

The New-York Tribune has invited me and Freiligrath to work as paid collaborators.461 It's the most widely disseminated journal in North America. If you could possibly let me have an article in English on conditions in Germany by Friday morning (15 August), that would make a splendid beginning.

As to Schramm, we know that he corresponds regularly with his brother.0 He wrote and told Bamberger not to give us his address. Fresh reports come in daily of his infamous doings here.

Red Wolff has once again become an 'Irishman'.11

Now for the Idée générale de la Révolution au XIX siècle par P. J. Proudhon. The first time I wrote to you about this book," I had read no more than extracts from it—often misquoted, to boot. Now I can send you the crxe Xerov.' First of all, the book contains well-written attacks on Rousseau, Robespierre, the Montagne,2"'1

etc. The force of the true sequence, to use the words of the immortal Ruge, is generated as follows:

I. Etude." It was reaction that first brought about the develop- ment of the revolution.

The revolution of 1789 overthrew the ancien régime. But it omitted to create a new society or to create society anew. It was concerned only with politique' instead of with économie politique^ At present 'anarchie des forces économiques* prevails, hence 'tendance de la société à la misère!' This manifests itself in the division of labour, machinery, competition, the credit system. Increase in pauperism and crime. Again, the State (l'état) becomes ever greater, endowed with all the attributes of absolutism, acquires ever more indepen- dence and power. Increase in the national debt. The State sides with wealth against poverty. Corruption. The State subjugates society. There is a need for the new revolution. The task of the revolution consists à changer, à redresser la mauvaise tendance de la société.™ Society itself must not be touched. In its case there can be no question of reconstitution arbitraire."

[^1]: II. Etude. Y a-t-il raison suffisante de la Révolution au XIX siècle?h

[^2]: ;' See this volume, pp. 436-38. - b the Great Exhibition of 1851 - c Conrad and Rudolf Schramm - d See this volume, p. 383. - e ibid., p. 399. - f skeleton - 8 First Essay. - h Second Essay. Is there sufficient reason for revolution in the nineteenth century? - ' politics - i political economy - k anarchy of economic forces - ' the tendency of society towards poverty - m in changing, in redressing the evil tendency of society - " arbitrary reconstruction





**[p. 410]**

III. Étude. Du Principe d'Association?

Association is a dogma, but not a force économique. Association is in no way organic or productive, as are the division of labour, commerce, exchange, etc. Association should not be confused with force collective.

La force collective est un acte impersonnel, l'association un engagement volontaire. L'association est de sa nature stérile, nuisible même, car elle est une entrave à la liberté du travailleur. b

The force that has been ascribed to the contrat de société1' belongs solely to the division of labour, to exchange, to the force collective. When an association is founded for the purpose of carrying out great works, these must be ascribed to its means rather than to the principe of association. A man submits to an association only if it offers him une indemnité suffisante? Only to the associé faible or paresseux'' is the association productive d'utilité.1 It is solidarité, responsabilité commune^ vis-à-vis third parties. As a rule an association is only feasible dans des conditions spéciales, dépendantes de ses moyens.h

L'association, formée en vue du lien de famille et de la loi du dévouement, et en dehors de toute considération économique extérieure—l'association pour elle même, est un acte de pure religion, un lien surnaturel, sans valeur positive, un mythe.1

Association should not be confused with the

[^1]: rapports nouveaux que se propose de développer la réciprocité entre les producteurs et les consommateurs. L'association met de niveau les contractants, subordonne leur liberté au devoir social, les dépersonnalise.J

[^2]: 11 Third Essay. On the Principle of Association. - b Collective force is an impersonal act, association is voluntary commitment. Association is by its nature sterile, even harmful, since it impedes the freedom of the worker. - c social contract - d adequate compensation - e the associate who is weak or lazy - f production association of any utility - s solidarity, joint responsibility - h in special conditions, depending on the means employed - ' Association established with a view to the family tie and the law of dedication, and apart from any external economic consideration—association for its own sake, is purely an act of religion, a supernatural bond, devoid of positive value, a myth. - J new relations which are intended to evolve from reciprocity between producers and consumers. Association puts the contracting parties on an equal footing, subordinates their freedom to social duty, depersonalises them.





**[p. 411]**

IV. Étude. Du Principe d'Autorité."

The idée gouvernementale naquit des mœurs de famille et de l'expérience domestique. The démocratie is the dernier terme of évolution gouvernementale.b

The idea of government is in opposition to that of contract. The true revolutionary motto is: Plus de Gouvernement!"1 The autorité absolue6 is soon compelled to negate itself and to circumscribe itself with loise and institutions. The laws enacted are as innumerable as the interests which they outwardly determine. They have an ominous tendency to multiply. The law is a fetter forced on me from without. Constitutional monarchy. A contradiction in terms. Suffrage universel. The intuition divinatoire de la multitude1 is nonsense. Qu'ai-je besoin de mandataires, pas plus que de représen- tants!e Votes, even though unanimous, decide nothing. According to suffrage universel, Bonaparte would be the right man, etc. La

démocratie pure ou le gouvernement direct*1—figments in the minds of Rittinghausen, Considérant, Ledru-Rollin—aboutit à l'impossible et à l'absurde.1 In being carried to extremes this idea of the State is revealed for the nonsense it is.

V. Etude. Liquidation sociale. 1. Banque nationale. The liquidation of the Bank of France is decreed. It is not declared a national bank, but rather an

'établissement d'utilité publique'? Interest is reduced to V2 or l U per cent.

2. The national debt. The capitaux particuliers,1, having been deprived of the industrie de l'escompte,1 flows into the Bourse, the State no longer pays more than V2 or 'A per cent, and thus interest ceases to be of interest. Instead of interest, the State pays annuities, i.e. it repays in yearly quotas the capital it has been loaned. Or in other words, a decree to the effect that the interest on the debt paid by the State be deemed annuities and deducted from the principal.

3. Dettes hypothécaires. Obligations simples.

[^1]: 'Les intérêts te toutes créances, hypothécaires, chirographaires, actions de commandite, sont fixés à l/4 or il^%. Les remboursements ne pourront être exigés

[^2]: a Fourth Essay. On the Principle of Authority. - b The idea of government was born of family custom and domestic experience. The final stage of governmental evolution is democracy. - c No more government! - ä absolute authority - e laws - ' Universal suffrage. The prophetic intuition of the masses - B What need have I of mandatories, any more than of representatives! - h Pure democracy or direct government - ' leads to impossibility and absurdity - i establishment of public utility - k private capital - 1 discount industry

[^3]: 15»





**[p. 412]**

10%; pour les sommes au-dessus de 2000frs., 5%. Pour faciliter le remboursement des créances et suppléer à la fonction des anciens prêteurs, une division des bureaux de la banque nationale d'escompte deviendra Banque foncière: le maximum de ses avances sera, par année, de 500 millions.'3 [op. cit., p. 213.]

4. Propriété immobilière: Bâtiments.

Decree: 'Tout payement fait à titre de loyer sera porté en à compte de la propriété, celle-ci estimée au vingtuple du prix de location. Tout acquittement de terme vaudra au locataire part proportioneile et indivise dans la maison par lui habitée, et dans la totalité des constructions exploitées à loyer, et servant à la demeure des citoyens. La propriété ainsi remboursée passera à fur et mesure au droit de l'administration communale qui, par le fait du remboursement, prendra hypothè- que et privilège de premier ordre, au nom de la masse des locataires, et leur garantira à tous, à perpétuité, le domicile, au prix de revient du bâtiment. Les communes pourront traiter de gré à gré avec les propriétaires, pour la liquidation et le remboursement immédiat des propriétés louées. Dans ce cas, et afin de faire jouir la génération présente de la réduction des prix de loyer, les dites communes pourront opérer immédiatement une diminution sur le loyer des maisons pour lesquelles elles auront traité, de manière que l'amortissement en soit opéré seulement en trente ans. Pour les réparations, l'agencement et l'entretien des édifices, comme pour les constructions nouvelles, les communes traiteront avec les Compagnies maçonnes ou associations d'ouvriers en bâtiment, d'après les principes et les règles du nouveau contrat social. Les propriétaires, occupant seuls leurs propres maisons, en conserveront la propriété aussi longtemps qu'ils le jugeront utile à leurs intérêts.'b [op. cit., pp. 221-22.]

[^1]: 11 3. Mortgage Debts. Simple Bonds. 'Interest on all debts, mortgages, simple contract debts, joint-stock shares, is fixed at V4 or V2 P e r cent. Repayment claims can be met only by annual instalments. The annual instalment for all sums below 2,000 fr. will be 10 per cent, for sums above 2,000 fr. 5 per cent. In order to facilitate the repayment and replace the function of the former money-lenders a section of the offices of the National Discount Bank will become a mortgage bank, the maximum of its advances will be 500 million per annum.' - b 4. Real estate: Buildings. Decree: 'Every payment made in respect of rent shall be entered to the account of the property reckoned as twenty times the rent. With every instalment of rent the tenant will acquire a proportional and joint share in the house he occupies and in the totality of all buildings let for rent and serving as dwellings for the citizens. Property thus paid for will pass by degrees into the hands of the communal administration, which by the fact of the payment will take over the mortgages and prerogatives in the name of the mass of tenants, and will guarantee their domicile to all of them in perpetuity at the cost price of the building. The communes will be able to negotiate separate agreements with the owners for the immediate liquidation and repayment of the leased properties. In this case, and in order that the present generations shall enjoy reduced rents, the said communes will be able immediately to reduce the rent of houses for which they have concluded agreements, in such a way that amortisation be completed only in thirty years. For repairs, fittings and upkeep of the buildings, as in the case of new constructions, the communes will negotiate with the companies of masons or associations of building workers according to the principles and rules of the new social contract. The owners, sole occupiers of their own houses, will retain the property as long as they judge this advantageous to their interests.'





**[p. 413]**

5. Propriété foncière.

'Tout payement de redevance pour l'exploitation d'un immeuble acquerra au fermier une part de propriété dans l'immeuble, et lui vaudra hypothèque. La propriété, intégralement ' remboursée, relèvera immédiotement de la commune, laquelle succédera à l'ancien propriétaire et partagera avec le fermier la nue-propriété et le produit net. Les communes pourront traiter de gré à gré avec les propriétaires qui le désireront, pour le rachat des rentes et le remboursement immédiat des propriétés. Dans ce cas il sera pourvu, à la diligence des communes, à l'installation des cultivateurs et à la délimitation des possessions, en ayant soin de compenser autant que possible l'étendue superficiaire avec la qualité du fonds, et de proportionner la redevance au produit. Aussitôt que la propriété foncière aura été intégralement remboursée, toutes les communes de la République devront s'eniendre pour égaliser entre elles les différences de qualité des terrains, ainsi que les accidents de la culture. La part de redevance à laquelle elles ont droits sur les fractions de leurs territoires respectifs, servira à cette compensation et assurance générale. A partir de la même époque, les anciens propriétaires qui, faisant valoir par eux-mêmes leurs propriétés, auront conservé leur titre, seront assimilés aux nouveaux, soumis à la même redevance et investis des mêmes droits, de manière que le hasard des localités et des successions ne favorise personne, cl que les conditions de culture soient pour tous égales. L'impôt foncier sera aboli. La police agricole est dévolue aux conseils municipaux.'3 [op. cit., p. 228.]

VI. Elude. Organisation des forces économiques. 1. Crédit. T h e above-mentioned banque nationale, together with its branches. Gradual withdrawal of gold and silver from circulation. Substitution of paper. Quant au crédit personnel, c'est dans les compagnies ouvrières et les sociétés agricoles et industrielles qu'il doit trouver son exercise.'

[^1]: a 5. Landed property. 'Every payment of rent for the use of a piece of real estate will make the farmer part-proprietor of it and will count as a mortgage payment by him. When the property has been entirely paid for it will be immediately taken over by the commune, which will take the place of the former owner and will share with the farmer the ownership and the net product. The communes will be able to negotiate separate agreements with the owners who desire it for the redemption of the rents and the immediate repayment of the properties. In that case at the request of the communes steps shall be taken to instal the cultivators, and to delimit their properties, taking care that as far as possible the size of the area shall make up for the quality of the land, and that the rent shall be proportional to the product. As soon as the property has been entirely paid for, all the communes of the Republic will have to reach agreement among themselves to equalise the differences in the quality of the strips of land, and also the contingencies of farming. The part of the rent due to them from the plots in their particular area will be used for this compensation and general insurance. Dating from the same period the old owners who worked themselves on their properties, will retain their title, and will be treated in the same way as the new owners, will have to pay the same rent and will be granted the same rights in such a way that no one i. favoured by the chance of location and inheritance and that the conditions of cultivation are equal for all. The land tax will be abolished. The functions of the rural police will devolve on the municipal councils. - h As for personal credit, it should be operated in the workers' companies and the agricultural and industrial societies.





**[p. 414]**

2. Propriété. See 'Propriété foncière' cited above. Under the above conditions it is possible

sans la moindre inquiétude, permettre au propriétaire de vendre, transmettre, aliéner, faire circuler à volonté la propriété Avec les facilités du remboursement par annuités, la valeur de l'immeuble peut être indéfiniment partagée, échangée, subir toutes les mutations imaginables, sans que l'immeuble soit entamé jamais. Le travail agricole repousse la forme sociétaire.3

3. Division du travail, forces collectives, machines. Compagnies ouvrières.

Toute industrie, exploitation ou entreprise qui par sa nature exige l'emploi combiné d'un grand nombre d'ouvriers de spécialités différentes, est destinée à devenir le foyer d'une société ou compagnie de travailleurs. Mais là où le produit peut s'obtenir sans un concours de facultés spéciales, par l'action d'un individu ou d'une famille, il n'y a pas lieu à l'association.b

Hence no associations in small workshops, among artisans, shoemakers, tailors, etc., marchands,"1 etc. Association in big industry. Here, then, compagnies ouvrières.

Tout individu employé dans l'association a un droit indivisé dans la propriété de la compagnie; il a le droit d'en remplir successivement toutes les fonctions; son éducation, son instruction et son apprentissage, doivent être dirigés de telle sorte, qu'en lui faisant supporter sa part des corvées répugnantes et pénibles, ils lui fassent parcourir une série de travaux et de connaissances, et lui assurent, à l'époque de la maturité, une aptitude encyclopédique et une revenue suffisant; les fonctions sont électives et les règlements soumis à l'adoption des associés; le salaire est proportionné à la nature de la fonction, à l'importance du talent, à l'étendue de la responsabilité; tout associé participe aux bénéfices comme aux charges de la compagnie, dans la proportion de ses services; chacun est libre de quitter à volonté l'association, de faire régler son compte et liquider ses droits, et réciproquement la compagnie maîtresse de s'adjoindre toujours de nouveaux membresd

[^1]: a without the slightest misgiving, to permit the owner to sell, transfer, alienate or otherwise dispose of his property as he pleases Given the facility of repayment by annual instalments, the value of a piece of real estate can be indefinitely divided, exchanged, and undergo any conceivable change, without the real estate being in the least affected. Agricultural labour rejects associatory forms. - h 3. Division of labour, collective forces, machinery. Companies of workers. Every industry, enterprise or undertaking which by its nature requires the combined employment of a large number of workers with different skills is bound to become the basis for an association or company of workers. But where a product may be obtained without a combination of special skills, through the activity of an individual or family, there is no need for association. - c shopkeepers - d Every person working in the association possesses an indivisible right in the property of the company; he has the right to perform successively all duties. His education, training and apprenticeship ought therefore to be conducted in such a way that, while he is made to take his share of disagreeable and arduous tasks, he will acquire experience in various sorts of work and fields of



This is the solution to the deux problèmes: celui de la force collective, et celui de la division du travail' In the transitional period these workshops will be managed by the manufacturers, etc.

4. Constitution de la valeur: organisation du bon marché.b To combat cherté de la marchandisec and the arbitraire du prix.d The juste prix représente avec exactitude: a) le montant des frais de production, d'après la moyenne officielle des libres producteurs; b) le salaire du commerçant, ou l'indemnité de l'avantage dont le vendeur se prive en se dessaisissant de la chose." To induce the merchant so to do, he must be given a guarantee. This may be

de plusieures manières: soit que les consommateurs qui veulent jouir du juste prix, et qui sont en même temps producteurs, s'obligent à leur tour envers le marchand à lui livrer, à des conditions égales, leurs propres produits, comme cela se pratique entre les différentes associations ouvrières parisiennes; soit que les dits consommateurs se contentent d'assurer au débitant une crime ou bien encore une vente assez considérable pour lui assurer une revenue.

E.g., the State

au nom des intérêts que provisoirement il représente, les départements et communes, au nom de leurs habitants respectifs, voulant assurer à tous le juste prix et la bonne qualité des produits et services, offrent de garantir aux entrepreneurs qui offriront les conditions les plus avantageuses, soit un intérêt pour les capitaux et le matériel engagé dans leurs entreprises, soit un traitement fixe, soit, s'il y a lieu, une masse suffisante de commandes. Les soumissionnaires s'obligeront, en retour, à fournir les produits et services pour lesquels ils s'engagent, à toute réquisition des consommateurs. Toute latitude réservée, du reste, à la concurrence. Ils devront indiquer les éléments de leurs prix, le mode des

[^1]: knowledge, so that when he reaches mature age he will have a wide range of qualifications and a sufficient income. Posts are subject to election and the rules are adopted by the members of the association. The size of the recompense depends on the nature of the work, the degree of the proficiency, and the amount of responsibility. Every member of the association shares both in the profits and in the expenses of the company in proportion to his services. Everyone is free to resign from the association whenever he wishes, and therefore to settle his accounts and renounce his rights; conversely the company is entitled to recruit new members at any time. a two problems', that of collective force, and that of the division of labour - b The Determination of Value; the Establishment of a Cheap Market. - ' the high price of goods - d arbitrariness of prices - e The fair price accurately reflects: a) a total production cost according to the official average for free producers, b) the merchant's salary or the compensation for the advantages which the seller forgoes by parting with the article. - f of several kinds: either the consumers, who wish to have the benefit of a fair price and who are at the same time producers themselves, undertake in their turn to supply the merchant with their own products on equal terms, as is done by the various workers' associations in Paris; or else the said consumers confine themselves to guaranteeing the dealer either a premium, or a sale large enough to guarantee him an income.



5. Commerce extérieur}' As soon as the interest falls, it is necessary to abaisser les tarifsc and, if it be depressed or standing between 1/4 and V2 per cent, the Customs must be abolished.

VII. Etude. Dissolution du gouvernement dans l'organisme économique.

La société sans l'autorité. Elimination des cultes, Justice, administra- tion, police, Instruction publique, Guerre, Marine etc.d, the whole with appropriate Stirnerian stock phrases.

Write and tell me in detail what you think of this formula. Salut.

Your

K. Marx

First published in Der Briefwechsel zwischen Printed according to the original F. Engels und K. Marx, Bd. 1, Stuttgart, 1913 Translated from the German and French

[^1]: Published in English for the first time

[^2]: a on behalf of the interests which it temporarily represents, and the departments and communes on behalf of their respective inhabitants, being desirous of ensuring a fair price and a high standard of goods and services for all, propose to guarantee that the entrepreneurs who offer the most advantageous conditions will receive either interest on the capital and material invested in their enterprises, or a fixed salary, or in appropriate cases a sufficient quantity of orders. In return, the tendering parties will pledge themselves to meet all consumers' requests for the goods and services they have undertaken to supply. Apart from that, full scope is left for competition. They must state the component parts of their prices, the method of delivery, the duration • of their commitments, and their means of fulfilment. The tenders submitted under seal within the periods prescribed will subsequently be opened and made public 8 days, 15 days, 1 month or 3 months before the contracts are allocated depending on the importance of the contracts. At the expiry of each contract, new tenders will be invited. - b External trade. - c to lower the tariffs - A Seventh Essay. The Merging of Government in the Economic Organism. Society without authority. Elimination of cults, Justice, Administration, police, Public Education, War, the Navy.



