---
Volume: 38
Document_Title: "199. Engels to Marx. About 10 August "
Page_Range: "454-456"
---

# 199. Engels to Marx. About 10 August 



**[p. 199]**

ENGELS TO MARX

IN LONDON

[Manchester, about 10 August 1851]

Dear Marx.

I was very much tickled by the Schnellpost. It's a long time since I've read such consummate balderdash as 'A. Ruge an K. Hein- zen'.a I couldn't have believed that even two jackasses such as Ruge and Heinzen could emerge from three years of revolution- ary tumult so completely unchanged and still so encumbered with the same old stock phrases, absurd mannerisms, turns of speech, etc. It's like the clown in the circus riders' troupe who, after performing the most hair-raising leaps, makes yet another bow, says: 'HERE WE ARE AGAIN!' and then, without the least compunction, proceeds to repeat every item in his ail-too familiar repertoire. I can just see Ruge, that egregious literary laxative, as he seriously declares that

and then himself hits the bull's-eye with the discovery that the modern class struggle is the secessio plebis^ whence, by a process of effortless association, he goes on to the Roman schoolmasterc

and other such charming fourth form pedagogic recollections. The chap's impayable1* when he comes to speak of 'circumstances',

His lame attempts at making wittily malicious allusions were a dismal failure. The fellow is adroit enough; his malice is plain for all to see, but nobody has the faintest idea of its object nor of the general why and wherefore. And whereas the great Ruge is turning out to be a buffoon pure and simple, the great Heinzen excels no less as a boor, a condition now become chronic. The manner in which the

[^1]: 'the fundamental answer to tyranny, anarchy and high treason is precisely the bull's-eye which it behoves us to hit',

[^2]: whose name I forget, his fable of the stomach and the hands4b2

[^3]: 'As you know by "circumstances" all I mean are the thoughts which are presently uppermost in men's minds!'

[^4]: a See this volume, p. 408. - b secession of the plebs - c Menenius Agrippa - d priceless



Et pourtant,h the fellows are compelled to recognise the superiority of our stuff, not only by their constant preoccupation with it, but even more by its influence on them of which despite their stubbornness and rage they are quite unaware. In all this scribble, there is not a single phrase that does not contain a plagiarism, an uncomprehending distortion of our stuff, or something suggested by it.

Mr Meyen or Faucher has published a fatuous article in Manteuffel's semi-official Lithographische Correspondenz in Berlin about the attempted conciliation in Londonc; only we two still stick to one another, etc.—all the rest being united and opposed to us. No mention of Freiligrath or Wolff. It would seem that, following the disbandment of the army of the future, the great Willich finds himself obliged to gain recognition as 'a character'0 among the great men of all parties; he is even said to have attended their meetings. A

quoi tous ces coups de désespoir ont-ils abouti?" And has the great Sigel been to see you?

I have just been assured by a German social jackass who arrived from Dessau with an introduction from Julius, that the gentlemen there have been circulating the rumour that, by your own confession—you yourself are alleged to have told Mr Louis Drucker (!) so—you are writing for the Neue Preussische Zeitung. En voilà une bonne!1

As for Proudhon,g the man seems to be making progress. The phases of development through which his nonsense passes are at least assuming a more tolerable form and these 'hérésies' are something for Mr Louis Blanc to break his teeth on. Thus, au bout du compte? Mr Proudhon has now also come to the conclusion that the true meaning of property rights lies in the disguised confiscation of all property by a more or less disguised State, and that what abolition of the State really means is intensified state centralisation. What else are

[^1]: a 'Karl Heinzen und die Kommunisten', Deutsche-Brüsseler-Zeitung, No. 77, 26 September 1847. Engels' reply to it were articles 'The Communists and Karl Heinzen'. - b Nevertheless - c See this volume, p. 425. - d Cf. H. Heine, Atta Troll, XXIV—'no talent but a character' (description of the bear-hero Atta Troll). - « What have all these acts of despair led to? - f That's a good one! - 8 P. J. Proudhon, Idée générale de la Révolution au XIXe siècle - h in the final analysis



