---
Volume: 38
Document_Title: "207. Marx to Engels. 31 August "
Page_Range: "482-486"
---

# 207. Marx to Engels. 31 August 



**[p. 445]**

devoid of meaning. This second part is really not to be treated seriously; with the best will in the world one couldn't do so.

I have not, of course, been able to do anything for the Tribune—shall resume next week." In great haste.

Your

F. E.

Kirst published slightly abridged in Der Printed according to the original Briefwechsel zwischen F. Engels und K. Marx, Bd. 1, Stuttgart, 1913 and in Published m English for the first full in MEGA, Abt. Ill, Bd. 1, 1929 , l m e

207

MARX TO ENGELS

IK MANCHESTER

[London,] 31 August 1851 28 Dean Street, Soho

Dear Engels,

One always miscalculates badly if one reckons on a definitive crisis among the democratic heroes. A row like the one a fortnight ago demands a recuperation of several weeks for these PERFORMERS. Hence nothing of any moment happened the day before yesterday, Friday the 29th.

D'abord!' On Monday, 25 August, as I have already told you, Willich and Schapper threatened to resign from the Great Windmill refugee committee.292 The following Tuesday they did in fact resign during an official sitting, and all in all the committee came to a satisfactory end. Harsh words were exchanged on this occasion. Willich moralised and pontificated, whereupon he was confronted with his iniquities. The main charge against him was that on this, as on an earlier occasion, when account had to be given of the twenty or so pounds invested in the brush-making business, matters had been so arranged that Mr Lüssel, the manager responsible for same, had absconded.

On Friday General Sigelc had attended the general meeting of the agreement-seekers. He had counted on the appearance of the

[^1]: a A series of articles Revolution and Counter-Revolution in Germany- b First of all. - c Franz Sigel





**[p. 446]**

A few Rugians such as Ronge, 4 in number, had been elected to the refugee committee of the 'united democrats'. These men announced their resignation. So the committee was dissolved. A new, provisional, one was elected, consisting of Mr Kinkel, Count Reichenbach,3 Mr Bücher and Mr Semper from Saxony.

From this you will see that they have entered a new phase. They have thrown themselves into the arms of the respectable 'hommes d'état'^ since the former leaders are now compromised as being bourgeois scum. The 'hommes d'état'-—their nucleus—are the 'doughty men of the people' Bûcher (Berlin agréer467), Count

Reichenbach (Knight of the Spirit and compromised deputy to the Frankfurt Assembly, not the Berlin beard of the partyc) and that eminent stutterer 'Rudolf Schramm' (connud).

Because of his long-standing friendship with Countess Reichen- bach and her brother—also now in this country—Lupus now and again frequents the Reichenbach's house, and yesterday found there Mr Techow, whom he had known in Switzerland. Not long afterwards Willich himself appeared, in company with the melancholy Eduard Meyen. Lupus left when these two great ones took their seats.

Voilà tout ce que j'ai à rapporter pour le moment* With the help of the 160 pounds from America, Kinkel has clearly succeeded — partly himself and partly through his followers—in inducing in the 'respectables' and 'hommes d'état' a tremendous opinion of his power and connections. But with the dissolution of the Windmill committee, the precious Willich has broken the stoutest link that bound him to the 'rascals'.

Maintenant,1 as to yourself, there is no doubt whatever that Fischer expressly named you as one of the godfathers of the £160. General Sigel and Goegg told their friend Schabelitz about this,

[^1]: a Oskar Reichenbach - b statesmen - c Eduard Reichenbach - d well-known - e That's all I have to report for the present. - ' Now





**[p. 447]**

Lest I forget the big event. In the issuec of 13 August, the unfortunate Heinzen announces that Otto has withdrawn his capital, thus leaving him on his own with his mental capital which will not, in industrial America, keep a newspaper going. Hence he writes an elegy on the premature fall of Hector. And in the same issue Hoff and Kapp invite readers to subscribe for shares in a newspaper which is to take the place of the Schnellpost. And, fate having strange quirks, the Staatszeitung has at the same time begun proceedings against the precious Heinzen—incidentally disclosing many of his financial villainies—for libel, proceedings which, he anticipates, will land him up in a 'house of correction'. Le pauvred Heinzen! Moreover this great man is now morally outraged at America and the 'unemotional Yankees' and at the German Americans who take after them, instead of working for the 'humanisation of society' and going into raptures over A. Ruge's politico-social revelations.

In the said issue we read, for example:

[^1]: 'That free German spirit, which is to fill the world that spring which, for almost two millennia now, and in ever richer spiritual measure, has been flowing over the continents of the earth.'

[^2]: 'For what purpose, then, are there Germans in the world? For what purpose a German heart, for what purpose the German tongue? To what purpose, e.g., this instrument, invented by the German Gutenberg, for the education and enlighten- ment of the mind? All this exists, and so does the very soil on which it is coming or should come to pass, this America, discovered by A German

[^3]: 'The free communities, lusty German philosophy, magnificent German literature, transposed and brought into intellectual interaction with everything excellent and enduring that the country and its inhabitants possess,—from factors such as these there must arise an American-ness [Amerikanertum] of world-historical importance, an ail-powerfully humane, spiritual and moral greatness, whose heart is activated by a never-ceasing influx of Teuton-ness [Teutschtum], its head by a refined Yankee-ness [Yankeetum] and its arm by both combined.'

[^4]: a in confidence - b simply - c of the Deutsche Schnellpost - d Poor





**[p. 448]**

Thus writes the German buffoon,3 or gets someone to write, at the very time when the Americans have successfully made their way across the isthmus.476 In the same issue the hooligan has himself addressed as follows:

'So aptly do you castigate American conditions, notably the German Americans, that any discriminating and unbiassed person must agree with you. You would be doing really praiseworthy work were you, through your paper, to help assure the refinement and education of Germans in America, and even if your voice should elude the untutored masses, enough would be achieved if you freed the individual German of the simian and pernicious urge to ape the Americans.'

And then, with all stops pulled out, the churl proceeds to vent the foul, morning-after-the-night—before pecuniary jeremiads.

You'll have undoubtedly long since learnt from the papers that Girardin has allied himself with Ledru-Rollin. He was already convinced he was the future Great Mogul of France. But now a Lamennais-Michel (de Bourges)-Schoelcher rival committee has been set up in Paris whose intention is to bring into being the 'United States of Europe' with the help of the Romance peoples— French, Spanish and Italians—round whom the Germans, etc., will then crystallise. So the Spanish! are to civilise us! Mon Dieu,h

that even outdoes K. Heinzen, who wants to introduce Feuerbach and A. Ruge among the Yankees in order to 'humanise' them. Ledru's Proscrit bitterly attacked the rival committee.0 They replied in the same coin. But what was still more bitter for the Great Mogul in partibusd was this: a conclave of the entire press was held in Paris. The Proscrit, too, was represented by a delegate.6

Purpose: to agree on a common President. The rejection of all the Proscrit's proposals was followed by the unequivocal declaration that, let the gentlemen in London chatter as they would, what was necessary for France must emanate from France herself; Ledru was very much mistaken if he regarded himself as 'the important personage' Mazzini made him out to be.

[^1]: 11 Karl Heinzen - b My God - c 'Cronique de l'intérieur', La Voix du Proscrit, No 18, 23 August 1851. - d In partibus infidetium—literally: in parts inhabited by infidels; figuratively; without any real power. - e Ch. Delescluze [see Ch. Delescluze, 'Le conclave démocratique', La Voix du Proscrit, No. 19, 30 August 1851]



