---
Volume: 38
Document_Title: "208. Engels to Marx. 1 September "
Page_Range: "486-488"
---

# 208. Engels to Marx. 1 September 



**[p. 449]**

Adieu.

Your

K. M.

First published slightly abridged in Printed according to the original Der Briefwechsel zwischen F. Engels und K. Marx, Bd. 1, Stuttgart, 1913 and in Published in English for the first full in MEGA, Abt. Ill, Bd. 1, 1929 t l r n e

208

ENGELS TO MARX

IN LONDON

[Manchester,] Monday, 1 September [1851]

Dear Marx,

Once again you must excuse me.

having for the past 4 days been plagued by the most atrocious toothache, which has rendered me quite incapable of anything. On top of that my brotherb (whom you know) is arriving this evening from London and will keep me from my work for heaven knows how long. Que le diable emporte l'exposition!c

2. I can't send the £5 I promised for today until tomorrow, since there is absolutely no money at all in the firm's cash box, and so I won't be able to get it until tomorrow.

The triumphant article in the Lithographische Correspondenz on the unity finally achieved by the honest emigres is belied by another lament and the attacks by the 'Prussians' on the 'South Germans' and on Ruge the 'Pomeranian' in the very same number of the Lithographische Correspondenz. Sic transit gloriad—their joy was short-lived. It's a good thing that, having so many friends in both the new societies,' we'll be molested by neither.

[^1]: 1. I still haven't been able to make a start on the Proudhon,3

[^2]: a Reference to Engels' 'Critical Review of Proudhon's Book Idée générale de la Révolution au XIX' siècle'. - b probably Hermann - c Confound the Exhibition! (i.e. the Great Exhibition in London in 1851.) - d Thus passes away the glory - e the German Agitation Society and the Refugee club





**[p. 450]**

In Liverpool and London the bankruptcies have already begun and The Economist, despite the evidence it adduces that the country's TRADE is exceptionally healthy, i.e. that most of the sur- plus capital is invested in soundly based production, has to admit that East India is again over-stocked and that the old story of consignment goods and cash advances is once again the rule rather than the exception in Indian trade.b Next week it proposes to tell us how to run the consignment business on a sound basis—to which I much look forward. In the meantime the spinners and weavers here are making an enormous amount of money—most of them are booked up until the New Year, and in the country they generally work until at least 8 o'clock in the evening, that is, between 12 and 12 V2 hours, and often longer. They are spinning yarn at 7-8d a pound from cotton at 3 s/ 4 to 4 /2d per pound; the cost of spinning these coarse counts is barely 1 '/2-2d per pound, hence, with a weekly production of 12 million pounds (with 600,000,000 pounds of raw cotton imports) and taking the coarse counts as the norm, English spinners as a whole are earning £75,000 a week, 33A million

[^1]: a 'Remarkable Case of Fraud by an Austrian Spy.—Sudden Death of the Impostor', the Daily News, 1 September 1851. - b 'Indigo', The Economist, No. 417, 23 August 1851.



