---
Volume: 38
Document_Title: "209. Engels to Marx. 8 September "
Page_Range: "488-490"
---

# 209. Engels to Marx. 8 September 



**[p. 451]**

pounds a year net. The same holds good if, instead of Nos. 6-12, we take an average yarn count of 18-24 and many of those who can use inferior cotton on good machines earn, not 1 1l?d per pound of yarn, but 2 Väd. All this dates back to the fall in cotton prices in April and May, and the people who buy relatively more twist than anyone else are the Germans. When the trouble starts—and the present state of TRADE will certainly not persist beyond March at the latest—and if at the same time the fun begins in France, it will be keenly felt by the Germans, with all that unsaleable yarn on their hands, and in this way, too, the country will be well prepared.

Let us dedicate a silent tear to the shade of Brüggemann.477

Never before, perhaps, has a worthy citizen met with more undeserved misfortune—sit Uli terra levis.3

Your

F. E.

First published slightly abridged in Printed according to the original Der Briefwechsel zwischen F. Engels und K. Marx, Bd. 1, Stuttgart, 1913 and in Published in English for the first full in MEGA, Abt. Ill, Bd. 1, 1929 t i m e

209

ENGELS TO MARX

[Manchester,] Monday, 8 September [1851]

Dear Marx,

My brother15 is going away tomorrow and then I shall at last get some peace again. All this while I haven't had a moment to myself, and it was quite impossible to get the banknote off to you before Saturday, both pieces going by the same post, since there's only one DELIVERY on Sundays. As this involves the risk of its misapprop- riation, herewith the PARTICULARS of the note—its number was E/X 01780 and it was dated Leeds, 15 July 1850. So if it hasn't reached

[^1]: IN LONDON

[^2]: a may the earth lie lightly upon him - b probably Hermann





**[p. 452]**

you, go at once to.the bank and STOP PAYMENT; there's still time enough. It was a five pound note.

On Friday evening I suddenly got a letter from my old man in which he tells me that I'm spending far too much money and must make do with £150. Naturally I shan't stand for this ludicrous imposition, all the less so that it is accompanied by the threat that, if necessary, the Ermens will be instructed not to pay me more than that amount. I shall, of course, at once write and tell him that the moment he attempts to put his scandalous plan into practice, I shall turn my back on the office for ever and immediately hie me to London again. The man's completely mad. The whole thing's all the more absurd and preposterous in that this point was agreed verbally between us long ago, and I have given him absolutely no pretext for it. I think that, with the help of my brother and mater, I shall be able to settle the matter, but at first shall have to retrench a little, having already spent £230 summa summarum and, from now until November when I shall have been here a year, I had better not to go too far beyond that sum. Anyhow this fresh piece of knavery is most disagreeable and vexes me considerably, the more so because of the mean attitude my old man has adopted. Admittedly he is making far less money here than he did last year, but that's due entirely to the bad MANAGEMENT of his partners over whom I have no control.

What's this fresh piece of knavery in Paris478? This time it's the hippopotamus3 clique that seems to have got into trouble; to judge by the names of the Germans arrested, they are all former Weitlingians from the 1847 period and earlier.479 A number of little betrayals seem to have been involved. The Swabian saviour appears to be one of the lucky ones. Tant mieux pour lui.h If you hear anything, let me know.

According to the German papers, the Cologne peoplec will not be brought before the next—October—assizes.

More tomorrow or the day after.

Your

F. E.

[^1]: First published in Der Briefwechsel zwischen F. Engels und K. Marx, Bd. 1, Stuttgart,

[^2]: 1913

[^3]: Printed according to the original

[^4]: Published in English for the first time

[^5]: 11 Karl Schapper - h So much the better for him. The reference is probably to Willich. - ' i.e. the arrested members of the Central Authority of the Communist League set up in Cologne in October 1850



