---
Volume: 38
Document_Title: "211. Marx to Joseph Weydemeyer. 11 September "
Page_Range: "490-492"
---

# 211. Marx to Joseph Weydemeyer. 11 September 



**[p. 210]**

ENGELS TO MARX

IN LONDON

[Manchester,] Thursday, 11 September [1851]

Dear Marx,

Today I had hoped to be able to finish an article for you to send to America.3 I still have about 3-4 pages to do. So I must give up all idea of tomorrow's post but, unless I'm mistaken, a Collins steamer is leaving on Wednesday—the article can go by that, to be followed by the 3rd on Friday. I shall make inquiries about it. IN THE PRESENT MOMENT I consider this American business, which definite- ly brings in money, to be more urgent than the Proudhon,b of which I can't tell whether it will bring so certain and rapid a return; that is why I have tackled the former first. If you should think otherwise, write and say so.

You'll have got my Monday's letter.

En attendant tes nouvelles?

Your

F. E.

211

[London,] 11 September [1851] 28 Dean Street, Soho

Dear Weydemeyer,

Lupus has written to his acquaintance on the Staatszeitung about your affairs. The only cause for regret is that Mr Kinkel has

[^1]: First published in Der Briefwechsel zwischen Printed according to the original F. Engels und K. Marx, Bd. 1, Stuttgart, 1913 Published in English for the first

[^2]: MARX TO JOSEPH WEYDEMEYER220

[^3]: IN ZURICH

[^4]: a F. Engels, Revolution and Counter-Revolution in Germany. Article II. - b F. Engels, 'Critical Review of Proudhon's Book Idée générale de la Révolution au XIXe siècle'. - c Waiting to hear from you.



Schnellpost, has been compelled to declare itself insolvent. Messrs Hoff and Kapp are now trying to found a new paper by issuing shares. At any rate, this is a favourable moment for speculating in newspapers.

Our local great men are now completely at loggerheads. They are behaving as though they were Alexander's successors and were having to share out the Macedonian-Asiatic Empire between them, les drôles*

If only I knew more people here, I would have tried to get you a post as an engineer, railroad surveyor or the like. Unfortunately I have no contacts whatever. Otherwise I feel sure that employ- ment is to be found here in that LINE. The pity of it is that we are all so SHORT OF MONEY and that you haven't the means to spend some time here and take a look around. But if you really succeed in carrying out your plans in New York, you will at all events find it easier, in case of revolution, to return to Europe from there than we from here.

And yet I rack my brains trying to think of ways for you to SETTLE here, for once over there, who can say that you won't lose yourself in the FAR WEST! And we have so few people and have to be so sparing of the talent we have.

Besides, you are choosing a bad and uncomfortable time to travel. However, il n'y a rien à faire contre la nécessité des choses.b And if there is one thing of which I am convinced, it is that, once you are over there, you will not have to go through the same misère as all of us here. And that prospect, at least, has to be taken into account.

That this is a time of dissolution for 'democratic' provisional governments, Mr Mazzini, too, has had to learn. After some violent clashes the minority has resigned from the Italian Committee.480 It is said that they are the more advanced ones.

I regard Mazzini's policy as basically wrong. He is working wholly in the Austrian interest by inciting Italy to the present secession. On the other hand, by failing to turn to the part of Italy that has been repressed for centuries, to the peasants, he is laying up fresh resources for the counter-revolution. Mr Mazzini knows only the towns with their liberal nobility and their citoyens éclairés^

[^1]: a the queer fellows - b needs must when the devil drives - c enlightened citizens



