---
Volume: 38
Document_Title: "212. Marx to Engels. 13 September "
Page_Range: "492-494"
---

# 212. Marx to Engels. 13 September 



**[p. 455]**

The material needs of the Italian country folk—bled white and systematically enervated and stultified just like their Irish counter- parts— are, of course, too lowly for the platitudinous paradise of his cosmopolitan-neo-catholic-ideological manifestos. But admitted- ly it required some courage to tell the bourgeoisie and the nobility that the first step towards gaining Italy's independence was the complete emancipation of the peasants and the transformation of their métayage system into bourgeois freeholdings. Mazzini would seem to regard a loan of 10 million francs as more revolutionary than a gain of 10 million human beings. I very much fear that, if the worst comes to the worst, the Austrian Government itself will alter the state of tenure in Italy and effect 'Galician' reforms.481

Tell Dronke that I shall write to him in a few days' time. Warm regards to you and your wife from my wife and myself. Consider once again whether you mightn't give it a try here.

Your

K. Marx

First published abridged in Die Neue Zeit, Printed according to the original Bd. 2, No. 28, 1906-07 and in full in: , ,. , , . „ ,. , . r „ r , Marx and Engels, Works, First Russian Published in English in full for the Edition, Vol. XXV, Moscow, 1934 f l r s t t i m e

212

[London,] Saturday, 13 September 1851 28 Dean Street, Soho

Dear Engels,

Did you in fact—while your brother3 was there—get a letter from me? I ask, because you don't mention it, not on account of its contents. It contained only gossip, although even that might as

[^1]: MARX TO ENGELS482

[^2]: IN MANCHESTER

[^3]: a probably Hermann Engels





**[p. 456]**

well be kept on record. But I would rather it didn't fall into the hands of strangers.

Your various letters, including the one with the five pounds, have arrived here safely.

Kinkel is now making his tour of northern England. Hasn't he been to Manchester yet?

Little has happened here since the matter referred to in my last letter. A week ago yesterday (Friday), Count Reichenbach" announced his resignation from the general refugee society. You, too, Brutus? Sigel, etc., who had still not definitively resigned, have now done so. Willich, however, is conducting a campaign against the 'Lumpenproletariat' among the refugees. As yet I've had no report of the sitting held yesterday evening.

There has also been a split in the Italian committee.480 An appreciable minority has resigned. Mazzini gives a sorrowful account of the event in the Voix du Peuple.' The main causes would appear to be:

D'abord Dio. Ils ne veulent pas de dieu. Ensuite, et c'est plus grave, ils reprochent à Maître Mazzini de travailler dans l'intérêt autrichien en prêchant l'insurrection, d. h. en la précipitant. Enfin: Ils insistent sur un appel direct aux intérêts matériels des paysans italiens, ce qui ne peut se faire sans attaquer de l'autre côté les intérêts matériels des bourgeois et de la noblesse libérale qui forment la grande phalange mazzinienne.d

This last matter is exceedingly important. If Mazzini, or anyone else puts himself at the head of the Italian agitators and fails this time to transform the peasants, franchement and immédiatement* from

métaires( into free landowners,—the condition of the Italian peasants is atrocious, I have thoroughly mugged up the beastly subject—, the Austrian government will, in the event of revolution, have recourse to Galician methods.481 In the Lloyd it has already threatened 'a complete transformation of the state of tenure' and the 'extermina- tion of the turbulent nobility'. If Mazzini's eyes have not yet been opened, then he's a dunderhead. Admittedly certain agitational interests are involved here. Where will he find the 10 million fr. if he

[^1]: * Oskar Reichenbach - b Franz Sigel - c Marx probably means La Voix du Proscrit - A 'Firstly, Dio. They don't want a god. Next, and more serious, they blame Maître Mazzini for working for the Austrian interest by preaching insurrection, i.e. by precipitating it. Finally, they insist on a direct appeal to the material interests of the Italian peasants, and this cannot be made without a corresponding attack on the material interests of the bourgeoisie and liberal nobility, who form the great Mazzinian phalanx. - e outright and immediately - f tenant share-croppers



