---
Volume: 38
Document_Title: "213. Engels to Marx. 19 September "
Page_Range: "494-495"
---

# 213. Engels to Marx. 19 September 



**[p. 457]**

antagonises the bourgeoisie? How retain the services of the nobility, if he informs them that their expropriation comes first on the agenda? Such are the difficulties encountered by a demagogue of the old school.

Unfortunately those arrested in Paris include that rascal Schramm.483 The day before yesterday Liebknecht had a letter from the rogue, and we are faced with the agreeable prospect of having this dissolute character once again in our midst. But he'll get a bit of a shock, ce monsieur là!" You would greatly oblige me by sending me the essay for Dana by Tuesday morning!'

Herewith letter from Dronke. By the by, should you write him a letter, you must send it direct to his address. Schuster's is by no means safe. In a day or two I'll send you a note for him, to which you can add something before forwarding it to the little fellow.

First published in Der Briefwechsel zwischen Printed according to the original F. Engels und K. Marx, Bd. 1, Stuttgart, . , • , .qio ' Published in English in full for the first time

213

ENGELS TO MARX

[Manchester,] Friday, 19 September [1851]

Dear Marx,

Yesterday, in the greatest haste, I managed to finish the American article0—tel quelf with many interruptions over the past 3 weeks and finally the remainder thrown together in haste. Tu en feras ce que tu pourras.' At all events you'll get it by the first post today.

The only letter I got after my brother's' arrival was yours of 31

[^1]: IN LONDON

[^2]: a will that gentleman - b F. Engels, Revolution and Counter-Revolution in Germany. Article II. - c F. Engels, Revolution and Counter-Revolution in Germany. Article II. - d such as it is - e You'll have to do what you can with it. - ' probably Hermann



