---
Volume: 38
Document_Title: "216. Engels to Marx. 25 September "
Page_Range: "505-506"
---

# 216. Engels to Marx. 25 September 



**[p. 468]**

(Schramm) present himself with the note, which was couched in general terms. The worst of it is that my name is at the bottom. It could earn Schramm 6 months. Addio!

First published in Der Briefwechsel zwischen Printed according to the original F. Engels und K. Marx, Bd. 1, Stuttgart, , , , . , , . „ , . , r • r- 10,13 Published m English tor the first time

216

ENGELS TO MARX

IN LONDON

[Manchester,] [25]a September 1851

Dear Marx,

Your letter has arrived. Will write about Techow's erudition tomorrow. Kinkel's begging letter to New Orleans is very charming, but unfortunately I only saw the French version. Mr Stechan must also be in London by now; should he fail to announce himself, you will be absolutely right to leave the fellow to his own devices and to wait and see what happens before allowing anyone to take his side. Those released in Paris, of whom there is word in today's papers, will doubtless include Mr Conrad.b

I, too, was much annoyed by the stupidity of the German newspapers in laying Willich's document484 at our door. However, it will soon transpire that we have nothing to do with this wretched screed. Par dieu, nous en avons assez sur les brasc with other people's documents, as regards both style and content. Herewith article No. 3 d for New York, at least a little less trashy than No. 2. I shall shortly be tackling No. 4.

[^1]: a Manuscript damaged - b Conrad Schramm - c By God, we have enough on our hands - d F. Engels, Revolution and Counter-Revolution in Germany. Article III.



