---
Volume: 38
Document_Title: "223. Marx to Engels. 25 October "
Page_Range: "522-523"
---

# 223. Marx to Engels. 25 October 



**[p. 485]**

revision—with its prospect of re-election for Bonaparte—they were merely concealing their hatred of suffrage universel, which would exclude their man, Cavaignac, and their entire coterie. The National, poor thing, s'était déjà consolé du départ du suffrage universel?

So much is certain. This coup will have thwarted the May 1852 uprising,499 which at best might now break out earlier should one of the ruling coteries attempt a coup d'état.

Your

K. M.

First published abridged in Der Briefwech- Printed according to the original sei zwischen F. Engels und K. Marx, Bd. 1, Stuttgart, 1913 and in full in MEGA, Published in English for the first Abt. Ill, Bd. 1, 1929 t l m e

223

MARX TO ENGELS

[London,] 25 October 1851

Dear Engels,

Did you get my letter of last Monday? You're so meticulous about writing that your silence disturbs me.

I have heard nothing from Pieper up to the present. If nothing has happened to him, he is being unpardonably irresponsible. Dronke has not yet arrived. Have heard nothing from Cologne.

Enclosed a letter from Fischer who writes like a true democratic philistine. For the time being, il faut le laisser faired since nothing further can be done about it. If only he doesn't do anything silly where Kinkel is concerned. His letter rather gives the impression that he might.

Well, as we now learn, Kinkel had arranged matters as follows. Part of the £160 sterling was used to send Schurz on a secret mission to Belgium, France and Switzerland. He induced all the

[^1]: IN MANCHESTER

[^2]: 11 had already consoled itself for the demise of universal suffrage - '> he must be given his head



