---
Volume: 38
Document_Title: "229. Marx to Engels. 1 December "
Page_Range: "533-536"
---

# 229. Marx to Engels. 1 December 



**[p. 228]**

MARX TO ADOLF CLUSS507

IN WASHINGTON

[London, beginning of December 1851]

 One of our best friends, Joseph Weydemeyer, has now arrived in New York. Make contact with him straight away; I do not yet know his address. But if you send a letter to the Staatszeitung or the Abendzeitung it will no doubt reach him. He can enlighten you on all matters relating to the party. He will be useful to you in the gathering in New York508 and you can help him to arrange his living in America. Write and tell him that I asked you to write to him

First published in: Marx and Engels, Printed according to Adolf Cluss' Wm JL% First Russian Edition, Vol. XXV, letter to Joseph Weydemeyer of Moscow, 1934 20 December 1851

Published in English for the first time

229

MARX TO ENGELS

[London,] 1 December 1851 28 Dean Street, Soho

Dear Engels,

I enclose herewith: 1. Extract from Cluss' letter (from Washington) to Wolf P; 2. Letter from Pieper from Brussels.

As to No. 1, Lupus forgot to extract two more items of information which you will find not uninteresting. Firstly: the

[^1]: IN MANCHESTER

[^2]: a Wilhelm Wolff (Lupus)



article 'Revolution and Counter-Revolution in Germany' has appeared in German in the New-Yorker Abendzeitung, has been reprinted in various papers and has created a furore. Cluss doesn't say whether or not this is a translation from the Tribune. I've written direct to Dana about it.509 Secondly: Mr Wiss, Kinke Fs principal tool, has publicly declared that 'economically' he shares our views. You can see how the curs operate.

As for Mr Tupman,a he mentions neither our letter from Manchester nor a subsequent letter written him from here by my wife at my behest.510

But as to the people in Cologne? it is typical of these dastardly émigré swine, who root about in all the cess-pits of the press, that they should maintain la conspiration du silence in this matter so as not to detract from their own importance. This must now be counteracted. Today I have sent letters to Paris attacking Prussian justice, in order to raise the matter in the press there.511 Lupus has undertaken to do the articles for America and Switzerland.

Maintenant* you must hammer out for me something for England, along with a private letter to the EDITOR of The Times, to which the thing must tentatively be sent. If The Times, which at present is seeking to regain its popularity and would certainly feel flat- tered if treated as the only influential paper on the Continent and which is in any case hostile to Prussia—if The Times were to accept the thing, we could exert some influence in Germany. Stress should be laid on the state of the judicial system generally in Prussia.

Should this attempt not succeed—it can in any case do no harm—then write from Manchester direct to The Sun. If they receive the thing before The Times, the latter would not accept it under any circumstances.512

You can hardly be aware that addresses have reached O'Connor from almost every city in England and have been published in The Northern Star and Reynolds's Newspaper in which Thornton Hunt was described as 'INFAMOUS' and the scene at 'Copenhagen Fields' roundly denounced.513 In addition there was a meeting of all the Chartist sections in London at which abuse was heaped upon Th. Hunt, who was present. When the executive committee is renewed, he will definitely be thrown out. In his desperation, this

allié of the great Ruge now publicly proclaims himself a 'communist.

[^1]: a Wilhelm Pieper - b the Communist League members arrested and under investigation - c Now





**[p. 498]**

E. Jones—drawing on my letter514—has attacked Kossuth sans miséricorde.3

* 'I tell him that the revolutions of Europe mean the crusade of labour against capital, and I tell him they are not to be cut down to the intellectual and social standard of an obscure semi-barbarous people, like the Magyars, still standing in the half-civilisation of the 16th century, who actually presume to dictate to the great enlightenment of Germany and France, and to gain a false won cheer from the gullibility of England.'*b

You'll have seen that Kinkel will, tout bonnement,c set himself up here, after the pattern of the provisional government in France. I, for my part, believe it would be a good idea if, as soon as we know that Weydemeyer is editor of the Abendzeitung, you were to communicate, initially in the form of pamphlets, fragments from K. Schnapper/503 whose first confessions I long to see. (See continuation after Pieper's letter.')

Apropos! I'd almost forgotten an important item in the chronique scandaleuse. Stechan, Hirsch, Gümpel, etc., in short the working men who have arrived from Germany, have announced their intention of calling on me. I shall receive them today. They have already considerably fallen out with Schapper and Wiilich. Stechan has publicly denounced Dietz as a spy before the Workers' Society331 and, though a few voices declared him to be an agent of Marx, effected the establishment of a committee in which, however, the chief role is played by the friends and patrons of Dietz-Schapper and Willich. At all events I shall use these

Straubingers86 to precipitate fresh crises in the wretched hostel for tailors and idlers.

I herewith acknowledge receipt of the £3. Salut.

Your

K.M.

[^1]: First published slightly abridged in Der Printed according to the original Briefwechsel zwischen F. Engels und K. Marx, Bd. 1, Stuttgart, 1913 and in full in Published in English for the first MEGA, Abt. Ill, Bd. 1, 1929 t l m e

[^2]: a mercilessly - b E. Jones, 'What is Kossuth', Notes to the People, Vol. II, No. 31, 1851. - c quite simply - d Snapper, i.e. Schapper - e The continuation is on the third page of Pieper's letter to Marx sent from Brussels on 27 November 1851.



