---
Volume: 38
Document_Title: "232. Marx to Engels. 9 December "
Page_Range: "544-545"
---

# 232. Marx to Engels. 9 December 



**[p. 232]**

MARX TO ENGELS115

IN MANCHESTER

[London,] 9 December 1851 28 Dean Street, Soho

DEAR Frederic,

I have kept you waiting for an answer, QUITE BEWILDERED by the tragi-comic sequence of events in Paris. Unlike Willich, I couldn't say: 'Strange, we've had no advice from Paris!' Nor, like Schapper, declare myself and my pot of beer a permanent fixture at Schärttner's. To save the fatherland, Schapper and a few of his satellites slept two nights at Schärttner's on the pretext of holding a vigil. These gentlemen, like Löwe of Calbe and his like, had packed their malles3 but, discretion being the better part of valour,'1 decided not to move there until the issue had been 'decided'.

Have you read Louis Blanc's Misererec? The other day Bernard le Clubiste protested that he had not been a co-signatory of this jeremiad.

Pieper is here again, highly delighted with himself. He is leaving the Rothschilds but continuing to give German lessons there; Madame has given him notice as resident private tutor. Since writing to me last he has done nothing, seen nothing and heard nothing in connection with my Proudhon business." It seems to me that he has treated the translation as his own work, ce qui n'est pas!

Maintenant? what can I tell you about the situation? This much is clear, the proletariat has spared its strength. For the time being Bonaparte is victorious because, overnight, he transformed the open ballot into a secret one. With the million £ sterling purloined, despite all d'Argout's posthumous protestations, from the bank, he has bought the army. Will his coup again succeed if the vote goes against him? Will the majority vote at all? The Orléans have left for France. It is difficult, indeed impossible, to

[^1]: Enclosed a letter from Reinhardt from Paris and the 'drunken gossip' I spoke to you about when I was in Manchester.*1

[^2]: a trunks - b Cf. Shakespeare, Henry IV, Part One, Act 5, Scene 4. - c Address of the French Exiles to Their Countrymen, by Bernard le Clubiste, Louis Blanc and others, The Daily News, 5 December 1851. - d See this volume, p. 492. - e The planned publication of The Poverty of Philosophy in German - f which is not so - s Now

[^3]: 18»



