---
Volume: 38
Document_Title: "233. Engels to Marx. 10 December "
Page_Range: "545-547"
---

# 233. Engels to Marx. 10 December 

Capital, the disappointment of Techow & Co., who, without more ado, saw in the French army les apôtres de la trinité démocratique, de la liberté, de l'égalité, de la fraternité. Les pauvres hommes!b And Messrs Mazzini and Ledru can also now sleep easy. The catastrophe was the DOWNFALL of the émigrés. It has been shown that they are pour rieuc in the revolution. For these gentlemen had resolved to suspend world history until Kossuth's return. Apropos, the penny subscription for the latter in London yielded exactly l OOd., pronounced pence.

Salut.

Your

K. M.

Apropos, didn't I send you a letter from Pieper to me, written in French? If so, let me have it back by return.

233

ENGELS TO MARX

Manchester, 10 December 1851

Dear Marx,

What are the great men doing in this EVENTFUL CRISIS? It is said that L. Blanc has been arrested in France, but this cannot alas be true;

nous connaissons notre petit bonhomme? By the way, since nothing has

[^1]: First published in Der Briefwechsel zwischen Printed according to the original F. Engels und K. Marx, Bd. 1, Stuttgart, 1913 Published in English in full for the first time

[^2]: IN LONDON

[^3]: a a character in Heine's 'Zwei Ritter', here Louis Bonaparte - b the apostles of the democratic trinity, of liberty, equality, fraternity. The poor chaps! - c of no account - d we know our little fellow





**[p. 509]**

come of the Paris insurrection,5 I'm glad that the first storm is over. On such occasions, tout blasé qu'on est? one is always to some extent gripped by the old political fever and one always has some personal interest in the upshot of such a business. Now I can at least resume my ethnological study 132 upon which I was engaged at the onset of this great coup.

By the way, in spite of all this there's no sign of a return of confiance? either here or in Liverpool, and P. Ermen alone is as cocksure and as faithful to Napoleon as 4 days ago he was DEJECTED and CHAPFALLEN. By and large the bourgeois here are too shrewd to regard this Napoleonic farce as anything other than ephemeral. But what is to come of the whole dirty business? Napoleon will be elected, no question of that, the bourgeoisie has no choice, and who is to verify the ballot-papers? To make a wrong count in favour of the adventurer is too much of a temptation, and the full measure of the French property-owning class's turpitude, its servile abjection in the face of the slightest success, its habit of crawling before a pouvoir quelconque? have this time come more splendidly to light than ever before. But how does the jackass propose to rule? He will receive fewer votes than in 1848, c'est clair? perhaps 3 to 3 V2 million in all; that is already a dangerous setback so far as credit is concerned. Any financial and taxation reform is impossible 1. because of shortage of money, 2. because it can only be effected by a military dictator who wages successful wars abroad, où la guerre paie la guerre? whereas in peacetime any surplus, and a great deal more besides, inevitably finds its way into the pockets of the army, 3. because Napoleon is too stupid. What remains for him? La guerre?1 Against whom, against England perhaps? Or simple military despotism, which in peacetime must necessarily lead to a fresh military revolution and call into being the parties of the National Assembly within the army itself? Here there is no way out, the farce is bound to collapse. And what if a trade crisis comes!

That Louis Napoleon has something 'big' up his sleeve, I do not for a moment doubt. But I shall be curious to see what sort of foolishness it will be. The développement of the Napoleonic ideasg

will fly exceeding high and come a cropper over the most ordinary obstacles.

What emerges pretty clearly from the whole transaction is that

[^1]: •' however blase one may be - b confidence - c any kind of power - d that's clear - c where war pays for war - f War? - 8 An allusion to Louis Napoleon Bonaparte's Des idées napoléoniennes.



