---
Volume: 38
Document_Title: "234. Engels to Marx! 11 December "
Page_Range: "547-551"
---

# 234. Engels to Marx! 11 December 

I see only 2 ways out of this beastly mess: Either the factions of the party of order, as reflected in the army, now take the place of the 'anarchists', i.e. bring about such a state of anarchy that ultimately the reds and Ledru-Rollin will appear as saviours just as now Louis Napoleon; or Louis Napoleon abolishes the tax on drinks and lets himself be inveigled into introducing one or two bourgeois reforms—though where the money and power are to come from is hard to say. In this highly unlikely event he might be able to maintain his position.

Qu'en penses-tu?b

Your

F. E.

First published in Der Briefwechsel zwischen Printed according to the original F. Engels und K. Marx, Bd. 1, Stuttgart, [gjg Published in English for the first time

234

Manchester, 11 December 1851

Dear Marx,

Herewith I return Reinhardt's letter as well as the one from Pieper which I had been keeping for a time because of the happenings in Cologne.

It seems that the 700 vagabonds' great expedition to Paris, so loudly proclaimed by the press, will not take place; and little L. Blanc, too, to judge by his renewed groans of pain in today's

[^1]: ENGELS TO MARX523

[^2]: IN LONDON

[^3]: a i.e. democrats and socialists of various trends - h What do you think?





**[p. 511]**

Daily News* is, even if allegedly not in London, at least for the time being in safety. The first jeremiad b was divine by comparison with today's. Peuple français—noble fierté—courage indomptable— éternel amour de la liberté—honneur au courage malheureux0—and thereupon the little fellow makes a demi-tour à droite6 and preaches trust and union between the people and the bourgeoisie. Vide Proudhon: Appel à la bourgeoisie, page 2.e And such reasoning! If the insurgents were beaten, it was due to the fact that they were not the vrai peuple'; the vrai peuple cannot be beaten; and if the

vrai peuple failed to fight, this was due to the fact that it didn't wish to fight for the National Assembly; true, it may be objected that, once victorious, the vrai peuple would itself have been a dictator, but it was taken so much by surprise that it could never have thought of that and, after all, it had so often been duped before!

It's the old, vulgar, democratic logic of the kind disseminated whenever the revolutionary party suffers defeat. Le fait est? in my opinion, that if, this time, the proletariat failed to fight en masse, it was because it was fully aware of its own prostration and impotence and was prepared to submit with fatalistic resignation to a renewed cycle of Republic, Empire, restoration and fresh revolution, until such time as it regained fresh strength from a few years of misère under a rule of maximum order. I'm not saying that this will be so, but it seems to me to have been at bottom the instinctive attitude which prevailed among the people of Paris on Tuesday and Wednesday,11 and after the introduction of the secret ballot and the resulting retreat of the bourgeoisie on Friday. It is nonsense to say that this was not an opportunity for the people. If the proletariat wants to wait until confronted by the government with its own question, until a collision occurs in which the conflict will assume a sharper and more definite form than in June 1848,488 it may have to wait a long time. The last time the question between proletariat and bourgeoisie was posed with any degree of precision was on the occasion of the 1850 electoral law, and then the people chose not to fight. This and the perpetual references to 1852 were of themselves proof enough of inertia for us to make a

[^1]: a L. Blanc, 'To the Editor of The Daily News', The Daily News, 11 December 1851. - b Address of the French Exiles to Their Countrymen, by Bernard le Clubiste, Louis Blanc and others, The Daily News, 5 December 1851. - c French people—noble pride—indomitable courage—eternal love of liberty—all honour to courage in adversity - d right-about turn - e A reference to the section 'Appeal to the Bourgeoisie' in the introduction to Proudhon's Idée générale de la Révolution au XIX' siècle. - f true people - B The fact is - h 2 and 3 December 1851



Nor is there any denying that the effect which the establishment of the secret ballot has had on the bourgeoisie, the petty bourgeoisie and, au bout du compte" upon many proletarians as well (as all the reports go to show), casts a curious light on the courage and insight of the Parisians. It has clearly never occurred to many of them how fatuous is the question posed by Louis Napoleon, or to ask what guarantees there were that the votes would be correctly recorded, yet the majority must have seen through this humbug and have nevertheless persuaded themselves that every- thing was now ALL RIGHT, merely in order to have a pretext for not fighting.

According to Reinhardt's letter, according to the fresh revela- tions each day brings about the infamies perpetrated by the soldiery and in particular their outrages on the boulevards against any and every pékin quelconque, n'importe4 whether worker or bourgeois, red or Bonapartist—according to the accumulating reports of local insurrections even in the remotest places where no one expected any resistance,522 according to the letter in yester- day's Daily News from a French ex-deputy and commerçant' it would indeed seem that the appel au peuple1 is taking an undesirable turn for Bonaparte. The mass of the bourgeoisie in Paris would not appear very much to RELISH this new régime and the deportation laws it has imposed. Military terrorism is increasing too rapidly and too brazenly. 2/3 of France is in a state

[^1]: a February 1848 - b uninvolved - c in the end - d civilian of any description, no matter - e businessman - f appeal to the people





**[p. 513]**

of siege. I believe that after all this the bulk of the bourgeoisie won't vote at all, that the whole electoral farce will come to nothing; for in all the doubtful localities, where Louis Napoleon's opponents will turn up in crowds to vote, the gendarmes will stir up trouble with the voters, and then the whole electoral procedure will be declared null and void there. Then Louis Napoleon will declare France to be en état d'aliénation mentale'' and proclaim the army the sole saviour of society and then the whole dungheap will be plain to all and Louis Napoleon in the middle of it. Yet it is precisely through this business of elections that things could take a very nasty turn, if by then any really serious resistance to an established government could still be expected.

The fellow's assured of a million votes from officials and soldiers. There are also half a million Bonapartists in the country, maybe more. Half a million, maybe more, irresolute townspeople will vote for him. Half a million stupid peasants, a million mistakes in adding up, that makes 3 V2 millions already—more than the old Napoleon could boast in an empire which included the entire left bank of the Rhine and Belgium, i.e. certainly 32 million inhabitants. Why shouldn't he be content with that to start off with? And were he to get them with, perhaps, 1 million against him, the bourgeois would soon fall into his lap. But maybe he won't get the 2V2 millions and maybe—though this might be asking too much of the probity of French officials—he will not succeed in having himself credited with mistakes in adding up to the tune of 1 million. At all events a great deal depends on the measures he is forced to take in the meantime. Anyhow, what's to prevent the officials from chucking a few hundred oufsb into the ballot box before the voting starts? 77 n'y a plus de presse"—nobody can verify it.

At any rate it's unfortunate for Krapülinskid that funds should be falling again, and for L. Blanc that he should now have to recognise England as a free country.

In a few months' time the reds are bound to be given another opportunity of proving their mettle, perhaps actually when the •voting takes place; but if they again hang back, then I shall give them up, and then, even with the finest of trade crises, all that they can hope for is a sound thrashing which will most assuredly eliminate them for several years to come. What is the rabble worth if it has forgotten how to fight?

[^1]: a non compos mentis - b Ayes - c There's no longer any press - d a character in Heine's 'Zwei Ritte K, here Loiiis Bonaparte



