---
Volume: 38
Document_Title: "236. Engels to Marx. 16 December "
Page_Range: "552-554"
---

# 236. Engels to Marx. 16 December 

winter, the more disagreeable in that it interferes with my customary bathing, etc. I hope, however, that the thing will pass off without too much inconvenience—at any rate I don't intend to fret in advance about pain which I'm not yet suffering.

By the end of this week I shall probably have put my current business in order and, this being a quiet time for us anyway, I shall see to it that I leave here on Saturday evening526 and, since the trains all arrive in London either too late at night or too early in the morning for one to drive across to Camberwell directly, I shall recuperate a while in the Euston Hotel and arrive at your place BEFORE DINNER TIME on Sunday. At any rate you can expect me at the Grove for dinner on Sunday, unless you get a letter to the contrary from me on Saturday morning.

As for the French, the jackasses can do what they like, it's all one to me.

My warm regards to Emil and Hermann and your children. Your description of your new maids has made me eager to see them. Nota bene, should you have too much BOTHER in the house on Sunday, thus making my company and any further inconvenience seem undesirable just now, you have only to write and send me an army order instructing me when to present myself, and I shall not fail to be punctual.

Toujours* your

Friedrich

236

ENGELS TO MARX

[Manchester,] 16 December 1851

Dear Marx,

about to expire and Weydemeyer already in a position to bring

[^1]: First published in: Marx and Engels, Printed according to the original Works, Second Russian Edition, Vol. 27, Moscow 1962 Published in English tor the first time

[^2]: IN LONDON

[^3]: Herewith a letter from Weydemeyer which reached me at midday today. So far, the news is quite good, Heinzen's paperb

[^4]: a Ever - b Deutsche Schnellpost





**[p. 516]**

Weydemeyer must really keep his fingers out of the American pie until he is able to get the local names right. It's a pity he hasn't the time to orient himself first and learn a little English. The 'abolutionists'c would make a splendid tidbit for Heinzen. As for Weerth, I shall see him here tomorrow or the day after and find out what he can do. Next week, or maybe even on Saturday evening, I shall be in London,526 when we can discuss matters further; meanwhile there remains only the question of what is to be done for the first number; this cannot be put off, so you must write and tell me by return what you propose to do.

To judge by this letter Weydemeyer certainly appears to be still somewhat 'green' in regard to business matters; I shall drop him such hints on the subject as are necessary. As yet he knows nothing whatever about his readers.

Lupus might also bestir himself and see what he can produce for the first number. Weydemeyer will be very hard put to it to find material.

What do you think of the French funds, which yesterday were

[^1]: a impulsive act of Louis Bonaparte (called Krapiilinski after a character in Heine's 'Zwei Ritter') - b time is short - c Engels refers to a mistake made by Weydemeyer when he used this word instead of 'abolitionists.'



