---
Volume: 38
Document_Title: "237. Engels to Jenny Marx. 18 December "
Page_Range: "554-557"
---

# 237. Engels to Jenny Marx. 18 December 



**[p. 517]**

Write to me at once, then, about Weydemeyer.

Your

F. E.

237

ENGELS TO JENNY MARX

[Manchester,] Thursday evening [18 December 1851]

Dear Mrs Marx,

I have received both your letters11 and hasten to write and tell you that it goes without saying that each of us will send off his article separately, as there is otherwise every prospect of none of

[^1]: First published in Der Briefwechsel zwischen Printed according to the original F. Engels und K. Marx, Bd. 1, Stuttgart, .ni» Published in English for the first time

[^2]: IN LONDON

[^3]: a See this volume, pp. 512-13. - b basically - c high finance - d See this volume, pp. 562 and 563.





**[p. 518]**

When I shall be able to leave—maybe not until Saturday morning—I don't yet know exactly.526 But I think I shall arrive at the latest at 6 o'clock on Saturday evening, perhaps as early as 11 in the morning. Until then, my warm regards to you and all your family from your

F. Engels

First published in MEGA, Abt. Ill, Bd. 1, Printed according to the original 1929

Published in English for the first time

238

MARX TO JOSEPH WEYDEMEYER435

[London,] 19 December 1851 28 Dean Street, Soho

DEAR Weydemeyer,

The day before yesterday I received your letter, sent on to me by Engels.

First, my best New Year wishes to your wifec and yourself. Ditto from my wife.

[^1]: IN NEW YORK

[^2]: a the English translation of the Manifesto of the Communist Party - h with the Revolution and Counter-Revolution in Germany - c Louise



You can now settle down in the United States for du moins* a year. 'It' is not going to begin on 2 May 1852.530

I suppose that you will hold back your first numberb until the above articles arrive. After all, it will only make a difference of 5 days. For the following numbers you can announce a serialised work of mine, to appear article by article, namely, Neuste Offenbarungen des Sozialismus, oder 'Idée generale de la Révolution au XIX' siècle' par J. P. Proudhon.— Kritik von K.M."'i[

Write forthwith to 'Adolf Cluss, U.S. Navy Yard, Washington D . C We've already told him you are coming.c He is one of our best and most talented men and could be of the greatest use to you both generally and for the preparation and founding of your paper in particular.

Don't forget the following: Go and see Dana; ask him to give you the numbers of the Tribune in which my articles appeared,d and send them to me forthwith. Hearing nothing from him, I had stopped writing, and there's been such a long interval that I must see the paper itself in order to write the sequel, which I must do, if only for pecuniary reasons.

As soon as your paper appears you must not only send it to us regularly, but let us have a sufficient number of copies so that we can send them out as samples.

Tout à toi"

K. Marx

Unless you are contractually committed, don't buy the Arbeiter- republik' from the wretched Weitling. While you might gain 200

[^1]: a at least - b of Die Revolution - c See this volume, p. 496. - d first articles from Revolution and Counter-Revolution in Germany by Engels - e All yours - f Die

[^2]: Republik der Arbeiter



