---
Volume: 38
Document_Title: "238. Marx to Joseph Weydemeyer. 19 December 518' 239. Marx to Ferdinand Freiligrath. 27 December "
Page_Range: "557-562"
---

# 238. Marx to Joseph Weydemeyer. 19 December 518" 239. Marx to Ferdinand Freiligrath. 27 December 



**[p. 520]**

First published abridged in Die Neue Zeit, Printed according to the original Bd. 2. No. 29, 1906-07 and in full in: Marx and Engels, Work. First Russian Published in English in full for the Edition, Vol. XXV, Moscow, 1934 " r s t t l m e

239

MARX TO FERDINAND FREILIGRATH

IN LONDON

[London,] 27 December 1851 28 Dean Street, Soho

Moorish Prince1'!

Enclosed a letter from Ebner. Today I also received another letter from Wevdemeyer in which, among other things, he says:

After dunning us once again Weydemeyer goes on:

Take that to heart and hammer out a New Year's ode to the New World. As things are now, it seems to me really more feasible to write in verse than in prose, whether sentimental or humorous. If, by the by, you were some time to attempt to render as art the humour that is peculiar to Your African Majesty in private life, I

[^1]: 'Not long ago an emissary arrived from the London "agitation club" for the purpose of opposing Kinkel's loan. These people probably imagine that here in America all are split into Kinkelians and anti-Kinkelians simply because a handful of refugees have made much ado about nothing. The stir over Kossuth has long consigned Kinkel to oblivion and the couple of thousand dollars he is collecting are, indeed, hardly worth making a fuss about.

[^2]: 'In any case, I can see to the sale of the Revue for you over here. Similarly it would be possible to dispose of some more of Freiligrath's more recent poetry.'

[^3]: 'But above all, a poem from Freiligrath: that is the most popular of all.'

[^4]: General rule - h From the title of Freiligrath's ballad 'Der Mohrenfürst'.





**[p. 521]**

feel sure you would play a role in this genre also, since you are, as your wife3 has rightly remarked, rather a rogue.

I would enclose Weydemeyer's letter if I hadn't first to show it to Engels, who will probably be staying here until Thursday and who had hoped last Tuesday to find you ensconced in the 'synagogue'.

The Association has now moved its quarters to 'Farringdon Street, City, Market House, c/o W. J. Masters. Wine and Spirit Merchant.' Meetings henceforward on Thursdays, 9 o'clock. The Association rightly claims that its quarters are now within your district.53"

Palmerston has been dismissed by Russell,5'3 1) in order that the latter may act the constitutional hero vis-à-vis Bonaparte, 2) in order to make a concession to Russia and Austria. While I do not share the view that this FACT will in any way affect the fate of the refugees generally or our own in particular, I believe that for Britain it presages a most lively year politically. From what Engels tells me, the CITY MERCHANTS now also share our view that the crisis, held in check by all kinds of factors (including, e.g., political misgivings, the high price of cotton last year), etc., must blow up at the latest next autumn. And, après les derniers événements je suis plus convaincu que jamais, qu'il n'y aura pas de révolution sérieuse sans crise commerciale!'

Regards from my family to yours.

Expiring,

The Moor

[^1]: First published abridged in Die Neue Zeit, Ergänzungshefte, No. 12, 12 April 1912 and in full in: Marx and Engels, Work, First Russian Edition, Vol. XXV, Moscow, 1934

[^2]: Printed according to the original

[^3]: Published in English for the first time

[^4]: a Ida - b since the latest events 1 am more than ever convinced that there will be no serious revolution without a trade crisis.





APPENDICES



