---
Volume: 38
Document_Title: "3. Jenny Marx to Karl Marx. 24 March 1846 "
Page_Range: "566-570"
---

# 3. Jenny Marx to Karl Marx. 24 March 1846 

Your

Jenny

3

Trier, 24 [March 1846]

A thousand thanks, my dearly beloved Karl, for your long, dear letter of yesterday.538 How I longed for news of you all during those days of anxiety and sorrow when my heart scarcely dared to

[^1]: First published in Af EGA2, Abt. Ill, Printed according to the original Bd. 1, Berlin, 1975

[^2]: Published in English for the first time

[^3]: JENNY MARX TO KARL MARX537

[^4]: IN BRUSSELS

[^5]: a in company - b Heinrich Bürgers - c encounters



It seems that murder and mayhem has broken loose among you! I am glad that this radical breach should not have taken place until after my departure. Much of it would have been attributed to the machinations of that ambitious woman, Lady Macbeth,b and not without reason. For I have, to be sure, for too long again been carping at circumstances and exercising la petite critique.1 But it is better thus. Now as regards this critical woman, Engels was perfectly right, as opposed to yourselves, in finding such a woman 'as she ought to be',d as the eternal antithesis, very arrogant and hence in

[^1]: a Jenny and Laura - b i. e. Mary Burns - c petty criticism - d an adaptation of Weitling's Die Menschheit, wie sie ist und wie sie sein sollte (Mankind as it is and as it ought to be)





**[p. 531]**

Present-day women, in particular, are receptive to all things and very capable of self-sacrifice. True, one would have to acquire a somewhat wider knowledge of one's wares if one was not to renounce all taste which, more than anything else, is reprehensible in a salesman who has long been dealing in such articles. Who could accuse Rabbi Rabuni3 of a blunder, a display of ignorance, in respect of a commercial transaction? To him, all cats are of the same colour and he is satisfied at that. On the other hand, when he sees rosy tints appear in far-away Poland, he forgets that the colour of these blood-red roses is not genuine; they are pleasing to the eye and necessary and have, 'for all that and all that',b created a great stir, but how can one establish any connection between this attempt and attempts to attempt an attempt? Who can understand that? Things have come to such a pass that, along with the per- fectly justified aim and intention of conceiving the real flesh-and- blood human being, with all his needs and desires, as the be-all and end-all, of seeing man as humankind—that, along with this, almost all idealism has gone by the board and been replaced by nothing but fantasticism. Once again the mania for practical reality is firmly in the saddle. And when men like Hess, who are, in fact, nothing but ideologists, who actually have no real flesh and blood but only, as it were, an abstraction of the same, when such men suddenly parade the knife and fork question as their mission in life, then they are bound to plunge neck and crop into fantasticism. Hess will constantly beguile himself with bogus projects while still continuing to exercise a mysterious, inexplicable, magical, personal sway over the weak. Such is indeed his calling—to act, as it were, the prophet and high priest. So let him go to Babel-Jerusalem-Elberfeld if he will. Weitling's hullaballoo about his fantastical projects is also quite

[^1]: a A reference to Moses Hess. - b An allusion to Freiligrath's 'Trotz alledem!'





[^1]: First published in MEGA2, Abt. Ill, Printed according to the original Bd. 1, Berlin, 1975

[^2]: Published in English for the first time

[^3]: a A reference to 'Saint Max', an important part of The German Ideology. - b This presumably refers to A. Ruge's article 'Der Rabbi Moses und Moritz Hess' in the collection Die Opposition.



