---
Volume: 38
Document_Title: "5. Jenny Marx to Joseph Weydemeyer. 17 March 1848 "
Page_Range: "576-577"
---

# 5. Jenny Marx to Joseph Weydemeyer. 17 March 1848 

following within a few days a 'leader' in which the Times man had asserted that the 'delusion of Chartism' was dead and gone.a This meeting will be the commencement of a new era in English agitation, henceforth mere Chartism will not do, ultra democracy, social as well as political, will be the object of our propaganda. Tonight a meeting is to be holden in South London, but that of course [will] not be reported in the daily papers. I must conclude. Write again soon. I will myself write again in a week or two. Mary's love to Mrs E.b [and] yourself. Remember me to Marx, Gigot, etc.

Thine fraternally—

Julian

(Henceforth 'J.')

First published in The Harney Papers, Reproduced from the original Assen, 1969

5

JENNY MARX TO JOSEPH WEYDEMEYER310

Paris, on Thursdayc [17 March 1848] Hotel Manchester, rue Grammont No. 1

Dear Mr Weydemeyer,

My husband, being again so caught up in the work and pother here in this huge city, has asked me to suggest that you announce in the Westphälisches Dampfboot that several German societies have been formed here, particulars of which will be known to Mr Lüning; but that the German Workers' Club550 under the leadership of the Germans in London, Schapper, Bauer, Moll, and the Germans in Brussels, Marx, Wolff, Engels, Wallau, Born, that these (who are also in direct touch with the Chartists in England via Harney and Jones) have nothing in common with the

[^1]: IN HAMM

[^2]: a 'The painful impression', The Times, No. 19188, 19 March 1846. - b Mary Burns - c Judging by the mention made in the second paragraph of the Paris workers' demonstration, which took place on Friday, 17 March, the letter must also have been written on that date.

[^3]: 19»



