---
Volume: 38
Document_Title: "6. Elisabeth Engels to Frederick Engels. After 4 October 1848 "
Page_Range: "577-579"
---

# 6. Elisabeth Engels to Frederick Engels. After 4 October 1848 

I would like to write and tell you a great deal more about the interesting goings-on here which grow livelier by the minute (tonight 400,000 workers are meeting in front of the Hôtel de Ville3), while attroupementsh are again on the increase; however I am so busy with house and home and the three mitesc that all I have time for is to hail you and your dear wifed from afar with a few friendly words of greeting.

Greeting and fraternity.

Your Citoyenne and Vagabonde

Jenny Marx

6

ELISABETH ENGELS TO FREDERICK ENGELS

Barmen [after 4 October 1848]

Dear Friedrich,

You will have received your father's letter; I should have liked to add a few words to it, but I felt too sick at heart. Now you have really gone too far. So often have I begged you to proceed no

[^1]: First published in: Marx and Engels, Printed according to the original Works, First Russian Edition, Vol. XXV, Moscow, 1934

[^2]: IN BRUSSELS

[^3]: town hall - b unlawful assemblies - c Jenny, Laura and Edgar - d Louise





**[p. 541]**

further, but you have paid more heed to other people, to strangers, and have taken no account of your mother's pleas. God alone knows what I have felt and suffered of late. I was trembling when I picked up the newspaper" and saw therein that a warrant was out for my son's arrest.2M

I can think of nothing else but you and then I often see you as a little boy still, playing near me. How happy I used to be then and what hopes did I not pin upon you. Dear Friedrich, if the words of a poor, sorrowing mother still mean anything to you, then follow your father's advice, go to America and abandon the course you have pursued hitherto. With your knowledge you will surely succeed in finding a position in a good firm and if, later on, you should not like it, you could always take to something else. For so many years now I have never been able to think of you without a pang; pray send me for once some piece of news that will gladden my heart a little. You are now separated from your friends—why not break away from them too now and go your own way for once, or listen for once to what your mother has to say. Nobody, surely, can mean so well by you as I do, so why have you refused to listen to my plea?

Do write to me soon, dear Friedrich, and let me have good news of you, I beseech you. May God have mercy on you and not forsake you.

But believe me when I say that your father, no less than I, will bless the day when you return to us again and once more consent to be our child and walk the same path with us. May God soon grant us that joy. Then we shall forget all the worry and distress we have endured on account of you.

Write soon to your deeply grieving mother

Elise Engels

[^1]: First published in Zeitschrift für Ge- schichtswissenschaft, Jg. 18, Heft 10, Berlin, 1970

[^2]: Printed according to the original

[^3]: Published in English for the first time

[^4]: a 'Steckbrief, Kölnische Zeitung, No. 271, 4 October 1848 (see present edition, Vol. 7, p. 593).



