---
Volume: 38
Document_Title: "7. Hermann Ewerbeck to Moses Hess. 14 November 1848 "
Page_Range: "579-580"
---

# 7. Hermann Ewerbeck to Moses Hess. 14 November 1848 



**[p. 7]**

HERMANN EWERBECK TO MOSES HESS

IN PARIS

Cologne, 14 November 1848

My dear Hess,

Here I sit—not in a bower of roses, far from it—at half past one in the morning side by side with Marx at the newspaper's3

editorial table correcting proof-sheets, but still find time to write to you, especially since, newly arrived and due (I hope) to depart for Paris tomorrow, I have heard that the philosopher Wolfb is in Paris. There is, Tpresume, no need for me to advise you as to how our club551 should act vis-à-vis this man. My presence in Paris might be needed at this moment, lest the philosopher should prove troublesome with his nagging and taunting. So I am hastening thither. I could not come any sooner. Berlin has held me in thrall and I have got to spend one day in Cologne, especially since Marx has been summoned to appear in court tomorrow and is in danger of being arrested.236

Do not let Wolf exert any influence. Neither Worcell nor anyone else must be allowed to listen to him. He seems to be corresponding with Marx. The latter is very enthusiastic about Engels, whom he describes as outstanding 'intellectually, morally and from the point of view of character'. The said Engels is in Switzerland for the good cause, says Marx.233

Farewell. NB. Post the enclosed without delay.

[^1]: The city of Berlin, in state of siege, will be severely wrangled/ It is a matter either of a republic or of Cossack rule.d

[^2]: First published in: M. Hess, Briefwechsel, Printed according to the original 's-Gravenhage, 1959

[^3]: Published in English for the first time

[^4]: a Neue Rheinische Zeitung - b Probably Ferdinand Wolff - c Ewerbeck coins a verb from the name Wrangel. - d A pun on Napoleon's words: 'In fifty years Europe will be republican or Cossack', cited by Las Cases in Memorial de Sainte-Hélène.



