---
Volume: 38
Document_Title: "9. Jenny Marx to Caroline Schöler. 14 July 1849 "
Page_Range: "583-585"
---

# 9. Jenny Marx to Caroline Schöler. 14 July 1849 



**[p. 546]**

With much love

Your mother Elise

Your father returned from his trip last Friday3 but left again today for Engelskirchen.

Hermann, Hedwig, Rudolf and Elise send their love.

First published in extracts in Archiv für Printed according to the original Sozialçeschichte, Bd. 9, Hannover, 1969 and in full in Zeitschrift für Geschichtswis- Published in English for the first senschaft, Jg. 18, Heft 10, Berlin, 1970 t i m e

9

JENNY MARX TO CAROLINE SCHÖLER

Paris, 14 July 1849 rue de Lille, No. 45

My dear Lina,

You will have received my two letters from Trier and will have seen from them that on this occasion I did not feel at ease there. Everything has changed too much there and one does not, of course, always remain the same oneself. I felt an intense nostalgia for Paris and so, together with all my baggage, I returned posthaste via Aix and Brussels; we got back here last Saturday, fit and well.263 I found very pretty, convenient lodgings in a salubrious district where we have already set up house, including kitchen, quite cosily.

At this moment Paris is splendid and luxurious in the extreme. The aristocracy and bourgeoisie suppose themselves safe since the ill-starred 13th of June and the fresh victories their party has

[^1]: IN COLOGNE

[^2]: a 1 December 1848



Until 15 August we shall remain in these lodgings which, however, are too dear for us to stay in for any length of time. In Passy, a very pretty place an hour's distance from Paris, we have been offered a whole cottage with garden, 6-10 rooms, elegantly furnished throughout, and having four beds, at the unbelievable rent of eleven thalers a month. If it were not too remote we should remove there at once. ; We have still not made up our minds whether we should have our things sent or not. So I shall have to make yet further calls upon your kindness and good nature.

Could you not find out from Johann and my packing-case maker, Hansen [Kunibert], approximately how many cwt. the whole amounts to, i.e. including only one of the boxes of books, No. 4, and how much it costs to transport a cwt. from Cologne to Paris? That would enable us to make an estimate of sorts. Before winter sets in you would in any case have to unpack out of the trunks and dispatch to me here some of the linen, clothing, etc. I shall be sending you further details later on. Johann would be of very great service to you in this.

At the end of August our things will have to be removed from the place where they are now. Perhaps you could have a word with Johann or Faulenbach about cheap storage for them later on. These are all very tiresome affairs, but unavoidable in view of our vagabond existence. I am only sorry that I should have to place this additional burden on you, the more so since you yourself will surely have had a great deal to arrange and see to of late. For I feel sure that your next dear letter will bring me the joyous tidings of Bertha's3 marriage. Whether that day is already past or whether it is yet to come, do please convey to her my most cordial wishes for her future prosperity and happiness. I wish it were within my power to make you all really happy and more than anything else I should like to see you, my dear Lina, as cheerful and contented as

[^1]: Caroline Schöler's sister



