---
Volume: 38
Document_Title: "10. Conrad Schramm to Joseph Weydemeyer. 8 January 1850 "
Page_Range: "585-587"
---

# 10. Conrad Schramm to Joseph Weydemeyer. 8 January 1850 

I shall not write anything about politics today. There is no telling what may happen to a letter.

My dear husband sends you his warm regards and wonders whether you could, perhaps, find out from Stein, the banker in the Neumarkt, or from his mother, etc., etc., the address of Jung, the assessor, and then forward the enclosed letter to him,555 the matter is one of some urgency. I am not franking these letters because the franking office is much too far away—I beg you not to frank your letters either and, in fact, to get yourself a cash book for your outlays on my behalf. If you fail to keep strict accounts, I shall have to have recourse to coercive measures.

The children,3 who can hardly open their eyes wide enough to take in all these marvels, often babble about their dear Aunt Lina and send you their love, so does Lenchen,b qui est toujours la même.c

My love to your sisters, to Roland et femme and to the Eschweilers should you happen to see them, etc., etc.

Yours ever

Jennye

10

CONRAD SCHRAMM TO JOSEPH WEYDEMEYER

London, 8 January 1850

Dear Weydemeyer,

I am writing to you at the request of Marx, who is up to his eyes in work completing the first issue of the Revue. The Revue will be distributed through booksellers and besides, in larger cities,

[^1]: First published in: Marx and Engels, Printed according to the original Works, Second Russian Edition, Vol. 50, Moscow 1981 Published in English for the first time

[^2]: IN FRANKFURT AM MAIN

[^3]: a Jenny, Laura and Edgar - h Helene Demuth - cwho is still the same as ever - '' Roland Daniels and his wife (Amalie) - e Postscript bv Marx see on p. 202.



Little that's new today over here. Struve and Heinzen are doing all they can to create a commotion and are, to the best of their ability, making asses of themselves and the German emigration. These two dictators, by the by, have fallen out, Struve having allegedly stolen an idea (?) of Heinzen's! I shall shortly be writing to Bruhn, to whom kindly give my regards, and shall then provide a detailed account of what is going on here.

Do you not require a correspondent over here? I could always send you prompt reports on the most important events in Parliament, which, in any case, promises to be interesting. I regularly follow the English movement for financial reform284 and can keep you au courant. In the next day or two I shall send you a sample article and you could then let me know at your convenience whether you would like to have my letters and what you would give for them. Here in England one has got to have something with which to pay for one's STEAKS and beer.

The young communist who has installed himself chez Marx is called Henry Edward Guy Fawkes. He was born on the anniversary of the Gun Powder Plot, 5th Nov., and for that reason

[^1]: a K. Marx and F. Engels, 'Announcement of the Neue Rheinische Zeitung. Politisch- ökonomische Revue' (The Neue Deutsche Zeitung, edited by Weydemeyer, carried it in Nos. 14, 23 and 31, 16 and 26 January and 5 February 1850). - b The Kölnische Zeitung published the announcement in the supplement to No. 24, 27 January 1850. - c silver groschen - d good groschen



