---
Volume: 38
Document_Title: "11. From Peter Röser's Evidence "
Page_Range: "587-592"
---

# 11. From Peter Röser's Evidence 



**[p. 550]**

All your acquaintances send their kind regards.

With cordial regards,

Yours

C. Schramm3

First published in: Marx and Engels, Printed according to the original Works, Second Russian Edition, Vol. 27, Moscow 1962 Published in English for the first time

11

FROM PETER RÖSER'S EVIDENCE656

 Immediately after the New Year of 1850 / received a letter from Marx in which he asked me to set up a community13 in Cologne and to do my utmost to start communities in other Rhine towns, because, now that freedom of speech and of the press has been all but suppressed, he too considers it necessary to reorganise the League, as in the near future, clandestine propaganda will alone be possible. I replied that I was prepared to do this but demanded, before proceeding further, Rules to which we [must] conform and such as would preclude any kind of conspiracy. Marx replied that the Rules of 1847c were no longer in keeping with the times, that the Rules of 1848 were no longer approved in London557 and that new Rules were to be drafted; also that, as soon as the League had been organised, a Congress was to be held to which the Rules would be submitted for approval. Up till then, he said, I was to organise things on the basis of the Manifesto6 of 1847 which was sold openly in Cologne in 1848 as printed in The Hague and had been in my possession ever since. In both letters he urgently recommended that I hold discussions with Dr Daniels and Bürgers with a view to recruiting them into the League

[^1]: a Postscript by Marx see on p. 224. - b of the Communist League - c Rules of the Communist League (see present edition, Vol. 6, pp. 633-38). - d Manifesto of the Communist Party.





**[p. 551]**

I received no reply to two letters conveyed to von Westphalen through Schlegel

At the end of Julyb Wilhelm Klein, a knife grinder and a native of Solingen, who had hitherto lived in London as a refugee, having been compromised by his participation in the uprising in Elberfeld in 1849,286 returned from London to Germany after the trial relating to the Elberfeld uprising was over and there was no longer any fear of his being prosecuted. I had known Klein since the time of the 1848 and 1849 congresses in Cologne.558 He arrived in Cologne at the end of July 1850, lodged there with his uncle, whose name and address I do not know, and brought me a letter from Marx in which the latter gave vent to his anger at Willich & Company and said it was a great pity that Schapper should have attached himself to this bunch of frauds. He said that during the winter of 1849/50 he had lectured to the London Workers' Society52 on the Manifesto and had explained that communism could only be introduced after a number of years, that it would have to go through several phases and that generally its introduction could only be effected by a process of education and gradual development, but that Willich had violently opposed him with his rubbish—as Marx called it—saying that it would be introduced in the next revolution, if only by the might of the guillotine, that the hostility between them was already great and he [Marx] feared it would lead to a split in the League, General Willich having got it firmly into his head that, come the next revolution, he and his brave men from the Palatinate would introduce communism on their own and against the will of everyone in Germany. Finally he recommended the said Klein to me as a capable worker who did not as yet have any clear idea of social and communist principles. Here I must repeat what I said during the trialc—that we did not receive the second London Address,0 or at any rate I was not given it by the said Klein

[^1]: a Edgar von Westphalen - b 1850 - c the communist trial in Cologne in the autumn of 1852 - d K. Marx and F. Engels, 'Address of the Central Authority to the League. June 1850'.





**[p. 552]**

Haupt gave us detailed information on the London conflict and stressed in particular that the split had occurred because Marx and Engels, the opposing party maintained, were not going forward resolutely enough and refused to abandon the illusion that it would not be possible to introduce communism already in the next revolution. The conflict had become so embittered that Schramm called Willich a liar at a committee sitting. The result was that Willich challenged Schramm to a duel, which took place on Belgian territory.379 Willich is said to have left Schramm lying severely wounded at the place of the duel while he himself returned to London and said that he had bumped Schramm off. There were no seconds at the duel, Schramm was found by a peasant, in whose house he was attended to, and later he returned to London. This Schramm is a Krefeld merchant.

We explained to Haupt that we would submit the resolutions of the Central Authority to the community for discussion, but must first await the arrival of the relevant minutes which, Haupt had said, would follow. Haupt told us that he had fought in the Baden campaigna and had taken refuge in Switzerland, and had gone from there to London. It was only very recently that he had been

[^1]: n of the insurgent Baden-Palatinate army in the summer of 1849





**[p. 553]**

admitted into the League by Marx. I was surprised at his admittance and subsequently also expressed my disapproval of it to Bürgers, because I did not trust Haupt.

A few days later, I received through the cashier Zimmermann a letter from Eccarius together with a copy of the London minutes, if I am not mistaken, of the 15th of September 1850.a I had recommended Zimmermann to Marx as a reliable man. I gave him the letters and took the letters from him. Police Sergeant Quelting of Cologne saw me frequently visit Zimmermann at his tax collector's office. Through whom Zimmermann forwarded the letters I do not know, but at all events through guards or other employees of the Cologne-Aix-la-Chapelle Railway. Marx must have had similar connections in Belgium and on the Calais-Dover or Ostend-London crossings, through whom letters were for- warded.

The letter was signed by Eccarius. At that time Engels must already have been living in Manchester and Eccarius have been secretary of the Central Authority. I knew of Eccarius, partly through Moll and partly from an earlier letter which, as secretary of the London Workers' Society, he had addressed to the Cologne Workers' Association559 in the autumn of 1848. This last- mentioned letter is among the documents relating to the case. I obtained the most reliable information on Eccarius during a visit I paid to Schapper in Cologne in February 1850.

There was nothing in Eccarius' letter save a note to the effect that the minutes of the London Central Authority were enclosed. The minutes contained the resolutions already communicated to us by Marx, namely the removal of the Central Authority to Cologne and the drafting of new Rules. The minutes had been signed by the majority of the now dissolved London Central Authority—that is, if I am not mistaken, by Marx, Eccarius, Schramm, Harry Bauer, Pfänder and by Engels or else by Friedrichb Wolf (Lupus) — I can no longer say for certain—and the signatures were, moreover, original ones. Hence I cannot say whether the minutes sent to Cologne were the original ones, or a duplicate of the same, or a copy with original signatures. This document remained in Bürgers' possession and only after we had been arrested was it burnt with all the other papers, as stated by

[^1]: a Meeting of the Central Authority. 15 September 1850 (see present edition, Vol. 10, pp. 625-29). - b Roser was wrong here, it should be Wilhelm Wolff; but he was in Switzerland at the time and did not sign the minutes.





**[p. 1964]**

Bürgers during the final hearing. Bürgers had placed the said papers in safe hands—whose, I do not know, nor could I hazard a guess

Finally, I would further remark that we—both parties, that of Marx as well as that of Schapper—have been reproached for wanting communism. Yet it was on the question of the introduc- tion of communism that the two parties became declared opponents, even enemies. Schapper-Willich propose to introduce communism on the basis of the present state of education, if necessary in the next revolution and by force of arms. Marx considers it to be feasible only by a process of education and gradual development and, in a letter to us, cites four phases through which it must pass before it is introduced. He says that as things are now, the petty bourgeoisie and proletariat will combine against the monarchy until the next revolution. That revolution will not be of their making but will arise out of the force of circumstances, of the general distress. It will be accelerat- ed by periodically recurring trade crises. Only after the next rev- olution, when the petty bourgeoisie is at the helm, will the com- munists' activities and opposition really begin. This will be fol- lowed by a social and then a socio-communist republic which will finally make way for the purely communist republic

After the Central Authority had removed to Cologne, Marx told me in a letter that there was a very good community in Göttingen and that Liebknecht, a student, maintained correspondence with it, for which there were very favourable opportunities. For this reason he held that it was better for the time being to correspond with this community from London. I presume that this community consisted or still consists of students. Liebknecht studied in Giessen and Göttingen and does not come from Hanau, as I mistakenly testified today. My testimony in this instance must therefore be corrected. But one of the members of the London League is from Hanau, his name will be easy to ascertain. I can give no further testimony on the community in Göttingen, we never corresponded with it

[^1]: First published in extracts in German in Printed according to the original International Review of Social History, Vol. IX, Part 1, 1964 and in Soyuz Published in English for the first Kommunistov, Russian edition, Moscow, t l m e



