---
Volume: 38
Document_Title: "13. Jenny Marx to Joseph Weydemeyer. About 20 June 1850 "
Page_Range: "596-597"
---

# 13. Jenny Marx to Joseph Weydemeyer. About 20 June 1850 

Come, o June, and bring us deeds, Fresh deeds for which our hearts do yearna

in a deafening voice, the whole house reverberates. Like its two unfortunate precursors, that month may be destined by world history to see the opening of the gigantic struggle during which we shall all clasp one another's hands again.

Fare well.

First published in Die Neue Zeit, Bd. 2, Printed according to the original No. 27, 1906-07

Published in English for the first time

13

JENNY MARX TO JOSEPH WEYDEMEYER

IN FRANKFURT AM MAIN

[London, about 20 June 1850]

Dear Mr Weydemeyer,

My husband is not a little astonished that you could send the money to Naut, and likewise that from the red numberb to anyone but himself.

There will, of course, have to be a complete overhaul of the way in which the Revue is distributed. Meanwhile my husband requests you not to send anything more to Mr Naut, but rather all of it here, even the smallest amount (in Prussian talers). Conditions here are not as they are in Germany. We live, all six of us, in one small room and a very small closet, for which we pay more than for the largest house in Germany, and pay weekly at that. Hence you can imagine what a position one finds oneself in if so much as 1 Reichstaler arrives a day too late. For all of us here, without exception, it's a question of our daily bread. So do not await Mr Naut's orders and so forth. Another thing my husband wishes me to say is that it really is not desirable for Liming to write a critique, a strong attack would do, only no praise. Nor has my husband ever expected a profound critique, but only a straightfor- ward piece such as all newspapers accord to reviews and

[^1]: a Freiligrath, 'Reveille'. - b Neue Rheinische Zeitung of 19 May 1849



