---
Volume: 38
Document_Title: "14. Jenny Marx to Frederick Engels. 19 December 1850 "
Page_Range: "597-598"
---

# 14. Jenny Marx to Frederick Engels. 19 December 1850 



**[p. 560]**

Many regards to your dear wife,b and my cordial regards to yourself.

Yours

Jenny Marx

First published in: Marx and Engels, Printed according to the original Works, First Russian Edition, Vol. XXV, Moscow 1934 Published in English for the first time

14

JENNY MARX TO FREDERICK ENGELS

IN MANCHESTER

London, 19 December [1850]

Dear Mr Engels,

On Karl's request I send you herewith six copies of the Neue Rheinische Zeitung!" Harney, who is a little better, wishes you to send one to Helen Macfarlane. Just imagine, that rascal Schuberth will only let Eisen have the 300 copies if he is paid in cash and Naut, the jackass, is now quite beside himself. Hence Karl has masses of letters to write, and you know what that means where he is concerned. The Cologne anathema against Willich and Co. arrived yesterday, together with new Rules,560

circulars, etc. This time the Cologne people were exceptionally active and energetic and adopted a firm stand vis-à-vis the rotten band. Just imagine, it wasn't enough for Willich to have put his foot in it once, with the Fanon-Caperon manifesto11—the leviathans must needs issue another epistle, while Willich has gone so far as to send red Beckere 3 decrees for forwarding to the Cologne Landwehr™5 in which he gives them orders from here to

[^1]: 3 Neue Deutsche Zeitung - h Louise - c Neue Rheinische Zeitung. Politisch-ökonomische Revue - à See this volume pp. 246-47. - e Hermann Becker (see this volume, p. 320)



