---
Volume: 38
Document_Title: "17. Jenny Marx to Frederick Engels. 17 December 1851 "
Page_Range: "600-604"
---

# 17. Jenny Marx to Frederick Engels. 17 December 1851 



**[p. 17]**

JENNY MARX TO FREDERICK ENGELS

IN MANCHESTER

[London, 17 December 1851]

Dear Mr Engels,

Hardly had I posted my letter to you (yoursa not having arrived until four o'clock in the afternoon) when Moor returned from the Museumb and began 'burning his fingers' over the French stuff.0

Now he asks me to send you at once this second epistle to tell you that, as he would not be able to post his article until late on Thursday evening,0 he proposes to send it off from here, and that, supposing you were in fact to leave on Friday,526 everything would cross. If you can send your article562 here by Friday, it could travel in company with the rest; but you might consider it preferable to send yours off from Liverpool. So comme il vous plaira? How do you like my husband creating a stir with your articlef

throughout western, eastern and southern America—and mutilated at that, and what's more under another name? For the rest the whole article is nothing but a source of mystification.

Should you have the English version of the Manifesto* to hand, please bring it with you.

Colonel Muschh writes three letters a day to Frederick in Manchester, sticking used stamps thereon with the utmost conscientiousness. The whole tribe sends its love. Until Saturday, then.

Farewell.

Yours

Jenny Marx

[^1]: First published in: Marx and Engels, Printed according to the original Works, Second Russian Edition, Vol. 50, . Moscow, 1981 Published in English for the first time

[^2]: a See this volume, pp. 515-17. - b the library of the British Museum - c The Eighteenth Brumaire of Louis Bonaparte-6 18 December - e as you please- f Presumably Engels' series of articles Revolution and Counter-Revolution in Germany published in the New-York Daily Tribune over Marx's signature. - 8 K. Marx and F. Engels, Manifesto of the Communist Party.- h Edgar Marx





NOTES

AND INDEXES



