---
Volume: 22
Document_Title: "3. Karl Marx. To the Committee of the Social- Democratic Workers' Party "
Page_Range: "292-293"
---

# 3. Karl Marx. To the Committee of the Social- Democratic Workers' Party 



**[p. 259]**

Karl Marx

TO THE COMMITTEE OF THE SOCIAL-DEMOCRATIC WORKERS' PARTY123

London, August 2, 1870

Friends,

First my thanks for the detailed report on the Workers' Party in Germany. I immediately communicated it to the General Council.

The work which I was asked to write on the relations of land ownership in Germany had to be put to one side for the time being owing to sheer lack of time.124

As you will have seen from the Address of the General Council which I sent to you last week, I have incorporated into this address parts of the appeal issued at the Brunswick MEETING (of 16th July, 1870)a

According to article 3 of the Rules'3 the General Council cannot defer the date of the Congress. In the present, exceptional, circumstances, however, it would accept responsibility for such a step, if the necessary support from the sections was forthcoming. It would therefore be desirable for a reasoned application to this effect to be sent to us officially from Germany.

[^1]: First published in an abbreviated form in Printed according to W. Bracke's the book: C. Koch, Der Process gegen den book Der Braunschweiger Ausschuss Ausschuss der social-demokratischen Arbeiter- der socialdemokratischen Arbeiter- partei, Braunschweig, 1871 Partei in Lätzen und vor dem Gericht, Braunschweig, 1872

[^2]: Published in English for the first time

[^3]: a See this volume, p. 6. The appeal was published in the column "Politische Uebersicht" in Der Volksstaat, No. 58, July 20, 1870.— Ed.

[^4]: b See present edition, Vol. 20, p. 15.— Ed.



