---
Volume: 22
Document_Title: "4. Karl Marx and Frederick Engels. Letter to the Committee of the Social- Democratic Workers' Party "
Page_Range: "293-296"
---

# 4. Karl Marx and Frederick Engels. Letter to the Committee of the Social- Democratic Workers' Party 



**[p. 260]**

Karl Marx and Frederick Engels

[LETTER TO THE COMMITTEE OF THE SOCIAL- DEMOCRATIC WORKERS' PARTY]125

The military camarilla, professors, middle-class people and public-house politicians are pretending thisa is the way to protect Germany from war with France forever. On the contrary, it is the most tried and tested way of turning war into a European institution. It is, in fact, the surest means of perpetuating military despotism in the rejuvenated Germany, as a necessity for maintaining a western Poland—Alsace and Lorraine. It is the most infallible way of turning the imminent peace into a mere armistice, until France is sufficiently recovered to demand the lost territory back. It is the most infallible way of ruining Germany and France through internecine strife.

The villains and fools, who have discovered these guarantees for eternal peace, should surely know from Prussian history, from Napoleon's drastic remedy in the Peace of Tilsit,126 how such coercive measures to silence a viable people have precisely the opposite effect to that intended. And what is France, even after losing Alsace and Lorraine, compared with Prussia after the Peace of Tilsit!

If French chauvinism had some material justification, as long as the old state relations persisted, in the fact that since 1815 the capital, Paris, and thus France itself, were exposed after a few lost battles—will it not derive new vigour once the eastern border runs along the Vosges and northern at Metz?

Not even the most rabid b Teuton dares to claim that the people of Alsace and Lorraine desire the blessings of German govern-

[^1]: a The reference is to the annexation of Alsace and Lorraine.— Ed. b "Most rabid" was written down in Engels' hand in his copy instead of the dots in the printed text.— Ed.



ment. It is the principle of pan-Germanism and "secure" borders which is being proclaimed here, and which would lead to fine results for Germany and Europe from the eastern sidea!

Anyone who is not deafened by the clamour of the hour, and has no interest in deafening the German people, must realise that the war of 1870 just as necessarily carries within it the seed of a war between Germany and Russia, as the war of 1866 does the war of 1870.

I say necessarily, inevitably, except in the unlikely event of revolution in Russia breaking out first.

Should this unlikely event not occur, the war between Germany and Russia must already be treated as a fait accompli (an accomplished fact).

It depends entirely on the present conduct of the German victors whether the war will prove useful or harmful.

If they take Alsace and Lorraine, France will join with Russia to wage war on Germany. There is no need to point out the disastrous consequences.

If they conclude an honourable peace with France, that war will emancipate Europe from the Muscovite dictatorship, make Prussia merge into Germany, allow the western continent peaceful development and, finally, help a social revolution to break out in Russia, whose elements only need such an impulse from without for their development—thus benefitting the Russian people, too.

But I fear that the villains and fools will play their mad game unhindered unless the German working class en masse raises its voice.

The present war is opening up a new epoch in the history of the world in that Germany has proved that, even without German Austria, it is capable of going its own way, independently of foreign countries. That, to begin with, it is finding its unity in the Prussian barracks is a punishment which it amply deserves. But one result has been achieved immediately. Petty trifles, such as, for example, the conflict between North German National Liberals and South German supporters of the People's Party,127 will no longer pointlessly get in the way. The state of affairs will develop and become simpler on a grand scale. If the German working class then fails to play the historic role allotted to it, it will only have itself to blame. This war has shifted the centre of gravity of the

[^1]: a See the Appeal of a group of German political figures to the King and the German people of August 30, 1870, "Berlin, 31. Aug.", Kölnische Zeitung, No. 242; September, 1, 1870. Second edition.— Ed.



Written between August 22 and 30, 1870

Included in the text of the Manifesto of the Committee of the Social-Democratic Workers' Party published as a leaflet on September 5 and in the newspaper Der

Volksstaat, No. 73, September 11, 1870

Printed according to Engels' copy of the leaflet

