---
Volume: 22
Document_Title: "12. Karl Marx. Statement by the General Council to the Editor of The Times and Other Papers "
Page_Range: "319-321"
---

# 12. Karl Marx. Statement by the General Council to the Editor of The Times and Other Papers 



**[p. 286]**

Karl Marx

[STATEMENT BY THE GENERAL COUNCIL TO THE

EDITOR OF THE TIMES AND OTHER PAPERS]145

TO THE EDITOR OF THE TIMES

Sir,—

I am directed by the General Council of the International Working Men's Association to solicit your favour to publish the following in the columns of your journal: —

A statement has gone the round of the English press that the Paris members of the International Working Men's Association had in so far joined the so-called Anti-German League146 as to declare all Germans to be henceforth excluded from our association.3

This statement is the very reverse of fact. Neither the Federal Council of our association in Paris, nor any of the Paris sections represented by that council, have ever passed any such resolution. The so-called Anti-German League, as far as it exists at all, is the exclusive work of the upper and middle classes: it was started by the Jockey Club,147 and kept up by the adhesions of the Academy, of the Stock Exchange, of some bankers and manufacturers, etc. The working-classes have nothing whatever to do with it.

The object of these calumnies is evident. A short time before the outbreak of the late war the International was made the general scapegoat for all untoward events. This is now repeated over again. While the Swiss and the Prussian press accuses it of having created the late outrages upon Germans in Zurich,148

French papers, such as the Courrier de Lyon, Courrier de la Gironde, La Liberté, etc., tell of certain secret meetings of Internationals

[^1]: a This statement entitled "Les scrupules de l'Internationale" was first published in Paris-Journal, No. 67, March 10, 1871.— Ed.





**[p. 287]**

Yours respectfully,

/. George Eccarius, General Secretary of the International Working Men's Association

256, High Holborn, March 22

Written on March 21, 1871 Reproduced from The Times, ver- Approved at the meeting of the General i f i e d w i t h t h e General Council's Council on March 21, 1871 b Minute Book

Published in The Times, No. 27018, March 23, 1871, in The Eastern Post, No. 130, March 25, 1871 and in other press organs of the International

[^1]: a "On lit dans le Courrier de Lyon", Courrier de la Gironde, March 14, 1871; "On lit dans le Courrier de Lyon, , Courrier de la Gironde, March 16, 1871; "Chronique des Départements", La Liberté, March 18, 1871.— Ed.

[^2]: b Before its despatch to the Editor of The Times, the statement was datelined March 22.— Ed.



