---
Volume: 22
Document_Title: "16. Frederick Engels. On the Cigar- Workers' Strike in Antwerp "
Page_Range: "327-328"
---

# 16. Frederick Engels. On the Cigar- Workers' Strike in Antwerp 



**[p. 294]**

Frederick Engels

[ON THE CIGAR-WORKERS' STRIKE IN ANTWERP]1

In Antwerp 500 cigar-workers are out of work. The manufactur- ers gave them the choice: either to dissolve their trade union (which belongs to the International Working Men's Association) or to be dismissed. Every one of them without exception decisively rejected this unreasonable demand, and so the manufacturers closed their workshops.

The workers have funds of 6,000 Fr. (1,600 Talers); they have already established contact with the cigar-workers of Holland and England and any influx of workers from these countries is being prevented. From England they are to receive fairly considerable financial aid. £176 (1,200 Talers) has already been sent, and further assistance will be provided. Anyway, the Antwerpers are only asking for an advance, since they say they are in a position to pay back any aid which they are given. If the German cigar-workers or any other trade unions are in a position to offer assistance to their brothers in Antwerp, it is to be hoped that they will not hold back. Remittances should be made to Ph. Coenen, Boomgaardsstraat 3, Antwerp. But, at any rate, it is their duty to stop German cigar-workers moving to Antwerp as long as the manufacturers there insist on their demands.

[^1]: Written on April 5, 1871

[^2]: First published in Der Volksstaat, No. 30, April 12, 1871

[^3]: Printed according to the news- paper

[^4]: Published in English for the first time



