---
Volume: 22
Document_Title: "18. Karl Marx and Frederick Engels. Resolution of the General Council Expelling Henri Louis Tolain from the International Working Men's Association "
Page_Range: "330-331"
---

# 18. Karl Marx and Frederick Engels. Resolution of the General Council Expelling Henri Louis Tolain from the International Working Men's Association 



**[p. 297]**

Karl Marx and Frederick Engels

[RESOLUTION OF THE GENERAL COUNCIL

EXPELLING HENRI LOUIS TOLAIN FROM THE INTERNATIONAL WORKING MEN'S ASSOCIATION]l

The General Council of the I.W.M.A. Considering the resolution of the Federal Council of the Paris Sections expelling Citizen Tolain from the Association3 because, after having been elected to the National Assembly as a representative of the Working Classes, he has deserted their cause in the most disgraceful manner; which resolution the General Council is called upon to confirm;

Considering that the place of every French member of the I.W.M.A. is undoubtedly on the side of the Commune of Paris and not in the usurpatory and counter-revolutionary Assembly of Versailles;

Confirms the resolution of the Paris Federal Council and declares that Citizen Tolain is expelled from the I.W.M.A.

The General Council was prevented from taking action in this matter sooner by the fact that the above resolution of the Paris Federal Council was laid before them, in an authentic shape, on the 25th April only.

[^1]: Written between April 22 and 25, 1871 Reproduced from the manuscript, verified with the newspapers Approved at the meeting of the General Council on April 25, 1871

[^2]: Published in the newspapers The Eastern Post, No. 135, April 29, 1871; L'Inter- nationale, No. 122, May 14, 1871; Der Volksstaat, No. 42, May 24, 1871 and Vorbote, No. 7, July 1871

[^3]: a [Resolution of the Federal Council of the Paris Sections of the I.W.M.A. expelling Tolain] La Revolution politique et sociale, No. 3, April 16, 1871.— Ed.



