---
Volume: 22
Document_Title: "II "
Page_Range: "353-361"
---

# II 



**[p. 320]**

And now we have to address a question to M. Thiers and the men of national defence, his understrappers. It is known that, through the agency of M. Pouyer-Quertier, his finance minister, Thiers had contracted a loan of two milliards. Now, is it true, or not,—

1. That the business was so managed that a consideration of several hundred millions was secured for the private benefit of Thiers, Jules Favre, Ernest Picard, Pouyer-Quertier, and Jules Simon? and—

2. That no money was to be paid down until after the "pacification" of Paris? 182

At all events, there must have been something very pressing in the matter, for Thiers and Jules Favre, in the name of the majority of the Bordeaux Assembly, unblushingly solicited the immediate occupation of Paris by Prussian troops. Such, however, was not the game of Bismarck, as he sneeringly, and in public, told the admiring Frankfort Philistines on his return to Germany.b

II

Armed Paris was the only serious obstacle in the way of the counter-revolutionary conspiracy. Paris was, therefore, to be disarmed. On this point the Bordeaux Assembly was sincerity itself. If the roaring rant of its Rurals had not been audible enough, the surrender of Paris by Thiers to the tender mercies of the triumvirate of Vinoy the Décembriseur, Valentin the Bonapartist gendarme, and Aurelle de Paladines the Jesuit general, would have cut off even the last subterfuge of doubt. But while insultingly exhibiting the true purpose of the disarmament of Paris, the conspirators asked her to lay down her arms on a pretext which was the most glaring, the most barefaced of lies. The artillery of

[^1]: a See "The scanty news from the capital of Revolution", The Daily News, No. 7774, March 30, 1871.— Ed.

[^2]: b See report from Germany in the column "Révélations", La Situation, No. 156, March 21, 1871.— Ed.





**[p. 321]**

The seizure of her artillery was evidently but to serve as the preliminary to the general disarmament of Paris, and, therefore, of the Revolution of the 4th of September. But that Revolution had become the legal status of France. The republic, its work, was recognized by the conqueror in the terms of the capitulation. After the capitulation, it was acknowledged by all the foreign Powers, and in its name the National Assembly had been summoned. The Paris working men's revolution of the 4th of September was the only legal title of the National Assembly seated at Bordeaux, and of its executive. Without it, the National Assembly would at once have to give way to the Corps Législatif, elected in 1869 by universal suffrage under French, not under Prussian, rule, and forcibly dispersed by the arm of the Revolution. Thiers and his ticket-of-leave men c would have had to capitulate for safe-conducts signed by Louis Bonaparte, to save them from a voyage to Cayenne.183 The National Assembly, with its power of attorney to settle the terms of peace with Prussia, was

[^1]: a L. A. Thiers' proclamation of March 17, 1871 to the inhabitants of Paris, The Daily News, No. 7765, March 20, 1871.— Ed.

[^2]: b Convention entre l'Allemagne et la France pour la suspension des hostilités et la capitulation de Paris; signée à Versailles, le 28 janvier 1871, art. 7.— Ed.

[^3]: ç See this volume, p. 314.— Ed.





**[p. 322]**

Thiers opened the civil war by sending Vinoy, at the head of a multitude of sergents-de-ville and some regiments of the line, upon a nocturnal expedition3 against Montmartre, there to seize, by surprise, the artillery of the National Guard. It is well known how this attempt broke down before the resistance of the National Guard and the fraternization of the line with the people. Aurelle de Paladines had printed beforehand his bulletin of victory, and Thiers held ready the placards announcing his measures of coup

d'état. Now these had to be replaced by Thiers' appeals, imparting his magnanimous resolve to leave the National Guard in the possession of their arms, with which, he said, he felt sure they would rally round the Government against the rebels.b Out of 300,000 National Guards only 300 responded to this summons to rally round little Thiers against themselves. The glorious working men's Revolution of the 18th March took undisputed sway of Paris. The Central Committee was its provisional Government. Europe seemed, for a moment, to doubt whether its recent

[^1]: a The 1871 and 1891 German editions have "night raids".— Ed. b See L. A. Thiers' proclamation of March 17, 1871 to the inhabitants of Paris, The Daily News, No. 7765, March 20, 1871.— Ed.





**[p. 323]**

From the 18th of March to the entrance of the Versailles troops into Paris, the proletarian revolution remained so free from the acts of violence in which the revolutions, and still more the counter-revolutions, of the "better classes" abound, that no facts were left to its opponents to cry out about, but the execution of Generals Lecomte and Clément Thomas, and the affair of the Place Vendôme.

One of the Bonapartist officers engaged in the nocturnal attempt against Montmartre, General Lecomte, had four times ordered the 81st line regiment to fire at an unarmed gathering in the Place Pigalle, and on their refusal fiercely insulted them. Instead of shooting women and children, his own men shot him. The inveterate habits acquired by the soldiery under the training of the enemies of the working class are, of course, not likely to change the very moment these soldiers change sides. The same men executed Clément Thomas.

"General" Clément Thomas, a malcontent ex-quartermaster- sergeant, had, in the latter times of Louis Philippe's reign, enlisted at the office of the Republican newspaper Le National, there to serve in the double capacity of responsible man-of-straw (gérant

responsable"1) and of duelling bully to that very combative journal. After the revolution of February, the men of the National having got into power, they metamorphosed this old quartermaster- sergeant into a general on the eve of the butchery of June, of which he, like Jules Favre, was one of the sinister plotters, and became one of the most dastardly executioners. Then he and his generalship disappeared for a long time, to again rise to the surface on the 1st November, 1870. The day before the Government of Defence, caught at the Hôtel de Ville, had solemnly pledged their parole to Blanqui, Flourens, and other representatives of the working class, to abdicate their usurped power into the hands of a commune to be freely elected by Paris.184 Instead of keeping their word they let loose on Paris the Bretons of Trochu, who now replaced the Corsicans of Bonaparte.185 General Tamisier alone, refusing to sully his name by such a breach of faith, resigned the commandership-in-chief of the National Guard, and in his place Clément Thomas for once became again a general. During the whole of his tenure of

[^1]: a Responsible editor. The 1871 and 1891 German editions have further: "who takes upon himself the responsibility including imprisonment".— Ed.





**[p. 324]**

The massacre of unarmed citizens in the Place Vendôme is a myth which M. Thiers and the Rurals persistently ignored in the Assembly, intrusting its propagation exclusively to the servants' hall of European journalism. "The men of order," the reactionists of Paris, trembled at the victory of the 18th of March. To them it was the signal of popular retribution at last arriving. The ghosts of the victims assassinated at their hands from the days of June, 1848, down to the 22nd of January, 1871,186 arose before their faces. Their panic was their only punishment. Even the sergents- de-ville, instead of being disarmed and locked up, as ought to have been done, had the gates of Paris flung wide open for their safe retreat to Versailles. The men of order were left not only unharmed, but allowed to rally and quietly to seize more than one stronghold in the very centre of Paris. This indulgence of the Central Committee—this magnanimity of the armed working men—so strangely at variance with the habits of the "party of order," the latter misinterpreted as mere symptoms of conscious weakness. Hence their silly plan to try, under the cloak of an unarmed demonstration, what Vinoy had failed to perform with his cannon and mitrailleuses. On the 22nd of March a riotous mob of swells started from the quarters of luxury, all the petits crevésd in

[^1]: a 1848.— Ed. b "La Sociale publie une curieuse lettre", Le Vengeur, No. 21, April 19, 1871. Canaille—rabble.— Ed.

[^2]: c Alexandra.— Ed. d Dandy, swell.— Ed.





**[p. II]**



[^1]: a Jules Bergeret.— Ed. b Joshua 6:20.—£<i c Louis Charles Maljournal.— Ed. d See "Le Journal officiel de Paris raconte", Le Rappel, No. 650, March 25, 1871.— Ed.

[^2]: e Marx gives a detailed analysis of the events of June 13, 1849 in The Class Struggles in France, to 1850, Ch. (see present edition, Vol. 10, pp. 71-100).— Ed.





**[p. civil]**

The captured soldiers of the line were massacred in cold blood; our brave friend, General Duval, the ironfounder, was shot without any form of trial. Galliffet, the kept man of his wife, so notorious for her shameless exhibitions at the orgies of the Second Empire, boasted in a proclamation of having commanded the murder of a small troop of National Guards, with their captain and lieutenant, surprised and disarmed by his Chasseurs.b Vinoy, the runaway, was appointed by Thiers Grand Cross of the Legion of Honour, for his general order to shoot down every soldier of the line taken in the ranks of the Federals. Desmarets, the gendarme, was decorated for the treacherous butcher-like chop- ping in pieces of the high-souled and chivalrous Flourens, who had saved the heads of the Government of Defence on the 31st of October 1870.189 "The encouraging particulars" of his assassina- tion were triumphantly expatiated upon by Thiers in the National Assembly.0 With the elated vanity of a parliamentary Tom Thumb, permitted to play the part of a Tamerlane, he denied the rebels against his littleness every right of civilized warfare, up to the right

[^1]: a See "The Advance of the Insurgents on Versailles", The Daily News, No. 7781, April 7, 1871.— Ed.

[^2]: b See notice on proclamation of General de Galliffet, April 3, 1871, The Daily News, No. 7783, April 10, 1871.—Ed.

[^3]: c Marx gives a rendering of Thiers' speech in the National Assembly on April 3, 1871 according to The Daily Telegraph, No. 4932, April 5, 1871.— Ed.





**[p. 327]**

After the decree of the Commune of the 7th April,191 ordering reprisals and declaring it to be its duty "to protect Paris against the cannibal exploits of the Versailles banditti, and to demand an eye for an eye, a tooth for a tooth," Thiers did not stop the barbarous treatment of prisoners, moreover insulting them in his bulletins as follows: — "Never have more degraded countenances of a degraded democracy met the afflicted gazes of honest men,"c—honest like Thiers himself and his ministerial ticket-of- leave men. Still the shooting of prisoners was suspended for a time. Hardly, however, had Thiers and his Decembrist generals become aware that the Communal decree of reprisals was but an empty threat, that even their gendarme spies caught in Paris under the disguise of National Guards, that even sergents-de-ville taken with incendiary shells upon them, were spared,—when the wholesale shooting of prisoners was resumed and carried on uninterruptedly to the end. Houses to which National Guards had fled were surrounded by gendarmes, inundated with petroleum (which here occurs for the first time in this war), and then set fire to, the charred corpses being afterwards brought out by the ambulance of the Press at the Ternes.d Four National Guards having surrendered to a troop of mounted Chasseurs at Belle Epine, on the 25th of April, were afterwards shot down, one after another, by the captain, a worthy man of Galliffet's. One of his four victims, left for dead, Scheffer, crawled back to the Parisian outposts, and deposed to this fact before a commission of the Commune.6 When Tolain interpellated the War Minister upon the report of this commission, the Rurals drowned his voice and forbade Le Flô to answer. It would be an insult to their "glorious" army to speak of its deeds. The flippant tone in which Thiers' bulletins announced the bayoneting of the Federals surprised asleep at Moulin Saquet, and the wholesale fusillades at Clamart shocked the nerves even of the not oversensitive London Times*

[^1]: a Voltaire, Candide ou l'optimisme, Ch. 22.— Ed. b See this volume, pp. 356-57.— Ed. c L. A. Thiers' proclamation of April 4, 1871, The Daily News, No. 7779, April 5, 1871.— Ed.

[^2]: d See "Les gendarmes usent", Le Mot d'Ordre, No. 56, April 20, 1871.— Ed. e See [Rapport de la Commission d'enquête de la Commune], Le Mot d'Ordre, No. 65, April 29, 1871; see also Journal officiel (Paris), No. 118, April 28, 1871.— Ed.

[^3]: f See "Voici, sur le même fait, le bulletin", Le Rappel, No. 692, May 6, 1871; "The Massacre at Clamart", The Times, No. 27056, May 6, 1871.— Ed.



