---
Volume: 22
Document_Title: "22. Karl Marx and Frederick Engels. Statement by thé General Council on Jules Favre's Circular "
Page_Range: "394-397"
---

# 22. Karl Marx and Frederick Engels. Statement by thé General Council on Jules Favre's Circular 



**[p. 361]**

Karl Marx and Frederick Engels

[STATEMENT BY THE GENERAL COUNCIL

ON JULES FAVRE'S CIRCULAR]224

TO THE EDITOR OF THE TIMES

Sir,—

On June 6, 1871, M. Jules Favre issued a circular to all the European Powers, calling upon them to hunt down the Interna- tional Working Men's Association.3 A few remarks will suffice to characterize that document.

In the very preamble of our statutes it is stated that the International was founded "September 28, 1864, at a public meeting held at St. Martin's Hall, London."b For purposes of his own Jules Favre puts back the date of its origin behind 1862.

In order to explain our principles, he professes to quote "their (the International's) sheet of the 25th of March, 1869." And then what does he quote? The sheet of a society which is not the International.0 This sort of manoeuvre he already recurred to when, still a comparatively young lawyer, he had to defend the National newspaper, prosecuted for libel by Cabet. Then he pretended to read extracts from Cabet's pamphlets while reading interpolations of his own—a trick exposed while the court was

[^1]: a J. Favre, [Circulaire adressée aux agents diplomatiques de la République française], "Versailles, le 6 juin 1871", Journal officiel (Versailles), No. 159, June 8, 1871.— Ed.

[^2]: b See present edition, Vol. 20, p. 15.— Ed. c Programme de l'Alliance internationale de la Démocratie Socialiste, Geneva, 1868.— Ed.





**[p. 362]**

sitting, and which but for the indulgence of Cabet, would have been punished by Jules Favre's expulsion from the Paris bar. Of all the documents quoted by him as documents of the Interna- tional not one belongs to the International. He says, for in- stance,

"The Alliance declares itself Atheist, says the General Council, constituted in London in July, 1869."

The General Council never issued such a document. On the contrary, it issued a document3 which quashed the original statutes of the "Alliance"—L'Alliance de la Démocratie Socialiste at Geneva—quoted by Jules Favre.

Throughout his circular, which pretends in part also to be directed against the Empire, Jules Favre repeats against the International but the police inventions of the public prosecutors of the Empire, and which broke down miserably even before the law courts of that Empire.

It is known that in its two addresses (of July and September last) on the late warb the General Council of the International denounced the Prussian plans of conquest against France. Later on Mr. Reitlinger, Jules Favre's private secretary, applied, though of course in vain, to some members of the General Council for getting up by the Council a demonstration against Bismarck, in favour of the Government of National Defence; they were particularly requested not to mention the Republic. The prepara- tions for a demonstration with regard to the expected arrival of Jules Favre in London were made—certainly with the best of intentions—in spite of the General Council, which in its address of the 9th of September had distinctly forewarned the Paris workmen against Jules Favre and his colleagues.

What would Jules Favre say if in its turn the International were to send a circular on Jules Favre to all the Cabinets of Europe, drawing their particular attention to the documents published at Paris by the late M. Millière?c

[^1]: a The reference is to the circular letter written by Marx, "The International Working Men's Association and the International Alliance of Socialist Democracy" (see present edition, Vol. 21, p. 34).— Ed.

[^2]: b See this volume, pp. 3-8, 263-70.— Ed. c J.-B. E. Millière, "Le Faussaire", Le Vengeur, No. 6, February 8, 1871.— Ed.





**[p. 363]**

John Hales, Secretary to the General Council of the International Working Men's Association

256, High Holborn, W.C., June 12, 1871

Published in The Times, No. 27088, June Reproduced from The Times 13, 1871 and also in The Eastern Post, No. 142, June 17, 1871; L'Internationale, No. 127, June 18, 1871; Der Volksstaat, No. 50, June 21, 1871 and other press organs of the International

