---
Volume: 22
Document_Title: "23. Karl Marx and Frederick Engels. Statement by the General Council to the Editor of The Times "
Page_Range: "397-399"
---

# 23. Karl Marx and Frederick Engels. Statement by the General Council to the Editor of The Times 



**[p. 364]**

Karl Marx and Frederick Engels

[STATEMENT BY THE GENERAL COUNCIL

TO THE EDITOR OF THE TIMES]225

TO THE TIMES

The General Council of this Association has instructed me to state, in reply to your leader of June 19, 1871, on the "International"3 the following facts.

The pretended Paris manifestoes, published by the Paris- Journal13 and similar journals, manifestoes which you place on the same line as our Address on the Civil war in France, are mere fabrications of the Versailles police.

You say:

Now, the Council, in its address, quotes nothing from the "political notes" except the testimony of the writer, who is a known and honourable French savant, as to the personal character of the "Internationals" implicated in the last Paris revolution.0

What has this to do with the "Ex-Emperor" and the society saved by him! The "programme" of the Association was not, as you say, "prepared" by Messrs. Tolain and Odger "seven years ago". It was issued by the Provisional Council, chosen at the public meeting held at St. Martin's Hall, Long Acre, on 28 September 1864.e

[^1]: "The 'political notes' published by Professor Beesly,c and quoted the other day in these columns, are quoted also, with entire approval, in the address of the Council, and we can now understand how justly the Ex-Emperor was entitled to be called the saviour of society."

[^2]: a "The International Working Men's Association has not", The Times, No. 27093, June 19, 1871 — Ed.

[^3]: b "Le Comité central de l'Internationale", Paris-Journal, No. 157, June 17, 1871.— £d L

[^4]: c [J. F. E. Robinet,] Political Notes on the Present Situation of France and Paris. By a French Positivist (ed. by Edward Spencer Beesly), London [1871].— Ed.

[^5]: d See this volume, p. 354.— Ed. e The reference is to Marx's Inaugural Address of the Working Men's International Association (present edition, Vol. 20, pp. 5-13).— Ed.



You say that "Millière" was "one of the most ferocious members of the Commune". Millière has never been a member of the Commune.

"We," you proceed, "should also point out that Assi, lately President of the Association etc."

Assi has never been a member of the "International", and as to the dignity of "President of the Association", it has been abolished as long ago as 1867.226

Written on June 19 or 20, 1871 Reproduced from the rough manu- script First published in: Marx and Engels,

Works, First Russian Edition, Vol. XIII, Part II, 1940

