---
Volume: 22
Document_Title: "24. Karl Marx and Frederick Engels. Statement by the General Council to the Editor of The Standard "
Page_Range: "399-400"
---

# 24. Karl Marx and Frederick Engels. Statement by the General Council to the Editor of The Standard 



**[p. 366]**

Karl Marx and Frederick Engels

[STATEMENT BY THE GENERAL COUNCIL

TO THE EDITOR OF THE STANDARD]227

TO THE EDITOR OF THE STANDARD

In your leader on the "International" (of the 19 June)3 you say:

"Of the two programmes (that of London and that of Paris) recently issued in favour of the Commune b that of the Paris branch has the merit of being the more honest and the more outspoken."

Unfortunately, the "Paris" manifesto has been issued not by our Paris Branch, but by the "Versailles Police". You say:

Now the General Council of this Association summons you to quote the exact pages and lines of our Address where the words attributed by you to us do occur!

[^1]: "The London Internationalists insist no less earnestly than their Paris brethren that 'the old society must perish and ought to perish'. They speak of the burning of the public buildings and the shooting of the hostages as 'a gigantic effort to bring society down'—which, although unsuccessful once, will be persevered in until it succeeds."

[^2]: Written on June 19 or 20, 1871

[^3]: First published in: Marx and Engels,

[^4]: Works, First Russian Edition, Vol. XIII, Part II, 1940

[^5]: a "If there are any in England", The Standard, No. 14627, June 19, 1871.— Ed

[^6]: b The reference is to the General Council's Address The Civil War in France, written by Marx (pp. 307-59), and the Manifesto, supposedly issued by the International, published in the Paris-Journal, No. 157, June 17, 1871 under the heading "Le Comité central de l'Internationale".— Ed.

[^7]: Reproduced from the rough manu- script



