---
Volume: 22
Document_Title: "25. Frederick Engels. Statement by the General Council on George Jacob Holyoake's Letter "
Page_Range: "400-402"
---

# 25. Frederick Engels. Statement by the General Council on George Jacob Holyoake's Letter 



**[p. 367]**

Frederick Engels

[STATEMENT BY THE GENERAL COUNCIL ON GEORGE JACOB HOLYOAKE'S LETTER]25

TO THE EDITOR OF THE DAILY NEWS

Sir,

I am instructed by the General Council of the International Working Men's Association to state, in reply to Mr. Geo. Jacob Holyoake's Letter in Tuesday's Daily News.3

1. As to the insinuation that the address issued by the Councilb

"may become a cause of death or deportation at Versailles", the Council thinks that its Paris friends are better judges than Mr. Holyoake.

2. It is a rule with the Council that the names of all its members whether absent or present are appended to its public documents.0

3. As to the statement that this address

the Council begs to observe that, as a matter of course, the productions of an international Society cannot have any national character. However, the Council need not have any secrets in this matter. The address, like many previous publications of the Council, was drawn up by the Corresponding Secretary for Germany, Dr. Karl Marx, was adopted unanimously and "revised" by nobody.

[^1]: "cannot be an English production, though manifestly revised by some Saxon or Celtic pen",

[^2]: a G. J. Holyoake, "To the Editor of The Daily News", The Daily News, No. 7844, June 20, 1871.— Ed.

[^3]: b The reference is to the General Council's Address The Civil War in France, written by Marx (pp. 307-59).— Ed.

[^4]: c In Engels' manuscript this is followed by the sentence "On this occasion, however, an exception was made, and the consent of absent members was formally requested." — Ed.

[^5]: 14-1232





**[p. 368]**

4. In the course of last year Mr. George Jacob Holyoake presented himself as a Candidate for membership of the Council but was not admitted.

I am, Sir, your obedient servant,

John Hales, Secretary to the General Council of the International Working Men's Association

256, High Holborn, W.C., London, June 21, 1871

Written on June 20, 1871 Reproduced from The Daily News, . , , „ , „ .. . verified with the manuscript Approved at the General Council meeting r

of June 20, 1871 Published in The Daily News, No. 7847, June 23, 1871, in The Eastern Post, No. 143, June 24, 1871 (a slightly differ- ent version) and in The Pall Mall Gazette, No. 1984, June 23, 1871 (as a summary of the statement)

