---
Volume: 22
Document_Title: "35. Frederick Engels. Mazzini's Statement against the International Working Men's Association "
Page_Range: "418-421"
---

# 35. Frederick Engels. Mazzini's Statement against the International Working Men's Association 



**[p. 385]**

F r e d e r i c k Engels

[MAZZINFS STATEMENT AGAINST THE INTERNATIONAL

WORKING MEN'S ASSOCIATION]237

In his Address to the Italian workers Mazzini says:

"This Association, founded in London some years ago and with which I refused to collaborate from the start A nucleus of individuals which takes it upon itself directly to govern a broad multitude of men of different nations, tendencies, political conditions, economic interests and methods of action will always end up by not functioning, or it will have to function tyrannically. For this reason, I withdrew and, shortly afterwards, the Italian workers' section withdrew, etc."3

Now for the facts. After the foundation meeting of the International Working Men's Association of 28 September 1864, when the Provisional Council elected by that Assembly met, Major L. Wolff presented a manifesto and draft Rules written by Mazzini himself.238 Not only did this draft not find it difficult directly to govern a multitude, etc. and not only did it not say that this nucleus of individuals will always end up by not functioning, or it will have to function tyrannically, but, on the contrary, the Rules were inspired by a centralised conspiracy which gave tyrannical powers to the central body. The manifesto was in Mazzini's usual style: bourgeois democracy offering the workers political rights so that the social privileges of the middle and upper classes could be preserved.

This manifesto and the draft Rules were naturally rejected. The Italians continued their membership until certain questions were raised anew by a number of French bourgeois in an effort to manipulate the International. When the latter failed, first Wolff

[^1]: a G. Mazzini, "Agli opérai italiani", La Roma del popolo, No. 20, July 13, 1871.— Ed.





**[p. 386]**

Mazzini calls Marx a man of corrosive intellect, of domineering temper, etc., perhaps because Marx knew very well how to corrode away the cabal plotted against the International by Mazzini, dominating the old conspirator's poorly disguised lusting for authority so effectively that he has been rendered permanently harmless to the Association. This being the case, the International should be delighted to number among its members an intellect and a temper which, by corroding and domineering in this way, have kept it going for seven years, one working more than any other man to bring it to its present exalted position.

As for the split in the Association, which has, according to Mazzini, already begun in England, the fact is that two English members of the Council,0 who had been getting on too close terms with the bourgeoisie, found the "Address on the Civil War" too extreme and withdrew. In their place four new English members and one Irishmane have joined the General Council, which has been more strengthened by this than before.

Rather than being in a state of dissolution, now for the first time the International is being publicly recognised by the whole English press as a great power in Europe, and never has a little pamphlet published in London made such a big impression as the Address of the General Council on the civil war in France, which is now about to be published in its third edition.

[^1]: a P. Vésinier, "L'Association Internationale des Travailleurs", L'Echo de Verviers, No. 293, December 16, 1865; No. 294, December 18, 1865.— Ed.

[^2]: b G. Mazzini, "The Commune in Paris", The Contemporary Review, Vol. 17, June 1871.— Ed,

[^3]: c L. Blanc, Des socialistes français à M. Mazzini, Brussels, 1852.— Ed. d G. Odger and B. Lucraft.— Ed. e A. Taylor, J. Roach, Ch. Mills, G. Lochner and J. P. Mc Donnell.— Ed.



Written on July 28, 1871

Published in the magazine II Libero Pen- siero, No. 9, August 31, 1871 and in the newspapers La Favilla, No. 209, Sep- tember 7, 1871, II Motto d'Ordine, November 20, 1871, in Gazzettino Rosa, No. 255, September 13, 1871 (in part) and in a number of other Italian news- papers

Printed according to the magazine II Libero Pensiero

Translated from the Italian

Published in English for the first time

