---
Volume: 22
Document_Title: "41. Karl Marx. To the Editor of the Gaulois "
Page_Range: "428-429"
---

# 41. Karl Marx. To the Editor of the Gaulois 



**[p. 395]**

Karl Marx

TO THE EDITOR OF THE GAULOIS246

Brighton, August 24, 1871 Sir,

Since you have published extracts from the report of a conversation I had with one of the correspondents of The New York Herald,3 I hope that you will also publish the following statement, which I have sent to The New York Herald. I am sending you this statement in its original form, that is, in English.0

Yours faithfully,

Karl Marx

London, 17 August 1871 Sir,

In the Herald of August 3rd, I find a report of a conversation I had with one of your correspondents.0 I beg to say that I must decline all and every responsibility for the statements attributed to me in that report, whether such statements refer to individuals connected with the late events in France, or to any political or economical opinions. Of what I am reported to have said, one part I said differently, and another I never said at all.

Yours obediently,

[^1]: T O THE EDITOR OF THE NEW YORK HERALD

[^2]: Karl Marx First published in Le Gaulois, No. 1145, Printed according to the news- August 27, 1871 paper

[^3]: a G. C , "La Commune jugée par Karl Marx", Le Gaulois, No. 1140, August 22, 1871.— Ed.

[^4]: b This letter was published in English in Le Gaulois. The covering letter, written in French, is published in English in this volume.— Ed.

[^5]: c "The International", The New York Herald, No. 12765, August 3, 1871.— Ed.



