---
Volume: 22
Document_Title: "42. Karl Marx. Letter to the Editor of The Sun, Charles Dana "
Page_Range: "429-433"
---

# 42. Karl Marx. Letter to the Editor of The Sun, Charles Dana 



**[p. 396]**

Karl Marx

[LETTER TO THE EDITOR OF THE SUN, CHARLES DANA]247

Brighton, August 25, 1871

My dear Sir:

In the first instance I must beg you to excuse my prolonged silence. I should have answered your letter long ago if I had not been quite overburdened with work, so much so that my health broke down, and my doctor found it necessary to banish me for a few months to this sea-bathing place, with the strict injunction to do nothing.

I shall comply with your wish after my return to London when a favorable occasion occurs for rushing into print.

I have sent a declaration to The New York Herald,3 in which I decline all and every responsibility for the trash and positive falsehoods with which its correspondent burdens me.b I do not know whether the Herald has printed it.

The number of the Communal refugees arriving in London is on the increase, while our means of supporting them is daily on the decrease, so that many find themselves in a very deplorable state. We shall make an appeal for assistance to the Americans.248

To give you an inkling of the state of things that under the République Thiers prevails in France, I will tell you what has happened to my own daughters.

My second daughter, Laura, is married to Monsieur Lafargue, a medical man. They left Paris a few days before the commence- ment of the first siege for Bordeaux, where Lafargue's father' lived. The latter, having fallen very ill, wanted to see his son, who

[^1]: a See this volume, p. 395.— Ed. b "The International", The New York Herald, No. 12765, August 3, 1871.—Ed c François Lafargue.— Ed.





**[p. 397]**

Lafargue had received a hint the evening before, and had crossed the Spanish frontier, having provided himself with a Spanish passport at Bordeaux.

Although the son of French parents, he was born in Cuba, and is therefore a Spaniard. A domiciliary visit was made at the dwelling place of my daughters, and they themselves were subjected to a severe cross examination by the two mighty representatives of the République Thiers. They were charged with carrying on an insurrectional correspondence. That correspon- dence consisted simply in letters to their mother, the contents of which were of course not flattering to the French Government, and in copies of some London newspapers! For about a week their house was watched by gendarmes. They had to promise to leave

[^1]: a High society.— Ed. b So-called.— Ed.





**[p. 398]**

Meanwhile the Paris papers told the most incredible lies; the Gaulois, for instance, transforming my three daughters into three brothers of mine, well known and dangerous agents of the International Propaganda, though I have no brothers.b At the same time that La France, a Paris organ of Thiers, gave a most varnished tale of the events at Luchon, and asserted that Monsieur Lafargue might quietly return to France without incurring any danger,0 the French Government requested the Spanish Govern- ment to arrest Lafargue as a member of the Paris Commune! to which he had never belonged, and to which, as a resident of Bordeaux, he could not belong. Lafargue was in fact arrested, and under the escort of gendarmes marched to Barbastro, where he had to take his night quarters in the town prison, thence to Huesca, whence the Governor, on telegraphic order from the Spanish Minister of the Interior,0 had to forward him to Madrid. According to The Daily News of the 24th August, he has at last been set free.e

The whole proceedings at Luchon and in the papersf were nothing but shabby attempts of Mr. Thiers & Co. to revenge themselves upon me as the author of the address of the General Council of the International on the Civil War.g Between their revenge and my daughters stood the English passport, and Mr. Thiers is as cowardly in his relations to foreign powers as he is unscrupulous in regard to his disarmed countrymen.

[^1]: a Strict surveillance.— Ed. b E. Cardon, "Les nouvelles qui nous arrivent", Le Gaulois, No. 1133, August 14, 1871.— Ed.

[^2]: c "Luchon, 8 août 1871", La France, No. 213, August 12, 1871.— Ed. d Prâxedes Mateo Sagasta.— Ed. e "The International Society", The Daily News, No. 7900, August 24, 1871.— Ed.

[^3]: f The extant fragment of the manuscript has "and in Spain" instead of "and in the papers".— Ed.

[^4]: s See this volume, pp. 307-59.— Ed.



As to Cluseret, I do not think that he was a traitor, but certainly he undertook to play a part for which he lacked the mettle, and thus he did great harm to the Commune. I know nothing as to his whereabouts. And now addio!

Your old friend,

Karl Marx

Published in The Sun, September 9, 1871 Reproduced from the newspaper

