---
Volume: 22
Document_Title: "44. Karl Marx. To the Editor of La Vérité "
Page_Range: "436-438"
---

# 44. Karl Marx. To the Editor of La Vérité 



**[p. 403]**

Karl Marx

[TO THE EDITOR OF LA VÉRITÉ]250

International Working Men's Association 256, High Holborn, London.—W.C.

30 August 1871 Mr. Editor,

Having read in today's Daily News that M. Renaut is attributing to the International a manifesto inviting the French peasants to burn all the châteaux they can, etc.,3 Mr. John Hales, the General Secretary of the General Council of the International Working Men's Association, immediately sent this telegram to M. L. Bigot, Assi's defence counsel:

I now hasten to warn the French public through your respected newspaper that all the manifestos printed in Paris in the name of the International since the entry of the French government troops into Paris—that all these manifestos without a single exception are fabrica- tions.251

I make this declaration to you not only on my word of honour, but I am ready to give you an affidavit6 sworn before an English magistrate.

I have reason to believe that these vile creations do not even emanate directly from the police, but from Monsieur B,c an

[^1]: "Incendiary proclamation attributed to the International is a fabrication. We are ready to make a sworn affidavit before an English magistrate."

[^2]: a "Trial of the Communist Prisoners", The Daily News, No. 7905, August 30, 1871.— Ed.

[^3]: b Marx gives the English word "the affidavit" in the parentheses after the French one.— Ed.

[^4]: c Most likely, Ch. Bradlaugh.— Ed.





**[p. 404]**

Yours faithfully,

Karl Marx

First published in Le Soir, No. 862, September 3, 1871, and in other bourgeois newspapers and also in the newspapers L'Internationale, No. 139, September 10, 1871, Der Volksstaat., No. 74, September 13, 1871, and others

Printed according to the manu- script, verified with the text in

Le Soir

Translated from the French

Published in English for the first time

[^1]: a "Paris, August 18. Evening", The Standard, No. 14681, August 21, 1871.— Ed.



