---
Volume: 22
Document_Title: "45. Karl Marx. To the Editor of The Evening Standard. "
Page_Range: "438-439"
---

# 45. Karl Marx. To the Editor of The Evening Standard. 



**[p. 405]**

Karl Marx

[TO THE EDITOR OF THE EVENING STANDARD]

T O THE EDITOR

Sir,

In your number of the 2nd September, your Berlin correspon- dent publishes "the translation of an interesting article on the International, which has appeared in the Cologne Gazette"* which article charges me with living at the expense of the working classes. Up to the 30th August, the date of your correspondent's letter, no such article appeared in the Cologne Gazette, from which paper, therefore, your correspondent could not translate it. On the contrary, the article in question appeared, more than a fortnight ago, in the Berlin National Zeitung6; and an English translation of it, literally identical with the one given by your correspondent, figured in the London weekly paper, Public Opinion* as far back as the 19th August. The next number of Public Opinion contained my reply to these slanders,*1 and I hereby summon you to insert that reply, of which I enclose a copy, in the next number of your paper. The Prussian government have reasons of their own why they push, by every means in their power, the spreading of such infamous calumnies through the English press. These articles are but the harbingers of impending government prosecutions against the "International".—

I am, Sir, your obedient servant,

Karl Marx Haverstock-hill, Sept. 4, 1871

[^1]: Published in The Evening Standard, Reproduced from the newspaper September 6, 1871

[^2]: a "The International", The Evening Standard, No. 14692, September 2, 1871.— Ed.

[^3]: b "Die Internationale", National-Zeitung, No. 351, July 30, 1871, Morning edition.— Ed.

[^4]: c "A German View of the Internationale", Public Opinion, No. 517, August 19, 1871.— £d.

[^5]: d See this volume, p. 393.— Ed.



