---
Volume: 22
Document_Title: "46. Karl Marx and Frederick Engels. Propositions to the General Council Concerning Preparations for the London Conference "
Page_Range: "439-440"
---

# 46. Karl Marx and Frederick Engels. Propositions to the General Council Concerning Preparations for the London Conference 



**[p. 406]**

Karl Marx and Frederick Engels

[PROPOSITIONS TO THE GENERAL COUNCIL

CONCERNING PREPARATIONS FOR THE LONDON CONFERENCE]252

Financial account.

1) To find a room for the meetings of the Conference. 2) To find an hotel where the members of the Conference can stay—propose the same as last, Leicester Square.

3) A Committee to be appointed to arrange these two points. 4) That the entire Council assist at the meetings of the Conference, with the right of taking part in the debate, but that a certain number of the Council only be delegated with the right of voting—such number to be fixed by the Council when the number of delegates to the Conference shall be known.

5) That the Frenchmen now resident in London who are acknowledged members of the International, provide for the representation of France at the Conference by three delegates.

6) That if the members of any Country should not be represented at the Conference, the Corresponding Secretary for that Country be appointed to represent them.

[^1]: Written not later than September 5, 1871

[^2]: First published, in Russian, in the book The London Conference of the First Interna- tional, 1936

[^3]: Reproduced from Engels' manu- script Adopted at the General Council meeting of September 5, 1871



