---
Volume: 22
Document_Title: "47. Karl Marx and Frederick Engels. Propositions to Be Submitted to the Conference by the General Council "
Page_Range: "440-444"
---

# 47. Karl Marx and Frederick Engels. Propositions to Be Submitted to the Conference by the General Council 



**[p. 407]**

Karl Marx and Frederick Engels

PROPOSITIONS TO BE SUBMITTED T O THE CONFERENCE BY THE GENERAL COUNCIL253

1) That after the close of the Conference, no branch be acknowledged as belonging to the Association by the General Council and by the Central Councils of the various countries until its annual contribution of 1 d per head for the current year shall have been remitted to the General Council.3

2) a) For those countries in which the regular organization of the Association may for the moment become impossible by Government interference, the delegates of each Country are invited to propose such plans of organization as may be compatible with the peculiar circumstances of the Case, ß) The Association may be re-formed under other names, 7) but all secret organizations are formally excluded.

3) The General Council will submit to the Conference a report of its administration of the affairs of the International since the last Congress.

5) The General Council will propose to the Conference to discuss the propriety of issuing a reply, to the various govern- ments which have prosecuted and are now prosecuting the International; the Conference to name a Committee to be charged with drawing up this reply after its close.

4) Resolution of Congress of Basle to be inforced: That to avoid confusion the Central Councils of the various countries be instructed to designate themselves henceforth as

[^1]: a The following text is crossed out in the manuscript: "No exception to this rule shall be allowed until it be proved to the satisfaction of the General Council that the branch in question has been prevented by existing legal obstacles from complying with the rule." — Ed.





**[p. 408]**

6)a

7) That all delegates of the General Council appointed to distinct missions shall have the right to attend, and be heard at, all meetings of federal councils and local committees or branches, without however being thereby entitled to vote thereat.

8) That the General Council be instructed to issue a fresh edition of the Statutes including the resolutions of the Congresses having relation thereto; and inasmuch as a mutilated French translation has hitherto been in circulation in France, and re-translated into Spanish and Italian, that it provide an authentic French translation which is to be forwarded to Spain and Italy also. German-Holland.b

3 languages printed side by side.

Written between September 5 and 12, Reproduced from the manuscript 1871

First published, in Russian, in the book The London Conference of the First Interna- tional, 1936

[^1]: a The text of the sixth point is crossed out in the manuscript: "That in all countries where the Association is regularly organised, the federal councils send regular reports of the amounts levied and received in the shape of local or district contributions. " — Ed.

[^2]: b The end of the sentence is indecipherable. It looks like " Spain and Italy, Holland, also Germany." — Ed.





**[p. 409]**

THE LONDON CONFERENCE

OF THE INTERNATIONAL WORKING MEN'S

ASSOCIATION

September 17-23, 1871



