---
Volume: 22
Document_Title: "48. Karl Marx. On the Activity of the Alliance of Socialist Democracy. Record of the Speech at the Sitting of the Conference Commission of 18 September 1871 "
Page_Range: "444-446"
---

# 48. Karl Marx. On the Activity of the Alliance of Socialist Democracy. Record of the Speech at the Sitting of the Conference Commission of 18 September 1871 



**[p. 411]**

Karl Marx

[ON THE ACTIVITY OF THE ALLIANCE OF SOCIALIST DEMOCRACY]256

[RECORD OF THE SPEECH AT THE SITTING OF THE CONFERENCE COMMISSION OF 18 SEPTEMBER 1871]

Marx: The dispute has its origin in the formation of the Alliance of Socialist Democracy in Geneva, founded by Bakunin and others. He reads the two communications from the General Council to the Alliance of 1868 and March 1869,a in the second of which the dissolution of the Alliance and the communication on the number of its sections and their numerical strength are laid down as conditions for their admission into the International. These conditions were never met, the Alliance was never really dissolved; it has always maintained a sort of organisation. The organ of the Geneva sections, L'Egalité, 11 December 1869,b

blamed the General Council for failing to do its duty by not replying to its articles,0 whereupon the General Council replied that it was not its duty to join in newspaper polemics, but that it was prepared to answer requests or complaints made by the Romance Federal Council, and this circular was communicated to all the sections0; every one of them approved the conduct of the General Council. The Swiss Council disowned L'Egalité, with whose editorial board it had broken off; the editorial board was changed, and subsequently the organ of the Alliance adherents

[^1]: a See K. Marx, "The International Working Men's Association and the International Alliance of Socialist Democracy" and "The General Council of the International Working Men's Association to the Central Bureau of the International Alliance of Socialist Democracy" (present edition, Vol. 21).— Ed.

[^2]: h P. Robin, "Réflexions", L'Egalité, No. 47, December 11, 1869.— Ed. c The reference is to a set of articles published in Le Progrès in November 1869.— Ed.

[^3]: d See K. Marx, "The General Council to the Federal Council of Romance Switzerland" (present edition, Vol. 21).— Ed.



was the Progrès and later the Solidarité. Then came the Congress of Locle where the two parties, the Romance Federation of Geneva and that of the mountains (the Alliance), were openly divided.257

The General Council left things as they were, only forbidding the new council to set itself up as a Romance council alongside the other. Guillaume, who had preached abstention from all politics, contrary to our Statutes,3 the moment the war broke out published a proclamation demanding in the name of the International the formation of an army to come to the aid of France,5 which is even more contrary to our Statutes.

Recorded by F. Engels Printed according to the manu- script First published, in Russian, in the book The London Conference of the First International, Translated from the French

Published in English for the first time

[^1]: a See K. Marx, Rules and Administrative Regulations of the International Working Men's Association (present edition, Vol. 20, Appendices).— Ed.

[^2]: b J. Guillaume, "Manifeste aux Sections de l'Internationale", La Solidarité, No. 22, September 5, 1870.— Ed



