---
Volume: 22
Document_Title: "49. Karl Marx and Frederick Engels. Motions of the General Council Adopted by the Conference "
Page_Range: "446-448"
---

# 49. Karl Marx and Frederick Engels. Motions of the General Council Adopted by the Conference 



**[p. 413]**

Karl Marx and Frederick Engels

MOTIONS OF THE GENERAL COUNCIL ADOPTED

BY THE CONFERENCE258

1) In order to avoid any misunderstanding the resolution of the Basle Congressa shall be strictly observed, whereby the central councils in the various countries where the Association has regular organisations shall call themselves Federal Councils or Committees of their respective countries, and the local sections or committees shall call themselves sections or committees of their respective areas.

2) Conference instructs the General Council to publish a new edition of the Rules, with authentic translations into French and German printed opposite the English text.b All translations into other languages must be approved by the General Council prior to publication.

3) At the suggestion of the General Council, Conference recommends the formation of women's sections among female workers. It is understood that this in no way affects the existence of mixed sections including both sexes.

4) Conference invites the General Council to enforce Clause 5 of the Rulesc ordering general statistical surveys of the working class, and the resolutions of the Geneva Congress to the same effect.d Working men's societies or branches which refuse to

[^1]: a See Association Internationale des Travailleurs. Compte-rendu de IVe Congrès International, tenu à Bâle, en Septembre 1869, Brussels, 1869.

[^2]: b K. Marx, General Rules and Administrative Regulations of the International Working Men's Association, London, 1871 (present edition, Vol. 23).— Ed.

[^3]: c K. Marx, Rules and Administrative Regulations of the International Working Men's Association (present edition, Vol. 20, Appendices).— Ed.

[^4]: d Resolutions of the Congress of Geneva, 1866, and the Congress of Brussels, 1868. The International Working Men's Association. Office of General Council, London [1869].— Ed.





**[p. 414]**

5) All the delegates appointed by the General Council to special missions shall be entitled to be present and to be heard at all meetings of the federal councils, district or local committees, and local branches, without, however, having a vote.

6) After the closure of Conference no branch shall be consi- dered by the General Council and the Federal Councils to belong to the Association until it has paid to the General Council its contribution of 10c. per member for the current year.

Recorded on September 19 or 20, 1871 Printed according to the manu First published in MEGA2, Bd. I/22, S C" p t

Berlin, 1978 Translated from the French

Published in English for the first time

