---
Volume: 22
Document_Title: "50. Frederick Engels. On the Political Action of the Working Class "
Page_Range: "448-450"
---

# 50. Frederick Engels. On the Political Action of the Working Class 



**[p. 415]**

Frederick Engels

[ON THE POLITICAL ACTION OF THE WORKING CLASS]259

[PLAN FOR SPEECH AT THE CONFERENCE SESSION ON SEPTEMBER 21, 1871]

1) Lorenzo matter of principle—this decided.

2) Abstention impossible. Newspaper politics is also politics; all abstaining papers attack the government. The only question is how and how far to get involved in politics. This depends on circumstances and cannot be prescribed.

2) Abstention nonsensical; one should abstain because bad people might be elected—so no contributions because the treasurer might abscond. So, no newspaper because the editor is just as likely to sell himself as the deputy. 3) Political freedoms—particularly of association, assembly and press—our means of agitation; is it unimportant whether these are taken from us or not? And should we not resist if they are attacked? 4) Abstention preached, because otherwise one is recognis- ing the status quo. The status quo exists and se fiche pas mal* about our recognition. If we use the means offered us by the status quo to protest against the status quo, is that . recognition? b

3) Abstention impossible.0 The Workers' Party as a political party exists and wants to act politically, and to preach abstention to it is to ruin the International. The mere contemplation of conditions, of political suppression for social ends forces the workers into

[^1]: a It could care no less.— Ed. b Clauses 2,3,4, marked by Engels with a brace in the manuscript, were written as an insertion into the text on the right side.— Ed.

[^2]: c Then follows the phrase "after the Commune" crossed out by Engels.— Ed.





**[p. 416]**

4) We want the abolition of classes. Sole means is political power in the hands of the proletariat—and we should not go into politics? All abstentionists call themselves revolutionaries. Revolu- tion is the highest act of politics, and anyone who wants it must also want the means of preparing revolution, educate the workers for it, and see to it that he is not cheated again by Favre and Pyat the following day. It is purely a question of which politics—the exclusively proletarian, not as the tail of the bourgeoisie.

Written on September 20 or 21, 1871

First published, in French, in the magazine Cahiers du Bolchévisme. Revue

bimensuelle publiée par le C.C. du Parti communiste français (S.F.I.C.), No. 20, 1934

Printed according to the manu- script

Published in English for the first time

