---
Volume: 22
Document_Title: "51. Frederick Engels. On the Political Action of the Working Class "
Page_Range: "450-452"
---

# 51. Frederick Engels. On the Political Action of the Working Class 



**[p. 417]**

Frederick Engels

[ON THE POLITICAL ACTION OF THE WORKING CLASS]2

[HANDWRITTEN TEXT OF THE SPEECH DELIVERED AT THE CONFERENCE SESSION ON SEPTEMBER 21, 1871]

Absolute abstention from politics is impossible; all the absten- tionist newspapers go in for politics, too. It only depends how one does it and what sort of politics. Moreover, for us abstention is impossible. The workers' party already exists as a political party in most countries. It is not up to us to ruin it by preaching abstention. The experience of real life and the political oppression imposed on them by existing governments—whether for political or social ends—force the workers to concern themselves with politics, whether they wish to or not. To preach abstention would be to push them into the arms of bourgeois politics. Especially in the aftermath of the Paris Commune, which placed the political action of the proletariat on the agenda, abstention is quite impossible.

We seek the abolition of Classes. What is the means of achieving it? The political domination of the proletariat. And when everyone is agreed on that, we are asked not to get involved in politics! All abstentionists call themselves revolutionaries, even revolutionaries par excellence. But revolution is the supreme act of politics; whoever wants it must also want the means, political action, which prepares for it, which gives the workers the education for revolution and without which the workers will always be duped by the Favres and the Pyats the day after the struggle. But the politics which are needed are working class politics; the workers' party must be constituted not as the tail of some bourgeois party, but as an independent party with its own objective, its own politics.

The political freedoms, the right of assembly and association and the freedom of the press, these are our weapons—should we

fold our arms and abstain if they seek to take them away from us? It is said that every political act implies recognition of the status quo. But when this status quo gives us the means of protesting against it, then to make use of these means is not to recognise the status quo.

First published in full, in Russian, in the Printed according to the manu- magazine The Communist International, script No. 29, 1934

Translated from the French

