---
Volume: 22
Document_Title: "2. Frederick Engels. Robert Reid, Ex- Correspondent of The Daily Telegraph "
Page_Range: "585-598"
---

# 2. Frederick Engels. Robert Reid, Ex- Correspondent of The Daily Telegraph 



**[p. 552]**

Frederick Engels

ROBERT REID, EX-CORRESPONDENT

O F THE DAILY TELEGRAPH326

July l, 1871

Just after the arrest at Peter's restaurant, Bower, the correspon- dent of The Morning Advertiser, and the other, the Times correspondent Dallas, and a Russian attaché were released, but Bower went back inside to fetch his (English) lady friend, who had already taken u p with another gentleman, so THAT HE PITCHED INTO

HIM, ASSAULTED HIM, WAS TAKEN INTO CUSTODY, AND LOCKED UP FOR THAT.

These 3 published a letter, 3 which was in reality a fake. 1) that it was the members of the C o m m u n e who had been in the café with red and gold sashes and also whores, who showed their cards in the café, and 2) that Bower was arrested without reason (it was only the police commissars who were wearing red sashes but without gold fringes).

* "Sir,

[^1]: IN THE TELEGRAPH REID'S REPORTS OFTEN ALTERED.' A VERY IMPORTANT LETTER WAS SUPPRESSED BY THEM.

[^2]: O N 2OTH MAY, Reid had the newspaper. In The Telegraph of the n OR 18TH MAY VERSAILLES CORRESPONDENT STATED THAT COURBET HAD WITH A HAMMER DESTROYED OBJECTS OF ART IN LOUVRE.13 O n the 20th, Reid showed this telegram to Courbet. Below follows Courbet's letter to the editor of The Telegraph:

[^3]: "Not only have I not destroyed any works of art in the Louvre, but on the contrary it was under my care that all those which had been dispersed by various ministers in different buildings throughout the capital were collected, and restored to their proper

[^4]: a E. Bower, "A monsieur le rédacteur de La Vérité", La Vérité, No. 225, May 19, 1871.—Ed.

[^5]: b "The Civil War around Paris", The Daily Telegraph, No. 4971, May 20, 1871.— Ed.



"Greetings and fraternity

"G. Courbet

"Hôtel de Ville 20 MAY 71."

This letter was sent to The Telegraph by Reid but was not printed.b

See PAPERS for about April 10.12. Tolain. The Times correspondent wished to know what the General Council would say to it— The Times suppressed our resolution.327

Reid was engaged by The Telegraph to send telegrams and is ready to swear that they were amended in printing to show the Commune in a bad light.

Adolphus Smith, Ex-correspondent of The Daily News to lecture on the Commune, Charing Cross Theatre, 3.7.71.328

Present at the demonstration on Rue de la Paix.c In the Place Vendôme the rifles of the National Guard were stacked together in piles, and one Englishman, whom he referred to as (Leatham?) and who was in the front row of the procession, rushed out to seize a pile of rifles.

Jourde was in the burning Ministry of Finance until the very last and saved books and money. And he is alleged to have set it afire! An Englishman, who lives opposite, whom he can name, saw 2 bombs strike the roof, explode, and soon thereafter smoke, then flame, then gradually the whole building in flames.

[^1]: Written down by Engels on July 1, 1871

[^2]: First published, in Russian, in the magazine Kommunist, No. 2, Moscow, 1971

[^3]: a The museum in the Luxemburg Palace in Paris.— Ed. b Reid sent the letter to The Times, where it was printed under the title "M. Courbet, the painter" in its issue No. 27100 on June 27, 1871.— Ed.

[^4]: c On March 22, 1871 (see this volume, pp. 324-25, 511-12, 528-30).— Ed.

[^5]: Printed according to the manu- script





**[p. 554]**

Karl Marx and Frederick Engels

[NOTES FROM THE MINUTES OF THE GENERAL COUNCIL, 1869-1871]

1869

(SINCE BASLE CONGRESS)

September 28, 1869. Jung stated the receipt of a letter from General Cluseret of New York. It was addressed to the Congress but had arrived too late.330

Printing of Basle Congress Report.3

A letter from the Paper-stainers New York requesting the Council to use its influence to prevent an importation of men to defeat the men now on strike. Action taken thereupon.1" (later letter from Manchester, Edinburgh etc Trades Councils re- ceived, which had got letters from the General Council.) 5 October 1869. Letter from Varlin of Paris stating that a meeting of the Congress delegates had been held and that they had agreed to urge the affiliation of their societies.331

Latham and Lampbord proposed in one of the former sittings by Odger. Postponed.

Hales (seconded by Lucraft). "That the Council proceed to establish an English Section of the International Working Men Association, with a platform based upon the Congressional Resolutions, to be called 'The National Labour League and British Section of I.W.A:'." Weston announces that a conference would be held on October 13, at Bell Inn, to establish an Association for the agitation of the land-question and other workingmen's measures.

[^1]: a Report of the Fourth Annual Congress of the International Working Men's Association, held at Basle, in Switzerland. From the 6th to the 11th September, 1869. London [1869].— Ed.

[^2]: b See the appeal "A toutes les sections de l'Association Internationale des Travailleurs", L'Internationale, No. 38, October 3, 1869.— Ed.



International carried. 19 October, 1869. 26 October, 1869. Mottershead elected.

Resolved "that a resolution be drawn up asking for the release of the (Irish) political prisoners and stating the opinion of the Council". 2 November.

Hales: "On the previous Wednesday {27 Oct) the Land and Labour League had been established, many Council members were on the executive of that league, it was not necessary to go any farther (with English Section) at present. 9 November. 16 November. Article against the Council in Egalité? {Opening of

Irish question by Marx.) Resolutions proposed by Marx on Irish Political prisoners. 23 November. (Irish Debate.) 30 November. (The Resolutions on the Irish prisoners passed.)b

7 December. 14 December. Jung reads strictures from the Egalité against the

Irish Resolutions of the Council {Schweitzer, Liebknecht etc.) [Monthly Reports.]c

1870

[1 January. Private Circular on Egalité etc. Irish Question etc. Reports

4 January. Robert Hume appointed Correspondent {of Long Island

United States) (3000 Cards sent to the German Committee. {Brunswick)).

Complaints of Progrès (Locle) and Egalité (Genève) against Zürich movement {Tagwacht) as too political.332

11 January. A letter from the Geneva Committee stated that the

section did not approve of the proceedings of the Egalité. [The Editorial Committee resigned, their resignation ac- cepted.] 333

[^1]: etc.]d

[^2]: a See "L'Organisation de l'Internationale", L'Egalité, No. 43, November 13, 1869.— Ed.

[^3]: b See "Draft Resolution of the General Council on the Policy of the British Government Towards the Irish Prisoners" (present edition, Vol. 21, p. 83).— Ed.

[^4]: c "Réflexions", L'Egalité, No. 47, December 11, 1869.— Ed. d K. Marx, "The General Council to the Federal Council of Romance Switzerland" (present edition, Vol. 21, p. 84).— Ed.





**[p. 556]**

Serraillier received letter from Brussels, the Belgian General Council approved the answer of the General Council to the attack in the Egalité.* 8 February. Application of Prolétaires Positivistes Society.311

15 February. Dupont communicates on difference between the elder and younger branches at Lyons.334 (handed over to Sub- Committee.)238

22 February. At Naples search made at the meeting place of the International for papers, without a search-warrant being pro- duced by the police officer. President, secretary and a lawyer who had protested against it as illegal, had been arrested.

Le Réveil contained paragraph from a Spanish paper according to which the governments of Austria, Italy, and France are going to take rigorous measures against the International. 8 March. Report of the Sub-Committee on the Lyons Affaire (Richard etc.) 15 March. Letter of the Prolétaires Positivistes at Paris. [They had been asked by Dupont for their rules and by-laws.]

Admitted but not as "sect" and the discrepancy between their own programme and that of the International pointed out to them. 22 March. Russian Section in Geneva founded. Desired Marx to become their representative. 29 March. 4, 5, 6 April. Congress at La Chaux-de-fonds.c256

5 April.

12 April. Jung letter from La Chaux-de-fonds. Split at the Congress. In consequence of a majority having voted for the admission of the Geneva Alliance the Geneva and La Chaux-de-fonds delegates had withdrawn and continued the Congress by

[^1]: a K. Marx, "The General Council to the Federal Council of Romance Switzerland" (present edition, Vol. 21, p. 84).—Ed.

[^2]: b K. Marx, "Concerning the Conflict in the Lyons Section" (present edition, Vol. 21, p. 108).— Ed.

[^3]: c This line is written in pencil.— Ed.



3 May. Resolution on pretended Conspiracy against Badinguet (plebiscite) [arrest of many members of Paris and Lyons sections].21

10 May. Resolution against the London French branch,}* (10 May)— Jung proposed that in future all the names of the Council members should be signed to official documents whether the members were present or not. 17 May.

Resolution: "Considering: That by the Basle Congress Paris was appointed as the meeting place of this year's Congress of the I.W.A.; that the present French regime continuing the Congress will not be able to meet at Paris; that nevertheless the preparations for the meeting render an immediate resolution necessary; that art. 3 of the Statutes obliges the Council to change, in case of need, the place of meeting appointed by the Congress; that the Central Committee of the German Social Democratic Workingmen's Party has invited the General Council to transfer this year's Congress to Germany; the General Council has in its sitting of the 17 of May unanimously resolved that this year's Congress of the I.W.A. be opened on the 5th September next and meet at Mayence." De Paepe, in letter to Serraillier, asked the opinion of the Council on the affairs of Switzerland. Jung letter from Perret (Geneva) who wished the Council to decide upon the Swiss question. 24 May. (Row over the Beehive Resolutions.)c

31 May. Parisians against the transfer to Mayence. Question Cluseret.—Osborne Ward introduced by Jung.—Jung intro- duced Duval as delegate from the Paris iron-founders on strike.

[^1]: a K. Marx, "Concerning the Persecution of the Members of the French Sections. Declaration of the General Council of the International Working Men's Association" (present edition, Vol. 21, p. 127).— Ed.

[^2]: b K. Marx, "Draft Resolution of the General Council on the French Federal Section in London" (present edition, Vol. 21, p. 131).— Ed.

[^3]: c K. Marx, "Resolution of the General Council on The Bee-Hive" (present edition, Vol. 21, p. 126).— Ed.





**[p. 558]**

Letter from Geneva asked the Council to come to a decision as soon as possible. (Discussion over this affaire.)

(On the Alliance. See Weston's Statement.)336 (Proposition adopted that Geneva Committee remains in its old faction; the new committee may choose a local name.)b

Marx proposed that the General Council be transferred from London to Brussels, (this to be proposed to next Congress) (and that this proposition, to consider the removal of Council, be communicated to all Sections). Carried. Hales gave notice of motion to reconsider the question. 5 July. Parisians want refutation of the false statements of Aulois,337 the public prosecutor, but they had sent no papers etc. to the Council. Dupont complains of receiving no reply. 12 July. French branch. Lemaître.338—Positivist branch send their contribution.— Money (voted by the Amalgamated Engineers to the Paris iron-moulders).—The proposition (Marx stated) was: "to write to the sections to ask them to consider the advisability of removing the Council from London. If they were favourable to a removal, then Brussels should be proposed etc.c

19 July. Geneva Committee thanks for the resolution of the Council. Jung written to La-Chaux-de-Fonds against their political abstentionism.— Anti-War Address of Paris Section.— Marx to draw up Anti-War Address.6

26 July. Bebel and Liebknecht on German War Loan.

(North German Reichstag. Berlin)—(In their written declaration

[^1]: Programme for Mayence Congress.d

[^2]: a K. Marx. "The Lock-out of the Building Trades in Geneva" (present edition, Vol. 21, pp. 137-39).— Ed.

[^3]: b K. Marx, "General Council Resolution on the Federal Committee of Romance Switzerland. The General Council to the Romance Federal Committee" (present edition, Vol. 21, p. 136).— Ed.

[^4]: c K. Marx, "Confidential Communication to All Sections" (present edition, Vol. 21, p. 142).— Ed.

[^5]: d K. Marx, "Programme for the Mainz Congress of the International" (present edition, Vol. 21, p. 143).—Ed.

[^6]: e See this volume, pp. 3-8.— Ed.



2 August. Serraillier reads letter from Belgium: Council to be left at London; but gives notice that Belgium Congress Delegates will ask why Council interfered in the Swiss affair. Marx states that protest against War has been issued in Barmen, Munich, Breslau etc.—Jung on Swiss affair. Article in Solidarité". Guil- laume's party has not sent a proper reply. The Parisians asked for a prompt settlement of this affair. Referred to Sub- Committee. Marx proposes to ask sections to agree to postpone- ment of Congress. Carried. 9 August. Jung [received] letter from Naples about Caporusso having bertrayed them. 16 August. Third 1,000 of War Address printed. Letters from Switzerland and Germany (Central Committee) to leave Council at London and to empower it to postpone Congress to any time and place. 23 August. 15,000 German and 15,000 French copies of Address ordered to be printed at Geneva. Belgian Council's letter withdrawing observations on Swiss affair (see 2 August) and agreeing to postponement of Congress. Romance Council of Geneva also for postponement and Council to remain in London.

Resolution passed to postpone Congress. August 30th. French Section formed at New York. Osborne Ward attended and spoke. September 6. Marx had correspondence with German Social Democratic Partyd who say they will do their duty. Second War Address resolved upon.6

September 9. Address carried. September 13. Serraillier off to Paris. September 20. Arrest of Braunschweigers. Expulsion from May- ence.339 Protests against annexation in Berlin, München, Augsburg, Nürnberg etc. Deputation of 5 to act with the Arundel Hall Committee in fitting up a demonstration for the French Republic and against annexation.

[^1]: a See "Motiviertes Votum der Reichstagsabgeordneten Liebknecht und Bebel in Sachen der 120 Millionen Kriegsanleihe", Der Volksstaat, No. 59, July 29, 1870.— Ed.

[^2]: b Beginning from here the notes are in Engels' hand.— Ed. c "Le Conseil général de Londres", La Solidarité, No. 16, July 23, 1870.— Ed. d See this volume, pp. 260-62.—-Ed. e Ibid., pp. 263-70.— Ed.

[^3]: 20-1232





**[p. 560]**

October 4. October 11. Meetings at Berlin and Munich against the Prussian war policy. Letter about Bakounin at Lyons 28 Sept.341 Report of Finance Committee. October 18. Birmingham Trades Council joins. Objection taken to Belgian International papers not having published 2nd War Address. Financial Secretary appointed. October 25. The Belgian Internationale at last prints the beginning of the 2-d War Address.2—Heinemann's Meeting. Protest of the [German] Workers' Educational Society.342 Resolved that when questions of an internal administration are discussed none but members of Council be allowed to be present. November 1. Letters from Patterson N. J. and New York that French and Germans there had issued a joint address against the war.343 Letter from Aubrey (Rouen) about the Bonapartists still in power there and their doings. November 8.— Meeting of Intervention Committee attended by Secretary.344

November 15.—Mass Meeting in New York on the War announced as impending.345

November 22. Letter from Brest, that all the 12 members of the Committee there had been arrested 2/10 October, and tried 27 October for conspiring against safety of State, 2 got 2 years, one 1 year (merely for holding a Defence meeting).— From the Bonaparte papers published it appeared that on the eve of the plebiscite the hunting down of the International was purposely organised. November 29. The Trades Council of Manchester promises its moral support. Dupont appointed Representative for Lancashire.0

6 December. Marx proposed that the secretary should make out a list of the attendance of the members for the last 3 months. Carried. 13 December. Secretary read a list of the members and the number

[^1]: a [K. Marx,] "Deuxième adresse du Conseil général de l'Association inter- nationale des Travailleurs au sujet de la guerre", L'Internationale, No. 93, October 23, 1870.— Ed.

[^2]: b Then follows Marx's note in pencil: "The Romance Federal Committee in Geneva during the 1869-70 refused [the Alliance] affiliation to the Romance Federation of the International Association. The section was recognized by the General Council." Beginning from here the notes are written by Marx.— Ed.



of times they had been absent since September. To be entered into the minutes, and in future the absent members to be noted down as well as those present. 20 December. Announcement of formation of Central Committee at New York.346 (See list of attendance) (after the last sitting of December). (From Sept.-December 1870 and from January-end of March, 1871.)

1871

3 January.

17 January. Birmingham Trades' Council joins. Felleisen to be asked in what position towards the International (These fellows for annexation.)347 Marx speaks against Odger's rant at St. James's Hall. (Favre et Co.)348 (against our Second Address). 24 January. Formation of Central Committee for the United States at New York. 31 January. Swiss (Geneva Romance Confédération) write that they had received letter from Spain to enter into close communica- tion, but before doing so they desired to know whether the Spanish section was in relation with the Council; otherwise they would not communicate with them.

Engels appointed Spanish Secretary. Engels resolution on the war (Franco-German) (and attitude of English Government).3

7 February. Discussion of Franco-German War. Attitude of English government. 14 February. (Continuation of that discussion.) 21 February. Land Tenure Reform Association^49 meeting the workingmen's party half ways in regard to the nationalisation of land. (Mill) Harris thought it was a move to break up the Land and Labour League.350

28 February. Discussion of Land Tenure Reform Association. (Resolu- tion to discuss their programme.)

Report of Citizen Serraillier. (Federal Paris Council during the siege.) 7 March. (Discussion on New York Central Committee) (Marx on Paris declaration of 1856)?5Ï

14 March: Robin (Conference of delegates from all the sections to be convocated to London). (Rejected.) (Debate on declaration of 1856) (Irish Question).

[^1]: a See this volume, pp. 263-70.— Ed.

[^2]: 20*





**[p. 562]**

21 March. Marx stated: when the war broke out letters sent to all the continental Sections that the congress could not be held at Mayence or Paris; all the sections that had answered had left it to the Council to choose time and place when and where the Council should meet. Robin said that letter had never been received at Paris. Declaration to be sent to the English papers against the false resolution (of excluding the Germans) attributed to the Paris Federal Council.3

(Revolution of March 18.) Section in the East of London. 28 March. Serraillier sent to Paris. 5£ voted for his wife.

Our German friends only prosecuted as Internationals (all other charges dropped).

Central Republican Meeting at Wellington Music Hall (to establish a Republican Club).352—Wade moved the addition of "social and democratic" (26 for, 50 against). Resolutions for founding branches in the East End of London. 4 April. San Francisco (line) branch. Bethnal Green branch.

11 April. (Antwerp, etc. Cigarmakers (strike) lockout) (Action taken by Council).h

18 April. (Tolain affair first brought before the Council.) 25 April. Expulsion of Tolain. Confirmed.0

2 May. Applegarth and Odger (Eccarius moved that the rule of appending all names to Addresses should be suspended with regard to them. Mottershead against. Jung to speak about it with Applegarth, Eccarius with Odger). 9 May. Eccarius resignes General Secretaryship (Applegarth left to the Council the appending of his name. Odger should like to see the address beforehand).

16 May. Hales elected General Secretary. 23 May. The English shall convoke meeting to urge the English Government not to act against the French Refugees. This was done and different meetings took place on that point. 30 May. Marx read Address "On Civil War" (Accepted)^ 6 June. Commune. English press. Mazzini. (Attempts of Internation- al Democratic Association554 to play a role.) (Citizen Cadiot appears on the scene.)

[^1]: New Zealand correspondence.353

[^2]: a See this volume, pp. 286-87.— Ed. b Ibid., p. 294.— Ed. c Ibid., p. 297.— Ed. d Ibid., pp. 307-59.— Ed.



13 June. (12 June. Reply to Favre's circular sent to Times?) Address

on Civil War issued. (Citizen Baudry turns up.) 20 June. Odger and Lucraft leave (Scandal-sitting) (Holyoake- scandal).b

Declarations against the false Paris (International) manifes- toes.0

27th June. Refugee Committee on Saturdays formed. Declarations about Odger, Lucraft, Holyoake etc.d Letter of Marx in Daily News about Address.

First Edition" exhausted. 4 July. Mc Donnell elected.

Correspondence of Cafiero.355 Robert Reid sent with Address as lecturer on the Commune to the Provinces.

Major Wolff (Tibaldi etc.) Marx and "Pall Mall"} 11 July. Assi-Bigot affair, (Lumley, barrister, present) Address on Washburne?

Rutson (Bruce) applies for the published documents of the International. 18 July. Richard Affair (not admitted as member) Elliot (rejected). Herman elected as Belgian secretary. Refugee—money question. 25 July. New Orleans branch. ("La Commune", their organ.) Popeh

and Mazzini against the International'

Robin brings Swiss affair forward. Referred to a Confer- ence.

Private Conference Resolved upon (for 17 September)} 1 August. Bishop of Malinese Catholic Workingmen's International Association. Washington section.

Rochat's Proposition as to formation of Enquiry (through and from the Refugees) on the History of the Commune (Cohn.) 8 August. Deputation of Newcastle and London Engineers on the Newcastle Lockout. Deputation sent by General Council to

[^1]: a See this volume, p. 361.— Ed. b Ibid., pp. 367-68.— Ed. c Ibid., p. 369.— Ed. d Ibid., pp. 372-73.— Ed. e Of The Civil War in France.—Ed.

[^2]: f See this volume, p. 378.— Ed. g Ibid., pp. 379-82.— Ed. h Pius IX.— Ed. • See this volume, pp. 607-08.— Ed. J Ibid., p. 609.— Ed. k V. A. Dechamps.— Ed.





**[p. 564]**

Belgium etc. Warning to all international branches against importation of men into Newcastle-on-Tyne.

Applegarth's letter. Visitors to be excluded in future. 15 August. Branches at Liverpool and Loughborough in Leicestershire.

Conference to be confined to questions of organisation and policy. 22 August. (Canada Communard Exportation Scheme.) 29 August. Deputation from Refugees' Society. Quarrel.356

5 September. Marx, Engels, Hales, Jung resign as members of Refugees' Committee. Propositions as to Conference.

Written presumably in September 1871 Reproduced from the manuscript

First published, in Russian, in the book The Hague Congress of the First Internation- al, September 2-7, 1872. Minutes and Docu- ments, Moscow, 1970

