---
Volume: 22
Document_Title: "5. Frederick Engels. Meeting of Sub- Committee "
Page_Range: "600-604"
---

# 5. Frederick Engels. Meeting of Sub- Committee 



**[p. 567]**

Frederick Engels

MEETING OF SUB-COMMITTEE

Monday 11th September 1871 at 1 Maitland Park

Serraillier in the Chair. Engels appointed Secretary. Proposed by Engels, seconded by Hales that the Bill of Mr. Truelove359 £25 11.6 be passed, reserving the question of the price of the handbills and the 5th Thousand copies.3 Adopted unanimously.

Proposed by Engels, seconded by Eccarius: that Mr. Truelove be paid £10.—on account and the payment of the rest be delayed until he shall have handed in an account of copies sold. Adopted unanimously.

Proposed by Marx, seconded by Longuet: that the General Council be requested, to avoid all misunderstandings, to declare at the opening of the Conference: that a Conference is nothing but a meeting of delegates from various countries called to consult and decide together with the General Council, on administrative measures rendered necessary by extraordinary circumstances.15

Hales proposed, Longuet seconded: that the General Council recommend the formation of an English Federal Council. With- drawn to be submitted to General Council tomorrow.

[^1]: Marx proposes, Jung seconds: that the formation of working women's sections be recommended.c

[^2]: First published, in Russian, in the book Reproduced from the manuscript The London Conference of the First Interna- tional, Moscow, 1936

[^3]: a Of the third edition of The Civil War in France.—Ed.

[^4]: b See this volume, p. 613.— Ed. c Ibid., p. 424.— Ed.





APPENDICES



