---
Volume: 22
Document_Title: " 1. Record of Marx's Speech on the Government of National Defence "
Page_Range: "604-606"
---

#  1. Record of Marx's Speech on the Government of National Defence 



**[p. 571]**

[RECORD OF MARX'S SPEECH ON THE GOVERNMENT OF NATIONAL DEFENCE]360

[FROM THE MINUTES OF THE GENERAL COUNCIL MEETING OF JANUARY 17, 1871]

Cit. Marx said as there were several English members present he had a very important statement to make. At the last meeting at St. James's Hall Odger spoke of the French Government contrary to truth. In our second address we said the brand of infamy attaches to some of the members of the provisional government from the Revolution of 1848.a Odger said there was not a blame attached to them. Favre can only be received as the representative of the Republic, not as the spotless patriot Jules Favre. The way that is now talked about him put Favre in the foreground and the Republic almost out of sight. One example of Favre's doings. After the Revolution of 1848 Favre became Secretary of the Interior; on account of Flocon being ill, Ledru-Rollin chose Favre. One of the first things he did was to bring back the army to Paris, which afterwards enabled the bourgeoisie to shoot the work-people down. Later, when the people became convinced that the Assembly consisted of middle-class men, the people made a demonstration in favour of Poland on which occasion the people ran into the assembly.361 The president entreated Louis Blanc to speak to them and pacify them, which he did. A war with Russia would have saved the Republic. The first thing Jules Favre did a few days after was to ask for authority to prosecute Louis Blanc as an accomplice of the invaders. The Assembly thought he was instructed by the Government to do but all the other members of the Government denounced [this measure] as the private affair of Favre. The provisional government conspired to provoke the insurrection of June. After the people were shot down Favre

[^1]: a See this volume, p. 269.— Ed.





**[p. 572]**

The account of the speech (without any Reproduced from the General mention of the author) was published in Council's Minute Book The Eastern Post No. 121, January 21, 1871.

This variant of the record was first published in: K. Marx and F. Engels, Works, Second Russian Edition, Vol. 17, Moscow, 1960

