---
Volume: 22
Document_Title: "3. Record of Engels' Speech on the Revolution of March 18 in Paris "
Page_Range: "618-620"
---

# 3. Record of Engels' Speech on the Revolution of March 18 in Paris 

[RECORD OF ENGELS' SPEECH ON THE REVOLUTION OF MARCH 18 IN PARIS]377

[FROM THE MINUTES OF THE GENERAL COUNCIL MEETING OF MARCH 21, 1871]

Cit. Engels then gave a description of the state of things in Paris. He said the letters received during the week from Paris, which Serraillier had already mentioned, had cleared up what had been incomprehensible before. It had appeared as if a few men had suddenly seized a number of cannon and kept them. The whole of the press and every one of the correspondents had written that these men must be [put] down but the French Government had temporised. The information received from our Paris Committee was [that] the National Guards paid for the making of these guns and liked to keep them. After the election they had found that the Republic was anything but safe under such an Assembly as had been elected.378 When the Prussians had entered Paris the guns had been taken away to another part of the town to keep them out of their reach. Then the Government had laid claim to them and endeavoured to take them away from the National Guards. Aurelle de Paladines had been appointed Commander in Chief of the National Guards and prefect of the police.3 Under Napoleon he had been Commander in Chief of the Gendarmerie and he was a partisan of the priests. At the bidding of Dupanloup, the bishop of Orleans, he had done five hours' penance at Church while his army had been defeated in an action with the Germans. This had left no doubt as to the intentions of the Government.

[^1]: a At the next meeting on March 28, 1871, Engels pointed out to the mistake made in the record of his speech on March 21: "Two Generals, Aurelle de Paladines and Valentin, were made into one. It was the latter who had been appointed Prefect of the Police".— Ed.



The Commune was to be elected the next day. They had announced that the liberty of the press should be respected but not the rotten Bonapartist press. The most important resolution passed was that the preliminaries of peace should be respected. The Prussians were still near and if they could be kept out of the quarrel the chances of success were increased.

[^1]: The account of the speech was printed, Reproduced from the General without the author's name, in The Eastern Council's Minute Book Post, No. 130, March 25, 1871

[^2]: This variant of the record was first published, in Russian, in the newspaper Pravda, No. 77, March 18, 1932

[^3]: a A. Alavoine, J.-L. Durand, L.-E. Varlin, J.-L. Pindy.— Ed.



