---
Volume: 22
Document_Title: "5. Record of Engels' Speech on the Paris Commune "
Page_Range: "621-622"
---

# 5. Record of Engels' Speech on the Paris Commune 



**[p. 588]**

[RECORD OF ENGELS' SPEECH ON THE PARIS

COMMUNE]380

[FROM THE MINUTES OF THE GENERAL COUNCIL MEETING OF APRIL 11, 1871]

Cit. Engels said he had another fact to communicate. The press had lately been full of the wonders done by the Association, but the last stated in a Paris paper was that Marx had been private secretary to Bismarck in 1857.a

He further said it would not be well to allow the Paris affair to go on without saying something about it. As long as the Central Committee of the National Guards had managed the affair it had gone on well but after the election381 there had been talk and no action. The time for action against Versailles had been when it was weak but that opportunity had been lost and now it seemed that Versailles was getting the upper hand and driving the Parisians back. People would not put up long with being led into defeat. They lost ground, their ammunition was spent to little purpose and they were eating up their provisions. They could not be starved into submission as long as one side of Paris was open. Favre declined to take Prussian help.382 In June 1848 the fight had been over in four days but then the workpeople had had no cannon. It would not be over so quick now. Louis Napoleon had made the streets wide that they might be swept with cannon against the workpeople but now it was in their favor; they would sweep the streets with cannon against the other party. The workpeople 200,000 men far better organised than at any former insurrection. Their case was a bad one but the chances were not so good as a fortnight ago.

[^1]: First published, in Russian, in the news- Reproduced from the General paper Pravda, No. 77, March 18, 1932 Council's Minute Book

[^2]: a See "Nouvelles d'hier. Paris, 2 avril", La Province, No. 428, April 5, 1871. See also Marx's letter to Karl Liebknecht, about April 10, 1871, present edition, Vol. 44.— Ed.



