---
Volume: 22
Document_Title: "7. Record of Engels' Speeches on the Paris Commune and in Connection with the Centennial Anniversary of Robert Owen's Birth "
Page_Range: "626-628"
---

# 7. Record of Engels' Speeches on the Paris Commune and in Connection with the Centennial Anniversary of Robert Owen's Birth 



**[p. 593]**

[RECORD OF ENGELS' SPEECHES

ON THE PARIS COMMUNE AND IN CONNECTION WITH THE CENTENNIAL ANNIVERSARY OF ROBERT OWEN'S BIRTH]3!

[FROM THE MINUTES OF THE GENERAL COUNCIL MEETING OF MAY 9, 1871]

Cit. Engels then stated that the address3 was not ready yet. Cit. Marx had been seriously unwell and drawing up the address had made him worse. But it would be ready on Saturday and the Subcommittee 238 could meet at Marx's any time after five o'clock in the afternoon. A delegate from the Commune had been here, the reports were good. Strictness had to be employed not to let people pass without passports. It had been discovered that spies from Versailles had lounged about at their leisure. The main attack had failed. The Versailles army had tried to get in between the National Guards and the ramparts but now they could only attack in one place and that was where they had failed before. The defence was getting stronger. The Commune had lost a little ground [but] had regained Clamart. Even if the army succeeded at the ramparts there were the barricades afterwards and there had never been such a struggle before as the one impending. For the first time barricades would be defended by cannon, by military guns, and by regularly organised forces. The contending armies were nearly equal now. Versailles could get no troops from the country, they had to send some away to keep the towns in order. Thiers could not even allow the Town Councils to meet at Bordeaux and talk politics,306 he had to use Napoleon's Law to prevent it.325

Cit. Engels seconded the proposition.389 He said he knew too little of the promoters of the affair but there was no doubt about

[^1]: a K. Marx, The Civil War in France (pp. 307-59).— Ed.

[^2]: 21*





**[p. 594]**

Cit. Engels objected to Mottershead390 that Locke had been a deist but Owen a materialist. Locke's philosophy had led the French to materialism. He doubted that Owen had been ac- quainted with the older French writers. He differed entirely from Mottershead. Owen's movement had commenced as early as 1809 and had been independent of anything previously written. In 1812 he had published his book on marriagea and 1818 he had gone to the King's Congress at Aix-la-Chapelle to induce them to proclaim Communism. That later the movement had been more in the direction of religion was true to a certain extent but much had been said about social reform. Most of the Owenites had gone over to the middle classes. They had been Chartists but forced into the position of professional agitators and then they had become less reliable and not stuck [to] their principles. He should regret if the festival came off in such a way that we could not take part in it.

Cit. Engels said he had not meant that all the socialists were Chartists but some he had known had been.

[^1]: First published, in Russian, in the book Reproduced from the General The First International during the Paris Council's Minute Book Commune, Moscow, 1941 and in the book The General Council of the First Internation- al, 1870-1871, Moscow, 1965

[^2]: a Evidently a mistake in the date. The reference is to Owen's book The Marriage System of the New Moral World, Leeds, 1838.— Ed.



