---
Volume: 22
Document_Title: "8. Record of Marx's Speech on the Paris Commune "
Page_Range: "628-630"
---

# 8. Record of Marx's Speech on the Paris Commune 



**[p. 595]**

[RECORD OF MARX'S SPEECH ON THE PARIS COMMUNE]391

[FROM THE MINUTES OF THE GENERAL COUNCIL MEETING OF MAY 23, 1871]

Citizen Marx explained that he had been ill, and had not been able to finish the address3 upon which he was engaged, but he hoped to have it ready by Tuesday next. In reference to the struggle in Paris he said. "He was afraid the end was near, but if the Commune was beaten, the struggle would only be deferred. The principles of the Commune were eternal and could not be crushed; they would assert themselves again and again until the working classes were emancipated. The Commune of Paris was being crushed by the aid of the Prussians, they were acting as gendarmes for Thiers. The plot for its destruction was concocted between Bismarck, Thiers and Favre; Bismarck stated at Frankfort that Thiers and Favre had asked him to interfere.b The result showed that he was willing to do anything he could to assist them, short of risking the lives of German soldiers—not that he valued life when there was anything to be got—but he wished to see France sink still lower so that he might be able to exact the more. He had allowed Thiers to have more soldiers than was stipulated in the Convention,118 and had only allowed food to go into Paris in limited quantities. It was only the old story. The upper classes always united to keep down the working class. In the 11th century there was a war between some French Knights and Norman Knights, and the Peasants rose in insurrection; the Knights immediately forgot their differences and coalesced to crush the movement of the Peasants. To show how the Prussians have been

[^1]: a K. Marx, The Civil War in France (pp. 307-59).— Ed. b Report from Germany in the column "Révélations", La Situation, No. 156, March 21, 1871.— Ed.





**[p. 596]**

First published in The Eastern Post, Reproduced from the General No. 139, May 27, 1871 Council's Minute Book, verified with The Eastern Post

[^1]: a See H. F. Jaubert's speech in the National Assembly, May 12, 1871, Journal officiel (Versailles), No. 133, May 13, 1871.— Ed.



