---
Volume: 22
Document_Title: "9. Record of Marx's Speech Against the Calumny Invented by the Bourgeois Press to Slander the International and the Paris Commune "
Page_Range: "630-632"
---

# 9. Record of Marx's Speech Against the Calumny Invented by the Bourgeois Press to Slander the International and the Paris Commune 



**[p. 597]**

[RECORD OF MARX'S SPEECH AGAINST THE CALUMNY INVENTED BY THE BOURGEOIS PRESS

TO SLANDER THE INTERNATIONAL AND THE PARIS

COMMUNE]

[FROM THE MINUTES OF THE GENERAL COUNCIL MEETING OF JUNE 6, 1871]

Citizen Marx said the Council must disclaim all connection with the so-called International Democratic Association 354 as it was started in opposition to the International Workingmen's Association which had to bear the responsibilities of acts absurd as they sometimes were.3 Another thing to which he wished to call the attention of the Council was the infamous lies circulated about the Commune by the English Press. They were lies fabricated by the French and Prussian police. They were afraid lest the truth should be known. It was asseited that Millière was one of the most furious members of the Commune. Now it was a fact that he never was a member of the Commune, but as he had been a deputy for Paris it was necessary to have an excuse for shooting him. The English press acted as police and bloodhounds for Thiers. Slanders against the Commune and against the Interna- tional were invented to serve his bloody policy. The press knew full well the objects and principles of the International. It had given reports of the prosecutions against it in Paris under the Empire. It had had representatives at the various Congresses held by the Association, and had reported their proceedings, and yet it circulated reports to the effect that the Association included the Fenian Brotherhood, the Carbonari, ceased to exist 1830, the Marianne, Ditto 1854392 and other secret Societies, and asked if Colonel Henderson knew of the whereabouts of the General Council which was said to sit in London. These things were simply

[^1]: a The first sentence is omitted in the report published in The Eastern Post.—Ed.





**[p. 598]**

He wished also to call attention to the fact that Mazzini had written in The Contemporary Review denouncing the Commune.3 It was not so well known as it ought to be, but Mazzini had always been opposed to the Workmen's movements. He denounced the insurgents of June 1848 when Louis Blanc, who then had more courage than he has now—answered him.b

When Pierre Leroux—who had a large family—obtained employment in London Mazzini was the man to denounce him. The fact was, Mazzini, with his old-fashioned Republicanism knew nothing and accomplished nothing. In Italy he had created a military despotism by his cry for Nationality. With him the State—which was an imaginary thing, was everything, and Society—which was a reality—was nothing. The sooner the People repudiated such men the better.

First published in The Eastern Post, Reproduced from the General No. 141, June 10, 1871 Council's Minute Book, verified with The Eastern Post

[^1]: a G. Mazzini, "The Commune in Paris", The Contemporary Review, June 1871.— Ed.

[^2]: b L. Blanc, Des socialistes français à M. Mazzini, Brussels, 1852.— Ed.



