---
Volume: 22
Document_Title: "12. Account of Engels' Speech on Mazzini's Attitude Towards the International "
Page_Range: "640-642"
---

# 12. Account of Engels' Speech on Mazzini's Attitude Towards the International 



**[p. 607]**

[ACCOUNT OF ENGELS' SPEECH ON MAZZINI'S ATTITUDE TOWARDS THE INTERNATIONAL]

[FROM THE NEWSPAPER REPORT ON THE GENERAL COUNCIL MEETING OF JULY 25, 1871]

Citizen Engels said after the Popea should come the Anti- Pope,399 he had to report that Joseph Mazzini had been attacking the Internationalb in the columns of his Journal. After stating that he knew the Italian people loved him and he loved them, he proceeded: —

After descanting at length upon these points, he concluded by advising the Italian Working Class to organise themselves strongly under his banner in a counter-league against the Internationals, to have faith in the future of Italy, and to work for its future and glory, and to form among themselves Co-operative Stores (not

[^1]: "An association has arisen which threatens to subvert all order (the same words as used by the Pope) started many years ago, I refused from the first to belong [to] it. It is controlled by a Council sitting in London, the soul of which is Karl Marx, a man of acute intellect, but like that of Proudhon of a dissolving character, and of domineering temper, who is jealous of other people's influence. The Council itself, composed of men of different nationalities, can have no unity of purpose either to discuss the evils which afflict society, nor the unity of sentiment necessary to amend them. These are the reasons why I retired from the Association, and why the Italian branch of the Democratic Alliance (London) retired from it also. The three fundamental principles of the International are: — 1st Negation of God, that is of all morality. 2nd Negation of Country, which it dissolves into a Conglomeration of Communes, whose inevitable fate it must be to quarrel among themselves, 3rd Negation of Property, thereby depriving every working-man of the fruits of his labour for the right to individual property is nothing but the right of every man to that which he has produced."

[^2]: a Pius IX.— Ed. b G. Mazzini, "Agli opérai italiani", La Roma del popolo, No. 20, July 13, 1871; see also this volume, pp. 385-87.— Ed.





**[p. 608]**

It will be seen that upon one important point Mazzini contradicts himself, in one place he says "he refused to belong to the International from the first," and afterwards says he retired. How a man can retire from that to which he never belonged, the public must imagine. The fact is Mazzini never was a member of the International but he tried to turn it into a tool of his own. He drew up a programme which was submitted to the provisional Council but it was rejected, and after some further attempts made through Major Wolff, since discovered to be a police spy, towards the same end had failed,238 Mazzini refrained from all interference with the International until lately.

As to the charges against the International, they are either untrue or absurd, with regard to the first that it wants to make atheism compulsory, that is untrue, and was refuted in the Secretary's3 letter in reply to Jules Favre's circular.0 The second is absurd, for while the International recognises no country, it desires to unite, not dissolve. It is opposed to the cry for Nationality, because it tends to separate people from people, and is used by tyrants to create prejudices and antagonism,400 the jealousy existing between the Latin and Teuton races led to the late disastrous war, and was equally used by Napoleon and Bismarck. The third charge only betrays Mazzini's ignorance of the very elements of political economy. That individual property which assures to everyone the fruits of his own labour, the International does not intend to abolish, but on the contrary to establish. At present the fruits of the labour of the masses goes into the pockets of the few, and this system of capitalist production is what Mazzini proposes to leave unaltered, but which the International would destroy. It desires everyone to have the produce of his or her labour. The letters received from Italy prove that the Italian Workmen are with the International, and are not to be misguided by Mazzini's shallow sophistry.

[^1]: First published in The Eastern Post, Reproduced from the newspaper, No. 148, July 29, 1871 verified with the General Council's Minute Book

[^2]: a J. Hales.— Ed. b See this volume, pp. 361-63.— Ed.



