---
Volume: 22
Document_Title: "14. Account of Marx's Speech Against Odger "
Page_Range: "643-645"
---

# 14. Account of Marx's Speech Against Odger 



**[p. 610]**

[ACCOUNT OF MARX'S SPEECH AGAINST ODGER]

[FROM THE NEWSPAPER REPORT ON THE GENERAL COUNCIL MEETING OF AUGUST 1, 1871]

Citizen Marx said there was one other subject to which he wished to allude. It appeared that at a meeting of the Land and Labour League350 a Mr. Shipton—whom he did not know but who had the reputation of being Mr. Odger's Lieutenant—had been criticising the address on the "Civil War in France" and had said that he (Dr Marx) had repudiated the Council. Such a remark only shewed Mr. Shipton's ignorance and didn't speak much for his perception even though he might be a dummy in the hands of Odger.—"Because he had avowed himself the author of the charges contained in the address, he had repudiated the Coun- cil"!—Why, that avowal was made by the sanction of the Council, so that men like Mr. Odger who were apologists for M. Thiers and Favre—should no longer have the power to say they did not know whether the charges were true or not that were made in the address. In the letter of avowal the men charged were distinctly challenged to indict him for libel so that the matter might be tested in a court of law,a but it did not serve their purpose to do so, as they knew well what the result would be. Of course it was to be easily understood why Mr. Odger was not satisfied. He had exhibited an amount of ignorance in dealing with foreign politics that would not have been creditable to any ordinary reader of newspapers. He had said "The character of Jules Favre was irreproachable": Why, it was well known that he had been all his life the bitter opponent of the French Working Class, and of all Labour movements, he was the principal instigator of the massacres of June—'48;—he was the author of the expedition to

[^1]: a See this volume, p. 370.— Ed.





**[p. 611]**

First published in The Eastern Post, Reproduced from the newspaper, No. 149, August 5, 1871 verified with the General Council's Minute Book

