---
Volume: 22
Document_Title: "15. Record of Engels' Speech on the Situation in Spain "
Page_Range: "645-646"
---

# 15. Record of Engels' Speech on the Situation in Spain 



**[p. 612]**

[RECORD OF ENGELS' SPEECH ON

THE SITUATION IN SPAIN]

[FROM THE NEWSPAPER REPORT ON THE GENERAL COUNCIL MEETING OF AUGUST 22, 1871]

Citizen Engels reported that the members of the Spanish Federal Council had great hopes from the change of Ministry which had just taken place in Spain. It was expected that the prosecutions against the International would cease, and then the Association would soon extend its ramifications throughout the length and breadth of the peninsula. A great change had taken place in the ranks of the Republican party. On the establishment of the Commune in Paris, the leaders of the Republican party in Spain—not knowing the social principles involved—went in for it. But as soon as they found out that it meant a struggle for more than municipal government they turned round and denounced it. This shocked the Spanish working-class, which formed the bulk of the Republican party. Having had their eyes opened, the people not wishing to be used as tools, had turned to the International. Citizen Engels also reported that Citizen Paul Lafargue, son-in-law to Dr. Marx, and formerly a member of the General Council, had been arrested in Spain and sent under an escort of gendarmes to Madrid. The government, however, finding nothing against him, had since liberated him.

[^1]: First published in The Eastern Post, Reproduced from the newspaper No. 152, August 26, 1871



