---
Volume: 22
Document_Title: "18. Record of Marx's Speech on the Political Action of the Working Class "
Page_Range: "649-651"
---

# 18. Record of Marx's Speech on the Political Action of the Working Class 



**[p. 616]**

[RECORD OF MARX'S SPEECH ON THE POLITICAL ACTION OF THE WORKING CLASS]411

[FROM THE MINUTES OF THE SESSION OF THE LONDON CONFERENCE OF THE INTERNATIONAL WORKING

MEN'S ASSOCIATION ON SEPTEMBER 20, 1871]

Citizen Lorenzo has called on us to observe the Regulations, and Citizen Bastelica has followed him in this course.— I take the original Rules and the Inaugural Address, and I read in the two that the General Council will be responsible for presenting a programme for discussion at the congresses.3

The programme which the General Council is presenting to the conference for discussion comprisesb—the organisation of the Association; and the Vaillant motion relates to this point—the claim of Lorenzo and Bastelica is therefore unfounded —

In almost all countries some members of the International, basing themselves on the mutilated formulation of the Rules passed by the Congress of Geneva,412 have indulged in propaganda in favour of abstention from politics, which the governments have taken great care not to interrupt. Even in Germany, Schweitzer and others in the pay of Bismarck tried to rally the sections round the policies of the government. In France this culpable abstention had allowed Favre, Picard and others to seize power on 4 September— this abstention enabled a dictatorial committee to set itself up in Paris on 18 March, composed largely of Bonapartists and intriguers who knowingly wasted the first days of the Revolution in inaction, when they should have spent them consolidating it.413

In America a congress held recently414 and composed of workers has resolved to deal seriously with the political question

[^1]: a K. Marx, Rules and Administrative Regulations of the International Working Men's Association, London, 1867 (present edition, Vol. 20, Appendices); K. Marx, Inaugural Address of the Working Men's International Association, London, 1864 (present edition, Vol. 20).— Ed.

[^2]: b See this volume, p. 613.— Ed.



In England it is less easy for a worker to enter Parliament. The Members receiving no subsidy, and the worker having nothing but the proceeds of his labour to live on, Parliament is closed to him, and the Bourgeoisie, stubbornly refusing to pay an allowance to Members, knows full well that this is the way to prevent the working class from being represented.

But it must not be thought that it is of minor importance to have workers in parliament. If their voices are stifled, like those of De Potter and Castiau, if they are ejected like Manuel—the effect of this severity and intolerance on the people is profound— Whereas if, like Bebel and Liebknecht, they are able to speak from this platform, the entire world can hear them—in one way or the other it means considerable publicity for our principles—To mention only one example—When, during the war taking place in France, Bebel and Liebknecht embarked on the struggle against it, and to disclaim all responsibility on behalf of the working class with regard to what was happening—the whole of Germany was shaken, and even Munich, this city where no-one would contemp- late revolution unless it involved the price of beer, was the scene of great demonstrations demanding an end to the war.

The governments are hostile to us.a We must answer them by using every possible means at our disposal, getting workers into parliament is so much gaining over them, but we must choose the right men and watch out for the Tolains.b

He supports Citizen Vaillant's motkm with the Frankel amend- ment, which consists in prefacing it with a preamble explaining the reason for this declaration, that is stating that it is not just today that the Association asks the workers to engage in politics, but all the time.

[^1]: First published, in Russian, in the Printed according to the Rochat's magazine The Communist International, minutes, verified with the rough No. 29, 1934 notes of Martin and Rochat

[^2]: Translated from the French

[^3]: Published in English for the first time

[^4]: a The paragraph in the draft notes by Martin begins as follows: "Since the July Revolution the bourgeoisie has always made every effort to unnoticeably create obstacles, in the workers' way. Our newspapers are not reaching the masses—the speaker's platform is the best means of publicity."—Ed.

[^5]: b See this volume, p. 297.— Ed.



