---
Volume: 22
Document_Title: "21. Record of Marx's Speech on Secret Societies "
Page_Range: "654-655"
---

# 21. Record of Marx's Speech on Secret Societies 



**[p. 621]**

[RECORD OF MARX'S SPEECH ON SECRET SOCIETIES]

[FROM THE MINUTES OF THE SESSION OF THE LONDON CONFERENCE OF THE INTERNATIONAL WORKING MEN'S ASSOCIATION ON SEPTEMBER 22, 1871]

Marx reads out the following motion. In countries where the regular organisation of the International Association has become temporarily impracticable in consequence of government intervention, the Association and its local groups may reconstitute themselves under various designations, but any secret society in the strict sense is formally prohibited.3

By secret organisation we do not mean secret societies in the strict sense, which, on the contrary, must be fought against. In France and Italy, where the political situation is such that the right of assembly is an offence, there will be strong tendencies for men to become involved in secret societies, the results of which are always negative. Moreover, this type of organisation is opposed to the development of the proletarian movement because, instead of instructing the workers, these societies subject them to au- thoritarian, mystical laws which cramp their independence and distort their powers of reasonb—He seeks acceptance of the motion.

[^1]: First published, in Russian, in the book Printed according to Rochat's min- The London Conference of the First Interna- utes, verified with Rochat's and tional, 1936 Martin's rough notes

[^2]: Translated from the French

[^3]: Published in English for the first time

[^4]: a See this volume, pp. 427-28.— Ed. b The rough notes by Martin continue as follows: "Secret societies would annihilate the spirit of the International Association. This is good for the carbonari. They cannot suit the proletarian movement."—Ed.



