---
Volume: 48
Document_Title: "5. Engels to Florence Kelley- Wischnewetsky 27 January "
Page_Range: "20-22"
---

# 5. Engels to Florence Kelley- Wischnewetsky 27 January 



**[p. 5]**

ENGELS TO FLORENCE KELLEY-WISCHNEWETZKY10

IN NEW YORK

[London,] 27 January 1887 122 Regent's Park Road, N.W.

Dear Mrs Wischnewetzky,

Herewith I send you, at last, the Preface.11'12 No sooner had the Avelings returned3 when I was seized with a slight conjunctivitis which was however sufficient to prevent all regular work especially as the short time I could each day devote to writing was unavoidably taken up by urgent correspondence. Although my eye is not yet quite free from inflammation, yet I have managed to get through the Preface and hope the delay will not have inconvenienced you too much.

As I have not been able to keep a copy I must request you to return me the MS when done with. I suppose you will be good enongh to see it through the press.

I hope Dr Wischnewetzky has arrived safe after a good passage. I regret that I could not have him all to myself for a couple of hours, but he just dropped in at an evening when, for the time being, the old 'International' was made to undergo a practical revival.

The movement in America, just at this moment, is I believe best seen from across the ocean. On the spot, personal bickering and local disputes must obscure much of the grandeur of it. And the only thing that could really delay its march, would be the consolidation of these differences into established sects. To some extent, that will be unavoid- able, but the less of it the better. And the Germans have most to guard against this. Our theory is a theory of evolution, not a dogma to be learnt by heart and to be repeated mechanically. Je weniger sie den Amerikanern von Aussen eingepaukt wird und je mehr sie sie durch eigne Erfahrung—unter dem Beistand der Deutschen—erproben, desto tiefer geht sie ihnen in Fleisch und Blut Über.* When we returned to Germany in spring 1848, we joined the Democratic Party as the only possible

a The less it is drummed into the Americans from outside and the more thor- oughly they test it—with Germans' assistance—by personal experience, the more deeply will it penetrate their flesh and blood



**[p. 9]**

I hope you are by this time perfectly restored to health and that your husband and children are well too. Kind regards to Dr Wischnewetzky.

Very truly yours

F. Engels

First published, in English, slightly abridged, in Briefe und Auszüge aus Briefen von Job. Phil. Becker, Jos Dietzgen, Friedrich Engels, Karl Marx u. A. an F. A. Sorge und Andere,

Stuttgart, 1906 and in full in: Marx and Engels, Works First Russian Edition, Vol. XXVII, Moscow, 1935

Reproduced from the original

a K. Marx, Provisional Rules of the Association

