---
Volume: 48
Document_Title: "6. Engels to Paul Lafargue 28 January "
Page_Range: "22-24"
---

# 6. Engels to Paul Lafargue 28 January 



**[p. 6]**

ENGELS TO PAUL LAFARGUE13

IN PARIS

London, 28 January 1887

My dear Lafargue,

My eye is at last getting slightly better, but not yet well enough to enable me to shift the mountain of work and correspondence that has accumulated in the meantime. I can only write by daylight and then not all the time, but I am at least able to read for the better part of the evening.

If the Parisians are beginning to feel bellicose just now, they would be better advised to direct their wrath against Russia, which has used them to pull her chestnuts out of the fire and, now that they've burnt their fingers, is abandoning them to their fate. Can they not see that it is Russia which, through the Paris papers in her pay (the most dissolute being, it seems, the Débats3-), has incited their revanchist rodomontade with the sole aim of getting Bismarck to capitulate to the Tsarb? And now she has got what she wanted; Bismarck has made his peace with Russia and has sacrificed Austria, while Russia has sacrificed her Parisian dupes to Bismarck.14 The Russian alliance has its points!

Come to that, I do not believe that Bismarck wants a war which, no sooner begun, would become European. Once France and Germany had got to grips—and it would be a hard struggle and rather long—the Tsar would be compelled, willy-nilly, to march on the Balkans: Austro-Russian war. From that moment on, Bismarck would be at the mercy of unforeseeable circumstances, and I don't suppose he is so stupid to provoke such a situation in cold blood. But the Russian agency in Paris will continue its activities; it is in the interests of Russia to get France and Germany embroiled in a war; then she would have no one left to fight except Austria and, at most, England which would mean, in the opinion of the Russian chauvinists, who despise both England and Austria, a free hand for Russia in the East. And there lies the danger. If those gentry, Cyon & Co., succeed in pushing France into this war, they

a Journal des Débats politiques et littéraires -b Alexander III



**[p. 11]**

As to the elections in Germany, our prospects are first-rate. I think we shall get 700,000 votes in all, maybe even more.15 But when it comes to the majority in the new Reichstag, you have to reckon with the German philistine, and he's no angel, far from it.

Here it is being said that the Daily News' scoop was a scoop for Baring on the Stock Exchange. To Bismarck it must have seemed a most unpleasant manoeuvre, making a hash as it did of his electoral manoeu- vres. He has been forced to issue a démenti.16

Martignetti has again written to me.a It seems that he in at his wits' end and he asks me to find some way out for him, putting forward the most impossible suggestions. I have written to Hamburg and Vienna on his behalf and have also promised him I would write to you. No doubt you will hear from him direct. There's nothing for him either here or in America, since he does not speak a word of English. Might there be some opening for him in France, as a teacher of Italian? As I see it, there is nothing else he could do. Or can you think of some- thing better? He is about to be dismissed from his post. Do try and find some opening for the poor devil, either in Paris or in the provinces.

Pumps is a great deal better and her only serious complaint is intercostal rheumatism. When I saw her this morning she was quite cheerful.

Nothing's going on here among Socialists but inter-clique intrigue. According to Scheu, Champion is sick of Hyndman and would like to topple him, which accounts for his rapprochement with Bax. He ran into Aveling the other day and was as friendly as could be. We shall see how it all ends. In the meantime Aveling is going to hold up before the East End working men the example set by the Americans—that of a labour movement which is independent of the older parties, this being a method of agitation that may well be effec- tive. Last week he spoke at a meeting in Farringdon Street, as did Tussy the day before yesterday, and this they will continue to do both there and elsewhere.

As soon as I have any time to spare I shall write to Laura. Meanwhile Nim would like to know if she has spoken to Longuet yet, and what his answer was.

[^1]: a See this volume, pp.5-7



