---
Volume: 48
Document_Title: "12. Engels to Laura Lafargue 24 February "
Page_Range: "39-41"
---

# 12. Engels to Laura Lafargue 24 February 



**[p. 27]**

Yours sincerely

P. W. Rosher39

First published, in Russian, in Reproduced from the original Minuvshiye gody, No. 29 1908

Published in English in full for the first time

12

ENGELS TO LAURA LAFARGUE40

IN PARIS

London, 24 February 1887

My dear Laura,

The Révolution en Allemagne-Prise de Berlin3-—does not exactly come off in the way depicted in the Way of the People. The Voie du peuple on the other side of the Vosges is not exactly along the Boulevards of beautiful Paris. Not to speak of their mistakes about seats lost and gained, etc., the success of our German friends lies in another direction than where they seek it.41 First of all, we have so far lost seats and not gained any, but that, though a fact, counts for nothing. The decisive fact is that, while we are very slowly losing ground in the Saxon districts of hand-weaving (which is dying out) and which were our original strong- holds, we are gaining far more rapidly not only in the large towns but in all rural industrial districts. I have the exact figures of 43 districts with one deputy each, including Berlin, Hamburg, Dresden, Munich, Leipzig, Hanover, Magdeburg, Elberfeld, Cologne, Düsseldorf, Nürnberg, Stuttgart, Frankfurt etc, mostly large towns of course.

[^1]: a Revolution in Germany—Capture of Berlin





**[p. 28]**

or 27 per cent on the votes of 1884, in 3 years; and these include 5 districts in which we lost votes. In a day or two I shall have more data to extend my list which comprises all districts the figures of which I know. Berlin has come out splendidly and I begin to have some confidence in that otherwise ridiculous town.

The pressure brought to bear on our people was tremendous. Not even public proclamation of their candidates was allowed. Every one who took a part in the election by distributing bulletins de vote3- etc. was noted—which means expulsion in the numerous towns under state of siege. Wherever possible, the manufacturers conducted them to the poll and saw that they voted for Bismarck unless they wanted immediate discharge from work. And all this will be repeated and increased on the day of ballotage where we expect to secure most of our seats.

Singer is the Lockroy42—le premier élu de l'Allemagne. He had 32,227 votes which no other member can boast of. Bebel is in for Hamburg, Liebknecht out for Offenbach0; had he had 50 more votes, he would have been in the ballot at Bremen and then sure of election. But there are sure to be double elections so that he will not want the place whereon to rest his hind quarters.43 The exact number of ballots in which we are interested I do not know; 16 at the least. These we shall almost all carry, as far as I can see—and unless we are left in the lurch by the Centre44 or Progressists,45 which is quite on the cards.

While ordinarily but 55 to 65% of the voters polled, this time the philistine came up in force; 85 to 90% of the number on the list. And this accounts for many defeats.

I am extremely glad of the Alsatian vote.46 That will help us to get rid of these non-descripts—neither fish nor flesh nor good red herring—all the easier.

In a day or two you will get a printed circular with Aveling's reply to the charges of the New York Executive.47 If this circular has not been sent to the German club in Paris, then it has not been sent to Paris at all. It is nothing but the usual complaint of Knoten A against Gelehrte* that

[^1]: a polling cards - b the top candidate in Germany - c Engels has: Offenburg - d louts - e the educated



