---
Volume: 48
Document_Title: "13. Engels to Friedrich Adolph Sorge 3 March "
Page_Range: "41-44"
---

# 13. Engels to Friedrich Adolph Sorge 3 March 



**[p. 29]**

Tell Paul that his discovery about Oriental Circumcision* shares the fate of many of my discoveries in natural science viz. that it had been made before. I have read the same thing long ago in German books and should not wonder if it was already in old Creuzer's Symbolik^1 which is as old as the battle of Waterloo.

Poor Edward had an awful shock about these ridiculous accusations, so soon after his quinsy. He is not over-endowed with power of resis- tance to malady, and so this threw him back very much. He has been off and on at Hastings and is going off again to-night.

The last page of the Voie to-dayc looks rather queer, all Bel Amid and no advertisements.48 Rather too much for one dose, I should think.

Half past five—Postscblusse—and Dinner Bell! So farewell for to-day.

Very affectionately yours

F. Engels

First published, in the language of II, Paris, 1956 the original (English), in F. Engels, P. et L. Lafargue, Correspondance, t. Reproduced from the original

13

ENGELS TO FRIEDRICH ADOLPH SORGE49

IN HOBOKEN

London, 3 March 1887

Dear Sorge,

I am sending off simultaneously with this a package containing 1 Commonweal, 1 To-Day, 3 Gleichheits and 4 copies in German, 4 copies in English of Aveling's second circular.47

a See P. Lafargue, 'Die Beschneidung, ihre soziale und religiöse Bedeutung', Neue Zeit, 6. Jhg., 1888, pp.496-505 - ' F . Creuzer, Symbolik und Mythologie der alten Völker, besonders der Griechen - c the Voie du peuple of 24 February 1887 - d the novel of Guy de Maupassant - e time for the post



**[p. 30]**

The Executive is wisely confining itself to the age-old and, to German expatriates, eternally new story of squandering the workers' pence; so presumably the additional charges of attempted embezzlement, etc., are only being disseminated in private. No doubt you will find some oppor- tunity of putting the circulars to use.

We have good reason to be satisfied with the elections in Germany.15

The increase in the number of votes is marvellous, especially consider- ing how much pressure is being exerted not only by the government but also by the industrialists who, wherever feasible, presented the workers with the choice either of being dismissed or of voting compulsorily for a Bismarckian. I fear this will again be in evidence in the second ballot, the results of which are not yet known over here. The Pope3 is forbid- ding Catholics to vote for us, the men of Progress45 voluntarily prefer a Bismarckian to a Socialist, while the industrialists exercise outright coercion—so if in these circumstances we capture one or two more seats it will be a victory truly won.50 But it's not the number of seats that matter, only the statistical demonstration of the party's irresistible growth.

You suggest that our people have made fools of themselves in electing such men as Geiser, Frohme, Viereck, etc. There's no alternative. They have to take the candidates as and where they find them. That is a fate shared by all workers' parties in parliaments where there is no remuner- ation. Nor does it matter. The chaps are under no illusion regarding their representatives; of this the best proof is the total defeat of the 'parlia- mentary group' in its trial of strength with the Sozialdemokrat.51 And the deputies are well aware of it; the gentlemen of the right wing know that, if they are still tolerated, it is only by reason of the Anti-Socialist Law52 and that they will instantly be thrown out on the day the party

[^1]: a Leo XIII





**[p. 31]**

N o r need you worry about Liebknecht. They realise perfectly well what he's like in Germany. I have seldom known a man about whom the opinions of the most diverse people are so closely agreed as they are about Liebknecht. While he imagines he's got them all eating out of his hand, they are sizing him up quite critically. His incorrigible optimism, particularly about anything in which he himself has a hand, his firm belief that he is the life and soul of the movement, the chap who does everything and manages everything for the best and that it's only the other 'jackasses' who spoil things, his urge to create order everywhere and to cover up all contradictions by resolving them into commonplaces, his yearning for outward and momentary successes, even at the expense of enduring losses—all this is very well known. But our people also know that all these failings are only the obverse of most valuable quali- ties and that without those foibles he simply could not achieve what he does in fact achieve. So long as he has Bebel at his side he won't perpe- trate any serious blunders although he may cause a lot of unnecessary trouble and strife. And when it comes to parting from the philistines, he will defend them up to the very last, but at the crucial moment will be found in the right place.

I hope that your health will improve with the coming of spring.

Your

R E .

First published, slightly abridged, in Briefe und Auszüge aus Briefen von Joh. Phil. Becker, Jos. Dietzgen, Friedrich Engels, Karl Marx u. A. an F. A. Sorge und Andere, Stuttgart, 1906 and in full in: Marx and Engels, Works, First Russian Edition, Vol.

XXVII, Moscow, 1935

Printed according to the original

Published in English in full for the first time

