---
Volume: 48
Document_Title: "16. Engels to Julie Bebel 12 March "
Page_Range: "47-49"
---

# 16. Engels to Julie Bebel 12 March 



**[p. 35]**

Between the above and what follows lies a long-winded visit from old Jakins the house agent who took the rent and payment for coals and two glasses of gin and a cigar—a repeated ringing of the dinner-bell to drive the old fellow away—successful at the third repetition—then a rather heavy dinner with Nim's potato-cakes as a wind-up, and so I am wound up, but not for letter-writing. I think you will not be sorry if under these circumstances I make no further attempt, but proceed at once to subscribe myself.

Yours affectionately

F. Engels

First published, in the language of the Reproduced from the original original (English), in F. Engels, P. et L. Lafargue, Correspondance, II, Paris, 1956

16

ENGELS TO JULIE BEBEL

IN DRESDEN

London, 12 March 1887 122 Regent's Park Road, N.W.

Dear Mrs Bebel,

I am taking'the liberty of writing to you today in the hope that you will be able to give me news of how my friend Bebel is getting on at the charitable institution in Zwickau.64 I have heard nothing further of Bebel since Singer was over here in December. I know, of course, that deten- tion will have no effect whatever on his intellectual powers, but I should also be very glad to learn that it is not adversely affecting his physical



**[p. 36]**

Throughout the past autumn and winter Russian and Prussian diplo- macy has been at pains to engineer a localised war and prevent a European one. The Russians would have liked to crush Austria alone, the Prussians France alone, while the rest were supposed to look on.14

Unfortunately these well-intentioned endeavours were mutually incom- patible in that whoever attacked first would have provoked a world war. That the days of localised wars were over was, of course, obvious to any child, but not to the clever men who govern Europe; only now are the great statesmen finding this out and they really are somewhat afraid of a world conflagration, for its effects would be incalculable and more than even the Prussian and Russian armies could cope with. And so far as I'm concerned herein lies the only remaining guarantee of peace we have.

Would you please be kind enough to tell Bebel when you see him that the first edition of the English translation of Das Kapital* was sold out in 2 months and that the second is printing. And this before any of the bigger papers had devoted an article to the book!

[^1]: a Volume I



