---
Volume: 48
Document_Title: "18. Engels to Hermann Schluter 19 March "
Page_Range: "51-52"
---

# 18. Engels to Hermann Schluter 19 March 



**[p. 39]**

No more time now, alas, to send you various newspapers today; they will leave tomorrow—post about to go,

Your

RE.

First published, slightly abridged, in and in full in: Marx and Engels, Briefe und Auszüge aus Briefen von Works, First Russian Edition, Vol. Job. Phil. Becker, Jos. Dietzgen, XXVII, Moscow, 1035 Friedrich Engels, Karl Marx u. A. an F. A. Sorge und Andere, Stuttgart, 1906 Printed according to the original

18

ENGELS TO HERMANN SCHLÜTERS

IN HOTTINGEN-ZURICH

[Extract]

London, 19 March 1887

It is truly fortunate that our people no longer constitute a 'faction' in the Reichstag—for the next few years, at any rate, this will be just as well.681 also like the way so many have all of a sudden come to regard 'parliamentarism' as discreditable. Irresistible, gradually accelerating growth in the number of votes—that is the main thing. Our struggle is a form of siege warfare and so long as the approach trenches keep moving forward, all will be well. We are already close to the second parallel, where we shall be able to establish our dismounting batteries and silence the enemy's guns. And, if we get as far without the besieged's gaining temporary respite from a world war, we shall then be able to estimate when it will be possible to establish breaching batteries on the crest of the glacis, make a breach with our guns and mount an

