---
Volume: 48
Document_Title: "19. Engels to Laura Lafargue 21 March "
Page_Range: "52-54"
---

# 19. Engels to Laura Lafargue 21 March 



**[p. 40]**

Kindest regards to you all. Yours,

Engels

First published in Pionier. Illustrierter Printed according to a facsimile copy

Volks-Kalender für 1902, New York, 1901 Published in English for the first time

19

ENGELS TO LAURA LAFARGUE40

IN PARIS

London, 21 March 1887

My dear Laura,

I have received Fortin 's Ms.23 which, I am afraid, will have to rest a bit in my drawer, as I must still nurse my eye. Of course the inflammation was merely symptomatic of the real affliction, a weakness brought on by over-exertion of the eye especially at night-time, and that can be cured by nothing but the removal of the cause; in consequence Nim and I pass our evenings now at card-playing and I find it acts, but has to be contin- ued yet a bit. If Paul continues his work at the Bibliothèque etc. in the usual way, I am afraid he will have to suffer for it, though of course his doctor ought to know.

To settle business first: I enclose cheque for £12, and further inform you that nothing has been heard here from Longuet. I sent him a post- card69 about the copy of Capital addressed to La Justice, asking if he had got it; no reply either.



**[p. 41]**

Old William, if not actually dead, seems to be dying—vide enclosed cut from the Weekly Dispatch.71 And the dynamite shells of St Petersburg seem after all not to have missed their aim. Vide the abject declaration which through Reuter (!!) the Russian government have sent round Europe.72 The Czare goes on his knees before revolution, and even the Russophile Daily Newsi says this abject document can be compared only to the abject telegram of Alexander Battenberg to the Czar.73 This thing looks indeed like the beginning of the end in Russia, and that would be the beginning of the end in Europe too. What a fool that Czar must be! Not to see that when he ordered the plot to kidnap and, if necessary, to kill that poor ass Alexander Battenberg, he justified the same proceedings against himself, and called upon his own enemies to apply to him his own methods!

Pumps is expected back from Eastbourne to-morrow. Edward lectured yesterday morning—for the first time since his quinsy—in an East-End Radical Club22; he is making a very useful and probably

a slaps - b clowns at a fair - c See 'L'Exécution d'un Mouchard' in La Voie du Peuple, No. 35, 17 March, 1881 - d louts, here the uneducated section of the working-class movement - e Alexander III - f 'The Nihilist Conspiracy'. The Daily News, 21 March 1887

