---
Volume: 48
Document_Title: "21. Engels to Friedrich Adolph Sorge 6 April "
Page_Range: "55-57"
---

# 21. Engels to Friedrich Adolph Sorge 6 April 



**[p. 43]**

Yours very sincerely,

F. Engels

First published, in Danish, in Printed according to the original Meddelesner om Forskning i Arbejderbovaegelsens Historie, No. 4, Published in English for the first time February 1975

21

ENGELS TO FRIEDRICH ADOLPH SORGE29

IN HOBOKEN

London, 6 April 1887

Dear Sorge,

Whoever told you that Kautsky had become restive was either lying or had been lied to. I would trust Kautsky as I would trust myself; like most young men he is sometimes apt to be a bit opinionated, but if he harboured any doubts I would be the first to whom he would confide them. Anyway, I shall ask him this evening to what, if anything, the statement can refer.

[^1]: Have received postcard together with the Dietzgen cutting, 24 March, and letter of 25 ditto. Hepner could hardly be in a position to judge from those few disconnected facts whether Aveling ought to have been 'more frank'.75 I myself wouldn't venture to say so; all I know is that Aveling is as unfortunate in money matters as Hepner himself. Both have an enviable talent for getting mixed up in money squabbles through no fault of their own.

[^2]: Wilhelm,a having first shrouded himself in silence, can now scarcely

[^3]: a Wilhelm Liebknecht





**[p. 1887]**

'The New Yorkers will probably toe the line. I had already—weeks ago—written and told them in no uncertain terms that, no matter what the circumstances, I refused to allow myself to be played off against Aveling and Tussy. I have categorically insisted upon a full apology and, as I have said, I think they will comply. It's a great pity Aveling didn't write to me immediately after his return.'

(this is an empty excuse, since I had already informed him of the essentials round about 20 January,76 in so far as they were known to ourselves at the time)

—'it was from you I first learnt about the whole thing and by then we were in the midst of the electoral hurly-burly which, of course, claimed my whole attention. And so a lot of time was lost. But every- thing's bound to come out all right. If the New Yorkers dig their heels in, I shall attack them publicly. You can tell Aveling and Tussy so.'

O n the whole the tide seems to be turning very much against the gentlemen of the Executive. Aveling has received sympathetic letters from several private quarters in New York; the American Rochester section has expressed its continuing confidence in him, the German Cleveland (or Buffalo? I forget) section has come out unanimously in his favour. And as much as a month ago the Executive—without waiting for the sections' votes—submitted all the files to the Board of Supervisors for a decision—i.e. appealed to another tribunal! We, of course, immedi- ately wrote to them as well, sending documents and insisting that they examine certain letters, etc.

Our Parisians have again got themselves into a fix. They had lost the Cri du Peuple,™ and now the Socialiste has also died for want of funds. The Paris working men have so spoilt their digestions with 50 years of sectarian and phrase-mongering socialism that they cannot at present stomach wholesome fare. Paris, le centre des lumières, la ville de l'idée, est dégoûté d'idées.*

[^1]: You will have had a copy of Aveling's reply to the second and, indeed, even more infamousq article in the Volkszeitung.65

[^2]: a Paris, the centre of enlightenment, the city of ideas, is disgusted with ideas



