---
Volume: 48
Document_Title: "22. Engels to Friedrich Adolph Sorge 9 April "
Page_Range: "57-59"
---

# 22. Engels to Friedrich Adolph Sorge 9 April 



**[p. 45]**

78

Kindest regards, Your Engels

and in full in: Marx and Engels, Works, First Russian Edition, Vol. XXVII, Moscow, 1935

Printed according to the original

First published, slightly abridged, in Briefe und Auszüge aus Briefen von Job. Phil. Becker, Jos. Dietzgen, Friedrich Engels, Karl Marx u A. an F. A. Sorge und Andere, Stuttgart, 1906

22

ENGELS TO FRIEDRICH ADOLPH SORGE53

IN HOBOKEN

London, 9 April 1887

Dear Sorge,

So the Executive intends to reply. That will mean a further suppres- sion of facts. But the decision to reply is in itself proof of how base and silly it was to try and worm a verdict out of the sections merely on the strength of the Executive's first allegations. First the sections were supposed to decide. Then, even before the expiry of the time limit they had been set, the Executive goes and implores the Board of Supervisors for a verdict. And now the Executive itself admits that further investiga- tions will be necessary before a decision can be reached.

[^1]: I wrote to you on the 6tha and have had your letter of 29 March. Many thanks for your efforts re Jonas.79 I think they will bear fruit.

[^2]: a See previous letter





**[p. 46]**

I'm glad in as much as I can now hope to be relieved of Mrs Wischnewetzky's importunities in the matter of translations. In the first place she translates mechanically, leaving all the real work to me, in the second, having delayed publication0 in the most deplorable way, she let the thing fall into the hands of the said louts.80 But we are now no longer in the position of having to hawk around our manuscripts. And now that I've written a preface0" for her into the bargain, something's evidently amiss just because the said preface is not to the liking of the Executive!

The Avelings have also had sympathetic messages and resolutions from the section in Springfield, Massachusetts; no doubt others will be coming in from the West during the next few days.

The Swiss government would seem—according to conservative English reports—to be preparing to move against the Zurich Sozialdemokrat.81 I have been expecting this ever since the war-like hubbub first arose; endanger his neutrality and your Swiss turns really nasty. However, it may yet blow over.

On the other hand it looks very much as though the 2 latest assassi- nation attempts in Russia77 have been the last straw. For a long time no one has had any faith in the government, and now they've lost faith in the Tsar as well. The army is full of discontented, conspiring officers. The Pan-Slavs82 want to place the half-brothere of the present Tsar/ the eldest son of Alexander II and la Dolgoruky on the throne. And the police are powerless against the Nihilists.83 According to the Frankfurter Zeitung, 482 officers were sent from Moscow via Odessa to the convict settlement on Sakhalin in the Pacific. I don't believe that it will last out the year, unless war provides a loophole, and even that might come too late. And once the fun begins in Russia, then hurrah!

Aveling's campaign among the Radical Clubs in London's East End is

a An English rendering of 'Waschlapski', the name of a character in Heine's poem Zwei Ritter - b See this volume, pp.15-20 - c Of the American edition of The Condition of the Working Class in England - d F. Engels, 'The Labor Movement in America' - e Georgi Alexandrovish Yurievsky - f Alexander III

