---
Volume: 48
Document_Title: "23. Engels to Paul Lafargue 11 April "
Page_Range: "59-60"
---

# 23. Engels to Paul Lafargue 11 April 



**[p. 47]**

making good progress.84 The relatively successful results obtained in the recent elections in Chicago and Cincinnati85 have been of great assis- tance to him here—John Bull has no wish to see himself outstripped by those fellows. It's the only foreign influence that is at all effective in this country. At the big Anti-Coercion meeting in Hyde Park the day after tomorrow, Aveling will be speaking from two and Tussy from one of the fifteen platforms.86 It promises to be one of those big meetings whereby the London working men make manifest a crisis in English politics. Incidentally, the German elections,15 too, have not failed to make an impact over here.

Are you moving to Rochester, or where?

Your

F. Engels

First published, slightly abridged, in Briefe und Auszüge aus Briefen von Joh. Phil. Becker, Jos. Dietzgen, Friedrich Engels, Karl Marx u. A. an F. A. Sorge und Andere, Stuttgart, 1906 and in full in: Marx and Engels, Works, First Russian Edition, Vol.,

XXVII, Moscow, 1935

Printed according to the original

Published in English in full for the first time

23

ENGELS TO PAUL LAFARGUE87

IN PARIS

London, 11 April 1887 122 Regent's Park Road. N. W.

My dear Lafargue,

You ask me, as the person charged with the execution of Karl Marx's last wishes in regard to his works, to give you formal authorisation to negotiate the publication of a new edition of Misere de la philosophie and his other works written in French.88 Although this seems hardly neces-

