---
Volume: 48
Document_Title: "24. Engels to Paul Lafargue 13 April "
Page_Range: "60-62"
---

# 24. Engels to Paul Lafargue 13 April 



**[p. 48]**

Yours ever,

F. Engels

First published, in the language of the Printed according to the original original (French), in F. Engels, P. et L. Lafargue, Correspondance, t. II, Paris, Translated from the French 1956

24

ENGELS TO PAUL LAFARGUE87

IN PARIS

London, 13 April 1887

My dear Lafargue,

Herewith the letter for your publisher.* I hope you will be successful this time but in any case make sure the copy is returned to you since I have no other to send you.88 Also negotiate for 20 to 25 free copies for us; we shall be sorely in need of them.

I shall send you the Daily Telegraph's report on the meeting of the day before yesterday, in which there in much talk of Tussy.86

Schorlemmer was there. It was undoubtedly the biggest meeting we have ever held here.

The New York affair24 is going very well. The gentlemen of the Executive Committee have done so many silly things that they have already scuppered themselves. It has been a very long business and a very tortuous one, but we no longer have anything to fear from that quarter.

You must have a high opinion of Mr Sonnenschein if you suppose that we have at our disposal copies of the article by Aveling and Tussy. I have only seen the proofs, but I shall ask Tussy to have a copy sent me for you.89 They'll have to pay for it; Sonnenschein treats his authors as though they were mere clerks.

[^1]: a See previous letter





**[p. 1956]**

Impossible to press for the appearance of your article in Time—Price is in the midst of leaving Swan & Sonnenschein, says it is his partner Lowrey who is running the review—a man we have never set eyes on. If only you knew the confusion and disorder that reign in that business, you'd be far more patient.

Put yourself forward as candidate in any case, whether or no you stand a chance.90 It is something you have got to go through, especially in Paris and especially now that you have managed once again to kill off all your periodicals.91 There's nothing else you can do, for agitation involves keeping oneself in the public eye. With 10,000 francs you can maintain a weekly paper for a long time, and you ought to be able to raise that sum. Come to that, I hope that revolution in Russia will relieve your difficul- ties and will set Europe in motion. Three assassination attempts in thirty days92—enough, I should have thought, even for a Tsar.a According to the English press, even the pro-Russian, everything is topsy-turvy in Russia; faith in the power of the administration has been shattered, the army teems with Nihilists83—482 officers exiled to the island of Sakhalin (Pacific)b—, while the peasants, crushed by emancipation,93 taxation and usury, have been dealt a mortal blow in the shape of compulsory military service on the Prussian system.78 Add to that the permanent financial crisis, the paper ruble worth 2 fr. 8 or 9 centimes instead of 4, American and Indian competition in corn and not a banker in Europe prepared to lend—such a state of affairs cannot last out the year!

Schorlemmer sends his regards. A kiss to Laura, to whom I shall be writing,

Yours ever, F.E.

First published in the language of the Printed according to the original original (French), in F. Engels, P. et L. Lafargue, Correspondance, t. II, Paris, Translated from the French

[^1]: a This refers to Alexander III - b See this volume, p.46



