---
Volume: 48
Document_Title: "25. Engels to Friedrich Adolph Sorge 23 April "
Page_Range: "62-64"
---

# 25. Engels to Friedrich Adolph Sorge 23 April 



**[p. 25]**

ENGELS T O FRIEDRICH A D O L P H SORGE 5 3

IN HOBOKEN

London, 23 April 1887

Dear Sorge,

I wrote to you on the 9th inst.a Postcard and packages received with thanks. The publication in the Volkszeitung of my preface12 in a trans- lation made over there is doubly scandalous. Firstly because I wish to have nothing to do with the paper so long as it goes on behaving so despicably towards Aveling. Secondly, however, because I cannot approve of my English works being rendered into German by a stranger, especially when the said stranger makes a mass of mistakes and misconstrues the most important passages. The person13 has had my preface since the beginning of February (posted on 27 January)0 and in the only letter I have received since then, dated 19 March, postmarked 8 April, she merely mentions her intention of bringing out a German edition and asks for my assent—she knew I had no copy here. I wrote at once76 asking her to return me the original so that I could translate it; there are passages in it where every word must be meticulously weighed. And meanwhile she has been conniving with Jonas & Co. behind my back.

This is the last straw. It's utterly impossible to work with someone who keeps on playing such tricks.

But there's one more thing she's got coming to her. Her last long letter about the Aveling affair24 may be summed up in one word: abominable. An attempt by someone who is weak, who is swayed by every puff of wind, to uphold the Tightness of a cause she herself knows to be rotten. I shall reply to her next week con amore. A person like that mustn't imagine that I can be bamboozled like a baby.

Hyndman's letter to The Standard^ is both pitiful and pusillanimous.

[^1]: I immediately protested. You should ask her to show you my letter.76

[^2]: a See this volume, pp.45-7 - b Florence Kelley-Wischnewetzky - c See this volume pp.8-9 - d H.M. Hyndman, 'England's Democracy', The Standard, 9 April 1887





**[p. 51]**

In the Socialist League, too, matters are slowly approaching a crisis. At Whitsun the delegates hold their conference when a decision will, I hope, be reached in the struggle with the anarchist elements who have wormed their way in and have Morris as a supporter.95

In Germany there are reprisals upon reprisals.96 It's as though Bismarck wants to get everything ready so that when revolution breaks out in Russia, in what is now probably only a matter of months, the fun can likewise begin in Germany.

Your

F. E.

First published, slightly abridged, in Briefe und Auszüge aus Briefen von Job. Phil. Becker, Jos. Dietzgen, Friedrich Engels, Karl Marx u. A. an F. A. Sorge und Andere, and in full in: Marx and Engels, Works, First Russian

Edition, Vol. XXVII, Moscow, 1935

Printed according to the original

Published in English in full for first time

