---
Volume: 48
Document_Title: "27. Engels to Laura Lafargue 26 April "
Page_Range: "64-67"
---

# 27. Engels to Laura Lafargue 26 April 



**[p. 26]**

ENGELS TO NIKOLAI DANIELSON

IN ST PETERSBURG

London, 24 April 1887

Dear Sir,

I write these few lines to inform you—in haste—of the safe arrival of the 2 packages registered with letters3 and your letter of the 7th April old style to advise us of their having been forwarded. There was no hurry in sending them, yet I am thankful to you for having entrusted me with these valuable relics which I shall read with the greatest interest, make use of for ulterior purposes, and always hold at your disposal.

Yours faithfully

P. W. Rosher39

First published, in Russian, in Reproduced from the original Minuvshiye gody, No. 2, 1908

Published in English for the first time

27

IN PARIS

London, 26 April 1887

My dear Laura,

My congratulations to Paul le candidat du Jardin des Plantes—et des animaux. Being, in his quality as a nigger, a degree nearer to the rest of

[^1]: ENGELS T O LAURA LAFARGUE 4 0

[^2]: a This refers to Karl Marx's letters to Danielson - b the candidate for the Botanical Gardens—and the animals





**[p. 53]**

That Stanton of yours seems to be an out-and-out Yankee. But the cutest Yankee in Europe is as often and as much out of his element as the toughest Polish Jew. They misjudge the people they have to deal with.97

The New York Executive have launched in their despair another circular against Aveling saying that his statements are lies, yet making very important admissions in our favour.98 We shall of course reply. But the affair is practically ended, the Executive are themselves accused in New York as swindlers and liars in another affair and on their trial before the New York sections; so that whatever they have said, say, or may say, loses all importance. In the meantime the Aufsichtsbehörde^ of the American party appeals to them (to Edward and Tussy) to let the matter drop, and from very many places they receive very nice letters both from Americans and Germans. So that matter is virtually settled.

Edward and Tussy's agitation in the East End clubs is going on very favourably. The American example has its effects; it at last offers a handle to stir up the English working people.84

In the League21 the Anarchists are on the decline, as everywhere when they are seriously handled instead of being trifled with. Their last proposal yesterday in the Council was, that at the Conference of Delegates95 all vérification des mandats should be suppressed and anybody accepted who said he was a delegate—to allow them to manu- facture their usual bogus votes. This however was too much even for Morris; yet a minority of five was found to vote for such nonsense!

[^1]: a beasts - b auditing committee





**[p. 54]**

'Pourra être poursuivi selon les lois pénales de l'empire allemand: 1) un étranger qui aura commis, à l'étranger {en pays étranger) un acte de haute trahison contre l'empire allemand ou contre un des états fédérés, ou qui aura fait de la fausse monnaie.'*

To apply this article to anybody but a political refugee not naturalised abroad, must produce a collision with the country of the man prose- cuted. No nation in its senses will stand such treatment and if they tried it upon an Englishman, the most peaceable minister would be compelled to send at once the British fleet to the German coast. Therefore this looks as if Bismarck wanted to place France between war or humiliation. For that he was ignorant of the warrant against Schnaebelé is impossible. And yet the state of Europe is such that a war would be, for Bismarck, to play va banque. The man must be completely mad to act thus. Perhaps a few days more will give a clue. I really cannot imagine him to be such a consummate ass.

Enclosed the cheque Paul writes for £12. Nim is well—was at the theatre last night with Pumps—going again this week to the Princess's—with Edward's ticket. Beer is flowing plen- tiful—I consume fully 2 bottles a day and march three miles, and for the last few Sundays have taken a glass of Port—voila, du progrès^

Bien à vous, je vous embrasse

F. Engels

First published, in the language of the Reproduced from the original original (English), in F. Engels, P. et L. Lafargue, Correspondance, t. II, Paris, 1956

[^1]: a 'Liable to prosecution under the penal laws of the German Empire is: 1) a foreigner who has committed, abroad (in a foreign country), an act of high trea- son against the German Empire or against any one of the federated States, or who has manufactured forged money.' - there's progress for you



