---
Volume: 48
Document_Title: "29. Engels to Eduard Bernstein 5 May "
Page_Range: "69-72"
---

# 29. Engels to Eduard Bernstein 5 May 



**[p. 57]**

This comes with my best wishes and my hopes for your speedy recovery. Yesterday the Avelings and I were in America, i.e. in Buffalo Bill's camp104—very nice.

Your

First published, slightly abridged, in Briefe und Auszüge aus Briefen von Job. Phil. Becker, Jos. Dietzgen, Friedrich Engels, Karl Marx u. A. an F. A. Sorge und Andere, Stuttgart, 1906, and in full in: Marx and Engels, Works, First Russian Edition, Vol.

F. Engels

XXVII, Moscow, 1935

Printed according to the original

Published in English in full for the first time

29

ENGELS TO EDUARD BERNSTEIN

IN ZURICH

London, 5 May 1887

Dear Ede,

You're the most incorrigible Hamlet I have ever come across. You are aware that Kautsky and I keep completely aloof from the local German goings-on here105 and have to do so if all our time is not to be wasted on piffling tittle-tattle. You are aware that we haven't got a single spokesman in the local association because all these people are involved in embittered feuds of the pettiest kind.106 So if we do anything at all in this matter, it will cause a stir, the chaps will want to know the whys and wherefores, and the next day it will be the gossip of all the anarchist clubs. If you were to come over here, a visit to the club and a chat there would at once put you in a position to find out all you want within the



**[p. 58]**

There's nothing about the Babeuf affair in Avenel's Lundis*0 or Anarchasis Cloots.—Yes, there is—pp. 42 and 94.107—So I shall send you the Lundis by registered post. Please let me have it back soon, i.e. in about a fortnight, since I need the book for reference and can't very well dispense with it. I used to have the main source, namely Buonarroti's Conspiration de Babeuf, in an English translation0 brought out by the Chartists but, like so much else, it has been pinched; I have had another good look for it, but without result.

As regards the Russians, there is a point that ought now to be stressed but of which I have nowhere seen any mention.108 All over Europe reac- tionaries are fuming about Nihilist regicide83 and the use of dynamite in particular, special objects of odium being Russian revolutionaries, whose extradition to Russia they are demanding not without success, even in America. But what is the Russian government up to? In Sofia it gets Alexander Battenberg deposed and, if he wasn't shot in the process, this was thanks solely to his own ineptitude.109 In Bucharest it instigates assassination attempts on Bulgarian civil governors.d And, lastly—some four weeks ago in Sofia—it gets a dynamite bomb thrown at the house of Major Popoff,e the commandant or whatever he is.110 So everything the Russian government reproaches the Nihilists with and for which it demands their extradition as common criminals, it is itself doing through the medium of its notorious agents in Bulgaria. We must demand that, in respect of these specifically Russian modes of procedure, the same stan- dards should be applied to revolutionaries and government alike. This is already felt fairly generally, but it is important that it be said—and pretty loudly at that.

The Schnaebelé affair" was obviously a put-up job to get Boulanger into difficulties. The only person to have got the story right, and this as much as a fortnight ago, was Mother Crawford, the Paris correspondent of the Daily News and the Weekly Dispatch, as is confirmed by Bismarck's dispatch.

a poor - b G. Avenel, Lundis révolutionnaires, 1871-1874 - c Buonarroti, History of Babeufs Conspiracy for Equality, London, 1836 - d This refers to an attempt on Mantoff - e Panoff in the ms



**[p. 59]**

In confidence. Should la Schack return to Switzerland, it might be better not to confide in her too much. She is endowed with an excess of energy which is not always channeled in the right direction. On the one hand she seeks out the liberals from amongst her former acquaintances, on the other her chosen companions are the anarchists among the English workers over here. I personally have no objection to her moving in any circle she pleases, and she herself is a very nice, intelligent and amusing person, but the very fact of her choosing just now, on the eve of a clash with the anarchists in the League (at the Whitsun delegates' conference95), to consort with the latter—so much so that the others already call her the Anarchist Countess—is something that must be taken into account. Strictly between ourselves, however, I think she is, all in all, pretty innocuous.

Aveling and Tussy are conducting a splendid propaganda campaign in the East End Radical Clubs,84 which have been galvanised into life by the example of America and are now seriously thinking of forming an independent labour party. The chaps came to Aveling of their own accord and that's an excellent sign. Should we succeed in gaining a firm foothold there, the Social Democratic Federation62 and the Socialist League21 will both be pushed into the background, and a start will have been made on the conquest of London. What is immediately at stake in this instance is a dozen parliamentary seats—these clubs have hitherto been a source of strength to the Liberals here. And even Hyndman has seen the red light, which is why he is repeating in Justice the calumnies levelled against Aveling by the New York Executive.103 This is just what we want for the furtherance of our campaign. But you can see how diffi- cult our work over here is being made by the lubberly calumnies of the wretched New York Executive.

Your

F. E.

First published, in Russian, in Marx- Printed according to the original Engels Archives, Vol. I, Moscow, 1924

Published in English for the first time

[^1]: Mumma,1 who is here at the moment, sends her regards.

[^2]: a Louise Kautsky



