---
Volume: 48
Document_Title: "31. Engels to Friedrich Adolph Sorge 7 May "
Page_Range: "73-75"
---

# 31. Engels to Friedrich Adolph Sorge 7 May 



**[p. 61]**

I remain, dear Mrs Wischnewetzky,

very sincerely yours

F. Engels

First published, slightly abridged, in and in full in: Marx and Engels, the language of the original (English), Works, First Russian Edition, Vol. in Briefe und Auszüge aus Briefen von XXVII, Moscow, 1935 Joh. Phil. Becker, Jos. Dietzgen,

Friedrich Engels, Karl Marx u. A. an F, Reproduced from the original A. Sorge und Andere, Stuttgart, 1906

31

ENGELS TO FRIEDRICH ADOLPH SORGE29

IN HOBOKEN

London, 7 May 1887

Dear Sorge,

I wrote to you on the 4thc and have received yours of 26 April. Very many thanks for your reports, which I feel sure must have been written while you were suffering from severe physical tribulations. As to the bit

[^1]: a Anti-Socialist Law - b Die Volksbuchhandlung in Zürich (the People's Bookshop in Zurich) - c See this volume, p.55





**[p. 62]**

I'm particularly pleased that Mr Jonas has had to eat humble pie.113

Considering his jealousy of the Executive in the business sphere, he was the last person one would have expected to bestir himself on their behalf and, precisely because he knew he had burnt his fingers, he has behaved as shabbily as could be throughout the whole episode.

Friend Liebknecht, too, is suddenly proving reluctant 'to break with the Executive'. As to the $8,000 that has been sent, the Executive is trying to use it as a bribe, nor could the Germans possibly stand up to such people! However I have put a pistol to the head of the worthy Liebknecht, who has grown anxious all of a sudden not to fall out with either side, and he'll come round all right. If he hadn't made such fools of us, our reply to Circular II would have long since been ready.98 But it is not really so urgent and should clinch the matter. We have won, thanks to your support and all you have done; without you we should still be a long way from where we are now. What a good thing that we old chaps can still depend on one another.

Your

F. Engels

[^1]: a See previous letter - b Father, I have sinned



