---
Volume: 48
Document_Title: "32. Engels to Pasquale Martignetti 21 May "
Page_Range: "75-77"
---

# 32. Engels to Pasquale Martignetti 21 May 



**[p. 63]**

32

ENGELS TO PASQUALE MARTIGNETTI

IN BENEVENTO

London, 21 May 1887

Dear Citizen Martignetti,

I'm glad to be able to inform you that my efforts on your behalf have not been entirely unsuccessful.8 Johannes Wedde, editor of the (soc.) Bürger-Zeitung in Hamburg, has written to me as follows:

'A businessman here (cotton firm), who is a personal friend of mine and has no political prejudices, may perhaps have an opening for Martignetti, though only a modest one to begin with. However he would like Martignetti to send a photograph first. I find this rather odd—as does my friend himself—but it is necessary on practical grounds. It would be a good idea if the photograph were sent to this gentleman by Martignetti in person, together with a letter of recom- mendation. His name is Johannes Paul, of the firm of Paul & Steinberg, Alterwall 58.'

So if you want to find out whether a post is available there, you would be well-advised to send Mr Paul your photograph. Overleaf is the draft of a letter for you to send him, worded in conformity with German commercial usage. I would remind you not to engage in any overt polit- ical activity while in Hamburg, because if you do you will certainly be expelled. The position of socialists in Germany gets worse every day and further coercive legislation is in the offing. O n the other hand this may



**[p. 64]**

My eye seems to be getting better at last. But I can't yet turn my mind to serious work, so your manuscript* is still in abeyance.

With kindest regards,

Ever yours,

F. Engels

To Johannes Paul, Hamburg.

I was pleased to learn through Mr Joh. Wedde that there is a prospect of my securing employment with your esteemed firm but that you would like to see my photograph first. I enclose same herewith and would mention that for the past (il numéro degli annih) years I have been employed in the Royal Notary's Office here. I should be greatly obliged if you would be so good as to furnish me with particulars of the work I should be required to do and of any other conditions. Were the prospect of this post to materialise, I should gladly do all in my power to discharge my new duties in accordance with your wishes. With sincere thanks for your sympathetic interest.

I am, Sir,

Your obedient servant, P.M.

Herrn Johannes Paul in Firma Paul & Steinberg Alterwall 58 Hamburg Germania

First published, in the language of the original (German), in La corrispon- denza di Marx e Engels con italiani. 1848-1895, Milano, 1964

Printed according to the original

Published in English for the first time

[^1]: E l'indirizzo esteriore0

[^2]: a of the Italian translation of Karl Marx's Wage Labour and Capital - b number of years - c Address envelope



