---
Volume: 48
Document_Title: "33. Engels to Laur a Lafargue 21 May "
Page_Range: "77-78"
---

# 33. Engels to Laur a Lafargue 21 May 



**[p. 33]**

ENGELS TO LAURA LAFARGUE40

IN PARIS

London, 21 May 1887

My dear Laura,

A few words in a hurry. There is hope of a place for Martignetti in Hamburg—correspondence about this has kept me busy to-day.a You will have seen injustice how Hyndman has tried to bring out Edward's American bother,103 but has apparently got more than he expectedb—his retreat in this week's No. is undignified enough.114 A 3rd Circular on this affair is in the printer's hands.1151 have had some droll correspon- dence with Liebknecht about the letter from him it will publish. In New York we are completely victorious and that is the chief point; and our final circular I hope will settle the business.

Paul's success is though externally negative, still quite satisfactory.90

Only the ballotage seems to have been attempted on rather too Parisian grounds. However it gives him a better standing for the future.

I confess the success of Brousse and Co. is inconceivable to me.116 It is no use crying after a new 'journal quotidien c after having been kicked out of ever so many and after having secured so little permanent effect out of it while our friends had it.91 But all the same the next best thing to a victory of our people is the entry of Brousse and Co. into the City Council—there they will have to show what they are. Cremer, Howell and Co. were never lower in London than now since they are in Parliament.

My congratulations to Paul for having cudgelled one of his electors. Ça doit avoir produit un effete

My eye is considerably better since I have taken to smoke different cigars. There was the determining cause of the whole affair. You may laugh but I shall as soon as I have time explain to Paul medicinally that the thing was entirely caused by applying too much guano to the tobacco-fields of the Vuelta Abajo, Of course I have to be very careful still, limit reading and writing. I am rather curious to see how the Ministerial crisis in France will end117—unless it brings in Clemenceau,

[^1]: 1 See previous letter - b See 'Dr Aveling and the Socialist Labour Party in America', Justice, No. 174, 14 May 1887 - c daily newspaper - d This must have created a stir



