---
Volume: 48
Document_Title: "34. Engels to Karl Kautsky 27 May "
Page_Range: "78-79"
---

# 34. Engels to Karl Kautsky 27 May 



**[p. 66]**

Edward and Tussy speak to-day in an open air meeting in Victoria Park, Hackney; the weather was boisterous and wet though, showery up to 4 p.m., now better. Don't know the hour of meeting, but hope it's late in the afternoon. Their agitation in the East End is going on quietly and steadily.84 Next Sunday Delegate Conference of the League.95 Will decide its fate. Both League and Federation62 are in a bad way; Hyndman is in very bad odour again amongst his lot, has fallen out with Champion, and Burns goes about preaching an independent union of the working men of both societies leaving Hyndman, Morris, Aveling and Co. to fight out their quarrels themselves.

So much for to-day - the implacable Nim calls with the dinner-bell.

Affectionately yours

F. Engels

First published, in the language of II. Paris, 1956 the original (English), in, F. Engels, P. et L. Lafargue, Correspondance, t. Reproduced from the original

34

IN LONDON

London, Friday 27 May 1887

I shall finish the translation of the preface to the English Lage, etc. tomorrow.111 If you would like to have it and can get a copy done by Tuesday evening, I shall gladly place it at your disposal. A good part of it can be picked up early tomorrow, Saturday, if necessary—Nim will know what to do, should early prove to be all too early.

Your

F. E.

[^1]: ENGELS T O KARL KAUTSKY118



