---
Volume: 48
Document_Title: "38. Engels to Friedrich Adolph Sorge 4 June "
Page_Range: "81-85"
---

# 38. Engels to Friedrich Adolph Sorge 4 June 



**[p. 37]**

ENGELS TO FLORENCE KELLEY-WISCHNEWETZKY120

IN NEW YORK

London, 31 May 1887

Dear Mrs Wischnewetzky,

I have just mailed to you, registered, the translation of the preface.111

It will also be published in the Sozialdemokrat.3To-day I received per post 12 copies of the bookb which I was very glad of and for which please accept my best thanks. The book looks better than I was led to expect, I have not as yet had time to look at the contents.

Very truly yours—in haste

F. Engels

First published, in the language of the Engels, Karl Marx u. A. an F A. Sorge original (English), in Briefe und und Andere, Stuttgart, 1906 Auszüge aus Briefen von Job. Phil. Becker, Jos. Dietzgen, Friedrich Reproduced from the original

38

ENGELS TO FRIEDRICH ADOLPH SORGE121

IN HOBOKEN

London, 4 June 1887

Dear Sorge,

No movement causes so much fruitless work as one that is still at the sectarian stage. You know that as well as I do. For everything then still revolves round tittle-tattle. As will this letter about English affairs.

a See F. Engels, 'Die Arbeiterbewegung in Amerika', Der Sozialdemokrat, Nos 24 and 25, 10 and 17 June 1887 - ^ the American edition of Engels' The Condition of the Working Class in England



**[p. 70]**

What really clinched the matter was Morris' declaration that he would quit the moment any parliamentary action was accepted in prin- ciple. And since Morris makes good the Commonweal's deficit to the tune of £4 a week, this was for many the decisive factor.

Our people now intend to get the provinces organised, which they are at present well on the way to doing, and to call an extraordinary confer- ence in about three or four months' time with a view to quashing the above. But it's unlikely to succeed; in the fabrication of voting sections, the anarchists are vastly superior to ourselves and can make eight enfranchised sections out of seven men. But nevertheless the farce is not without its good points and, having regard to the mood of the working men in the League, it was unavoidable. Bax is for us, of course, and, of the working men, Donald, Binning and Mahon amongst others—the best. None of ours stood for election to the Executive Council. The anarchists, by the way, may shortly throw our people out, and that might be all to the good.

The main thing is that, with the emergence of a genuine labour move- ment in the offing, our people should not be shackled with an organisa- tion which lays claim to the leadership of the whole—à la Executive in New York and the Social Democratic Federation62 over here. Everywhere in the provinces the workers are organising local associa- tions (socialist) independently of London. They have a tremendous contempt for everything that hails from London.

Now for some further tittle-tattle. Hardly had we finished dealing with the New York Executive115 than Mother Schack wrote to say she could no longer frequent my house because unable to meet Aveling, against whom there were grave imputations far more serious than the

a 'The Socialist League', Commonweal, No. 73, 4 June 1887



**[p. 71]**

I am bothering you with this only because la Schack will undoubtedly write to her bosom friend, Mrs Wischnewetzky, expatiating on the subject, and people might come pestering you about it. All this tittle- tattle emanates from pious souls enraged by the fact that Aveling, the son of a parson of high repute (Congregationalist)a'122—with whom, by the by, he was on the best of terms until his death not long ago—had joined in Bradlaugh's disreputable atheist campaign; and now that Aveling has gone over to socialism, it is being gleefully redisseminated by Bradlaugh & Co. It revolves round two points, first the fact that his first wife lives apart from him and runs him down—she left him for a parson—and, secondly, his being up to his eyes in debt. He contracted those debts 1. through being stupid enough to endorse substantial bills for Bradlaugh's printer out of sheer willingness to oblige, and all unaware that Bradlaugh had sacked the man, thus forcing him into bankruptcy; 2. because, in company with Bradlaugh, he had set up a physiological laboratory and schoolb in Newman St, and the crafty Bradlaugh—a former attorney's clerk—had so arranged matters as to place sole legal responsibility on Aveling. When things went wrong and it came to a split between Aveling and Bradlaugh, it was easy for the latter to encumber Aveling with all the liabilities while himself openly appropriating all the assets. Aveling has now got to go on discharging these debts till he's blue in the face. He is as easy to diddle in money-matters as a three-year-old—only appeal to his sense of honour and he'll do anything you want. And as always, it's those people who are honourable to the point of absurdity when it comes to money, who are reviled as swindlers. All this la Schack could have learned from me simply by asking. But that wouldn't have suited her book. It was something quite different she was after.

La Schack—in other respects a sociable, amusing person—is intent on cutting a figure, à tout prix. Having been pushed into our party as a result

[^1]: a Thomas Aveling - b the Science School





**[p. 72]**

And with that, goodbye for today. By the same post I am sending off a parcel containing I To-Day, 2 Commonweals, I Gleichheit, 5 English and 5 German copies of Aveling's circular.115

Your

F. Engels

First published, slightly abridged, in Edition, Vol. XXVII, Moscow, 1935 Briefe und Auszüge aus Briefen von Job. Phil. Becker, Jos. Dietzgen, Printed according to the original Friedrich Engels, Karl Marx u. A. and F. A Sorge und Andere, P u b l i s h e d i n E lish in full for t h e Stuttgart, 1906 and in full in Marx ^ time and Engels, Works, First Russian

See Der Sozialdemokrat, No. 30, 22 July 1887 - b 1 June

[^1]: I have now sent Mrs Wischnewetzky the preface in German111 by registered post (Wednesday'sb steamer).



