---
Volume: 48
Document_Title: "40. Engels to Jules Guesde 11 June "
Page_Range: "87-88"
---

# 40. Engels to Jules Guesde 11 June 



**[p. 40]**

ENGELS TO JULES GUESDE

IN PARIS

London, 11 June 1887 122 Regent's Park Road, N. W.

Dear Citizen Guesde,

I would gladly lend a hand in getting the 18th Brumaire* published in the resuscitated Socialiste,23 but to this there are two minor obstacles.

In the first place, as you know, it was intended that, at the time of its publication in the Socialiste, the Communist Manifesto^ should also appear in book form.123 For reasons which are not known to me, that edition never appeared, and I should like to be assured that such a thing will not recur.

In the second place—and this is a matter of far greater moment—I am prevented by eye-trouble, which has been dragging on for the past six months, from taking on any literary commitments at the present time. And, since a great deal still remains to be done before the translation is completed, it is ten to one that printing will be held up and that we shall miss the boat altogether.

Hence I would ask you to allow the matter to drop, for the time being at any rate; later on, when I am again fit for work, we might discuss it further.

With best wishes for the success of the Socialiste,

Yours very sincerely

F. Engels

First published, in the language of the original (French), in Friedrich Engels 1820-1970. Referate. Discussionen. Dokumente, Hanover, 1971

Printed acording to the original

Translated from the French

Published in English for the first time

a K. Marx, The Eighteenth Brumaire of Louis Bonaparte - b K. Marx and F. Engels, Manifesto of the Communist Party

