---
Volume: 48
Document_Title: "43. Engels to Friedrich Adolph Sorge 18 June "
Page_Range: "90-92"
---

# 43. Engels to Friedrich Adolph Sorge 18 June 



**[p. 43]**

ENGELS T O FRIEDRICH A D O L P H SORGE 1 2 5

IN HOBOKEN

London, 18 June 1887

Dear Sorge,

I shall send this letter to Rochester or better still, perhaps—to abide strictly by your instructions—to Hoboken.

Postcard received. You guessed aright. The delay was all Wilhelm V fault and I have had to hold a pistol to his head. Meanwhile you will have had the circulars (6 English, 6 German), sent off in my parcel of 4 June.

End of the Schack affair: after I had thanked her heartily for propos- ing not to visit me any more, Tussy and Aveling went to see her on Friday, 10 June. She received only Tussy, who demanded to know what facts she had to adduce against Aveling, and upon what evidence.— Reply again refused.—Tussy observes:-—Mrs Kautsky being present— That's a filthy thing to do.—La Schack: I won't let anyone speak to me like that.—Tussy: In that case, I shall repeat, here in the presence of Louise Kautsky, that to bring charges against someone else and not have the courage to substantiate them is a filthy thing to do.—Thereupon la Schack flounced out of her own bedroom, where this was taking place, and that was the last Tussy saw of her. A few days later she left for Germany. She is one of the most vulgar scandalmongers I have ever known, typical Prussian Junker aristo.

I shall for the time being go on sending you the Commonweal because of the debate between Bax and Bradlaugh.126 Bax will hardly get the better of the crafty Bradlaugh—in the eyes of the public at large. He is very talented, studies a lot, but is still deeply immersed in German philosophy, which he will, no doubt, get over in the long run, but has as yet by no means digested.

In the interests of accuracy I should rectify the assertion in my last letter about Aveling's first wife running away with a parsonb; in fact, they separated by mutual consent, so I shall let the matter of the said parson—although he did play some part in the affair—rest at that.

[^1]: a Liebknecht - b See this volume, p.71





**[p. 79]**

Yesterday the Irish Coercion Bill was whipped through the House of Commons, clause by clause, in two minutes.86 It is a worthy companion- piece to the Anti-Socialist Law.52 Arbitrary powers for the police, no less. Things regarded as fundamental rights in England are forbidden in Ireland and become crimes. It will be the death-knell of the present Tories, whom I wouldn't have thought so stupid, and of the Unionist Liberals,127 whom I should hardly have thought so base. What's more, the Bill is to remain in force, not just for a time but for ever. The English Parliament has descended to the level of the German Reichstag. Not that it's likely to last very long.

It will soon be time to publish Marx's letter to you about Henry George.128 Maybe after next November's elections in New York when George is again throwing his weight about there.129 He should be given enough latitude, either to develop further or to run to seed, the latter course being evidently the one he prefers.

Another parcel will be going off to you. I have not yet had the last Commonweal; will follow shortly. I hope a rest in Rochester will soon put you to rights again. In this marvellous weather the enforced idleness, due to the condition of my eye, suits me very well. Let's hope it goes on like this.

Your

First published, slightly abridged, in Briefe und Auszüge aus Briefen von Joh. Phil. Becker, Jos. Dietzgen, Friedrich Engels, Karl Marx u. A. an F. A. Sorge und Andere, Stuttgart, 1906 and in full in: Marx and Engels, Works, First Russian Edition, Vol.

XXVII, Moscow, 1935

Printed according to the original

Published in English in full for the first time

[^1]: F. E.



