---
Volume: 48
Document_Title: "47. Engels to Friedrich Adolph Sorge 30 June "
Page_Range: "94-97"
---

# 47. Engels to Friedrich Adolph Sorge 30 June 



**[p. 82]**

As to the League, if it upholds the resolution1 of the last Conference,95

I do not see how anyone can remain a member who intends using the present political machinery as a means of propaganda and action.

In the meantime it is necessary, of course, that the propaganda be kept up and I am quite willing to contribute my share. But the means for this must be got together and distributed by some English Committee, and as far as they are to come from London, by a London Committee. I shall speak to the Avelings about this and give them my contribution.

I do not know any books where you could get information about the Luddite movement133; it will be a laborious task to trace out reliable sources from the references in history books and pamphlets of the time.

Yours faithfully

F. Engels

First published in: Marx and Engels, Reproduced from the original Works, First Russian Edition, Vol. XXVII, Moscow, 1935

47

ENGELS TO FRIEDRICH ADOLPH SORGE49

IN MOUNT DESERT

London, 30 June 1887

Dear Sorge,

[^1]: Have received letters, etc., up to 16 June. I shall write and tell the Wischnewetzkys76 to word the note thus: 'to

[^2]: a See 'The Socialist League', The Commonweal, No. 73, 4 June 1887





**[p. 83]**

Aveling sends the enclosed postcard re Time.135 The copies will have gone to Rochester.

The business of Scribner's advertisement for Capital has the appear- ance of a deliberate piracy.136 Thanks for the information; I shall pass it on to Sonnenschein. So far as I know, Scribner is not Sonnenschein's agent in New York.

That the members of the Executive should have believed they had bought Liebknecht's silence with the electoral fundsa was predictable and not altogether unjustified. Luckily Liebknecht's first boastful letter had put him wholly in my power115 and of this, when he tried to with- draw, I made the most determined use.

Over here Hyndman has been continually defaming Aveling,103 in which he is strongly abetted by Aveling's reticence about such things. If we could catch the fellow out just once, he'd have cause to remember it. However, he is gradually bringing about his own demise. He's so wretchedly envious that he cannot tolerate a rival and is openly or secretly at war with all and sundry. And Aveling is at last eager for the fray and Tussy will see to it that he stays that way.

You mustn't forget what I told you about la Schack. The creature wants to come back and is partout determined to cut a figure over here. So it's better to know exactly what she's up to. The affair between her and the Wischnewetzkys caused the Kautskys and Avelings much glee; may very well have had something to do with her going over to the Anarchists so as to prove that she had finished with us. Liebknecht writes to say that, in a letter to Dresden, she came out with the shock- ing news that Aveling already had a previous wife from whom he was not divorced, and that he lived with Tussy without being married to her! So profound a secret is it in this country that any Englishman harbouring doubts on this score and desirous of making the Avelings' acquaintance, is informed of it by them in writing so that he cannot claim to have been kept in the dark and received under false pretences.

a See 'The Socialist League', The Commonweal, No. 73, 4 June 1887



**[p. 84]**

I have written to Lafargue76 telling him to send the Socialiste to you at Rochester, but have had no reply.

I trust the warm weather will put you to rights again. It is doing me a power of good. During these four weeks of drought I have had all my windows wide open and lived so to speak in the open air; I find it as good as a visit to a spa and am also hoping it will make my eyes better again.

I am sick to death of Father Mc Glynn and George is turning out to be a proper founder of sects. Not that I really expected anything else; considering how recent the movement is, however, this was a transi- tional stage that could hardly have been avoided. Such people must be given the length of their tether; the masses will learn only from the consequences of their own mistakes.

I wish you a good recovery and good weather in Mount Desert!

Your

F. Engels

First published, slightly abridged, in Briefe und Auszüge aus Briefen von Joh. Phil. Becker, Jos. Dietzgen, Friedrich Engls, Karl Marx u. A. an F. A. Sorge und Andere, Stuttgart, 1906, and, in full, in: Marx and Engels, Works, First Russian Edition, Vol.

XXVII, Moscow 1935

Printed according to the original

Published in English in full for the first time

