---
Volume: 48
Document_Title: "48. Engels to Laura Lafargue 15 July "
Page_Range: "97-98"
---

# 48. Engels to Laura Lafargue 15 July 



**[p. 1956]**

ENGELS T O LAURA LAFARGUE 4 0

IN PARIS

London, 15 July 1887

My dear Laura,

Thanks for your letters. I have Schorlemmer still here; a chronic catarrh of the stomach, the great heat, and the absence of a very pressing wish to revisit his dear country keep him here. Besides him, Fritz Beust from Zürich, whom you saw here eight years ago, has arrived too. So I must confine myself to urgent matters.

I was obliged to give a card of introduction (to Paul) to a young Dr Conrad Schmidt of Königsberg, who dabbles in question sociale. He is about the greenest youth I ever saw, he was here about 3 months, seems a decent fellow, as decent fellows go nowadays, frisst keine Schuhnägel und säuft keine Tinte? If Paul deposits him in rue Richelieu, Bibliothèque nationale, he will not trouble him much. He admires Zola in whom he has discovered the 'materialistische Geschichtsanschauung \h

The Boulanger fit of paroxysm137 ought to make our people demand again and again l'armement du peuple as the only guarantee against Caesaristic velleities on the part of popular generals. That is the only argument against the outcry of the Royalist press with regard to Boulanger being a danger to—the Republic they say, and the future monarchy they mean.

same as last year. If your Jersey trip is realised, let us know. I should not wonder if Tussy and Edward caught the Jersey fever.

Love from Nim, Jollymeier.

Yours affectionately

F. Engels

First published, in the language of the Reproduced from the original original (English), in F. Engels, P. et L. Lafargue, Correspondance, t. II, Paris,

[^1]: Saturday week, 23 July, we move to Eastbourne, 4 Cavendish Place,138

[^2]: a he eats no bootnails and drinks no ink - b materialist conception of history



