---
Volume: 48
Document_Title: "51. Engels to John Lincoln Mahon 26 July "
Page_Range: "99-100"
---

# 51. Engels to John Lincoln Mahon 26 July 



**[p. 87]**

Your

F. E.

First published in Ans der Frühzeit Printed according to the original des Marxismus. Engels Briefwechsel mit Kautsky, Prag, 1935, and in: Marx Published in English for the first time and Engels, Works, First Russian Edition, Vol. XXVII, Moscow, 1935

51

ENGELS TO JOHN LINCOLN MAHON130

IN LONDON

Eastbourne, 26 July 1887 4 Cavendish Place

Dear Mr Mahon,

Your postcard with address was forwarded to me here, hence the delay.

If your letter means anything, it means that you intend, as far as you can, to shove Aveling entirely out of the movement.141 If you decline to work along with Aveling on public grounds, you are bound to come out with them, so as either to enable Aveling to clear himself or to free the movement from a dangerous and false co-operator. If not, then you are bound, in my opinion, to set aside your personal feelings in the interest of the movement.

Of all the various Socialist groups in England, what is now the 'oppo- sition' in the League,21 was the only one with which so far I could thor- oughly sympathise. But if that group is allowed to fall to pieces from mere personal whims and squabbles, or from mutual suspicions and insinuations which are carefully kept away from the light of day, it can only dissolve into a number of small cliques held together by personal motives, and utterly unfit to take any sort of lead in a really national movement. And I do not see on what grounds I should sympathise with

