---
Volume: 48
Document_Title: "52. Engels to Karl Kautsky 1 August "
Page_Range: "100-101"
---

# 52. Engels to Karl Kautsky 1 August 



**[p. 88]**

I have no right to ask you why you refuse to co-operate with Aveling. But as you have worked with him for years,142 he has, and therefore I consider myself bound to communicate your letter to him.

Yours sincerely

F. Engels

First published in: Marx and Engels, Reproduced from the original Works, First Russian Edition, Vol. XXVII, Moscow, 1935

52

ENGELS T O KARL KAUTSKY

IN VENTNOR

Eastbourne, 1 August 1887

Dear Kautsky,

I return Mandl herewith; signature overleaf.143 I'm glad you like Ventnor. It is lovely here too, except for the Bank Holiday144 today, besides which Bax has set up his headquarters here for a week and cate- chises me for an hour and a half every morning with the conscien- tiousness of an American interviewer. Schorlemmer was here until last Saturday when he went off to Germany. F. Beust leaves on Thursday.

So far as I remember, when dealing with the iron law of wages neither Mandl nor L. Frankel correctly emphasised its elastic rather than iron character.145 And, while Lassalle may sometimes formulate the law more or less correctly,146 he is wont to apply it in practice in such a way as to declare the minimum wage to be the normal wage.

It's very difficult to write here, with four people sitting at one's back, chatting and drinking beer. So good cheer and goodbye.

Warmest regards from us all,

Your

F. E.

