---
Volume: 48
Document_Title: "54. Engels to Friedrich Adolph Sorge 8 August "
Page_Range: "102-104"
---

# 54. Engels to Friedrich Adolph Sorge 8 August 



**[p. 54]**

ENGELS TO FRIEDRICH ADOLPH SORGE121

IN MOUNT DESERT

Eastbourne, 8 August 1887

Dear Sorge,

All postcards, letters and packages up to 27 July gratefully received, save for a few newspapers which are still in London and awaited daily. We have been here for a fortnight and shall be staying until about the 25th of this month.138 It's terribly hot, hardly a drop of rain since the 1st of June, in other words an American summer. There's only one remedy for your leg, rest and patience; then, with any luck, it will get well again, but at our age things of this sort always drag on for the devil of a long time.

Let Monsieur Grunzig see what sort of a job he can make of a biog- raphy of myself.148 You were quite right to leave the man to his own resources; who knows what rubbish he might not have written on the strength of your notes, only to cite you as his authority. Kautsky has written a biographical piece about me which is appearing in the Österre- ichischer Arbeiter-Kalender1^ and which I have read over, corrected and added to; hence, so far as the facts are concerned, it can serve for any future eventuality and I shall send it to you. Needless to say, I am not responsible for anything else that may be in it.

I had to do most of the proof-correcting of Das Kapital I, 3rd ed., while ill in bed so that various mistakes slipped through. The punctua- tion was deliberately altered to approximate to the French and English, as is now largely done in Germany. For that matter, the only place where the old pedagogic German of our boyhood days is still taught and writ- ten is America.

Aveling has told me that he himself sent you the copy of Time.89 But if only one halfpenny stamp too few is affixed to a parcel of books for abroad it will be withheld by the English post office. I shall make further inquiries on my return.—Aveling and Tussy are having a holiday at Stratford-on-Avon, Shakespeare's birthplace.

The business of the Wischnewetzkys is becoming ever more of a joke.149 In Germany an Executive such as this would have long since been removed from office. The chaps would seem to think that they can



**[p. 91]**

Mount Desert is undoubtedly very beautiful, but this place isn't to be sneezed at either—long avenues of ancient elms and oaks right next the sea, the chalk cliffs of Beachy Head right next the town, which last has quite a continental air with its tree-lined promenades—if only I could again walk 4 or 5 miles (English ones)!

I shall go on writing to Mount Desert from here up till about the 18th or 20th of August, and after that to Rochester unless instructed other- wise.

I am sending you the August number of To-day containing some comments, not altogether unfounded, on Aveling's circulars.150 The lad has brought all this down on his own head through his utter ignorance of the world, of men and of business, and his predilection for poetical dream- ing. I, however, have woken him up a bit and Tussy will see to the rest. He's a very talented and serviceable sort of chap and thoroughly honest, but gushing as a flapper, with a perpetual itch to do something silly. Well, I can still recall the time when I was much the same kind of idiot.

