---
Volume: 48
Document_Title: "55. Engels to Laura Lafargue 9 August "
Page_Range: "104-106"
---

# 55. Engels to Laura Lafargue 9 August 



**[p. 92]**

On the whole I am feeling better, as I hope you are.

Your

F. Engels

First published in Briefe und Auszüge Printed according to the original aus Briefen von Job. Phil. Becker, Jos. Dietzgen, Friedrich Engels, Karl Published in English in full for the Maxx u. A. an E A. Sorge und Andere, first time Stuttgart, 1906

55

ENGELS TO LAURA LAFARGUE

IN PARIS

Eastbourne, 9 August 1887 4 Cavendish Place

My dear Laura,

We have now been here more than a fortnight138 and nothing to complain of but the heat. This is indeed an exceptional summer as the sneaks in Nature call it: 'the Jubilee Anticyclone'. I have taken some light work with me for a rainy day but the rainy day will not come and the work remains fast asleep in my drawer. Jollymeier was here with us for a week and Fritz Beust a fortnight—he had to begin teaching again the day before yesterday in Zürich—there was considerable and quite undisguised flirtation between Pumps and him and nobody was prouder of it than Percy. Oh les maris!h

[^1]: a William I - b Oh, those husbands!





**[p. 93]**

The determined stand our people have made against Russophilism and Katkoffolatrie has evidently had a good effect. I see the Justice is coming round, and Kropotkin has tackled Rochfort. Guesde's article in l'Action shows that he knows more about the matter of Russia than I dared to hope for.151

Otherwise French, like all other, politics are under the influence of the hot weather. Tout rate, même les duels.*154

I hope that great Polish oculistb will be the last and finally successful of Paul's panaceas. When he wrote before of operations, I thought they consisted in the opening out of the lachrymal duct, as this is the most common of all slight operations on the external eye. But most old men with watery eyes suffer from that rétrécissement,0 and I am almost certain I have got it myself on one eye at least. But that I can get set right, if need be, in London, and before rushing into the arms and tools of that miraculous Pole, I shall await Paul's final report. There is nothing to give you such mountain-moving faith in individual doctors, as a general scepticism with regard to scientific medicine.

I have had Bax here for a week and was daily interviewed by him with the regularity of a clock and the inquisitiveness of an American journalist. But it gave me an opportunity of quiet talk with him on many subjects, and when he has done with his set questions (which, as with most people here, are meant to save them study) and has exhausted his sudden flashes of original ideas about le lendemain de la révolution^ and so on, he begins to talk sense and more sense than the preliminary conversation led you to expect. Then you find that after all he has a largeness of view that is but too scarce here amongst the sectarians calling themselves Socialists. But as to unacquaintance with the world that is, as to hermit-like simplicity and Fremdheit^ in the midst of the largest town of the world, an English Stubengelehrter^ beats his German compeer hollow.

Paul's article on the services publics was very good.g It would do good in Germany too, where the Vierecks and Co. are only too eager to use 'Verstaatlichung^ in the same bamboozling way as Brousse and Co. the services publics.

[^1]: a Everything misfires, even duels - b Galezowski - c contraction - d the morrow of the revolution - e estrangement - f bookworm - s P. Lafargue, 'Les services publics', in Le Socialiste, 6 August 1887 - h nationalisation



