---
Volume: 48
Document_Title: "56. Engels to August Bebel 13 August "
Page_Range: "106-108"
---

# 56. Engels to August Bebel 13 August 



**[p. 94]**

Nim was at first, while here, suffering from slight muscular rheuma- tism—pains all over, as poor Lizziea used to say—but she is all right now and very jolly. So is Pumps and her two children. Percy has to spend most of the week in London. I am lazy and give way to it, as being the best thing under the circumstances to do. And here comes the whole brigade ready for dinner and the children want me to make them paper boats, so it's all up with writing and I close in haste.

Yours affectionately

F. Engels And love from all.

First published, in the language of the Reproduced from the original original (English), in F. Engels, P. et L. Lafargue, Correspondance, t. II, Paris, 1956

56

ENGELS T O AUGUST BEBEL

IN PLAUEN NEAR DRESDEN

Eastbourne, 13 August 1887 4 Cavendish Place

Dear Bebel,

Tomorrow or the day after you will be released from prison64 and I, for my part, hope to realise a plan which I have had in mind ever since you took up lodgings with the King of Saxony. Namely, to invite you to

[^1]: a Lydia Burns





**[p. 95]**

I shall be here for the next fortnight, i.e. shall return to London on the 27th inst.1381 imagine it will take you roughly the same amount of time to put various matters in order, and I myself am unable to go back to town before then because my house is being refurbished from attic to cellar and everything is at sixes and sevens. But if you can come over any earlier and spend a few days with us here at the seaside, so much the better and the sooner the better. You can take the night boat from Flushing and travel to Victoria Station in London; the trains for Eastbourne leave from the same station and will get you here in 2 or 2xh hours. Kautsky, who returns to town from Ventnor on Monday (address 35 Lady Somerset Road, High- gate, London, N. W.), will gladly pilot you around London. Liebknecht, who also paid us a visit last year, was enthusiastic about the locality.

So I eagerly await your answer and, provided this is in the affirmative and you are not coming straight away, shall send you an advance remit- tance and thus make even more sure of you.

All other discussions have best be left until we meet. So much has happened which you are better qualified than anyone else to explain to me. On the whole I am satisfied with the course the world has taken since you went into isolation; things are going ahead everywhere.

Now I must close, for down here the post goes at 1.15 p.m. and if I miss it my letter won't leave London until Monday morning. I am addressing it for safety's sake to your wife, to whom, as to your daugh- ter,3 kindly give my warmest regards.

Your old friend

F. E.

[^1]: a Julie and Frieda Bebel



