---
Volume: 48
Document_Title: "57. Engels to Karl Kautsky 17 August "
Page_Range: "108-109"
---

# 57. Engels to Karl Kautsky 17 August 



**[p. 96]**

35 Lady Somerset Road, Highgate, near Kentish Town Station, Kentish Town Road. No need to put this on letters.

First published in: Marx and Engels, Printed according to the original Works, First Russian Edition, Vol. XXVII, Moscow, 1935 Published in English for the first time

57

ENGELS TO KARL KAUTSKY

IN LONDON

Eastbourne, 17 August 1887 4 Cavendish Place

Dear Kautsky,

Please excuse the belated return of the enclosed, which I have read with thanks.155 I shall be interested to peruse the clean proofs of the More,a though I don't see of what help I can be to you in this.

We shall be coming back on Saturday week, 27 August,138 by which time my house will presumably be habitable once more.

If you happen to be passing Regent's Park Road I should be greatly obliged if you would drop in there and leave 3 or 4 large (long) envelopes, addressed to me here; I had left some there but they would all seem to have been used up. I mean the sort of envelope in which my people will be able to send me 3 or 4 letters at a time.

For the rest, we are as merry as grigs and are expecting Sam Moore this evening. Last night we at last had a storm, but it's fine again now.

Regards from my family to yours. The Avelings are at Stratford-on- Avon, revelling in Shakespeariana at source.

Your

F. E.

a K. Kautsky, Thomas More und seine Utopie, Stuttgart, 1888

