---
Volume: 48
Document_Title: "62. Engels to Florence Kelley- Wischnewetsky 15 September "
Page_Range: "112-115"
---

# 62. Engels to Florence Kelley- Wischnewetsky 15 September 



**[p. 61]**

ENGELS TO PYOTR LAVROV158

IN PARIS

London, 3 September 1887

Danielson in St Petersburg has informed me of H. Lopatin's death.a

Have you had confirmation? I should like to think there has been some mistake.159 If by mischance the news should be true, let me know and I shall at once send a tribute* to the S.D. of 2 b

Yours ever RE.

First published in: Marx and Engels, Printed according to the original Works, First Russian Edition, Vol. XXVII, Moscow, 1935 Translated from the French

Published in English for the first time

62

ENGELS TO FLORENCE KELLEY-WISCHNEWETZKY

IN NEW YORK

London, 15 September 1887 122 Regent's Park Road, N. W.

Dear Mrs Wischnewetzky,

I have received your letter of 28 August. I am glad the pamphlet0 sells so well. The copies I received I shall

a This sentence was in Russian in the original - b Sozialdemokrat of Zürich (in the original Engels uses the Russian initials) - c F. Engels, The Labor Movement in America.



**[p. 101]**

What I wrote about Trübner3 has come true stronger than I expected. Yesterday Dr Baernreither, Austrian M.P., told me that he had asked Trübner—with whom he dealt regularly—to procure him a copy of our book.b Trübner said he had none, and that Dr Baernreither had better order it through an American Agency whose address he gave to Baernreither and through which Baernreither ordered the book. Thus Trübner not only boycotts but actually burns the book.

As to the copies sent to Kautsky he could hardly act otherwise than he did.160 Neither Lovell nor yourself ever wrote him a line of instruction. I myself never heard whether any copies had been sent to the press here and to what papers. We were completely in the dark, and if the book has not got into the hands of the English press and not been noticed, that is entirely the fault of mistakes committed on your side of the water. Had I been informed of what had been done in that respect, or had I been told that that was left to me I could have acted. There is no doubt of a sale for it here, but not while it is in Trübner's hands; and if I was authorised to find an agent here I have no doubt of being able to do so; of course you would have to send a limited number of copies as a consignment.

The repudiation of the Socialists by George161 is in my opinion an unmerited piece of good luck which will redeem to a great extent the— unavoidable—blunder of placing George at the head of a movement he did not even understand. George as the standard-bearer of the whole working-class movement was a danger; George as the Chief of the Georgeites will soon be a thing of the past, the leader of a sect like the thousands of sects in America.

Your pamphlet on philanthropy'1 has not yet come to hand. Your translation of Marx's Free Trade speech I shall look over with pleasure and compare it with the French original of which I have perhaps the only copy extant. We will see about the preface later on. The 7th Bemerkung^ from the Misere de la Philosophie would fit in very well. As to the chapter on Rent, that seems more doubtful, as there is a good

a See this volume, p.68 - b F. Engels, The Condition of the Working-Class in England - d F. Kelley-Wischnewetzky, The Need of Theoretical Preparation for Philanthropic Work [New York, 1887] - e observation



**[p. 102]**

The reply of the Executive to my footnote is in itself so deprecatory and meaningless that to reply to it would be a work of supererogation.163

I cannot reply in time for the Congress, and the fact remains that I have openly taken sides against the Executive in this matter. A fresh contro- versy across the Atlantic can lead to nothing. As to the Sozialist and

Volkszeitung boycotting me, I am sorry for it on account of the sale of the book and pamphlet, otherwise it is a matter of perfect indifference to me. I have got too often over such chicanery by simply waiting and looking on.

Your expulsion I read in the Volkszeitung at the time, it was what was to be expected. I hope your pamphlet will come in time for the Congress, it would have been well if it had been out a month ago so as to come into the hands of the sections before they sent delegates. I am curious what the Congress will do but do not hope for too much.

Faithfully yours

F. Engels

Fortunately the movement in America has now got such a start that neither George, nor Powderly nor the German intriguers can spoil or stop it. Only it will take unexpected forms. The real movement always looks different to what it ought to have done in the eyes of those who were tools in preparing it.

First published, in the language of the Engels, Karl Marx u. A. an F A. Sorge original (English), in Briefe und und Andere, Stuttgart, 1906 Auszüge aus Briefen von Job. Phil. Becker, Jos. Dietzgen, Friedrich Reproduced from the original

