---
Volume: 48
Document_Title: "63. Engels to Friedrich Adolph Sorge 16 September "
Page_Range: "115-117"
---

# 63. Engels to Friedrich Adolph Sorge 16 September 



**[p. 63]**

ENGELS T O FRIEDRICH A D O L P H SORGE 1 2 1

IN ROCHESTER

London, 16 September 1887

Dear Sorge,

Letter of 1 September received. I hope your leg will gradually improve again; rest and patience, that's the main thing.

This summer has been appallingly disrupted and my house full of visitors from all over the world, as it will continue to be until the middle of October since I am expecting Bebel in a fortnight's time. I shall not be able to look out Marx's letter about George128 until I can get things in order, i.e. until the new bookcases I have ordered arrive and provide me with more space. Then you shall at once have the translation. There's no hurry. Let George get himself into rather more of a fix. His repudiation of the Socialists161 is by far the best thing that could have happened to us. His elevation to the status of standard-bearer last November6 was a mistake that was unavoidable and was bound to have repercussions. For the fact remains that the masses can only be set in motion along a course—usually a circuitous one—appropriate to the country and the circumstances concerned. Everything else is of secondary importance, provided only they are galvanised into life. But on each occasion the penalty has to be paid for the blunders which inevitably ensue. Thus, it might have been feared in this instance that the elevation of the founder of a sect to the status of shield-bearer might have encumbered the movement with sectarian nonsense for years to come. By chucking out the founders of the movement, by constituting his sect a special, orthodox, Georgian sect, and by proclaiming his borné views to be the bornes3 of the movement as a whole, George is saving the latter and ruining himself.

Needless to say, the movement as such still has many unpleasant phases to go through—unpleasant in particular for anyone who lives in the country and has to endure them. But I am absolutely convinced that things are now going ahead over there, and perhaps more rapidly than

[^1]: a limits





**[p. 104]**

The New York Executive's reply to my note is deplorable.163 Nor do I expect very much of their congress.164. The chaps in the east—the sections—don't seem to be up to much and yet there seems little likelihood of the Social Democratic Party's centre of gravity shifting to the west.

The Trades Union Congress over here has again gone to show that a revolution is taking place within the old trades unions. It was resolved, in opposition to the leaders, notably Broadhurst, and to the other labour members of parliament, to form an Independent Labour Party.165 An armchair socialist and Austrian parliamentary deputy11 was quite amazed at the vast changes that had come about since he was last here in 1883.

I haven't heard a word, or seen anyone, from France since Lafargue left for Jersey, where he is spending a week or two.

I shall write to you about Germany as soon as I have discussed things over here with Bebel.

As regards politics generally, everyone is getting ready for old William'sb death, whereupon the Russians will behave rather more cock- ily in the East and Bismarck will egg them on in order to maintain his own position. But I hardly suppose it will come to a war. The uncertainty of what a war might entail is so great, the reciprocal intention of cabinets to betray each other so manifest, the certitude that the war would be more violent, bloody, costly and prostrating than any previous war (10 or 12 million soldiers locked in battle) so indubitable, that everyone is uttering threats but no one has the courage to begin. But it's a game that may unleash a war without their wanting it, and therein lies the danger.

Five thousand copies of Kautsky's work on Marx's theory0 have already been sold.

And there I must stop for today—time for the post and for dinner.

Your

F. E.

First published in Briefe und Auszüge Printed according to the original aus Briefen von Job. Phil. Becker, Jos. Dietzgen, Friedrich Engels, Karl Marx Published in English in full for the u. A. and F A. Sorge und Andere, first time Stuttgart, 1906

a Joseph Maria Baernreither - b William I - c K. Kautsky, Karl Marx's oekonomis- che Lehren, Stuttgart, 1887

