---
Volume: 48
Document_Title: "66. Engels to Laura Lafargue 11 October "
Page_Range: "118-121"
---

# 66. Engels to Laura Lafargue 11 October 



**[p. 106]**

Trusting that you will succeed in obtaining the money in question elsewhere, I remain,

Yours faithfully

First published in: Marx and Engels, Printed according to the original Works, First Russian Edition, Vol. XXVII, Moscow, 1935 Published in English for the first time

66

ENGELS TO LAURA LAFARGUE40

IN PARIS

London, 11 October 1887

My dear Laura,

I was glad to hear you received the cheque all right—a miscarriage with that sort of thing may be a very unpleasant matter and so I was rather anxious about news with regard to it.



**[p. 107]**

It would be a splendid piece of historical irony if the bourgeois republic was doomed to kill itself by the same révolutiondu mépris*0

which swept away the bourgeois monarchy in 1848.17°

The Raon-sur-Plaine affair was simply this: within Bismarck's empire this way of treating civilians is quite the rule with the military.171 They are trained to it, and rewarded for it; and the cowardly bourgeois press praises such things if committed upon working men, and excuses them if committed upon bourgeois. And then it is of course impossible to drive into the same soldiers that on the frontier they must act differently, and that a Frenchman, a Russian or an Austrian is to be treated with more consideration. That drunken brute Kauffman will either be acquit- ted or, if sentenced, for appearances' sake, to a nominal imprisonment, will be treated like le bon dieu en France^ and promoted hereafter.

The Socialiste in its new shape is a considerable improvement upon the old one.172 Paul could not do everything and his own articles look more worked out since he has not the whole burden upon his shoulders. It will do Deville good to contribute an article per week, his journalistic practice wanted developing and his articles are getting less ponderous.

Next week I expect Bebel here173 and also probably Singer. Their Congress seems to have been a great success, and the right wing of the party have got a direct snub:174 Geiser and Viereck have been too cowardly to sign the Aufrufe for the Congress, and have consequently been declared incapable of further occupying eine Vertrauensstellung in

[^1]: a the cunning Emile - b revolution of contempt - c our merciful Lord in France (i.e. very well) - d appeal





**[p. 108]**

Here things are moving slowly but they are moving. The Trades Union Congress was a splendid symptom.165 The Tories help us here by all sorts of little police chicanery with regard to open-air meetings— what confounded jackasses they are both here and in Ireland! Jackasses—unless they intend opening next parliament with the announcement that they have tried coercion and broken down and that nothing therefore remains but Home-Rule175—thus taking the wind out of Gladstone's sails and bringing in a half-and-half Home-Rule Bill of their own shaping. But I cannot think Salisbury has either so much sense or so much boldness.

In the meantime Champion has openly attacked Hyndmanb in his paper Common Sense (rather Uncommon Nonsense) and the Fabians176—a dilettante lot of egregiously conceited mutual admirers who soar high above such ignorant people as Marx—are trying to concentrate the 'movement' in their hands. Very nice amusements en attendant que la classe ouvrière se mette en mouvement et balaye tous ces mannequins et femmequinesc (Mrs Besant is of them too).

Yours affectionately RE.

Nim sends her love, is just remanaging the carpet in my room over- head. I have not yet had Sonnenschein's account. I have reminded him of its being due.

First published, in the language of the Reproduced from the original original (English), in F. Engels, P. et L. Lafargue, Correspondance, t. II, Paris, 1956

a a position of trust in the party - b H. H. Champion, 'The Future of Socialism in England', Common Sense, 15 September 1887 - c until the working class goes into action and sweeps away all these male and female puppets

