---
Volume: 48
Document_Title: "69. Engels to Laura Lafargue 12 November "
Page_Range: "122-124"
---

# 69. Engels to Laura Lafargue 12 November 



**[p. 110]**

F. E.

First published in Le Populaire de Printed according to a facsimile Paris, No. 948, 29 November 1920

Translated from the French

69

ENGELS TO LAURA LAFARGUE40

IN PARIS

London, 12 November 1887

My dear Laura,

Nous voilà en plein 1847V- The parallel is indeed striking; for Teste read: Wilson, for Emile de Girardin read: A. E. Portalis; and if Grévy is not an exact counterpart of Louis Philippe, he is a very well got-up combination of both Louis Philippe and Guizot, uniting the money- greed of the first with the false dignity of the other.181 I have devoured this morning the papers Paul was good enough to send me, and thought myself forty years younger. Only that the république bourgeoise beats the bourgeois monarchy in out-and-out in cheek. Girardin's study was

[^1]: a We are back in 1847!





**[p. 111]**

The most important feature is that this commencement de la fin de la république bourgeoise^ does not come alone. In Russia, too, the end seems near. The ever-repeated promises of an energetic and successful policy with regard to Bulgaria, followed by ever-renewed checks and moral defeats, seem to have again united the various elements of opposi- tion—it looks as if there might soon be a crisis. Then there is Unser Fritz0 with a now undeniable cancer in his throat—if anything happens to him, the successor to Old William will be a dummer schnoddriger Junge,d of the Gardelieutenant type, at present an adorer of Bismarck but sure soon to fall out with him because he will want to command; a fellow who will soon drive things to extremes and upset the present alliance between feudal nobility and bourgeoisie by sacrificing the latter entirely to the former and who even in army matters is almost sure to fall out with the old experienced generals. And then a crisis is certain. Thus, the critical point is coming nearer everywhere, and I only hope that everywhere people will find as much work cut out for them at home as to prevent them from rushing into war.

La belle Limouzin alias Scharnetm is indeed a beauty of a peculiar kind to fascinate French officers. But then, she aimed at nothing less than generals, and generals are people of a certain age when tastes begin to be uncertain with some people. It is certainly a very queer new edition of the Victoires et conquêtes de l'armée française^—the conquest of a hunchbacked, lame, repulsive old hag from Karlsruhe! Anyhow she looks energetic and has roused Thibaudin to a rare enthusiasm.

The stories you tell me about the men of the agglomération^ are char- acteristic too.184 The transformation of Paris into a Luxusstadtf under the Second Empire could not help telling on the working-class too. But any serious movement will shake off a good deal of that. The effect upon the intellect of the masses, I am afraid, will be more lasting.

[^1]: a public prosecutor - b beginning of the end of the bourgeois republic - c Our Fritz (Crown Prince Frederick William) - d stupid, insolent youth - e victories and conquests of the French army - f the Paris branch of the French Workers' Party - s luxury city



