---
Volume: 48
Document_Title: "70. Engels to Paul Lafargue 16 November "
Page_Range: "124-127"
---

# 70. Engels to Paul Lafargue 16 November 



**[p. 112]**

I must shut up now, it's past five and no time to lose if you are to have this letter to-morrow morning. So good-bye. Nim keeps cutting her fingers now with one kitchen tool and then with another. Percy has been to Dresden and Berlin for his buttonhole machines and consumed untold quantities of lager. Pumps and children are well.

Ever yours affectionately

F. Engels

First published, in the language of the Reproduced from the original original (English), in F. Engels, P. et L. Lafargue, Correspondance, t. II, Paris, 1956

70

ENGELS T O PAUL LAFARGUE

IN PARIS

London, 16 November 1887

My dear Lafargue

Dense fog—can't possibly write more than a line or two. Didn't either of you see Tussy's letter in Monday1 evening's Pall Mall} It ought to have reached you by Tuesday evening. She arrived here

[^1]: a 14 November





**[p. 113]**

The case is to be heard in the courts and it remains to be seen whether the jury endorses Matthews' famous doctrine which holds that any person walking in Trafalgar Square without the Crown's permission is a trespasser. The Liberals, from Gladstone to Labouchere and Bradlaugh, are begging the people to leave the question in abeyance since it is to be settled in court. But so exasperated have the working men been by police brutality that there may well be another clash next Sunday. Then— provided, that is, that nothing unforseen happens—there'll be another rout, Trafalgar Square being the place most favourable to the govern- ment. It is easily defended, can be approached from the east only by narrow streets, is far removed from the abode of the working class and is situated at the heart of the shopping centre, with barracks close by and with St James's Park—in which to muster reserves of troops—a stone's throw away from the field of battle. Since your philistine, both of the bourgeois and the working-class variety, is in favour of constitutional action, it is to be expected that the next demonstration will be too half- hearted to attempt anything serious. In which case it would be a shame to see the best elements sacrifice themselves to preserve the honour of the chicken-hearted who are now pulling out.

And in France? If you get Ferry in place of Grévy, not only will you get a thief of a son-in-law in place of a father-in-law who is at worst a fence; you'll get a son-in-law who's a thief of the first water.168 For what Wilson has stolen throughout a whole lifetime does not amount to anything like the sum stolen by Ferry during the Tunis affair alone. To admit the possibility—even pro tern—of such a dénouement seems to me too incompatible with the dramatic genius of French history. Rather than a solution, it would be intrigue at its most extreme and tending towards a crisis. And, from that point of view, Ferry's accession is almost to be wished for—the accession of the head of the firm of Roublard & Co. in place of humble clerk. Grévy, for having merely turned a blind eye to corruption, toppled by Ferry who indulges in it openly and boasts of so doing—that would be fine! But Ferry as President—that would be a call to revolution: the bourgeoisie's 'I don't give a fig for you!' flung in the face of the people.

As for peace, no one but a fool would try to end it just now. The



**[p. 114]**

As for your army, the soldiers with 2 or 3 years' service have not yet been used against the people, hence it is impossible to say how they might conduct themselves. But they are no longer the undisciplined troops of the Empire. One would have to know how the regiments are constituted, from what regions they are recruited, and whether there are many Parisians in their ranks.

By the way, has the Socialiste again succumbed? My last number is dated 29 October.

Yours ever, RE.

Keep an eye on the XIXe Siècle and send me a copy if it contains documents and fresh news.

First published in: Marx and Engels, Works, Second Russian Edition, Vol. 36, Moscow, 1964

Printed according to the original

Translated from the French

Published in English for the first time

[^1]: a Frederick William's - b Alexander III - c impulsive actions



