---
Volume: 48
Document_Title: "72. Engels to Paul Lafargue 23 November "
Page_Range: "127-129"
---

# 72. Engels to Paul Lafargue 23 November 



**[p. 71]**

ENGELS TO PAUL LAFARGUE87

IN PARIS

[Extract]

London, 22 November 1887

You will have read in the L the speech made by V. in the constituency of K. He complains, not without reason, that the Party is getting bourgeois.

It is a misfortune that overtakes all extreme parties as soon as the day for them to become 'possible' draws near. But ours cannot go beyond a certain limit in this respect without betraying its own cause, and it seems to me that in France as in Germany we have now reached that point. Luckily there is still time to call a halt.

First published in Le Socialiste, No. Printed according to the newspaper 115, 24 November 1900

Translated from the French

72

ENGELS TO PAUL LAFARGUE

IN PARIS

London, 23 November 1887

My dear Lafargue,

I haven't a bean and shall have to sell some shares, which I cannot do for another two or three days. As soon as the money comes in I will send you a cheque. Meanwhile, here is Sonnenschein 's statement in respect of the English edition of Capital—it amounts to very little—only £39.12— From that I shall deduct £20 in order to recoup some of the £80



**[p. 116]**

For the Longuet children3 £ 3.18.4 " Laura £ 3.18.4 "Tussy £ 3.18.4 £11.15.-

For Samb 3/5 £4.14.2 " Edwardc2/5 £3.12.6 £ 7.17.- £19.12.-

Cheque for Laura enclosed herewith. Sonnenschein says he has printed 1,000 copies, of which 480 are in stock and 78 have been given gratis either to us or to the press.

224 copies sold in England £336. - 10% £33.12 200 America £120.- 5% £ 6.- £39.12.-

18 " thirteenth gratis189

442 558 1,000

As to the American 5%, I shall compare this statement with the contract. But I do not believe we can do anything about it. The fellow has clearly sold far more, but is concealing the fact from us in order to have a year in hand.

The Parisian devil-may-care attitude, cited by you as a symptom of demoralisation, is proudly acclaimed by Camille Pelletan in La Justice. My £20 were immediately swallowed up by urgent payments and, indeed, I am completely cleaned out just now. Otherwise I should be sending you a cheque today.

Yours ever

F. E.

