---
Volume: 48
Document_Title: "76. Engels to Florence Kelley- Wischnewetsky 3 December "
Page_Range: "133-136"
---

# 76. Engels to Florence Kelley- Wischnewetsky 3 December 



**[p. 75]**

ENGELS TO FRIEDRICH ADOLPH SORGE

IN ROCHESTER

[London, November 1887]

Dear Old Man,

Have received and burned the letter concerned. Had a shrewd idea that the isolation of Rochester wouldn't suit you. In a little hole like that one even misses the irritation of seeing the movement ruined by inept would-be big wigs and business men on the make. But perhaps you'll get used to it. Being in business is, after all, no more boring than teaching music to lazy, recalcitrant pupils. One gets used to counting-house chores; I had to do them for close on thirty years,9 though I must say I'm glad to be quit of them. Well, let me know honestly how you get on.

Your old friend,

F. E.

First published in: Marx and Engels, Printed according to the original Works, First Russian Edition, Vol. XXVII, Moscow, 1935 Published in English for the first time

76

ENGELS TO FLORENCE KELLEY-WISCHNEWETZKY10

IN NEW YORK

London, 3 December 1887

Dear Mrs Wischnewetzky,

As I told you in my postcard per last mail,69 William Reeves, publisher of To-day and of the greater portion of London popular



**[p. 1887]**

'Regarding our conversation of to-day (Wednesday) in reference to the agency of The Condition etc. by Engels we shall be pleased to under- take the same and have copies from you or the publisher in Americab at the rate of 3s. net bound—the future copies should be sent unbound. The sole charge will be the necessary printing of titles and insertion of same which will cost about 10s.'

And further, December 2: 'In answer to your enquiry as to date of making up accounts we beg to say that every six months is the time and payment made a month after. We understand until other arrangements are made we are dealing with you.'

This latter proviso I made as otherwise Reeves could have evaded settlement of accounts by saying he did not know whom to pay, Mr Lovell or myself, and then cause delay and procrastination. In future transactions other arrangements can be made. As to these he writes December 1st:

'The rates for other works similar in character could be taken at about the same rate of discounts—it depends a little on the price to be put on for retail price, for instance a 6s.- book is supplied to the trade at a little cheaper rate than a 5s.- one.'

So the fellow will keep a door open for haggling and in future cases it will be well to inform me in time, so as to arrange definitely his discount before you put his name on the title as London agent. These people are all alike.

The above terms are of course for books delivered to him carriage paid and free of all expense on his part. He says the carriage is but trifling and so it may be to the trade and for bales, but I know that for parcels sent to private people they stick it on pretty well; Kautsky had to pay above 10s for the copies sent to him, and the Liverpool agent (Wheatley) made me pay 2s.6d. extra expenses on the parcel containing the 1,000 pamphlets,0 altho' no carriage whatever was charged to me.

We shall send copies to the Socialist press (except Justice which had one from America and said just two lines about itd), to the Athenaeum,

a F. Engels, The Condition of the Working-Class in England - b John W. Lovell - c F. Engels, The Labor Movement in America - A Justice, No. 176, 28 May



**[p. 123]**

As to the pamphlet,a as I told you, Reeves had it pirated and will of course sell his own lot first. I shall hand the 1,000 copies to Aveling to do the best he can—either sell at meetings or give to Reeves as he may want them; but I am afraid a good deal of them will have to be given away gratis in the long run at meetings.

Your translation of Free Trade shall have attention as soon as ever possible.196 I shall also write a preface, only I am sure it will not in any case be what you want. It is impossible for me to answer the probable arguments of American protectionists beforehand. I do not know that sort of literature and have no time to go into it. My reasoning in nine cases out of ten would miss the mark, and moreover whatever we may say, they will always find a way out, and have something to say that we cannot foresee. To enter into polemics with them directly, one must be in America. And I have always found that a good book makes its way and has its effect whatever the penny-a-liners of the day may say.

Yours faithfully

F. Engels

First published, slightly abridged, in the language of the original (English), in Briefe und Auszüge aus Briefen von Job. Phil. Becker, Jos. Dietzgen, Friedrich Engels, Karl Marx u. A. an F. A. Sorge und Andere, Stuttgart, 1906 and in full in: Marx and Engels,

Works, First Russian Edition, Vol. XXVII, Moscow, 1935

Reproduced from the original

Published in English in full for the first time

a F. Engels, The Labor Movement in America

