---
Volume: 48
Document_Title: "78. Engels to Hermann Schlüter 7 December "
Page_Range: "137-139"
---

# 78. Engels to Hermann Schlüter 7 December 



**[p. 125]**

Yours ever,

F. E.

The Social Democratic Federation was supposed to be meeting in Trafalgar Square yesterday,3 but there wasn't a word about it in the Daily News; we may be sure Hyndman didn't run any risk.201

First published, slightly abridged, in Le Socialiste, No. 110, 10 December Printed according to the original 1887 and in full in F. Engels, P. et L. Lafargue, Correspondance, t. II, Paris, Translated from the French 1956

78

ENGELS TO HERMANN SCHLÜTER

IN HOTTINGEN-ZURICH

London, 7 December 1887

Dear Mr Schlüter,

It would be best if you were to make up a volume of Shorter Papers, 1871-75 by F. Engels, as follows:

3. Tkachov's letter 4. [On] Social Relations in Russia 5. The Bakuninists at Work

a 4 December - b F. Engels, Once Again 'Herr Vogt' - c F. Engels, Refugee Literature, IV

[^1]: 1. Article on Vogt, 1871, No. 38, 10 Mayb

[^2]: 2. Refugee Literature0





**[p. 126]**

Herewith The Bakuninists at Work with the paragraphs in Section III correctly numbered in the order in which they should appear. Would you kindly send this sheet for me to look at, so that I know what I'm about. The remaining proof reading can be attended to over there.

If you could get hold of one or two copies of the Revue of the Neue Rheinische Zeitung (complete), I will gladly pay for them. I have only got vols 3, 5 and 6, and should like to have 1, 2 and 4 as well.

You shall have the 'Mordspatrioten'b shortly: I am writing the intro- duction. I shall also try and put the 'Force Theory' to rights.203

As regards other matters, 1. Neue Rheinische Zeitung articles, see above; 2. Revue of the Neue Rheinische Zeitung—nothing that could do without an introduction and wouldn't be time-consuming; 3.1 have sold the Prussian Military Question to Meissner, with whom I cannot start a row, and much of what I say in it would be very difficult to understand today without a commentary.

After the New Year I shall have to tackle Volume III of Das Kapital, for which I must spare my eyes. Aside from what I have already under- taken, therefore, I can at present do absolutely nothing for you; I'm very sorry, but I have no alternative. As soon as this ms. has gone to press, and while correcting the proofs, I shall have time to spare for you, provided my eyes are all right again. But you must remember that I can only really write for a few hours each day and then only by daylight— often not to be had for love or money over here—and withal a vast correspondence!

With kindest regards,

Your

F. Engels

First published in: Marx and Engels, Printed according to the original Works, First Russian Edition, Vol. XXVII, Moscow, 1935 Published in English for the first time

a F. Engels, 'Democratic Pan-Slavism' - b S. Borkheim, Zur Erinnerung für die deutschen Mordspatrioten, 1806-1807. Mit einer Einleitung von Fr. Engels, Hottingen-Zürich, 1888

