---
Volume: 48
Document_Title: "80. Engels to Laura Lafargue 24 December "
Page_Range: "139-141"
---

# 80. Engels to Laura Lafargue 24 December 



**[p. 79]**

ENGELS TO KARL KAUTSKY

IN LONDON

London, 20 December 1887

Dear Kautsky,

I have got to go to Brighton today and shall try and be back by tomorrow evening. But as something might intervene, it might be safer if you were to let us have the pleasure of your company on Thursdaya

evening instead of tomorrow.

Kindest regards,

Your

F. E.

First published in Aus der Früzheit Printed according to the original des Marxismus. Engels Briefwechsel mit Kautsky, Prag, 1935, and in: Marx Published in English for the first time and Engels, Works, First Russian Edition, Vol. XXVII, Moscow, 1935

80

ENGELS TO LAURA LAFARGUE40

IN PARIS

London, 24 December 1887

My dear Laura,

Nobody is gladder to be in possession of your new address than Nim who was in an awful funk—not so much about the arrival of the pudding

[^1]: a 22 December





**[p. 128]**

I enclose cheque £25—the odd five is a little Christmas present for you which no doubt will soon find investment.

Schorlemmer is here and I expect him in every minute, so shall have to close this letter before he comes in.

I was in Brighton last Tuesday0 to see Gumpert who is there—gener- ally very well outwardly but still very much shaken morally—absolute loss of self-confidence and energy. His poor young wife has to suffer very much in consequence. Perhaps when spring comes on, we may shake him up a bit.

The Pall Mall Gazette is getting horribly dull—the paper is either a chronic bore or an acute sensation of chamber of horrors. Stead is out of date—a puritan fanatic who ought to have lived in 1648, quite out of date nowadays. But useful and good in one way—he, though full of it himself, hates respectability and middle-class cant.

Will send you some American comic papers'1 after to-morrow, must show them here first. The parvenu in all his glory—how they are enchanted to see themselves in evening dress! And the vulgarity breaks out all over their skins especially when talking about socialism. One almost gets a prejudice in favour of English 'Society' after that.

Yours affectionately

F. Engels

Jollymeier was very 'bould' last night and lost fivepence to Nim.

First published, in the language of the Reproduced from the original original (English), in F. Engels, P. et L. Lafargue, Correspondance, t. II, Paris, 1956

[^1]: a Jean, Edgar, Marcel and Jenny Longuet - b to the proper quarter - c 20 December - d The Judge and Puck



