---
Volume: 48
Document_Title: "1888"
Page_Range: "144-255"
---

# 1888

1888

82

ENGELS TO ION NADEJDE

IN JASSY

London, 4 January 1888 122 Regent's Park Road, N. W.

Dear Citizen,

My friend Karl Kautsky, editor of the Neue Zeit, has sent me several consecutive numbers of La Revista Sociala and of Contemporanul containing, amongst other things, your translations of some of my works, in particular my Origin of the Family, etc.207 Allow me to prof- fer my sincere thanks for the trouble you have been so good as to take in making these writings accessible to the Romanian public. In addition to the honour you have thus done me, you have also rendered me, personally, the service of enabling me at long last to learn something of your language. I say at long last because, almost fifty years ago, I tried to do this, if in vain, with the help of the Grammaire comparée des langues romanes* by Diez. Recently I succeeded in getting hold of Cionca's little grammar but, having no texts to read and no dictionary, I did not get on very well. But with your translation I have been able to make some progress, the original text and the Latin and Slav etymology having taken the place of the dictionary and now, thanks to you, I can say that Romanian is no longer, for me, a completely unknown language. However, if you could tell me of a passable dictionary, whether Romanian-German or Romanian-French or -Italian, you would be doing me another signal service; for it would help me the

a Gramatica comparatâ a limbelor romanice



**[p. 133]**

From these I have, with much pleasure, gained the conviction that the socialists of your country have adopted in their programmea the funda- mental principles of the theory formulated by my late friend Karl Marx—a theory which has succeeded in welding together into a single fighting force the vast majority of European and American socialists. At the time of that great thinker's death, the social and political situation, and the progress being made by our Party in all civilised countries, enabled him to close his eyes in the conviction that his efforts to unite the proletarians of the two worlds into one big army and under the same flag would ultimately be crowned with success. But if only he had been able to catch a glimpse of the immense strides we have since made in America no less than in Europe!

So great have been those strides that, for the European party at any rate, a common international policy has become imperative. In this regard, I again have the satisfaction of seeing that you agree, in principle, with ourselves and with the large majority of western socialists. Your translation of my article 'The Political Situation in Europe', as also your letter to the Editor of the Neue Zeit, are proof enough of this.

Indeed we are all confronted by the same great obstacle that is hampering the free development of all the nations and of each individual nation; in the absence of that development we could not embark upon, still less accomplish, social revolution in the various countries merely by means of mutual cooperation. That obstacle is the old Holy Alliance209

between the three assassins of Poland, led since 1815 by Russian Tsarism and surviving until today despite occasional domestic squabbles. It was founded in 1815 to combat the revolutionary spirit of the French people; in 1871 it was ratified by the annexation of Alsace, which turned Germany into the slave of Tsarism and the Tsar into the arbiter of Europe; in 1888 it is maintained for the purpose of crushing the revolu- tionary spirit within the three empires—the national aspirations no less than the political and social movements of the working classes. Since Russia enjoys a virtually impregnable strategic position, Russian Tsarism forms the nub of that alliance, great repository of all European reaction. To topple Tsarism, to destroy that incubus which lies heavy on the

a C. Dobrogeanu-Gherea, Ce vor socialiçtii romîni. Expunerea socialismului stiintific si Programul socialist



**[p. 134]**

You in Romania must know what Tsarism is, having had more than enough experience of it through Kiselev's 'règlement organique', through the intervention of 1848, through the theft—perpetrated not once, but twice—of Bessarabia,210 through the innumerable invasions of your country, a mere Russian staging-post, no more, on the way to the Bosphorus, and through the sure knowledge that your independent exis- tence will cease on the day the Tsar fulfils his dream—the conquest of Constantinople^

At this moment the alliance appears to have disintegrated and war to be imminent. But even if war does come, it will be merely in order to make recalcitrant Prussia and Austria toe the line. I hope that peace will be maintained: in such a war it would be impossible to sympathise with any of the combatants; rather, were such a thing possible, one would wish that all should be beaten. It would be a terrible war—but, come what may, everything will eventually turn to the advantage of the socialist movement and bring nearer the accession of the working class.

Pray excuse these elucidations, but just now I could not well write to a Romanian without expressing an opinion on these burning questions. What it boils down to is this: revolution in Russia at this moment would

[^1]: a The rough copy further reads: 'and our workingmen's Party will march with giant strides towards revolution' - b penal servitude (Russ.) - c The last two sentences are missing in the rough copy





**[p. 135]**

Since your relations with the German socialists, newspaper exchange, etc., leave something to be desired, I would gladly do for you whatever I can.

With fraternal greetings,

F. Engels

First published, in the language of the Translated from the French original (Romanian), in Contemp- oranul, No. 6, 1888 Published in English for the first time

Printed according to the journal, checked with the rough copy of the manuscript, written in French

83

ENGELS TO NIKOLAI DANIELSON211

IN ST PETERSBURG

London, 5 January 1888

Dear Sir,

I have removed and my new address is: Mrs Rosher, Cottesloe, Burton Road, Kilburn, London N . W. There is no number, Cottesloe being the name of the house.

[^1]: I have at once ordered from my bookseller here the work of Dr Keussler.b Even if the first volumes are based on imperfect materials I have seen enough of the work of your Zemstvos to know that the résumé of them must contain immensely valuable material and, being written in German, prove a perfect revelation to Occidentals.212 I shall take good care that these materials are made use of.

[^2]: I am afraid your land-bank for the nobility213 will have about the

[^3]: a The rough copy of the manuscript ends here - b J. V. Keussler, Zur Geschichte und Kritik des häuerlichen Gemeindehesitzes in Kussland





**[p. 136]**

The peasants' bank214 too seems similar to the Prussian peasants' banks, and it is almost inconceivable how difficult it is for some people to see that all fresh sources of credit opened up to landed proprietors (small or large) must result in enslaving them to the victorious capitalist.

My eyes still require des ménagements? but anyhow I hope in a short time, say next month, to be able to resume my work on the 3rd volumef; unfortunately I cannot as yet make any promises as to the time of finish- ing it.

The English translation? has sold and is selling very well, indeed surprisingly well for a book of that size and class; the publisher11 is enchanted with his speculation. The critics are on the other hand very, very much below the average low level. Only one good article in the Athenaeum^7; the rest either merely give extracts from the preface or, if trying to tackle the book itself, are unutterably poor. The fashionable theory just now here is that of Stanley Jevons,215 according to which value is determined by utility, i.e. Tauschwert-Gebrauchswert' and on

[^1]: a big cities - b to live according to their social status - c in Russian in the original letter. An allusion to Alexander Herzen's book From Another Shore) - d in Russian in the original e good care - f of Capital - s of Vol. I of Capital - h William Swan Sonnenschein - ' exchange value = use value





**[p. 137]**

The sale of the German edition of I and II volumes goes on very well. There are a great many articles written about the book and its theories, an extract, or rather independent reproduction in: Karl Marx's Ökonomische Lehren vona K. Kautsky, not bad, though not always quite correct, I will send it you. Then a miserable apostate Jew Georg Adler, Privatdozent in Breslau,b has written a big book, the title of which I forget, to prove Marx wrong,0 but it is simply a scurrilous and ridiculous pamphlet by which the author wants to call attention—the attention of the ministry and bourgeoisie—on himself and his impor- tance. I have asked all my friends not to notice it. Indeed if any miser- able impotent fellow wants to faire de la réclame^ for himself, he attacks our author.e

Friends in Paris have doubted the accuracy of your very sad news about Mr Mutual/ Could you give me in some way or other any partic- ulars of this event?'216

I enclose a little thing published some years ago.

Yours sincerely, P. W. Rosher

First published, in Russian, in the Reproduced from the original magazine Minuvshiye gody, No. 2, St Petersburg, 1908 Published in English in full for the first time

a by - b lecturer in Wroclaw - c G. Adler, Die Grundlagen der Karl Karx'schen Kritik der bestehenden Volkswirtschaft. Kritische und ökonomisch-litterarische Studien, Tübingen, 1887 - d gain publicity - e Karl Marx - f Hermann Lopatin



**[p. 84]**

ENGELS T O FRIEDRICH A D O L P H SORGE 2 1 7

IN ROCHESTER

London, 7 January 1888

Dear Sorge

First, let me wish you a Happy New Year and express the hope that you will soon settle down in your new locality218 and that you have completely recovered from your accidents last summer.

We can only hope that the gathering war clouds will disperse— everything is already going as nicely as we could wish and we can very well dispense with the interruption through a general war and one, moreover, on a vaster scale than ever before, although this too must eventually redound in our favour. Bismarck's policy is driving the working and petty-bourgeois masses over to us in their thousands; the pitiable inadequacy of the social reforms, so pompously proclaimed, and which are a mere pretext for coercive measures against the workers (Puttkamer's anti-strike edict, the proposed re-introduction of employ- ment books, the purloining of trades union and provident funds) is proving enormously effective.219 The new Anti-Socialist Law will do little harm; this time, the expatriation clause is unlikely to go through and, if it does, it's questionable how long it will last.220 For if—as would be best for us—old William* were shortly to kick the bucket and the Crown Princeb came to the helm, if only for six months, everything would probably be thrown into confusion. Bismarck has laboured so hard at getting rid of the Crown Prince altogether and bringing about the regency of that insolent guards' subaltern, the younger William,0

that he would, in such an event, probably be got rid of and replaced by a short-lived, head-in-clouds liberal regime. That would be enough to destroy your philistine's confidence in the stability of the Bismarckian system; and if, along with the young whippersnapper, Bismarck were subsequently to return to power, your philistine's faith would nonethe- less be gone, the lad being after all no substitute for the old man. For the bogus Bonapartes of today are as naught unless people believe in them

[^1]: a William I - b Frederick William (later Frederick III) - c Frederick William's son (William II)





**[p. 139]**

On the other hand, a war would set us back by many years. Chauvinism would swamp all else since there would be a struggle for survival. Germany would place some 5 million men under arms, or 10 per cent of the population, the others, say, 4 or 5 per cent, Russia rela- tively less. But there would be some 10 to 15 million combatants in the field. And how they are to be fed beats me; it would mean devastation like that of the Thirty Years War.221 And it wouldn't be over quickly, despite the colossal military forces engaged. For France is protected by very extensive fortifications along its frontiers in the northwest and southeast, and the new works at Paris are models of their kind. So it will take a long time, and Russia is not to be reduced by storm either. Even if everything goes in accordance with Bismarck's wishes, therefore, unprecedented demands will be made on the nation and it is quite possi- ble that the postponement of a decisive victory and partial reverses would evoke revolution inside the country. But if the Germans were beaten from the start, or forced permanently onto the defensive, then the fun would surely begin. If the war were fought to a finish without inter- nal disorder, the state of prostration would be unlike anything Europe has experienced in the past 200 years. Then American industry would triumph all along the line and we should all be faced with the alternative either of a complete reversion to agriculture for domestic consumption (any other kind being precluded by American grain) or—social trans- formation. Hence I suspect that they do not intend to go to extremes, to have recourse to anything more than a mock war. But once the first shot has been fired, control will have been lost and the horse can take the bit between its teeth.

So everything is tending inexorably towards a decision, war or peace, and I must hasten to complete the third volume.a But events demand that I remain au courant and this, particularly as regards the military side, requires a great deal of time, and yet I must still take care of my eyes. If only I could simply withdraw into my study! However, it's got to be done and I shall set to work next month at the latest.

Shorlemmer, who is here, sends his kindest regards. Our people were immediately responsible for resolving the presiden- tial crisis in Paris.197 The Blanquists took the lead, Vaillant having carried

[^1]: a Of Capital - b informed





**[p. 140]**

You have, I trust, been getting Commonweal, Gleichheit and To-day regularly.

Your old friend,

F. E.

First published in Briefe und Auszüge Printed according to the original aus Briefen von Joh. Phil. Becker, Jos. Dietzgen, Friedrich Engels, Karl Marx Published in English in full for the u. A. an F A. Sorge und Andere, first time Stuttgart, 1906

85

ENGELS T O WILHELM LIEBKNECHT

IN BORSDORF NEAR LEIPZIG

London, 10 January 1888

Dear Liebknecht,

As regards expatriation, things are unlikely to move very rapidly. However contemptible the German bourgeoisie may be, such cowardice calls for a modicum of courage and in my view it will take Bismarck a year to knock that courage into them. But quite a lot can happen in a year. By intriguing against the Crown Prince,a Monsieur

[^1]: a Frederick William (later Frederick III)





**[p. 141]**

There's nothing new to report here. The old Communist Society106 is going steadily downhill, being now in the hands of the rascally Gilles; it is becoming increasingly chummy with the anarchists whose headquar- ters are now in London. The Trafalgar Square affair224 is being celebrated afresh with the wholesale sentencing—both in the magistrates' and in the criminal courts—of those who took part in the demonstration. Graham and Burns are to appear shortly. If they too are sentenced, the London juryman will, by his action, have passed a vote of thanks to Warren and the police, which can only further the split between the classes. The workingmen have an enormous hatred of the police and at the next elec- tion the stupid Tories will have cause to be aware of it.

I wish you belatedly a Happy New Year and let's hope there will be peace both internally and externally. I have no wish either for war or for attempted coups. Everything is going much too famously for that.

Your

F. Engels

First published in: Marx and Engels, Printed according to the original Works, First Russian Edition, Vol. XXVIII, Moscow, 1940 Published in English for the first time

[^1]: a William I - b Frederick William's son (William II)





**[p. 86]**

ENGELS TO HERMANN SCHLÜTER225

IN HOTTINGEN-ZURICH

London, 10 January 1888

Dear Mr Schlüter,

I have no objection to Ede's printing the final part of the introduction to the Blood-and-Thunder Patriots.226

Kindly tell me when, approximately, you will be able to start printing the Theory of Force. For I am working on a fourth chapter to it in which I examine Bismarck's use of force and the reasons for its momentary success. I am writing it now, but shall have to revise it immediately before printing and make additions in accordance with the latest facts. Naturally I shall be happy to place this chapter too at Ede's disposal, once everything has got to that stage.203

I shall shortly be putting my books in order and it may be that another copy of the Holy Family will turn up; if so, the archives227 shall have it. Meanwhile please continue to keep an eye open for the Revue der Neue Rheinischen Zeitung—isolated articles would be of use only in cases of direct necessity.228

Bruhn's distorted account is mentioned in Herr Vogt, p. 124. Note— Bangya, having represented himself as the agent of a chap called Eisenmann, or some such name, who was supposedly setting up as a bookseller in Berlin, had promised that the latter would print the ms.229

This was by Marx and myself and the original is here in my house. However, the actual purchaser of the copy was Stieber, who was silly enough to imagine that the Prussian police would find in a ms. intended by us for publication secret revelations and not merely a derisive portrayal of the great men of the emigration, for there was, of course, nothing more to it than that. We were done out of its publication, but the people who were really done were the Prussian police, who no doubt also took care never to boast about it and, along with them, Mr Kossuth who, until this episode, had been unaware of the unsavoury nature of his protégé, though subsequently he still sought to support him.

Your kind wishes for the New Year are heartily reciprocated.

Ever yours,

F. E.



**[p. 143]**

87

ENGELS T O PASQUALE MARTIGNETTI

IN BENEVENTO

London, 10 January 1888

Dear Friend,

I would have written to you long ago, but could only suppose that you were no longer in Benevento, for one of the periodicals you very kindly sent me bore a different address with a domicile I didn't know. So I have been awaiting further word from you.

The ludicrous charge brought against you in connection with the embezzlement of LI5,000 is best refuted by the fact that you have been given employment by the government prefect himself. I trust that the whole intrigue will fizzle out before things get to the stage of public proceedings.

I don't know how the Hamburg business passed off; I have heard no further news on the subject from Wedde.230 But it is just as well that nothing has come of it. The Prussian government has at last managed to bring the government of the Hamburg 'republic' to heel. Our newspa- per therea has been banned; Wedde, the editor, though a citizen of Hamburg, has been banished from his native city, and some twenty socialists have been sentenced in Altona (the neighbouring Prussian town) and will, on release, be expelled from Hamburg. Under the circumstances you too would have been expelled from there and, as a foreigner, from the German Empire as a whole; and the cost of the double removal complete with family would have been ruinous.

[^1]: a Bürgerzeitung





**[p. 144]**

I shall also be able to attend to your manuscript within the next few weeks, after which it will go off to you at once.232 Unfortunately I still have to spare my eyes.

With sincere regards,

Yours ever,

F. Engels

Mefistofele I will be posted this evening.

First published, in the language of the Printed according to the original original (German), in La corrispon- denza di Marx e Engels con italiani. Published in English for the first time 1848-1895, Milano, 1964

88

ENGELS T O H E R M A N N SCHLÜTER

IN HOTTINGEN-ZURICH

[London], 23 January 1888

Dear Mr Schlüter,

You should have the Theory of Force by 20 February; you would be getting it even sooner but for the intervention of the English translation of the Manifesto* which I must polish off quickly with Sam Moore, the translator of Capital, who is here with me, otherwise I shall be missing a splendid opportunity.

a K. Marx and F. Engels, Manifesto of the Communist Party



**[p. 145]**

Kindest regards.

Yours,

F. E.

The only thing that might possibly intervene would by my eyesight, for which I'm receiving treatment so as to get the wretched business properly over and done with—but in that case I shall write.

First published in: Marx and Engels, Printed according to the original Works, First Russian Edition, Vol. XXVIII, Moscow, 1940 Published in English for the first time

89

ENGELS TO PAUL LAFARGUE87

AT LE PERREUX

London, 7 February 1888

My dear Lafargue,

Herewith the cheque for LI5. I am overwhelmed with work. The business of the English Manifesto has at last been rushed through and I expect to have the proofs in a few days' time.54 I am counting on Laura for improvements to the transla- tion, my own revision having had to be done in something of a hurry, and this would be of the greatest help to me in the event of a reprint.

Then, I am writing a critique of Bismarck's policy generally. It is to appear as an appendix to the Anti-DUhring's Theory of Force, or rather, as its application to current practice. I promised to deliver the ms. on the



**[p. 146]**

The disappearance of the Socialiste spells your own disappearance qua party from the Paris scene.234 After all, the Possibilists manage to keep the Prolétariat going and, if you cannot do as much, it means you are contracting instead of expanding; it is not the weekly organ that is to blame—the other's a weekly too. Meanwhile I refuse to believe that the Paris workingman has embarked irretrievably on a period of decadence. The French are unpredictable and capable of springing all manner of surprises. So I shall wait and see.

As for Bismarck he, no less than the Russian Panslavists82 and French chauvinists, is playing with fire. The present situation suits him so long as a glimmer of life remains in old Lehmann (nickname for William,a as you doubtless know). Bismarck has every reason to make himself indis- pensable against the day the old man dies. He and young Williamb have hatched something of a plot against the Crown Princec in an attempt to induce him to have a laryngotomy, i.e. to have his throat slit.d Since the Crown Prince and his wifee are perfectly well aware of this, Bismarck has made himself all but impossible so far as they are concerned. And that's one of the reasons why the new Anti-Socialist Law has failed to get through the Reichstag.235 A Catholic from Colognef declared in open session that, before 30 September (when the existing law expires) the ministry might well have changed hands.

That debate on the Anti-Socialist Law was, for us, a real masterpiece. It is the first time our men have scored an out-and-out victory in the Reichstag. The law will be extended for two years, probably for the last time. But not all the arguments nor all the facts in the world would have sufficed to bring about the rejection of the government's demands had there been any immediate prospect of young William's succession; he is your true Prussian, insolent and arrogant as the officers in Berlin in 1806, who would use the steps of the French embassy to whet their swords on only, vanquished, to surrender those swords to Napoleon's soldiers two months later.236

[^1]: a William I - b William II, son of Frederick William - c Frederick William (later Frederick III) - d Frederick William had larynx cancer - e Victoria Adelaide Mary Louisa - f Peter Franz Reichensperger (Speech in the Reichstag on 27 January 1888)





**[p. 147]**

In the meantime I am taking care of my eyesight which is improving under the treatment prescribed by my specialist, although he hasn't yet butchered my tear duct. But I have to spare my eyes.

My love to Laura.

Yours ever,

F. E.

First published, in the language of the Printed according to the original original (French), in: F. Engels, P. et L. Lafargue, Correspondance, t. II, Paris, Translated from the French 1956

90

ENGELS TO HERMANN SCHLÜTER

IN HOTTINGEN-ZURICH

London, 12 February 1888

Dear Mr Schlüter,

Unfortunately I shall not be able to send the ms.a I promised you by the 20th of this month, the reason being interruptions of all kinds, the arrival next week of the proofs of the Manifesto}' and the special care I am having to take of my eyes just now, while under treatment.

a F. Engels, The Role of Force in History - b The English edition of the Manifesto of the Communist Party by Marx and Engels



**[p. 148]**

As soon as you give me a definite date I can let you know whether or not I shall be able to manage it by then. If not, it might be best if you could print something shorter in the meantime, for it will be a question or 3 or 4 weeks at most.

Whether the ms. is suitable for publication in the Sozialdemokrat is something that had better be decided on the spot when it arrives.

In any case, having regard to the present critical political situation, a certain amount of delay—to see how things turn out—would seem to me almost mandatory.

With kindest regards,

Yours,

F. Engels

First published in: Marx and Engels, Printed according to the original Works, First Russian Edition, Vol. XXVIII, Moscow, 1940 Published in English for the first time

91

ENGELS TO HERMANN SCHLÜTER

IN HOTTINGEN-ZURICH

London, 19 February 1888

Dear Mr Schlüter,

I cannot manage it. So you had better print something else in the meantime and if possible let me know a fortnight or 3 weeks in advance



**[p. 149]**

As soon as possible I shall send you the English Manifesto for the archives.227

Kindest regards to you all,

Yours,

F. Engels

First published in: Marx and Engels, Printed according to the original Works, First Russian Edition, Vol. XXVIII, Moscow, 1940 Published in English for the first time

92

ENGELS TO FRIEDRICH ADOLPH SORGE237

IN ROCHESTER

London, 22 February 1888

Dear Sorge,

I must in all honesty confess that, from the start, I hardly thought it possible you would be able to stick it out in that small provincial town.2181 can think of no greater misfortune for a civilised man who has come of age in a big movement than to be relegated to some such remote hole after living for years in a metropolis. Well, I'm glad you have made up your mind. It will make the remaining few months more tolerable for you.

a F. Engels, The Role of Force in History



**[p. 150]**

At all events, a long-standing wish of yours is to be fulfilled in the next few days: the Manifesto is being brought out in English over here by Reeves. Translated by S. Moore,54 revised by us both, preface by me." Have already read the first proofs. As soon as I get copies I shall let you have two, one of them for the Wischnewetzkys. For Reeves is paying S. Moore a royalty for author's rights, and since it was / who concluded the contract, I cannot be directly involved in getting it pirated in America. Otherwise Reeves could declare that this constituted a breach of contract, and poor Sam Moore wouldn't get anything. But obviously I neither could nor would prevent its being pirated. After all, did not Reeves pirate my preface to the Condition of the Working Classa2

Aveling is getting a couple of plays produced and, if all goes well, will extricate himself from his journalistic misère!0 He and Tussy are due here shortly; they are dining with me as Aveling has a meeting not far from here. At Christmas the Lafargues moved to Le Perreux, beyond Vincennes, 20 minutes from Paris by train, and are amusing themselves doing rural tasks. The Socialiste has died yet again.234 The workers of Paris don't want to read a weekly. Vaillant is acquitting himself famously in the Municipal Council; he was much in evidence during the presiden- tial crisis197 when the menacing attitude of the workers prevented the election of Ferry. He will be the guiding light of the next provisional government provided it's not too long in coming.

Bebel and Singer have inflicted a formidable defeat on the Prussians over the Anti-Socialist Law.235 For the first time the whole of Europe has had to pay attention to our people in the Reichstag. You will have read the text of Bebel's speech in the Gleichheit—a masterpiece in which he excelled himself.0

I hope it won't come to war, though this would mean that all the mili- tary studies which those very rumours of war have forced me to take up again will have been done in vain. The odds are as follows: Thanks to

a F. Engels, 'Preface to the 1888 English Edition of the Manifesto of the Communist Party' - b misery - c Gleichheit, No. 6, 11 February 1888



**[p. 151]**

War or no war, everything is heading for a crisis. The state of affairs in Russia can't go on very much longer. The Hohenzollerns are done for, the Crown Prince3 is mortally ill, his son,b a cripple and insolent young guardee.0 In France the downfall of the exploiters' bourgeois republic looms ever closer; as in 1847, scandals threaten to bring about a révolu- tion du mépris.238 And in this country the masses are coming increas- ingly under the sway of an instinctive socialism which still, I am glad to say, resists definite formulation in accordance with the dogma of this or that socialist organisation, and hence will accept it all the more readily when something crucial happens. All that is needed is for the fun to begin somewhere or other, and the bourgeoisie will be dumbfounded by the hitherto latent socialism which will then vent itself and become manifest.

Your old friend,

F. Engels

First published, slightly abridged, in Briefe und Auszüge aus Briefen von Job. Phil. Becker, Jos. Dietzgen, Friedrich Engels, Karl Marx, u. A. an F. A. Sorge und Andere, Stuttgart,

1906 and, in full, in: Marx and Engels, Works, First Russian Edition,

Vol. XXVIII, Moscow, 1940

Printed according to the original

Published in English in full for the first time

[^1]: a Frederick William (later Frederick III) - b William, later William II - c In the original: Jardeleutenant (Berlin dialect)





**[p. 93]**

ENGELS T O F L O R E N C E KELLEY-WISCHNEWETZKY 2 3 9

IN NEW YORK

London, 22 February 1888 122 Regent's Park Road, N. W.

Dear Mrs Wischnewetzky,

I have duly received your letters [of] 21 December and 8 January and return Lovel Ps letter with thanks.

I am astonished at Grönlund's proceedings, I was rather glad he did not call on me here. From all I hear he is full of vanity and self-conceit, to a degree unattainable even to a German, to be reached only by a Scandinavian, but also so naif in it as only a Scandinavian can be—in a German it would be offensive. Es muss auch solche Käuze geben.3- In America not less than in England all these self-announced grands hommes'0 will find their own level as soon as the masses begin to stir— and will then find themselves shifted to that level of their own with a velocity that will astonish them. We have had all that in Germany and France, and in the International too.

I have since heard from poor old Sorge, in a way that fully confirms all you say. I fully expected from the beginning that he would not be able to live in that solitude and wilderness.218 I hope his return to Hoboken may prove a success.

I sent you a No. of Bradlaugh's National Reformer with an article No. 1 on my book.0 Copies were sent to: National Reformer, Weekly Dispatch, Reynold's Newspaper, Club Journal, Our Corner (Mrs Besant), To-day (H. Bland), Christian Socialist, Pall Mall Gazette. I have requested friends to look at these papers and magazines and let me know if anything appears, when you shall have it.

Reeves has also sent for the 1,000 pamphlets,d whether that is merely a ruse to keep competition out, remains to be seen. The thing seems to sell exceedingly well.

[^1]: a There must be such odd characters too - b great men - c The Condition of the Working-Class in England - d F. Engels, The Labor Movement in America





**[p. 153]**

Justice brought out again the old American translation of the Communist Manifesto.240 This set Reeves inquiring about an authorised translation. I had one by S. Moore, and Sam happened to be here. So we revised it and sold it to Reeves; he got the proofs last week and as soon as it is out you shall have a copy. Sam Moore is the best translator I know but not in a position to do work without getting something for it.

I do not quite understand your remark about the book being sold here 1 shilling dearer. $1.25 is equal as far as I know to 5s. and that is the selling price here.

Mrs Campbell has not yet called on me so far. Your remarks about my books being boycotted by the official German Socialists of New York241 are quite correct, but I am used to that sort of thing, and so the efforts of these gentry amuse me. Better so than to have to undergo their patronage. With them the movement is a business, and 'business is business'. This kind of thing won't last very long, their efforts to boss the American movement as they have done with the German-American one, must fail miserably. The masses will set all that right when once they move.

Here things go slowly but well. The various little organisations have found their level and are willing to co-operate without bickerings. The police brutalities in Trafalgar Square185 have done wonders in helping to widen the gap between the working men Radicals and the Middle Class Liberals and Radicals, the latter have behaved cowardly in and out of Parliament. The Law and Liberty League—a body gaining ground every day—is the first organisation in which Socialist delegates, as such, sit aside of Radical delegates.242 The stupidity of the present Tory govern- ment is appalling—if old Disraeli was alive, he would box their ears right and left. But this stupidity helps on matters wonderfully. Home Rule175

for Ireland and for London is now the cry here; the latter a thing which the Liberals fear even more than the Tories do. The working-class element is getting more and more exasperated, through the stupid Tory provocations, is getting daily more conscious of its strength at the ballot- box, and more penetrated by the Socialist leaven. The American exam- ple has opened their eyes, and if next autumn there was to be a repeti- tion, in any large American town, of the New York election campaign of 1886,7 the effect here would be instantaneous. The two great Anglo- Saxon nations are sure to set up competition in Socialism, as well as in other matters, and then it will be a race with ever accelerated velocity.



**[p. 1888]**

Reciprocating your kind wishes I remain

Yours very truly,

F. Engels

First published, slightly abridged, in Works, First Russian Edition, Vol. the language of the original (English), XXVIII, Moscow, 1940 in Briefe und Auszüge aus Briefen, von Job. Phil. Becker, Jos. Dietzgen, Reproduced from the original Friedrich Engels, Karl Marx u. A. an F. A. Sorge und Andere, Stuttgart, 1906 Published in English in full for the and, in full, in: Marx and Engels, first time.

94

ENGELS TO WILHELM LIEBKNECHT243

IN HOBOKEN

London, 23 February 1888

Dear Liebknecht,

[^1]: The debate on the Anti-Socialist Law235 was the biggest triumph we have ever scored in the parliamentary sphere and I'm only sorry that you were unable to be there. However, that's unlikely to go on for much longer, since you will, after all, be taking Hasenclever's place shortly.43

[^2]: a F. Engels, 'Protection and Free Trade. Preface to the Pamphlet: Karl Marx, Speech on the Question of Free Trade'





**[p. 155]**

prevails.

Bismarck's speech was addressed to Tsar Alexander in person in order that the Gatchina prisoner might at long last learn the truth.245 Whether it will help is doubtful. The Russians, such is their irresolution, are becoming ever more deeply embroiled and in the end they may not be able to draw back with honour. Therein lies the danger. As a rule they behave like utter jack-asses when they embark on a war. It's a repeat of Croesus by crossing the Halys will ruin a mighty realm.*0 They can place barely a million men on the border and haven't enough officers for more. France disposes of VA million very good troops, but no longer has sufficient seasoned men and still fewer officers to provide more. With 2 Vi million seasoned troops and an adequate supply of officers and NCOs, Bismarck has, however, still pitched Germany's strength too low. Nor is it a bad thing that this should be so. Until the revolution gets under way in Russia, Bismarck must not be brought down by an external defeat. That would only restore his popularity.

But it is impossible to foretell what will come of the affair if it really gets to the stage of a war. They'll certainly try to turn it into a mock war, but that is not so easy to do. If it is to be done in the way that suits us best, and the odds are strongly in favour of it, then let it be a static war with changing fortunes on the French border, an offensive war with the capture of the Polish fortresses on the Russian border, and a revolution in Petersburg which will all at once throw an entirely different light on everything, so far as the gentlemen prosecuting the war are concerned. This much is certain—there will be no rapid decisions, no triumphal marches either on Berlin or on Paris. France is very strong and very clev- erly fortified; so far as their disposition is concerned, the works round Paris are a masterly affair.

[^1]: a conspiracy of silence - b This sentence was in Greek in the original





**[p. 156]**

Reuss has instituted proceedings against the Commonweal (Morris) for denouncing him as a spy.247 Obviously the Prussian embassy wishes to regain over here the ground lost in Berlin. It may, however, be making hellish blunder. Mr Reuss has to go into the witness box, and in this country perjury is not to be trifled with. There's no Puttkamer over here to help!

The Manifesto is coming out in English, edited by myself.54 I shall send you one as soon as I get some.

Your

F. E.

Apropos, Pfänder's widow is living over here in the most wretched circumstances. I do what I can and have just sent her another couple of £s. The louts' society106 put on a concert for her and collected about £5. She herself is ill, her daughter paints, and the pair of them do bits of needlework, but all is wretchedness. Might the party not set aside a trifling sum every quarter? The doctor says she'll barely get through the winter. See what you can do. We really ought to set aside pensions for our veterans' widows.

First published in full in: Marx and Printed according to the original Engels, Works, First Russian Edition, Vol. XXVIII, Moscow, 1940 Published in English for the first time



**[p. 95]**

ENGELS T O F E R D I N A N D D O M E L A N I E U W E N H U I S

IN THE HAGUE

London, 23 February 1888 122 Regent's Park Road, N.W.

My dear Nieuwenhuis,

I informed Kautsky of the contents of your letter immediately it arrived and understand that he has since seen to everything you wanted.

The news from here is pretty good on the whole. The various social- ist organisations have refrained from forcibly accelerating the natural, normal and hence somewhat slow process of development of the English working class; hence less fuss, less vainglory, but also less disap- pointment. Moreover they get on amongst themselves. As to setting the masses in motion, that has been taken care of by the incomprehensible stupidity of the government and the imperturbable cowardice of the Liberal opposition. The Trafalgar Square affair185 did not simply breathe new life into the working men; the deplorable way in which the Liberal leaders behaved then and subsequently is driving more and more radical workers over to the socialists, the more so as the latter behaved very well on that particular occasion and were to be seen everywhere in the front rank. Cunninghame-Graham is a declared Marxist and at the meeting last Monday246 demanded outright that the nation confiscate all the means of production. So here too we are repre- sented in Parliament.

The best proof of how far the workers over here have advanced is provided by the radical working men's clubs22 in the East End. What impressed them above all was the example set by the New York election campaign in November 1886;7 for what America does makes a greater impression over here than anything the whole of the continent of Europe may do. The example set by New York made it clear to the chaps that in the end the workers would do best if they formed their own party. When the Avelings returned, they seized on this mood and since then their activities have proved most effective in these clubs84—the only political workingmen's organisations of any importance that exist here. Both Aveling and his wife give several lectures a week down there and exert a great deal of influence; there's no doubt that they are now the



**[p. 158]**

An English edition of the Communist Manifesto, revised by myself, will be coming out in the next week or two; I shall send you one—there's a big demand for it over here, which is also a good sign.

You too will have been delighted at our brilliant victory in the Reichstag in Berlin. Bebel surpassed himself.235 He came to stay with me last autumn173 and I only hope that gaol suits you5 as well as it does him.64 He says he always feels very much better afterwards (he suffers from nerves and in gaol his nervous excitation dies down).

Shall you be coming over here again next summer? With kindest regards.

Yours,

F. Engels

First published, in Russian, in the Printed according to the original magazine Istorik-Marksist, No. 6 (40), Moscow, 1934 Published in English for the first time



**[p. 96]**

ENGELS T O LAURA LAFARGUE 4 0

AT LE PERREUX

London, 25 February 1888

My dear Laura,

I have just half an hour before post-time to give you a sign of life after sending off the last proofs of the Manifesto.3' I hope you have better weather than we here: nothing but East winds, frost, snow showers, varying with a few hours' thaw. Very uncomfortable with the English system of fire-places, but then this winter cannot last for ever.

I have not sent the Pall Mall Gazette of late because there is literally nothing in it. It is strictly a London local paper, and consequently deadly dull when nothing is stirring in London.

Bebel and Singer had a glorious victory in the Reichstag, not only at the first but also at the third reading of the bill.235 It was exactly like O'Brien's victory over Balfour244 (who is a Scottish Puttkamer all over). Most of our people were at the meeting last Monday to welcome Cunninghame-Graham and Burns246; O'Brien spoke there again, and very well. Cunninghame-Graham who already before, at Glasgow, had publicly stated that he stood on the basis of Karl Marx 'absolutely and entirely', here again proclaimed the nationalisation of all means of production. So we are represented in the British Parliament too. Hyndman, who had not been asked to speak, had got some of his fellows to call for him, took possession of the platform, but only to attack violently and personally some Radical M.P.s present—invited guests— who by the way had been told before by others, quite sufficiently, about their shortcomings.b This attack of Hyndman's however was so uncalled for and out of place that he was hooted down.

You will have heard that Reuss has sued Morris for libel for calling him a spy in the Commonweal.1*7 Evidently the work of the Bismarckian embassy. Morris was very funky at first, not having any evidence ready at hand, but I think we have since secured enough to

a K. Marx and F. Engels, Manifesto of the Communist Party - b See J. Blackwell, 'The Release of Burns and Graham', Justice, No. 215, Vol. V, 25 February



**[p. 160]**

Nim wishes me to ask you again to give Longuet a hint that he better begin repaying a little of that money. She seems very sore on that point.

Shall we have war? If so, it will be the most foolish thing on the part of the Czara and the French chauvins^ that they can be guilty of. I have lately studied the military chances. What Bismarck says, that Germany can send out 2Vi-}> million of drilled and well-officered men, is rather below than above the truth. Russia will never have as many as a million actually on the seat of war, and France can send out VA-IV2 million of drilled and well-officered men; beyond that, officers and sergeants will be either absent or unfit. Thus Germany alone will be quite capable of resist- ing, for a time at least, an attack on both sides at once. The great advan- tage of Germany is in the greater number of drilled men, and especially of sergeants and officers. As to quality, the French will be fully equal to the Germans, as far as the line is concerned; beyond that, the German Landwehr2** is far better than the French territorials. The Russians I consider worse than they used to be, they have adopted a system of universal liability to service78 for which they are not civilised enough and certainly are very short of good officers. And corruption is there as rife as ever—and probably will also play a certain part on the French side, if we are to judge from the Wilsoniades168 and other scandals.

Jollymeier is very melancholy that you have not written him a line yet with that gold pen. Have you no mercy with him? He will be here again in about 4 weeks for Easter, which this year falls on Bismarck's birthday, alias All fools; day.c Very proper too, after people have been foolish enough for 1,800 years to celebrate such a fantastical festival!

Methinks I hear a certain bell calling me to the consumption of—I dare say veal cutlets. Farewell for today, and may the breeches of Paul, with their excessive length, lose also their perfume of sour size—a perfume too well known, alas, to an old Manchesterian!

Yours ever,

F. Engels

First published, in the language of II, Paris, 1956 the original (English), in: F. Engels, P. et L. Lafargue, Correspondance, Reproduced from the original

[^1]: a Alexander III - b chauvinists - c 1 April





**[p. 97]**

ENGELS T O WILHELM LIEBKNECHT 1 2 5

IN BORSDORF NEAR LEIPZIG

London, 29 February 1888

Dear Liebknecht,

If you people will allocate 100 marks a quarter to Mrs Pfänder, I shall do the same, in which case she will have £40 a year and that will safe- guard her against extreme indigence.

After Pfänder's death she had a little money, opened a lodging house, but was necessarily restricted to a very second-rate neighbourhood; she was also unfortunate in other respects (e.g. let rooms to several paed- erasts who were found out)—in short, it didn't work. Next she took a little shop, whereupon the daughter died who alone understood how to manage a small business of that sort—in short, the money melted away. Pfänder's brother, whom the former had at one time bought out of the army and supported for a long period, and who is in New Ulm, Minnesota, insisted upon her going over there with her other daughter. On arrival they found they were to be treated as 'poor relations' and do domestic service. Mrs Pfänder was not slow to decide; she returned forthwith, having been there barely a fortnight. That ate up what little resources she had left. Since then everything possible has been done for her over here, but I am the only person here who can provide for her in the long run, though not with a sufficiency in view of all the other calls upon me. But, as I say, if your proposal goes through, the worst will be taken care of. In any case, it won't be for very long.

I read the Daily News in the morning, the Evening Standard and Pall Mall Gazette in the evenings and the Weekly Dispatch on Sundays. At the moment, that is; I sometimes ring the changes. But if there is anything interesting in them, I send it to Paris for Laura and cannot very well depart from this. However, I shall see what I can send you. Provided you are look- ing for literary contributions rather than politics, the Weekly Dispatch is at all events better than the Saturday Review. Belongs to Mrs Ashton Dilke, editor Dr Al. Hunter, M. P. for Aberdeen. It's bigoted, middle class-radical, but comprehensive so far as English news is concerned, has much parlia- mentary gossip during session time, and first-rate correspondence from Paris (Mrs Crawford of the Daily News, who can speak her mind much more freely here). I'll send it to you sometimes.



**[p. 162]**

I don't think Bismarck is so stupid as to believe that the Russians would be a party to his crushing France. Constant squabbling between France and Germany is, after all, their chief means of dominating Europe and this implies their holding the scales. That Bismarck desires nothing more ardently than to sink France, if possible, beneath the waves is, of course, undeniable. But it won't be so easy to do. The new French fortifications— the Mass and Moselle Lines, the two groups of fortresses in the north and southeast (Belfort, Besançon, Lyons, Dijon, Langres, Epinal) and, finally, the wonderful new groups of forts round Paris—have taken the wind out of his sails; as things are now, Germany cannot get the better of France or France the better of Germany. And that's a very good thing. If the worst comes to the worst, the frontier will probably be the scene of a static war with changing fortunes, which will instill respect for their opponents into both armies and make possible a reasonable peace. On the other hand, the Russians may suffer a formidable drubbing, and that would be best of all.

It's just begun to snow again—for the past 3 weeks nothing but snow, frost and east wind, with a bit of a thaw in between-whiles. You would also seem to be having really filthy weather where you are.

Many regards.

Your

F. E.

Do you know a workingman called Carl August Nitzer from Lindenau, who was allegedly expelled from Leipzig (after being held for 3 months on remand), but then allegedly spent another 3 months agitat- ing on behalf of Viereck before fleeing (which is why, he says, he cannot produce an expulsion order)? The laddie has come to me two or three times asking for money, but he gives the impression of being a case-hard- ened layabout and sponger.

First published in: Marx and Engels, Printed according to the original Works, First Russian Edition, Vol. XXVIII, Moscow, 1940 Published in English in full for the first time



**[p. 98]**

ENGELS TO HERMANN SCHLÜTER49

IN HOTTINGEN-ZURICH

London, 17 March 1888

Dear Mr Schlüter,

Once again it's no go with the pamphlet203 so far as the date you give is concerned. I am very sorry to have played fast and loose with you like this, but it's not my fault. I have to do exactly what my eye specialist tells me if I want to get back into proper shape again; I am not allowed to write for more than 2 hours, i.e. am forced to break off when I'm just getting into my stride, and frequently cannot even make a start because of the pressure of correspondence. So it would be better if I were to take my time over the thing and do it properly. Also, there's a mass of essen- tial material which has only just turned up and requires perusal. In short, it would be best if you were to look to your own convenience and, when I have made enough progress, I shall write and tell you.

Lehmann the Younger3 writes a hideously affected German. He has every reason to warn people against the dangers of an inadequate educa- tion, of which he himself, in his muddled, liberal-conservative Manchesterist proclamation,251 presents such a terrifying example. However, it's hard to have to play the Emperor when you have one foot in the grave. Anyhow, if he holds out for another 6 months he will intro- duce a measure of instability and uncertainty into the economic system, and that's all we need. As soon as your philistine has any inkling that the system will not go on as it is for ever but is, on the contrary, tottering, it will be the beginning of the end. The building has lost its keystone, Lehmann I,b and it will soon become evident how rickety the whole contraption is. That may mean things will be momentarily better for us but also—in certain circumstances—momentarily worse; alternatively it may mean war. At all events, we are once more in for a lively time.

Kindest regards to Ede and Liebknecht if, as I suppose, he is there.

Yours,

F. E.

[^1]: a Frederick III - b William I





**[p. 164]**

99

ENGELS TO PAUL LAFARGUE87

AT LE PERREUX

London, 19 March 1888

My dear Lafargue,

I am sending you a Weekly Dispatch which sheds light on the reason why 'friend Fritz' is made to work so hard.252 Bismarck would give two years of his life to reduce him—Fritz—to a state in which he would be obliged to acknowledge himself unfit to rule. That is why his nose is kept to the grindstone, and that is why Fritz is having to sweat. The intrigue is of long date, its original object being the total elimination of Fritz before the old man's3 death; this having failed, they are trying to kill him by dint of hard work, state occasions, etc. All this can only lead to an open breach, provided Fritz does not succumb too soon; if he recovers a little in the course of the summer and then brings about a ministerial reshuffle, it will be greatly to our benefit. The main thing is that home affairs should become unstable, that the philistine should lose his faith in the perpetuity of Bismarck's régime and that he should find himself face to face with a situation in which he, the philistine, will have to decide and act instead of leaving it all to the government. Old William was the keystone and, now that it has fallen, the whole building is threat- ened with collapse. What we need is at least six months of Fritz to undermine it still further, to make philistines and functionaries uncertain of the future, and to conjure up the possibility of a change in home affairs. Fritz is spineless and, even when in good health, he agrees with

[^1]: a William I





**[p. 165]**

On the other hand, if Fritz dies sooner, William II will not be the same as William I and we shall nonetheless experience a sudden volte- face on the part of the bourgeoisie. This young man is bound to perpe- trate follies which will not be forgiven him as were the old man's. If the doctors slit his father's throat0 he, the son, may well suffer a similar fate, but at the hands of others. He is not paralysed, by the way. His arm was fractured at birth, no one noticed this at the time, hence the atrophy of that limb.

In any case the ice has been broken. Continuity in home affairs has been disrupted, and movement will take the place of stagnation. That is all we require.

Boulanger is undoubtedly something of a charlatan, but he's not a cipher for all that. He has given proof of military gumption and his char- latanism may serve him well in the French army; Napoleon had his fair share of it, too. But he seems politically inept, perhaps because of his overweening ambition. There can be no doubt that, if the French want to throw away any chance they have of recovering the lost provinces, they need only ape Boulanger's friends—in particular Rochefort, who seems stupid to the point of folly. All that is needed to reconcile the numbskull Alsatians with Germany is an abortive war of revenge; the peasants are mercenaries who, given the choice, will always serve in the victor's army, while the bourgeois will find their profits assured by the German tariff no less than by that of the French. As for the Russians, they are sure to be defeated; I have just been studying their 1877-78 campaign in Turkey253—98 incompetent generals to 2 tolerable ones, an exceedingly ill-organised army with officers beneath all criticism, with brave soldiers inured to the utmost hardship (they waded through fords, in minus 10 degrees Reaumur, with water up to their chests), very obedi- ent, but also totally incapable of understanding the only kind of fighting possible today—fighting in extended order. Their strength lay in fight- ing in close order, a form which no longer exists, and anyone seeking to revive it would be swept by the fire of modern weapons.

[^1]: a Victoria Adelaide Mary Louisa - b William (later William II) - c Frederick III had larynx cancer





**[p. 166]**

Tussy and Edward are leaving on Thursday for their 'castle' at Stratford-on-Avon and the Kautskys are to follow them. What a pleas- ant prospect—a labourer's cottage, with the cold and the wind and the flurries of snow we're now having! As for the rest of us, we have so far stood the winter very well until, a week ago, we had a brilliant, warm, spring day, followed by frost, nor'-easter and snow. It gave Nim the mumps, alias parotitis, and me a 'flu-like cold in the head—difficult things to get rid of in this weather. But nothing particularly irksome.

I enclose cheque for £15. My love to Laura. What are Longuet and the children3 doing? Nim always asks me for news of them as soon as a letter arrives from Paris.

Yours ever, RE.

First published in the language of the Printed according to the original original (French), in F. Engels, P. et L. Lafargue, Correspondance, 1.11, Paris, Translated from the French 1956

100

ENGELS TO MARGARET HARKNESS256

IN LONDON

[Draft]

London, early April 1888

Dear Miss Harkness,

I thank you very much for sending me through Messrs Vizetelly your City Girl. I have read it with the greatest pleasure and avidity. It is indeed, as my friend Eichhoff your translator calls it, ein kleines

[^1]: a Jean, Edgar, Marcel and Jenny Longuet





**[p. 167]**

What strikes me most in your tale besides its realistic truth is that it exhibits the courage of the true artist. Not only in the way you treat the Salvation Army,205 in the teeth of supercilious respectability, which respectability will perhaps learn from your tale, for the first time, why the Salvation Army has such a hold on the popular masses. But chiefly in the plain unvarnished manner in which you make the old, old story, the proletarian girl seduced by a middle-class man, the pivot of the whole book. Mediocrity would have felt bound to hide the, to it, commonplace character of the plot under heaps of artificial complica- tions and adornments, and yet would not have got rid of the fate of being found out. You felt you could afford to tell an old story, because you could make it a new one by simply telling it truly.

Your Mr Arthur Grant is a masterpiece. If I have anything to criticise, it would be that perhaps, after all, the tale is not quite realistic enough. Realism, to my mind, implies, beside truth of detail, the truthful reproduction of typical characters under typical circumstances. Now your characters are typical enough, as far as they go; but the circumstances which surround them and make them act, are not perhaps equally so. In the City Girl the working class figures as a passive mass, unable to help itself and not even making any attempt at striving to help itself. All attempts to drag it out of its torpid misery come from without, from above. Now if this was a correct description about 1800 or 1810, in the days of Saint-Simon and Robert Owen, it cannot appear so in 1887 to a man who for nearly fifty years has had the honour of sharing in most of the fights of the militant proletariat. The rebellious reaction of the working class against the oppressive medium which surrounds them, their attempts—convulsive, half-conscious or conscious—at recovering their status as human beings, belong to history and must therefore lay claim to a place in the domain of realism.

I am far from finding fault with your not having written a point-blank socialist novel, a 'Tendenz-roman' as we Germans call it, to glorify the social and political views of the author. That is not at all what I mean. The more the opinions of the author remain hidden, the better for the work of art. The realism I allude to may crop out even in spite of the author's opinions. Let me refer to an example. Balzac whom I consider a

[^1]: a a little masterpiece





**[p. 168]**

in La Comédie humaine gives us a most wonderfully realistic history of French 'Society', especially of le monde parisien^ describing, chronicle- fashion, almost year by year from 1816 to 1848 the progressive inroads of the rising bourgeosie upon the society of nobles, that reconstituted itself after 1815 and set up again, as far as it could, the standard of la vieille politesse française? He describes how the last remnants of this, to him, model society gradually succumbed before the intrusion of the vulgar moneyed upstart, or were corrupted by him; how the grande dame, whose conjugal infidelities were but a mode of asserting herself in perfect accordance with the way she had been disposed of in marriage, gave way to the bourgeois, who horned her husband for cash or cashmere; and around this central picture he groups a complete history of French Society from which, even in economical details (for instance the re- arrangement of real and personal property after the Revolution) I have learned more than from all the professed historians, economists and statisticians of the period together. Well, Balzac was politically a Legitimist257; his great work is a constant elegy on the irretrievable decay of good society; his sympathies are all with the class doomed to extinc- tion. But for all that his satire is never keener, his irony never bitterer, than when he sets in motion the very men and women with whom he sympathises most deeply—the nobles. And the only men of whom he always speaks with undisguised admiration, are his bitterest political antagonists, the republican heroes of the Cloîtred Saint-Méry,258 the men, who at that time (1830-36) were indeed the representatives of the popu- lar masses. That Balzac thus was compelled to go against his own class sympathies and political prejudices, that he saw the necessity of the downfall of his favourite nobles, and described them as people deserving no better fate; and that he saw the real men of the future where, for the time being, they alone were to be found—that I consider one of the great- est triumphs of Realism, and one of the grandest features in old Balzac.

I must own, in your defence, that nowhere in the civilised world are the working people less actively resistant, more passively submitting to fate, more hébétése than in the East End of London. And how do I know whether you have not had very good reasons for contenting yourself, for once, with a picture of the passive side of working-class life, reserving the active side for another work?

[^1]: a past, present and future - b Paris high society - c French politeness of old - d monastery - e dull





**[p. 169]**

101

ENGELS TO LAURA LAFARGUE

AT LE PERREUX

London, 10-11 April 1888

My dear Laura,

Schorlemmer returned to Manchester yesterday and so I can sit down today and write a few lines, that is to say if Edward and Tussy, who are returning from their 'Castle' and will be here about 5, do not drop in too soon.

First of all I must congratulate Paul on his splendid discoveries in etymology, which are truly astonishing.259 That a great many French words which we used to derive from the Latin bos ox, are descended from the Greek bous ox, is already something. But that bouillon comes from bous and not from bullire to boil, is a great discovery and only pity that Paul did not follow it up a little further. Thus 5o«-strapa260 is evidently of the same derivation, and 5«o-naparte (for 2?o«-naparte) also, and Bonapartism being thus connected with ox, Bou-lznger must be derived from bous; and then also its English equivalent Baker, which throws a completely new light on the adventure of Colonel Baker in the railway-carriage: how could he help rushing on Europa-Robinson, being descended from bous Jupiter?261 Moreover there can be no doubt that in mou-tarde the m stands for an original b, and that thus its derivation from bous is assured—what a flood of light this throws on the fact that mustard is eaten to beef only and not to mutton!

Another great progress is to treat Sanskrit on the same level as cran- iology, and to have discovered des linguistes d'Allemagne et d'Angleterre3- who say that le finnois offre plus d'analogie avec les idiomes aryens que le sanscrit.^ I have only heard of some who, ascribing

[^1]: a the German and English linguists - b Finnish shows more analogies to Aryan idioms than Sanskrit





**[p. 170]**

But joke à part the articles are very good, and what does it matter to the Parisians qui s'en fichent* whether Fergus tells them a few bulls about etymology. It is far more important that they should learn a little about their own language, and that they find here. Only I don't think it is necessary to the amusement of the Parisians that an author should commit himself by such assertions. But then we all of us have the incli- nation to brag most of what we know least; at all events I know I am.b

11th April. Exactly as I expected. The two hungry soulsc dropped in just as I finished the preceding page, bringing eggs, butter, pork pie, sausages from their truly rural retreat, and two good appetites. Today I had my American mail-day and now try to finish this.

In France things seems to me to go very well. Boulangism is the just and deserved punishment for the cowardice of all parties in the face of that bourgeois chauvinism which thinks it can make the clock of univer- sal history stand still until France has reconquered Alsace. Fortunately

[^1]: a who do not care a straw - b Engels presumably wanted to say: '. . . I know I have it' - c Eleanor Marx-Aveling and Edward Aveling





**[p. 171]**

For the rest, the Opportunists199 are getting more and more worn out, verschlissen^ and have to fall back upon the alliance with the Monarchists, that is to say upon political suicide. The great progress in French public opinion is this: that the Republic is recognised as the only possible government, that Monarchy is equivalent to civil war and foreign war. The action of the Opportunists (besides their flagrant corruption) drives public opinion more and more towards the Left, and compels the nomination of more and more radical governments. All this in strict harmony with the regular development since 1875. We can wish for no more than that this should continue, and if Boulanger assists this move unintentionally all the better. The sense which the French have unbeknown to themselves—the necessary logical inheritance of a great, unconsciously logical history—will I hope prove more powerful than all the nonsense they set to work consciously and intentionally.

The German philistine convinces himself more and more that with old Williamc the clef de voûteà of the present system has gone, and that the whole voûte11 will gradually follow. I only hope Bismarck will not be sent to the right-about merely in order to re-enter in triumph. Otherwise he had better stop.

What a fool that Rochefort is. Quotes Catholic Munich papers to prove that the Germans are only awaiting the French again invading Germany in order to join them, upset Bismarck and restore French domination in Germany! Cannot that idiot see that nothing would more fortify Bismarck than such a French attempt to 'free' Germany, and that we intend to settle our internal concerns ourselves!

Ever yours,

F. Engels called by Dinner Bell

First published in: Marx and Engels, Reproduced from the original Works, Second Russian Edition, Vol. 37, Moscow 1965 Published in English for the first time

[^1]: a A man who harbours plans similar to Trochu's is done for - b seedy - c William I - d keystone - e vault





**[p. 102]**

ENGELS TO FLORENCE KELLY-WISCHNEWETZKY239

IN NEW YORK

London, 11 April 1888

Dear Mrs Wischnewetzky,

Your call for the ms.a comes upon me very suddenly and I am afraid I shall not be able to oblige you. I am allowed to write two hours a day, no more; have a large correspondence to attend to; find that at the end of the two hours, am only just getting warm in harness, and then, just then, must stop. Under these circumstances I am quite unable to do arti- cles de saison to order, especially for a distant market, and do not see my way to having the pamphlet ready in ms. by 15th May, much less have it ready printed in New York by that time. Still I will set about it at once, after clearing off urgent letters, and do my best. I interrupt an important piece of business13 on purpose, to clear this matter off.

Still in my opinion you need not fear of losing your opportunity. The Free Trade question will not disappear from the American horizon until settled. I am sure that Protection has done its duty for the United States and is now an obstacle, and whatever may be the fate of the Mills bill,263

the struggle will not end until either Free Trade enables the United States manufacturers to take the leading part in the world market to which they are entitled in many branches of trade, or until both Protectionists and Free Traders are shoved aside by those behind them. Economic facts are stronger than politics, especially if the politics are so much mixed up with corruption as in America. I should not wonder if during the next few years one set of American manufacturers after the other passed over to the Free Traders—if they understand their interests they must.

[^1]: Thanks for the official publications0—I think they will be just what I want.

[^2]: I am glad of your success against the Executive as far as it goes—from Volkszeitung weekly 31 Marchd I see they won't give in yet—there you

[^3]: a F. Engels, 'Protection and Free Trade. Preface to the Pamphlet: Karl Marx, Speech on the Question of Free Trade' - b work on Vol. Ill of Capital -c See this volume, pv - d The item referred to appeared in the column 'Socialistische Arbeiter-Partei National-Executiv-Komite', Wochenblatt der N. Y. Volkszeitung, No. 13,31 March 1888





**[p. 173]**

I was very much rejoiced to read that the Sorges feel happier again in their old quarters,218 I hope they will continue so. Old Sorge could no more live in a hole like Rochester than I could in Krähwinker or its Lancashire equivalents, Chowbent or Bullocksmithy.

I return herewith the letters of the Board of Supervision. In haste

Yours faithfully,

F. Engels

First published, slightly abridged, in the language of the original (English), in Briefe und Auszüge aus Briefen von John. Phil. Becker, Jos. Dietzgen, Friedrich Engels, Karl Marx u.A. an F. A. Sorge und Andere, Stuttgart, 1906 and, in full, in: Marx and Engels,

Works, First Russian Edition, Vol. XXVIII, Moscow 1940

Reproduced from the original

Published in English in full for the first time

103

ENGELS T O AUGUST BEBEL

IN PLAUEN NEAR DRESDEN

London, 12 April 1888

Dear Bebel,

Since you wrote on 8 March, I have been taking a bit of a look at events; things now seem to be settling down sufficiently for one to size them up. Your policy of saying that nothing has changed is, when applied to the masses, tactically quite correct; but in my view it by no means does justice to the historical situation.

[^1]: a gossip - b (fig.) a godforsaken hole





**[p. 174]**

In assessing his character one must—because of the state of his health—proceed with the utmost caution. If a man is in constant danger of having his throat slit by his doctors," he may be excused from bestir- ring himself unduly; this would only be appropriate were his health to improve. Hence it is understandable that in internal affairs Bismarck and Puttkamer should have a freer hand than ever before.

But that is not to imply that nothing has changed. In William1, the building has lost its keystone and the fact that it is tottering is plainly manifest. Their internal policy betrays how desperately Bismarck and Co. are clinging to their positions. Nor is yours unchanged; it has dete- riorated precisely because Bismarck wishes to demonstrate that nothing has changed. The ostentatious exclusion of the Social Democrats from the amnesty, the mass scale of house searches and persecution, the desperate efforts to kill off the Sozialdemokrat in Switzerland81—all this proves that Bismarck & Co. feel the ground quaking under their feet, as do the efforts of the supporters of the Kartell265 to make Fritz realise what a monarch is.

In true monarchical fashion they give way over all political questions, yet it's a court intrigue which brings the conflict to light. The thing's absolutely farcical—according to Bismarck, the Tsarc has the right to forbid Battenberg's marriage, while according to Fritz and Victoria, in their particular case, all the profound and inscrutable political axioms whereby they have been guided throughout their lives are suddenly to be abolished!266

Being in such a parlous state, Fritz will doubtless be forced to give way here again—unless he gets better and can really weather a minis- terial crisis. It is not at all in our interests that Bismarck should sulkily withdraw, only to return in triumph 4 weeks later, the idol of your coalitionist philistine. We should be more than satisfied if the said

[^1]: a Frederick III had larynx cancer - b William I - c Alexander III





**[p. 175]**

Since absolutely nothing more is being divulged about the nature of the disease—not even Waldeyer's report which, if favourable, would certainly have been made public—there can be no doubt that it's a case of cancer. And here again our men of Progress45 are showing what stuff they are made of. Virchow who, if only in his capacity as a medical man, and one who has already been consulted, ought now to be on the spot, is digging for antiquities in Egypt! No doubt he wishes to be called in officially!

There can be no empire without an empereur, no Bonapartism with- out a Bonaparte. The system is tailored to the man, stands or falls with him. Like the old Slav idol of Pomerania, Triglav, our Bonaparte had three heads; the middle one has been cut off and, of the other two, Moltke is already past his prime and Bismarck tottering. He won't get the better of Victoria, she having learnt from her mother3 how to deal with ministers, even all-powerful ones. The old security is gone. The insecurity of the foundations will also become apparent in their policy; blunders abroad, at home recurrent coups de main. And it will become apparent in your philistine's loss of faith in his own idol, in the dwin- dling energy and zeal of civil servants, their minds bent on the possibil- ity of change and consequently of a changed future for themselves. All this if, as seems probable, Bismarck stays where he is. But should Fritz get better and Bismarck's position become seriously endangered, then, so Lenchen maintains, they'll take a pot shot at Fritz. This might in fact actually happen, should Puttkamer and his Ihrings and Naporras be endangered.

So whatever happens there'll be an interregnum, with Bismarck yearning for the exit of Fritz and the entry of the other William.b In that case, however, things won't be at all the same as they used to be. In that case there'll be bedlam. Our Bonapartism has now just about reached its Mexican period. When that comes, so will our 1866, followed shortly by 1870; i.e. it will come from within, a domestic Sedan.267 Well, let it!

In France things are taking a perfectly logical course—the right-wing Republicans are being forced into an alliance with the Monarchists and are foundering as a result, and possible governments have to be formed ever further to the left. Boulanger is obviously a political nitwit and will

[^1]: a Queen Victoria - b William II





**[p. 176]**

Shall send receipt for Mrs Pf ander 's 100 marks in my next; I forgot to get it from her. Meanwhile many thanks for the donation. I shall do what I can to support the woman, but shall take the liberty of approaching you people again.

Kindest regards to your wife and daughter, and to Singer.

Your

EE.

First published in: Marx and Engels, Printed according to the original Works, First Russian Edition, Vol. XXVIII, Moscow 1940 Published in English for the first time

104

ENGELS TO WILHELM LIEBKNECHT

IN BORSDORF NEAR LEIPZIG

London, 16 April 1888

Dear Liebknecht,

I was on the point of answering your letter of the 4th when your second one arrived with an enclosure for Karl Kautsky and giving me to understand that my answers no less than your questions were already things of the past.

1. The Social Democratic Federation still poses as the only socialist organisation in England and the only one entitled to act and speak on behalf of the movement over here as a whole. This was why it was neces- sary, having regard to the preparations for the congress, to emphasise that position, the more so as the Socialist League21 in its present form will probably fizzle out before long and the Social Democratic

[^1]: All I want to do now is point out how this is connected with the Social Democratic Federation's circular.268





**[p. 177]**

2. The Social Democratic Federation is closely in league with the Possibilists in Paris and, since these in their turn are in league with Broadhurst & Co.,269 the Social Democratic Federation must manoeu- vre. This second reason is the crucial one. Hyndman & Co. have become so deeply embroiled with the Possibilists that they can no longer draw back, even if they wanted to.

My opinion of all this congress business? I'm barely capable of expressing one, since I haven't the faintest idea of what has been discussed and anyway views change, kaleidoscope-fashion, even in your own case. By and large I regard all such congresses as exceedingly risky unless one is absolutely sure of success from the outset and, unless some- thing definite and attainable is to be discussed, as somewhat unnecessary. The small fry, in particular the Belgians, have the chief say and, since the foreign department in Belgium is run, not by the Flemings, but by the old Brussels clique—the Brismée family—the same old dish is served up every time. But to want to hold your congress over here,270 one week after the Trades Unions have held theirs, would spell utter ruin. Your funds would be used up, your people would run off and you'd be irre- deemably delivered up into the arms of London's wirepullers—ad majorem gloriam Hyndmanni.^

That Geneva is the place where the French—never mind what sort— ought to hold a congress to celebrate the French Revolution of 1789 and à propos of the Paris Exhibition0 is something you'll certainly never get them to believe.

So even if your congress doesn't materialise, it will, in my view, be no great disaster. In any case the agenda is needlessly restricted. A congress convoked by our Reichstag group would, after all, be attended exclu- sively by socialists and anarchists, not by Trade Unionists pure and simple. A social-democratic congress could throw the anarchists out, a general workingmen's congress cannot, and they are capable of being thoroughly obstreperous.

Fritz had better make haste and perk up—from the point of view of his health; otherwise Bismarck will prove too much for him. I hope that

[^1]: a scattered limbs (Horace, Satires, I, 4) - b to the greater glory of Hyndman - c The international exhibition which was to be held in Paris in 1889





**[p. 178]**

Kindest regards.

Your

RE.

Was the stuff we sent you on Saturday what you wanted? If not, there has been a misunderstanding. The German is by Eccarius.271

First published in: Marx and Engels, Printed according to the original Works, First Russian Edition, Vol. XXVIII, Moscow 1940 Published in English for the first time

105

ENGELS TO PASQUALE MARTIGNETTI

IN BENEVENTO

London, 20 April 1888 122 Regent's Park Road

Dear Friend

I cannot, unfortunately, suggest any books that might assist your studies in this direction. For an Italian examination German books would cover too much ground on the one hand and too little on the other; moreover, I am not familiar with the more recent short

[^1]: I'm glad to hear that a fresh prospect appears to be opening up for you and hope you'll manage to prepare for the exam.272

[^2]: a Frederick III had larynx cancer





**[p. 179]**

But since it is impossible for you in your present straitened circum- stances to purchase these books I deem it my duty to offer you my assis- tance. I have therefore permitted myself the liberty of taking out the enclosed money order in your name for the sum of four pounds sterling or fr. 10080 centesimi and trust you won't be angry with me for sending you this small amount without first obtaining your consent. I only hope that it will be enough, and that you will be able to procure what you need and pass your exam.

You will have read about our Zurich friends' expulsion from Switzerland.81

I shall look over and return the translation shortly231—as soon as I have finished an important piece for America.a Going through a whole lot of numbers at the same time cuts down the work.

With most cordial regards.

Yours

F. Engels

For postal purposes my first name has been given in its English form: 'Frederick'.

First published, in the language of the Printed according to the original original (German), in La corrispon- denza di Marx e Engels con italiani. Published in English for the first time 1848-1895, Milano, 1964

a 'Protection and Free Trade. Preface to the Pamphlet: Karl Marx, Speech on the Question of Free Trade'



**[p. 106]**

ENGELS TO GABRIEL DEVILLE

IN PARIS

London, 27 April 1888 122 Regent's Park Road, N . W.

Dear Citizen Deville,

Thank you for your book on Balzac,a which I will read with pleasure. After Cervantes Balzac is, or so I think, the greatest novelist of all time, as well as the most faithful recorder of French society between 1815 and 1848. I am fond of Balzac in whatever form.

Your interpretation of Marx's formula is faultless. In manuscript it read: M — c ^C MP an<^ ll w a s o n l y f ° r his own convenience and delecta- tion that the printer put the symbol <, which has given rise to endless misunderstandings.

Hence the complete formula on p. 18b

M—CCT P . . . C ' - M ' or -MP

M — C ^ P . . . (C + c) - (M + m) "-MP

means:

M, money, converted into C (commodity), which commodity is made up of L (labour power) and of MP (means of production); the said commodity C is subjected to a process of production P, this last result- ing in a new commodity C (of different quality, but this does not concern us here where we have to do only with values), of greater value than and hence equal to C plus an increment c (C + c); this C is once more exchanged for money, that is to say for an amount M ' greater than M, or equal to M plus an increment m (M + m).

The symbol — serves to mark the conclusion of an exchange; the . . . .

[^1]: a G. Deville, La Femme et l'Amour. Paris, 1888 - b K. Marx, Capital. A Critique of Political Economy, Vol. II, Book II, The Process of Circulation of Capital, Part 1, The Metamorphoses of Capital and Their Circuits, Ch. 1, Circuit of Money Capital





**[p. 181]**

Should you wish to have anything else explained, I shall always be at your service. This second volume will, I am afraid, prove something of a headache for you, while failing to reward you with brilliant new solu- tions. It is concerned with transactions between bourgeois and the results are very nice theoretically but do not have any practical applica- tion. That is why I am in no hurry to see it translated into French or English; it needs to be complemented by Volume III.

I am Sir, etc.,

Your

F. Engels

First published in: M. Dommanget, Printed according to the original L'Introduction du Marxisme en France, Lausanne, 1969 Translated from the Fench Published in English for the first time

107

ENGELS TO WILHELM LIEBKNECHT

IN BORSDORF NEAR LEIPZIG

London, about 29 April 1888

Dear Liebknecht,

It's just as well that Fritza is a bit better. If young Williamb comes to the throne at this particular juncture, he and Bismarck—unless all the indications are deceptive—will compound with Russia so as to secure her permission for a war with France. It would seem that certain contin- gent agreements have already been concluded. In this way, and only in this way, would Boulanger constitute a danger, to France no less than to Germany. The French would be beaten, but because their fortifications

[^1]: Enclosed received this morning.273

[^2]: a Frederick III - b Frederick Ill's son (William II)





**[p. 182]**

Your

F.E.

First published in: Marx and Engels, Printed according to the original Works, First Russian Edition, Vol. XXVIII, Moscow, 1940 Published in English for the first time

108

ENGELS TO FLORENCE KELLEY-WISCHNEWETZKY10

IN NEW YORK

London, 2 May 1888

Dear Mrs Wischnewetzky,

By this mail I send you registered the ms.a that is to say the copy Mrs Aveling made of it when she found that with your close handwriting and absence of margin it was impossible to insert in pencil legibly the suggested alterations. There were many, arising from the fact that you translated from a German translation and we had the original to work upon. Many alterations have therefore no other purpose than to bring the English text nearer to the French original. In others, I have for the sake of clearness taken more liberties.

The prefaceb is nearly done in the rough, but as you will require a German translation, I shall have to keep it a little longer on that account.

a K. Marx, Speech on the Question of Free Trade - b F. Engels, 'Protection and Free Trade. Preface to the Pamphlet: Karl Marx, Speech on the Question of Free Trade'



**[p. 183]**

Will you please tell Sorge that according to present arrangements the Sozialdemokrat^1 is going to be removed to London. But it will be well to keep this quiet for the present, when our friends intend this to be talked about and to get into the news-hunting press, they will no doubt arrange that themselves.

I am boycotted here almost as much as you are in New York—the various socialist cliques here are dissatisfied at my absolute neutrality with regard to them, and being all of them agreed as to that point, try to pay me out by not mentioning any of my writings. Neither Our Corner (Mrs Beasant) nor To-day nor the Christian Socialist (of this latter monthly, however, I am not quite certain) have mentioned the Condition of the Working-Class though I sent them copies myself. I fully expected this but did not like to say so to you until the proof was there. I don't blame them, because I have seriously offended them by saying that so far there is no real working-class movement here,a and that, as soon as that comes, all the great men and women who now make themselves busy as officers of an army without soldiers, will soon find their level, and a rather lower one than they expect. But if they think their needle pinks can pierce my old well-tanned and pachydermatous skin, they are mistaken.

Yours very truly,

F. Engels

First published, slightly abridged, in the language of the original (English), in Briefe und Auszüge aus Briefen von Job. Phil. Becker, Jos. Dietzgen, Friedrich Engels, Karl Marx u. A. an F. A. Sorge und Andere, Stuttgart, 1906

and, in full, in: Marx and Engels, Works, First Russian Edition, Vol. XXVIII, Moscow, 1940

Reproduced from the original

[^1]: a F. Engels, 'England in 1845 and in 1885'





**[p. 109]**

ENGELS TO LAURA LAFARGUE274

AT LE PERREUX

London, 9 May 1888

My dear Laura,

I have just finished, after many interruptions, a lengthy preface to the English edition of Mohr's discourse on Free Trade (Brussels 1848)a

which is to come out in New York, and as this is the last piece of work which had to be done within a certain time I make use of my recovered liberty in order to write to you at once. And I have a rather important object too to write about, viz. that we want you here in London. You have planted, as I hear from Schorlemmer, some Waldmeister^ in your garden, and as it will be utterly impossible for us to come over and use it there, there is nothing left but that you should come over and bring it here, when the other ingredients shall be duly and quickly found. The weather is beautiful, on Saturday,0 Mohr's birthday, Nim and I went to Highgate, and today we have been on Hampstead Heath, I am writing with both windows open, and by the time you come which I hope will be next week we shall have lilacs and laburnums ready to receive you. If you only say by return that you are willing to come, je me charge du rested Moreover you will by this time have brought your country-house and garden to such a state of perfection that you can leave it in charge of Paul who must be by now an accomplished gardener. Nim has been sighing for Löhr for some time past, and surely you ought to be present at Edward's great dramatic triumph on the 5 of June when his dramati- sation of N. Hawthorne's Scarlet Letter is to be brought out at a matinée. And I need not add that I want you here as much as anybody else. There are moreover so many other reasons for your coming that I must refrain from stating them here for fear of missing the post and killing you with ennui. So make up your mind at once, and say you will.

Of Edward's remarkable preliminary successes in the dramatic line you will have heard. He has sold about half a dozen or more pieces which he had quietly manufactured; some have been played in the

[^1]: a F. Engels, 'Protection and Free Trade' - b woodruff - c 5 May - d I'll attend to the rest





**[p. 185]**

Paul's letter in the Intransigeant* was very good indeed. He managed to hit the Radicals200 without the slightest concession to Boulangism137

and with the demand for general armament, put a spoke in both their wheels. It was done with great tact.

Have you heard that Fritz Beust is engaged—to an Italian-Swiss girl from Castasegna, hard on the border of Lombardy. I don't know who she is, we shall soon hear from our Zurich friends,b who are expected here in less than a fortnight. Maybe you will see Bernstein in Paris on his journey; he may be there any day. How they are going to manage here with regard to the paper01 am curious to see.81 For many reasons London is not the best place for it, though perhaps the only one now. However we shall see, and generally things do settle down at their natural level.

Paul's 'Victor Hugo' in the Neue Zeit is very good. I wonder what they would say in France if they could read it.

The great Stead is off to Petersburg to interview the Czar'1 and to make him tell the truth about peace or war. I sent you his Paris inter- views,6 profound man left Paris exactly as wise as when he came there. The Russians will soft-sawder him to his heart's content, I am afraid he will return from Petersburg a greater ass than what he is now. Perhaps in tonight's paper we may read that he has fathomed Bismarck.

in which I tried to work them up in the anti-Russian line. Now the Jassy Marxists are quarrelling with the Bucharest Anarchists on account of the peasant revolt275 stirred up by Russia, and so they translate and print my letter at once!g This time I am not sorry, but it shows what indiscreet fellows they are.

a P. Lafargue, 'Le Boulangisme et les parlementaires', L'Intransigeant, 1 May 1888 - b Eduard Bernstein, Julius Motteier, Leonhard Tauscher and Hermann Schlüter - c Der Sozialdemokrat - d Alexander III - e W. Th. Stead, 'The Life and Adventures of a Lady Special. From our Special Commissioner in Paris', The Pall Mall Gazette, 5 May 1888 - f See this volume, pp.132-5 - s See Contemp- oranul, No. 6, 1888

[^1]: The Romanians are queer people. I wrote to Nadejde in Jassy a letterf





**[p. 186]**

Affectionately yours,

F. Engels

First published in full, in the language Reproduced from the original of the original (English), in: F. Engels, P. et L. Lafargue, Correspondance, t. II, Paris, 1956

110

ENGELS T O E L E A N O R MARX-AVELING 1 3 0

IN LONDON

London, 10 May 1888

My dear Tussy,

Best thanks, but we can't come. Nim has to do her marketing or else you won't get any dinner on Sunday, and I have to get off ms.a by the American mail on Saturday, which is anything but ready (the ms. not the mail).

Tell Mahon that on Sunday I receive my private friends and that there is no chance of talking business on Sundays here. If he wants to see me he is welcome any evening in the week and if he wants Edward to be present they might arrange to come together one night—perhaps you would come too?

Love from Nim.

Ever yours, F.E.

First published in: E. P. Thompson, Reproduced from the original William Morris: Romantic to Revol- utionary, London, 1955

[^1]: a F. Engels, 'Protection and Free Trade'





**[p. 111]**

ENGELS TO HERMANN SCHLÜTER

IN HOTTINGEN-ZURICH

London, 10 May 1888

Dear Mr Schlüter,

What's the position as regards your coming over here? All we have heard from Edea is that he is travelling via Paris and will be hanging about there for a bit. He says nothing definite about the others.81 So here we are, in a state of suspense and unable to do anything.

So would you be good enough to get in touch with the others and let us know when you are all arriving—yourself, Motteler and Tauscher, we presume—and whether we can do anything for you here in the mean- time. Let us also know at which station you will be arriving and by what route, so that you can be met. Otherwise there could be a glorious muddle, in the course of which quite a lot of money might go down the drain.

With kindest regards to you all

Yours,

F. Engels

First published in: Marx and Engels, Works, First Russian Edition, Vol. XXVIII, Moscow, 1940

Printed according to the original

Published in English for the first time.

[^1]: a Eduard Bernstein





**[p. 112]**

ENGELS TO FLORENCE KELLY-WISCHNEWETZKY

IN NEW YORK

London, 16 May 1888

Dear Mrs Wischnewetzky,

Per today's mail the rest of the prefacea goes registered. Reeves is willing to take the agency for the pamphletb at the same percentage as before, and wishes to have his name on the title page under that of the New York publisher, viz.

London William Reeves, 185 Fleet Street, E. C.

This is at least some guarantee against piracy on his part, and he is the most dangerous man in this respect. If you will forward the copies intended for him to me I will get them delivered against receipt, 300-500 will do to begin with.

The German translation will follow as soon as Mrs Kautsky has done copying it. That may be delayed some days as we expect the Züricher Ausgewiesener0^ here every day and they will keep us rather busy at first.

Yours faithfully,

F. Engels

First published in: Marx and Engels, Printed according to the original Works, First Russian Edition, Vol. XXVIII, Moscow, 1940 Published in English for the first time

[^1]: a F. Engels, 'Protection and Free Trade' - b K. Marx, Speech on the Question of Free Trade - c Zurich exiles





**[p. 113]**

ENGELS TO AMAND GOEGG

IN BADEN

London, 2 June 1888 122 Regent's Park Road, N. W

Dear Goegg,

The lectures at universities here, in all branches of the natural sciences and literature, are open to ladies too. Fees the same as for men. The only lectures not open to ladies are those given by Ray Lankester. The fees vary—details in the prospectus which has been promised me and which I shall send on to you as soon as it arrives.

If what is wanted are medical lectures, I would recommend the college for ladies in Henrietta Street about which, if you so wish, I can let you have further details.

With kind regards,

Yours, RE.

First published in Friedrich Engels Printed according to the original 1820-1970. Referate. Diskussionen. Dokumente, Hanover, 1971 Published in English for the first time

114

ENGELS TO LAURA LAFARGUE276

AT LE PERREUX

London, 3 June 1888

My dear Laura,

I am very sorry you do not see your way to come just now; the woodruff having failed in your garden would not have mattered, because Nim has got some and we are going to have it tonight; it would be so



**[p. 190]**

Our Zurich friends3 are getting used to London ways a little, and it is time, for their notions of the possibilities of a settlement here were uncom- monly kleinstädtisch.b Next week I hope the principal questions as to local- ity etc. will be settled and then there will be less difficulties and discussions.

Paul's arguments about Boulanger are rather derogatory to the French character. First he says, c'est un mouvement populaire ', but not dangerous because Boulanger is an ass. But what to think of a peuple capable d'un mouvement populaire in favour of an ass? This he explains thus: En France on patauge pendant un temps donné dans un semblant de parlementarisme, puis on réclame un sauveur, un gouvernement personnel en ce moment on réclame un sauveur et Boulanger se présente.c That is to say: the French are such that their real wants require a Bonapartist régime, while their idealistic illusions are republican and do not go beyond parliamentarism. Why, if the French see no other issue than either personal government, or parliamentary government, they may as well give it up. What I want our people to do, is to show that there is a real third issue besides this pretended dilemma, which is a dilemma but for the vulgar philistines, and not to take the muddling philistine and au fond chauvinistic Boulangist movement for a really popular one.277 The chauvinistic claim, that all the history of the world is to resolve itself into the recovery of Alsace by France, and that until then nothing shall be allowed to happen—this claim has been far too much bowed to by our friends in France, by every one in fact, and this is the upshot. Because Boulanger incorporates this claim, which has been silently admitted by all parties, he is powerful. His opponents— the Clémenceaux and Co.—do not, dare not contradict that claim but are too cowardly to proclaim it openly, and therefore they are weak. And because the movement is at bottom chauvinistic and nothing else, therefore it plays into Bismarck's hands who would be only too glad to entangle that poor devil Fritzd into a war. And all this at a time when even among the German philistines the consciousness is dawning that the sooner they get rid of Alsace the better, and when Bismarck's crazy

[^1]: a Eduard Bernstein, Julius Motteler, Leonard Tauscher and Hermann Schlüter - b provincial - c In France they dabble for a time in a semblance of parliamen- tarism and then they clamour for a saviour, personal government at the moment they are clamouring for a saviour and Boulanger presents himself - d Frederick III





**[p. 191]**

The revolution in our household which I have been trying to set about for more than a year has at last been accomplished. Last night Annie left under notice from me, and we have another girl. Nim will at last be able to do no more work than she really likes and to have her sleep out in the morning.

Enclosed the cheque that Paul wrote about. Being Sunday, I must close, before the people come.

Ever yours affectionately,

F. Engels

Keep in mind that you must come this summer or autumn at latest!

First published, in the language of Istorichesky Arkhiv, No. 2, 1956 the original (English), in: F. Engels, P. et L. Lafargue, Correspondance, t. II, Reproduced from the original Paris, 1956 and, in russian, in

115

ENGELS T O H E R M A N N SCHLÜTER

IN LONDON

London, 15 June 1888 122 Regent's Park Road

Dear Schlüter,

Will you and Tauscher do me the pleasure of taking luncheon with me on Sunday afternoon at half past two?

Your

F. Engels

First published in: Marx and Engels, Printed according to the original Works, Second Russian Edition, Vol. 37, Moscow, 1965 Published in English for the first time



**[p. 116]**

ENGELS TO PAUL LAFARGUE279

AT LE PERREUX

London, 30 June 1888

My dear Lafargue,

Little Mac Donnell of the General Council,3 who is editor of a work- ing-class paper at Paterson, New Jersey,b has sent me a young man named R. Block, son of an old New York Socialist—his father is editor of a German bakers' newspaper0 and secretary of their trades union. As the young man will be spending some days in Paris, I have given him a card addressed to you—his only other introduction in Paris is to Delahaye—also telling him that, since you live in the country, you can be of little use to him, save perhaps as a source of information. He is not involved in politics or socialism, and all he wants is to see Europe 'in the most approved fashion'. If, then, he should find his way to Le Perreux, I would be obliged if you could give him some good advice of the kind one might provide for a traveller desirous of seeing as much as possible in as short a time as possible. He is perfectly aware that you are in no position to show him the sights of Paris.

Aveling is back in London for a play that is to be performed tonight— his fifth, while his sixth will probably be performed next week. There can be no doubt that, by devoting himself to drama, 'He has struck oil', as the Yankees say.

Yours ever, F.E.

First published, in the language of the Printed according to the original original (French), in F. Engels, P. et L. Lafargue, Correspondance, t. Ill, Paris, Translated from the French 1959

[^1]: a Of the International Working Men's Association - b Paterson Labor Standard -c Deutsch-Amerikanische Bäcker-Zeitung





**[p. 117]**

ENGELS T O KARL KAUTSKY

IN ST GILGEN

London, before 6 July 1888

Dear Baron,

Now that I've smelt you out Stieber-fashion,a and having noted from its longitude and latitude that it must be a very lovely district, let me reply briefly re Shelley.280 I will gladly do the thing but ought, for the sake of the context, to have a copy of Shelley which, however, I have not got, nor do I know where to obtain one in a hurry. E. Aveling, when he was here yesterday, said he would go and fetch his for me, but has left London without keeping his word. If I had the passages, I should be able to get hold of a Shelley all right.

I trust that the taenia mediocanellatah will by now have been happily reduced ad absurdum. Pumps' son has got the measles which so far has taken an altogether favourable course; Lilic is therefore staying with us. Mrs Schlüter and Mrs Eded are here and we are still expecting the Aunte—when, we don't know. On Sunday they were all of them here. The muddle has not yet been []* out. E. Aveling has been extraordi- narily lucky with his [.. .]f—unanimously [. . .]

[• • -]

General [.. .f all right again, I hope.

First published in: Aus der Frühzeit Printed according to the original des Marxismus. Engels Briefwechsel mit Kautsky, Prag, 1935 Published in English for the first time

[^1]: f Louise? if, as I hope, she is there.

[^2]: f

[^3]: a Engels uses the verb herausstiebern, a play on the verb stöbern - to hunt or rout out - and Stieber, name of the chief of the Prussian political police (1852-60) - b

[^4]: tape worm - c Lilian Rosher - d Regina Bernstein - e Emilie Motteier - f Ms. damaged - g Louise Kautsky





**[p. 118]**

ENGELS T O LAURA LAFARGUE 4 0

AT LE PERREUX

London, 6 Julya 1888

My dear Laura,

Today I write on business and therefore short and, I hope, sweet. Jollymeier1, came last night and leaves next week, probably Wednesday, for Germany. He will not have time to return by way of Paris, but the present plan is that Nim is going with him as far as Coblenz, and then to St Wendel to see her friends, and she does intend to come back by way of Paris provided you and the children0 are there. Will you therefore be good enough to let us know if possible by a letter written on Sunday, but on Monday at latest, whether 1) you will be at home and 2) whether the chil- dren will be in Asnières, about the 26th or 28th July?

It is almost certain that you would have had a visit from Pumps at the same time, as she hoped to go with Jollymeier too, but last Sunday she came with the news that her boy has got the measles and that will keep her here.

Tussy and Edward are still at their 'Castle'd and expect to sail some- time in August to America where Edward is to superintend the mise en- scène of three of his pieces, to be played simultaneously in New York, Chicago and God knows where besides. I don't think they will be away more than 8-10 weeks altogether. If his dramatic success goes on at this rate, maybe he will have to go next year to Australia, at the expense of some theatrical impresario.

Our Zurich friendse are not settled yet—but on the way towards it. It is most astonishing, the bother, delay and kicking about of heels that is caused by the London system of monopolist landlords who prescribe their own terms to their leaseholders so that when you want to take a business-place from one of these latter—and that you have to do—you have to wait the great landlord's pleasure in giving you leave to set up the necessary machinery. French or Prussian bureaucratic interference

[^1]: a In the original: August - b Schorlemmer - c Jean, Edgar, Marcel and Jenny Longuet - ° See this volume, p. 166 - e Eduard Bernstein, Julius Motteler, Leonard Tauscher and Hermann Schlüter





**[p. 195]**

Yours affectionately,

F. Engels

First published, in the language of the Reproduced from the original original (English), in: F. Engels, P. et L. Lafargue, Correspondance, t. Il, Paris, 1956

119

ENGELS TO FRIEDRICH ADOLPH SORGE29

IN HOBOKEN

London, 11 July 1888

Dear Sorge,

Your

R E .

First published in Briefe und und Andere, Stuttgart, 1906 Auszüge aus Briefen von Joh. Phil. Becker, Jos. Dietzgen, Friedrich Printed according to the original Engels, Karl Marx u. A. an F. A. Sorge

[^1]: In great haste a piece of news which, however, you must keep absolutely secret. Don't be surprised to see me suddenly turn up about the middle of August or a few days after that—I may be taking a quick trip across the ocean.281 Could you please let me know by return where you lie, so that I can look you up or, should you happen not to be at home at the time, where you are to be found? Also whether the Wischnewetzkys will be in New York at the time. I shall not see anyone else when I come over, for I have no wish to fall into the hands of the worthy German Socialists—which is why the thing has got to be kept secret. If I do come, I shall not come alone but with the Avelings, who have business over there. More anon.





**[p. 120]**

ENGELS TO LAURA LAFARGUE274

AT LE PERREUX

London, 15 July 1888

My dear Laura,

You ask why Schorlemmer cannot come too, and you hope to see Pumps over at Le Perreux. Well, I am afraid you will have your wish fulfilled and your question answered with a vengeance.

Pumps' boy having improved extra-rapidly, sudden resolutions were come to last Monday, and on Wednesday the lot—Jollymeier, Nim and Pumps, all three set off for Germany. Pumps to Paulis', Nim to St Wendel. And then, according to what was arranged here, Pumps and Schorlemmer are to take up Nim at St Wendel and all three start for Paris, where they will arrive somewhere about the 29th or 30th July— but they will let you know. Nim and Schorlemmer must be here again on Saturday, 4th August; Pumps talked of going from Paris to St Malo and Jersey where Percy intends taking the children.

How you will manage to quarter the lot of them is more than I know. But Nim thought you would get over that difficulty right enough. Anyhow you will be wanting some little cash for the occasion which I shall not omit sending you in time.

Last night your letter with Longuet's document came to hand—at the same time as Edward who is again brought to London by his dramatic industry. He is going to read two plays today to speculative actors (Alma Murray is one) who intend to invest in a bit of novelty. Of course Longuet is again counting without his host, as Edward and Tussy will be going to America for at least two months and I shall take my holiday as soon as Nim comes back—if he likes to leave Jean with Nim at my place, all right, and Nim would be glad of his company; but is that what Longuet contemplates? Anyhow Tussy will return the plaidoyer* to you and write, and you and Nim can settle the remainder.

What a nice mess that was which Boulanger and Floquet cooked betwixt the two of them the other day—Boulanger's coup de théâtre,

[^1]: a speech for the defence





**[p. 197]**

Our business is not to complicate but to simplify and make clear the issues between the Radicals and ourselves. What little good Boulanger could do, he has done, and the chief good he did is to bring the Radicals to power. A dissolution would be a good thing—while a Radical govern- ment is in, upon whom we can exercise pressure; but Boulanger seems to me the least likely person to bring that dissolution about.

Here, after two fine days, it rains again cats and dogs since this morn- ing. This is really a solution—summer dissolved in rain water—which makes one dissolute and drives one to drink. In fact I shall go and open a bottle of Pilsener and drink your health. Sur ce, je vous embrasse.^

Bien a vous} F. E.

First published in full, in the language Istorichesky Arkhiv, No. 2, 1956 of the original (English), in: F. Engels, P. et L. Lafargue, Correspondance, t. Reproduced from the original II, Paris, 1956 and, in Russian, in

[^1]: a Alexander III - b saviour of society - c truly popular - d showdown - e Meanwhile the best of love - i Ever yours





**[p. 121]**

ENGELS TO LAURA LAFARGUE40

AT LE PERREUX

London, 23 July 1888

My dear Laura,

Tussy returns me Longuet 's letter, instead of direct to you, so I send it herewith. She said she would write to him. Edward told me last week they would be here again yesterday, but he has a capacity of neglecting facts, when they are contrary to his wishes, that is worthy of a more juvenile age. So they won't be here before end of week.

Of course Pumps and Nim can sleep in your room and if you can find a bed for Schorlemmer somewhere in Le Perreux, he will be all right. I enclose a cheque for £15—so as to set you at ease with regard to the ways and means.

Our Zürichers3 are at last in a fair way of settlement. Their wives have arrived, they have got a business-place—that is, the agreement for an empty and not quite finished house—and private houses for them- selves, so that in a week or 14 days they will all be unter Dach und Fach.h The female part of the Sozialdemokrat is not over charming. Ede Bernstein's wife seems the pleasantest, a sharp little Jewess, but she squints awfully; Schlüter's is an exceedingly good-natured and retiring little Dresden article, but uncommon soft; and as to the Tante,c id est Mrs Motteler, let Nim give you a description of this dignified juvenile of fifty (so they say), this Swabian Kleinstädter^ affecting the dame du mondee—I am told she is a very worthy woman after all, but I don't think she feels at home among our undignified lot, and I anticipate some pleasant little sparrings when Tussy and she do meet. But Nim and Pumps will give you a description of her to your heart's content. I had them all here yesterday for supper, as our new girl (I think I told you that I sent Annie away) cooks quite passably and rather prides in cooking for company, and Mrs Motteler lost no time in telling me that the custard was burnt (just as she told Pumps: Sie sind aber mal fettlf

[^1]: a Eduard Bernstein, Julius Motteler, Leonard Tauscher and Hermann Schlüter - b settled in - c Aunt - A small town resident - e society woman - i You are so fat!





**[p. 199]**

I have got myself photographed before I shall be quite grey—and enclose the one they all say is the best.

Post-time and dinner-time, so here I shut up.

Love from your old

F. Engels

First published, in the language of 11, Paris, 1956 the original (English), in: F. Engels, P. et L. Lafargue, Correspondance, t. Reproduced from the original

122

ENGELS TO HERMANN SCHLÜTER

IN LONDON

London, Saturday 21 or 28 July 1888

Dear Schlüter,

Grover has been to see me about the house in Kentish Town; I explained the whole matter to him and, unless he changes his mind, the house is yours.

Your

F.E.

Be careful in the meantime not to call again at Salto Rex & Co. (unless perhaps invited to do so by Grover or S. Rex & Co.; for I don't know of course whether Grover will be letting direct or through the above).

First published in: Marx and Engels, Printed according to the original Works, Second Russian Edition, Vol. 37, Moscow, 1965 Published in English for the first time

[^1]: a Engels' home, at 122 Regent's Park Road





**[p. 123]**

ENGELS TO LAURA LAFARGUE40

AT LE PERREUX

London, 30 July 1888

My dear Laura,

Hope by this time you have got the travellersa with you. This morning letter from Schorlemmer. When he arrived at Bonn, his friends advised him to have his wound cured there and so he went to the University Klinik from which he was on Saturday discharged cured, but he still suffers from a Magenkatarrh^ or, as his brother0 who is with him and serves him as amanuensis, more properly spells it, Magenkater;A and is ordered to keep quiet for some time—he is even afraid that ulterior plans we had about a sea-trip281 of some duration may fall to the bottom as far as he is concerned. That however we shall see by and by. Anyhow, he intended to go to Darmstadt yesterday and will write again from there.

For Nim's information: yesterday we had roast beef and peas, very well cooked; there were only Edward and Tussy, as Percy and the chil- dren dined at Sandhurst Lodge, it being his mother's birthday. After dinner they came over (and Charley,e whose wife had called for supper the Sunday before, and I was only sorry she did not drop in then) and later on the four Zürichers^ with Mrs Bernstein and Mrs Schlüter—the Tante% was out of sorts fortunately—and we were very jolly. I am getting on right enough with the girl, only her sweets are not what they exactly should be; she makes a beautifully leathery paste and makes up for other defects in her custard by putting in about as much essence of bitter almonds as sugar—that however I have stopped. The girl is right enough, only she wants a bit more breaking-in by Nim; longer than three weeks' more or less independent management she is not yet fit for, as she imports a lot of superior notions from the East End lodging-house where she was attending upon 'Ladyships'. But as these are confined to

[^1]: a Helene Demuth and Mary Ellen Rosher - b stomach cold - c Ludwig Schorlemmer - d stomach hangover - e presumably Charles Roesgen - f Eduard Bernstein, Julius Motteler, Leonard Tauscher and Herman Schlüter - s Aunt (Emilie Motteler)





**[p. 201]**

I hope you have better weather. I went to town about 2, it began rain- ing before 3, and is still at it.

Love to all of you.

Ever yours, RE.

First published, in the language of the Reproduced from the original original (English), in: F. Engels, P. et L. Lafargue, Correspondance, t. Il, Paris, 1956

124

ENGELS T O FRIEDRICH A D O L P H SORGE 2 9

IN HOBOKEN

London, 4 August 1888

Dear Sorge,

Your two letters* received with thanks. I am most grateful for the hospitality you offer me, but whether I shall be able to take advantage of it is somewhat problematical, as you will see from what follows.

For if all goes well, Schorlemmer will be coming too—he is in Germany and not particularly well but has telegraphed saying he'll be here on Monday. Since we shall have to remain together—Schorlemmer and I, at any rate—Aveling has already booked rooms for all of us at an hotel, which means that I shall have to go there—to begin with, at least. What happens after that remains to be seen. At all events Schorlemmer and I shall stay in town for a few days only and set off as soon as possi- ble on a tour of the country, for at the beginning of October he has got to start lecturing again and we are anxious to see as much as we can.

aof21 and 23 July 1888



**[p. 202]**

We are sailing on the City of Berlin on the 8th of this month. Aveling has made a successful début in the field of drama and is to help stage 4 plays (of which 3V2 are by him) in 4 cities over there.

Since Monday is a Bank Holiday,144 when nothing can be done because all the shops are closed, and we have got to leave here on Tuesday/ there's a lot of shopping to be done—besides which I have got to be at Charing Cross at 5.40 to meet Lenchen and Pumps (who has been married for 7 years and has 2 children) on their return from Germany resp. Paris, and hence must close. I, too, look forward tremen- dously to seeing you again. So no more till we meet.

Your

RE.

First published, slightly abridged, in and in full, in: Marx and Engels, Briefe und Auszüge aus Briefen von Works, First Russian Edition, Vol. John. Phil. Becker, Jos. Dietzgen, XXVIII, Moscow, 1940 Friedrich Engels, Karl Marx u. A. an F. A. Sorge und Andere, Stuttgart, 1906 Printed according to the original

125

AT LE PERREUX

London, 6 August 1888

My dear Laura,

When you receive this letter I shall be floating away on the City of Berlin, with Tussy, Edward, and Schorlemmer towards the shores of the New World.281 The plan has been of pretty long standing, only it was

[^1]: ENGELS T O LAURA LAFARGUE 4 0

[^2]: a 7 August





**[p. 203]**

Edward and Tussy will not come back with us, as far as we can see; they are sure to be kept there at least a fortnight longer.

Our travellers arrived here all right, though half an hour behind time, on Saturday and as our post-card will have informed you, your currants—both raw and in the juice extracted by Helen—I mean Nim—found the fullest and most general appreciation; the enthusiasm as to your garden is almost wild in its manifestations and I think both Pumps and Nim dream of it. In spite of their partly rough passage neither was sick, they were wise enough to lay down at once.

I enclose a cheque for £25—to go on with during my absence. Shall let you hear again on arrival and report on adventures, sea-monsters, icebergs and the other wonders of the sea, unless captured by the Irish fleet which has succeeded in breaking the blockade of the English on Saturday night and is now destroying British commerce, capturing Scotch coast towns, etc.b—a capital augury of the real political victory of the Irish over the British philistine which the next general election is sure to bring.

So farewell until then. I was very proud to hear from Nim that you

[^1]: a 8 August - b A joking allusion to the British naval exercises then in progress





**[p. 204]**

Ever yours affectionately

F. Engels and kindest regards to Paul.

First published, in the language of the Reproduced from the original original (English), in: F. Engels, P. et L. Lafargue, Correspondance, t. Il, Paris, 1956

126

ENGELS TO EDUARD BERNSTEIN284

IN LONDON

S.S.City of Berlin, between Liverpool and Queenstown a

9 August 1888

Dear Ede,

Your old friend, The General

First published in: Marx and Engels, Printed according to the original Works, First Russian Edition, Vol. XXVIII, Moscow, 1940 Published in English for the first time

[^1]: Never has Berlin seemed to be so beautiful as on board this City of Berlin. If the young guard lieutenantsb knew how good and plentiful the food is here, they'd instantly exchange the Berlin on land (or sand0) for that on water. In 2Vi hours we should be at Queenstown and thence head for the open sea. Cordial regards to your wife,d the Schlüters, the Mottelers and Tauscher.

[^2]: a Modern name: Cobh - b Engels has Jardeleutnants (Berlin dialect), an allusion to William II - c The margraviate of Brandenburg, of which Berlin was the centre, was called the Sandbox {'Streusandbüchse') of the Empire. - d Regina Bernstein





**[p. 127]**

ENGELS TO HERMANN ENGELS

IN ENGELSKIRCHEN

SS City of Berlin, between Liverpool and Queenstown,

9 August 1888

Dear Hermann,

I set sail yesterday on a quick trip to America281 and just wanted to tell you as much before we leave the last European port. We are a merry party of four—myself, Prof. Schorlemmer of Manchester, Dr Aveling of London and his wife, Marx's youngest daughter. Schorlemmer and I shall be returning towards the end of September and expect to be back in England on 2/3 October. My being able to realise this long-standing plan this summer was most propitious and I had also been strongly advised on medical grounds to make the two longish voyages and get a complete change of air.

Our ship is much more beautiful than the Berlin ashore; she is nearly 6,000 tons and the Avelings came back from New York on her eighteen months ago. They know the captain, purser and crew, which is very nice. We have charming cabins, the fare is excellent and on top of that there is American lager beer, which is by no means bad, a long deck to rove about on and not too many passengers, provided a large number don't join us at Queenstown—in short, it all promises to be very pleasant. I am most eager to see the world on the other side; we shall be staying for 3 or 4 weeks, which is just long enough, I think.

We are nearing Queenstown, so I had better close. Mind you all keep well. I shall write to you again from the other side of the ocean. Regards to your wife and children3 and all other relatives.

With much love from Your old Friedrich

First published in Deutsche Revue, Jg. Printed according to the original 46, Bd. Ill, 1921

Published in English for the first time

[^1]: a Emma, Hermann Friedrich Theodor and Walter Engels





**[p. 128]**

ENGELS TO FRIEDRICH ADOLPH SORGE285

IN HOBOKEN

Postmarked Boston,

28 August 1888

Dear Old Man,

Arrived here yesterday morning; your letters3 reached Schorlemmer and myself this morning—very many thanks. I left my cough behind in Hoboken and Schorlemmer has also got over his trouble. We have just been with Mrs Harney, who says Harney will be coming to London in October, so I shall see him there. I have not yet been able to get hold of my nephew,b but expect to see him tomorrow, either here in the hotel or in Roxbury. Boston is an awful sprawl but more human than New York City, and Cambridge is actually very pretty and looks quite European and continental. Warm regards to you and your wife.c But for the two of you we should still be ailing. We are staying until Saturday.11 Letters are sure to find us here till Friday night.

Your

P.E.

First published in Briefe und Auszüge aus Briefen von Job. Phil. Becker, Jos. Dietzgen, Friedrich Engels, Karl Marx u. A. an F. A. Sorge und Andere,

Stuttgart, 1906

Printed according to the original

[^1]: a of 27 August 1888 - b Willie Burns - c Katharine Sorge - d 1 September





**[p. 129]**

ENGELS TO FRIEDRICH ADOLPH SORGE286

IN HOBOKEN

Boston, 31 August 1888

Dear Sorge,

The paper1 arrived the day before yesterday and your letterb today. Thanks. But I'm sorry that your throat should still be troubling you and it would seem that you have actually appropriated my cough. If our staying with you gets us well and makes you ill, that is really rather dreadful.

Were in Concord yesterday, in the Reformatory and the town. Both pleased us greatly. A prison where the prisoners can read novels and scientific works, form clubs, congregate and talk without warders being present, eat meat and fish twice a day with bread ad lib., iced water in every workroom, running water in every cell, the cells decorated with pictures, etc., where the chaps, dressed as ordinary workingmen, look you straight in the eye with none of the hang-dog look of the usual criminal in gaol—this is something you will see nowhere in Europe. The Europeans, as I told the superintendent, are not bold enough for that. To which he replied in true American fashion: well, we try to make it pay, and it does pay. I acquired a great respect for the Americans in that place.

Concord is really beautiful, elegant in a way one wouldn't have expected after New York or even Boston, but a splendid little place in which to be buried, though not alive! four weeks there would either kill me or drive me crazy.

My nephew Willie Burns is a wonderful fellow, bright, energetic and with his heart and soul in the movement. He is doing well, works for the Boston and Providence Railroad (now the Old Colony0), gets $12 a week, has a nice wife (whom he brought with him from Manchester) and three children. Nothing would induce him to return to England; he's just the lad for a country like America.

[^1]: a New Yorker Volkszeitung of 28 August 1888 - b of 30 August 1888 - a the southern part of Massachusetts





**[p. 208]**

Such news from Europe as reaches us over here is sparse and infre- quent and is supplied exclusively by the New York World and the Herald?

The last of the jobs Aveling has to do in America will be polished off today and thereafter his time will be his own. It is still uncertain whether we shall go to Chicago. We have ample time for the remainder of the programme.

Warm regards to your wifeb and yourself from us all, but especially from

Your

F. Engels

First published slightly abridged, in and, in full, in: Marx and Engels, Briefe und Auszüge aus Briefen von Works, First Russian Edition, Vol. Joh. Phil. Becker, Jos. Dietzgen, XXVIII, Moscow, 1940 Friedrich Engels, Karl Marx u. A. an F. A. Sorge und Andere, Stuttgart, 1906 Printed according to the original

130

ENGELS TO WILHELM LIEBKNECHT288

IN BORSDORF NEAR LEIPZIG

Boston, 31 August 1888

Dear Liebknecht,

A moment ago, at 9.30 a.m., that is, we saw in the Boston Herald that you had been elected in Berlin with an absolute majority of more than 10,000 votes43 and we—myself, Schorlemmer and both the Avelings— send you our heartiest congratulations.

Boston Herald - b Katharina Sorge



**[p. 209]**

Your

F.E.

First published in: Marx and Engels, Printed according to the original Works, First Russian Edition, Vol. XXVIII, Moscow, 1940 Published in English for the first time

131

ENGELS TO FRIEDRICH ADOLPH SORGE289

IN HOBOKEN

Niagara Falls, N. Y, 4 September 1888

Dear Sorge,

We have been here since Sunday0 morning and are enjoying ourselves greatly. The nature is beautiful here, the air is superb, the food is excel- lent and the nigger waiters are amusing—what more could one want, given this fine weather. As yet there have been no mosquitoes either, despite all the water. Our tour of the Oil Regions has been abandoned— whether we go to Chicago will be decided today—I think not. If we don't go we shall have adhered rigidly to your itinerary.

The fact that Jonas has found me out is yet another reason for delay- ing my return to New York for as long as possible. However, even if he

[^1]: a 27 August - b Natalie Liebknecht - c 2 September





**[p. 210]**

Warm regards from us all to your wifea and yourself.

Your

F. E.

First published in Briefe und Auszüge Printed according to the original aus Briefen, von Joh. Phil. Becker, Jos. Dietzgen, Friedrieb Engels, Karl Marx Published in English for the first time u. A. an F A. Sorge und Andere, Stuttgart, 1906

132

ENGELS TO LAURA LAFARGUE289

AT LE PERREUX

Niagara Falls, N . Y., 5 September 1888

My dear Laura,

[^1]: Here we are since last Sundayb morning, after having spent a week in New York and another in Boston. Don't you believe that America is a new country—it is the most old-fashioned place in the world; vis-à-vis de nous autres Européens c'est tout simplement la province, et nous nous sommes tous Parisiens comparés aux Américains.' The American girls on the Steamer already struck me as having all the manners of the Unschuld vom Landed the furniture is in the style of country house furniture of the ancien régime^ in Boston the cabs are of a shape which I saw last in

[^2]: a Katharina Sorge - b 2 September - c to other Europeans like us it is exceedingly provincial, and we are all Parisians compared to the Americans - d unsophisti- cated country lass - e ancient times





**[p. 211]**

But for all that they have very very grand features and the making of a very great nation in them, such as are only to be found in a people which never knew feudalism. They are long-suffering as to grievances of their own making, like all Anglo-Saxons, but when they do a thing they do it thoroughly. The way in which the State of New York bought up all the grounds (on the American side) about the falls," turned out all the touts, hucksters and extortionists, and transformed the whole into a public park where you go about freely and unmolested, not a policeman or park-keeper to be seen, on good footpaths and safe stairs quite up to the edge of the falls—that is a thing you do not find anywhere in such places in Europe. And the simple fact of the Americans having done this compelled the Canadian government to do the same on their side, in order to attract the visitors who ran away from Canadian exploitation.

New York is the grandest site for the capital of Capitalist Production you can see. But everything there, made by man, is horrid—save Bartholdy's Statue of Liberty which is not only fine but in exact propor- tion—as to size—to the surroundings. We got into New York after dark and I thought I got into a chapter of Dante's Inferno. London is a fool to it as to noise, crowd, pushing—a pavement worse than in the sunken- est European village—elevated railways thundering over your head, tram-cars by the hundred with rattling bells, awful noises on all sides, the most horrible of which are the unearthly fog-horns which give the signals from all the steamers on the river (the whistle is unknown here)— naked electric arc-lights over every ship, not to light you but to attract you as an advertisement, and consequently blinding you and confusing everything before you—in short a town worthy to be inhabited by the most vile-looking crowd in the world, they all look like discharged croupiers from Monte Carlo.

[^1]: a Niagara Falls





**[p. 212]**

We go from here into Canada, down the St Lawrence to Montréal, thence back to the States, via Lake Champlain and Lake George, then per Steamer down the Hudson to New York and sail per City of New York any time about 18th, hoping to be back in London about 28 or 29th at latest.

The little Steamer on the photo is the Maid of the Mist and goes quite close up to the falls (they lend you waterproof coats and helmets for the occasion) and yesterday we went quite into the mouth of the Horseshoe falls (the one facing you).

We are all very well and jolly, Edward conducts and commands, and we have appointed him General Boulanger of the port, which post he fills most creditably. As to European politics we are quite out of reach of everything. So now I close. Kind regards to Paul.

Ever yours

F. Engels

Postscripts by Engels' companions My dear Laura, the General leaves the rest of us only room to send our loves. And it's a poor thing too. For what with Niagara Falls and Niagara Beer we are most of us beyond the writing stage. When I pull myself together I'll write.

Yours

Tussy

First published in: Marx and Engels, Reproduced from the original Works, Second Russian Edition, Vol. 50, Moscow, 1981 Published in English for the first time

[^1]: Dearest Laura, I shall not forget the 26th and send you your birthday letter with best love. C. S.a

[^2]: a Carl Schorlemmer. There is also an illegible note by Edward Aveling





**[p. 133]**

ENGELS TO FRIEDRICH ADOLPH SORGE291

IN HOBOKEN

Montreal, 10 September 1888 Dear Sorge,

Arrived here yesterday, having had to turn back because of a storm between Toronto and Kingston (it really blew pretty hard) and put into Port Hope. So the two-day trip from Toronto to here turned into three. The St Lawrence and the rapids were very fine. Canada is richer in ruined houses than any country save Ireland. We are doing what we can to understand Canadian French; that language beats Yankee English hollow. Tonight we go to Plattsburg and from there to the Adirondacks and if possible the Catskills as well, so we're unlikely to be back in New York before Sunday.3 As we have to embark on Tuesday eveningb and there are still various things we must see in New York, and as during these last few days we shall all have to keep together more than would otherwise be necessary, Schorlemmer and I shan't be able to stay with you in Hoboken this time, much though we regret it, but must go to the St Nicholas with the Avelings. However we shall come and see you as soon as we get there. The transition from the States to Canada is a curious one. First of all you imagine yourself back in Europe and then you feel you're in a land that is positively retrogressing and going to rack and ruin. Here you can see how essen- tial the Americans' feverish spirit of speculation is to the rapid devel- opment of a new country (given capitalist production as its basis). In ten years this sleepy Canada will be ripe for annexation—by which time the farmers in Manitoba, etc., will be demanding it themselves. In any case this country has already been half annexed from the social point of view—hotels, newspapers, advertisements, etc., all conform to the American pattern. And however much they may struggle and resist, the economic need for an infusion of Yankee blood will assert itself and abolish this ludicrous boundary line—to which, when that time comes, John Bull will say Yea and Amen.

Your

F. E.

[^1]: a 16 September - b 18 September





**[p. 214]**

134

ENGELS T O FRIEDRICH A D O L P H SORGE 2 9 2

IN HOBOKEN

Plattsburg, N. Y., Tuesday, 11 September 1888

Dear Sorge,

Arrived here safely. We leave for the Adirondacks at 1 p.m. sharp, shall return tomorrow evening and then cross the lakes to the Hudson. Back in New York by Saturday* evening, I hope.

Should any letters have arrived for me, would you please forward them to the Narragansatt Hotel, Albany, but they must get there not later than Friday evening.

I hope you received my letter from Montreal.13 Is your throat all right again?

Your

F. Engels

First published in: K. Marx and F. Printed according to the original Engels, Letters to American";, 1848- 1895, New York, 1953

[^1]: Shall we see your sonc in New York before we leave? All of us well and cheerful. Kindest regards from us all to you and your wife.d

[^2]: a 15 September - b See previous letter - c Adolph Sorge - d Katharina Sorge





**[p. 135]**

ENGELS TO FRIEDRICH ADOLPH SORGE292

IN HOBOKEN

Plattsburg, N. Y., Wednesday 12 September 1888

Dear Sorge,

Got back from Lake Placid this evening; tomorrow we go down Lake Champlain.

I think I forgot to ask you in my last to get us another 150 cigars of the usual brand. We're right cleaned out. Kindest regards.

Your

F. Engels

First published in: K. Marx and F. Printed according to the original Engels, Letters to Americans, 1848- 1895, New York, 1953

136

ENGELS TO FLORENCE KELLEY-WISCHNEWETZKY293

IN NEW YORK

18 September 1888

Dear Mrs Wischnewetzky,

We returned on Saturdaya evening from our trip to Boston, Niagara, the St Lawrence, Adirondacks, Lakes Champlain and George, down the Hudson to New York City, we enjoyed ourselves very much and, all of us, brought home a stock of invigorated health which I hope will see us

[^1]: a 15 September





**[p. 216]**

I have some copies of the pamphlet3 from Mrs Sorge, it is very cred- itably got up and so far I have discovered only two misprints. Please let me know how many copies you are sending me to England and how many I may distribute to the press; I believe it ought to be sent to all the chief dailies and weeklies in London and some in the provinces, also the monthlies. Of course, unless instructed to the contrary, I shall entrust the sale to Reeves. As he has accepted the agency for your American publication generally, his name might have been put on the title page; he will have to print a new title page and send in a bill for that.

Hoping to see Dr Wischnewetzky in London on his return, I remain, dear Mrs Wischnewetzky,

ever yours faithfully

F. Engels

First published in: Marx and Engels, Reproduced from the original Works, First Russian Edition, Vol. XXVIII, Moscow, 1940

a K. Marx, Speech on the Question of Free Trade



**[p. 137]**

ENGELS T O T H E E D I T O R O F T H E NEW YORKER VOLKSZEITUNG294

[Draft]

Hoboken, 18 September 1888

For your private information To the Editor of the New Yorker Volkszeitung (Der Sozialist)

At the end of my brief visit to America I intended to call in at your office in person. However, my stay in New York prior to sailing by the City of New York has been so short that, to my regret, it has not been possible to do as I had intended. I hope, therefore, that you will be so kind as to excuse me.

Yours faithfully,

F. E.

First published in: Marx and Engels Printed according to the original Works, Second Russian Edition, Vol. 37, Moscow, 1965 Published in English for the first time

138

ENGELS T O T H E EDITOR O F T H E CHICAGOER ARBEITER-ZEITUNG

[Draft]

Hoboken, 18 September 1888 For your private information

Chicagoer Arbeiter-Zeitung

In the course of a short visit to America it has not, unfortunately, proved possible for me to come to Chicago and call on you in person at your office. I should like to say how much I regret this, and remain

Yours very faithfully

First published in: Marx and Engels, Printed according to the original Works, Second Russian Edition, Vol. 37, Moscow, 1965 Published in English for the first time



**[p. 139]**

ENGELS TO HERMAN ENGELS

IN ENGELSKIRCHEN

S.S. City of New York Thursday, 27-28 September 1888

Dear Hermann,

I am writing to you under difficult circumstances as our ship is rolling abominably and half the people on board are still sea-sick. We have had a very agreeable, interesting and instructive trip. After a good crossing— only one really nice storm—we arrived in New York on 17 August, stayed there about 8 days, then spent 7 days in Boston, 5 days at the Niagara Falls, then, via the Lake of Ontario to the St Lawrence River, down which a steamboat took us to Montreal, thence back to the States and Plattsburg, whence we diverted to the Adirondacks, which are very lovely, then on by steamer via Lake Champlain and Lake George (like parts of Lake Como, but smaller and quite untamed) to Albany and, finally, down the Hudson and back to New York by steamboat. As ill- luck would have it, we had booked a passage aboard the new vessel City of New York, the largest passenger ship afloat, 10,500 tons and said to be capable of 500 sea miles a day. But this is only her fourth voyage, the engines tend to fail, one is ailing and is operating at barely half power, while the other is put to considerable strain and is constantly having to be tinkered with. Luckily we have reached this spot, latitude 51 degrees north, longitude roughly 21 degrees west of Greenwich, without any particular mishap to the engines, and hope to be at Queenstowna tomor- row afternoon, and in London on Saturdaya evening. The crossing has been pretty rough, two whopping great storms and high seas all the time except for the first two days. No one in our small company has been in the least affected by sea-sickness, we have eaten, drunk and smoked incessantly and I have just this moment—11 o'clock in the morning— been summoned to take my morning Tipple.

The voyage has done me a tremendous amount of good; I feel at least 5 years younger, all my little infirmities have faded into the background,

[^1]: a Modern name: Cobh - b 29 Septemb er





**[p. 219]**

Much love to Emmab and the children,0 ditto to all our relations.

Your old brother

Friedrich

Friday morning 10 o'clock

Have been off the Irish coast since early morning, due in Queenstown at 12—where I shall post this letter—in Liverpool tomorrow morning and in London that same evening.

Again much love.

First published in Deutsche Revue, Jg. Printed according to the original 46, Bd. Ill, 1921

Published in English for the first time

[^1]: c Rudolph Engels - b Emma Engels - c Hermann and Walter Engels





**[p. 140]**

ENGELS TO CONRAD SCHMIDT4

IN BERLIN

London, 8 October 1888

Dear Dr Schmidt,

I should have answered your letter of 2 February long since had I known where to write to. I had been daily expecting news of your successful Habilitation* in Switzerland and hence of your removal to Zurich or Berne. Finally I took it with me to America, which I visited last August and September in company with Dr Aveling and his wife and Schorlemmer, but once again did not get round to answering it during the trip and now, on my return, I find a further message from you dated 23 August (on which day I was battling with mosquitoes in New York, much more dangerous adversaries than all your German professors of political economy put together).

Your account of the adventures attending your Habilitation bring back vivid recollections of the wretchedness of the German universities. That's what passes as freedom of scholarship. It's the old story of Bruno Bauer in the forties,295 except that we have come on a bit and now have not only theological and political heretics but economic ones also. Still, I trust that Thucydides296 is in a humane mood and won't place any seri- ous difficulties in your way in Leipzig.

I was most interested to learn that a 'confessional' university still actually exists in Germany.297 What odd things the 'reborn' fatherland continues to harbour!

I am very anxious to hear about your work. Apart from yourself, Lexis also tried to solve the problem to which I am obliged to revert in my preface to Volume III of Capital.™ That you should finally have arrived at Marx's viewpoint in the course of your studies doesn't surprise me at all; I believe that this would happen in the case of anyone who tackled the matter painstakingly and with an open mind. After all, many professors nowadays, exploiting Marx as they do, have trouble enough in maintaining a more or less seemly distance between themselves and

[^1]: a Qualification for lecturing at universities





**[p. 221]**

If, as I hope, my eyesight lasts out—my American jaunt did me a power of good—Volume IIP will be ready for the press this winter and in a year's time will hit that company like a bombshell. I have broken off or postponed all my other jobs so as finally to be done with it and am exceedingly hard pressed. The greater part is almost ready for the print- ers, but two or three of the seven sections need a great deal of revision, especially the first, of which there are two versions.

I found America most interesting. It is a place one really must have seen with one's own eyes, this country whose history goes back no further than commodity production and which is the promised land of capitalist production. People's usual conceptions of it are as false as those a German schoolboy has of France. There was also much natural beauty to be enjoyed at Niagara, on the St Lawrence, in the Adirondacks and on the smaller lakes.

I have read Platter's critique of G. Cohn.b The beginning is very good and witty, but further on the good Platter runs out of steam.

Over here all is much as it was, save that the four people expelled from Zurich0 have arrived, and Aveling is now writing plays which have been very well received by the impresarios. He was sent to America to rehearse 3 of his plays over there.

I still have a whole pile of letters to answer and if I miss this post I fear I shall be interrupted, so I had better close straight away. Goodbye and let me have further news of you very soon, by which time I trust you will have been duly installed as a lecturer.

Yours very sincerely,

F. Engels

First published in Sozialistische Printed according to the original Monatshefte, Nos. 15 and 16, 1920

Published in English for the first time

a Of Capital - b J. Platter, Gustav Cohns 'ethische' Nationalökonomie, Wien,

1886 - c Eduard Bernstein, Julius Motteier, Leonard Tauscher and Hermann Schlüter



**[p. 141]**

ENGELS TO FRIEDRICH ADOLPH SORGE29

IN HOBOKEN

London, 10 October 1888

Dear Sorge,

We finally got back here last Saturday week3 and since then I have sent off to you 2 To-Days and a pile of Commonweals and today a pile of Gleichheits as well as 2 more Commonweals. One Gleichheit is miss- ing. Ede Bernstein took it and I haven't got it back yet.

Little has changed over here; the next No. of the Sozialdemokrat will be printed in this country.81 Otherwise nothing at all seems to have happened.

The City of New York is a humbug; in a calm sea she is steady, of course, but once she starts rolling, no one can do anything to stop her. Moreover, her engines are in a deplorable state; one of them was operat- ing at barely half power, while the other threatened to break down at any moment because of the excessive strain. We never did more than 370 sea miles in a day and once it was only 313.

In so far as the political situation makes a survey possible, the esti- mate we formed of it over there was quite right. Bismarck has gone on for so long spinning silly young Williamb the yarn that he's a greater version of old Fritz0 that the lad is now taking it seriously and wants to be 'Emperor and Chancellor in one person'. Bismarck is presently letting him have his way in order that he may make a thorough ass of himself, whereupon Bismarck will step into the breach as his guardian angel. Meanwhile he has assigned his Herbert^ to the insolent lad as spy and custodian. A row between the two will not be long in coming and then the fun will begin.

In France the Radicals200 in the government are making bigger asses of themselves than one could have hoped for. They have renounced the whole of their old programme vis-à-vis the workers and are behaving like out and out Opportunists199; they are pulling the chestnuts out of the fire for the Opportunists and doing their dirty work for them. That

[^1]: a 29 September - b William II - c Frederick II - d Herbert von Bismarck





**[p. 223]**

So Jonas has wriggled quite cleverly out of it after all and faked an interview I can't very well disclaim.300

Mother Wischnewetzky is furious because I 'spent 10 days in New York and didn't find the time to make the two hours easy railway journey to her home. There was really so much she wanted to talk to me about'. All very well if I hadn't caught a cold and been plagued with indigestion and if I had had 10 consecutive days in New York in the first place.

Warm regards to your wife.a

Your old friend,

F. Engels

First published, slightly abridged, in and, in full, in: Marx and Engels, Briefe und Auszüge aus Briefen von Works, First Russian Edition, Vol. Joh. Phil. Becker, Jos. Dietzgen, XXVIII, Moscow, 1940 Friedrich Engels, Karl Marx u. A. an F. A. Sorge und Andere, Stuttgart, 1906, Printed according to the original

142

ENGELS TO LOUISE KAUTSKY301

IN VIENNA

[Draft]

London, 11 October 1888

My Dear, Dear Louise,

Immediately after our return, your letter got into Tussy's hands and then went to Schorlemmer, from whom I have only just retrieved it. Hence the lateness of my reply.

[^1]: a Katharina Sorge





**[p. 224]**

You say there can be no question of guilt on Karl V part. Very well, you are the best judge of that, but it does not entitle the rest of us to do you an injustice. You speak of a divorce as the only possible solution, your characters being what they are. But if your characters had really been incompatible, this must needs have been apparent to us too and we should have long anticipated a divorce as something both natural and unavoidable. But let us suppose it to have been a case of true incompat- ibility. Karl had wooed and won you in defiance of his family and yours, he knew what you had given up for his sake and, so far as we could tell, lived with you happily for five years. That being so, he should not have allowed himself to be flummoxed by what, to use your own expression, was a momentary unpleasantness. And if he was driven to take so extreme a step by a new and sudden onset of passion, he ought not to have taken that step impetuously, and should above all have avoided the remotest semblance of doing so under the influence of those who had objected to his union with you and who, perhaps, have not altogether forgiven you for becoming his wife.

Of Karl you say that, in the absence of love or passion, his personal- ity would go to pieces. If one of the traits of that personality is to require a new love every few years, he would surely be the first to admit that, in present-day circumstances, a personality of this kind has got to be kept in check if it is not to involve him and others in one long series of tragic conflicts.

So much, dear Louise, I feel it behoves me to say. Apart from anything else, our social conditions are such as to make it positively easy for a man to do a woman a gross injustice, and how many men are there

[^1]: a Karl Kautsky





**[p. 225]**

We cannot get the business out of our minds. Nim and I constantly revert to it as to something incomprehensible, impossible. One of these mornings, I told her, Karl will wake up as if out of a dream to find that he has committed the greatest folly of his life. And this is what seems to be actually happening if, as he wrote and told Ede, his new love has left him after having, within the first five days, fallen in love with his brother Hans and become engaged to him.

We had all of us so much looked forward to seeing you here again and had been correspondingly cast down when we heard through Percy while in New York that you and Karl would be staying in Vienna for the winter. But neither Nim nor I can really take in the fact that we shall never see your dear face in this house again. Yet who knows what may not happen? Who knows whether, one of these days, you may not be sitting in the same old chair where you have so often sat before? Whatever happens, of one thing I can be sure—your courage will help you to overcome all difficulties and to emerge victorious from every struggle. My own and Nim's most cordial good wishes go with you. What we can do for you, we shall gladly do—we are at your beck and call and, should fate ever bring you here again, you must in all circum- stances regard this house as your own.

Yours, from all our hearts

First published in: Marx and Engels, Printed according to the original Works, First Russian Edition, Vol. XXVIII, Moscow, 1940 Published in English for the first time



**[p. 143]**

ENGELS TO LAURA LAFARGUE40

AT LE PERREUX

London, 13 October 1888

My dear Laura,

At last. The heap of letters which Paul foresaw would meet me here and which was indeed frightful, is mostly brushed away and I can sit down to write to you a few lines.

And to begin with, a bit of gossip. When we arrived, the first news Nim told us, was that Kautsky and his wife were going to be divorced, that Kautsky had fallen in love with a girl in the Salzburg Alps, informed his wife of the fact, and Louise had set him free as far as she was concerned. We were all thunderstruck. However, a letter from Louise to me—a really heroic letter—confirmed the news, and with a generosity beyond all praise even acquitted Kautsky of all blame. We all of us here were very fond of Louise and could not make it out how Kautsky could be such a fool—and such a mean one; except that an intrigue was at the bottom, planned by his mother3 and sisterb (who both hated Louise) and that he had fallen into the trap. This seems indeed to have been the case, from all we can learn. The girl is a Bezirksrichter Y daughter, longing evidently for a husband and especially for one who will take her to Vienna. Kautsky flirted with her while his wife was in Vienna nursing her sick mother; and one fine morning the discovery was made that neither could live without the other—the sister, of course, working both puppets behind the scenes, while the mother pretended not to see anything. Well, Kautsky came here, told Bernstein, sold his furniture, took his books with him and returned, with his younger brother Hans, to St Gilgen near Salzburg, the scene of the above drama. When the youthful Bella (such is her name) saw the equally youthful Hans, a flot- ter strammer Bursch,A she at once discovered that she had, in Karl, really loved Hans alone, and Hans reciprocated with the alacrity becoming to a young Viennese; within five days they were engaged and Karl found himself between two stools of his own setting. Karl in his generosity has

[^1]: a Minna Kautsky - b Minna Kautsky - c district judge - d jolly smart fellow





**[p. 227]**

Of course, now Kautsky discovers at once that he has lived unhappily with Louise for the last 12 months (that is since his mother and sister were here and spent a month with them at the Isle of Wight) and Ede Bernstein will also have noted some disharmony when he came from Switzerland. This is all the more curious that during this time when he could not agree with her, we all here liked her all the better, the longer we knew her; which proves that she is not only a heroic woman, for that she is undoubtedly (and such are certainly not always the best for domestic use), but a woman with whom reasonable people can get on. Well I think and said to Nim: this is the greatest Dummheit Kautsky ever committed in his life and I do not envy him the moralischen Kater* which will be the upshot (sans calembourg\h) of it all.

The matter is up to the present kept quiet. Here only Ede Bernstein and his wife, Nim, and Schorlemmer know about it, also Tussy and Edward, and probably one or two of Louise's and Tussy's common lady friends. How it will all end, I do not know, but I guess Kautsky wishes it was all a dream.

Now to business. Enclosed account of Capital, for the last 12 months, according to which I owe you £2.8s.9d, and as you must be by this time pretty short of cash I add £15—making the cheque £17.8s.9d in all.

Nim informs me dinner is getting ready and so I stop short, using the rest of the page for the account. Love from Nim and your old General.

Received from S. Sonnenschein and Co. for Royalties July 1887-June 88

£12.3.9 1/5 Longuet 's children 1/5 Laura Lafargue 1/5 Tussy

£ 2.8.9 £ 2.8.9 £ 2.8.9

£ 7.6.3

Remainder 2/5 for the Translators - £ 4.17.6 of which Sam Moore 3/5 E. Aveling 2/5

£ 2.18.6 £ 1.19.- £ 4. 7.6'

[^1]: a moral hangover - b no pun intended - c should be: £4.17.6





**[p. 228]**

First published, in the language of the Reproduced from the original original (English), in: F. Engels, P. et L. Lafargue, Correspondance, t. Il, Paris, 1956

144

ENGELS T O N I K O L A I DANIELSON 2 1 1

IN ST PETERSBURG

London, 15 October 1888

Dear Sir,

I was prevented from replying to your kind letters of 8/20 January and 3/15 June—as also to a great many other letters—first by a weakness of my eyes which made it impossible for me to write at my desk for more than two hours a day, and thus necessitated an almost complete neglect of work and correspondence, and second by a journey to America during August and September from which I am only just returned. My eyes are better but as I now shall take in hand Volume IIP and finish it, I must still be careful not to overwork them, and conse- quently my friends must excuse me if my letters are not too long and not too frequent.

The disquisitions in your first letter on the relation between rate of surplus value and rate of profits are highly interesting and no doubt of great value for grouping statistics; but it is not in this way that our authorb attacks the problem. You suppose, in your formula, that every manufacturer keeps all the surplus value, which he, in the first hand appropriates. Now upon that supposition, merchant's capital and banker's capital would be impossible, because they would not make any profit. The profit of a manufacturer therefore cannot represent all the surplus value he has extracted from his workmen.

[^1]: a of Capital - b Karl Marx





**[p. 229]**

You wonder why in England political economy is in such a pitiful state. It is the same everywhere; even classical economy, nay, even the most vulgar Free Trade Hausierburschen3- are looked upon with contempt by the still more vulgar 'superior' beings who fill the univer- sity chairs of economy. That is the fault of our author, to a great extent; he has taught people to see the dangerous consequences of classical economy; they find that no science at all, on this field at least, is the safe side of the question. And they have so well succeeded in blinding the ordinary philistine, that there are at the present moment four people in London, calling themselves 'Socialist'302 who claim to have refuted our author completely by opposing to his theory that of—Stanley Jevons!215

Paris friends insist upon saying that Mr Mutualb is not dead;216 I have no means of testing their information.

I have read with great interest your physiological observations upon exhaustion by prolonged labour time and the quantity of potential energy in the shape of food required to replace the exhaustion. To the statement of Ranke quoted by youc I have to make a slight exception: if the 1,000,000 kgmetres in food merely replaced the amount of heat and mechanical work done, it will still be insufficient, for it does not then replace the wear and tear of muscle and nerve; for that not only heat- producing food is required but albumen and this cannot be measured in kgmetres alone, as the animal body is incapable of building it up from the elements.

I do not know the two books of Ed. Young and Phil. Bevan,d but there must be some mistake in the statement that spinners and weavers in the Cotton Industry in America receive $90-120 a year. That repre- sents $2- a week,—8/- sterling, but in reality equals, in purchasing power, less than 5/- in England. From all I have heard, the wages of spin- ners and weavers in America are nominally higher but in reality only

a peddlers - b Hermann Lopatin - c J. Ranke, Grundzüge der Physiologie des Menschen mit Rücksicht auf die Gesundheitspflege und das praktische Bedürfniss des Arztes, Leipzig, 1868 - d Ed. Young, Labor in Europe and America . •., Washington, 1875; G. Ph. Bevan, The Industrial Classes, and Industrial Statistics, London, 1876



**[p. 1888]**

Operatives and officers 174,659 Deduct clerks, managers etc. 2.115 172.544 operatives (Men 59,685 (over 16 years) boys 16,107 (under 16 years) women 84,539 (over 15 years) girls 13,213 (under 15 years))

172,544. total wages $42,040,510 or $243.06 per head per annum, which agrees with my estimate given above, as what the men get more will be made up by what girls and boys get less.

To prove to you to what depths of degradation economical science has fallen, Lujo Brentano has published a lecture on Die Klassische Nationalökonomie (Leipzig, 1888), in which he proclaims: general or theo- retical economy is worth noting, but special or practical economy is every- thing. Like natural science (!), we must limit ourselves to the description of facts; such descriptions are of infinitely higher value than all apriori deduc- tions. 'Like natural science'! That is impayable in the century of Darwin, of Mayer, Joule and Clausius, of evolution and the transformation of energy!

Thanks for the N o . of Russkiye Vedomosti with the interesting article on the interference with the statistical work of the Zemstvos. It is a great pity that this valuable work should be interrupted.

First published, in Russian, in Reproduced from the original Minuvshiye gody, No. 2, 1908

Published in English in full for the first time

[^1]: Very sincerely yours P. W. Rosher39

[^2]: a Department of the Interior, Census Office Compendium of the Tenth Census (June 1, 1880), Washington, 1883, pp.1-2





**[p. 145]**

ENGELS TO KARL KAUTSKY

IN VIENNA

London, 17 October 1888

Dear Kautsky,

In reply to your letter, I can only begin by repeating what I have already written and told Louise,a that my mind reels at the thought of what has happened between you two. If there had been any serious discord, this must have been apparent, however slightly, to us over here, particularly when you were at Dodwell with the Avelings. But no one noticed a thing—except Ede.

You yourself say that Louise likewise refused to admit as much and, in view of the remarkable magnanimity of which she has given proof throughout, I can only assume that she feels and believes what she says. However, it could be that you are both right. According to you, your dissatisfaction began over a year ago. That takes you back more or less to your time in Ventnor. Your relations never approved of your marriage. From my experience of my own family I know how difficult and, for a time, impossible, it is for parents to do justice to a daughter- or son-in-law who has come into the family against their wishes. For all that, the parents are conscious of having the best of intentions, the only result of which is, as a rule, to pave the streets of hell for their son- or daughter-in-law and, indirectly, for their own child. Every husband has something to criticise in his wife, and vice versa; that is as it should be. But as a result of well-meaning Ingerentzk by third parties, this critical attitude may be exacerbated to the point of resentment if not lasting discord. If this is what has happened in your case, you are both of you right: Louise in saying that there is no cause for discord between you, you in saying that your relationship is, in fact, discordant.

But if the discord—no matter what the reason for it—was so grave that you seriously contemplated divorce, what you should have borne in mind above all was, I should say, the differing status of husband and wife in present-day conditions. No social stigma whatever attaches to the

[^1]: a See this volume, pp.223-5 - b intervention





**[p. 232]**

Again, profound discord cannot occur without both parties being aware of it. And you know Louise well enough to realise that in such an event she would have been the first to release both herself and you. If, however, you were intent on making the first move, then surely you owed it to Louise to do so while in full command of your faculties and not in a state of euphoria such as you were in at St Gilgen, and which was destined to evaporate so soon.

Enough. As I have said, the thing's utterly inconceivable to all of us except Ede. While you were becoming dissatisfied with Louise, she was acquiring one friend after another here, and we were growing fonder of her every day, and envying you for being married to her. And I still maintain that this is the silliest thing you have ever done.

You say you think that you'll have to stay in Vienna. Of that you are, of course, the best judge. In your place I should feel impelled to with- draw for the time being into relative solitude, away from all the inter- ested parties, in order to get a clear idea of the nature and implications of what has happened.

And that's enough of that. Your news about the state of the party in Austria is not particularly edifying, although hardly unexpected. Strife between nationalities is still too deeply engrained, even in the mass of the workers, to permit of a general surge forward, and that will take time. Of the 3 groups you mention, the Alpine provinces hardly come into it— except for Vienna, which I do not count. The chaps in Brno have the great advantage of being an international group. Finally, the bickering about leadership only goes to show—just as it does over here—that the masses as a whole are not yet in process of going over to the party, that everything's proceeding too slowly, which is why everyone tries to put the blame on someone else, while hoping that this or that panacea will produce better results.303 Your only course is to be patient, and I'm glad that I needn't have anything to do with the business.



**[p. 233]**

Your

F.E.

Fist published in: Aus der Frühzeit des Printed according to the original Marxismus. Engels Briefwechsel mit Kautsky, Prag, 1935 Published in England in full for the first time

146

ENGELS T O AUGUST BEBEL

IN BERLIN

London, 25 October 1888

Dear Bebel,

I have sent you through Schlüter Der Hülferuf der deutschen Jugend together with its sequel, Die Junge Generation, Weitling's periodical of the forties. Schlüter had got the other stuff and has sent it to you; the Garantien, Das Evangelium des armen Sünders, etc.305

In my view, it would be better to distinguish between the 3 trends in the German movement during the forties. There is very little connection between them, Weitlingian communism306 in particular having remained aloof until it fizzled out or its members came over to us—a phase which does not figure in the literature on the subject. As regards the history of

[^1]: a of Capital





**[p. 1888]**

Here it occurs to me that you ought also, perhaps, to have Kuhlmann's book—the prophetic religion that succeeded Weitling in Switzerland and to which many of his followers were converted.308 I completely forgot to give it to Schlüter.

I enclose a letter from Weitling to Hess (from the archives). It was at a meeting of a small band of close associates that the breach between Weitling and ourselves took place. (An account of the said meeting, writ- ten by Annenkov, a Russian who was present, also appeared in the Neue Zeit a few years ago.)309 What happened was as follows: Hess had been to Westphalia (Bielefeld, etc.); the chaps there—Lüning, Rempel et al— wished, he said, to put up the money for the publication of our writ- ings.310 Then Weitling came up with the proposal that his disquisitions re his Utopian system be placed with them forthwith, as also his other great works (including a new grammar in which the dative was abolished as the invention of aristocrats)311—things we would have had to criticise and combat the moment the plan came off. The letter shows the distorted form in which our arguments were reflected in Weitling's mind. Everywhere he saw nothing but professional jealousy, nothing but an attempt to suppress his genius, to 'come between him and the sources of money'. But in points 5 and 6 of his resume the fundamental differ- ence between him and ourselves emerges plainly enough, and that's the main thing.312

[^1]: P. 3, lines 10-12: This refers to our intention of bringing out the great

[^2]: a K. Marx and E. Engels, The German Ideology - b F. Engels, 'On the History of the Communist League' - c Revelations Concerning the Communist Trial in Cologne





**[p. 235]**

P. 3, bottom: E. is Ewerbeck in Paris. N.B. It finally transpired that Mosesa had omitted to tell us the essen- tials, namely that all the Westphalians had offered was to guarantee other publishers against the losses they might make on our stuff. Moses had led us to believe that they, the Westphalians, would themselves undertake publication. As soon as we learnt what the position was, we naturally washed our hands of the whole business; to be writers guaranteed by the Westphalians was something that would never have occurred to us.

The affair of the Kautskys has astonished us all. Louise has conducted herself throughout with exceptional heroism. Kautsky was in a state of complete euphoria but was sadly sobered down when jilted within 5 days by his new beloved, who thereupon got engaged to his brother Hans. Now they both intend to wait and see how things go; the strangest part of it is that Louise is now complaining how unfair we are all being to Karl! I have written and told Kautsky that it's the silliest thing he has ever done and, if Louise thinks this too unkind, I suppose I shall have to return my sword to its scabbard.

I am now working on Volume III of Capital. I am still supposed to take great care of my eyes and not write for more than 2 hours daily and that only by daylight. So my correspondence will have to be severely curtailed.

Regards to Singer.

Your

EE.

First published in: Marx and Engels, Printed according to the original Works, First Russian Edition, Vol. XXVIII, Moscow, 1940 Published in English for the first time

[^1]: a Moses Hess





**[p. 147]**

ENGELS TO LAURA LAFARGUE274

AT LE PERREUX

London, 24 November 1888

My dear Laura,

I was going to write two lines to Paul just when your letter3 arrived. I have been busy with a very important chapter in Book IIIb which I have had to re-write entirely, the materials left by Mohr being all in the rought, and as it is a mathematical one, it required much attention.314

And when one has only two daily fragments of IV2 hours each allowed for work by the doctor, a thing which otherwise could be settled in 14 days takes more than 6 weeks—and so I determined to do it all before I allowed myself any interruption for correspondence. Well, the main portion is finished to-day and so I can just send a line to ask Paul to let me know as usual when he wants any money and I will do what I can.

As soon as my chapter is definitely got rid of, I shall write again—I have such a lot of letter-debts!—in the meantime hope to get the Figaro to-night, so far it has not come. The position in France seems indeed very curious—our friends have allowed themselves by their hatred of the Radicals200 to take Boulanger too little au sérieux and find now that he is a real danger137—anyhow he has the lower ranks of the army on his side and that is a power not to be disdained. And anyhow the way the fellow not only accepts but courts the support of the monarchists makes him more contemptible in my eyes than even the Radicals. Let us hope that the conscious breaches of logic committed by all parties—but then one must not forget that the form of all unconscious development is the Negation der Negation,0 the movement by contrasts, and that this in France means Republicanism (or respectively Socialism) and Bonapartism (or Boulangism). And Boulanger 's avènement^ would be a European war—the very thing most to be feared.

Ever yours

F. Engels

[^1]: a of 5 November 1888 - b of Capital -c negation of the negation - d accession to power





**[p. 237]**

First published in full, in the language Istorichesky arkhiv, No. 2, 1956 of the original (English), in: F. Engels, P. et L. Lafargue, Correspondance, t. Reproduced from the original II, Paris, 1956 and, in Russian, in

148

ENGELS TO PAUL LAFARGUE

AT LE PERREUX

London, 4 December 1888

My dear Lafargue,

in order to cope with it I have had to set aside all other occupations, notably letter-writing. Hence my silence.

Bernstein has sent your article to Bebel to find out what he thinks of it. As for me, my advice to you would be to withdraw it. The things you say in your historical introduction are common knowledge and we are all of one mind about them. But when you come to the Possibilists,19 all you do is to say they've sold themselves to the government, and this without the slightest proof or even circumstantial evidence. If you haven't anything else to say about them, it would be better to say noth- ing at all.316 Had you given an account of all the dirty tricks they allegedly played on the Municipal Council and on the Bourse du Travail317 affairs, and had then gone on to provide facts and reasons in support of your assertion of their venality, it might have amounted to

[^1]: I have just finished editing a very important chapter in Volume III," a chapter Marx left uncompleted—and a mathematical chapter at that,314

[^2]: a of Capital





**[p. 238]**

Don't forget that, in reply, these gentry will say that you have sold yourselves to the Boulangists. There is no denying the fact that your atti- tude to Boulangism has done you tremendous harm in the eyes of Socialists outside France.277 You have coquetted and flirted with the Boulangists out of hatred of the Radicals200 when you might easily have attacked both, thus leaving no room for ambiguity regarding the inde- pendence of your position vis-à-vis the two parties. Nothing forced you to choose between these two sets of nincompoops. You could have cocked a snook at one no less than at the other. But instead, you made much of the Boulangists, you even mentioned the possibility of sharing an electoral roll with them at the next elections—with people allied to the Bonapartists and Royalists, who are certainly no better than Mr Brousse's Radical allies! If you have been seduced by the attitude of the Blanquists318 who, idealists though they be, are also circumspect in their dealings with Boulanger because of the money received from Rochefort, you ought to have known 'those idealists', since we used to have some in London too.

You say it is necessary for the people to personify their aspirations— if that were true, the French would be Bonapartists from birth, in which case we might as well shut up shop in Paris. But even if you did so believe, would it be reason enough to take the said Bonapartists under your wing?

Boulanger, you say, doesn't want war. What the poor fellow wants is neither here nor there! He has to do what the situation demands, whether he likes it or not. Once in power, he'll be a slave to his chau- vinist programme, the only programme he's got, aside from his accession to power. Within less than six weeks Bismarck will have enmeshed him in a web of complications, provocations and frontier incidents, etc. Then Boulanger will either have to declare war or else abdicate; have you any doubt what his choice will be? Boulanger spells war, nothing could be more certain. And what war? France allied to Russia, and hence no possibility of revolution; the least movement in Paris, and the Tsara

would so arrange things with Bismarck as to stifle revolutionary ardour for good and all; worse still, once war had been embarked upon, the Tsar would be absolute master of France and would impose on you what

[^1]: a Alexander III





**[p. 239]**

I don't know what Liebknecht may have done about the Possibilists. Whatever the case, I feel sure that our party in Germany could hardly bring itself to attend the Possibilist congress319 and, if it did, this could only be as the result of grave mistakes on your part. But do not forget that the Possibilists have succeeded in posing as the official representa- tives of French socialism, that they are recognised as such by the English,269 the Americans and the Belgians, that they fraternised at the London Congress320 with the Dutch and the Danes because you, having abdicated, were not represented there. If you do nothing in the way of advertising and preparing for your 1889 congress,321 everybody will attend that of the Broussists, there being no following for those who abdicate. So advertise your congress, make a bit of to-do in the socialist press of all countries, so that others may realise that the little chap's still alive and kicking. And if your Troyes322 Congress is successful—and succeed it must, for otherwise your party will be done for—beat the big drum, have a central committee that bestirs itself and to which people may refer and, if possible, have a little weekly paper which will give the world proof of your existence. And make a clean break with the Boulangists, otherwise no one will come.

Circumstances permitting, Liebknecht will have his congress—any old congress—provided he himself is there. And if your congress seems to him to offer little chance of success, he'll go to the Possibilist one. I'll do what I can to see that others are informed; Bebel already has been, by Bernstein, who will himself write about the Possibilists in the Sozialdemokrat!0 But he hasn't the power to bind the Party.

Has Liebknecht been in touch with you, and what did you reply? That's what I must know if I am to act in accordance with the facts.

Last Sunday Anseele and Van Beveren came to see me, and who do you think was with them? Adolphe Smith-Headingly! Needless to say, I lost no time in showing him the door. Can you imagine such impu- dence!

a H. Heine, 'Disputation', Romanzero - b See E. Bernstein, 'Boulanger's Sieg in Paris', Der Sozialdemokrat, 3 February 1889



**[p. 240]**

My love to Laura. Nim has had a bronchial cold which she has at last shaken off, after three weeks.

Yours ever,

F. E.

First published, in Russian, in Voprosy Translated from the French istorii KPSS,'No.6, 1965

Published in English for the first time Printed according to the original

149

ENGELS T O FRIEDRICH A D O L P H SORGE 4 9

IN HOBOKEN

London, 15 December 1888

In haste: You might tell Speyer that Lessner has found his sister-in- law. His people are still living in the old house and the woman has promised to write to the Speyers straight away. However, I did not wish to delay sending you this information.

Volume IIP is proving more of a handful than I had imagined. I have had to recast the whole of one chapter from the existing material and there's another, of which only the title exists, which I am having to produce myself.323 However it's going ahead and will cause much surprise among their worships the political economists. My eyes are better and I still feel five years younger than I did last July. Regards to your wife.b

Your

F. E.

[^1]: a of Capital - b Katharine Sorge





**[p. 241]**

150

ENGELS TO E WALTER

IN LONDON

[Draft]

London, 21 December 1888

Mr F. Walter 47 Marshall Street, Golden Sq., W

Dear Mr Walter,

The first time you wrote to me I knew nothing about you and hence could take no more account of your letter than of the many others on a similar subject which I receive from strangers.

You now refer to Most from which I must conclude that you belong to the anarchists. But as long as the weight of the anarchists' attack is directed at our embattled party in Germany rather than at the common enemy, my resources will be devoted to the victims of persecution at the hands of the German governments, and it cannot be expected of me that I should support people who maintain a hostile stance towards my friends and party comrades in Germany and elsewhere.

In no circumstances would I be capable of getting the broker out of your house.

If, however, I should be mistaken about your political affiliations, you will have no difficulty in establishing your bona fides with my old friend Lessner, 12 Fitzroy St, in which case I shall be happy to do some-



**[p. 242]**

Yours very truly

First published in: Marx and Engels, Printed according to the original Works, First Russian Edition, Vol. XXVIII, Moscow, 1940 Published in English for the first time

