---
Volume: 48
Document_Title: "83. Engels to Nikolai Danielson 5 January "
Page_Range: "147-150"
---

# 83. Engels to Nikolai Danielson 5 January 



**[p. 135]**

Since your relations with the German socialists, newspaper exchange, etc., leave something to be desired, I would gladly do for you whatever I can.

With fraternal greetings,

F. Engels

First published, in the language of the Translated from the French original (Romanian), in Contemp- oranul, No. 6, 1888 Published in English for the first time

Printed according to the journal, checked with the rough copy of the manuscript, written in French

83

ENGELS TO NIKOLAI DANIELSON211

IN ST PETERSBURG

London, 5 January 1888

Dear Sir,

I have removed and my new address is: Mrs Rosher, Cottesloe, Burton Road, Kilburn, London N . W. There is no number, Cottesloe being the name of the house.

[^1]: I have at once ordered from my bookseller here the work of Dr Keussler.b Even if the first volumes are based on imperfect materials I have seen enough of the work of your Zemstvos to know that the résumé of them must contain immensely valuable material and, being written in German, prove a perfect revelation to Occidentals.212 I shall take good care that these materials are made use of.

[^2]: I am afraid your land-bank for the nobility213 will have about the

[^3]: a The rough copy of the manuscript ends here - b J. V. Keussler, Zur Geschichte und Kritik des häuerlichen Gemeindehesitzes in Kussland





**[p. 136]**

The peasants' bank214 too seems similar to the Prussian peasants' banks, and it is almost inconceivable how difficult it is for some people to see that all fresh sources of credit opened up to landed proprietors (small or large) must result in enslaving them to the victorious capitalist.

My eyes still require des ménagements? but anyhow I hope in a short time, say next month, to be able to resume my work on the 3rd volumef; unfortunately I cannot as yet make any promises as to the time of finish- ing it.

The English translation? has sold and is selling very well, indeed surprisingly well for a book of that size and class; the publisher11 is enchanted with his speculation. The critics are on the other hand very, very much below the average low level. Only one good article in the Athenaeum^7; the rest either merely give extracts from the preface or, if trying to tackle the book itself, are unutterably poor. The fashionable theory just now here is that of Stanley Jevons,215 according to which value is determined by utility, i.e. Tauschwert-Gebrauchswert' and on

[^1]: a big cities - b to live according to their social status - c in Russian in the original letter. An allusion to Alexander Herzen's book From Another Shore) - d in Russian in the original e good care - f of Capital - s of Vol. I of Capital - h William Swan Sonnenschein - ' exchange value = use value





**[p. 137]**

The sale of the German edition of I and II volumes goes on very well. There are a great many articles written about the book and its theories, an extract, or rather independent reproduction in: Karl Marx's Ökonomische Lehren vona K. Kautsky, not bad, though not always quite correct, I will send it you. Then a miserable apostate Jew Georg Adler, Privatdozent in Breslau,b has written a big book, the title of which I forget, to prove Marx wrong,0 but it is simply a scurrilous and ridiculous pamphlet by which the author wants to call attention—the attention of the ministry and bourgeoisie—on himself and his impor- tance. I have asked all my friends not to notice it. Indeed if any miser- able impotent fellow wants to faire de la réclame^ for himself, he attacks our author.e

Friends in Paris have doubted the accuracy of your very sad news about Mr Mutual/ Could you give me in some way or other any partic- ulars of this event?'216

I enclose a little thing published some years ago.

Yours sincerely, P. W. Rosher

First published, in Russian, in the Reproduced from the original magazine Minuvshiye gody, No. 2, St Petersburg, 1908 Published in English in full for the first time

a by - b lecturer in Wroclaw - c G. Adler, Die Grundlagen der Karl Karx'schen Kritik der bestehenden Volkswirtschaft. Kritische und ökonomisch-litterarische Studien, Tübingen, 1887 - d gain publicity - e Karl Marx - f Hermann Lopatin

