---
Volume: 48
Document_Title: "84. Engels to Friedrich Adolph Sorge 7 January "
Page_Range: "150-152"
---

# 84. Engels to Friedrich Adolph Sorge 7 January 



**[p. 84]**

ENGELS T O FRIEDRICH A D O L P H SORGE 2 1 7

IN ROCHESTER

London, 7 January 1888

Dear Sorge

First, let me wish you a Happy New Year and express the hope that you will soon settle down in your new locality218 and that you have completely recovered from your accidents last summer.

We can only hope that the gathering war clouds will disperse— everything is already going as nicely as we could wish and we can very well dispense with the interruption through a general war and one, moreover, on a vaster scale than ever before, although this too must eventually redound in our favour. Bismarck's policy is driving the working and petty-bourgeois masses over to us in their thousands; the pitiable inadequacy of the social reforms, so pompously proclaimed, and which are a mere pretext for coercive measures against the workers (Puttkamer's anti-strike edict, the proposed re-introduction of employ- ment books, the purloining of trades union and provident funds) is proving enormously effective.219 The new Anti-Socialist Law will do little harm; this time, the expatriation clause is unlikely to go through and, if it does, it's questionable how long it will last.220 For if—as would be best for us—old William* were shortly to kick the bucket and the Crown Princeb came to the helm, if only for six months, everything would probably be thrown into confusion. Bismarck has laboured so hard at getting rid of the Crown Prince altogether and bringing about the regency of that insolent guards' subaltern, the younger William,0

that he would, in such an event, probably be got rid of and replaced by a short-lived, head-in-clouds liberal regime. That would be enough to destroy your philistine's confidence in the stability of the Bismarckian system; and if, along with the young whippersnapper, Bismarck were subsequently to return to power, your philistine's faith would nonethe- less be gone, the lad being after all no substitute for the old man. For the bogus Bonapartes of today are as naught unless people believe in them

[^1]: a William I - b Frederick William (later Frederick III) - c Frederick William's son (William II)





**[p. 139]**

On the other hand, a war would set us back by many years. Chauvinism would swamp all else since there would be a struggle for survival. Germany would place some 5 million men under arms, or 10 per cent of the population, the others, say, 4 or 5 per cent, Russia rela- tively less. But there would be some 10 to 15 million combatants in the field. And how they are to be fed beats me; it would mean devastation like that of the Thirty Years War.221 And it wouldn't be over quickly, despite the colossal military forces engaged. For France is protected by very extensive fortifications along its frontiers in the northwest and southeast, and the new works at Paris are models of their kind. So it will take a long time, and Russia is not to be reduced by storm either. Even if everything goes in accordance with Bismarck's wishes, therefore, unprecedented demands will be made on the nation and it is quite possi- ble that the postponement of a decisive victory and partial reverses would evoke revolution inside the country. But if the Germans were beaten from the start, or forced permanently onto the defensive, then the fun would surely begin. If the war were fought to a finish without inter- nal disorder, the state of prostration would be unlike anything Europe has experienced in the past 200 years. Then American industry would triumph all along the line and we should all be faced with the alternative either of a complete reversion to agriculture for domestic consumption (any other kind being precluded by American grain) or—social trans- formation. Hence I suspect that they do not intend to go to extremes, to have recourse to anything more than a mock war. But once the first shot has been fired, control will have been lost and the horse can take the bit between its teeth.

So everything is tending inexorably towards a decision, war or peace, and I must hasten to complete the third volume.a But events demand that I remain au courant and this, particularly as regards the military side, requires a great deal of time, and yet I must still take care of my eyes. If only I could simply withdraw into my study! However, it's got to be done and I shall set to work next month at the latest.

Shorlemmer, who is here, sends his kindest regards. Our people were immediately responsible for resolving the presiden- tial crisis in Paris.197 The Blanquists took the lead, Vaillant having carried

[^1]: a Of Capital - b informed



