---
Volume: 48
Document_Title: "85. Engels to Wilhelm Liebknecht 10 January "
Page_Range: "152-154"
---

# 85. Engels to Wilhelm Liebknecht 10 January 



**[p. 140]**

You have, I trust, been getting Commonweal, Gleichheit and To-day regularly.

Your old friend,

F. E.

First published in Briefe und Auszüge Printed according to the original aus Briefen von Joh. Phil. Becker, Jos. Dietzgen, Friedrich Engels, Karl Marx Published in English in full for the u. A. an F A. Sorge und Andere, first time Stuttgart, 1906

85

ENGELS T O WILHELM LIEBKNECHT

IN BORSDORF NEAR LEIPZIG

London, 10 January 1888

Dear Liebknecht,

As regards expatriation, things are unlikely to move very rapidly. However contemptible the German bourgeoisie may be, such cowardice calls for a modicum of courage and in my view it will take Bismarck a year to knock that courage into them. But quite a lot can happen in a year. By intriguing against the Crown Prince,a Monsieur

[^1]: a Frederick William (later Frederick III)





**[p. 141]**

There's nothing new to report here. The old Communist Society106 is going steadily downhill, being now in the hands of the rascally Gilles; it is becoming increasingly chummy with the anarchists whose headquar- ters are now in London. The Trafalgar Square affair224 is being celebrated afresh with the wholesale sentencing—both in the magistrates' and in the criminal courts—of those who took part in the demonstration. Graham and Burns are to appear shortly. If they too are sentenced, the London juryman will, by his action, have passed a vote of thanks to Warren and the police, which can only further the split between the classes. The workingmen have an enormous hatred of the police and at the next elec- tion the stupid Tories will have cause to be aware of it.

I wish you belatedly a Happy New Year and let's hope there will be peace both internally and externally. I have no wish either for war or for attempted coups. Everything is going much too famously for that.

Your

F. Engels

First published in: Marx and Engels, Printed according to the original Works, First Russian Edition, Vol. XXVIII, Moscow, 1940 Published in English for the first time

[^1]: a William I - b Frederick William's son (William II)



