---
Volume: 48
Document_Title: "86. Engels to Hermann Schlüter 10 January "
Page_Range: "154-155"
---

# 86. Engels to Hermann Schlüter 10 January 



**[p. 86]**

ENGELS TO HERMANN SCHLÜTER225

IN HOTTINGEN-ZURICH

London, 10 January 1888

Dear Mr Schlüter,

I have no objection to Ede's printing the final part of the introduction to the Blood-and-Thunder Patriots.226

Kindly tell me when, approximately, you will be able to start printing the Theory of Force. For I am working on a fourth chapter to it in which I examine Bismarck's use of force and the reasons for its momentary success. I am writing it now, but shall have to revise it immediately before printing and make additions in accordance with the latest facts. Naturally I shall be happy to place this chapter too at Ede's disposal, once everything has got to that stage.203

I shall shortly be putting my books in order and it may be that another copy of the Holy Family will turn up; if so, the archives227 shall have it. Meanwhile please continue to keep an eye open for the Revue der Neue Rheinischen Zeitung—isolated articles would be of use only in cases of direct necessity.228

Bruhn's distorted account is mentioned in Herr Vogt, p. 124. Note— Bangya, having represented himself as the agent of a chap called Eisenmann, or some such name, who was supposedly setting up as a bookseller in Berlin, had promised that the latter would print the ms.229

This was by Marx and myself and the original is here in my house. However, the actual purchaser of the copy was Stieber, who was silly enough to imagine that the Prussian police would find in a ms. intended by us for publication secret revelations and not merely a derisive portrayal of the great men of the emigration, for there was, of course, nothing more to it than that. We were done out of its publication, but the people who were really done were the Prussian police, who no doubt also took care never to boast about it and, along with them, Mr Kossuth who, until this episode, had been unaware of the unsavoury nature of his protégé, though subsequently he still sought to support him.

Your kind wishes for the New Year are heartily reciprocated.

Ever yours,

F. E.

