---
Volume: 48
Document_Title: "89. Engels to Paul Lafargue 7 February "
Page_Range: "157-159"
---

# 89. Engels to Paul Lafargue 7 February 



**[p. 145]**

Kindest regards.

Yours,

F. E.

The only thing that might possibly intervene would by my eyesight, for which I'm receiving treatment so as to get the wretched business properly over and done with—but in that case I shall write.

First published in: Marx and Engels, Printed according to the original Works, First Russian Edition, Vol. XXVIII, Moscow, 1940 Published in English for the first time

89

ENGELS TO PAUL LAFARGUE87

AT LE PERREUX

London, 7 February 1888

My dear Lafargue,

Herewith the cheque for LI5. I am overwhelmed with work. The business of the English Manifesto has at last been rushed through and I expect to have the proofs in a few days' time.54 I am counting on Laura for improvements to the transla- tion, my own revision having had to be done in something of a hurry, and this would be of the greatest help to me in the event of a reprint.

Then, I am writing a critique of Bismarck's policy generally. It is to appear as an appendix to the Anti-DUhring's Theory of Force, or rather, as its application to current practice. I promised to deliver the ms. on the



**[p. 146]**

The disappearance of the Socialiste spells your own disappearance qua party from the Paris scene.234 After all, the Possibilists manage to keep the Prolétariat going and, if you cannot do as much, it means you are contracting instead of expanding; it is not the weekly organ that is to blame—the other's a weekly too. Meanwhile I refuse to believe that the Paris workingman has embarked irretrievably on a period of decadence. The French are unpredictable and capable of springing all manner of surprises. So I shall wait and see.

As for Bismarck he, no less than the Russian Panslavists82 and French chauvinists, is playing with fire. The present situation suits him so long as a glimmer of life remains in old Lehmann (nickname for William,a as you doubtless know). Bismarck has every reason to make himself indis- pensable against the day the old man dies. He and young Williamb have hatched something of a plot against the Crown Princec in an attempt to induce him to have a laryngotomy, i.e. to have his throat slit.d Since the Crown Prince and his wifee are perfectly well aware of this, Bismarck has made himself all but impossible so far as they are concerned. And that's one of the reasons why the new Anti-Socialist Law has failed to get through the Reichstag.235 A Catholic from Colognef declared in open session that, before 30 September (when the existing law expires) the ministry might well have changed hands.

That debate on the Anti-Socialist Law was, for us, a real masterpiece. It is the first time our men have scored an out-and-out victory in the Reichstag. The law will be extended for two years, probably for the last time. But not all the arguments nor all the facts in the world would have sufficed to bring about the rejection of the government's demands had there been any immediate prospect of young William's succession; he is your true Prussian, insolent and arrogant as the officers in Berlin in 1806, who would use the steps of the French embassy to whet their swords on only, vanquished, to surrender those swords to Napoleon's soldiers two months later.236

[^1]: a William I - b William II, son of Frederick William - c Frederick William (later Frederick III) - d Frederick William had larynx cancer - e Victoria Adelaide Mary Louisa - f Peter Franz Reichensperger (Speech in the Reichstag on 27 January 1888)



