---
Volume: 48
Document_Title: "92. Engels to Friedrich Adolph Sorge 22 February "
Page_Range: "161-164"
---

# 92. Engels to Friedrich Adolph Sorge 22 February 



**[p. 149]**

As soon as possible I shall send you the English Manifesto for the archives.227

Kindest regards to you all,

Yours,

F. Engels

First published in: Marx and Engels, Printed according to the original Works, First Russian Edition, Vol. XXVIII, Moscow, 1940 Published in English for the first time

92

ENGELS TO FRIEDRICH ADOLPH SORGE237

IN ROCHESTER

London, 22 February 1888

Dear Sorge,

I must in all honesty confess that, from the start, I hardly thought it possible you would be able to stick it out in that small provincial town.2181 can think of no greater misfortune for a civilised man who has come of age in a big movement than to be relegated to some such remote hole after living for years in a metropolis. Well, I'm glad you have made up your mind. It will make the remaining few months more tolerable for you.

a F. Engels, The Role of Force in History



**[p. 150]**

At all events, a long-standing wish of yours is to be fulfilled in the next few days: the Manifesto is being brought out in English over here by Reeves. Translated by S. Moore,54 revised by us both, preface by me." Have already read the first proofs. As soon as I get copies I shall let you have two, one of them for the Wischnewetzkys. For Reeves is paying S. Moore a royalty for author's rights, and since it was / who concluded the contract, I cannot be directly involved in getting it pirated in America. Otherwise Reeves could declare that this constituted a breach of contract, and poor Sam Moore wouldn't get anything. But obviously I neither could nor would prevent its being pirated. After all, did not Reeves pirate my preface to the Condition of the Working Classa2

Aveling is getting a couple of plays produced and, if all goes well, will extricate himself from his journalistic misère!0 He and Tussy are due here shortly; they are dining with me as Aveling has a meeting not far from here. At Christmas the Lafargues moved to Le Perreux, beyond Vincennes, 20 minutes from Paris by train, and are amusing themselves doing rural tasks. The Socialiste has died yet again.234 The workers of Paris don't want to read a weekly. Vaillant is acquitting himself famously in the Municipal Council; he was much in evidence during the presiden- tial crisis197 when the menacing attitude of the workers prevented the election of Ferry. He will be the guiding light of the next provisional government provided it's not too long in coming.

Bebel and Singer have inflicted a formidable defeat on the Prussians over the Anti-Socialist Law.235 For the first time the whole of Europe has had to pay attention to our people in the Reichstag. You will have read the text of Bebel's speech in the Gleichheit—a masterpiece in which he excelled himself.0

I hope it won't come to war, though this would mean that all the mili- tary studies which those very rumours of war have forced me to take up again will have been done in vain. The odds are as follows: Thanks to

a F. Engels, 'Preface to the 1888 English Edition of the Manifesto of the Communist Party' - b misery - c Gleichheit, No. 6, 11 February 1888



**[p. 151]**

War or no war, everything is heading for a crisis. The state of affairs in Russia can't go on very much longer. The Hohenzollerns are done for, the Crown Prince3 is mortally ill, his son,b a cripple and insolent young guardee.0 In France the downfall of the exploiters' bourgeois republic looms ever closer; as in 1847, scandals threaten to bring about a révolu- tion du mépris.238 And in this country the masses are coming increas- ingly under the sway of an instinctive socialism which still, I am glad to say, resists definite formulation in accordance with the dogma of this or that socialist organisation, and hence will accept it all the more readily when something crucial happens. All that is needed is for the fun to begin somewhere or other, and the bourgeoisie will be dumbfounded by the hitherto latent socialism which will then vent itself and become manifest.

Your old friend,

F. Engels

First published, slightly abridged, in Briefe und Auszüge aus Briefen von Job. Phil. Becker, Jos. Dietzgen, Friedrich Engels, Karl Marx, u. A. an F. A. Sorge und Andere, Stuttgart,

1906 and, in full, in: Marx and Engels, Works, First Russian Edition,

Vol. XXVIII, Moscow, 1940

Printed according to the original

Published in English in full for the first time

[^1]: a Frederick William (later Frederick III) - b William, later William II - c In the original: Jardeleutenant (Berlin dialect)



