---
Volume: 48
Document_Title: "94. Engels to Wilhelm Liebknecht 23 February "
Page_Range: "166-169"
---

# 94. Engels to Wilhelm Liebknecht 23 February 



**[p. 1888]**

Reciprocating your kind wishes I remain

Yours very truly,

F. Engels

First published, slightly abridged, in Works, First Russian Edition, Vol. the language of the original (English), XXVIII, Moscow, 1940 in Briefe und Auszüge aus Briefen, von Job. Phil. Becker, Jos. Dietzgen, Reproduced from the original Friedrich Engels, Karl Marx u. A. an F. A. Sorge und Andere, Stuttgart, 1906 Published in English in full for the and, in full, in: Marx and Engels, first time.

94

ENGELS TO WILHELM LIEBKNECHT243

IN HOBOKEN

London, 23 February 1888

Dear Liebknecht,

[^1]: The debate on the Anti-Socialist Law235 was the biggest triumph we have ever scored in the parliamentary sphere and I'm only sorry that you were unable to be there. However, that's unlikely to go on for much longer, since you will, after all, be taking Hasenclever's place shortly.43

[^2]: a F. Engels, 'Protection and Free Trade. Preface to the Pamphlet: Karl Marx, Speech on the Question of Free Trade'





**[p. 155]**

prevails.

Bismarck's speech was addressed to Tsar Alexander in person in order that the Gatchina prisoner might at long last learn the truth.245 Whether it will help is doubtful. The Russians, such is their irresolution, are becoming ever more deeply embroiled and in the end they may not be able to draw back with honour. Therein lies the danger. As a rule they behave like utter jack-asses when they embark on a war. It's a repeat of Croesus by crossing the Halys will ruin a mighty realm.*0 They can place barely a million men on the border and haven't enough officers for more. France disposes of VA million very good troops, but no longer has sufficient seasoned men and still fewer officers to provide more. With 2 Vi million seasoned troops and an adequate supply of officers and NCOs, Bismarck has, however, still pitched Germany's strength too low. Nor is it a bad thing that this should be so. Until the revolution gets under way in Russia, Bismarck must not be brought down by an external defeat. That would only restore his popularity.

But it is impossible to foretell what will come of the affair if it really gets to the stage of a war. They'll certainly try to turn it into a mock war, but that is not so easy to do. If it is to be done in the way that suits us best, and the odds are strongly in favour of it, then let it be a static war with changing fortunes on the French border, an offensive war with the capture of the Polish fortresses on the Russian border, and a revolution in Petersburg which will all at once throw an entirely different light on everything, so far as the gentlemen prosecuting the war are concerned. This much is certain—there will be no rapid decisions, no triumphal marches either on Berlin or on Paris. France is very strong and very clev- erly fortified; so far as their disposition is concerned, the works round Paris are a masterly affair.

[^1]: a conspiracy of silence - b This sentence was in Greek in the original





**[p. 156]**

Reuss has instituted proceedings against the Commonweal (Morris) for denouncing him as a spy.247 Obviously the Prussian embassy wishes to regain over here the ground lost in Berlin. It may, however, be making hellish blunder. Mr Reuss has to go into the witness box, and in this country perjury is not to be trifled with. There's no Puttkamer over here to help!

The Manifesto is coming out in English, edited by myself.54 I shall send you one as soon as I get some.

Your

F. E.

Apropos, Pfänder's widow is living over here in the most wretched circumstances. I do what I can and have just sent her another couple of £s. The louts' society106 put on a concert for her and collected about £5. She herself is ill, her daughter paints, and the pair of them do bits of needlework, but all is wretchedness. Might the party not set aside a trifling sum every quarter? The doctor says she'll barely get through the winter. See what you can do. We really ought to set aside pensions for our veterans' widows.

First published in full in: Marx and Printed according to the original Engels, Works, First Russian Edition, Vol. XXVIII, Moscow, 1940 Published in English for the first time

