---
Volume: 48
Document_Title: "95. Engels to Ferdinand Domela Nieuwenhuis 23 February "
Page_Range: "169-171"
---

# 95. Engels to Ferdinand Domela Nieuwenhuis 23 February 



**[p. 95]**

ENGELS T O F E R D I N A N D D O M E L A N I E U W E N H U I S

IN THE HAGUE

London, 23 February 1888 122 Regent's Park Road, N.W.

My dear Nieuwenhuis,

I informed Kautsky of the contents of your letter immediately it arrived and understand that he has since seen to everything you wanted.

The news from here is pretty good on the whole. The various social- ist organisations have refrained from forcibly accelerating the natural, normal and hence somewhat slow process of development of the English working class; hence less fuss, less vainglory, but also less disap- pointment. Moreover they get on amongst themselves. As to setting the masses in motion, that has been taken care of by the incomprehensible stupidity of the government and the imperturbable cowardice of the Liberal opposition. The Trafalgar Square affair185 did not simply breathe new life into the working men; the deplorable way in which the Liberal leaders behaved then and subsequently is driving more and more radical workers over to the socialists, the more so as the latter behaved very well on that particular occasion and were to be seen everywhere in the front rank. Cunninghame-Graham is a declared Marxist and at the meeting last Monday246 demanded outright that the nation confiscate all the means of production. So here too we are repre- sented in Parliament.

The best proof of how far the workers over here have advanced is provided by the radical working men's clubs22 in the East End. What impressed them above all was the example set by the New York election campaign in November 1886;7 for what America does makes a greater impression over here than anything the whole of the continent of Europe may do. The example set by New York made it clear to the chaps that in the end the workers would do best if they formed their own party. When the Avelings returned, they seized on this mood and since then their activities have proved most effective in these clubs84—the only political workingmen's organisations of any importance that exist here. Both Aveling and his wife give several lectures a week down there and exert a great deal of influence; there's no doubt that they are now the



**[p. 158]**

An English edition of the Communist Manifesto, revised by myself, will be coming out in the next week or two; I shall send you one—there's a big demand for it over here, which is also a good sign.

You too will have been delighted at our brilliant victory in the Reichstag in Berlin. Bebel surpassed himself.235 He came to stay with me last autumn173 and I only hope that gaol suits you5 as well as it does him.64 He says he always feels very much better afterwards (he suffers from nerves and in gaol his nervous excitation dies down).

Shall you be coming over here again next summer? With kindest regards.

Yours,

F. Engels

First published, in Russian, in the Printed according to the original magazine Istorik-Marksist, No. 6 (40), Moscow, 1934 Published in English for the first time

