---
Volume: 48
Document_Title: "101. Engels to Laura Lafargue 10- 11 April "
Page_Range: "181-184"
---

# 101. Engels to Laura Lafargue 10- 11 April 



**[p. 169]**

101

ENGELS TO LAURA LAFARGUE

AT LE PERREUX

London, 10-11 April 1888

My dear Laura,

Schorlemmer returned to Manchester yesterday and so I can sit down today and write a few lines, that is to say if Edward and Tussy, who are returning from their 'Castle' and will be here about 5, do not drop in too soon.

First of all I must congratulate Paul on his splendid discoveries in etymology, which are truly astonishing.259 That a great many French words which we used to derive from the Latin bos ox, are descended from the Greek bous ox, is already something. But that bouillon comes from bous and not from bullire to boil, is a great discovery and only pity that Paul did not follow it up a little further. Thus 5o«-strapa260 is evidently of the same derivation, and 5«o-naparte (for 2?o«-naparte) also, and Bonapartism being thus connected with ox, Bou-lznger must be derived from bous; and then also its English equivalent Baker, which throws a completely new light on the adventure of Colonel Baker in the railway-carriage: how could he help rushing on Europa-Robinson, being descended from bous Jupiter?261 Moreover there can be no doubt that in mou-tarde the m stands for an original b, and that thus its derivation from bous is assured—what a flood of light this throws on the fact that mustard is eaten to beef only and not to mutton!

Another great progress is to treat Sanskrit on the same level as cran- iology, and to have discovered des linguistes d'Allemagne et d'Angleterre3- who say that le finnois offre plus d'analogie avec les idiomes aryens que le sanscrit.^ I have only heard of some who, ascribing

[^1]: a the German and English linguists - b Finnish shows more analogies to Aryan idioms than Sanskrit





**[p. 170]**

But joke à part the articles are very good, and what does it matter to the Parisians qui s'en fichent* whether Fergus tells them a few bulls about etymology. It is far more important that they should learn a little about their own language, and that they find here. Only I don't think it is necessary to the amusement of the Parisians that an author should commit himself by such assertions. But then we all of us have the incli- nation to brag most of what we know least; at all events I know I am.b

11th April. Exactly as I expected. The two hungry soulsc dropped in just as I finished the preceding page, bringing eggs, butter, pork pie, sausages from their truly rural retreat, and two good appetites. Today I had my American mail-day and now try to finish this.

In France things seems to me to go very well. Boulangism is the just and deserved punishment for the cowardice of all parties in the face of that bourgeois chauvinism which thinks it can make the clock of univer- sal history stand still until France has reconquered Alsace. Fortunately

[^1]: a who do not care a straw - b Engels presumably wanted to say: '. . . I know I have it' - c Eleanor Marx-Aveling and Edward Aveling





**[p. 171]**

For the rest, the Opportunists199 are getting more and more worn out, verschlissen^ and have to fall back upon the alliance with the Monarchists, that is to say upon political suicide. The great progress in French public opinion is this: that the Republic is recognised as the only possible government, that Monarchy is equivalent to civil war and foreign war. The action of the Opportunists (besides their flagrant corruption) drives public opinion more and more towards the Left, and compels the nomination of more and more radical governments. All this in strict harmony with the regular development since 1875. We can wish for no more than that this should continue, and if Boulanger assists this move unintentionally all the better. The sense which the French have unbeknown to themselves—the necessary logical inheritance of a great, unconsciously logical history—will I hope prove more powerful than all the nonsense they set to work consciously and intentionally.

The German philistine convinces himself more and more that with old Williamc the clef de voûteà of the present system has gone, and that the whole voûte11 will gradually follow. I only hope Bismarck will not be sent to the right-about merely in order to re-enter in triumph. Otherwise he had better stop.

What a fool that Rochefort is. Quotes Catholic Munich papers to prove that the Germans are only awaiting the French again invading Germany in order to join them, upset Bismarck and restore French domination in Germany! Cannot that idiot see that nothing would more fortify Bismarck than such a French attempt to 'free' Germany, and that we intend to settle our internal concerns ourselves!

Ever yours,

F. Engels called by Dinner Bell

First published in: Marx and Engels, Reproduced from the original Works, Second Russian Edition, Vol. 37, Moscow 1965 Published in English for the first time

[^1]: a A man who harbours plans similar to Trochu's is done for - b seedy - c William I - d keystone - e vault



