---
Volume: 48
Document_Title: "102. Engels to Florence Kelley- Wischnewetsky 11 April "
Page_Range: "184-185"
---

# 102. Engels to Florence Kelley- Wischnewetsky 11 April 



**[p. 102]**

ENGELS TO FLORENCE KELLY-WISCHNEWETZKY239

IN NEW YORK

London, 11 April 1888

Dear Mrs Wischnewetzky,

Your call for the ms.a comes upon me very suddenly and I am afraid I shall not be able to oblige you. I am allowed to write two hours a day, no more; have a large correspondence to attend to; find that at the end of the two hours, am only just getting warm in harness, and then, just then, must stop. Under these circumstances I am quite unable to do arti- cles de saison to order, especially for a distant market, and do not see my way to having the pamphlet ready in ms. by 15th May, much less have it ready printed in New York by that time. Still I will set about it at once, after clearing off urgent letters, and do my best. I interrupt an important piece of business13 on purpose, to clear this matter off.

Still in my opinion you need not fear of losing your opportunity. The Free Trade question will not disappear from the American horizon until settled. I am sure that Protection has done its duty for the United States and is now an obstacle, and whatever may be the fate of the Mills bill,263

the struggle will not end until either Free Trade enables the United States manufacturers to take the leading part in the world market to which they are entitled in many branches of trade, or until both Protectionists and Free Traders are shoved aside by those behind them. Economic facts are stronger than politics, especially if the politics are so much mixed up with corruption as in America. I should not wonder if during the next few years one set of American manufacturers after the other passed over to the Free Traders—if they understand their interests they must.

[^1]: Thanks for the official publications0—I think they will be just what I want.

[^2]: I am glad of your success against the Executive as far as it goes—from Volkszeitung weekly 31 Marchd I see they won't give in yet—there you

[^3]: a F. Engels, 'Protection and Free Trade. Preface to the Pamphlet: Karl Marx, Speech on the Question of Free Trade' - b work on Vol. Ill of Capital -c See this volume, pv - d The item referred to appeared in the column 'Socialistische Arbeiter-Partei National-Executiv-Komite', Wochenblatt der N. Y. Volkszeitung, No. 13,31 March 1888



