---
Volume: 48
Document_Title: "104. Engels to Wilhelm Liebknecht 16 April "
Page_Range: "188-190"
---

# 104. Engels to Wilhelm Liebknecht 16 April 



**[p. 176]**

Shall send receipt for Mrs Pf ander 's 100 marks in my next; I forgot to get it from her. Meanwhile many thanks for the donation. I shall do what I can to support the woman, but shall take the liberty of approaching you people again.

Kindest regards to your wife and daughter, and to Singer.

Your

EE.

First published in: Marx and Engels, Printed according to the original Works, First Russian Edition, Vol. XXVIII, Moscow 1940 Published in English for the first time

104

ENGELS TO WILHELM LIEBKNECHT

IN BORSDORF NEAR LEIPZIG

London, 16 April 1888

Dear Liebknecht,

I was on the point of answering your letter of the 4th when your second one arrived with an enclosure for Karl Kautsky and giving me to understand that my answers no less than your questions were already things of the past.

1. The Social Democratic Federation still poses as the only socialist organisation in England and the only one entitled to act and speak on behalf of the movement over here as a whole. This was why it was neces- sary, having regard to the preparations for the congress, to emphasise that position, the more so as the Socialist League21 in its present form will probably fizzle out before long and the Social Democratic

[^1]: All I want to do now is point out how this is connected with the Social Democratic Federation's circular.268





**[p. 177]**

2. The Social Democratic Federation is closely in league with the Possibilists in Paris and, since these in their turn are in league with Broadhurst & Co.,269 the Social Democratic Federation must manoeu- vre. This second reason is the crucial one. Hyndman & Co. have become so deeply embroiled with the Possibilists that they can no longer draw back, even if they wanted to.

My opinion of all this congress business? I'm barely capable of expressing one, since I haven't the faintest idea of what has been discussed and anyway views change, kaleidoscope-fashion, even in your own case. By and large I regard all such congresses as exceedingly risky unless one is absolutely sure of success from the outset and, unless some- thing definite and attainable is to be discussed, as somewhat unnecessary. The small fry, in particular the Belgians, have the chief say and, since the foreign department in Belgium is run, not by the Flemings, but by the old Brussels clique—the Brismée family—the same old dish is served up every time. But to want to hold your congress over here,270 one week after the Trades Unions have held theirs, would spell utter ruin. Your funds would be used up, your people would run off and you'd be irre- deemably delivered up into the arms of London's wirepullers—ad majorem gloriam Hyndmanni.^

That Geneva is the place where the French—never mind what sort— ought to hold a congress to celebrate the French Revolution of 1789 and à propos of the Paris Exhibition0 is something you'll certainly never get them to believe.

So even if your congress doesn't materialise, it will, in my view, be no great disaster. In any case the agenda is needlessly restricted. A congress convoked by our Reichstag group would, after all, be attended exclu- sively by socialists and anarchists, not by Trade Unionists pure and simple. A social-democratic congress could throw the anarchists out, a general workingmen's congress cannot, and they are capable of being thoroughly obstreperous.

Fritz had better make haste and perk up—from the point of view of his health; otherwise Bismarck will prove too much for him. I hope that

[^1]: a scattered limbs (Horace, Satires, I, 4) - b to the greater glory of Hyndman - c The international exhibition which was to be held in Paris in 1889



