---
Volume: 48
Document_Title: "105. Engels to Pasquale Martignetti 20 April "
Page_Range: "190-192"
---

# 105. Engels to Pasquale Martignetti 20 April 



**[p. 178]**

Kindest regards.

Your

RE.

Was the stuff we sent you on Saturday what you wanted? If not, there has been a misunderstanding. The German is by Eccarius.271

First published in: Marx and Engels, Printed according to the original Works, First Russian Edition, Vol. XXVIII, Moscow 1940 Published in English for the first time

105

ENGELS TO PASQUALE MARTIGNETTI

IN BENEVENTO

London, 20 April 1888 122 Regent's Park Road

Dear Friend

I cannot, unfortunately, suggest any books that might assist your studies in this direction. For an Italian examination German books would cover too much ground on the one hand and too little on the other; moreover, I am not familiar with the more recent short

[^1]: I'm glad to hear that a fresh prospect appears to be opening up for you and hope you'll manage to prepare for the exam.272

[^2]: a Frederick III had larynx cancer





**[p. 179]**

But since it is impossible for you in your present straitened circum- stances to purchase these books I deem it my duty to offer you my assis- tance. I have therefore permitted myself the liberty of taking out the enclosed money order in your name for the sum of four pounds sterling or fr. 10080 centesimi and trust you won't be angry with me for sending you this small amount without first obtaining your consent. I only hope that it will be enough, and that you will be able to procure what you need and pass your exam.

You will have read about our Zurich friends' expulsion from Switzerland.81

I shall look over and return the translation shortly231—as soon as I have finished an important piece for America.a Going through a whole lot of numbers at the same time cuts down the work.

With most cordial regards.

Yours

F. Engels

For postal purposes my first name has been given in its English form: 'Frederick'.

First published, in the language of the Printed according to the original original (German), in La corrispon- denza di Marx e Engels con italiani. Published in English for the first time 1848-1895, Milano, 1964

a 'Protection and Free Trade. Preface to the Pamphlet: Karl Marx, Speech on the Question of Free Trade'

