---
Volume: 48
Document_Title: "106. Engels to Gabriel Deville 27 April "
Page_Range: "192-193"
---

# 106. Engels to Gabriel Deville 27 April 



**[p. 106]**

ENGELS TO GABRIEL DEVILLE

IN PARIS

London, 27 April 1888 122 Regent's Park Road, N . W.

Dear Citizen Deville,

Thank you for your book on Balzac,a which I will read with pleasure. After Cervantes Balzac is, or so I think, the greatest novelist of all time, as well as the most faithful recorder of French society between 1815 and 1848. I am fond of Balzac in whatever form.

Your interpretation of Marx's formula is faultless. In manuscript it read: M — c ^C MP an<^ ll w a s o n l y f ° r his own convenience and delecta- tion that the printer put the symbol <, which has given rise to endless misunderstandings.

Hence the complete formula on p. 18b

M—CCT P . . . C ' - M ' or -MP

M — C ^ P . . . (C + c) - (M + m) "-MP

means:

M, money, converted into C (commodity), which commodity is made up of L (labour power) and of MP (means of production); the said commodity C is subjected to a process of production P, this last result- ing in a new commodity C (of different quality, but this does not concern us here where we have to do only with values), of greater value than and hence equal to C plus an increment c (C + c); this C is once more exchanged for money, that is to say for an amount M ' greater than M, or equal to M plus an increment m (M + m).

The symbol — serves to mark the conclusion of an exchange; the . . . .

[^1]: a G. Deville, La Femme et l'Amour. Paris, 1888 - b K. Marx, Capital. A Critique of Political Economy, Vol. II, Book II, The Process of Circulation of Capital, Part 1, The Metamorphoses of Capital and Their Circuits, Ch. 1, Circuit of Money Capital



