---
Volume: 48
Document_Title: "107. Engels to Wilhel m Liebknecht 29 April "
Page_Range: "193-194"
---

# 107. Engels to Wilhel m Liebknecht 29 April 



**[p. 181]**

Should you wish to have anything else explained, I shall always be at your service. This second volume will, I am afraid, prove something of a headache for you, while failing to reward you with brilliant new solu- tions. It is concerned with transactions between bourgeois and the results are very nice theoretically but do not have any practical applica- tion. That is why I am in no hurry to see it translated into French or English; it needs to be complemented by Volume III.

I am Sir, etc.,

Your

F. Engels

First published in: M. Dommanget, Printed according to the original L'Introduction du Marxisme en France, Lausanne, 1969 Translated from the Fench Published in English for the first time

107

ENGELS TO WILHELM LIEBKNECHT

IN BORSDORF NEAR LEIPZIG

London, about 29 April 1888

Dear Liebknecht,

It's just as well that Fritza is a bit better. If young Williamb comes to the throne at this particular juncture, he and Bismarck—unless all the indications are deceptive—will compound with Russia so as to secure her permission for a war with France. It would seem that certain contin- gent agreements have already been concluded. In this way, and only in this way, would Boulanger constitute a danger, to France no less than to Germany. The French would be beaten, but because their fortifications

[^1]: Enclosed received this morning.273

[^2]: a Frederick III - b Frederick Ill's son (William II)



