---
Volume: 48
Document_Title: "114. Engels to Laura Lafargue 3 June "
Page_Range: "201-203"
---

# 114. Engels to Laura Lafargue 3 June 



**[p. 113]**

ENGELS TO AMAND GOEGG

IN BADEN

London, 2 June 1888 122 Regent's Park Road, N. W

Dear Goegg,

The lectures at universities here, in all branches of the natural sciences and literature, are open to ladies too. Fees the same as for men. The only lectures not open to ladies are those given by Ray Lankester. The fees vary—details in the prospectus which has been promised me and which I shall send on to you as soon as it arrives.

If what is wanted are medical lectures, I would recommend the college for ladies in Henrietta Street about which, if you so wish, I can let you have further details.

With kind regards,

Yours, RE.

First published in Friedrich Engels Printed according to the original 1820-1970. Referate. Diskussionen. Dokumente, Hanover, 1971 Published in English for the first time

114

ENGELS TO LAURA LAFARGUE276

AT LE PERREUX

London, 3 June 1888

My dear Laura,

I am very sorry you do not see your way to come just now; the woodruff having failed in your garden would not have mattered, because Nim has got some and we are going to have it tonight; it would be so



**[p. 190]**

Our Zurich friends3 are getting used to London ways a little, and it is time, for their notions of the possibilities of a settlement here were uncom- monly kleinstädtisch.b Next week I hope the principal questions as to local- ity etc. will be settled and then there will be less difficulties and discussions.

Paul's arguments about Boulanger are rather derogatory to the French character. First he says, c'est un mouvement populaire ', but not dangerous because Boulanger is an ass. But what to think of a peuple capable d'un mouvement populaire in favour of an ass? This he explains thus: En France on patauge pendant un temps donné dans un semblant de parlementarisme, puis on réclame un sauveur, un gouvernement personnel en ce moment on réclame un sauveur et Boulanger se présente.c That is to say: the French are such that their real wants require a Bonapartist régime, while their idealistic illusions are republican and do not go beyond parliamentarism. Why, if the French see no other issue than either personal government, or parliamentary government, they may as well give it up. What I want our people to do, is to show that there is a real third issue besides this pretended dilemma, which is a dilemma but for the vulgar philistines, and not to take the muddling philistine and au fond chauvinistic Boulangist movement for a really popular one.277 The chauvinistic claim, that all the history of the world is to resolve itself into the recovery of Alsace by France, and that until then nothing shall be allowed to happen—this claim has been far too much bowed to by our friends in France, by every one in fact, and this is the upshot. Because Boulanger incorporates this claim, which has been silently admitted by all parties, he is powerful. His opponents— the Clémenceaux and Co.—do not, dare not contradict that claim but are too cowardly to proclaim it openly, and therefore they are weak. And because the movement is at bottom chauvinistic and nothing else, therefore it plays into Bismarck's hands who would be only too glad to entangle that poor devil Fritzd into a war. And all this at a time when even among the German philistines the consciousness is dawning that the sooner they get rid of Alsace the better, and when Bismarck's crazy

[^1]: a Eduard Bernstein, Julius Motteler, Leonard Tauscher and Hermann Schlüter - b provincial - c In France they dabble for a time in a semblance of parliamen- tarism and then they clamour for a saviour, personal government at the moment they are clamouring for a saviour and Boulanger presents himself - d Frederick III



