---
Volume: 48
Document_Title: "117. Engels to Karl Kautsky before 6 July "
Page_Range: "205-206"
---

# 117. Engels to Karl Kautsky before 6 July 



**[p. 117]**

ENGELS T O KARL KAUTSKY

IN ST GILGEN

London, before 6 July 1888

Dear Baron,

Now that I've smelt you out Stieber-fashion,a and having noted from its longitude and latitude that it must be a very lovely district, let me reply briefly re Shelley.280 I will gladly do the thing but ought, for the sake of the context, to have a copy of Shelley which, however, I have not got, nor do I know where to obtain one in a hurry. E. Aveling, when he was here yesterday, said he would go and fetch his for me, but has left London without keeping his word. If I had the passages, I should be able to get hold of a Shelley all right.

I trust that the taenia mediocanellatah will by now have been happily reduced ad absurdum. Pumps' son has got the measles which so far has taken an altogether favourable course; Lilic is therefore staying with us. Mrs Schlüter and Mrs Eded are here and we are still expecting the Aunte—when, we don't know. On Sunday they were all of them here. The muddle has not yet been []* out. E. Aveling has been extraordi- narily lucky with his [.. .]f—unanimously [. . .]

[• • -]

General [.. .f all right again, I hope.

First published in: Aus der Frühzeit Printed according to the original des Marxismus. Engels Briefwechsel mit Kautsky, Prag, 1935 Published in English for the first time

[^1]: f Louise? if, as I hope, she is there.

[^2]: f

[^3]: a Engels uses the verb herausstiebern, a play on the verb stöbern - to hunt or rout out - and Stieber, name of the chief of the Prussian political police (1852-60) - b

[^4]: tape worm - c Lilian Rosher - d Regina Bernstein - e Emilie Motteier - f Ms. damaged - g Louise Kautsky



