---
Volume: 48
Document_Title: "120. Engels to Laura Lafargue 15 July "
Page_Range: "208-210"
---

# 120. Engels to Laura Lafargue 15 July 



**[p. 120]**

ENGELS TO LAURA LAFARGUE274

AT LE PERREUX

London, 15 July 1888

My dear Laura,

You ask why Schorlemmer cannot come too, and you hope to see Pumps over at Le Perreux. Well, I am afraid you will have your wish fulfilled and your question answered with a vengeance.

Pumps' boy having improved extra-rapidly, sudden resolutions were come to last Monday, and on Wednesday the lot—Jollymeier, Nim and Pumps, all three set off for Germany. Pumps to Paulis', Nim to St Wendel. And then, according to what was arranged here, Pumps and Schorlemmer are to take up Nim at St Wendel and all three start for Paris, where they will arrive somewhere about the 29th or 30th July— but they will let you know. Nim and Schorlemmer must be here again on Saturday, 4th August; Pumps talked of going from Paris to St Malo and Jersey where Percy intends taking the children.

How you will manage to quarter the lot of them is more than I know. But Nim thought you would get over that difficulty right enough. Anyhow you will be wanting some little cash for the occasion which I shall not omit sending you in time.

Last night your letter with Longuet's document came to hand—at the same time as Edward who is again brought to London by his dramatic industry. He is going to read two plays today to speculative actors (Alma Murray is one) who intend to invest in a bit of novelty. Of course Longuet is again counting without his host, as Edward and Tussy will be going to America for at least two months and I shall take my holiday as soon as Nim comes back—if he likes to leave Jean with Nim at my place, all right, and Nim would be glad of his company; but is that what Longuet contemplates? Anyhow Tussy will return the plaidoyer* to you and write, and you and Nim can settle the remainder.

What a nice mess that was which Boulanger and Floquet cooked betwixt the two of them the other day—Boulanger's coup de théâtre,

[^1]: a speech for the defence





**[p. 197]**

Our business is not to complicate but to simplify and make clear the issues between the Radicals and ourselves. What little good Boulanger could do, he has done, and the chief good he did is to bring the Radicals to power. A dissolution would be a good thing—while a Radical govern- ment is in, upon whom we can exercise pressure; but Boulanger seems to me the least likely person to bring that dissolution about.

Here, after two fine days, it rains again cats and dogs since this morn- ing. This is really a solution—summer dissolved in rain water—which makes one dissolute and drives one to drink. In fact I shall go and open a bottle of Pilsener and drink your health. Sur ce, je vous embrasse.^

Bien a vous} F. E.

First published in full, in the language Istorichesky Arkhiv, No. 2, 1956 of the original (English), in: F. Engels, P. et L. Lafargue, Correspondance, t. Reproduced from the original II, Paris, 1956 and, in Russian, in

[^1]: a Alexander III - b saviour of society - c truly popular - d showdown - e Meanwhile the best of love - i Ever yours



