---
Volume: 48
Document_Title: "121. Engels to Laura Lafargue 23 July "
Page_Range: "210-211"
---

# 121. Engels to Laura Lafargue 23 July 



**[p. 121]**

ENGELS TO LAURA LAFARGUE40

AT LE PERREUX

London, 23 July 1888

My dear Laura,

Tussy returns me Longuet 's letter, instead of direct to you, so I send it herewith. She said she would write to him. Edward told me last week they would be here again yesterday, but he has a capacity of neglecting facts, when they are contrary to his wishes, that is worthy of a more juvenile age. So they won't be here before end of week.

Of course Pumps and Nim can sleep in your room and if you can find a bed for Schorlemmer somewhere in Le Perreux, he will be all right. I enclose a cheque for £15—so as to set you at ease with regard to the ways and means.

Our Zürichers3 are at last in a fair way of settlement. Their wives have arrived, they have got a business-place—that is, the agreement for an empty and not quite finished house—and private houses for them- selves, so that in a week or 14 days they will all be unter Dach und Fach.h The female part of the Sozialdemokrat is not over charming. Ede Bernstein's wife seems the pleasantest, a sharp little Jewess, but she squints awfully; Schlüter's is an exceedingly good-natured and retiring little Dresden article, but uncommon soft; and as to the Tante,c id est Mrs Motteler, let Nim give you a description of this dignified juvenile of fifty (so they say), this Swabian Kleinstädter^ affecting the dame du mondee—I am told she is a very worthy woman after all, but I don't think she feels at home among our undignified lot, and I anticipate some pleasant little sparrings when Tussy and she do meet. But Nim and Pumps will give you a description of her to your heart's content. I had them all here yesterday for supper, as our new girl (I think I told you that I sent Annie away) cooks quite passably and rather prides in cooking for company, and Mrs Motteler lost no time in telling me that the custard was burnt (just as she told Pumps: Sie sind aber mal fettlf

[^1]: a Eduard Bernstein, Julius Motteler, Leonard Tauscher and Hermann Schlüter - b settled in - c Aunt - A small town resident - e society woman - i You are so fat!



