---
Volume: 48
Document_Title: "125. Engels to Laura Lafargue 6 August "
Page_Range: "214-216"
---

# 125. Engels to Laura Lafargue 6 August 



**[p. 202]**

We are sailing on the City of Berlin on the 8th of this month. Aveling has made a successful début in the field of drama and is to help stage 4 plays (of which 3V2 are by him) in 4 cities over there.

Since Monday is a Bank Holiday,144 when nothing can be done because all the shops are closed, and we have got to leave here on Tuesday/ there's a lot of shopping to be done—besides which I have got to be at Charing Cross at 5.40 to meet Lenchen and Pumps (who has been married for 7 years and has 2 children) on their return from Germany resp. Paris, and hence must close. I, too, look forward tremen- dously to seeing you again. So no more till we meet.

Your

RE.

First published, slightly abridged, in and in full, in: Marx and Engels, Briefe und Auszüge aus Briefen von Works, First Russian Edition, Vol. John. Phil. Becker, Jos. Dietzgen, XXVIII, Moscow, 1940 Friedrich Engels, Karl Marx u. A. an F. A. Sorge und Andere, Stuttgart, 1906 Printed according to the original

125

AT LE PERREUX

London, 6 August 1888

My dear Laura,

When you receive this letter I shall be floating away on the City of Berlin, with Tussy, Edward, and Schorlemmer towards the shores of the New World.281 The plan has been of pretty long standing, only it was

[^1]: ENGELS T O LAURA LAFARGUE 4 0

[^2]: a 7 August





**[p. 203]**

Edward and Tussy will not come back with us, as far as we can see; they are sure to be kept there at least a fortnight longer.

Our travellers arrived here all right, though half an hour behind time, on Saturday and as our post-card will have informed you, your currants—both raw and in the juice extracted by Helen—I mean Nim—found the fullest and most general appreciation; the enthusiasm as to your garden is almost wild in its manifestations and I think both Pumps and Nim dream of it. In spite of their partly rough passage neither was sick, they were wise enough to lay down at once.

I enclose a cheque for £25—to go on with during my absence. Shall let you hear again on arrival and report on adventures, sea-monsters, icebergs and the other wonders of the sea, unless captured by the Irish fleet which has succeeded in breaking the blockade of the English on Saturday night and is now destroying British commerce, capturing Scotch coast towns, etc.b—a capital augury of the real political victory of the Irish over the British philistine which the next general election is sure to bring.

So farewell until then. I was very proud to hear from Nim that you

[^1]: a 8 August - b A joking allusion to the British naval exercises then in progress



