---
Volume: 48
Document_Title: "129. Engels to Friedrich Adolph Sorge 31 August "
Page_Range: "219-220"
---

# 129. Engels to Friedrich Adolph Sorge 31 August 



**[p. 129]**

ENGELS TO FRIEDRICH ADOLPH SORGE286

IN HOBOKEN

Boston, 31 August 1888

Dear Sorge,

The paper1 arrived the day before yesterday and your letterb today. Thanks. But I'm sorry that your throat should still be troubling you and it would seem that you have actually appropriated my cough. If our staying with you gets us well and makes you ill, that is really rather dreadful.

Were in Concord yesterday, in the Reformatory and the town. Both pleased us greatly. A prison where the prisoners can read novels and scientific works, form clubs, congregate and talk without warders being present, eat meat and fish twice a day with bread ad lib., iced water in every workroom, running water in every cell, the cells decorated with pictures, etc., where the chaps, dressed as ordinary workingmen, look you straight in the eye with none of the hang-dog look of the usual criminal in gaol—this is something you will see nowhere in Europe. The Europeans, as I told the superintendent, are not bold enough for that. To which he replied in true American fashion: well, we try to make it pay, and it does pay. I acquired a great respect for the Americans in that place.

Concord is really beautiful, elegant in a way one wouldn't have expected after New York or even Boston, but a splendid little place in which to be buried, though not alive! four weeks there would either kill me or drive me crazy.

My nephew Willie Burns is a wonderful fellow, bright, energetic and with his heart and soul in the movement. He is doing well, works for the Boston and Providence Railroad (now the Old Colony0), gets $12 a week, has a nice wife (whom he brought with him from Manchester) and three children. Nothing would induce him to return to England; he's just the lad for a country like America.

[^1]: a New Yorker Volkszeitung of 28 August 1888 - b of 30 August 1888 - a the southern part of Massachusetts



