---
Volume: 48
Document_Title: "133. Engels to Friedrich Adolph Sorge 10 September "
Page_Range: "225-226"
---

# 133. Engels to Friedrich Adolph Sorge 10 September 



**[p. 133]**

ENGELS TO FRIEDRICH ADOLPH SORGE291

IN HOBOKEN

Montreal, 10 September 1888 Dear Sorge,

Arrived here yesterday, having had to turn back because of a storm between Toronto and Kingston (it really blew pretty hard) and put into Port Hope. So the two-day trip from Toronto to here turned into three. The St Lawrence and the rapids were very fine. Canada is richer in ruined houses than any country save Ireland. We are doing what we can to understand Canadian French; that language beats Yankee English hollow. Tonight we go to Plattsburg and from there to the Adirondacks and if possible the Catskills as well, so we're unlikely to be back in New York before Sunday.3 As we have to embark on Tuesday eveningb and there are still various things we must see in New York, and as during these last few days we shall all have to keep together more than would otherwise be necessary, Schorlemmer and I shan't be able to stay with you in Hoboken this time, much though we regret it, but must go to the St Nicholas with the Avelings. However we shall come and see you as soon as we get there. The transition from the States to Canada is a curious one. First of all you imagine yourself back in Europe and then you feel you're in a land that is positively retrogressing and going to rack and ruin. Here you can see how essen- tial the Americans' feverish spirit of speculation is to the rapid devel- opment of a new country (given capitalist production as its basis). In ten years this sleepy Canada will be ripe for annexation—by which time the farmers in Manitoba, etc., will be demanding it themselves. In any case this country has already been half annexed from the social point of view—hotels, newspapers, advertisements, etc., all conform to the American pattern. And however much they may struggle and resist, the economic need for an infusion of Yankee blood will assert itself and abolish this ludicrous boundary line—to which, when that time comes, John Bull will say Yea and Amen.

Your

F. E.

[^1]: a 16 September - b 18 September



