---
Volume: 48
Document_Title: "136. Engels to Florence Kelley- Wischnewetsky 18 September "
Page_Range: "227-229"
---

# 136. Engels to Florence Kelley- Wischnewetsky 18 September 



**[p. 135]**

ENGELS TO FRIEDRICH ADOLPH SORGE292

IN HOBOKEN

Plattsburg, N. Y., Wednesday 12 September 1888

Dear Sorge,

Got back from Lake Placid this evening; tomorrow we go down Lake Champlain.

I think I forgot to ask you in my last to get us another 150 cigars of the usual brand. We're right cleaned out. Kindest regards.

Your

F. Engels

First published in: K. Marx and F. Printed according to the original Engels, Letters to Americans, 1848- 1895, New York, 1953

136

ENGELS TO FLORENCE KELLEY-WISCHNEWETZKY293

IN NEW YORK

18 September 1888

Dear Mrs Wischnewetzky,

We returned on Saturdaya evening from our trip to Boston, Niagara, the St Lawrence, Adirondacks, Lakes Champlain and George, down the Hudson to New York City, we enjoyed ourselves very much and, all of us, brought home a stock of invigorated health which I hope will see us

[^1]: a 15 September





**[p. 216]**

I have some copies of the pamphlet3 from Mrs Sorge, it is very cred- itably got up and so far I have discovered only two misprints. Please let me know how many copies you are sending me to England and how many I may distribute to the press; I believe it ought to be sent to all the chief dailies and weeklies in London and some in the provinces, also the monthlies. Of course, unless instructed to the contrary, I shall entrust the sale to Reeves. As he has accepted the agency for your American publication generally, his name might have been put on the title page; he will have to print a new title page and send in a bill for that.

Hoping to see Dr Wischnewetzky in London on his return, I remain, dear Mrs Wischnewetzky,

ever yours faithfully

F. Engels

First published in: Marx and Engels, Reproduced from the original Works, First Russian Edition, Vol. XXVIII, Moscow, 1940

a K. Marx, Speech on the Question of Free Trade

