---
Volume: 48
Document_Title: "139. Engels to Hermann Engels Thursday, 27- 28 September "
Page_Range: "230-232"
---

# 139. Engels to Hermann Engels Thursday, 27- 28 September 



**[p. 139]**

ENGELS TO HERMAN ENGELS

IN ENGELSKIRCHEN

S.S. City of New York Thursday, 27-28 September 1888

Dear Hermann,

I am writing to you under difficult circumstances as our ship is rolling abominably and half the people on board are still sea-sick. We have had a very agreeable, interesting and instructive trip. After a good crossing— only one really nice storm—we arrived in New York on 17 August, stayed there about 8 days, then spent 7 days in Boston, 5 days at the Niagara Falls, then, via the Lake of Ontario to the St Lawrence River, down which a steamboat took us to Montreal, thence back to the States and Plattsburg, whence we diverted to the Adirondacks, which are very lovely, then on by steamer via Lake Champlain and Lake George (like parts of Lake Como, but smaller and quite untamed) to Albany and, finally, down the Hudson and back to New York by steamboat. As ill- luck would have it, we had booked a passage aboard the new vessel City of New York, the largest passenger ship afloat, 10,500 tons and said to be capable of 500 sea miles a day. But this is only her fourth voyage, the engines tend to fail, one is ailing and is operating at barely half power, while the other is put to considerable strain and is constantly having to be tinkered with. Luckily we have reached this spot, latitude 51 degrees north, longitude roughly 21 degrees west of Greenwich, without any particular mishap to the engines, and hope to be at Queenstowna tomor- row afternoon, and in London on Saturdaya evening. The crossing has been pretty rough, two whopping great storms and high seas all the time except for the first two days. No one in our small company has been in the least affected by sea-sickness, we have eaten, drunk and smoked incessantly and I have just this moment—11 o'clock in the morning— been summoned to take my morning Tipple.

The voyage has done me a tremendous amount of good; I feel at least 5 years younger, all my little infirmities have faded into the background,

[^1]: a Modern name: Cobh - b 29 Septemb er





**[p. 219]**

Much love to Emmab and the children,0 ditto to all our relations.

Your old brother

Friedrich

Friday morning 10 o'clock

Have been off the Irish coast since early morning, due in Queenstown at 12—where I shall post this letter—in Liverpool tomorrow morning and in London that same evening.

Again much love.

First published in Deutsche Revue, Jg. Printed according to the original 46, Bd. Ill, 1921

Published in English for the first time

[^1]: c Rudolph Engels - b Emma Engels - c Hermann and Walter Engels



