---
Volume: 48
Document_Title: "140. Engels to Conrad Schmidt 8 October "
Page_Range: "232-234"
---

# 140. Engels to Conrad Schmidt 8 October 



**[p. 140]**

ENGELS TO CONRAD SCHMIDT4

IN BERLIN

London, 8 October 1888

Dear Dr Schmidt,

I should have answered your letter of 2 February long since had I known where to write to. I had been daily expecting news of your successful Habilitation* in Switzerland and hence of your removal to Zurich or Berne. Finally I took it with me to America, which I visited last August and September in company with Dr Aveling and his wife and Schorlemmer, but once again did not get round to answering it during the trip and now, on my return, I find a further message from you dated 23 August (on which day I was battling with mosquitoes in New York, much more dangerous adversaries than all your German professors of political economy put together).

Your account of the adventures attending your Habilitation bring back vivid recollections of the wretchedness of the German universities. That's what passes as freedom of scholarship. It's the old story of Bruno Bauer in the forties,295 except that we have come on a bit and now have not only theological and political heretics but economic ones also. Still, I trust that Thucydides296 is in a humane mood and won't place any seri- ous difficulties in your way in Leipzig.

I was most interested to learn that a 'confessional' university still actually exists in Germany.297 What odd things the 'reborn' fatherland continues to harbour!

I am very anxious to hear about your work. Apart from yourself, Lexis also tried to solve the problem to which I am obliged to revert in my preface to Volume III of Capital.™ That you should finally have arrived at Marx's viewpoint in the course of your studies doesn't surprise me at all; I believe that this would happen in the case of anyone who tackled the matter painstakingly and with an open mind. After all, many professors nowadays, exploiting Marx as they do, have trouble enough in maintaining a more or less seemly distance between themselves and

[^1]: a Qualification for lecturing at universities





**[p. 221]**

If, as I hope, my eyesight lasts out—my American jaunt did me a power of good—Volume IIP will be ready for the press this winter and in a year's time will hit that company like a bombshell. I have broken off or postponed all my other jobs so as finally to be done with it and am exceedingly hard pressed. The greater part is almost ready for the print- ers, but two or three of the seven sections need a great deal of revision, especially the first, of which there are two versions.

I found America most interesting. It is a place one really must have seen with one's own eyes, this country whose history goes back no further than commodity production and which is the promised land of capitalist production. People's usual conceptions of it are as false as those a German schoolboy has of France. There was also much natural beauty to be enjoyed at Niagara, on the St Lawrence, in the Adirondacks and on the smaller lakes.

I have read Platter's critique of G. Cohn.b The beginning is very good and witty, but further on the good Platter runs out of steam.

Over here all is much as it was, save that the four people expelled from Zurich0 have arrived, and Aveling is now writing plays which have been very well received by the impresarios. He was sent to America to rehearse 3 of his plays over there.

I still have a whole pile of letters to answer and if I miss this post I fear I shall be interrupted, so I had better close straight away. Goodbye and let me have further news of you very soon, by which time I trust you will have been duly installed as a lecturer.

Yours very sincerely,

F. Engels

First published in Sozialistische Printed according to the original Monatshefte, Nos. 15 and 16, 1920

Published in English for the first time

a Of Capital - b J. Platter, Gustav Cohns 'ethische' Nationalökonomie, Wien,

1886 - c Eduard Bernstein, Julius Motteier, Leonard Tauscher and Hermann Schlüter

