---
Volume: 48
Document_Title: "141. Engels to Friedrich Adolph Sorge 10 October "
Page_Range: "234-235"
---

# 141. Engels to Friedrich Adolph Sorge 10 October 



**[p. 141]**

ENGELS TO FRIEDRICH ADOLPH SORGE29

IN HOBOKEN

London, 10 October 1888

Dear Sorge,

We finally got back here last Saturday week3 and since then I have sent off to you 2 To-Days and a pile of Commonweals and today a pile of Gleichheits as well as 2 more Commonweals. One Gleichheit is miss- ing. Ede Bernstein took it and I haven't got it back yet.

Little has changed over here; the next No. of the Sozialdemokrat will be printed in this country.81 Otherwise nothing at all seems to have happened.

The City of New York is a humbug; in a calm sea she is steady, of course, but once she starts rolling, no one can do anything to stop her. Moreover, her engines are in a deplorable state; one of them was operat- ing at barely half power, while the other threatened to break down at any moment because of the excessive strain. We never did more than 370 sea miles in a day and once it was only 313.

In so far as the political situation makes a survey possible, the esti- mate we formed of it over there was quite right. Bismarck has gone on for so long spinning silly young Williamb the yarn that he's a greater version of old Fritz0 that the lad is now taking it seriously and wants to be 'Emperor and Chancellor in one person'. Bismarck is presently letting him have his way in order that he may make a thorough ass of himself, whereupon Bismarck will step into the breach as his guardian angel. Meanwhile he has assigned his Herbert^ to the insolent lad as spy and custodian. A row between the two will not be long in coming and then the fun will begin.

In France the Radicals200 in the government are making bigger asses of themselves than one could have hoped for. They have renounced the whole of their old programme vis-à-vis the workers and are behaving like out and out Opportunists199; they are pulling the chestnuts out of the fire for the Opportunists and doing their dirty work for them. That

[^1]: a 29 September - b William II - c Frederick II - d Herbert von Bismarck



