---
Volume: 48
Document_Title: "142. Engels to Louise Kautsky 11 October "
Page_Range: "235-238"
---

# 142. Engels to Louise Kautsky 11 October 



**[p. 223]**

So Jonas has wriggled quite cleverly out of it after all and faked an interview I can't very well disclaim.300

Mother Wischnewetzky is furious because I 'spent 10 days in New York and didn't find the time to make the two hours easy railway journey to her home. There was really so much she wanted to talk to me about'. All very well if I hadn't caught a cold and been plagued with indigestion and if I had had 10 consecutive days in New York in the first place.

Warm regards to your wife.a

Your old friend,

F. Engels

First published, slightly abridged, in and, in full, in: Marx and Engels, Briefe und Auszüge aus Briefen von Works, First Russian Edition, Vol. Joh. Phil. Becker, Jos. Dietzgen, XXVIII, Moscow, 1940 Friedrich Engels, Karl Marx u. A. an F. A. Sorge und Andere, Stuttgart, 1906, Printed according to the original

142

ENGELS TO LOUISE KAUTSKY301

IN VIENNA

[Draft]

London, 11 October 1888

My Dear, Dear Louise,

Immediately after our return, your letter got into Tussy's hands and then went to Schorlemmer, from whom I have only just retrieved it. Hence the lateness of my reply.

[^1]: a Katharina Sorge





**[p. 224]**

You say there can be no question of guilt on Karl V part. Very well, you are the best judge of that, but it does not entitle the rest of us to do you an injustice. You speak of a divorce as the only possible solution, your characters being what they are. But if your characters had really been incompatible, this must needs have been apparent to us too and we should have long anticipated a divorce as something both natural and unavoidable. But let us suppose it to have been a case of true incompat- ibility. Karl had wooed and won you in defiance of his family and yours, he knew what you had given up for his sake and, so far as we could tell, lived with you happily for five years. That being so, he should not have allowed himself to be flummoxed by what, to use your own expression, was a momentary unpleasantness. And if he was driven to take so extreme a step by a new and sudden onset of passion, he ought not to have taken that step impetuously, and should above all have avoided the remotest semblance of doing so under the influence of those who had objected to his union with you and who, perhaps, have not altogether forgiven you for becoming his wife.

Of Karl you say that, in the absence of love or passion, his personal- ity would go to pieces. If one of the traits of that personality is to require a new love every few years, he would surely be the first to admit that, in present-day circumstances, a personality of this kind has got to be kept in check if it is not to involve him and others in one long series of tragic conflicts.

So much, dear Louise, I feel it behoves me to say. Apart from anything else, our social conditions are such as to make it positively easy for a man to do a woman a gross injustice, and how many men are there

[^1]: a Karl Kautsky





**[p. 225]**

We cannot get the business out of our minds. Nim and I constantly revert to it as to something incomprehensible, impossible. One of these mornings, I told her, Karl will wake up as if out of a dream to find that he has committed the greatest folly of his life. And this is what seems to be actually happening if, as he wrote and told Ede, his new love has left him after having, within the first five days, fallen in love with his brother Hans and become engaged to him.

We had all of us so much looked forward to seeing you here again and had been correspondingly cast down when we heard through Percy while in New York that you and Karl would be staying in Vienna for the winter. But neither Nim nor I can really take in the fact that we shall never see your dear face in this house again. Yet who knows what may not happen? Who knows whether, one of these days, you may not be sitting in the same old chair where you have so often sat before? Whatever happens, of one thing I can be sure—your courage will help you to overcome all difficulties and to emerge victorious from every struggle. My own and Nim's most cordial good wishes go with you. What we can do for you, we shall gladly do—we are at your beck and call and, should fate ever bring you here again, you must in all circum- stances regard this house as your own.

Yours, from all our hearts

First published in: Marx and Engels, Printed according to the original Works, First Russian Edition, Vol. XXVIII, Moscow, 1940 Published in English for the first time

