---
Volume: 48
Document_Title: "144. Engels to Nikolai Danielson 15 October "
Page_Range: "240-243"
---

# 144. Engels to Nikolai Danielson 15 October 



**[p. 228]**

First published, in the language of the Reproduced from the original original (English), in: F. Engels, P. et L. Lafargue, Correspondance, t. Il, Paris, 1956

144

ENGELS T O N I K O L A I DANIELSON 2 1 1

IN ST PETERSBURG

London, 15 October 1888

Dear Sir,

I was prevented from replying to your kind letters of 8/20 January and 3/15 June—as also to a great many other letters—first by a weakness of my eyes which made it impossible for me to write at my desk for more than two hours a day, and thus necessitated an almost complete neglect of work and correspondence, and second by a journey to America during August and September from which I am only just returned. My eyes are better but as I now shall take in hand Volume IIP and finish it, I must still be careful not to overwork them, and conse- quently my friends must excuse me if my letters are not too long and not too frequent.

The disquisitions in your first letter on the relation between rate of surplus value and rate of profits are highly interesting and no doubt of great value for grouping statistics; but it is not in this way that our authorb attacks the problem. You suppose, in your formula, that every manufacturer keeps all the surplus value, which he, in the first hand appropriates. Now upon that supposition, merchant's capital and banker's capital would be impossible, because they would not make any profit. The profit of a manufacturer therefore cannot represent all the surplus value he has extracted from his workmen.

[^1]: a of Capital - b Karl Marx





**[p. 229]**

You wonder why in England political economy is in such a pitiful state. It is the same everywhere; even classical economy, nay, even the most vulgar Free Trade Hausierburschen3- are looked upon with contempt by the still more vulgar 'superior' beings who fill the univer- sity chairs of economy. That is the fault of our author, to a great extent; he has taught people to see the dangerous consequences of classical economy; they find that no science at all, on this field at least, is the safe side of the question. And they have so well succeeded in blinding the ordinary philistine, that there are at the present moment four people in London, calling themselves 'Socialist'302 who claim to have refuted our author completely by opposing to his theory that of—Stanley Jevons!215

Paris friends insist upon saying that Mr Mutualb is not dead;216 I have no means of testing their information.

I have read with great interest your physiological observations upon exhaustion by prolonged labour time and the quantity of potential energy in the shape of food required to replace the exhaustion. To the statement of Ranke quoted by youc I have to make a slight exception: if the 1,000,000 kgmetres in food merely replaced the amount of heat and mechanical work done, it will still be insufficient, for it does not then replace the wear and tear of muscle and nerve; for that not only heat- producing food is required but albumen and this cannot be measured in kgmetres alone, as the animal body is incapable of building it up from the elements.

I do not know the two books of Ed. Young and Phil. Bevan,d but there must be some mistake in the statement that spinners and weavers in the Cotton Industry in America receive $90-120 a year. That repre- sents $2- a week,—8/- sterling, but in reality equals, in purchasing power, less than 5/- in England. From all I have heard, the wages of spin- ners and weavers in America are nominally higher but in reality only

a peddlers - b Hermann Lopatin - c J. Ranke, Grundzüge der Physiologie des Menschen mit Rücksicht auf die Gesundheitspflege und das praktische Bedürfniss des Arztes, Leipzig, 1868 - d Ed. Young, Labor in Europe and America . •., Washington, 1875; G. Ph. Bevan, The Industrial Classes, and Industrial Statistics, London, 1876



**[p. 1888]**

Operatives and officers 174,659 Deduct clerks, managers etc. 2.115 172.544 operatives (Men 59,685 (over 16 years) boys 16,107 (under 16 years) women 84,539 (over 15 years) girls 13,213 (under 15 years))

172,544. total wages $42,040,510 or $243.06 per head per annum, which agrees with my estimate given above, as what the men get more will be made up by what girls and boys get less.

To prove to you to what depths of degradation economical science has fallen, Lujo Brentano has published a lecture on Die Klassische Nationalökonomie (Leipzig, 1888), in which he proclaims: general or theo- retical economy is worth noting, but special or practical economy is every- thing. Like natural science (!), we must limit ourselves to the description of facts; such descriptions are of infinitely higher value than all apriori deduc- tions. 'Like natural science'! That is impayable in the century of Darwin, of Mayer, Joule and Clausius, of evolution and the transformation of energy!

Thanks for the N o . of Russkiye Vedomosti with the interesting article on the interference with the statistical work of the Zemstvos. It is a great pity that this valuable work should be interrupted.

First published, in Russian, in Reproduced from the original Minuvshiye gody, No. 2, 1908

Published in English in full for the first time

[^1]: Very sincerely yours P. W. Rosher39

[^2]: a Department of the Interior, Census Office Compendium of the Tenth Census (June 1, 1880), Washington, 1883, pp.1-2



