---
Volume: 48
Document_Title: "147. Engels to Laura Lafargue 24 November "
Page_Range: "248-249"
---

# 147. Engels to Laura Lafargue 24 November 



**[p. 147]**

ENGELS TO LAURA LAFARGUE274

AT LE PERREUX

London, 24 November 1888

My dear Laura,

I was going to write two lines to Paul just when your letter3 arrived. I have been busy with a very important chapter in Book IIIb which I have had to re-write entirely, the materials left by Mohr being all in the rought, and as it is a mathematical one, it required much attention.314

And when one has only two daily fragments of IV2 hours each allowed for work by the doctor, a thing which otherwise could be settled in 14 days takes more than 6 weeks—and so I determined to do it all before I allowed myself any interruption for correspondence. Well, the main portion is finished to-day and so I can just send a line to ask Paul to let me know as usual when he wants any money and I will do what I can.

As soon as my chapter is definitely got rid of, I shall write again—I have such a lot of letter-debts!—in the meantime hope to get the Figaro to-night, so far it has not come. The position in France seems indeed very curious—our friends have allowed themselves by their hatred of the Radicals200 to take Boulanger too little au sérieux and find now that he is a real danger137—anyhow he has the lower ranks of the army on his side and that is a power not to be disdained. And anyhow the way the fellow not only accepts but courts the support of the monarchists makes him more contemptible in my eyes than even the Radicals. Let us hope that the conscious breaches of logic committed by all parties—but then one must not forget that the form of all unconscious development is the Negation der Negation,0 the movement by contrasts, and that this in France means Republicanism (or respectively Socialism) and Bonapartism (or Boulangism). And Boulanger 's avènement^ would be a European war—the very thing most to be feared.

Ever yours

F. Engels

[^1]: a of 5 November 1888 - b of Capital -c negation of the negation - d accession to power



