---
Volume: 48
Document_Title: "148. Engels to Paul Lafargue 4 December "
Page_Range: "249-252"
---

# 148. Engels to Paul Lafargue 4 December 



**[p. 237]**

First published in full, in the language Istorichesky arkhiv, No. 2, 1956 of the original (English), in: F. Engels, P. et L. Lafargue, Correspondance, t. Reproduced from the original II, Paris, 1956 and, in Russian, in

148

ENGELS TO PAUL LAFARGUE

AT LE PERREUX

London, 4 December 1888

My dear Lafargue,

in order to cope with it I have had to set aside all other occupations, notably letter-writing. Hence my silence.

Bernstein has sent your article to Bebel to find out what he thinks of it. As for me, my advice to you would be to withdraw it. The things you say in your historical introduction are common knowledge and we are all of one mind about them. But when you come to the Possibilists,19 all you do is to say they've sold themselves to the government, and this without the slightest proof or even circumstantial evidence. If you haven't anything else to say about them, it would be better to say noth- ing at all.316 Had you given an account of all the dirty tricks they allegedly played on the Municipal Council and on the Bourse du Travail317 affairs, and had then gone on to provide facts and reasons in support of your assertion of their venality, it might have amounted to

[^1]: I have just finished editing a very important chapter in Volume III," a chapter Marx left uncompleted—and a mathematical chapter at that,314

[^2]: a of Capital





**[p. 238]**

Don't forget that, in reply, these gentry will say that you have sold yourselves to the Boulangists. There is no denying the fact that your atti- tude to Boulangism has done you tremendous harm in the eyes of Socialists outside France.277 You have coquetted and flirted with the Boulangists out of hatred of the Radicals200 when you might easily have attacked both, thus leaving no room for ambiguity regarding the inde- pendence of your position vis-à-vis the two parties. Nothing forced you to choose between these two sets of nincompoops. You could have cocked a snook at one no less than at the other. But instead, you made much of the Boulangists, you even mentioned the possibility of sharing an electoral roll with them at the next elections—with people allied to the Bonapartists and Royalists, who are certainly no better than Mr Brousse's Radical allies! If you have been seduced by the attitude of the Blanquists318 who, idealists though they be, are also circumspect in their dealings with Boulanger because of the money received from Rochefort, you ought to have known 'those idealists', since we used to have some in London too.

You say it is necessary for the people to personify their aspirations— if that were true, the French would be Bonapartists from birth, in which case we might as well shut up shop in Paris. But even if you did so believe, would it be reason enough to take the said Bonapartists under your wing?

Boulanger, you say, doesn't want war. What the poor fellow wants is neither here nor there! He has to do what the situation demands, whether he likes it or not. Once in power, he'll be a slave to his chau- vinist programme, the only programme he's got, aside from his accession to power. Within less than six weeks Bismarck will have enmeshed him in a web of complications, provocations and frontier incidents, etc. Then Boulanger will either have to declare war or else abdicate; have you any doubt what his choice will be? Boulanger spells war, nothing could be more certain. And what war? France allied to Russia, and hence no possibility of revolution; the least movement in Paris, and the Tsara

would so arrange things with Bismarck as to stifle revolutionary ardour for good and all; worse still, once war had been embarked upon, the Tsar would be absolute master of France and would impose on you what

[^1]: a Alexander III





**[p. 239]**

I don't know what Liebknecht may have done about the Possibilists. Whatever the case, I feel sure that our party in Germany could hardly bring itself to attend the Possibilist congress319 and, if it did, this could only be as the result of grave mistakes on your part. But do not forget that the Possibilists have succeeded in posing as the official representa- tives of French socialism, that they are recognised as such by the English,269 the Americans and the Belgians, that they fraternised at the London Congress320 with the Dutch and the Danes because you, having abdicated, were not represented there. If you do nothing in the way of advertising and preparing for your 1889 congress,321 everybody will attend that of the Broussists, there being no following for those who abdicate. So advertise your congress, make a bit of to-do in the socialist press of all countries, so that others may realise that the little chap's still alive and kicking. And if your Troyes322 Congress is successful—and succeed it must, for otherwise your party will be done for—beat the big drum, have a central committee that bestirs itself and to which people may refer and, if possible, have a little weekly paper which will give the world proof of your existence. And make a clean break with the Boulangists, otherwise no one will come.

Circumstances permitting, Liebknecht will have his congress—any old congress—provided he himself is there. And if your congress seems to him to offer little chance of success, he'll go to the Possibilist one. I'll do what I can to see that others are informed; Bebel already has been, by Bernstein, who will himself write about the Possibilists in the Sozialdemokrat!0 But he hasn't the power to bind the Party.

Has Liebknecht been in touch with you, and what did you reply? That's what I must know if I am to act in accordance with the facts.

Last Sunday Anseele and Van Beveren came to see me, and who do you think was with them? Adolphe Smith-Headingly! Needless to say, I lost no time in showing him the door. Can you imagine such impu- dence!

a H. Heine, 'Disputation', Romanzero - b See E. Bernstein, 'Boulanger's Sieg in Paris', Der Sozialdemokrat, 3 February 1889

