---
Volume: 48
Document_Title: "152. Engels to August Bebel 5 January "
Page_Range: "257-259"
---

# 152. Engels to August Bebel 5 January 



**[p. 245]**

Cunninghame Graham was here last Sunday week—a nice fellow, but always in want of a manager, otherwise brave to foolhardiness, alto- gether much of an English Blanquist.

Love from Nim, Schorlemmer and myself.

Ever yours affectionately,

F. Engels

First published in full, in the language Istorichesky arkhiv, No. 2, 1956 of the original (English), in: F. Engels, P. et L. Lafargue, Correspondance, t. Reproduced from the original II, Paris, 1956 and, in Russian, in

152

ENGELS TO AUGUST BEBEL

IN BERLIN

London, 5 January 1889

Dear Bebel,

First of all let me heartily reciprocate your kind New Year's wishes. Today, fog permitting, I must write to you by request concerning two delicate matters. Both have to do with the fear that Liebknecht might commit the party to a not altogether desirable course when, as has been announced, he visits London and Paris330 (if he comes on bis own, that is), nor, in view of his dependence on passing moods (which again is often due to self-deception), can I altogether disagree with the chaps.

In Paris it is a question of the congress or rather two congresses—the Possibilists' and our own, in other words the international congress decided upon at the Trades Unions Congress in Bordeaux in November331

and again at the Socialist Congress in Troyes.329 Lafargue is afraid that Liebknecht has had dealings with the Possibilists and that you might perhaps send delegates to their congress. I have written and told Lafargue* that in my view you cannot possibly do this. The Possibilists, having joined



**[p. 246]**



[^1]: a See this volume, p.239



