---
Volume: 48
Document_Title: "153. Engels to Ludwig Kugelmann 10 January "
Page_Range: "259-261"
---

# 153. Engels to Ludwig Kugelmann 10 January 



**[p. 247]**

The fog precludes any further writing today. More in a day or two.

Your

F. E.

First published in: Marx and Engels, Printed according to the original Works, First Russian Edition, Vol. XXVIII, Moscow, 1940 Published in English for the first time

153

ENGELS TO LUDWIG KUGELMANN

IN HANOVER

London, 10 January 1889

Dear Kugelmann,

May I reciprocate with best wishes for a very Happy New Year to yourself, your wife and daughter.*

I should be amused to see Soetbeer's piece of sagacityb if you would be so good as to send it to me; the post office here would be unlikely to take exception to the marginal notes; all it bans is anything in the nature of a letter.

a Gertrud and Franziska Kugelmann - b H. Soetbeer, Die Stellung der Sozialisten zur Malthus'schen Bevölkerungslehre, Göttingen, 1886



**[p. 248]**

returned to the aristocracy, the other part of it being purchased after 1826 by the aristocracy with the help of the émigré milliard337), and how, by 1830, small peasant landownership had reached its highest degree of development, is to be found in Avenel's Lundis Révolutionnaires and Balzac's novel, Les Paysans. Taine isn't up to much.b I haven't read the Schweichel article.0

The third volume^ is going ahead slowly. My health was given a tremendous fillip by my American jaunt, but my eyesight is still not all it might be—slight but chronic conjunctivitis and increasing myopia in the left eye due to the displacement of the rear wall of the sclerotic as a result of strain. The first duty of a citizen is rest.338

Your

F. Engels

First published in: Marx and Engels, Printed according to the original Works, First Russian Edition, Vol. XXVIII, Moscow, 1940 Published in English for the first time

a with a grain of salt - b H. Taine, Les origines de la France contemporaine, t. 1-4, Paris, 1876-1885 - c R. Schweichel, 'La Terre', Die Neue Zeit, 7. Jg., 1889, H. 1 - d of Capital

