---
Volume: 48
Document_Title: "155. Engels to Friedrich Adolph Sorge 12 January "
Page_Range: "263-266"
---

# 155. Engels to Friedrich Adolph Sorge 12 January 



**[p. 251]**

leave. So nolens volens? the whole party of us had to go on tippling until day (or rather a pitch black morning) dawned, which we did with much merriment. Towards five o'clock some of us were able to leave for town by the first train; the rest lay down at seven on hastily improvised beds and slept until the first noon of the New Year. Voilà la vie de Londres^

With kindest regards,

Yours sincerely,

F. Engels

First published, slightly abridged, in Printed according to the original Sozialistische Monatshefte, Nos 15 and 16,1920 and, in full, in: Marx and Published in English in full for the Engels, Works, First Russian Edition, first time Vol. XXVIII, Moscow, 1940

155

ENGELS TO FRIEDRICH ADOLPH SORGE343

IN HOBOKEN

London, 12 January 1889

Dear Sorge,

Have got your letter of 29 December. I am sorry to hear that you as well as your wife are beginning to find the work a strain. But I hope this is only a passing phase and that you will gradually get used to it. I am well, but during the ghastly December fogs my eyes got rather worse again. I have pretty well sorted that out by taking more exercise and spending more time out of doors.

The chief characteristic of European socialism just now is contentiousness. In France the Possibilists have sold themselves to the government and are using the secret funds to keep their unsaleable news

[^1]: A very Happy New Year and my most cordial greetings to you and your wife.0

[^2]: a willy-nilly - b That's London life for you - c Katharina Sorge





**[p. 252]**

Here in London the tuck3 of an army of officers sans soldiers still goes on. It's like Robert Blum's column of 1849345—one colonel, 11 officers, 1 trumpeter and 1 private. Outwardly and before the public they appear to hit it off all right but the cliquishness behind the scenes is all the greater. Every now and again the bickering comes out into the open. Thus Champion, having been thrown out of the Social Democratic Federation,62 has founded a paperb (of which one No. goes off to you this week) and is now attacking Hyndman, but more especially his ally, Adolphe Smith Headingley, who is half French, swears by the Possibilists and is chief mediator in the Hyndman-Possibilist alliance. In the days after the Commune, the fellow was co-loaferc of the London Branche française1**' by whom we were abused and misrepresented, then ditto of the pseudo-General Council consisting of Jung, Hales & Co. I have evidence that he is still telling lies about us. This lout-interpreter at the international Trades Congress over here had the effrontery to come to my house one Sunday under the aegis of Anseele and Van Beverend; when Schlüter arrives, he will tell you how I sent the fellow packing.

As soon as the working class, as yet only just stirring, really gets under way here, every one of these gentry will be relegated to his level and station—some inside, some outside the movement. It's now at the tooth-cutting stage.

Contentiousness also prevails in the office of the Sozialdemokrat. Schlüter will be able to tell you about it. By the way, he is also to some extent party to it and capable of concealing what doesn't suit his book. When I see how badly mismanaged the paper is here at headquarters, I can only admire our workingmen the more for the way in which they counterbalance and neutralise it all.

a here meaning 'farce' - b The Labour Elector - c In the German text Mitloafer, a play on the word Mitläufer - a political hanger-on - d See this volume, p.239



**[p. 253]**

We spent New Year's Eve with Pumps and, because of the fog, had to stay the whole night tippling there. Tussy only left at 5 a.m. by the first train. She is now staying in Cornwall for a week or two.

Bismarck has been nicely cuffed over the ears by Geffcken and Morier.347 If the Supreme Court has not yet gone so far as to accept his undergraduate-bully boy's version of the penal code, this is thanks to the singular contempt with which young Williama lately favoured those gentlemen at Leipzig.

Diplomatic intrigue is at its height. The Russians have received 20 million pounds,348 in April the Prussians will get their new 8 mm maga- zine rifle (the 11 mm one—a new version of the Mauser—was utterly unsuitable for war), the Austrians are boasting like mad, claiming to be prêts et archiprêts,*0 which proves that they're ready for another drub- bing, and in France Boulanger might come to the helm. Bismarck's machinations with Salisbury in East Africa349 have only one purpose, namely to involve Britain so deeply in a joint operation with Germany that, even under Gladstone, it wouldn't be able to draw back. Thus it was definitely against his will that William staged the Morier affair, but it's he who has to carry the can. In short, the situation is becoming crit- ical and could lead to war in the spring.

Your

RE.

Section I of Vol. IIIe is finished, II and III in hand. Seven sections in all.

First published, abridged, in Briefe und Auszüge ans Briefen von Job. Phil. Becker, Jos. Dietzgen, Friedrich Engels, Karl Marx u. A. and F. A. Sorge und Andere, Stuttgart, 1906 and, in full, in: Marx and Engels, Works, First Russian

Edition, Vol. XXVIII, Moscow, 1940

Printed according to the original

Published in English in full for the first time

[^1]: a William II - b ready and more than ready - c of Capital



