---
Volume: 48
Document_Title: "157. Engels to Paul Lafargue 14 January "
Page_Range: "267-269"
---

# 157. Engels to Paul Lafargue 14 January 



**[p. 157]**

ENGELS TO PAUL LAFARGUE87

AT LE PERREUX

London, 14 January 1889

My dear Lafargue,

Reply from Liebknecht and Bebel after mutual consultation.351 It would appear that they never had any intention of going to the Possibilist congress direct and without reference to you. But

1) Since the London congress320 resolved to convene a congress in Paris and entrusted its organisation to the Possibilists, the latter do have certain rights, notably in regard to the nationalities represented in London who concurred with that resolution. (Why, by the bye, have you abdicated so completely and abandoned the field to the Possibilists?)

2) The Dutch have expressly asked that the Possibilists be invited to the congress, making this a condition for their (the Dutchmen's) atten- dance.

3) And Liebknecht is right when he says that the Germans cannot expose themselves to attack by French workers in Paris—a hazard, he avers, against which you have been unable to give them any sort of guar- antee.

Apparently, then, it has been resolved to convene a preliminary conference at Nancy,352 one delegate per foreign nationality, and one delegate from each of the three French parties—yourselves, Blanquists, Possibilists; also to move that, at the congress, the right to speak be with- drawn from any speaker alluding to the internal affairs of those three parties and to the differences between them. In this way there would be only one congress, at which everyone would be represented.

I don't see how you can turn this down. If it then be seen that you are prepared to act along with everyone else, and that the Possibilists are trying to exclude you, it would be enough to put the Possibilists in the wrong, even in the eyes of the Dutch and Belgians (the Flemings are all right but, where their foreign policy is concerned, they are under the thumb of those false brethren in Brussels of whom you know); if, on the other hand, they accept, you will only have yourselves to blame should you fail to prove to one and all that it is you, and not they, who repre- sent French Socialism.



**[p. 256]**

If all this is correct, I cannot see that you have cause for complaint; on the contrary, it would provide an excellent opportunity to force the hand of the Possibilists. Before answering, however, I am anxious to ascertain the facts and to hear what you have to say. After consulting your friends, therefore, and after seeking the advice of the Blanquists, do write and tell me what you think about all this; and do it soon, it's urgent.

Give Laura a kiss from Nim and from myself.

Yours ever,

F. Engels

First published, in the language of the Printed according to the original original (French), in: F. Engels, P. et L. Lafargue, Correspondance, t. II, Paris, Translated from the French 1956

[^1]: a Parti Ouvrier - Engels gives this sentence in a close rendering rather than word for word - c 'On Tuesday, 8 January, after discussing the matter with Bebel, I sent a formal invitation to the (Possibilist) paper. Should the latter not send a delegate (to the conference), we shall have a free hand. Should one or several attend, we shall know how to deal with them. If they toe the line, well and good. If they do not toe the line, they will stand on their own and will be wiped out by us.' 'In either case the meeting will ensure the success of the congress and the hamstringing of the Broussists.'



