---
Volume: 48
Document_Title: "161. Engels to Laura Lafargue 4 February "
Page_Range: "272-275"
---

# 161. Engels to Laura Lafargue 4 February 



**[p. 160]**

ENGELS TO HERMANN SCHLÜTER

IN LONDON

[London], 31 January 1889

Dear Schlüter,

I had hoped to see you and your wifea here yesterday. Did Mrs Bernstein come with you? If so, I hope to see her and you both at my house one evening—Sunday at the latest. Kindest regards.

Your

F. Engels

First published in: Marx and Engels, Printed according to the original Works, Second Russian Edition, Vol. 37, Moscow, 1965 Published in English for the first time

161

ENGELS TO LAURA LAFARGUE324

AT LE PERREUX

London, 4 February 1889

My dear Laura,

The news about the Egalité (ominous name, égalité devant la morth

That the Blanquists would be brought to their senses, as to the extent of their journalistic capacities, was pretty clear—but that this necessary experience would eat up the necessary funds for a paper, was clearer still.

[^1]: I hope not!) is good news indeed and I await anxiously the results.355

[^2]: a Anna Schlüter - b equality before death





**[p. 261]**

'Die Pariser Arbeiter haben sich in ihrer Mehrheit einfach erbärmlich benommen — mitt ihrer sozialistischen und klassenbewussten Gesinnung muss es sehr traurig stehn, wenn nur 17,000 Stimmen auf einen sozialistischen Kandidaten fallen und ein Hanswurst und dema- gog wie Boulanger 244,000 Stimmen erhält'b357

— Nobody can say that he is wrong. The effect upon our party every- where has been that if Floquet has suffered a crushing defeat, so have we. Cutting off your nose to spite your face is no doubt also a sort of policy, but what sort?

Well, Boulanger is now sure to be master of France unless he commits some egregious blunder, and the Parisians will have their bellyful of him. If the thing goes off without war being brought on, it will be something gained—but the danger is great. Bismarck has every reason to hurry on

a investor (Jules Roques) - b 'The majority of Paris workers behaved downright despicably - their socialist and class consciousness must be in a sorry state indeed if a socialist candidate only gets 17,000 votes and a clown and demagogue like Boulanger polls 244,000 votes.'



**[p. 262]**

In all this mess it is but a poor consolation that the Possibilists have ruined themselves a little sooner than they would have done otherwise. But such as it is, let us rejoice over it. I send you two Recht voor Allen in which you see how they are getting treated by the very mass who insisted on their presence at the Congress.358 Bernstein has given it them this week in the Sozialdemokrat^ too, and even Hyndman has not the courage to stick up for them in Justice. To take his revenge, he writes a letter to Bax (5 Canning Road, Croydon) and asks him what it was that he, Bax, said about this point at the office of the Sozialdemokrat and what was repeated to me yesterday by Joos (one of the men there). I should be the more glad of this, as Bax was here yesterday too and never mentioned a word to me about it—it came out only after he had left. He can tell Bax that I told him so.

Well, I hope the new paper0 will come out; we must take the situation as it is and make the best of it. When Paul gets to work at a paper again, he will brace himself up for the fight and no longer say despondingly: il n'y a pas à aller contre le courante Nobody asks of him to stop the current, but if we are not to go against the popular current of momen- tary tomfoolery, what in the name of the devil is our business? The inhabitants of the Ville lumière^ have proved to evidence that they are 2 million 'mostly fools' as Carlyle says, but that is no reason why we should be fools too. Let the Parisians turn reactionists if they cannot be happy otherwise—the social revolution will go on in spite of them, and when it's done they can cry out: Ah tiens! C'est fait—et sans nous—qui l'aurait imaginée

With Nim's love

Ever yours RE.

Doesn't Paul want any cash?

[^1]: a William II - b E. Bernstein, 'Boulanger's Sieg in Paris,' Der Sozialdemokrat, 3 February 1889 - c Egalité - d there is no going against the current - e Luminary City - f Just look! It's done - and without us - who could have imagined it!



