---
Volume: 48
Document_Title: "163. Engels to Laura Lafargue 11 February "
Page_Range: "276-277"
---

# 163. Engels to Laura Lafargue 11 February 



**[p. 163]**

ENGELS T O LAURA LAFARGUE 4 0

AT LE PERREUX

London, 11 February 1889

My dear Laura,

Well this Egalité anyhow is quite a relief after the dear dull deadly Cri du Peuple {ennuyeux*). The last few numbers of that defunct paper were really crushing. Poor Vaillant who can write a very good article when a critical point has been reached, but who is the last man in the world to spin out yarns by the yard day after day—you actually saw him perspire over his daily task, and it was a desponding sight. The involu- tions, evolutions and circumvolutions of Longuet in his attempts to set himself right (and at the same time wrong) with his Radical ex-friends are at least amusing, and artistically done.359 Paul's [article on] night- work is really good; though he might have tapé un peu plus dur0 on Boulanger. Today I had no Egalité—perhaps the snow has delayed it. We are six inches deep in it here.

I read your admonition yesterday to Tussy and she pleads guilty. How far she will mind is beyond my cognizance.

Nim was rather out of sorts last week, some sort of derangement of the bowels, but is all right now.

Of Capital, III, vol. I finished section IV yesterday—about 1/3 of the whole cubic foot of ms.

In the Dispatch I send you please note A. Smith on page 2C—full of lies as usual—but it shows what the Possibilists are after. That the Germans are going to their congress is a barefaced lie, and that the Danes, Dutch etc. are, is probably another. Bax told Tussy that Hyndman had sounded him as to what the Germans intended doing in this respect, and Bax asked him: are you then the representative of the Possibilists in London? to which Hyndman said he was and in that capacity wanted the information. Whereupon Bax said: then you better write me a letter which I can submit to Engels and Bernstein. There the matter rests at present. But you see how busy they are.

[^1]: a boring - b hit a bit harder - c [Ad. Smith], 'The International Workmen's Congress of 1889'



