---
Volume: 48
Document_Title: "165. Engels to Karl Kautsky 20 February "
Page_Range: "278-283"
---

# 165. Engels to Karl Kautsky 20 February 



**[p. 165]**

ENGELS TO KARL KAUTSKY362

IN VIENNA

London, 20 February 1889

Dear Kautsky,

I return herewith the Neue Zeit articles* with brief marginal notes. The chief defect lies in the want of good material—Taine and Tocqueville, those idols of the philistines, are inadequate here.b Had you been working over here, you would have found material of quite a different order—better secondary and masses of primary sources. Quite apart from the fact that the best book on the peasants, by Kareyev, is in Russian. But if, over there, you can get hold of:

Moreau de Jounès, Etat économique et social de la France depuis Henri IV jusqu'à Louis XIV, Paris 1867, you could profitably read the same.

Section II, p. 3. Here you could do with a clear exposé showing how absolute monarchy comes into being as a natural compromise between aristocracy and bourgeoisie and hence must protect the inter- ests of, and share out favours to, either side. To the—politically super- annuated—aristocracy falls the share of plundering the peasants and the Exchequer, and of exercising indirect political influence through the Court, the army, the Church and the upper reaches of the admin- istration; to the bourgeoisie, protection by means of tariffs and monopolies, and a relatively well-organised administration and judi- ciary. If you make that your starting-point, much will be elucidated and simplified.

This paragraph also omits all mention of the judicial aristocracy

a K. Kautsky, 'Die Klassengegensätze von 1789. Zur hundert-jährigen Gedenkfeier der grosen Revolution', Die Neue Zeit, 7. Jhg, 1889, Hefte 1-4 - b H. A. Taine, Les origines de la France contemporaine; A. de Tocqueville, L'Ancien régime et la Révolution



**[p. 267]**

III, p. 49. Cf. Note I from Kareyev herewith. P. 50 'this species of bourgeois' suddenly becomes 'the' bourgeois par excellence, which gives the lie to the dichotomy of the bourgeois class of which you are speaking. Altogether you generalise far too much and this often makes you absolute where the utmost relativity is called for.

IV, p. 54. Here there ought to be some mention of how it was that these plebeians, who were outside the system of estates and thus more or less disenfranchised or outlawed, arrived in the course of the revolution only by degrees at what you call 'Sansculottism' (yet another ism!); like- wise some mention of the role they played. That would get you over the difficulties on p. 53, which you seek to cope with by means of casual references and veiled allusions to new modes of production. Then it becomes plain that, here as always, the bourgeois were too cowardly to stand up for their own interests, that, from the time of the Bastille onwards, all their work had to be done for them by the plebs, that with- out the latter's intervention on 14 July, 5/6 October, and right up to 10 August, 2 September, etc., the bourgeoisie would invariably have been defeated by the ancien régime and the revolution have been crushed by the Coalition in alliance with the Court, and hence that it was those plebeians alone who effected the revolution;363 but that this would not have been possible had the said plebeians not put a construction on the revolutionary demands of the bourgeoisie which these did not possess, had they not pushed equality and fraternity to their furthest logical conclusion, thereby standing the bourgeois meaning of those catch- words completely on its head because, if taken to extremes, that mean- ing in fact turned into its opposite; that this plebeian equality and frater- nity must have been sheer moonshine at a time when it was a question of producing precisely the opposite and that, as always, this plebeian

a People whose patents of nobility derived from administrative or legal posts purchased by themselves or their forebears - b Collection complète des Mémoires de Monsieur de Beaumarchais, avec la suite de sa justification, t. 1-2



**[p. 268]**

I would say a great deal less about the modern mode of production. In every case a yawning gap divides it from the facts you adduce and, thus out of context, it appears as a pure abstraction which, far from throwing light on the subject, renders it still more obscure.

As regards the Terror, it was essentially a military measure, so long as it had any point. It enabled the class or faction of the class group which alone could secure the victory of the revolution, not only to remain at the helm (the least of their problems once the rebellions had been subdued), but also to ensure that they had freedom of movement, elbow- room, and could concentrate their forces at the crucial point, the frontier. By the end of 1793 this last had been pretty well secured; 1794 began well, with the French armies advancing almost everywhere. The Commune364 with its extremist tendencies became redundant, its pro- revolutionary propagandism became an embarrassment to Robespierre no less than to Danton, both of whom—if each after his own fashion— wanted peace. In this conflict of three elements Robespierre was the victor, but now the Terror became for him a means of self-preservation and therefore absurd: when, at Fleurus on the 26th of June, Jourdan laid the whole of Belgium at the Republic's feet,365 it became unwarrantable; on 27 July Robespierre fell and the bourgeois orgy began.

'Prosperity for all based on labour' is far too definite a way of expressing the aspirations of the plebeian 'fraternité' of those days. What they wanted no one could say until, long after the fall of the Commune, Babeuf gave it definite form.366 If the Commune with its aspirations to fraternity came too soon, Babeuf for his part came too late.

The section on peasants suffers most from the absence of all but the most common sources.

Ranke 's howlers are nice!a in the case of Sybelb you unfortunately failed to make use of the Austrian refutations, from which you could have gleaned a good deal about the second partition of Poland,368 etc., and which, in so far as they are in the archives, are certainly available.

As regards Rudolf,0 history shows that even in Austria feudal licena L. Ranke, Über die Epochen der neueren Geschichte - b H. Sybel, Geschichte der Revolutionszeit von 1789-1795 - c Rudolf Franz Karl Joseph - d Bernstein

[^1]: P. 100. Beggars—see Note II from Kareyev.367





**[p. 269]**

My cordial regards to Louise, likewise Frankel, Alder, etc. What is Bardorf doing? One never hears anything of him nowadays.

Hyndman is endeavouring to entice Ede, via Bax, into an alliance with himself and the Possibilists.19 The silly ass imagines that we carry on in exactly the same way as the London literary cliques, in which alliances are made and broken at will simply because those concerned have no one behind them.

How do you like the Égalité's novel about Rudolf?

Your

F. E.

Note I. Fourth Estate

The conception of a Fourth Estate, alongside I, II and III, arose very early in the Revolution. Dufaurny de Villiers' Cahiers du 4e ordre, celui des pauvres journaliers, des infirmes, des indigents, etc., l'ordre des infor- tunés—25 avril 1789 appeared at the very start. But as a rule the Fourth Estate was regarded as consisting of peasants. E.g. Noilliac, Le plus fort des pamphlets. L'ordre des paysans aux États-généraux. 26 février 1789, p. 9: 'Prenons de la constitution suédoise les quartre ordres.'*—Vartout, Lettre d'un paysan à son curé, sur une nouvelle manière de tenir les États-généraux, Sartrouville, 1789, p. 7: 'J'avons entendu dire que dans un pays qui est au Nord on admettait aux États assemblés l'ordre des paysans. *

A few other versions of the Fourth Estate also occur; one pamphlet suggests a Fourth Estate of merchants, another, of magistrates, etc.

According to Kareyev, The Peasants and the Peasant Question in France in the Last Quarter of the 18th Century, Moscow, 1879, p. 327.

Note II. Beggars 'Characteristically, the number of the impoverished (niscich; niscyi means beggar) was highest in the provinces which were considered the

[^1]: a 'Let us take the four estates of the Swedish Constitution' - b 'I have heard told that in a country up in the North the Peasants' Estate was admitted to the States-General.'





**[p. 270]**

'But let the figures speak. In Argentré (Brittany), out of the 2,300 inhabitants not living by industry or trade, more than half can barely make ends meet, and over 500 people have been reduced to destitution. In Dainville (Artois), 60 families out of 130 are impoverished. Normandy: in Saint-Patrice 400 out of the 1,500 inhabitants, and in Saint-Laurent three-quarters out of the 500 live on alms (Taine). From the Cahiers369 of the Douai bailliage we learn that in one village (Bouvignies parish) half of the 332 families live on alms, in another (Aix parish) 65 families out of the 143 are impoverished, in a third (Landus parish) about one hundred out of the 413 are destitute, and so on and so forth. In the Puy-en-Velay sénéchaussée, according to the Cahiers of the local clergy, 58,897 of the 120,000 inhabitants are not in a position to pay any taxes at all (Archives Parlementaires de 1787 à 1860, Vol. V, p. 467). In the villages of the Carhaix arrondissement the position was as follows: Frerogan: 10 well-to-do families (dostatochnyi, possessing enough), 10 poor, and 10 destitute. Motref: 47 well-to-do families, 74 less prosperous ones, 64 poor ones and families of day labourers. Paule: 200 households, most of which fully deserve the description of beggars' homes (Archives Nationales BA, IV, 17). The Cahier of the Marboeuf parish states that out of the 500 inhabitants nearly 100 are destitute (Boivin-Champeaux, Notice historique sur la Révolution dans le département de l'Eure, 1872, p. 83). The peasants of Harville village say as many as one-third of them live in poverty for lack of employment ('Requête des habitants de la Commune d'Harville', Archives Nationales).

'In the cities the position was no better. In Lyons 30,000 workmen were destitute in 1787. Paris, with a population of 650,000 had 118,784 indigents (Taine I, [p.] 507). In Rennes 1/3 of the inhabitants lived on alms and another 1/3 were in constant danger of destitution (Duchatellier, L'agriculture en Bretagne, Paris, 1863, p. 178). The Jurassian town of Lons-le-Saunier was so poor that, when the

Constituante370 introduced the electoral qualification, only 728 of the 6,518 inhabitants were qualified as eligible to vote (Sommier, Histoire de la révolution dans le Jura, Paris, 1846, p. 33). Small wonder, therefore, that during the revolution those living on charity were counted by the million. For instance, a church pamphlet published in 1791 says there were 6 million paupers (indigents) in France (Avis aux Pauvres sur la rév olution présente et sur les biens du clergé, p. 15). This is doubtless a some-

