---
Volume: 48
Document_Title: "167. Engels to Friedrich Adolph Sorge 23 February "
Page_Range: "284-286"
---

# 167. Engels to Friedrich Adolph Sorge 23 February 



**[p. 272]**

I may have a few odd numbers of The People's Paper but, if so, shall not be able to lay my hands on them until I find time for a re-arrange- ment of my collection of old papers, pamphlets, etc.

Faithfully yours,

F. Engels

First published in: Marx and Engels, Reproduced from the original Works, First Russian Edition, Vol. XXVIII, Moscow, 1940

167

ENGELS TO FRIEDRICH ADOLPH SORGE371

IN HOBOKEN

London, 23 February 1889

Dear Sorge,

Your postcard of 19 January and letter of 10 February received.372 I take The Labor Standard and shall give Mrs Wischnewetzky's articles to Tussy, who will use them, should the 'Labor Movement' happen to be re-issued. The stuff in them is typical of America. Neglect of fire precau- tions, etc., on that scale simply would not pay in Europe. But it's the same attitude as you take to railroads and everything else; provided only that they exist, no matter how, that is sufficient.

Thank you for the item on Appleton.373 On being approached, Sonnenschein said he had sold 500 copies of the cheap edition to Appleton.

I didn't see Der arme Teufel. It is Motteler's favourite reading and that is something no one will begrudge him. Any remarks it makes about Aveling, no matter what they may be, are downright lies.374



**[p. 273]**

Lack of material and a desire to be versatile mean that many get in who have no business to be there. Kautsky has been in Vienna since July and won't be returning here before July.

I have sent you The Holy Family by registered book packet along with some French stuff. But you mustn't tell Schlüter that I sent it to you; I had more or less promised him my spare copy for the archives227 before my trip to America, but you come first. It will probably arrive in March or April.

In addition to this—all of them by today's post—there's a further parcel of French stuff as well as Commonweal and Gleichheit. Lafargue's and Deville's lectures376 are no longer to be had here and I can't get a reply out of the authors. However I keep pegging away at them.

You will have received the copies of the Egalité. The Blanquists have had no luck with their Cri du Peuple; having bored people to tears, they found themselves compelled to join forces with Guesde, Lafargue, etc. (which Vaillant wanted to do from the beginning but was outvoted). In addition there are a few discontented Radicals. Up till now they have all got on well together—let's hope it will remain so. Some more copies will go off shortly.

The workers are now beginning to desert them. In the provinces, which are far better than Paris, they have lost all support. Their attempt, with the help of the English Trades Unions and of Hyndman, their trusty ally over here, to arrange an international congress in Paris without our Frenchmen but with the Belgians, Danes, Dutch and hence, or so they hoped, the Germans as well, is proving an ignominious failure. The Germans say they will not attend either congress if 2 of them are held in Paris. And both parties have been summoned to a conference at The Hague on the 28th of this month360; of the Germans, Liebknecht, Bebel and Bernstein will be there, and so will the Dutch and Belgians. Lafargue is going. So they must either eat humble pie or face universal opposition.

[^1]: During the latest election in Paris the Possibilists thoroughly disgraced themselves and actively supported the Opportunist Jacques.344

[^2]: In Germany things are getting more and more confused. Now that old William3 is dead and Bismarck is tottering, the philistines have lost all confidence in the wielders of power. That vain young fool,b the new, greater version of Old Fritzc (pour rired) wants to be Emperor and

[^3]: a William I - b William II - c Frederick II (Frederick the Great) - d in jest



