---
Volume: 48
Document_Title: "169. Engels to Conrad Schmidt 12 March "
Page_Range: "288-290"
---

# 169. Engels to Conrad Schmidt 12 March 



**[p. 276]**

Give Laura a kiss from me. I hope she has got rid of her cold.

Yours ever, RE.

First published in the language of the Printed according to the original original (French), in: F. Engels, P. et L. Lafargue, Correspondance, t. II, Paris, Translated from the French 1956

169

ENGELS TO CONRAD SCHMIDT

IN BERLIN

London, 12 March 1889 122 Regent's Park Road, N. W.

Dear Dr Schmidt,

You must excuse me for being unable to reply to your note of the 5th inst. Until today. I have had a family over here from Germany on a visit and there hasn't been a moment to spare.

So your academic adventures have been followed by adventures with the press.382 It's just like it was between 1842 and 1845383 and you'll now have some idea of how we fared then. However, we have made a bit of progress since that time and the tricks played by the world of official- dom today, even though they may be quite as beastly as they were then, are no longer so far-reaching.

If you approach Meissner, don't hesitate to refer him straight to me, and if he sends me an inquiry, I shall gladly do whatever I can. But I

[^1]: a Sozialdemokrat





**[p. 277]**

However, I have yet another suggestion: You should write and ask Karl Kautsky, whom you know, of course, from the time you were both over here—Igelgasse 13/I, Vienna IV—whether he cannot arrange for Dietz in Stuttgart to take the piece. Or again to Dr H. Braun, Munich, to see whether he can suggest a publisher.

If you would like me to send you an introduction to Bebel, Liebknecht or Singer while the Reichstag is in session, you are very welcome to one.

If the thing isn't too long, Kautsky might possibly take it for the Neue Zeit.™4

So you too live in the Dorotheenstrasse—I myself lived there in 1841191 on the south side, a bit to the east of the Friedrichstrasse—it will all have changed a great deal by now.

I was also glad to get your note of 18 January. I trust the plan you outlined in it to live by your pen will come off. Obviously you will first have to learn the ropes to some extent in this new world and if the gentlemen of the press are of the same breed over there as they are here, you can hardly fail to make a number of unavoidable, if somewhat unde- sirable, acquaintanceships.

I have taken a look at the Sweating Committee report3—there are two fat folio volumes (containing the witnesses' statements) and hardly believe you will feel impelled to work your way through them. However, if you want to take a preliminary look at them, you will find them in the Reichstag library; one or other of the deputies could get hold of them for you, and if you then felt inclined to go into the matter more thoroughly, I should be happy to send them to you.

Meanwhile my sincere regards combined with the request that you send me further news of yourself from time to time.

Yours,

F. Engels

First published in Sozialistische Printed according to the original Monatschefte, Nos. 15 and 16, 1920

Published in English for the first time

a First report from the Select Committee of the House of Lords on the Sweating System; together with the Proceedings of the Committee, Minutes of Evidence, and Appendix. Ordered by the House of Commons, to be printed, 11 August 1888, London

