---
Volume: 48
Document_Title: "175. Engels to Wilhelm Liebknecht 4 April "
Page_Range: "301-303"
---

# 175. Engels to Wilhelm Liebknecht 4 April 



**[p. 175]**

ENGELS TO WILHELM LIEBKNECHT

IN BORSDORF NEAR LEIPZIG

London, 4 April 1889

Dear Liebknecht,

Besides your letters to myself, I have before me those to Bonnier and Ede.392

From them I see that, as usual, we diverge very considerably as soon as it comes to taking action.

Your 'politeness' post festum* would now simply make you look ridiculous in the eyes of the English.

Your advice to the French, namely that they might ultimately arriver à un arrangement quelconque avec les Broussistes,h i.e. deliberately go and present their backsides to be kicked, has, quite understandably, infu- riated them. The above advice, and your annoyance at the fact that we— for the pamphlet was embarked upon at my instigation and almost wholly edited by me386—should have presented the Possibilists for what they are—recipients of reptile funds30 of the Opportunists,199 i.e. haute finance0—thereby opening the eyes of large numbers of Englishmen to things which had been deliberately withheld from them,—your annoy- ance, I say, is explicable only if you were intent on keeping a foot in the back door so that—even after being spurned by the Possibilists—you might cook up some little deal for the account and at the risk of the German party. If that's how things are, then I am not at all sorry to have taken some of the wind out of your sails.

This, along with your opinion393 that Ede should have replied to the Justice with an editorial, i.e. in the Sozialdemokrat, i.e. in German and thus in a form neither accessible nor comprehensible to the English, shows that you are totally out of touch with conditions both in France and over here, and that your calculations are based on out-of-date infor- mation and imaginary situations. Nor is anything else to be expected since you receive none of the relevant journals there and have no regular correspondence with anyone of note (I mean, of course, in the socialist

[^1]: a after the event - b corne to an arrangement of some sort with the Broussists - c high finance





**[p. 290]**

That the pamphlet was not only the greatest service we could do you people, but also completely indispensable, is something I trust I shall be able to bring home, if not to you, then at least to Singer, when the two of you come over here.

One thing I do know—you can arrange the next congress yourselves; I shall wash my hands of it.

The Hague resolution was sent to me by Lafargue expressly for publication, as was absolutely essential after the brazen rebuff meted out to you by the Possibilists.394 So I'll damned well forget about etiquette and just wait and see whether anyone else besides you complains.

As regards the date of the congress, any alteration to what has already been resolved will put fresh difficulties in the way of an under- standing, since everybody will propose a different date and it will be the 10th of October before they have agreed upon, let us say, the 10th of August. For us to make proposals to you on this matter will serve no useful purpose and I can only hope that, after all this bother—for the past 4 weeks I haven't been able to do a stroke of work on Volume IIP because of this damned business—something real will actually come of it.

Cordial regards to your wife and to the others when you see them.

Your

RE.

that you should want to avoid a set-to with the Possibilists which, be it noted, would take place with the consent of the powers that be, and with police protection for the Possibilists; in other words, out of gratitude for the favourable attitude you have adopted towards France since 1870, you would be beaten up as Prussians0 by the French.

[^1]: I fully understand—and have plainly intimated as much to Lafargueb

[^2]: a of Capital - b See previous letter - c Prussians



