---
Volume: 48
Document_Title: "176. Engels to Wilhelm Liebknecht 5 April "
Page_Range: "303-306"
---

# 176. Engels to Wilhelm Liebknecht 5 April 



**[p. 291]**

176

ENGELS TO WILHELM LIEBKNECHT

IN BORSDORF NEAR LEIPZIG

London, 5 April 1889

Dear Liebknecht,

When I wrote to you yesterday I hardly expected that by today I should already be in a position to point the moral of my letter.

Our pamphlet386—of which, 2,000 copies were distributed in London and 1,000 in the provinces and, thanks to Tussy, just at the right places— has acted like a bombshell, making a tremendous rent in Hyndman's and Brousse's tissue of intrigue, and this at the most crucial spot. The people over here, suddenly enlightened as to the real state of affairs, have now discovered that Hyndman has shamefully deceived them about the congress, the French socialist parties, the Germans and the Hague affair385 and has concealed the essentials from them. The rebellious, progressive elements in the Trades Unions,395 whom Hyndman was just in process of annexing, are now turning to Ede, and all are anxious for further enlightenment. Inside his own camp, the Social Democratic Federation,62 Hyndman has also encountered opposition, which means that our pamphlet has induced some uncertainty in the ranks of the Social Democratic Federation, the only sure ally the Possibilists had. The consequence, enclosed herewith, was Hyndman's backward-look- ing and, as compared with his previous insolent language, almost hang- dog, reply injustice* Never before has Hyndman beat so ignominious a retreat, and the article will bring us further victories. At one fell swoop

a H. Hyndman, 'The International Workers' Congress of Paris of 1889 and the German Social-Democrats', Justice, 6 April 1889



**[p. 292]**

Well, Ede is going to reply to the effect that he can only speak in his own name, but believes he can say that, should the Possibilists now instantly and unreservedly accept the Hague resolutions, it might not be too late to reach an understanding and he would be glad to do what he could to bring it about.

Now that the Possibilists have also had bad news from Spain, their agent Gély having simply been sent packing in Madrid—where we are in full control—and having no prospects whatever anywhere else if you except a Trades Union in Barcelona, and now that the Belgians also appear to be taking a tougher line than they, the Possibilists, expected, there's every possibility that this final blow, which is causing their chief reserves to waver, will make them more amenable. In order that you may strike while the iron is hot, it might be a good idea for you to copy,— more or less—the enclosed letter to Ede, preferably just as it stands, and send it to him without delay.396 I am sending the same letter to Bebel with the same request.397 Preferably just as it stands, however, for one single expression inappropriate to the situation over here would prevent us from using the thing. Then the letters might be published. What we hope to do is to induce Hyndman to influence the Possibilists along the lines we want, in which case they'd be bound to submit and we should have salvaged one congress.

All this was agreed today between Ede and myself. And now, having regard to my letter of yesterday,3 you may again call me the rudest man in Europe.

Your

F. E.

Dear Ede,

I am very glad to hear that the Social Democratic Federation is show- ing itself more conciliatory. But the rejection of the Hague resolutions by the Possibilists has forced us into the position of proceeding inde- pendently and convoking a congress to which all will be admitted and

[^1]: a See previous letter





**[p. 293]**

If the Social Democratic Federation earnestly desires an understand- ing, it might perhaps still contribute thereto. There may yet be time. Such an understanding might possibly still be reached if the Possibilists were to accept the Hague resolutions purement et simplement*—but without delay, for, having already once been rebuffed, we can no longer allow ourselves to be trifled with.

I cannot speak here in the name of the German Party since the faction is not now in session, and still less in the names of the other groups represented at The Hague. But one thing I will gladly promise: If, by the 20th of April at the latest, the Possibilists can lodge with the Belgian delegates Volders and Anseele written notice of their unconditional acceptance of the Hague resolutions, from which we cannot deviate by a hair's breadth, I shall do all I can to promote an understanding and likewise the attendance of all concerned at the congress convoked by the Possibilists with due regard for the Hague resolutions.

Your

W.L.

The date, 20 April, is important—because of the need to come to a decision before the Belgian National Congress on the 21st.398

I also enclose something from the Sozialist™—the Americans are wholly of one mind with Ede as to this.

What has proved more effective than anything else over here has, in fact, been the publication of the Hague resolution385 concerning which Hyndman had disseminated nothing but lies and which has struck home all the more forcibly for restricting itself to the demand for things that were pretty well axiomatic.

First published in: Marx and Engels, Printed according to the original Works, First Russian Edition, Vol. XXVIII, Moscow, 1940 Published in English for the first time

[^1]: a purely and simply



