---
Volume: 48
Document_Title: "178. Engels to Wilhelm Liebknecht 17 April "
Page_Range: "309-311"
---

# 178. Engels to Wilhelm Liebknecht 17 April 



**[p. 178]**

ENGELS TO WILHELM LIEBKNECHT

IN BORSDORF NEAR LEIPZIG

London, 17 April 1889

Dear Liebknecht,

I never doubted for one moment that you aborigines of Borsdorf were the better men—better, I might almost say, to the point of incorri- gibility.

Your conference at The Hague385 gets funnier and funnier. Lafargue and Bonnier (who is over here) know nothing about one resolution— what was to happen after the Possibilists' refusal—and neither Lafargue, nor Bonnier, nor Ede know anything about the other, the maintenance of secrecy. It must have been a curious sort of presidency and an odd sort of secretariat for something like that to have happened. So what we didn't know about we couldn't have abided by.

That silence should have been observed until the Possibilists had refused goes without saying and this is what in fact happened. But after- wards it was essential to let fly at once. And if, as usual, you yourself were unlucky enough to be prevented by unforeseen circumstances from doing so and if none of the rest of you stepped into the breach and Lafargue sent me the resolution precisely for the purpose of getting it published, it was damned well up to us—especially so, considering the circumstances over here—to take this responsibility upon ourselves and commit this horrendous breach of etiquette.

Your joint protest,* you say, would certainly have had an effect alto- gether different from that of our pamphlet386—indeed it would, if it had ever appeared in the first place. Why then hasn't it yet done so? What the devil is stopping you? You know as well as I do that it will never mate- rialise or not at any rate until six months post festum.b

Your little scheme for busting up the Possibilists by means of moral exhortations from Borsdorf and coming to an understanding with them over Brousse's head is a childish chimera from the execution of which, come to that, our 'railing' at the Possibilists will not be able to deter you.

[^1]: a See this volume, pp.292-3 - b after the event





**[p. 298]**

If Ede, who throughout the pamphlet speaks on his own behalf and adopts a line no different from the one he adopts in the paper* itself, has provided the public prosecutors with grist for their mill, the paper itself constitutes a far greater danger to you people than the pamphlet. In which case for heaven's sake write to the chaps over here, telling them to attack rather than defend you, or better still to shut up shop. And if you're on such uncertain ground, you ought above all to avoid meddling in such things as international congresses, etc.

As to the Schlesinger business,400 we should like to discuss this further by word of mouth. I haven't seen the piece yet, but this really cannot go on, a situation in which something of the kind—if only the advertisement—is able to appear under your own aegis and without you yourself protesting. What I myself shall feel it necessary to do about the matter will of course depend on the concoction's contents.

Schorlemmer has been here since Saturday. He and Lenchen send you their regards.

Your

F.E.

Your letter to Edeb will not be used. It would be far better if you wrote to Leec along the same lines.

In lighter vein: Last Friday Ede was at a socialist soirée for the eddi- cated socialists here401 and was told by Mr Sidney Webb, who is professor of political economy at the Working Men's College and has actually refuted Marx's theory of value, that 'we are only 2000 socialists in England but we are doing more than all the 700,000 Socialists in Germany'

First published in: Marx and Engels, Printed according to the original Works, First Russian Edition, Vol. XXVIII, Moscow, 1940 Published in English for the first time

[^1]: Der Sozialdemokrat - b See this volume, pp.292-3 - c Henry William



