---
Volume: 48
Document_Title: "179. Engels to Karl Kautsky 20 April "
Page_Range: "311-312"
---

# 179. Engels to Karl Kautsky 20 April 



**[p. 179]**

ENGELS TO KARL KAUTSKY

IN VIENNA

London, 20 April 1889

Dear Kautsky,

As regards Schlesinger, I shall have a word with Liebknecht when he comes over here in about a fortnight. I have already written to him outlining the essential points. But you might be so good as to send me the thing*—stuff of this sort is unobtainable over here and I shouldn't like to be in the position of having to accept everything he says at its face value.

As to Schmidt, I have advised him to send you the ms. and see whether you can place it.b Schmidt has quietly developed into a Marxian and, as a result, no longer has any prospect of a university career, having been turned down by Halle—that noble university is confessional!—as a dissident and by Leipzig as a socialist,297 while the Swiss have begged him to spare them his presence. Just now he is trying to get someone to publish the thesis he wrote for his habilitationf the academic socialists402

tell him it is too Marxist and really won't do. So the publishers are none too many. Schmidt came over to us entirely of his own accord, without any prompting and, indeed, despite numerous indirect warnings from myself, simply because he could not set his face against the truth. As things are today that is greatly to his credit and he has, moreover, acted most courageously.

Now the point is that I am the very person who must not read and pass an opinion on his ms. He is seeking to reply to the question I raised in the preface to Volume II.298 But I mustn't come out prematurely with the contents of Volume III, and that is what is preventing me from taking a direct hand in the business. So I can't be of any help to you this time.

He—Schmidt—has thrown himself into journalism in Berlin; how he'll get on I have no idea. At all events he has behaved with more energy and good sense than I credited him with. For a journalist, his style is

a M. Schlesinger, Die soziale Frage - b See this volume, p.276 - c Formal admis- sion of a lecturer into a university faculty

