---
Volume: 48
Document_Title: "180. Engels to Paul Lafargue 30 April "
Page_Range: "312-314"
---

# 180. Engels to Paul Lafargue 30 April 



**[p. 300]**

I hope Louise gets through her last six weeks all right, and that she'll then take a rest.354 That damned Paris congress is causing me nothing but vexation. What a muddle! Ede helps me and I help him, where possible, and Tussy helps us both, but for the rest all is chaos.

Your lieutenant3 hasn't been here yet. On the other hand we have Schorlemmer with us. The weather is glorious. Nim and I were in Highgateb today—three hours' stroll. But it's now time for a meal and— at 5.30—for the post.

Kindest regards from us all to Louise and yourself.

Your

F. E.

First published in: Aus der Frühzeit Printed according to the original des Marxismus, Engels Briefwechsel mit Kautsky, Prag, 1935 Published in English for the first time

180

ENGELS T O PAUL LAFARGUE

AT LE PERREUX

London, 30 April 1889

My dear Lafargue,

Père Duchêne,403 I see, is in a filthy temper this morning, describing everyone as ne'er-do-wells even when they have not done anything at all. The worthy fellow would do well to look about him and ask himself what name would be most fitting for those who allowed three Egalités and one Socialiste4®* to die, thus putting paid to your Party's

[^1]: a Fritz Kautsky - b The cemetery where Marx, his wife and their daughter Jenny are buried





**[p. 301]**

But enough of that. Can you really not see that what the Belgians have done405 has restored your freedom of action? That now, since you are so intent on it, you can convene your congress for whatever date you choose, 1 July, 14 July or 1 August? That it's by no means too late to do something about it now, provided you act at once and provided, as seems to be the case, you have at your back a Party prepared to foot part of the bill?

I have written and told Bebel that I shall no longer feel able to advise you not to act and that, since mistakes have been made on all sides, you were right to complain.406 That was yesterday; today he writes407 to say that the Dutch intend to follow the example of the Belgians and send delegates to each of the two congresses; that the Germans will not go to the Possibilist congress, despite the votes of Auer and Schippel, who expressed a contrary opinion (Bonnier replied to both)408; that he, Bebel, is in favour of sending a delegation to your congress, which he suggests should be held in August; but that, in order to pass a definitive resolu- tion, the deputies would have to meet,409 which cannot be done until the next session of the Reichstag on 7 May.

Now, having already waited long enough, you cannot wait until 7 May for an uncertain result. I shall therefore write to Bebel saying that you will probably act now, in accordance with your own views, and I shall beg him to prevent over-hasty resolutions, should the date you select not be altogether agreeable to them.

There is very good reason for the Germans' reserve. Within the next day or two there is to be a monster trial of 128 Barmen-Elberfeld Socialists. In the bill of indictment now being drawn up, the public pros- ecutor has made it known that, after sentence has been passed on the 128 and the Reichstag has adjourned, he intends to accuse all the Party deputies of constituting the central committee of Germany's vast Socialist secret society.410 It's the most sinister ploy they have ever concocted against us. Included in the evidence is the convocation of the Wyden411 and St. Gallen congresses. We knew all about this five or six weeks ago and it was fear of providing additional material for the indict- ment which inhibited Bebel from doing anything.

Bernstein believes that, if the two congresses meet at the same time, this would suffice to create a climate of opinion, especially among the

[^1]: As for the attitude of the Dutch, it seems a bit dubious to me, consid- ering the way Nieuwenhuis behaved at The Hague.412



