---
Volume: 48
Document_Title: "181. Engels to Paul Lafargue 1 May "
Page_Range: "314-315"
---

# 181. Engels to Paul Lafargue 1 May 



**[p. 302]**

Bernstein also tells me that, as regards propaganda in Germany in support of your congress, the Sozialdemokrat will do its utmost, despite the right honourable deputies; he says: 'They have asked me so often to pursue an independent policy that would enable them to disown the Sozialdemokrat, supposedly their organ, that I shall oblige them for once. This might, of course, lead the deputies to issue a categorical order, but we haven't nearly got to that stage yet.'

So my advice is that you assemble your committee,413 convene the congress, settle on the date you think best in the circumstances, and write a convocation circular, which Laura will translate into English and I shall gladly translate into German. All this will take until next week and if, in the meantime, further news arrives involving, perhaps, some minor alteration, there will still be time enough. Your circular should be printed in French by the end of next week and distributed forthwith. I shall send you the addresses you will need. Printing in English and German would be done over here. Your congress once convened for a definite date, the dispute will again revive and we shall help to keep it going.

In your convocation circular you must stress the sovereignty of the congress and the purely provisional character of the rules laid down by you. You would also have to suggest some basis for representation, i.e. one delegate per local group—subject, of course, to confirmation by the congress. This has been kept open by the others in order that they might have three or four delegates per Paris group in the event of your being represented by one delegate per provincial group. By proposing a cut- and-dried basis, you would force the others to lay their cards on the table.

To work then! You have a good two months ahead of you and that should be ample. And see that your convocation circular is concilia- tory—the Possibilists are not sparing of soft soap, so the more thickly you apply it, the better things will go. You are perfectly entitled to say that, while yet there was hope, you submitted to all the demands made by the others, but that it has now become your duty to take the initia- tive. But play down the Belgian betrayal as much as you can—so as not

