---
Volume: 48
Document_Title: "183. Engels to Paul Lafargue 2 May "
Page_Range: "317-319"
---

# 183. Engels to Paul Lafargue 2 May 



**[p. 305]**

Yours ever,

F. E.

First published in: Marx and Engels, Printed according to the original Works, First Russian Edition, Vol. XXVIII, Moscow, 1940 Translated from the French

182

ENGELS TO PAUL LAFARGUE87

AT LE PERREUX

London, 2 May 1889

My dear Lafargue,

N o w things are beginning to move. This is what Bebel writes:

'Liebknecht and I have agreed that Lafargue and his friends should be urged to convene a congress immediately for 14 July. This we are doing in the conviction that, once the two congresses have met on the same day, it will prove impossible for them to hold separate sessions, and that they will join forces, whether the Possibilists like it or not.

[^1]: I think you people should now be satisfied. As soon as the convo- cation circular is published by the French, we shall issue an open appeal to the Germans, asking them to elect delegates to the congress and indicating the procedure by which this may be done' (under German law). T have written in the same vein to the Austrians, and the Danes and Swiss will likewise be notified. In this way we shall, I hope, manage to expropriate the Possibilists—or at any rate well and truly thwart their plan.'415





**[p. 306]**

I hope to get a few lines from you tomorrow morning which would enable me to rekindle Bebel's ardour by telling him that you are now taking action.

Don't forget, by the bye, to return to me, deciphered, the letter from Lyons.416 I must not keep the workmen there waiting for an answer.

Now that you've got several provincial papers, choose one to be your Monitor for the duration of your congress and arrange for it to be sent to the various Parties, along with all your publications.417 Below you will find some of the addresses. The rest will follow.

Give Laura a kiss from me. I shall write to her as soon as this bally congress ceases to monopolise my right hand.

Yours ever,

F. E.

A. Bebel, Hohestrasse 22, Dresden-Plauen, Germany W. Liebknecht, Borsdorf-Leipzig, Germany The Editor, Socialdemokraten, Römersgade 22, Copenhagen, Denmark F. Domela Nieuwenhuis, 96 Malakkastraat, The Hague, Holland The Editor, Recht voor Allen, Roggeveenstraat 54, The Hague The Editor, Arbejderen, Nansensgade 28A, Copenhagen, Denmark The Editor, Gleichheit, Gumpendorferstrasse 79, Vienna VI, Austria The Editor, Muncitoriul, 38 Strada Sarariei, Jassy, Romania The Editor, Justice, 181 Queen Victoria Street, London, E. C. The Editor, Labour Elector, 13 Paternoster Row, London, E. C. The Editor, Commonweal, 13 Farringdon Road, London, E. C.

The Editor, Sozialdemokrat, 114 Kentish Town Road, London, N. W. The Editor, Volkszeitung, Box 3560, New York City, U.S.A. The Editor, Sozialist, 25 East 4th St., New York City, U.S.A.

(to be continued).

[^1]: A. Reichel, Barrister-at-law, Berne, Switzerland 1 t w 0

[^2]: Henri Scherrer, Barrister-at-law, St Gall, Switzerland | ™g u e

[^3]: J delegates385



