---
Volume: 48
Document_Title: "184. Engels to Laura Lafargue 7 May "
Page_Range: "319-322"
---

# 184. Engels to Laura Lafargue 7 May 



**[p. 307]**

Arbejderen is the radical opposition paper run by Petersen (who was acquainted with Rouannet and Malon in Paris, but has changed greatly since then) and by Trier, translator of my Origin of the Family. For tacti- cal reasons you would be well-advised not to send them anything that is not simultaneously dispatched to the Socialdemokraten, organ of the moderate majority.418

The address of P. Christensen, delegate to London (a good one)419 is 9 Römersgade, Copenhagen.

Belgians: Vooruit (The Editor), Marché au fil, Ghent. Same address for Anseele (E.). At the Jolimont congress405 the Ghent people declared that they would not attend the congress of the Possibilists so long as the latter persisted in their claims. The report in the Prolétariat is riddled with Possibilist lies.420

First published in La Nouvelle Revue Translated from the French Socialiste, No. 21, 1928

Printed according to the original

183

ENGELS TO LAURA LAFARGUE40

AT LE PERREUX

London, 7 May 1889

My dear Laura,

I was very glad to receive this morning the Convocation.414 As you say, there is no time to lose, and Paul who seems boiling over with virtu- ous indignation had made me expect an interminable series of bureau- cratic difficulties and delays. Now, as there has been such quick and determined action, everything is all right. The Convocation is short and



**[p. 308]**

is founded upon fact and not upon a misunderstanding, as a disavowal on their part would be awkard. As to obtaining their signature, we ought to be informed of the contents of Morris' reply to Paul, so as not to be quite in the dark.

Now will you make an English translation and Paul put at the bottom: 'For the English translation, Paul Lafargue'—and will he autho- rise me to do the same with a German translation to be made by me? We will then get them printed here at once and spread them by the thousand; also forward you copies as you may require them.

The loss of time is entirely due to Liebknecht who considers himself, or would like to figure as, the centre of the international movement, and who, being cocksure of bringing about a union, allowed himself to be led by the nose by the Belgians for six or eight weeks. Even now he is certain that if only he shows himself on the scene at Paris, the union will follow. But as it is not too late now, the lost time is not lost in reality. It has rallied round to the date desired by the French the mass of foreigners who at first objected and certainly would have abstained, had the date been settled without these preliminaries and against their wishes. Nobody suffers in reality through Liebknecht 's action, but we here, who, having entered upon our campaign with uncommon success, were entirely left to our own resources, as all the letters addressed by the working men here whom we had stirred up against the Possibilist congress, were replied to in the most uncertain and vague way by Danes, Dutch, Belgians and Germans; and nobody could tell them anything about the other congress, in consequence of which they fell into the hands of Smith Headingley and Hyndman. Well, as soon as the English Convocation is out, we must begin afresh and I hope with better success.

But if Paul thinks we can cram down people's throats, here in England, the fictio juris3 that the Possibilists are no socialists, that conse- quently their congress does not exist at all or does not count, he is strangely mistaken. He says Bonnier's letter to the Labour Elector*21 was a bêtise0 because it did not start from that point of view. Now I am

[^1]: a legal fiction - b a blunder





**[p. 309]**

Anyhow we shall here continue to work for the Congress in our own way and never mind faultfinding. I have not yet done a single act in this affair but it has been found fault with by someone. So I am quite used to that sort of thing and go on acting as I think is right.

The finest thing of it all is that three months after these two congresses Boulanger will be in all probability dictator of France, do away with parliamentarism, epurate the judges under pretext of corrup- tion, have a gouvernement à poigne0 and a chambre pour rire,c and crush Marxists, Blanquists and Possibilists all together. And then, ma belle France—tu l'as voulu\AA2i

Six months after that we may have war—that depends entirely on Russia; she is now engaged in vast financial operations to restore her credit and cannot well go in for a fight until these are finished.424 In that war the neutrality of Belgium and Switzerland will be the first thing that goes to smash, and if the war becomes really serious, our only chance is

[^1]: a 'it is the workers and socialists of France, without distinction of party, that convene the congress' - b strong government - c mock chamber - my beautiful France - that's what you wanted!



