---
Volume: 48
Document_Title: "185. Engels to Friedrich Adolph Sorge 11 May "
Page_Range: "322-324"
---

# 185. Engels to Friedrich Adolph Sorge 11 May 



**[p. 310]**

To-morrow there will be a deputation to the Star to protest against last Saturday's article on the Congress (Bax, Tussy, Edward)425 which article was smuggled in, probably by Hyndman and Smith Headingly, in Massingham's absence.

Love from Nim and from

Ever yours

F E .

First published in English in: F. Engels, Reproduced from the original P. et L. Lafargue, Correspondance, t. Il, Paris, 1956

IN HOBOKEN

London, 11 May 1889

Dear Sorge,

There's so much writing and running about to be done in connnection with the damned congress that I hardly have any time left for other matters. It's the devil of a job—nothing but misunderstandings, rows and vexation all round, and in the end there'll be nothing to show for it.

The Hague Conference people385 allowed the Belgians to make fools of them. Instead of at once proceeding, as had been decided after the Possibilists'19 refusal, to protest and convoke a rival congress (which

[^1]: 184 ENGELS T O FRIEDRICH A D O L P H SORGE 3 4 3





**[p. 311]**

In this country, however, it is we who are having to suffer worst from Liebknecht's clever-clever goings-on. Our pamphlet386 had struck home like a thunderbolt and shown up Hyndman & Co. for the liars and cheats they are; everything was in our favour and, if Liebknecht had been prompt to act vis-à-vis the Belgians, as he damned well ought to have done, or else had let them go hang and himself negotiated with the others, either convoking, or getting the French to convoke, the congress at some definite date, we should have won over the masses, and the Social Democratic Federation62 would have deserted Hyndman. But as it was, we were fobbed off with assurances and told to wait; and, since the chief bone of contention in the Trades Unions here was whether to comply with the leaders' wishes and not send delegates to the congress or whether to defy them and send delegates regardless—the quality of the congress being of secondary importance and their sole concern, entry or non-entry into the international movement—it was clear that the chaps would join forces with those who know their own minds rather than with those who didn't. And thus we lost a splendid position we had only just won, nor, unless some miracle happens, will any Englishman of note attend our congress.

[^1]: a See this volume, p.301



