---
Volume: 48
Document_Title: "188. Engels to Laura Lafargue 14 May "
Page_Range: "327-329"
---

# 188. Engels to Laura Lafargue 14 May 



**[p. 186]**

ENGELS TO ELEANOR MARX-AVELING40

IN LONDON

[London, about 13 May 1889]

As Laura has sent her letter to you in open envelope, I enclose this.429

Shall see you tonight at Sam's.a

First published, in English, in: F. Reproduced from the original Engels, P. et L. Lafargue, Correspondance, t. II, Paris, 1956

187

ENGELS TO LAURA LAFARGUE40

AT LE PERREUX

London, 14 May 1889

My dear Laura,

Could not your people in Paris, now that things are mending and going on swimmingly, look with a little less morosity upon what we are trying to do in order to help them? Nobody has asked them to enter into polemics with the Star, nor write long refutations. But supposing Vaillant wrote to the Star: 'In your No.- you assert, on the strength of Possibilist assertions made to you, that I (did so and so, Star, May 7th).b I have not the time nor you the space to refute in detail such rubbish. I merely ask you to allow me to state, in your next issue, that this is an infamous calumny' (or something of the sort).

[^1]: a Samuel Moore - b See this volume, p.313





**[p. 316]**

And so a few more by different people. That would strengthen our hands with the Star very much.

Especially at this moment. This morning's Star has Paul's invita- tion430—I am afraid, put in in order to give hima an excuse not to put in the official Convocation with all the signatures. Still, Bernstein shall try him again with that (copy enclosed) in a day or two. And Edward and Bonnier saw him this morning, when he promised to put in a letter of Bonnier's tomorrow1, and asked Bonnier to dinner for next Monday when Bonnier must try and work him. You see the iron is still a little hot and may be welded if only we could be supported by a few blows from Paris. If we do not strike now, it will be too late soon.

You say the Paris Committee413 will work by its numerous procla- mations and that is better than letters to the Editor. Most certainly; but the letters to the Editor are wanted exactly for the purpose of getting him to insert the proclamations when they come. What use will be all the proclamations here when we cannot get them into any paper except the Labour Elector, which does perhaps more harm than good if it is the only paper to notice them?

As part of the conversation with Massingham was carried on in English, not understood by Bonnier, I do not yet know all that happened. Anyhow I hope you will see that our plan of campaign—to maintain the position we had from the beginning and to keep the Star open for communications from our side—was the only one possible, and not quite so absurd as our Paris friends seem to think. We know that at the Star office great weight is laid upon such bombardments with letters from the outside public, and in this case it is the more important as you know yourself that Possibilists, Smith Headingly and Hyndman all'unisono shout into Massingham's ears that the whole affair is a personal affair of the Marx family and nothing else.

a Henry William Massingham, the Editor of the Star - b Ch. Bonnier, 'The Paris Congress', The Star, No. 40, 15 May 1889

