---
Volume: 48
Document_Title: "189. Engels to Paul Lafargue 16 May "
Page_Range: "329-332"
---

# 189. Engels to Paul Lafargue 16 May 



**[p. 317]**

I am sure your people in Paris have every reason to be content. They have got what they wanted, and there is plenty of time left for every- thing. Why then should they be so anxious to take revenge on friend and foe alike, look glum at every proposal made to them, try to find out diffi- culties where there are none and grumble like John Bulls? Surely tout le gaîté française ne s'est pas évanouie*0—let them become French again, the road to victory is open before them; it is we here that have suffered defeat but this is not the decisive position and as you see we keep fight- ing on as well as we can.

Ever yours

F.E.

First published, in English, in: F. Reproduced from the original Engels, P. et L. Lafargue, Corres- pondance, t. II, Paris, 1956

188

AT PERREUX

London, 16 May 1889

My dear Lafargue,

Herewith my notes on your draft appeal,432 which I have discussed with Bernstein. If, by the bye, you say that the Troyes329 congress repre- sented the whole of the French working class you are putting yourselves

[^1]: ENGELS T O PAUL LAFARGUE 8 7

[^2]: a provincial - b not all French gaiety has vanished





**[p. 318]**

I have sent out the English circular to the weekly papers, tomorrow it will go to the daily press, to the London radical clubs,22 to Socialist organisations and to such influential people as may be interested.

This will account for perhaps 1,000 copies, Tussy will dispose of 500 others and Keir Hardie of another 500 in Scotland. The addresses and wrappers are ready, and everything will go off tomorrow so that by Saturday evening, when the clubs, Trade Unions, etc., meet, all will have been distributed.

Bonnier's letter is in the Star.433

Clara Zetkina has written an excellent article in the Berlin Tribune— had we had so exact an account of things three months ago, it would have helped us a great deal. Bernstein will make good use of it when he goes to see Massingham tomorrow, as also of the affair of the 13th427

whose significance was not apparent from the Egalité article, but all the details of which she has given to Bernstein.

You are quite right not to locate the National Council in Paris—since your strength lies in the provinces, it is there rather than in Paris that the official leadership belongs. That the provinces should be better than Paris is, moreover, a very good sign.

Tomorrow will see the first performance of another of Aveling's plays.434 Although he has not taken the public by storm, he is attracting the notice of some critics, even those who have hitherto adhered to the conspiracy of silence.

The miners' strike in my part of Germany (Barmen lies some five or six miles from the edge of the coal-field) is an event of the very greatest signif- icance.435 Whatever the outcome, it will open up territory hitherto closed to us and, as of now, will earn us 40,000-50,000 more votes in the elec- tions. The government is scared stiff, for any attempt at resolute action or, as they say in Prussia (although the term is an Austrian one), 'schneidiges Handeln\b might precipitate a week of bloodshed, as happened in Paris in 1872. Henceforward the miners will be ours throughout the length and breadth of Germany—and they are a force to be reckoned with.

a [C. Zetkin,] 'Der internationale Arbeiterkongres und die Streitigkeiten unter den französischen Arbeitern', Berliner Volks-Tribüne, No. 19, 11 May 1889 - b brisk action



**[p. 319]**

POST-TIMEI Yours ever,

F. E.

I shall write to Danielsona

International Socialist Working Men's Congress. 14th to 21st July, 1889.

Workers and Socialists of Europe and America, —

The Bordeaux331 Working Men's Congress, held by the delegates of upwards of 200 trades unions from all the industrial centres of France,h

and the Troyes329 Congress, constituted by the delegates of 300 work- men's andc Socialist groups representing the French^ working class and revolutionary Socialism at large, have resolved to convene an International Congress in Paris, during the Exhibition, that shall be open to the workers of the whole world.

This resolution has been joyfully welcomed by the Socialists of Europe and America, happy to be able to meet and to clearly formu- late the demands of the working-class on the subject of international labour legislation, which question will be treated at the Berne Conference, to be held by the representatives of the Governments of Europe in September.

The capitalists invite the rich and mighty to the Universal Exhibition, to contemplate and admire the achievements of the work- ers doomed to misery in the midst of the most colossal wealth ever possessed by any human society. We, Socialists, whose aim is the emancipation of labour, the abolition of wage-slavery, and the creation of an order of things in which all workers—without distinction of sex or nationality—shall have a right to the riches produced by their common toil; it is the producers whom we invite to meet us on the 14th July in Paris.

'Working men of all countries, unite!'

[^1]: We call on them to seal the bonde of fellowship that, by consolidat- ing the efforts of the proletariat of all countries, will hasten the advent of the new world.

[^2]: a See this volume, p.346 - b The word 'France' was inserted by Engels with a question mark - c Engels underlined this word and put a question mark - "Underlined by Engels - e Underlined by Engels



