---
Volume: 48
Document_Title: "190. Engels to Paul Lafargue 17 May "
Page_Range: "332-335"
---

# 190. Engels to Paul Lafargue 17 May 



**[p. 320]**

It also seems to me that one or two good sentences are needed to make an effective ending.

And you might tell the international Socialists who are going to sign this that the details of place of meeting, etc., will be communicated later by the Paris commission. A little prose after so much rhetoric would not come amiss. It would be more businesslike.

First published (without supplement) Printed according to the original in: Marx and Engels, Works, First Russian Edition, Vol. XXVIII, Translated from the French Moscow, 1940

189

AT LE PERREUX

London, 17 May 1889

My dear Lafargue,

When are you going to send me back the—deciphered—letter from Lyons ?a I wouldn't like to seem negligent or in any way discourteous towards French working men.

Since the Sozialdemokrat and the Berlin Volksblatt have published

[^1]: ENGELS T O PAUL LAFARGUE 8 7

[^2]: Herewith 25 English circulars.422

[^3]: a See this volume, p.306





**[p. 321]**

1) French text: The Socialist League of England21 and the Danish Socialists have given their prior assent to the resolutions to be taken.

2) English text: W. Morris of the Socialist League and the Danes, etc., etc.

3) German text in the Berlin translation (probably Liebknecht's): The Socialist League and the Danes have made their excuses, and the Socialist League has given prior assent to the resolutions, etc., (according to this version the Danes did not assent).

Since the Possibilists have German friends in Paris and English ones over here, it seems not unlikely that they will get wind of these discrep- ancies. That would be most undesirable, and we can only hope it won't happen; but you can also see what might result from yet another circu- lar,432 featuring yourselves as 'the whole of the French working class'— the translations would again vary, for you may be sure that Liebknecht would change that in the German.

A hundred English circulars go off to America tomorrow. The Star hasn't printed the circular yet. Massingham was out when Bernstein called yesterday.

Aveling's play went off better than I had hoped—it's a sketch, very well made, but ends, after the manner of Ibsen, without a solution— something to which English audiences are not accustomed. The piece preceded another—by Baby Rose and someone else436—a very free English version of Conflicto entre dos deberes* by Echegaray. This one, being strongly spiced with sensationalism, went down very well, although ponderous and vulgar and in the English taste.

Yours ever,

F. E.

First published in: Marx and Engels, Printed according to the original Works, First Russian Edition, Vol. XXVIII, Moscow, 1940 Translated from the French

a The Conflict of Two Duties



**[p. 190]**

ENGELS TO PAUL LAFARGUE87

AT LE PERREUX

London, 20 May 1889

My dear Lafargue,

I am sending you two newspapers, 1) Reynolds3 which, at Tussy's request, printed the circular but without the signatures. This provides you with a first-rate pretext for writing to them as follows: 'The Commission of Organization is very much obliged to you for publishing in your paper our circular of convocation for the International Working Men and Socialist Congress at Paris to be opened on July 14th, but as you have not given any address will you allow me to state, through your columns, that all communications from abroad are to be sent to the undersigned Foreign Secretary to the Commission. Yours etc. P. Lafargue, Le Perreux, Paris, Banlieue, May—etc.,' or something of that sort.

2) The Sun, a new radical Weekly, which carries one paragraph, again thanks to Tussy's influence.437 We shall have to see if there isn't some way in which we can make further use of this newspaper, but the influ- ence of the Star might do us a mischief here.

Injustice, which I shall send you as soon as I have some copies of it, Hyndman gives vent to a cry of triumph438 in the belief that, along with the Star, he has deprived us of all means of publicity in London. He says that, though you are an amiable and estimable man, you are making a fool of yourself, and Bebel, Liebknecht and Bernstein likewise; and he hopes that we shall at last desist from our futile intrigues, etc.

Have you seen the Prolétaire (or Parti ouvrier}) in which the Possibilists say they are sure of the Danes?439 Bernstein has written to Germany to find out what it's all about.

The moment he no longer feels the boulevards under his feet, Rochefort insists on making a fool of himself—in Geneva when he quar- relled with old Becker, here, by drawing his revolver in Regent Street after he had been given a slap in the face. The case is to be heard today in the Police Court440; I shall send you the paper.

Yours ever,

F. E.

[^1]: a Reynold's Newspaper



