---
Volume: 48
Document_Title: "191. Engels to Karl Kautsky 21 May "
Page_Range: "335-339"
---

# 191. Engels to Karl Kautsky 21 May 



**[p. 323]**

191

ENGELS TO KARL KAUTSKY

IN VIENNA

London, 21 May 1889

Dear Kautsky,

At last a few minutes in which to write to you. The damned congress and everything connected with it has taken up all my time for the past 3 months; there's the devil of a lot of writing, running about and slaving to do, and nothing comes of it but vexation, trouble and strife. At St Gallen,174 our worthy Germans imagined, as they have done ever since, that they only had to convoke a congress for it to happen—jehi ôr, vajebi ôr*\ (get Adler to tell you what that means). Having themselves got over their internal quarrels, they imagined that love and friendship, peace and harmony, prevailed throughout the socialist world, and it never occurred to them that convoking a congress would mean either submitting to the Brousse-Hyndman alliance or else combating it. Now, however, having had ample experience they still seem to be somewhat in the dark and flat- ter themselves with dreams of the merger of both congresses at the instant of meeting; thus they abjure the only mode of combat capable of bringing this about, namely snarling defiance at Brousse and Hyndman. Anyone who knows anything about these men is aware that they will only cede to force and regard every concession as a sign of weakness. Instead, Liebknecht demands that we treat them considerately, not only handling them with kid gloves but even going so far as to give them a helping hand. Liebknecht has made a mess of the whole business. The

[^1]: a let there be light: and there was light (Genesis, 1.3)





**[p. 324]**

But now it is, in many ways, too late. Over here the battle has been lost all along the line because we were left in the lurch at the crucial moment. People who sympathised with us could count themselves lucky to be selected—to go to the other, Possibilist congress. In Belgium, thanks to those intriguers in Brussels, the Possibilists have all



**[p. 325]**

Close alliance with the Austrians; the Americans up till now merely a branch of the German party; the Danes, Swedes, Norwegians and Swiss as it were offshoots of the Germans; the Dutch a reliable inter- mediary for the West; add to that, German colonies everywhere and the non-Possibilist French almost wholly dependent on their alliance with the Germans; likewise the Slav colonies and refugees in the West, who have also been gravitating towards the Germans ever since the fiasco of the anarchists:—what a magnificent position it is! And all this placed in jeopardy by Liebknecht's illusion that he only has to open his mouth for all Europe to dance to his tune, and that, unless he gives the order to advance, the enemy won't do anything either. And, thanks to Bebel's comprehensible but most regrettable ignorance of foreign affairs, Liebknecht has had a pretty free hand. If things go wrong, it will be he who is to blame because of his failure to do anything (save intrigue) and his failure to make a public stand between the time of the Possibilists' refusal early in March and the Belgian congress on 22 April.

However, I think all may yet be well, provided we all of us pull together. If we can win over the Danes, we shall carry the day—but it so happens that it's only from Germany—i.e. through Liebknecht—that influence can be brought to bear on them. Yet it's absolutely maddening that we should have got into this frightful predicament at all, when swift action in March and early April must have secured us the whole of Europe. The Possibilists acted, whereas Liebknecht not only failed to act, but also made it impossible for anyone else to do so—the French might not lift a finger, come to any decision, issue a circular or convoke a congress—until it finally dawned on him that for the past six weeks the Brussels people had been leading him by the nose and that the effect of the Possibilists' activities, in contrast to his own masterly inactivity, was to make his own Germans desert him. And on top of all that there was the business of that scoundrel Schlesinger.400 He, Liebknecht, has appealed to my better feelings, saying that the least public move might



**[p. 326]**

What is Louise doing? Is she still busily engaged in helping to multi- ply the human species? I trust she is well and happy and that she got through her last exam.354 Nim and I send her our love. Presumably she will now be able to take a bit of a rest.

I have had to give up smoking because of its effect on my nerves and more especially on my heart, which is otherwise very sound. I have also got to cut down my drinking a lot, its effect being more marked when the nerves are disordered. I am taking sulphonal to help me sleep, and spend a lot of time in the open air in Hampstead and Highgate. That, too, is time-consuming. If only the damned congress were over, so that one didn't have to plough through so many newspapers; it prevents me from doing anything else and, when I do at last get round to some sensi- ble reading, my eyes are too tired and I have to turn to some other occu- pation. The doctor tells me my eyes won't ever be quite right again, though it's nothing serious, only a constant nuisance—i.e. having to restrict the time I spend reading and writing.

Tussy now uses a machine with keys for writing with. Kindest regards from Nim and

Your

F. E.

First published in Aus der Frühzeit des Marxismus, Engels Briefwechsel mit Kautsky, Prag, 1935

Printed according to the original

Published in English for the first time

[^1]: a Maximilian Schlesinger



