---
Volume: 48
Document_Title: "193. Engels to Paul Lafargue 24 May "
Page_Range: "339-342"
---

# 193. Engels to Paul Lafargue 24 May 



**[p. 192]**

ENGELS TO A. F. ROBINSON

IN LONDON

London, 21 May 1889 122 Regent's Park Road, N. W.

Mr A. F. Robinson 47 Little George St. Hampstead Road

Sir,

As I am informed that you are now in good work and well able to repay gradually the 25sh. I advanced to you, and Mr Lahr your neigh- bour is out of work, I request you to pay the above money to him in such weekly payments as you may agree amongst yourselves and as are reasonable, and I shall consider their receipt—Mr and Mrs Lahr's—for the money as good as my own.

I am, Sir,

Yours respectfully

F. Engels

First published in: Marx and Engels, Reproduced from the original Works, First Russian Edition, Vol. XXVIII, Moscow, 1940 Published in English for the first time

193

ENGELS TO PAUL LAFARGUE87

AT LE PERREUX

London, 24 May 1889

My dear Lafargue,

Do for goodness' sake expedite the circular432 with the foreign signa- tures! Here as everywhere else it will be of the greatest importance to us.



**[p. 328]**

Herewith Justice with a manifesto* of which the fury and bare-faced mendacity betray all too plainly the effect created here by the Convocation,414 even at this late hour. The Social Democratic Federation,62 you see,—or rather Hyndman—are well aware that what is at stake is their position over here, and likewise that of the Possibilists in France. We shall, of course, reply. But if we could append to our flysheet the Convocation with the foreign signatures, the effect would be tremendous.

The Convocation has appeared in Commonweal}3 and Morris has come out openly in support of our congress. In the Labour Elector W. Parnell, a delegate to the London congress320 and a very good and capa- ble chap—a worker—says he has got copies of the Convocation for anybody who may want one.443 A very good acquisition. Tussy has arranged a meeting for tomorrow at which Bernstein (over here we call him Ede, so if I happen to use that name, you will know whom I mean) will meet Burns, Tom Mann and other influential working men. Burns has been nominated for the Possibilist congress by his branch. It will be a very good thing to have men of that stamp at the Possibilist congress, supposing we cannot have them at our own.

The Star has not yet printed Okecki's letter,0 but only Bax's on Vaillant.d We shall remind hime about the former. As he wishes to promote the sale of his paper in Paris, we shall give him introductions to the radical Socialists of the Municipal Council, Longuet, Daumas, etc. What does Okecki say in his letter? Does he deny outright the imputa- tion that Boulé accepted Boulangist money? You cannot conceive the importance—both to ourselves and to you—of this English daily, nor how much it would repay the trouble of getting it out of Hyndman's clutches.

The manifesto in Justice claims that Farj at voted for the Possibilist congress (at the London congress). This cannot be true! I am asking him

a 'Manifesto of the Social-Democratic Federation. Plain Truths about the International Congress of Workers in Paris in 1889', Justice, No. 280, 25 May 1889 - b on 25 May (see Note 414) - c See this volume, p.316- d The Star, 22 May 1889 - e Henry William Massingham



**[p. 329]**

I have written to Denmark to find out what is holding things up there445—but my correspondent belongs to the radical opposition and not to the moderates who lead the party. We have also written to Bebel, telling him how important it is to secure the Danes who, in turn, will be followed by the Swedes and Norwegians, and have suggested that one of the Germans should go there in person if things don't go well.

And now, my dear Lafargue, make haste with the Convocation, signed by everybody concerned. It is the only effective way of stifling all the calumnies and lies put about by the others. And it is most important for the countries still hesitating that they should get it before they have made up their minds. Liebknecht, with his irresolution and dilatoriness, has cost us many a position; do not follow his example. For of one thing you may be certain—if you cause us to lose another battle by what others can only regard as incomprehensible delays, we over here shall be fully justified in losing patience and leaving you to 'shift for yourselves'. It is impossible to help people unless they are willing to help themselves just a little. So send out a circular of some sort, but not one liable to arouse opposition, to the Parties abroad without further delay, collect the signatures and have the thing printed, or send it to us for that purpose—with an English translation by Laura to save time. The prospects are so good, if only the lot of you would deign to put first things first, setting aside all petty rivalries and matters of detail. Don't ruin your own congress, don't be more German than the Germans.

Love to Laura, Yours ever,

Herewith Justice and Commonweal.

First published in: Marx and Engels, Printed according to the original Works, First Russian Edition, Vol. XXVIII, Moscow, 1940 Translated from the French

[^1]: F. E.

[^2]: a Gerson Trier



