---
Volume: 48
Document_Title: "195. Engels to Paul Lafargue 27 May "
Page_Range: "343-344"
---

# 195. Engels to Paul Lafargue 27 May 



**[p. 195]**

E N G E L S T O P A U L L A F A R G U E 8 7

AT LE PERREUX

London, 27 May 1889

My dear Lafargue,

By the same post I am sending you the report on the Alliance* Would you also like to have the Fictitious Splits^} Send me the article for the Russian review,446 and I'll send it on to Danielson.

Since Lavrov has turned coy,447 write to N . Axelrod, Képhir-Anstalt, Hirschengraben, Zurich and ask him to get you, besides his own, the signatures of Vera Zasulich (since you haven't got her address), and those of G. Plekhanov and other Russian Marxists. That will astound our worthy eclectic.

The English Convocation432 is already at the printers; tomorrow I shall have the proofs, and distribution will begin the day after.

Since you must have received this signature, together with those of its other members (Champion, Mann, Bateman), I did not telegraph you, for you would, of course, take the signatures as sent to you direct, and not from my letter.

If I seemed insistent, it was because of the contradictory information that was coming in from Paris, and because I didn't know whether or

[^1]: Parnell has refused his signature as a private person, but has given it in his capacity as the HONORARY SECRETARY of the LABOUR ELECTORAL ASSOCIATION.449

[^2]: The reason is that he is being sent by his TRADES UNION (cabinet makers) to the Possibilist congress, where he and Burns will support our line. If the Possibilists oppose their proposal for a merger, they might even part company with them and join us. But that is, as yet, the music of the future.449

[^3]: a K. Marx and F. Engels, The Alliance of Socialist Democracy and the International Working Men's Association. Report and Documents, Published by Decision of the Hague Congress of the International (see present edition, Vol. 23) - b K. Marx and F. Engels, Fictitious Splits in the International (see present edition, Vol. 23)



