---
Volume: 48
Document_Title: "197. Engels to Laura Lafargue 11 June "
Page_Range: "348-351"
---

# 197. Engels to Laura Lafargue 11 June 



**[p. 336]**

I am curious to see what effect Bernstein's No. II will have.450 Let's hope it will be the concluding document in this affair.

In other respects, things here are so-so. I have had to give up smok- ing because of its effect on my nerves, and this has cost me surprisingly little effort; every 2 or 3 days I smoke about one-third of a cigarette, but next year I think I shall take it up again. Sam Moore is going to Africa as Chief Justice in the Niger territory. Leaves Liverpool next Saturday and will come back for six months after serving a year and a half; will trans- late Volume IIP while out there. Kind regards to your wife,

Your

F. Engels

First published, slightly abridged, in Printed according to the original Briefe und Auszüge aus Briefen von Job. Phil. Becker, Jos. Dietzgen, Published in English in full for the Friedrich Engels, Karl Marx u. A. an F. first time A. Sorge und Andere, Stuttgart, 1906

197

ENGELS TO LAURA LAFARGUE40

AT LE PERREUX

London, 11 June 1889

My dear Laura,

At last, I can find a few minutes for a quiet chat with you. And first of all let me thank you for your charming invitation to Le Perreux for the

[^1]: a of Capital





**[p. 337]**

Here is a bit of news for Paul; Sam Moore gives us tonight a parting dinner, he sails on Saturday for the Niger, where, at Asâba, in the interior of Africa, he will be Chief Justice of the Territories of the Royal Niger Company, Chartered and Limited, with six months' leave to Europe every other year, good pay, and the expectation of returning in 8 years or so an independent man. It was chiefly in honour of Pauld that he consented to become Lord Chief Justice of the Niger Niggers, the very cream of Nigritione Niger Niggerdom. We are all very sorry to lose him, but he has been looking out for some thing of the sort for more than a year and this is an excellent place. He owes his appointment not only to his legal qualifications, but very much, also, to his being an accomplished geologist and botanist and ex-volunteer officer—all qualities very valu- able in a new country. He will have a botanical garden, and make a mete- orological station; his judicial duties will mainly consist in punishing German smugglers of Bismarck's potato spirit and of arms and ammuni- tion. The climate is far better than its reputation, and his medical exami- nation was highly satisfactory, the doctor telling him he would have a better chance than young men who kill themselves—out of pure

[^1]: a The Paris Great Fair - b of Capital - c postponed does not mean cancelled - d An allusion to Paul Lafargue's black extraction - e Former name of West Sudan





**[p. 338]**

To return to our beloved congress. I consider these congresses to be unavoidable evils in the movement; people will insist on playing at congresses, and though they have their useful demonstrative side, and do good in bringing people of different countries together, it is doubtful whether le jeu vaut la chandelle* when there are serious differences. But the persistent efforts of the Possibilists and Hyndmanites to sneak into the leadership of a new International, by means of their congresses, made a struggle unavoidable for us, and here is the only point in which I agree with Brousse: that it is the old split in the International over again, which now drives people into two opposite camps. On one side the disciples of Bakunin, with a different flag but with all the old equipment and tactics, a set of intriguers and humbugs who try to 'boss' the working class move- ment for their own private ends; on the other side the real working-class movement. And it was this, and this alone that made me take the matter up in such good earnest. Debates about details of legislation do not inter- est me to such a degree. But the position reconquered upon the Anarchists after 1873455 was now attacked by their successors, and so I had no choice. Now we have been victorious, we have proved to the world that almost all Socialists in Europe are 'Marxists' (they will be mad they gave us that name!) and they are left alone in the cold with Hyndman to console them. And now I hope my services are no longer required.

As they have nobody to come to them, they fall back upon non- Socialist or half-Socialist Trades Unions and thus their congress will have a quite distinct character from ours. That makes the question of fusion a secondary one; two such congresses may sit side by side, without scan- dal.

My dear Laura, I was going to write a lot more, but I cannot see hardly, it is so foggy, and thus I had to interrupt for brighter intervals, until now it is post-time. So I can but enclose the cheque £10.—about which Paul writes.

Ever yours

F. Engels

[^1]: As to money for Congress, the Germans ought to do something—if I can, will write to Paul about that tomorrow.b

[^2]: a the game is worth the candle — b See this volume, p.341



