---
Volume: 48
Document_Title: "199. Engels to Paul Lafargue 15 June "
Page_Range: "353-355"
---

# 199. Engels to Paul Lafargue 15 June 



**[p. 341]**

Yours sincerely,

F. Engels

First published in Sozialistische Printed according to the original Monatshefte, No. 17, 1920

Published in English for the first time

199

ENGELS T O PAUL LAFARGUE 8 7

AT LE PERREUX

London, 15 June 1889

My dear Lafargue,

I have written and told Bebel458 that your contributions are coming in rather slowly, and that you are hard put to it to obtain adequate funds for the congress, etc. I explained to him the reasons (your numerical weakness in Paris, the necessity for the provincials to scrape up their funds for their delegations, the habitual sluggishness of the French in paying contributions, etc.) and I suggested that here was an opportunity for the German Party to make a grant as a good international invest- ment. You would be well-advised to ginger up Liebknecht with a view to obtaining the said grant since you would be better able than I to put your case to him, at the same time mentioning that you have written to him on the subject at my instance.

I am sending you Justice, containing Hyndman's reply.459 It is an outburst of impotent rage from a man aware that he has been well and truly trounced. What he says about Parnell and Stepniak is an out-and- out lie. I have before me a letter from Stepniak, sent to Tussy yesterday just after he had seta. Justice, in which he says it is false and that he will be writing to Justice without delay.460 As for Parnell, his name was given



**[p. 342]**

and, so long as he has not divested himself of his functions as secretary to that Association, he cannot contest the validity of his signature.3 He had refused to sign as a private person and we had respected his scruples on that score.

No one knows who this Field is—the chap who has evinced such ardour in defending our congress.461

The Danish paper run by Trier and Petersenb has come out publicly in our favour, but they are right not to have gone further than this. Should they propose sending a delegation to our congress, they would impel the official Danish Party into the arms of the Possibilists. We have the satisfaction of knowing that these cryptic-Possibilists will not dare go to the other congress.

Since the nature of the two congresses is now quite distinct—ours consisting of all the Socialists combined, the other of men who stop short at Trades Unionism (it'll get nothing more, except for the Possibilists and the Social Democratic Federation), it is beginning to seem unlikely that there will be a merger, and if there is none there will be no disgrace. For it is a matter of common knowledge that Socialism has, as yet, failed to unite under its banner the whole of Europe's work- ing class—knowledge which the existence of two parallel congresses would merely go to confirm.

On the other hand, our congress being now more progressive than the other, we now have different responsibilities. If the two congresses were both avowedly Socialist, we could avoid a rumpus by making sundry concessions of a formal nature. But now that the forces have been mustered, without intervention by us, in two different camps and under two different banners, it behoves us to safeguard the honour of the Socialist banner, while the merger—if it happens—will be not so much a merger as an alliance. Hence it is a matter of thoroughly thrash- ing out the terms of that alliance.

Whatever the case, we must wait and see how things go, and not tie ourselves down beforehand by making irrevocable decisions. The real aim must always be to put one's adversary in the wrong and so to arrange things that, in the event of a breach, it is he who will take the blame.

You may be sure that, after what has happened, neither the Possibilists

[^1]: a See this volume, p.331 - b Arbeideren



