---
Volume: 48
Document_Title: "206. Engels to Friedrich Adolph Sorge 20 July "
Page_Range: "367-369"
---

# 206. Engels to Friedrich Adolph Sorge 20 July 



**[p. 206]**

ENGELS TO FRIEDRICH ADOLPH SORGE343

IN MOUNT DESERT

London, 20 July 1889

Dear Sorge,

In my last letter I forgot to ask you if possible to question Hartmann about the article in the Evening News and Post. If you could get him to write a brief note in his own hand to the effect that the story is false and that he has not been to Europe, it would be important for us over here.476 Because,

1. Bismarck is trying to make the Tsara beholden to him by revealing alleged plots against his (the Tsar's) life.

2. Hitherto these have been going on in Switzerland, but now that the Swiss have expelled all potential plotters, operations must be transferred to London.

3. This end is being served by the mouchardh Carl Theodor Reuss, who had already, on a previous occasion, used the Evening News as a repository for his lying allegations with regard to dynamite.

4. This latest Reussiad was telegraphed from Berlin to all German newspapers.

If we can expose this business outright, there'll be a nice rumpus over here.

Yours of the 7th inst. received yesterday evening.477 I don't demand any particular satisfaction of Wischnewetzky for his failure to visit me.— It didn't grieve me. So if he eats humble pie vis-à-vis yourself, that will suit me. I did not call on his wife,0 whereat she took umbrage, which was why he failed to visit me, so that makes us quits. If these people view the matter in a similar light, I shall be content. Obviously if they demand more, I shan't be able to oblige them. But as I have business matters to settle with his wife, it's always best to be at least on speaking terms; I'll be in no hurry to let them revert to anything more intimate, now that I know as much about them as you do. They're a couple of conceited fools.

Pop! The bubble of reconciliation has burst in Paris. How fortunate

[^1]: a Alexander III - b police spy - c See this volume, p.223





**[p. 356]**

etc., to the effect that we had always operated with false credentials.478

This libel, which Brousse has been raking up off and on ever since 1883, was bound to come to the fore again on the present occasion, once they saw that they had been abandoned by all the socialists and that they could only save themselves with the help of the Trades Unions. The nature of their credentials will doubtless be revealed in the course of the furious polemic that is now flaring up. Unfortunately this old rubbish cuts no more ice today than it did back in 1873455; but something had to be found to cover up the fact that they have been utterly disgraced. However it's just as well that our sentimental brethren, the advocates of reconciliation, received a savage kick on the backside in return for all their assurances of friendship. That will doubtless cure them for some time to come.

I shan't be able to send you any more papers until the next post (week- lies which Aveling writes for but which won't come out until this evening and tomorrow); I have not had a single letter from Paris since Tuesday.

As regards Lingenau,479 congratulations on the sum extracted. Liebknecht alone was at fault here; Bebel is methodical and precise in such matters. No doubt Mount Desert will do you good; I too shall make for the water before long.

Warm regards to your wife and the Schlüters.

Your

F. E.

Schorlemmer has been here since the day before yesterday and sends you both his best wishes.

First published, slightly abridged, in Briefe und Auszüge aus Briefen von Job. Phil. Becker, Jos. Dietzgen, Friedrich Engels, Karl Marx u. A. an F. A. Sorge und Andere, Stuttgart,

1906, and, in full, in: Marx and Engels, Works, First Russian Edition,

Vol. XXVIII, Moscow, 1940

Printed according to the original

Published in English in full for the first time

well in advance

