---
Volume: 48
Document_Title: "211. Engels to Eduard Bernstein 22 August "
Page_Range: "376-378"
---

# 211. Engels to Eduard Bernstein 22 August 



**[p. 211]**

ENGELS TO EDUARD BERNSTEIN487

IN LONDON

Eastbourne, 22 August 1889 4 Cavendish Place

Dear Ede,

Who is Paul Fischer? He wishes to translate my old article in Progress4*9 for the Berliner Volks-Tribüne. Since I should have to do some notes for it and thus appear as an actual contributor to the Volks- Tribüne, I have my reservations which, having sent a non committal answer, I shall keep in abeyance until my return.

In your next numbera you ought to deal with the dock labourers' strike.489 The matter is one of crucial importance so far as this country is concerned. Hitherto the East End had been in a state of poverty-stricken stagnation, its hallmark being the apathy of men whose spirit had been broken by hunger, and who had abandoned all hope. Anyone who found himself there was lost, physically and morally. Then, last year, there came the victorious strike of the match-girls.490 And now, this gigantic strike of the most demoralised elements of the lot, the dock labourers, not the regular, strong, experienced, relatively well-paid men in steady employment, but those who have happened to land up in dock- land, the Jonahs who have suffered shipwreck in all other spheres, starvelings by trade, a welter of broken lives heading straight for utter ruin and for whom Dante's words, 'lasciate ogni speranza, voi che' entrate'h might be written up on the dock gates!

And this dully despairing mass of humanity who, every morning when the dock gates are opened, literally fight pitched battles to be first to reach the chap who signs them on—literal battles in the competitive struggle of the redundant workers amongst themselves—that mass, haphazardly thrown together and changing every day, has successfully combined to form a band 40,000 strong, maintain discipline and inspire fear in the powerful dock companies. It is something I am glad that I have lived to see. For this stratum to be capable of organisation is a fact

a of Der Sozialdemokrat - b 'Abandon hope, all ye who enter here.' Dante, Inferno, III, 9



**[p. 365]**

And there's more to it than that. Because of the lack of organisation and the passively vegetable existence of the real East End workers, the lumpen proletariat has hitherto had last say there, purporting, and indeed being held, to be the prototype and representative of the million starvelings in the East End. That will now cease. The hawker and his ilk will be pushed into the background, the East End working men will be able to develop a prototype of their own and so organise themselves as to assert it, and this will be of enormous value to the movement. Scenes such as took place during Hyndman's procession along Pall Mall and Piccadilly491 will no longer be possible; a ne'er-do-well who tried to go on the rampage would simply be put down.

In short, it is an event. And just look how even the abject Daily News is covering the affair!3 That alone shows what a tremendous impact it has made. It's just like the miners' strike at home435—a new stratum is coming into the movement, a new army corps. And your bourgeois who, only 5 years ago, would have been cursing and fuming, now finds himself forced to applaud half-heartedly just when, and precisely because, his bowels have turned to water. Hurrah!

What you said about parliamentarianism and its decline in your arti- cle on the anarchistsb is absolutely right. I was delighted.

Here it's so-so—changeable weather—am again somewhat lame as a result of too much walking, and hence teetotal, whatever Julius0 may say—but I'm not allowed tea in the evenings because of my nerves, and therefore I do take a glass of beer instead—on teetotal grounds!

Regards to your wife and children and all our friends.

Your

F. E.

a Daily News, 20 August 1889 - b E. Bernstein, 'Anarchistische Phraseologie', Der Sozialdemokrat, No. 34, 24 August 1889 - c Probably Julius Motteier

