---
Volume: 48
Document_Title: "213. Engels to Laura Lafargue 27 August "
Page_Range: "379-382"
---

# 213. Engels to Laura Lafargue 27 August 



**[p. 367]**

'Back to my home I cannot go', the place being full of whitewashers, paperers, painters and other work- men, who make three-quarters of the rooms uninhabitable and, once they're in the house, you never know when you'll be rid of them again. This is because in England large-scale industry has ruined the crafts but has not been able to find anything else to put in their place. For a long time now the Germans have not had the sole prerogative of providing shoddy wares in return for good money; the Londoners have a positively stunning aptitude for this. In America, however, it's altogether different. So far as ordinary, everyday business dealings are concerned, in which no speculation is involved, America is, I believe, the most reliable country in the world—the only one in which you will still find 'good workmanship'.

I trust you are all well. Much love to Emmaa and to the children and grandchildren, as well as to the rest of the Engels-kirchen, from

Your old

Friedrich

First published in Deutsche Revue, Jg. Printed according to the original 46, Bd. Ill, 1921

Published in English for the first time

213

ENGELS TO LAURA LAFARGUE493

AT LE PERREUX

Eastbourne, 27 August 1889 4 Cavendish Place

My dear Laura,

That letter-writing at the sea-side is well nigh an impossibility, I thought you knew long since. And if, as in my case, a lot of people

* Emma Engels



**[p. 368]**

You had your adventures with Séraphine, Nim had hers with Ellen. Which Ellen having been long suspected by the knowing ones was one morning reported by the doctor to be six months gone in the way all flesh comes into the world and had consequently to leave—about a month before we came here. When we return there will be fresh engage- ment of someone—perhaps worse.

I am glad Paul is off on his election trip465 and moreover with funds from his Mamma." Of the three put up for Marseilles, one, perhaps two, may get in; I hope Paul may be one. But anyhow it is a distinct step in advance to have once been put up as candidate for the party, and facili- tates further moves; especially with a rising party as ours at this moment undoubtedly is in France, once a candidate generally means always a candidate.

I do hope Boulangism will come to grief next elections. Nothing worse could happen to us than even a succès d'estime of that humbug which might prolong, at least, the apparent dilemma: either Boulanger or Ferry—a dilemma which alone gives vitality to either scoundrel. If Boulanger got well thrashed, and his following reduced, more or less, to the Bonapartists, it would prove that this Bonapartist vein in the French character—explicable by the inheritance from the great Revolution—is gradually dying out. And with the elimination of this incident the regu- lar development of French republican evolution would reprendre son course the Radicals200 would, in their new incarnation Millerand, grad- ually discredit themselves as much as in the incarnation Clemenceau, and the better elements among them pass over to us; the Opportunists199

would lose their last pretext for political existence, that of being at least defenders of the republic against pretenders; the liberties conquered by

[^1]: "Anna Virginia Armaignac - b resume its course





**[p. 369]**

Hyndman's campaign with regard to the discredit to be thrown on the Marxist credentials478 seems to have utterly broken down. Burns' disclosuresb were a ready blow, and our further revelations, especially about the Austrian Possibilist credentials,0 did the rest. These people never know what a glass-house they are living in themselves. And as in France the Possibilists seem to have kept quiet with regard to that point (these fellows are far cleverer than Hyndman and Co—in their small way) there will be no further necessity to follow up the victory unless fresh attempts are made. The whole trick was calculated for the British market, and there it has failed—cela suffit.^ Then there is the resolution about the 1st of May demonstration. That is the best thing our Congress did. That will tell immensely here in England, and the Hyndman lot dare not oppose it; if they do, they ruin themselves; if they don't, they must follow in our wake; let them choose.

[^1]: Another great fact is the Dock Labourers strike.489 They are as you know the most miserable of all the misérables*95 of the East End, the broken down ones of all trades, the lowest stratum above the Lumpenproletariat. That these poor famished broken-down creatures who bodily fight amongst each other every morning for admission to work, should organise for resistance, turn out 40-50,000 strong, draw after them into the strike all and every trade of the East End in any way connected with shipping, hold out above a week, and terrify the wealthy and powerful Dock Companies—that is a revival I am proud erlebt zu haben? And they have even bourgeois opinion on their side: the merchants, who suffer severely from this interruption of traffic, do not

[^2]: a fanatics - b J. Burns, 'The Paris International Congress', The Labour Elector, 3 August 1889 - c F. Engels, 'Possibilist Credentials' - d that's enough - e to have lived to see



