---
Volume: 48
Document_Title: "214. Engels to Laura Lafargue 1 September "
Page_Range: "382-385"
---

# 214. Engels to Laura Lafargue 1 September 



**[p. 370]**

And all this strike is worked and led by our people, by Burns and Mann, and the Hyndmanites are nowhere in it.

My dear Laura, I am almost sure you are in want of some cash and I should have sent a cheque with this if I was not myself hard up. My balance at the bank is at the lowest ebb; a dividend of some £33, due generally about 18th August, has not yet been paid and Edward has borrowed £15 till end of month, as he was quite fast. So I have hardly room to turn round in, but as soon as I receive a supply I shall remit; at latest next Monday, I hope before.

Domelaa becomes quite incomprehensible. Is he perhaps after all not Jesus Christ, but Jan van Leiden? la prophète de Meyerbeer} Vegetarianism and solitary confinement seem apt to produce queer results in the long run.

Edward and Tussy will be going to Dundee to report Trades Union Congress and then we shall get the boysb here in the meantime.

Ever yours

F. Engels

First published in full in Labour Reproduced from the original Monthly, No. 8, 1955

214

ENGELS TO LAURA LAFARGUE493

AT LE PERREUX

[Eastbourne], 1 September 1889 Sunday

My dear Laura,

Yesterday evening late I had news from my bank that the long expected dividend of £36 has been paid in and so I hasten to send you

[^1]: a Nieuwenhuis - b Edgar and Jean Longuet





**[p. 371]**

Cannot write much being Sunday and our people always in and out, moreover have to write to Tussy about the strike489 which was in an important crisis yesterday. As the dock directors kept stubborn, our people were led to a very foolish resolution. They had outstripped their means of relief and had to announce that on Saturday no relief could be dealt out to strikers. In order to make this go down—that is the way at least I take it—they declared that if the dock directors had not caved in by Saturday noon, on Monday there would be a general strike—reckoning chiefly on the supposition that the Gas works for want of coal or of work- men or both would come to a stand and London be in darkness—and this threat was to terrify all into submission to the demands of the men.

Now this was playing va banque, staking £1000 to win, possibly, £10; it was threatening more than they could carry out; it was creating millions of hungry mouths for no reason but because they had some tens of thousands on hand which they could not feed; it was casting away wilfully all the sympathies of the shopkeepers and even of the great mass of the bourgeoisie who all hated the dock monopolists, but who now would at once turn against the workmen; in fact it was such a declaration of despair and such a desperate game that I wrote to Tussy at once:406 if this is persisted in, the Dock Companies have only to hold out till Wednesday and they will be victorious.

Fortunately they have thought better of it. Not only has the threat been 'provisionally' withdrawn, but they have even acceded to the demands of the wharfingers (in some respect competitors of the docks), have reduced their demands for an increase of wages, and this has again been rejected by the Dock Companies. This I think will secure them the victory. The threat with the general strike will now have a salutary effect, and the generosity of the workmen, both in withdrawing it and in acced- ing to a compromise, will secure them fresh sympathy and help.

On Friday* we shall return to London. Shorlemmer has left about a fortnight ago for Germany, where he is now, what he is doing and what his intentions are, I don't know.

[^1]: a on 6 September





**[p. 372]**

Ever yours RE.

Love from Nim and all the lot here.

First published in Labour Monthly, Reproduced from the original No. 8, 1955

a Alexander III - b 'polishing one off makes no difference to us' - c La Voix - Shakespeare, Macbeth, Act I, Scene V

