---
Volume: 48
Document_Title: "215. Engels to Laura Lafargue 9 September "
Page_Range: "385-386"
---

# 215. Engels to Laura Lafargue 9 September 



**[p. 215]**

ENGELS T O LAURA LAFARGUE 4 0

AT LE PERREUX

London, 9 September 1889

My dear Laura,

Today I have the pleasant task of remitting you cheque for £14.6.8, one-third share of Meissner 's Remittance of £43,—the account is to follow. A fourth edition of Vol. Ia 497 is impending, maybe before New Year we shall begin printing it.

Tussy was here yesterday with Liebknecht, his son and daughter Gertrud, Singer, Bernstein, Fischer, etc. etc. She is still over head and ears in the strike.489 The Lord Mayor's,13 Cardinal Manning's and Bishop of London's0 proposals were ridiculously in favour of the Dock Companies and had never a chance of acceptance. This is the busiest time; from Christmas to April nearly no work is done at the docks, so that the real purport of delaying the advance to January would have been to delay it till April.

You will have Liebknecht in Paris in about a week, that is if you are there still. And also his wife and one or two more of the family.

Domelad and his Dutchmen seem to stick to their new line. Another proof that the little nations can play but a secondary part in Socialist development, while they expect to be allowed to lead. The Belgians will never give up the idea that their central situation and neutrality give them the manifest destiny of being the central seat of the future International. The Swiss are and always were philistines and petits bour- geois, the Danes had become the same and it remains to be seen whether Trier, Petersen and Co. can move them on out of this their present stag- nation. And now the Dutch begin the same way. None of them can forget and will forget that at Paris the Germans and French led the way, and that they were not allowed to occupy the Congress with their petti- fogging troubles. Never mind, there is a greater hope now of French, Germans and English pulling together, and if the little babies get obstreperous, nous en ferons cadeaux aux possibilistes.e

[^1]: a of Capital - b Henry Aaron Isaacs - c John Lubbock - d Nieuwenhuis - e we shall make a present of them to the Possibilists



