---
Volume: 48
Document_Title: "216. Engels to Karl Kautsky 15 September "
Page_Range: "386-390"
---

# 216. Engels to Karl Kautsky 15 September 



**[p. 374]**

But I must conclude. I have got the two boysa here who were enchanted at little Marcel'sb letter. They have been to the Zoo and want to write to their cher papa and I must clear out from the desk.

Success to Paul in the Cher—I fully expected his fate at Cette, the town being too small not to be outvoted by the 74 hamlets making up the circonscription^

Nim's love.

Affectionately yours

F. E.

First published, in the language of the Reproduced from the original original (English), in: F. Engels, P. et L. Lafargue, Correspondance, t. Il, Paris, 1956

216

IN VIENNA

London, 15 September 1889 122 Regent's Park Road, N.W.

Dear Kautsky,

I am taking advantage of its being Sunday morning to write you a letter, which I should have done long since—but for interruptions! First

[^1]: ENGELS T O KARL KAUTSKY211

[^2]: Jean and Edgar Longuet - b Marcel Longuet - c constituency





**[p. 375]**

We are all of us, Nim, Tussy, Edward and myself, tremendously sorry that your relations with Louise should have ended in so negative a fash- ion. But there's no help for it. You two alone are competent to judge, and whatever you think is right, the rest of us must accept. But what I don't understand—if I can be said to understand anything at all of this busi- ness—is your continual use of the word 'compassion'—that all you now feel for Louise is 'compassion'. Louise has conducted herself throughout with such heroism and such womanliness that we cannot admire her enough. If anyone is to be pitied in this affair, it certainly isn't Louise. And I still maintain you have perpetrated a folly which you will yet live to regret.

As I have already told Adler, this turn in your relations does nothing to alter the proposal I made you in regard to the ms. of Volume IV.e The work has got to be done and you and Ede are the only people to whom I can entrust it. The business of the archives227 has, Paul tells me, like- wise now been settled which means, no doubt, that you will be coming over here again this winter, when we can discuss and make a start on what is to be done. Because of the damned congress I've been able to do no work at all on Volume III since February, and even now I am kept from it by the necessity of bringing out a fourth edition of Volume I, which I must attend to first. It's no great task but when one is not allowed to spend more than three hours a day at one's desk, it tends to be rather long-drawn-out. And then we have got two months of perpet- ual fog and darkness ahead of us.

A correspondent in St Petersburg has informed me that the Revue du Nord has published a translation of your Klassengegensätze in Frankreich and that this has caused a furore in Russia. When you come over here I shall give you a hint or two as to how you might, perhaps, extract money from Russia for your articles.

[^1]: a Paul Singer - b Wilhelm Liebknecht - c Gertrud and Theodor Liebknecht - d Jean and Edgar Longuet - e of Capital. See this volume, p.257





**[p. 376]**

Liebknecht has now come to see that there's nothing to be done with the Possibilists19; when you're talking to him he's not nearly so cocksure as he otherwise tends to be, particularly when he writes. How lucky it was that the Possibilists refused, since a union of the two congresses would have led to fighting and general loss of life and we should have been hugely discredited. The campaign launched by the Possibilists and the Social Democratic Federation with a view to casting doubts on our people's credentials has failed miserably.478 Not only were Adler's reve- lations about the possibilist Austrianse (in the Labour Elector here) quite devastating, but in this country—and this made an even greater impact over here—the idiots had admitted Burns to the credentials committee, whereupon he mercilessly demolished the credentials of the Social Democratic Federation in the columns of the Labour Elector} Hyndman represented 28 people! The entire Federation, alleged to be but 1,925 strong, consists, in fact, of less than half that number!

a 'Die Bergarbeiter und der Bauernkrieg, vornehmlich in Thüringen' - b Der Einfluss der Volksvermehrung auf den Fortschritt der Gesellschaft - c Die Entstehung der Ehe und Familie - d A. Soetbeer, Edelmetall-Produktion und Werthverhältniss zwischen Gold und Silber seit der Entdeckung Amerikas bis zur Gegenwart - e F. Engels, 'Possibilist Credentials - f J. Burns, 'The Paris International Congress'



**[p. 377]**

In Denmark the old party leadership have put their foot in it badly over the matter of the congress, and the opposition, Trier, Petersen, etc., are gaining ground.418 You ought to engage Trier as correspondent for the Arbeiter-Zeitung—Gerson Trier, Ahlefeltsgade 16, Copenhagen. The Dock Strike has been won. It's the greatest event to have taken place in England since the last Reform Bills500 and marks the beginning of a complete revolution in the East End. The reason for the universal sympathy shown by the press, and even by the philistines, is, 1. Hatred of the monopolistic Dock Companies who, instead of writing off the non existent capital they have squandered, fleece the shipowners, business- men and workers so as to be able to declare dividends on it; 2. The knowl- edge that the Dockers are voters and need to be cajoled if the 16 to 18 East End M.P.s of Liberal and Conservative complexion wish to be re-elected (which they won't be; this time there'll be Labour M.P.s). What decided the victory was the £14,000 from Australia, whereby the Australian workers will prevent themselves from suddenly being landed with a mass influx of English workers. Burns, Champion, Mann and Tille« have earned their laurels, while the Social Democratic Federation was nowhere. The strike is to England what the coalminers' strike435 was to Germany— it means that a new system, a vast army, has entered the labour move- ment. If we can now get by without a war, the fun may soon begin.

Guesde is standing for parliament in Marseilles, Lafargue in Saint Amand (Cher).

Kindest regards to Adler.

Your

F. Engels

As I don't know whether you still have your hedgehog's apartments I am sending this to Adler, whose address is a safe one. Have received

[^1]: a Engels has 'Igelwohnung', a pun on 'Igelgasse', literally 'Hedgehog Alley', the name of the street where Kautsky lived in Vienna



