---
Volume: 48
Document_Title: "218. Engels to Paul Lafargue 3 October "
Page_Range: "391-395"
---

# 218. Engels to Paul Lafargue 3 October 



**[p. 379]**

Your

F.E.

The Nationalzeitung of Boston (Nos 1-5) received with thanks. They're the local 'Fabians'.bm

First published, slightly abridged, in Briefe und Auszüge aus Briefen von Job. Phil. Becker, Jos. Dietzgen, Friedrich Engels, Karl Marx, u. A. an F.A. Sorge und Andere, Stuttgart,

1906, and, in full, in: Marx and Engels, Works, First Russian Edition,

a Pionier. Illustrirter Volks-Kalender

Vol. XXVIII, Moscow, 1940

Printed according to the original

Published in English in full for the first time

218

AT LE PERREUX

London, 3 October 1889

My dear Lafargue,

So after all ours is the only Party able to register an increase in strength at the elections. Altogether, though our information is by no means complete, we can reckon on 60,000 votes for our candidates, i.e.

[^1]: ENGELS T O PAUL LAFARGUE 5 0 4





**[p. 380]**

But how comes it that we over here have been left without any statis- tical information regarding the elections except for that contained in the bourgeois press, from which we cannot possibly deduce the position of all those unknown candidates? How are we to know how many votes are ours when the papers fail to classify the candidates save in the vaguest possible manner? Yet I should say that it would be very much worth your while to keep German and English Socialists informed about your doings, seeing that you no longer possess a paper through which this might be done. And, as you know, we over here are all of us ready to work in the interests of your Party as, indeed, we have always done to the very best of our ability; but if you French gentlemen will not deign to keep us au fait with las cosas de Francia* we shall be powerless, and more than one of our number will tire of a task so little appreciated by those for whom it is performed.

So as soon as possible after the poll send us a complete list of Socialist candidates belonging to the groups represented at our congress, as also of other Socialists (if any) who are neither Possibilists nor Radical Socialists, with the number of votes cast for each in both the first and the second ballots. We cannot here run the risk of having our facts contested by men like Hyndman, etc., as is bound to happen if we are again thrown back on our own sources of information.

At the congress you set up a National Council505 which passed certain resolutions. Not one of you deemed it necessary to breathe a word to us about it; and if I hadn't come upon the thing by chance in the Madrid Socialista, it would not have appeared either in the German Sozialdemokrat or in the Labour Elector—and, what is more, two months after the event.

You yourselves must realise that, by carrying on in this way, you are playing into the hands of the Possibilists and of their friends in this country.

I have written and asked Bebel506 to send some money for Guesde's election campaign, of the importance of which I am very well aware. I hope it will be voted, but it must be remembered that the Germans have already contributed 500 fr. towards the congress, 1,000 for Saint-

[^1]: a French affairs





**[p. 381]**

for which, furthermore, they are holding more than 3,500 fr. in reserve. In all, 8,400 fr. voted for international purposes, and this on the eve of their own general election! And, after all these sacrifices, M. Jaclard goes and gratuitously insults them in the Voix by calling them machines who vote to order.508 As if it was the Germans' fault that the workmen of Paris are Possibilists or Radicadets327 or Boulangists or nothing at all! It would seem that, in Jaclard's eyes, the Germans' ability to accept a majority vote and to act in concert of itself constitutes an insult to the Parisian gents, and that, if Paris marks time, the rest are forbidden to march on.

But if memory serves me aright, M. Jaclard is a Blanquist for whom Paris is therefore a holy city, Rome and Jerusalem at the same time.

To come back to the elections. If it is true that Guesde and Thivrier stand a chance, and if they are successful, we shall be vastly better placed in the Chamber than the Possibilists.—Baudin appears to be a certainty, then there's Cluseret, Boyer and Baslu,509 one or the other of whom will succeed and, with four or five such, Guesde could form a group which would not only impress the Chamber and the public, but would also place the Possibilists in a rum sort of position. It was the co-existence in the Reichstag of our deputies and those of the Lassalleans which, more than any other circumstance, brought about a merger between the two groups, i.e. the capitulation of the Lassalleans.510 In this case, too, our group would be the stronger and would end up by forcing the Dumays and the Joffrins to enter its orbit, so that the Possibilist leaders would have to choose between capitulation and abdication.

For the time being, however, all this is the music of the future.449 But of one thing you may be sure, and that is that Boulangism is in extremist And to my mind that is something of the utmost significance. This has been the third attack of Bonapartist fever; the first, involving a genuine and great Bonaparte, the second a bogus ditto,d the third a man who isn't even a bogus Bonaparte, but simply a bogus hero, bogus general, bogus everything, whose chief attribute has been his black charger. And, even with this charlatan-cum-adventurer, it was a dangerous business—as you

a Congrès international ouvrier socialiste de Paris (Du 14 Juillet au 21 Juillet 1889), Paris, 1889 - b Arbeitstag: Der Achtstündige Arbeitstag - c on its last legs - d Louis-Napoleon, subsequently Emperor Napoleon III



**[p. 382]**

All this if there is no war. The Portland Place HUMBUGV defeat will at least postpone that but, on the other hand, the amassing of armaments by all the powers will have the reverse effect. And if war does come, then goodbye to the Socialist movement for some time. Everywhere we shall be crushed, disorganised, deprived of elbow-room. France, bound to Russia's chariot wheel, will be unable to move and will have to renounce all revolutionary pretensions for fear of seeing her ally go over to the other camp. With the forces of the two sides pretty well equal, England will be in a position to tip the scales in favour of whichever side she may take. This will hold good for two or three years to come but, if war does break out later, I am willing to wager that the Germans will be beaten hollow for, within three or four years, young Williamb will have replaced all the good generals with his favourites—imbeciles or fake geniuses, like those who commanded the Austrians and Russians at Austerlitz,511 and each with a prescription for military miracles in his pocket. And just now Berlin is swarming with that breed, which has every chance of success since young William belongs to it himself.

Give Laura a kiss from Nim and me. I shall be writing to her soon.

Yours ever,

F. E.

First published in full in: F. Engels, P. Printed according to the original et L. Lafargue, Correspondance, t. Il, Paris, 1956 Translated from the French

[^1]: a Boulanger, who had lived in Portland Place in London - b William II



