---
Volume: 48
Document_Title: "220. Engels to Laura Lafargue 8 October "
Page_Range: "396-399"
---

# 220. Engels to Laura Lafargue 8 October 



**[p. 384]**

At all events Boulangism137 is done for and will presumably be dealt further blows at the second ballots, unless the fatuous annulment of the poll in Montmartre514 brings it new supporters, at least in Paris. If the Russians' cash then fails to appear, le brave général will have to move from Portland Place to Soho,a or rent a couple of rooms from Lessner.

Regards to your wife and Theodor.b

Your F. E.

First published in: Wilhelm Printed according to the original Liebknecht. Briefwechsel mit Karl Marx und Friedrich Engels, The Published in English for the first time Hague, 1963

220

ENGELS TO LAURA LAFARGUE274

London, 8 October 1889

My dear Laura,

What a melancholy set our French friends are! Because Paul and Guesde have not succeeded, they seem to despair of everything and Paul thinks the less said about these elections, the better! Why, I consider the result of the elections not a déroute0 but a relative success worth regis- tering both in England and Germany. At the first ballots we had between 60 and 80,000 votes, which is quite enough to show that we are nearly twice as strong as the Possibilists, and while they got but two mend (of whom one moribunde) elected, we have Baudin, Thivrier, Lachize, and

[^1]: a then a poor district, where many émigrés lived - b Liebknecht's son - c defeat - d J. B. Dumay and J. F. A. Joffrin - e Joffrin





**[p. 385]**

Of course Guesde's defeat is a misfortune, but then while I thought it necessary to do everything to prevent it, I never believed much in his success, after the 1,445 votes au premier tour!0 What cannot be helped we must put up with. It is a far greater advantage for us to have got rid of Boulanger. Boulanger in France and the Irish question in England are the two great obstacles in our way, the two side-issues which prevent the formation of an independent working men's party. Now Boulanger is smashed up, the road is cleared in France. And at the same time, the monarchist attack on the Republic has failed. That means the gradual passage of monarchism from the ground of practical to that of senti- mental, politics, the transfer of Monarchists to Opportunism,199 the formation of a new Conservative party out of both, and the struggle of that Conservative-Bourgeois-party with the petits bourgeois and peas- ants (Radicals200) and the working class; a struggle in which the work- ing-class Socialists will soon get the upper hand of the Radicals, espe- cially after the way they have discredited themselves. I do not expect that everything will pass off in this simple, classical form, but the innate logic of French development is sure to overcome all side-issues and obstacles, especially as both forms of antiquated (not simply bourgeois) reaction—Boulangism and monarchism—have been so well beaten. And all we can ask for is that all these side-issues be removed and that the field be clear for the struggle of the three great sections of the French society: bourgeois, petits bourgeois et paysans, ouvriers? And that I think we shall get.

Then Ferry is got rid of and I think Mother Crawford is right when she considers him an obstacle to even his own party.516 Colonial adven- tures will no longer bar the way; nor will the formation of the new

[^1]: a right to idleness - b in the first ballot - c and peasants, workers





**[p. 386]**

Thus I do not despair at all, on the contrary; I see a distinct advance in the result of the elections, eine sehr bestimmte Klärung der Lage* Of course you will get Conservative government to begin with; but not what you had, the government of a distinct set of the bourgeoisie only. The Opportunists were as much a mere section of the French bour- geoisie as were the satisfaits^17 of Louis-Philippe and Guizot: these were the haute finance}' the others are the set which strives to become the haute finance. Now, for the first time, you will get a real government of the entire bourgeoisie. In 1849-51, the Rue de Poitiers518 under Thiers, too, formed a government of the whole bourgeois class, but that was by the truce between the two opposing monarchical parties, and by its very nature passager.c Now you will get one based upon the despair to upset the republic, upon its recognition as an unavoidable pis-aller^ and there- fore a bourgeois government which has the stuff to last until its final smash-up.

It was the splitting-up of the French bourgeoisie into so many sections, fractions and factions which has so often deceived the people. You upset one section, say the haute finance, and thought you had upset the whole bourgeoisie; but you merely brought into power another section. There are 1/ the legitimist or generally monarchist landed proprietors, 2/ the old haute finance of Louis-Philippe's time, 3/ the second set of haute finance of the Second Empire, 4/ the Opportunists199

who to a great extent have still their fortunes to make, 5/ the industrial and commercial bourgeoisie chiefly of the provinces, who are generally hangers-on, practically, to whatever section happens to be in power, being themselves scattered and without their common centre. Now these all will now have to unite as 'Moderates' and 'Conservatives', will have to drop their old shibboleths and party-cries which divided them, and for the first time act as a bourgeoisie une et indivisible? And this concen- tration bourgeoise will be the real meaning of all the concentrations républicaines et autres1 so much talked about of late, and it will be a great progress, leading gradually to a scattering of Radicals and a real concen- tration of Socialists.

Ouf! Now that's enough on this blessed subject. Tonight I expect

[^1]: a a very definite clarification of the position - b high finance - c short-lived - evil - e one and indivisible - i republican and others



