---
Volume: 48
Document_Title: "221. Engels to Friedrich Adolph Sorge 12 October "
Page_Range: "399-401"
---

# 221. Engels to Friedrich Adolph Sorge 12 October 



**[p. 387]**

Of Sam Moore no news since he passed Sierra Leone. Tussy has tried to see his brother, but cannot find him at home. So we don't know whether his family have heard of him.

Nim has raved all the summer about your garden and the vegetables and fruit therein, and I have her special orders to say that she anxiously awaits what she calls her share of the pears, grapes and other good things now about due.

Will you give Paul the enclosed cheque for £20.

Ever your old

F. Engels

First published in full, in the language Reproduced from the original of the original (English), in: F. Engels, P. et L. Lafargue, Correspondance, t. II, Paris, 1956

221

ENGELS TO FRIEDRICH ADOLPH SORGE519

IN HOBOKEN

[London,] 12 October 1889

Herewith as usual the Labour Elector and Commonweal. The International Review is said to have already met its end, thus quickly has Hyndman ruined it by his mismanagement. Bax, however, is in negotia- tion over another revue3; if he acquires it, Aveling will probably be his assistant editor. The revolution in New York501 gets funnier and funnier; the attempts by Rosenberg & Co. to remain on top à tout prix,h while amusing, are fortunately doomed to failure. Your exchanges with the nationalists0 in the Workmen's Advocate520 have gladdened me, firstly

[^1]: a Time - h at all costs - c De Leon and others





**[p. 388]**

I don't know whether I wrote and told you that Sam Moore left for Asaba on the Niger (Africa) in June as Chief Justice for the territories of the English Niger Company. I received the first letter from there yester- day; he finds the climate very good and apparently salubrious; the heat is not very great—75° F in the mornings and 81°-83°a in the afternoons. Cool, therefore, by comparison with New York. Thus the 3rd volume of Capital will probably be translated into English in Africa. I am working on the 4th edition of the 1st volume; the quotations are all having to be revised to conform to the English edition, but it can't be helped. After that I shall buckle down to the 3rd.

Longuet arrived yesterday to fetch his two elder boys,b who have been staying with Tussy. As a result of the Opportunists'199 abstention he polled 800 votes fewer than his opponent. Of our people about 6 were elected, but not, alas, Guesde.c

Your

F. E.

First published in: Briefe und Auszüge aus Briefen von Joh. Phil. Becker, Jos. Dietzgen, Friedrich Engels, Karl Marx u. A. an F. A. Sorge und Andere, Stuttgart, 1906

Printed according to the original

Published in English in full for the first time

[^1]: a 23.5° and 27-28°C - b Jean and Edgar Longuet - c See this volume, pp.384-7



