---
Volume: 48
Document_Title: "224. Engels to Max Hildebrand 22 October "
Page_Range: "405-407"
---

# 224. Engels to Max Hildebrand 22 October 



**[p. 224]**

ENGELS TO MAX HILDEBRAND522

IN BERLIN

London, 22 October 1889 122 Regent's Park Road, N.W.

Dear Sir,

In reply to your note of the 19th,523 I made Stirner's acquaintance around the beginning of 1842 in Berlin191 when he was hobnobbing with E. Meyen, Buhl, Edgar and subsequently Bruno Bauer, etc. It is true that his name was Schmidt; he owed the nickname of Stirner1 to his remark- ably high forehead. He cannot have been hobnobbing with this circle for very long, since he didn't know Marx, who had left Berlin, if my memory is correct, less than a year previously524 and was much respected by the others. He was, I think, no longer a grammar school master or at any rate ceased to be one shortly afterwards. Apart from the above named, others who used to meet together at that time were a certain von Leitner, an Austrian, K. F. Koppen, who taught at a grammar school and was a special friend of Marx's, Mussak, his colleague, Cornelius, the bookseller who appears in Fritz Reuter's Festungstid, Miigge, Dr J. Klein, the dramatist and dramaturgist, a certain Wachenhusen, Dr Zabel, subsequently editor of the National-Zeitung, Rutenberg who, however, left for Cologne shortly afterwards to join the first Rheinische Zeitung, a certain Waldeckb (not the jurist and high court counsellor0) and others whose names escape me; there were in fact several groups which would meet and mingle depending on the time and the opportunity. Jungnitz, Szeliga and Faucher did not arrive until after November 1842, the month in which I completed my year of military service and left Berlin. We would meet at Stehely's and, in the evenings, at this or that Bavarian ale-house in Friedrichsstadtd or, if we were in funds, at a wineshop in the Poststrasse, which was Köppen's favourite haunt. I knew Stirner well and we were on Due terms; he was a good sort, not nearly as bad as he makes himself out to be in his Einzige^ and

a Stirn - forehead in German - b Julius Waldeck - c Benedikt Waldeck - d district in old Berlin - e Du or thou, the intimate form of address - f M. Stirner, Der Einzige und sein Eigenthum



**[p. 394]**

I saw less of Stirner during the latter part of my time in Berlin; no doubt he was even then pursuing the lines of reasoning that resulted in his magnum opus. By the time it came out, our views had already diverged a great deal; the two years I had spent in Manchester had left their mark on me.525 When, later on in Brussels,526 Marx and I felt it necessary to join issue with the offshoots of the Hegelian school, we criticised Stirner amongst others—the critique is as bulky as the book itself. The ms.,a which has never been published, is still here in my house in so far as it hasn't been eaten by mice.

Stirner enjoyed a revival thanks to Bakunin who, by the way, was also in Berlin at the time and, during Werder 's course of lectures on logic (1841-42), sat on the bench in front of me along with four or five other Russians. Proudhon's harmless, purely etymological anarchy (i.e. absence of government) would never have resulted in the present anar- chist doctrines had not Bakunin laced it with a good measure of Stirnerian 'rebellion'.527 As a result the anarchists have themselves become nothing but a collection of 'Unique Ones', so much so that no two of them can abide one another's company.

For the rest I know nothing about Stirner; I never found out what subsequently befell him, except that Marx told me he had almost liter- ally starved to death; where he got this from, I don't know.

I saw his wifeb in this country on one occasion; while here she took up with - ah que j'aime le militaire^ - ex-Lieutenant Techow and, if I'm not mistaken, accompanied him to Australia.

[^1]: a K. Marx and F. Engels, The German Ideology - b Marie Stirner-Schmidt - c Ooh, I do love soldiers!



