---
Volume: 48
Document_Title: "226. Engels to Laura Lafargue 29 October "
Page_Range: "408-410"
---

# 226. Engels to Laura Lafargue 29 October 



**[p. 226]**

ENGELS TO LAURA LAFARGUE274

AT LE PERREUX

London, 29 October 1889

My dear Laura,

A solemn vote of thanks I have to transmit to you for the fresh batch of pears sent by Edward and consumed, in great part, last Sunday with the port wine. They were splendid, and what was left will be mellow by next Sunday.

The Christmas trip legenda was also explained by Edward—that it was little Marcelb who caused the misunderstanding in Longuet 's brain. Anyhow, whenever you are ready to come, we shall be ready to receive you.

I must have expressed myself rather badly about the impending rule of the French bourgeoisie as a class.01 meant that zunächst^ the rank and file of the Royalists and Bonapartists will pass over—gradually—into the ranks of the Moderate Republicans, and forsake, as in 1851, when the mass of the Republicans and Royalists passed over to Bonaparte, such of their leaders as will stick to their old-fashioned party shibboleths. That will mean a strengthening of the Moderate Republicans (though not necessar- ily of the Ferryist or the Léon Sayist cliques of speculators) but at the same time a cessation, once for all, of the power of the old cry: La république en danger? 53° Then, and only then, the Radicals200 can come to the fore as 'Her Majesty's, the Republic's, most faithful opposition', and then you have the real conditions of the rule of the whole bourgeois class, of parlia- mentarism in full blossom: two parties struggling for the majority and taking in turns the parts of Ins and Outs, of Government and opposition. Here, in England, you have the rule of the whole bourgeois class; but that does not mean that Conservatives and Radicals coalesce; on the contrary, they relieve each other. If things were to take their slow, classical course, then the rise of the Proletarian party would no doubt finally force them to coalesce against this new and unparliamentary opposition. But that is not likely to come off; there will be violent accelerations of the development.

[^1]: a See this volume, p.390 - b Marcel Longuet - c See this volume, pp.384-7 - d to begin with - e The Republic is in danger





**[p. 397]**

About the defeat of the Socialists we agree perfectly. Only that I expected it—and a far worse one—and that our Paris friends have expected miracles which of course did not come off. I am perfectly satis- fied with the result—under the circumstances. That we got six or seven men in against either the Cadettists327 or the Boulangists, and something like 120,000 votes, is more than I expected.

As to the policy with regard to the fellows that came in under Boulanger's flag, I am rather of the opinion of Vaillant and Guesde than of Paul. If you admit the Boulangists, you must admit the Cadettists too—Joffrin and Dumay. But moreover, after the infamous way in which the Boulangeo-Blanquists494 behaved to Vaillant in his circon- scription* and brought him to fall, we ought I believe not to have anything to do with them. Moreover, we have no interest to reconstitute the dissolving Blanquist faction as such. We know what peculiarly 'pure' elements it always contained. Granger is an imbecile chauvin, to have got rid of whom appears to me a blessing. As to Jourde (who seems to me the one after whom Paul really longs), perhaps he can be made to slip in later on, if he vaut la peine, ce que j'ignore^ and if he breaks off point blank with the Boulangists. But there is no mistake, Paul's whilom Boulangist sympathies have done us an immense deal of harm and are now being used by Liebknecht who throws them into my face.

As it is, the new socialist faction will be hard to manage, and the less its numbers are swelled by doubtful (still more doubtful) elements, the better it will be. Especially as Guesde is not elected. If the thing is found to work well, then fresh additions of the above sort might be less harm- ful and could be taken into consideration; and then, the novices ought to do public penance, unless the French party is to stand out as corrupt before the Germans, Swiss, Dutch and even Belgians. What a triumph would it be for the Possibilists19 if they could point to declared Boulangists in our ranks! And how difficult then for me to make the Germans understand the doings of our French party!

[^1]: a constituency - b deserves it, which I do not know



