---
Volume: 48
Document_Title: "228. Engels to Pasquale Martignetti 9 November "
Page_Range: "412-414"
---

# 228. Engels to Pasquale Martignetti 9 November 



**[p. 400]**

Warm regards from Lenchen and

Your

F. E.

First published in: Marx and Engels, Printed according to the original Works, First Russian Edition, Vol. XXVIII, Moscow, 1940 Published in English for the first time

228

ENGELS TO PASQUALE MARTIGNETTI536

IN BENEVENTO

London, 9 November 1889

Dear Friend,

Difficult as your situation is I can proffer no definite advice; for that, I should have to be on the spot, it being impossible to give an expert opinion from a distance.

[^1]: a Percy Rosher's father - b An allusion to the song O du lieber Augustin.





**[p. 401]**

To find you even temporary employment in this country would be utterly impossible. Neither I nor my friends could procure this for you— your having been sentenced could not be kept secret. It would be impos- sible to accommodate you on the Sozialdemokrat. And in any case, the demand for your extradition would soon catch up with you. On the other side of the Atlantic things might be different.

So there only remains the choice between prison and Buenos Aires. If you are finally convicted by the court of appeal and go to prison, it seems unlikely that, on the day of your release, you will have any other alternative but to go to Buenos Aires, for you would surely not be able to find work in Europe. In my opinion, therefore, the only question is whether you want to go now, or after having spent three or four years in gaol.

Should you decide to go now, I can put 200 francs at your disposal as a contribution towards your travelling expenses. But this is the last help I shall be able to give you. At the moment I am having to maintain two families who are related to me, which means that I am myself sometimes at a loss to know where to turn for the necessary cash.

I am sorry that I cannot do more for you. But the funds I have avail- able are limited, and I am powerless against the Italian judiciary. I know full well how desperate your plight is and assure you of my sincere sympathy but it is not in my power to help you beyond the extent indi- cated above.

Very sincerely yours,

F. Engels

First published, in Italian, in La Printed according to the original corrispondenza di Marx e Engels con italiani. 1848-1895, Milan, 1964 Published in English for the first time

