---
Volume: 48
Document_Title: "229. Engels to August Bebel 15 November "
Page_Range: "414-417"
---

# 229. Engels to August Bebel 15 November 



**[p. 229]**

ENGELS TO AUGUST BEBEL

IN PLAUEN NEAR DRESDEN

London, 15 November 1889

Dear Bebel,

I got your letter of 17 October when I was up to my eyes in work on the 4th edition of Capital3'—no small task, as it meant comparing yet again all the quotations Tussy had checked for the English edition and correct- ing the numerous copyist's and printer's errors. Hardly had that been done than I had to set to work again on Volume III, which has now got to be brought out quickly, for in Berlin little Schmidt has published a work on the average rate of profitb which shows that the laddie has—greatly to his credit—puzzled out more than one could wish. So you can see that my hands are already completely full; add to that the necessity of keeping up with the international party press and referring back to the economic liter- ature relevant to Volume III, some of which has to be read cover to cover—and you will see that I'm pretty well bogged down and hence you must forgive me if I don't communicate with you as often as I should like.

As for the French,537 if you were to spend longer in their midst and become more closely acquainted with the sort of effect produced by their curious modes of procedure, you would probably take a more lenient view. The Party33 there found itself in what was, for France, the unprecedented, if in the long run favourable, position of being strong in the provinces and weak in Paris. Thus what was needed was a victory of the steady-going provinces over arrogant, domineering, supercilious and partially corrupt Paris (the corruption being evident in 1. The domi- nance there of the corrupt Possibilist leaders, 2. The fact that successful opposition to that domination could, in Paris, only take the form of Boulangism). On top of that, there were two executives in the provinces—one in Bordeaux for the Trades Unions and one in Troyes538

for the socialist groups, these being organised as such. So they lacked not only the customary executive in Paris (or any possibility thereof) but

a Volume I - b Conrad Schmidt, Die Durchschnittsprofitrate auf Grundlage des Marxschen Werthgesetzes



**[p. 403]**

That the position during this interregnum should seem to you people exceedingly confused and unsatisfactory I can quite understand. It is but temporary, however, but it was typical of the French that, despite such a disorganisation of their own party, and despite having made one mistake after another, they should nevertheless have convoked a congress in Paris473 where all this must be plain for Europe to see. They rightly considered that any discredit incurred would be far outweighed by the fact of Europe's being represented at their congress and no more than a few sects at that of the Possibilists.478

That the creation of an immediate impact on the public should be to them a consideration of greater moment than it is to you and me and the bulk of the German party is a failing that is not confined to France. Here and in America the case is just the same. It comes from the greater free- dom of their political life and their long familiarity with it. Besides, Liebknecht is acting in just the same way in Germany (one of the chief reasons for our perpetual rows), and, if you were to abolish the Anti- Socialist Law52 tomorrow, you'd soon see how quickly the deplorable consideration mentioned above would come to the fore.

Again, I think you would be deceiving yourself were you to conclude from what you experienced at the Paris congress that the working men were being thrust into the background by, say, the literary men. Such may appear to be the case at a congress in Paris, the more so as the impossibility of communicating in foreign languages thrusts the work- ing men into the background. In actual fact the French workers set far greater store than those of any other country by complete and, in partic- ular, formal, equality with men of letters and bourgeois, and, had you read the reports I received regarding Guesde's, Lafargue's, etc., agitation during the last elections,539 you would probably take a different view.

It was only on account of Protot (see enclosed proclamation) that Guesde wasn't elected at Marseilles.540 In France (because the number of candidates is not restricted in the second ballot, while the relative majority is decisive) it is the general rule that where there are 2 candi- dates of the same party, the one who polled fewer votes at the first ballot must stand down. Protot was in that position, but he remained a candidate and disseminated the most infamous calumnies about Guesde. Neither was known locally in Marseilles but, as an old member of the Commune, Protot was supported by the followers of that brag- gart Pyat, the former deputy for Marseilles. Hence it was understand-



**[p. 404]**

So now we have 7 men—by no means the best possible ones. They have chosen Guesde for their secretary and he is to concoct their speeches for them. On the Municipal Council, Vaillant, Longuet and others likewise constitute a separate group. The two groups will enlist the co-operation of Lafargue, Deville, etc., and afterwards form a central committee of the united (or federated) Blanquists and Marxists.541 In this way an organisation will gradually take shape.

Besides the above, 3 socialists were elected as Boulangists and 2 as Possibilists but these will, of course, be excluded and allowed to fend for themselves.

I am very sorry that Auer should be in such poor case542—but no doubt you'll be getting better news anon. I can only deplore the relative weakness—and this also applies in the field of theory—of the younger generation. But now we have got little Schmidt; he was here for a year and I should never have guessed how much he had in him. If he retains his former modesty—megalomania being today the most insidious and commonest of diseases—he may do excellently.

Over here everything is going swimmingly, but not along the same simple, straightforward lines as in Germany. That calls for people with a natural aptitude for theory. In this country we shall have blunders and to spare. But never mind; the masses are now in motion and every new blunder will bring its own lesson with it. So man tau,3- as the Lower Saxons say.

doing?

Your

F. E.

First published in: Marx and Engels, Printed according to the original Works, First Russian Edition, Vol. XXVIII, Moscow, 1940 Published in English for the first time

[^1]: What are your wife and the future wife of the doctor of medicineb

[^2]: a let 'em do - b Julia and Frieda Bebel



