---
Volume: 48
Document_Title: "231. Engels to Paul Lafargue 16 November "
Page_Range: "418-420"
---

# 231. Engels to Paul Lafargue 16 November 



**[p. 231]**

ENGELS TO PAUL LAFARGUE274

AT LE PERREUX

London, 16 November, 1889

My dear Lafargue,

Let us say no more about your proclivity for Boulangism, now happily a thing of the past, and why re-read, at this late date, your letters of yester- year? In any case the gallant general has ruined himself, not only by his fail- ure to remain on the field of battle, but—and this was infinitely worse—by his royalist and Bonapartist alliances; this he now sees and would like to recover his Republican virginity but, as in the case of the fair Eugénie:

Should he this night find a maidenhead,

(Bonaparte, on his wedding-night) It'll mean the fair lady had two.

is justified, but it is precisely the form assumed by that discontent which goes to show that the majority of Parisian working men are as little aware of their situation as in 1848 and 1851. Then, too, their discontent was justified; the form it assumed, Bonapartism, cost us eighteen years of Empire—and what an Empire! And at that time a fair number of the Parisian working men were still fighting against it; but in 1889 they thought fit to celebrate the hundredth anniversary of 1789 by grovelling at the feet of a mere scallywag. That being so, you can hardly expect other people to defer to the Parisians with the same respect they so read- ily accorded their forebears.

likewise. Had they been admitted such as they are I should have been at a loss what to say to the English, Danes, Germans, etc. For the past twenty years we have been advocating the formation of a Party that was distinct from and opposed to all bourgeois parties—and the inclusion of men elected under Boulanger's banner, a banner whose protection, in those same elections, was extended to the Monarchists and repudiated by them—would have spelt our French Party's ruin vis-à-vis other

[^1]: No one is in any doubt that the discontent underlying Boulangism137

[^2]: I am much relieved to hear that the Boulangists—genuine or other- wise—have been kept at arm's length by the Party, and the Possibilists19





**[p. 407]**

You say that the attacks on Boulé achieved nothing save to gain him access to the Intransigeant and to get him nominated as a municipal candi- date—in other words, publicly profess himself a Boulangist, fall into line with that crew and receive the due reward of his treachery.544 Thank you!

Your plan is very good if it is practicable—if, that is to say, the provinces are prepared to assume the leadership of this committee.3

You keep talking about your provincial papers, but you hardly ever send me any.545 A few used to be forwarded to me by Bonnier, but now I seldom see one. Everything you send me, or get others to send me, will bear fruit in that it will help me keep Bebel posted, and Bebel is ten times more important than Liebknecht; if, moreover, I know what is going on, I can get to work on Ede and the Sozialdemokrat.

It would be a good idea if all your newspapers were to arrange exchanges with the Sozialdemokrat and the Labour Elector, 13 Paternoster Row, E. C. In all other countries this is done as a matter of course; but the French gentlemen wait to be begged—and sometimes begged in vain—to put us in a position to work in their interest. Should this kind of behaviour exceed certain limits, we for our part might begin to tire. Is it really too much to expect some small modicum of order and organisation?

But enough of that. I stand up for you so often and with such ardour vis-à-vis other people that, by way of return, it is only fair that I should give you a thorough dressing-down. At the moment I have no means of checking M. de Paepe's intimations546 and the Vienna Arbeiterzeitung has received confirmation of his deathb from St. Petersburg; in view of the Russian government's mendacity and the myths about Russian revo- lutionaries, there's no knowing what is true and what is false.

Now for Laura.

Yours ever,

F. E.

First published in: F. Engels, P. et L. Printed according to the original Lafargue, Correspondance, t. II, Paris, 1956 Translated from the French

[^1]: a See this volume, p.402-3 - b The death of Nikolai Gavrilovich Chernyshevsky



