---
Volume: 48
Document_Title: "234. Engels to Jules Guesde 20 November "
Page_Range: "423-425"
---

# 234. Engels to Jules Guesde 20 November 



**[p. 234]**

ENGELS TO JULES GUESDE

IN PARIS

London, 20 November 1889, 122 Regent's Park Road, N. W.

Dear Citizen Guesde,

I have just had a letter from Mrs Aveling who asks me to write to you if I should happen to have your address. Luckily it had been given me by Bonnier and hence I am doing so without delay. The case is as follows:

In Silvertown, a London suburb, Mrs Aveling is conducting a strike549

in Messrs Silver's works where rubber goods, etc., are produced. The strike, in which three thousand working men and women are involved, has been going on for ten weeks and has every prospect of success. That it should succeed is important, for its failure would mean the interrup- tion of the long series of successes scored by the workers since the dock strike,489 and would spell victory for the English employers whose rapidly dwindling confidence would thus be restored.

A few days ago, the Silver company received very urgent orders they would not possibly be able to carry out with 3,000 out of their 3,500 work people on strike. Furthermore, there was an order for a consider- able quantity of submarine cables, which was to be shared out between four factories, among them Silver's. They will miss their chance, if the strike continues. They made tempting offers to some of the strikers, but to no avail. They then played their last card.

Messrs Silver (a joint stock company which operates under that name) owns a similar establishment at Beaumont-Persan near Paris, where Frenchmen work under English foremen. Some of them were brought over to England. It is known for certain that 70 working men and women from Beaumont have arrived at the docks, but whether they have been introduced into the Silvertown factory is not yet known. It is now imperative that a stop be put to this. They were probably induced to come over under false pretences, without having been told that it was because of a strike.

Mrs Aveling at once telegraphed to Lafargue and Vaillant but, the matter being urgent, we are also addressing ourselves to you, with the



**[p. 412]**

When, during the dock strike, we sent Anseele a telegram informing him that the employers were bringing in Belgian workmen, he immedi- ately took the necessary action and his letters and telegrams went a long way towards reviving the sometimes flagging spirits of the combatants.

If you feel able to offer similar encouragement to the people of Silvertown, you should write direct to Mrs Aveling, 65 Chancery Lane, London, W. C , which would create an excellent impression.

I hear from Bonnier that your health has greatly improved and that the Marseilles campaign551 has strengthened your constitution instead of weakening it. I am delighted, for we need every ounce of your energy. It is good news that your slogan 'Neither Ferry nor Boulanger' should have excluded the renegades and traitors of both these camps from the Socialist Workers' Party552 in the Chamber.

With cordial and fraternal greetings,

F. Engels

First published in: Marx and Engels, Printed according to the original Works, Second Russian Edition, Vol. 37 Moscow 1965 Translated from the French Published in English for the first time

