---
Volume: 48
Document_Title: "236. Engels to Victor Adler 4 December "
Page_Range: "425-427"
---

# 236. Engels to Victor Adler 4 December 



**[p. 235]**

ENGELS TO PASQUALE MARTIGNETTI

IN BENEVENTO

London, 30 November 1889

Dear Friend,

This is just to let you know in great haste that, immediately after the receipt of your letter, I wrote to Lafargue about Labriola.553 I have today heard from Lafargue, who tells me that he had already written to Labriola about your case, asking him to do all he could for you, and that there was hence no need for me to write to him as well.

Trusting that these steps will meet with success, I remain

Very sincerely yours,

F. Engels

First published, in Italian, in La Printed according to the original corrispondenza di Marx e Engels con italiani. 1848-95, Milano, 1964 Published in English for the first time

236

ENGELS TO VICTOR ADLER554

IN VIENNA

London, 4 December 1889

Dear Adler,

I suggest that you undertake a revision of Avenel's Cloots3 for the following reasons:

a G. Avenel, Anacharsis Cloots: d'orateur du genre humaine



**[p. 414]**

The Paris Commune364 and Cloots were in favour of a propaganda war as the only possible expedient, whereas the Comité de salut public556

went in for politics, was afraid of the European coalition and sought peace by dividing the members of that coalition. Danton wished for peace with England, in other words with Fox and the opposition party, which hoped to come to the helm at the elections. Robespierre was conducting intrigues in Basle with Austria and Prussia and wished to compound with those powers. Both joined forces against the Commune, primarily with the intention of overthrowing the men who wished for a propaganda war—the republicanisation of Europe. They succeeded and the Commune (Hébert, Cloots, etc.) had their heads cut off. From then on, however, no peace was possible between those who wanted to conclude peace only with Britain and those who wanted to conclude peace only with the German powers. The English elections turned out in favour of Pitt, which meant Fox's exclusion from power for years to come; as a result Danton's position was ruined, Robespierre emerged victorious and cut off Danton's head. But—and this was a point upon which Avenel didn't lay enough stress—whereas the reign of terror was now intensified beyond all reason, because indispensable if Robespierre was to remain at the helm in the conditions then obtaining in France, it was rendered wholly superfluous by the Fleurus victory of 26 June 1794,365 which not only liberated the frontiers but delivered up to France both Belgium and, indirectly, the left bank of the Rhine, whereby Robespierre was also rendered superfluous and fell on 28 July.

The whole of the French Revolution is dominated by the war with the coalition, a war upon which its every pulsation depends.—Let the coali- tion army advance into France, and the vagus takes over, the heart pounds, there's a revolutionary crisis. Let it be pushed back—and the sympathetic ganglion takes over, the heart slows down, reactionary elements again push themselves to the fore, the plebeians—the forerun- ners of the later proletariat, thanks to whose energy alone the Revolution was saved—are restored to reason and order.

The tragic thing about it was that the party of war à outrance,3- of war for the liberation of the peoples, eventually turned out to be right, and

[^1]: a to the knife



