---
Volume: 48
Document_Title: "237. Engels to Nikolai Danielson 5 December "
Page_Range: "427-429"
---

# 237. Engels to Nikolai Danielson 5 December 



**[p. 415]**

The book must be completely revised and abridged—the bombast must be excised, and the facts, having been supplemented from ordinary history books, made to stand out clearly. In the process Cloots can be completely relegated to the background; the most important things from the Lundis révolutionnaires can be interpolated3—and in this way it can be made into a work on the Revolution such as has never existed before.

The account of how the Battle of Fleuras precipitated the collapse of the reign of terror appeared in 1842 in the (first) Rheinische Zeitung, in an excellent review by C. F. Koppen of H. Leo's Geschichte der franzö- sischen Revolution.™

Many regards to your wife and to Louise Kautsky.

Your

F. E.

First published in: Victor Adlers Printed according to the text of the Aufsätze, Reden und Briefe, Heft 1, book Vienna, 1922

237

IN ST. PETERSBURG

London, 5 December 1889 11 Burton Road Kilburn, N. W.

Dear Sir,

Immediately on receipt of your letter of the 14/26 November561 I informed Mr Lafargue of its contents. He replies that he has written to you at once, saying that he never received any letters from the Lady

a G. Avenel, Lundis révolutionnaires 1871-1874

[^1]: ENGELS T O N I K O L A I DANIELSON 5 6 0





**[p. 416]**

P. Lafargue, 60, Avenue des Champs Elysées Le Perreux

Seine, France

I now forward to you registered a copy of Th. Tooke, on the Currency Principle,b London, 1844. This is a copy I bought second hand, it contains some pencil notes by the former owner, mostly confused stuff; also two old newspaper cuttings, one referring to the crisis of 1847 and rather interesting.

In the meantime I have got ready the 4th edition of Volume Ie now in the press, there are two or three fresh additions from the French edition; the quotations have been looked over with the help of the English edition, and I have added a few notes of my own, especially one about Bimetallism.562 As soon as ready I shall forward you a copy.

Yours sincerely yours P. W. Rosher39

First published in Russian in: Reproduced from the original Minuvshiye gody, No. 2, 1908

Published in English for the first time

[^1]: a A. M. Yevreinova - b T. Tooke, An Inquiry into the Currency Principle, etc. - c of Capital



