---
Volume: 48
Document_Title: "238. Engels to Friedrich Adolph Sorge 7 December "
Page_Range: "429-432"
---

# 238. Engels to Friedrich Adolph Sorge 7 December 



**[p. 238]**

ENGELS T O FRIEDRICH A D O L P H SORGE 5 6 3

IN HOBOKEN

London, 7 December 1889

Dear Sorge,

Letters of 8 and 29 October received with thanks.564

That the 'Socialist Labor Party'3 might go into liquidation is too much to hope. Apart from Shevich, Rosenberg has other heirs in plenty, and the conceited, doctrinaire Germans out there will certainly not be anxious to give up their position as self-appointed tutors to the 'imma- ture' Americans. Otherwise they'd be complete nonentities.

Here, too, we have seen that it's not so easy to educate a great nation in doctrinaire and dogmatic fashion, even if one is in possession of the best of theories deriving from that nation's own mode of existence, and has relatively better educators than those of the Socialist Labor Party. Now the movement has at last got going—as I believe for good. But it isn't actually socialist and those Englishmen who have understood our theory best remain outside it—Hyndman because he's an incorrigible intriguer and dog-in-the-manger, Bax because he's too much of an acad- emic. In form, the movement is first and foremost a trades union move- ment, but totally different from the movement of the old Trades Unions, that of the skilled labourers or working men's aristocracy. The way the chaps are tackling the job now is altogether different; they are leading vastly greater masses into the fray, are convulsing society far more profoundly and making much more extensive demands—8-hour day, the universal federation of all organisations, complete solidarity. Thanks to Tussy, the Gas Workers' and General Labourers' Union565 has, for the first time, got women's branches. Moreover, the chaps consider their present demands to be merely provisional, although they themselves don't yet know what their ultimate goal will be. But this obscure presen- timent is deep-seated enough for them to choose only avowed socialists for their leaders. Like everyone else, they will have to learn by experi- ence and from the consequences of their own mistakes. But it won't take them long since, unlike the old Trades Unions, they greet with derision any reference to an identity of interests between capital and labour. I hope there won't be any general elections for the next three years, 1. so



**[p. 418]**

What is most repellent here is the workers' deeply ingrained sense of middle-class 'respectability'. The division of society into innumerable, incontestably recognised grades, each having its own pride but also an innate respect for its 'betters' and 'superiors', is so old and so firmly established that it's still pretty easy for the middle classes to practise their allurements. I am by no means sure that John Burns, for one, isn't secretly prouder of his popularity with Cardinal Manning, with the Lord Mayorb and with the middle classes generally than he is of his popularity with his own class. And Champion—an ex-subaltern—has always indulged in intrigue with middle-class, and notably Conservative, elements, preached socialism at the priest-ridden Church Congress, etc. And even Tom Mann, who to my mind is the best of the lot, likes to say that he's going to lunch with the Lord Mayor. You only have to compare them with the French to see what the benefits of a revo- lution are. Incidentally, it won't greatly profit the middle classes if they do succeed in luring a few of the leaders into their web. By then the movement will be strong enough to cope with things of that kind. The 4th edition0 has been finished and is printing.

Rappaport has been sent to Kautsky.566 Anyone with such an appalling name must be capable of every kind of nonsense.

Little Hepner567 is such a clever and, in his own eyes, such an impar- tial, and at the same time such an impractical, little chap (what the Jews call Schlemihl—a born Jonah) that I'm surprised he hasn't long ago come to grief out there. It's a pity about the little fellow, but there's nothing we can do.

Time has now been bought by Bax, who has also, I believe, arranged

[^1]: a Alexander III - b Henry Aaron Isaacs - c of the first volume of Capital





**[p. 419]**

Your catalogue of the Tribune articles by Marx568 is doubtless buried under a mountain of unsorted letters. I have got the Tribune articles pasted in somewhere, but whether they are complete I can't say just now. I only came upon them again this autumn.

Strictly between you and me, I have only just heard that, before leaving here, Schlüter's wife apparently alleged that Kautsky had elbowed Schlüter out of his post. If she should say anything of the sort out there, there is no truth whatever in it. Schlüter resigned of his own accord and his resignation was accepted by the parliamentary group in Germany.409 He had a personal quarrel with Motteler, with whom no one can get on, but who is of great value to the party leadership because of his absolute and universally acknowledged reliability in money matters. If on this occasion Schlüter didn't get from Ede Bernstein all the support he might have expected, the blame rested partly with Ede but also partly with Schlüter himself. Our thoughts only turned to Kautsky as a replacement for Schlüter in the post of archivist227 after Schlüter's resignation. I would not have bothered you with this tittle-tattle, but now feel obliged to do so.

A fortnight ago a long letter arrived from Sam Moore. He finds the district salubrious, the situation very fine, and the company tolerable, subscribes to a whole lot of periodicals, but nevertheless would already appear to be looking forward to 1891 and his 6 months' leave in Europe.

In Germany things are going swimmingly; little Williea is an even more proficient agitator than Bismarck, the miners of the Ruhr are certainly ours, those of the Saar soon will be, and the Elberfeld trial, with its revelations about mouchards0 is also doing its bit.569 In France our parliamentary group now numbers 8 men, amongst whom 5 of the dele- gates to the Marxist congress in Paris473, Guesde is their secretary and prepares their speeches for them. There is once more some prospect of a daily paper. The group is going to put forward as a motion the resolu- tions taken by the congress. Everywhere work is under way for May Day 1890.—In Austria things are also going very well, Adler0 has managed splendidly and the anarchists there are done for.

[^1]: a William II - b police spies - c Victor Adler



