---
Volume: 48
Document_Title: "240. Engels to Gerson Trier 18 December "
Page_Range: "435-438"
---

# 240. Engels to Gerson Trier 18 December 



**[p. 240]**

ENGELS T O GERSON TRIER571

IN COPENHAGEN

London, 18 December 1889 [Draft]

Dear Mr Trier,

Many thanks for your interesting communication of the 8th.572

Since you ask my opinion about the recent dramatic events in Copenhagen418 to which you fell victim, let me begin with one point upon which I am not of one mind with you.

You reject on principle any kind of collaboration, however transient, with other parties. I am revolutionary enough not to deprive myself even of this recourse in circumstances in which it would be more to our advantage or at any rate do us least harm.

That the proletariat cannot seize political power, which alone will open the doors to the new society, without violent revolution is some- thing upon which we are both agreed. If the proletariat is to be strong enough to win on the crucial day, it is essential—and Marx and I have been advocating this ever since 1847—for it to constitute a party in its own right, distinct from and opposed to all the rest, one that is conscious of itself as a class party.

This does not mean, however, that the said party cannot occasionally make use of other parties for its own ends. Nor does it mean that it cannot temporarily support other parties in promoting measures which are either of immediate advantage to the proletariat or spell progress in the direction of economic development or political freedom. I would support anyone in Germany who genuinely fought for the abolition of primogeniture573 and other feudal relics, of bureaucracy, protective tariffs, and Anti-Socialist Law52 and restrictions on the right of assembly and of association. If our German Party of Progress45 or your Danish Venstre418 were genuine radical-bourgeois parties and not just a miser- able bunch of windbags who creep into their holes at the first threat uttered by Bismarck or Estrup, I would by no means unreservedly reject any kind of temporary collaboration with them having a specific end in view. When our deputies vote for a motion tabled by a different party— as they all too often have to do—even this could be described as a form



**[p. 424]**

Disregarding the question of morality—a point I am not concerned with here and shall therefore not discuss—I would, as a revolutionary, countenance any means, the most violent but also what may seem the most moderate, that were conducive to the ends.

Such a policy demands insight and strength of character, but what policy does not? It exposes us to the dangers of corruption, or so say the anarchists and friend Morris. Very well, if the working class is an assort- ment of blockheads and weaklings and downright venal blackguards, then we might as well pack up at once, for in that case neither the prole- tariat nor any of the rest of us would have any business to be in the polit- ical arena at all. Like all other parties, the proletariat will be best taught by its own mistakes, and from those mistakes no one can wholly save it.

In my opinion, therefore, you are wrong when you elevate what is primarily a question of tactics to the level of a question of principle. And so far as I'm concerned, the only question that confronts us at the start is a tactical one. A tactical error, however, may in certain circumstances, lead to an infringement of principle.

And here, so far as I can judge, you are right in criticising the tactics of the Hovedbestyrelsen.h For years the Danish Leftc has been acting out an undignified comedy of opposition, nor does it ever tire of demon- strating its own impotence to the world at large. It has long since missed the opportunity—if ever it had one—of avenging the infringement of the Constitution574 by force or arms; indeed, an ever increasing proportion of the Left would seem to be yearning for reconciliation with Estrup. A genuinely proletarian party could not, or so it seems to me, collaborate with a party of that kind without in the long run forfeiting its class char- acter as a working men's party. Hence, in so far as you stress the class character of the movement as arguing against this policy, I can only agree with you.

[^1]: a See present edition, Vol. 6, pp.477-520 - b Central Executive - c the Venstre Party





**[p. 425]**

If you should wish to publish the whole of this letter, I should have no objection.

Yours sincerely

First published in Russian in Printed according to the original Bolshevik, No. 21, 1932

Published in English in full for the first time

