---
Volume: 48
Document_Title: "241. Engels to Natalie Liebknecht 24 December "
Page_Range: "438-440"
---

# 241. Engels to Natalie Liebknecht 24 December 



**[p. 241]**

ENGELS TO NATALIE LIEBKNECHT

IN LEIPZIG

London, 24 December 1889

Dear Mrs Liebknecht,

First of all my most sincere thanks for the greetings you and your sona so kindly sent me on my last birthday, which was a most merry occasion. We all had to sit up until midnight so as to kill two birds with one stone, for the next day was Aveling's birthday and this we proceeded to celebrate together.

We were glad to hear that you are all in the best of health. We, too, are getting on pretty well; Nimmi has had some bad colds and all of us have had attacks of rheumatism—not that it can be wholly avoided in this climate, but so long as it doesn't get too bad, no one complains about it.

All is also well with the Roshers, except that last Sunday Papa Percy caught a bad cold which very nearly developed into pneumonia. However he's improving though it will, of course, put paid to any Christmas jollifications so far as he is concerned and he won't be allowed to leave the house tomorrow. At the moment Pumps is without a maid; the last one upped and left a fortnight ago while she and the children were out, and when Pumps returned she found the house deserted and locked and, since she had no key, the company had to come round to me and await Percy's arrival; until then they were unable to get in. So here too, you see, all kinds of petits misères^1 keep cropping up.

There will be a big party here tomorrow evening if Pumps and her chil- dren are able to come; besides them, the Mottelers, Fischers and Bernsteins will be coming, as will the Avelings, of course, and then there'll be Schorlemmer, who has been here since yesterday. The number coming corresponds exactly to the number we can, at a pinch, find place for. Nimmi is busy cooking and baking—the plum puddings were made a week ago. It's an awful chore, with no purpose other than to bring on attacks of indigestion! But such is required by custom, and one has to conform. Nevertheless we'll make merry, even if we're sorry for it on Boxing Day.

[^1]: a Theodor Liebknecht - b little calamities





**[p. 427]**

I also got a letter from Liebknecht yesterday578 and would ask you to be good enough to thank him for it on my behalf. He will doubtless be with you tomorrow. We over here are anxiously awaiting the verdict at the Elberfeld trial.569 I have long since lost all faith in the Prussian judi- ciary and only trust that Bebel won't be convicted along with others.

The people in Paris are, it seems, to have a daily paper again—but my hopes on this score have so often been dashed that I won't really believe it until I see it. Our French parliamentary group of eight men has not done at all badly up till now and has shown remarkable discipline when one considers that they have come together from all parts of France and are, to a great extent, strangers to one another.

And now, dear Mrs Liebknecht, I should like to send my best wishes for a merry Christmas and a thoroughly enjoyable New Year to you, Liebknecht, Theodor and all the other children, not forgetting Mrs Geiser. I heard from the Schlüters yesterday; they seem to be getting on pretty well.

With warm regards from Nimmi, the Roshers and myself

Yours very sincerely

F. Engels

First published in: Marx and Engels, Printed according to the original Works, First Russian Edition, Vol. XXVIII, Moscow, 1940 Published in English for the first time

[^1]: a Time



