---
Volume: 48
Document_Title: "247. Engels to Hermann Schlüter 11 January "
Page_Range: "448-451"
---

# 247. Engels to Hermann Schlüter 11 January 



**[p. 247]**

ENGELS TO HERMANN SCHLÜTER583

IN NEW YORK

London, 11 January 1890

Dear Schlüter,

Warmest thanks for your and your wife's good wishes, most cordially reciprocated by all of us over here. I also received your letter of 1 July,584

shortly after that date, likewise the Commonwealth with Marx as a gigantic tree and, all round it, the inhabitants of the new communist Jerusalem. Also the article about G. Weerth, but unfortunate only No. 1 and not the final part.

Now as for Reid, I have sent your letter to Tussy and asked her to make inquiries from Champion (Labour Elector), but haven't so far had an answer.585 The chaps over here are frightfully dilatory about anything with which they are not immediately concerned and are, besides, exceed- ingly busy; Tussy may have something to tell me tomorrow, in which case I'll let you know by the next post.

As regards the matter of John Burns' trip to America, this would seem to me highly problematical; he cannot really leave this country without making way for his rivals and he also has to be present on the County Council,451 since he is the only labour representative there.

The movement's headlong progress last summer has slackened off a bit. And, best of all, the bourgeois rabble's mindless sympathy for the labour movement as manifested during the dockers' strike has also abated and is starting to give way to a far more natural feeling of mistrust and anxiety. During the gas strike in South London,577 which the Gas Company forcibly imposed on the workers, the latter have again been left completely in the lurch by the philistines. This is excellent, and I only hope that some day Burns will himself meet with a similar experi- ence in a strike led by him, for in this respect he is subject to all manner of illusions.

On top of that there is, as was only to be expected, all manner of fric- tion, e.g. between gas workers and dockers. But despite all this the masses are in spate and there's no restraining them. The longer the tide is dammed back, the more violent the irruption will be when it comes. And these unskilled men are a very different proposition from the stick-



**[p. 437]**

is gradually being worsted by the new unions and, in 2 or 3 years at the most, the Trades Union Congress269 will itself have been revolutionised. Even at the next one your Broadhursts are going to get the shock of their lives.

The main thing about your revolution in the American socialist tea- cup is that you have killed off Rosenberg & Co.501 As such, the German party over there has got to go; it is proving the worst obsta- cle. The American workers will come along all right but, just like the English, they will go their own way. You can't drum theory into them before the event, but they will soon light upon it as a result of their

[^1]: However, the old Trades Unions, the big self-opinionated ones, will soon be cut down to size; their mainstay, the London Trades Council,587





**[p. 438]**

I am pretty well and my eyesight has improved at last, but I'm not allowed to write for more than 3 hours a day (by daylight). Nim is also well. In the Rosher household, first Percy and then Pumps have fallen ill. Aveling has got influenza. In Kentish Towna things are going on much as usual to the inevitable accompaniment of tirades from Germany.— The Edes have settled down very well. So have the Fischers.

Tell Sorge he'll be getting a letter one of these days but, having waited for so long, you were first on the list. Cordial regards to your wife and self from Nim and

Your

F. Engels

First published, slightly abridged, in: Briefe und Auszüge aus Briefen von Job. Phil. Becker, Jos. Dietzgen, Friedrieb Engels, Karl Marx u. A. an F. A. Sorge und Andere, Stuttgart, 1906 and, in full, in: Marx and Engels, Works, First Russian Edition,

Vol. XXVIII, Moscow, 1940

Printed according to the original

Published in English in full for the first time

[^1]: a The seat of the Sozialdemokrat editorial office in London



