---
Volume: 48
Document_Title: "252. Engels to August Bebel 23 January "
Page_Range: "455-458"
---

# 252. Engels to August Bebel 23 January 



**[p. 443]**

Yours sincerely RE.

First published in: Marx and Engels, Reproduced from the original Works, Second Russian Edition, Vol. 37, Moscow, 1965 Published in English for the first time

252

ENGELS TO AUGUST BEBEL592

IN BERLIN

London, 23 January 1890

Dear Bebel,

Congratulations on the Elberfeld acquittal569 and no less on your bril- liant handling of the case, which emerged quite clearly despite the bad reporting. It was no small thing to steer your way through it as you did, with a train of 90 accused, including a Röllinghof593 and, no doubt, a number of other worthless elements: but I don't suppose that Mr Pinoff will ever want to see you confronting him from the dock again. So that chap is the ultimate of which the Prusso-German Public Prosecutor's Office is capable. He interprets the law just as Bismarck does the Constitution, i.e. as an undergraduate in a pub interprets the students' beer drinking ritual—the greater the uproar the better. It's enough to make a French—not to mention English—lawyer's hair stand on end.

Today, no doubt, the Anti-Socialist Law will again be debated in Berlin.594 I think you are right when you say (in the Arbeiter-Zeitung595)



**[p. 444]**

will disappear with the suspension of the Anti-Socialist Law; the bour- geois elements among them will go over to the National Liberals,596 and the petty bourgeois and working men to us. That is why they will cry off every time it looks as though the Anti-Socialist Law might be thrown out. And in other respects also Bismarck will always obtain a majority; even though they may still show some tendency to bridle and jib in the first year, he'll talk them round in the second and they are, after all, safe from their constituents for the next 5 years! But if Bismarck goes off the rails or otherwise disqualifies himself, it doesn't really matter what sort of people (bourgeois, I mean, not Junkers) there are in the Reichstag; let the wind but shift and they are all equally capable of reviling their idols of yesterday. On this occasion, therefore, I can see absolutely no reason for not repaying the Progress people in kind for their infamous behav- iour in 1887597 and bringing it home to them that if they exist at all, it is only by courtesy of ourselves. It was Parnel Ps decision in 1886 to get the Irish in England to vote everywhere against the Liberals and for the Tories, i.e. to abandon the role of a tame Liberal electorate for the first time since 1880, which, in the space of 6 weeks, turned Gladstone and the Liberal leaders into Home Rulers.598 And if ever something is to be made of the men of Progress, this can only be done by showing them ad oculos*—in the second ballot—that they are dependent upon ourselves. I am looking forward enormously to the actual elections.595 For then our German working men will again show the world what finely tempered steel they are made of. It's possible that you'll have a new element in the Reichstag—labour representatives who are not as yet socialists. The movement amongst the miners435 will have given you an idea of the way in which the movement is progressing over here—a hith- erto indifferent stratum of the working class, largely proof against agita- tion, is being galvanised out of its lethargy by having to fight for its immediate interests and is virtually impelled into the movement by the

[^1]: a plainly





**[p. 445]**

I have just received your Hamburg speech600 but shall not be able to read it till after luncheon.

The French are making a collection for your election fund, though I doubt that very much will come of it; the point is that it's an interna- tional gesture.

Unless something unforeseen happens, peace would seem assured so far as this year is concerned—thanks to the tremendous advances in technology whereby every new gun, every new type of gunpowder, etc., is already obsolete even before it can be introduced into so much as one army, and thanks to the universal fear of unleashing these vast masses of men and powers of destruction, of which no one can say what their effect would be in practice. Thanks also to the French and the way they have dropped Boulanger, who was in the pay of Russia (they'd put 15 million francs at his disposal), thereby eliminating all prospects of a restoration of the monarchy (that being the only purpose Boulanger was supposed to serve). But neither the Tsara nor Russia's diplomats care to embark on anything they are not sure of attaining; an alliance with the Republic is to them too dubious—the Orléans would better suit their book.601 Nor does the anti-Turkish campaign launched by Gladstone for the benefit of his Russian friends602 cut any ice here and, since Gladstone is not yet in office and the Tory government is decidedly pro-German, pro-Austrian and anti-Russian, the Little Father will have to bide his time. But we are indeed sitting upon a live mine and a spark would be enough to set it off.

Our people's Paris daily, already advertised by Liebknecht in German newspapers,603 has not yet been born—the birth pangs still continue. The matter will probably be decided within the next 2 or 3 weeks. At all

[^1]: a Alexander III



