---
Volume: 48
Document_Title: "253. Engels to Friedrich Adolph Sorge 8 February "
Page_Range: "458-462"
---

# 253. Engels to Friedrich Adolph Sorge 8 February 



**[p. 446]**

You people will be unlikely to get much money from America too. Au fond,3- not a bad thing. A genuinely American party is of far greater use to you and the world generally than the few pence you used to get, precisely because the so-called party over there was not a party but a sect, and a purely German sect at that, a branch on foreign soil of the German party and of its specifically Lassallean and outmoded elements in particular. But now the Rosenberg clique has been thrown out501 and, with it, the greatest obstacle to the development and rise of a genuinely American party.

Cordial regards to yourself and your wife,

Your

RE.

First published in: Marx and Engels, Printed according to the original works, First Russian Edition, Vol. XXVIII, Moscow, 1940 Published in English in full for the first time

253

IN HOBOKEN

London, 8 February 1890

Dear Sorge,

Have got your letter of the 14th and 2 postcards re H. Schlüter. What we shall lose as a result of the official socialists in America going

[^1]: ENGELS T O FRIEDRICH A D O L P H SORGE 6 0 4

[^2]: a Basically





**[p. 447]**

it would be a gain, but we're unlikely to be so fortunate. For, after all, the really useful elements will eventually come together again, doing so all the sooner for the rapid self-separation of the dross, and will be suffi- cient, by reason of their superior theoretical insight and experience, to assume the leading role the moment events themselves set the American proletariat in motion. And then you will find that all your years of toil have not been in vain.

The movement over there, just like the one in this country and now, too, in the mining districts of Germany, cannot be produced by exhor- tation alone. It's the facts themselves that will have to bring all this home to the chaps, after which, however, things will move fast—fastest, of course, where an organised and theoretically educated section of the proletariat already exists, as in Germany. Today the coal miners belong to us, potentially and of necessity; in the Ruhr, the process is well under way, the Aachen and Saar Basins will follow, then Saxony, then Lower Silesia and, finally, the Wasserpolaken of Upper Silesia.605 Considering our party's position in Germany, all that was needed to call forth an irre- sistible movement was the impulse arising out of the miners' own living conditions.

Over here the same thing is happening. The movement, which I now regard as irrepressible, arose out of the dock strike,489 out of the sheer necessity of their standing up for themselves. But here again the ground had been so well prepared by the various propaganda campaigns of the past eight years that the men, though not themselves socialists, refused to have any but socialists for their leaders. Now, without themselves being aware of it, they are adopting a theoretically correct course, they drift into it, and the movement is so vigorous that I believe it will survive, without undue damage, the inevitable blunders and the friction between the various trades unions and the leaders resulting therefrom. More about this below.

And that, I think, is what will also happen in America. For now we know that it's not lectures that will convert the Schlewswig-Holsteiners and their successors in England and America;606 that stubborn and presumptuous breed have got to learn by bitter experience. They are doing so increasingly from year to year; but they are ultra-conservative precisely because America is so utterly bourgeois, has absolutely no feudal past and is therefore proud of its purely bourgeois system—and that is why only practice can ride them of their old, traditional, ragbag



**[p. 448]**

Here we are having yet another storm in a tea cup. You will have seen the outcry in the Labour Elector on the subject of Parke,607 the assistant editor of the Star, who, in a local paper, and à propos the buggery scan- dals among the aristocracy here, actually accused Lord Euston of paed- erasty. It was a scurrilous article, but only in a personal sense, the matter being hardly a political one. But it caused a great scandal, the Star took it up and challenged Burns outright and Burns, instead of consulting the committee, disavowed Champion outright in the Star. There was a great rumpus on the committee of the Labour Elector, all of whose members were opposed to Champion but each of whom wishes to get into parlia- ment and must look to his own particular interests; nothing, therefore, was decided, which may also have been because they had no power (last autumn Champion told Tussy that the paper belonged to the committee, he being merely a temporary editor, but I doubt whether that was really the entire truth)—in short, Burns and Bateman resigned from the committee on account of this affair (Burns also on account of the chau- vinistic article on the Portuguese rumpus),608 and this week the entire committee absented itself from the paper. Tussy, too, has now written off Champion, whom she used to provide with international items on France, Germany, Belgium, Holland and Scandinavia—(the crazy stuff about Spain, Portugal, Mexico, etc., is by Cunninghame-Graham, a very honest, very brave but very muddle-headed ex-ranchman).

All that the case has proved, so far as I'm concerned, is that Champion did in fact accept Tory money and then, with the opening of



**[p. 449]**

In Paris our people are still trying to bring a daily into being. The Possibilist Parti Ouvrier, a daily financed by the government, has perished; on n'a plus besoin de ces messieurs?

Bax's Time is quite an ordinary, middle-class affair and he's terrified of making it socialist. Well, it can't carry on just as it is, but there is still no room here for a purely socialist monthly, especially at 1/- a copy. As soon as there's anything interesting in it, I shall send it to you.

Here too we have our Nationalists, the Fabians,176 a well-meaning gang of eddicated middle-class folk who have refuted Marx with Jevons' worthless vulgar economics215—so vulgar that you can make anything of it, including socialism. As in America, its chief object is to convert your bourgeois to socialism and so introduce the thing peacefully and consti- tutionally. They have brought out a bulky tome on the subject, written by 7 authors.15

I trust you are keeping well and the work is becoming easier as you grow accustomed to it.

I am having the same trouble with Percy Rosher as you are with your Adolph,c only more so. The laddie has got into such a hole with his mania for speculation that his family and I have had to compromise with his creditors, and now all he can do is try and find some position or other for himself. But it would be better not to mention this to the Schlüters, lest word of it gets back here.

[^1]: a They no longer have any need of those gentry - b Fabian Essays in Socialism, London, 1889 - c Adolph Sorge Junior



