---
Volume: 48
Document_Title: "254. Engels to August Bebel 17 February "
Page_Range: "462-466"
---

# 254. Engels to August Bebel 17 February 



**[p. 450]**

Cordial regards to your wife.a

Your

F. E.

Schorlemmer isn't allowed to drink either.

First published, slightly abridged, in: Briefe und Auszüge aus Briefen von Joh. Phil. Becker, Jos. Dietzgen, Friedrich Engels, Karl Marx u. A. an F. A. Sorge und Andere, Stuttgart,

1906 and, in full, in: Marx and Engels, Works, First Russian Edition,

Vol. XXVIII, Moscow, 1940

Printed according to the original

Published in English in full for the first time

254

ENGELS TO AUGUST BEBEL

IN PLAUEN NEAR DRESDEN

London, 17 February 1890

Dear Bebel,

Karl Kautsky says you are proposing to telegraph to me on the evening of the 20th such results as are known to you, and it occurred to me that I had better let you have some information about the night deliv- ery service here so that you might not err through ignorance and we not get the telegram until the following morning after all. Ede, Fischer and Kautsky all take the view that it would be best to telegraph me, as they will all be here on Thursday evening and, I hope, also Julius.b

[^1]: a Katarina Sorge - b Julius Motteier





**[p. 451]**

From the start I have thought that, because of his thirst for action qua efficient new broom, and because of his imperiousness that was bound sooner or later to clash with Bismarck's, William the Younger3 was better suited to the task of undermining the ostensibly stable system in Germany, destroying the philistines' faith in the government and stabil- ity and causing a general state of confusion and uncertainty, than was even the 'noble' Frederickb (of whom, by the way, I have here seen a photograph in which he has exactly the same shifty, hereditary, Hohenzollern expression as his half-uncle Willich, son of Prince August, Frederick William IFs brother). But I couldn't have expected that he would attend to this with such promptitude and brilliance as he has done. The man is worth more than his weight in gold to us; he need fear no attempts on his life, for shooting him would not only be a crime but a colossal blunder. If the worst comes to the worst, we ought to provide him with a bodyguard against anarchist assininities.

As I see it, the position is as follows: The Christian Social Conservatives have got the whip hand with young William and, since Bismarck can do nothing to prevent this, he is giving the laddie a free rein in the hope that he will get himself into a thorough fix, at which time he, Bismarck, will step into the breach as guardian angel and thereafter be safe from any relapse. Hence Bismarck hopes for the worst possible Reichstag, which would soon be ripe for dissolution, thus enabling him once again to invoke the philistines' fear of the threat posed by the labour movement.

But here there is one thing Bismarck has forgotten, namely that, from the moment the philistine becomes aware of the discord between old Bismarck and young William, the aforesaid philistine will become an unknown quantity so far as Bismarck is concerned. The philistine will still be afraid, more so even than now, if only because he won't know

[^1]: a William II - b Frederick III





**[p. 452]**

From now on all Bismarck's expedients will avail him less and less. He wants to avenge himself on the National Liberals for having thrown out his expulsion clause.610 In so doing he will kick away his last, feeble prop. He wants to bring the Centre44 over onto his side, and in so doing will dissolve the Centre. The Catholic Junkers ardently desire to ally themselves with the Prussian Junkers, but the day that alliance is sealed the Catholic peasants and workers (on the Rhine the bourgeoisie is predominantly Protestant) will cease to be of any use. This breakup of the Centre will benefit no one so much as ourselves; for Germany it is, on a small scale, what the agreement over nationalities was for Austria on a large one—the elimination of the last party structure not resting upon a purely economic basis, in other words, an important factor in the process of clarification, a setting free of labour elements hitherto ideo- logically enslaved.

The philistine can no longer put his faith in little Willie because he is doing things which the philistine necessarily regards as foolish pranks; he can no longer put his faith in Bismarck because he sees that it's all up with his (B's) omnipotence.

What will come of this confusion, seeing how craven our bourgeoisie is, we cannot possibly say. At all events the old order has been smashed for good and can no more be resuscitated than an extinct species. Things are livening up again, and that's all we require. At first you will be better off, but it's worth considering whether Puttkamer's prediction of a greater state of emergency611 might not eventually be realised. That too would be a step forward—the last, the very last panacea—pretty fright- ful for you while it lasted, but beyond all doubt heralding our victory. Before then, however, a great deal of water will have flowed down the Rhine.

Since conditions for the elections are favourable to a degree we could never have hoped for, my only fear is that we shall obtain too many seats. Every other party in the Reichstag can have as many jackasses and allow them to perpetrate as many blunders as it can afford to pay for, and nobody gives a damn, whereas we, if we are not to be held cheap, must have nothing but heroes and men of genius. Well, the fact is that we are becoming a great party and must learn to take the consequences.

In Paris the Boulangists have scored yet another victory.137 It's all to the good. Paris has been greatly spoiled by the sybaritism of the many



**[p. 453]**

Well, as regards telegraphing, I shall write to the head office here to say that, this week, telegrams should be delivered to me at any hour of the night. But if your telegrams are to be of any use, they must arrive here before 1 o'clock in the morning. So if, on Thursday night, you tele- graph before 11.30, that will leave 2Vi hours for transmission, allowing for the time difference; but not any later, as it wouldn't be much use. So 11.30 p.m. on Thursday at the latest. Ede is going to arrange for telegrams to be sent to us direct from Berlin, Hamburg, and Elberfeld.

But if you have no results to telegraph before 11.30 on Thursday, then it would be better to wait until about midday or 1 o'clock on Friday, when you are bound to know something, and perhaps again on Friday night at about 10 or 11; the latter would be desirable whatever happens.

Further, only the names of towns where we have won or got into the second ballot. Where there are several constituencies in one town, I suggest the following: For Hamburg write Hbg, all 3 seats; for Hamburg one two, write Hbg I and II constituency. Again: All victories first, then all second ballots that we are in; e.g. thus,—victory Berlin four, five, six, Hamburg, Breslau one, Chemnitz, Leipzig Province, etc., second ballot Berlin three, Breslau two, Dresden one, Leipzig city, etc. If that's too long, then: Fifteen victories, seventeen second ballots, etc. And in the second telegram: So many victories all told and so, etc. second ballots.

This will save money and time. Cordial regards and 1,200,000 votes.

Your

F. E.

First published in: Marx and Engels, Printed according to the original Works, first Russian Edition, Vol. XXVIII, Moscow, 1940 Published in English in full for the first time

