---
Volume: 48
Document_Title: "258. Engels to Laura Lafargue 14 March "
Page_Range: "473-475"
---

# 258. Engels to Laura Lafargue 14 March 



**[p. 461]**

Regards from Nim, the Avelings, the Edes, Dr Zadek and Mrs Romm-Zadek, likewise Pumps and Percy, all of whom are here.

Your

F. E.

First published in: Marx and Engels, Printed according to the original Works, First Russian Edition, Vol. XXVIII, Moscow, 1940 Published in English for the first time

258

ENGELS TO LAURA LAFARGUE

AT LE PERREUX

My dear Laura,

Last night Bernstein called. We think it best you should write to Bebel asking him for some information. He has the Parliamentsalmanach which we have not and a Secretary who might copy out a few extracts. You might say Bernstein and I had suggested this to you.

If you like you might write also direct to Carl Grillenberger, Weizenstrasse 14, Nürnberg G. von Vollmar, Schwabing bei München, J. H. W Dietz, Furthbachstrasse 12, Stuttgart,

F. Kunert, Red. Der 'Breslauer Nachrichten', Breslaub and ask them

[^1]: London, 14 Marcha 1890

[^2]: a In the MS 'February' - a mistake - b Wraclaw





**[p. 462]**

I will ask Tussy about that niece of Mohr's Paul has written about. I have not heard anything about her. Would be curious if you should turn out to be connected with little Abraham, vulgo Alexander, Weill!

Things are getting serious in Germany. The Kreuz-Zeitung, ultra- conservative, declares the Socialist law useless and bad! Well, we shall probably get rid of it, but Puttkamer's word will then become true: we shall have the major state of siège instead of the minor one, and cannons instead of expulsions.611 Things go so well for us, we never dared to hope half so much, but, but, it will be stirring times and everything depends upon our men not allowing themselves to be provoked into riots. In three years we may have the agricultural labourer, the mainstay of Prussia, and then—feua!

Ever yours

F. E.

We went to-day up to Highgate. Tussy had been already in the morn- ing, planted Mohr's and your Mama's grave with crocus, primroses, hyacinths, etc. very beautifully. If Mohr had lived to see this!

First published in English in: F. Engels, Reproduced from the original P. et L. Lafargue, Correspondance, t. Il, Paris, 1956

[^1]: a fire



