---
Volume: 48
Document_Title: "259. Engels to Antonio Labriola 30 March "
Page_Range: "475-476"
---

# 259. Engels to Antonio Labriola 30 March 



**[p. 259]**

ENGELS TO ANTONIO LABRIOLA

IN ROME

[Draft]

London, 30 March 1890. Labriola. Dear Professor,—Please accept my thanks for the pamphlets you were so very good as to send me. I read the first, Del socialismo, with much interest and next week, when I hope to have some leisure, shall go carefully through the second one, that on the philosophy of history.3 This is a subject in which Marx and I had long taken a special interest. A new contribution from Vico's mother country and from a scholar conversant with our German philosophers calls for my fullest attention. I should like to take the liberty of sending you in return my little piece of Feuerbach.b

I am also indebted to you for your kind endeavours on behalf of P. Martignetti, which have, I am glad to say, met with their first big success. I have been in correspondence with Mr Martignetti since 1884 and am morally convinced that he is innocent of the actions imputed to him and has fallen victim to a shabby intrigue. Perhaps, when you have occasion, you would convey to Mr Aw. c Lollini my most sincere thanks for his willing, able and successful defence of Martignetti. I trust that this magnanimous intervention on the part of you both will succeed in protecting him from undeserved vilification and ruin.

You must forgive me for writing to you in German. Over the last few years, however, my Italian, such as it is, has, alas, grown exceedingly rusty and I dare not mangle the Italian language in front of a master of that beautiful tongue.

Very respectfully yours,

First published in: Marx and Engels, Printed according to the original Works, First Russian Edition, Vol. XXVIII, Moscow, 1940 Published in English for the first time

[^1]: F. E.

[^2]: a I problemi delta filosofia delta storia - b Ludwig Feuerbach and the End of Classical German Philosophy - c Advocate



