---
Volume: 48
Document_Title: "260. Engels to Pasquale Martignetti 30 March "
Page_Range: "476-477"
---

# 260. Engels to Pasquale Martignetti 30 March 



**[p. 260]**

ENGELS TO PASQUALE MARTIGNETTI

IN BENEVENTO620

London, 30 March 1890

Dear Friend,

Herewith the letter to Labriola you asked for.a

As to his terra libera,621 it is in fact altogether too much to expect of the present Italian government that it will allocate property in the colonies to small farmers for themselves to cultivate and not to monopolists, whether companies or individuals. Small-scale farming is the natural and best system for the colonies presently being founded by bourgeois govern- ments, on which point cf Marx, Capital, Volume I, last chapter, 'The Modern Theory of Colonisation'.b So we socialists can, with a good conscience, support the introduction of the system of small farms into colonies that have already been founded. But whether this will be done is another question. All governments today are so much the creatures and hirelings of financiers and the stock exchange that there's nothing to stop the speculators themselves from gaining control of the colonies in order to exploit them, and no doubt that will also apply in Eritrea. But one can, after all, hit back, even if it's in the shape of a demand that the government should give the emigrant Italian farmers an assurance that they will enjoy the same advantages there as they seek and generally find in Buenos Aires.

I can't discover from the Messaggero's article622 whether Labriola combines his demand with still further requirements, namely govern- ment loans for emigrants to Eritrea, co-operatively run settlements, etc.

Unfortunately I have absolutely no time to spare for revising the translation of Wage Labour and Capital.232 I have had some urgent jobs to do, and must now get back at once to Volume III of Capital before events in Germany take a revolutionary turn, as is very possible.

Yours sincerely,

F. Engels

First published in Italian in: La Printed according to the original corrispondenza di Marx e Engels con italiani. 1848-1895, Milano, 1964 Published in English for the first time

[^1]: a See previous letter - b See present edition, Vol. 35, pp.751-64



