---
Volume: 48
Document_Title: "261. Engels to Karl Kautsky 1 April "
Page_Range: "477-478"
---

# 261. Engels to Karl Kautsky 1 April 



**[p. 261]**

ENGELS T O KARL KAUTSKY

IN STUTTGART

London, 1 April 1890

Dear Kautsky,

I have just received the Russian Sotsial-Demokrat and have compared my article* with the Neue Zeit.62i I now find that Mr Dietz has had the impudence to alter without reference to ourselves various passages which he had not even scored in red. Not one of these passages infringes the penal code or contravenes the Anti-Socialist Law;52 they were, however, too strong for philistine tastes.

Yet I have behaved as decently as possible and have done all I could to make the elimination of harmful matter easier for him. But censor- ship of this kind, carried out behind my back, is something I won't stand for from any publisher. I shall therefore write to Dietz expressly forbidding him to print the remainder of the article in any form other than that in which it appears in the proof corrected by me, and by that I mean word for word. What else I shall do remains to be seen. At all events, Mr Dietz has made it impossible for me to send further contri- butions to a periodical in which one is exposed to this kind of treat- ment.

Your

F. Engels

First published in: Aus der Frühzeit Printed according to the original des Marxismus. Engels Briefwechsel mit Kautsky. Prag, 1935 Published in English for the first time

[^1]: a Engels, F. 'The Foreign Policy of Russian Tsardom' (present edition, Vol. 27).



