---
Volume: 48
Document_Title: "268. Engels to Conrad Schmidt 12 April "
Page_Range: "488-491"
---

# 268. Engels to Conrad Schmidt 12 April 



**[p. 268]**

ENGELS TO CONRAD SCHMIDT

IN BERLIN

London, 12 April 1890

Dear Schmidt,

I am precluded today by lack of time from replying save very briefly to your letters of 25.2 and 1.4, but as the second requires an early answer,631 I must get on with it today.

I realised as much as a year ago that I should require help with Marx's mss. I therefore proposed that Ede—i.e. Bernstein—and Kautsky should assist me with these, needless to say not without remu- neration, and both accepted. Well, so far I have had from Kautsky a copy of part of the ms. of Book IV, mentioned in the preface to Volume II632; he has got quite adept at reading the handwriting and still devotes some of his spare time to this. Now there is, in fact, a possibility that he will be leaving London for good, i.e. at any rate for a few years, but in that case, as has already been agreed, his place will probably be taken by Ede, particularly in view of the fact that, though his position might change should the Anti-Socialist Law52 expire and not be renewed, he might still not be able to return to Germany there and then. As things stand at present, therefore, I could not offer you any real prospect of work in this sphere; but in six months things can change a lot, and I shall be all the happier to bear your kind offer in mind in that I am anxious to familiarise as many properly qualified people as possible with Marx's handwriting—something that can't be done without teach- ers, of whom I am the only one. For if I were to kick the bucket, as might happen any day, these mss. would otherwise be a book sealed with seven seals and would be subject to guesswork rather than a correct reading. So if a situation should arise in which I lost my present collaborators or otherwise obtained a free hand in this respect, I should at once apply to you and can only hope that you would then still feel inclined to accept; perhaps you will succeed in coming over here notwithstanding and, once you were in this country, much might easily be arranged which, from a distance, appears difficult.

[^1]: Our electoral victory3 was indeed astonishing and the success it





**[p. 477]**

Have you seen a review of your book by Achille Loria of Siena,c in Conrad's Jahrbücher} It was sent me from Italy—maybe indirectly by Loria himself. I know the said Loria; he was over here and he also corre- sponded with Marx. He speaks German and writes it as in his article— that is to say, badly—and he is the most consummate careerist I have ever met. At one time he believed that world redemption lay in small- scale peasant landownership, but whether he still does, I cannot say. He

[^1]: a to the Reichstag in Germany - b Social-democratic parliamentary group - c A. Loria, Die Durchschnittsprofitrate auf Grundlage des Marx'schen Wertgesetzes





**[p. 478]**

Yours,

F. Engels

First published in: Sozialistische Printed according to the original Monatshefte, Nos 18-19, 1920

Published in English for the first time

a A. Loria, La teoria economica della Constituzione Politica - b A. Loria, Karl Marx: Nuova antologia di scienze, lettere ed arti, Serie II, Bd. 38, vom. 1. April 1883 - c A known sophism - d Engels to Loria, end of April 1883 (see present edition, Vol. 47, pp.24-5)

