---
Volume: 48
Document_Title: "269. Engels to Laura Lafargue 16 April "
Page_Range: "491-494"
---

# 269. Engels to Laura Lafargue 16 April 



**[p. 269]**

ENGELS TO LAURA LAFARGUE40

AT LE PERREUX

London, 16 April 1890

My dear Laura,

At last! a free hour to write a line to you. I am pestered almost to death with letters, verbal and other applications of all sorts, and wish I could shut myself off for a month or so—for I find it impossible to reply to all my letters, much less to do any serious work.

Many thanks for the kind wishes in your poem but I am afraid the Lord on high and the lord below will settle my hash for me some day and find me a place somewhere. But that need not trouble us now.

And now a little business:

1) Will you give me Longuet 's address? 2) Will Paul procure me the title, publisher's name, etc. of a pocket edition (cheap) of the Code Napoléon634 as at present in force, for Sam Moore? (les cinq codes suffiront, civil, procédure civile, pénal, procédure criminelle, de commerce1) and price.

3) Enclosed a bill found in last lot of French newspapers.

The Parisian workmen are acting indeed as if they had but one purpose to live for, and that is to prove how utterly undeserved was their revolu- tionary reputation. It's all very well for Paul to repeat over and over again that they are Boulangists out of pure opposition against the bour- geoisie—but so were those who voted for Louis Bonaparte, and what would our Parisians say if the German workmen, to spite Bismarck and the bourgeoisie, threw themselves blindfold in the arms of young William? It is plainly cutting off your nose to spite your face, and the Parisians have still so much left of their former esprit that they can still back up the worst of all possible causes by the best of all possible reasons.

No, the cause of this surfeit of Boulangism lies deeper. It is Chauvinism. The French Chauvins, after 1871, resolved that history should stand still until Alsace was reconquered. Everything was made subordinate to that. And our friends never had the courage to stand up

[^1]: a five statutes will suffice: civil, civil and penal procedure, criminal procedure and commerce





**[p. 480]**

against this absurdity. There were fellows at the Citoyen and Qr'f who howled with the masses against everything German, no matter what, and our friends submitted to that. The consequences are there. The only excuse for Boulangism is la revanche, Alsace reconquered. What not one party in Paris ever dared to oppose, is it a wonder that the Parisian workmen now cling to as a gospel?

But in spite of French patriots, history did not stand still—only France did, after the fall of Mc Mahon.198 And the necessary consequence of this French patriotic aberration is that the French workmen are now the allies of the Czarb against not only Germany, but against the Russian workmen and revolutionists too! In order to preserve to Paris the posi- tion of revolutionary centre, the revolution must be crushed in Russia, for how to reconquer, without the help of the Czar, the leading position belonging to Paris by right?

If the desertion en masse to Boulanger of the French or rather Parisian workmen should cause socialists abroad to consider them as completely déchus? there would be no cause to be astonished. What else can they expect?

Of course, I should not be so hasty in my judgment. This momentary aberration should not lead me to such a conclusion. But it is the third time that such an aberration recurs since 1789—the first time Napoleon No. I, the second time Napoleon No. 3 was carried to the top by that wave of aberration, and now it's a worse creature than either—but fortunately the force of the wave, too, is broken. Anyhow, we must apparently come to the conclusion that the negative side of the Parisian revolutionary charac- ter—chauvinistic Bonapartism—is as essential to it as the positive side, and that after every great revolutionary effort, we may have a recrudescence of Bonapartism, of an appeal to a saviour who is to destroy the vile bourgeois qui ont escamoté la révolution et la république^ and in whose traps the naïfs ouvrierf have fallen—because, being Parisians, they know every- thing from birth and by birth, and need not learn like vulgar mortals.

So I shall welcome any revolutionary spurt the Parisians may favour us with, but shall expect them to be again volés1 afterwards and then fly to a miracle-performing saviour. For action I hope and trust the Parisians to be as fit as ever, but if they claim to lead with regard to ideas, I shall say thank you.

[^1]: a Cri du Peuple (see also Engels to Lafargue, 30 October 1882, present edition, Vol. 46) - b Alexander III - c degraded - ° Who have done away with the revo- lution and the Republic - e Simple working men - f cheated



«1

By the bye Boulanger is so deep down now that the other day Frank Rosher who was in Jersey on business—a boy of 22, and the most conceited snob in London—called on him and was received courteously

wmmmmmttmmÈi

c the 1st ot May i i t disappoint the expectations of our

French friends, I it turns ont a success in Ms, it fill k a heavy h of

i to tue M b i t s and may mark tie beginning of an awakening from

Boukngism. Tie 1st May resolution was tie test our congress took.

473

It prows our power all over tie world, is a letter revival of tie

rnational than I formal attempts at reorganization, and slows agi

