---
Volume: 48
Document_Title: "270. Engels to Vera Zasulich 17 April "
Page_Range: "494-497"
---

# 270. Engels to Vera Zasulich 17 April 

482 Letters-1890

'. et L.

Pine

mm

i&t) Uli Ft Ëfl|Çl?i Reproduced from the orieinal

and in Russian in:

lte 1



**[p. 481]**

By the bye Boulanger is so deep down now that the other day Frank Rosher who was in Jersey on business—a boy of 22, and the most conceited snob in London—called on him and was received courteously and both assured each other of their mutual bienveillance et protection*]

I hope the 1st of May will not disappoint the expectations of our French friends. If it turns out a success in Paris, it will be a heavy blow to the Possibilists and may mark the beginning of an awakening from Boulangism. The 1st May resolution was the best our congress took.473

It proves our power all over the world, is a better revival of the International than all formal attempts at reorganization, and shows again which of the two congresses478 was representative.

I am afraid I shall not be able to take one of your two dogs. The one is a bitch and Nim objects firmly to have again to do the massacre of the innocents, and the other is a pointer, id est a sporting dog, and there are most absurd laws here with regard to them—I could not take him out to Hampstead without being stopped by the police as a potential poacher; that is the reason why pointers, fox-hounds, setters, etc. are kept only for real sporting purposes and never, as with us on the continent, for private amusement. Voilà ce que c'est que de vivre dans un pays aristocratique}'

In Germany we shall have to keep the 1st May as quiet as possible. The military has strict orders to interfere at once and not to wait for requisi- tion from the civil authorities, and the secret police—on the point of being discharged—are straining every nerve to provoke a collision. In fact if the telegrams just to hand by Reuter are worth anything, they are beginning already and have found a few anarchists to provoke some 'outrages'.

Nim says she can't come, her gardening days are over. She has rheumatism in the hip-joint—not much, but there it sticks.

By the bye our Paris friends seem to go all to pieces. There is the Parti socialiste—a paper to work the Municipal elections, that I can conceive as a rational purpose. But then there is Okecki's Autonomie, and then a daily paper, the Combat in Boyer's hands, and now Guesde wants to organize a lithographic correspondence—why this looks like an attempt at gaspillage0—they all cry after a daily paper and now they have one they don't seem to use it—or are they all at sixes and sevens? I cannot make it out.

Ever yours,

F. Engels

[^1]: a Goodwill and protection - b That's what comes of living in an aristocratic country - c squandering





**[p. 482]**

First published in English in: F. Engels, Reproduced from the original P. et L. Lafargue, Correspondance, t. Il, Paris, 1956 and in Russian in: Istoricbesky arkhiv, No. 2, 1956

270

ENGELS TO VERA ZASULICH635

IN MORNEX (FRANCE)

London, 17 April 1890 122 Regent's Park Road, N. W.

My dear Citizen,

When I read Beck's article, I had a feeling it might anger you and your friends, and I told Bernstein that, in his place, I would not have published such twaddle. To this, his answer was that he felt he had no right to suppress an article which did, after all, express the views of a fair number of young Russians, people who had no other organ in which to reply, for the benefit of Sozialdemokrat readers, to the article which had preceded it, and that what he had chiefly in mind was to give you an opportunity to answer those criticisms; he added that he would natu- rally, and with the greatest pleasure, print any reply you cared to send him.636

The position of the Sozialdemokrat vis-à-vis the Russians in the West is somewhat delicate. Needless to say, the paper looks upon you as the allies and particular friends of the German movement, but other socialist groups can also lay claim to some measure of consideration. If they are to communicate with German working men, they are more or less obliged to write to the Sozialdemokrat; should that paper refuse them its hospitality? To do so would be to meddle in the internal affairs of the Russians—something to be avoided at all costs. Consider the internal struggles of the French and Danish Socialists; for as long as it was able, i.e. so long as it was not itself called in question, the

