---
Volume: 48
Document_Title: "271. Engels to Friedrich Adolph Sorge 19 April "
Page_Range: "497-500"
---

# 271. Engels to Friedrich Adolph Sorge 19 April 



**[p. 483]**

Sozialdemokrat maintained its neutrality vis-à-vis the Possibilitsts,19 as it has continued to do vis-à-vis the two Danish parties, although its sympathies lie entirely with the 'revolutionary' side.418 And the same thing applies to the Russians; Bernstein has never harboured any ill- will whatsoever towards you, of that you may be assured, but he has an exaggerated sense of justice and equity; and rather than perpetrate one injustice against an enemy or a man he finds uncongenial, he will sooner perpetrate ten against his friends and allies; all his friends criti- cise him for an impartiality so excessive that it ends up as bias against his allies. This is why he always tends to give the enemy the benefit of the doubt.

Add to that the fact that we are all very much in the dark as regards the various, and far from immutable, groupings which occur among the Russians in the West, so that we are liable at any given moment to drop a brick. Bernstein is much better informed than I am, having had at least some first-hand experience of this kind of thing in Zurich, whereas I, on the contrary, did not know so much as the names, or even suspect the existence of the journals you cite.637 Bernstein tells me that, in Beck's letter, he detects the accents of Lavrov's followers—whether rightly or wrongly, I do not know—but this was one of the reasons which induced him to publish the letter.

He also told me that he had arranged for a translation of Plekhanov's preface to be sent him from Paris so that he might print it in its entirety; it had arrived, he said, and would appear as soon as possible. He arranged this as soon as he got Beck's letter, which can only mean that he intended to take advantage of its publication to give Plekhanov another say. I would now suggest that you write a reply to Beck—in French, if you so wish—and send it to me or else direct to the Sozialdemokrat (address 4 Corinne Road, Tufnell Park, London N.). While you, for your part, may know the said Mr Beck who, outside Russian circles, is quite unknown, and while you may regard entering into debate with him as a somewhat demeaning occupation, this is, after all, the sort of unpleasantness to which one is all too often compelled to submit, as I am only too well aware.

I know from experience what an upheaval is like when it takes place, as now, in the bosom of a small community of the Russians in the West. Everyone knows everyone else, having had with them personal relations of a friendly or hostile nature and, as a result, any development—accom- panied as it inevitably is by divisions, schisms and controversies—will assume a wholly personal character. Such things are inherent in any



**[p. 484]**

If you wish to rob your enemies of all desire to swagger in front of the German Socialists, your best way would be to contribute regularly to the Sozialdemokrat and the Neue Zeit. Once the identity of your views with those of the Germans has been thoroughly established and recognised, let the others say what they will—no one will heed them. I am sure that contributions from you would be welcomed with open arms, and was delighted to hear that Plekhanov's article on Chernyshevsky was to appear in the Neue Zeit.

My cordial regards to Plekhanov, as also to yourself.

Yours very sincerely,

F. Engels

Bernstein is an excellent chap as regards both intelligence and charac- ter, but it is typical of him that the measure of the esteem in which he holds you should be the number of attacks he permits others to make upon you in the Sozialdemokrat; the greater his respect for you, the more anxious he is to appear impartial where you are concerned.



**[p. 485]**

First published in: Marx and Engels, Typed copy of manuscript Works, First Russian Edition, Vol. XXVIII, Moscow, 1941 Translated from the French

Published in English in full for the first time

271

ENGELS TO FRIEDRICH ADOLPH SORGE237

IN HOBOKEN

London, 19 April 1890

Dear Sorge,

I get the Nationalist regularly but unfortunately there's not much in it. Just feeble reflections of our Fabians176 over here. Dreary and shallow as Dismal Swamp,63* but pleased as Punch about the magnanimous magnanimity with which they, eddicated middle-class folk, condescend to emancipate the workers who, however, are expected in return to be sweetly submissive and kowtow obediently to the eddicated cranks and their isms. Let them enjoy their little pleasure while they may; one fine day the movement will efface all this. Indeed, we continentals are at an advantage in that this sort of thing would not be possible in our case because of the very different effect the French Revolution has had on us.

Today I am also sending you The People's Press, which, so far as reports on the new Trades Unions are concerned, has now taken the place of the Labour Elector. The latter, as you will have seen, no longer carries any factual news because the workers flatly refuse to have anything further to do with it. Not that this prevents Burns, Mann and others (particularly some of the dockers) from consorting a great deal with Champion on the sly and allowing themselves to be influenced by him. The People's Press is edited by a very youthful Fabian named Dell, the second in command being the parson Morris; both, from what I have heard so far, are decent people and most obliging to the gas workers. The

