---
Volume: 48
Document_Title: "272. Engels to Friedrich Adolph Sorge 30 April "
Page_Range: "500-504"
---

# 272. Engels to Friedrich Adolph Sorge 30 April 



**[p. 486]**

In a country such as this, with an old political and labour movement, there will always be a vast accumulation of traditionally received rubbish to be gradually got rid of. There are the prejudices, all of which need to be broken down, of the skilled Unions—Engineers, Bricklayers, Carpenters, Joiners, Type Compositors, etc., the petty jealousies between individual trades which, fomented in word and deed by the leaders, are surreptitiously exacerbated to the point of outright enmity and strife; there are the incompatible ambitions and the intrigues of the leaders—this one wants to get into Parliament, so does that, the other wants to get on to the County Council451 or the School Board, yet another to establish the universal centralisation of all workers, and another still to found a newspaper, a club, etc., etc.,—in short, there are endless causes of friction; and, in the midst of it all, the Socialist League,21 contemptuous of everything that is not downright revolution-



**[p. 487]**

ary (which means here in England as with you in America, everything that's not confined to spouting hot air to the exclusion of everything else), and the Federation,62 which continues to behave as if, except for itself, there were nothing but fools and bunglers, even though the modicum of support it is regaining is due solely to the vigour of the new movement. In short, anyone who merely considered the surface of things would say that all was confusion and personal quarrels. But beneath the surface the movement continues, spreading to ever wider strata, for the most part precisely those at the very base of the hitherto inert masses, nor is the day far off when those masses will suddenly discover their identity, when it will dawn on them that it is they who are these vast dynamic masses and, on that day, short work will be made of all the shabby tricks and petty quarrels.

Needless to say, the above details as to persons and momentary differ- ences are solely for your own information and must not on any account be allowed to get into the Volkszeitung. Let this be understood once and for all—for when Schlüter was over here, he more than once demon- strated a tendency to take this sort of thing rather too lightly.

I much look forward to the First of May. In Germany the group in the Reichstag was duty-bound to restrain any excess of zeal. The bourgeois, the political police, whose 'bread and butter' is at stake, the worthy offi- cers—all are itching for mayhem and slaughter and are seeking any pretext to persuade young William3 that it's never too soon to shoot. But this would completely ruin our game. First we have to get rid of the Anti- Socialist Law,52 i.e. survive the 30th of September. And after that our prospects in Germany will be much too brilliant for us to wreck them merely for the sake of blowing our own trumpet. Come to that, the parliamentary group's proclamation640 is bad; it stems from Liebknecht and the nonsense about a 'general strike' was wholly unnecessary. But either way, our people have been so elated by the 20th of February599 that a certain amount of restraint is necessary if blunders are to be avoided.

In France the First of May might be a turning-point, for Paris at any rate, provided it helps to restore to their right minds the large numbers of working men who have gone over to Boulangism there. For this, our people have only themselves to blame. They have never had the courage to oppose the outcry against the Germans, qua Germans, and now in Paris they are falling victim to chauvinism. Luckily the position is better in the provinces. But abroad people look only to Paris.

[^1]: a William II





**[p. 488]**

If the French sent me their stuff, I would send it on to you. But I think they themselves are ashamed of the things. Well, it's in the French nature—defeat is more than they can stomach. The moment they again have a taste of success, all will suddenly change.

Cordial regards to your wifea and yourself. Likewise to the Schlüters. Schorlemmer returned to Manchester last Monday. We are both of necessity strict abstainers. Quelle horreur^0

First published in: Briefe und Auszüge Printed according to the original aus Briefen von Joh. Phil. Becker, Jos. Dietzgen, Friedrich Engels, Karl Marx Published in English in full for the u. A. an F A. Sorge und Andere. first time Stuttgart, 1906

272

ENGELS TO FRIEDRICH ADOLPH SORGE

London, 30 April 1890

Dear Sorge

If, next Sunday, a gigantic demonstration for the eight hour day takes place here in London, this will be thanks only to Tussy and Aveling. Tussy represents her Silvertown working women on the council of the Gasworkers' and General Labourers' Union and enjoys so much popu- larity on that Council that no one calls her anything but our mother. The gas workers—the best of the new Unions—were greatly in favour of the 8 hours demonstration for, besides having fought for and secured an 8 hour day for themselves, they had also learnt how insecure in practice is such an achievement, liable as it is to being reversed by the capitalists

[^1]: IN HOBOKEN641

[^2]: "Katharina Sorge - b How awful!





**[p. 489]**

at the first opportunity; for the gas workers as for the Miners, the main thing is that it should be legally established.

Thus it was the gasworkers and the Bloomsbury Socialist Society642

(the best section, which seceded from the Socialist League 2 years ago and of which Lessner, Tussy and Aveling are members) who initiated the thing, and obtained a strong following among the smaller Trades Unions and the Radical Clubs,22 which are increasingly splitting up into social- ist working men's clubs and middle-class Gladstonian clubs. In all sincerity, they approached the London Trades Council587 and suggested they take part in the proposed demonstration in Hyde Park. That body (next year it, too, will be in our hands), consisting mainly of representa- tives of the old skilled Trades Unions, realised that there was no avoid- ing the thing and attempted to gain control of it by a coup de main.

In collusion with the Social Democratic Federation62 (Hyndman), they applied to the Commissioner of Works and reserved Hyde Park for the 4th of May, something the others had as yet failed to do. For when- ever a large meeting is to be held in the park, prior notice must be given to the Commissioner of Works, who then stipulates how many plat- forms may be erected, etc. Since the regulations also prohibit the hold- ing of any other meeting at the same time on the same day, these gentle- men imagined they now had the upper hand and, having monopolised the park, would be able to order the original committee about.643 They had applied for 7 platforms, intending to allow the Social Democratic Federation to have two of them—thus, or so they thought, preserving a semblance of impartiality towards the socialists while at the same time gaining a socialist ally.

Hence they decided that only Trades Societies, not political associa- tions (thus excluding the clubs), were to parade with banners and provide speakers. They edited the resolution, omitting all mention of the legal 8 hours day and referring only to the 8 hours to be striven for by means of Trades Union action. Not till they had arranged the procession, the routes to be taken, etc., did they call a meeting of delegates—of Trades Societies only. When this took place, 1. Tussy was not admitted on the grounds that she was not herself employed in the calling she represented! (and yet Mr Shipton, the secretary of the Trades Council, hasn't done a hand's turn in his trade for 15 or 16 years!!) 2. An amend- ment calling for the re-introduction of the legal 8 hours day into the resolution was not allowed to be put to the vote or debated—this matter having already been settledl 3. The delegates were given plainly to understand that the Trades Council was the man in possession, that the

