---
Volume: 48
Document_Title: "273. Engels to August Bebel 9 May "
Page_Range: "504-507"
---

# 273. Engels to August Bebel 9 May 



**[p. 490]**

Park was his for the 4th of May, and if they did not like it they could leave it alone.

Much wrath and consternation among the delegates of the original committee. The following day the tables were turned, however. Aveling went to the commissioner of Works and told him that, unless the origi- nal committee were simultaneously awarded a sufficient number of plat- forms, there would be a set-to; luckily the Tories are in power (the Liberals would have prevaricated and conceded nothing) and cannot afford to make any more enemies amongst the workers—Aveling was awarded seven platforms, and now it was the turn of the gentlemen on the Trades Council to eat humble pie, for a clash at this juncture would really have shown how weak they were.

Our committee then buckled to, settling the details of its plans and of the routes to be taken by the procession—these it published forthwith— and thus was first to be ready. Yesterday Aveling and Shipton met and so arranged matters as to preclude all possibility of a clash, which means that Sunday's meeting will be one of the biggest there has ever been.

You may get this published in the Volkszeitung and also in the Workmen's Advocate; I should be only too pleased if it were to come back to the gentlemen in English from America.

I am now sending you a few Stars, which will be comprehensible to you in the light of the above (NB each article as a rule contains news emanating both from our side and from the other lot, in addition to that obtained by the reporters themselves, all of it lumped together indis- criminately).

Further, the May number of Time. Also a bundle of Combats (belongs to us, Guesde editor-in-chief) and with them the Vienna Arbeiter-Zeitung. The object of the threats of expulsion in Bebel's arti- cle644 is Schippel—one of the chief intriguers and a great adept in sharp practice, whom Liebknecht discovered several years ago and introduced into the party but now mortally detests. Luckily Schippel is a coward, like Hyndman.

This is our first major victory in London and it shows that we now have the masses behind us in this country too. Four strong branches of the Social Democratic Federation, which is to have two platforms of its own, will be marching with us and are represented on our committee. The same applies to many of the skilled trades—the old, traditional lead- ers side with Shipton and the Trades Council—the majority with us. The whole of the East End is on our side. The masses over here, though not yet socialist, are well on the way there and have already got to the stage



**[p. 491]**

of wanting to have only socialist leaders. The Trades Council is the only labour organisation of note to be still anti-socialist but already includes a socialist minority and, the moment the gas workers—who so far have been kept at arm's length by all manner of little ruses—get into it, things will begin to move fast. I feel convinced that, after the 4th of May, the movement here will take on an altogether different character, and then you will hear more about Tussy's public activities. We have shown the intriguers of the Trades Council and the Social Democratic Federation that we are a match for their wiles and ruses and, much though the chaps hate us, they cannot deny the facts. The English proletariat would now at long last appear to be entering the movement en masse and, should this be the case, all the petty intrigues, swindlers and would-be bigwigs will, by this time next year, either have been relegated to the modest position that is their due or else swept away.

Another edition of the Manifesto* is now printing; we want to bombard Germany with another 5,000 copies before the demise of the Anti-Socialist Law.52

A superb spring day. In a week's time the gilliflowers, white and pink may, laburnum and apple blossom will be out—the cherry trees have already been in flower for 5 days.

I trust you and your wife will keep well—cordial regards to you both.

Your

F. E.

Did you know that the Labour Elector had gone bust? It sold 23,000 copies during the dockers' strike,429 but was spoilt by Tory money.b

First published in: Briefe und Auszge Printed according to the original aus Briefen von Joh. Phil. Becker, Jos. Dietzgen, Friedrich Engels, Karl Marx Published in English in full for the u. A. an F A. Sorge und Andere, first time Stuttgart, 1906

a K. Marx and F. Engels, Manifesto of the Communist Party - b See this volume, pp.446-50



**[p. 273]**

ENGELS TO AUGUST BEBEL

IN PLAUEN NEAR DRESDEN

London, 9 May 1890

Dear Bebel,

Thank you for your news from Zurich—I am glad that we should have arrived at the same opinion in regard to this point too.645 Your corroboration was of particular importance to me, the likes of us being so dependent in matters of this sort upon conclusions that are inade- quately founded as to feel reluctant to use those unreliable conclusions as a basis for further inferences, let alone actions, without corroboration from an authoritative quarter.

My hearty congratulations to you and your wife on your daughter's engagement.* The fact that it will eventually mean her emigrating to America is certainly most unpleasant for you, though for me it might have the agreeable consequence of our some day making a trip together across the Atlantic. What do you feel about it? I am firmly convinced that you would get over your sea-sickness within 2 or 3 days and quite possibly for good and all. And a sea voyage of that kind is an invaluable antidote to wear and tear—even now, almost two years later, I can still feel the beneficial effects of my jaunt. Moreover, Zadek claims to have discovered a sure remedy for sea-sickness (anti-pyrin is said to be excel- lent) and, according to medical opinion, only 2 or 3 per cent of all human beings are unable to get used to the motion within 2 or 3 days. So consider the matter.

If you find my articleb wanting in logic, the fault lies probably more with me than with Bios. To compress such a lengthy and complex matter into less than 2 printed sheets is a difficult feat and I am aware that there are all too many passages in which the thread gets lost and the reasoning is inadequate. In the event of my going into the subject—which is of the greatest importance to us—in rather more detail, some critical notes from you would be very welcome indeed just brief indications as to where you lost the thread and bow you think it got snarled up.

a Frieda Bebel - b F. Engels, The Foreign Policy of Russian Tsardom

