---
Volume: 48
Document_Title: "274. Engels to Laura Lafargue 10 May "
Page_Range: "507-509"
---

# 274. Engels to Laura Lafargue 10 May 



**[p. 493]**

Well, no doubt the bourgeoisie will everywhere have had time enough to sweat out the fear inspired in them by the First of May and to wash the linen they dirtied in consequence. The Daily News correspondent in Berlin, one of the most vociferous Jeremiahs, complained on the First of May that the workers had made April fools of all and sundry, nor, until 4 days later, did the truth dawn on him that, despite the workers having insistently declared beforehand that all they wanted was a peaceable demonstration, no one had believed them.

You did perfectly right in so arranging things as to preclude the possi- bility of clashes. After 20 February599 there is no longer any need for the German workers merely to kick up a row. Under the circumstances Germany was bound to make a more modest showing on the First of May than the others did, and no one thought the worse of you for that, either here or in France. But there is, I think, one lesson to be drawn from the Schippel business,646 namely the need to ensure that, next time there's an interregnum between the general elections and the convoca- tion of the Reichstag, the leadership of the parliamentary group is either empowered to continue functioning as before, or is expressly reinstated in office by the newly elected representatives for the period of the inter- regnum. It could then confidently intervene and also act, if necessary, while the gentlemen in Berlin, who would like to behave Paris-fashion, as though they were natural party leaders, would not be given the opportunity of throwing their weight about prematurely. Always providing that, after 1 October,52 the organisation stays as it is.

Over here the demonstration on 4 May647 was quite overwhelming, as the entire bourgeois press actually had to admit. I was on platform 4 (a heavy goods waggon) and could only see part—a fifth, say, or an eighth—of the crowd, but it was one vast sea of faces, as far as the eye could reach. Between 250,000 and 300,000 people, about 3/4 of them demonstrating workers. Aveling, Lafargue and Stepniak spoke from my platform—I was just an onlooker. Lafargue, with his mixture of south- ern vivacity and excellent English—if spoken with a strong French accent—elicited a storm of applause. So did Stepniak, while Ede, who was on the same platform as Tussy, was accorded a stunning reception. Each of the 7 platforms was 150 metres away from the next, the last ones being 150 metres from the edge of the park,a so that our meeting (the one in favour of international legal enforcement of an 8 hours working day)

[^1]: a Hyde Park





**[p. 494]**

And, what's more, a stunning victory, particularly for us. You will have read the details in Ede's report in the Volksblatt.MS The Trades Council and the Social Democratic Federation had, or so they thought, done us out of the park for that day, but they were bilked. Aveling persuaded the Commissioner of Public Works to allow us to have 7 plat- forms in the park as well, though this was, in effect, contrary to regula- tions. But luckily the Tories were in power and he succeeded in intimi- dating them by saying that our people would otherwise storm the other lot's platforms. And our meeting was the biggest, the best organised and the most enthusiastic. The vast majority here are already in favour of an eight hours law. Aveling and, even more so, Tussy organised the whole thing, and their position in the movement is now altogether different from what it was. The Union of Gasworkers and General Labourers565—by far the best of the new trade societies—supported them manfully nor, without them, would the thing have been possible. Now it behoves us to keep together the committee that organised our meeting—delegates of Trades Unions, and of radical and socialist clubs—and to make it the centre of the movement over here.643 The first moves towards this end will probably be made tonight. Of one thing we may be certain: the workers, the bourgeoisie, the heads of the old, rotten Trades Unions and of the many political and social sects and sub-sects, and the careerists, place-seekers and men of letters intent on exploiting the movement, are well aware that the real socialist mass movement began on the fourth of May. Now the masses are at last on the move and, after a few battles and a certain amount of wavering to and fro, will, just as it happened in Germany, put an end to the personal ambitions and attempts at exploitation of the careerists and to the rivalries of the sects, and will relegate every man to his proper place. And since an interna- tional mentality will evolve very strongly in the process, you will soon discover what stuff your new allies are made of. All that the English do in the way of action, agitation or organisation shows that they are much more akin to us than the French, and once everything has got going along the right lines here and the internal friction, unavoidable at the start, has been overcome, you will be able to march alongside these people in truly fine style. What wouldn't I give for Marx to have

