---
Volume: 48
Document_Title: "275. Engels to Paul Lafargue 21 May "
Page_Range: "509-511"
---

# 275. Engels to Paul Lafargue 21 May 



**[p. 495]**

witnessed this awakening, he who, on this self-same English soil, was alive to the minutest symptom! You people can have no conception of the pleasure I have experienced during the past fortnight. And things are coming thick and fast. First Germany in February, then the First of May there and in America, and now this Sunday when, for the first time in 40 years, the voice of the English proletariat rang out once again. I carried my head a couple of inches higher as I climbed down from the old goods waggon.

Regards to your wife* and Singer,

Your

F.E.

First published in: Marx and Engels, Printed according to the original Works, First Russian Edition, Vol. XXVIII, Moscow, 1940 Published in English for the first time

274

ENGELS TO LAURA LAFARGUE649

AT LE PERREUX

London, 10 May 1890

My dear Laura,

Only a few lines this busy Saturday—I am awfully behindhand with my correspondence—to thank you for your card and to enclose the £20 cheque I promised Paul. I also send you the People's Press with report of Sunday last.650 It was tremendous. England at last is stirring, and no mistake. And it was a great victory for us specially, for Tussy and Aveling

[^1]: a Julie Bebel





**[p. 498]**

THAN ONCE TO PUBLISH THE ARTICLE OF MR LAFARGUE BUT IN VAIN; OUR CENSORS ARE TOO SEVERE EXCUSE ME THAT I SEND YOU PER NEXT POST THE MS.; I DO NOT SEND IT DIRECT TO THE AUTHOR SINCE I AM NOT SURE THAT HE RECEIVES MY LETTERS. I HAVE WRITTEN TO HIM TWICE, IN MARCH AND IN APRIL, IN ANSWER TO HIS KIND SENDING.'652

Have you had his letters ? I shall send you the MS as soon as I get it. You would be well-advised to let him have another, non-suspect, address in Paris where he could send his letters for you, and also not to put your name to your own letters. That is what I do myself, and our correspon- dence has never been interrupted by such mishaps.

It's good that your Eight Hours Committee should continue to func- tion—we are doing the same thing here, the Legal Eight Hour Day League is in process of formation, the Committee,643 in particular, will continue to function, and new societies (among them branches of the DOCKERS Union) are affiliating themselves. Since the question is a completely practical and straightforward one, it might, perhaps, bring back those of your adherents who defected to Boulanger's camp two years ago. By a strange quirk of history the Parisians, after having upset their digestions with grandiloquent phrases dubbed ideas, have now been reduced to a diet of 'DR RIDGE'S FOOD FOR INFANTS', the eight hour day, and suchlike easily digested stuff.

The end of the Boulangea is comic indeed. Having been given a kick by universal suffrage, the gallant general passes it on to his 'committee'653 so that there may be no intermediary between himself and universal suffrage!

After that, he could sink no lower.

Is Laura making preparations to come over here? The month is nearly over.

Give her a kiss from Nim and myself.

Yours,

F. E.

Martignetti has been acquitted.

First published in: F. Engels, P. et L. Lafargue, Correspondance, t. Ill, Paris, 1959

Reproduced from the original

Translated from the French

[^1]: Rumour has it that Frank Rosher's visit gave him the coup de grâce.b

[^2]: a Bread-making, here meaning General Boulanger - b See this volume, p.481



