---
Volume: 48
Document_Title: "277. Engels to Friedrich Adolph Sorge 29 May "
Page_Range: "511-515"
---

# 277. Engels to Friedrich Adolph Sorge 29 May 



**[p. 276]**

ENGELS TO PASQUALE MARTIGNETTI

IN BENEVENTO

[London,] 24 May 1890

[Dear friend,]

[Many] congratulations on your [acquit] tal! What joy for you and your [family, who] must have suffered no less [than yo]u did yourself! I immediately wrote a [note o]f thanks to A.L [abriola] and also asked him to thank Lollini.

Now you will be embarking on a new existence, and doing so better and more hopefully than you would have been able to do on the other side of the Atlantic.

Yours sincerely yours, E E.

First published in Italian in: La Printed according to the original corrispondenza di Marx e Engels con italiani. 1848-1895, Milano, 1964 Published in English for the first time

277

ENGELS TO FRIEDRICH ADOLPH SORGE655

IN HOBOKEN

London, 29 May 1890

Dear Sorge,

Have received letters of 30 April and 15 May, likewise Volkszeitung containing passage from my letter.3 Your statement will be appearing in the Sozialdemokrat^^ but, when I arrived at the office with your

[^1]: a See this volume, p.488-91





**[p. 500]**

I must now burden you with another piece of gossip about Schlüter which I would not otherwise have thought worth mentioning. But Motteler, a mortal enemy of Schlüter's, who was also responsible for Schlüter's leaving here, has recounted his version of the affair to Jonas and so it is necessary for you, at any rate, to know the true story.

Motteler is a crib-biter of the first water and is very difficult to get on with; he's a faux bonhomme," a Swabian and an unrecognised genius who feels he has been downgraded because, though he was at one time solely responsible for managing the Sozialdemokrat and for party affairs abroad, others had to be appointed alongside himself, things having expanded. Not only is he absolutely reliable in money matters, however, but, more important still, he is generally recognised to be so by the whole of the party, and no one would venture to doubt him. In the post of party treasurer abroad, therefore, he is a most valuable man, and the others can only be glad to have been relieved of that responsibility for so long. Well, should anyone he dislikes happen to join the business, the results will be perpetual squabbling and never-ending persecution. That's what happened, first with Derossi and then with Schlüter, both of whom were hounded out by him. He now brings two charges against Schlüter—first, that he embezzled money. There is absolutely no proof of this save that, in accounts that were over a year old at the time and had already been passed by the auditors, Motteler discovered a sum of 150 marks in respect of which Schlüter had failed to provide either proof of payment or a signed receipt. No one in Germany or over here, save for Motteler, cares a rap about this, for the sums paid out by Motteler himself are said frequently to have been certified only by the entries he made, and the way the chaps run the business, while egregiously pedan- tic like everything Motteler does, is far from businesslike and accurate. That Schlüter was careless and guilty of small oversights—which he

[^1]: a speciously benevolent





**[p. 501]**

So if Jonas should start spreading gossip, you will be in possession of the true facts.

Jonas did indeed come to see me, somewhat embarrassed, but found Tussy and Edward Aveling here (it was just after the Hyde Park meet- ing)647 who gave him a very cool reception (on applying to the Central Committee643 for a journalist's pass for the meeting, Jonas had already been told by Aveling that he hoped the Volkszeitung would be more truthful in its report than heretofore)3. So he very soon went away again when the Bernsteins had to leave on account of their children. The more elegantly the man tries to dress, the commoner he looks.

One more thing. For the new edition of the Origin etc.a I have got to have Morgan's last work,b but cannot go to the British Museum early enough in the morning to compete for a seat in the Reading Room with the novel-readers. I am therefore sending you the enclosed letter for the department concerned, and two copies of the book. The question now is how these things—the letter and 1 copy—should be conveyed, whether direct to the department or through an intermediary who would vouch for me? Aveling believes that Ely in Baltimore would be glad to oblige. You are better acquainted with the chap, and I shall therefore leave it to you to decide what the best procedure would be. In case you should decide on an intermediary, I have included a second copy for him. I also include a note for Ely in case you think fit to use him as an intermediary.

a Frederick Engels, The Origin of the Family, Private Property and the State (see present edition, Vol. 26) - b L. H. Morgan, Houses and houselife of the American aborigines



**[p. 502]**

The meeting, by the by, did not mark the end of the matter over here. You will have seen from the last People's Press that the Central Committee is remaining in existence and is founding a Legal Eight Hours and International Labour League.657 The constitution has been drafted and will be submitted on 22 June to a delegates' meeting to which all London labour organisations, radical clubs, etc., have been invited. The constitution demands 1. the implementation of the resolu- tions of the Paris Congress473 in so far as these are not yet law in England, 2. such further measures for bringing about the full emancipa- tion of the workers as may be decided upon by the Association, 3. the founding of an independent labour party with its own candidates for all constituencies in which they would stand some chance of getting in. You may publish this.

In the Vienna Arbeiter-Zeitung (by the next post) there is a longish article of minea about the happenings over here.

Your

F. Engels

First published slightly abridged in: Briefe und Auszüge aus Briefen von Joh. Phil. Becker, Jos. Dietzgen, Friedrich Engels, Karl Marx u. A. an F. A. Sorge und Andere, Stuttgart,

1906 and in full in: Marx and Engels, Works, First Russian Edition, Vol.

XXVIII, Moscow, 1940

Printed according to the original

Published in English in full for the first time

[^1]: Cordial regards to your wife,b

[^2]: a 'May 4 in London' - b Katharina Sorge



