---
Volume: 48
Document_Title: "278. Engels to Paul Ernst 5 June "
Page_Range: "515-518"
---

# 278. Engels to Paul Ernst 5 June 



**[p. 278]**

ENGELS TO PAUL ERNST658

IN BERLIN

[Draft]

London, 5 June 1890

Dear Sir,

Unfortunately I cannot do as you ask and write a letter to you for use against Mr Bahr.659 This would involve me in a public polemic with the same, and for that I should literally have to rob myself of my own time. What I am writing to say, therefore, is solely for your private informa- tion.

Moreover, what you describe as the northern women's movement is totally unknown to me; all I know is a few of Ibsen's plays, nor could I possibly say whether, or how far, Ibsen can be held responsible for the more or less hysterical lucubrations of middle class and lower middle class female careerists.

Again, the field which we have accustomed ourselves to describe as the woman question is so extensive that nothing of an exhaustive or even moderately satisfactory kind can be said about it within the confines of a letter. But of one thing you may be sure—Marx could never have 'made such a fuss' as Bahr asserts he did. He was not as crazy as that.

As regards your attempt to handle the matter in a materialist way, I should say first of all that the materialist method turns into its opposite if, in an historical study, it is used not as a guide but rather as a ready- made pattern in accordance with which one tailors the historical facts. And if Mr Bahr believes he has caught you out in this respect, it seems to me that he may not be altogether unjustified.

You subsume the whole of Norway and everything that happens there under one category, philistinism, and then unhesitatingly and erro- neously apply to that Norwegian philistinism your opinion of German philistinism. But here there are two facts which present an insuperable obstacle.

Firstly: When, throughout Europe, the victory over Napoleon turned out to be the victory of reaction over the Revolution, the fear inspired by the latter sufficing only in its cradle, France, to wrest a bourgeois- liberal constitution660 from the returning legitimists, Norway took occa-



**[p. 504]**

And, secondly, Norway has, during the past 20 years, experienced a literary revival unparallelled in any other country during that period save Russia. Philistine or not, this people has been far more creative than all the rest and is, indeed, putting its stamp on other literature, not least the German.

These facts, in my view, render it necessary to examine Norwegian philistinism in the light of its particular characteristics.

And in so doing you will probably find that a very important distinc- tion emerges. In Germany philistinism was born of a failed revolution, a development that was interrupted and repressed. Its idiosyncratic, abnormally pronounced character made up of cowardice, bigotry, inep- titude, and a total lack of initiative, resulted from the Thirty Years War221

and the period that ensued—the very time in which practically all the other great nations were experiencing a rapid rise. That character persisted, even after Germany had again been gripped by the historical movement, and was strong enough to imprint itself, more or less as a generalised German type, on all the other social classes in Germany until such time as our working class broke out of these narrow confines. If the German workers are flagrantly 'unpatriotic',662 it is precisely because they have completely shaken off German philistine bigotry.

Hence German philistinism is not a normal historical phase but a cari- cature taken to extremes, a form of degeneration, just as your Polish Jew is a caricature of the Jews. The English, French, etc., lower middle class is not at all on the same level as your German lower middle class.

In Norway, on the other hand, the class of small peasants and the lower middle class with a slight admixture of middle class elements—as it existed, say, in England and France in the 17th century—have, for several centuries, constituted the normal state of society. Here there is no question of an archaic state of affairs having been forcibly imposed upon them by the failure of a great movement or by a Thirty Years War. The country has been retarded by its isolation and by its natural circum- stances, but its state was commensurate with the conditions of its production, and hence normal. It is only quite recently that large-scale industry has, sporadically and on a very small scale, begun to come into the country, where, however, there is no place for the most powerful lever for the concentration of capital—the stock exchange; and even the tremendous expansion of maritime trade has proved to be a conservative factor. For whereas everywhere else steam is superseding sail, Norway is



**[p. 505]**

enormously increasing the number of its sailing vessels and possesses, if not the largest, then certainly the second largest, fleet of windjammers in the world, most of them owned by small and medium-sized shipping firms, as in England in, say, 1720. But nevertheless this has brought some animation into the old, sluggish existence—animation which finds expression in, among other things, the literary revival.

The Norwegian peasant was never a serf, so that the whole process takes place against an entirely different background as in Castile. The lower middle class Norwegian is the son of a free peasant and, such being the case, is a man compared with the degenerate German philis- tine. And in the same way the Norwegian lower middle class woman is infinitely superior to the German lower middle class wife. And whatever the failings of, for example, Ibsen's plays, these reflect a world which is, it is true, lower middle and middle class, but utterly different from the German world—a world in which people still have character and initia- tive and act independently if, by the standards of other countries, often eccentrically. Personally, I would prefer to get to know all I could about things of this sort before passing judgment.

But in return to the above-mentioned sheep, namely Mr Bahr, I can only marvel at the fact that people in Germany take each other so terri- bly seriously. Wit and humour seem to be more than ever taboo there, and boredom to be a civic duty. Otherwise you would surely have taken a closer look at Mr Bahr's 'woman' from whom all that is 'historically evolved' has been removed. Her skin is historically evolved, for it must perforce be either white or black, yellow, brown or red—hence she cannot have a human skin. Her hair, whether crinkled or woolly, whether straight or curly, whether black, red or blond, is historically evolved. Hence human hair is forbidden her. What, then, remains after you have removed what is historically evolved along with skin and hair, and 'the woman as such appears'? What is revealed? Simply a female ape, anthropopitheca, and may Mr Bahr take her to bed with him, 'purely tangible and perceptible', together with her 'natural instincts'.

First published in Russian in: Printed according to the original Literaturnoye nasledistvo, No. 1,1931

Published in English in full for the first time

