---
Volume: 48
Document_Title: "279. Engels to Nikolai Danielson ( Nicolai- on) 10 June "
Page_Range: "518-520"
---

# 279. Engels to Nikolai Danielson ( Nicolai- on) 10 June 



**[p. 279]**

ENGELS TO NIKOLAI DANIELSON (NICOLAI-ON)592

IN ST. PETERSBURG

London, 10 June 1890

My dear sir,

I am in possession of your kind letters of 18th December, 22 January, 24th February and 17th May, as also of Mr. Lafargue's article returned which was sent back to him. I wrote to hima that you had written to him twice in March and April but have not had any positive reply as to whether he received these two letters. His wife who is here at present, cannot from memory tell positively. She regrets very much the change of ownership in the Northern Review and desires me to convey to you her and her husband's thanks for your kind efforts in their interest.

Of the 4th edition Capital I am now reading proof-sheets 39-42, there will be less than 50 in all, as the print, though larger, is closer. As soon as out, it will be forwarded to you.

I have had the letters of our authorb you kindly lent me, copied by type- writer (the author's youngest daughter0 did them) and shall now return them to you in a registered letter, unless you instruct me to the contrary.

I thank you very much for your continued and interesting information respecting the economic condition of your great country. Under the smooth surface of political quietude there is as great and as important an economical change going on as in any other European country, to watch which is of the highest interest. The consequences of this economic change must sooner or later develop themselves in other directions too.

We had heard here of the death of N.G.C.d, and with much sorrow and sympathy. But perhaps it is better so.

I have been so exceedingly busy, and my eyes, though improving, are still so much affected by reading Russian printing, that I have not as yet been able to read the article in the Statistical Yearbook but

[^1]: Many thanks for your congratulations of 24th February—they have rejoiced more than one.663

[^2]: a See this volume, p.497 - b Marx - c Eleanor Marx-Aveling - i N. G. Chernyshevsky. The initials are written in Russian letters in the original - e This word is written in Russian in the original





**[p. 507]**

shall do so as soon as I find a free moment.664 The misuse of economic terms, you point out, is a very usual defect of all literatures. Here in England, Rent is applied as well to the payment of the English capitalist farmer to his landlord, as to that of the Irish pauper farmer, who pays a complete tribute composed chiefly of a deduction from his fund of main- tenance, earned by his own labour, and only in the smallest consisting of true rent. So the English in India transformed the land-tax paid by the ryot (peasant) to the State into 'rent', and consequently have, in Bengal at least, actually transformed the zamindar (tax-gatherer of the former Indian prince) into a landlord holding a nominal feudal tenure from the Crown exactly as in England, where the Crown is nominal proprietor of all the land, and the great nobles, the real owners, are by juridical fiction supposed to be feudal tenants of the Crown. Similarly when in the begin- ning of the 17th century the North of Ireland was subjected to direct English dominion, and the English lawyer Sir John Davies found there a rural community with common possession of the land, which was peri- odically divided amongst the members of the clan who paid a tribute to the chief, Davies declared that tribute at once to be 'rent'.a Thus the Scotch lairds—chiefs of clans—profited, since the insurrection of 1745, of this juridical confusion, of the tribute paid to them by the clansmen, with a 'rent' for the lands held by them, in order to transform the whole of the clan-land, the common property of the clan, into their, the lairds', private property; for—said the lawyers, if they were not the landlords, how could they receive rent for that land? And thus this confusion of tribute and rent was the basis of the confiscation of all the lands of the Scottish Highlands for the benefit of a few chiefs of clan who very soon after drove out the old clansmen and replaced them by sheep as described in Capital, chapter 24, 2 (p. 754, 3rd edition).b

With kind regards

Yours very faithfully P. W. Rosher.39

First published in Russian in Reproduced from the original Minuvshiye gody, No. 2, 1908

Published in English in full for the first time

a Davies, J. Historical tracts - b K. Marx, Das Kapital. Kritik der politischen Oekonomie, Erster Band, Buch I. Der Produktions-process des Kapitals. Dritte vermehrte Auflage. Hamburg. Verlag von Otto Meisner, 1883

