---
Volume: 48
Document_Title: "285. Engels to Laura Lafargue 4 July "
Page_Range: "525-526"
---

# 285. Engels to Laura Lafargue 4 July 



**[p. 513]**

Dell), 1 Hare Place, Fleet Street, London, E.C.; I am sending you its latest number.

Searching for lodgings in Berlin must certainly be a pleasant occupa- tion!

Your

R E .

First published in: Marx and Engels, Printed according to the original Works, First Russian Edition, Vol. XXVIII, Moscow, 1940 Published in English for the first time

285

[Odde], Friday, 4 July 1890

My dear Laura,

I hope you got as safe to Paris as we did to Norway. We had a very quiet passage, though lots of people sick, sighted the coast of Norway yesterday afternoon, and by 6 were between the islands and rocks. Went up the Harvanger Fiord which leads right into the heart of the country, and are now at the farthest point, Odde, where we remain until to- morrow. Had a drive up the valley this morning and only just back; it rained a little, but not enough to spoil the scenery which is grand. The sun set yesterday at 10 and there was no real night, only a rather deep dusk, and red sky in the north. The people are very primitive, but a sound strong handsome race; they understand my Danish but I cannot make much of their Norwegian. Here at this place the invaders coming by this one ship have cleared the place of Norwegian money in change for English, and the post-office of postage stamps.

[^1]: ENGELS T O LAURA LAFARGUE 4 0

[^2]: a Richard in the ms



