---
Volume: 48
Document_Title: "287. Engels to Wilhelm Liebknecht 22 July "
Page_Range: "527-529"
---

# 287. Engels to Wilhelm Liebknecht 22 July 



**[p. 515]**

Much love to Emma and your children, Rudolf, Mathilde, Hedwig, etc.a

Your

Friedrich

First published in: Deutsche Revue, Printed according to the original Jg. 46, Bd. 3, 1921

Published in English for the first time

287

ENGELS TO WILHELM LIEBKNECHT

IN BORSDORF NEAR LEIPZIG

Steam Yacht Ceylon Bergen Roads, 22 July 1890

Dear Liebknecht,

Having safely returned to civilised latitudes after our trip to North Cape—Schorlemmer and I left London in the above vessel on the 1st of this month—I hasten to inform you that we shall be back in London on Saturday the 26th inst. And look forward to seeing you as soon as may be. Come straight away if that suits you, since we shall probably be setting off for the seaside shortly afterwards and intend to inveigle you into joining us;673 that will still leave you some time to do what you have to do in London.

[^1]: a Emma Engels, Rudolf Engels, Mathilde Engels, Hedwig Engels





**[p. 516]**

As young William3 was favouring Norway with his presence at the same time,675 I kept as quiet as possible about my itinerary, lest there should be any police chicanery. On our way home we met the fleet in Molde; 'young Hopeful', however, was not present, having gone off gallivanting in a torpedo boat; he sneaked past us in the Geiranger Fjord, much to the annoyance of the middle-class English gang on board our ship, who would have liked to give three cheers for a real live emperor.

While the sailors in the fleet were splendid chaps, the junior officers and midshipmen differed little from the ensigns of the Prussian guards, their every turn of phrase being of the kind we've known from time immemorial; the senior officers we met in the hotel dressed in mufti were quite different and were in no way distinguishable from ordinary civilians. The predominant accents were those of old Prussia. We nearly died of laughter at the sight of two fat admirals sitting squashed together in a minute Norwegian cab (there was barely room in it for one) as they went to pay their calls (Primrose Hill would accommodate the whole of Molde twice over); all one could see from behind were apaulettes and tricorns.

It was a very pleasant and very interesting trip and I liked the Norwegians a great deal. Up in Tromsö we visited the Lapps and their reindeer and in Hammerfest saw piles of dried cod—at first I took it to be firewood—and, at North Cape, the famous midnight sun. But there's nothing one gets sick of more quickly than perpetual daylight when for a solid week there's literally no night at all and it's always quite light when one goes to bed.

We sampled the beer conscientiously right up to 71 degrees of lati- tude; it was good but not so good as the German stuff, and invariably bottled. Only in Trondheim could one actually get draught beer. Here too, by the way, the legislators are much concerned with temperance and it would seem that sales of Bismarck's spirits have been steadily drop- ping. We shall probably carry out a reconnaissance today to see whether there is a beer hall in Bergen where draught ale may be had.

[^1]: a William II



