---
Volume: 48
Document_Title: "288. Engels to Friedrich Adolph Sorge 30 July "
Page_Range: "529-531"
---

# 288. Engels to Friedrich Adolph Sorge 30 July 



**[p. 517]**

The train from Gossevangen to Bergen covers 108 kilometres in 4 1/2 hours—24 kilometres per hour! But it passes through rock of all kinds out of which pretty well the whole line had to be blasted.

Up north on the Svartisen, which is one enormous ice field, we walked on a glacier separated from the sea only by the low moraine, i.e. it drops to approximately 100 feet above sea level.

But now it's time for breakfast and I shall close so as to be able to hand this letter in for posting immediately it is over.

Warm regards to your wife and children and to yourself from Schorlemmer and

Your

F. Engels

First published in: Marx and Engels, Printed according to the original Works, First Russian Edition, Vol. XXVIII, Moscow, 1940 Published in English for the first time

288

ENGELS TO FRIEDRICH ADOLPH SORGE

[London], 30 July 1890

Schorlemmer and I are home again after our very delightful and very inter- esting trip to North Cape and Norway generally and, as from Sunday, I shall be able to start sending stuff to you again and make up for arrears. Morgan* received with many thanks, the more so as Ely's intervention was avoided. It is always disagreeable to be beholden to an intermediary. The relevant lettersb have likewise come back and been destroyed.

a L. H. Morgan, Houses and houselife of the American aborigines - b See this volume, pp.499-500

[^1]: IN MOUNT DESERT676





**[p. 518]**

Those two battles in Leeds were magnificent.677 It was splendid news to be greeted with on our return.

There is also a social democratic organisation in Bergen, but we had neither the time nor the occasion to look it up; I merely saw in the news- papers that it had its own premises and had applied for a licence to sell beer.

Our trip has done us a power of good. Tussy and Edward are them- selves off to Norway next week. Regards from Schorlemmer and

Your

F. E.

Also and especially to your wife.

First published in: Briefe und Printed according to the original Auszüger aus Briefen von Joh. Phil. Becker, Jos. Dietzgen, Friedrich Published in English for the first time Engels, Karl Marx u. A. an F. A. Sorge und Andere, Stuttgart, 1906

[^1]: a Roben Dell and William Morris



