---
Volume: 48
Document_Title: "289. Engels to Laura Lafargue 30 July "
Page_Range: "531-533"
---

# 289. Engels to Laura Lafargue 30 July 



**[p. 289]**

ENGELS TO LAURA LAFARGUE40

AT LE PERREUX

London, 30 July 1890

My dear Laura,

Here we are again from the icy regions of the North—temperature mostly 10° in cloudy weather, very hot when the sun shone, two flannels and a topcoat not too much on an average! The journey has done us both a world of good, and with a Nachkur* at the seaside I hope to be completely set up again. I found Nim quite enthusiastic about her stay in Paris, she never enjoyed herself so much, and if I am not mistaken and you do not take care, you will have her an annual customer.

We met the German fleet at Molde but young Williamb was not there—he sneaked past our steamer later on in the Sunelvsfjord in a torpedo boat—so that with the impossibility of getting papers we were out altogether of la grande politique. Fortunately nothing happened worth knowing—the first news at Bergen were about the reorganisation of the German Party after Oct. 1st,52 and on arriving here, the splendid news about the two fights in Leeds677 where young Will Thorne proved himself a leader in battle of both courage and ability. This mode of lawful resistance is very much to be approved of, especially here in England—and it succeeded.

Enclosed I found on my return and opened, but it is for Même. Cannot anyone in Paris give us any information about that de Lavigerie who here gives as references Baudin, Ferroul, Guesde, the whole of the party in the Chamber and those in the Conseil Municipal} Of course, if none of all these gentlemen will either disavow or acknow- ledge this man, or give any information about him, what must the people here do? So long as none of his references repudiate him, the people here cannot but take him for genuine. And if afterwards he turns out a black sheep, or does harm to our French friends (for to the people here he can do none), they must blame themselves.

Now I must conclude. You will not want telling that I found an immense heap of correspondence, papers, etc. here and that I have my

[^1]: " after-cure - b William II





**[p. 520]**

Love from Nim, Schorlemmer,

and Yours ever

F. Engels

First published in English in: F. Reproduced from the original Engels, P. et L. Lafargue, Correspondance, t. II, Paris, 1956

