---
Volume: 48
Document_Title: "Notes "
Page_Range: "535-628"
---

# Notes 

Notes

1. Engels wrote this letter on a postcard. The address, written by him on the back, reads: F. A. Sorge Esq., Hoboken N.J., U.S. America. 2. Marx first thought of the need for an English translation of Das Kapital

while working on the manuscript in 1865 (see his letter to Engels of 31 July 1865; present edition, Vol. 42, pl72). The English journalist Peter Fox, a member of the General Council of the International, was to look for a publisher. However he died, in 1869, and the matter remained unsettled. The English version of Volume I, edited by Engels, was published by Swan Sonnenschein, Lowrey & Co. in January 1887, after Marx's death. The translation was done by Samuel Moore and Edward Aveling, between mid- 1883 and March 1886. Eleanor Marx-Aveling helped prepare the edition. The translation was based on the third German edition of Das Kapital, due account being taken of the French edition and Marx's directions for the English translation, which failed to materialise, planned for late 1877.

3. Between September and December 1886 Wilhelm Liebknecht, Eleanor Marx-Aveling and Edward Aveling toured the United States at the invita- tion of Executive of the Socialist Labor Party of North America. They gave talks and lectures in a number of cities on the theory and history of social- ism, on the working-class movement in Europe and on other themes. After the tour the Executive, which had financed it, accused Aveling of over- expenditure. This charge was taken up by the bourgeois press and used for anti-socialist agitation. The conflict between Aveling and the Executive lasted for several months. Engels took part in settling it. The Socialist Labor Party of the United States (originally called the Workingmen's Party) was set up at the Philadelphia union congress, 19-22 June 1876, through the merger of the US sections of the First International, led by F. A. Sorge and Otto Weydemeyer, with the Lassallean-type Labor Party of Illinois and the Social Democratic Party, led by A. Strasser, A. Gabriel and Peter J. Mc Guire. It was the first Marxist party in America. However, it failed to win a mass following because of the sectarian policy of its leaders, who wanted no links with the mass organisations of the indigenous US workers, and because of the Lassalleans' prevalence in a number of local branches.

Engels, On the United States, Moscow, Progress Publishers, 1979. 5. In June 1886, a Hague court sentenced F. D. Nieuwenhuis to one year in

[^1]: 4. An excerpt from this letter was first published in English in: K. Marx and F.





**[p. 524]**

prison and a fine of 50 guldens on charges of 'lese majesté' and 'denigration of officials' in the press. Early in January 1887 the conviction was upheld by the Netherlands Supreme Court. The charges were based on two articles by Nieuwenhuis published anonymously in the newspaper Recht voor Allen. He was released from prison on 1 September 1887. 6. In the Mayoral election in New York on 2 November 1886 Henry George, the candidate of the United Labor Party, got 68,110 votes, 31 per cent of the total cast. During the preparation for the municipal election in New York in August 1886, the United Labor Party was founded to rally the workers for joint political action. The initiative came from the New York Central Workers' Union, an association of New York trade unions formed in 1882. Similar parties were set up in many other cities. 7. In November 1886 elections were held to the US Congress and the State legislatures. Led by its parties, the working class achieved substantial success in the elections in New York (see note 6), Chicago and Milwaukee. In Chicago, ten Labor Party candidates were elected to the State Legislative Assembly (one to the Senate and nine to the Lower Chamber). The party's candidate to the US Congress was short of only 64 votes. In Milwaukee, the Labor Party candidate was elected Mayor, one of its men got into the State Senate, six into the Lower Chamber, and one into the US Congress. 8. In his letter of 9 January 1887 Martignetti informed Engels that he was being persecuted for his socialist views and was, as an official of the govern- ment notary archives, in danger of dismissal. He asked Engels to help him find employment outside Italy. 9. From November 1850 Engels supervised the Manchester branch of the Ermen and Engels German textile firm. The German side of the enterprise was run by Fr. Engels Sr., with the assistance of Anthony Ermen. The firm's office was in Barmen. In 1860, after his father's death, Engels received £10,000 from his brothers in compensation for his share in the family concern in Engelskirchen, which consolidated his financial and legal stand- ing in the Manchester firm. From June 1864 to June 1869 Engels was a co- owner of the Ermen and Engels firm. After five years in this capacity he withdrew from the firm and devoted himself entirely to party work, schol- arship and journalism. 10. This letter was first published abridged, in the language of the original (English), in Briefe und Auszuge aus Briefen von Job. Phil. Becker, Jos. Dietzgen, Friedrich Engels, Karl Marx, u. A. an F. A. Sorge und Andere, Stuttgart, 1906, and in full in: Karl Marx and Frederick Engels, Letters to Americans. 1848-1895. A Selection, International Publishers, New York, 1953. 11. In a letter dated 10 December 1886 Kelley-Wischnewetzky asked Engels to write a preface to the American edition of The Condition of the Working Class in England in 1844, which she had translated into English. She argued



**[p. 525]**

13. This letter was first published in English, abridged, in: Frederick Engels,

Paul and Laura Lafargue, Correspondence. 1887-1890,Vo\. 2, Foreign Languages Publishing House, Moscow, 1960. 14. Russo-German rapprochement appeared to be on the cards in early 1887. In the course of negotiations between the two countries, the Russian ambas- sador, P. Shuvalov, proposed to Bismarck that the 'alliance of three emper- ors', which was expiring in the summer of 1887, should be resumed, but without Austrian participation. Shuvalov's proposal also envisaged Russia's neutrality in the event of another Franco-German war and a free hand for Russia in the Balkans. Addressing the Reichstag on 11 January 1887, Bismarck urged the need for friendly relations with Russia. An anti-French press campaign, the mobilisation of reservists and other steps on the part of the German government gave rise to fears of an imminent military clash with France (the 'war alarm' in January 1887). However, the Russian government refused to back up Shuvalov's proposals and Bismarck's actions.

15. On 14 January 1887, Bismarck dissolved the Reichstag in view of its refusal to endorse the proposed seven-year military budget (the bill on the septen- nate). The elections to the new Reichstag, held on 21 February, were attended by a brutal campaign of terror, directed above all against the Socialist Party. Nevertheless, the Social Democrats polled 763,128 votes (10.1 per cent of the total), 213,038 more than in the 1884 elections. However, owing to the undemocratic additional ballots law the number of Social Democratic deputies declined to 11, as against 24 in the previous Reichstag.



**[p. 526]**

19. The Possibilists (Broussists) were a reformist trend in the French socialist movement between the 1880s and the early 20th century. Its leaders - Paul Brousse and Benoit Malon -caused a split in the French Workers' Party (see note 33) in 1882 and formed the Federation of Socialist Workers. Its ideo- logical basis was the theory of municipal socialism. The Possibilists pursued a 'policy of the possible' ('la politique des possibilités'). At the beginning of the 20th century the Possibilists merged with the French Socialist Party. 20. Presumably Engels means the newspaper Le Citoyen, of which Jules

Guesde was a co-founder. It appeared from 1 October 1881 to 8 March 1884. In October 1882 it merged with the newspaper La Bataille, edited by Prosper-Olivier Lissagaray. As a result, the French Workers' Party (see note 33) lost its influence on the paper. 21. The Socialist League was founded in December 1884 by a group of English socialists who had withdrawn from the Social Democratic Federation (see note 62). The League's organisers included Eleanor Marx Aveling, Ernest Belfort Bax and William Morris. 'The Manifesto of the Socialist League' (see The Commonweal No.l, February 1885) stated that its members advocated 'the principles of Revolutionary International Socialism' and sought 'a change in the basis of Society which would destroy the distinctions of classes and nationalities'. The tasks of the League included the formation of a national socialist party, the conquest of political power through the elec- tion of socialists to local government bodies, and the promotion of the trade union and co-operative movement. In the League's early years its leaders



**[p. 527]**

took an active part in the working-class movement. However, in 1887 the League split into three factions (Anarchist elements, 'parliamentarists and 'anti-parliamentarists'). With sectarian tendencies growing stronger, the League gradually distanced itself from the day-to-day struggle of the British workers and finally disintegrated in 1889-90. 22. Radical Clubs began to emerge in London and other cities in the 1870s. They consisted of bourgeois radicals and workers. In the Clubs of London's poorer areas, such as the East End, the workers predominated. The Clubs criticised the Irish policy of Gladstone's Liberal government and urged an extension of the suffrage and other democratic reforms. From the early 1880s they engaged in socialist propaganda. In 1885 London's Radical Clubs united in the Metropolitan Radical Federation.

23. Two French translations of Marx's The Eighteenth Brumaire of Louis Bonaparte were made, almost simultaneously, by the French socialists Paul Lavigne and Edouard Fortin. Fortin's translation, sent to Engels somewhat earlier (see Engels' letter to Paul Lavigne of 1 December 1885 in Vol. 47 of the present edition) and edited by Engels at Fortin's request, was published first in Le Socialiste, the newspaper of the French Workers' Party, in January-November 1891 and appeared in book form in Lille the same year. 24. This concerns the charges the levelled at Aveling by the Executive of the Socialist Labor Party of North America (see note 3). This letter was the first of the many Engels wrote to American and German working-class leaders in defence of Aveling. 25. On 30 December 1886 The New York Herald published an article headlined 'Aveling's Unpaid Labor', containing accusations against Aveling (see note 3). Cabled to London, it was reprinted, abridged, in The Daily Telegraph (1 January 1887) and The Evening Standard (13 January 1887). After the publication of the article in England, Aveling cabled a denial to America, which appeared in The New York Herald on 10 January 1887. An official denial by the Avelings addressed to the Executive of the Socialist Labor Party was published in the Herald on 15 January 1887. 26. This refers to the article 'Aveling und die Sozialisten' in the New Yorker

Volkszeitung, No. 10,12 January 1887, which was the first public statement of the charges levelled at Aveling (see note 3). The article was reprinted in the Wochenblatt (weekly supplement) of the New Yorker Volkszeitung on 22 January. As can be seen from F.A. Surge's letter to Engels of 28 February 1887 the article was written by Alexander Jonas, the chief editor of the paper. 27. At the end of November 1886 a court in Leipzig sentenced the Social Democratic worker K. Schumann to four years in prison and another eleven people to various prison terms on charges of 'rebellion'. The pretext for the prosecution was the farewell party given to Schumann by Leipzig workers on 21 September 1886 in connection with his expulsion from the city under



**[p. 528]**

29. This letter was first published in English in Karl Marx and Frederick Engels,

Letters to Americans. 1848-1895. A Selection, International Publishers, New York, 1953. 30. 'Reptiles' and 'the reptile press' were designations used by left-wing writers for the venal reactionary pro-government press. The 'reptile fund' referred to Bismarck's special fund for bribing periodicals and individual journalists. 31. In her letter of 7 February 1887 Laura Lafargue asked Engels to remind Eleanor of Pyotr Lavrov's copy of the Historical Review and to send her (Laura) the January issue. 32. This refers to the Circular containing accusations against Aveling (see note 3) which was directed by the Executive of the Socialist Labor Party to the party's branches on 7 January 1887. It was signed by Wilhelm Ludwig Rosenberg, Hermann Walther and others. 33. Engels means the French Workers' Party (Parti ouvrier français), formed at the 1880 Le Havre congress, when a party programme drawn up with Marx's participation was adopted (see his 'Preamble to the Programme of the French Workers' Party', present edition, Vol. 24). The adoption of the programme led to an aggravation of the inner-party struggle between the Possibilists (see note 19) and the Guesdists (the revolutionary wing), and to a split at the 1882 St Etienne congress. The Guesdists retained the name of the Workers' Party. They relied for support on the workers of France's largest industrial centres, in particular those of some big plants in Paris. The struggle to win broad support among the workers was one of the party's top priorities. 34. On 30 October 1886 Laura Lafargue informed Engels of the publication of the book Das Recht auf den vollen Arbeitsertrag in geschichtlicher Darstellung by the Austrian sociologist and lawyer Anton Menger. The



**[p. 529]**

author alleged that Marx's economic theory was 'not original'. Some of Marx's conclusions, he maintained, were borrowings from William Thompson and other English Ricardian Utopian Socialists. Engels believed that by attacking Menger directly he would provide him a welcome oppor- tunity for self-advertising. He therefore decided to answer him either in an editorial in Die Neue Zeit or in a review signed by the journal's editor, Karl Kautsky. Poor health prevented Engels from writing the bulk of the text as intended. The article was completed, with his help, by Kautsky. It appeared unsigned, under the title 'Juristen-Sozialismus', in Die Neue Zeit, Vol. 2, 1887 (see present edition, Vol. 2). 35. Engels means diplomatic preparations for the 1866 Austro-Prussian war. Early in March of that year he had secured, through Robert Goltz, the Russian Ambassador to Paris, an undertaking by Napoleon III that France would maintain positive neutrality towards Russia in the event of an Austro-Prussian war. At about the same time, Bismarck conducted talks with the Italian general Giuseppe Govone in Berlin on forming a Prusso- Italian coalition against Austria. On 8 April 1866 Prussia and Italy signed a treaty establishing a defensive and offensive alliance. It provided for the transfer of Veneto to Italy in the event of victory over Austria. 36. On 14 January 1887 the German Reichstag, by 186 votes to 154, adopted a bill limiting the army contingent to 441,000 persons, with a three-year term of service (the government had insisted on 468,000 for seven years). As a result, the Reichstag was disbanded and new elections held (see note 15). On 11 March 1887 the new Reichstag passed the bill on the septennate despite opposition from the Social Democratic group. 37. This refers to the festival of international brotherhood which was to be held in Paris on 19 February 1887 on the initiative of a number of socialist émigré organisations. German, Scandinavian, Polish and Russian socialists took part. The festival was to protest against the arms drive and war preparations in Europe. At the request of one of the organisers, the Russian socialist émigré Ossip Zetkin, Engels addressed a message to the Organising committee of the festival (see present edition, Vol. 26). It was read out at the festive meeting and published in Le Socialiste on 26 February and, in German translation, in the Sozialdemocrat on 11 March and the New York Sozialist on 19 March. 38. Danielson's letter to Engels was dated 22 January (3 February new style) 1887. 39. This is the pseudonym Engels used in his correspondence with Nikolai Danielson. Percy White Rosher was the name of the husband of the niece of Engels's wife. 40. This letter was first published, in the language of the original (English), in

F. Engels, P. et L. Lafargue, Correspondance, t. 2 (1887-1890), Paris, Ed. sociales, 1956.



**[p. 530]**

Revolution en Allemagne. Prise de Berlin', carried an editorial entitled 'Victoire!' devoted to the German Reichstag election of 21 February (see note 15). 42. Engels compares Paul Singer's success at the Reichstag election to that of the French Radical Edouard Lockroy, who obtained 272,680 votes, more than any other candidate, at the 1885 parliamentary election and was called 'le premier élu de la France' (France's first choice). As can be seen from Singer's letter of 7 March 1887, Engels congratulated him on the great success. 43. After failing to poll the requisite number of votes at the Reichstag election of 21 February 1887,Wilhelm Liebknecht succeeded in winning a seat in the run-off in Berlin's Fourth constituency on 30 August 1888 in lieu of Wilhelm Hasenclever, who had dropped out for health reasons. 44. The Centre was a political party of German Catholics formed in June 1870. It expressed the separatist and anti-Prussian sentiments current in West and Southwest Germany. (The seats of its Reichstag deputies were in the centre of the hall, hence the name of the party.) The Centre's following consisted of socially disparate sections of Catholic clergy, landowners, bourgeois and peasants. Its deputies usually took a noncommittal attitude, manoeuvring between the pro-government parties and the Left opposition groups. Although it opposed the Bismarck government in the mid-1870s and early 1880s, the Centre voted for its measures against the working-class and socialist movement. Engels gave a detailed characterisation of the Centre in his work The Role of Force in History (see present edition, Vol. 26) and in his article 'What Now?' (see Vol. 27). 45. The Party of Progress, founded in June 1861, advocated the unification of Germany under the aegis of Prussia, the convocation of an all-German parliament, and a liberal Ministry responsible to the Chamber of Deputies. Fearing a popular revolution, it did not support the basic democratic demands - universal suffrage and the freedom of the press, association and assembly. In 1866 the Party of Progress split. Its right wing founded the National Liberal Party, which capitulated to the Bismarck government. After the final unification of Germany in 1871, the Progressists continued to describe themselves as an opposition party, but their opposition was purely declaratory. In March 1884 they merged with the left wing of the National Liberals to form the German Free-Thinking Party (Die Deutsche Freisinnige Partei). 46. Despite Bismarck's anti-French press campaign in Alsace Lorraine, which was supported by the clergy, candidates opposing his militarist ambitions were put up in the Reichstag elections. All the fifteen nominees elected were members of the Elsasser (Alsatian) party. 47. This refers to Aveling's letter of 26 February 1887 which was circulated, in printed form, to the sections of the Socialist Labor Party of North America



**[p. 531]**

Maupassant's novel Bel Ami. 49. A passage from this letter was first published in English in Karl Marx and Frederick Engels Letters to Americans. 1848-1895.A selection, New York, International Publishers, 1953. 50. The second ballot, in eighteen constituencies, brought the Social Democrats another five seats in the Reichstag (Breslau-West, Elberfeld, Frankfurt am Main, Hanover and Solingen). 51. At the end of 1884, Bismarck, seeking to activate Germany's colonial policy, demanded that the Reichstag should vote an annual subsidy to shipping companies to enable them to operate regular lines to East Asia, Australia and Africa. The left wing of the Social Democratic parliamentary group, led by August Bebel and Wilhelm Liebknecht, came out against the government scheme. The right wing, which made up the majority (Dietz, Frohme, Grillenberger and others), intended to vote for the subsidy, on the pretext that it would help promote international communications. Under pressure from the majority the group decided that the issue was of a non-fundamen- tal nature and every deputy should be free to vote as he chose (see Der Sozialdemokrat, No. 50, 11 December 1884). The sharp critique of the proposed subsidies in Der Sozialdemokrat and in resolutions of the party leadership forced the majority of the Social Democratic group to somewhat modify its stand during the discussion of the matter in the Reichstag in March 1855. The group made its support for the subsidies conditional on the adoption of a number of its own proposals. Since the Reichstag rejected these, all Social Democratic deputies voted against the subsidies. 52. The Anti-Socialist law {Gesetz gegen die gemeingefährlichen Bestrebungen der Sozialdemokratie) was introduced by the Bismarck government, with the support of the majority of the Reichstag, on 21 October 1878, as a means of combating the socialist and working-class movement. It imposed a ban on all Social Democratic and working-class organisations and on the socialist and workers' press; socialist literature was subject to confiscation, and Social Democrats to reprisals. However, under the Constitution, the Social Democratic Party retained its group in parliament. By combining underground activities with the use of legal possibilities, in particular by working to overcome reformist and anarchist tendencies in its own ranks, the party was able to consolidate and expand its influence among the masses. Marx and Engels gave the party leaders considerable help. Under the pressure of the mass working-class movement the Anti-Socialist Law was repealed (1 October 1890). For Engels' characterisation of the law see his article 'Bismarck and the German Workers Party' (present edition, Vol. 24, pp407-09).



**[p. 532]**

Rosenberg, secretary of the Socialist Labor Party of North America, head- lined 'Letter from America - The Great Strike', which characterised the longshoremen's strike in New Jersey as an unmitigated defeat for the work- ers, incurred through the fault of the Knights of Labor leaders. The party, Rosenberg stressed, must not support this organisation. The Knights of Labor (The Noble Order of the Knights of Labor) was an American work- ers' organisation founded in Philadelphia in 1869. Originally a secret soci- ety (up to 1878), it included mostly unskilled workers, among them black workers. The Knights' aim was the promotion of co-operatives and mutual aid societies. They took part in a number of working-class actions, but the organisation's leadership opposed workers' participation in political strug- gle. It forbade members of the organisation to take part in the 1886 general strike; however the rank and file ignored the ban. After the strike the Knights' influence among the workers began to shrink. Towards the end of



**[p. 533]**

the 1890s the organisation disintegrated. 61. The Central Labor Unions were mass trade union centres of US and foreign workers, both white and black, in a number of American cities in the 1880s. The first was formed in New York in 1882. Many of these centres joined the American Federation of Labor (AFL), set up in December 1886. 62. The Social Democratic Federation was a British socialist organisation, the successor of the Democratic Federation, reformed in August 1884. It consisted of heterogeneous socialist elements, mostly intellectuals, but also politically active workers. The programme of the Federation provided for the collectivisation of the means of production, distribution and exchange. Its leader, Henry Hyndman, was dictatorial and arbitrary, and his support- ers among the Federation's leaders denied the need to work among the trade unions. In contrast to Hyndman, the Federation members grouped round Eleanor Marx-Aveling, Edward Aveling, William Morris and Tom Mann sought close ties with the mass working-class movement. In December 1884, differences on questions of tactics and international co-operation led to a split in the Federation and the establishment of the independent social- ist league (see note 21). In 1885-86 the Federation's branches were active in the movement of the unemployed, in strike struggles and in the campaign for the eight-hour day. 63. In 1886 and 1887 the Social Democratic Federation conducted a broad campaign of agitation among London's unemployed. The church parades were a form of this agitation, practised in early 1887. It was an attempt to address the unemployed from the pulpit. One parade, on 27 February 1887, took place in front of St Paul's Cathedral. During the sermon, parade partic- ipants proclaimed socialist slogans. After the service the Social Democratic Federation held three meetings in the streets, the speakers including John Burns, George Bateman and Fielding. However, this form of agitation failed to produce tangible results and was abandoned. 64. From mid-November 1886 to 14 August 1887 August Bebel was in prison in Zwickau. He was one of a group of German Social Democrats (others included Ignaz Auer, Johann Dietz, Georg Vollmar, Karl Frohme) condemned on trumped up charges of belonging to a 'secret union' whose purpose it was to obstruct by illegal means the enforcement of laws and government regulations. The indictment was based on the defendants' participation in the 1883 Copenhagen Social Democratic Party Congress. The court brought in a verdict of not guilty. However, the government appealed to the Imperial Court, which sent the case for re-examination to the Saxony State Court in Freiberg. On 4 August 1886 the latter sentenced the defendants to various prison terms. In the subsequent two and a half years another 55 trials of socialists were staged, resulting in the conviction of 236 people. 65. This refers to Aveling's answer to the article in the New Yorker



**[p. 534]**

Volkszeitung, No. 10, 12 January 1887 (see note 26). The answer was published by the paper on 2 March, Issue 52,1887, alongside another attack on Aveling, an editorial headlined 'Affaire Aveling noch einmal'. To this second article Aveling answered by a letter dated 16 March 1887, mentioned here, which, as the rough copy shows, had been written by Engels. It was published on 30 March, in Issue 76. 66. In a letter dated 28 February 1887 Sorge informed Engels that a long state- ment in support of Aveling, signed by K.H. Müller, had appeared in the Chicago Arbeiterzeitung. Sorge sent Engels a clipping from the paper. On Aveling's second Circular see note 47. 67. This extract is the last page of Engels's letter to Hermann Schlüter of 19 March 1887. The whereabouts of the letter are unknown. The text is repro- duced from a facsimile of a publication in Pionier. Illustrierter Volks- Kalender fur 1902, New York, 1901. 68. At the Reichstag elections of 21 February 1887 (see note 15) the Social Democrats obtained 11 seats. Under the existing regulations, 15 mandates were needed to form a faction. 69. No information is available concerning this postcard. 70. Rumours published in the last issue of the Voie du peuple (17 March 1887) caused a quarrel and even an exchange of seconds between Albert Goulle, who contributed to this newspaper, and Georges de Labruyere, a contribu- tor to the Cri du peuple. The two then accused each other of trying to evade the duel. In publishing its version of the incident, the Cri du peuple, while careful to avoid referring to the Voie du peuple by name, suggested that its demise had been due to the lack of readers. On 20 March 1887, Le Radical published Albert Goulle's and Gabriel Deville's answer to the Cri du peuple. 71. This presumably refers to an item published in the 'Topics of the Day' column of the Weekly Dispatch on 20 March 1887 denying the rumours about the death of William I. 72. On 13 (1) March 1887 a group of members of the Narodnaya Volya (People's Will), led by Alexander Ulyanov, Lenin's elder brother, made an attempt on the life of Alexander III in St Petersburg. The police arrested and handed over for trial thirteen people, five of whom, including Alexander Ulyanov, were executed, while the rest were given long prison terms. The official declaration of the tsarist government referred to by Engels main- tained that 'some foreign newspapers' were exaggerating the role of the constitutional party and that 'the most influential classes in Russia do not consider that the time is ripe for the introduction of constitutional government.' It also declared that the Russian government was 'carefully studying state socialism, which is being successfully implemented in Germany by Prince Bismarck', and expressed the Tsar's hypocritical regret at 'the need for costly precautions to safeguard his personal security'.



**[p. 535]**

73. Engels refers to the political crisis in Bulgaria brought about by the over- throw, on 9 August 1886, of Prince Alexander Battenberg by a group of Russophile military conspirators (see note 109). In an attempt to regain the throne, Battenberg sent an obsequious message to Alexander III promising every support to the Tsar's 'noble intention to bring Bulgaria out of the grave crisis'. The closing sentence read: 'Since it was Russia that gave me my Crown, I am prepared to return it into the hands of her sovereign.' 74. Engels is replying to Trier's letter of 22 March 1887 in which Trier informed him that he was sending the manuscript of his Danish translation of Engels'

The Origin of the Family, Private Property and the State, and asked for Engels' opinion. The translation, revised by Engels, appeared in Copenhagen in 1838. 75. On 25 March 1887 Sorge informed Engels that Hepner had openly protested against the accusations levelled at Aveling (see note 3), describing them as 'insidious and mean', but saying that the whole thing could have been avoided had Aveling been 'more frank'. Sorge also said that according to his information Kautsky did not know what to make of the matter and Liebknecht kept silent. 76. The whereabouts of this letter is unknown. 77. This refers to the attempt on the life of Alexander III which took place on 13 March 1887 (see note 72) and to the widespread rumours that prepara- tions for another attempt, to be staged in Gatchina, had been uncovered on 1 April. 78. Engels means the replacement of recruitment in Russia by conscription. Under the introduction of compulsory military service of 1 January 1874, the entire male population aged 21 to 43, with the exception of natives of Central Asia and Kazakhstan and men belonging to certain peoples of the Caucasus, Siberia, the Volga area and the Arctic regions, were liable for mili- tary service in the regular army, the reserve or the militia. The call up was conducted by casting lots. This system was to turn the Russian army into a mass army. However, under the existing autocratic and landlord system, the implementation of universal military service was hampered by the numer- ous privileges of the propertied classes and the unequal conditions of army service for members of different social strata. As early as 9 January 1877, during the Russo-Turkish war, Engels pointed out that conscription was contributing to the 'disorganisation' of the Russian army (see present edition, Vol. 45). 79. At Engels' request Sorge sent a message to Alexander Jonas, Editor of the New Yorker Volkszeitung, on 29 March 1877, asking why he was not publishing Edward Aveling's letter of 16 March 1887 (see note 65). 80. On behalf of Florence Kelley-Wischnewetzky, the translator of Engels' The Condition of the Working Class in England, Rachel Foster, Secretary of the National Woman Suffrage Association, was trying to find a publisher for



**[p. 536]**

the book in America. On 8 February 1886 the Executive of the Socialist Labor Party, which she had approached for support, set up a special committee to deal with publishers, but the negotiations dragged, and the book was published in May 1887, independently of the Executive. 81. At the insistence of the German authorities the Swiss Federal Council on 18 April 1888 expelled several associate editors of and contributors to the Sozialdemokrat (Eduard Bernstein, Julius Motteler, Hermann Schlüter and Leonard Tauscher) from the country. Until 22 September the paper contin- ued to appear in Switzerland, edited by the Swiss Social Democrat Conrad Consett. From 1 October 1888 to 27 September 1890 the paper was published in London. 82. Pan-Slavism was a social and political movement predicated on the notion that the Slavonic peoples ought to oppose themselves to other peoples and merge in a single state with tsarist Russia. In Russia itself, Pan-Slavism assumed a reactionary character in the 1830s. The Russian historian Mikhail Pogodin, drawing on official populism, asserted that the Slavs were superior to other nations and that Russia was destined for hegemony in the Slavonic world. The same ideas, with various modifications, were propounded by the Slavophiles in the 1850s and 1860s (see note 187). 83. Nihilists were the extreme wing of the radical movement in Russia in the 1860s, intellectuals who believed in the destruction of existing society and culture. The Nihilists rejected the dominant ideology and morality and fought against religious prejudices. They demanded freedom of the individ- ual and equality for women, and favoured the study of the natural and exact sciences. Towards the end of the 1860s the term practically ceased to be used in polemic literature, but in later years reactionary journalists occasionally applied it to revolutionaries. In West European literature the term was used to denote Russian revolutionaries, including the members of the Narodnaya Volya (People's Will), in the 1870s and 1880s. 84. After their return from the USA (see note 3) Eleanor Marx-Aveling and Edward Aveling launched a large-scale socialist propaganda campaign in London's Radical Clubs (see note 22). Their purpose was, among other things, to familiarise the British workers with the experience of the US labour movement. 85. At the April 1887 municipal elections in the USA, workers' organisations put up candidates in about 60 cities and succeeded in having them elected in twenty. In Cincinnati (Ohio), Milwaukee and Chicago their candidates failed by a few hundred votes. 86. In the first half of April 1887 the British House of Commons discussed a Crimes Bill for Ireland which was to introduce a simplified judicial proce- dure for quelling the growing peasant unrest. The executive authorities were to be allowed to outlaw various societies, and members of the judiciary to pass sentence on charges of plotting, illegal assembly, disobedience to the



**[p. 537]**

authorities and the like without a jury. On 11 April 1887 several mass meet- ings to protest against the Bill were held in Hyde Park, with 100 to 150 thousand people attending. The meetings, held separately by different organisations, were addressed by speakers for the Liberal Party (William Gladstone), the Social Democratic Federation (George Bateman, John Burns, Michael Davitt, John Williams and others), the socialist League (Eleanor Marx-Aveling, Edward Aveling and others) and other organisa- tions. A report headlined 'Irish Crimes Bill, Great Demonstration in Hyde Park, Processions and Speeches', in The Daily Telegraph of 12 April 1887, said that Eleanor Marx-Aveling's speech was warmly greeted and heard with great interest. Despite the protests the two chambers of parliament passed the bill in July 1837. Beginning 23 July, a state of emergency was introduced on the strength of it, initially in four and ultimately in about 30 counties of Ireland. 87. This letter was first published in English in Frederick Engels, Paul and Laura Lafargue. Correspondence. 1887-1890, Vol. 2, Foreign Languages Publishing House, Moscow, 1960. 88. This refers to Marx's Misere de la philosophie. In 1884 Laura Lafargue failed to reach an agreement on a second French edition of the book. In 1887 Paul Lafargue again conducted negotiations on the matter. However, it was not until 1896, after Engels 's death, that the project materialised (in Paris). 89. This presumably refers to the Avelings' series of articles, 'The Labour movement in America', published between March and May 1887 in the journal Time, which appeared in Swan Sonnenschein's publishing house in London. 90. Engels means the municipal elections in Paris held on 8 May 1887. Lafargue stood for election in the Fifth arrondissement (Jardin des Plantes). In the first ballot he received 568 votes and was third. In the second, on 15 May, he got 685 votes and was second. 91. After Jules Guesde, Gabriel Deville and other members of the French Workers' Party had resigned from the editorial board of the Cri du peuple and after the Voie du peuple, the paper they had started, also ceased publi- cation (see note 18), the Party's weekly La Socialiste likewise closed down (the last issue appeared on 26 March 1887). The Party's paper resumed publication on 11 June 1887. 92. On 11 April 1887 the European press reported that another conspiracy to assassinate Alexander III had been uncovered. It was to take place during the Tsar's inspection of a Guards cavalry regiment. These reports were not confirmed (see also notes 72 and 77). 93. This refers to the Peasant Reform of 19 February 1861 ('Regulations concerning Peasants Emerging from Serf Dependence'). It put an end to serfdom in Russia and brought freedom to about 22.5 million peasants. However, even after the abolition of serfdom some of the former serfs (the



**[p. 538]**





**[p. 539]**

99. This refers to the 'Schnaebelé case', a conflict between France and Germany engineered by the Bismarck government. On 20 April 1887 Police Commissioner Schnaebelé, a French border official in Pagny-sur-Moselle, was invited onto German territory, ostensibly for negotiations, and arrested on charges of organising espionage and encouraging young people in Alsace-Lorraine to emigrate from Germany. At the same time, the German ruling quarters launched a virulent anti-French press campaign. This was taken advantage of by French revanchist circles for stepping up anti- German propaganda. However, the governments of Russia, Great Britain and Austria-Hungary refused to support Bismarck. Germany was forced to beat a retreat. On 30 April Schnaebelé was released and the conflict thus settled. 100. This letter was first published in English, abridged, in Labour Monthly, No. 2, London, 1934, and, without the first paragraph, in: Karl Marx and Frederick Engels, Letters to Americans. 1848-1895. A Selection, International Publishers, New York, 1953. 101. In the letter in question Sorge, replying to remarks contained in Engels'

letter of 10 March 1887, pointed out that the leaders of the Socialist Labor Party of North America had, by their mistaken tactics, to a considerable extent nullified the successes achieved in the US labour movement by Marx's adherents at the time of the First International. 102. This refers to the English translation of the Manifesto of the Communist Party made by Samuel Moore (published in 1888). The three manuscripts mentioned are those of a French translation of Marx's The Eighteenth Brumaire of Louis Bonaparte (see note 23), an Italian translation of Marx's Wage Labour and Capital and a Danish translation of Engels's The Origin of the Family, Private Property and the State (see note 74). 103. An item headlined 'A Costly Apostle', published in Justice No. 172, 30 April 1887, reproduced the contents of the circulars of the Executive of the Socialist Labor Party of North America attacking Edward Aveling (see notes 32 and 98). Aveling answered in a Letter to the Editor, published in Justice, No. 174. 14 May 1887. 104. An American exhibition opened in London in May 1887, the programme including the show Buffalo Bill's Wild West. 105. In his letter of 29 April 1887 Eduard Bernstein asked Engels and Kautsky to find out, confidentially, whether the Austrian anarchist Joseph Peukert, resident in London, was not, as he, Bernstein, assumed, a police agent. In late 1887 Peukert was exposed. 106. This refers to the London German Workers' Educational Society. It was founded by members of the League of the Just Karl Schapper, Joseph Moll and Heinrich Bauer in London in 1840. In 1847 and in 1849-50 Marx and Engels took part in its activities. The Society changed its name in subse- quent years. From the 1870s it was called the Communist Workers'



**[p. 540]**

Educational society. Soon after the introduction of the Anti-Socialist Law in Germany (see note 52), the Society was overruled by the faction that rejected the tactics adopted by German Social Democracy for the period of operation of the Law. It opposed combining legal and illegal methods of struggle, objected to the Social Democrats' use of the Reichstag platform and favoured individual terrorism. In March 1880 a considerable part of the Society's members formed an independent organisation of their own, retaining the Society's name. This new Society declared that it would be guided by the principles and tactics of German Social Democracy. The remainder of the members, in particular the followers of Johann Most, stuck to their extreme Left views. They operated under the same name. 107. This refers to data on the state of affairs in the French republic at the time of the conspiracy of the Equals, which Bernstein needed for his Afterword to Gabriel Deville's book Gracchus Babeuf und die Verschworung der Gleichen. Translated by Bernstein into German, the book was published, with his Afterword, in the series Sozialdemokratische Bibliothek, in Hottingen-Zurich in 1887. The Conspiracy of the Equals, organised by Babeuf and his followers, aimed at provoking an armed uprising of the plebeian masses against the bourgeois regime of the Directory and estab- lishing a revolutionary dictatorship as a transitional stage on the way to 'pure democracy' and 'egalitarian communism'. The conspiracy was exposed in May 1796. At the end of May 1797 its leaders were executed. Buonarroti's Conspiration de Babeuf, which Engels mentions later in his letter, was translated into English and published by William O'Brien, a prominent Chartist. 108. Engels's remarks contained in this paragraph were used in the column

'Sozialpolitische Rundschau' of Der Sozialdemocrat, No. 20, 13 May 1887. 109. Engels means the political crisis in Bulgaria in the summer of 1886 created by the overthrow of Prince Alexander Battenberg by a group of military conspirators linked with agents of the Russian Government. The provisional government formed on 9 August was replaced, a few days later, by a pro- Austrian regency. An attempt to re-enthrone Alexander Battenberg failed in the face of open opposition from Russia. In September, the Russian Government dispatched Major General N. V. Kaulbars to Sofia with the task to prepare the ground for the election of a Russian candidate to the Bulgarian throne. However, his mission failed, owing in particular to the stance taken by the West European powers, notably Britain. On 5 November Russia recalled Kaulbars and broke off diplomatic relations with Bulgaria. 110. On 31 March 1887 two Bulgarian émigrés staged an attempt on the life of Mantoff, prefect of the Bulgarian city of Ruschtschuk, in Bucharest for negotiations with the Russian ambassador. Mantoff was seriously injured. On the night of 23 April a bomb was set off in the house of Major Popoff, chief of the Sofia garrison. The attack had been organised by members of



**[p. 541]**

the pro-Russian Liberal Party. The Russophile officer Olimpi Panoff was shot in Bulgaria in February 1887. 111. Kelley-Wischnewetzky had suggested that Engels's article, 'Die Arbeiterbewegung in America' ('The Labour Movement in America'), writ- ten as a preface to the US edition of The Condition of the Working Class in England, should be issued in the form of separate German and English pamphlets. This was also suggested by Sorge in his letter of 26 April 1887. Engels translated the preface into German himself. The pamphlets appeared in New York in July 1887. Engels's German translation was also published in the Sozialdemokrat, Nos 24 and 25; 10 and 17 June 1887. 112. Engels is quoting from Sorge's letter of 26 April 1887. Enclosed in it was a clipping from the New Yorker Volkszeitung of 25 April with a report on a sitting of the New York Section that had concerned itself with the Aveling case. 113. In his letter of 26 April 1887 Sorge informed Engels that Alexander Jonas, editor of the New Yorker Volkszeitung, had stayed away from the meeting of the Executive of the Socialist Labor Party which discussed the Aveling case (see note 3). Sorge also noted that the Executive had dealt itself a mortal blow by its second circular on the matter (see note 98). 114. On 21 May \H7, Justice, No. 175, carried an editorial note in the 'Tell Tale Straws' column which gave the following resume of Aveling's latest Letter to the Editor (see Justice, No. 174, 14 May 1887): 'The gist of it is that the Board of Supervisors in America exonerate him from all blame, and that Mr. Friedrich Engels, Mr. F. A. Sorge, and Mr. Wilhelm Liebknecht (who writes a letter to that effect) are ready to answer for Dr. Aveling's correct behav- iour in the matter of his expenditure on his American trip'. 115. Aveling's answer to the second circular of the Executive of the Socialist Labor Party (see note 98) was printed in the form of a pamphlet, containing Aveling's statement of 27 May 1887 (a detailed reply to the charges levelled at him); a statement by Eleanor Marx-Aveling of 24 May, confirming her husband's arguments and adding certain details; a statement by Wilhelm Liebknecht in defence of Aveling of 16 May. 116. Six Possibilists (see note 19), including Paul Brousse, were elected to the Paris Municipal Council in a second ballot on 15 May 1887. 117. On 17 May 1887, in a debate at the French Chamber of Deputies, the budget committee opposed the draft budget for 1888 submitted by Rene Goblet's Radical Cabinet (see note 200). The majority of deputies supported the committee, thus forcing the Cabinet to resign. The government crisis lasted for 13 days. On 30 May 1887 Maurice Rouvier formed a Cabinet composed mostly of Rightists. 118. Engels wrote this letter on a postcard. The address, written by him on the back, reads K. Kautsky Esq., 54 Langdon Park Road, Highgate, No 661. The text of the letter is slightly damaged.



**[p. 542]**

Ireland and the Irish Question, Progress Publishers, Moscow, 1971. 126. The Commonweal weekly, Nos 71, 72, 74, 76, 79 and 80; 21 and 28 May, 11 and 25 June, and 16 and 23 July 1887, carried a polemic between Ernest Belfort Bax and Charles Bradlaugh on the subject, 'Will Socialism Benefit the English People?'. Each author contributed three articles. Bax advocated socialism, Bradlaugh opposed it. 127. Engels means the differences within the Liberal Party and the incipient rapprochement of its Right wing (the Whigs) with the Conservatives. The Right-wing Liberals opposed Home Rule for Ireland. In 1886 they broke away from the Liberal Party and formed the Liberal-Unionist bloc led by Joseph Chamberlain. It favoured retaining the 1801 Union of Ireland with Great Britain and supported the Conservatives on most issues. Unionist Liberals reflected the regrouping of Britain's ruling classes and their shift to the Right. 128. On 19 March 1883 Sorge had informed Engels that Henry George's propa- ganda in America was leading the working-class movement astray and



**[p. 543]**





**[p. 544]**

continued to whip up a revanchist campaign with the support of the chauvinist elements of different parties, from the radicals to the monar- chists. On 8 July 1887, when Boulanger was leaving for Clermont- Ferrand to assume command of the 13th Corps, his supporters staged a chauvinist demonstration at the Lyons railway station. Boulangism was a reactionary movement in France in the mid-1880s, led by ex-War Minister General Boulanger. It urged a revanchist war against Germany to win back Alsace, annexed by Germany in the Franco-Prussian war of 1870-71. In alliance with the monarchists, the Boulangists sought to capi- talise on the masses' discontent with the government's policy. Their large-scale demagogic propaganda was especially effective among the lower ranks of the army. France was under the threat of a monarchist coup. Measures taken by the republican government, with the support of the progressive forces led to the collapse of the Boulangist movement. Its leaders fled from France. 138. Engels holidayed in Eastbourne from 23 July to 2 September. 139. This letter was first published, in the language of the original (English), in

Briefe und Auszuge aus Briefen von Joh. Phil. Becker, Jos. Dietzgen, Friedrich Engels, Karl Marx u. A. an F. A Sorge und Anders, Stuttgart, 1906. 140. Kelley-Wischnewetzky had sent Engels clippings from the US (New York and provincial) press with reviews of the American edition of the Condition of the Working Class in England. 141. On 21 July 1887 Mahon wrote to tell Engels that he no longer trusted Aveling and considered it impossible further to co-operate with him. He did not give any reasons. 142. Aveling and Mahon, along with some other members of the Socialist League, opposed the anarchist policies of its leaders (see note 95). 143. In a letter of 30 July 1887 Kautsky asked Engels to send his signature, a



**[p. 545]**

facsimile of which he wanted to give under Engels' portrait in the annual

Österreichischer Arbeiter-Kalender for 1888, where Kautsky's article, 'Friedrich Engels' was to appear. The article was published, with some addenda and amendments, after Engels' death, in 1895, in Vorwärts (Berlin), under the title 'Friedrich Engels, sein Leben, sein Wirken, seine Schriften'. 144. Bank Holidays - in 1871 additional holidays were legally introduced for all English banks: Easter and Whit Monday, the first Monday of August and 26 December. 145. The Austrian Social Democrat Heinrich Mandl questioned the 'iron law of wages' in his article '1st das eherne Lohngesetz richtig?' {Gleichheit, No 21, 14 May 1887). Leo Frankel answered him in an article headlined 'Zur Kritik des "ehernen" Lohngesetzes' {Gleichheit, Nos 28-30; 2, 9 and 16 July 1887). 146. The 'iron law of wages' was formulated by Ferdinand Lassalle, in the pamphlet Offnes Antwortschreiben an das Central-Comité zur Berufung eines Allgemeinen Deutschen Arbeitercongresses zu Leipzig, Zurich, 1863, ppl5-16. 147. Engels means J.M. Baernreither's book Die englischen Arbeiterverbande und ihr Recht. Ein Beitrag zur Geschichte der sozialen Bewegung in der Gegenwart, Bd 1 Tubingen, 1886. The second volume, which was to deal with the English trade unions, was not published. 148. On 27 July 1887 Sorge wrote to tell Engels that Julius Grunzig, associate editor of the New Yorker Volkszeitung, had asked him for biographical data on Engels, since he intended to write an article on him for the Pionier calen- dar, published by that newspaper. 149. On 16 July 1887 Florence Kelley-Wischnewetsky and her husband, Lazar Wischnewetzky were expelled from the New York section of the Socialist Labor Party of North America for defending Edward Aveling at a section sitting (see note 3). 150. The August 1887 issue of To-Day (Vol. 8, No. 45) contained a note by its editor, Hubert Bland, setting forth the contents of Edward Aveling's circu- lars on the charges levelled at him by the Executive of the Socialist Labor Party of North America (see note 3). Bland dealt with the charges favourably to Aveling, pointing out that at the bottom of it all was a differ- ence of policy, as Aveling had advocated a line of action which the Executive Committee had disliked. 151. In connection with the death, on 1 August 1887, of the Russian political writer M.N. Katkov, who advocated an anti-German alliance of Russia with French chauvinistic circles, the French bourgeois press published a series of articles eulogising Katkov as a 'great friend of France'. On the other hand, the socialist press exposed Katkov as a reactionary and champion of the autocracy. In particular, Jules Guesde, in an article headlined 'Républicains et cosaques' {l'Action, 4 August), pointed out that Katkov was responsible for the Tsarist government's reprisals against Polish patriots and that revo-



**[p. 546]**





**[p. 547]**

159. The report about G. Lopatin's death proved wrong. 160. In a letter of 28 August 1887, Florence Kelley-Wischnewetzky voiced her regret over the fact that Kautsky, to whom the American editor of the Engels-written book The Condition of the Working Class in England, John Lovell, had sent a considerable number of copies, did not take the trouble to send it to London newspapers and magazines for reviewing. 161. Characterising the resolution of the conference of the United Labor Party of the State of New York, held on 17-19 August 1887, in Syracuse, N.Y. (see note 6) on the expulsion of the Socialists from this party, ostensibly in conformity with its Rules, Henry George declared in his paper The Standard that this decision largely furthered the success of his efforts to enlist representatives of the petty bourgeoisie and even big capitalists; as he explained, these social groups would have certainly refused to back the new independent political movement had it involved the Socialists with their 'doctrine of the class struggle'. 162. The American edition of Marx's speech on free trade, which he made in Brussels on 9 January 1848 (See present edition, Vol. 6, pp450-65), appeared in Boston in September 1888, in Kelley-Wischnewetzky's translation. Engels wrote a special preface to this edition - first published in the author's translation into the German by the magazine Neue Zeit No 7, July 1888, under the title 'Schutzzoll und Freihandel' and then in the English original, in the latter half of August 1888, in The Labor Standard of New York. Appended as an addendum was the slightly abridged version of the 'Seventh and Last Observation' from Chapter II ('The Metaphysics of Political Economy') of Marx's work The Poverty of Philosophy (see present edition, Vol. 6, ppl74-78). Kelley-Wischnewetzky suggested that the fourth part of this chapter, 'Property of Rent' (ibid., pp 197-206) be likewise included in the addendum; she argued that the American anarchists, Benjamin Tucker in particular, raised a noisy publicity campaign in connection with the publication of Proudhon's works they had undertaken. However, Engels did not find it necessary to include this part. 163. In connection with Engels' note to a separate edition of his article 'The Labor Movement in America' (see note 134), the Executive of the Socialist Labor Party issued a statement published in the newspaper Sozialist, No. 35, on 27 August 1887. It expressed surprise that a comrade in such an exposed position as Engels could not expect such accusation against a whole number of persons who have taken their stand under the circum- stances' and also claimed that allegedly none of the sections of the party 'has come out against the National Executive Committee concerning the financial aspect of the matter'. 164. Apparently the reference is to the convention of the Socialist Labor Party of North America (see note 3) held on 17-20 September 1887, in Buffalo, NY.



**[p. 548]**





**[p. 549]**





**[p. 550]**

1886 to the spring of 1887, the Chief Constable of London, Charles Warren, banned demonstrations and meetings in Trafalgar Square by his fiat of 8 November, 1887. In reply the Metropolitan Radical Federation (see note 22) appointed Sunday, 13 November 1887, as the day of a rally. On that day Trafalgar Square was cordoned off by the police and soldiers, and nearly all the demonstrators, about a hundred thousand strong, were dispersed with exceptional cruelty on their way to the square. Hundreds of workers sustained injuries in clashes with the police (with three workers receiving deadly wounds); numerous arrests were made. Also taking part in the demonstration was Eleanor Marx-Aveling, who described the events of that day in the Pall Mall Gazette on the 14th of November 1887. 13 November

1887 went down in the history of the British working class movement as 'Bloody Sunday'. 186. The reference is to the joint meeting of the Social Democratic Federation, the Socialist League, the Labour Emancipation League and the London



**[p. 551]**

Radical Clubs in London on 20 September 1885, in protest against the arrest of Socialist speakers who had addressed rallies in the East End in July- September 1885 when the British Socialists were fighting for freedom of speech ('the free speech struggles against the police suppression of outdoor meetings'). The September 20 rally brought together several thousand who offered resistance to the police trying to arrest the speakers. Several people were detained nonetheless, but they were set free the next day. September 27 saw an even larger demonstration and a rally that adopted a resolution protesting the police actions. Thereupon the authorities ceased their attempts to silence Socialist speakers.

187. Slavophiles (e.g. A. Khomyakov, the brothers Aksakov, I. Kireevsky, Yu. Samarin and others) were a trend in nineteenth-century Russian social and philosophical thought. In the late 1830s-1850s they advanced a theory of Russia's unique path of historical development which, in their opinion, differed from that of Western Europe. Among the characteristic features of their theory were monarchism, a negative attitude to revolution and a lean- ing towards religious-philosophical conceptions. The Slavophiles met mostly in the literary salons of Moscow. 188. On 10 November 1887, die Deutsche Reichsbank announced, on Bismarck's orders, that it would no longer accept Russian securities as deposits. 189. It was common practice in the book trade for a publishing house to grant a discount to bookstores on wholesale purchases depending on the quantity ordered; for example it might offer about 12 copies, a thirteenth part of the total print, free of charge. Referring to '18 copies - a thirteenth part - free of charge', Engels meant 224 copies of the book sold in Britain. 190. As Conrad Schmidt told Engels in his letter of 22 November 1887, his rela- tives in Königsberg had been searched on having received a box with books which he, Schmidt, had sent them from Paris during his trip abroad. The police tried to prosecute Schmidt on the grounds that the parcel had contained several numbers of the newspaper Sozialdemokrat which was banned in Germany. He managed to avoid arrest. 191. From the latter half of September 1841, to about 10 October 1842, Engels

stayed in Berlin for his tour of duty in an artillery brigade. In his spare time he attended lectures at Berlin University and forged close contacts with left- wing Hegelians, progressive writers and scholars. It was at that time that Engels maintained close ties with East Prussian liberals (Eduard Plottwell and Johann Jacoby). Through them he might have contacted the bourgeois newspaper Königl. Preuß. Staats-Kriegs-und-Friedenszeitung (a progressive paper in the 1840s); however, we have no evidence that Engels really co- operated with the newspaper. 'The restricted intelligence of loyal subjects' ('beschränkter Untertanenverstand') was a phrase coined by the Prussian Minister of the Interior von Rochow; it gained wide currency in Germany.



**[p. 552]**





**[p. 553]**

Macmahon found no support among the broad popular masses or in the army (among the soldiers and the greater part of commissioned officers), which reflected the republican sentiments of the French peasantry. The parliamentary election of October 1877 brought victory to the republicans, with a bourgeois republican government being formed; in January 1879 Macmahon resigned. 199. Opportunists was the name given in France to the party of moderate bour- geois republicans upon its split in 1881 and the formation of a left-wing party of radicals under Georges Clemenceau. The name was first used in 1877 by Henri Rochefort, a journalist, after the leader of the party, L. Gambetta, had said that reforms were to be implemented at 'an opportune time' ('un temps opportun'). 200. The Radicals were a parliamentary group in France in the 1880s and 1890s that emerged from the party of moderate republicans ('Opportunists', see note 199). The Radicals relied chiefly on the petty bourgeoisie and to some extent on the middle bourgeoisie; they upheld the bourgeois-democratic demands: a unicameral system of parliament, separation of the church from the state, a progressive income tax, limitation of the workday, among other social issues. The Radicals were led by George Clemenceau. This group transformed itself into the Republican Party of Radicals and Radical- Socialists (parti républicain radical et radical-socialiste) in 1901. 201. On 4 December 1887, London was the scene of several meetings of the unemployed, organised by the Social Democratic Federation (see note 62). Although significant police reinforcements were moved in, no clashes were reported. For an account of the meetings, see Justice Vol. IV, No. 204, 10 December 1887: The Unemployed Agitation. 202. Such a collection was not published at the time; in 1894 the Social Democratic Publishers Vorwärts released a collection of Engels' works under the title Internationales aus dem 'Volksstaat' (1871-75) which comprised all the articles mentioned in the letter with the exception of Refugee Literature IV. Friedrich Hermann Schlüter also suggested that Engels include in the collection some of his articles from Die Neue Rheinische Zeitung, Die Neue Rheinische Zeitung. Politisch-Ökonomische Revue, as well as excerpts from his pamphlet The Prussian Military Question and the German Workers' Party. 203. Engels replies to F. Schlüter's suggestion to revise three chapters from the second part of Anti-Duhring and have them published as a separate pamphlet. These chapters, under the single title The Theory of Force contained an explanation of materialist views on economics and politics. Engels subsequently changed his plan and decided also to add a fourth chapter on Germany history from 1848 to 1888 and a critique of Bismarck. The proposed title of the pamphlet was The Role of Force in History. Engels wrote this (fourth) chapter somewhat later, at the close of 1887 and in the



**[p. 554]**

first three months of 1888. Having interrupted his work in March 1888, Engels must have never resumed it. This unfinished work of his, an outline of the preface to the pamphlet, the plan of the fourth chapter, as well as the plan of the concluding part of this chapter (this plan delineated the contents of the unfinished part of the work) are published in the present edition, Vol. 26. 204. Engels replies to Paul Lafargue's inquiry in the letter of 25 December 1887, concerning Heinrich Oberwinder, formerly active in the First International, and exposed as an agent of the Prussian police. The exposure was made by Swiss socialists in the newspaper Der Sozialdemokrat on 24 December 1887; they had found one of the German émigrés, Christian Haupt, to be Bismarck's agent. Subsequently they uncovered other spies as well, includ- ing Heinrich Nonne and Heinrich Oberwinder. 205. The Salvation Army was a religious-philanthropic organisation founded by William Booth of the Church of England in 1865. Subsequently it extended its activities to other countries as well (it adopted the present name in 1878 upon being reorganised after a military model). 206. On 25 December 1887, Paul Lafargue told Engels in jest about Laura's 'new-found talent' as an artist. 207. The following works of Engels were translated into Romanian: The Origin of the Family, Private Property and the State (the journal Contemporanul Nos. 17-21, 1885, and Nos. 22-24, 1886) (present edition, Vol. 26) and the article The Political Situation in Europe (the journal Revista Socialista No. 2, December 1886) (present edition, Vol. 26, pp410-17). 208. The author of both pamphlets, published anonymously, was Constantin

Dobrogenau-Gherea. 209. The Holy Alliance was an association of European monarchs founded on 26 September 1815, on the initiative of the Russian Tsar Alexander I and the Austrian Chancellor Metternich, to suppress revolutionary movements and preserve feudal monarchies in European countries. 210. Règlement organique (1831-32) constitutional acts laying down the socio- political system of the Danubian Principalities (Wallachia and Moldavia) after the Russo-Turkish war of 1828-29. The Règlement, based on a draft framed by P.D. Kiselev, head of the Russian administration, was adopted by an assembly of boyars and clergymen. Legislative power in each of the Principalities was vested in an assembly elected by the big landowners. Executive power was wielded by hospodars, the titled rulers elected for life by representative of the landowners, the clergy and the towns. The Règlement envisaged a number of bourgeois reforms: abolition of internal customs duties, introduction of free trade, and the right of peasants to move from one owner to another. However, in view of the preservation of serf- dom and concentration of political power in the hands of the big landown- ers and boyars, the progressive forces in the Principalities regarded the



**[p. 555]**

Règlement as a symbol of feudal stagnation. Reimposed in 1849 during the occupation of Moldavia and Wallachia by Russia and Turkey, the Règlement became invalid with the setting up of an independent Romanian state in the 1860s.

To suppress the revolutionary movement in Wallachia and Moldavia, Russia and Turkey sent in their troops in the summer of 1848. By the Balta- Liman Treaty of 19 April (1 May) 1849, the occupationist regime was to be in force till after the revolutionary threat had been eliminated in full (the foreign troops were withdrawn only in 1851); as a provisional measure, the hospodars were to be appointed by the Turkish Sultan with the consent of the Russian Tsar. Also, Turkey and Russia were to take steps, not excluding another military intervention, in case of repeated revolutionary unrest. In keeping with the Bucharest Peace Treaty of 12 May 1812, virtually all of Bessarabia up to the River Pruth was ceded to Russia. By the Paris Treaty of 1856 Turkey annexed a portion of this territory. However, in accordance with the Berlin treaty of 1878, this part of Bessarabia was ceded back to Russia.

211. An excerpt of this letter was first published in the language of the original (English) in the book: K. Marx, F. Engels, Letters on 'Capital', London, 1983. 212. In his letter of 11 (23) December 1887, Nikolai Danielson told Engels that Volume IV of Johannes v. Keussler's work Zur Geschichte und Kritik des bäuerlichen Gemeinbesitzes in Rußland had come off the press. These four volumes, he pointed out, were the only reliable source of data based on the relevant statistical and economic studies of the Russian zemstvos. Danielson regretted that Keussler undertook his work after only 20 volumes of the total 100-volume edition of the extensive statistical study of the zemstvos had seen print. 213. In the same letter Danielson wrote to Engels about the institution of a State Land Bank for the Nobility in Russia. The State Land Bank for the Nobility was set up in 1885 with the aim of helping the Russian landed proprietors from among the nobility in the maintenance of their estates. The landown- ers could get loans from this bank on fairly easy terms by mortgaging their land. The tsarist government provided substantial financial assistance to this bank. Loans were issued on a long-term basis and at a lower interest rate than in other Russian banks. 214. The Peasant Land Bank was a state mortgage bank instituted in Russia in 1882 for providing long-term loans to peasant farmers for land purchases. Catering to the interests of the big landowners, the bank charged high inter- est rates. Its activity resulted in soaring land prices. The land of insolvent real estate owners who failed to pay off the loans on time was auctioned off by the bank or sequestered into its land pool. The Peasant Land Bank was operating in close contact with the State Land Bank for the Nobility set up



**[p. 556]**

220. In view of the expiration of the Anti-Socialist Law (see note 52), the Bismarck government tabled a motion (November 1887) to prolong it for another five years and supplement it with some new clauses with stiffer penalties for the promulgation of socialist literature and for membership in Social Democratic unions, to the extent of banishment and deprivation of citizenship (expatriation). 221. The Thirty Years War (1618-1648) was a European war in which the Pope, the Spanish and Austrian Habsburgs and the Catholic German princes rallied under the banner of Catholicism and fought the Protestant countries: Bohemia, Denmark, Sweden, the Republic of the Netherlands and a number of Protestant German states. The rulers of Catholic France - rivals of the Habsburgs - supported the Protestant camp. Germany was the main battle arena or the object of plunder and territorial claims. The Treaty of Westphalia (1648) sealed the political dismemberment of Germany.



**[p. 557]**

222. Probably Wilhelm Liebknecht wrote in his letter to Engels that in case of a prolongation of the Anti-Socialist Law (see note 52) he and his family would have to emigrate to America. One of the additional clauses to the law envisaged banishment and deprivation of citizenship (expatriation) for Social Democratic activities (see also note 220). 223. Engels means the leaders of the Socialist Labour Party of North America (see note 3). 224. An allusion to the events of 'Bloody Sunday' in London's Trafalgar Square on 13 November 1887 (see note 185). Among those arrested were the prominent figures in the socialist and trade union movement Robert Cunninghame-Graham and John Burns. On 18 January 1888, the two men were sentenced to 6 weeks' imprisonment. However, they were soon set free under public pressure (see note 246). 225. An excerpt from this letter was first published in the preface to Marx-Engels Gesamtausgabe. Dritte Abteilung, Bd. 1, 1929. 226. On 30 December 1887, Hermann Schlüter told Engels about Eduard

Bernstein's request to allow Der Sozialdemokrat to publish the final part of the Engels-written introduction to S. Borkheim's pamphlet Zur Erinnerung für die deutschen Mordspatrioten 1806-1807 pending the publication of the pamphlet itself. On 15 January 1888, Der Sozialdemokrat carried the second part of the Engels introduction under the title Was Europa bevorsteht. The booklet was printed in June 1888. 227. The German Social Democratic archives were set up at the Zurich Conference of the Socialist Workers' Party of Germany held on 19-21 August 1882. Their purpose was to preserve the manuscripts of prominent figures in the German labour movement (including the works of Marx and Engels), and documents pertaining to the history of Germany and the inter- national working-class movement, and the labour press. The initial site of the archives was Zurich. The first materials were collected by Eduard Bernstein. From April 1883 the archives were in the custody of Hermann Schlüter. In June 1888, following the expulsion of some members of the Sozialdemokrat editorial staff and co-workers from Switzerland (see note 81), the archives were moved to London and, after the abrogation of the Anti-Socialist law (see note 52), to Berlin. 228. In his letter of 30 December 1887, Schlüter wrote to Engels that the book dealers had cut the journal Neue Rheinische Zeitung. Politisch-ökonomische Revue into separate pieces and sold these articles separately as independent works. Meanwhile, longer works of Marx and Engels were printed in instal- ments in different numbers of the journal. 229. The reference is to the manuscript of The Great Men of the Exile written by Marx and Engels (see present edition, Vol. 11, pp227-326). At the end of June 1852, Marx passed on the manuscript to the Hungarian emigre, Kossuth's emissary abroad Janos Bangya, who offered to have it published



**[p. 558]**

in Germany. Later, it turned out that Bangya was a police spy who had handed over the manuscript to the Prussian police. The actions of Bangya, who managed to win Marx's confidence for a time, were unmasked by Marx in his article 'Hirsch's Confessions' written in April 1853 and published in American newspapers (see present edition, Vol. 12, pp40-43). The reference is to the following part of the pamphlet Herr Vogt (see present edition, Vol. 17, pp219-20): Karl Bruhn made slanderous accusations against Marx and Engels by claiming they had allegedly sold the MS of the pamphlet to the Prussian police (see present edition, Vol. 42, pp 117-118). 230. Early in 1887 Pasquale Martignetti, an Italian socialist, approached Engels

with the request to help him find work outside Italy as he was being perse- cuted for his views (see note 8). Engels, through the mediation of Johannes Wedde, editor of the Hamburg-based Social Democratic newspaper Bürger- Zeitung, tried to find a job for Martignetti, but failed in his attempt. 231. Martignetti's letter to Engels (dated 3 January 1888) was accompanied by the issue of the journal Mefistofele, carrying the first instalment of the Italian translation of Engels' biography written by Karl Kautsky. Martignetti intended to continue the publication in this journal of excerpts from Kautsky's work and then have it published in full as a separate pamphlet. For this reason he asked Engels to look through the translations in the Mefistofele and send him comments on the translation. The Engels biography was published in the journal between 1 January and 30 November 1888. 232. In February 1886 P. Martignetti sent his Italian translation of Marx's Wage Labour and Capital for Engels to peruse. However, because of his work on the English edition of Volume I of Capital, and his eye disease, Engels was unable to read the Italian translation immediately. It was published in Milan only in 1893. 233. The reference is to Engels' article Prussian Schnapps in the German Reichstag (see present edition, Vol. 24, ppl09-27). The publication of this work, exposing the Prussian Junkers, in the newspaper Volksstaat and in the form of a reprint, caused exasperation in government quarters. Therefore the promulgation of Engels' works in Germany was banned. 234. In his letter of 5 February 1888, Paul Lafargue informed Engels about the cessation of the publication of the newspaper Socialiste, an organ of the French Workers Party (Guesdists), on 4 February of the same year (see note 33). 235. The debates in the Reichstag about the motion to prolong the Anti-Socialist law (see note 52) in January-February 1888 ended in a defeat for the govern- ment. This outcome was largely predetermined by the speeches of August Bebel (30 January and 17 February) and Paul Singer (27 January and 17 February) during the first and the third reading of the draft bill, respec- tively. Both speakers exposed the provocative activities of the government



**[p. 559]**

which was planting spies in the labour unions. On 17 February 1888, the Reichstag prolonged the law for the last time, but not for a term of five years, as the government had suggested - the action of the law was extended for two years only (until 30 September 1890). The new clauses suggested by the government for the law were not adopted (see note 220). 236. An allusion to the entry of Napoleon's troops into Berlin in 1806 following the defeat of the Prussian forces, at Jena and Auerstedt. 237. An excerpt from this letter was first published in English in the journal The Socialist Review, London 1908, III-VIII. 238. The reference is to a scandal over the criminal actions of Louis Charles Caffarel and Daniel Wilson (see note 168). In 1847, just before the Revolution of 1848, there were many scandalous exposures of cases of corruption involving French statesmen (see note 169). For Révolution du mépris (a revolution of contempt) see note 170. 239. An excerpt from this letter was first published in the language of the origi- nal (English) in the book Briefe und Auszüge aus Briefen von Joh. Phil. Becker, Jos. Dietzgen, Friedrich Engels, Karl Marx u. A. an F. A. Sorge und Andere. Stuttgart, 1906. 240. The first American edition of The Manifesto of the Communist Party (reprint of the English translation from the Red Republican) under the title Manifesto of the German Communist Party (without the names of the authors being mentioned) was published by Woodhull & Claflin's Weekly, New York, 30 December 1871. 241. As Florence Kelley-Wischnewetzky wrote to Engels, the attitude of the German socialists in New York to his book The Condition of the Working Class in England was tantamount to a boycott. Engels described the Executive of the Socialist Labour Party of North America, with Lassalle's supporters in it, as 'the official German socialists of New York'. (See note 3). 242. The Law and Liberty League was set up on 18 November 1887, after the Trafalgar Square demonstration (see note 185). The League united repre- sentatives of labour radical clubs, socialist organisations, trade unions affil- iated with the Fabian Society, etc. Active in the League were: Eleanor Marx- Aveling, Edward Aveling, William Morris, John Burns, Sidney Webb, and others. The League championed freedom of speech and assembly, and came out for independent representation of working men in Parliament. The League ceased its activities in February 1888 because of the differences among its members. 243. An excerpt from this letter was first published in the language of the origi- nal by the journal Die Kommunistische Internationale No. 24, 1931; in Russian it appeared in the journal Kommunisticheski Internatsional, Nos. 19-20, 1931. 244. An allusion to William O'Brien's speech in the House of Commons on 16 February 1888, with scathing criticism of the policy of Arthur Balfour,



**[p. 560]**

Secretary of State for Ireland and nephew of the Prime Minister, Mr Robert Salisbury. 245. Speaking in the Reichstag on 6 February 1888, in debates on a draft bill providing for reorganisation of the German armed forces, Bismarck lauded the pro-German policies of Alexander III in contrast to the anti-German pronouncements of some organs of the Russian press. Still, he spoke in favour of a stronger military might for the German Reich in view of a possi- ble anti-German alliance between France and Russia. By calling Alexander III a 'Gatchina prisoner', Engels referred to the fact that, ascending the throne after the assassination of Tsar Alexander II by members of the radi- cal organisation Narodnaya Volya ('People's will') on 1 March 1881, Alexander III feared revolutionary action and fresh acts of terrorism, so used to seclude himself in his palace at Gatchina.

246. On 19 February 1888, a big rally was held in London on the occasion of liberation of the socialists Robert Cunninghame-Graham and John Burns, convicted for taking part in the Trafalgar Square demonstration of 13 November 1887 (see note 185). 247. The Commonweal, the organ of the Socialist League, reprinted a list of police agents promulgated in Der Sozialdemokrat under the heading Polizeiagent - Dynamitagenten with 12 police agents in it (see note 204). The newspaper augmented this list without giving cogent proof of the culpability of the persons mentioned, including Theodor Reuß. 248. Landwehr was the army second reserve formed in Prussia during the strug- gle against Napoleon. In the 1840s it consisted of men under forty who had done three years of active service and had been in the reserve not less than two years. In contrast to the regular army, the Landwehr was called up only in case of extreme necessity (war, or threat of war). 249. The Fenians were Irish revolutionaries who named themselves after the

'Féne', a name for the ancient population of Ireland. Their first organisations appeared in the 1850s in the USA among the Irish immigrants and later in Ireland itself. The secret Irish Revolutionary Brotherhood, as the organi- sation was known in the early 1860s, aimed at establishing an independent Irish republic by means of an armed uprising. The Fenians, who expressed the interests of the Irish peasantry, came chiefly from the urban petty bourgeoisie and intellectuals, and believed in conspiracy tactics. The British Government attempted to suppress the Fenian movement by severe police reprisals. 250. The Orange Order, named after William III, Prince of Orange, was an organisation set up in Ireland in 1795. The English authorities, the landlords and the Protestant clergy used this organisation to fight the Irish national liberation movement. The Order united English and Irish elements from all strata of society and systematically incited the Protestants against the Irish Catholics. The Orangemen had a particularly great influence in Northern Ireland, where the majority of the population were Protestants.



**[p. 561]**

251. The reference is to the manifesto of Frederick III on the occasion of his ascension to the throne on 12 March 1888. This proclamation - An mein Volk (To my people) - was marked by the same date as his message to Chancellor Bismarck. 252. On 18 March 1888, the newspaper Weekly Dispatch published the mani- festos of Frederick III ('Letter to Prince Bismarck', 'Proclamation of the Emperor') (see note 251). 253. Engels alludes to the Russo-Turkish war of 1877-78. 254. In his letter to Engels of 18 March 1888, Paul Lafargue expressed his convic- tion that the only chance of preventing General Boulanger from being elected to the Chamber of Deputies would be to abrogate the balloting procedure 'according to the lists', introduced in June 1885 instead of the former procedure providing for voting 'in small arrondissements'. The new system of balloting, effected in keeping with departmental lists, envisaged integration of small constituencies into larger ones, each corresponding to a department in size. A voter would be offered a list of candidates from vari- ous parties, and was supposed to cast his ballot for the overall number of candidates due to be elected as deputies in a given department (proceeding from the ratio: 1 deputy to 700,000 of the population). An absolute major- ity of votes was needed in the first round for a candidate to be elected, but he could do with a relative majority in the runoff. 255. The Vendôme Column was erected in Parts between 1806 and 1810 in trib- ute to the military victories of Napoleon I. It was made of bronze from captured enemy guns and crowned by a statue of Napoleon; the statue was removed during the Restoration but re-erected in 1833. In the spring of 1871, by order of the Paris Commune, the Vendôme Column was destroyed as a symbol of militarism. 256. An abridged version of this letter was first published in English (in facsim- ile) in the book Literary Heritage 1932, No.2; and in full it was published in: Marx K., Engels F. Literature and Art, New York, Intern. Publ., 1947. 257. Legitimists were the party who supported the French Bourbon dynasty (overthrown in 1792); they represented the interests of the big landed aris- tocracy and the top clergy; they took shape as a party and assumed this name in 1830, after the second overthrow of the Bourbon dynasty. During the Second Republic, the Legitimists, together with the other monarchist parties, formed the Party of Order. Failing to win support from the people under the Second Empire, they confined themselves to marking time and issuing critical pamphlets and were galvanised into action only in 1871, when they joined the general counter-revolutionary onslaught against the Paris Commune. 258. Engels refers to the uprising in Paris of 5-6 June 1832, prepared by the Left Wing of the Republican Party and secret revolutionary societies. The imme- diate cause of this uprising was the funeral of General Lamarque, who had



**[p. 562]**

been in opposition to the government of Louis Philippe. The revolutionary workmen raised barricades and fought back with great courage and tenac- ity. One of the barricades, put up in rue Saint-Martin (formerly the site of the Saint-Méri cloister) was among the last to fall. In his novel Illusions perdues and story Les secrets de la Princesse de Cardignan, Balzac depicted a republican Michel Chrestien who 'died at the walls of the cloister Saint- Méri ('mourut au cloître Saint-Mérri'). Balzac called him a 'great statesman who could have changed the face of the world' ('ce grand homme d'Etat, qui peut être eût changé la face du monde'). 259. The reference is to Paul Lafargue's article 'La langue française avant et après la Révolution' published in the journal Nouvelle Revue, t. 51, 1888, under the nom de plume Fergus. As is apparent from Lafargue's letter to Engels on 27 November 1887, this article was conceived as part of a larger work in which he intended to look into changes that had occurred in matters of property, philosophy, art, etc., after the French Revolution. 260. Boustrapa - nickname of Louis Bonaparte, composed of the first syllables of the names of the places where he and his supporters staged Bonapartist putsches, or coups: Boulogne (August 1840), Strasbourg (October 1846) and Paris (coup d'état of 2 December 1851). 261. An allusion to a scandalous incident involving the British colonel Valentine Baker who had seduced a young girl in a railway carriage and was brought to trial. Engels compared this incident in jest to the rape of Europa when Jupiter, in love with the young Phoenician princess Europa, assumed the form of a white bull to carry her off. 262. For British Association for the Advancement of Science see note 124; for the materials of the discussion mentioned by Engels, see Report of the Fifty- Seventh Meeting of the British Association for the Advancement of Science held at Manchester in August and September 1887, London, 1888, pp885- 95. Engels usually familiarised himself with the materials of the Association's annual meetings by means of publications in the journal Nature. 263. The reference is to a bill tabled by Roger Quarks Mills at US Congress in April 1888 on rescinding taxes on raw materials used in industry and on reducing duties on many import items. The bill was not adopted. 264. Florence Kelley-Wischnewetzky and her husband, Dr Lazar Wischnewetzky, both expelled from the New York section of the Socialist Labour Party of North America in July 1887 (see note 149), did not agree with the decision of the Executive and pressed for reinstatement of their membership in the party. On 31 March 1888, the newspaper Wochenblatt der N. Y. Volkszeitung carried a report on the Executive sittings of 2, 9 and 16 March 1888, which decided first to study the additional evidence before discussing the Wischnewetzkys' appeal. 265. The Kartell was a coalition of conservative parties - die Deutsch-



**[p. 563]**

Konservative Partei, die Deutsche Reichspartei (Freikonservative) und die Nationalliberale Partei - which was formed after Bismarck had dissolved the Reichstag in January 1887 (see note 15). Supporting the Bismarck govern- ment, Kartell won the election of February 1887 by obtaining the largest number of seats in the Reichstag (220). Assisted by the coalition, Bismarck was able to secure the passage of reactionary laws in the interests of the Junkers and the big bourgeoisie (imposition of protectionist tariffs, higher taxes, etc.) (see note 152). However, he could not get the Reichstag to prolong the Anti-Socialist Law. The exacerbation of differences among the parties affiliated with the Kartell and the electoral defeat of 1890, with only 135 seats secured in the Reichstag, resulted in the disintegration of the coalition.

266. A reference to the intended marriage of Victoria, the daughter of Frederick III, to Prince Alexander Battenberg of Bulgaria, who occupied the Bulgarian throne in 1879-86 and steered a policy hostile to Russia. Fearing a worsening of Russo-German relations, Bismarck opposed the marriage. 267. Believing that the Bismarck regime was in for a political crisis, Engels

considers, by way of comparison, the landmark stages of the political crisis of the Second Empire in France: The Mexican period of Bonapartism - the abortive armed intervention of France in Mexico (1862-67) with the aim of suppressing the Mexican revolution. The military expedition incurred huge expenses and caused grave damage to the empire of Napoleon III. 1866 - the defeat of Austria in her war against Prussia deprived Napoleon III of an essential ally in the confrontation with Prussia. 1870 - the routing, on 1-2 September, of French troops at Sedan during the Franco-Prussian War of 1870-71. The Sedan debacle speeded up the collapse of the Second Empire and led to the proclamation of a republic in France on 4 September 1870.

268. Engels means Die Erklärung der Sozialdemokratischen Föderation Englands in Sachen des nach London einberufenen internationalen Gewerkschaftskongresses which was published by the newspaper Sozialdemokrat on 14 April 1888. The Declaration came in view of the intended convocation by the British trade unions of an international congress of labour unions in November 1888 (see note 165). The Decla- ration was a response to the protest of the German Social Democrats against the decision of the Parliamentary Committee of the Trades Unions Congress of Great Britain (see note 269) on conditions for representation at the Congress: only delegates officially elected by trade unions were to attend. Thereby the German Social Democrats were unable to take part on account of the enforcement of the Anti-Socialist law in Germany. In its Declaration the Social Democratic Federation voiced its discontent at the protest of the German Social Democrats.

269. The reference is to the rapprochement of the leadership of the Social Democratic Federation (see note 62) and the Possibilists (see note 19). Starting in 1884, the Federation, acting through its organ Justice, conducted



**[p. 564]**

a broad campaign in support of the Possibilists; it recognised them as the principal organisation of French Socialists and maintained no relations with the French Workers' Party (see note 33). The Social Democratic Federation was the only socialist organisation to support the Possibilist International Congress in Paris in 1889 (see note 478). An allusion to the Parliamentary Committee, an executive body of The Trades Union Congress of Great Britain formed in 1868 and uniting the British trade unions. As of 1871 the Parliamentary Committee was annually elected by Trades Union Congresses as a steering body of the trade unions in between the congresses. It was designed to nominate trade union MPs, support draft bills tabled in the interests of the trade unions, and prepare regular union congresses. Henry Broadhurst was the parliamentary Committee's Secretary from 1875 to 1890. In 1921 the Parliamentary Committee was replaced with the Trades Union Congress General Council.

270. The Congress of the German Social Democratic Party at St Gallen (see note 174) passed a decision to convene an international labour congress in 1888. However, the party's Executive stated its readiness to refrain from the convocation of that congress and to participate in a congress being convened in London by the Parliamentary Committee of the British Trades Unions (see note 165). Following its unsuccessful negotiations with the Parliamentary Committee which had stipulated unacceptable conditions for representation of German Social Democracy at the London congress, the party's Executive reverted to the resolution of its congress.

271. Probably the reference is to the work of Johann Georg Eccarius Eines Arbeiters Widerlegung der national-ökonomischen Lehren John Stuart Mill's republished by the Social Democratic Publishers of Zurich in 1888. Originally written in English for the journal The Commonweal (10.11.1866, 27.3.1867), it first appeared in German in 1869 as a pamphlet in Eccarius' translation. 272. In this letter to Engels on 11 April 1888, P. Martignetti said he was offered a job in the archives of the Italian town of Benevento, but had to pass competitive examination to be able to qualify. 273. Engels sent Lafargue's letter on 27 April 1888, addressed to Wilhelm Liebknecht, pertaining to the preparation of an international labour congress. P. Lafargue believed that in this way his letter would reach the addressee the sooner. 274. A brief excerpt from this letter was first published in French by the journal

La Pensée, No. 61, 1955. For the first publication of this letter in English, see note 40. 275. In March-April 1888 a peasant uprising broke out in Romania's central districts. The rebels burned landlords' estates, destroyed promissory notes, and divided bread, cattle and land amongst themselves. The revolts were crushed brutally by the government.



**[p. 565]**

276. This letter was first published in English by the journal Istoricheskv Arkhiv (Historical Archives), No. 2,1956 (the facsimile of the first page) and in full in: F. Engels, P. and L. Lafargue, Correspondance, T. 2 (1887-1890), Paris, 1956. 277. The French Socialists differed in their attitude to Boulangism (see note 137). Some of them, including P. Lafargue, at first erroneously qualified Boulangism as a 'popular movement' with little regard for the aims of this movement and Boulanger's personality. The Workers' Party majority with Jules Guesde at the head and the greater part of the Blanquists led by M.E. Vaillant adhered to a policy of non-interference with respect to Boulangism by regarding this movement only as a bourgeois party; they said they were loath to intervene in partisan strife among the bourgeois parties. Yet the sectarian stance of non-interference isolated the party from the popular masses and gravely prejudiced its influence in the home country.

278. The decree adopted by the German Ministry of the Interior on 22 May 1888, prohibited free passage of the French into Alsace and Lorraine. All foreigners crossing into Germany from France were supposed to have pass- ports with a visa from the German embassy in Paris. 279. This letter was first published in English in: Frederick Engels, Paul and Laura Lafargue, Correspondence, Vol. 3 (1891-95), Supplement Letters, Moscow, 1963. 280. Engels, at the request or Karl Kautsky, and Eleanor and Edward Aveling, was translating poems by Shelley into German for the Avelings's article 'Shelley als Sozialist', published in the December issue of Neue Zeit in 1888. 281. Refers to the voyage of Engels, Eleanor Marx-Aveling, Edward Aveling and their friend Carl Schorlemmer to the United States where they spent over a month - from 17 August to 19 September 1888. They journeyed from New York to Boston and nearby towns, then on to the Niagara Falls and across Lake Ontario to Canada. Engels made this tour incognito, without meeting German Socialists or representatives of the press. 282. On 12 June 1888, Georges Boulanger addressed the Chamber of Deputies demanding its dissolution and a revision of the Constitution. The head of the government, Charles Floquet, proposed that Boulanger's demand be turned down and pointed out to the general's unseemly activities. Accusing Floquet of slander, Boulanger presented the Chairman of the Chamber with a waiver, framed in advance, whereby he relinquished his mandate as a deputy; the matter culminated in a duel in which Boulanger was wounded. 283. Plebiscitary Boulangism was a description that Engels gave to Boulanger's attempt to obtain a deputy's mandate from many departments of France. Making use of the voting 'according to the lists' (see note 254), Boulanger nominated his candidacy in any department where a deputy's seat happened to be vacant. As soon as a new vacancy was open, Boulanger relinquished his mandate so as to run for Parliament in another department. Boulanger



**[p. 566]**

hoped that with the aid of such tricks he would appear an elected represen- tative of the entire nation. Boulanger's victory at the election of 1889 compelled the French government as early as 31 January 1889 to table a draft bill on restoring the old system of balloting in electoral constituencies. This bill was approved and came into effect on 13 February. On 17 July 1889 Parliament passed yet another law whereby no one could be elected deputy other than in one constituency only. 284. Engels wrote this letter on a post card. On the back was the address: E. Bernstein Esq., 4, Corinne Road, Tufnell Park, N. London. 285. Engels wrote this letter on a post card. He indicated the address on the back: F. A. Sorge, Hoboken, New Jersey. For the first publication of the letter in English see note 29. 286. This letter was first published in English in Science and Society, Vol. 2, No. 3, 1938. It was written on hotel notepaper with the address: Adams House, No. 553, Washington Street, Boston. 287. The reference is to the dissent in the Socialist Labour Party of North America (see note 3). Speaking of the resignation of the Executive Secretary Wilhelm Rosenberg, Engels proceeded from a report made by Friedrich Sorge in his letter of 30 August 1888. The official decision on Rosenberg's resignation was adopted in September 1889 (see note 501). 288. The letter was written on hotel notepaper with the address: Adams House, No.553. Washington Street, Boston. 289. The letter was written on hotel notepaper with a picture of the Niagara Falls and the address: Spencer House, Niagara Falls, N.Y. 290. Engels stayed in London in July-August 1838 when he accompanied his father on a business trip to Britain. That was the first trip of the young Frederick Engels abroad (see present edition, Vol. 2, pp99-100) 291. This letter was written on hotel notepaper with the address: Richelieu Hotel, Montreal. For the first English publication, see note 286. 292. This letter was written on a hotel notepaper with the address: Paul Smith's Fouquet House, Phelps Smith, Manager, Plattsburgh, N.Y. About the first English publication of the letter, see note 29. 293. This letter was written on hotel notepaper with the address: Broadway, opposite Bond Street, Julius A. Robinson Prop'r, New York. For the first English publication of the letter, see note 29. 294. The available rough copy of this and the next letter was written on a single sheet. 295. In the autumn of 1841 Bruno Bauer, one of the leaders of the Young Hegelians, was suspended from teaching at Bonn University by Eichhorn, the Prussian Minister of Religious Worship, Education and Medicine. In March 1842, he was dismissed from his post as lecturer in theology on account of his atheistic views and opposition speeches. Bauer's dismissal evoked sharp protests from radical and liberal intellectuals.



**[p. 567]**

V. I. Lenin, The Communist View on Morality, Moscow, Novosti Publishers, 1974. 302. Engels probably meant the leaders of the Fabian Society - Sidney and Beatrice Webb, George Bernard Shaw, Edward Pease (see note 176). 303. Following their abortive attempts in the 1870s to form a party of their own, the Austrian Socialists remained split into several groups for many years. There were also anarchist and moderate radical groups besides the adher- ents of scientific socialism among them. The above groups were divided on



**[p. 568]**

304. Engels intended to write travel notes of his tour of the United states, as shown by an excerpt from Notes on My Journey Through America and Canada (see present edition Vol. 26), as well as by rough notes which Engels wrote in the latter half of September 1888, evidently, aboard the steamship City of New York. In them Engels planned to give his assessment of the country's social and political life. This intention was not realised. 305. August Bebel intended to write a large work on Wilhelm Weitling in which he also wanted to take up the subject of 'the social movement of the 1840s'. He applied to Engels with the request to help in the collection of material. 306. Weitlingian communists held to a doctrine of egalitarian Utopian commu- nism that gained wide currency among German artisans, especially among tailors in Paris. Being a progressive movement in the early 1840s, before the development of modern Socialist ideas, the Weitling doctrine (with its nega- tion of the need for an active political struggle of the proletariat and its emphasis on sectarian, conspiratorial methods of struggle) became to some extent a hindrance to the growing class consciousness of the German work- ers The reactionary characteristics of the Weitling doctrine, gradually taking on a religious-Christian colouring, became increasingly manifest. Weitling's supporters, always suspicious of 'scholars' (i.e. revolutionary intellectuals), would in their practical activities confine themselves to projects involving communes, partially borrowed from Fourier and his followers, and to small-scale experiments like establishing collective canteens, etc. In May 1846 Marx and Engels, with their adherents, broke from Weitling. Engels, living in Paris in 1846-47, had regular and stubborn discussions with work- ers to explain the backward nature of Weitling's views.

307. The reference is to German, or 'true socialism' which became widespread in Germany in the 1840s, mostly among intellectuals. The 'true socialists' - Karl Grün, Moses Hess and Hermann Kriege - substituted the sentimental preaching of love and brotherhood for the ideas of socialism and denied the need for a bourgeois-democratic revolution in Germany. Marx and Engels criticised this trend in the following works: The German Ideology (see present edition, Vol. 5), Circular Against Kriege, German Socialism in Verse and Prose and Manifesto of the Communist Party (Vol. 6).



**[p. 569]**





**[p. 570]**





**[p. 571]**

they were nominated with the Boulangists in common electoral lists. A group led by Ernest Roche and Ernest Granger separated itself from the rest of the Blanquists and gave open and vigorous support to General Boulanger. 319. The reference is to the proposed calling of an International Working Men's Congress in Paris in 1889. The Possibilists (see note 19) received powers to organise this congress from the 1886-held Paris International Conference which they had sponsored and which involved representatives of the British trade unions, delegates from German Social Democracy, and the workers' parties of Belgium, Austria-Hungary, Sweden and Australia (about this conference, see note 333). 320. The reference is to the London International Congress of Trades Unions held on 6-10 November 1888 at the initiative of the British trade unions. The congress involved trade union representatives of Britain, Belgium, Holland, Denmark, Italy as well as French syndicates aligned with the Possibilists. Stipulating that delegates to this congress should be officially elected by respective trade unions, its organisers thereby deprived the German and Austrian. Social Democrats, as well as representatives of the French Workers' Party (the Guesdists), see note 33, of an opportunity to attend. Yet the leaders of the British trade unions failed in their attempts to foist reformist decisions on the congress and isolate it from the Socialists. The congress adopted a number of positive decisions. Thus, the workers were not to confine themselves to forming purely professional organisa- tions - they were to unite into an independent political party as well. One of the resolutions stressed the need to press for legislative regulation of the working day and working conditions. In its most significant decision, the congress resolved to convene an International Working Men's Congress in Paris in 1889; organisation of this congress was entrusted to the Possibilists. 321. The National Congress of French Labour Unions (syndicates) held on 23 October - 4 November 1888 (see note 331) adopted a decision on conven- ing an International Working Men's Congress in Paris in 1889. 322. Troyes was the proposed venue of a convention of the Workers' Party of French Socialist-Revolutionaries (the Possibilists) (see note 19). The organ- isers of the congress - local party functionaries - invited representatives of the Guesdists to attend as well. However the Paris Possibilists, fearing that the Guesdists might be in a majority, refused to take part (see also note 329). 323. The reference is to Chapters III and IV of Volume III of Capital, (see present edition, Vol. 37). 324. Excerpts from this letter were first published in French in the journal La

Pensée, No. 61, 1955. Concerning the first publication of this letter in the language of the original (English), (see note 40). 325. The newspaper Parti Ouvrier, the mouthpiece of the Possibilists (see note



**[p. 572]**

19), on 28 December 1888 carried an article 'L'Agglomération parisienne' that accused the Guesdists of lending support to the Boulangist movement (see note 277) so as to have Jules Guesde, Paul Lafargue and Gabriel Deville in Parliament. The Paris Amalgamation {Agglomération) was the name of the Paris branch of the French Worker's Party. 326. In her letter to Engels of 27 December 1888 Laura Lafargue wrote that the anti-Boulangism of the Possibilists was similar to their other deception. They used to good advantage the pronouncements of the Guesdists in support of the international and, specifically, the German working-class movement and, as a result, the latter lost its popularity in Paris. For the Guesdists' attitude to Boulangism see note 277. 327. Cadettists was the name by which members of the Société des Droits de L'Homme et du Citoyen were known. The Society was set up on 25 May 1888 by bourgeois radicals and moderate republicans for combating Boulangism. The Possibilists became affiliated with this organisation. Its name came from Rue Cadet, where it was located. 328. In view of the death, on 23 December 1888, of the deputy to the Chamber from Seine-Department, Antoine Auguste Hude, the Prime Minister Floquet fixed a by-election on 27 January 1889. 329. The convention of the French Workers' Party held in Troyes in December 1888 (see note 322) passed a decision on nominating a socialist as an inde- pendent candidacy for the by-election of 27 January 1889. The candidature of Boulé, a labourer and stonemason, was nominated accordingly. This convention also decided to hold an International Socialist Working Men's Congress in Paris in 1889, thus confirming the decision of the National Congress of the French trade unions (see note 331). 330. On 29 December 1888 Wilhelm Liebknecht told Engels he intended to visit Paris and London to hold preliminary negotiations with local socialists about the forthcoming International Socialist Congress in Paris. 331. The National Congress of the French Trade Unions took place on 23 October-4 November 1888. It represented 272 labour unions - the workers' syndical chambers and industrial groups. Most of the delegates belonged to the revolutionary wing of the French workers' movement. The congress had been opened in Bordeaux, but its sessions had to be transferred to Le Bouscat after the police declared the congress disbanded because of a red banner over its rostrum. The congress passed a decision to convene an International Socialist Working Men's Congress in Paris in 1889 to commemorate the centennial of the French Revolution Also discussed was a general strike, considered to be the only revolutionary way. 332. The funeral of the Paris Commune general Emiles Eudes on 8 August 1888, developed into a mammoth demonstration of the Paris proletariat; its participants carried red flags and posters urging a new commune. This demonstration was dispersed by the police.



**[p. 573]**





**[p. 574]**

347. In September 1888 the German Professor Friedrich Heinrich Geffcken had the journal Deutsche Rundschau publish excerpts from the diary of the German Emperor Frederick III, a close friend of his. These excerpts, dating back to the time of the Franco-Prussian War of 1870-71, showed Bismarck's role in the building or the German Empire in an unfavourable light. Bismarck had criminal proceedings initiated against the professor who was charged with high treason. The Reichsgericht acquitted Professor Geffcken on 4 January 1889; on the following day he was released from custody. At about the same time Herbert von Bismarck, the Reichskanzler's older son,



**[p. 575]**





**[p. 576]**





**[p. 577]**

364. A reference to the Commune of Paris in 1789-94. Formally being no more than a body of municipal self-government, the Commune from 1792 actu- ally guided the struggle of the people of Paris in the revolution. The Commune played an active part in the overthrow of the monarchy, in the imposition of a Jacobin dictatorship, in the introduction of a price maxi- mum, in the adoption of a 'law against suspects' (i.e. against the counter revolutionaries), etc. Following the overthrow of 9 Thermidor (27 July 1794) most of the Commune members, supporters of Robespierre and his adherents, were executed. The Commune was thereafter abolished. 365. At Fleurus (Belgium) on 26 June 1794, French troops defeated the Austrian army under the Duke of Coburg. This victory enabled the French revolu- tionary army to enter and occupy Belgium. 366. Francois Noel (Gracchus) Babeuf was a French revolutionary and advocate of Utopian egalitarian communism based on the ideas of natural law. 367. Preparing his notes on Kautsky's article, Engels translated excerpts from Nikolai Kareyev's article., 'Peasants and the Peasant Problem in France', expressly for the author; Engels gave the full names of the sources which Kareyev had indicated in an abbreviated form. 368. By the Second Partition of Poland (12 /23/ January 1793) Russia gained eastern Byelorussia and the Ukraine on the right bank of the Dnieper; Prussia acquired Gdansk, Torûn, part of Great Poland, Mazovia and of the Krakow province. 369. This refers to the mandates and complaints (cahiers de doléances) sent to deputies of the General States at the time of the French Revolution by representatives of the French 'third estate' who were reduced to penury. The General States (États généraux) were the highest body of estate repre- sentation in France in a period from the fourteenth to the eighteenth century. 370. Constituante - the Constituent Assembly (Assemblée nationale constitu- ante) of France which was in session from 9 July 1789 to 30 September 1791. 371. A fragment of this letter was first published in English by Labour Monthly, London, 1934, No. 3, and in full in Marx K., Engels F., Letters to Americans. 1848-1895, A Selection, International Publishers, New York 1953, I.E. Mins (trans). 372. Engels might have made a mistake by indicating the date, 19 January. He meant the post card of 29 January and the letter of 10 February, sent by Friedrich Sorge, who called Engels' attention to F. Kelley-Wischnewetzky's article on child labour, carried by the newspaper The Labour Standard on 19 and 26 January 1889. 373. On 29 January 1889, F. Sorge sent a cutting from the New York newspaper Standard to Engels with an advertisement announcing a sale of the English edition of Volume I of Capital by the American book dealers Appleton and Co.



**[p. 578]**

374. In his letter of 10 February 1889, F. Sorge called Engels' attention to a report carried by the newspaper Der arme Teufel, Nos. 9 and 10, 26 January and 2 February 1889, entitled 'Korrespondenz des A.T. aus London, England', containing disparaging comments about Edward Aveling. 375. A reference to Philipp Rappaport's article 'Über die Arbeiterbewegung in Amerika' published in the journal Die Neue Zeit, No. 2, 1889. In his letter of 10 February 1889 F. Sorge pointed to the poor quality of the article and said it would be better to publish excerpts from Edward Aveling and Eleanor Marx-Aveling, The Labour Movement in America (see note 89). 376. The reference is to a series of lectures by Paul Lafargue and Gabriel Deville

(Cours d'Economie Sociale) on Marx; these lectures were arranged by a circle at the Socialist Library of the French Workers' Party on Sundays as of 23 January 1884. Lafargue's series of lectures was called Le Matérialisme économique de Karl Marx. To his second lecture Paul Lafargue gave the following title: Le Milieu naturel. Théorie darwinienne. Gabriel Deville entitled his course of lectures L'Evolution du capital. There were five lectures in all: Genèse du capital, Formation du proletariat, Coopération et manufacture, Machinisme et grande industrie and Fin du capital. The lectures were published in the press and in separate editions in 1884. 377. Engels refers to the defeat of the Prussians and Saxons at the hands of Napoleon at Jena (14 October 1806). 378. Engels refers to the refusal of the Possibilists to take part in the International Hague Conference (see note 360). 379. An allusion to the request of a group of Possibilists to the Municipal Council of Paris to grant them 50,000 francs for the organisation of an International Working Men's Congress. 380. Jules Roques, the publisher of the newspaper Egalité, fired a group of print- ing-shop workers who had been paid at rates fixed by the printers' union and had then replaced by non-unionised workmen. The indignant members of the editorial board, the Guesdists and the Blanquists, declared on 3 March 1889 they would leave the editorial board (see also note 355). 381. The materials of P. Lafargue's letter of 5 March 1889 were indeed used in the report Aus Frankreich, Paris, 9 March, 1889 in the newspaper Der Sozialdemokrat, No. 12, 23 March, 1889, S.2-3. 382. On 5 March 1889, Conrad Schmidt asked Engels to help him come to terms with Otto Meissner with the publication of his monograph Die Durch Schnittsprofitrate auf Grundlage des Marx'schen Wertgesetzes; this work appeared somewhat later at Stuttgart published by Dietz. Schmidt also wrote about his failure to obtain the position of senior lecturer at Leipzig University because of his socialist views. 383. This refers to the setbacks of Marx and Engels in connection with the publi- cation of their works in those years, specifically, The German Ideology (present edition, Vol. 5).



**[p. 579]**

384. C. Schmidt's article 'Das Wertgesetz und Profitrate' was published in the

Journal Die Neue Zeit, No. 10, 7 Jhrg. 1889. 385. The International Socialist Conference was held in the Hague on 28 February 1889. It was attended by representatives of the socialist movement of Germany, France, Belgium, Holland and Switzerland. The conference was convened at the suggestion of the Social Democratic faction in the German Reichstag with the aim of framing the conditions for the calling of an International Socialist Working Men's Congress in Paris. The Possibilists refused to attend the conference despite the invitation and did not recognise its decisions. The conference defined the powers of the forthcoming congress, its date and agenda. The International Working Men's Congress took place on 14 July 1889. 386. A reference to the pamphlet The International Working Men's Congress of 1889. A Reply to 'Justice', London 1889. Its original version was written by Eduard Bernstein at Engels' suggestion in reply to the editorial comment entitled The German 'Official' Social Democrats and the International Congress in Paris and carried by the newspaper Justice on 16 March 1889, No. 270. Having been edited by Engels, the pamphlet appeared in English in London, and then it was published by the German newspaper Der Sozialdemokrat and signed: E. Bernstein. 387. An excerpt from this letter was first published in the journal La Pensée, No. 61, 1955. About the first English publication of the letter, see note 77. 388. In the latter half of the 1860s the government of the Second Empire exiled Henri Rochefort to New Caledonia for his virulent attacks against Napoleon III. In the 1880s, being an active supporter of General Boulanger and one of the editors of the newspaper L'Intransigeant, he placed it at the disposal of the Boulangists. 389. April 1 - Bismarck's birthday. Engels refers to April's Fool Day (1 April). 390. A hint at the ties with the Prussian police and the Bismarck government, incriminating for Johann Baptist von Schweitzer, President of the General Association of German Workers. 391. The French government, alarmed at General Boulanger's popularity, decided

to put him on trial on the pretext of his conspiring in a plot threatening the security of the republic. On 1 April 1889, Boulanger and some of his supporters fled abroad. On 8 April Boulanger was deprived of his parlia- mentary immunity; and on 14 August 1889, the Supreme Court sentenced him, together with Dillon and Rochefort, who had fled in company with Boulanger, in absentia, to banishment. 392. The reference is to Wilhelm Liebknecht's letter to Charles Bonnier of 26 March 1889, about the need to change the date of an International Socialist Congress or, as an alternative, reaching agreement with the Possibilists. Wilhelm Liebknecht's letter to Eduard Bernstein has not been found. 393. A reference to Wilhelm Liebknecht's letters to F. Engels of 20 and 28 March



**[p. 580]**

dealing with the forthcoming International Congress, in particular, when it was called, and British representation in it. 394. The resolution of the Hague Conference (see note 385) was published in the pamphlet The International Working Men's Congress of 1889. A Reply to 'Justice', (see note 386). 395. Engels means the Trade Union Committee of Protest Against the Parliamentary Committee's Actions With Regard To the Paris International Working Men's Congre«. The Parliamentary Committee (see note 269) refused to take part on the pretext of British workers having a shorter work- ing day and higher wages than the workers of other European countries and thus not needing any protection of their interests. The newly established Protest Committee of representatives of many trade unions organised protest meetings and entered into correspondence with socialist parties abroad concerning the preparation of the Congress. 396. Wilhelm Liebknecht's letters of this period are not available. However,

Engels' letter to P. Lafargue of 10 April 1889 suggests that Liebknecht must have written to Bernstein. 397. The whereabouts of this letter of Engels is not known but it is apparent from A. Bebel's letter to Engels of 14 April 1889 that he had received the Engels letter. 398. The Workers' Party of Belgium had its congress at Jolimont on 22 April 1889 (see note 405). 399. The newspaper Der Sozialist, the organ of the Socialist Labor Party of North America, carried the article 'Zum Internationalen Kongres in Paris' in its issue of 16 March 1889. 400. In the book series Volks-Bibliothek, with Wilhelm Liebknecht as one of the editors, his son-in-law, Bruno Geiser, published Maximilian Schlesinger^ pamphlet Die soziale Frage, Breslau 1889. In it Schlesinger attempted to 'make a critical revision' of Marxian ideas. Liebknecht did not come forward with an open protest against this work. Subsequently Liebknecht dissociated himself from the book, a fact that made Engels indignant. 401. Living in London, E. Bernstein made regular visits to the Fabian Society meetings at which problems of socialism were being discussed - The Fabian Society, see note 176. 402. The academic socialists (die Kathedersozialisten - literally 'lectern social- ists') were representatives of a trend in German political economy in the latter third of the 19th century, a response to the growing working-class movement and the propagation of the ideas of socialism. They used univer- sity lecterns {Katheder) to preach bourgeois reformism under the flag of socialism and claimed that the state, the German Reich in particular, was above class, and that with its help the working class would be able to improve its position through social reforms. 403. Le Père Duchesne was a newspaper published at the time of the French



**[p. 581]**





**[p. 582]**

412. At the Hague Conference (see note 385) some of the delegates, Ferdinand Nieuwenhuis among them, displayed a conciliatory attitude towards the Possibilists. 413. A reference to the Organising Committee for the Convocation of an International Working Men's Congress. Set up in Paris on the eve of 1889, it included representatives of the Syndicates Federation (Boulé, Besset, Féline, Monceau, Roussel), of a group of socialists - members of the Paris Municipal Council (Longuet, Vaillant, etc.) and of a socialist group from the Chamber of Deputies (Ferroul, Planteau). Paul Lafargue and Besset became its secretaries. 414. The circular was written with P. Lafargue's active participation so as to inform the working-class and socialist organisations of all countries about the decision of the Hague Socialist Conference (February 1889) (see note 385) and about the International Working Men's Congress due on 6 May 1889. Lafargue sent the text of the circular to Engels who approved it and translated it into German. Engels also saw about it being published in English. In German the circular was published, in the Engels translation, by the newspaper Der Sozialdemokrat on 11 May and, in Wilhelm Liebknecht's translation, by the newspaper Berliner Volksblatt on 10 May; in English, the text of the circular came cut in the form of a leaflet, published by the newspapers Labour Elector on 18 May and by Reynold's Newspaper on 19 May under the heading 'International Workmen's Congress', as well as by The Commonweal on 25 May.

Socialiste as its official organ. This newspaper came out from 20 April to 14 July 1889 as an organ of the Workers' Party. It carried reports relating to the preparation of the Congress.

[^1]: 415. Engels cites an excerpt from August Bebel's letter of 30 April 1889. 416. Engels had received a letter from the workmen of Lyon, but, since the signa- tures and the address were illegible, he asked Lafargue to transcribe them. 417. The International Working Men's Congress must have used the weekly





**[p. 583]**

'Au congrès belge' which subscribed to the Possibilist point of view concerning the preparation of the International socialist Workingmen's Congress. 421. 'A Letter to the Editors' of the newspaper Labour Elector, Vol. I, No. 18, published on 4 May 1689 and signed by Bonnier, was written by Engels and sent in at his suggestion. Bonnier was staying in London at the time and taking an active part in the preparation for the International Working Men's Congress. 422. A reference to an appeal by the Paris Chamber of Labour, urging participa- tion in the Possibilist Congress due in the latter half of July 1889. The authors of this appeal said they were speaking on behalf of 78 trade unions of France that had allegedly agreed to take part. Bonnier's letter of 4 May 1889 to the editorial board of the newspaper Labour Elector said the authors of the appeal had abrogated the right to speak on behalf of the entire work- ing class of France. Engels, the real author of the letter, urged the French socialists not to confine themselves to declarative statements but prove their case by deed and convince the masses by irrefutable facts.

from Molière's George Dandin. 424. In March 1889 a new external Russian loan was issued to a sum of 175 million gold roubles for the conversion of the older 5 per cent bonds. 425. On 3 May 1889, the newspaper The Star, No. 400, published an article enti- tled The Paris International Congress. 426. The reference is to the issues of the newspaper The Star of 4 and 7 May 1889. On 7 May the newspaper carried the article 'The Workingmen's Party - A Chat with Some Practical Socialists at the Hôtel de Ville', which contained the attacks on Edouard Vaillant mentioned in the text of the letter. 427. Several Possibilist organisations, dissatisfied with the behaviour of their leaders during the election to the chamber of Deputies on 27 January 1889, and in the course of the preparation for the International Working Men's Congress, levelled strong criticism at them. In its turn, the leadership of the Possibilist Party on 16 April expelled the group of the 14th arrondissement of Paris from its ranks; late in April 1889 the key organisations of the 13th arrondissement left the Federation of the Possibilists. For more detail, see

[^1]: 423. A paraphrase of 'Vous l'avez voulu, George Dandin, vous l'avez voulu'





**[p. 584]**

433. The reference is to Bonnier's letter published by The Star on 15 May 1889, under the heading The Paris Congress; it exposed the collusion of the Possibilists with the reactionary wing in the Paris Municipal Council. 434. Engels is referring to E. Aveling's play Dregs, staged by the Vaudeville Theatre on 16 May 1889. 435. The German coal miners' strike in the Ruhr was a major event in the German working-class movement of the late 19th century. It began on 3 May 1889 in the Essen and on 4 May in the Helsenkirch coal mining districts; then it spread to the entire Dortmund area. At its height the strike action involved as many as eighty thousand miners. The main demands were: higher wages, an eight-hour working day and recognition of the worker committees. Frightened by the scope of the strike action, govern- ment bodies had the entrepreneurs make a promise to fulfil some of the miners' demands. As a result, some of the miners resumed their work in mid May. However, the mine-owners broke their promises, and a meeting of



**[p. 585]**

coal miners' delegates on 24 May decided to continue the strike action. The threat of reprisals and the new promises made by mine-owners resulted in the termination of the strike in the beginning of June. 436. Engels refers to the piece Her Father with the subtitle Time of Trial, writ- ten by Edward Rose and I. Douglas. 437. An allusion to two notes by Alec Rubie, published by The Sun, No. 5, Vol. 1,19 May 1889 in the feature Political Men and Matters. Both dealt with the convocation of an International Working Men's Congress in Paris. 438. The reference is to Henry Hyndman's note 'Much Ado About Nothing' published anonymously by the newspaper Justice, No. 279, Vol. VI, on 18 May 1889, in the feature Critical Chronicle. While paying tribute to Paul Lafargue's literary talent, eloquence and charisma, the author attacked the French and German socialists for their ostensibly deliberate action in not inviting the Possibilists to the Hague Conference. 439. In reference to a brief note, bearing no title, carried by the newspaper

Prolétariat, No. 268,18 May 1889, pi, col. 5, which opened with the follow- ing words: 'Les irlando-guesdo-blanquistes assurent dans leur circulaire a l'étranger que le Danemark leur a donné son adhésion'. 440. In Regent Street on the evening of 18 May 1889 Rochefort met Pilotell, a well-known caricaturist of the Commune days, who boxed his ears. Rochefort drew his revolver, but was disarmed. The matter ended in the English Courts. 441. Henry Hyndman called the Hague Conference (see note 385) a 'caucus' in his editorial note 'Much Ado About Nothing' (see note 438). 442. In mid March 1889 Wilhelm Liebknecht spent about two weeks in Switzerland as a representative of German Social Democracy; on 17 March 1889, he attended the unveiling of a monument to Johann Becker at the St Georges cemetery near Geneva. 443. The appeal was published by Labour Elector on 18 May 1889; yet the paper had nothing to say about William Parnell and about copies of this appeal which he allegedly had. 444. According to The Manifesto of the Social Democratic Federation, the International Congress of Trade Unions in London (see note 320) voted unanimously to authorise the Possibilists to convene an International Workingmen's Congress in Paris. The manifesto also claimed that Gabriel Farjat, described as a representative of the 'French soidisant Marxists, or Guesdists', voted for this resolution. E. Bernstein, in his pamphlet The International Working Men's Congress of 1889, II, A Reply to the Manifesto of the Social Democratic Federation rebutted these fabrications by proving that as a representative of the French trade unions, not Socialists, Farjat could not vote for this resolution. Subsequently one of the publications released by the Organising Committee for the Convocation of an International Working Men's Congress in Paris had a special postscript with



**[p. 586]**

Farjat's statement to the effect that, far from voting for the resolution entrusting the convocation of an International Congress to the Possibilists, he could not do it for the simple reason that the resolution was never put to the vote. 445. Pertaining to the collection of signatures to the circular for the convocation of an International Working Men's Congress in Paris. Representatives of the Danish Social Democratic Party, who had not attended the Hague Conference (see note 385) but had announced in advance that they agreed with all of its decisions, unexpectedly refused to send delegates to both congresses. Concerning the two trends in the Danish socialist movement, see note 418. 446. P. Lafargue asked Engels to write to Nikolai Danielson (see Lafargue P., F.

Engels, 14 May 1889, Correspondence, Vol. 2, Moscow 1960) and request him to get in touch with the publishers of the Northern Review. In 1889, in its issue No. 4, this journal published the Russian translation of Lafargue's article 'The Machine as a Factor of Progress' (see note 468), the final chap- ter of his major work Das Proletariat der Handarbeit und Kopfarbeit published by Die Neue Zeit, No. 3, 1888. 447. The reference is to the difficulties in getting the signatures of Russian Socialists to the circular about the convocation of the Paris Congress (see note 432). Lafargue had approached Pyotr Lavrov, with whom he was acquainted, on the matter. Lavrov declined at first by saying that, not being a representative of any particular revolutionary organisation in Russia, he was not entitled to sign. Subsequently he was authorised to do this. However, by that time Sergei Stepniak-Kravchinsky, Vera Zasulich, Pavel Axelrod and Georgy Plekhanov had given their consent. 448. The National Labour Electoral Association - a trade union organisation that succeeded, in 1887, to the Labour Electoral Committee; its aim was to have workmen being elected to Parliament and municipal councils. 449. The expression 'music of the future' gained popularity with the publication, in 1861, of Richard Wagner's letter to Frédéric Villot, the custodian of French museums, under the title: 'Zukunftsmusik. An einen französischen Freund' ('Music of the Future. To a French Friend'). 450. A reference to the pamphlet The International Working Men's Congress of 1889, II, A Reply to the 'Manifesto of the Social Democratic Federation', London 1889. Its original version was written by Eduard Bernstein on Engels' initiative in connection with the campaign waged by the leadership of the Social Democratic Federation (see note 62) in support of a Congress convened by the Possibilists in Paris, with the aim of preventing the success of an International Socialist Workingmen's Congress which the Marxists were to hold. This work was edited by Engels and published as a pamphlet in English. 451. The reference is to the elected council of the London County in charge of taxes, local budget, etc. All persons entitled to take part in parliamentary



**[p. 587]**

elections were eligible to elect county councillors as well as women 30 years of age and older. This reform of local government was implemented in August 1888. 452. The section of the Social Democratic Federation in Battersea; affiliated with the Trade Union Protest Committee (see note 395). 453. The Hague Congress (2-7 September 1872) of the International was the most representative forum of the International Working Men's Association; taking part were 65 delegates from 15 countries. The Congress reviewed the results of the struggle against the Bakunin anarchists within the International and outlined a programme of action under new conditions obtaining after the Paris Commune. The main decision of the Congress was the endorsement of Resolution IX of the London Conference of 1871 on the political action of the working class, summed up as Article 7a of the General Rules of the International. The Congress also adopted a number of resolutions designed to strengthen the organisational structure of the Workingmen's Association. The anarchist leaders, Mikhail Bakunin and James Guillaume, were expelled from the International Working Men's Association. After the Congress, Bakunin and his supporters openly opposed its resolutions, a move that resulted in an actual split of the International. 454. A reference to the congress of the Bakuninist Jura Federation in Sonvillier on 12 November 1871, which adopted the Circulaire à toutes les fédérations de l'Association Internationale des Travailleurs.

The Sonvillier circular countered the decisions of the London Conference of the International with anarchist dogmas on political indifferentism and complete autonomy of sections; it also calumniated the General Council of the International. The Bakuninists suggested that all federations should demand an immediate congress to revise the General Rules of the International and to condemn the General Council's actions. About the Manifesto of the Social Democratic Federation, see note 444. 455. Engels alludes to the split within the International Working Men's Association following the Hague Congress of the First International (see note 453). In 1873 the anarchists convened their congress in Geneva which set the stage for an international association of anarchists - an organisation which they would describe as a genuine International Working Men's Association. 456. Pertaining to C. Schmidt's letter to F. Engels of 15 April 1889. Seeking a publisher for his work Die Durchschnittsprofitrate auf Grundlage des Marx'sehen Werthgesetzes; C. Schmidt asked to send him F. Lassalle's book Der Criminal-Prozeß wider mich wegen Verleitung zum Cassetten- Diebstahl oder: Die Anklage der moralischen Mitschuld, Köln, 1848. Schmidt thanked Engels who had offered him to give letters of recommen- dation to A. Bebel and W. Liebknecht.



**[p. 588]**





**[p. 589]**

470. The whereabouts of the letter is not known. 471. Writing to F. Engels on 2 July 1889, P. Laf argue told him he met at Epernay, in the champagne-producing district, a large number of revolutionary socialist winegrowers, small growers completely ruined by the big cham- pagne manufactures. 472 In these letters P. Martignetti told F. Engels about the outcome of the court trial and about the persecutions he had been subjected to from 1885 for the translation and circulation of F. Engels' works in Italy. Martignetti said he would leave for Buenos Aires if the sentence was endorsed (see note 230). 473. The International (Socialist) Working Men's Congress was in session in Paris on 14-20 July 1889, on the centennial of the storming of the Bastille. In fact, it became a constituent Congress of the Second International. Taking part were 393 delegates, representing the worker and socialist parties of 20 coun- tries of Europe and America.

The Congress heard the reports of representatives of the socialist parties on the situation in the labour movement in their countries; it outlined the principles of international labour legislation in respective countries by supporting demands for a legislative enactment of an 8-hour working day, prohibition of child labour and steps toward the protection of the work of women and adolescents. The Congress stressed the need of political organ- isation of the proletariat and of a struggle for implementation of democra- tic demands of the working class; it spoke out for a disbandment of regular armies and their replacement by armed detachments of the people. It resolved to hold, on 1 May 1890, demonstrations and meetings in support of an 8-hour working day and labour legislation. 474. The International Conference of Miners was held on 18-19 July 1889; it was attended by delegates to both international working men's congresses which were in session at the time in Paris (see note 473). The Conference discussed reports on the situation of miners' trade unions and decided to set up an international association of miners' unions, which was formed in 1890. 475. Engels must have been referring to F. Schlüter 's letter of 1 July 1889 about the labour and trade union movement in North America and about his futile attempts to get a job in American labour newspapers. 476. At that time many German newspapers carried reports about a conversation allegedly held by a correspondent of the London newspaper Evening News and Post with Lev Hartman, who said he had been staying for six months in Germany, Austria, France and Switzerland under an assumed name with the aim of organising there an 'overthrow party' and that this party was getting ready for big events. At Engels' request, Sorge turned to Hartman for explanations; the latter refuted such inventions - he said he had not left the United States at the time. Sorge informed Engels about this in his letter of 7 August.



**[p. 590]**

Only a few foreign delegates attended the Possibilists Congress held in Paris at the same time as the International Working Men's Congress; the representation of most of its delegates was of a purely fictitious nature. 479. On 18 March 1876, Ferdinand Lingenau, a German socialist who had emigrated to the United States, bequeathed about $7,000 to the Socialist Workers' Party of Germany, naming August Bebel, Johann Philipp Becker, Wilhelm Bracke, August Geib, Wilhelm Liebknecht and Karl Marx as executors. Upon Lingenau's death in the United States on 4 August 1877, his executors tried to act on his will and have the above sum placed at the party's disposal. Bismarck succeeded in preventing this. 480. Gustave Brocher appealed to Engels and asked for material assistance for V. Smirnov. 481. The reference is to two letters from Sorge in which he confirmed the receipt of the newspapers sent to him by Engels. They reported on a denial, sent to Schlüter, of the assertion of the newspaper New-Yorker Volkszeitung about the alleged presence of Engels at the Paris Congress, as well as a denial of the report carried by The Evening News and Post on Lev Hartman's trip to Europe (see note 476). 482. The Liberal-Unionists were a J. Chamberlain-led group which in July 1886 broke away from the Liberal Party, because of differences over the draft of Home Rule legislation (April 1886) tabled by the Liberal government for Ireland which provided for a restoration of the autonomous bicameral parliament, with the British government continuing its control over the Irish economy. The Liberal-Unionists came out for the preservation of the Anglo-Irish union which had been in existence from 1801. They made common cause with the Conservative Party and officially joined it several years later. 483. By 'Tory-Socialists' Engels meant the left wing of the Conservative Party; this faction comprised mainly representatives of the big industrial bour- geoisie and intellectuals (men-of-letters, lawyers, etc). 484. In August 1889 the Labour Elector published material on the forthcoming Trades Union Congress at Dundee; its agenda included issues of labour legislation, specifically, a law on an 8-hour working day. 485. Engels referred to events of the 1880s, in particular the arbitrary actions of the Turkish authorities with regard to the Armenian population. A special government commission (Commission of Inquiry) which was dispatched there suggested that victims of the reprisals should go to Constantinople



**[p. 591]**

(Istanbul) to have the conflict settled. However, the Turkish courts failed to settle the conflict. In July 1889 the population of several rural communities in Crete rose in rebellion against the Turkish authorities. This revolt esca- lated into bloody clashes between the Muslim and Christian populations of the island. The Russian government sent a message to Turkey in which it demanded action on her commitments with respect to the ethnic groups and nationalities inhabiting that country To restore order, the Turkish govern- ment sent Shakir Pasha, a former Turkish ambassador to Russia, as a new ruler of Crete. The bloodshed between the Muslim and Christian commu- nities on the island continued till December 1889. About the Anglo- Prussian union, see note 349. 486. An allusion to Wilhelm Liebknecht's trip to the United States for agitation purposes, which he undertook with Eleanor Marx-Aveling and Edward Aveling in September-December 1886 (see note 3). 487. A fragment of this letter was first published in English in the collection Marx K, Engels F. On Britain, Foreign Languages Publishing House, Moscow, 1953, pp520-21. An excerpt from this letter was first published by the newspaper Der Sozialdemokrat on 31 August 1889, as a leading article entitled "Der Streik der 'Unqualifizierten'". 488. A reference to P. Fischer's letters to F. Engels of 21 and 31 August in which he asked Engels* permission to translate into German - for the weekly Berliner Volk-Tribune - the article 'Book of Revelation' (see present edition, Vol. 26) which Engels had written for the journal Progress; Fischer also asked to mention the collection in Mannheimer Abendzeitung which had published Marx's article 'Comments on the Latest Prussian Censorship Instruction' (see present edition, Vol. 1). 489. The strike of the London dockers from 12 August to 14 September 1889 was a major event in the chronicle of the British labour movement of the late 19th century. It involved thirty thousand dockers and over thirty thou- sand - largely unskilled - workers of other trades not affiliated with the trade unions. Displaying tenacity and organisation, the strikers succeeded in their demands for higher wages and better working conditions. The strike contributed to stronger proletarian solidarity (with about £50,000 being donated to the strike fund) and promoted working-class solidarity. It gave rise to the dockers' union and other trade union organisations uniting a large number of general and unskilled workmen; the 'new trade unions' emerged as a result. The text of the excerpts from this letter coincides with some passages from a series of articles by E. Bernstein in the newspaper Der Sozialdemokrat (No. 35, 31 August, No. 36, 7 September and No. 37, 14 September 1889) on the London dockers' strike; these articles were written on F. Engels' advice. 490. As a result of their strike action Quly 1889), the working women of London's match-making factories won their demands for higher wages.



**[p. 592]**

491. On 8 February 1886, supporters of the protectionist tariffs held a rally in Trafalgar Square. Taking part were also trade union activists of pro- Conservative leanings (S. Peters, T.M. Kelley, W. Kenny and T. Lemon, who were expelled at the Trades Union Congress at Manchester in 1882). The Social Democratic Federation (see note 62) organised a protest meeting and a demonstration of unemployed against the agitation of the Conservatives for protectionist tariffs. The demonstration was joined by lumpen-proletarian elements who started sacking and looting the surround- ing shops. Subsequently the police arrested the federation leaders Henry Hyndman, John Burns, Henry Champion and John Williams on charges of inciting riot in their speeches. The court acquitted all the men on 10 April. 492. Engels cites words from the German folk song Prinz Eugen, der adle Ritter. 493. An excerpt from this letter was first published in French by the journal La

Pensée, No. 61, 1955. In English the text of this letter was first published in full by Labour Monthly, London, 1955, No. 8. 494. Engels refers to the group of Blanquists led by E. Roche and E. Granget that gave open support to General Boulanger. 495. Engels cites the name of V. Hugo's novel Les misérables. 496. The Russian Empress Maria Fyodorovna (wife of emperor Alexander III and mother of the last Russian tsar Nicholas II) was a daughter of the Danish King Christian IX. Her brother Waldemar was married to Louis Philippe's granddaughter, Maria, the Princess of Orléans. 497. A reference to the fourth German-language edition of Volume I of Capital

(Das Kapital. Kritik der politischen Oekonomie. Von Karl Marx. Erster Band. Buch I: Der Produktionsprocess des Kapitals. Vierte durchgesehene Auflage. Herausgegeben von Friedrich Engels. Hamburg, Verlag von Otto Meissner. Druck von Hesse & Becker in Leipzig, 1890), prepared for the press by F. Engels. The book came out late in 1890. In a preface to this edition and also in his letter to Nikolai Danielson of 5 December 1889, Engels pointed to the amendments made in the text of the third edition (two or three new additions from the French edition, a few notes of his own - one on bimetallism in particular; the quotations were collated with the English edition). 498. Engels alludes to his vacation at Eastbourne from 8 August to 6 September 1889. 499. Another regular Trades Union Congress took place in Dundee (Scotland) at the beginning of September 1889. Both the preparatory stage and the very course of the Congress mirrored the struggle between the old Conservative leadership with Henry Broadhurst at the head (see note 269) and represen- tatives of the new trade unions with broad masses of general and unskilled workers as members. One of the main issues discussed at the Congress related to a legislative enactment of an eight-hour working day. However, the absence of some of the leaders or the new trade unions, because of the



**[p. 593]**





**[p. 594]**





**[p. 595]**

Égalité in 1880 and appearing in a separate edition in 1833; Le droit a la paresse. Réfutation du Droit au Travail de 1848, Paris. 516. The bourgeois republican Jules Ferry, nominated from the department of

Vosges, suffered an electoral defeat. Engels mentions an article in The Daily News of 8 October 1889, published under the title 'The French Elections. Composition of the New Chamber'. 517. 'The Satisfied' ('Les satisfaits') - the reactionary majority of the French Chamber of Deputies that backed the Guizot government on the eve of the 1848 Revolution. They were called this after saying they were 'satisfied' with the government explanations of corruption among the ruling quarters. This issue was discussed at the Chamber of Deputies in February 1848. 518. Engels referred to the Rue Poitiers Committee, the steering body of a 'Party of Order' which was formed in 1848 as a coalition of two monarchist groups: the Legitimists (adherents of the Bourbon dynasty) and the Orléanists (adherents of the Orléans dynasty). Representing the interests of the big conservative bourgeoisie, this party held a dominating position in the legislative assembly of the Second Republic from 1849 down to the coup d'état of 2 December 1851.

[^1]: constituency (after Boulanger). 515. An allusion to P. Lafargue's pamphlet of the same name, published by





**[p. 596]**

Sorge, Esq., Hoboken N J, US America. About the English publication, see note 343. 520. A reference to a polemic between Friedrich Sorge and Daniel de Leon who shared the views of the 'Nationalists' at the time (see note 503). 521. A reference to the unsigned article in the newspaper Justice, no. 300 of 12 October 1889, published under the title 'Socialists and the French Elections', p3, col. III-IV. 522. A fragment from this letter was first published in English in the collection Marx K., Engels F., Lenin V. I., Anarchism and Anarcho-Syndicalism, Int. Publ., New York, 1972, pi79. 523. On 19 October 1889, Max Hildebrand wrote to Engels that he had, for more than 15 years, been interested in Europe's democratic movement. Accordingly, he had studied a number of works, among which of particular interest to him was Max Stirner's book Der Einzige und Sein Eigenthum. Hildebrand asked Engels for some information on Stirner's life and suggested that he, Engels, write historical biographies of thinkers repre- senting different ideological trends, provided no such biographies had been written before. 524. As a student of Berlin University, Marx lived in Berlin from the latter half of October 1836 to mid April 1841. 525. Engels refers to his stay in Manchester in 1842-44 where he was studying commercial business at the cotton mill belonging to the firm Ermen & Engels (see note 9). 526. Marx lived in Brussels from February 1845 to the beginning of March 1848 when he was expelled by the Belgian authorities. Engels lived in Brussels, on and off, from early April 1845 to the latter half of March 1848. 527. A critique of Stirner's views was made in Volume I of The German Ideology, in Chapter III entitled 'Saint Max' (see present edition, Vol. 5, ppl 17-451). 528. Engels replies to Hildebrand's suggestion to write the history of the period preceding the Revolution of 1848-49 in Germany. As Hildebrand observed in his letter, Engels was perhaps the only person capable of tackling such a work (see this volume, note 523). 529. O.A. Ellissen, who intended to write a book about Friedrich Lange, had found Engels' letters in his personal archives. He therefore asked Engels to give him Lange's letters (addressed to Engels) and allow him to use their correspondence in his book. Engels made the following marginal notes on Ellissen's letter, 'The letters are out of order and cannot be made available before the completion, next spring, of Vol. Ill; then they will be at your disposal. They may be reproduced in full or in part - in the latter case I beg you to give the respective excerpts in their total context'. Einbeck, Okt. 89. Dr O. A. Ellissen wegen Langes Briefe.



**[p. 597]**

530. The reference is to the slogan 'Fatherland in Danger' ('La patrie en danger') proclaimed by the French Legislative Assembly on 11 July 1792, i.e., during the French Revolution of the late 18th century. The Assembly issued an appeal to the army and the French people in which it called on everybody to rise in the struggle for liberty and Constitution. 531. The Communist League was the first German and international organisa- tion of the proletariat, and was formed under the leadership of Marx and Engels in London early in June 1847, as a result of the reorganisation of the League of the Just (a secret association of workers and artisans that appeared in the 1830s and had communities in Germany, France, Switzerland and England). The League's members took an active part in the bourgeois-democratic revolution in Germany in 1848-49. In 1849 and 1850, after the defeat or the revolution, the League was reorganised and thus continued its activities. In the summer of 1850 disagreements arose between the supporters of Marx and Engels and the sectarian Willich-Schapper group, which resulted in a split within the league. Owing to police persecu- tions and arrests of League members in May 1851, the Communist League as an organisation actually ceased its activities in Germany. On 17 November 1852, on a motion from Marx, the London District announced the dissolution of the League. 532. On 3 March 1848, a mass demonstration took place in Cologne, called by the local representatives of the Communist League. On behalf of all those taking part, Andreas Gottschalk handed a petition to the town magistrate with demands for democratic freedom and for protection of working men's rights. The police dispersed this demonstration; A. Gottschalk, Willich and F. Anneke were arrested and brought to trial. However, under a royal pardon, the three men were released from custody on 21 March 1848. 533. On 26 October 1889, W. Liebknecht wrote to Engels and asked if he knew when A. Gottschalk could have made the following statement: T am here on behalf of 20,000 proletarians who do not care at all whether we have a republic or a monarchy'. 534. The Cologne Workers' Association was a workers' organisation founded by Andreas Gottschalk on 13 April 1848. The Association was led by the President and the committee, which consisted of representatives of various trades. After Gottschalk's arrest Moll was elected President. He held this post till a state of siege was proclaimed in Cologne in September 1848, when he had to emigrate under threat of arrest. On 16 October Marx agreed to assume this post temporarily at the request of Association members. In November Röser became acting President and on 28 February 1849, Schapper was elected President and remained at this post until the end of May 1849. The majority of the leading members (Gottschalk, Anneke, Schapper, Moll, Lessner, Jansen, Röser, Nothjung, Bedorf) were members of the Communist League. During the initial period of its existence, the



**[p. 598]**

Workers' Association was influenced by Gottschalk who, sharing many of the views of the 'true socialists', ignored the historical tasks of the prole- tariat in the democratic revolution, carried on the sectarian tactics of boycotting indirect elections to the Federal and Prussian National Assemblies, and came out against supporting democratic candidates in elec- tions. He combined ultra-left phrases with very legalistic methods of strug- gle (workers' petitions to the Government and the City Council, etc.) and supported the demands of the workers affected by craft prejudices, etc. From the very beginning, Gottschalk's tactics were resisted by the support- ers of Marx and Engels. Under their influence, at the end of June a change occurred in the activities of the Workers' Association, which became a centre of revolutionary agitation from the autumn of 1848 onwards, also among the peasants. Members of the Association organised democratic and workers' associations near Cologne, disseminated revolutionary literature, including the 'Demands of the Communist Party in Germany', and studied Marx's writings. The Association maintained close contacts with other workers' and democratic organisations. When, in the spring of 1849, Marx and Engels took steps to organise the advanced workers on a national scale and actually started preparing for the creation of a proletarian party, they relied to a considerable extent on the Cologne Workers' Association. 535. On 26 October 1889, W. Liebknecht informed Engels that he had declined to take part in the publication of the Volksbibliothek (see note 400), a move that incurred significant material losses. 536. This is in reply to P. Martignetti's letter of 30 October 1889, in which he wrote about the sentence passed on him by the Naples court for alleged forgery and destruction of documents, as well as for alleged misappropria- tion of a sum which, at various stages of the court proceedings, ranged from 15 thousand to 500 liras. Martignetti, sentenced to a prison term of 3 years and 9 months, asked Engels for help in job finding and for advice on what to do under the circumstances - either emigrate and part with his family, or serve his prison term. 537. In his letter of 17 October 1889, A. Bebel criticised the French Socialists for their poor propaganda and organisational work. 538. A reference to the National Council in Bordeaux and the Executive Commission in Troyes, set up in 1888 at a labour unions congress in Bordeaux and at a Workers' Party Congress in Troyes, respectively (see notes 329; 331). 539. During the election campaign of September 1889 the French Workers' Party and the Central Revolutionary Committee of the Blanquists (see note 33) issued a joined manifesto, signed by Guesde, Lafargue and Vaillant and circulated in more than 100 towns. 540. On the eve of the parliamentary election of 1889, E. Protot mounted a campaign of slander against J. Guesde in Marseilles with the aim of prevent-



**[p. 599]**

ing him from being elected to the Chamber of Deputies. Protot accused Guesde of espionage for the German Government: he claimed that in 1879, as editor-in-chief of the newspaper Égalité, Guesde had received 4 thousand francs from Höhberg, allegedly the chief of the German police. Sued by Guesde for libel, Protot was sentenced to a fine. Under the court decision, Marseilles and Paris newspapers carried a report about the sentence. 541. P. Lafargue wrote to Engels in his letter of 4 November 1889, about the plan to set up Socialist factions in the Chamber of Deputies and in the Municipal Council; this initiative came from J. Guesde, E. Vaillant, G. Deville and P. Lafargue. He said that if this plan came off, the parliamentary faction should issue a declaration, stating its independent and socialist stand and setting the objective of inducing the Chamber of Deputies to give a legal seal to the decisions of the International Working Men's Congress of 1889. The unifi- cation of the Guesdists and the Blanquists into the Socialist Party of France took body and form at the Rheims Congress of September 1903. 542. In his letter of 17 October 1889, A. Bebel told Engels about I. Auer's nervous disease and his stay at Zurich for treatment. The newspaper Der Sozialdemokrat (19 October, No. 42) reported Auer's plans to move south after treatment. In Switzerland Auer had been collecting documents on the subject 'The Law on the Socialists in Ten Years' Time'. 543. The reference is to the letter of J.H. Johnson and G.B. Ellis to F. Engels of 7 November 1889, in which they requested him for the opinions of the passengers aboard the steamship The City of New York about the perfor- mance of the ship's circulating pumps. 544. Mr Boulé, representing the French syndicats, was running as a Socialist candidate at the by election in Paris in January 1889; thereupon, at a munic- ipal election in the department of Haute Marne, he nominated his candidacy as a Boulanger supporter. As a result, he forfeited his post of Secretary of the Federation of Syndical Chambers in Paris in the autumn of 1889. The newspaper Le Parti ouvrier exposed Boulé in J. Vidal's article 'Exécution d'un traître' published on 26 October. The newspaper Intransigeant on 29 October carried E. Roche's article in Boulé's defence and, on 2, 3 and 5 November it featured a series of Boulé's articles on the port workers' strike at Bourget. 545. Probably a reference to Le Cri du Travailleur (Lisle), Le Salariat (Rouen) and L'Action sociale (Lyon). 546. Engels had received from Lafargue an article by C. de Paepe; published by the Belgian press, it contained a report on Nikolai Chernyshevsky's death. 547. Laura Lafargue made a translation of Béranger's poem Le Sénateur. Laura added a postscript to Paul Lafargue's letter to Engels of 4 November 1889 in which she asked for his opinion about the quality of the translation. 548. In her letter of 14 November 1889, Laura Lafargue told Engels about the reaction of the French bourgeois press to Christophe Thivrier, a coal miner,



**[p. 600]**

appearing in the Chamber of Deputies in working clothes among the other Socialists. 549. In September-December 1889, there was a strike in Silvertown, a district in London's East End, by workers engaged in the production of underwater cables and rubber articles. The strikers, about three thousand strong, demanded higher pay rates (both hourly and piecework rates), higher pay for overtime and on holidays, as well as higher wages for women and chil- dren. Eleanor Marx-Aveling was actively involved in the organisation of this strike, during which she helped form the Women's Branch of the Gas Union. The strike, which continued for nearly three months, ended in fail- ure: the Silvertown workers were supported by other unions, notably the Gas Workers and the Dockers unions. 550. A reference to the siege of Paris by the Prussian army during the Prusso- French War of 1870-71. The siege was on from 19 September 1870 to the signing of an armistice between France and Germany on 28 January 1871. 551. An allusion to the electoral campaign of September-October 1889 in France. Jules Guesde was running for the Chamber of Deputies as a candidate from one of the constituencies in Marseilles but failed to be elected (see also note 465). 552. Engels cites a call to the voters at the end of the Manifesto of the French Workers' Party (see note 33) and the Central Revolutionary Committee of the Blanquists (see note 539). 553. In his letter of 23 October 1889, P. Martignetti asked Engels to recommend him, through P. Lafargue's mediation, to Antonio Labriola. Engels' letter to P. Lafargue is not available now. 554. An abridged text of the letter was first published in English in Marx K. and

Engels F., Correspondence, 1846-1895, Lawrence, London 1934, pp457-58. The English version of this letter was published in full in Marx K. and Engels F., Selected Correspondence, Foreign Languages Publishing House, Moscow 1955, pp405-407. 555. 9th Thermidor (27-28 July 1794) was the date of a counterrevolutionary coup which brought the big bourgeoisie to power. About the events of 10 August 1792, see note 363. 556. Le Comité de salut public (Committee of Public Safety) was established by the Convention on 6 April 1793; during the Jacobin dictatorship (2 June 1793-27 July 1794) it was the leading body of the revolutionary government in France. 557. The Peace of Basle was concluded on 5 April 1795 between France and Prussia, the latter being a member of the first anti-French coalition. This treaty came as a consequence of the French victories as well as of the differ- ences among the members of the coalition, in particular between Prussia and Austria. 558. The Directory was the regime established in France as a result of the over-



**[p. 601]**

throw of the Jacobin government on 27 July (9 Thermidor) 1794, and the introduction, on 4 November 1795, by the Thermidor Convention, of a new anti-democratic constitution. Supreme executive power was concen- trated in the hands of five Directors. The Directory, whose rule was marked by unrestrained profiteering and speculation, continued until the coup d'état of 9 November (18 Brumaire) 1799 leading to the personal rule of General Napoleon Bonaparte. 559. K.F. Keppen's article 'Leo's Geschichte der Revolution' was published in Die Rheinische Zeitung (Nos. 139, 141 and 142) on 21 and 22 May 1842. 560. The whereabouts of this letter is not known. 561. Engels received N. Danielson's letter of 26 November in which N. Danielson summed up the gist of the letter sent by the editors of the Russian journal Northern Review to P. Lafargue concerning the intended publica- tion in it of P. Lafargue's article about the evolution of property. 562. Karl Marx Capital Part I, Ch. Ill, 'Money, Or the Circulation of commodi- ties', Section 3, Universal Money. 563. The English translation of a fragment of this letter was first published in Marx K. and Engels F., Correspondence 1846-1895, London, 1934, pp460-62. 564. In these letters F. Sorge aired his views about the split within the Socialist Labor Party of North America. 565. The Gas Workers' and General Labourers' Union was the first trade union of general and unskilled workers in the history of the British working-class movement; it was formed late in March - early in April 1889 against the background of the growing strike movement of the 1880s and 1890s. Eleanor Marx-Aveling and E. Aveling did much for the organisation of this union and for its guidance. The Union put forward a demand for a legisla- tive enactment of an eight-hour working day. Within a brief space of time, it gained considerable influence - as many as 100,000 gas workers joined it within a year. It took an active part in organising the London dockers' strike of 1889 (see note 489). 566. A reference to P. Rappaport's article in the newspaper Indiana Tribune, sent to Engels by F. Sorge. 567. Hepner participated in the work of the conventions held by two conflicting groups within the Socialist Labor Party of North America in Chicago (see note 3). Sorge remarked in this connection in his letter to Engels of 18 October 1889, that 'Hepner wanted to play a non-partisan's part and went to Chicago to attend both conventions so-called'. 568. Writing to Engels on 29 October 1889, Sorge asked if he knew about the fate of a list of Marx's articles in the New York Daily Tribune which he, Sorge, had given to Marx in 1872, as well as of the clippings from the correspond- ing numbers of the paper. The list of Marx's articles for the Tribune had been compiled by Hermann Meier; Sorge had handed it to Marx during their meeting at the Hague Congress of the First International.



**[p. 602]**

Marx, Engels, Selected Correspondence, Foreign Languages, Publishing House, Moscow 1956, pp491-92. 572. Trier, writing to Engels on 8 December 1889, told him about the differences within the Danish Social Democratic Party over the issue of a possible bloc with the bourgeois Left-Radical parties at the forthcoming election to the Riksdag; he also wrote about a controversy between the party leadership and the opposition, involving party members who did not agree with the leaders' policies. 573. The primogeniture principle was the right of the eldest son in the family or kin to inherit his father's estate. This was instituted by the feudal law of England, France, Germany and other West European countries in the 11th- 13th centuries with the aim of keeping landed estates intact and preventing their fragmentation among many heirs. Only the eldest son was eligible to inherit. 574. A reference to a constitutional conflict in Denmark which began in 1875 and which manifested itself in a struggle between the government and the liberal opposition in Parliament, pressing for constitutional limits to the King's powers. Financial issues sparked off an acute controversy between the government and the parliamentary majority. Proceeding from Article 49 of the Constitution, according to which no tax could be levied in the absence or a parliamentary decision, the Folketing (lower house) would every now and then, beginning with 1877, reject budget bills tabled by the government. The government responded by introducing a provisional budget - it gave a loose interpretation of Article 25 of the Constitution which empowered the King, if need be, to issue provisional legislative enact- ments. The conflict continued until 1894 when the government and the liberal opposition came to some sort of settlement.



**[p. 603]**

575. 'Physical force' was the name given to one of the two trends in the Chartist movement. In contrast to the other trend, the 'moral force' Chartists, it opted for revolutionary methods, for the independence of the Chartist movement and against its subordination to the bourgeois radicals. 576. The General Association of German Workers was set up on 23 May 1863 at a meeting of worker societies in Leipzig. The founding of this political organisation, which included some of the members of the former Communist League (see note 531), contributed to the subsequent progress of the German labour movement and its emancipation from the ideological sway of the liberal bourgeoisie. Lassalle and his followers were agitating for universal suffrage which, as they deemed, could help the working people take on power in the state. A new democratic body politic, as Lassalle and his supporters saw it, was to provide a credit for setting up workers' production associations (see also note 508). 577. The Gas Workers Strike in South London took place in December 1889, February 1890. It was touched off by the failure of the company owners to honour the earlier agreement on an eight-hour working day, higher wages, and employment priority for unionised workers, members of the Gas Workers' and General Labourers' Union (see note 565). Among other things, the strikers demanded that three activists of the Union, dismissed from their job, be reinstated. The strike action did not succeed in the absence of vigorous support from other unions, the dockers' union in particular. 578. An allusion to W Liebknecht 's letter of 20 December about the Elberfeld trial and his own difficult conditions. 579. Herewith Engels sent to S.M. Kravchinsky (Stepniak) the first chapter of his work The Foreign Policy of Russian Tsardom (see present edition, Vol. 27) so as to have it published in the Russian literary and political journal Social Democrat run by the 'Emancipation of Labour' group; among its editors were V.l. Zasulich, G.V. Plekhanov and P.V. Axelrod (see also note 623). 580. In her letter of 31 December 1889, Laura Lafargue complained that for her translation of Walther von der Vogelweide's poem Unter der Linden, she had only an updated edition of the text. 581. Writing to Engels on 24 December 1889, P. Lafargue told him about the French Workers' Party (see note 33) planning to start a new daily. In keep- ing with the terms of an entrepreneur who had agreed to finance the news- paper, the editorial staff was supposed to work without remuneration, with the exception of J. Guesde and Quercy. It was somewhat later that this daily was launched. Engels' letter to C. Bonnier is not available. 582. A reference to the proceedings to have Engels' nephews - Hermann, Moritz

Engels F., Correspondence, 1846-1895, Lawrence, London, 1934, pp463-64.

[^1]: and Emil - made co-owners of the firm Ermen & Engels at Engelskirchen. 583. A fragment of this letter was first published in English in: Marx K. and





**[p. 604]**

584. F. Schlüter, in his letter to F. Engels of 12 December 1889, wrote this: 'Last week I sent you a number of the Commonweal with the image of a tree that had been baptised after our Marx'. 585. In his letter to Engels on 20 December 1889, F. Schlüter asked him to make inquiries about a George Reid, who had come to New York City from London and who was agitating among stevedores and seamen. In Schlüter's opinion, Reid was acting in the spirit of Hyndman's sectarian policies: 'For about three months there has been a certain George G. Reid here who says that he has been sent from London to organise longshoremen and seamen employed in the port The longshoremen are beginning to mistrust him. No attempt has been made to learn more about him.' 586. A reference to the Amalgamated Engineers' Society, founded by W. Newton and W. Allen in 1851 and known as the first trade union of a 'new type'. 587. The London Trades Council was elected at a conference of trade union dele- gates held in London in May 1860. The Council headed the London trade unions, numbering many thousands and was fairly influential among the British workers. In the first half of the 1860s it led the British workers' campaign against intervention in the Civil War in the United States, in defence of Poland and Italy, and later for the legislation of the trade unions. The leaders of the large trade unions played a major role in the Council. 588. Appended to this was a letter of recommendation from Engels; the rough draft of this letter is extant. 589. Refers to the socialist club Vorwärts, founded in Buenos Aires in January 1882 by German socialist emigres - H. Lalman, A. Kuhn and F. Weber. In 1886 this club launched the newspaper Vorwärts which advocated socialist ideas and called for strike action to secure better working and living condi- tions. 590. Engels sent the present note to Eleanor Marx-Aveling., together with Bonnier's letter to Engels of 14 January 1890. Engels sent this letter to Eleanor Aveling at Bonnier's request. It was a continuation of Bonnier's talk with Engels about the French Workers' Party preparing to start a newspa- per of its own (see also note 33). This plan only materialised in September 1890, as the party resumed the publication of its weekly newspaper Le Socialiste, which became its central organ. In his letter Bonnier asked Eleanor Marx-Aveling for her comments on the Gas Workers' strike (see note 577) for the French newspaper Le Cri du travailleur. 591. These lines were on a post card, with the following address at the back: H.

Schlüter Esq., 73, First Avenue, New York City, US America. 592. The English version of a fragment from this letter was published in the collection Marx K., Engels F., Ireland and the Irish Question, Progress Publishers, Moscow 1971. 593. Engels hints at acute differences - which came into the open during the



**[p. 605]**





**[p. 606]**

In his first edict, the Emperor instructed the Reichskanzler to appeal to the governments of a number of European countries with the proposal to convene an international conference on a unified labour legislation. (Such a



**[p. 607]**

with P. Lafargue and P. Roche about the attitude of the Socialists to the proposal made by Emperor William II to convene an international confer- ence on unified labour legislation (see note 609). This interview was published on 3 March 1890, in the regular feature 'En Allemagne'. 615. In the course of the election to the German Reichstag, the Social Democrats gained votes in 6 constituencies of Brandenburg, Pomerania (Stettin) and East Prussia; in 3 constituencies of Mecklenburg, and in 4 constituencies of Schleswig-Holstein.



**[p. 608]**





**[p. 609]**

Russia and Prussia, representatives of the Hohenzollern dynasty, among other things. Engels discovered this editorial tampering as he compared the Russian translation with the German text (see also his letter to J. Dietz of 1 April 1890). The May issue of Die Neue Zeit carried these two parts with- out amendments, together with the third part. Indicated at the end of this publication was the date Engels had completed the article: London, end of February 1890. 624. In her letter to Engels late in March 1890, Vera Zasulich asked him for the text of the last, third, chapter of the article 'The Foreign Policy of Russian Tsardom' (present edition, Vol. 26) so as to have it published together with the second chapter in Book II of the Social Democrat. 625. The February issue of Social Democrat (1890), which S.M. Stepniak- Kravchinsky passed to Engels, carried V. Zasulich's article 'Revolutionaries from the Bourgeois Midst' and G. Plekhanov's article 'N.G. Chernyshevsky'; the second part appeared in the August number of the journal. 626. There was considerable unrest among Moscow University students in November 1867 over the activity of inspectors in conformity with the new university regulations of 1884 (which abolished the university self-rule introduced by the 1863 regulations as well as authorised the Education Minister to appoint or dismiss at his discretion professors and other members of the teaching staff, fix scholarships, grants and other allowances for students, decide on curricula, etc.). At the beginning of December 1887 the student unrest spread to the universities and colleges of Kharkov, Odessa, Kazan and St Petersburg. Police and army units were thrown against the students. Many were expelled from college or university and exiled, and the most active were drafted into penal battalions. 627. Thanks to the active engagement of S.M. Kravchinsky-Stepniak, a 'Russian Freedom Friends' Society' was organised in Britain in 1890; its aim was to enlist support for the Russian revolutionary movement. Between 1891-1900 the Society published the newspaper Free Russia. 628. The district in London where the editorial board of the newspaper Der Sozialdemokrat had its office. 629. Stuttgart - the seat of the Dietz Publishers in charge of the journal Die Neue Zeit. 630. In his letter dated 3-6 March 1890, F. Sorge communicated F. Schlüter's

request to Engels to send - for publication in Die New Yorker Volkszeitung - the letters from the National-Liberal J. Miquel, a Reichstag deputy, which he had written to Engels during his membership in the Communist League (see note 531). 631. Engels must have made a mistake by dating C. Schmidt's letter 25 February. Actually, C. Schmidt wrote to Engels on 26 February and 1 April; in these letters he told him about his possible visit to London and about his plans for



**[p. 610]**

Köninggrätz (Hradec-Kralove), near Sadova. The Austrian troops were defeated. About the battle of Sedan, see note 267. 634. The Napoleonic Code - the code of French civil law, promulgated in 1804, exerted a great influence on legislation in many European and a number of Latin American European countries. 635. The present letter is in reply to V. Zasulich's letter written around 10 April 1890. 636. Grigori Beck's article 'Erwiderung' ran a sharp critique of G. Plekhanov for his preface to the pamphlet Pytr Alexeyev's Speech; in it Plekhanov cautioned workers against 'the false friends' from among the liberal intelli- gentsia. Published by Der Sozialdemokrat (No. 14, 5 April 1890), this arti- cle was written in reply to the report 'Aus der russischen Bewegung', carried by the same newspaper (No. 12) on 22 March and signed ZKW. On 26 April 1890, Der Sozialdemokrat (No. 17) published a letter to the editors from Ossipowitch (probably, V. Zasulich's pseudonym) with a prefatory editor's note 'Über die Propaganda unter den russischen Arbeitern'. 637. In her letter Vera Zasulich listed a number of Russian newspapers and magazines published in Switzerland in 1888-89: Svoboda (Freedom), Borba ( Struggle), Samoupravlenie (Self-Government) and Svobodnaya Rossia. 638. Dismal Swamp - boggy terrain in Virginia, USA. 639. Michael Davitt - an eminent activist in the Irish national movement and a champion of a union between the working classes of Ireland and England. He supported the struggle of the new trade unions (see note 489) for a law on an eight-hour working day. However, he also suggested setting up inde- pendent unions of English and Irish workers at every enterprise; this applied, in particular, to the Gas Workers' and General Labourers' Union in London and Ulster (see note 565). 640. The appeal of the Social Democratic parliamentary group in the Reichstag 'An die Arbeiter und Arbeiterinnen Deutschland!' was adopted at its meet- ing in Halle on 13 April 1890 and published in the newspaper Berliner Volksblatt on 15 April 1890. The appeal contained the party leadership's reply to the demand by the opposition of 'Die Jungen' ('The Young', see note 646) to stage a general strike on May 1. The appeal pointed to the danger of such a demand under the conditions of the still operating Anti- Socialist law, after the Reichstag election of 20 February 1890, when all kinds of provocations were possible on the part of the ruling quarters. It appealed instead to German workers to give no support to the idea of a



**[p. 611]**

general strike and to resort to work stoppages only whenever a serious conflict could be avoided; otherwise it advised the workers not to go beyond holding demonstration and rallies. The May 1 strikes held in some German towns involved about ten per cent of the labour force. 641. Part of this letter, in the language of the original, was first published in Die New Yorker Volksezeitung on 10 May 1890. A fragment of the letter was published in English for the first time in Labour Monthly, 1934, No. 5, pp309-ll. 642. The Bloomsbury Socialist Society, which had the local branch of the Socialist League (see note 21) as a nucleus, took form as an independent organisation in August 1888, after breaking with the Socialist League where anarchist elements had gained the upper hand. The Society was led by E. Marx-Aveling and E. Aveling; one of its members was F. Lessner, a friend and associate of Marx and Engels. In subsequent years the Bloomsbury Socialist Society carried on active propaganda and agitation work in London's East End. It was one of the organisers of the May Day demon- stration of 1890. Its representatives were among the Central Committee that organised a meeting in London's Hyde Park on 4 May 1890 (see note 643). 643. The reference is to the 'Central Committee of representatives of ' new trade unions' and of radical and socialist clubs (about the radical clubs, see note 22) set up for organising the 4 May demonstration in London. The Committee continued its activities in subsequent months in pursuit of the struggle for a law on a eight-hour working day and for implementing the decisions of the socialist International Working Men's Congress of 1889; it came out for setting up a workingmen's party. The leader of the Central Committee was E. Aveling, who maintained close contacts with Engels. In July 1890 the Committee gave rise to an organisation which came to be known as 'The Legal Eight Hours and International Labour League'. 644. A. Bebel's report was published in Die Arbeiter-Zeitung, No. 17, on 25 April 1890 in the regular feature: 'Ausland. Deutschland' and marked: 'Berlin 22 April'. 645. Replying to Engels on 9 April 1890 Bebel said he subscribed to Engels'

opinion about the psychological condition of Emperor William II. 646. Late in March 1890 a group of Berlin Social Democrats, Max Schippel among them, promulgated an appeal under the heading 'Was soil am 1 Mai geschehen?' in which it urged workmen to stage a general strike on that day. This appeal epitomised the position of the 'Young' - petty bourgeois, semi- anarchist oppositional group within German Social Democracy that took shape in 1890. This group was led by college students and raw litterati (hence the name of the opposition, the 'Young') who would arrogate to themselves the role of the party's theoreticians and leaders - such men as Paul Ernst, Paul Kampfmeyer, Hans Müller, Prune Wille among others. Ignoring the changed situation for the party's activity after the repeal of the



**[p. 612]**

Waltershausen with a protest against the characterisation of Marx in the



**[p. 613]**





**[p. 614]**





**[p. 615]**



