---
Volume: 44
Document_Title: "1. Marx to Engels. 20 July "
Page_Range: "38-41"
---

# 1. Marx to Engels. 20 July 



**[p. 3]**

1870

l

MARX TO ENGELS1

IN MANCHESTER

[London,] 20 July 1870

DEAR FRED,

Enclosed a letter from Kugelmann2 which significantly clarifies the political MYSTERIES of the present war.3 He is in the right with his criticism of the proclamation of the Brunswick meeting3 SOME COPIES of which I enclose. I am also sending you the Révei L4 You will find in it the first half of the acte d'accusationh presented before the Supreme Court at Blois5; what a poor figure the French CONSPIRATORS cut, compared to the FENIANS,6 as they transform themselves into mouchards0 without the least provocation. The paper is also interesting on account of the leading article by old Delescluze. Although he is opposed to the government, it's just unadulterated chauvinism, car la France est le seul pays de l'idéed

(namely, the idea it has of itself). These republican chauvinists are only indignant because the actual incarnation of their idol— Louis Bonaparte with his long nose and his stock exchange rigging —does not correspond to their FANCY. The French deserve a good hiding. If the Prussians win, then centralisation of the STATE POWER will be beneficial for the centralisation of the German working class. German predominance would then shift the centre of gravity of the West European workers' movement from France to Germany, and you need only to compare developments in the two countries from 1866 to the present day to realise that the German working class is superior to the French both in theory and

[^1]: a 'Proletarier aller Länder vereinigt Euch!', Der Volksstaat, No. 58, 20 July 1870, - b bill of indictment - c spies - d for France is the only nation of the Idea





**[p. 4]**

Finally, I enclose a review of my book from Hildebrand's journal for economics and statistics.3 The state of my health does not really predispose me to merriment, but this essay brought the tears to my eyes, bona fide tears of laughter. With the reaction and the DOWNFALL of the heroic age of philosophy in Germany, the 'petty bourgeois' latent in the German citizen has once again come to the fore—in philosophy nonsense worthy of Moses Mendelssohn; the smart-alecky, bad-tempered carping of wiseacres and know- alls. And they now want to dissolve political economy into a lot of rubbish about legal conceptsl That goes one better than the 'logarithm of stimuli'.7 As Schiller, a competent judge in this sphere, has already noted, the philistine resolves all questions by making them 'a matter of conscience'.

Apropos! A Yankee JOURNAL which I was reading yesterday in the Central Council is publishing a series of articles about capital, etc. It refers to my bookb among others. According to them I believe that the worker must work for a certain portion of the day for his own needs, and that therefore the work over and above that time, which I call SURPLUS LABOUR, forms the surplus value and hence the source of profit, etc. There is something in this, no doubt, they continue, but it is not the whole truth. For instance, the goods produced by a manufacturer= 0 for him until they have been sold. Let us assume then that the REAL VALUE (he means cost price) of clothes, etc. = a By selling them to the merchant the manufacturer adds b, and this is then increased by c by the different businessmen through whose hands the articles pass.

Therefore: VALUE^O. The increments= b + c. VALVE IN USE, THEREFORE, = a+ b+ c. Therefore, surplus value = excess of use value (!) over value. This really beats the 'FORMULE' which Frankel learnt in Paris! 8

Just interrupted while writing. Taran,c the French Italian, drove up in a CAB (he's the man from The Pall Mall Gazette). He brought back the things by Lassalle, etc., that I had lent him. He is going to Paris as war-correspondent. Inquired whether I would like to go to Prussia in that capacity, or if not, whether I could propose anyone else. Through him I am now so FAR in contact with the Pall

[^1]: a [H. K. F. Rosier,] 'Karl Marx. Das Kapital. Kritik der politischen Oekonomie', Jahrbücher für Nationalökonomie und Statistik, Vol. 12, Jena, 1869. - b Volume I of

[^2]: Capital - c Nicolas Léon Thieblin





**[p. 5]**

THE BARGAIN.

Yesterday I heard from Perret in Geneva that o u r resolution a

granting recognition to the Genevan Comité Fédéral Romand, in preference to the counter-committee formed by Bakunin, came like a bombshell to the fellows.9 They telegraphed Bakunin at once. At the next congress the GENERAL COUNCIL is to be put in the dock on account of this coup. It is now absolutely essential that Dupont should at long last send me the COPIES of o u r resolutions" concerning the ALLIANCE.10 D O press him on this score immédiatement and sérieusement in my name.

T h e GENERAL COUNCIL yesterday commissioned me to draw u p an address. 0 By no means welcome IN MY PRESENT STATE of liver troubles and DULLNESS. If it does not improve, Allen and Maddison, whom I saw yesterday, advise m e to go to the seaside, the East coast of England, in fact, because it's fresher there.

BEST COMPLIMENTS TO MRS LIZZY AND FRIENDS.

Your

K. M.

[^1]: Apropos! Hasn't Wilhelm's d stupidity excelled itself in his last Volksstaat ? e

[^2]: First published abridged in Der Briefwech- Printed according to the original sei zwischen F. Engels und K. Marx, Bd. IV, Stuttgart, 1913 and in full in Published in English in full for the MEGA, Abt. Ill, Bd. 4, Berlin, 1931 f l r s t t l m e

[^3]: a K. Marx, 'General Council Resolution on the Federal Committee of Romance Switzerland'. - b K. Marx, 'The International Working Men's Association and the International Alliance of Socialist Democracy', 'The General Council of the International Working Men's Association to the Central Bureau of the Internation- al Alliance of Socialist Democracy'. - c K. Marx, 'First Address of the General Council of the International Working Men's Association on the Franco-Prussian War'. - d Wilhelm Liebknecht's - e This presumably refers to the 'Politische Uebersicht' column in Der Volksstaat, No. 57, 17 July 1870.



