---
Volume: 44
Document_Title: "4. Marx to Engels. 28 July "
Page_Range: "45-47"
---

# 4. Marx to Engels. 28 July 



**[p. 4]**

MARX T O ENGELS 1 6

IN MANCHESTER

[London,] 28 July 1870

DEAR FRED,

I forwarded your article" at once to the Pall Mall EDITOR (F. Greenwood), with the request to return it immediately if he does not wish to print it. I have n o doubt that, in that event, we could place it with The Times or The Daily News. The Times had given us every reason, via Eccarius, to believe it would print o u r (i.e. the International's) ADDRESS.13 It did not appear, probably because of a HIT AT RUSSIA. W h e r e u p o n (MONDAY LASTC) I sent the thing off without delay to the Pall Mall and also wrote to the EDITOR,17 in accordance with the agreement with their WAR CORRESPONDENT (Thieblin, now in Luxembourg), about the MILITARY CORRESPONDENCE. Requested an ANSWER. N O REPLY. N o r was the Address printed. So today on sending your article to the EDITOR of the Pall Mall, I wrote a curt letter, SPEAKING ONLY OF THE MILITARY CORRESPON- DENCE, i.e. I simply asked whether yes or no.

Last Tuesday the General Council ordered a thousand COPIES of the Address to be r u n off. Today I expect the page proofs.

T h e singing of the Marseillaise in France is a parody just like the whole SECOND EMPIRE. But the d o g d at least feels that 'Partant pour la Syrie'18 WOULD NOT DO. In Prussia, on the other hand, such buffoonery is not necessary. 'Lord, in Thee is all my trust',19 sung by William I, with Bismarck on the right and Stieber on the left, is the German Marseillaise ! As in 1812 sqq. T h e German philistine seems fairly enraptured, now that he can give free vent to his innate servility. W h o would have thought it possible that 22 years after 1848 a national war in Germany would be given such theoretical expression!

Fortunately, this whole demonstration stems from the middle class. T h e working class, with the exception of the direct adherents of Schweitzer, takes n o part in it. And fortunately, the WAR OF CLASSES

[^1]: a F. Engels, Notes on the War.—J. - b K. Marx, 'First Address of the General Council of the International Working Men's Association on the Franco-Prussian War'. - c 25 July - d Napoleon III





**[p. 11]**

By publishing the TREATY (on Belgium), Bismarck too has overstepped the mark.20 Even London RESPECTABILITY no longer ventures to talk of the integrity of Prussia. Macaire et Co.! Incidentally, shortly before 1866, I recollect reading articles in the organ of the worthy Brass" and in the Kreuz-Zeitung, in which Belgium was denounced as a 'nest of Jacobins' (!) and its annexation by France was recommended. On the other hand, the moral indignation of John Bull is no less comic! RIGHT OF TREATIES! THE DEVIL! After all, it was Palmerston who made it a maxim of English policy that when you solemnly conclude a treaty, you do not necessarily swear to abide by it, and England has acted accordingly ever since 1830! ON ALL SIDES, nothing but war and immorality.

Charming of the Kreuz-Zeitung to demand that England should refuse to supply the French with coal, i.e. that she should violate the Anglo-French commercial treaty, i.e. declare war on France.21

That coal can be a military commodity is a fact that was vividly brought home to Pamb by the opposition at the time. He fobbed them off with bad jokes. So the point is one that was by no means overlooked when the treaty was concluded. Urquhart wrote fierce denunciations about it during the negotiations. So if England does not declare war de prime abordc she must continue to supply the French with coal. As far as a declaration of war is concerned, that could produce some extremely serious ill-feeling between the POWERS THAT BE and the London proletariat. The mood of the workers here is DECIDEDLY against such ostentatious gestures.22

From the enclosed letter by E. Oswald (an Urquhartite, but relatively rationalised in a continental spirit), you can see that even the democrats wish to do something.15 I have written to hime that I have already signed an Address of the INTERNATIONAL which, as far as the purely political aspect is concerned, puts forward essentially similar views. In further letters, yesterday and today, he insists that I should attend their MEETING in his house this afternoon. (He lives very near here.) He also sends me an extract from a letter by Louis Blanc.

[^1]: At last a letter from the Russians in Geneva.23 I enclose it. Return it soon, SAY MONDAY NEXT,*1 since I have to reply.

[^2]: a Norddeutsche Allgemeine Zeitung - b Palmerston - c from the very outset - d 1 August - e See previous letter.



