---
Volume: 44
Document_Title: "7. Marx to Wilhelm Liebknecht. 29 July "
Page_Range: "51-52"
---

# 7. Marx to Wilhelm Liebknecht. 29 July 



**[p. 7]**

MARX TO WILHELM LIEBKNECHT

IN LEIPZIG

[London,] 29 July 1870

Dear LIBRARY,3

Enclosed an extract from the Manifesto of the GENERAL COUNCIL taken from The Pall Mall Gazette of 28 July.b

Be so good as to insert a note in your translation in the Volksstaat that you received the Manifesto in English.*0 This will indicate to our other correspondents that we had no time to send them translations.

Last Tuesday0 I translated the Reichstag protest of Bebel and yourself into English for the GENERAL COUNCIL. It was received with great acclamation.31

One further matter. Mr Karl Blind made a patriotic speech to a German meeting in the Sports Hall; this comedian represented as a vital, world-shaking event the fact that he, the German Brutus, had suspended his republicanism, sacrificing it on the altar of the fatherland for the duration of the war. That was Act I.

Act II: Karl Blind gives an account in his own hand in the London Deutsche Post of that same meeting, whose size, impor- tance, etc., he exaggerates in his usual manner.

Act III: Karl Blind writes an anonymous letterd to The Daily News, in which he movingly depicts the overwhelming impact on the whole of Germany of the great speech made by Karl Blind at the meeting in the Sports Hall. All the German papers, he claims, have reproduced it. One of them, the Berlin Volks-Zeitung, even ventured (!) to print it in its entirety. (The fellow is a correspon- dent of the Volks-Zeitung.) Neither did Viennese papers allow the great event to pass them by without trace. (The fellow sent in a report himself to the Neue Freie Presse.*)

This is just one of a thousand instances in which this ant-lion

[^1]: a Nickname given to Wilhelm Liebknecht by Marx's daughters. - b K. Marx, 'First Address of the General Council of the International Working Men's Association on the Franco-Prussian War'. - c 26 July - d 'Karl Blind's Speech on the War', The Daily News, No. 7561, 25 July 1870. - * Neue Freie Presse, No. 2121, 25 July 1870.



