---
Volume: 44
Document_Title: "9. Marx to Engels. 1 August "
Page_Range: "57-59"
---

# 9. Marx to Engels. 1 August 



**[p. 22]**

First published abridged in Der Briefwech- Printed according to the original sei zwischen F. Engels und K. Marx, Bd. IV, Stuttgart, 1913 and in full in Published m English for the first MEGA, Abt. Ill, Bd. 4, Berlin, 1931 t l m e

9

{London,] 1 August 1870

In great haste

Your two last articles first-rate.a I galloped round to the Pall Mall at once. But since Greenwood was out, nothing could be decided. He will, however, be back before noon.

As for the 'Russians',23 they will learn that my attitude is one of à corsaire corsaire et demi}'

[^1]: MARX TO ENGELS37

[^2]: IN MANCHESTER

[^3]: DEAR FRED,

[^4]: I shall write to him today that in future you will send articles direct to him 12 (I SHALL NOW NAME YOU).

[^5]: The OLIGARCHY here wants an English war on behalf of Prussia. Having curried favour with Bonaparte for 18 years and having quite used him up as the SAVIOUR OF RENTS AND PROFITS, they now hope to find A

[^6]: MORE RESPECTABLE AND SAFER POLICEMAN OF THE CONTINENT i n r e l i a b l e ,

[^7]: a F. Engels, Notes on the War, II and III. - b tit for tat





**[p. 23]**

God-fearing monarchical Prussia. But the fellows should watch out. Ordinary people everywhere here are already saying: THAT DAMNED

GERMAN DYNASTY OF OURS WANTS FOR ITS FAMILY PURPOSES TO INVOLVE US IN THE

CONTINENTAL WAR!

The local Figaro, of which I have sent a typical issue to Dupont, is an English paper, founded by the French Embassy.

Bismarck for his part has also assiduously bought up support in the London press, Lloyd's and Reynolds's3 among others! The latter in yesterday's issue calls for the DISMEMBERMENT OF FRANCE. That swine

ne ménage pas les transitions^ The fellow has always hurled abuse at the GERMANS and fawned upon the French and now he has suddenly changed into a sort of Blind.

As to the latter chap, he hopes to achieve his election as deputy to the next Reichstag by means of a patriotic hubbub and by noisily 'suspending' his republicanism on the altar of the Father- land.

Oswald kept on at me until I finally went to the third MEETING fixed for yesterday.0 I took care to arrive a quarter of an hour early (the meeting was due to start at 11). I explained to him that I could not sign, 1. d'abordd because I had already signed the Address of the INTERNATIONAL,' 2. because I could not sign a private Address (i.e. a non-International one) without you and they would miss the OPPORTUNITY due to the time required just for consultation with you. In the future, if an occasion presented itself, we would invite him and his friends to the International to take joint action.

I then mentioned that there was a second, personal factor. If Louis Blanc was there, his FOOTMAN, Karl Blind, would surely be present too.

He interrupted me: 'At the last MEETING here Blind mounted a furious chauvinistic diatribe. We need you against him.'

'/ cannot remain in the same room as that character, and I must tell you that if he comes I shall leave your house at once.'

I was downstairs in Oswald's study which looks out onto the street. Right enough! My EYEGLASS spied from afar the portentous ex-student, even though he had dyed his head black ALL OVER. He was accompanied by two fellow layabouts. Oswald said he would send them up to the DRAWING ROOM (the conference room) for the moment.

[^1]: a Lloyd's Weekly Newspaper and Reynolds's Newspaper - b shrinks from no change of allegiance - c See this volume, p. 11. - d first of all - e K. Marx,'First Address of the General Council of the International Working Men's Association on the Franco- Prussian War'.



