---
Volume: 44
Document_Title: "11. Marx to Eugen Oswald. 2 August "
Page_Range: "63-64"
---

# 11. Marx to Eugen Oswald. 2 August 



**[p. 11]**

MARX TO EUGEN OSWALD

IN LONDON

[London,] 2 August 1870

Dear Sir,

I read in the Rappel of 1 August in a correspondence from Francfort-sur-Main of 27 juillet, the following, inter alia:

The town is full of people who have been paid to sustain warlike and anti-French feeling' (sic!). 'A letter addressed to the Frankfurter Zeitung from London contains, among other things, a highly interesting confession. Frenchmen living in London decided to issue a proclamation against this Napoleonic war and invited the principal German republicans likewise resident in London, to join them. The Germans are reported to have refused to take part in the protest on the grounds that the war was defensive on the German side.'

This misleading report which thoroughly distorts the facts concerning the 'convocation'b issued by you, stems from Blind, the correspondent of the Frankfurter Zeitung.c

I believe that a correction in the Rappel (Bureau de Rédaction, 18, Rue de Valois, Paris) will enable you best to achieve the effect you originally desired.

Yours,

K. Marx

[^1]: First published in: Marx and Engels, Printed according to a typewritten Works, Second Russian Edition, Vol. 33, copy Moscow, 1964

[^2]: Published in English for the first time

[^3]: a In the original, Marx quotes from Le Rappel in French. - b 'invitation' - c See this volume, p. 32.



