---
Volume: 44
Document_Title: "12. Engels to Marx. 3 August "
Page_Range: "64-65"
---

# 12. Engels to Marx. 3 August 



**[p. 12]**

ENGELS TO MARX

IN LONDON

Manchester, 3 August 1870

Dear Moor,

Enclosed are W/2 86721, Manchester, 20 June 1869—£20; W/2 77454, Manchester, 23 January 1869—£20, for Brighton, and S/11 13062, Liverpool, 17 May 1869—£5 Moore's subscription to the International. You will receive mine early in September, I am RATHER SHORT OF CASH and must wait for dividends. Since I have to make some payments, I shall have to sell SHARES. What do you think: should I wait a while or do it right away? I can still sell without loss.

I am very pleased to see that the French have advanced and occupied Saarbrücken (garrisoned by 1 battalion, 4 squadrons and perhaps some artillery). Firstly, for moral reasons. Secondly, because it means that the Germans will take up a defensive position in the first battle and a defensive position is enormously strengthened by the breech-loader. Since, on my reckoning, the Germans must have moved up into strategic positions yesterday evening, I assume that the battle, for which the introductory skirmishes are doubtless taking place today, will be fought tomorrow along the line Ottweiler-Neunkirchen-Homburg. The army of Frederick Charles and the Crown Princea will keep the front busy while Steinmetz will fall on the (left) French flank. Or vice versa.

That Greenwood did not publish the article1" until yesterday evening, when a mass of confirmation was already available, was very stupid.c He also made a number of absurd lexical changes which reveal his ignorance of military terminology. However, it has already had an effect. Today, The Times published a LEADER which was copied straight out of my Articles II & III. So I am writing to Greenwood about it.45

You would have received the money yesterday but your letter only came with the second post and I did not receive it until around 4 o'clock.

[^1]: a Frederick William - b F. Engels, Notes on the War.—III. - c See this volume, p. 22.

[^2]: 3-556



