---
Volume: 44
Document_Title: "13. Marx to Engels. 3 August "
Page_Range: "65-69"
---

# 13. Marx to Engels. 3 August 



**[p. 30]**

The joke about Blind is very pretty. Is Oswald one of the Baden Oswalds of 1849? There were 3 of them.

There is still a certain risk that the French will attack before the Germans have fully drawn up their troops. If the noble Louisa

had attacked on Friday,b he could have got as far as the Rhine without much trouble. But by Tuesday the Germans must be more or less ready. His best chance of taking the offensive was frustrated through his own fault—i.e. by the bas empire,46 by the JOBBERY in the army administration which delayed him for 5 days and has probably forced him to march in before he was ready.

If the Germans lose this first battle, against all expectation, they could still be significantly stronger in 4 weeks than they are now. They are protected from absolute defeat by the Rhine; the French, however, have no natural obstacle to protect them.

Be so good as to let me know as soon as you receive the money; even registered letters sometimes go astray. Best greetings to you all.

Your

F. E.

First published in Der Briefwechsel zwischen Printed according to the original F. Engels und K. Marx, Bd. IV, Stuttgart, jgig Published in English for the first time

13

MARX TO ENGELS1

[London,] 3 August 1870

The unfortunate Oswald has just left a moment ago—7 p.m., and although it is too late to catch the post, I shall write it all down since I do not know whether I might not be prevented by some diversion tomorrow.

The fellow with Blind was Prof. Goldstücker, an old-time National Liberal. The scene became very stormy.0 Student Blind even lied, asserting that Dr Jacoby was on his side (this was for the benefit of the Frenchmen present). On departing the fellows

[^1]: IN MANCHESTER

[^2]: DEAR FRED,

[^3]: a Napoleon III - b 5 August - c See this volume, pp. 23-24.



This threw POOR Oswald into convulsions. So he came to me. / should sign TO BACK HIM. OTHERWISE, HIS POSITION IN LONDON WOULD BE DANGEROUSLY DAMAGED. He brought a printed copy of the Address with him (just the page proofs).15 I repeated to him d'abord" everything I had said previously. I then read the stuff through—feeble, verbose and—out of courtoisie to the Frenchmen negotiating with him—not a hint at the DEFENSIVE CHARACTER of the WAR on the part of the GERMANS (to say nothing of PRUSSIA). I then proposed that he should drop the whole thing as its effect could not be 'great', since, as I had told him before, in my answer to his first letter,b the working class alone could offer active resistance to the national swindle.

He answered: d'abord, a certain number of Frenchmen had already signed and Louis Blanc had declared that he would lend his name (a formula to indicate that he had had no part in composing the Address).

Second, if he did not publish it now, Blind would write the next day in the German papers that he had prevented the publication of this treasonable Address. It would be better to print it.

The last point is right. I must say that I felt sorry for the lad. So I gave him the following ultimatum:

I too would lend my name (and, like Louis Blanc, not actually subscribe) on these two conditions:

1. that a note would be printed under my name saying *'I agree with the above Address so far as its general sentiments coincide with the manifesto issued by the General Council of the "International Working Men's Association".'*0

2. that a sentence was added hinting at the DEFENSIVE CHARACTER of the WAR on the GERMAN side, if only in the most unobtrusive and tactful manner.

He accepted these conditions. The next day at 5 p.m. there would be another MEETING in his house, which I would attend.

He then said: Would Engels not sign too with the same reservations as myself?

I said it was a London Address. I was lending my name on certain conditions only out of courtesy to him and wholly against my critical judgment. I saw absolutely no reason why you too should compromise yourself because Oswald had made the mistake of

[^1]: a First of all. - b See this volume, p. 9. - c K. Marx, 'First Address of the General Council of the International Working Men's Association on the Franco-Prussian War'.

[^2]: 3*





**[p. 32]**

Incidentally, I had already written to Oswald since Sunday/ drawing his attention to another manoeuvre of Blind's.*51 had read in the Rappel a correspondent's report from Frankfurt (quite rational for a change) in which the author was very anti-chauvinistic for a Frenchman. Nevertheless, he remarks against the Germans that

the Frankfurter Zeitung11 had printed a correspondent's report from London according to which the 'French republicans in London had invited all known German republicans to join in a common protest contre cette guerre napoléonienned.The German republicans had refused to do so because on the Prussian side the war was a defensive one.'

This was the work of the ex-student who constantly writes of, to, for and about Karl Blind and his deeds of heroism.

The Pall Mall administration sent me a cheque for 2 V2 guineas yesterday for the first ARTICLE ON WAR e (DURING JULY), with the comment that all correspondents are always paid at the end of the month. The younger branche of the Marx * family consisting of the ferocious girl£

and the illustrious Williams g have declared 'they should seize upon these first spoils of war as due to them for brokerage'.* If you wish to protest, you should act quickly in view of the energetic nature of these 'neutrals'. I enclose a cutting from yesterday's Pall Mall in which they protest against The Times' plagiarism.*1 If the war lasts A CERTAIN TIME, you will soon be acknowledged as the foremost military authority in London.

Despite all the DRAWBACKS the Pall Mall has two advantages:

1. Of the respectable newspapers it is the only one which cultivates a certain opposition to Russia. This may become important as the war progresses.

2. As the GENTLEMEN'S PAPER par excellence it sets the fashion in all the clubs, and particularly the military ones.

3. It is the only non-venal paper in London.

Apropos! Buy a copy of the latest London Illustrated News' for the portrait of that scoundrel Brunnow. His face is the very incarnation of Russian diplomacy.

BY THE BY. Disraeli came out with that ridiculous guarantee of Prussian Saxony for Prussia in the Vienna Treaties, using it as the

[^1]: a 31 July - b See this volume, p. 28. - c Frankfurter Zeitung und Handels- blatt - d against this Napoleonic war - e F. Engels, Notes on the War.— /. - f Eleanor Marx - s Marx's daughter Jenny, who signed her articles on the Irish question with the pseudonym Williams. - h 'Observations of the News', The Pall Mall Gazette, No. 1707, 3 August 1870. - ' The Illustrated London News, Vol. LVII, Nos. 1604, 1605, 23 July 1870.





**[p. 1913]**

The Belgians have proposed the congress be held in Amsterdam on 5 September. This is the plan of Mr Bakunin. The congress would consist chiefly of his TOOLS. I have proposed instead: *Appeal to all the sections whether they think not that, under present circumstances, where the French and German delegates would be excluded from the congress, power should be given to the General Council

1. to postpone the congress; 2. to enable the Council to convoke congress at the moment it shall consider opportune.* This was passed.4

The matter was all the more pressing as we see from the open attack on us in the LAST Solidarité (using our decision on the Swiss matter as a pretext)48 that Bakunin had taken all his precautionary measures for the Amsterdam Congress. He would have defeated us at the last congress in Basle, had it not been for the German element in Switzerland.49

Lopatin has moved to London from Brighton, where he was almost dying of boredom. He is the only 'reliable' Russian I have got to know up to now, and I shall soon succeed in driving his national prejudices out of him. I also learned from him that Bakunin had been spreading the rumour that I was an agent of Bismarck—mirabile dictu3l And, c'est vraiment drôle,b the same evening (last Tuesday, yesterday), Serraillier told me that Châtelain, MEMBER OF THE FRENCH BRANCH,50 and a particular friend of Pyat, had even informed the FRENCH BRANCH IN FULL SITTING how much Bismarck had paid me—namely 250,000 francs. If, on the one hand, one is in the French habit of thinking in francs and if, on the other hand, one bears Prussian niggardliness in mind, then this is at least a very decent estimatel

Salut

Your

K. M.

[^1]: Printed according to the original

[^2]: Published in English in full for the first time

[^3]: First published in Der Briefwechsel zwischen F. Engels und K. Marx, Bd. IV, Stuttgart,

[^4]: a wonderful to tell - b this is really funny



