---
Volume: 44
Document_Title: "15. Marx to Engels. 4 August "
Page_Range: "69-70"
---

# 15. Marx to Engels. 4 August 



**[p. 14]**

MARX TO EUGEN OSWALD

IN LONDON

[London,] 3 August 1870

Dear Mr Oswald,

I enclose herewith my ultimatum appropriately 'inscribed' and hope that it satisfies you.a I am unable to go any further.

Yours,

K. M.

* I agree with the above Address so far as its general sentiments coincide with the manifesto on the warb issued by the General Council of the 'International Working Men's Association'.*c

First published in: Marx and Engels, Printed according to the original Worts, Second Russian Edition, Vol. 33, . Moscow 1964 Published in English for the first time 15

MARX TO ENGELS

[London,] 4 August [1870]

As to the sale of SHARES, my view is as follows: They will go up again, but will then fall in the very near future, because the London STOCK EXCHANGE, inert for so long, is taking the opportunity for bankruptcies and this will have the same effect on the continental EXCHANGES SO that a mass of papers will have to be thrown on to the market.

[^1]: IN MANCHESTER

[^2]: DEAR FRED,

[^3]: THANKS FOR the £40. Ditto the £5 received from KING COAL*1 for the INTERNA TIONAL.

[^4]: a See this volume, pp. 31-32. - b K. Marx, 'First Address of the General Council of the International Working Men's Association on the Franco-Prussian War'. - c In the original Marx adds the German translation of this phrase: 'Ich stimme obiger Adresse bei, soweit ihre Tendenz im allgemeinen dem Manifest des Generalrats der "Internationalen Arbeiterassoziation" entspricht.' - d Samuel Moore



