---
Volume: 44
Document_Title: "16. Engels to Marx. 5 August "
Page_Range: "70-71"
---

# 16. Engels to Marx. 5 August 



**[p. 1913]**

As to Oswald's 'êtres',* I shall examine him on the subject today. Salut

Your

K. M.

P.S. Among the first victims of the war are the Lafargues and Schnappy.b Their cottage, in the [fortification] rayon,29 will be torn down at the first unfavourable turn of events.

First published abridged in Der Briefwech- sel zwischen F. Engels und K. Marx, Bd. IV, Stuttgart, 1913 and in full in MEGA, Abt. III, Bd. 4, Berlin, 1931

Printed according to the original

Published in English for the first time

16

ENGELS TO MARX

IN LONDON

Manchester, 5 August 1870

Dear Moor,

But what do you think of our soldiers? They have taken entrenched positions with bayonets against mitrailleuses26 and breech-loaders! Mo AOAeu T>!d I'll bet that tomorrow Bonaparte will invent a victory so as to blur over the thing.

Greenwood wrote very politely today, saying I should send him articles as often as I like. He's asked for it!

Best greetings.

Your

F. E.

[^1]: In great haste. The BROKERAGE was honestly earned.c

[^2]: If you think it important, and if there is still time, you can add my name to the Oswald Address with the same reservations.15

[^3]: Crucial battle tomorrow or Sunday,e this time probably right on the Lorraine frontier.32

[^4]: First published in Der Briefwechsel zwischen F. Engels und K. Marx, Bd. IV, Stuttgart,

[^5]: Printed according to the original

[^6]: Published in English for the first time

[^7]: a identity (see this volume, p. 30). - b Charles Etienne Lafargue - c See this volume, p. 32. - d (Russ.) Well done! - e 7 August



