---
Volume: 44
Document_Title: "20. Marx to Engels. 8 August "
Page_Range: "73-76"
---

# 20. Marx to Engels. 8 August 



**[p. 20]**

MARX TO ENGELS1

IN MANCHESTER

[London,] 8 August 1870

DEAR FRED,

I shall not get away until tomorrow (I've been held back by BUSINESS for the INTERNATIONAL). I shall not be going to Brighton after all, but to Ramsgate,53 since the former place turned out on inquiry to be too hot, and besides it is made unsafe by the presence of Arnold Winkelried Ruge.a

L'Empire est fait,b i.e. the German Empire. BY HOOK AND by CROOK, neither in the way intended nor in the manner imagined, it appears that all the double-dealing since the SECOND EMPIRE began has finally combined to carry out the 'national' aims of 1848— Hungary, Italy and Germany! It seems to me that this sort of movement will only be complete when a brawl breaks out between the Prussians and the Russians. This is by no means improbable. The press of the Muscovite party (I have seen a good deal of it chez

Borkheim) has attacked the Russian government just as savagely for its friendly attitude towards Prussia as the French papers sympathetic to Thiers attacked Boustrapa54 in 1866 for his flirtation with Prussia. No one but the Emperor,c the German- Russian party and the official St Petersburg Journal1* were sounding the bugle against France. But they did not at all expect Prussian-German successes on such a decisive scale. Like Bonaparte in 1866, they imagined that the BELLIGERENT POWERS would exhaust each other in protracted struggles, so that Holy Russia might then step in as supreme ARBITER.

So Russia will do just what Bonaparte did between 1866 and 1870, namely, play tricks on Prussia in order to gain concessions

[^1]: But now! Unless Alexander wants to be poisoned, SOMETHING MUST

[^2]: BE DONE to appease the national party. The prestige of Russia will obviously be 'harmed' even more by a German-Prussian Empire than was the prestige of the 'SECOND EMPIRE' by the establishment of the North German Confederation.55

[^3]: a Arnold Winkelried was a legendary folk-hero of the Swiss struggle for freedom against the Habsburgs. Used by Marx to deride Ruge. - b The Empire is created. - c Alexander II - d Journal de Saint-Pétersbourg politique, littéraire, com- mercial et industriel





**[p. 39]**

from Turkey, and despite the Russian religion of the Hohenzol- lerns, all this trickery will end in war between the tricksters. However gullible the German simpleton may be, his newly reinforced national sentiment (especially at the present time, when he is no longer to be persuaded that he must put up with all sorts of things in order to first establish German unity) will hardly allow him to be pressed into the service of Russia, for which there is no good reason, nor even a PRETEXT anymore. Qui vivra, verra.3 If our handsome Williamb survives yet awhile, we may well live to see his proclamations to the Poles. As OLD Carlyle has said: when God wishes to accomplish something particularly great, his choice always falls on the most stupid people to carry it out.

What gives me cause for anxiety at the present moment is the state of affairs in France itself. The next great battle can hardly but go against the French. And what then? If the defeated army makes for Paris under Boustrapa's leadership it will produce the most humiliating peace possible for France, perhaps ending in the restauration of the Orléans. If a revolution breaks out in Paris, it is questionable whether they will have the means and the leaders capable of offering serious resistance to the Prussians. One cannot remain blind to the fact that the 20-year-long Bonapartist farce has brought tremendous demoralisation in its wake. One would hardly be justified to rely on revolutionary heroism. What is your opinion?

I understand nothing of military matters, but it is still my impression that rarely has a campaign been conducted in a more mindless, planless and mediocre manner than this campaign of Badinguet's.c And then, too, the beautiful opening scene with the whole Porte St Martind melodrama of the LOWER EMPIRE46: the father and son at the flash-vent of the cannon, and the infamous deeds such as the bombarding of Saarbrücken with which this 'sublime' scene is amalgamated! It's the man to a T!

Mac Mahon pressed for swift action in the original war council in Metz, but Leboeuf was of the opposite point of view.

Apropos! We have heard from Vienna (in a letter from a cousin of Eccarius, a 72-year-old man) that Bismarck was there on a secret visit!

Quite in accordance with the spirit of the LOWER EMPIRE, we can see how in this war—in its commissariat and its diplomacy—

[^1]: a Time will tell. - b William I - c A derisive nickname of Louis Bonaparte (Napoleon III) who, in 1846, fled from prison in Ham in the clothes of a mason by the name of Badinguet. - d A theatre company in Paris that catered for low tastes during the Second Empire.





**[p. 40]**

Mr John Stuart Mill was full of praise for our Address.3 It has had a great EFFECT in London generally. Among others, the philistine Cobden PEACE SOCIETY has made a written offer to distribute it.56

Ad vocemb Oswald's Address. I have taken advantage of your permission since I was in fact reluctant to act without 'you'.c The delay has, of course, only made the Address even more absurd, but this is of no concern to us as we have only endorsed ITS GENERAL SENTIMENTS, etc., so far as, etc. It cannot be withdrawn now, despite its ridiculousness, since Louis Blanc, etc., would imagine we had done so because of the Prussian victories.

Apropos! Old Ruge had written to Oswald a week ago saying he could not sign. Why not? Because he was 'convinced that the Prussians would proclaim a French republic in Paris'l Can't you just picture to yourself the old woolly muddlehead in all his glory?

Enclosed are a number of pieces by the Prophet Urquhart. Salut.

Your

K. M.

P.S. In an article in The Fortnightly Review (August issue) on 'OUR UNCULTIVATED LANDS',d I found the following on the soil in Ireland:

Since the English regard Laveleye as a great authority on agronomy because of his books on Belgian and Italian agriculture, the passage may be of use to you.57

[^1]: * 'That her soil is fertile is proved upon the testimony etc. etc. and M. de Laveleye : the latter gentleman says etc. etc' (p. 204).*

[^2]: First published in Der Briefwechsel zwischen Printed according to the original F. Engels und K. Marx, Bd. IV, Stuttgart, . . jgjg Published in English in full for the first time

[^3]: a K. Marx, 'First Address of the General Council of the International Working Men's Association on the Franco-Prussian War'. - b And now to - c See previous letter, p. 37. - d F. A. Maxse, 'Our uncultivated Lands', The Fortnightly Review, No. XLIV, 1 August 1870.



