---
Volume: 44
Document_Title: "21. Engels to Marx. 10 August "
Page_Range: "76-78"
---

# 21. Engels to Marx. 10 August 



**[p. 21]**

ENGELS TO MARX

IN RAMSGATE

Manchester, 10 August 1870

Dear Moor,

Today is 10 August. Can the Parisians have forgotten it completely? To judge from this evening's Pall Mall Gazette, it would seem not.5 The bas empire46 looks like dissolving in a fart. Badinguet3 is abdicating from the army and has to hand it over to Bazaine (!!) who is now the best man among those left undefeated. This means in reality that he is abdicating altogether. It seems that people are to have the revolution made very easy for them; everything is falling to pieces entirely of its own accord, as was to be expected. The next few days will surely decide the matter.

I think that without the army the Orleanists are not strong enough to risk a restoration immediately. Since they are now the only possible dynasty left, it is conceivable that they might themselves prefer a republican interregnum again. In that event would the ex-Marseillaise59 come to power?

I believe that faced with a republic the Prussians would agree to a peace on terms that would be honourable on the whole. It cannot be in their interest to stir up 1793 and 1794 all over again. The whole tenor of the King'sb speech suggested that they were reckoning with a revolution and were unwilling to let things go to extremes. It is true that, against this, there has been since then the great national mania in Germany and the universal cry for Alsace-Lorraine. Nor can William be relied upon. But for the moment I still believe that they will settle for less. France will doubtless have to cede some territory. And for the élan of 1793 to be reborn, and effectively reborn—that calls for the enemies of 1793 and, as you rightly say, it also calls for somewhat different Frenchmen than those who have just come from the bas empire.

Incidentally, I would surmise that the Prussians have already held discussions with the Orléans.

That Bismarck was in Vienna sounds like a local stock-market rumour to me. There is a lot of that about in Vienna.

[^1]: a A derisive nickname of Louis Bonaparte (Napoleon III) who, in 1846, fled from prison in Ham in the clothes of a mason by the name of Badinguet. - b i.e. William I's





**[p. 42]**

On Badinguet's strategy there were articles yesterday (LEADER) and this evening in The Pall Mall Gazette* Since then still more follies discovered. The 7th Corps of Félix Douay only left Belfort on 1 August and began a leisurely march towards Altkirch. But now that the line Strasbourg-Nancy is, or is about to be, taken by the Germans near Zabern,c the corps will have to be sent to Metz or Chalons via Vesoul and Chaumont. Such a mess is unheard of. It is excellent that it should be the Germans to expose the whole swindle at a stroke!

The letters published in the Temps since Sunday by Captain Jeannerodd give the best idea of the conception of thé enemy prevailing in the French army. The good man was taken prisoner in Saarbrücken and saw the 8th Corps (our Rhinelanders). The fellow's amazement is enough to make you die laughing. The very first glimpse of the Prussian camp impressed him enormously. ' Une belle et bonne armée, une nation fortement organisée pour la guerre'e—that is what he perceives in everything down to the Prussian N.C.O. whose 'valeur morale is 'malheureusement digne d'être enviée par nou J.1 And he is one of the most intelligent of them and can himself speak good German! He admits, moreover, that the Prussians shoot far better than the French.

The Germans now have IV4 million men under arms, so that even 100,000-200,000 Italians (=half that number of Frenchmen) make little difference. Austria risks a revolution in Vienna if she makes a move. Russia will doubtless feel SAFE until peace is concluded, or a revolutionary government has been established in Paris which cannot be relied on to enter into any double-dealing. Everyone will take good care not to irritate the enraged German simpleton still further. However, you can see how right I was in my belief that the Prussian military organisation contained tremendous power, a power completely invincible in a national war like this.

Official accounts now refer to the 1st, 2nd, 3rd German army.

[^1]: a See previous letter, p. 38. - b F. Engels, Notes on the War, V and VI. - c French name: Saverne.- d G. Jeannerod, 'La guerre. Correspondances particulières du

[^2]: Temps', Le Temps, No. 3448, 7 August 1870. See also F. Engels, Notes on the War.-— VI. - e 'An excellent army, a nation highly organised for war' - £ 'moral value' is, 'regrettably, worthy of being envied by us'



