---
Volume: 44
Document_Title: "25. Engels to Marx. 15 August "
Page_Range: "80-84"
---

# 25. Engels to Marx. 15 August 



**[p. 45]**

Since you have some influence in the Pall Mall now, you must tear the rubbish to pieces as soon as it appears, and really flay the beast alive.

Between ourselves, the Prussians could bring off a great diploma- tic coup if—without demanding an inch of French soil for themselves—they were to insist on the return of Savoy and Nice to Italy and of the territory neutralised by the 1815 treaties to Switzerland.63 No one could raise any objections to that. However, it is none of our business to offer advice on these territorial exchanges.

The family is amusing itself here royally. Tussy and Jennychen never come out of the sea and are building up a good stock of health. For my part, I am lying more or less fallow thanks to the rheumatism and the sleepless nights.

Salut.

Your

K. M.

25

Manchester, 15 August 1870

Dear Moor,

When one has had severe stomach trouble for three days like me, with slight fever from time to time, it's no great pleasure at all, even when starting to feel better, to expatiate on Wilhelm's" politique. But since you must get this rubbish back, here goes.61

[^1]: First published in Der Briefwechsel zwischen Printed according to the original F. Engels und K. Marx, Bd. IV, Stuttgart, . . jgj3 Published in English for the first time

[^2]: ENGELS TO MARX64

[^3]: IN RAMSGATE

[^4]: a Wilhelm Liebknecht's





**[p. 46]**

The case seems to me to be as follows: Germany has been driven by Badinguetb into a war for her national existence. If Badinguet defeats her, Bonapartism will be strengthened for years and Germany broken for years, perhaps for generations. In that event there can be no question any more of an independent German working-class movement either; the struggle to restore Germany's national existence will absorb everything, and at best the German workers will be dragged in the wake of the French. If Germany wins, French Bonapartism will at any rate be smashed, the endless row about the establishment of German unity will at last be over, the German workers will be able to organise on a national scale quite different from that prevailing hitherto, and the French workers, whatever sort of government may succeed this one, are certain to have a freer field than under Bonapartism. The whole mass of the German people of every class have realised that this is first and foremost a question of national existence and have therefore at once flung themselves into the fray. That in these circumstances a German political party should preach total abstention à la Wilhelm and place all sorts of secondary considerations before the main one, seems to me impossible.

To this must be added that Badinguet would never have been able to wage this war without the chauvinism of the mass of the French population: the bourgeoisie, the petty bourgeoisie, the peasants and the imperialistic, Haussmannist building-trade pro- letariat stemming from the peasants, which Bonaparte created in the big towns.65 Until this chauvinism is knocked on the head, and knocked good and proper, peace between Germany and France is impossible. One might have expected a proletarian revolution to take this work over, but since the war is already on there is no choice for the Germans but to attend to the job themselves and quickly.

[^1]: a the Committee of the German Social-Democratic Workers' Party in Bruns- wick - b A derisive nickname of Louis Bonaparte (Napoleon III) who, in 1846, fled from prison in Ham in the clothes of a mason by the name of Badinguet.





**[p. 47]**

Now come the secondary considerations. For the fact that Lehmann,3 Bismarck & Co, are in command in this war and that it must minister to their temporary gloire if they conduct it successfully, we have to thank the miserable state of the German bourgeoisie. It is certainly very unpleasant, but cannot be altered. But to magnify anti-Bismarckism into the sole guiding principle on that account would be absurd. In the first place, now, as in 1866,66

Bismarck is doing a bit of our work, in his own way and without meaning to, but all the same he is doing it. He is clearing the deck for us better than before. Moreover it is no longer the year 1815. The South Germans are now bound to enter the Reichstag and this will develop a counterweight to Prussianism. Then there are the national duties which devolve on him and which, as you wrote, forbid the Russian alliance from the outset. In general it is senseless to try à la Liebknecht to set back the clock of history on all that has happened since 1866, just because it is not to his liking. But we know our model South Germans. There is nothing to be done with these fools.

I think our people can:

1) join the national movement—you can see from Kugelmann's letter how strong it is67—insofar and for so long as it is limited to the defence of Germany (which does not exclude an offensive, in certain circumstances, until peace is attained);

2) at the same time emphasise the difference between German national and dynastic-Prussian interests;

3) oppose any ANNEXATION of Alsace and Lorraine—Bismarck is now intimating an intention of annexing them to Bavaria and Baden;

4) as soon as a non-chauvinistic republican government is at the helm in Paris, work for an honourable peace with it;

5) constantly stress the unity of interests between the German and French workers, who did not approve of the war and are also not making war on each other;

6) Russia, as in the Address of the International.11

Amusing is Wilhelm's assertion that because Bismarck is a former accomplice of Badinguet's the correct position would be to remain neutral. If that were the general opinion in Germany, we should soon have the Confederation of the Rhine68 again and the noble Wilhelm should see what sort of role he would play in that, and what would become of the workers' movement. A people that

[^1]: a nickname of William I - b K. Marx, 'First Address of the General Council of the International Working Men's Association on the Franco-Prussian War'.



gets nothing but kicks and blows is indeed the right one to make a social revolution, above all in the innumerable small states so beloved of Wilhelm!

How nice of the poor little fellow to seek to call me to account for something that was 'supposed' to have been in the Elberfelder Zeitungl69 Poor animal! The débâcle in France seems to be frightful. Everything squandered, sold, swindled away. The chassepots70 are badly made and misfire in action; there are none left of them and the old flintlocks have got to be hunted out again. Nevertheless a revolutionary government, if it comes soon, need not despair. But it must abandon Paris to its fate and carry on the war from the South. There would then still be a possibility of its holding out until arms have been bought and new armies organised which would gradually force the enemy back to the frontier. This would really be the true end of the war, both countries reciprocally furnishing proof that they are unconquerable. But if this does not happen quickly the game is up. Moltke's operations are a model—old William seems to give him a perfectly free hand—and the fourth battalions are already joining the army, while the French ones are not yet in existence.

If Badinguet is not out of Metz yet it may go badly with him. Sea-bathing is no good for rheumatism. But Gumpert, who is spending four weeks in Wales, maintains that sea air is particularly wholesome. I hope you will soon be relieved of your pain. It's something terrible. At any rate it's not dangerous and the restoration of your general health is much more important.

Best regards.

Your

F. E.

You can see, incidentally, how the wretched Wilhelm constantly flirts with the reactionary particularists71—Wulster, Obermüller, etc., and drags the Party in with him.

Wilhelm has obviously counted on Bonaparte's victory, simply in the hope that it would finish off his dear Bismarck. You recollect how he always threatened him with the French. And it goes without saying, of course, that you too are on Wilhelm's side]"

[^1]: First published abridged in Der Briefwech- sel zwischen F. Engels und K. Marx, Bd. IV, Stuttgart, 1913 and in full in MEGA, Abt. III, Bd. 4, Berlin, 1931

[^2]: Printed according to the original

[^3]: a The last two paragraphs are written in the margin.



