---
Volume: 44
Document_Title: "26. Engels to Jenny Marx. 15 August "
Page_Range: "84-85"
---

# 26. Engels to Jenny Marx. 15 August 



**[p. 26]**

ENGELS TO JENNY MARX72

IN RAMSGATE

Manchester, 15 August 1870

Dear Mrs Marx,

Today I was at the bank I had given to Smith as a reference and I heard there by chance that he had finally condescended to ask for information. What he found out (namely, that the bank would guarantee ten times the sum concerned, if it were required) will doubtless satisfy him.24 I suppose I shall now hear from him soon. I am very glad that I do not have to write first to that stupid aristocrat of a LANDLORD whose SEAT near Bolton seems to be a diminutive affair in the middle of the factory smoke. The fellow is obviously off shooting GROUSE on the moors nearby and will certainly be in just the mood to enter into business correspon- dence with TENANTS. The ass obviously wanted to make himself feel important.

In view of the present situation in France, where everything may be overturned any day—and probably will be in a week or two—it is of course risky to take a house and furnish it for 3 V2 years. However, it is a risk that must be taken. It seems to me that the Orleanists now want an interim republic like that of 1848 directed by themselves, in the hope that such a republic would suffer the obloquy of having to conclude a peace, thus ensuring that the Crown would go to their Orléans as the only possible dynasty left. However, this strategy can easily misfire.

The worst thing is: who could possibly take over leadership of a genuine revolutionary movement in Paris? Rochefort is the most popular and the only suitable man—Blanqui seems to be forgotten.

That Barbes is dead is a blessing. The 'Beard of the Party' would spoil everything again. Enfin, nous verrons.3

I have been very lucky with my articles.b Some few little prophecies which I made at a moment when they were certain, appeared in the press in time, so that they could be confirmed by the news the next morning. Such things are pure luck and impress the philistines enormously.

[^1]: a Well, we shall see. - b F. Engels, Notes on the War, I-VIII.



