---
Volume: 44
Document_Title: "27. Marx to Engels. 17 August "
Page_Range: "85-87"
---

# 27. Marx to Engels. 17 August 



**[p. 50]**

Who wrote the article that appeared recently under the name of 'von Thunder-ten-Tronckh' in which the English philistines were so bluntly told the truth?73 In general, it is remarkable what tremendous qualities the English are suddenly able to discover in the Germans, and how they are all at Bonaparte's throat, having lain in the dust at his feet only four weeks ago. There is no greater rabble than the honnêtes gens.*

Unfortunately, I have no time to write to Tussy today; would you please tell her that I shall be writing to Kugelmann in the next few days and shall enclose the relevant material.74

My wifeb and I send you all our warmest regards and hope that the stay at the seaside will do you a world of good.

Yours,

F. Engels

First published abridged in Der Briefwech- Printed according to the original sei zwischen F. Engels und K. Marx, . Bd. IV, Stuttgart, 1913 and in full in Published m Enghsh for the first MEGA, Abt. Ill, Bd. 4, Berlin, 1931 n m e

27

My best thanks (ditto from MRS Marx for the letter to herd) for the pains you took under such circonstances aggravantes.' Your letter' tallies completely with the plan of the answer I have already worked out in my head. Nevertheless, in such an important matter—it is not a question of Wilhelmg but of instructions to the German workers as to their line of conduct—I did not want to act without first consulting with you. 5

Wilhelm infers his agreement with me:

[^1]: MARX TO ENGELS64

[^2]: IN MANCHESTER

[^3]: [Ramsgate,] 17 August0 1870

[^4]: DEAR FRED,

[^5]: a respectable people - b Lydia Burns - c In the original '17 April', which is a slip of the pen. - d See previous letter. - e worsening circumstances - f See this volume, pp. 45-48. - s Wilhelm Liebknecht





**[p. 51]**

2) from the fact that I approved his and Bebel's statement in the Reichstag.31 That was a 'moment' when harping on principles was un acte de courage? but it by no means follows that the moment still continues, much less that the attitude of the German proletariat toward a war which has become national is com- prehended in Wilhelm's antipathy to the Prussians. It would be just as if we were to object to the relative independence which Italy received as a result of this war merely because at a suitable moment we had raised our voices against the 'Bonapartist' liberation of Italy.

The lust for Alsace and Lorraine seems to predominate in two circles: the Prussian camarilla and the South-German beer-patriots. It would be the greatest misfortune that could befall Europe and above all Germany. You will have seen that most of the Russian newspapers are already talking of the necessity of European diplomatic intervention in order to maintain the balance of power in Europe.

Kugelmann confuses a defensive war with defensive military operations.0 So if a fellow falls upon me in the street I may only parry his blows but not KNOCK him DOWN, because then I should turn into an aggressor! The WANT of dialectics peeps out of every word these people utter.

I have not slept a wink the fourth night running because of the rheumatism, and all that time fantasies about Paris, etc., run through my mind. I shall have Gumpert's sleeping potion prepared for me this evening.

[^1]: W i t h the DEATH-KNELL of the SECOND EMPIRE THAT WILL END AS IT BEGAN, BY A PARODY,d I hit the neil on the head with my Bonaparte, after all! Can one imagine a finer parody of Napoleon's 1814 campaign? I believe we two are the only folks who grasped the whole mediocrity of Boustrapa54 FROM THE BEGINNING, regarded him as a mere SHOWMAN, and never allowed ourselves to be misled by his momentary successes.

[^2]: Apropos! The bourgeois PEACE SOCIETY56 has sent the General

[^3]: a K. Marx, 'First Address of the General Council of the International Working Men's Association on the Franco-Prussian War'. - b an act of courage - c A reference to Kugelmann's letter to Marx of 7 August 1870. - d See Marx's 'First Address of the General Council of the International Working Men's Association on the Franco- Prussian War'.



