---
Volume: 44
Document_Title: "28. Engels to Marx. 20 August "
Page_Range: "87-89"
---

# 28. Engels to Marx. 20 August 



**[p. 52]**

Salut

Your

K. M.

The Times, Telegraph," Daily News, etc., all of which fawned so prettily on Bonaparte for 20 years!

The Brunswick suggestion that the General Council should request Borkheim to draw up a pamphlet against Russia is really hilarious!

How naive can people be! The sea air is very good for me and at any rate this attack would have been far more unpleasant in London.

I don't agree with you about the house rent for 3V2 years.b

Thanks to the French catastrophe, GENTLEMEN'S dwellings in London will now go up in price and you will be able to get rid of the house any day 'with ease'.

First published abridged in Der Briefwech- Printed according to the original sei zwischen F. Engels und K. Marx, Bd. IV, Stuttgart, 1913 and in full in MEGA, Abt. III, Bd. 4, Berlin, 1931

28

Manchester, 20 August 1870

Dear Moor,

I hope that your rheumatism has become less acute. The chloral will have done you some good; if not, then see a doctor and ask him to prescribe a sedative. Gumpert is in Wales and hence unavailable for consultation.

I have written a vigorous letter to Smith today about the house.2* I can't let myself be humbugged any longer by this

[^1]: ENGELS TO MARX76

[^2]: IN RAMSGATE

[^3]: a The Daily Telegraph - b See this volume, p. 43.





**[p. 53]**

I think that the ANNEXATION of the French Germans is as good as settled. If a revolutionary government had been formed in Paris as late as last week something still might have been done about it. Now, however, it comes too late and can only make a fool of itself by parodying the Convention. I am convinced that Bismarck would have settled for a peace without cession of territory with a revolutionary government if it had come on the scene in time. But the way France is behaving now he has no reason to resist the pressures from without and his vanity from within. It is a great pity, but it seems to me inevitable. If Germany were a state like France, it would be easier to find excuses. But as things stand, with the need to divide the conquered territory between the three neighbouring countries, it is ridiculous. Even more ridiculous is the fact that the Germans should be willing to lumber themselves with a German-speaking Venetia in the West.77 I shall try to obtain the ponderous Blind's weighty pamphlet, but it will likely as not come too late."

What do you think of Mack-Bazaine? Mac-Mahon was bad enough, but now we shall have Mack (of Ulm)—tout court? It will be an unheard-of thing if 120,000 Frenchmen have to lay down their arms, and that will doubtless be the result.78 Just imagine that old mule Williamc deflowering la pucelled of Metz in his old age! There has never been such a dégringolade* as the one now displayed by the 2nd Empire. I am only curious to see whether the Parisians will not finally muster the energy to do something when they learn the truth about the events of this last week.79 Not that it would be of any use any more. The demolitions undertaken around Paris to facilitate its defence are on such a colossal scale that I cannot believe they have been carried out properly. The population of the city has almost trebled since 1840 and the difficulties of provisioning it likewise. And finally, all traffic relies so greatly on the railway now that if a few bridges are blown up on every line it will be almost impossible to bring any supplies worth mentioning into the city, even if the blockade is not complete.

[^1]: a See this volume, p. 45. - b just that; Engels is referring here to Bazaine who allowed himself to be shut up with his army and besieged in Metz, and suggesting a parallel firstly with Mac Mahon and then with the similar fate that befell the Austrian general Mack in Ulm in 1805. - c William I - d the maid - e collapse



