---
Volume: 44
Document_Title: "30. Marx to Engels. 30 August "
Page_Range: "90-91"
---

# 30. Marx to Engels. 30 August 



**[p. 55]**

In Paris they seem concerned only to keep the population at bay until the necessary measures have been taken to make the interim secure for the TRUSTEES of the Orléans.

Salut

Your

K. M.

Did you read the lousy letter from Louis Blanc?a The essence of patriotism is to remain passive so as to force the Bonapartists to shoulder the entire responsibility.

That Scottish jackass Elcho seems to imagine that he is the British Moltke.82

Freiligrath: 'Hurra! Germania!'88 Nor does he fail to bring God into his laboriously farted song, and 'the Gaul' as well.

I had rather be a kitten and cry mew, Than one of these same metre ballad-mongers!b

First published abridged in Der Briefwech- Printed according to the original sei zwischen F. Engels und K. Marx, . . . . , . r ,, , Bd. IV, Stuttgart, 1913 and in full in Published in English in full for the MEGA, Abt. Ill, Bd. 4, Berlin, 1931 f i r s t t i m e

30

MARX TO ENGELS

Ramsgate, 30 August 1870 DEAR FRED,

Tomorrow morning back to London by STEAMER. In the first place, it is very expensive to pay for 5 people to stay here since the English have thronged to all the seaside resorts on account of the war.

In the second place, RELATIVELY to the price the accommodation is damned 'draughty'. The worst pains have stopped, but I am

[^1]: IN MANCHESTER

[^2]: a L. Blanc, 'Lettres de Londres. 14 août 1870', Le Temps, No. 3460, 19 August 1870. - b Shakespeare, King Henry IV, Part I, Act III, Scene 1.



