---
Volume: 44
Document_Title: "31. Marx to Friedrich Adolph Sorge. 1 September "
Page_Range: "91-93"
---

# 31. Marx to Friedrich Adolph Sorge. 1 September 



**[p. 56]**

More details from London.

Your

K. M.

The Spectator—8 DAYS SINCE—said that your articles12 were the only significant ones in the English press, but regretted that the

AUTHOR W a s SO CHARY OF HIS WORDS AND HIS FACTS. Apropos. Borkheim was here yesterday on a visit from Margate. He seemed put out because he wanted to write your articles, and had approached the Pall Mall before us. He took his leave with a long face.

First published in Der Briefwechsel zwischen Printed according to the original F. Engels und K. Marx, Bd. IV, Stuttgart, „ , ,. , , . ,, ,. , r , r- jgja Published in English lor the Irrst time

31

London, 1 September 1870 1 Maitland Park Road, Haverstock Hill

My continued silence in the face of your several letters was due to two circumstances: at first 'OVERWORK', later very serious illness. At the beginning of August the doctors sent me to the seaside.53

But there a severe attack of SCIATICA bent me double for weeks. I have been back in London only since yesterday, by no means fully recovered.

First of all, my best thanks for what you have sent me, especially the LABOR STATISTICS* which are of great value to me.

[^1]: MARX TO FRIEDRICH ADOLPH SORGE84

[^2]: IN HOBOKEN

[^3]: Dear Mr Sorge,85

[^4]: a Report of the Bureau of Statistics of Labor





**[p. 57]**

As for the 'secretaryship' for the UNITED STATES, the matter is as follows: I am secretary for the German BRANCHES over there, Dupont for the French, and lastly Eccarius for the Yankees and the English-speaking part of the branches. In our public DECLARATIONS, therefore, Eccarius figured as 'SECRETARY FOR THE UNITED STATES'. Otherwise we should have to employ useless circumlocutions. I, for instance, would also have to sign as 'Secretary for the Russian branche'in Geneva, and so on. Moreover, Eccarius himself plainly set forth the state of affairs in a New York PAPER—in connection with Cluseret.87

Next week I shall send you a new pack of CARDS OF MEMBERSHIP. The lamentable behaviour of Paris during the war—still allowing itself to be ruled by the mamelukes of Louis Bonaparte and of the Spanish adventuress Eugénie3 after appalling defeats— shows how much the French need a tragic lesson in order to regain their manhood.

What the Prussian jackasses do not see is that the present war is leading just as inevitably to a war between Germany and Russia as the war of 186666 led to the war between Prussia and France. This is the best outcome that I expect from it for Germany. 'Prussianism' as such never has existed, and never can exist, except in alliance with and in subjection to Russia. And such a war No. 2 will act as the midwife of the inevitable social revolution in Russia.

I regret that some misunderstanding on the part of my friend Vogt which is incomprehensible to me has led to a wrong opinion regarding Schily.88 Schily is not only one of my oldest and most intimate personal friends; he is one of the ablest, most courageous, and most reliable members of the Party.

Most faithfully yours,

Karl Marx

I should like to have a look at the Kellogg money nonsense (merely a variety of Bray, Gray, Bronterre O'Brien, etc., in

[^1]: I am very glad that Meyer is going to Cincinnati as a delegate.89

[^2]: a wife of Napoleon III



