---
Volume: 44
Document_Title: "33. Marx to Sigfrid Meyer. 2 September "
Page_Range: "95-96"
---

# 33. Marx to Sigfrid Meyer. 2 September 



**[p. 33]**

MARX TO SIGFRID MEYER

IN HOBOKEN

London, 2 September 1870 1 Maitland Park Road, Haverstock Hill

Dear Meyer,

Just a few lines in great haste (if I am to catch die post). I shall write to you more fully next week. I came back yesterday from the seaside where the doctors had sent me for my health53 but where a violent and painful attack of SCIATICA bent me double for weeks on end.

The first thing I did on my return was to reply to a pile of letters waiting for me; among my letter-creditors was Sorge, with half a dozen letters. Your letter had been mislaid and I only received it after sending off my reply to Sorge,3 so I was unable to modify that in the light of the information contained in your letter.*5

In any case I simply had to write to Sorge because he had sent me newspapers and LABOR STATISTICS (Massachusetts)1", ditto infor- mation about Hume of use to the General Council, together with 2 SAMPLES of the International cards, etc., he had produced.86 Lastly, I could not under any circumstances permit friend Vogt's erroneous view of Schily—one of my oldest and most intimate friends—to stand uncorrected.88

If the German Workers' Union has nominated other correspon- dents this FACT should be reported to me officially for communica- tion to the General Council.

Salut et fraternité.

Yours,

K. M.

[^1]: I was delighted to see from Sorge's last letter that you were being sent as a delegate to Cincinnati.89

[^2]: a See this volume, pp. 56-57. - b Report of the Bureau of Statistics of Labor



