---
Volume: 44
Document_Title: "34. Engels to Marx. 4 September "
Page_Range: "96-99"
---

# 34. Engels to Marx. 4 September 



**[p. 61]**

Could you give me any further information, such as the relevant acts of Congress, etc., about the economics of the railroad in the West?

First published in: Marx and Engels, Printed according to the original Works, First Russian Edition, Vol. XXVI, Moscow 1935 Published in English for the first time

34

ENGELS TO MARX1

IN LONDON

Manchester, 4 September 1870

What care I for wife, what care I for child— I .have higher yearnings; If hungry they are, let them go and beg— My Emperor, my Emperor a captive!a

World history is surely the greatest of poets; it has even succeeded in parodying Heine! My Emperor,b my Emperor a captive! 9I And what is more, a captive of the 'stinking Prussians', and poor William c stands by and assures everybody for the hundredth time that he is really quite innocent of the whole business and that it is purely the will of God! William really is just like the schoolboy: 'Who created the world?' 'Please, teacher, I did—but I won't ever do it again!'

And then that wretch Jules Favre comes along with the proposal that Palikao, Trochu and a few Arcadians 7 should form a government. There has never been such a band of riff-raff. But all the same, when this becomes known in Paris we must expect something or other to happen. I cannot believe that this flood of news, which is bound to become known today or tomorrow, will fail to produce its effect. Perhaps a government of the gauched

which, after a show of resistance, will conclude peace.

The war is at an end. There is no longer an army in France.

[^1]: a from Heinrich Heine's Die Grenadiere - b Napoleon III - c William I - d Left

[^2]: 4-556





**[p. 62]**

As soon as Bazaine capitulates, which will likely as not happen this week,98 half the German army will march on Paris and the other half across the Loire to sweep the country clean of all armed units.

On the subject of my articles,12 you will have seen that I did what was necessary in the one that appeared the day before yesterday.3 But my worst enemy in the English press is MR Greenwood himself. The fool regularly cuts out all the taunts I make about his competitors' plagiarisms, and what is even better, in his Epitome he excerpts the articles copied from mine the previous night with the greatest good humour and without even allowing himself a jibe about their plagiarism. The trouble is that the fellow cannot refrain from indulging his private passion for his own military opinion, which is pure nonsense. Every philistine regards the ability to ride as a matter of honour, and understand- ing strategy comes into the same category. But even that is not enough to satisfy him. A few days ago he inserted a few utterly absurd lines about the siege of Strasbourg—simply in order to fill up the column. At the first opportunity I shall write an article on the same subject and say the exact opposite.99 But what can one say? Journalism in peacetime is nothing but a continual process of reasoning about things which one has not learned about, and so I have no real right to complain.

Cash the CHEQUE yourself and keep the money.b Half belongs to you by rights and the other half is an advance on the next payment when I shall send you a further £70.

The Alsace swindle—apart from its pristine Teutonic features— is mainly of a strategic nature and aims at getting the line of the Vosges and German Lorraine as border territory. (Language frontier: if you draw a straight line from Donon or Schirmeck in the Vosges to one hour's travelling east of Longwy where the Belgian-Luxembourg and French frontiers meet, that is almost the exact place: from Donon along the Vosges to the Swiss frontier.) Northwards from Donon the Vosges are actually not so high and steep as in the south. Only the jackasses of the Staats-Anzeiger and Brass & Co. could get the notion that France will be 'throttled' by the snipping off of this narrow strip with its IV4 million or so inhabitants. The hysterical demands of the philistines for 'guaran- tees' are altogether absurd, but they tell because they suit the book of the people at Court.

[^1]: a F. Engels, Notes on the War.— XV". - b See this volume, p. 58.





**[p. 63]**

In Saarbrücken the French did as much damage as they could. Of course the bombardment lasted only a few hours and not, as in Strasbourg, day and night for weeks.

Herewith returning Cacadou'sb letter with thanks. Very interest- ing. The defence of Paris will be an entertaining episode, if nothing out of the way happens inside. These perpetual little PANICS on the part of the French—all of which arise from fear of the moment when they will at last have to learn the truth—give one a much better idea of the Reign of Terror. We take this to mean the rule of people who inspire terror. On the contrary, it is the rule of people who themselves are terror-stricken. La terreur implies mostly useless cruelties perpetuated by frightened people in order to reassure themselves. I am convinced that the blame for the Reign of Terror in 1793 lies almost exclusively with the bourgeois frightened out of their wits and setting out to comport themselves like patriots, with the small philistines crapping their trousers, and with the mob of the underworld who knew how to coin profit from the terreur. These are the very classes active in the present minor terreur too.

and Moore.

Your

F. E.

[^1]: Best regards to all of you from all of us, including Jollymeyerc

[^2]: Fist published abridged in Der Briefwech- Printed according to the original sei zwischen F. Engels und K. Marx, Bd. IV, Stuttgart, 1913 and in full in Published in English in full for the MEGA, Abt. Ill, Bd. 4, Berlin, 1931 f i r s t t l m e

[^3]: a F. Freiligrath, An Wolfgang im Felde. - b Laura Lafargue's nickname - c Carl Schorlemmer's nickname

[^4]: 4*



