---
Volume: 44
Document_Title: "36. Marx to Engels. 6 September "
Page_Range: "99-101"
---

# 36. Marx to Engels. 6 September 



**[p. 35]**

MARX T O EUGEN OSWALD

IN LONDON

London, 4 September 1870

In great haste

Dear Oswald,

I only arrived back in London 5 3 on Saturday, 3 and had too much BUSINESS on hand to be able to accept your kind invitation.

If you are doing a 4th EDITION,15 could you please put instead of 'Association Internationale Ouvrière', the official title current in France: 'Association Internationale des Travailleurs'. I was right about the EMPIRE ending in 'PARODY'.1"

Yours,

K. M.

First published in: Marx and Engels, Printed according to the original Works, Second Russian Edition, Vol. 33, . Moscow 1964 Published in English for the first time

36

I had just 'sat down' to write to you when Serraillier came to tell me that he is leaving London tomorrow for Paris, but only for a few days. His chief purpose is to arrange matters with the International there (Conseil Federal de Paris). This is all the more essential as the entire FRENCH BRANCH 50 is setting off for Paris today to commit all sorts of follies there in the name of the International

[^1]: MARX T O ENGELS 1 0 0

[^2]: IN MANCHESTER

[^3]: [London,] 6 September 1870 DEAR FRED,

[^4]: a 3 September - b See K. Marx, 'First Address of the General Council of the International Working Men's Association on the Franco-Prussian War'.





**[p. 65]**

I received today a proclamation to the German people from the Conseil Fédéral in Paris 1 0 1 (I shall send it on to you tomorrow), together with an urgent appeal to the Conseil General to issue a new manifesto specifically for the Germans. I had already planned to propose that this evening. Please could you send me as soon as possible the relevant military notes on Alsace-Lorraine in English for use in the manifesto.3

I have already sent a detailed answer today to the Conseil Fédéral, and have also subjected myself to the unpleasant task of opening their eyes to the true state of affairs.17

Received a reply from Brunswick to the effect that they will agitate precisely in accordance with my instructions.102

Apropos! Longuet telegraphed me the proclamation of the Republic on Sunday. I received the telegram at 4 a.m.

Jules Favre, although a notorious scoundrel and man of J u n e b is good pour le moment0 as Foreign Minister. H e had always opposed the old Thiers policies and come out in favour of the unity of Italy and of Germany.

I am only sorry for Rochefort for being a member of this gouvernement which also includes the infamous Gamier-Pages. But he could not well refuse to take part as a MEMBER of the comité de défense.10*

Best thanks for the cash. Even the gods have no knowledge of any claim I might have to half your fee.

Salut.

Your

K. M.

[^1]: Paul, Laura and Schnappy d arrived safely in Bordeaux on 2 September. All the better as Lafargue would never have left [Paris] UNDER the PRESENT CIRCUMSTANCES.*1

[^2]: Here there are veritable floods of réfugiés qui ont sauvé la caisse.1

[^3]: As I wrote to you before, GENTLEMEN-S residences are going u p in price.g

[^4]: a K. Marx, 'Second Address of the General Council of the International Working Men's Association otnhe Franco-Prussian War'. - b See this volume, pp. 98-99. - c for the moment - d Paul and Laura Lafargue and their son Charles Etienne - e See this volume, pp. 59 and 556. - f refugees who have rescued the funds - s See this volume, p. 52.



