---
Volume: 44
Document_Title: "37. Engels to Marx. 7 September "
Page_Range: "101-104"
---

# 37. Engels to Marx. 7 September 



**[p. 66]**

Dupont, who used to correspond with Pigott, ought to write the swine an abusive letter in the name of the French republicans. Urge him to do so.

First published abridged in Der Briefwech- Printed according to the original sei zwischen F. Engels und K. Marx, Bd. IV, Stuttgart, 1913 and in full in MEGA, Abt. III, Bd. 4, Berlin, 1931

37

ENGELS TO MARX

IN LONDON

Manchester, 7 September 1870

Dear Moor,

(Continuation.)a Due to the unexpected victories chauvinism has gone horribly to the heads of the German philistines who have done nothing to bring them about, and it is high time to do something about this. If only the Volksstaat were not so contemptible! But nothing can be done about that. By the time my preface to The Peasant Warh in pamphlet form appears in print, it will have been long since overtaken by events. All the more urgent, therefore, is the new proclamation of the International0 (for which you must do the German as well this time).

If the telegraphed version of the Parisian International procla- mation 101 is anything near accurate, it undoubtedly shows that these people are still entirely dominated by rhetoric. Having endured Badinguetd for 20 years, having been unable to prevent

[^1]: a See this volume, pp. 61-63. - b F. Engels, 'Preface to the Second Edition of The Peasant War in Germany'. - c K. Marx, 'Second Address of the General Council of the International Working Men's Association on the Franco-Prussian War'. - d A derisive nickname of Louis Bonaparte (Napoleon III) who, in 1846, fled from prison in Ham in the clothes of a mason by the name of Badinguet.





**[p. 67]**

I hope that they will all reflect on the matter once more when the first intoxication is past, for if not, it will be damned difficult to have any truck with them at an International level.

The entire republic, like its pacific origin, has been a complete farce up to now. As I have expected for the past two weeks and even longer,0 the Orleanists want an interim republic to conclude the shameful peace, so that the ONUS will not fall on the Orléans who are to be restored subsequently. The Orleanists have the real power: Trochu the military command and Kératry the po- lice; the gentlemen of the gauched have the hot-air portfolios. Since the Orléans are now the only possible dynasty, they can wait calmly for the right moment for the real avènement au pou- voir.'

Dupont has just left. He spent the evening here and was furious about this beautiful Paris proclamation. He was reassured to hear that Serraillier will go there having had prior discussions with you. His views on the case are perfectly clear and accurate: make use of the freedoms inevitably granted by the republic to organise the party in France; act when occasion presents itself, once organisa- tion has been completed; the International to be held on a leash in France until after peace has been concluded.

The gentlemen of the Provisional Government and the bourgeois in Paris appear to know full well (to judge by the reports in The Daily News) that any ideas of continuing the war are just idle talk. The rain will hardly hold up the Germans at all; the men in the field are used to it by now and healthier for it than they would be in the heat. Of course there could be epidemics,

[^1]: a and what a republic! - b war to the knife - c See this volume, p. 41. - d Left -

[^2]: e acquisition of power





**[p. 68]**

Rochefort will probably not remain with that mob for long. When the Marseillaise reappears things will quickly come to a head between him and them.

Schorlemmer left today with Wehner to bring a mass of spirits, wine, woollen blankets, flannel shirts, etc. (for over £1,000 in all) from the local Aid-Committee106 directly through Belgium to Sedan for the wounded. If he has time, he will call on you, but they still have a heap of things to attend to there; they did not start buying things and parcelling them up until yesterday morning. From there, they intend to go on to Metz, if possible, where each of them has a brother with the army.

It is typical of the lousy government in Paris that they do not venture to tell the public the true facts of the present situation. I fear that unless there is a miracle, there will have to be a phase of direct bourgeois rule under the Orleans to allow the struggle to proceed in its pure form. To sacrifice the workers now, would be strategy à la Bonaparte and Mac Mahon; before peace they cannot act under any circumstances, and after that they will first need time to organise.

The threat of the alliance3 will doubtless bring pressure to bear on the Prussians. But they know that the Russian breech-loaders are good for nothing, that the English have no army and that the Austrians are very weak. In Italy Bismarck with the Popeb (since the Florentine government has officially announced it will go to Rome in September), and with the consent of Nice and Savoy, appears to have made any resistance by the ruling circles impossible; it was a brilliant coup. Incidentally, Bismarck seems only to be waiting for some pressure to declare himself satisfied with money and the town of Strasbourg and its environs. He can

[^1]: a An allusion to the rumours about the Anglo-Russo-Austrian alliance aimed against Prussia (see this volume, p. 66). - b Pius IX



