---
Volume: 44
Document_Title: "38. Marx to Engels. 10 September "
Page_Range: "104-106"
---

# 38. Marx to Engels. 10 September 

Adjiis, best greetings,

Your

F. E.

First published in Der Briefwechsel zwischen Printed according to the original F. Engels und K. Marx, Bd. IV, Stuttgart, jgj3 Published in English for the first time

38

MARX TO ENGELS

IN MANCHESTER

[London,] 10 September 1870

Dear FRED,

You and Dupont must forgive me for answering so late and then only in a few lines. I am OVERWHELMED with political BUSINESS.

You can see from the enclosed pieces of imbecility from opposite places—one from Paris, the other from Brunswick—just how pleasant our task is made for us.

You know that I sent instructions to Brunswick.3 I assumed— mistakenly—that I was not dealing with uncouth BABIES, but with educated people who must be aware that the brutal language of a letter is not designed 'for printing', and furthermore that instructions have to contain confidential hints that are not intended to be revealed in the blare of publicity. WELL! These jackasses not only print 'word-for-word' extracts from my letter. They point their pitchforks at me, identifying me as the author. And they print sentences, such as the one about 'shifting the centre of gravity of the continental labour movement from France to Germany', etc., which were intended to spur them on, but which were not to be published now under any circumstances.107 I suppose I must be grateful to them at least for not having published my criticism of the French workers. And to cap it all the fellows even sent their compromising mishmash IN HOT HASTE— to Parisl (To say nothing of Brussels and Geneva.)

[^1]: a K. Marx and F. Engels, 'Letter to the Committee of the Social-Democratic Workers' Party' (see also this volume, p. 65).





**[p. 70]**

I have set everything in motion here for the workers to force their government to recognise the French Republic.108 (The series of MEETINGS begins on Monday.b) Gladstone WAS WILLING ENOUGH at first. But the Queen0 was under Prussian instructions and there was also the oligarchic part of the CABINET!

I am sorry to see that that lousy, importunate, vain and over-ambitious babbler Cluseret has got his hooks into Grousset of the Marseillaise, a very able, staunch and courageous man.

The new Address6 (THANKS for your contribution to it) will be printed by Tuesday. It is long, but that was unavoidable.

Tell Dupont that I am in complete agreement with his views, and that I expressly commissioned Serraillier to write to him saying that he should not leave Manchester pro nunc}

Schorlemmer here the evening before last.

Salut

Your

K. M.

Apropos! Prof. Schäffle of Tübingen has published a massive and idiotic book8 against me (it costs 12/6d!).

[^1]: Your articles on the FORTIFICATIONS of Paris and the bombardment of Strasbourg are masterly.c

[^2]: First published abridged in Der Briefweck- Printed according to the original sei zwischen F. Engels und K. Marx, Bd. IV, Stuttgart, 1913 and in full in Published in English for the first MEGA, Abt. Ill, Bd. 4, Berlin, 1931 t l m e

[^3]: a Here: Brilliant! - b 12 September - c Queen Victoria - d K. Marx, 'Second Ad- dress of the General Council of the International Working Men's Association on the Franco-Prussian War'. - e F. Engels, Notes on the War, XVI and XVII. - f for the present - s A. E. F. Schäffle, Kapitalismus und Socialismus mit besonderer Rücksicht auf Geschäfts- und Vermögensformen.



