---
Volume: 44
Document_Title: "42. Marx to Engels. 14 September "
Page_Range: "111-113"
---

# 42. Marx to Engels. 14 September 



**[p. 76]**

'Now fare thee well with throbbing heart at the end of such a letter.' What a king! And of the most educated0 nation in the world! And his wifed has it printed! If this sort of thing goes on for another week, people will think that both sides can, etc., etc.

Now fare thee well with throbbing heart, or not, at the end of such a letter.

Your

F. E.

First published in Der Briefwechsel zwischen Printed according to the original F. Engels und K. Marx, Bd. IV, Stuttgart, Published in English in full for the 1913 first time

42

[London,] 14 September 1870

Am sending 12 COPIES of the ADDRESS e at the same time as this letter. Various minor printing errors, small words omitted, etc., but nothing that distorts the meaning. This will be corrected in the second edition. You must bear in mind that the GENERAL COUNCIL HAS

[^1]: MARX TO ENGELS76

[^2]: IN MANCHESTER

[^3]: DEAR FRED,

[^4]: a V. Hugo, 'Aux allemands', Le Rappel No. 455, 10 September 1870 and Le Moniteur universel. No. 253, 10 September 1870. - b Wilhelm [I], 'Der Königin Augusta in Berlin', Königlich Preußischer Staats-Anzeiger, No. 253, 7 September 1870. - c In the original the word 'educated' is written in Berlin dialect (jebildetsten). - d Augusta - e K. Marx, 'Second Address of the General Council of the International Working Men's Association on the Franco-Prussian War'.





**[p. 77]**

The news from Brunswick115 arrived yesterday evening from Liebknecht, but with Wilhelm's usual vagueness and hence unusable. I have sent notices about it today to the Pall Mall, Echo, etc.a

The FACT itself is very good. This time the witch-hunt against the 'demagogues'116 is beginning before the end of the war, and is aimed at workers rather than the student windbags of yore. It is very good that the Prussians are showing themselves in their true colours, and are destroying any possible illusions in the working class even before peace is concluded. Moreover, the working class can only be stirred to action by direct persecution on the part of the state.

The 'Republic'—even the mere word—has given the matter quite a new turn. E.g. Mr George Potter—that hero of the workers from the Bee-Hive—has PUBLICLY declared himself A REPUBLICAN. This shows you the mood in London. I hope that the Prussian policies of the Court will produce a lot of ill-feeling here. It is a splendid

LEVER, t h e UNCONSTITUTIONAL INTERFERENCE OF THE GRANDDAUGHTER OF G e o r g e

I I I AND THE MOTHER-IN-LAW OF F r i t Z b |

For all that Bismarck is a jackass. Just because everything went right for him as long as he was the instrument of the aspirations to German unity, he has now lost his head to such an extent that he imagines himself able to throw all scruples to the winds and pursue specific Prussian policies, not merely externally, but internally too.

Yesterday there was a workers' meeting in a pub in Lincoln Inn Fields. We were sitting in our own meeting as usual on Tuesdays. A telegram arrived TO COME TO THE RESCUE. The PEACE SOCIETY 56 fellows, who have been actively 'buying up' workers (e.g. Cremer), had as good as managed to assure themselves of a majority, albeit a slight one. Our sudden appearance TURNED THE SCALE. At issue was a number of resolutions on behalf of the FRENCH REPUBLIC, which the PEACE SOCIETY claims could lead to war with Prussia. I have today sent detailed instructions to Belgium and Switzerland, ditto to the UNITED STATES.

The enclosed letter from Serraillier0 will interest Dupont and yourself. Only a part of it is enclosed, since the other part contains

[^1]: a K. Marx, 'Concerning the Arrest of the Members of the Central Committee of the Social-Democratic Workers' Party'. - b Queen Victoria, whose daughter, Victoria Adelaide Marie Louise, was married to Frederick William, Crown Prince of Prussia. - c See this volume, p. 80.



