---
Volume: 44
Document_Title: "50. Marx to Eugen Oswald. 23 September "
Page_Range: "122-123"
---

# 50. Marx to Eugen Oswald. 23 September 



**[p. 50]**

MARX TO EUGEN OSWALD

IN LONDON

[London,] 23 September 1870

Dear Oswald,

Herewith the Volksstaat (Nos. 72-76) and the Volkswille (No. 34), both of which I must have back by Monday NEXT.*

I only receive occasional copies of the Zukunft. The copies that Engels has have not yet been unpacked, any more than the rest of the furniture he has JUST brought down from Manchester.125 This is also the reason why I cannot yet accept your kind invitation. I must first get Engels AND his FAMILY settled in.

I am toto oveloh opposed to your neutralisation plan 126 and have already expressed my views to this effect in detail after hearing about the plan from another direction.

If people were SERIOUSLY concerned about the military security of Germany, it would meet the case exactly if the fortresses of Metz and Strasbourg were to be razed to the ground.

Bismarck knows this. He also knows that on this side neutralisa- tion can achieve no more and that it would contribute much less, in fact nothing, towards the reconciliation with France that will again become necessary in the future. It is one of those measures that ruin everything and settle nothing.

Consider further that the entire opposition in Germany is only a real power, a power that grows as a result of persecution by the government, because and insofar as it makes a strong stand on principle.

This is appreciated not only by the workers but even by people like Jacoby, people like Ludwig Simon of Trier and even Jakob Venedey! Once such a motley opposition starts playing around with diplomacy, all is lost. It would gain nothing at all through such diplomacy but on the contrary, by involving itself with C c

Du reste* Jules Favre, and not Thiers, is the man of the moment. Razing the fortresses was first proposed in the official Journal de

[^1]: it would lose the right to declare: Annex, IF YOU PLEASE. We declare these annexations non avenues A\

[^2]: a 26 September - b quite definitely - c Text illegible in source. - d inva- lid - e Moreover



