---
Volume: 44
Document_Title: "51. Marx to Edward Spencer Beesly. 19 October "
Page_Range: "123-124"
---

# 51. Marx to Edward Spencer Beesly. 19 October 

Yours,

K. M.

First published in: Marx and Engels,

Works, Second Russian Edition, Vol. 33, Moscow, 1964

51

MARX TO EDWARD SPENCER BEESLY

IN LONDON

[London,] 19 October 1870

My dear Sir,

Deak is against the workmen. He is, in fact, a Hungarian edition of an English Whig.

As to Lyons,128 I have received letters not fit for publication. At first everything went well. Under the pressure of the 'Internation- al' section, the Republic was proclaimed before Paris had taken that step. A revolutionary Government was at once established— La Commune—composed partly of workmen belonging to the 'International', partly of Radical middle-class Republicans. The octrois were at once abolished, and rightly so. The Bonapartist and Clerical intriguers were intimidated. Energetic measures were taken to arm the whole people. The middle class began if not really to sympathise with, at least to quietly undergo, the new order of things. The action of Lyons was at once felt at Marseilles and Toulouse, where the 'International' sections are strong.

But the asses, Bakunine and Cluseret, arrived at Lyons and spoiled everything. Belonging both to the 'International', they had, unfortunately, influence enough to mislead our friends. The Hotel de Ville was seized—for a short time—and most foolish decrees

Printed according to a typewritten copy

Published in English for the first time

[^1]: a William I



