---
Volume: 44
Document_Title: "52. Marx to Peter Imandt. 11 November "
Page_Range: "124-126"
---

# 52. Marx to Peter Imandt. 11 November 



**[p. 89]**

At Rouen, as in most other industrial towns of France, the sections of the International, following the example of Lyons, have enforced the official admission into the 'committees of defence'10S

of the working-class element.

Still, I must tell you that according to all information I receive from France, the middle class on the whole prefers Prussian conquest to the victory of a Republic with Socialist tendencies.

Yours truly,

Karl Marx

I send you a copy of the New-York Tribune which I received yesterday. You will oblige me by returning it after perusal. It contains an article on the International, penned I do not know by whom, but to guess from style and manner, Mr Dana might be the writer.

I forward also three copies of the Défense nationale, which Lafargue sends you with his compliments.

52

MARX TO PETER IMANDT

[London,] 11 November 1870 Dear Imandt,

Your nephew0 arrived yesterday morning. Your letter came today. However, we have resolved in a full family council that

[^1]: First published in The Social-Democrat, Reproduced from the magazine Vol. VII, No. 4, London, 1903

[^2]: IN DUNDEE

[^3]: a abolition of the state - b Committee of Salvation of France - c Robert Imandt





**[p. 90]**

Firstly, as far as his departure itself is concerned, we do not wish to lose the pleasure of his company so soon, and it will d o him good to take a breather.

Secondly, quoadb the method of travel, he arrived here from Southampton quite frozen, and the train journey to Dundee would be far too exhausting for him (and it would be even worse in the 3rd class), whereas travelling FIRST CLASS by boat for 20sh., he would receive his d u e measure of warmth.

H e is a very sound and well-educated young man who has given us all immense pleasure.

I hope that you are satisfied with this arrangement. Salut

Your

K. M.

Apropos, o u r Wilhelm, not rex, but Wilhelm Liebknecht is a real thorn in the side of the Prussians with his Volksstaat even though he imagines, in his narrow-minded way, that he always has to say black when the enemy says white and vice versa. In consequence he takes all the phrases of someone like Gambetta and his consorts at their face value a n d so constantly deceives his readers on matters of fact in just the same way as the French are entertained with FALSE NEWS by their GOVERNORS.

[^1]: Mr Freiligrath, meanwhile, has become the producer of feelings for the NATIONAL LIBERAL PHILISTINE. A n d rightly so. H e has to give something in return for the proceeds of the collections WHICH HE HAS POCKETED.

[^2]: First published in: Marx and Engels,

[^3]: Works, Second Russian Edition, Vol. 33, Moscow, 1964

[^4]: Printed according to the original

[^5]: Published in English for the first time

[^6]: a 16 November - b as to



