---
Volume: 44
Document_Title: "56. Engels to Natalie Liebknecht. 19 December "
Page_Range: "130-132"
---

# 56. Engels to Natalie Liebknecht. 19 December 



**[p. 55]**

ENGELS TO FREDERICK GREENWOOD

IN LONDON

[Draft] [London,] 17 December [1870] 1 p.m.

A friend of mine Mr Oswald sends me the enclosed. He says that the usual tickets have been sent to The Pall Mall Gazette and wishes me to say a word in favour of Mrs Oswald's tonight's concert being noticed in that paper, or at least to induce your musical critic to go and hear her. I have told him that this is entirely out of my line and that I even do not know how to go about such a thing. However he insists, and as he is a very worthy fellow I can only say, that if you can consistently do something in that direction you will confer a personal favour upon me. I am too bad a musician to permit myself an opinion but I have heard people who ought to know, speak very highly of Mrs Oswald's play..

56

ENGELS TO NATALIE LIEBKNECHT

London, 19 December 1870 122 Regent's Park Road, N.W.

Dear Mrs Liebknecht,

We have just received the news that Liebknecht, Bebel and Hepner were arrested yesterday. It is the revenge of the Prussians for the moral defeats suffered by the Prussian Empire at the hands of Liebknecht and Bebel even before it was born.134 We all rejoiced here at the courageous behaviour of both of them in the Reichstag under circumstances where it was really no small achievement to put forward our views freely and defiantly. We

[^1]: First published in: Marx and Engels, Reproduced from the original Works, Second Russian Edition, Vol. 39, • , - , • • ,. , r , Moscow, 1966 Published in English for the first time

[^2]: IN LEIPZIG

[^3]: 5*



However, we also have the duty to make sure, as best we can, that our arrested friends and their families in Germany do not suffer need, especially at this time when the approaching Christmas season is in any case being so bitterly spoilt for them. We have therefore taken the liberty of enclosing a £5 note of the Bank of England 'B/10, 04841, London, 12 October 1870' and would ask you to share it with Mrs Bebel.

We also enclose 7 thalers collected by the local German Workers' Educational Society135 and intended for the families of the Brunswickers who have been arrested.115 Might I ask you to sign and return the enclosed receipt for the latter, so that it may be returned to the Society as proof that Marx has duly forwarded it.

My wifeb is a revolutionary Irishwoman and so you can imagine the rejoicings at home here yesterday on hearing the news that the condemned Fenians had been amnestied—albeit in the shabbiest, most Prussian of ways.136 And then to have to hear of the arrest of our friends in Germany immediately afterwards!

Farewell, dear Mrs Liebknecht, and do not lose heart. The Prussians, and the Russians, their masters, have started something that they will be unable to finish.

With my warmest sympathy,

Yours,

Frederick Engels The Marx family sends its best regards to you and fond greetings to the children.

[^1]: First published in Die Neue Zeit, Bd. 2, Printed according to the original Nr. 6, Stuttgart, 1915

[^2]: Published in English for the first time a Der Volksstaat - b Lydia Burns



