---
Volume: 44
Document_Title: "58. Marx to Hermann Jung. 18 January "
Page_Range: "133-135"
---

# 58. Marx to Hermann Jung. 18 January 

With best wishes for the New Year.

Yours very sincerely,

Karl Marx

First published, in Russian, in Marx- Printed according to the original Engels Archives, Vol. I (VI), Moscow, 1932

58

MARX TO HERMANN JUNG

IN LONDON

[London,] 18 January3 1871

Dear Jung,

I have in yesterday's sitting of the General Council fully exposed the past history of Jules Favre. I send you a few main points relating to his counterrevolutionary deeds.139

The Council has also yesterday passed a Resolution instructing you to write to the Editors of the Felleisen—as the Organ of the German Arbeiterbildungsvereineb in Switzerland—in the following sense:

1) What is the position of those 'Vereine' and their organ, the Felleisen, to the International Workingmen's Association?

2) Till now they have never paid any contribution to the General Council.

3) In their organ—the Felleisen—the annexation to Germany of Alsace and Lorraine is defended in flagrant contradiction to the circulars of the General Council0 of which not even an extract has ever been published by them.

4) If they persist in the non-fulfilment of their duties (point 2) and in their opposition to the policy of the General Council (point 3 d), which is in consonance with the Statutes of the International, the General Council, using the right deferred to him by the Basel

[^1]: 3 In the original: '17 January'. - b workers' educational societies - c the first and second Addresses of the General Council of the International Working Men's Association on the Franco-Prussian War - <* In the original: point 1.





**[p. 99]**

Congress, will provisionally—that is to say until the meeting of next General Congress—exclude them from the Internatio- nal140

Yours fraternally,

Karl Marx

Ladendorf is no longer the Editor of the Felleisen. You must address your letter: 'Redaktion des Felleisen. Deutscher Arbeiterbil- dungsverein, in Gassen, Zürich'.

Jules Favre

The infamous decree of 27th June 1848, by which many thousand Parisian workmen made prisoners during the June Insurrection,113 were, without even the formality of any judicial inquiry, to be transported to Algeria, etc., was drawn up by Jules Favre. Afterwards, he constantly refused to join the motions of amnesty, brought forward from time to time by the Republican party of the Constituent Assembly.

Jules Favre was one of the most notorious tools of the reign of terror inflicted on the French working class by General Cavaignac after the Insurrection of June. He supported all the shameless laws then passed with a view to suppress the right of reunion, coalition, and the freedom of the press.141

On the 16th April 1849, Jules Favre, as the spokesman of the counterrevolutionary majority of a parliamentary committee, proposed to grant Louis Bonaparte the 1,200,000 francs he demanded for the expedition against the Roman Republic.142

[^1]: First published abridged, in the language of the original (English), in: G. Jaeckh, Die Internationale, Leipzig, 1904 and in full in: Marx and Engels, Works, First Russian Edition, Vol. XXVI, Moscow, 1935

[^2]: Reproduced from the original

[^3]: Published in English in full for the first time



