---
Volume: 44
Document_Title: "59. Marx to G. Julian Harney. 21 January "
Page_Range: "135-136"
---

# 59. Marx to G. Julian Harney. 21 January 



**[p. 59]**

MARX TO G. JULIAN HARNEY U8

IN BOSTON

London, 21 January 1871 1 a Maitland Park Road, H averstock Hill, N.W.

Dear Harney,

I want for the second volume of my Criticism of Political Economy documents on the disposal of public lands in the United States since the beginning of the Civil War.143 Mr S. Meyer, a friend of mine at New York, has advised me to address myself to Mr Wilson, Commissioner of the General Land Office, Washing- ton. As I am not at all acquainted with the form in which this ought to be done, I address myself to you. Perhaps, you will act as my negotiator.144

In spring, there will be offered a second edition in Germany of the first volume of my work.145 A Russian translation at St Petersburg has been stopped by the Moscovite police,146 a French edition at Paris by the war.147 An 'homme de lettres'b at New York proposed me preparing an English translation for the United States148 but I declined the offer since he seemed to me not a competent man for the task.

Unfortunately, some of the leading workmen—like Mr Motters- head, an old Chartist and a member of our Council—have been bought up by the Peace Society.56 They can do no harm at London but they do in the provinces.

The Trades' Councils at Manchester and Birmingham have lately become active agents of the General Council of the 'International'. At London I regret saying, most of the workmen's

[^1]: By our International Council0 we have stirred the English working class and provoked numerous demonstrations in favour of the French Republic149 and against the policy of unctuous Gladstone, who has become a servile tool in the hands of the granddaughter of George III and the mother-in-law of 'Fritz'.d

[^2]: a In the source used, the number is given as '7', presumably a printing error. - b man of letters - c General Council of the International Working Men's Associati- on - d Marx refers to Queen Victoria, whose daughter, Victoria Adélaïde Marie Louise, married Frederick William, Crown Prince of Prussia.



