---
Volume: 44
Document_Title: "60. Marx to Sigfrid Meyer. 21 January "
Page_Range: "136-141"
---

# 60. Marx to Sigfrid Meyer. 21 January 



**[p. 101]**

representatives use their position in our council only as a means of furthering their own petty personal aims. To get into the House of Commons by hook or by crook, is their ultima Thule* and they like nothing better than rubbing elbows with the lords and M.P.'s by whom they are petted and demoralised.

The state of things in Germany you may judge from my letter to The Daily Newsh which I enclose.

Mrs Marx and F. Engels send you their best compliments. Salut et fraternité.

Yours,

Karl Marx

First published in The Harney Papers, ed. Reproduced from the book by F. G. Black and R. M. Black, Assen,

1969

60

MARX TO SIGFRID MEYER150

[London,] 21 January 1871

Dear Meyer,

The formation of the so-called Central Committee in New York was absolutely not to my taste.151 I deferred the approval of the General Council as long as possible but found the ground taken from under my feet as soon as it emerged from a letter from Mr Charnier that Dupont, our French secretary'—a thoroughly good man, but too forceful and so often led astray by his thirst for action—had been responsible for starting the whole thing. Alors, il n'y avait plus rien à faire? He was officially rebuked by the General Council, mais le jeu était fait*l Engels (who now lives here) and I would just like to remind Vogt and yourself that according to our Rules the General Council can only intervene with a veto in the

[^1]: IN NEW YORK

[^2]: a Here: most cherished goal. - b K. Marx, 'On the Freedom of the Press and Meetings in Germany'. - c Corresponding Secretary of the General Council for the French sections of the International in the United States - d So nothing further could be done. - e Here: but the damage was done!





**[p. 102]**

event of open VIOLATIONS of the Rules and principles of the International. Apart from that, however, it is our invariable policy to let the sections have their head and conduct their own affairs. The only exception to this was France, because of her special situation under the Empire. It follows, therefore, that our friends will just have to cut their coat according to their cloth. Here in London, we work together with Englishmen, some of whom are not at all to our liking and who, as we know perfectly well, only want to exploit the International as a milch-cow for their own petty personal ambitions. Nevertheless, we have to put bonne mine

à mauvais jeu? If we were to withdraw in indignation on their account, we would only give them a power which is at pre- sent paralysed by our presence. And you must act in the same way.

Quant àb Vogt I was convinced from the outset that pompous Sorge was just blustering. However, I had to make a reply when he questioned me directly.0 Otherwise he would have taken his gossip to my friend Schily in person, a piece of unpleasantness I wished the latter to be spared.88

We have given rise to a powerful movement among the working class over here against Gladstone (in support of the FRENCH REPUBLIC 149), which will probably bring about his downfall. Prussia is wholly under the sway of the Russian Cabinet. If it gains a conclusive victory, the HEROIC GERMAN PHILISTINE will get what he deserves. Unfortunately, the present French government thinks it can wage a revolutionary war without a revolution.

etc.

My health has again been abominable for months on end, but who can give thought to such trivia at a time of such momentous historical events!

The semi-official Archives of Forensic Medicine* are published in St Petersburg (in Russian). One of the physicians writing for this journal published an article, 'On the Hygienic Conditions of the West European Proletariat', in the last quarto issue, chiefly quoting my book8 and mentioning the source. This resulted in the

[^1]: Freiligrath, the noble poet, is on a visit to his daughters0 here at the moment. He does not dare to show his face to me. The 60,000 thalers presented to him by the German philistines129 have to be paid off in Tyrtaean hymns like 'Germania, thou woman proud',e

[^2]: a good face on it - b As for - c See this volume, p. 57. - d Käthe and Luise Freiligrath - e from Freiligrath's poem Hurra, Germania! - f Apxue& Cyaeöuoü Meduii UHta u O&mecmee HHoü r Wiewta - s Volume I of Capital



<W*~Xt,V;- V*-—

[^1]: A page from Marx's letter to Sigfrid Meyer of 21 January 1871







**[p. 105]**

following calamity: the censor was severely rebuked by the MINISTER OF THE INTERIOR,3 the EDITOR-IN-CHIEF was fired, and that issue of the journal—all the COPIES they could still get hold of—was consigned to the flames!152

I don't know whether I told you that since the beginning of 1870 I have been having to teach myself Russian, which I now read fairly fluently. This came about after I had been sent Flerovsky's very important work on The Condition of the Working Class (Especially the Peasants) in Russia from St Petersburg; I also wanted to familiarise myself with the (excellent) economic works of Chernyshevsky (who was rewarded by being sentenced to the Siberian mines for the past seven years153). The result was worth the effort that a man of my age must make to master a language differing so greatly from the classical, Germanic, and Romance languages. The intellectual movement now taking place in Russia testifies to the fact that things are seething deep below the surface. Minds are always connected by invisible threads with the BODY of the people.

You and Vogt still owe me your photograms. At least I think they were promised to me.

Regards to you and Vogt,

Yours,

Karl Marx

[^1]: I wrote to my old friend G. J. Harney,b who is now Assis- tant Secretary of State of Massachusetts, concerning the PUBLIC LANDS.

[^2]: First published in: Marx and Engels,

[^3]: Works, First Russian Edition, Vol. XXVI, Moscow, 1935

[^4]: Printed according to the original

[^5]: Published in English in full for the first time

[^6]: a A. Ye. Timashev - b See this volume, p. 100.



