---
Volume: 44
Document_Title: "61. Marx to Friedrich Adolph Sorge. 21 January "
Page_Range: "141-142"
---

# 61. Marx to Friedrich Adolph Sorge. 21 January 



**[p. 61]**

MARX TO FRIEDRICH ADOLPH SORGE137

IN HOBOKEN

London, 21 January 1871 1 Maitland Park Road, Haverstock Hill, N.W.

Dear Mr Sorge,

All reports from the German sections in America are to be sent to me. Eccarius is only the correspondent for the Yankees. As Secretary TO THE GENERAL COUNCIL he has nothing to do with FOREIGN

CORRESPONDENCE.

I had completely forgotten the business about the 'contribution' of the German section.154 On receiving your letter, therefore, I wrote to Eccarius 17 whose reply, which I enclose, can also serve as a receipt.

I have already written about the FORMATION of the CENTRAL COUNCIL (we would have preferred the term Central Committee '51 to avoid confusion).3

I have not received Kellogg.b It was presumably sent in a yellow envelope that I received from the POST OFFICE here. It was torn open and had been stamped 'NO CONTENTS'. I expect that the envelope was not strong enough.

A few weeks ago I sent to your address a large parcel of publications of the GENERAL COUNCIL of different dates but up to now have had no notice of receipt. They belonged to me personally and I sent them because the supplies of the GENERAL COUNCIL are quite exhausted (for the majority of its publications).

Yours sincerely,

K. Marx

[^1]: First published in Briefe und Auszüge aus Printed according to the original Briefen von Joh. Phil Becker, Jos. Dietzgen, Friedrich Engels, Karl Marx u. A. an F. A. Sorge und Andere, Stuttgart, 1906

[^2]: a See this volume, p. 101. - b E. Kellogg, A New Monetary System



