---
Volume: 44
Document_Title: "63. Marx to Ludwig Kugelmann. 4 February "
Page_Range: "143-147"
---

# 63. Marx to Ludwig Kugelmann. 4 February 



**[p. 63]**

MARX TO LUDWIG KUGELMANN121

IN HANOVER

London, 4 February 1871

Dear Kugelmann,

I am sorry to learn from your last letter that your state of health has again got worse. In the autumn and winter months mine was tolerable, although the cough which I contracted during my last stay in Hanover 55 is still troubling me.

I sent you The Daily News containing my letter.3 Obviously it has been intercepted like the other things I sent you. Today I am enclosing the cutting, as well as the first Address of the General Council. The letter actually contains nothing but facts, but was effective for precisely that reason.

You know my opinion of MIDDLE-CLASS HEROES. Still, Mr Jules Favre (notorious from the days of the Provisional Government and Cavaignacc) et Co. have contrived to surpass my worst anticipa- tions. First of all they allowed the 'sabre orthodoxe', the 'crétin militaire', as Blanqui rightly dubs Trochu, to carry out his 'plan'. This plan consisted simply in prolonging the passive resistance of Paris to the utmost limit, that is, to STARVATION POINT, and in confining the offensive to sham manoeuvres and 'des sorties platoniques'. I am not 'guessing' all this. I know the contents of a letter which Jules Favre himself wrote to Gambetta, and in which he complains that he and other members of that part of the government cowering in Paris sought in vain to spur Trochu on to serious offensive measures. Trochu always answered that that would give the upper hand to Parisian demagogy. Gambetta replied: Vous avez prononcé votre propre condamnationd\ Trochu considered it much more important to keep down the Reds in Paris with the help of his Breton bodyguard—which rendered him the same service that the Corsicans rendered Louis Bonaparte 156—than to defeat the Prussians. This is the real secret of the defeats not only at Paris, but throughout France, where the

[^1]: a K. Marx, 'On the Freedom of the Press and Meetings in Germany'. - b K. Marx, 'First Address of the General Council of the International Working Men's Association on the Franco-Prussian War'. - c See this volume, pp. 98-99. - d You have pronounced your own condemnation.





**[p. 109]**

bourgeoisie, in agreement with the majority of the local au- thorities, have acted on the same principle.

After Trochu's plan had been carried through to its CLIMAX—to the point where Paris had to surrender or starve—Jules Favre et Co. were only to follow the example of the Governor of the fortress at Toul.a He did not surrender. He merely explained to the Prussians that he was compelled through lack of food to abandon the defence and open the gates of the fortress. They could now do as they chose.

But Jules Favre is not content with signing a formal surren- der.157 Having declared himself, his governmental colleagues and Paris to be prisoners of war of the roi de Prusse* he has the impudence to act on behalf of all France. What did he know of the state of affairs in France outside Paris? Absolutely nothing, except what Bismarck was gracious enough to tell him.

More. These Messieurs les prisonniers du roi de Prussec go further and declare that the part of the French government still free in Bordeaux158 has lost its power and must only act in unison with them—the prisoners of war of the Prussian King. Since they, as prisoners of war, can themselves only act at the command of their war-lord, they have thereby proclaimed the King of Prussia de facto the highest authority in France.

Even Louis Bonaparte, after he surrendered and was taken prisoner at Sedan,15 was less shameless. To Bismarck's proposals he replied that he could enter into no negotiations because, by the very fact of his being a Prussian prisoner, he had ceased to hold any authority in France.

At the most Favre could have accepted a conditional armistice for the whole of France, with the proviso, namely, that this agreement should be sanctioned by the Bordeaux government, which alone had the right and the capacity to agree upon the clauses of such an armistice with the Prussians. They, at any rate, would not have allowed the latter to exclude the Eastern theatre of war from the armistice. They would not have allowed the Prussians to round off the outlines of their occupation so profitably to themselves.

Rendered impudent by the pretensions of his prisoners of war, who in that capacity continue to play at being the French government, Bismarck is now interfering sans gêned in internal

[^1]: a i.e. Hück, who gave up resistance on 23 September 1870 after the siege that had lasted from 19 August - b William I - c worthy prisoners of the King of Prus- sia - d brazenly





**[p. 110]**

French affairs. He protests, the noble fellow, against Gambetta's decree concerning the general elections to the Assemblée, because the decree is prejudicial to the freedom of the elections!160 INDEED! Gambetta should answer with a protest against the state of siege and other circumstances in Germany, which annul the freedom of the elections to the Reichstag.

I hope that Bismarck sticks to his conditions of peace! Four hundred million pounds sterling as war indemnity1 '—half the English national debt! Even the French bourgeois will under- stand that. They will perhaps at last realise that by continuing the war they could, at the worst, only win.

The MOB, high class and low, judges by appearances, by the façade, the immediate success. During the last twenty years it has, ALL OVER THE WORLD, apotheosised Louis Bonaparte. I have in actual fact always exposed him, even at his apogée, as a mediocre canaille. That is also my opinion of the Junker Bismarck. Nevertheless, I do not consider Bismarck as stupid as he would be if his diplomacy were voluntary. The man is caught by the Russian Chancellery in a net which only a lion could tear through, and he is no lion.

For example, Bismarck's demand that France should hand over her twenty best men-of-war and Pondicherry in the East Indies! Such an idea could not emanate from a genuine Prussian diplomat. He would know that a Prussian Pondicherry would be nothing but a Prussian hostage in English hands; that England, if she wanted to, could seize the twenty men-of-war before they enter the Baltic Sea, and that such demands could only have the object, absurd from the Prussian point of view, of making John Bull distrustful before the Prussians are OUT OF THE FRENCH WOOD. But Russia is interested precisely in such a result, in order to secure Prussia's vassalage still more firmly. In fact these demands have given rise to a complete change of feeling even in the peace-loving English middle class. Everybody is now calling for war. This provocative act and this threat to English interests are making even the bourgeois mad. It is more than probable that, thanks to this piece of Prussian 'wisdom', Gladstone et Co. WILL BE KICKED OUT OF

On the other hand things look pretty 'awful' in Russia. Since William became an Emperor,162 the old Muscovite, anti-German party, with the heir to the throne3 at its head, has again won the upper hand completely. And it is supported by the sentiments of

[^1]: OFFICE AND SUPPLANTED BY A MINISTRY DECLARING WAR AGAINST PRUSSIA.

[^2]: Alexander Alexandrovich (future Alexander III)





**[p. 111]**

the people. Gorchakov's subtle policy is incomprehensible to them. It is therefore probable that the Tsara will either have to reverse his foreign policy altogether, or THAT HE WILL BE OBLIGED TO KICK THE BUCKET, like his predecessors Alexander I, Paul and Peter III.

With a simultaneous convulsion in the politics of England and Russia, WHERE WOULD PRUSSIA BE at a moment when her frontiers to both the north-east and south-east are left defenceless against any invasion and Germany's military strength is exhausted? Not forgetting that since the outbreak of war Prussia-Germany has sent 1,500,000 men to France, of whom only about 700,000 are still on their feet!

So, despite all appearance to the contrary, Prussia's position is ANYTHING BUT PLEASANT. If France holds out, uses the armistice to reorganise her army and finally gives the war a really revolution- ary character—and the artful Bismarck is doing his best TO THIS END—the new German, Borussianb Empire may still get a quite unexpected thrashing as its baptism.

MY BEST COMPLIMENTS TO THE Comtesse AND Fränzchen.0

Your

K. M.

Apropos. You wrote to me once about a book by Haxthausen on Westphalian (I think) land ownership relations.0 I should be glad if you would send it to me.

Be so good as to forward the enclosure to Dr Jacoby (Königsberge) but stamp it by way of precaution.

Get your wife to write on the enclosed letter the address of Dr Johann Jacoby, Königsberg.

Jennychen has just asked me to send her greetings to 'Trautchen, Fränzchen and Wenzelchen'£, which I hereby do.

[^1]: First published abridged in Die Neue Zeit, Printed according to the original Bd. 2, Nr. 19, Stuttgart, 1901-02 and in full, in Russian, in Pisma Marksa k Kugel- manu (Letters from Marx to Kugel- mann), Moscow-Leningrad, 1928

[^2]: a Alexander II - b Borussia: old name for Prussia, frequendy used in an ironical sense to indicate the feudal landlord nature of Prussia. - c Gertrud and Franziska Kugelmann - d A. von Haxthausen, Ueber den Ursprung und die Grundlagen der Verfassung in den ehemals slavischen Ländern Deutschlands, im allgemeinen und des Herzogthums Pommern im besondern. - e Modern name: Kaliningrad. - f Gertrud, Franziska and Ludwig Kugelmann



