---
Volume: 44
Document_Title: "66. Marx to Natalie Liebknecht. 2 March"
Page_Range: "150-152"
---

# 66. Marx to Natalie Liebknecht. 2 March



**[p. 115]**

Behind the back of his master—a most infamous and brutal parvenu—Dupont would like to ascertain whether he would get that agency. He therefore requests you to obtain information about this point. The address of the house in question, is: Labadie et Co. (Vins et esprits) Rue des terres de Bordes. Bordeaux.

What is Prudhomme doing? Has his health improved?

First published, in the language of the Reproduced from the original original (English), in Annali, an. 1, Milan,

1958

65

MARX TO PYOTR LAVROV 164

IN PARIS

London, 27 February 1871

Dear Sir,

Lopatin has left for the United States and I have not yet heard from him.

I have the honour to be, Sir,

Your obedient servant,

Karl Marx

66

London, 2 March 1871

The unfortunately very meagre contributions that I sent you for the benefit of the families of the imprisoned men did not in any

[^1]: First published, in Russian, in Letopisi Printed according to the original marksizma, Book 5, Moscow-Leningrad, jogg Translated from the French Published in English for the first time

[^2]: MARX TO NATALIE LIEBKNECHT165

[^3]: IN LEIPZIG

[^4]: My dear Mrs Liebknecht,166





**[p. 116]**

sense stem from the General Council of the International which has absolutely no funds for such purposes. The General Council was merely chosen by the subscribers as 'trustee' to ensure that the money was duly sent. Incidentally, no further evidence of receipt is necessary.

On the subject of the articles on the German workers' movement which have appeared in English reviews, what Lieb- knecht probably had in mind was the enclosed article on the International by Professor Beesly3 which appeared in the November NUMBER (1870) of The Fortnightly Review. It may well be the passages from p. 531 on (I have put a mark to show where they begin)167 which Stieber wants to use to cook his proof. In the first place, Professor Beesly is not a member of the International and his statements are not authoritative for that reason. In the second place, he himself refutes Stieber's inferences.

The letter I sent to the Brunswick peopleb was not written in the name of or on the instructions of the General Council That is why it was not written on paper with the letterhead of the General Council. My statements there are made entirely in my own name. It was in fact a reply—and a long-deferred reply at that—to a letter asking me for my personal views. They were perfectly within their rights to ask for this. At least, I know of no § in the Penal Code that would proscribe it. At any rate, it is not Mr Bismarck's fault if 'my views' cannot be found printed in the Preussischer

Staats-Anzeiger. The worthy Lothar Bucher did invite me after the heady days of Sadowa to write the financial column for that paper. More likely than not he took care not to publicise my reply.168

The German Empire is carrying on the campaign of the French Empire against the International Nothing is so characteristic of the last days of the latter empire as the legal persecution of members of the International because they waged war on the intended war. The secret papers of Mr Ollivier published by the Republic are very revealing in this respect.169

I was very pleased to receive your letter today. An article by me was to have appeared in The Fortnightly Review, but I shall postpone it for the time being, since the inability of the Prussian government to intervene here might be more than made good at the expense of friends there [in Germany], who are of course in

[^1]: a E. S. Beesly, 'The International Working Men's Association', The Fortnightly Review, No. XLVII, 1 November 1870. - b K. Marx and F. Engels, 'Letter to the Committee of the Social-Democratic Workers' Party'.



