---
Volume: 44
Document_Title: "67. Engels to Karl Klein and Friedrich Moll. 10 March "
Page_Range: "152-154"
---

# 67. Engels to Karl Klein and Friedrich Moll. 10 March 



**[p. 117]**

no way responsible for things that happen without their knowl- edge.

I would be greatly obliged to you if you could send me the complete stenographic report of the last session of the Reichstag that ended on 10 December 1870. I would of course reimburse you for the costs.

Jennychen has unfortunately come down with pleurisy. With warmest regards to Liebknecht and yourself.

Yours very sincerely,

K. M.

First published abridged in: H. Lange, Printed according to the original Aus einer alten Handwerksburschen-Mappe, Leipzig, 1925 and in full in Einheit, Published in English in full for the Berlin, April 1953, special edition f l r s t t l m e

67

ENGELS TO KARL KLEIN AND FRIEDRICH MOLL

London, 10 March 1871

122 Regent's Park Road, N.W.

Dear Friends Klein and Moll,

You must have been very surprised not to have received any reply to your letters of February last year. There were, however, a number of reasons for it. In the first place, I had hoped from one day to the next to be in a position to have something positive to say about the Association. But this turned out to be impossible and after the outbreak of the war it could no longer be expected. In the second place, your letter arrived in such a sorry state that I could be in no doubt that the postal authorities had been at pains to read it. So I waited for an opportune moment, particularly since the war, the state of siege and the many arrests. And, finally, I could not know whether both of you had not been conscripted into the Landwehr11 during the war.

An opportunity has now arisen to send a letter to Barmen, whence it could be passed on with little danger, and so I shall make use of it to give you a sign of life, and to enclose the promised portrait of

[^1]: IN SOLINGEN





**[p. 118]**

The German workers now have a hard time ahead of them; it seems to have been decided that they should be the victims whose sacrifice will provide the occasion for a reconciliation between Junker and bourgeoisie. But it doesn't matter. The workers' movement has become too powerful even in Germany to be snuffed out that easily by Prussian tricks. On the contrary, the persecutions we have to be prepared for will just give us greater strength, and when the bourgeois at present drunk with victory has overslept from intoxication and the hangover is beginning, a chance will arise for our party to raise its voice once more. At any rate, the exemplary behaviour of the German workers during the war has demonstrated that they know what is at stake and that they alone, of all the parties, have a correct insight into the history of our age, whereas the bourgeois have really let victory go to their heads.

I have been living here in London for the past five months. It seems doubtful whether you can continue for much longer to belong to the International Working Men's Association unless just in principle, since they seem to want to make it a criminal offence to be a member of that Association in Germany. At any rate, you may rest assured that having prepared the way for the association of the entire European and American proletariat over the past seven years, we shall take good care that it does not disintegrate whatever the circumstances. And that is the main thing.

With fraternal greetings,

Yours,

F. Engels

[^1]: First published in: Marx and Engels, Printed according to the original Works, First Russian Edition, Vol. XXVI, Moscow 1935 Published in English for the first time



