---
Volume: 44
Document_Title: "68. Engels to Rudolf Engels. 10 March "
Page_Range: "154-156"
---

# 68. Engels to Rudolf Engels. 10 March 



**[p. 68]**

ENGELS TO RUDOLF ENGELS

IN ENGELSKIRCHEN

London, 10 March 1871

Dear Rudolf,

Since I am not yet acquainted with any lawyer here who is reliably informed or especially competent in commercial affairs, I have decided after some reflection that the best thing would be to write to the man in Manchester who made the contract with Funke on your behalf. I was quite clear in my mind about the issue at stake, but in matters of English law it is always better not to rely on common sense. However, on this occasion, the lawyer said: * law and common sense agree; the retirement of one of the partners in the German firm, from the German firm, in no way affects the firm in England, nor can the firm in England have any voice in the matter. On the other hand no member of the English firm can retire before the expiration of the term without the consent of the other members of the same concern.*

Therefore (1) Adolf's3 position in the firm of R. Funke & Co. remains unaltered even though he has left the firm of Ermen 8c Engels in Barmen; and (2) his resignation from R. Funke & Co. requires not just his agreement, but also the agreement of Funke, a point that may not have occurred to you.

Since these affairs affect Adolf, too, and since I cannot take sides on this matter, I am writing to him in the same terms to- day.

I purchased this information at a cost of 10/6d., which equals 3.15 thalers, and would be glad if you could credit me with it.

I find it quite natural that Adolf should want to retire from the business as soon as he can. The winter in Engelskirchen is fearfully boring and you will not take it amiss that he should long for some other entertainment than endless family drinking- sessions. I am only astonished that he stood it there for so long; I would have kicked up a fuss much sooner and more often. It is all very well for you and Hermann b to talk, but you both jib at the idea of moving to Engelskirchen, and you cannot persuade me

[^1]: a Adolf Griesheim - b Hermann Engels





**[p. 120]**

Gottfrieda will not suffer any great inconvenience; the old MILL in West Lane was empty and available, machinery is also easily procured. In Manchester one can get quite a few things done, etc., by other people, so you should not entertain any exaggerated hopes. Moreover, it is self-evident that I am under a moral obligation not to do anything to harm a former associé who has given me a round sum in return for my own resignation. To what purpose then do you have agents and travellers? If they do their duty you do not need any further information.

I rather doubt that the present sympathy with France (both here and fairly generally all over the world) stems from the fact that the French were given the greater thrashing. However, this much is certain: if the Prussians should be given another thrashing at a later stage (which is not at all improbable) people will laugh at them, rather than sympathise with them. The fact is that you cannot see beyond the end of your noses; but the hangover will follow the victory celebrations soon enough, and then you will find it hard to take much pleasure in yourselves. For all your power and glory you are as firmly 'in the thrall of Olmiitz' as ever. Olmütz was made in Warsaw,170 where your sovereign lord, the Emperor of Russia,b commanded you to bow to Austria and the Federal Diet, and now that you have made sure that for many years to come France (which after all lies on your border) will remain your enemy, Russia will be your only protector and will soon make you pay for that protection. You are more firmly in the grip of Russian domination than ever before.

Would you kindly give my motherc my warmest wishes and say that I shall be writing to her shortly. Give my regards to your wife

[^1]: a Gottfried Ermen - b Nicholas I - c Elisabeth Engels



