---
Volume: 44
Document_Title: "69. Marx to Paul Lafargue. 23 March "
Page_Range: "156-159"
---

# 69. Marx to Paul Lafargue. 23 March 



**[p. 121]**

and children and all my brothers and sisters and all their encumbrances.

Your

Frederick

First published in Deutsche Revue, Bd. II, Printed according to the original Stuttgart and Leipzig, 1921

Published in English for the first time

69

MARX TO PAUL LAFARGUE m

IN BORDEAUX118

London, 23 March 1871

Dear Paul,

I enclose Serraillier's declaration in the Courrier de l'Europe, 18 March, 1871—(this French paper is published at London) in regard to the impudent mystification of the Paris-Journal of March 14, of which you are probably aware.17'

The following is published in The Times of 22nd March 1871 under the title ' The International Association':

'M. Karl Marx asks us to contradict the statement contained in a letter published by us on the 16th of March, from our Paris correspondent, that

'M. Karl Marx says this statement has evidently been taken from the Paris-Journal of the 14th of March, where also the publication in full of the pretended letter is promised, and that the Paris-Journal of the 19th of March contains a letter dated London, February 28, 1871, purporting to be signed by him, which letter M. Marx declares is from beginning to end an impudent forgery.'"

[^1]: "Karl Marx has written a letter to one of his principal affiliés in Paris, stating that he is not satisfied with the attitude which the members of that society have taken up in that city, that they violate the Statutes of the Association in dabbling in politics, that they disorganise labour instead of organising it, etc."

[^2]: a K. Marx and F. Engels, 'To the Editor of The Times'.





**[p. 122]**

In to-day's Times (23 March, 1871) the following declaration of the General Council* is published:

'The Anti-German League172 of Paris To the Editor of "The Times"

'Sir,

'A statement has gone the round of the English press that the Paris members of the International Working Men's Association had in so far joined the so-called Anti-German League as to declare all Germans to be henceforth excluded from our association.

'This statement is the very reverse of fact. Neither the Federal Council of our association in Paris, nor any of the Paris sections represented by that council, have ever passed any such resolution. The so-called Anti-German League, as far as it exists at all, is the exclusive work of the upper and middle classes; it was started by the Jockey Club,173 and kept up by the adhesions of the Academy, of the Stock Exchange, of some bankers and manufacturers, etc. The working classes have nothing whatever to do with it.

'The object of these calumnies is evident. A short time before the outbreak of the late war the International was made the general scapegoat for all untoward events. This is now repeated over again. While the Swiss and Prussian press accuse it of having created the late outrage upon Germans in Zurich,174 French papers, such as the Courrier de Lyon, Le Courrier de la Gironde, La Liberté, etc., tell of certain secret meetings of Internationals having been held at Geneva and Bern, the Prussian ambassador in the chair, in which meetings a plan was concocted to hand over Lyons to the united Prussians and Internationals for the sake of common plunder.

[^1]: a K. Marx, 'Statement by the General Council to the Editor of The Times and Other Papers'.





**[p. 123]**

'J. G. Eccarius, General Secretary' London, March 22

I have to-day still so many letters to write that I must shut up. Tell Laura that I was greatly delighted with her letter.

Yours,

K. Marx3

Your letter to Jenny has just arrived. It is not my youthful ardour, as you believe, but manifestoes published by the Federal Council of Paris during the war and communicated to us officially, that made the GENERAL COUNCIL believe in the possibility of such a foolish thing as the exclusion of the German Internationals by the Parisian Internationals! I have today sent to the Volksstaat in

Leipzig (Liebknecht's newspaper) and the Zukunft in Berlin (Dr Jacoby's organ) a statement on the fantasies of the Paris-Journal and the alleged exclusion of the German Internationals by the Parisians, which has caused a great commotion in the German 'bonne presse'} I concluded this statement with the words:

'It is quite natural that the important dignitaries and the ruling classes of the old society who can only maintain their own power and the exploitation of the productive masses by national conflicts and antagonisms, recognise their common adversary in the International Working Men's Association.'

[^1]: First published, in the languages of the original (English and French), in Annali, an. 1, Milan, 1958

[^2]: Printed according to the original

[^3]: a Thus far Marx wrote in English. The rest of the letter is in French. - b K. Marx, 'To the Editorial Boards of the Volksstaat and the Zukunft'.



