---
Volume: 44
Document_Title: "73. Marx to Wilhelm Liebknecht. 6 April "
Page_Range: "162-165"
---

# 73. Marx to Wilhelm Liebknecht. 6 April 



**[p. 72]**

ENGELS TO WILHELM LIEBKNECHT

IN LEIPZIG

London, 5 April 1871 122 Regent's Park Road, N.W.

Dear Liebknecht,

Could you have the enclosed3 inserted in the next issue of the Volksstaat? Precisely this STRIKE is one of supreme importance for the International in Belgium.177

I congratulate you on your release.178

Best regards.

Your

F. E.

If the German cigar-workers can afford to advance funds to Antwerp, this should be set in train. The Elberfeld Address was received by the GENERAL COUNCIL yesterday to be sent on and has already gone off.179 I have read it.

73

[London,] 6 April 1871

Dear Liebknecht,

The news that you and Bebel as well as the Brunswick people were released178 was received here in the Centralb Council with great rejoicing.

[^1]: First published, in Russian, in Marx- Printed according to the original Engels Archives, Vol. I (VI), Moscow, 1932

[^2]: Published in English for the first time

[^3]: MARX TO WILHELM LIEBKNECHT1

[^4]: IN LEIPZIG

[^5]: a F. Engels, 'On the Cigar-Workers' Strike in Antwerp'. - b General

[^6]: 6*





**[p. 128]**

It seems the Parisians are succumbing. It is their own fault but a fault which really was due to their too great honnêteté? The Central Committee and later the Commune gave that MISCHIEVOUS avorton,h

Thiers, time to consolidate hostile forces, in the first place by their folly of not wanting to start a civil war—as if Thiers had not already started it by his attempt at forcibly disarming Paris, as if the National Assembly, summoned merely to decide the question of war or peace with the Prussians, had not immediately declared war on the Republic] Secondly, in order that the appearance of having usurped power should not attach to them, they lost precious moments (they should immediately have advanced on Versailles after the defeat (Place Vendôme) of the réactionnaires in Paris 175) by the election of the Commune, the organisation of which, etc., cost yet more time.

You must not believe a word of all the stuff you get to see in the papers about the internal events in Paris. It is all lies and deception. Never has the vileness of the reptile bourgeois newspaper hacks displayed itself more splendidly.

It is highly characteristic that the German Unity-Emperor,c

Unity-Empire, and Unity-Parliament in Berlin appear not to exist at all for the outside world. Every breath of wind that stirs in Paris excites more interest.

You should follow developments in the Danube Principalities with some care. If the revolution in France is defeated for the time being—the movement there can only be suppressed for a short time—Europe will have to face a new threat of war from the East, and Romania will be the first to present the orthodox Tsard

with a pretext. So keep an eye on events there.

One of the most comical phenomena in London is undoubtedly that ex-student Karl Blind. The self-important fellow eagerly seized on the recent war to show off his pan-Germanic allegiance. He was the first to start screaming for Alsace-Lorraine. He even had the impudence to deny the great revolutionary activities of the French people in the past. The scoundrel even ventured to warn the local workers not to incur the hostility of workers in Germany by their sympathy for France against Prussia! Each week this gentleman composes a report describing the activities of Karl Blind and sends it to all the London papers, two or three of which are actually so foolish as to print these bulletins of, about and for Karl Blind. If this system is applied consistently, one cannot fail to force oneself on the public in the end. In this manner this weighty

[^1]: a decency - b degenerate - c William I - d Alexander II





**[p. 129]**

personage has managed to delude a section of local public opinion into believing that he plays the same sort of role in Germany as Mazzini used to in Italy. In his bulletins he recounts what Karl Blind had announced in the Viennese Freie Presse, and how the whole of Germany looked forward to his oracular utterances with bated breath and anxiously awaited for Karl Blind to deliver himself of the watchword for the week. Now it would be extremely desirable—since this individual, this puffed-up frog, does make us Germans here ridiculous—if you people in the Volksstaat could publish a few home truths about the fellow and his 'complete unimportance'.180 We would ensure that a translation appeared in The Eastern Post (a London workers' paper). It is quite simple. Karl Blind does not exist in the eyes of the German working class, and a republican German middle class, whose MOUTHPIECE he pretends to be, does not exist anywhere and hence cannot exist for Karl Blind either. HE IS NOWHERE. While such figures should not be taken seriously, it is no less true that they should not be allowed to delude the public ON FALSE PRETENCES.

Laura had already arrived in Bordeaux some days before the siege of Paris began.

Our children—Tussy and Jennychen (the latter suffering from pleurisy)—are also going to Bordeaux shortly.

Bebel would oblige me greatly if he could arrange for me to be sent regularly the stenographic reports of the Berlin Unity- Reichstag.

A visit from you here would be very welcome. The Volksstaat must be preserved at all costs now. I have some prospects of being able to raise money for it.

My warmest greetings to your dear wife.3

Your

K. M.

Could you not let me have a reliable address in Leipzig? Apropos. I enclose a charming notice about Stieber from the Petit Journal (which appears in Paris) in its issue of 5 April.181

[^1]: First published abridged, in Russian, in Pravda, No. 75, 17 March 1931 and in full in Marx-Engels Archives, Vol. I (VI), Moscow, 1932

[^2]: Printed according to the original

[^3]: Published in English in full for the first time

[^4]: a Natalie Liebknecht



