---
Volume: 44
Document_Title: "74. Marx to Wilhelm Liebknecht. Around 10 April "
Page_Range: "165-166"
---

# 74. Marx to Wilhelm Liebknecht. Around 10 April 



**[p. 74]**

MARX TO WILHELM LIEBKNECHT137

IN LEIPZIG

London, [around 10 April]3 1871

Dear Wilhelm,

Just two notices in great haste which you could surely arrange to put into the Volksstaat:

1. In the Papiers et correspondance de la famille impériale, now officially published, there is a reference under the letter V (the recipients of money are arranged alphabetically ) which states verbo

tenus :

'Vogt—il lui est remis en août 1859 40,000 francs.'c

2. Whereas the Bismarck government in Germany has made correspondence with me into a more or less highly penal affair (vide the Brunswick trial,183 just like the Cologne Communist trial of earlier years 138), in France it attempts to discredit me (and with me the International in Paris—that is the aim of the whole manoeuvre) by branding me as one of Mr Bismarck's agents. This is done through the organs of the old-Bonapartist police which is still entwined by international bonds with Stieber's police— particularly under the Thiers regime.

In consequence I have been compelled to publish denials in The Times of various lies that have appeared in the Paris-Journal, the Gaulois, and so on, because the rubbish is reported to the English press by telegraph.171 The latest example was provided by the Soir (the paper of About, the well-known Plonplonistd), which has only very recently been suppressed by the Commune, and from the

Soir it circulated to all the French reactionary press throughout the provinces. E.g. today I received from Laura (BY THE BY, Lafargue is at this moment in Paris as a delegate from Bordeaux) the following extract from the paper La Province (and yesterday I received the same piece from a clerical newspaper in Belgium):

[^1]: 'Paris, 2 April. A piece of news just arrived from Germany is causing a great sensation here. Authentic proof is now to hand to show that Karl Marx, one of the

[^2]: a In the original '14 March', which is a slip of the pen. - b literally - c 'Vogt—40,000 francs were remitted to him in August 1859.' - d an adherent of Prince Joseph Napoleon known under the nickname of Plon-Plon



