---
Volume: 44
Document_Title: "75. Marx to Ludwig Kugelmann. 12 April "
Page_Range: "166-170"
---

# 75. Marx to Ludwig Kugelmann. 12 April 



**[p. 131]**

most influential leaders of the International, was the private secretary of Count Bismarck in 1857, and has never ceased to remain in contact with his former patron.'"

Stieber really is becoming a 'terror'!

Salut.

Your

K. M.

First published, in Russian, in Marx- Printed according to the original Engels Archives, Vol. I (VI), Moscow, 1932

75

MARX T O LUDWIG KUGELMANN 1 2 1

IN HANOVER

London, 12 April 1871

Dear Kugelmann,

Your 'doctor's orders' were effective insofar as I consulted my Dr Maddison and have for the present put myself under his treatment. H e says, however, that my lungs are in excellent condition and the coughing is connected with bronchitis, etc. Ditto, it may affect the liver.

Yesterday we received the by no means reassuring news that Lafargue (not Laura) is in Paris at the moment.

If you look at the last chapter of my Eighteenth Brumaire you will find that I say that the next attempt of the French revolution will be no longer, as before, to transfer the bureaucratic military machine from one hand to another, but to break it, and that is essential for every real people's revolution on the Continent. And this is what our heroic Party comrades in Paris are attempting. What resilience, what historical initiative, what a capacity for sacrifice in these Parisians! After six months of hunger and ruin, caused rather by internal treachery than by the external enemy, they rise, beneath Prussian bayonets, as if there had never been a war between France and Germany and the enemy were not still at the gates of Paris! History has no like example of a like greatness.

[^1]: a 'Nouvelles d'hier', La Province, No. 428, 5 April 1871.





**[p. 132]**

If they are defeated only their 'decency' will be to blame. They should have marched at once on Versailles, after first Vinoy and then the reactionary section of the Paris National Guard had themselves retired from the battlefield. The right moment was missed because of conscientious scruples. They did not want to start the civil war, as if that MISCHIEVOUS avorton3 Thiers had not already started the civil war with his attempt to disarm Paris! Second mistake: The Central Committee surrendered its power too soon, to make way for the Commune.184 Again from a too 'honourable' scrupulousness! However that may be, the present rising in Paris—-even if it be crushed by the wolves, swine and vile curs of the old society—is the most glorious deed of our Party since the June Insurrection in Paris.1 Compare these Parisians, storming the heavens, with the slaves to heaven of the German- Prussian Holy Roman Empire, with its posthumous masquerades reeking of the barracks, the Church, the cabbage Junkers and above all, of the philistines.

Apropos. In the official publication* of the list of those receiving direct subsidies from Louis Bonaparte's treasury there is a note that Vogt received 40,000 francs in August 1859! I have informed Liebknecht of the fait, for further use.c

You can send me the Haxthausen,d because recently I have received various pamphlets, etc., undamaged, not only from Germany, but even from Petersburg.

Thanks for the various newspapers you have been sending (I would ask you for more, as I want to write something about Germany, the Reichstag, etc.).

Your

K. M.

[^1]: Best greetings to the Countess and Käuzchen.e

[^2]: First published abridged in Die Neue Zeit, Printed according to the original Bd. 1, Nr. 23, Stuttgart, 1901-02 and in full, in Russian, in Pisma Marksa k Kugel- manu (Letters from Marx to Kugel- mann), Moscow-Leningrad, 1928

[^3]: a degenerate - b Papiers et correspondance de la famille impériale - c See this vo- lume, p. 130. - d A. von Haxthausen, Ueber den Ursprung und die Grundlagen der Verfassung in den ehemals slavischen Ländern Deutschlands, im allgemeinen und des Herzogthums Pommern im besondern. - e Gertrud and Franziska Kugelmann



t

L-^ „.^-u*^.-- V-*-

^U^. Vf* , Wr'~ ~ - " - " _ 4 M ^ 'k Vt * - * - V*V- ^ *-v^- ^W»-** .*%;>- C s ^ - * ^ . _ ^ ^ > ^ f -

V*--f a-Bv^*- v w >w ^ A Ä?JJJ

-**¥&•

[^1]: Marx's letter to Ludwig Kugelmann of 12 April 1871



. ^ * ~ - ^ c ^ ^YT*— «.-p--^ yo—' W-*M- ' Y V ^ ^ ^ V ^ ^ - V ^ V ^ :^^-l HV

Ä *v*^ 'toft -^v-\ *x\yuw "

^Vc r:^^^

