---
Volume: 44
Document_Title: "76. Marx to Wilhelm Liebknecht. 13 April "
Page_Range: "170-171"
---

# 76. Marx to Wilhelm Liebknecht. 13 April 



**[p. 76]**

MARX TO WILHELM LIEBKNECHT185

IN LEIPZIG

[London,] 13 April 1871

Dear Liebknecht,

You may make use of the 80 thalers either for your family, or for the Volksstaat.3 Both are 'victims' of the recent war.

I do not have the Freiligrath poem; it came out in 1852 and appeared also in Cotta's Morgenblatt which you can perhaps unearth in Leipzig.186

I do not think it would be useful to reprint items from the Revue der Rheinischen Zeitung without introductions, additions, etc., and this is hardly the time for that.187

Engels asks me to tell you that his essay in the Deutsch- Französische Jahrbücherh is now only of historical interest and so no longer has any value as practical propaganda. On the other hand, you could print more extensive excerpts from Capital, e.g. extracts from the chapter on 'Primitive Accumulation',188 etc.

Miquel was in the Leaguec and threw his weight about in the Kingdom of Hanover as the League's District Adviser Extraordi- nary. You can print that, but leave my name out of it, since I have to keep the 'secret' unless directly forced by Miquel [to reveal it].

The Communist Manifesto cannot of course appear without a new preface. Engels and I will see what can be done about it. My kind regards to your dear wife.e

Your

K. M.

[^1]: 'Bid me not speak, bid me be silent To keep the secret I am bound.'d

[^2]: First published, in Russian, in Marx- Engels Archives, Vol. I (VI), Moscow, 1932

[^3]: Printed according to the original

[^4]: Published in English in full for the first time

[^5]: a In the original Volksblatt, which is a slip of the pen. - b F. Engels, Outlines of a Critique of Political Economy. - c the Communist League - d Goethe, Wilhelm Meisters Lehrjahre. - e Natalie Liebknecht



