---
Volume: 44
Document_Title: "79. Engels to Wilhelm Liebknecht. 20 April "
Page_Range: "172-174"
---

# 79. Engels to Wilhelm Liebknecht. 20 April 



**[p. I]**

It would, on the other hand, be of a very mystical nature, if 'accidents' played no part. These accidents themselves fall natural- ly into the general course of development and are compensated again by other accidents. But acceleration and delay are very dependent upon such 'accidents', which include the 'accident' of the character of those who first stand at the head of the movement.

The decisively unfavourable 'accident' this time is by no means to be found in the general conditions of French society, but in the presence of the Prussians in France and their position right before Paris. Of this the Parisians were well aware. But of this, the bourgeois canaille of Versailles were also well aware. Precisely for that reason they presented the Parisians with the alternative of taking up the fight or succumbing without a struggle. In the latter case, the demoralisation of the working class would have been a far greater misfortune than the fall of any number of 'leaders'. The struggle of the working class against the capitalist class and its state has entered upon a new phase with the struggle in Paris. Whatever the immediate results may be, a new point of departure of world-historic importance has been gained.

Adio.

K. M.

79

ENGELS TO WILHELM LIEBKNECHT

London, 20 April 1871 122 Regent's Park Road, N.W.

Dear Liebknecht,

must tell you today in all haste about the so-called INTERNATIONAL DEMOCRATIC ASSOCIATION,192 which you may well never have heard of and which, therefore, might be confused with us.

[^1]: First published abridged in Die Neue Zeit, Printed according to the original Bd. 2, Nr. 23, Stuttgart, 1901-02 and in full, in Russian, in Pisma Marksa k Kugel- manu (Letters from Marx to Kugel- mann), Moscow-Leningrad, 1928

[^2]: IN LEIPZIG





**[p. 138]**

As long as these fellows pursued their activities in obscurity here, we left them to themselves, but if they choose to expand, conflicts will be unavoidable and we shall then have to hit them where it hurts.

So the Volksstaat was confiscated again yesterday for lèse majesté, as we hear on the telegraph.194 I am astonished that it did not happen earlier. You are extremely impudent. But 'after all, this is only right and proper', as Frederick II used to say.

The Vogt storyb should be kept alive for a while. It is evident from the context that Karl Vogt is the only Vogt who can be meant. In the first place, no other Vogt is so well known as to be referred to as Vogt, tout court, without first name and address. In the second place, what other Vogt performed such valuable services at that time for the Bonaparte family that he should have been given 40,000 frs in August, i.e. immediately after the

[^1]: a 16 April - b See this volume, p. 130.



