---
Volume: 44
Document_Title: "80. Engels to Francisco Mora. Around 20 April "
Page_Range: "174-175"
---

# 80. Engels to Francisco Mora. Around 20 April 



**[p. 139]**

conclusion of the Italian campaign? Moreover, the formula, 'il lui a été remis en Août 1859',' indicates that he had received other remittances. T h e more frequently you return to the point, the more the bourgeois press, which suppresses all this, will find itself forced to take note of it. You might also bring it to the attention of the Proletarier and the Volkswille. Since experience has taught me that Stieber's agents are as clumsy at opening letters as they are at fabricating conspiracies, I hereby inform you once and for all that all my letters to you are securely sealed with my seal and the initials F. E. in Gothic script. T h e Prussians cannot yet in all decency break open sealing-wax on rubber, and certainly not so that it cannot be noticed. Mostly they just tear open the side of the envelope with their oafish fists. So if my seal is not clear and legible you will know what has happened. It will at any rate infuriate the fellows to have to let a letter addressed to you and with F. E. on the seal pass through their hands unbroken.

It is time for the post and I still have all sorts of things to tell you, but I must end now.

Your

F. E.

First published, in Russian, in Marx- Printed according to the original Engels Archives, Vol. I (VI), Moscow, 1932 , . , , . „ , . , . Published in English tor the first

80

IN MADRID

[Résumé of a letter]

[London, around 20 April 1871]

[^1]: ENGELS T O FRANCISCO MORA 1 9 5

[^2]: O n 19 April the relevant extracts from Nos. 80-92 of the Federation about the SPINNERS'STRIKE in Barcelona b sent to Eccarius who was to report on it to the Manchester TRADE COUNCIL.

[^3]: a 'it was remitted to him in August 1859' - b See F. Engels, 'Outline of an Appeal of the General Council to the Weavers' and Spinners' Trade Unions of Manchester for Assistance to the Spanish Textile Workers Strike'.



