---
Volume: 44
Document_Title: "81. Marx to Friedrich Adolph Sorge. Around20 April "
Page_Range: "175-176"
---

# 81. Marx to Friedrich Adolph Sorge. Around20 April 



**[p. 140]**

Wrote ditto to Mora, acknowledging receipt and reporting what had happened, pointing out that little help would be forthcoming because of the Belgian and Sunderland STRIKES and the general world situation. .

The loan an essential instrument and the one we have mainly used up to now. Therefore the Barcelonese must write a letter binding themselves to repay all loan-monies received through the agency of the General Council. This only necessary to comply with the formalities of the English TRADE UNIONS.

Promise a copy of the Address on Paris.196

First published in: Marx and Engels, Printed according to the original Works, Second Russian Edition, Vol. 33, Moscow 1964 Published in English for the first time

81

MARX TO FRIEDRICH ADOLPH SORGE137

IN HOBOKEN

[London, around 20 April 1871]

Dear Mr Sorge,

My best thanks for the Kellogg,3 which arrived safely this time; ditto for the other things you sent.

The Committee11 will receive its replies sooner in future, but in recent weeks business on the European Continent, together with agitation here among the English, 7 has taken up all the more time as the majority of the non-English secretaries are in Paris.

Yours most sincerely,

K. M.

[^1]: First published in Briefe und Auszüge aus Printed according to the original Briefen von Joh. Phil. Becker, Jos. Dietzgen, Friedrich Engels, Karl Marx u. A. an F.A.

[^2]: Sorge und Andere, Stuttgart, 1906

[^3]: a E. Kellogg, A New Monetary System See this volume, p. 57. - b the Central Committee of the International Working Men's Association for the United States



