---
Volume: 44
Document_Title: "84. Marx to Wilhelm Liebknecht. 4 May "
Page_Range: "179-180"
---

# 84. Marx to Wilhelm Liebknecht. 4 May 



**[p. 84]**

MARX TO WILHELM LIEBKNECHT

IN LEIPZIG

[London,] 4 MAY 1871

Dear LIBRARY,3

Just this in great haste. The Papiers et correspondance de la famille impériale, in which Vogt figures among others as someone who was subsidised from the official coffers,b were not published by the Commune, which has no time for such trivia, but by the gouvernement de la défense, i.e. by Jules Favre et Co., the honest republicans so greatly admired by Vogt in his letters to Kolb.201

Extracts from these official publications (and particularly the names of those who received subsidies) were printed in almost all the Paris papers. The cutting I enclose comes from the Petit Journal (issue of 3 May 187Ie), a paper which to this very day is conducting in Paris the same sort of campaign against the Commune as Signor Vogt in Vienna. From a sense of spiritual affinity with Vogt it even prints a (?) after his name.

Meanwhile, Vogt himself retracts all his talk when he says at the end of his gibberish:

So Louis Bonaparte misused 'Vogt' by inscribing his name in his expenses-book! 'Vogt' as someone subsidised by Louis Bonaparte in August 1859—and moreover, just plain 'Vogt', Vogt without 'first name', Vogt sans phrase—naturally, that could only be the 'celebrated' Karl Vogt of Geneva! Mr Vogt is so well aware of that that he says 'my name was misused'. The good man feels so stung that he forgets to have recourse to the simple evasion: Just as there are many 'Karls' in the world, so too are there many 'Vogts'. What does it matter to me if some 'Vogt' or other without a first name received 40,000 frs in August 1859 from the Emperor's central treasury? No, says Vogt, I am the Vogt, the Vogt to whom

[^1]: 'It is even possible that my name was misused as far back as 1859, albeit, so it seems, without my first name Karl.'d

[^2]: a This nickname was given to Liebknecht by Marx's daughters. - b See this volume, p. 130. - c In the original a slip of the pen. The correct date is 25 March 1871 (see this volume, p. 146). - d C. Vogt, 'An die Redaktion des Schweizer Handels-Couriers',

[^3]: Der Volksstaat, No. 36, 3 May 1871.



