---
Volume: 44
Document_Title: "85. Engels to Wilhelm Liebknecht. 4 May "
Page_Range: "180-181"
---

# 85. Engels to Wilhelm Liebknecht. 4 May 



**[p. 145]**

people refer even without 'first name', but 'my name' has been ' misused' !

You must use all this to make the necessary statement in your paper. It is quite absurd to mince words for the sake of Mr Weiß and similar 'People's Partyites'.202

Your

K. M.

First published, in Russian, in Marx- Printed according to the original Engels Archives, Vol. I (VI), Moscow, 1932 . . . r Published in English tor the first

85

ENGELS TO WILHELM LIEBKNECHT

IN LEIPZIG

[London,] 4 May 1871

Dear Liebknecht,

Enclosed an article for the Volksstaa L* The Antwerp cigar-makers maintain that, at the time of the great German cigar-workers' STRIKE, they had sent a contribution of 3,000 frs in support. The STRIKE in Antwerp and Brussels is still in progress " 7 and, if this story of the 3,000 frs is correct, it would damn-well be the responsibility of the Germans to pay it back. Please, try to find out about it and, depending on the result, write something on it briefly in the Volksstaat.

We have greatly enjoyed Bebel's speeches and articles here. His speech in the debate on Basic Rights was excellent,203 and the elegant superiority with which he, a worker, poured ridicule on the assortment of priests, Junkers and bourgeois, was really by far the best thing that has yet happened in the entire Berlin spittoon.

We heard with pleasure that you were going to visit us soon. You can, of course, stay both with me and with Marx; we shall arrange all that.

[^1]: a F. Engels, 'Once Again "Herr Vogt" '.



