---
Volume: 44
Document_Title: "88. Marx to Leo Frankel and Louis Eugène Varlin. 13 May "
Page_Range: "183-185"
---

# 88. Marx to Leo Frankel and Louis Eugène Varlin. 13 May 



**[p. 148]**

Britain and as such has to keep up the agitation in this country which Eccarius never did and which yet is very important. This latter portion of his duties Marx and I consider the most important.

However, you will have to talk the matter over and see what can be done.

At all events here you have our opinion (confidentially of course) as you asked for it; there is no hurry, perhaps it might be as well merely to come to a provisional arrangement, but that will be for your committee to decide, as well as all the rest.

Very truly yours,

F. Engels

Those fellows that ran away from Fort Issy206 without being attacked deserve to be shot. The military situation has become much worse through this piece of cowardice.

First published in: Marx and Engels, Reproduced from the original Works, First Russian Edition, Vol. XXVI, , . ,. , r , r. Moscow, 1935 Published m English for the first time

88

[Draft] [London,] 13 MAY 1871

Dear Citizens Frankel and Varlin,

Might it not be useful if all papers likely to compromise the riffraff of Versailles were kept in a safe place?b A precaution of this kind could never do any harm.

They have written to me from Bordeaux to say that four Internationalists have been elected at the last municipal elec-

[^1]: MARX TO LÉO FRANKEL AND LOUIS EUGÈNE VARLIN207

[^2]: IN PARIS

[^3]: I have had a number of interviews with the bearer.3

[^4]: a presumably N. Eilau - b See K. Marx, The Civil War in France (First Draft). 'The Government of Defence'.





**[p. 149]**

I have written hundreds of letters on behalf of your cause to all the corners of the earth where we have branches. The working class was, incidentally, pro-Commune since the latter's incep- tion.

Even the bourgeois papers in this country have departed from their earlier ferocity. From time to time I contrive to slip a favourable paragraph into them.3

I believe that the Commune wastes too much time over trifles and personal squabbles. One can see that there are influences at work other than those of the working men. None of this would matter if you had time enough to make up for lost time.

It is very necessary to do quickly what you intend to do outside Paris, in England or elsewhere. The Prussians won't hand over the forts to the Versailles people, but after the definitive conclusion of peace (26 MAY209)b they will allow the government to invest Paris with its gendarmes. Since Thiers & Co. had, as you know, stipulated a handsome bribe in their treaty concluded by Pouyer-Quertier,210 they refused to accept Bismarck's offer of assistance by German bankers. Had they done so, they would have forfeited their bribe. Since the prior condition for the accomplish- ment of their treaty was the conquest of Paris, they asked Bismarck to delay payment of the first instalment until the occupation of Paris. Bismarck accepted this condition. Prussia, being herself in urgent need of that money, will therefore provide the Versailles people with every possible facility to hasten the occupation of Paris. So be on your guard!

[^1]: First published, in the language of the Printed according to the original original (French), in Die Neue Zeil, Bd. 1, Nr. 23, Stuttgart, 1911 Translated from the French

[^2]: a See, for instance, K. Marx, 'To the Editor of The Times', The Times, No. 27028, 4 April 1871. - b In the original there follows a phrase 'they will leave everything for Thiers to do', which is crossed out.



