---
Volume: 44
Document_Title: "89. Marx to Edward Spencer Beesly. 12 June "
Page_Range: "185-187"
---

# 89. Marx to Edward Spencer Beesly. 12 June 



**[p. 89]**

MARX TO EDWARD SPENCER BEESLY211

IN LONDON

London, 12 June 1871

1 Maitland Park Road, N.W.

My dear Sir,

Lafargue, his family and my daughters are in the Pyrenees near the Spanish border but on the French side of it.212 As Lafargue was born in Cuba he was able to obtain a Spanish passport. I wish however he would definitely settle on the Spanish side, as he played a leading role in Bordeaux.

Despite my admiration for your articles in the Bee-Hive,213 I am almost sorry to see your name in that newspaper. Permit me to observe in passing that as a Party man I take up an entirely hostile attitude towards Comtism,214 while as a scholar I have a very poor opinion of it; I regard you however as the only Comtist, both in England and in France, who deals with historical turning points (CRISES) not as a sectarian but as an historian in the best sense of the word. The Bee-Hive pretends to be a workers' paper but it is really the organ of renegades, sold to Sam. Morley & Co. During the recent Franco-Prussian war, the General Council of the International was obliged to sever all connection with this paper and publicly to declare that it was a workers' paper only in appearance.215 The big London papers, however, with the exception of the local London Eastern Post, refused to print this declaration.3 In such circumstances your cooperation with the Bee-Hive is a further sacrifice you are making to the good cause.

A woman friend of mineb will be going to Paris in three or four days. I am giving her regular passports for some members of the Commune who are still hiding in Paris.0 If you or one of your friends have any commissions there please write to me.

publishes every day about my writings and my relations with the

[^1]: What comforts me is the nonsense which the petite presse0

[^2]: a K. Marx, 'Resolution of the General Council on The Bee-Hive'. - b presumably Anna Jaclard - c See this volume, p. 174. - d yellow press





**[p. 151]**

Commune; this is sent to me each day from Paris. It shows that the Versailles police is very hard put to it to get hold of genuine documents. My relations with the Commune were maintained through a German merchant3 who travels on business between Paris and London all the year round. Everything was settled verbally with the exception of two matters:

First, through the same intermediary I sent the members of the Commune a letter in answer to a question from them as to how they could sell certain securities on the London Ex- change.1"

Second, on 11 May, ten days before the catastrophe, I sent them via the same channel all the details of the secret agreement between Bismarck and Favre in Frankfurt.216

I had this information from Bismarck's right hand—a man c

who had formerly (from 1848 to 1853) belonged to a secret society of which I was the leader.217 This man knows that I still have all the reports which he sent me from and about Germany. He is dependent on my discretion. Hence his continual efforts to prove to me his good intentions. It is the same man who, as I told you, had warned me that Bismarck was determined to have me arrested if I again visited Dr Kugelmann in Hanover this year.

If only the Commune had listened to my warnings! I advised its members to fortify the northern side of the heights of Montmartre, the Prussian side, and they still had time to do this; I told them beforehand that they would otherwise be caught in a trap; I denounced Pyat, Grousset and Vésinier to them; I demanded that they should at once send to London all the documents compromising the members of the National Defence, so that by this means the savagery of the enemies of the Commune could to some extent be held in check—thus the plan of the Versailles people would at least partially have been frustrated.

If the Versailles people had discovered these documents, they would not have published forged ones.

The "Address" of the International11 will not be published befo- re Wednesday.e I shall then send you a copy at once. Material for four to five sheets has been compressed into two. Hence the

[^1]: a probably N. Eilau. - b See this volume, p. 142. — c Lothar Bucher - d K. Marx, The Civil War in France. - e 14 June



