---
Volume: 44
Document_Title: "92. Engels to Elisabeth Engels. 16 June "
Page_Range: "190-192"
---

# 92. Engels to Elisabeth Engels. 16 June 



**[p. 155]**

Old Nicka

First published, in Russian, in Voin- Reproduced from the original stvuyushchy materialist, Book 4, Moscow, , jogg Published in English for the first time

92

ENGELS TO ELISABETH ENGELS

IN ENGELSKIRCHEN

London, 16 June 1871

Dear Mother,

I was just sitting down to write to you when your letter from Leutesdorf arrived, which moved me to take out the map from which I was fortunate enough to discover the place. It must be very prettily situated, just there where the mountains come right up close to the Rhine again, with a view of the plain which stretches from Andernach to Koblenz. I am sure that the air there will have been very good for you.

You have done well to take a whole party of lively young girls home with you to Engelskirchen. Relations between the two adjoining housesb must be rather tense and embarrassing under the circumstances, and the presence of the girls will make sure that it is not talked about too much. Moreover, since the matter has now been settled it would be only right and proper for both sides to leave you in peace; it cannot do any good to keep raking over the ashes. As far as I am concerned, it was extremely unpleasant for me to find myself suddenly asked by Rudolf to do a favour for him, Hermann and Emil which I could not carry out without taking sides against Adolf. As you know, Rudolf is as honest as the day is long and is quite unable to dissemble, so that his letter did not leave me in the slightest doubt that the whole

[^1]: a Marx's family nickname - b An allusion to the relations between Engels' brothers—Rudolf, Emil and Hermann—on the one hand, and Adolf von Griesheim, the husband of Engels' sister, on the other.





**[p. 156]**

As for my coming on a visit, that is a separate problem. As you know, ever since the business in Paris, there has been general hounding of us "Internationals"; we are supposed to have incited the whole revolution here from London, which is much the same as if someone were to accuse me of having stirred up the ill-feeling between Adolf and my brothers. But the hue and cry is on and we have definite information that Marx, who was expected in Hanover, would have been arrested there. True, they could not do me any serious harm if I did go over, but there could be minor conflicts, and I wouldn't have it for the world that they should take place in your house. Furthermore, the wretched Belgians still insist on passports. I think therefore that it would be best to wait a while until the police and the philistine heads have calmed down a little.

That is a strange business with Emma.b You seem to have curious accoucheurs in Barmen.

[^1]: a See this volume, pp. 119-20. - b Emma Engels



