---
Volume: 44
Document_Title: "93. Marx to Ludwig Kugelmann. 18 June "
Page_Range: "192-193"
---

# 93. Marx to Ludwig Kugelmann. 18 June 



**[p. 157]**

We have also had a lot of east wind here, but not until late May, so that the weather was often very fine and not excessively cold. Nevertheless, a fire had to be lit a few times early in June. It has been sultry since the day before yesterday, and there has been heavy rain which was very good for the plants, and it looks now as if we shall soon have fine weather. On the whole we had a very pleasant spring here, much better than in Manchester. I often have visitors from there. The day before yesterday, Dr Gumpert and his wife were here. She was puzzled about what I did with such a large house but was full of praise for the good order in which it was kept. Otherwise I have my usual good health and appetite, am now trying to accustom myself to an afternoon nap, am visibly greyer in the beard, and suffer, as always, almost only from thirst. I hope that you are also well and still able to take your walks in the linden avenue on the Agger, where I hope quite soon to be able to lie down again on a bench after a meal and fall asleep.

Affectionate greetings to all from your faithful son,

Frederick

First published abridged in Deutsche Revue, Bd. II, Leipzig, 1921 and in full in: Marx and Engels, Works, First Russian Edition, Vol. XXVI, Moscow, 1935

93

[London,] 18 June 1871

Dear Kugelmann,

You must forgive my silence; even now I have only time to Hvrite a few lines.

You know that throughout the period of the last Paris revolution I was denounced continuously as the 'grand chef de l'Internationale'3 by the Versailles papers (Stieber collaborating) and par répercussionh by the press here.

Printed according to the original

[^1]: MARX TO LUDWIG KUGELMANN m

[^2]: IN HANOVER

[^3]: a 'ringleader of the International'. See this volume, p. 124. - h following them

[^4]: Published in English for the first time

[^5]: 7-556



