---
Volume: 44
Document_Title: "94. Marx to an Unknown Addressee. 19 June "
Page_Range: "193-194"
---

# 94. Marx to an Unknown Addressee. 19 June 



**[p. 158]**

And now the Address,3 which you will have received. It is making the devil of a noise and I have the h o n o u r to be AT THIS MOMENT THE

BEST CALUMNIATED AND THE MOST MENACED MAN OF LONDON. T h a t r e a l l y d o e s one good after a tedious twenty years' idyll in the backwoods. T h e government p a p e r — T h e Observer—threatens m e with legal pro- secution. Qu'ils osent! Je me moque bien de ces canailles-là!h I am enclosing a cutting from The Eastern Post, because it has o u r answer to Jules Favre's circular.224 O u r answer appeared originally in The Times of 13 June. That honourable paper received a severe reprimand from M r Bob Lowe (CHANCELLOR OF THE EXCHEQUER and member of the Supervisory Committee of The Times) for this indiscretion.

My best thanks for the Reuters c and MY BEST COMPLIMENTS TO Madame la Comtesse et ma chère Fränzchen. d

Your

K. M.

First published abridged in Die Neue Zeit, Printed according to the original Bd. 2, Nr. 25, Stuttgart, 1901-02 and in full, in Russian, in Pisma Marksa Kugel- manu (Letters from Marx to Kugel- mann), Moscow-Leningrad, 1928

94

[London,] 19 June 1871

1 Modena Villas, Maitland Park, Haverstock Hill, W.L.

Sir,

Yours obediently,

Karl Marx

[^1]: MARX T O A N U N K N O W N ADDRESSEE 1 9 4

[^2]: Please send me two copies of the Pall Mall of Saturday last (17 June). e I enclose 5 d. for the transmission.

[^3]: Published for the first time Reproduced from the original

[^4]: a K. Marx, The Civil War in France. - b Let them dare! I don't care a damn about these scoundrels! - c F. Reuter, Ut mine Stromtid. - d Gertrud and Franziska Kugelmann - e The leader of this issue, 'The International Working Men's Association', dealt with Marx's Address The Civil War in France. See also this volume, p. 159.



