---
Volume: 44
Document_Title: "95. Engels to Wilhelm Liebknecht. 22 June "
Page_Range: "194-196"
---

# 95. Engels to Wilhelm Liebknecht. 22 June 



**[p. 95]**

ENGELS TO WILHELM LIEBKNECHT225

IN LEIPZIG

London, 22 June 1871

Dear Liebknecht,

Herewith the translation of Section I of the Address.3 The rest will follow so quickly that you can print Section I in two successive issues, i.e. you will have more copy in 8 days. On condition

1. that you print quickly and a lot in each issue; 2. that there are no marginal notes; I have translated so as to make them superfluous, apart from innuendos and details which could not in any case be explained in a few words;

3. that the type is left standing for separate publication as a pamphlet, which on this occasion is extremely necessary. If you do not have the money or credit for this, let us know.

Anything you cannot print you should replace with dots and send the relevant part of the manuscript to Becker in Geneva for him to publish it in the Vorbote (mark it clearly so that he can see where such passages fit in).226

You will have already received the copy of the original Address which I sent you as a letter with a few lines.45 More of these are available.

The Address has caused a tremendous hullaballoo here in London. First they tried to ignore it, but it was not possible. On Wednesday the 14th, The Evening Standard published a denuncia- tion, on the 15th The Daily News had an excerpt that then went through most other papers. Then The Echo, Spectator on Saturday, Graphic, Pall Mall Gazette, Telegraph—with leading articles, and that was it. On Monday The Times followed with a really lousy LEADER, then the Standard once more, yesterday The Times again, and the whole of London spoke only of us.227 All wailing, of course. Tant mieux.h

In your place I would not give up Hessian citizenship without having a substitute safely in my pocket. You are too timid on this issue. A single great public scandal, which would make it clear to the whole world what a humbug all these imperial laws really are, would put an end to all this nonsense. But if you avoid the scandal

[^1]: I simply do not understand your scruples about deportation.228

[^2]: a K. Marx, The Civil War in France. - b So much the better.





**[p. 160]**

I did not at all realise that your deportation from Prussia was still in force. It may be that the police maintain this. But I was never able to comprehend why you did not settle the matter while you were still a deputy.

I am unable to correspond for the Volksstaat, but, as you see, I help wherever I can.

Nothing can be done about The Pall Mall Gazette. I have myself had all sorts of conflicts with the paper, even in the case of exclusively military articles, and neither you nor I can get political things accepted. I only keep the contact going TO KEEP A FOOTING THERE, so as to be able to print things there from time to time. If they did accept you as a correspondent, which they will not do, none of your reports would be printed. I even went so far in the New Year as to tell the editorb I knew full well that I could only produce military articles for him and not political ones, and said I only did this in the hope that he would publish our factual notices dealing with Party affairs when we thought it necessary. And this is what has happened.

You seem to have a very good idea of Reynolds. The greatest scoundrel in the press here, an arrant coward whenever he is uncertain of success, he has suppressed the entire Address right down to the extract from The Daily News.

The German workers have behaved themselves quite splendidly in this last great crisis, better than anyone else. And Bebel has been an outstanding spokesman on their behalf; his speech on the Commune went through the entire English press and made a great impression here. You should send the Volksstaat to the Pall Mall from time to time; they publish items from it occasionally because the man is afraid of Marx and myself, and because there is another man' there who knows German and makes use of such things. Moreover, the paper readily publishes all sorts of curious information that others do not include.

[^1]: a Der Volksstaat - b Frederick Greenwood - c Nicolas Léon Thieblin



