---
Volume: 44
Document_Title: "98. Marx to Léon Bigot. 11 July "
Page_Range: "202-203"
---

# 98. Marx to Léon Bigot. 11 July 



**[p. 167]**

ahead and establish a Bürger- und Bauernfreund here without more ado.237 You surely ought still to be aware that just as London is larger than Crimmitschau so too the difficulties in setting up a paper and all the demands made of it are correspondingly greater. If you can put some £10,000 at our disposal, we shall be at your service.

Ad vocem Odger, you forget that the man was elected by the Congress and could not be expelled without a valid reason.238 From what you say on this point it is quite clear that you have completely lost touch with the situation here, which is not surprising since the papers maintain a total silence about events within the workers' party.

We have now thoroughly and definitively broken off relations with The Pall Mall Gazette.

Best regards to you and yours from my wifea and the Marx family.

Your

F. E.

First published, in Russian, in Marx- Printed according to the original Engels Archives, Vol. 1 (VI), Moscow, 1932 , , - , , • ,• , r r- Published in English for the first time

98

London, 11 July 1871

Sir,

I declare that the letter attributed to me in which I allegedly speak of Mr Assi is a forgery, like all the other letters attributed to me by the French newspapers.

I have never dealt with Mr Assi either in private or in public with one exception. A few days after the revolution of 18 March the London newspapers published a telegram according to which that revolution was allegedly prepared by me in secret collabora-

[^1]: MARX TO LÉON BIGOT240

[^2]: IN PARIS

[^3]: a Lydia Burns



