---
Volume: 44
Document_Title: "104. Marx to Eugen Oswald. 24 July "
Page_Range: "210-211"
---

# 104. Marx to Eugen Oswald. 24 July 



**[p. 175]**

As to our mutual friend3 the most alarming news has arrived here, but, I hope, it is false, or at all events exaggerated.

If you were able to find me a correspondent in Berlin who might serve as an intermediary for some of the commercial business I have to transact with Petersburg, it would be a useful thing, and for some articles that circuitous way might prove shorter than the direct way. The straight line is not in all cases, as the mathematicians fancy, the shortest one.

Yours most faithfully,

A. Williamsb

First published, in Russian, in Minuvshiye Printed according to the original gody, No. 1, St Petersburg, 1908

Published in English for the first time

104

MARX TO EUGEN OSWALD

[London,] 24 July 1871

Dear Oswald,

I would like warmly to recommend my friend Josef Rozwadows- kic to you. He was Chef d'état major6 under General Wroblewski. He is an excellent young man, mais sans le sou." What he would like, is, for a start, to give French lessons. As soon as he can speak English, it will be possible to look around for a post as engineer for him.

He is living at 9 Packington Street, Essex Road, Islington.

Yours sincerely,

K. Marx

[^1]: IN LONDON

[^2]: First published in: Marx and Engels, Printed according to the original Works, Second Russian Edition, Vol. 33, Moscow, 1964 Published in English for the first time

[^3]: a Hermann Lopatin; see also this volume, p. 152 - b Marx's pseudonym - c Misspelled in the original as 'Rodwanowski'. - d Chief of Staff - e but without a penny



