---
Volume: 44
Document_Title: "106. Marx to Ludwig Kugelmann. 27 July "
Page_Range: "211-212"
---

# 106. Marx to Ludwig Kugelmann. 27 July 



**[p. 105]**

MARX TO CHARLES CARON250

IN NEW ORLEANS

[Résumé of a letter] [London,] 26 July 1871

Lettre sent to Chas. Caron, New Orleans (Président et Secrétaire par interim du Club International et Républicain, etc.). Accepted as branch of the International. Written them to communicate with Central Committee at New York. Sent them 1 Civil War* (2eme

edit), 1 Rules, et 1 Washburne.h

First published in: Marx and Engels, Reproduced from the original Works, Second Russian Edition, Vol. 33, Moscow, 1964 Published in English for the first time

106

[London,] 27 July [1871]

Dear Kugelmann,

I find your silence very strange. I cannot assume that the various packages of printed matter have failed to reach you.

On the other hand, it would be very foolish if you wanted to punish me in this way for not writing—on the old principle of an eye for an eye, a tooth for a tooth. Remember, mon cher, that if the day had 48 hours, I would still not have finished my day's work for months now.

Moreover, I am overrun by other people—newspaper men and others of every description—who want to see the 'MONSTER' with their own eyes.

[^1]: MARX TO LUDWIG KUGELMANN121

[^2]: IN HANOVER

[^3]: Be so good as to send the enclosed note to Liebknecht at once.17

[^4]: The work for the International is immense, and in addition London is overrun with REFUGEES, whom we have to look after.251

[^5]: a K. Marx, The Civil War in France. - b K. Marx, 'Mr. Washburne, the American Ambassador, in Paris'.



