---
Volume: 44
Document_Title: "107. Engels to Wilhelm Liebknecht. Not later than 27 July "
Page_Range: "212-213"
---

# 107. Engels to Wilhelm Liebknecht. Not later than 27 July 



**[p. 177]**

Up till now it has been thought that the emergence of the Christian myths during the Roman Empire was possible only because printing had not yet been invented. Precisely the contrary. The daily press and the telegraph, which in a moment spreads its inventions over the whole earth, fabricate more myths in one day (and the bourgeois cattle believe and propagate them still further), than could have previously been produced in a century.

My daughters have been in the Pyrenees for some months.212

Jennychen, who was still suffering from the after-effects of pleurésie, is, she writes me, mending visibly.

Best thanks for your Germanic despatches. I hope that you, as well as your dear wife and Fränzchena— whom I ask you to greet cordially—are well.

Apropos. You were probably astonished to see that I made references to a duel in my missive to the Pall Mall.b The matter was quite simple. Had I not given the EDITOR this excuse for making a few cheap jokes, he would simply have suppressed the whole thing. As it was he fell [into] the trap and did what was my real purpose—he published word for word the accusations against Jules Favre et Co. contained in the Address/

Salut.

Your

107

ENGELS TO WILHELM LIEBKNECHT

[London, not later than 27 July 1871]

Dear Liebknecht,

Herewith the final portion/

When I gave you the Peasant War, you did not even send me a

[^1]: K. M. First published abridged in Die Neue Zeit, Printed according to the original Bd. 2, Nr. 25, Stuttgart, 1901-1902 and in full, in Russian, in Pisma Marksa k Kugelmanu (Letters from Marx to Kugel- mann), Moscow-Leningrad, 1928

[^2]: IN LEIPZIG

[^3]: a Gertrud and Franziska Kugelmann - b K. Marx, 'Letter to Frederick Greenwood, the Editor of The Pall Mall Gazette'. - c K. Marx, The Civil War in France. - d of the German translation of Marx's The Civil War in France



