---
Volume: 44
Document_Title: "108. Marx to Nikolai Utin. 27 July "
Page_Range: "213-215"
---

# 108. Marx to Nikolai Utin. 27 July 



**[p. 178]**

single copy of it.252 In order to procure some, I had to order them through the local Workers' Society.135 This time I am counting on more decent treatment and would like to have for myself 25 copies of a separate offprint of the Address. I not only have private debts of politeness to repay, but I also have to present copies to the local and other German workers. Apart from myself, the General Council should also be sent 25 copies. You can add 50 copies of Borkheim's pamphlet, for which we shall pay, as well as around 6 copies each of your other publications (1 doz. each of Bebel's and of Dietzgen's things), for which we shall pay too.253

Your

F. E.

We shall also have the German translation printed in America as soon as the complete text becomes available.

First published, in Russian, in Marx- Printed according to the original Engels Archives, Vol. I (VI), Moscow, 1932

Published in English for the first time

108

[London,] 27 July 1871

Dear Citizen,

Last Tuesday" the General Council resolved that there would not be a Congress this year (in view of extraordinary cir- cumstances) but that, as in 1865, there should be a private Conference in London254 to which different sections would be invited to send their delegates. The convocation of this Confer- ence must not be published in the press. Its meetings will not be public ones. The Conference will be required to concern itself, not with theoretical questions, but exclusively with questions of organisation. It will also deal with disputes between the different sections of a particular country. The Conference will open in London on 17 September (third Sunday in September). Jung will advise Becker and Perret of these resolutions.

[^1]: MARX TO NIKOLAI UTIN137

[^2]: IN GENEVA

[^3]: [Draft]

[^4]: a 25 July





**[p. 179]**

At last Tuesday's meeting two questions were put to the General Council by Guillaume255: 1) He sent copies of two letters, one, dated 28 July 1869, from Eccarius, whereby the Alliance was recognised as a section of the International, the other, dated 25 August 1869, from Jung. This was a receipt for the Alliance's contribution (year 1868-69). Now Guillaume is asking if these letters were authentic.

We replied saying that there could be no doubt on that score.

2nd question: 'Has the General Council passed a resolution excluding the Alliance from the International?' We replied, saying, as was the case, that there had been no resolution of this kind

Up till then, there had been nothing but facts to ascertain, but when Robin, on behalf of his mandatories, sought to interpret these facts in a light that would have prejudged the Swiss dispute,9 the Council cut things short!

First it was pointed out that, in a letter preceding the one from Eccarius, the conditions of the Alliance's admission had been specified, that they had been accepted by the Alliance and that it was a question of knowing whether the Alliance had fulfilled those conditions—a question to be dealt with by the Conference.

As to the contribution for 1868-69, it was pointed out that this payment was made by the Alliance to buy its admission to the Basle Congress of 1869 and that thereafter the Alliance had paid nothing further.

As to the second question, it was pointed out that if the General Council had not passed a resolution excluding the Alliance, this certainly was no proof that the Alliance had not excluded itself by its own conduct and actions.

The Council then resolved that, while it might reply to the factual questions raised by Guillaume, it reserved for the Conference the right to pronounce on the essential aspects of the affair.

L'Egalité arrives here at very irregular intervals. You would oblige me by acknowledging receipt of this letter.

Fraternal greetings,

K. M.

P. S. I do not sign myself Secretary for Russia in the Council's manifestoes for fear of compromising our friends in Russia.

[^1]: First published in: Marx and Engels,

[^2]: Works, First Russian Edition, Vol. XXVI, Moscow, 1935

[^3]: Printed according to the original

[^4]: Translated from the French



