---
Volume: 44
Document_Title: "111. Engels to the Mother Superior of the Convent of the Sisters of Providence in Hampstead. Early August "
Page_Range: "224-225"
---

# 111. Engels to the Mother Superior of the Convent of the Sisters of Providence in Hampstead. Early August 



**[p. 111]**

ENGELS T O THE MOTHER SUPERIOR OF THE CONVENT OF THE SISTERS OF PROVIDENCE

IN HAMPSTEAD

IN LONDON

[Draft]

[London, early August 1871]

Madam,

I am taking the liberty of writing to you, following a conversation I had yesterday with one of the sisters from your establishment.

My concern is to find places as boarders for three little girls, Eugénie Dupont (aged 9), Marie D. (aged 7) and Clarisse D. (aged 3). Their father works as foreman in Mr Joseph Higham's musical instrument factory in Manchester; their mother died some eighteen months ago and Mr Dupont, feeling he cannot bring up his children at home in a satisfactory manner, has requested me to find suitable places for them.

The lady who received me yesterday informed me that you would have room for the little girls and that the fee for boarding them would be £13 a child for the first year and £12 for subsequent years; she then suggested I communicate to you in writing what I require.

I would therefore beg you, Madam, to be so kind as to tell me whether you would agree to take them, in which case I should instruct their father to come to London without delay in order to introduce them to you. If, by any chance, you should need further information I would beg you to let me know at what time I should call and provide you with it.

It was Mr Clarkson of Maitland Park who gave me the address of your establishment.

I am, Madam, your most obedient servant,

F. E.

[^1]: First published in: Marx and Engels, Printed according to the original Works, First Russian Edition, Vol. XXVI, , , , „ , Moscow, 1935 Translated from the French Published in English for the first time

[^2]: 8-556



