---
Volume: 44
Document_Title: "113. Engels to Pyotr Lavrov. 9 August "
Page_Range: "227-229"
---

# 113. Engels to Pyotr Lavrov. 9 August 



**[p. 113]**

ENGELS TO PYOTR LAVROV

IN PARIS

London, 9 August 1871

My dear Sidorov,a

Here are the prices of the English books:

Lecky, History of the Spirit of Rationalism* —£-. 16/ Ditto, Ditto of European Morals" Tylor, Primitive Culture Lubbock, Origin of Civilisation6

Maine, Ancient Law Ditto, Rural Communities*

1.8/- ' 1.4/- '-. 16/- '-. 12/- '-. 9/-

These are bookseller's prices and there would be a discount of about 15 per cent on the above. However, if you authorise me to try and get them for you second-hand, I would probably have to pay no more than half the price and my little bookseller would gladly attend to the matter. I would have let you have this information sooner, but my bookseller has been away on his travels.

but we have found the means of conveying a letter by safe hand to Ile Tep6yprbf and hope soon to have the more detailed news for which we have insistently been asking.

As to the Tauchnitz edition of Buckle,8 I know nothing about it but I should be very surprised if it does not exist—any German bookseller in Paris would, by the way, be able to tell you.

We have had various new arrivals here, amongst others

[^1]: You will have received a letter from Williams17 yesterday. We have not had more recent news from the indisposed traveller,266

[^2]: I am sending you the last two numbers of The Eastern Post.367

[^3]: a Lavrov's pseudonym used by Engels in their correspondence. - b W. E. H. Lecky, History of the Rise and Influence of the Spirit of Rationalism in Europe. - c Idem, History of European Morals from Augustus to Charlemagne. - d J. Lubbock, The Origin of Civilisation and the Primitive Condition of Man. - e H. S. Maine, Village-communities in the East and West. - (Russ.) St Petersburg. Engels is referring to Marx's letter, signed A. Williams, to Danielson of 22 July 1871 (see this volume, pp. 174-75). - 8 H. T. Buckle, History of Civilization in England.





**[p. 193]**

Ba Aba H-b, Teöcb, Ao Hré,a probably Williams has written to you about that.

Could you arrange a subscription for me to the Gazette des Tribuneaux beginning on 7 August or even 1 August? We need the most authentic text of the Versailles trials268 for our historical studies and there is no other journal to my knowledge that would give as comprehensive a report. At the same time I don't know how to get hold of it over here, and there is no time to lose, for if we delay we might miss the most interesting numbers. You would greatly oblige us if you could see to this matter; we shall attend to your outlays afterwards.

Another thing. In order to make a study of military events during the two sieges of Paris,269 I need a plan of Paris and its environs, the best that is to be had, giving if possible also the street names in Neuilly and the other minor localities where fighting took place. I have tried in vain to obtain one here. Perhaps you could give me the title of a detailed map and the publisher's name after which I should have no difficulty in procuring it.

So you see, my dear friend, that you cannot live in Paris with impunity and that I shall probably have more commissions for you than you will have for me. Meanwhile let me know what to do about the English books and rest assured of my cordial respects.

F. Engels

[^1]: First published in: Marx and Engels, Printed according to the original Works, First Russian Edition, Vol. XXVI, Moscow, 1935 Translated from the French

[^2]: Published in English for the first time

[^3]: a Vaillant, Theisz, Longuet (the names are written in Cyrillic in the original)



