---
Volume: 44
Document_Title: "114. Marx to Theodor Koll. 10 August "
Page_Range: "229-230"
---

# 114. Marx to Theodor Koll. 10 August 



**[p. 114]**

MARX TO THEODOR KOLL

IN LONDON

[Draft]

[London,] 10 August [1871] 1 Maitland Park Road, Haverstock Hill, N.W.

Citizen Koll,

After I had received £4.1/6 from Lessner for the Pest tailors, I read in the German papers that the tailors' strike in Pest was

271 over.

I therefore wrote at once to Jakob Holländer11 (at the address of Johann Travnick, etc., which is the address Holländer himself had given to the Workers' Society3). In my letter [I] informed him that I had received £4.1/6 to send to him from the German Workers' Society, but that I had read in the German papers that the STRIKE was over, and therefore wanted to know— if the news turned out to be true—whether the Pest tailors would mind the money being put into the fund for the French refugees. I asked him for an immediate reply.

Since no answer came, on 27 June I paid the money into the refugee fund (as you can see from the enclosed receipt) in the name of the Workers' Society.

This was done with the reservation that if the Pest workers, acting through their correspondent Holländer, should direct me to put the money to another use, the £4.1/6 paid by me into the refugee fund in the name of the Workers' Educational Society should be regarded as a personal contribution from myself, and I would then send the money on to Pest on behalf of the Workers' Society.

However, no reply came from Pest and so I regarded the matter as settled.

(a Hungarian worker in Paris) and asked him to find a safe way to write to Jakob Holländer in Pest and request him to reply to my letter at once.

[^1]: In consequence of your letter I have now written to Bachruch 17

[^2]: a the German Workers' Educational Society in London



