---
Volume: 44
Document_Title: "115. Marx to Adolphe Hubert. 10 August "
Page_Range: "230-232"
---

# 115. Marx to Adolphe Hubert. 10 August 



**[p. 195]**

I would ask you at the same time to announce my resignation from the Society to its members.

Yours faithfully,

Karl Marx

First published in: Marx and Engels, Printed according to the original Works, First Russian Edition, Vol. XXVI, Moscow 1935 Published in English for the first time

115

MARX TO ADOLPHE HUBERT 1

IN LONDON

L J [London,] 10 August 1871

Dear Citizen,

I think there has been a misunderstanding. In the first place it was not a bookseller, but my friend E. Glaser de Willebrord, who expressed his willingness to undertake, at his own expense, the publication of the reports in Brussels.264

The day before yesterday I received a letter from him in which he says:

Mr Willebrord adds that in future all correspondence should be sent direct to him: E. Glaser de Willebrord, 24, Rue de la Pépinière,

Brussels.

The public prosecutor at Versailles has made a grotesque accusation against the International}1* In the interests of the defence it might be useful to acquaint Mr Bigot with the following facts:

[^1]: 'On Sunday I received the enclosed letter' (from Mr Bigot) 'to which I replied, pointing out that, owing to the already considerable costs of publication, I could not increase them by a daily sum of 100 francs, but that, since personal gain was not my object, I was prepared to pay the stenographer and the correspondent out of the profits expected to accrue. The absence of a reply indicated that my proposal had not been accepted. This caused me much delight, for the Figaro and the Gazette des Tribuneaux have arranged to publish full reports of the trial that began yesterday in Versailles. In any case my prolonged stay in London would have prevented me from making the necessary preparations.'





**[p. 196]**

1. Enclosed (under No. I) the General Council's two manifestoes on the Franco-Prussian War.3 In its first manifesto, of 23 July 1870, the General Council declared that the war was being waged, not by the French people, but by the Empire and that at bottom Bismarck was as culpable as Bonaparte. At the same time the General Council appealed to German workers not to permit the Prussian government to change a defensive war into a war of conquest.

2. In the second manifesto, of 9 September 1870 (5 days after the proclamation of the Republic), there is a most emphatic denunciation of the Prussian government's plans for conquest. It is an appeal to German and English working men to throw in their lot with the French Republic.

In fact the working men in Germany belonging to the International Association opposed Bismarck's policies with such vigour that he illegally sequestered the principal German rep- resentatives of the International and cast them into Prussian fortresses on a false charge of 'conspiring' with the enemy.115

In London, following the appeal by the Council, English working men held mass meetings in order to compel their government to recognise the French Republic and do all in its power to oppose the dismemberment of France.108

3. Now, is the French government unaware of the support given to France by the International during the war? On the contrary. Mr Jules Favre's Consul in Vienna—Mr Lefaivre—has actually been so indiscreet as to publish—in the name of the French government—a letter of thanks to Messrs Liebknecht and Bebel, the two representatives of the International in the German Reichstag. In this letter he says, inter alia (I am retranslating this from a German translation of Lefaivre's letter):

Well now. This letter figures in the action for alleged high treason which the Saxon government has been forced by Bismarck to bring against Liebknecht and Bebel and which is still being heard.2 4 It gave Bismarck a pretext to order Bebel's arrest after the adjournment of the German Reichstag.

At the very moment when some scurrilous journals were denouncing me to Thiers as an agent of Bismarck, Bismarck was

[^1]: 'You, Sirs, and your Party' (i.e. the International) 'are alone upholding the ancient German tradition, i.e. the humanitarian spirit, etc.'

[^2]: a K. Marx, 'First Address of the General Council of the International Working Men's Association on the Franco-Prussian War'; K. Marx, 'Second Address of the General Council of the International Working Men's Association on the Franco- Prussian War'.



