---
Volume: 44
Document_Title: "116. Marx to Hermann Jung. 14 August "
Page_Range: "232-233"
---

# 116. Marx to Hermann Jung. 14 August 



**[p. 197]**

imprisoning my friends on a charge of high treason against Germany and ordering my arrest should I visit Germany.

4. Some time before the Armistice157 the good Jules Favre—as the General Council pointed out in a letter to The Times of 12 June,3 of which I enclose a reprint (No. II)—requested us through his private secretary, Dr Reitlinger, to organise public demonstrations in London in support of the 'government of defence'. Reitlinger, as the General Council stated in its letter to The Times, went on to say that we must not speak of 'the Republic' but simply 'of France'. The General Council refused to collaborate in demonstrations of that kind. But the whole thing proves that the French government itself regarded the International as an ally of the French Republic against the Prussian conqueror—and indeed it was France's sole ally during the war.

Fraternal greetings,

K. M.

First published in: Marx and Engels, Printed according to the original Works, First Russian Edition, Vol. XXVI, Moscow, 1935 Translated from the French Published in English in full for the first time

116

MARX TO HERMANN JUNG

[London,] 14 August 1871

Dear Jung,

Would you tell Le Moussu (whose name must be Constant)h to go with the enclosed card to Mr Rosenthal, N. 2, Red Lion Square. He must say to be sent by Mr Eugène Oswald.

Rosenthal is a French Jew who perhaps will be able to employ Le Moussu as dessinateur!1 He does of course best not to say at all that he is a refugee.

There are two Rosenthals, father and son. Le Moussu will do

[^1]: IN LONDON

[^2]: a K. Marx and F. Engels, 'Statement by the General Council on Jules Favre's Circular'. - b Thus far Marx wrote in German. The rest of the letter is in English. - c designer



