---
Volume: 44
Document_Title: "117. Marx to Adolphe Hubert. Not before 14 August "
Page_Range: "233-234"
---

# 117. Marx to Adolphe Hubert. Not before 14 August 



**[p. 198]**

well to speak with both of them. He must go at once, because the places vacant must be filled this week.

Please send also to my house the Italian artist—I don't know his name, but remember to have seen him amongst our refugees. I can perhaps find him an occupation.

I enclose a few lines for Mdme Tomanowski.275

Mes civilités à Madame Jung?

Tout à vous,h

K. Marx

First published in: Marx and Engels, Printed according to the original Works, First Russian Edition, Vol. XXVI, . . . Moscow 1935 Published in English for the first time

117

MARX TO ADOLPHE HUBERT

IN LONDON

Dear Citizen,

First of all I haven't got Mr Bigot's address, so cannot write to him direct. Moreover, I believe it would be safer to send any mail through you.

I cannot immediately lay my hands on the German journals relating to the Lefaivre incident,0 but in the issue of the Volksstaat

(published in Leipzig and edited by Liebknecht), Mr Bigot will find the letter from Lefaivre as well as editorial comments on that letter. The trial of Liebknecht and Bebel has, by the bye, gained widespread notoriety.

In No. 63 of the Volksstaat (5 August 1871) (see marked passage) Mr Bigot will observe that the proceedings against Liebknecht, Bebel, etc., for planning high treason axe going ahead and that Lefaivre's letter figures amongst the documents used in the indictment.

[^1]: [Draft] [London, not before 14 August 1871]

[^2]: a With my best compliments to Mrs Jung. - b Yours truly - c See this volume, p. 196.



