---
Volume: 44
Document_Title: "118. Engels to Wilhelm Liebknecht. Mid- August "
Page_Range: "234-235"
---

# 118. Engels to Wilhelm Liebknecht. Mid- August 



**[p. 199]**

For Jourde's defence I enclose a declaration by an Englishman, Mr Wm. Träte, in regard to the fire at the Ministry of Finance.276

I shall write to Willebrord3 asking him to keep the things which he has received from Mr Bigot.

Fraternal greetings,

K. M.

First published in: Marx and Engels, Printed according to the original Works, First Russian Edition, Vol. XXVI, Moscow 1935 Translated from the French

Published in English for the first time

118

ENGELS T O WILHELM LIEBKNECHTb

IN LEIPZIG

[London, mid-August 1871]

Wrôblewski, Longuet, Bastelica are here. Why bother to rehabilitate that good-for-nothing B. Becker? And allow that jackass Goegg to parade his own idiocies before the public?277

Marx's daughters are in Bagnères-de-Luchon in the Pyrenees, where they were visited by the Prefect, the great Kératry, and Delpech, the Prosecutor-General, who made it clear that it was necessary for them to leave France. Lafargue was safelyc

mountains to Spain. Two gendarmes were posted in their garden until their departure! But do not mention any of this in public (apart from what might be reported in the French papers), until we have them safely back here again.212 Thiers is determined to make a complete fool of himself.

Your

F. E.

[^1]: First published in: Marx and Engels, Printed according to the original Works, First Russian Edition, Vol. XXIX, Moscow 1946 Published in English for the first time

[^2]: a E. Glaser de Willebrord - b The beginning of the letter is missing because the top of the sheet is damaged. - c Paper damaged and partly illegible.



