---
Volume: 44
Document_Title: "122. Engels to Marx. 23 August "
Page_Range: "237-239"
---

# 122. Engels to Marx. 23 August 



**[p. 121]**

MARX TO ENGELS

IN LONDON

[Brighton,] 21 August 1871

DEAR FRED,

Time until Wednesday.3

Jung here since Saturday, goes back today. I shall get some money for the REFUGEES through a (French) priest called Pascal.251

Salut,

The pen too bad to write.

Your

K. M.

First published in MEGA, Abt. Ill, Printed according to the original Bd. 4, Berlin, 1931 . . . „ , , . . Published in English for the first time

122

ENGELS TO MARX

London, 23 August 1871

Dear Moor,

In great haste. Enclosed B/57 68868, London, 27 July 1871, £5. Stay there as long as you can; it will do you more good than to come here. The girls won't be coming this week after all.212

According to the Pall Mall Lafargue too is at liberty.281

[^1]: IN BRIGHTON

[^2]: Lessner says that the Lassalleans have resolved to sue you if they do not receive the money next week!270

[^3]: 23 August; see also previous letter.





**[p. 203]**

Frankel is here and was elected a member of the GENERAL COUNCIL yesterday, along with Chalain and Bastelica. He was here today with Rochat; does not seem to be a high-flyer.

Allsop was in the COUNCIL yesterday and gave me the sum of 5 shillings for you for the refugees. He is leaving town once more and will be writing to you again. In the crush there was of course no chance to speak with the deaf man in more detail.

Jung's letter saying that I should launch an appeal to the Yankees came yesterday at 7 p.m., i.e. too late. It was resolved that you should be charged with formulating the appeal282 and despatching it by STEAMER next Saturday.2 If you can't, I could do something of the sort; the enclosed letter proves that it would be worth it. Yesterday between £2 and £3 came in altogether!

The whole meetingb was used once more for the following debate: Weston, Hales, Applegarth and another of our English- men had been invited by George Potter to a meeting at which Dr Engländer (!) was also present. Potter produced the informa- tion that Sir Edward Watkin had made an agreement with the Canadian government according to which the Versailles prisoners would be sent to Canada where they would each be given 1 ACRE of land—presumably Thiers is behind it in order to get l id of them. Weston was enthusiastically in favour, il radote de plus en plusf In

the end Longuet, Theisz and Vaillant moved the next item on the agenda—it was quite well done.

I am overrun from morning till night; can't even manage to read a newspaper, and at this very moment there is someone waiting for me downstairs again. To cap it all my brothers'* are due to come too.

Salut.

Your

F. E.

[^1]: First published in MEGA, Abt. HI, Bd. 4, Berlin, 1931

[^2]: Printed according to the original

[^3]: Published in English for the first time

[^4]: a 26 August - b the meeting of the General Council held on 22 August 1871 - c He is falling into his dotage. - d Hermann and Rudolf Engels



