---
Volume: 44
Document_Title: "125. Marx to Jenny Marx. 25 August "
Page_Range: "235-243"
---

# 125. Marx to Jenny Marx. 25 August 



**[p. 119]**

ENGELS TO MARX

IN BRIGHTON 2 7 8

[London,] 18 August 1871 Dear Moor,

Enclosed The Public Opinion with a fuller version of the article from the National-Zeitung.279 You will see that immediately following the passage incriminated in 'The International', there is a further passage, prudently omitted by the latter, which must be answered. The paper has just lost a court case against Goldschmidt and Jenny Lind and is acquiring a reputation for premeditated libel. I would accordingly insist not only on their inserting a reply, but on AN AMPLE AND COMPLETE APOLOGY, IN THE SAME PLACE

OF THE PAPER.

It would also serve the National-Zeitung damn well right if we were to turn the tables on them and publish the article simultaneously in the Volksstaat. That louse Zabel feels far too much at his cannibalistic ease again under Bismarck.

Rozwadowski had a post as a schoolmaster in Somerset without salary, but free board and lodging, until 15 December.3 He leaves for there tomorrow. He must learn English there. I have procured his release — agent's commission £1.1/-, clothes £3.7/-, debts £1.13/-, travel and incidental expenses £1.10/-, total £7.11/-. In addition I laid out £12.12/- yesterday for Dupont's children,b

which has cleaned me out. Just after we left this morning to settle the matter, your wife arrived with a letter for me from Tibaldi, holding out other prospects for Rozwadowski from Davydov. But it was now too late and Rozwadowski had to leave for Somerset, at least for the moment. If we find out later that the arrangements can be changed to suit all sides, a Frenchman like Beaufort could take over his post and he could return and obtain the Russian money.

I hope the sea air does you good.

Your

F. E.

[^1]: First published in MEGA, Abt. Ill, Bd. 4, Printed according to the original Berlin, 1931 r , r. Published in English for the first time a See this volume, p. 175. - b Ibid., p. 189.





**[p. 120]**

MARX TO ENGELS

IN LONDON

Brighton, 19 August 1871 Globe Hotel, Manchester St.

Dear FRED,

Be so good as to write out the contents of the opposite page3

and send it to The Public Opinion, 4 Southampton Street, Strand, with my signature. My own handwriting might give the fellows an excuse for MISPRINTS.279 We shall deal with the German side of things b

278 on my return.

Today is the first fine day here. Yesterday and the day before it rained. Unfortunately, I have not brought my liver-medicine with me, but the air does me a world of good. If possible (and if the children do not arrive before212), I would gladly stay here until Thursday, but NO CASH IN HAND, and I see from your letterc that you too are broke.

Nechayev has a highly idiosyncratic manner of circulating false rumours about himself. When I return it will be necessary for the GENERAL COUNCIL to take action against him publicly.280

Salut.

Your

K. M.

Add or change what you think necessary.

[^1]: First published abridged in Der Briefwech- sel zwischen F. Engels und K. Marx, Bd. IV, Stuttgart, 1913 and in full in MEGA, Abt. III, Bd. 4, Berlin, 1931

[^2]: Printed according to the original

[^3]: Published in English for the first time

[^4]: a K. Marx, 'To the Editor of The Public Opinion'. - b A reference to the National-Zeitung. - c See previous letter.





**[p. 121]**

MARX TO ENGELS

IN LONDON

[Brighton,] 21 August 1871

DEAR FRED,

Time until Wednesday.3

Jung here since Saturday, goes back today. I shall get some money for the REFUGEES through a (French) priest called Pascal.251

Salut,

The pen too bad to write.

Your

K. M.

First published in MEGA, Abt. Ill, Printed according to the original Bd. 4, Berlin, 1931 . . . „ , , . . Published in English for the first time

122

ENGELS TO MARX

London, 23 August 1871

Dear Moor,

In great haste. Enclosed B/57 68868, London, 27 July 1871, £5. Stay there as long as you can; it will do you more good than to come here. The girls won't be coming this week after all.212

According to the Pall Mall Lafargue too is at liberty.281

[^1]: IN BRIGHTON

[^2]: Lessner says that the Lassalleans have resolved to sue you if they do not receive the money next week!270

[^3]: 23 August; see also previous letter.





**[p. 203]**

Frankel is here and was elected a member of the GENERAL COUNCIL yesterday, along with Chalain and Bastelica. He was here today with Rochat; does not seem to be a high-flyer.

Allsop was in the COUNCIL yesterday and gave me the sum of 5 shillings for you for the refugees. He is leaving town once more and will be writing to you again. In the crush there was of course no chance to speak with the deaf man in more detail.

Jung's letter saying that I should launch an appeal to the Yankees came yesterday at 7 p.m., i.e. too late. It was resolved that you should be charged with formulating the appeal282 and despatching it by STEAMER next Saturday.2 If you can't, I could do something of the sort; the enclosed letter proves that it would be worth it. Yesterday between £2 and £3 came in altogether!

The whole meetingb was used once more for the following debate: Weston, Hales, Applegarth and another of our English- men had been invited by George Potter to a meeting at which Dr Engländer (!) was also present. Potter produced the informa- tion that Sir Edward Watkin had made an agreement with the Canadian government according to which the Versailles prisoners would be sent to Canada where they would each be given 1 ACRE of land—presumably Thiers is behind it in order to get l id of them. Weston was enthusiastically in favour, il radote de plus en plusf In

the end Longuet, Theisz and Vaillant moved the next item on the agenda—it was quite well done.

I am overrun from morning till night; can't even manage to read a newspaper, and at this very moment there is someone waiting for me downstairs again. To cap it all my brothers'* are due to come too.

Salut.

Your

F. E.

[^1]: First published in MEGA, Abt. HI, Bd. 4, Berlin, 1931

[^2]: Printed according to the original

[^3]: Published in English for the first time

[^4]: a 26 August - b the meeting of the General Council held on 22 August 1871 - c He is falling into his dotage. - d Hermann and Rudolf Engels





**[p. 123]**

MARX TO ENGELS

IN LONDON

[Brighton,] 24 August [1871]

Dear FRED,

Your letter with the £5—for which many thanks—arrived at midday, by which time I had already sent my telegram.283

I shall write a few lines to New York tomorrow.3 The appeal can be made after my return to London (next Saturdayb).

You can see the abject collapse of The Public Opinion279 from the letter which I have just sent to my wife today.17

So Lafargue is at liberty!281

Salut.

Your

K. M.

First published in Der Briefwechsel zwischen Printed according to the original F. Engels und K. Marx, Bd. IV, Stuttgart, igig Published in English for the first time

124

Brighton, 25 August 1871

Dear Mr Bolte,

I have been here for about two weeks, sent by the doctor because my health was very much impaired as a result of overwork. I shall probably return to London next week, how- ever.278

Next week you will receive an Appeal by the General Council for the refugee Communards.282 Most of them are in London (over

[^1]: MARX TO FRIEDRICH BOLTE284

[^2]: IN NEW YORK

[^3]: a See next letter. - b 26 August





**[p. 205]**

80 to 90 by now). The General Council has kept them above water up to now, but in the past two weeks our funds have been melting away just like that, while the number of arrivals increases daily, so that they are in a very deplorable condition. I hope that everything possible will be done from New York. In Germany all the resources of the party are still absorbed by the victims of the police persecution there, as is the case in Austria, ditto Spain and Italy. In Switzerland they not only have a part of the refugees themselves to support, albeit a small part, but they also have to aid the members of the International as a result of the St Gallen LOCKOUT.285 Lastly, there are also some refugees in Belgium, though only a few and, what is more, the Belgians have to aid them, particularly in getting them through to London.

Owing to these circumstances, up to the present all the funds for the bulk of the refugees in London have been raised exclusively in England.

The General Council now includes the following members of the Commune: Serraillier, Vaillant, Theisz, Longuet and Frankel, and the following agents of the Commune: Delahaye, Rochat, Bastelica and Chalain.

I have sent The New-York Herald a statement in which I disclaim all responsibility for its correspondent's absurd and wholly distorted report of his conversation with me.286 I do not know whether it has printed the statement.

Give Sorge my regards. I shall answer his letter next week."

Faithfully yours,

Karl Marx

[^1]: First published in Briefe und Auszüge aus Printed according to the book Briefen von Joh. Phil. Becker, Jos. Dietzgen, Friedrich Engels, Karl Marx u. A. an F. A. Sorge und Andere, Stuttgart, 1906

[^2]: a See this volume, pp. 211 and 217.





**[p. 125]**

MARX T O JENNY MARX 2 8 7

IN LONDON

[Brighton,] 25 August 1871

Dear Jenny,

I forgot to tell you yesterday 3 of a curious événement* T h e second day after my arrival here,278 I met a chap in a waiting posture at the corner of my street. H e was the same man whom I had told you about before as having accompanied Engels and myself on our way HOME on a number of occasions. Engels h a d thought h e was a spy and we once gave him a 'hint'. As you know, GENERALLY SPEAKING I am not good at detecting spies. But this fellow has obviously a n d undeniably dogged my every step down here. Yesterday, I became fed u p with it, so I stopped, turned round a n d stared at him with my notorious EYEGLASS. WHAT DID HE DO? H e doffed his hat very humbly a n d today h e n o longer honoured m e with the pleasure of his company.

I wrote a detailed letter to Dana today giving him, among other things, an extensive account of the adventures in Luchon and Spain.212 H e will certainly be able to use it for his Sun. It is EXACTLY THAT SORT OF THING THE YANKEES ARE FOND OF. I have of course dealt with the matter in terms which can do the children no harm—should they stay longer over there.

N o one is so deaf as those who will not hear! A n d so OLD STEPNEY

T h e fellow is altogether 'off his head', as J u n g says. J u n g came here last Saturday d a n d left again on Monday. H e brought his two boys with him and before his departure h e told Stepney that he

[^1]: IN REGARD TO THE REFUGEES! J u n g a n d I told him the whole story without mincing words. Hales sent him subscription lists/ I told him of the letter from Davydov,288 and lastly I advised him of the steps taken here to obtain subsidies. But for all that the old jackass has TILL NOW NOT LOOSENED HIS PURSE-STRINGS NOR SEEMS HE AT ALL WILLING TO DO so. Yesterday h e told m e with his eunuch's voice that he had sent subscription lists—to Boston, and h e showed me a letter that he had written to a local lady, asking for contributions. But he himself! NOT HE!

[^2]: a See Note 17. - b incident - c This refers to the fund for refugee Communards. - d 19 August





**[p. 207]**

was going to a family h e knew of who would look after the boys. Stepney went with him a n d after Jung had SETTLED everything with the LANDLADY, Stepney said: 'BUT I WANT FOR 8 DAYS TO TAKE CARE OF THE BOYS MYSELF.' A n d so all was UNSETTLED again.

O n the whole, the weather here has been stormy and rainy, so that I have not ceased to have colds with accompanying cough. But the wonderful air a n d the bath that I take daily have h a d a very good effect on my GENERAL STATE OF HEALTH. T h r o u g h o u t the whole period I have regretted nothing so much as the fact that you were not here. Anyhow, you must also—by hook or by crook—have, if not a summer trip, at least an autumn one this year.

As for those Swiss oafs, Schneider and Zichlinsky (the 'tailor'3

was a highly suspect individual even in Germany), they will soon realise that they are not in Germany any more. b

I find that too many Proudhonists are being admitted to the General Council, a n d on my return I shall insist on the admission of Martin a n d Le Moussu as an antidote.

Brighton—where, incidentally, I am living the life of a hermit on the whole—is naturally ABSORBED IN THE GREAT POISONING CASE, obviously a pure outbreak of hysterical boredom on the part of a SILLY, love-sick, 35-year-old SPINSTER in comfortable circumstances.

Your

Karl

[^1]: T h e reports by The Daily Newsc and The Daily Telegraph PARIS CORRESPONDENTS on the Versailles trial268 are truly loathsome, infamous products of PENNY-A-LINERS.

[^2]: Adio.

[^3]: First published, in German, in Annali, Printed according to the original an. 1, Milan, 1958

[^4]: a A pun in the original: 'Schneider' means 'tailor' in German. - b The reference is to the Lassallean members of the German Workers' Educational Society (see Letter 122). - c Presumably the item 'Trial of the Communist Prisoners' in The Daily News, Nos. 7899 and 7900, 23 and 24 August 1871.



