---
Volume: 44
Document_Title: "126. Marx to Hermann Meyer. Around 25 August "
Page_Range: "243-244"
---

# 126. Marx to Hermann Meyer. Around 25 August 



**[p. 126]**

M A R X T O H E R M A N N M E Y E R 2 8 9

IN WASHINGTON

[Brighton, around 25 August 1871]

We are greatly in want of money The affaire of the Commune increased our duties and obligations, while the war preceding it cut off our Continental supplies. We are now almost overwhelmed with letters from different parts of this country (England), from people wanting information about the International, and sections are being established in the provinces. There are also Irish sections in the course of formation, and we now have an Irish secretary on the Council in the person of Mac Donnel,3 of Fenian notoriety.6 Besides that, we have had applications from the East Indies and New Zealand.

The Paris Federal Council is to be reorganised. After all Thiers has caught but very few of our men. There is not a prominent member of our association amongst all his prisoners, and there are but two or three missing, who must have been killed in the last days of fighting, as we cannot get either tale or doings of them. Many who were reported over and over again as shot, even detailed accounts given, have turned up again, and are now safely here b or in Switzerland.

There is great distress among the refugees here, and between fifty and sixty are without the means of subsistence. Money comes in very slowly. There is to be an appeal issued to your working-men28 which we trust will be liberally responded to.

[^1]: First published in The World, No. 3687, Reproduced from the newspaper 21 September 1871

[^2]: a In the original: Mac Donald. - b in England



