---
Volume: 44
Document_Title: "130. Marx to Collet Dobson Collet. 6 September "
Page_Range: "246-248"
---

# 130. Marx to Collet Dobson Collet. 6 September 



**[p. 211]**

Williams' two daughters3 have arrived here, the third is in Spain with her husband.b212

First published in: Marx and Engels,

Works, First Russian Edition, Vol. XXVI, Moscow, 1935

Printed according to the original

Translated from the French

Published in English for the first time

129

MARX T O FRIEDRICH ADOLPH SORGE

IN HOBOKEN

[London,] 5 September 1871

Dear Mr Sorge,

Enclosed the appeal for the REFUGEES.282 Your mail from America, dated 23 August, arrived today.291

Yours sincerely,

Karl Marx

130

MARX TO COLLET DOBSON COLLET

[London,] 6 September 1871

Dear Sir,

From your letter I see that you are not only 'alarmed',292 but have also grown suspicious, since you tuned down your usual 'My dear Sir' to 'Dear Sir'.

[^1]: First published in: Marx and Engels,

[^2]: Works, First Russian Edition, Vol. XXVI, Moscow, 1935

[^3]: Printed according to the original

[^4]: Published in English for the first time

[^5]: [Draft]

[^6]: IN LONDON

[^7]: a Jenny and Eleanor Marx; Williams was Marx's pseudonym. - b Laura and Paul Lafargue





**[p. 212]**

For my own part I consider the feeling of 'alarm' not one peculiarly adapted to lend a scientific and objective point de vue.

I regret not being able to fulfil your wish. I have gone through the whole round of my Continental friends but found no one in possession of some of the numerous reviews and extracts of my booka that have appeared in Italian and French. The French edition in extenso has been cut short by the Prussian war.14

Neither translation nor review has appeared in English. Two years since my friend F. Engels sent a very accurate analysis of Das

Kapital to the Fortnightly, but it was returned with the remark that 'it was too scientific for the English Review-reader'.29S

I do not know of what manifestoes you speak. Save the address on The Civil War in France and Mr. Washburne,b which I had the honour to send you, the General Council has, since September 1870, published no manifesto except those on the Franco-Prussian Warc which I hereby forward you. Apart [from] the manifestoes published by the French and Prussian police in the name of the International, and which I have declared to be forgeries in La

Vérité (Paris),d no manifesto has besides been published in the latter times. The so-called Swiss manifesto, printed in The Times,' is, as The Examiner of last Saturday justly remarked,

Yours faithfully,

K. M.

[^1]: 'a garbled translation of a French version, itself far from accurate It issues, not from the International Workingmen's Association, but from some of its Swiss members'.'

[^2]: First published in: Marx and Engels, Reproduced from the original Works, First Russian Edition, Vol. XXVI, Moscow 1935 Published in English for the first time

[^3]: a Volume I of Capital - b K. Marx, 'Mr. Washburne, the American Ambassador, in Paris'. - c Marx has in mind the pamphlet The General Council of the International Workingmen's Association on the war (London, 187/)), containing the first and second Addresses of the General Council of the International on the Franco-Prussian War. - d K. Marx, 'To the Editor of La Vérité'. - c 'A New Socialist Programme', The Times, No. 27155, 30 August 1871 (reprint from the Journal de Genève). - f 'A New Socialist Programme', The Examiner, No. 3318, 2 September 1871.



