---
Volume: 44
Document_Title: "131. Marx to Engels. 8 September "
Page_Range: "248-249"
---

# 131. Marx to Engels. 8 September 



**[p. 131]**

M A R X T O E N G E L S 2 9 4

IN RAMSGATE

[London,] 8 September 1871

Dear FRED,

Allsop's address is Pegwell Bay. N o number has been given nor is it needed. EVERYBODY WILL TELL YOU THE WHEREABOUTS OF Pegwell Bay. It is a good thing that you can speak to him since he is coming to London on Tuesday a with the money and has invited me to come and see him there. I have written to him at length 17 a n d made it clear that I can only continue TO BE THE aumônier OF HIMSELF AND his FRIENDS if I a m allowed complete freedom of action AND am NOT BOTHERED WITH THE DEMAND TO PRODUCE LISTS OF THE DIFFERENT DEGREES OF DISTRESS' of the refugees.295

What d o you think of o u r honourable Favre? T h e lousy London press now has to report its own disgrace by telegraph. 96

Last Monday L'Avenir liberal—journal bonapartiste, publié à Paris—reported my death .c

Your

K. M.

Rochat does a splendid imitation of Frankel's French.

I did not see the stuff until yesterday. Since the letters to the fellows were in your handwriting f I got my wife to write to them at once in her own name, on the pretext that I was out of London for a few days. She has sent the Public Opinion (and REGISTERED the letter), a n d demanded that it be printed together with an apologie, u n d e r threat of legal proceedings. She p u t in an 'old' card with it,

[^1]: In consequence we have received a number of letters; among others, Dronke wrote to my wife today, and Imandt too sent the Dundee Advertiser which contained the same nonsense. À demain^ CALL UPON ME AFTER YOUR ARRIVAL AT LONDON. Regards to the WHOLE FAMILY.

[^2]: The Evening Standard of 6 September only published the letter to the EDITOR,' adding the note: ' W E HAVE RECEIVED NO ENCLOSURE.' 2 7

[^3]: a 12 September - b almoner - c L'Avenir libéral, No. 376, 5 September 1871. - d Until tomorrow. - e K. Marx, 'To the Editor of The Evening Standard'. - f See this volume, p. 201.



