---
Volume: 44
Document_Title: "133. Engels to Wilhelm Liebknecht. 11 September "
Page_Range: "250-252"
---

# 133. Engels to Wilhelm Liebknecht. 11 September 



**[p. 133]**

ENGELS TO WILHELM LIEBKNECHT

IN LEIPZIG

London, 11 September 1871

Dear Liebknecht,

I do not require any credentials—as secretary for Italy and Spain, I shall probably have to represent 2 countries in any event.299 If you send anyone you could nominate 2 others; the French here are also nominating 3. Alternatively, you could send credentials for 3, but they must be here by Saturday.3

Marx and I do not deal in secret first names; we each have only

300 one.

Why have you not sent any copies of the German edition of the Address226? We are daily being pestered for it here. I must say that to treat us in this manner is not the way to encourage us to do any further work. I shall not send another line of manuscript, nor Marx either, until you finally condescend to treat us with the barest minimum of common decency.

To compare Monsieur Goegg with Odger is a bit strong. In the first place, Odger has in his own way a thousand times as much political understanding as that stupid Badener, and in the second place, as secretary of the LONDON TRADES COUNCIL,301 Odger was the spokesman for some 100,000 workers, and he still represents a whole sector of them, whereas I have never heard that Mr Goegg ever spoke for anyone other than a few reactionary Baden numbskulls in Switzerland, the only authentic 'numbskulls' still surviving in fossil form. But when you provide space in the

Volksstaat for the lucubrations of such people,277 while we throw the Odgers out,238 it is evident that there the parallel ends. As for Bernhard Becker, whose shabby dealings began when he was still here, in London, and are known to you, you could have knocked us over with a feather when we read that you had forgiven him his rascality because of his—abilities! I had always believed hitherto that his shabby dealings, his total rascality, could only be overlooked, if at all, on the grounds of his stupidity! Well, you will see what joy your latest acquisition will bring you. The wretch will never forgive you for having had to come to you 'with a rope

[^1]: a 16 September





**[p. 216]**

round his neck'.302 And as for the newspaper, better none at all than one of his sort! If Mr B. Becker has not betrayed the Party (which I do not know for certain), it can hardly be his fault. The man who could write that swinish book on Lassalle, his lord and master, is capable de tout? The book was of interest to us, but it rendered its author worthy of undying contempt.303

Marx was very astonished to see the notice in the Volksstaat announcing that you intend to publish a history of the Commune, etc., etc. (No. 73, p. 4).304 I was no less surprised than him. How you arrived at the idea was a complete mystery to us. / have not promised you anything of the sort, and we have no idea where you might have heard the news that someone would write an authentic history of the Commune for the Volksstaat by agreement with the General Council. At any rate, since the General Council has been mentioned, could we be informed, since there would be questions about it?

You will soon have some jolly persecution to look forward to. There can be no doubt that Bismarck has just agreed a general witch-hunt with the Austrians and the Italians.305 Bismarck does not feel too strongly about it himself; he wants to work off a little personal rancour and would also like to force the workers' movement back into the Schweitzer-channel that is useful to him. For the rest he is, as a Junker, a speculative bourgeois and a superficial, successful statesman (which he is all in one person), quite without fear of the red spectre. Austria is now being put in fear of the International, just as it was fooled about the 'revolution' and the 'Carbonari' in 1823 at Verona and later in Carlsbad.b306 But that you will come in for your share, is clear enough.

My wifec and Mrs Marx are in Ramsgate; I shall also spend a few days there this week, but shall be back here on Saturday.307 If you do not come, I hope that Bebel will. We were very pleased to hear that the babyd is doing so well. With best regards from Marx and me to all your family.

Your

F E Still no news from Lafargue.

[^1]: First published, in Russian, in Marx- Engels Archives, Vol. I (VI), Moscow, 1932

[^2]: Printed according to the original

[^3]: Published in English for the first time

[^4]: a capable of everything - b Czech name: Karlovy Vary. - c Lydia Burns - d Karl Liebknecht



