---
Volume: 44
Document_Title: "134. Marx to Friedrich Adolph Sorge. 12 September "
Page_Range: "252-253"
---

# 134. Marx to Friedrich Adolph Sorge. 12 September 



**[p. 134]**

MARX TO FRIEDRICH ADOLPH SORGE308

IN HOBOKEN

[London,] 12 September 1871

Dear Mr Sorge,

Kindly convey the enclosed letter from our Irish secretary, Mac Donnell, to John Devoy.

I had no time to reply to you in greater detail. We are so extremely busy here at the present time that I have been compelled for the past 3 months (and still am) to interrupt some very urgent theoretical work.

I shall merely say in regard to the Rules that the English EDITION is the sole authentic one.a The conference265 will issue authentic versions in English, French and German,309 which is also necessary because various Congress resolutions relating to the Rules must be incorporated in them.

The CENTRAL COMMITTEE in New York 151 must not forget:

1. That the General Council had contacts in America long before the Committee was established;

2. That, as far as the Addressb is concerned, it was on sale in London, and hence anybody had the right to send it to his friends in America at his own expense. The first shipment to New York was so small because the first edition was sold out in two days, which is why I did not get the number of copies allotted for my shipments.

Salut fraternel,

Karl Marx

[^1]: 3. In Par. 6 of the Rules it is expressly stated that 'NO INDEPENDENT

[^2]: LOCAL SOCIETY SHALL BE PRECLUDED FROM DIRECTLY CORRESPONDING WITH THE GENERAL COUNCIL', and in Washington, for example, the branch declared that it did not want to enter into contact with New York.310.

[^3]: First published in Briefe und Auszüge aus Printed according to the original Briefen von Joh. Phil. Becker, Jos. Dietzgen, Friedrich Engels, Karl Marx u. A. an F. A. Sorge und Andere, Stuttgart, 1906

[^4]: a Rules of the International Working Men's Association, London, [1867]. - b K. Marx, The Civil War in France.



