---
Volume: 44
Document_Title: "135. Engels to Pyotr Lavrov. 12 September "
Page_Range: "253-254"
---

# 135. Engels to Pyotr Lavrov. 12 September 



**[p. 135]**

ENGELS TO PYOTR LAVROV

IN PARIS

London, 12 September 1871

My dear Mr Sidorov,3

Herewith the receipted account for the English books that were sent off to you yesterdayb—my little bookseller did not tell me through what channel, but I think it will have been by the CONTINENTAL PARCELS EXPRESS. If you have not received them in two days' time, please let me know.

Buckle,c 3 vols, the least expensive edition, costs 24/- and, since I am in no doubt that the book is to be had in Paris, I did not send it. However, should you require it, you need only tell me so.

Williamsd has had your letter. As you will have seen, he was reported to be dead,e which made us laugh a great deal.

Etp H-txaji H 3fltcb BpoÖJie BCKi H H Kyp He TT»/ As you will know, Williams' daughters8 are back again.

Excuse my not writing at greater length this evening. I must, you see, leave at about eight o'clock for a meeting h and it is nearly eight o'clock now.

Yours ever,

F. Engels

[^1]: Printed according to the original

[^2]: Translated from the French

[^3]: Published in English for the first time

[^4]: a Lavrov's pseudonym used by Engels in their correspondence - b See this volume, p. 210. - c H. T. Buckle, History of Civilization in England. - d Marx's pseudonym - e See this volume, p. 213. - f (Russ.) Wroblewski and Cournet had arrived here. - 8 Jenny and Eleanor Marx (see also Note 212) - h of the General Council of the International

[^5]: First published in: Marx and Engels,

[^6]: Works, First Russian Edition, Vol. XXVI, Moscow, 1935



