---
Volume: 44
Document_Title: "137. Marx to Adolphe Hubert. 15 September "
Page_Range: "254-255"
---

# 137. Marx to Adolphe Hubert. 15 September 



**[p. 136]**

MARX TO HERMANN JUNG

IN LONDON

[London,] 13 September 1871 1 Maitland Park Road Dear Jung,

Enclosed please find £3.10/-. Would you be so good as to give £2.15/- to COLONEL Naze and 15/- to the fat Russian whom Lavrov sent us. Give it to them in my name and obtain a receipt.

Yours,

K. M.

First published in: Marx and Engels,

Works, First Russian Edition, Vol. XXVI, Moscow, 1935

Printed according to the original

Published in English for the first time

[London,] 15 September 1871

My dear Citizen,

Go tomorrow (but you must be there before ten o'clock in the morning) to Mr Fuisse, 35 Richmond Terrace, Clapham Road.

Mr Fuisse is French, former refugee, merchant Yesterday I spoke to him about your business; I told him I should be much obliged if he could help you. In reply, he said that he might be able to facilitate the sale of some of your pictures. To gain entry to Mr Fuisse's house, present the card enclosed herewith.

Fraternal greetings,

Karl Marx

be there before ten o'clock in the nond Terrace, Clapham Road.

refugee, merchant Yesterday I ss; I told him I should be much i reply, he said that he might be of your pictures. To gain entry to :ard enclosed herewith.

Karl Marx

137

MARX TO ADOLPHE HUBERT

[^1]: First published in: Marx and Engels,

[^2]: Works, First Russian Edition, Vol. XXVI, Moscow, 1935

[^3]: Printed according to the original

[^4]: Translated from the French

[^5]: Published in English for the first time

[^6]: IN LONDON



