---
Volume: 44
Document_Title: "138. Marx to Jenn y Marx. 23 September "
Page_Range: "255-256"
---

# 138. Marx to Jenn y Marx. 23 September 



**[p. m]**

MARX T O JENNY MARX

IN RAMSGATE

[London,] 23 September 1871

Dear Jenny,

T h e Conference is at last coming to an end today.265 It was HARD WORK. Morning a n d evening sessions, commission sessions in between, HEARING OF WITNESSES, REPORTS TO BE DRAWN UP AND so FORTH. But more was done than at all the previous Congresses p u t together, because there was n o audience in front of which to stage rhetorical comedies. Germany was not represented and from Zwitzerland only Perret and Outine were there.

Last week the revolutionary party in Rome held a banquet for Ricciotti Garibaldi, and a report on it in the Rome paper La

Capitale has been sent to me. O n e speaker {il signore Luciani) proposed an enthusiastically received toast to the working class and 'a Carlo Marx che (qui) se ne (en) è fatto (a fait) l'instancabile instrumenta (l'instrument infatigable)'.3 This is a bitter pill for Mazzini!

Tussy has also received an anxious letter from o u r friends in St Petersburg.312

We had a hard time here with Robin a n d Bastelica, Bakunin's friends and fellow-intriguers. T h e revelations about Robin's activities in Geneva and Paris were, INDEED, STRANGE.313 Jennychen's article was sent off to America today.314

Your

Karl

[^1]: T h e news OF MY DEATH b led to a MEETING of the 'COSMOPOLITAN SOCIETY' in New York whose resolutions in the World I am sending to you.311

[^2]: First published, in Russian, in Pravda, Printed according to the original No. 126, 6 May 1958

[^3]: a 'to Karl Marx, who has made himself its indefatigable instrument' - b See this volume, p. 213.



