---
Volume: 44
Document_Title: "140. Engels to Pyotr Lavrov. 5 October "
Page_Range: "257-258"
---

# 140. Engels to Pyotr Lavrov. 5 October 



**[p. 222]**

As a member of the Control Commission of the Social- Democratic Workers' Party, it will perhaps be possible for you personally to work in this direction.

Yours in sincere friendship,

Karl Marx

First published in Die Gesellschaft, No. 3, Printed according to the handwrit- Berlin, 1933 ten copy

140

ENGELS TO PYOTR LAVROV

IN PARIS

London, 5 October 1871

My dear Friend,

I found your Tetter316 on my return from Ramsgate, where Johnson3 and I had just been spending a couple of days.317

As to the money that is still owing to me, might I request you, first, before the end of this month to take out another quarterly subscription for me to the Gazette des Tribuneaux. My subscription expires on 31 October. Later on I may, perhaps, wish you to make some other purchases in Paris, so do not hasten to remit any money to me. As for the Buckle,b etc., I am always at your command. I shall also send you The Eastern Post whenever there is anything of interest.

As for the firm of Tp H6ep-b,c it is perfectly sound and reliable, and you may therefore deliver goods to it without the slightest misgivings. The address was certainly written by Johnson and it was certainly Cep.d who delivered it to the person in question. Moreover, it was supplied over here with a goodly assortment of engravings. We are temporarily rather short of this article and shall not be able to make any deliveries just now.

I conveyed your letter to our friend in Lower Charles St.e He no longer deals with the matter in question, which has passed into other hands and has thus lost much of the interest it held for us.

[^1]: a Marx - b H. T. Buckle, History of Civilization in England. - c Triber (written in Cyrillic in the original) - d Serraillier (written in Cyrillic in the original) - e Hermann Jung



