---
Volume: 44
Document_Title: "141. Marx to Hermann Jung. 11 October "
Page_Range: "258-259"
---

# 141. Marx to Hermann Jung. 11 October 



**[p. 223]**

To give you more precise information would involve entering into endless detail; suffice it to say that a few of the people on whose behalf the business was to be undertaken have behaved in a shameful manner, and refuse, despite our admonitions, to break with individuals undeserving either of credit or of trust, and even go so far as to accept their guidance in their speculations.318 As a result, their closest acquaintances have pulled out in the belief that it would be throwing money down the drain to encourage them in undertakings which would either end badly or merely serve to benefit out-and-out rogues. The individuals in question have, by the way, or so I believe, obtained what they needed elsewhere. But there are always a number of good honest lads whose business is gravely hampered by want of capital and if some way could be found of providing them with funds, we should be delighted. An approach might be made to Johnson who, as you know, is the general intermediary in such matters. My salutations to all our friends.

Yours ever,

F. E.

First published in: Marx and Engels, Printed according to the original Works, First Russian Edition, Vol. XXVI, Moscow, 1935 Translated from the French Published in English for the first time

141

MARX TO HERMANN JUNG

[London,] 11 October 1871

Dear Jung,

From the enclosed letter of Perret319 you will see that he has not yet received the Resolutions on the 'Alliance', etc.a If you have not yet sent them, do not do so, because I shall send you a corrected copy.

[^1]: IN LONDON

[^2]: a K. Marx and F. Engels, 'Resolutions of the Conference of Delegates of the International Working Men's Association Assembled at London from 17th to 23rd September 1871'.

[^3]: 9»



