---
Volume: 44
Document_Title: "148. Marx to Edouard Vaillant. 22 October "
Page_Range: "265-266"
---

# 148. Marx to Edouard Vaillant. 22 October 



**[p. 230]**

points. Once the financial side has been sorted out, at least there can be no further occasion for dispute. I hope that all will resolve itself with time.

For the rest, I am well and cheerful and have returned to my first love, namely my long pipe, having finally managed to discover a reasonable tobacco here. This evening I have put aside a special pleasure for myself: despite the rain I am going to the Viennese beerhall in the Strand, where for once I shall be able to drink my fill; Emil Blank junior called in for a moment a few days ago, otherwise I never get to see the young madcap, since I hardly ever go to the CITY.

Good-bye for now, give my cordial greetings to all my brothers and sisters, and do not be cross with me for my long silence.

With all my heart,

Your

Frederick

You can tell Emil Blank that Marx does not need any money from me. But I should like to see the expression on the face of that same Emil Blank if J were to advise him about how to spend his money.

148

MARX TO EDOUARD VAILLANT

[London,] 22 October 1871

Dear Mr Vaillant,

As I am having my pamphlet" printed next Monday, please make your corrections as soon as possible.

[^1]: First published, abridged, in Deutsche Printed according to the original Revue, Bd. II, Stuttgart and Leipzig, 1921 and in full, in Russian, in Voinstvuyushchy Published in English in full for the materialist, Book 3, Moscow, 1925 f , r s t t , m e

[^2]: IN LONDON

[^3]: a K. Marx and F. Engels, 'Resolutions of the Conference of Delegates of the International Working Men's Association Assembled at London from 17th to 23rd September 1871'.



