---
Volume: 44
Document_Title: "149. Marx to Hermann Jung. Around 25 October "
Page_Range: "266-267"
---

# 149. Marx to Hermann Jung. Around 25 October 



**[p. 231]**

As to the resolution on political action,325 the form initially produced by the Committee (Engels, [Martin],3 Le Moussu) and the amendments subsequently adopted by vote of the General Council have created such an imbroglio that I have been compelled to alter the arrangement.

Yours ever,

Karl Marx

First published, in the language of the original (French), in International Review of Social History, Vol. XVII, Parts I-II, Assen, 1972

Printed according to the magazine

Translated from the French

Published in English for the first time

149

MARX TO HERMANN JUNG

IN LONDON

[London, around 25 October 1871]

Dear Jung,

Mr Chautard was here with the enclosed letter. That means that 4 days have been lost already. I told Chautard that I must have the resolutions back IMMEDIATELY, if they cannot finish them at once.323 I do not see how the same people will be able to print the Rules, etc.

You will have to send those refugee riff-raff some money, let us say £10. The sooner we can finish with the fellows THE BETTER.

Yours,

K. Marx

[^1]: Veuillez me retourner la lettre.h

[^2]: First published in: Marx and Engels,

[^3]: Works, First Russian Edition, Vol. XXVI, Moscow, 1935

[^4]: Printed according to the original

[^5]: Published in English for the first time

[^6]: a An illegible word here; Constant Martin was the third member of the Committee.- b Kindly return the letter to me.



