---
Volume: 44
Document_Title: "153. Mar x to Friedrich Adolph Sorge. 6 November "
Page_Range: "271-272"
---

# 153. Mar x to Friedrich Adolph Sorge. 6 November 



**[p. 153]**

MARX TO FRIEDRICH ADOLPH SORGE284

IN HOBOKEN

[London,] 6 November 1871 Dear Friend,

Today 100 copies (50 in French and 50 in English) of the Conference resolutions" are being sent off to New York. The decisions not intended for publication will be communicated to you later.

A new, revised edition of the Rules and Regulations'3 is due to appear in English tomorrow, and you will receive 1,000 copies for sale in America (Id. each). The text must not be translated into French and German in New York, as we are issuing official editions in both languages.309 Write us how many copies in each language will be wanted.

I have turned over the correspondence with the German Section and the New York Committee' to Eccarius (he has been appointed to handle that at my suggestion),ssl since my time does not allow me to perform this function properly.

Section 12 (New York) has submitted proposals to the General Council that it be constituted the leader in America. Eccarius will have sent the decisions against these pretensions and for the present Committeed to Section 12.332

As for the Washington BRANCH (which has sent the General Council a list of its members), the New York Committee went too far.310 It had no right to demand anything but the number of members and the name, etc., of the corresponding secretary.

Yours,

K. M.

[^1]: More in the next letter (this week).e

[^2]: First published in Briefe und Auszüge aus Printed according to the original Briefen von Joh. Phil. Becker, Jos. Dietzgen, Friedrich Engels, Karl Marx u. A. an F. A. Sorge und Andere, Stuttgart, 1906

[^3]: a K. Marx and F. Engels, 'Resolutions of the Conference of Delegates of the International Working Men's Association Assembled at London from 17th to 23rd September 1871'. - b K. Marx, General Rules and Administrative Regulations of the International Working Men's Association. - c the Central Committee of the Interna- tional Working Men's Association for North America - d See 'Résolution du Conseil general de l'Association Internationale des Travailleurs, au réponse à application de la section 12 de New-York', - e See this volume, pp. 241-42.



