---
Volume: 44
Document_Title: "155. Mar x to Nikolai Danielson. 9 November "
Page_Range: "273-276"
---

# 155. Mar x to Nikolai Danielson. 9 November 



**[p. 238]**

It is not just my duty as corresponding secretary for Germany, it is also a great pleasure for me to be in constant communication with our other friends in Berlin through yourself and Kwas- niewski.

Salut et fraternité.

Karl Marx

First published in Die Gesellschaft, No. 3, Printed according to a handwrit- Berlin, 1933 ten copy

155

MARX TO NIKOLAI DANIELSON336

IN ST PETERSBURG

[London,] 9 November 1871

Dear Friend,

Enclosed are a few changes, some of them just printing errors. Of some importance, however, are the changes on p. 192 [p. 225], p. 201 [p. 234], p. 288, Note 205a [p. 309, Note 1], and p. 376 [p. 390], which affect the content.337

It would be pointless to wait for the revision of Chapter I,218

since for months now my time has been so taken up that I have not been able to get to my theoretical work (and the foreseeable future holds out small prospect of an improvement in this respect).

* Certainly, I shall one fine morning put a stop to all this but there are circumstances where you are in duty bound to occupy yourselves with things much less attractive than theoretical study and research.

My warmest thanks for all the kindness I have met with on your part. The writings of Ehrlieb* I am partly acquainted with. I compare him as a writer to Lessing and Diderot.

I have received some curious numbers of the Moscow Gazette}

Yours truly,*

[^1]: A. W.c

[^2]: a Nikolai Dobrolyubov. The surname means 'lover of good'. Marx translates this into German. - b MOCKOSCKVI etdo Mocmu - c A. Williams—Marx's pseudonym





**[p. 239]**

[Appendix]

p. 68, Note 52, line —2 [p. 109, Note 1, line —4] read 'ne pouvant' instead of 'ne pouvant pas'.

p. 83, Note 62, line -6 [p. 123, Note 1, line -23] read 'specie' instead of 'species'.

p. 192, line 3 [p. 224, line - 2 ] read 'The annual return' [Umsatz] instead of 'The annual income' [Einkommen].

Ibid., line 7 [p. 225, lines 2-3] read 'Of the 23/23rds' instead of 'Of these 23/2s working hours', so that the sentence should now run, 'Of the 23/23rds (constituting the whole £115,000)', etc."

Ibid. Insert the following after Note 32, p. 192 [p. 225, Note 1]: Author's addition to Note 32: 'Apart from errors in principle, Senior's statement is confused. What he wants to say is this:

'The manufacturer employs the workman for 11 V2 hours or for 23 half-hours daily. As the working day, so, too, the working year, may be conceived to consist of 11 V2 hours or 23 half-hours, but each multiplied by the number of working days in the year. On this supposition,

the 23 half-hours yield a total product of £115,000;

the gross profit. 'Of these 3 half-hours, one yields V2sx£ll5,000=£5,000; i.e. it makes up for the wear and tear of the factory and the machi- nery.

'The remaining 2 half-hours, i.e. the last hour, yield the last 2/2s of the product, i.e. /2Sx£115,000=£10,000, i.e. they produce the net profit. Q.E.D.

'In the text, however, Senior says,

'That is to say, he suddenly confuses the 23rds into which he

[^1]: 1 half-hour yields 1/ 2 3x£l 15,000; 23 half-hours yield 23/23x£115,000=£115,000b; 20 half-hours yield 20/2Sx£l 15,000= 100,000, i.e. they replace no more than the capital of £100,000 advanced.

[^2]: There remain 3 half-hours, which yield s/2Sx£115,000=£15,000 or

[^3]: ' "The remaining 2/23rds, that is, the last two of the twenty-three half-hours of every day, produce the net profit of 10 per cent."

[^4]: a The English edition, which is quoting Senior, actually reads, 'Of these 23/23rds' - b This line is omitted from the English translation.





**[p. 240]**

has divided the product with the half-hours into which he has divided the working day.'

p. 201, line— 7 [p. 234, line 18] seqq read 'But if you consume it in 10 years, you pay me daily V10950 instead of Vs6so of its total value, i.e. only V3 of its daily value, and you rob me, therefore, every day of 2/ä of the value of my commodity.'

p. 288, Note 205a [p. 309, Note 1] read 'The molecular theory of modern chemistry first scientifically worked out by Laurent and

Gerhardt rests on no other law', i.e. omitting the words 'on the foundations laid by Professor Wurtz in Paris'.

p. 307, line 8 [p. 326, line 14] read 'ANIMAL SPIRITS' instead of

'ANIMAL SPIRIT'.

p. 309, Note 15, line 4 [p. 328, end of French Note 2, continued from p. 327] read 'le poisson' instead of 'le poison'.

p. 319, Note 26, line -9 [p. 337, line -12] read 'dévider' instead of 'divider'.

Line —6 [lines —10 and —9] read 'dévidenses' instead of 'dividendes' and 'teinturiers' instead of 'teinturieurs'.

p. 376, line 20 [p. 390, line 1] read 'The less value it gives up' instead of 'The less value it creates'.

p. 593, Note 60, line —16 [p. 606, line —2] read ' ces services' instead of 'ses services'.

p. 658, line —17 [p. 669, line 7] read '2 silver Groschen, 6 Pfennige' instead of '1 silver Groschen, 8 Pfennige'.3

[^1]: First published, in Russian, without the appendix, in Minuvshiye gody, No. 1, 1908 and in full in: Marx and Engels, Works, First Russian Edition, Vol. XXVI, Mos- cow, 1935

[^2]: Printed according to the original

[^3]: Published in English in full for the first time

[^4]: a These figures, which translate the value of 3d. into German, are omitted from the English edition.



