---
Volume: 44
Document_Title: "158. Mar x to Carl Speyer. 10 November "
Page_Range: "278-280"
---

# 158. Mar x to Carl Speyer. 10 November 



**[p. 157]**

MARX TO LUDWIG KUGELMANN121

IN HANOVER

[London,] 9 November 1871

Dear Kugelmann,

I still have my hands so overfull with work that I can only write you these few lines.

Document received. It is a worthy imitation of the Viennese model,342 which was later quashed by the Vienna Court of Appeal.

Enclosed 1 FRENCH AND 1 ENGLISH COPY OF THE RESOLUTIONS.3 Best greetings to Madame la Comtesse and Fränzchen.b

Your

K. M.

First published, in Russian, in Pisma Printed according to the original Marksa k Kugelmanu (Letters from Marx to Kugelmann), Moscow-Leningrad, 1928

158

London, 10 November 1871 1 Maitland Park Road, Haverstock Hill, N.W.

Dear Speyer,

Lessner acquainted me with your letter. Overwork and then illness have prevented me from replying to you sooner. There are a number of errors in your letter.

1. According to the Rules the General Council in YANKEELAND should concern itself primarily with the Yankees.

[^1]: MARX TO CARL SPEYER1"

[^2]: IN NEW YORK

[^3]: a K. Marx and F. Engels, 'Resolutions of the Conference of Delegates of the International Working Men's Association Assembled at London from 17th to 23rd September 1871'. - b Gertrud and Franziska Kugelmann





**[p. 244]**

2. But as far as the private correspondence with West, etc., is concerned, the General Council has absolutely nothing to do with it A number of the English members of the General Council, in particular George Harris and other sectarians of the school of O'Brien, the CURRENCY QUACK DOCTOR,343 are in contact with West et Co. Anything they may write to the UNITED STATES has no official status. If you can supply proof that Harris, etc., have taken it upon themselves to write to America in the name of the GENERAL COUNCIL, we shall soon put a stop to such mischief.

3. As far as any other correspondence from members of the General Council is concerned, we are not in a position to forbid it.

Firstly, I do not see what objection can be made to the correspondence between Eccarius and Jessup. It has not come to my notice that Jessup, one of our oldest correspondents in the UNITED STATES, has been acting against the New York COMMITTEE.161

Secondly, my correspondence with Sigfrid Meyer. Meyer and Vogt were mandataries of the GENERAL COUNCIL; I do not know either of them personally, but had regarded Meyer, and have always thought of Vogt, as having long been active members of the workers' party.344 I have been advising them both for a long time now to join the organisation established by the Central Committee in New York.

I have not had a letter from Vogt for some years now, and if he does intrigue, he will certainly find no support from me. I am concerned only with the interests of your movement, and not with private individuals.

As for Sorge, I am no more acquainted with him personally than I am with Meyer and Vogt. It is my conviction, however, that the General Council owes him a profound debt of gratitude for his activities—a belief which I have repeatedly expressed in the GENERAL COUNCIL.

This letter is addressed only to you personally. You must not show it to anyone except Sorge.

Write to me soon.

Salut fraternel

Yours sincerely,

Karl Marx

[^1]: 4. You must strive to win the support of the TRADES UNIONS AT ALL

[^2]: COSTS.

[^3]: First published in Briefe und Auszüge aus Printed according to a handwrit- Briefen von Joh. Phi L Becker, Jos. Dietzgen, ten copy Friedrich Engels, Karl Marx u. A. an F. A. Sorge und Andere, Stuttgart, 1906



