---
Volume: 44
Document_Title: "159. Engel s to Theodor Cuno. 13 November "
Page_Range: "280-281"
---

# 159. Engel s to Theodor Cuno. 13 November 



**[p. 159]**

ENGELS TO THEODOR CUNO345

IN MILAN

London, 13 November 1871 122 Regent's Park Road, N.W.

Esteemed Friend,

In reply to your kind letter of the 1st inst., I regret to have to tell you that we have no contacts in Milan at the moment, apart from the Gazzettino Rosa, to which we send documents for publication,346 but which has otherwise made no offers so far on the establishment of sections, etc. The movement in Italy in International terms broke out so suddenly and unexpectedly that everything is still very disorganised and, as you know, the Mordecaians3 are doing their best to hamper the organisation. That there must be useful elements in Milan is obvious enough, if only from the fact that the Gazzettino Rosa has a reading public. In the meantime, the only thing you can do is to try and discover them. I promise to send you the address of the first one to get into contact with me from there. This will undoubtedly happen shortly, since my name will soon enough become known everywhere as secretary for Italy through the flood of forthcoming publications from the General Council. As the stronghold of Mazzini's followers hitherto, and as major industrial city, Milan is of great importance for us, particularly since, if it falls to us, the areas in Lombardy where the silk industry is concentrated will automatically be ours, too. So anything you and your friends can achieve in Milan for the common cause will have a very special value.

We have a strong section in Turin (address: Proletario Italiano); letters from Lodi (the Plebe), which presumably reported on the establishment of sections, have gone astray.

I met Ricciotti Garibaldi at Marx's house this morning. He is a highly intelligent young man with a very calm manner, but a soldier rather than a thinker. However, he may turn out to be very useful. It is just as with the old manb; his theoretical ideas give more proof of his good intentions than of his clarity of vision, but his last letter to Petroni is invaluable to us.347 If the sons prove

[^1]: a police informers (an allusion to The Book of Esther, 4:1) - b Giuseppe Garibaldi



