---
Volume: 44
Document_Title: "161. Mar x to Wilhelm Liebknecht. 17 November "
Page_Range: "282-283"
---

# 161. Mar x to Wilhelm Liebknecht. 17 November 



**[p. 247]**

Is there a JEWELLERS' UNION or SOCIETY of any kind? If so, it would be good if you could contact them directly. A reduction in the working hours of the Paris JEWELLERS would be of great importance for the Londoners, since Paris is their greatest competitor.

Salut fraternel,

Karl Marx

First published in: Marx and Engels, Printed according to the original Works, First Russian Edition, Vol. XXVI, Moscow, 1935 Published in English for the first time

161

MARX T O WILHELM LIEBKNECHT137

IN LEIPZIG

London, 17 November 1871 1 Maitland Park Road, Haverstock Hill

Dear Liebknecht,

1. Letter to follow concerning the printing of the Rules," etc.

2. Your comments on my proposals concerning Berlin rest on a complete misunderstanding. I declared my opposition to unpro- voked demonstrations, but pointed to 'provocations', and immi- nent ones at that, which would provide demonstrations with a background and with prospects of success.b

3. First Bebel and yourself do not come to the Conference, and take no steps to ensure that other delegates turn up. Then you print a report from Boruttau in which, acting perhaps as an unconscious agent of the Geneva conspiracy against the General Council, he rebukes the latter for failing to invite delegates from Germany.' The construction already being put upon this in Geneva by the Bakuninists and the whole host of conspiratorial

[^1]: a K. Marx, General Rules and Administrative Regulations of the Internatio- nal Working Men's Association. - b See this volume, p. 237. - c [K.] Boruttau, 'Sozia- lismus und Kommunismus', Der Volksstaat, Nos. 88 and 89, 1 and 4 November 1871.



