---
Volume: 44
Document_Title: "162. Mar x to Jules Johannard. 18 November "
Page_Range: "283-284"
---

# 162. Mar x to Jules Johannard. 18 November 



**[p. 248]**

4. You may rest assured that I am better informed than you about the intrigues within the International. So when I write to you that letters from Boruttau with any bearing at all on the International (including the Manifesto already announced, which the aforesaid Boruttau has sent you) should not be printed in the

Volksstaat, you have simply to make up your mind whether you wish to act against us or with us. If the latter is the case, then my instructions, which are based on a thorough knowledge of the circumstances, should be followed to the letter.

5. Since we are most dissatisfied here with the way in which the affairs of the International have been conducted hitherto, it is my duty, in accordance with the instructions of the General Council, to make direct contact with the main centres in Germany. I have already made a start on this.3

6. We are so overwhelmed with International WORK here that Engels and myself have had no time up to now to write a Preface for the Communist Manifesto.™9 At all events we shall not write one simply in order to trigger off a polemic with Mr Boruttau in the

Volksstaat.

Your

K. M.

162

[London,] 18 November 1871

My dear Jules Johannard,

We expect you at my place tomorrow evening (Sunday) between

[^1]: First published, in Russian, in Marx-En- Printed according to the original gels Archives, Vol. I (VI), Moscow, 1932

[^2]: MARX TO JULES JOHANNARD U8

[^3]: IN LONDON

[^4]: a See this volume, p. 221.



