---
Volume: 44
Document_Title: "164. Mar x to Adolphe Hubert. 22 November "
Page_Range: "285-286"
---

# 164. Mar x to Adolphe Hubert. 22 November 



**[p. 164]**

MARX TO ADOLPHE HUBERT137

IN LONDON

[London,] 22 November 1871

Dear Citizen,

My ailment continues to keep me indoors, thereby preventing me from doing all I should like to do to support the better elements on the Qui Vive!.351 Nevertheless I have spoken to several of my French friends, though I don't know whether they have started things moving.

As to the terms of admission to the International, all that is needed is recognition of our principles. I am sending you 30 CARDS OF MEMBERSHIP which you may dispose of as and when you find new candidates. They only have to pay ONE PENNY for their annual contribution but may subscribe more if they so wish. All you have to do is enter the names of new members on the cards.

I am also sending you 30 copies of the Rules.3 Every member must be supplied with a copy, which costs ONE PENNY.

adhesive stamps are now being manufactured representing the value of one PENNY, and these must be affixed to the Rules in possession of members.

Those who have already paid for their cards will not have to make a further payment for the stamps.

THE PAMPHLET ON The Civil War in France is SOLD AT Truelove's, 256 High Holborn.

Fraternal greetings,

Karl Marx

[^1]: In accordance with a resolution passed at the last Conference,b

[^2]: First published in: Marx and Engels, Printed according to the original Works, First Russian Edition, Vol. XXVI, Moscow 1935 Translated from the French

[^3]: a K. Marx, General Rules and Administrative Regulations of the International Working Men's Association. - b K. Marx and F. Engels, 'Resolutions of the Conference of Delegates of the International Working Men's Association Assembled at London from 17th to 23rd September 1871'. IV: Contribution of Id. per Member to the General Council.



