---
Volume: 44
Document_Title: "165. Mar x to Friedrich Bolte. 23 November "
Page_Range: "286-294"
---

# 165. Mar x to Friedrich Bolte. 23 November 



**[p. 165]**

MARX TO FRIEDRICH BOLTE352

IN NEW YORK

[London,] 23 November 1871

Friend Boite,

I received your letter yesterday together with Sorge's report.353

1. First of all, as to the attitude of the General Council towards the New York Federal Council, I trust that my letters already sent to Sorge (and a letter to Speyer, which I authorised him to communicate to Sorge confidentially)" will have disposed of the highly erroneous viewpoint of the German Section which you represent.354

In the United States, as in every other country where the International first has to be established, the General Council originally had to authorise separate individuals and appoint them as its official correspondents. But from the moment the New York Committee had gained some stability, these correspondents were dropped one after the other, although they could not be removed all at once.

For some time past the official correspondence with formerly appointed authorised representatives has been confined to Ec- carius' correspondence with Jessup, and I see from your own letter that you have no complaint at all to make regarding the latter.

Except for Eccarius, however, no one was to carry on official correspondence with the United States but myself and Dupont as correspondent (at the time) for the French sections, and whatever correspondence he conducted was confined to the latter.

With the exception of yourself and Sorge, I have not carried on any official correspondence at all. My correspondence with Sigfrid Meyer is private correspondence, of which he has never published the slightest detail, and which by its very nature could in no way be troublesome or harmful to the New York Committee.

There is no doubt, on the other hand, that George Harris and perhaps Boon—two English members of the General Council— are carrying on private correspondence with Internationals in New York, etc. Both of them belong to the sect of the late Bronterre

[^1]: a See this volume, pp. 236, 241-42 and 244.



O'Brien, and are full of follies and CROTCHETS, such as CURRENCY quackery, false emancipation of women, and the like.343 They are thus BY NATURE allies of Section 12 in New York and its kindred souls.332

The General Council has no right to forbid its members to conduct private correspondence. But if it could be proved to us: either that this private correspondence pretends to be official, or that it counteracts the activity of the General Council—whether used for publication or to drag the New York Committee through the mire—the necessary measures would be taken to prevent such mischief.

These O'Brienites, in spite of their follies, constitute an often necessary counterweight to TRADES UNIONISTS in the COUNCIL. They are more revolutionary, firmer on the LAND QUESTION, less NATIONALISTIC, and not susceptible to bourgeois bribery in one form or another. Otherwise they would have been kicked out long ago.

2. I was greatly astonished to see that German Section No. 1 suspects the General Council of a preference for bourgeois philanthropists, sectarians, or amateur groups.

The position is quite the contrary. The International was founded in order to replace the socialist or semi-socialist sects by a real organisation of the working class for struggle. The original Rules and the Inaugural Address3 show this at a glance. On the other hand, the International could not have asserted itself if the course of history had not already smashed sectarianism. The development of socialist sectarianism and that of the real labour movement always stand in indirect proportion to each other. So long as the sects are justified (historically), the working class is not yet ripe for an independent historical movement. As soon as it has attained this maturity all sects are essentially reactionary. For all that, what history exhibits everywhere was repeated in the history of the International. What is antiquated tries to reconstitute and assert itself within the newly acquired form.

And the history of the International was a continual struggle of the General Council against the sects and attempts by amateurs to assert themselves within the International itself against the real movement of the working class. This struggle was conducted at the Congresses, but far more in the private dealings of the General Council with the individual sections.

[^1]: a K. Marx, 'Provisional Rules of the Association' and 'Inaugural Address of the Working Men's International Association'.



H « ! nodi

[^1]: A page from Marx's letter to Friedrich Boite of 23 November 1871

[^2]: 10-556







**[p. 255]**

As the Proudhonists (Mutualists35B) were co-founders of the Association in Paris, they naturally held the reirfs there for the first few years. Later, of course, collectivist, positivist, etc., groups were formed there in opposition to them.

In Germany—the Lassalle clique. I myself corresponded with the notorious Schweitzer for two years and irrefutably proved to him that Lassalle's organisation is purely a sectarian organisation and, as such, hostile to the organisation of the real workers' movement aimed at by the International. He had his 'reasons' for not understanding.

At the end of 1868 the Russian, Bakunin, joined the Internation- al with the aim of forming inside it a second International under the name of Alliance de la démocratie socialiste,10 with himself as leader. He—a man devoid of all theoretical knowledge—claimed that this separate body was to represent the scientific propaganda of the International, and that this propaganda was to become the special function of this second International within the Internatio- nal

His programme was a mishmash superficially scraped together from left and right—equality of classes (!), abolition of the right of inheritance as the starting point of the social movement (Saint-Simonist nonsense), atheism as a dogma dictated to the members, etc., and, as the main dogma, (Proudhonist) abstention from the political movement

This children's primer found favour (and still has a certain hold) in Italy and Spain, where the real conditions for the workers' movement are as yet little developed, and among a few vain, ambitious, and empty doctrinaires in Romance Switzerland and Belgium.

For Mr Bakunin the doctrine (the rubbish he has scraped together from Proudhon, St. Simon, etc.) was and is a secondary matter — merely a means to his personal self-assertion. Though a nonentity theoretically, he is in his element as an intriguer.

For years the General Council had to fight against this conspiracy (which was supported up to a certain point by the French Proudhonists, especially in Southern France). At last, by means of Conference resolutions 1, 2 and 3, IX, XVI, and XVII, it delivered its long-prepared blow.356

Obviously the General Council does not support in America what it combats in Europe. Resolutions 1, 2 and 3 and IX now give the New York Committee the legal weapons with which to put an end to all sectarianism and amateurish groups, and, if necessary, to expel them.

[^1]: 10*





**[p. 256]**

3. The New York Committee would do well to express its full agreement with the Conference decisions in an official letter to the General Council

Bakunin, personally threatened, moreover, by Resolution XIV (publication of the Nechayev trial in the Egalité),* which will bring to light his infamous doings in Russia, is making every possible effort to get protests started against the Conference among the remnants of his following.

For this purpose he has got into contact with the riff-raff among the French refugees in Geneva and London (a numerically weak component, anyway). The slogan issued is that the General Council is dominated by Pan-Germanism (or Bismarckism). This refers to the unpardonable fact that / am by birth a German and actually do exercise a decisive intellectual influence upon the General Council. (N. B. The German element in the COUNCIL is two-thirds weaker numerically than the English, and also weaker than the French. The crime therefore consists in the fact that the English and French elements are dominated by the German element theoretically (!) and find this domination, i. e. German science, very useful and even indispensable.)

In Geneva, under the patronage of the bourgeoise, Madame André Léo (who at the Lausanne Congress was so shameless as to denounce Ferré to his Versailles executioners357), they have published a paper, La Révolution sociale, which polemicises against us in almost literally the same words as the Journal de Genève, the most reactionary paper in Europe.

In London they tried to establish a French Section,338 of whose activities you will find an example in No. 42 of Qui Vive!, which I enclose. (Ditto the issue containing the letter from our French secretary, Serraillier.)368 This Section, consisting of 20 people (including many mquchards^), has not been recognised by the General Council, but another, a much larger section, has.359

In fact, despite the intrigues of this bunch of scoundrels, we are carrying on great propaganda in France — and in Russia, where they know what value to place on Bakunin, and where my book on capital is just being published in Russian.360

The secretary of the first-mentioned French Section (the one not recognised by us and now in the process of complete

[^1]: a K. Marx and F. Engels, 'Resolutions of the Conference of Delegates of the International Working Men's Association Assembled at London from 17th to 23rd September 1871'. XIV: Instruction to Citizen Outine. - b police spies





**[p. 257]**

dissolution) was the same Durand whom we expelled from the Association as a mouchard.361

The Bakuninist abstentionists from politics, Blanca and Albert Richard of Lyons, are now paid Bonapartist agents. The evidence is in our hands. Bousquet (of the same clique in Geneva), the correspondent in Béziers (Southern France), has been denounced to us by the section there as a police officer!362

4. With regard to the resolutions of the Conference, let me say that the whole edition was in my hands, and that I sent them first to New York (Sorge) as the most distant point.323

If reports on the Conference—half true and half false— appeared in the press before that, the blame rests on a delegate to the Conference,11 against whom the General Council has instituted an inquiry.0

5. As for the Washington Section, it applied first to the Gene- ral Council in order to maintain contact with it as an indepen- dent section.310 If the affair is now settled, it is useless to return to it.

With regard to sections the following general remarks app l y :

(a) According to Art. 7 of the Rules, sections that wish to be independent can apply directly to the General Council for admission (* 'no independent local society shall be precluded from directly corresponding with the General Council'*). II: Arts 4 and 5 of the Regulations: *'Every new branch or society'* (this refers to * 'independent local societies') 'intending to join the Interna- tional is bound immediately to announce its adhesion to the General Council!'* (II: Art. 4) and *'The General Council has the right to admit or to refuse the affiliation of any new branch etc' * (II: Art. 5).

(c) according to the decision of the Conference (see V: Art. 3 of the Regulations), no section will be admitted any more from the outset that takes a sectarian name, etc., or (V: Art. 2) does not constitute itself simply as a Section of the International Working Men's Association.

Kindly communicate this letter to the German Section you

[^1]: (b) According to Art. 5 of the Regulations,6 however, the GENERAL COUNCIL has to consult the FEDERAL COUNCILS or COMMITTEES beforehand regarding admission, etc., and

[^2]: a Gaspard Blanc - b J. G. Eccarius - c See this volume, p. 381. - d K. Marx, General Rules and Administrative Regulations of the International Working Men's Association, - e in Section II





**[p. 258]**

represent, and make use of its contents for action but not for publication.

Salut et fraternité,

Karl Marx

Capital has not been published in English or French as yet. A French edition was being worked on but was discontinued as a result of the events.147

Eccarius has been appointed, at my request, secretary for all sections in the UNITED STATES (with the exception of the French, for which Le Moussu is secretary). Nevertheless I shall be glad to answer any private questions that you or Sorge may address to me. Engels has sent the Irish Republic article on the International to Italy for publication there.

In future, issues of The Eastern Post containing reports on the General Council's meetings will be sent to New York regularly, addressed to Sorge.

N.B. ad" POLITICAL MOVEMENT : The POLITICAL MOVEMENT of the working class naturally has as its final object the conquest of POLITICAL POWER for this class, and this requires, of course, a PREVIOUS ORGANISATION of the WORKING CLASS developed up to a certain point, which arises from the economic struggles themselves.

But on the other hand, every movement in which the working class comes out as a class against the ruling classes and tries to coerce them by PRESSURE FROM WITHOUT is a POLITICAL MOVEMENT. For instance, the attempt in a particular factory, or even in a particular trade, to force a shorter working day out of the individual capitalists by STRIKES, etc., is a purely economic movement. The movement to force through an eight-hour law, etc., however, is a political movement. And in this way, out of the separate economic movements of the workers there grows up everywhere a political movement, that is to say a movement of the class, with the object of achieving its interests in a general form, in a form possessing general, socially binding force. Though these movements presup- pose a certain degree of PREVIOUS organisation, they are in turn equally a means of developing this organisation.

Where the working class is not yet far enough advanced in its organisation to undertake a decisive campaign against the collec- tive power, i.e. the political power, of the ruling classes, it must at any rate be trained for this by continual agitation against, and a hostile attitude towards, the policies of the ruling classes. Otherwise

[^1]: as to



