---
Volume: 44
Document_Title: "168. Mar x to Laura and Paul Lafargue. 24- 25 November "
Page_Range: "300-306"
---

# 168. Mar x to Laura and Paul Lafargue. 24- 25 November 



**[p. 168]**

MARX TO LAURA AND PAUL LAFARGUE366

IN SAN SEBASTIAN

London, 24[-25] November 1871

*My dear Laura and Toole,a

What with the International business, what with the * visits from members of the Commune, * I have not found the time to write. How my time is encroached upon, you may judge from one case. At Petersburg they have been translating Das Kapital into Russian, but they had reserved the first chapter because I had asked them to do so, since I intended to re-write it in a more popular manner. Since the events of Paris I was continually prevented from fulfilling my promise and was at last compelled to limit myself to a few alterations, in order not to stop the progress of the publication altogether.*218

As for the calumnies against Toole, *it is all moonshine*, a canard put about by the French branch No. 2. Serraillier, the secretary for France, * wrote immediately to Bordeaux. The six sections there existing have answered by a vote of absolute confidence in the illustrious Toole.

As to the scandals that have taken place at London and Geneva, I must begin from the beginning.

Amongst other French refugees we had admitted to the General Council Theisz, Chalain and Bastelica. The latter was hardly admitted when he proposed Avrial and Camélinat, but* est modus in rebus0 * and we found that there were now enough * Proudhon- ists *in our ranks. On different pretexts the election of these two worthies was therefore delayed until the Conference, and dropped after the Conference, the latter having passed a Resolution inviting us not to admit too many refugees.0 Hence * the great rage of citizens Avrial and Camélinat.

*On the Congress itself the Resolution on the political action of the working class was violently opposed by the Bakuninists— Robin, the Spaniard Lorenzo and the* Corsican Bastelica. *The

[^1]: a Paul Lafargue's jocular nickname - b there's measure in everything (Horace, Satirae, Book 1, Satire 1) - c K. Marx and F. Engels, 'Resolutions of the Conference of Delegates of the International Working Men's Association Assembled at London from 17th to 23rd September 1871'. I: Composition of General Council.



latter, an empty-headed and very pretentious fellow, got the worse of it and was rather roughly handled. His main quality*—i.e. his amour-propre—*got him into steam*. There was a further incident. * On the affair of the * 'Alliance of Socialist Democracy'10 * and the* dispute in Romance Switzerland, *the Conference appointed a * committee * (of which I was a member) and which met in my house.367 Outine on the one side, Bastelica and Robin on the other, were summoned as witnesses. Robin behaved in the most shabby and cowardly manner.* After having had his say (at the beginning of the meeting) he declared that he must leave and rose, intending to go. Outine told him that he must stay, that the investigation was going to be a serious one and that he would not like to discuss him in his absence. Robin, in an admirable series of tactical moves, approached the door. Outine apostrophised him violently, saying that he would have to accuse him of being the mainspring of the Alliance's intrigues. * Meanwhile, to secure a safe retreat,* the great Robin had partly opened the door and, like a true Parthian,368 delivered a parting shot at Outine with the words: 'Then I despise you.'

On 19 September, with Delahaye for intermediary, he communi- cated the following epistle to the Conference:

Several members of the Conference, amongst whom De Paepe, demanded that the fellow be expelled forthwith from the General Council but on my advice it was resolved that he be asked to withdraw his letter and that, in case of refusal, the matter be left in the hands of the General Council. Since Robin obstinately persisted in standing by his letter, he was eventually expelled from the Council.

* Meanwhile, he had addressed to myself the following * billet doux of 28 September.

[^1]: 'Called upon as a witness in the matter of the Swiss dispute, before the committee nominated to examine it, I put in an appearance in the hope of contributing to an appeasement.

[^2]: 'Having been directly impugned, I state categorically that I do not accept the role of accused and will refrain from attending those meetings of the Conference at which the Swiss question is to be discussed.

[^3]: '19 September 1871.

[^4]: 'P. Robin.'

[^5]: 'Citizen Marx, 'I have been under great personal obligations to you, nor have these been a burden to me so long as I believed that nothing could change my respectful



feelings of friendship towards you. Today, being unable to subordinate my gratitude to my conscience, and sorry though I am to break with you, I believe I owe you the following statement.

'I am convinced that, yielding to personal animosity, you have uttered or supported unjust accusations against the objects of that animosity, members of the International, whose sole crime is not to share the same.

'P. Robin.'

* I did not think it worth my while to answer to * R. R. R.— Robin the sheep. (He was already known by that name to Rabelais, who specifically includes him in Panurge's flock.)369 Let me now return to our other sheep.370

After the Conference, Avrial and Camélinat urged the forma- tion of a French branch ('London French Section of 1871').338

Collaborating therein were Theisz, Bastelica (who had already decided to go back to Switzerland and wished to create a prop for Bakunin in London before he left) and Chalain (a completely worthless wag). They published their own Rules in the paper Qui Vive!" of which more anon. Those Rules were contrary to the General Rules. In particular, these gentry (there were 20 of them, amongst whom several informers; their secretary was the illustri- ous Durand, publicly branded an informer by the General Council and expelled from the International361) arrogated to themselves the right to nominate delegates to the General Council with impera- tive mandates, at the same time resolving that no one belong- ing to their section must accept nomination as a member of the General Council save when sent as delegate by the Section it- self.

Even before their Rules had been confirmed by the General Council, they had the impudence to send as Council delegates Chautard (a cretin who, during the Commune, was the laughing- stock of Paris) and Camélinat. They were politely invited to withdraw and await the confirmation of their Rules by the General Council. I was entrusted with a critique thereof. This first missive from the Councilb to the new Section was still couched in conciliatory terms. All they were asked to do was to delete the articles contrary to the spirit and the letter of the General Rules and Regulations.

They were enraged. Avrial (in collaboration with Theisz and Camélinat) wrote a reply which cost him a fortnight's work *and

[^1]: a 'Association internationale des travailleurs. Section française à Londres de 1871. Statuts', Qui Vive!, No. 6, 8-9 October 1871. - b K. Marx, 'Resolution of the General Council on the Rules of the French Section of 1871'.



to which the last literary finish was given* by Vermersch (Le Père Duchêne)."

The said individual had wormed his way into their ranks because, with the aid of a few typographers (refugees), they had founded the paper Qui Vive!, under the provisional editorship of Le Verdet (a Schopenhauerian philosopher). Vermersch made much of them and stirred them up against the General Council in order to get hold of the paper—and in this he succeeded.

They sent Bastelica to Switzerland, whence they received a proclamation of policy: The General Council was under the yoke of Pan-Germanism (meaning me), authoritarian, etc. The prime duty of every citizen was to help bring about the fall of the said usurping Council, etc. All this emanated from Bakunin (acting through the Russian N. Zhukovsky, Secretary of the Alliance in Geneva,b Guillaume, etc.) whose clique (far from numerous in Switzerland by the by) had coalesced with Madame André Léo, Malon, Razoua and a small group of other French refugees SS9 who were not satisfied with playing second fiddle or * no part whatever.*

Incidentally, all the idiots who had been members of the Federal Council in Paris, or who falsely made themselves out so to have been—such as, e.g., Rouillier, that brawler, braggart and drunken sot—had deluded themselves into thinking they would be admitted—as of right—as members of the General Council.

Theisz (who had been nominated treasurer of the General Council, and not secretary for France) and Bastelica handed in their resignations from the Council on the grounds of the article in their Rules prohibiting them from accepting nomination by the Council.

I eventually replied to the letter embellished by old man Vermersch, whose wit is far more Flemish than French. So crushing was this replyc and at the same time so ironic that they resolved not to continue their correspondence with the Coun- cil. Hence they were not recognised as a section of the Interna- tional.

Old man Vermersch had become editor-in-chief of Qui Vive!. In No. 42 he printed a letter371 signed by Chautard, Chouteau (already denounced as an informer by Rigault in Patrie en danger 72), by Landeck—who had given his word to Mr Piétri (see

[^1]: a A. Avrial, 'Aux Citoyens membres du Conseil général de l'Internationale'. - b Secretary of the Geneva Section of the Alliance of Socialist Democracy - c K. Marx, 'Resolution of the General Council on the French Section of 1871'.



the last trial of the Internationalists in Paris) that he would withdraw from the International and from politics"—*and [by] similar riff-raff* in which they denounce the Resolution of the Conference which declares that the German working men (who demonstrated against the annexation of French provinces and, later, for the Commune, and many of whom are at this very moment suffering persecution at the hands of Bismarck) have done their duty, and adduce this as flagrant proof of 'pan- Germanism'!

This was rather too much for those zanies Theisz, Camélinat and Avrial. They refused to put their signatures to it. As members of the administrative council of Qui Viw/,.they also fell out with Vermersch over an immoral novel he had published in the feuilleton.c Vermersch, who had no further use for these gentry, proceeded, without naming names, to attack them in Qui Vive!. His nauseating articles have also led to quarrels with other refugees, and I believe that he yesterday had his face slapped by Sicard.373 Now they are determined to relieve him of his editorship. We shall see! He is believed to be paid by Versailles to compromise the Communards. To cut the story short: in London the conspiracy has failed. The French branch No. 2 is in complete disarray (needless to say, it was pushed by Le Lubez, Bradlaugh, Besson, etc.). Another and far larger French section has been formed which is in agreement with the General Council.359

In place of those who have resigned, we have nominated as members of the Council Ant. Arnaud, F. Cournet and G. Ranvier.

In Geneva the 'Alliance', with André Léo, Malon, etc., is publishing a little journal La Révolution sociale (edited by one Claris) in which they openly attack the General Council and the Conference. Pan-Germanism (German and Bismarckian intellects), authoritarian, etc., etc. The 'Jura Federation' (still the same old bunch, but under another name) has held a tiny little Congress at Sonvilliers (Bernese Jura) at which it was resolved that all the sections of the International be invited to join the Jura Federation in order to bring about the meeting, at the earliest opportunity, of a special Congress at which the conduct of the Council should be reviewed and the resolutions of the Conference annulled as being

[^1]: a Troisième procès de l'Association Internationale des Travailleurs à Paris, Paris, 1870, p. 4. - b K. Marx and F. Engels, 'Resolutions of the Conference of Delegates of the International Working Men's Association Assembled at London from 17th to 23rd September 1871'. XIII: Special Votes of the Conference. - c This refers to Alexis Berneville, the first novel in the series L'Infamie humaine, which was printed anonymously in the Qui Vive! in November-December 1871.



contrary to the principle of autonomy which those resolutions 'openly infringe'.374 In particular, they protest against Resolutions II, 2, 3, IX (Political action by the working class), XVI and XVII.356

They have not ventured to mention Resolution XIV, which is especially distasteful to Bakunin because it would reveal to the whole of Europe the turpitudes for which he was responsible in Russia."

The attitude of the Federal Council in Madrid (manipulated by Bakunin and Bastelica) is highly suspect. Since Lorenzo's depar- ture Engels has received no reply whatever to his many letters. They are imbued with the doctrine of abstention in politics. Engels has written and told them today that, if they persist in their silence, steps will be taken.b In any case Toole MUST ACT. I shall send him English and French copies of the new edition, revised and enlarged, of the Rules and Regulations.309

Our adversaries are indeed unfortunate. As I have already said, the first secretary of the dissident Section in London was G. Durand whom we unmasked as an agent of Versailles. The Bakuninists Blanc and Albert Richard (of Lyons) sold themselves to Bonaparte. They were over here to enrol members under his banner since—Bonaparte is worth more than Thiers!

Finally, the Béziers correspondent0 of the hostile refugees in Geneva—virtually their only French correspondent—has been denounced to us by the Béziers section as a police agent (he is secretary to the superintendent of police)!362

I trust I shall soon have good news of the state of health of my beloved Schnapsd and of the whole family.

As regards Theisz, he has lost all influence in Paris because of the praises meted out to him and to old man Beslay by the Versailles papers.

Bastelica is the chief of Bakunin's lickspittles. I should also remark that the attacks upon us by the Révolution sociale of Geneva are couched in more or less the same terms as those in the Journal de Genève (the most reactionary newspaper in

[^1]: Old Nicke

[^2]: a K. Marx and F. Engels, 'Resolutions of the Conference of Delegates of the International Working Men's Association Assembled at London from 17th to 23rd September 1871'. XIV: Instructions to Citizen Outine. - b F. Engels, 'To the Federal Council of the Spanish Region in Madrid'. - c Abel Bousquet - d Charles Etienne Lafargue - e Marx's family nickname



