---
Volume: 44
Document_Title: "169. Engel s to Paul Lafargue. 25 November "
Page_Range: "306-307"
---

# 169. Engel s to Paul Lafargue. 25 November 

Europe) and in The Times, which I am sending you. The newspaper mentioned in The Times is the Journal de Genève.

First published, in the languages of the Translated from the French. En- original (English and French), in Annali glish passages reproduced from an. 1, Milan, 1958 the original

169

ENGELS TO PAUL LAFARGUE375

IN SAN SEBASTIAN

[London, 25 November 1871]

My dear Toole,"

Thank you for your letter of which I made good use on the Council. My ultimatum to the Federal Council in Madridb goes off today, by registered mail; I tell them that, if they persist in their silence, debuemos procéder como nos la dictarâ el interés de la

Internaciona U If they fail to reply, or do so in an unsatisfactory manner, we shall at once appoint you plenipotentiary for the whole of Spain. In the meantime, our Rules confer on you, as on any other member, the right to form new sections. It is important that, in the event of a split, we should continue to have a pied-à-terre in Spain, even if the whole of the present organisation were to go over, lock, stock and barrel, to the Bakuninist camp; and you will be the only person we shall then be able to count upon. So do what you can to resume communications everywhere with the men who might be of use to us in such an event. These Bakuninists are absolutely determined to transform the Interna- tional into an abstentionist society, but they are not going to succeed.

La Federaciôn of Barcelona and La Emancipacian of Madrid arrive here only at very irregular intervals, so that I cannot know whether the intrigue has not already begun to betray its presence in these journals. But they have always preached abstention, which probably seems to them a question of far greater import than economic questions. So that's where they end up with their

[^1]: a Paul Lafargue's nickname - b F. Engels, 'To the Federal Council of the Spanish Region in Madrid'. - c We shall have to take such steps as the interests of the International dictate.



