---
Volume: 44
Document_Title: "170. Mar x to Juliusz Balaszewicz- Potocki. 25 November "
Page_Range: "307-308"
---

# 170. Mar x to Juliusz Balaszewicz- Potocki. 25 November 

abstention from politics; they themselves turn politics into the most important factor!

Please convey my kind salutations to Laura, and give little Schnaps3 a kiss from me.

Yours ever,

F. E.

First published, in the language of the Printed according to the original original (French), in Annali, an. 1, Milan,

ig5g Translated from the French

170

MARX TO JULIUSZ BALASZEWICZ-POTOCKI376

IN LONDON

London, 25 November 1871 1 Maitland Park Road, Haverstock Hill, N.W.

Dear Sir,

I send you together with these lines 4 copies of the Statutes and Regulationsh and some copies of the Resolutions of the London Conference^

As to the Statutes etc. the French edition will be published in a few days. Please write me how many copies of that edition you want?

For all other communications relative to the International, please address them to General W. Wroblewski (22 Vincent Terrace, Islington), who is the Secretary for Poland of the General Council.

Yours faithfully,

Karl Marx

[^1]: First published, in the language of the Reproduced from the original original (English), in Krasny Arkhiv, No. 6, Moscow, 1924

[^2]: a Charles Etienne Lafargue - b K. Marx, General Rules and Administrative Regulations of the International Working Men's Association. - c K. Marx and F. Engels, 'Resolutions of the Conference of Delegates of the International Working Men's Association Assembled at London from 17th to 23rd September 1871'.



