---
Volume: 44
Document_Title: "172. Mar x to Friedrich Adolph Sorge. 29 November "
Page_Range: "308-310"
---

# 172. Mar x to Friedrich Adolph Sorge. 29 November 



**[p. 171]**

MARX TO JULIUSZ BALASZEWICZ-POTOCKIs76

IN LONDON

[London,] 29 November 1871 1 Maitland Park Road, Haverstock Hill,. N.W.

Dear Sir,

The French edition of the General Statutes and Rules will only be ready in a few days when I shall send you some copies.

I shall be glad to see you at my house after 6 o'clock in the evening.

Yours truly,

Karl Marx

First published, in the language of the Reproduced from the original original (English), in Krasny Arkhiv, No. 6, Moscow, 1924

172

London, 29 November 1871

My dear Sorge,

I hope you have at last received at New York the Resolutions of the Conference and the different letters I sent you.a I send together with this letter the 3 last Eastern Post reports on the sittings of the General Council. They contain, of course, only what is meant for public use.

In regard to financial matters I have only to remark: 1) the New York Committee 151 has nothing to pay but 2d per piece for the pamphlets on the Civil War it has received. It will

[^1]: MARX TO FRIEDRICH ADOLPH SORGE377

[^2]: IN HOBOKEN

[^3]: a See this volume, p. 241.



pay Id per piece for the Statutes and Regulations à fur et mesure that they are sold. But you ought to write us how many French and German editions of the Statutes etc. you are in want of. Besides what you want immediately, you will perhaps find useful to have a certain stock in reserve.

2) With regard to the money sent us for the refugees, the General Council wants an express written declaration that the General Council alone is responsible for its distribution amongst the French refugees, and that the so-called 'Society of French refugees at London'378 has no right of control over the Council.

This is necessary, because, although the mass of the above- named society are honest people, the committee at their head are ruffians, so that a great part—and the most meritorious part of the refugees—does not want to have anything to do with the 'Society' but to be relieved directly by the Council. We, therefore, give a weekly sum for distribution to the Society, and distribute another sum directly.

It is the above said ruffians who have spread the most atrocious calumnies against the General Council without whose aid (and many of its members have not only given their time, but paid out of their own purse) the French refugees would have 'crevé de faim'*.

Before admitting him, the Council instituted a most searching inquiry as to his integrity, he, like all other Irish politicians, being much calumniated by his own country-men.

The Council—after most incontrovertible evidence on his private character—chose him because the mass of the Irish workmen in England have more confidence in him than in any other person. He is a man quite superior to religious prejudices and as to his general views, it is absurd to say that he has any 'bourgeois' predilections. He is a proletarian, by his circumstances of life and by his ideas.

If any accusation is to be brought forward against him, let it be done in exact terms, and not by vague insinuation. My opinion is that the Irishmen, removed for long time by imprisonment, are not competent judges. The best proof is—their relations with The Irishman whose editor, Pigott, is a mere speculator, and whose manager, Murphy, is a ruffian. That paper—despite the exertions of the General Council for the Irish cause—has always intrigued against us. Mac Donnel was constantly attacked in that paper by an

[^1]: I come now to the question of Mac Donnell.379

[^2]: a starved to death



