---
Volume: 44
Document_Title: "173. Engel s to Pyotr Lavrov. 29 November "
Page_Range: "310-312"
---

# 173. Engel s to Pyotr Lavrov. 29 November 

Irishman (O'Donnell) connected with Campbell (an officer of the London Police) and an habitual drunkard who for a glass of gin will tell the first constable all the secrets he may have to dispose of.

After the nomination of Mac Donnell, Murphy attacked and calumniated the International (not only Mac Donnell) in The Irishman, and, at the same time, secretly, asked us to nominate him secretary for Ireland.

As to O'Donovan Rossa, I wonder that you quote him still as an authority after what you have written me about him. If any man was obliged, personally, to the International and the French Communards, it was he, and you have seen what thanks we have received at his hands.

Let the Irish members of the New York Committee not forget that to be useful to them, we want above all influence on the Irish in England, and that for that purpose there exists, as far as we have been able to ascertain, no better man than Mac Donnell.

Yours fraternally,

Karl Marx

Train has never received credentials on the part of the General Council.

173

ENGELS TO PYOTR LAVROV

IN PARIS

London, 29 November 1871

My dear Sidorov,"

I have had your last two letters380 and if I have been unable to reply sooner, you must lay it at the door of that MOAO^eui» of

[^1]: First published, in the language of the Reproduced from the original original (English), in Briefe und Auszüge aus Briefen von Joh. Phil. Becker, Jos. Dietzgen, Friedrich Engels, Karl Marx u. A. an F. A. Sorge und Andere, Stuttgart, 1906

[^2]: a Lavrov's pseudonym used by Engels in their correspondence.



Ea Ky HHHi>'s,a whose intrigues have been causing us no end of labour. Things are approaching a crisis and open warfare will shortly break out in the press. A clean split is in the offing. In short the matter will be decided before long. I shall not attempt to give you the details—it would take too long and they are too boring. What with all this tomfoolery to contend with, it need hardly be said that neither Johnson0 nor I have had any time for work.

Thank you for your further disbursements on my behalf in the matter of the Gazette des Tribuneaux.

As to Bpo6A.c we have been informed by Po3Ba40BCKHH,d who left his first position, but found another one a few days later.e We have done all we could but, considering the man's obstinate character and ferocious pride, we have had to be very tactful. However we think we have succeeded to the point where at least he will not lack for necessities. You see, he refuses all medical help and it will be even more difficult to overcome this prejudice.

Johnson is suffering from a slight attack of bronchitis and from one or two furunculi that are more troublesome than serious. Yesterday he attended the Council for the first time in a month. Apart from that he is tolerably well. The abominable weather we have been having here has given everyone colds.

As to the intrigues over here, they dwindle in importance day by day. The few honest men, who allowed themselves to be carried away, have withdrawn and left the field open for the out and out riff-raff about whom there is no need to bother one's head.f It is worse in Switzerland, since Ma AOHi>,g etc., have fallen into the trap over there, some through spinelessness, others through vanity. So much the worse for them—the world can't stop turning because of their blunders!

Yours ever,

F. E.

Herbert Spencer Psychology* 16/- Do First Principles 16/- Bain Mental and Moral Science 10/6 Do Logic, 2 parts 10/6 Do Senses and Intellect 15/-

[^1]: a Bakunin's fine fellow. Engels probably means Basteliea. - b Marx - c (Russ. abbr.) Wroblewski - d Rozwadowski (written in Cyrillic in the original) - e See this volume, pp. 175 and 200. - f Ibid., p. 223. - s Malon (written in Cyrillic in the origi- nal) - h H. Spencer, The Principles of Psychology.



