---
Volume: 44
Document_Title: "174. Engels to Paul Lafargue. 9 December "
Page_Range: "312-314"
---

# 174. Engels to Paul Lafargue. 9 December 



**[p. 277]**

Do Emotions and the Will 15/- Do Study of Character with an Estimate of Phrenology 9/-

20% discount on the above prices. All the titles under Bain indicate individual works.

First published, without the postscript, in the language of the original (French) in Na boyevom postu (On Guard), Moscow, 1930 and in full in: Marx and Engels, Works, Second Russian Edition, Vol. 33, Moscow, 1964

174

ENGELS TO PAUL LAFARGUE381

IN SAN SEBASTIAN

London, 9 December 1871 122 Regent's Park Road, N.W.

My dear Lafargue,

Herewith a line or two on matters in Spain. There must have been internal struggles within the Spanish International, struggles that were finally decided in our favour. That, in my view, explains their continued silence and the resolution finally taken to break it. I had written to Mora on the 25th,45 on the 28th Mesa wrote to you382 and on the 29th Mora wrote me a letter saying they knew nothing about the calumnies and intrigues against the General Council I had mentioned to him, etc. However, the first of the two issues of La Federation that subsequently reached us carried the resolutions passed at the Conference,3 and the second an article on resolution No. IX reprinted from the Emancipaciôn, and with this we have every reason to be satisfied.383 Mesa's letter is even more explicit. In Spain, then, we have won our case. I replied to Mora immediately and trust that everything will go well from now on.

Come to that, the others had done their work well and, as usual,

Printed according to the original

Translated from the French

Published in English for the first time

[^1]: a K. Marx and F. Engels, 'Resolutions of the Conference of Delegates of the International Working Men's Association Assembled at London from 17th to 23rd September 1871'.



had had recourse to some pretty vile methods. La Revolution sociale of 23 November published an article which had appeared in the Barcelona Federaci&n of 19 November to the effect that the emissary of the Swiss dissidents, etc., had arrived down there and that the Barcelona sections, having satisfied themselves of the revolutionary character of the dissidents' principles, etc., had accepted the offer of alliance made by these people. We have looked through the relevant issue of La Federation but cannot find the article. The issue of 3 December provides the explanation: it says that the article did not reflect the opinion of the sections or even of one section, but only that of one solitary editor of the paper, who had slipped it in behind the backs of the editorial committee!

The victory won in Spain has much reduced the field of conflict. There remain only the French branch, which is not recognised here (15 members),338 the Geneva branch, the Jurassians, who are avowed adversaries, and the Italians, whose attitude is doubtful. But I have been working hard at Italy and we have now begun to shift the battleground; from private intrigue and correspondence we are moving into the public arena. Mazzini has given us an excellent opportunity, for in an article in his paper he has made the International responsible for Bakunin's words and deeds. So here was a chance to attack Mazzini and disavow Bakunin at one and the same time. I did so forthwith and sent the.article to all our Italian journals.384 Some at least will publish it, but others are, I fear, too much hand-in-glove with Bakunin to do so. But with this article I have advised all of them of the adherence of the Spaniards to the Conference and of the progress of the International in Spain reported by Mesa. That will have an effect; they will see that the others have been telling them nothing but lies about Spain. In fact their policy was to win Spain over by telling her that Italy was unanimously on their side and vice versa. We may still have a few unpleasantnesses in Italy, but the decision of the Spaniards to come over to our side will decide the matter—UPON THE WHOLE—all along the line. As to the CANTANKEROUS Jurassians, we shall go for them in the very near future.385

I shall be much relieved when all this business has been settled once and for all. You wouldn't believe how much work, correspondence, etc., all this has caused us. For weeks past Moor, Serraillier and I have been unable to turn to anything else. And I, poor devil, have had to write long letters, one after the other, in Italian and Spanish, two languages I scarcely know!

In France we are doing famously. Twenty-six journals have offered to publish our documents.

