---
Volume: 44
Document_Title: "175. Engel s to Wilhelm Liebknecht. 15 December "
Page_Range: "314-318"
---

# 175. Engel s to Wilhelm Liebknecht. 15 December 

It is devilish cold here and you should be glad to be spending the winter in a warm climate. Otherwise we are keeping well, likewise the Marx family. Compared with their condition last winter, Moor's health, as also Jenny's,3 has greatly improved. Moor is no longer coughing so much; he has had a small abscess below the shoulder but the carbunculosis has cleared up and not returned. His liver will never revert to a normal condition at his age, but is working a good deal better than before, and Moor, and this is the main thing, is leading a more sensible existence. Jenny, after the repeated attacks of pleurisy she has been through, will probably suffer permanently from mild emphysema, but she is beginning to understand that she must cosset herself a little and not try to harden herself, in good time, as she used to say, to the cold and the bad weather. She is singing again and her voice is stronger and clearer than ever before.

I learned with great pleasure of the recovery of little Schnaps.b

Give him a kiss from me—likewise one for your wife.c

Yours ever,

F. E.

General*

175

ENGELS TO WILHELM LIEBKNECHT

London, 15 December 1871

Dear Liebknecht,

About Schneider, the necessary steps will be taken at the local German Workers' Society135 next Monday.e Unfortunately too many of Schweitzer's followers have been allowed in, and if we did not have Frankel, the whole Society would have fallen into their hands of late. (The issues of the Social-Demokrat have just this moment arrived.386) How Frankel can object, as you demand, to his

[^1]: First published in: F. Engels, P. et Printed according to the original L. Lafargue, Correspondance, t. I, Paris, 1956 Translated from the French

[^2]: IN LEIPZIG

[^3]: a Marx's daughter - b Charles Etienne Lafargue - c Laura Lafargue - d Engels' nickname - e 18 December





**[p. 280]**

Against Schneider: 1. It goes without saying that the Con- ference3 delegates were elected. To answer his other stupid questions would be absurd. 2. The 15-strong French contingent consists of 1 Commune member, Chalain; a number of drunkards; the same B. Landeck who declared in the course of the International trial in Paris that he had indeed belonged to the International, but would never do so again; 3 people who do not belong to the International at all (but only to this newly formed French Section in London, which has never been recognised 8)— and the whole fuss stems from the fact that since their rules contravene the Rules, no one has been willing to grant them recognition as the local French Section. Theisz and Avrial, the only decent people in the Section, have not signed this proclama- tion, and are now trying to make overtures to us once more! In contrast, in the General Council there are now 8 Commune members (Serraillier, Frankel, Vaillant, Cournet, Ranvier, Arnaud, Johannard, Longuet), and we have a French Section 50 men strong here, which includes the most decent of the refugees in its numbers.359 Rouillier is not a Commune member but a loud- mouthed, drink-sodden cobbler. And these 15 men are described by the Neuer Social-Demokrat as 'the well-known French leaders'!

What the Neuer Social-Demokrat says about the English Federal Council and Dilke has been taken from an intentionally distorted report in the bourgeois press (The Daily News, etc.) and is false.388

The Neuer Social-Demokrat's report from Denmark proves that they have absolutely no contact with people there.im However, it would be a good idea for you to write to H. Brix, the editor of the Socialisten in Copenhagen, or to his deputy, L. Pio, offering them correspondents' reports from Germany if they are willing in return to send you reports in German or English from Denmark. They do understand English. And anyway, you can learn enough Danish in a fortnight to understand the Socialisten; the Tauchnitz dictionary will suffice. The language has no grammar whatever. Address: Editorial board of 'Socialisten', Copenhagen.

Incidentally, the Qui Vive! suffocated in its own filth a week ago.

[^1]: a the London Conference of 1871



Even if Vermersch, its editor, was not a mouchard,* his way of writing at least suited the French police to a tee. The paper was finally offered to us,351 but we wanted nothing to do with such an inheritance, and so it died.

Boruttau. The letter returned herewith390 shows even more clearly than the previous one that the ass really is entangled right up to his eyes in Bakunin's web. When he objects to our disavowal of the Alliance, or calls for compulsory atheism for all members of the International, is that Bakuninism or not? And when he expresses his partial approval of people's complaints on matters of which he knows nothing—every word he writes about the Conference is false—is that Bakuninism or not? And you would like to play him off against them? He may be 'honest', but when it comes to those honest dolts with their vast, silent expectations, I would much rather have their enmity than their friendship. The muddled blockhead will not receive a single line from us here.b

The events in Geneva391 will either have opened his eyes, or else pushed him entirely into the ranks of the Bakuninists, where he belongs. Why don't you get him to send you the Révolution sociale, especially Nos. 5, 6 and 7? I presume that you read the Egalité; that is absolutely essential to keep yourself au courant

You cannot understand why all the Geneva Communards should be against us. This problem, which has no interest at all for me, you can easily solve for yourself by thinking back to the behaviour of the various refugee associations of '49 and '50 where groupings were often determined by the sheer chance of being thrown together. All the Geneva Communards are confined to 3 men: Malon, Lefrançais and Ostyn; the rest are people without any name at all.

When you say that the non-representation of Germany at the Conference was the fault of Marx's mystery-mongering, we have to reply that this is not the case. Marx merely wrote to say that the police should learn nothing of it. Is it not possible for you to inform your own committee or other local groups about the Conference, without its coming to the ears of the police? That would be a fine piece of 'organisation'! We did indeed want to hold the Conference privatim, i.e. unbeknown to the continental police, but that does not mean that if you and Bebel could not attend, you should not have taken steps to ensure that others might come! Marx emphatically rejects this allegation.

In the context, action souterranéec means nothing more than

[^1]: a police informer - b See this volume, p. 248. - c underground activities



In Spain we are in the clear, we have gained a resounding victory. The relevant Conference resolution has been recognised (you can find the Emancipation article on it in the Egalité38 ) and even the business of abstaining from elections, on which they still insist for the moment, is about to crumble. Incidentally, this abstentionist ploy is just confined to the few Bakuninists and the remnants of the Proudhonists (we are rid of the majority) and has suffered a severe defeat this time. The matter is settled as far as/ Spain is concerned.

It was about the English company swindle that I wrote to you.a I know nothing of German ones. Have you any material on this? Without that nothing can be done.394

Your view that the German Internationalists do not need to pay dues, and that, in general, it is a matter of complete indifference whether the International has few members in Germany or many, is the exact opposite of ours. If you have not asked for the contributions of 1 silver groschen per person per annum, or if you have used them up yourselves, you will have to come up with your own justification. How you can imagine that the other nations would bear your share of the costs, so that you might come amongst them 'in the Spirit', like Jesus Christ, while saving your flesh and your money,—is something I quite fail to comprehend. At all events, this Platonic relationship has got to stop and the German workers must either be in the International or out of it. The French find themselves subjected to pressures of a completely different order, and we are better organised there than ever. If you personally treat the matter as being of no importance, we shall have to turn to others, but we shall clear the business up one way or the other, on that you may rely.

The French and English versions of the Rules take up less than 1 sheet of print,b309 so that special supplement will probably not be necessary—should this not be the case, let us know how much the costs of typesetting, on the one hand, and the cost of the special supplement, on the other, come to, and we shall see what we can do.

Marx is working on the 2nd edition of Capital; I have my hands full with the Italian and Spanish correspondence and other

[^1]: a F. Engels, 'On the Company Swindle in England'. - b i.e. 16 pages



