---
Volume: 44
Document_Title: "176. Marx to Laura Lafargue. 18 December "
Page_Range: "318-319"
---

# 176. Marx to Laura Lafargue. 18 December 

business. We shall have to see what time we can find to do the preface for the Manifesto.3

With best wishes from us all to you and yours.

Your

F. E.

First published, in Russian, in Marx- Printed according to the original Engels Archives, Vol. I (VI), Moscow, 1932 . . . Published in English for the first time

176

MARX TO LAURA LAFARGUE

IN SAN SEBASTIAN

[London,] 18 December 1871

My dear Laura,

In the first instance my best thanks for the offer of Toole.b395 I accept it under two express conditions,

1) that if the enterprise fails, I have to pay the sum advanced with the usual interest upon it,

2) that Toole does not advance more than the 2,000 frs. The expression of the Editor that this is only wanted for the beginning seems to me ominous. At all events Toole must stipulate that his obligations refer only to this 'beginning'.

I prefer in every respect a cheap popular edition. It is a fortunate combination that a second German edition has become necessary just now. I am fully occupied (and can therefore write only a few lines) in arranging it, and the French translator will of course have to translate the amended German edition.396 (I shall forward him the old one with the changes inserted.) Möhmchen is just trying to find out the whereabouts of Keller.147

She has written for that purpose to his sister. If he is not to be found (and in due time), the translator of Feuerbach would be the man.c

[^1]: The Russian edition (after the first German edition) will appear January next in St Petersburg.360

[^2]: a See this volume, p. 135. - b Paul Lafargue's nickname - c Joseph Roy



