---
Volume: 44
Document_Title: "177. Engels to Paul Lafargue. 30 December "
Page_Range: "319-323"
---

# 177. Engels to Paul Lafargue. 30 December 

Many kisses to you and Schnappy,3 Happy New Year to Toole and all.

Kakadou'sb old master

First published, in the language of the Reproduced from the original original (English), in Annali, an. 1, Milan,

1958

177

ENGELS TO PAUL LAFARGUE381

IN MADRID

London, 30 December 1871

My dear Friend,

Yesterday evening, when I was on the point of writing a pretty tart letter to the Spanish Council regarding the translation and publication of the Bakuninists' manifesto,397 a letter arrived from you which gave me a great deal of pleasure. Although I am sorry that circumstances should have necessitated your going to Madrid, it is most fortunate that you should be there at the moment, for the coyness and silence of the Spanish Council are really such as to invite a somewhat unpleasant interpretation. Though I wrote to Mora 24 days ago,c I have had no reply, or rather, for all reply, the publication of the hostile manifesto; if it were not for your letters, what could we make of this?

I am sending you herewith the resolutions of the 30 sections in Geneva in case they have not come your way. Likewise the Romance Committee's reply to the Bakuninists and / can only hope that the 'Emancipacion' will provide its readers also with a translation of that excellent piece.*98 In the same issue of L'Egalité you will find several other articles relating to this debate and to the meeting of the 30 sections. For the time being the Genevans' reply will suffice; needless to say, the General Council must at once take the matter in hand and will reply in a circular embracing all phases of the dispute from its inception385; as you can imagine, it will be lengthy and will take us some time. Meanwhile, what the Spaniards must be made to realise is [the following]:

[^1]: a Charles Etienne Lafargue - b Laura Lafargue's nickname - c F. Engels, 'To the Federal Council of the Spanish Region in Madrid'.



which, for the Association, have the force of law and which have to be obeyed by the General Council. This is an act of open rebellion and it is fortunate that these people should have shown their hand. But

2) who were the authors of those Basle resolutions? The General Council in London? Certainly not. They were put forward by the Belgian delegates (amongst them Robinl the Bakuninist) and they were most warmly supported by whom?—Bakunin, Guillaume, Schwitzguébel, etc., the very men, that is, who are attacking them today as having, by their authoritarian character, demoralised the General Council. Not that this has prevented Guillaume and Schwitzguébel from signing the self-same circular. We have witnesses over here and, unless Sentinon and Farga Pellicer have been blinded by the spirit of sectarianism, they must surely remember this (if they were at the meeting, which I do not know). But then things were different. The Bakuninists believed that they were certain of a majority and that the General Council would be transferred to Geneva. It turned out otherwise, and resolutions which, had they been passed by a General Council of their choosing, would have been as revolutionary as might be, became all at once authoritarian and bourgeois!

3) The convening of the Conference was absolutely in order. The Jurassians, represented on the Council by Robin, who himself requested that the dispute be brought before that Conference, must have been notified of it by him since he was their regular correspondent. Jung, the secretary for Switzerland, could not continue to correspond officially with a committee which, flying in the face of a resolution passed by the General Council, continued to flaunt the title of Committee of the Romance Federation.9 The said resolution of the General Council1" was taken by virtue of the power delegated to it by the Administrative Resolution of Basle No. VIII (new edition of the Rules, etc., Administrative Reg- ulations0 II, Art. 7). All the other sections were officially notified, and through the usual channels.

Our friends in Spain will now realise the way in which these gentry misuse the word 'authoritarian'. Whenever the Bakuninists

[^1]: a the London Conference of 1871 - b K. Marx, 'General Council Resolution on the Federal Committee of Romance Switzerland'. - c K. Marx, General Rules and Administrative Regulations of the International Working Men's Association.

[^2]: 11-556



You are right, we must find some way of achieving a wider continental circulation for the reports of the General Council's meetings. I am still searching for such a way. For some time I have been sending The Eastern Post to Lorenzo, he having assured me they had someone who spoke English. Now I am sending you the latest issue of that journal and enclosing cuttings from earlier issues (care of Lorenzo). You might be able to do something with them for the Emancipacion. I really do not have the time to translate all these things myself, being obliged to conduct a vast correspondence with Italy. But I shall see what can be done—if there was someone in Barcelona who spoke English, might I not send the paper there?

I have not seen Moor today, he is hard at work on his second German edition,3 but I will give him your letter this evening. We are very well. Jennyb is keeping well and Moor passably so. I make him go for walks as often as possible since what he needs is fresh

[^1]: of Volume I of Capital; see this volume, p. 283. - b Marx's daughter



air. My wife a sends you her compliments and wishes you A HAPPY NEW YEAR. REMEMBER ME TO LAURA WHEN YOU WRITE. THE POST CLOSES.

Yours ever,

T h e General b

Para Lafargue si esta a Madrid y si no para Mora y Lorenzo.c

First published in: F. Engels, P. et Printed according to the original L. Lafargue, Correspondance, t. I, Paris, IQcg Translated from the French

[^1]: a Lydia Burns - b Engels' nickname - c For Lafargue if he is in Madrid and if not for Mora and Lorenzo (the postscript on the blank, fourth, page of the letter).

[^2]: 11*



