---
Volume: 44
Document_Title: "178. Engels to Wilhelm Liebknecht. 2 January "
Page_Range: "323-325"
---

# 178. Engels to Wilhelm Liebknecht. 2 January 



**[p. 288]**

1872

178

ENGELS TO WILHELM LIEBKNECHT

IN LEIPZIG

London, 2 January 1872a

Dear Liebknecht,

First of all, Happy New Year, and then the proofsb en- closed.

Marx or Tussy will have written to you about the Stieberian escapade in the Deutsche Allgemeine Zeitung.c It was so transparent that no correspondence was needed to convince you of the deception; the cost of a telegram would have been money thrown away. You did right to denounce the thing as a forgery at once. Compare the names, most of which are false, with the correct ones under the Conference resolutions and you will have direct proof of the forgery.400

Marx still has your letter,401 so I cannot answer it point by point. At all events, you have to find a form that will make it possible for you to be represented at the next congress, and if no one can come, you could have yourselves represented by the old guard here. Since in all probability the Bakuninists and Proudhonists will leave no stone unturned, the credentials will be closely scrutinised and being delegated, for instance, by Bebel and yourself personally, as was the case with the conference credentials sent to me, would not make a good impression. The Spaniards are in as bad a position as you but have not let themselves be side-tracked. Incidentally, the decision of the court in Brunswick does not set a precedent. 83 A downright disgrace like that, where even the laws of the Federal Diet402 can be dragged in, could only happen in a

[^1]: a The original mistakenly has '1871'. - b K. Marx, General Rules and Administrative Regulations of the International Working Men's Association (German edition). - c See this volume, p. 571.



decadent small state. Bebel ought to protest against it in the Reichstag; the men of Progress236 would either have to support him or stand compromised before the whole of Germany. If I can find the time I shall send a (legal) critique of this pettifogging judgment to the Volksstaat.40i

In Spain, according to a report from Lafargue (who is or was in Madrid), things are going well—the Bakuninists have overshot the mark with the violence of their manner. The Spaniards are workers and want unity and organisation above all else. You will have received the last circular of the congress in Sonvillier,374 in which they attack the Basle administrative resolutions as the source of all evil.399 That is really the last straw and we shall now take action.

In the meantime, Hins, Steens and Co., in Belgium, have played us a fine trick (see the resolution of the Brussels Congress in

L'Internationale404). De Paepe shamefully let them make a fool of him; he wrote that all was well. However, up to now this opposition has kept itself within the bounds of legality and will likewise be dealt with when the time is ripe. Apart from De Paepe, the Belgians were never anything much.

A society in Macerata, in the Romagna, has nominated as its 3 honorary presidents: Garibaldi, Marx and Mazzini. This confu- sion will show you very clearly the state of public opinion among the Italian workers. Only Bakunin's name is needed and the mess is complete.

Cuttings from The Eastern Post (2 meetings)3 to follow tomor- row; I do not have the last issue anymore and shall only get a copy at today's meeting.

Best wishes to yours and to Bebel.

Your

F. E.

Notabene. Have you changed your address? Braustrasse 11?

[^1]: First published, in Russian, in Marx- Printed according to the original Engels Archives, Vol. I (VI), Moscow, 1932 „ , , . , , . * , , . , , , r- Published in English lor the tirst time

[^2]: a reports on the General Council meetings of 12 and 19 December, published in The Eastern Post, Nos. 168 and 169, 16 and 23 December 1871



