---
Volume: 44
Document_Title: "181. Engel s to Carlo Terzaghi. First Version. After 6 January "
Page_Range: "326-329"
---

# 181. Engel s to Carlo Terzaghi. First Version. After 6 January 

If Mr Mottershead has 'consented to stand for the secretary- ship', we at all events did not invite him to do so. His position as paid secretary of the 'Labour Representation League'406 makes the thing almost impossible. Mr Engels told you expressly after last Tuesday's meeting3 that his mind was not yet made up as [to] who was the proper person to vote for, and for the present we see difficulties on all sides. Hence we have resolved to leave our continental friends to their own discretion.

In our opinion the important thing is, to settle the position and composition of the Federal Council. As to the secretaryship, it is mainly a personal matter which need not and, perhaps, cannot be settled in a hurry. At all events this will depend upon cir- cumstances.

Yours truly,

K. M.

First published in: Marx and Engels, Reproduced from the original Works, First Russian Edition, Vol. XXVI, . , , .. Moscow, 1935 Published in English for the first time

181

[First Version]

London [after 6 January 1872] 122 Regent's Park Road

My dear Terzaghi,

I received your letter of 4 December last year, and if I have not replied sooner, it was because I wanted to give you a precise

[^1]: ENGELS TO CARLO TERZAGHI407

[^2]: IN TURIN

[^3]: [Draft]

[^4]: a meeting of the General Council on 2 January



We have very little money, and the millions of the International exist solely in the terrified imagination of the bourgeoisie and of the police, who cannot understand how an association like ours has been able to achieve such an important position without having money amounting to millions at its disposal. If they had only seen the accounts submitted at the last Conference3! But never mind; let them go on believing it, it will do us no harm. It had already been decided, on receipt of your letter, to take out a number of shares in the Proletario, in the name of the General Council represented by me, but then the news reached us of the split which you had caused408 and it was considered doubtful that the newspaper could go on being produced after it. Then there were the holidays, which meant that the meeting of the 26th did not take place, etc., etc. At last I can tell you that if you wish to continue the newspaper, and if there are solid grounds for hoping that this can be done, I am authorised to send you five pounds, i.e. roughly a hundred and sixty Italian lire, in return for which you can send me the corresponding amount of shares in my name. Write to me, then, by return of courier so that if, as I hope, the newspaper is to reappear, I can send you the money without delay.

Tell me at the same time whether the addresses given in your last letter (C. C[eretti] Mirandola, E. Pfescatori] Bologna) will be enough to write to them, with no other indication of street or number, because I would not like my letters to be written for any Mordecaian409 to read.

You will probably have been sent a circular by the congress of the Jura Federation in Switzerland attacking the General Council and demanding the immediate convocation of a Congress.374 The General Council will reply to these attacks, but in the meantime a reply has appeared in the Egalité in Geneva,410 which I sent you three days ago together with two English newspapers containing summaries of the meetings of the General Council.b These citizens, who first looked for an argument with us using the pretext of the Conference, now attack us because we are carrying out the resolutions of the Basle Congress, resolutions which have the force of law for us and which we are obliged to carry out.399 They do not

[^1]: a the London Conference of 1871 - b The Eastern Post, Nos. 168 and 169, 16 and 23 December 1871, carried reports on the General Council meetings of 12 and 19 December.



want the authority of the General Council, not even if it were to be voluntarily consented to by all I would really like to know how without this authority (as they call it) the Tolains, the Durands and the Nechayevs could have been dealt with according to their deserts and how, with that fine-sounding phrase about the autonomy of the sections, they expect to prevent the formation of sections of Mordecaians and traitors. Besides, what did these same men do at the Basle Congress? With Bakunin they were the most ardent advocates of these resolutions proposed not by the General Council, but by the delegates from Belgium!

If, however, you want to have an idea of what they have done and can do for the International, read the official report of the Federal Committee to the congress of the Jura Federation in the Revolution sociale, Geneva, No. 5, 23 November 1871, and you will see to what a state of dissolution and impotence they have reduced in one year a federation which was well established before.411

It seems to me that the term 'authority' is much abused. I know of nothing more authoritarian than a revolution, and when one fights with bombs and rifle bullets against one's enemies, this is an authoritarian act. If there had been a little more authority and centralisation in the Paris Commune, it would have triumphed over the bourgeois. After the victory we can organise ourselves as we like, but for the struggle it seems to me necessary to collect all our forces into a single band and direct them on the same point of attack. And when people tell me that this cannot be done without authority and centralisation, and that these are two things to be condemned outright, it seems to me that those who talk like this either do not know what a revolution is, or are revolutionaries in name only.a

Write to me, therefore, about the matter without delay. Greetings and fraternity.

Yours,

F. Engels

[^1]: a Marginal note by Engels (in German): 'This is not quite right.'



