---
Volume: 44
Document_Title: "182. Engel s to Wilhelm Liebknecht. 18 January "
Page_Range: "331-335"
---

# 182. Engel s to Wilhelm Liebknecht. 18 January 



**[p. 182]**

ENGELS TO WILHELM LIEBKNECHT

IN LEIPZIG

London, 18 January 1872a

Dear Liebknecht,

The facts about the Belgians are these: De Paepe is the only one who is worth anything, but he is not very active. Steens is a jackass, a schemer and perhaps worse, and Hins is a Proudhonist who by that very fact, but even more because of his Russian wife, has leanings towards Bakunin. The others are puppets. On the other hand, the Belgian workers show no inclination to spark off a rebellion in the International. Hence the bad grace evident in the formulation of the resolution.404 Fortunately, Mr Hins has been the victim of his own super-smartness, for the workers' papers, which have not been able to look behind the scenes, interpret the resolution literally and so read it as a declaration in our favour. E.g. the Tagwacht and the Emancipation in Madrid,413 etc.

Conference resolutionsb have no necessary binding force, since a conference is, in itself, an illegal mechanism, justified only by the gravity of the situation. Hence recognition is always desi- rable.

It would be good if you were to follow the lead of the Tagwacht and interpret the Belgian resolution as indicated above, adding that the resolution about revising the Rules amounts to a rejection of the Bakuninist call for an immediate congress. This is implicit because the revision would first have to be debated at their congress in June and only after that could it be brought before the regular congress of the International, which could not be held before the regular time scheduled in September. You could further remark that if the Belgians imagined that the General Council was nothing more than a correspondence bureau, they must have forgotten the Basle resolutions,399 which are of an entirely different nature and which at all events remain in force until they are revoked by a regular International congress.

Up to now we intend to convene the congress at the regular

[^1]: a The original mistakenly has '1871'. - b K. Marx and F. Engels, 'Resolutions of the Conference of Delegates of the International Working Men's Association Assembled at London from 17th to 23rd September 1871'.



I have received one copy of the issue of the Volksstaat with my article,3 and of the next issue nothing at all Marx received the next, but not the one with my article! No doubt a mix-up in despatching them. Send me half a dozen copies of No. 3 and one of No. 4 by return. I need several for correspondents in Italy who can read German, etc.

Warmest thanks from Marx for your discretion in sending the Neuer Social-Demokrat which, without preparation and before any counter-action had been initiated, would only have upset his wife unnecessarily. The Workers' Societyb will reply and send its answer to the Volksstaat; there will be also a reply to Schneider's article.415 In the meantime, I enclose an item which is unlikely to give the gentlemen any pleasure.416 Apropos the Workers' Society, there have been some funny goings-on there, too.386 Schneider and that asinine old scoundrel, Scherzer, thought they had got a majority, and together with Weber, who acted as intermediary, they made common cause with the dissident French and then proposed that the Society should resign from the International. Our people had become lax, had squandered their advantage and admitted far too much riff-raff. But this time things had gone too far. They were called out in force and the proposal was defeated by 27 votes to 20. A motion to expel the 20 was then tabled. The disorder made a vote impossible. Whereupon our people im- mediately salvaged all the Society's property, moved to another pub and expelled the 20. The rebels are now out in the cold and don't know what to do, but they had the impertinence to send Scherzer as their delegate to the General Council on Tuesdayc! Naturally, he was not admitted.

The alliance of the ultra-federalist French with the ultra- centralist Germans is likewise no bad thing.417 Moreover, these French are already completely divided. When Vésinier was elected secretary, Theisz, Avrial et Co. resigned (for the second time). The remnant has split into two bodies, one of which is led by the nose by Vésinier, the other by Vermersch (of the Père Duchêne, and here the editor of the Qui Vive! and at present of the Vermersch Journal). Personally and politically, the two are equally disreputable and at least 3 others are more than suspected of being spies. The French police have so overshot the mark with

[^1]: a F. Engels, 'The Congress of Sonvillier and the International'. - b the German Workers' Educational Society in London - c 16 January



The news about the Saxons' resolution gave us great pleasure. We shall see to publication in the appropriate form.41 Letters about INDIVIDUAL MEMBERS have not yet arrived.419

To your questions:

1. The [membership] cards have been superseded by stamps following the resolution.420

2. The stamps were to have been ready yesterday at Jung's and in any case will be available by the time you reply, so that we are just waiting to hear from you how many you need. We shall be sure to send them off to you.

3. You should have given us the names or addresses of the Italian Freethinkers at once. Everyone we have contact with in Italy is a Freethinker. I assume you are referring to Stefanoni in Florence; he is an industrialist, a Bakuninist and—the founder of a rival international Freethinking, socialist society.421

There is no urgency about Marx's second anti-Proudhon edition.b It is much more important for Capital to appear in French,395 and that will not be long in coming now. Negotiations are pending. It would be better not to say anything about the second edition of Capital?96 since the remaining copies of the first edition have still to be disposed of and it would be better for this bomb to strike the Roschers, Fauchers & Co. unawares.

Marx has said nothing to me about printing the essay on Proudhon from the Social-Demokrat.c If I do not write anything to the contrary within a day or so, go ahead and print it.

Sorge is a BUSYBODY who forgets that correspondence between here and New York takes 3 weeks, and that the General Council has other things on its mind apart from the American squabbles. Had they only waited just 1 day before staging their coup d'état,422

they would have had the answer from here, which would have rendered it superfluous. First, they admit a mass of unknown riff-raff in an incredibly casual fashion, and then, when the balloon goes up, we have to extricate them from the mess!

Goegg was here a few days ago. He really has improved greatly, and has progressed roughly to the stage reached by the German artisans in 1848. But from petty bourgeois to artisan is a real step forward. It is at least possible to talk to him now, a thing which

[^1]: a spies - b K. Marx, The Poverty of Philosophy. Answer to the 'Philosophy of Poverty' by M. Proudhon. - c K. Marx, 'On Proudhon'.



was quite out of the question 4 years ago. He is on his way to New York on business and wants to know whether you received the crate of wine he sent you for Christmas. He says that my article" killed Vogt stone-dead, and appears in general to be of the opinion that we were always in the right about him. It is quite possible that he may develop even further in time, or rather, that he may be developed by the course of events.

The news from Spain is good as far as it concerns the Federal Council. There is still a lot of intrigue going on in Barcelona and there is a strong Bakuninist influence in the Federation, but since in Spain the matter will be discussed by the Congress (in April)423

and since workers are in the majority there rather than lawyers and doctors, etc., I surmise that all will be well. Lafargue is fortunately still in Madrid; the information about the Neuer Social-Demokrat comes from him.b Mesa, the editor of the Emancipacion, is completely on our side.

In Italy we have Cuno in Milan, a Swiss engineer who knows Bebel and yourself and who up to now has blocked any Bakuninist resolutions there—apart from that, there are either Bakuninists or people who hang back. It is very difficult terrain and gives me a fiendish amount of work.

Best regards from us all to you and yours.

Your

F. E.

[^1]: I enclose reports of 2 meetings0 together with a polemic against Bradlaugh424; furthermore the circular of Sonvillier374 in case you do not have it.

[^2]: First published, in Russian, in Marx- Printed according to the original Engels Archives, Vol. I (VI), Moscow, 1932 , , . , , . .• , r , r- Published in English for the first time

[^3]: a F. Engels, 'Once Again "Herr Vogt"'. - b Engels means the editorial note in La Emancipacion, No. 31, 14 January 1872, to which he referred above. - c Presumably, the reports on the General Council meetings of 2 and 9 January 1872, published in The Eastern Post, Nos. 171 and 172, 6 and 14 January 1872.



