---
Volume: 44
Document_Title: "186. Engels to Theodor Cuno. 24 January "
Page_Range: "340-347"
---

# 186. Engels to Theodor Cuno. 24 January 



**[p. 185]**

MARX TO HERMANN JUNG

IN LONDON

[London,] 19 January 1872

My dear Jung,

It is absolutely necessary that I see you to-morrow evening. I hope, therefore, that you will come. If it be impossible, I shall call upon you on Sunday morning.

Yours fraternally,

Karl Marx

First published in: Marx and Engels, Reproduced from the original Works, First Russian Edition, Vol. XXVI, Moscow 1935 Published in English for the first time

186

London, 24 January 1872

Dear Cuno,

I have just received your letter via Becker3 and see from it that the damned Mordecaians409 have intercepted my lengthy letter to you of 16 December.45 This is all the more annoying as it contained all the necessary information about the Bakuninist intrigues, and would have put you in possession of the relevant facts a whole month earlier. Moreover, as you are a foreigner, and so liable to deportation, I had requested you not to be too prominent in public agitation, so that you might stay where you are and retain your position, one which is now, unfortunately, quite ruined.

[^1]: ENGELS TO THEODOR CUNO429

[^2]: IN MILAN

[^3]: a Johann Philipp Becker





**[p. 306]**

[Membership] cards have been abolished by the Conference resolution in favour of stamps and have now been replaced by the latter.420 The cards had been subject to much abuse over a long period, since everywhere a large number of blank cards had fallen into the hands of the police, who had made use of them for their own purposes. In a few days I shall send you the 100 stamps as a receipt for the 10 frs I have none in the house at present.— Nothing is known here of the old Captain with the wooden leg; he is not in touch with the General Council.430

I would gladly send you the Rules309 if only I had them. They have been printed in French and English; a German version is due out any day, the Italian translation is lying in my desk ready for printing, but 1. we have no money to have them printed on our own account, and 2. in view of the general rebellion against the Conference and the General Council instigated by Bakunin among the Italians, it is highly questionable whether they would in fact recognise an edition revised by the General Council in accordance with the Conference resolutions. Before this is resolved it would in my view be pointless to print. In the meantime, various editions of the Rules have come out in Italian there, e.g. in Girgentia (put out by the Eguaglianza), likewise in Ravenna (by the now defunct Romagnolo—Lodovico Nabruzzi in Ravenna could give you infor- mation about it), and also La Plebe of Lodi, Corso Palestro, has advertised some at 10c. It is true that all of these are badly and in part incorrectly translated and only contain the earliest Adminis- trative Regulations, but for the time being they will have to do.

Becker tells me that he will write to you about the Bakuninist intrigues, but I do not want to rely on that, so here, in brief, are the essentials. Bakunin, who up to 1868 had intrigued against the International, joined it after he had suffered a fiasco at the Berne Peace Congress481 and at once began to conspire within it against the General Council. Bakunin has a singular theory, a potpourri of Proudhonism and communism, the chief point of which is first of all, that he does not regard capital, and hence the class antagonism between capitalists and wage workers which has arisen through the development of society, as the main evil to be abolished, but instead the state. While the great mass of the Social-Democratic workers hold our view that state power is nothing more than the organisation with which the ruling classes—landowners and capitalists—have provided themselves in order to protect their social privileges, Bakunin maintains that the

[^1]: a Modern name: Agrigento.





**[p. 307]**

state has created capital, that the capitalist has his capital only by the grace of the state. And since the state is the chief evil, the state above all must be abolished; then capital will go to hell of itself. We, on the contrary, say: Abolish capital, the appropriation of all the means of production by the few, and the state will fall of itself. The difference is an essential one: the abolition of the state is nonsense without a social revolution beforehand; the abolition of capital is the social revolution and involves a change in the whole mode of production. However, since for Bakunin the state is the main evil, nothing must be done that can keep the state alive, i.e. any state, republic, monarchy, or whatever it may be. Hence, complete abstention from all politics. To commit a political action, especially to take part in an election, would be a betrayal of principle. The thing to do is to conduct propaganda, revile the state, organise, and when all the workers are won over, that is, the majority, to depose the authorities, abolish the state, and replace it by the organisation of the International. This great act, with which the millennium begins, is called social liquidation.

All this sounds extremely radical and is so simple that it can be learned by heart in five minutes, and that is why this Bakuninist theory has also rapidly found favour in Italy and Spain among the young lawyers, doctors, and other doctrinaires. But the mass of the workers will never allow themselves to be persuaded that the public affairs of their country are not also their own affairs; they are by nature political and whoever tries to convince them that they should leave politics alone will in the end be left in the lurch by them. To preach that the workers should abstain from politics under all circumstances means driving them into the arms of the priests or the bourgeois republicans.

Now as, according to Bakunin, the International was not formed for political struggle but in order that it might at once replace the old machinery of state when social liquidation occurs, it follows that it must come as near as possible to the Bakuninist ideal of future society. In this society there will above all be no authority, for authority=state=evil in the absolute. (How these people propose to operate a factory, run a railway, or steer a ship without one will that decides in the last resort, without unified direction, they do not, of course, tell us.) The authority of the majority over the minority also ceases. Every individual, every community, is autonomous, but how a society of even two people is possible unless each gives up some of his autonomy, Bakunin again keeps to himself.

So the International must be organised according to this pattern



**[p. 308]**

as well. Each section is autonomous, and in each section each individual. To hell with the Basle resolutions,399 which conferred upon the General Council a pernicious authority demoralising even to itself! Even if this authority is voluntarily conferred, it must cease—precisely because it is authority.

Here you have in brief the main points of the swindle. But who were the authors of the Basle resolutions? The same Mr Bakunin and Co.!

When these gentlemen saw at the Basle Congress that their plan for transferring the General Council to Geneva, i.e. getting it in their hands, stood no chance of success, they adopted another course. They founded the Alliance de la démocratie sociale, an international society within the large International under the pretext which you now encounter in the Bakuninist Italian press, for example in the Proletario and the Gazzettino Rosa: the ardent Latin races require a more striking programme than the chilly, deliberate Northerners. This little plan failed owing to the resistance of the General Council, which naturally could not tolerate the existence of any separate international organisation within the International. Since then, the same plan has appeared in all manner of forms in connection with the efforts of Bakunin and his adherents to substitute Bakunin's programme for the programme of the International. On the other hand, the reactionaries—beginning with Jules Favre and Bismarck and ending with Mazzini—have always come down hard upon the empty and vainglorious Bakuninist phrase-mongering when they have been at pains to attack the International. Hence the necessity of my declaration of 5 December against Mazzini and Bakunin, which was likewise printed in the Gazzettino Rosa."

The core of the Bakunin conspiracy consists of a few dozen people in the Jura, who have scarcely 200 workers behind them; its vanguard in Italy consists of young lawyers, doctors, and journalists, who now come forward everywhere as the representa- tives of the Italian workers, with a few of the same breed in Barcelona and Madrid, and a few individuals here and there—in Lyons and Brussels. There are almost no workers among them; they have only one specimen here,b Robin.—The Conference (convened out of necessity, because a Congress had become impossible)2M provided them with a pretext; and since most of the French refugees in Switzerland sided with them—they (the

[^1]: a F. Engels, 'Declaration Sent by the General Council to the Editors of Italian Newspapers Concerning Mazzini's Articles about the International'. - b in London





**[p. 309]**

Proudhonists) had much in common with them, while personal motives also played a part—they launched the campaign. To be sure, a dissatisfied minority and unrecognised geniuses are to be found everywhere within the International—and they counted on them, not without reason. At the present time their fighting forces are:

1. Bakunin himself—the Napoleon of this campaign. 2. The 200 Jurassians and 40-50 members of the French section (refugees in Geneva).

3. In Brussels, Hins, editor of the Liberie, who does not support them openly, however.

4. Here, the remnants of the Section française de 187l,33i never recognised by us, which has already split into 3 mutually hostile parts; then about 20 Lassalleans of the type of Mr von Schweitzer, expelled from the German section (for proposing resignation en masse from the International),3 who, as defenders of extreme centralisation and strict organisation, fit marvellously into an alliance with the anarchists and autonomists.

5. In Spain, a few personal friends and adherents of Bakunin, who have greatly influenced, at least theoretically, the workers, particularly in Barcelona. But, on the other hand, the Spaniards attach great importance to organisation, and its absence among the others is conspicuous to them. How much success Bakunin may expect here will be revealed only at the Spanish Congress in April,423 but as the workers will predominate at this congress, I have no fears about it.

6. Lastly, in Italy, as far as I know, the Turin, Bologna, and Girgenti sections have voted for convening a Congress before it is due.

The Bakuninist press asserts that 20 Italian sections have affiliated with them; I have no knowledge of them. In any event, the leadership is in the hands of Bakunin's friends and adherents almost everywhere, and they are raising a terrific hubbub. But on closer examination it will most likely be found that they haven't much of a following, since in the final analysis the overwhelming mass of Italian workers are still Mazzinists and will remain so as long as the International is identified there with abstention from politics.

At any rate the situation in Italy is such that, for the present, the International there is dominated by Bakuninist intrigues. Nor does the General Council think of complaining about this; the

[^1]: a See this volume, p. 297.





**[p. 310]**

The joke is that these same Turinese who have declared their support for the Jurassians and who therefore reproach us here with authoritarianism, are now suddenly demanding that the General Council should act in an authoritarian manner quite without precedent for it and take steps against their rival, the Federazione Operaia of Turin, and outlaw Beghelli of the Ficcanaso who is not even a member of the International, etc.c

And all this before we have even had a chance to listen to what the Federazione Operaia might have to say on it!

Last Mondayd I sent you the Révolution Sociale with the Jura circular,e an issue of the Genevan Égalité (unfortunately I no longer have a single copy of the one containing the reply of the Genevan Comité Fédéral,1391 which represents 20 times as many workers as the Jurassians), and a Volksstaat which will show you how people in Germany regard the matter.8 The Saxon provincial assembly—120 delegates from 60 places—has declared itself unanimously in favour of the General Council.418—The Belgian Congress (25-26 Decemberh) is calling for a revision of the Rules, but at the regular Congress (in September).404 From France

[^1]: a See this volume, pp. 291-95. - b K. Marx and F. Engels, Fictitious Splits in the International - c See this volume, p. 313. - A 22 January - c 'Circulaire à toutes les fédérations', La Révolution Sociale, No. 8, 14 December 1871. - f 'Réponse du Comité fédéral romand', L'Égalité, No. 24, 24 December 1871. - 8 Presumably, Der Volksstaat, No. 3, 10 January 1872, containing Engels' article 'The Congress of Sonvillier and the International' and a report headlined 'Die Landesversammlung des Sächsischen Social-Demokraten'. — h The Congress took place on 24-25 December 1871.





**[p. 311]**

If one bears in mind what a time these people choose to embark on their conspiracy—precisely when the International is being hounded everywhere—it is impossible not to think that the gentlemen of the international Mordecai gang are involved in the affair. And this is actually the case. In Béziers the Genevan Bakuninists have as their correspondent the Commissaire central de police*] Two of the chief Bakuninists, Albert Richard from Lyons and Blanc,b were here and told a worker, Scholl from Lyons, with whom they got in touch, that the only way to overthrow Thiers was to put Bonaparte back on the throne, and that was why they were travelling about at the Bonapartists' expense to carry on propa- ganda among the émigrés on behalf of a Bonapartist restoration ! That is what these gentlemen call abstention from politics! In Berlin the

Neuer Social-Demokrat, in Bismarck's pocket, is singing the same tune. For the time being I shall leave as a moot point the extent to which the Russian police are involved in this affair, though Bakunin was embroiled up to his eyes in the Nechayev business (he denies this, to be sure, but we have authentic Russian reports here, and since Marx and I understand Russian, he cannot bluff us).280 Nechayev is either a Russian agent-provocateur or, at any rate, has acted like one; moreover, there are all sorts of suspicious characters among Bakunin's Russian friends.

I am very sorry to hear that you have lost your job. I had expressly written to you saying that you should avoid anything that might have these consequences and that your presence in Milan was of much greater importance for the International than the minute effect that one can have by agitating in public; much could be done underground, etc. If I can be of any assistance with translations, etc., I shall do so with the greatest pleasure; just let me know from which languages and into which language you can translate and in what way I can help.

So the police swine have also intercepted my photograph. I

[^1]: a Abel Bousquet - b Gaspard Blanc



