---
Volume: 44
Document_Title: "187. Engels to Carlo Terzaghi. 29 January "
Page_Range: "347-349"
---

# 187. Engels to Carlo Terzaghi. 29 January 



**[p. 312]**

I also ask you to take care with all persons connected with Bakunin. It is a characteristic of all sects that they stick together closely and carry on intrigues. Every one of your confidences—you may rest assured of this—will be conveyed to Bakunin at once. One of his main principles is the affirmation that keeping a promise and other such things are nothing but bourgeois prejudices, which a true revolutionary should always disregard in the interests of the cause. In Russia he speaks of this openly, in Western Europe it is a secret doctrine.

Write to me very soon. It would be very good if we could manage to prevent the Milan branch from joining in the chorus of the other Italian sections.

Salut et fraternité.

Yours,

F. Engels

If you write to Miss Burns you need neither an inside envelope, nor to make any mention of my name whatever. I open everything myself.

187

ENGELS TO CARLO TERZAGHI

My dear Terzaghi,

[^1]: First published abridged in: F. Engels, Printed according to the original Politisches Vermächtnis. Aus unveröffentlich- ten Briefen, Berlin, 1920 and in full in Die Gesellschaft, No. 11, Berlin, 1925

[^2]: IN TURIN

[^3]: [Draft] [London, 29 January 1872]

[^4]: I wrote to you on the 15th of this month 3 and I then received your letter dated the 15th inst.432 I communicated the contents of

[^5]: a See this volume, pp. 294-95.





**[p. 313]**

your letter to the General Council, where the great activity of the Turin workers was recognised with pleasure.

So far the Workers' Federation of Turin has not approached the General Council. If it did, the Council, after listening to both parties, would have to deliberate whether this federation could be provisionally admitted or not. I cannot promise you in advance that it will under no circumstances be admitted. For one thing, I am not the Council; then there is the Council's position, as follows.

It is true that the Basle Congress conferred upon the General Council the power to refuse admission, until the next Congress, to any new section399; but this power has never been put into practice except in cases of well-proven necessity, and only after hearing the defence of the section in question. How can we possibly commit the General Council in advance, before it has heard the other party? You can rest assured that in any case the Council will look after the interests of the International.

As for Mr Beghelli, we cannot vote for the public declaration you request. Beghelli does not belong to the International and he is outside the Council's jurisdiction, and even if this were not the case I do not think he is sufficiently important to be distinguished in this manner from other journalists hostile to the International.

But I must tell you: we did not expect requests of this sort from you. You have supported the calling of a special congress374 whose sole aim is to accuse the General Council of authoritarianism, and to abolish the powers given to the General Council by the Basle Congress. And no sooner do you vote this support than you ask the General Council to perform acts ten times more authoritarian than any it has ever performed: you ask it to make use of these same powers which you have already condemned and refuse admission to a new section without even listening to what it has to say in its defence. What would your Jura friends say if we were to make ourselves guilty of such authoritarianism? You have certainly taken your decision on the basis of the Jura circular and you have, albeit indirectly, approved the lies and slanders it contains, without waiting for the reply of the General Council—you, a brand-new section, necessarily ignorant of the whole3 matter. You had a right to do this, you are an autonomous section insofar as this auto- nomy is not limited by the laws of the International. But the Gene- ral Council is responsible for its actions and cannot allow itself such liberty.

Perhaps you will now see for yourselves that such authoritarian

[^1]: a Crossed out in the original: 'previous history of the International'.



