---
Volume: 44
Document_Title: "189. Marx to Hermann Jung. 1 February "
Page_Range: "350-351"
---

# 189. Marx to Hermann Jung. 1 February 



**[p. 315]**

Thirdly, we are busy drawing up a circular15 to be printed for private circulation which will give a clear account of the intrigues of Bakunin and his comrades, etc. As soon as it is finished and in print, you shall receive a copy. For the moment, I would only say that as regards the French, everyone worth keeping is sticking by us. The small separate section that was formed here has now split into 3 sections which are devouring each other.338

With fraternal greetings,

Karl Marx

First published in Die Gesellschaft, No. 3, Printed according to a hand writ- Berlin, 1933 ten copy

Published in English for the first time

189

[London,] 1 February 1872 My dear Jung,

1) During the sitting of the Conference0 you received a letter from one of the Bakuninists, I think from Joukowski, in which the formation of a new section of propaganda359 was announced and the sanction of the General Council demanded. I knew from Outine that you had already sent a preliminary answer, and that that new section was nothing but a second edition of the 'Alliance

de la démocratie socialiste'.

This is the first letter we want. 2) The letter of Malon in which he calls upon the General Council to acknowledge a 'French Section', founded under his auspices, at Geneva.434

[^1]: MARX TO HERMANN JUNG118

[^2]: IN LONDON

[^3]: The letters we want for the project of the circular15 are:

[^4]: a K. Marx, Allgemeine Statuten und Verwaltungs-Verordnungen der Internationalen Arbeiterassoziation. - b K. Marx and F. Engels, Fictitious Splits in the International - c the London Conference of 1871



