---
Volume: 44
Document_Title: "193. Engel s to Wilhelm Liebknecht. 15 February "
Page_Range: "353-356"
---

# 193. Engel s to Wilhelm Liebknecht. 15 February 



**[p. 192]**

MARX TO ASHER & Co.437

IN LONDON

[London,] 13 February 1872

Dear Sir,

Together with these lines I send you the only copy of the 'Inaugural Address'3 I can still dispose of.

Yours truly,

Karl Marx

First published in: Marx and Engels, Reproduced from the original Works, Second Russian Edition, Vol. 50, Moscow, 1981

193

ENGELS TO WILHELM LIEBKNECHT

London, 15 February 1872

Dear Liebknecht,

Letters from Germany about enrolment are still not forth- coming.419 If the dear Germans again will not go beyond promises and fine phrases, we shall never get anywhere with them.

I cannot procure for you the data about the POOR-RATES438 for the moment. We are being kept busy by the replyb to the Jura circular,374 which is very urgent, and local statistics are the sort of thing one must collect oneself from the sources. For the time being, do not mention the reply to the Jurassians in public.

You will be aware that Albert Richard and Gaspard Blanc were the chief supporters of Bakunin & Co. (see the report on the last meeting).

[^1]: IN LEIPZIG

[^2]: 3 K. Marx, 'Inaugural Address of the Working Men's International Association'. - b K. Marx and F. Engels, Fictitious Splits in the International



Re the Misere de la philosophie, steps will be taken soon. Marx has signed the contract for the French translation of Capital and it will soon start to appear in instalments. (Between ourselves for the time being).436 As soon as some have come out, it will be the turn of the

Misère de la philosophie.

The Manifesto will follow, in German 189 and probably in French and English (having appeared in an English and a French periodical in New York ). You see that things are in full swing here. But it all makes for a lot of work.

The Lassalleans here have been thrown out, as you know." If they go on kicking up a fuss in the Neuer Social-Demokrat, send us the paper when you have finished with it—it doesn't get sent to the Workers' Educational Society135 anymore. The Lassallean gentlemen here had the impertinence to go on behaving as if they were 'The Society' and sent Scherzer as their delegate to the General Council, where he was turned back without further ado.

You will have received the 800-odd STAMPS from Marx. You stick them on the top of the back of the title leaf of the Rules, of which, I hope, we shall soon receive the 3,000 copies, together with the bill? Cf. the relevant Conference resolution, which is clear enough.420

Enclosed find a Prussian loan-certificate for 10 thalers in settlement of the accompanying invoice, for which I should like a receipt. Use the balance as you think fit.

Furthermore, 4 reports on meetings'1 from The Eastern Post and a few lines to Hepner.45

I had guessed that your Italian could only be Stefanoni. Now just pay attention to this:

1. Libero Pensiero No. 18, 2 November 1871. Programme of the Società Universale dei Razionalisti, setting up a rival association to the International. According to its programme rationalist monasteries are to be established, a colossal sum of money to be invested in land is to be amassed and a marble bust of every bourgeois who donates 10,000 francs to the society is to be placed in the congress hall.421

2. There follow, in Nos. 20 & 21, increasingly virulent attacks on the International for repudiating atheism, as conceived by the

[^1]: Cuno is behaving very courageously but has lost his job and is in a very bad way.c

[^2]: a See this volume, p. 297. - b of the General Council - c See this volume, p. 305.

[^3]: 12*





**[p. 320]**

Alliance, and on the General Council for its tyrannical ways, etc.

3. After an interval, this is followed in No. 1 of 4 January 1872 by a lengthy abusive article about the General Council, in which all the slanders of Schneider and Weber from the Neuer Social- Demokrat386 appear in translation and are accompanied by equally outrageous commentaries, e. g. on the Communist trial. S8

4. This is followed in No. 3 of 18 January by a letter from Wilhelm Liebknecht of 28 December, in which the latter promises help to Stefanoni and offers to publish his contributions and to lend his support, without seeing it, to the programme of this honest society at the Saxon provincial assembly.4

5. This is followed in No. 4 of 25 January by another abusive article about the General Council in which the slanderous allegations about Marx by Messrs Schenck and Winand are once more translated from the Neuer.415

You can see in what fine company you have involved yourself with your letter-writing. Stefanoni, behind whom none other than Bakunin (who supplied him with all this material) is concealed, has just used you as a tool He has used Feuerbach in the same way, having published one of his letters too. Büchner, of course, is also conspiring with Stefanoni against us. This is what happens when you take up with people you do not know, when a simple enquiry, or even the mere mention of a name, would have sufficed for us to give you the necessary information and to prevent you from compromising yourself in this way. As things stand you have no option but to write Stefanoni a brief rude letter, sending him the relevant numbers of the Volksstaat However, since Stefanoni will take good care not to print your letter, you must send me a copy so that I can translate it and see that it appears in the Italian press," for even the Bakuninist papers are at loggerheads with him. However, if you wish us to continue to be able to come out with you and on your behalf abroad, the first precondition is that you do not continue to make things difficult for us by writing such letters to unknown people.

The people in Spain have their hands full with their struggle against the government, and are much too busy to quarrel with us anymore.

The Marx family and all of us send best wishes to you all, especially to Bebel.

Your

F. E.

[^1]: See this volume, p. 577.



