---
Volume: 44
Document_Title: "198. Marx to Hermann Jung. 26 February "
Page_Range: "361-362"
---

# 198. Marx to Hermann Jung. 26 February 



**[p. 326]**

8. The Council enquires through me in what relationship the Hamburgers (i.e. the Committee of the Social-Democratic Party)452

stand towards the General Council. Up to now we have not had a word from them.

9. The General Council requests the Berlin section to declare its approval of the resolutions of the last Conference of delegates of the International (in London).264

With fraternal greetings, K. M.

First published in Die Gesellschaft, No. 3, Printed according to the handwrit- Berlin, 1933 ten copy

198

MARX TO HERMANN JUNG

IN LONDON

[London,] 26a February 1872 Dear Jung,

Could you come and visit me on Thursdayb evening to help Engels and myself prepare a report for the press on the monies disbursed by the General Council for the refugees, etc.?

We and a mass of Frenchmen will not go to Holborn tomorrow evening, since, in view of the uproar in the streets, the meeting cannot be held after all.453

Harrison has another brazenly boastful article in The Times about the wonderful help he & Co. have given to the réfugiés, thus putting an end to all need AMONGST THE REALLY DESERVING.0

Tout à vous,"

K. M.

[^1]: Bring all your account books with you, and also as many details as possible about the people we have placed.261

[^2]: Enclosed are a little letter and POST-OFFICE ORDER from Jenny.d

[^3]: First published in: Marx and Engels, Printed according to the original Works, First Russian Edition, Vol. XXVI, ,,. . , r , „. Moscow 1935 Published in English for the first time

[^4]: a The original has '27', a slip of the pen. - b 29 February - c F. Harrison, 'To the Editor of The Times', The Times, No. 27309, 26 February 1872. - d Marx's daughter - e Yours sincerely



