---
Volume: 44
Document_Title: "199. Marx to Laura Lafargue. 28 February "
Page_Range: "362-364"
---

# 199. Marx to Laura Lafargue. 28 February 



**[p. 199]**

MARX TO LAURA LAFARGUE

IN MADRID

[London,] 28 February 1872

My dear child,

You may judge of the overwork—I am being bothered with ever since December last—from my negligence in replying to your own and Paul's letters. Still my heart was always with you. In fact, the health of poor little Schnappya occupies my thoughts more than everything, else, and I feel even a little angry at Paul's last epistle, full of interesting details as to the 'movement', but a mere blank in regard to that dear little sufferer.454

In consequence of uninterrupted reading and writing, an inflammation of my right eye has set in since a few days, so that it forsakes service for the moment and obliges me to limit even this letter to the most necessary matter-of-fact communications.

In the first instance, Keller is not the translator of my book.b 147

When, at last, I had found out his whereabouts, I wrote at once.17

In his reply, he told me that he had till then only translated about 200 pages, and that, moreover, he could not proceed with the work before the month of May, being bound by contract to finish the translation of a medical work. This would not do for me. I have found in Roy, the translator of Feuerbach, a man perfectly suitable to my purpose. Since the end of December, he has received from me the corrected manuscript of the Second German edition396 up to pagina 280. To-day I have written him to send at once to Paris what manuscript may be ready.17

As to the biography, I have not yet made up my mind as to whether it be at all opportune to publish it in connection with this work.455

The printings Paul wants I shall send to-morrow45 and should have done so before, if I had found the time to look after some statistical facts in 'the 18. Brumaire' which, I apprehend, are not quite correct.

[^1]: As to the preface for Proudhon,456 j'y penserait

[^2]: To Liebknecht I shall write.458

[^3]: a Charles Etienne Lafargue - b Volume I of Capital - c I shall think of it.



As to Lara, making him—a man who is a perfect stranger to our party—a contributor to our party prints, is quite out of the question.459 At the same time, you ought not to neglect all relations with his family. Under certain circumstances they might prove useful.

I regret that you have written to Woodhull et C°. They are humbugs that compromise us. Let Paul write to Charles A. Dana, editor of The Sun (New York) and offer him Spanish correspon- dence, and ask him at the same time (such things must be settled beforehand with the Yankees) as to the money terms. I enclose a few lines to Dana.17 If he should not accept, I shall find another paper at New York. (The Herald or something else).

The New Social Demokrat is the continuation of Schweitzer's paper3 under another editorship. He observed still a certain decorum. It is now a mere police paper, Bismarck's paper for the Lassalleans, as he has his feudal, his liberal, his all sort of colour papers.

Apropos. Misled by one of your letters I had put in the contract with Lachâtre436 'somme de sera remise à Paris quinze jours après demande'}' I shall write him to-morrow, that I prefer the payment on 1st July. In case of need, I can find the money, but I must be informed beforehand.

And now, my dear child, adio, with thousand kisses for little Schnappy and yourself, and my greetings to Paul.

Yours most devotedly

The 'Circular' against the dissentients'1 you will receive as soon as printed.

[^1]: Old Nickc

[^2]: First published, in the language of the Reproduced from the original original (English), in Annali, an. 1, Milan,

[^3]: 1958

[^4]: a Der Social-Demokrat - b 'the sum of shall be paid in Paris within 15 days upon demand' - c Marx's nickname - d K. Marx and F. Engels, Fictitious Splits in the International



