---
Volume: 44
Document_Title: "201. Engels to Louis Pio. 7 March "
Page_Range: "364-368"
---

# 201. Engels to Louis Pio. 7 March 



**[p. 200]**

ENGELS TO SIGISMUND BORKHEIM460

IN LONDON

[London, early March 1872]

Sorge is very naive to ask for a book on Ireland from our standpoint. I have been trying to write one for two years now,57

but the war, the Commune and the International have called a halt to everything else. In the meantime I recommend him the following:

1. The Cromwellian Settlement of Ireland by Prendergast, London, Longmans, 2nd ed., 1870-71.

2. Memoir on Ireland by O'Connell, London—Duffey, 1869. For the historical fundamentals 3. The Irish People and the Irish Land by Isaac Butt, London— Ridgway.

This for the present. The Irish question, simple as it is, is nevertheless the product of a prolonged historical struggle and so requires a thorough study. A manual to make the situation comprehensible in around 2 hours does not exist

201

[London,] 7 March 1872

Dear Mr Pio,

I was very pleased to receive your letter of 24 February and would have written to you sooner, even before receiving it, had I had a reliable address in Köbenhavn and had I not heard from Outine that you were away. The truth is that it had not escaped our notice that Mottershead has not attended to his duties as

[^1]: First published in: Marx and Engels, Printed according to the original Works, First Russian Edition, Vol. XXVI, of Borkheim's letter to Sorge of Moscow, 1935 15 March 1872

[^2]: ENGELS TO LOUIS PIO461

[^3]: IN COPENHAGEN





**[p. 330]**

I shall do my best to send you a report for publication in the Socialisten from time to time, and you should indeed receive one today or tomorrow,b if at all possible. I am unfortunately so preoccupied at the moment with my secretarial duties for Italy and Spain and with other tasks that I have hardly any time. Until I can find correspondents in Spain and Italy for you, I shall keep you supplied with news and newspapers from both countries. The best solution would be for you to exchange the Socialisten for

[^1]: a It contained a report on the General Council meeting of 20 February 1872. - b See this volume, p. 340.





**[p. 331]**

papers from there—although there is the problem of cost, since their papers are weeklies and yours appears daily.

You will have heard in Geneva and Leipzig of the attempt made by some dissidents, led by Bakunin, to convene an extraordinary Congress in order to arraign the General Council.374 The crux of the business concerns the International's stance on politics. These gentlemen call for a complete abstention from all political activity, and especially from all elections, whereas, right from the start, the International has written on its banner the conquest of political power by the working class as a means to social emancipation,3 and the General Council has defended this position. Resolution IX of the Conferenceb sparked off the dispute,325 but since the Conference resolutions have no binding force on issues of principle until they are endorsed by the federations, it is vital to have a decision of the Danish Federal Council endorsing this one. I shall say nothing on the substance of the matter, as this would be insulting to a nation so highly developed politically as the Danes.

By the way, recognition of the Conference resolutions has already come in from the majority, that is to say from Zurich, from Romance Switzerland, from Germany, England, Holland and America. In Spain the congress due to meet in April will decide423; in Italy they are all still at sixes and sevens; the Belgians have made no comment up to now; in France the individual sections have all given their approval—a federation there is out of the question.

Incidentally, the attempts of the Jura people to force through an extraordinary Congress failed spectacularly, and have been abandoned by them in an autographed circular (of 3 March).463 In favour of their proposal were: one section in Spain (Palma, Majorca), one in Italy (Turin, which has now reversed its decision), and a number of supposed sections which in fact have neither applied for membership of the International, nor paid any subscriptions (Pisa, Bologna, etc.); in London a supposed Section française de 1871, which however has never been admitted because its local Rules are incompatible with the General Rules, and which has since split into four parts338—and that was all. In the meantime, the General Council has produced a reply to these

[^1]: a K. Marx, 'Inaugural Address of the Working Men's International Associa- tion'. - b K. Marx and F. Engels, 'Resolutions of the Conference of Delegates of the International Working Men's Association Assembled at London from 17th to 23rd September 1871'. IX. Political Action by the Working Class.





**[p. 332]**

intrigues,3 which is now in the press and which I shall send you as soon as it is ready.

I am sending you today through the post: 1 copy of the Emancipation from Madrid, 1 English and 1 French copy of the Conference resolutions; 1 English and 1 German copy of the new edition of the Rules.b

For the time being I shall send you the Emancipation along with The Eastern Post every week, and shall write to Madrid and Italy that they should send papers to you. If, when the Socialisten reappears, you can send me 4-6 copies of any interesting issues from time to time, I shall distribute them until you have made firm arrangements of your own.

Since I know that Mottershead has neither proposed that the Danish Federal Council should recognise the Conference resolu- tions, nor taken any action to implement the decision about the adhesive membership stamps, I am taking it upon myself to put these matters before the Danish Federal Council through you. As for the stamps (Conference Resolution IV, 1-5),420 they were not ready until much later than expected and so the settlement date has been postponed by a decision of the General Council from 1 March (IV, 4) to 1 July. I am sending you 500 stamps for the present. They cost £2.1/10 and I would be obliged if you could let me know whether you need any more and how many. This information should best go to Mottershead (33 Rathbone Place) or to Hales.

We are keenly awaiting the results of your Rigsdag elections464— we think it of very great importance that workers from the International should sit in all the parliaments and that Bebel, who up to now has alone had this honour, should receive some support, no matter where. We believe that you in Denmark have good prospects of getting people in and hope that you are successful.

Salut et fraternité.

Yours,

F. Engels

The best way to reach me is to write to Miss Burns,

122 Regent's Park Road, N.W. London.

[^1]: a K. Marx and F. Engels, Fictitious Splits in the International - b K. Marx, General Rules and Administrative Regulations of the International Working Men's Association.



