---
Volume: 44
Document_Title: "203. Mar x to Friedrich Adolph Sorge. 8 March "
Page_Range: "368-370"
---

# 203. Mar x to Friedrich Adolph Sorge. 8 March 



**[p. 333]**

An inner envelope is not necessary—it is where I live. I only go to Rathbone Place once a week and we have moved out of Holborn.

First published in Die Neue Zeit, Bd. 1, Nr. 23, Stuttgart, 1921

Printed according to the original

Published in English in full for the first time

202

MARX TO HERMANN JUNG

IN LONDON

[London,] 7 March 1872

My dear Jung,

I do not find the Rules of the Vermersch Section.465 Please to look about, whether you have them.

Yours fraternally,

K. Marx

203

Dear Sorge,

Have only received today the German Rules* sent by Liebknecht and they cannot be sent off until Monday}' Over there people seem

[^1]: First published in: Marx and Engels,

[^2]: Works, First Russian Edition, Vol. XXVI, Moscow, 1935

[^3]: Reproduced from the original

[^4]: Published in English for the first time

[^5]: MARX TO FRIEDRICH ADOLPH SORGE,s7

[^6]: IN HOBOKEN

[^7]: [London,] 8 March 1872 33 Rathbone Place, W.C.466

[^8]: a K. Marx, Allgemeine Statuten und Verwaltungs-Verordnungen der Internationalen Arbeiterassoziation. - b 11 March





**[p. 334]**

to imagine that the General Council just conjures up everything out of a hat, whereas the contrary is the case: without the private contributions of its members and their personal friends, absolutely nothing could be done. I notice the same comments in letters from Speyer, Boite and yourself, as I do in correspondence from other countries. Every country believes that our entire time can be devoted to it alone. If we wanted to grumble about every single detail, we could, e.g., complain that your REPORTS to us appear simultaneously in the Volksstaat.

Since I was commissioned by the General Council at long last to report on the SPLIT in America422 (the matter had had to be postponed from one meeting to the next on account of the chaos within the International in Europe)—I have carefully gone through all the correspondence from New York together with everything that appeared in the papers and have discovered that we were by no means duly informed in time about the elements that brought about the breach. A portion of the resolutions I have proposed3 has already been accepted, the rest will be passed next Tuesday0 and the final judgment will then be sent off to New York.

You will receive 1,000 copies of the German Rules. Hales will send 500 in English. I am sending 200 French ones, which have all been ordered.

Eccarius says that the things were sent to Gregory467 (his private correspondent) because you had written to him that you were resigning from office but had not named a new correspondent.

The complaint about the French having their 'own' correspon- dent is quite unjust,468 since the Germans also had one of their own and Eccarius, the SECRETARY for the UNITED STATES, can certainly deal with correspondence in German and English, but not in French. Moreover, the complaint was politically ill-advised, since it seemed to justify the view of the French members of the COUNCIL that Section I aspired to dictatorial authority over the other sections.354 It arrived here at the same time as the complaint from the COUNTER-COMMITTEE that Section I was represented on the old committee in numbers exceeding those stipulated by the Rules.

The cost of the Rules was higher for the COUNTER-COMMITTEE because import duties had to be paid (at least, that is what they maintain).

[^1]: a K. Marx, 'Resolutions on the Split in the United States' Federation Passed by the General Council of the I.W.A. in Its Sittings of 5th and 12th March, 1872'. - b 12 March



