---
Volume: 44
Document_Title: "207. Engel s to Louis Pio. Mid- March "
Page_Range: "375-376"
---

# 207. Engel s to Louis Pio. Mid- March 



**[p. 207]**

ENGELS TO LOUIS PIO

IN COPENHAGEN

[London, mid-March 1872]

Dear Mr Pio,

I think I cannot give you anything better for my first correspondence than the preceding translation of two excellent articles from the Pensamento Social.3 I have not the slightest idea who may be the author, but they show an insight into the economical and historical conditions of the development of modern society which I am astonished to find in a paper coming from so remote a corner of the world.

By the bye, the article on organisation of agricultural production by Association from Socialisten which I got inserted in the published report of the Meetings of the General Council, has gone the round of the Spanish, Italian and American press, and I now find it reproduced in the Pensamento Social470; it has created great sensation and will not be without its fruit. Altogether, with regard to the all-important question of enlisting the small peasantry and Husmaendenab in the proletarian movement, the Danes, owing to their local circumstances and to their great political intelligence, are now in advance of all other nations. I have told Liebknecht and others this, but unfortunately they are too lazy to learn Danish.

Mottershead0 has not attended the last three meetings of the General Council, but he intends, so he has told us, to resign from his office as Secretary for Denmark; he says he is too busy to carry out his duties as Secretary.

In the meantime, I beg you to be so kind as to correspond with me, and I take upon myself all responsibility for any repercussions which might affect you vis-à-vis the General Council because of it. We intend to transfer the secretaryship for Denmark to a Frenchman, a member of the Commune de Paris.6

With a socialist handshake and greetings,

F. Engels

[^1]: a Presumably the articles 'A Ignaldade' and 'A Internacional', published in O Pensamento Social, No. 1, February 1872. - b small tenants - c From here on up to and including the words 'literal translation' Engels writes in Danish. - d Frederic Etienne Cournet



