---
Volume: 44
Document_Title: "208. Mar x to Friedrich Adolph Sorge. 15 March "
Page_Range: "376-377"
---

# 208. Mar x to Friedrich Adolph Sorge. 15 March 



**[p. 341]**

First published, in the languages of the Printed according to the original original (English and Danish), in Die . . Neue Zeit, Bd. 1, Nr. 23, Stuttgart, 1921 Published in English m full for the first time

208

MARX TO FRIEDRICH ADOLPH SORGE118

IN HOBOKEN

[London,] 15 March 1872 33 Rathbone Place, W. C. (new address of the General Council)3

Dear Citizen,

Eccarius, at the end of the sitting of 12 March, told rhe privately that he would not send the Resolutions to New York and that, at next sitting, he would tender his resignation as Secretary for the United States. As this affair cannot be settled by the General Council before Tuesday next,c the Resolutions sent by me and Le Moussu, are not signed by a Secretary, the which, considering the form chosen, was not necessary. They will be printed in next week's Eastern Post.

During the discussion Eccarius spoke in a spirit most hostile to your Council. He spoke and voted against Resolution III, 2.471 He was moreover offended because, in order to save time, I had not submitted the Resolutions to the subcommittee435 of which he forms part, but laid them at once before the General Council. As the latter fully approved this proceeding, after my statement of

[^1]: I enclose the Resolutions of the General Council (in English and Frenchb). The other Council422 will receive them from Le Moussu.

[^2]: a Marx added this on the letterhead of the General Council. - b K. Marx, 'Resolutions on the Split in the United States' Federation Passed by the General Council of the I.W.A. in Its Sittings of 5th and 12th March, 1872'. - c 19 March



