---
Volume: 44
Document_Title: "209. Engel s to Friedrich Adolph Sorge. 17 March "
Page_Range: "377-379"
---

# 209. Engel s to Friedrich Adolph Sorge. 17 March 



**[p. 342]**

For the private information of your Council I add that M. and Madame Huleck—he is an imbecile and she is 'une intrigante de bas état'3—had for a moment slipped into the General Council at a time when most of us were absent, but that, soon after, this worthy couple was forced to withdraw consequent upon their intrigues with the soi-disant Branche Française* the which was excluded from the International and denounced by us, in the Marseillaise and the Réveil, on the eve of the plebiscite,104 as 'une section policière'."50

Moreover, these two persons, after their arrival at New York, cooperated in the foundation of a Society hostile to the International and were in constant connection with les beaux restes de la branche française6 at London. The same facts have been communicated by Le Moussu to the other Council.

Section 10 (French) has written an excellent letter to the General Council on the American split.472

Yours fraternally,

Karl Marx

209

ENGELS TO FRIEDRICH ADOLPH SORGE

London. 17 March 1872 122 Regent's Park Road, N.W.

Dear Sorge,

I have a favour to ask of you, which I hope will not put you to too much trouble.

[^1]: First published, in the language of the Reproduced from the original original (English), in Briefe und Auszüge aus Briefen von Joh. Phil. Becker, Jos. Dietzgen, Friedrich Engels, Karl Marx u. A. an F. A. Sorge und Andere, Stuttgart, 1906

[^2]: IN HOBOKEN

[^3]: a 'an intrigante of the basest kind' - b so-called French branch - c 'a police section' - d worthy remnants of the French section





**[p. 343]**

Would you be so kind as to buy 50 copies of the issue of Woodhull & Claflin's which contains the translation of the Com- munist Manifesto, and 50-100 of the issues of the Socialiste with the French translation, and send them on to me? 4 4 0 I shall send you the money for them as soon as I know how much it conies to. If there are not enough copies available, may I ask you to send what you can obtain. However much both translations leave to be desired, we still have to use them as propaganda for the time being, the French version especially is quite indispensable for the Latin countries of Europe as a counter to the nonsense purveyed by Bakunin, as well as the ubiquitous Proudhonist rubbish.

As soon as we have time, Marx and I, we shall prepare a new edition of the Manifesto with an introduction,189 etc., but at the moment we have our hands full. Apart from Spain and Italy, I have to act as Secretary for Portugal and Denmark as well at present. Marx has quite enough to do with his second edition of Capital396 and the various translations that are now loom- 436 ing.

We had intended to celebrate the revolution of 18 March with a PUBLIC MEETING tomorrow—but yesterday evening the HALL we had hired suddenly became unavailable! T h e pretext given was that THE FRENCH COMMUNISTS WERE NOT ALLOWED TO MEET IN ANY HALL IN LONDON! Since the owners are sure to be most unwilling to lose the 10 guineas rent, and since we shall sue for DAMAGES and shall get them too, it is obvious that they are being compensated by the government. Meanwhile we shall chance it and just go along quietly and if we find the door locked, which is probable, but not certain, we shall put the man who made the aforementioned statement into the WITNESS-BOX and see what can be made of the affair.473 At all events we shall contrive to embarrass Mr Gladstone.

With warmest regards,

In Lisbon a paper has come out called O Pensamento Social, Rua de S. Boaventura, No. 57, Lisboa, which has a number of outstanding articles in the first issue.a

I enclose an article on Arthur O'Connor from the Brussels Liberté, which certainly deserves to appear translated in The Irish

[^1]: F. Engels

[^2]: a See this volume, p. 340.



