---
Volume: 44
Document_Title: "211. Engels to Cesare Bert. 21 March "
Page_Range: "380-381"
---

# 211. Engels to Cesare Bert. 21 March 



**[p. 211]**

ENGELS TO CESARE BERT475

IN TURIN

[Draft]

London, 21 March 1872

Citizen Carlo Bert,

I have received your address from Citizen Et. Péchard, who was passing through Turin at the end of February, and also the information that you are now the secretary of our section Emancipation of the Proletarian, instead of C. Terzaghi, who was expelled for embezzlement, etc. It will therefore now be my pleasant duty to correspond with you.

I have just received a long letter from Terzaghia saying that he resigned as secretary and member of the Emancipation of the Proletarian because this society is made up in part of government agents and Mazzinians, and that this society wanted to pass a vote of no confidence in him because he was preaching war on capital

Naturally, we here are much more inclined to believe what you and the other members of your Council told Péchard than what I hear from Terzaghi, who has always played all sorts of tricks on us. But in order to be able to act confidently and decisively and to fulfil our responsibility at the next Congress, we should like you to send us an official letter from your Council, setting out the charges against Terzaghi and letting us know the resolutions passed by your society concerning him. In no way can we have two rival, warring sections in the same town. Fortunately, the Administrative Regulations (Resolutions of the Basle Congress) give the General Council the right to admit or reject any new section.476 You yourself see how necessary it is for our organisation to possess a right which Terzaghi's Jurassian friends wanted you to believe was authoritarian and unjustifiable.

Please reply as quickly as possible. A fraternal handshake.

Yours

[^1]: Printed according to the original

[^2]: Translated from the Italian

[^3]: Published in English for the first time

[^4]: a See this volume, pp. 352-53.

[^5]: First published in: Marx and Engels,

[^6]: Works, First Russian Edition, Vol. XXVI, Moscow, 1935



