---
Volume: 44
Document_Title: "212. Marx to Paul Lafargue. 21 March "
Page_Range: "381-387"
---

# 212. Marx to Paul Lafargue. 21 March 



**[p. 212]**

MARX TO PAUL LAFARGUE477

IN MADRID

London, 21 March 1872

My dear Toole,a

Enclosed herewith an extract from our missive against the dissidents'3 concerning the functions of the General Council.

All the General Council can do when applying the General Rules and the resolutions of Congresses to given cases is to take decisions as a tribunal. But their implementation in each country depends entirely on the International itself. Thus from the moment at which the Council ceases to function as the instrument of the general interests of the International, it becomes wholly invalid and powerless. On the other hand, the General Council itself is one of the Association's vital forces, being essential for the latter's unity and for preventing the Association from being taken over by hostile elements. The moral influence that the present Council (NOTWITHSTANDING ALL ITS SHORTCOMINGS) has been able to acquire vis-à-vis the common enemy, has wounded the vanity of those who saw the International as nothing save an instrument for their personal ambition.

Above all it should not be forgotten that our Association is the militant organisation of the proletariat and in no way a society created to bring amateur doctrinaires to the forefront. To destroy our organisation just now would be to abdicate. Bourgeois and governments combined could ask for nothing more. Read the report of the Rural Sacasec on the Dufaure plan.478 What does he most admire and fear about the Association? 'Its organisation.'

We have made marvellous progress since the London Confer- ence.254 New federations have been set up in Denmark, New Zealand and Portugal, great expansion in the United States, in France (where, by their own admission, Malon & Co. do not possess one single section), in Germany, in Hungary, in England (since the formation of the British Federal Council). The Irish sections are of very recent formation. In Italy the only serious

[^1]: a Paul Lafargue's nickname - b K. Marx and F. Engels, Fictitious Splits in the International - c J. F. Sacase, 'Rapport fait au nom de la commission chargée d'examiner le projet de loi'.



sections, in Milan and Turin, are ours; the others are led by lawyers, journalists and other bourgeois doctrinaires. (Apropos, one of Bakunin's personal grounds for complaint against me is that he has lost all influence in Russia where the revolutionary youth tread the same path as myself.)

The Resolutions of the London Conference3 have already been recognised by France, America, England, Ireland, Denmark, Holland, Germany, Austria, Hungary, Switzerland (minus the Jurassians), the genuine working men's sections in Italy and, finally, the Russians and Poles. Those who fail to recognise them will do nothing to alter this fact, but will be forced to part company with the vast majority of the International.

I am overburdened with work, so much so that I haven't even found time to write to my SWEET Kakadoub and DEAR Schnappy0 (of whom I should like to have further news). Indeed, the Interna- tional impinges too greatly on my time and, were it not my conviction that my presence on the Council is still necessary at this period of strife, I should have withdrawn long since.

The English government prevented our celebration of 18 March, the resolutions concerning which, adopted at a meeting of English working men and French refugees, are enclosed herewith.473

in which regard I was compelled to propose certain alterations to him).

Roy (6, Rue [de] Condillac, Bordeaux) is a marvellous trans- lator.479 He has already sent me the manuscript of the first chapter (I had sent the manuscript of the second German edition to him in Paris).396

Yours ever,

[^1]: La Châtre is an abominable charlatan. He wastes my time over the most absurd matters (e.g. his letter replying to my autograph,0

[^2]: OLD NICK*

[^3]: a K. Marx and F. Engels, 'Resolutions of the Conference of Delegates of the International Working Men's Association Assembled at London from 17th to 23rd September 1871'. - h Laura Lafargue's nickname - c Charles Etienne Lafargue - d i.e. Marx's letter to Lachâtre of 18 March 1872 (see this volume, p. 344) - e Marx's nickname





**[p. 348]**

Extract

The Council's Right of Co-option

'The body of the General Council is constantly changing, though some of the founding members remain, as in the Belgian, Romance, etc., Federal Councils.

'The General Council must fulfil three essential conditions, if it is to carry out its mandate. In the first place, it must have a numerically adequate membership to carry on its diverse func- tions; secondly, a membership of working men belonging to the different nationalities represented in the International Association; and, lastly, workers must be the predominant element therein. Since the exigencies of the worker's job incessantly cause changes in the membership of the General Council, how can it fulfil all these indispensable conditions without the right of co-option?' [Note: More than 3/4 of the members of the General Council in London are wage labourers.]

'Contrary to the rules of all bourgeois societies, the Internation- al's General Rules touch only lighdy on its administrative organisation. They leave its development to practice, and its régularisation to future Congresses. Nevertheless, inasmuch as only the unity and joint action of the sections of the various countries could give them a genuinely international character, the Rules pay more attention to the General Council than to the other bodies of the organisation.

'Article 5 of the original Rules' (Article 6 of the revised Rules3) 'states:

' "The General Council shall form an international agency between the different national and local groups" '

(There follow examples of its activities: information, statistics to be compiled, etc., and also this important passage, falsified by the Jurassians:

'when immediate practical steps should be needed, as, for instance, in case of international1" quarrels, the action of all the societies be simultaneous and uniform'.)

[^1]: Functions of the General Council

[^2]: a K. Marx, General Rules and Administrative Regulations of the International Working Men's Association. - b In the original: 'national'.





**[p. 349]**

The same article states : 'Whenever it seems opportune, the General Council shall take the initiative of proposals to be laid before the different national or local societies.'

The General Rules charge the General Council with working out certain matters to be submitted to the Congress, etc. (see articles 4 and 6 of the revised edition). 'In the original Rules so little distinction is made between the spontaneous action of various groups and unity of action of the Association as a whole, that Article 6' (Article 7 of the revised Rules) 'states:' (see this article).

'The first administrative resolution of the Geneva Congress' (1866) '(Article I) says:

' "The General Council is commissioned to carry the resolutions of the Congress into effect"

'This resolution legalised the position that the General Council has held ever since its origin: that of the Association's executive delegation.

'The Geneva Congress at the same time charged the General Council with publishing "the official and obligatory text of the Rules".' (See the revised Rules, Appendix I, pp. 16, 17.)

'The same Congress resolved (Administrative Resolutions of Geneva, Article 14):

'Who is to establish whether' the required conformity actually exists? 'Evidently, if there would be no authority charged with this function, the resolution would be null and void. Not only could police or hostile sections be formed, but also the intrusion of declassed sectarians and bourgeois philanthropists into the Associ- ation could warp its character and, by force of numbers at Congresses, crush the workers. Since their origin, the national and local federations have exercised in their respective countries the right to admit or reject new sections, according to whether or not their Rules conformed to the General Rules.' As to the General Council, the exercise of this function 'is provided for in Article 6 of the General Rules' (end of Article 7, revised Rules), 'which allows local independent societies (i.e. societies formed outside the federal body) the right to establish direct contacts with the General Council.' Since the foundation of the International such local independent societies have only been recognised after being admitted by the General Council.

[^1]: ' "Every section has the right to draw up its own rules and regulations adapted to local conditions and to the laws of its own country, but they must not contain anything contrary to the General Rules and Regulations."

[^2]: 13-556





**[p. 350]**

The same 'Article 6 of the Rules' (Article 7 of the revised Rules) 'deals with legal obstacles to the formation of national federations in certain countries where', by force of circumstances, 'the General Council is asked to function as a Federal Council (see Le Congrès de

Lausanne, Procès-verbaux, p. 13, 1867).

'Since the fall of the Commune, these legal obstacles have been multiplying in the various countries, making action by the General Council therein, designed to keep doubtful elements out of the Association, more necessary than ever. Thus, for instance, the French committees recently demanded the General Council's intervention to rid themselves of informers, and in another great country' [between you and me: Austria] 'members of the International requested it not to recognise any section which has not been formed by its direct mandatory or by themselves.' They are seeking, in this way, to rid 'themselves of agents-provocateurs, whose burning zeal manifested itself in the rapid formation of sections of unparalleled radicalism.'

[Note: Needless to say, in countries like Poland and Russia members of the International can only maintain links with the General Council, which must act with the utmost discretion there.]

'Like all the International's groups, the General Council is required to carry on propaganda. This it has accomplished through its' publications, through its correspondence with indi- viduals in countries where the Association has not yet been established, and through 'its agents, who laid the basis for the first organisations of the International in North America, in Germany and in many French towns' [ditto in Australia, in New Zealand].

'Another function of the General Council is to aid strikers and organise their support by the entire International. See General Council reports to the various Congresses. The following fact, inter alia, indicates the importance of its intervention in the strike movement. The Resistance Society of the English Foundrymen is in itself an international "Trades Union" with branches in other countries, notably in the United States. Nonetheless, during a strike of American foundrymen, the latter found it necessary to invoke the intercession of the General Council to prevent English foundrymen being brought into America.'

[Note: The only real international Trades Union in Europe is that of the cigar-men (cigar-makers). However, they stay entirely outside the proletarian movement and only have recourse to the General Council to further the interests of their trade.]

'The growth of the International obliged the General Council and all Federal Councils to assume the role of arbiter.'

Without the General Council having asked for it, 'the Brussels Congress' (1868) 'resolved that:

' "The Federal Councils shall transmit to the General Council every three months a report on the administration and financial state of their respective branches" ' (see Procès-verbaux du troisième Congrès etc.) '(Administrative Resolution No. 3).

'Lastly, the Basle Congress occupied itself solely with regulating the administrative relations engendered by the Association's continuing development' itself. 'If it extended unduly the limits of the General Council's powers, whose fault was it if not that of Bakunin, Schwitzguébel, Fritz Robert, Guillaume and other delegates of the Alliance' of Socialist Democracy, 'who were so anxious to achieve just that?' [Note: At the Basle Congress these gentlemen imagined that the Council would be transferred to Geneva.]

'Here are two resolutions of the Basle Congress:

' "No. IV. Each new section or society which is formed and wishes to be part of the International, must immediately announce its adhesion to the General Council",

'and "No. V. The General Council has the right to admit or reject the affiliation of any new society or group, subject to appeal at the next Congress."'

It is these resolutions that 'authorise the General Council to intervene in the internal affairs of the federations.' However, these articles have never been applied except in the case of sections placed outside federal associations or sections formed in countries where the International does not yet exist In these cases intervention by the Council is absolutely essential. On the other hand, the General Council has never 'intervened in the' internal 'affairs of new sections desirous of affiliating themselves with' already 'existing groups or federations.'

'The resolutions cited above' only 'refer to sections in the process of formation. The resolutions given below refer to sections already recognised :

'These two articles are necessary for extreme cases, although up to the present the General Council has never had recourse to them. It has never suspended any section and, in cases of conflict, has only acted as arbiter at the request of the two' sections.

[^1]: ' "VI. The General Council has equally the right to suspend' (see the following Note) 'until the next Congress any section of the International."

[^2]: ' "VII. When conflicts arise between the societies or branches of a national group, or between groups of different nationalities, the General Council shall have the right to decide the conflict, subject to appeal at the next Congress which will decide definitely."

[^3]: 13*



