---
Volume: 44
Document_Title: "213. Engels to Carlo Terzaghi. 21 March "
Page_Range: "387-388"
---

# 213. Engels to Carlo Terzaghi. 21 March 



**[p. 352]**

you will see that the Council has suspended one section composed almost exclusively of bourgeois. In the United States the intrusion of bourgeois seeking to turn the International into their instru- ment is very dangerous. This proves the necessity of Resolution VI of the Basle Congress.]

Apart from the various functions devolving upon the General Council as a result of the historical development of the Interna- tional, there is yet another one, imposed on it by the enemies of our Association. By making the Council the object of their attacks, all the parties and sects hostile to the proletarian movement have 'placed it in the vanguard of the International Working Men's Association'.

First published without the Appendix, in Printed according to the original Russian, in Voprosy istorii KPSS, No. 3, Moscow, 1962; first published in full in: Translated from the French Marx and Engels, Works, Second Russian Published in English in full for the Edition, Vol. 33, Moscow, 1964 fj r s t t j m e

213

ENGELS TO CARLO TERZAGHI

London, 21 [March] 1872

Dear Citizen,

I wrote to you on the 13th of this month45 and later received your letter of the 10th. Péchard was told in Turin481 that you had been expelled from the Emancipation of the Proletarian society for various reasons: that you refused to hand over a certain sum belonging to the Society as well as the 200 stamps which I sent you, etc., etc.

When such accusations are made, it is absolutely essential that the General Council should know whether or not they are true, before it can declare itself for one side or the other. I should be grateful, therefore, if you would tell me what is going on, because

[^1]: IN TURIN

[^2]: [Draft]

[^3]: a K. Marx, 'Resolutions on the Split in the United States' Federation Passed by the General Council of the I.W.A. in Its Sittings of 5th and 12th March, 1872'.



