---
Volume: 44
Document_Title: "214. Marx to Edouard Vaillant. 4 April "
Page_Range: "388-389"
---

# 214. Marx to Edouard Vaillant. 4 April 



**[p. 353]**

it is certain that such matters cannot be passed over in silence.

As for the contribution of 150 frs,a this money did not belong to the General Council but to a private Committee formed to collect funds with which to support the friendly press and other international causes, and since your sudden and enthusiastic declaration in favour of the Jura was such as to lead the Committee to believe that you had taken sides in a cause whose very foundations were necessarily unknown to you, the money was immediately spent on another purpose, and there are no more funds available at present.

I have not received II Proletario, which you promised to send me regularly, for the last 6 weeks.

We have changed the address of the Council meetings. I cannot at present give you another personal address, but I believe the one you have, C. R.,b 122 Regent's Park Road, is still better than that of the General Council.

I think Savio is no longer in London but has gone to work in the provinces.482

Greetings and emancipation.

First published in: Marx and Engels, , Printed according to the original Works, First Russian Edition, Vol. XXVI, Moscow, 1935 Translated from the Italian

214

MARX TO EDOUARD VAILLANT

[London,] 4 April 1872

My dear Vaillant,

I shall expect you tomorrow evening at 7 o'clock for dinner at my house with0 and some other friends.

Yours ever, Karl Marx

[^1]: Published in English for the first time

[^2]: IN LONDON

[^3]: a Engels has £150, presumably a slip of the pen. See this volume, p. 294. - b Probably for reasons of secrecy Engels gives the initials of Charles Renshaw, a Manchester businessman of his acquaintance, as the name of the addressee. - c name illegible



