---
Volume: 44
Document_Title: "216. Engels to Theodor Cuno. 22- 23 April "
Page_Range: "391-395"
---

# 216. Engels to Theodor Cuno. 22- 23 April 



**[p. 216]**

ENGELS TO THEODOR CUNO150

IN DÜSSELDORF

London, 22[-23] April 1872

Dear Cuno,

This morning I received your letter,3 which I had awaited with anxiety. Gandolfi wrote me some time agob saying it was believed that the Italian government had handed you over to the Prussians.—I found out about your arrest, etc., from the papers, which indicated that you were being deported for 'lack of visible means of support'. A police statement to that effect appeared in a Milan newspaper. This affair is not without significance. It is the first exploit of the international police conspiracy organised by Prussia, Austria, and Italy, and if you haven't been transported by the police from the Bavarian frontier to Düsseldorf, you owe this solely to the stupidity of the Bavarians. Tomorrow evening I shall report the matter to the General Council, after which the whole story will be included in the official report, which will be printed in The Eastern Post and sent out to every part in the world.c In the meantime, write an article about this in your own name and send it to the Volksstaat, the Geneva Égalité, and the Gazzettino Rosa. We shall take care of here, America, and Spain, as well as of France, over here.485 The rascals will finally have to realise that they cannot keep on doing this with impunity and that the Inter- national's arms are longer than those of the King of Italy.d As soon as the story is printed I shall send you a copy, together with all the newspapers I can collect for you—they won't be too numerous.

The advice Liebknecht gave you—to write to Bismarck—is very good, but for altogether different reasons. First, instead of assisting you to obtain redress, Bismarck will be very glad it happened and will merely be irritated that the Bavarians released you, instead of realising that this gave them a splendid opportuni- ty for having a member of the International transported all over Germany by the police. But you should write to Bismarck simply

[^1]: a Cuno's letter of 17 April 1872 - b on 14 March - c F. Engels, 'On the Police Persecution of the Member of the International Theodore Cuno'. - d Victor Emmanuel II





**[p. 357]**

You must not be surprised that you have received so little support from the party comrades. From one of your previous letters I had already realised that you laboured under youthful illusions concerning the aid people receive when in need. Unfortunately, my answer to this letter was confiscated by the Mordecaians 09 and never reached you. I should add that, although our German workers have far outstripped all the others as concerns theory, in practice they have by no means shaken off their artisan-type mentality, and owing to the dreadfully petty- bourgeois character of life in Germany, they are tremendously narrow-minded, especially in money matters. That is why I wasn't at all surprised at what you experienced in this respect. If I had money, I should send you some, but we here are really on the rocks just now. We have more than a hundred helpless refugees of the Paris Commune, literally helpless, for no people ever feel as helpless abroad as do the French; and what they didn't eat up, we sent to a fine chapa in Cork, Ireland, who founded the International there and was rewarded by being excommunicated by the priests and the bourgeoisie and completely ruined. We are in a tight spot at the moment. If we get some money from somewhere or other, I shall see to it that you are not forgot- ten.

Let me know in what branches of your profession you have had practical experience and in general what you can do. I shall look around immediately to see if anything can be found for you here. England is overrun by foreign engineers, it is true, but perhaps something can still be done. I have some very good contacts.

During your imprisonment all sorts of things have happened. In Turin Terzaghi was sacked from the Emancipazione del Proletario for embezzlement and suspicious dealings with the Questore.h He still managed to publish 2-3 issues of the Proletario in which he attacks them as canaglia, borghesi, vigliacchi,c etc.—just as he earlier attacked the Federazione Operaia—but the paper now appears to be dead, just like almost all the little new papers in Italy—Martello, Campana, etc. I wrote to Terzaghi,d asking him about these

[^1]: a John De Morgan - b police superintendent - c canaille, bourgeois, cowards - d See this volume, pp. 352-53.





**[p. 358]**

In Bologna the Fascio Operaio486 of the Romagna has held a congress in the course of which they threw off their masks and emerged as outright Bakuninists.487 The Romagnese are joining the International, but won't hear a word about the need to recognise the Rules, etc. They have not yet written to us, although the congress took place on 18 March; we shall give them a jolly reception!—The Ravenna section has written to us announcing that they intend to join but salva la propria autonomic.3 I have simply asked them whether they accept our Rules or not.488

I have just been looking at a heap of papers that has been sent to me and see that Pezza and Testini have also been arrested in Milan (around 30 March).

The circular of the General Council on Bakunin and Co.b is in the press and will probably be ready by the end of next week. I shall send you a copy without delay. It sets forth everything quite blundy, and it will produce a terrific row.

I believe I'll be able to send you newspapers tomorrow— Gazzettino Rosa and some other Italian items, in general, anything I can lay my hands upon.

A congress of the Spanish members of the International was held in Saragossa on 8-11 April, at which our people won a victory over the Bakuninists.489 It now turns out that the Alliance de la démocratie socialiste10 continued to exist in Spain within the International as a secret society under the leadership of Bakunin—a secret society aimed, not against the government, but against the mass of the workers! I have every reason to suspect that the same thing is going on in Italy. What information do you have on this subject?

If anything comes of the job in Spain that Becker0 had in mind for you, let me know at once so that I can give you letters of introduction to our people there. That job will probably be in Catalonia, the only industrial province of Spain, and you will be able to do very useful work, since the mass of workers there are

[^1]: a reserving their autonomy - b K. Marx and F. Engels, Fictitious Splits in the International - c Johann Philipp Becker





**[p. 359]**

admittedly good but leave their newspaper (La Federation in Barcelona) and the key positions in the hands of the Bakuninists.

There is only one newspaper appearing in Turin now— L'Anticristo, something of the order of a weekly Gazzettino Rosa. Then there are La Plebe in Lodi, II Fascio Operaio in Bologna, and L'Eguaglianza in Girgenti3—all the other Italian newspapers are dead. Experience in other countries made it obvious to me long ago that this was bound to happen. It is not enough to have a few people at the top; the masses in Italy are still too backward to be able to support so many newspapers. Prolonged and dogged work, with more theoretical content than the Bakuninists possess, is required to free the masses from the influence of the Mazzinist nonsense.

Many thanks for the Milan address. Would it not be a good idea for you to write first and ask the man b to send you a report on the present position of the International in Milan? You could then send it to me and I would reply to him. The present corresponding secretary is Mauro Gandolfi, i.e. one of Bakunin's supporters.

Write to me very soon—especially on what you are able to do in your profession, so that I can take the necessary steps.

Cordially yours,

F. E.

The address you have been using to write to me (that of your Düsseldorf letter) is by far the best.

23 April 1872

[^1]: First published in Die Gesellschaft, No. 11, Printed according to the original

[^2]: Published in English in full for the first time

[^3]: a Modern name: Agrigento. - b Francesco Danieli



