---
Volume: 44
Document_Title: "217. Engels to Wilhel m Liebknecht. 23 April "
Page_Range: "395-398"
---

# 217. Engels to Wilhel m Liebknecht. 23 April 



**[p. 217]**

ENGELS TO WILHELM LIEBKNECHT

IN LEIPZIG

London, 23 April 1872

Dear Liebknecht,

We all send you our congratulations on your performance in court.274 After the trial of the Brunswickers335 it was essential for someone to stand up to that gang and you have fairly done so. The only thing you might have left unsaid was the statement about the 1,000 members of the International.490

Here in England jurymen are locked up overnight or kept prisoner under guard in an hotel, to make sure that they do not come into contact with anyone. They are taken for walks under escort and are also escorted to church on Sundays, if they wish to go. An exception is only made in cases like the Tichborne trial,491

where this was not possible because of the inordinate duration of the proceedings (105 days), but even then the jurymen are harassed in all sorts of ways.

Marx will reply to the Concordia492 as soon as he has compared The Times of 1864.a

Your letter appeared in The Eastern Posth; whether it also appeared in The Morning Post is not to be discovered, since the paper is unobtainable here. The fact is that reading rooms where such things would be preserved, have simply ceased to exist. We send The Eastern Post regularly to the ends of the earth so that the letter will be publicised far more widely—and among the right people—than through other papers.

We can scarcely doubt that the sentence must be quashed. Such breaches of the law have been unheard of since the Demagogue trials.116 Nor can it be to the advantage of the national-liberal bourgeoisie to establish such precedents, and I doubt very much whether Bismarck, who is hiding behind the small states with the intention of discrediting them, would be willing to risk that sort of thing in Prussia.

I have seen very little about the trial in the English press—I have so many foreign papers to read that I can only read The

[^1]: * 'The Budget', The Times, No. 24535, 17 April 1863. - b W. Liebknecht, 'To the Editor of The Eastern Post', The Eastern Post, No. 185, 14 April 1872 (the letter concerned the Leipzig trial).





**[p. 361]**

Daily News and you must realise that since the introduction of the PENNY PRESS493 it is not possible to find papers anywhere to read without buying them. The article from The Daily News* is enclosed; you can make good use of it.

I have.passed the bill for the Rules'5 on to Marx; we shall send the money at the first opportunity.

I have not been able to get hold of a photograph of Blanqui up to now. The French have one but will not part with it, and there is none to be found here.

Enclosed the receipt for the 6 reichsthalers for the refugees. It is just not possible for us to conjure up an introduction to the Manifesto out of a hat for you.494 We shall have to study the socialist literature of the last 24 years, if we are to bring Section III up to date. This must be postponed for a subsequent edition, but we intend to send you a small 'Preface"" for the separate edition, and that will suffice for the moment.

What Scheud has to say about the Belgians is partly correct; the fellows have never been worth much and are now worth less than ever. We have sent someone over there who will let us have a detailed report shortly. At all events Scheu's deductions are wide of the mark—the mass of the people will never go so far with Messrs Hins (who through his Russian wife has a certain connection with Bakunin) and Steens (whose vanity is great enough to seduce him into foolish adventures). Particularly since we are making very good progress elsewhere in the world. Our people have defeated the Bakuninists at the Spanish Congress in Saragossa.489

As for Cuno, he has behaved extremely well in Milan and what he tells me in his letters about his fate is completely true and has been confirmed by the Italian press.e But it seems quite undeniable to me that, on his journeyings, having been shown the door for the sake of the International through no fault of his own and having landed in Bavaria, helpless and penniless, he has since been treated very uncouthly indeed by the people he has encountered in various places. He may have had rather dewy-eyed ideas about the help he might look forward to, but your money would be better spent if it were reserved for people such as him, instead of its being squandered on tramps and rogues

[^1]: a 'News from Berlin', The Daily News, No. 8096, 9 April 1872. - b K. Marx, General Rules and Administrative Regulations of the International Working Men's Association. - c K. Marx and F. Engels, 'Preface to the 1872 German edition of the Manifesto of the Communist Party'. - d Heinrich Scheu - e See this volume, p. 356.





**[p. 362]**

like Rüdt, etc., about whom you yourselves write letters like those read out at the trial (and which have unfortunately not appeared in the Volksstaat—as though that might help!). But, of course, Cuno was not one of the full-fledged men of the 'Party' and so had no business getting into trouble! If I had money I would really sooner send it to him than to anyone else.

The General Council's circular against the Bakuninists3 is now likely to appear next week; it is a French edition. The first instalment of Marx's second editionb will also come out soon, but do not mention it until Marx writes to you about it or until it is out.145 The Russian translation360—a very good one—is out, the French version436 is in the press.

Enclosed are:

1. Receipt for the 6 thalers. 2. 3 cuttings from The Eastern Post—meetings of the General Council,c etc.

3. 1 ditto on the celebrations of 18 March.473

4. 2 Irish documents.495

5. Our reply to the debate in Parliament.*1

6. Article from The Daily News on your trial.e So nine items in all.

Must catch the post. Best regards to Bebel and keep your chin up; they haven't got you in jug yet. But make sure that the sale of the stamps goes through properly and not just in Leipzig; we shall be very strict at the next Congress.

Best wishes to your family.

Your

F. E.

[^1]: First published, in Russian, in Marx- Printed according to the original Engels Archives, Vol. I (VI), Moscow, 1932

[^2]: Published in English for the first time

[^3]: a K. Marx and F. Engels, Fictitious Splits in the International - b of Volume I of Capital-c Presumably The Eastern Post, Nos. 184-86; 7, 14 and 20 April 1872, containing reports on the General Council meetings of 2, 9 and 16 April. - d K. Marx, 'Declaration of the General Council of the International Working Men's Association Concerning Cochrane's Speech in the House of Commons'. - e 'News from Berlin', The Daily News, No. 8096, 9 April 1872.



