---
Volume: 44
Document_Title: "218. Mar x to Johann Georg Eccarius. 3 May "
Page_Range: "398-399"
---

# 218. Mar x to Johann Georg Eccarius. 3 May 



**[p. 218]**

MARX T O JOHANN GEORG ECCARIUS496

IN LONDON

[London,] 3 May 1872

Dear Eccarius,

You seem to have lost your wits and as I regard this as a passing phase, at least for the present, perhaps you will allow me to address you for the time being as neither SIR, nor Herr nor Domine, and also to write to you in German instead of English.

If you haven't lost your memory along with your command of the German language—and if you have, the MINUTES of the General Council can jog it—you will recollect that all the quarrels I have had with the English since the founding of the Internation- al up to the last conference3 have been due simply and solely to the fact that I always took your side. Firstly, on the subject of The Commonwealth, against Odger, Cremer, Howell, etc.; secondly, against Fox, with whom I had been on very friendly terms497; and lastly, against Hales during the period when you were General Secretary.

If conflicts occurred later on, it would be important to establish who was responsible for them. I have only attacked you twice.

Firstly, on account of the premature publication of the Confer- ence resolutions, in which, as you are well aware, you exceeded your brief.498

Secondly, because of the last skirmish with America where you caused great MISCHIEF. (I am leaving out of account here the fact that your actions brought such abuse from the AMERICAN PAPERS, aided and abetted by Karl Heinzen et Co., down on my head; I am just as impervious to this abuse as I had previously been to praise, both public and private, from the same source.)

You appear to imagine, however, that when you make BLUNDERS others must pay you compliments in return, instead of telling you the truth as one would to anyone else. I shall give you back Gregory's stuff tomorrow evening.499 Today I have to go through the French and German proofsb simultaneously, so have no time to look through the American papers.

[^1]: a the London Conference of 1871 - b of the French and the second German edition of Volume I of Capital



