---
Volume: 44
Document_Title: "219. Engel s to Wilhelm Liebknecht. 7 May"
Page_Range: "399-402"
---

# 219. Engel s to Wilhelm Liebknecht. 7 May



**[p. 364]**

Finally, let me give you some good advice. You must not think that old personal and party friends are or will be less well disposed towards you just because they see it as their duty to oppose your FREAKS. On the other hand, you should not imagine that the small clique of Englishmen who make use of you for certain purposes are your friends. I could prove the contrary if I wished.

And so salut Since it is my birthday the day after tomorrow I have absolutely no desire to celebrate it in the unpleasant conviction that I have lost one of my oldest friends and like-minded comrades.

Salut fraternel,

Karl Marx

First published in: Marx and Engels, Printed according to the original Works, First Russian Edition, Vol. XXVI, , Moscow, 1935 Published in English m full for the first time

219

ENGELS TO WILHELM LIEBKNECHT

London, 7 May 1872

Dear Liebknecht,

I see now where your mistrust of Cuno stems from: you thought he was an agent of Becker'sb who had come on a mission to lead the German International back into the arms of its mother-section in Geneva.c This was quite unnecessary. When Cuno was in Chemnitz,d he could have been enrolled as a member there and then, if you had not treated the International so platonically. In

[^1]: IN LEIPZIG

[^2]: a That's all. - b Johann Philipp Becker - c See this volume, pp. 370-72. - d Modern name: Karl-Marx-Stadt.





**[p. 365]**

Milan, since he did not have our address, he turned to the only one known to him, that of Becker, and Becker, having admitted him, directed him to us. So just because Becker had once experienced the desire to annex Germany for himself, and because he may still intrigue a little here and there, you have to suspect every honest fellow who has had to turn to Becker because you were unwilling to act! I shall not believe your allegations about his boastfulness until I see proof; I have far less confidence in your correspondents in Nuremberg and elsewhere than I have in Cuno, who has never tried to pull the wool over our eyes, but has always reported more truthfully than most other people. Cuno's father is a Prussian official in Düsseldorf who simply threw him out; now he is stuck without a penny to his name. His possessions and those of his father are two different things altogether.

Enclosed an article by Lafargue from the Emancipation; you will have someone or other who knows enough Spanish to translate it.600 Lafargue is doing a terrific amount of work in Spain and very skilfully too. The report from the Liberie on the congress in Saragossa was also by him. Incidentally, do not forget to publish the second report, the one in the previous issue of the 'Liberté', in which he unmasks the secret intrigues of the Bakuninists and describes the spectacular victory gained over them by our supporters there.501

This was the decisive defeat for that pig-headed Bakunin. The Emancipation is now the best paper we have. These Bakuninists are jackasses. The Spaniards have a very good organisation, one which has stood the test with flying colours precisely in the last 6 months, and now these fools come along and imagine that they can seduce people with their phrases about autonomy and get them to dissolve their organisation to all intents and purposes.

You ought to make more use of The Eastern Post; the information we make available there is truly of greater interest than the dogmatic legalistic waffle of Mr Acollas about the best of all possible constitutions.502

I still believe that the conviction will be quashed. In the first place, too many formal errors have been made, and secondly, the trial has already caused far too much of a rumpus.274 Bismarck must surely perceive that he has gone too far and that quashing the sentence will be more advantageous for him than confirming it.

To the best of my knowledge, Stefanoni has not published your letter/ I have not received all the issues of the Libero Pensiero and

[^1]: a See this volume, p. 577.





**[p. 366]**

unfortunately your letter arrived in Italy at the very moment when all our papers I had sent it to folded up simultaneously. As for Büchner, you only need glance at his last would-be socialist production to see the envy and hatred the little cripple feels for Marx, whom he plunders and distorts without ever mentioning him by name.3 And I stick to my belief that it is he who has filled Stefanoni's head with all that junk. That he is on good terms with you is something he shares with Malon and many others who cherish a mortal hatred for us.

I am sending you today's Daily News with a delightful account of the behaviour of the German professors and students in Alsace and the reception given them by the Alsatians. A description of the German student is enclosed.b Both reports are by Major Forbes, the same man who was with the Saxons before Paris and was, at the time, beside himself with admiration for the German officers and soldiers, i.e. if anything he is prejudiced in favour of the Germans. You should make use of these descriptions of the representatives of 'German culture'; they are striking proof as to how threadbare that 'culture' of the bourgeoisie has become, and how ludicrous its official spokesmen.503

As soon as I have time I shall write you an article on the housing shortage and against the absurd Proudhonist stories that have appeared in a series of articles on the subject in the

Our reply to the Jurassiansc is still in the press. The devil take all these co-operative printers.

There is nothing to tell you about the Congress. Where it will take place can only be decided at the last moment.450 That it will take place, you know already.

Denmark is not Saxony. Unfortunately, I do not know who has been arrested and so am forced to interrupt the correspondence.

The Emancipation now regularly publishes extracts from the Volksstaat. Laura is looking after it, so make sure that the paper is sent there regularly.

In Belgium the Brussels Federal Council has let everything go to rack and ruin; the two decent people we have there do not have

[^1]: Volksstaat504

[^2]: The arrest of our people in Denmark will be of enormous advantage to us and will not do much harm to the victims.505

[^3]: a This presumably refers to L. Büchner's book Die Stellung des Menschen in der Natur in Vergangenheit, Gegenwart und Zukunft - b [A. Forbes,] 'The Opening of the Strasburg University. The Academical Excursion', The Daily News, No. 8120, 7 May 1872. - c K. Marx and F. Engels, Fictitious Splits in the International



