---
Volume: 44
Document_Title: "221. Engel s to Johann Philipp Becker. 9 May "
Page_Range: "407-408"
---

# 221. Engel s to Johann Philipp Becker. 9 May 

This, I trust, will explain the reception you got in Leipzig. No special importance should be attached to such trifles—they are all things that are overcome by themselves in time. When you meet the Belgian members of the International, you will, perhaps, again be disappointed. Above all, don't entertain too great illusions about these people. They are very good elements, but the cause has, by and large, run along in a worn-out rut, and phrases are more important to them than the cause itself. The big words

autonomie and autoritarisme can attract a large audience in Belgium as well. Eh bien, vous verrez pour vous-même*

Yours very truly,

F. E.

221

ENGELS TO JOHANN PHILIPP BECKER

London, 9 May 1872 Dear Becker,

Your suggestion of Geneva as a location for the Congress has much in its favour and has much support here, but naturally nothing can be decided at the moment since the position can alter from day to day.480 In the meantime, we must know, if we are to be able to make a final decision, what the situation is like there and whether it will be possible for you to be assured of a compact and reliable majority of the Swiss delegates. The Alliance people 10

[^1]: First published in Die Gesellschaft, No. 11, Printed according to the original Berlin, 1925

[^2]: Published in English in full for the first time

[^3]: IN GENEVA

[^4]: a Well, you will see for yourself.



