---
Volume: 44
Document_Title: "222. Engel s to Wilhelm Liebknecht. 15- 22 May "
Page_Range: "408-412"
---

# 222. Engel s to Wilhelm Liebknecht. 15- 22 May 

will use all the old tricks at their disposal to gain the majority for themselves, just as in Basle; the Jurassians will make sure that imaginary sections secure representation. Apart from Turin, the Italians will send nothing but friends of Bakunin—even Milan where, since Cuno's expulsion,3 they once again have the upper hand. The Spaniards will be divided, though it is not yet possible to say in what proportions. Germany will be weakly represented as usual, the same applies to England; for France there will only be a few refugees from there and perhaps some from here; the Belgians are highly unreliable so that very great efforts will have to be made to secure a respectable majority. For a slight majority is as bad as none at all, and the squabbling would just start up all over again. So let us know what the situation is with you and in German Switzerland, and speak quite frankly so that we do not miscalculate.

Cuno has also had to flee from Düsseldorf with the police after him and he is now in Seraing near Liège.

Wegmann is in Manchester, but since he delayed so long the situation has changed, business is worse and work is hard to come by. However, I shall see to it that he gets something soon. Best wishes from Marx.

Yours very truly,

F. Engels

222

ENGELS TO WILHELM LIEBKNECHT

London, 15[-22] May 1872

Dear Liebknecht,

Thanks for the letter from Verviers.510 It confirms our information from other sources and. as far as Hins is concerned, it

[^1]: First published in: Marx and Engels, Printed according to the original Works, First Russian Edition, Vol. XXVI, „ ,,. , , . ,, ,. , , Moscow, 1935 Published in English for the first time

[^2]: IN LEIPZIG

[^3]: a See this volume, pp. 356-57.



is agreeable to learn that his preference for the Neuer" not only makes itself felt in the Liberie but is also expressed directly. In this Hins, as a Bakuninist thanks to his wife, is quite consistent. It is good that all the scoundrels should meet up with each other.

I passed on the relevant information to Eccarius, who replied: Tell Liebknecht that I shall discuss corresponding with him again once he has answered my letter of last July.—What Sorge writes to you511 is at present the subject of charges levelled at Eccarius, who has lost much ground here thanks to his repeated indiscretions.

It goes without saying that nothing can be decided at present about the location of the Congress.45

I am delighted to hear that the Volksstaat is selling so well.512 As soon as time permits I shall contribute articles more frequently, but you can have no idea how hard-pressed we are, because Marx, myself and 1 or 2 others have to do absolutely everything.

We shall attend to the Preface for the Manifestoh at the first possible opportunity.494 Marx has a terrific amount of work to do on the French translation0; much has to be altered in the opening part.436 And then he has also to read the proofs of the 2nd German edition.396

The article on the housing shortage0 will be done today or tomorrow.

The Fédération Jurassienne publishes a swinish little paper: Bulletin de la Fédération jurassienne, subscription obtainable from Adhémar Schwitzguébel, Sonvillier, Jura Bernois, 4 frs per annum, 2 frs a half-year. You should take it and hit them hard from time to time, it is Bakunin's Moniteur. In the last issue Lafargue, who is in Madrid under an assumed name, was directly denounced to the Spanish police.513

Enclosed is a cutting from The Eastern Postil4—you will probably be sent the first edition, in which, thanks to Hales' indolence, the most important things are missing, as usual. If that is the case, drop me a couple of lines for the PUBLISHER SO that he can send you the second edition. Otherwise you will still be in the dark. What I said about the Saragossa Congress is accurate enough, but Lafargue forgot to tell us that at the same time a resolution had been passed recognising and adopting the resolutions of the Belgian Congress (of 25 December 1871).404 So that the victory was

[^1]: a Neuer Social-Demokrat - b K. Marx and F. Engels, 'Preface to the 1872 Ger- man edition of the Manifesto of the Communist Party'. - c of Volume I of Capital - d F. Engels, The Housing Question.



by no means as complete as he described it to us.489 I am awaiting further details about this last resolution.

That the Alliance10 has survived as a secret society, in Spain at least, is proved and recognised. Our own people were in it, because they knew no better and thought they had to be. This is a very serious matter for Mr Bakunin.

Don't forget to publish Lafargue's 2nd report on the Saragossa Congress from the Liberté.501 It has put the Jurassians into a fury and their last issue contains a public attack on Lafargue, myself, Marx and Serraillier. But they are as quiet as mice on the subject of the revelations about their secret society. This is the tell-tale point and so we must noise it abroad as much as possible. I am convinced that this secret organisation of the Alliance has branches in Switzerland and in Italy too. It will not be easy to obtain proof, however.—The next issue.of Egalité will include a statement by Lafargue against the Jurassians.3

22 May. In the interim I have been writing the enclosed article on housing. Your Proudhonistb will be satisfied with it.

I shall write to Wigand about my Condition of the Working- Class.515 But there can be no question at all of my attending to it before the Congress is over; my hands are full until then.

The Deutsch-Französische Jahrbücher are unobtainable, except, perhaps, second-hand; that should be perfectly clear to you. The same goes for the Misere de la philosophie (although Vieweg in Paris, Frank's successor, may still have a few). A collection of essays is an old plan of ours but it also needs time. Mr Knapp will find sufficient instruction in Capital; once he has digested that he will doubtless know whether he is on our side or not, and if he still does not know, not even Moses and all the Prophets will be able to do anything for him. The crux of the matter is to be found in Chapters II and III of Capital and he should know where he stands on that before calling for further nourishment.

Your request for clarification about Proudhon should be satisfied for the moment by the enclosed article.

Enclosed the report on Spain in The Eastern Post,c which you are unlikely to have received. Please do not publish it. It was based on Lafargue's letters, but since the Jurassians are interpreting another

[^1]: a P. Lafargue, 'Aux citoyens rédacteurs du Bulletin de la Fédération jurassienne. Madrid, 17 mai 1872', L'Égalité, No. 11, 1 June 1872; Bulletin de la Fédération jurassienne, No. 10-11, 15 June 1872. - b Arthur Mülberger - c Account of Engels' speech on the Saragossa Congress and the situation of the International in Italy. From the newspaper report on the General Council meeting of 7 May 1872.



I shall now see what can be done about the Preface to the Manifesto. Marx is in the CITY checking on the quotation from the Concordia; those gentlemen have got a big surprise coming to them.492

Best wishes and hopes for a speedy quashing.

Your

F. E.

What view does the 'Committee' in Hamburg452 take of the International? We must now try and clear up the situation there as quickly as possible so that Germany can be properly represented at the Congress.450 I must ask you straight out to tell us frankly how the International stands with you.

1. Roughly how many stamps have been distributed to how many places, and which places are involved? The 208 counted by Fink51 are surely not all there are?

2. Does the Social-Democratic Workers' Party intend to be represented at the Congress and IF SO how does it propose to place itself en règle' with the General Council in advance so that its mandate cannot be queried at the Congress? This would mean a) that it would have to declare itself to be the German Federation of the International in reality and not merely figuratively and b) that as such it would pay its dues before the Congress. The matter is becoming serious and we have to know where we are, or else you will force us to act on our own initiative and to consider the Social-Democratic Workers' Party as an alien body for whom the International has no significance. We cannot allow the representation of the German workers at the Congress to be fumbled or forfeited for reasons unknown to us, but which cannot be other than petty. We should like to ask for a clear statement about this quickly.

Receipt for Fink shortly. Notabene. It would perhaps be a good idea, if at all possible, to send me proofs of the article, but I leave it up to you. However, an essential prerequisite for my collaboration is 1) no marginal

[^1]: 3 to arrange matters



