---
Volume: 44
Document_Title: "223. Mar x to Friedrich Adolph Sorge. 23 May "
Page_Range: "412-413"
---

# 223. Mar x to Friedrich Adolph Sorge. 23 May 



**[p. 377]**

comments of any kind and 2) it must be printed in long instalments.

First published, in Russian, in Marx- Printed according to the original Engels Archives, Vol. I (VI), Moscow, 1932

Published in English for the first time

223

MARX TO FRIEDRICH ADOLPH SORGE166

IN HOBOKEN

[London,] 23 May 1872

Dear Sorge,

Just a few lines in great haste.

I am overwhelmed with work. Quite apart from all the International BUSINESS—everything is at sixes and sevens—every day I have to correct the German proofs of the second edition of Capital (which will appear in instalments)145

and the épreuves* of the French translation436 in Paris, which I often have to re-write completely to make matters clear to the French. And in addition I also have the épreuves of the ADDRESS ON THE CIVIL WAR* which we are bringing out in French in Brussels. You will be receiving a constant flow of instalments in German and French from me.

The Russian socialist paper, Die Neue Zeit (its German title, the paper comes out in Russian), recently published a five-column- long leader lavishing praise on the book, which, however, was only meant as an introduction to a series of articles.0 For this, the paper duly received a warning from the police, who threatened to suppress it.

I shall send Liebknecht my answer to the jackasses from the Concordia today.e I was unable to get round to it sooner. Moreover, it does no harm to leave that factory-owning mob their illusions of victory for a while.

[^1]: In Petersburg a splendid Russian translation0 has appeared.360

[^2]: a proofs - b K. Marx, The Civil War in France. - c of Volume I of Capital - d 'C.-IIe Tep6ypn,, 22 anpb An', Novoye Vremya, No. 106, 23 April (5 May) 1872. - e K. Marx, 'Reply to Brentano's Article'.



