---
Volume: 44
Document_Title: "224. Marx to Edouard Vaillant. 24 May "
Page_Range: "413-414"
---

# 224. Marx to Edouard Vaillant. 24 May 



**[p. I]**

A s TO H E I N Z E N , CARE NOT ONE FARTHING FOR THE fült S et gestes* OF THIS 'democratic numbskull'. He is the true representative of the 'KNOW-NOTHINGS', in the literal sense of the word.

It will do no harm to send me the French translation of the Communist Manifesto.440

I shall tell you in my next letter why the GENERAL COUNCIL is simply abiding by its resolutions'3 for the time being without proceeding in a more aggressive manner. We shall not continue to correspond with those people any more but have only instructed Le Moussu to ask them to return the letters from Eccarius (who has probably already given the ordre to print his letter over there) and Hales.518

(Between ourselves. Eccarius has been demoralised for quite some time now and is now a scoundrel pure and simple—canaille, even.)

In sincere friendship,

Karl Marx

First published in Briefe und Auszüge aus Printed according to the original Briefen von Joh. Phil. Becker, Jos. Dietzgen, Friedrich Engels, Karl Marx u. A. an Published in English in full for the F. A. Sorge und Andere, Stuttgart, 1906 f l r s t t l m e

224

[London,] 24 May 1872

My dear Vaillant,

Serraillier has received a letter from Brussels from some of the proscribed persons over there—which in my view makes it necessary that something be done here to avert if at all possible any further rumpus amongst the Communards. It is for this reason that I have agreed with Serraillier to ask you (and via you

Arnaud), Cournet and Ranvier to come to my house tomorrow evening (Saturday at 8 or 9 o'clock, whichever is more convenient) to

[^1]: MARX TO EDOUARD VAILLANT1'8

[^2]: IN LONDON

[^3]: a feats and gestures - b K. Marx, 'Resolutions on the Split in the United States' Federation Passed by the General Council of the I. W. A. in Its Sittings of 5th and 12th March, 1872'.



