---
Volume: 44
Document_Title: "225. Mar x to Friedrich Adolph Sorge. 27 May "
Page_Range: "414-415"
---

# 225. Mar x to Friedrich Adolph Sorge. 27 May 



**[p. 379]**

discuss what should be done (needless to say the General Council has nothing to do with the affair).

Yours ever,

Karl Marx

I have had a letter from Rochat,a who is presently working in a coal-mine in the Borinage.

First published, in the language of the Printed according to the original original (French), in International Review

of Social History, Vol. XVII, Parts I-II, Translated from the French Assen, 1972 Published in English for the first time.

225

MARX TO FRIEDRICH ADOLPH SORGE137

IN HOBOKEN

[London,] 27 May 1872

My dear Sorge,

I am flooded out with proofs, French proofs436 (where I have to re-write an enormous amount that has been translated too literally) and German proofs,396 all of which have to be sent off.b I can therefore only write you a few lines.

I am sending you the German and French versions of the General Council declaration on the farce of the 'Conseil fédéraliste universel etc.'.c Ditto notre circulaire privée sur les Jurassiens.6 (More to follow, as soon as we have the copies in quantity.) Eccarius handed in his resignation before his CASE was investigated.496 Provisionally, Le Moussu is responsible for toute l'Amérique (we also have contacts in South America now). Send everything to me since I see Le Moussu every day, and do not send anything to Hales, who keeps on doing the stupidest things simply out of a desire to seem important. There is an enquête* pending against him as well as Eccarius because of the American affaire.

[^1]: a Presumably Rochat's letter to Marx of 23 May 1872. - b This refers to the proofs of the second German and the French edition of Volume I of Capital - c K. Marx, 'Declaration of the General Council Concerning the Universal Federalist Council'. - d K. Marx and F. Engels, Fictitious Splits in the International - e investigation



