---
Volume: 44
Document_Title: "227. Mar x to Nikolai Danielson. 28 May "
Page_Range: "420-421"
---

# 227. Mar x to Nikolai Danielson. 28 May 



**[p. 385]**

declaration of the General Council against the petty intriguers here who have acquired a certain importance thanks to the bourgeois press on the Continent.3

Regards to your wifeb and children, ditto Bebel.

Your

F. E.

First published in Die Neue Zeit, Bd. 2, Printed according to the original Nr. 28, Stuttgart, 1902-03

Published in English in full for the first time

227

MARX TO NIKOLAI DANIELSON525

IN ST PETERSBURG

London, 28 May 1872

My dear Sir,

My reply to you has been so delayed because I had kept on hoping that I would be able to send you, simultaneously with the letter, the first instalments of the 2nd German edition of 'Capital'145

as well as the French translation456 (Paris). But the German and French booksellersc have dragged the business out for so long that I cannot postpone it any longer.

First of all, my best thanks for the beautifully bound copy. The translation is masterly.360 I would be grateful if you could let me have a second, unbound, copy—for the British Museum.526

I regret that absolute [lack of time] (IN THE MOST STRICTEST SENSE OF THE WORD) prevented me from making a start on the revision for the second edition before the end of December 1871. It would have been of great benefit for the Russian edition.

Although the French edition—(the translation is by Mr Roy, the translator of Feuerbach)—has been prepared by a great expert in both languages, he has often translated too literally. I have therefore found myself compelled to re-write whole PASSAGES in French, to make them palatable to the French public. It will be all the easier later on to translate the book from French into English and the Romance languages.

[^1]: a K. Marx, 'Declaration of the General Council Concerning the Universal Federalist Council'. - b Natalie Liebknecht - c Meissner and Lachâtre



