---
Volume: 44
Document_Title: "228. Mar x to César De Paepe. 28 May "
Page_Range: "421-423"
---

# 228. Mar x to César De Paepe. 28 May 



**[p. 386]**

I am so * overworked, and in fact so much interfered with in my theoretical studies, that, after September, I shall withdraw from the commercial concern* which, at this moment, weighs principally upon my own shoulders, and which, as you know, has its ramifications all over the world.* Mais, est modus in rebus,h *and I can no longer afford—for some time at least—to combine two sorts of business of so very different a character.

The news you have communicated to me on our mutual friendc

have delighted both myself and my family. There are few people in the world of whom I am so fond and whom I esteem so much.*527

You will much oblige me by delivering the enclosed letter to Dr W. Baranoff528 at this address: 'Frau Baggohufudt-Gross, Theater Platz, Haus Baron Küster'.

In the hope of hearing from you soon.

Yours very sincerely,

A. W.d

One of the barkers at present living in Switzerland—Mr Bakounine—is playing such strange tricks that I would be very grateful for any precise piece of information about the man— 1) as to the extent of his influence in Russia, 2) about his role in the trial of such notorious memory.529

228

My dear Friend,

Enclosed is a statement by the General Council against Vésinier

[^1]: First published, in Russian, in Minuvshiye Printed according to the original gody. No. 1, St Petersburg, 1908

[^2]: Published in English in full for the first time

[^3]: MARX TO CÉSAR DE PAEPE137

[^4]: IN BRUSSELS

[^5]: [London,] 28 May 1872U8

[^6]: a Marx intended to resign from the General Council of the International after the Hague Congress. - b But moderation in all things (Horace, Satires, I, 1). - c Hermann Lopatin - d A. Williams, Marx's pseudonym





**[p. 387]**

1) because it needs publicity, 2) because Mr Steens has suppressed the General Council's reply to the British Parliament which was sent to him.b

I have read the report on the Belgian Congressc in the L'Internationale.524 How is it that the Flemish are not included among the delegates? Generally speaking, according to the information received here by the French from their compatriots, it would not seem that the International has made much headway in Belgium after the events of the Commune.

For my part I should be ready to accept the Hins draft (with modifications of detail), not because I think it is good, but because it is always better to make certain experiments than to lull oneself with illusions.

It is very characteristic of the Alliance's10 tactics: in Spain, where it is strongly organised although it has lost the support of the Spanish Federal Council, it attacked at the Barcelona Council all elements of organisation, the Federal Council, etc., as well as the General Council. In Belgium, where 'prejudices' have to be taken into account, it has been proposed that the General Council be abolished with its functions being transferred to the Federal Councils (this was opposed at Barcelona) and even enlarged.

I can hardly wait for the next Congress. It will be the end of my slavery. After that I shall become a free man again; I shall accept no administrative functions any more, either for the General Council or for the British Federal Council.

Yours as ever,

Karl Marx

[^1]: First published in L'Actualité de l'histoire, Printed according to the original No. 25, Paris, 1958

[^2]: Translated from the French

[^3]: a K. Marx, 'Declaration of the General Council Concerning the Universal Federalist Council'. - b K. Marx, 'Declaration of the General Council of the International Working Men's Association Concerning Cochrane's Speech in the House of Commons'. - c 'Congrès ouvrier belge', L'Internationale, No. 176, 26 May 1872.



