---
Volume: 44
Document_Title: "229. Mar x to Friedrich Adolph Sorge. 29 May "
Page_Range: "423-424"
---

# 229. Mar x to Friedrich Adolph Sorge. 29 May 



**[p. 229]**

MARX TO FRIEDRICH ADOLPH SORGE137

IN HOBOKEN

[London,] 29 May 1872

Dear Friend,

En toute hâte* In yesterday's meeting of the General Council, at which almost all the members of the Commune were present, Hales read out Praitsching's letter.530

I followed this up by relating the aventures of the Contre COUNCIL, basing myself partly on your letter,b and partly on the issue of the World you sent me, and I emphasised how these facts confirmed the necessity of the RESOLUTIONS adopted at my sugges- tion.531 Eccarius WAS THUNDERSTRUCK.

This was followed by a useful INCIDENT which I instantly exploited.

Eccarius had received a letter from St Louis in which a German section which had formed there inquired which of the two FEDERAL COUNCILS to go by. I said, naturally, they should acknowledge the COUNCIL that agreed with us, the old one. Hales and Eccarius (although mortal enemies) spoke against this. I replied and the motion was carried in the very well-attended meeting with only 3 votes against (Hales, Eccarius and Delahaye—who counts for nothing with the other members of the Commune).

Le Moussu will inform you of this officially tomorrow, and you would then do well to make it known (naturally as something self-evident and not on instructions from London) that, on the occasion of this application from that German section, the General Council resolved that your COUNCIL is the only one with which it is en règlec and hence which is recognised.

Karl Marx

[^1]: Tout à vous,d

[^2]: First published in Briefe und Auszüge aus Printed according to the original Briefen von Joh. Phil. Becker, Jos. Dietzgen, Friedrich Engels, Karl Marx u. A. an F. A. Sorge und Andere, Stuttgart, 1906

[^3]: a In all haste. - b Sorge's letter to Marx of 7 May 1872. - c in agreement - d Yours sincerely



