---
Volume: 44
Document_Title: "232. Engel s to Cesare Bert. 7 June "
Page_Range: "426-428"
---

# 232. Engel s to Cesare Bert. 7 June 



**[p. 231]**

ENGELS TO J. MOLESWORTH534

IN LESTER

[Draft]

[London, after 5 June 1872]

a have every confidence in the character of Mr Glaser whom you will, I have no doubt, always find straightforward in all his dealings. As to his means I cannot give you any definite information but as I have the confidence in him that he would not order more than he was justified in doing, I should not hesitate to give him a moderate credit say a couple of £100—or even more. I think if you were to limit your credit at the beginning to £200—and then extend it afterwards as the business goes on and you get better acquainted with him, you would be pretty safe.

It is what I should do in your case.

First published in: Marx and Engels, Reproduced from the original Works, Second Russian Edition, Vol. 50, Moscow 1981 Published in English for the first time

232

ENGELS TO CESARE BERT

IN TURIN

[Resume of a letter]

[London, 7 June 1872]

[] In Milan, Ferrara, Naples, everywhere there are friends of Bakunin.b As for the Workers' Union486 of Bologna, it has never written us a word. The Jura party, abandoned on all sides, seems to want to make Italy its great fortress. This party has formed, in

[^1]: a The beginning of the letter is missing. - b This sentence, the one opening the next paragraph, and the two parentheses are in German in the original, the rest of the text

[^2]: IC i n T t i l l i n is in Italian





**[p. 392]**

The circular3 makes things known. We urge you meanwhile to suspend all decisions and you will subsequently act as the interest of the International dictates. I hope you will find that it is not the General Council, but these men of the Jura, acting solely to further the personal ambitions of Bakunin, head of the secret society, who have sown discord.

(Ask for immediate reply about the letter.)

[^1]: First published in: Marx and Engels, Printed according to the original Works, First Russian Edition, Vol. XXVI, Moscow 1935 Translated from the Italian

[^2]: Published in English for the first time

[^3]: a K. Marx and F. Engels, Fictitious Splits in the International.



