---
Volume: 44
Document_Title: "237. Marx to Octave van Suetendael. 21 June "
Page_Range: "435-438"
---

# 237. Marx to Octave van Suetendael. 21 June 



**[p. 400]**

In his announcement of my book the primeval KNOW-NOTHING lout Heinzen found cause for amusement at the statement on the title-page: 'Translation rights reserved'. Who would want to translate such nonsense! The book was obviously written merely in order that Karl Heinzen shouldn't understand it.

We have issued a French translation of the ADDRESS ON THE CIVIL WAR, price 2 Väd. per copy.246 If wanted in the UNITED STATES, please write.

Regarding the Nicholson affair, it is best not to say anything about it in the GENERAL COUNCIL for the present.547

Salut

Yours,

K. M.

First published in Briefe und Auszüge aus Printed according to the original Briefen von Joh. Phil. Becker, Jos. Dietzgen, . . . . , ,, r , Friedrich Engels, Karl Marx u. A. an Published in English in full for the F. A. Sorge und Andere, Stuttgart, 1906 f l r s t t l m e

237

MARX TO OCTAVE VAN SUETENDAEL

[London,] 21 June 1872

Dear Citizen,

Many thanks for your letter.548 Everywhere the same thing is going on. Everywhere it is non-working men who hamper the advance of the International and who intrigue against the General Council precisely because it represents the general interest and stands in the way of their petty personal ambitions.

According to the General Regulations, we have the right to ask the Belgian Federal Council for a copy of its printed regulations, and for information regarding the financial position of the sections and the number of members. We shall make these requests in such a manner as not to arouse suspicion.

[^1]: IN BRUSSELS





**[p. 401]**

As for the Paris correspondent, I now have his name.3

According to the General Regulations, II, Art. 5b: 'The General Council has the right to admit or to refuse the affiliation of any new society or group, subject to appeal to the Congress. Nevertheless, where there exist Federal Councils or Committees, the General Council is bound to consult them before admitting or rejecting the affiliation of a new branch or society, without prejudice, however, to its right of provisional decision'.

Thus, the new section now forming in Brussels has only to write to the General Council (and it may use my address, the Belgian secretary being away) and state that it wishes to form 'an independent society', in direct relation with the General Council. It must explain (without holding anything back) the reasons why it wants to constitute itself independently of the Belgian Federal Council. Whereupon, the General Council must consult the Belgian Council, however, 'without prejudice to its right of decision'.

The Federation of Working Men's Societies of which you speak would be well-advised, when nominally constituting several sec- tions (say 3 or 4), to request the Council to admit them all at the same time. Their very number would make it easier for the General Council to act. For the fact that several societies in Brussels desired to constitute themselves independently of the Belgian Federal Council would of itself provide serious presump- tive evidence against the latter. Once admitted by the General Council, the said societies will have the right to send delegates to the next Congress—either a common delegate or one delegate per society. The next Congress will take place at The Hague,45 on the first Monday of September 1872. I shall be sending an official communication to that effect to the Brussels Internationale in a few days' time.c

As for the Hins draft524 (Hins and his wife are correspondents and agents of Bakunin), this has had a very bad reception in all the countries from which we have heard so far, France, Germany, England, etc.

In L'Egalité (organ of the Romance Federal Council), which I am sending you, you will find resolutions against the Hins draft.545

L'Emancipaciön (of Madrid), organ of the Spanish Federal Council, has published two articles against the Hins draft.537

[^1]: a Léon Adrien Massenet - b K. Marx, General Rules and Administrative Regulations of the International Working Men's Association. - c See F. Engels, 'Announcement of the General Council on the Convocation and the Agenda of the Congress at The Hague', L'Internationale, No. 182, 7 July 1872.





**[p. 402]**

The first article is in the issue of 8 June and is entitled 'The Belgian Draft of the General Rules'. It says, among other things:

'If the draft stood the slightest chance of being accepted, this would of itself suffice to disorganise the International The Congresses, which take place only once a year, cannot serve as a true link uniting the various federations. The immediate effect of the suppression of the General Council would be to disrupt the unity of the Association and the strength deriving therefrom Consistency would further demand the suppression of the federal and local Councils, etc. The suppression of the General Council would spell death to the International.'

The Volksfreund ('Friend of the People'), the organ of the International sections of Brunswick, gave the Hins draft a thorough trouncing.3 Among other things it says that, if the working men of other countries were to imitate those of Belgium, the International would be transformed from a society organised for struggle into an incoherent mass of pietistic549 socialist conventicles. In its issue of 16 June it returns to the charge.b

It refers to the police Conference (consisting of Prussian, Austrian, Hungarian, etc., functionaries) which is to be held in Berlin in August and is to discuss measures to be taken by governments against the International. One of the first measures adumbrated by these gentlemen is to confine the proletarian movement within the national boundaries of each country. The

Volksfreund concludes its article by saying: Thus it is the despotic governments on the Continent which, in order to destroy the International, propose to break the ties which bind the various national proletarian movements to the centre in London.

Letters from the French sections express contempt for the Hins draft and say, for example, that according to this fine draft, France, Spain, Germany, Austria, Poland, Hungary—in a word, all those countries where the International is prevented by the

[^1]: 'Let our friends, the Belgians, ponder this: If we are reduced to the national level, as proposed by Bismarck's agents in Berlin,0 we shall be killed off in all the Continental countries, one after the other, by the reactionary forces. If, on the other hand, we retain our centre in London and thus remain Europeans, we shall be invulnerable. Our General Council and headquarters in London is not accessible to the blows struck by reaction: it would succumb in one situation only: if government agents were able to stir up successful rebellions against the common centre of the Association among the ranks of continental Internationalists.'

[^2]: a B. Becker, 'Der Kongreß der belgischen Internationale', Braunschweiger Volksfreund, No. 129, 5 June 1872. - b 'Die anti-sozialistische Konferenz in Berlin', Braunschweiger Volksfreund, No. 139, 16 June 1872. - c Italics by Marx.



