---
Volume: 44
Document_Title: "238. Engels to Adolf Hepner. 2 July "
Page_Range: "438-441"
---

# 238. Engels to Adolf Hepner. 2 July 



**[p. 403]**

governments from forming official federations, will be virtually excluded from the International 1) because it is intended to deprive them of their right to vote at Congresses, and 2) because, circumstances being what they are, the different sections in those countries would, without the General Council, lose all unified organisation and all reciprocal ties.

So, as you can see, the Hins draft will prove a fiasco. But there is one thing you must not forget! If the Federal Council sends deputies to the Hague Congress, insist that they be given precise written mandates signed by all the members of the Federal Council That is the only way to prevent the trickery to which the friends of the Alliance10 never hesitate to stoop in furtherance of their own particular little plans.

It goes without saying that you need fear no indiscretion, however slight, on my part.

Fraternal greetings,

Karl Marx

First published in Marx-Engels-Jahrbuch 9, Printed according to the original Berlin, 1986

Translated from the French

238

ENGELS T O ADOLF HEPNER

London, 2 July 1872

Dear Hepner,

When mandatesa are sent out it is absolutely essential to include one for Cuno, who is now in Belgium. He is of the greatest importance because of the Italian Bakuninists; these people will send nothing but lawyers and other doctrinaire bourgeois who play at being workers' representatives and who have done everything in their power to prevent the workers from corres-

[^1]: Published in English for the first time

[^2]: IN LEIPZIG

[^3]: a for delegates to the Hague Congress





**[p. 404]**

ponding with us directly. It was precisely Cuno who was the first to break through this barrier and, had he remained there, the whole problem would have been solved by now. Moreover, Cuno is one of our very best people; Liebknecht's entire mistrust of him is groundless and is based on his belief that Cuno was an agent of J. Ph. Becker, working in the interests of the Geneva 'Mother Section', something that never crossed Cuno's mind. I had to explain the whole absurd story to him later on since he knew nothing about the Mother Section." When I know what a man has really accomplished, I do not let myself be misled by such matters.

It goes without saying that the Congress deliberations will be conducted in all 3 languages—German, English and French — so that ignorance of the two last languages need deter no-one.450

Returning herewith Boruttau's letter.550 The man is assuredly honest, but terribly muddle-headed and driven on by an urge to perform deeds out of all proportion to his talents. These qualities make him a highly suitable DUPE for the Bakuninists who surround him and exploit him. If you read the Bulletin de la Fédération jurassienne, you will see that precisely now, before the Congress, these gentlemen are doing all they can to obtain private letters and so forth from us and to discover what material damaging to them we have in our possession.0 Apart from that the Boruttau letter is of no significance. It would not occur to us to do additional work for these gentlemen to our own detriment. If Boruttau is so unfamiliar with notorious facts which even Bakunin has never denied, it is not our responsibility'to look up the issue of Kolokol where he can find it all, i.e. if he knows Russian, for if he doesn't, even referring him to the right issue will not help him.c So much is certain: we have the material. Moreover, as long as 3 years ago Borkheim published more on this matter in his Russische Briefe43

than six Boruttaus could ask for. You would be well advised to tread warily with Boruttau. The magniloquent phrases of the Bakuninists have completely beguiled this muddle-head and this over-intense sort of honesty often turns into treachery in practice.

[^1]: 'Scissions'."1 The circular is confidential385 and so not intended for

[^2]: a See this volume, pp. 370-72. - b 'La Liberté de Bruxelles du 5 mai publie', Bulletin de la Fédération jurassienne, No. 6, 10 May 1872. - c This presumably refers to Bakunin's appeal, 'Pycc KHMii, no Ab CKHMi> H BCI>M CAa BKHCKHMi Apy3bn\rb' (To Russian, Polish and All Slavic Friends), Ko Jio Kqjit, (The Bell), No. 122 & 123 (with Supplement No. 4), 15 February 1862. - d K. Marx and F. Engels, Fictitious Splits in the International





**[p. 405]**

publication. We do not know how the (legitimist) Courrier de France in Paris—which is publishing it—obtained possession of it. Likewise with the Radical, which may have taken it from the

Courrier. A German translation in the Volksstaat (which you would have to produce over there) would only be desirable if the bourgeois press in Germany makes a scandal of the affair—but in that event it would be very desirable indeed In the meantime the Bulletin de la Fédération jurassienne has publicly attacked it,551 so an article in the Volksstaat could do no harm. I assume that Liebknecht has left you the copy we sent him. If not, I shall send you one in a letter—a postal wrapper is impossible since the police have stolen everything I sent to Germany in that way.

Henri Perret, Temple Unique, Genève, has been instructed to send the ' Volksstaat' 50 copies for distribution in Germany. If they have not yet arrived, please drop him a few lines.

I shall write to Wigand552

'Schulze-Bastiat''. Marx is buried up to his ears in work on the 2nd German edition396 and the 1st French edition of Capital436

But even apart from this he would never agree to write an appendix to correct the blunders in such a completely unscientific book as Lassalle's.3 He would have to correct almost the whole book. Entre nous if Marx ever does get around to correcting Lassalle there will be precious little of Lassalle left over. He has not done so up to now out of consideration for the many Lassalleans who have joined the Party, but one day it is sure to come.

'The Housing Question'. Liebknecht spoke of his intention of publishing my articleb on its own.504 If this is the case, please let me have the galley proofs since there are a number of disas- trous printing errors in it. There is also the following to be consi- dered:

You write to me about Sax. Is it worthwhile writing a special article on a book0 which appeared in 1869? If so, I shall give the man a good hiding for you, and it would perhaps be a good idea to follow up the critique of the petit bourgeois solution to the housing problem with a critique of the grand bourgeois solution. In that event the two articles'1 could be published together on their own, which would provide a more exhaustive treatment of

[^1]: a F. Lassalle, Herr Bastiat-Schuhe von Delitzsch, der ökonomische Julian, oder: Capital und Arbeit - b F. Engels, The Housing Question. - c E. Sax, Die Wohnungszustände der arbeitenden Klassen und ihre Reform. - d Parts I and II of Engels' work The Housing Question.



