---
Volume: 44
Document_Title: "240. Engels to Theodor Cuno. 5 July "
Page_Range: "442-444"
---

# 240. Engels to Theodor Cuno. 5 July 



**[p. 240]**

ENGELS TO THEODOR CUNO150

IN LIÈGE

London, 5 July 1872 Dear Cuno,

I sent some English and Spanish newspapers to Herman for you yesterday.

The Belgians make the same impression on everyone who comes in contact with them. The whole International there is just so much hot air and nothing more. This is chiefly the fault of the leaders, of whom only De Paepe is really capable, although indolent, while Hins is empty-headed, but cunning, scheming, ambitious and energetic. Through his Russian wife Hins is in direct contact with Bakunin and on the latter's instructions he has devised a salubrious project to abolish the General Council.524 Hins is at present in Verviers. You would be doing us a service if you could keep an eye on him.

There is also a German section in Verviers which is in correspondence with the Volksstaat. I wrote to their correspondent, P. Schlehbach, rue de Pont 2, (on 14 June)45 and also sent a copy of the Scissions,11385 but have had no reply up to now. It would be a good idea if you could slip over there and establish contact with them. I have written to Hepnerb saying that they should send you a mandate from Germany for the Congress.450 To be on the safe side, however, it would be good if you could also get the German section in Verviers to give you a mandate from them in case they do not send someone of their own. Bakunin & Co. will make every effort to beat us at the Congress, and as these gentlemen have no scruples about methods, we must take precautionary measures. They will send delegates from a hundred different societies not belonging to the International at all, and will try to obtain a seat and a vote for these persons as delegates of the International in order to place the General Council in the minority with the aid of a coalition of the most heterogeneous elements. Schweitzer and Hasenclever have already concluded an avowed alliance with the scoundrels over here—Vésinier, Landeck, Smith, Schneider, etc.— while the latter, in turn, are corresponding with the Jurassians and the American rogues (see the Emancipation554 I sent yesterday).

[^1]: a K. Marx and F. Engels, Fictitious Splits in the International. - b See this volume, pp. 403-04.





**[p. 408]**

How have the Scissions been received there? I have sent Herman 5 copies in all, but they must be distributed. Is Herman doing that? And how is he doing in general? I heard that at the last Belgian Congress he spoke out very vigorously in favour of the General Council.

It is questionable whether you can qualify for Belgian citizen- ship. American citizenship is only obtainable by prior registration and five years' residence in the country.

The Congress will be held in any event. On the Continent there is never any guarantee against police interference; but then we will have to get aboard a steamer, go to England, and hold it there. It would be inexpedient to convene it in England from the very start, for although it would be quite safe from police interference here, it would nevertheless be subjected to attacks by our enemies. The General Council, they would say, is convening the Congress in England because only there does it possess an artificial majority.

Bakunin has issued a furious, but very weak, abusive letter in reply to the Scissions.555 That fat elephant is beside himself with rage because he has finally been dragged from his Locarno lair out into the light, where neither scheming nor intrigues are of any more use. Now he declares that he is the victim of a conspiracy of all the European—Jewsl

What will break the old scoundrel's neck is the continued existence of the 'Alliance'10—at least in Spain—as a secret society. Not only do we have proof of this, but the affair has now become quite public in Madrid, etc., so that there can be no denying it any more. This gentleman, who everywhere acted as the most devoted champion of the International, organised this quiet conspiracy to seize overall control and, with the assistance of his initiated Jesuit brothers, to lead the broad masses of workers by the nose like a blind herd! If this had been tolerated, I wouldn't have remained in the International for a day. To be Bakunin's sheep—that would have been the limit! The hardest blow of all for him is that we have uncovered this whole story and are threatening to expose him at the Congress. And now Lafargue (Marx's son-in-law, who has been in Madrid for 8 months) is accusing him, Bakunin, of having drawn up by his own hand and sent to Spain the secret instructions on how the International was to be run there!a

[^1]: a P. Lafargue, 'Aux citoyens rédacteurs du Bulletin de la Fédération jurassienne', L'Egalité, No. 11, 1 June 1872, reprinted in Bulletin de la Fédération jurassienne, No. 10-11, 15 June 1872.



