---
Volume: 44
Document_Title: "241. Marx to Ludwig Kugelmann. 9 July "
Page_Range: "444-445"
---

# 241. Marx to Ludwig Kugelmann. 9 July 



**[p. 409]**

The enclosed letter arrived today. Give my best wishes to Herman, is he quite well again?

Yours,

F. E.

First published in Die Gesellschaft, No. 11, Printed according to the original Berlin, 1925

Published in English in full for the first time

241

MARX TO LUDWIG KUGELMANN121

IN HANOVER

[London,] 9 July 1872

Dear Kugelmann,

My best thanks for the gift of £15 for Jennychen. I have worked myself so much into the ground that today (in 2 hours) I am leaving London with Engels for 4 or 5 days, and going to the seaside (Ramsgate).556 From the date of my return until 2 Sep- tember (when the international Congress is to meet at The Hague450) I shall have my hands more than full, but from then on I shall have more free time again. But this freedom will not begin until mid-September, because I myself shall go to The Hague.

Perhaps we could see each other later (that is, you could see me, for I would not be safe in Germany).

Adio.

Your

Karl Marx

As soon as the first instalmentsa (whether German145 or French436) are out, you will of course receive them. J am highly dissatisfied with Meissner. He has led me by the nose—first overworked me due to the sudden haste with which he announced the 2nd edition (late November 1871); then wasted months and let the best time slip by. He is a lazy little philistine.

[^1]: a of Volume I of Capital



