---
Volume: 44
Document_Title: "242. Engels to Adolf Hepner. 9 July "
Page_Range: "445-446"
---

# 242. Engels to Adolf Hepner. 9 July 



**[p. 410]**

To punish Meissner it would be good if 3101t were to write him on the pretext of wanting to know when the 'first' instalment will finally appear. You can then remark, quite en passant, that from my last letters it seemed to you that I was feeling very embittered towards

Meissner and very dissatisfied with him; what is the reason for that? It is not my usual manner! The fellow has really annoyed me very much by his 'if you don't come today, you'll come tomorrow' attitude.

First published, in Russian, in Pisma Printed according to the original Marksa k Kugelmanu (Letters from Marx to Kugelmann), Moscow-Leningrad, 1928

242

ENGELS TO ADOLF HEPNER

IN LEIPZIG

[London,] 9 July 1872

Dear Hepner,

1. Proofs3 sent off yesterday. Ditto general title. 2. A note to the above which I should very much like to see inserted since it forestalls a possible misunderstanding.567

4. Sax must wait awhile.0 Marx and I are leaving tomorrow to relax a little for a few days at the seaside.556 I shall be back on Tuesday the 16th of the month and shall go hard at it as soon as I have dealt with the correspondence that is certain to have piled up in my absence. Marx wanted to reply to the Concordia today but was unwell, and it is not clear whether he can manage it now

ig. .556 before his return.492 He has received the Volks-Zeitung. Lindau will receive no article from him, you can bet on that. 58 Marx will probably take steps himself on the matter.

[^1]: 3. Furthermore, the article on the American squabbles.b

[^2]: First published, in Russian, in Marx- Printed according to the original Engels Archives, Vol. I (VI), Moscow, 1932 . . . . . . Published in English for the first

[^3]: a of Part I of Engels' The Housing Question - b F. Engels, 'The International in America'. - c See this volume, pp. 405-06.



