---
Volume: 44
Document_Title: "247. Engels to Adolf Hepner. 4 August "
Page_Range: "449-451"
---

# 247. Engels to Adolf Hepner. 4 August 



**[p. 414]**

'Les seigneurs de la terre et du capital se serviront toujours de leurs privelèges politiques pour défendre et perpétuer leurs monopoles économi- ques et asservir le travail

'La conquête du pouvoir politique devient donc le grand devoir du prolétariat'

* 'Against the collective power of the propertied classes the working class cannot act, as a class, except by constituting itself into a political party, distinct from, and opposed to, all old parties formed by the propertied classes.

'This constitution of the working class into a political party is indispensable in order to insure the triumph of the social Revolution and its ultimate end—the abolition of classes.

'The combination of forces which the working class has already effected by its economical struggles ought at the same time to serve as a lever for its struggles against the political power of landlords and capitalists.

'The lords of land and the lords of capital will always use their political privileges for the defence and perpetuation of their economical monopolies and for enslaving labour. To conquer political power has therefore become the great duty of the working classes.'*

Salut.

Karl Marx

247

London, 4 August 1872

Dear Hepner,

I was about to write a brief article for you on the latest Bakuninist affairs, when it developed that the General Council would have to make a statement on the matter itself. Thus the

[^1]: First published in: Marx and Engels, Printed according to the original Works, First Russian Edition, Vol. XXVI, Moscow 1935 Published, in the languages of the original, in full for the first time

[^2]: ENGELS TO ADOLF HEPNER150

[^3]: IN LEIPZIG





**[p. 415]**

The latest Spanish documents may well serve as a supplement shortly.564 Bakunin retained the Alliance de la démocratie socialiste,10

which you know of from the Scissions,b 385 as a secret society in order to obtain control of the International. But we learned of this, and now we have the proof. Thus, the charge will now be made publicly, as otherwise the elections to the Congress in Spain450

would be run by the Alliance and their outcome would be in its favour. Bakunin will break his neck in this affair.

You will have received the reply to the Concordia.'492 So that is what the armchair socialists amount to! I had not thought that they could be as stupid as that, I had thought that the paper must be edited by someone like Beta-Bettziech.

The factum of Verdy was something I knew from the Kölnische Zeitung, but I did not know that the man was also a trickster.665

Very fine. That wretched Sonnemann, incidentally, regards every great historical event merely as an opportunity to change his lousy Frankfurt back into a free city of the Empire. And for this reason the Prussians must always serve as whipping-boy. According to our information, the preparations are being made on such a colossal scale that the Prussians can be defeated only if they are opposed by Austria, as well as France and Russia. But Austria will be on Prussia's side, unless some sudden change occurs, which is not to be expected in the circumstances. Moreover, we shall soon witness the diverting spectacle of Williamd issuing an appeal to the Poles and re-establishing some sort of Poland. And with this he, and the whole Prussian regime, will break their necks. The Prusso-German Empire is far from having reached its culminating point; this war (if it ends well, which is to be expected) will swiftly raise it to its climax, and then it will come tumbling down from the dizzy heights of Napoleonic glory. It is quite possible that this time the movement will start in Berlin; the contradictions are growing very acute there, and all that is required to bring things to a head is a change in the political situation. A Berlin revolution of that kind will certainly be pretty rough, but still it is better for it to come from within than after a Sedan, which only brings harm everywhere.566

Hirsch must send to Switzerland for the following writings of Bakunin:

[^1]: a 7 August - b K. Marx and F. Engels, Fictitious Splits in the International - c K. Marx, 'Reply to Brentano's Second Article'. - d William I

[^2]: 15*



