---
Volume: 44
Document_Title: "248. Engels to Theodor Cuno. 4 August "
Page_Range: "451-453"
---

# 248. Engels to Theodor Cuno. 4 August 



**[p. 416]**

Pass on my greetings to Liebknecht and Bebel when you next visit them.

Best regards.

Yours,

F. E.

First published in: Marx and Engels, Printed according to the original Works, First Russian Edition, Vol. XXVI, , ,. , , . ^ , . , . „ „ , Moscow, 1935 Published in English in full for the first time

248

ENGELS TO THEODOR CUNO

London, 4 August 1872

Dear Cuno,

The Belgian Federal Council could not have done us a greater favour than by taking action against the German section in Verviers.567 By doing that it shows how necessary it is to have a General Council in order to defend the autonomy of the sections against the Federal Councils. The Belgian Federal Council, how- ever, cannot exclude the German section from the International, but only from the Belgian Federation:

Thus as an independent section, the German section in Verviers has, under Art. 7 of the General Rules (end of the Article), the

[^1]: IN LIÈGE

[^2]: 'Administrative Regulations Section IV: Federal Councils or Committees, Article 4. Any Federation may refuse to admit or may exclude from its midst societies or branches. It is, however, not empowered to deprive them of their International character.'a

[^3]: a See present edition, Vol. 23, p. 12. Engels quotes in French; the italics by him.





**[p. 417]**

Has Schlehbach in Verviers received my letter" and why does he not reply?

I am sending you an issue of the Emancipaciôn and a circular in Spanish by Lafargue (Marx's son-in-law)b and would like you to study it carefully. You will see from it what was at stake for Bakunin: a secret society within the International to gain control of the latter. Fortunately, the plan has now come to light and just in time. This business will break Bakunin's neck. The General Council will issue an Address devoted to it on Tuesday,0 also indicting the Spanish Federal Council, which has 5 members of the Alliance sitting on it.563

In all haste—I have to edit this Address and have a terrible amount of other work for the International in preparation for the Congress.450

Yours,

F. E.

Tell Herman that I have looked around for work for him, but have not come up with anything yet. There is no point in going to Jackson & Sons after my last experiences there in February. Tell Herman to write to his friend Prigneaux here: he is the right man.

[^1]: First published in Die Gesellschaft, No. 11, Berlin, 1925

[^2]: Printed according to the original

[^3]: Published in English for the first time

[^4]: a See this volume, p. 407. - b P. Lafargue, A los internacionales de la region espanola. - c 6 August



