---
Volume: 44
Document_Title: "249. Engels to Johann Philipp Becker. 5 August "
Page_Range: "453-456"
---

# 249. Engels to Johann Philipp Becker. 5 August 



**[p. 249]**

ENGELS TO JOHANN PHILIPP BECKER

IN GENEVA

London, 5 August 1872

My dear old Friend,

The fact that the Congress is to be held in The Hague450 is due, above all, to your unfortunate split3 on the question of revising the constitution.539 We could not foresee where that would lead and had no time to waste. However, there are also the following considerations to be borne in mind:

1. We have not overestimated the strength of the Jurassians. On their own count, and this is confirmed by their membership dues, they number 294, including Section Longemalle with 62, and also 74 newly joined graveurs and guillocheurs.h But we know their tactics. Of the 62 Longemallers every one would have managed to obtain an illicit mandate by some means or other; then there are the people from the Jura itself, say a dozen, and then some 20 Italians and 6 Spaniards—which makes more than enough. In these circumstances some of the Belgians would have gone over to their side.

2. As for the forged mandates, they would have around 30-40 from America (from the Woodhull people), around a dozen from here (from the sections forming the UNIVERSAL FEDERALIST COUNCIL417 which have never been affiliated to the International), around 50-60 from the German Schweitzerians who joined the Federalist Council directly, and if they play their cards well, they would also receive a fair number from Spain. I shall deal with Italy in a moment. So there was every chance that when the mandates are scrutinised—and this time everything depends on that—the societies which wish to force their way into the International without ever having belonged to it would have been able to gain entry with a majority, particularly when you remember how tolerant the workers usually are in such matters and how things worked out at all previous Congresses. Moreover, it should not be forgotten that there will be enough sections on our side, too, whose dues are not in order and which will have to take an indulgent line in voting so as to ensure that they too may be

[^1]: See this volume, pp. 395-96. - b engravers and etchers



treated indulgently. And if that were to happen we would have had no choice but to take our hats and leave the Internatio- nal.

3. You underestimate the power of the Alliance10 in Italy. In the whole of Italy we have only one section, Turin, of whose quality we are certain; and perhaps Ferrara. Milan has been, since Cuno's departure, completely in the hands of the Bakuninists, Naples always was and the Fascio Operaio in Emilia, the Romagna and Tuscany486 is wholly under Bakunin's influence. These people constitute an International of their own, they have never applied for membership, have never paid dues, but they act as if they belonged to the International. Directed by members of the secret Alliance, they are very numerous and at a rate of 1 delegate for 50 members they could easily elect 40 delegates, 15-20 of whom would be sent from there and the rest would come from Longemalle, provided with blank mandates.

4. The Belgians will not swamp The Hague, they are reluctant to pay. Moreover, the last Congress in Brussels has proved that when matters come to a head, they are not so bad at all. They have resolved that only sections that have been properly recog- nised can be represented in The Hague, and that is the main thing.

5. Finally, you should have read Schwitzguébel's hypocritical letter3 complaining that the Congress is not to be held in Switzerland and already giving a gentle hint of a future protest.569

If nothing else had shown me that we were pursuing the right tactics, this would.

At all events, pack your things and come, you will see that all will be well. But only if we, too, turn out in force. The othersb are fanatics, they have a number of wealthy bourgeois on a string who are willing to pay, and they have no expenses themselves the whole year through. If our friends were half as active as they, matters would never have deteriorated to such a point. From America Sorge and Dereure are coming, the others (the Woodhul- lers) are sending 3, including a petticoat. All of us will come, of course. See to it that the Swiss spare no expense this time and that they are properly represented. Especially the Swiss Ger- mans.

Incidentally, we shall be launching a bombshell tomorrow evening which will cause no small panic among the Bakuninists. It

[^1]: a A. Schwitzguébel, 'Au Conseil général de l'Internationale à Londres', Bulletin de la Fédération jurassienne, No. 13, 27 July 1872, Supplement. - b the Bakuninists



is a public statement about the continued existence of the Alliance

de la démocratie socialiste as a secret society.563 We have at long last received the necessary material and the proof of this from Spain 564 and are launching an attack without delay on the Spanish Federal Council, which has 5 members of the Alliance on it." The Emancipation in Madrid opened fire last Saturday weekb and there should be quite a battle. Of course, you will receive a copy for the Egalité without delay. Those swine imagined that with their secret organisation they could direct the entire International from Locarno.0 But this revelation will break their necks, and if Switzerland and Germany exert themselves just a little bit so that the Alliance people do not get a majority after all through the negligence of our friends, then the whole bubble will burst and we shall have peace and quiet at last.

I shall pass on your instructions to Frankel and Lessner tomorrow.

Vaillant is jogging along here as always, he is busy with chemistry and Rule-revision,570 something in which he takes a great interest.

Regards from Marx.

Your

F. Engels

[^1]: First published in: Marx and Engels, Printed according to the original Works, First Russian Edition, Vol. XXVI, Moscow 1935 Published in English for the first time

[^2]: a K. Marx and F. Engels, 'To the Spanish Sections of the International Working Men's Association'. - b 'Asociaciön Internacional de los Trabajadores. Nueva Federacion madrilefia. Circular', La Emancipation, No. 59, 27 July 1872. - c Bakunin's place of residence at the time



