---
Volume: 44
Document_Title: "251. Marx to Nikolai Danielson. 15 August "
Page_Range: "456-458"
---

# 251. Marx to Nikolai Danielson. 15 August 



**[p. 250]**

ENGELS TO WALERY WRÖBLEWSKI571

IN LONDON [Draft]

London, 7 August 1872 122 Regent's Park Road, N. W.

To Citizen Wrôblewski, Chairman of the Judicial Committee

Citizen,

Having been accused by Citizen Hales of untruths at a plenary meeting of the General Council, I ask the Judicial Committee to call upon the said citizen to be more specific in his accusation and to communicate it to me so that I may defend myself.

At the same time I am accusing Citizen Hales before the Judicial Committee of having shamefully calumniated me by uttering such an accusation against me before the General Council.

I am instructing Citizen Marx to impart this communication to the Judicial Committee.

251

[London,] 15 August 1872

Dear Sir,

I hope you have received the first part of the second German edition a 396 which I have sent you a few days since. I shall also send

[^1]: First published in: Marx and Engels, Printed according to the original Works, First Russian Edition, Vol. XXVI, , . Moscow, 1935 Translated from the French Published in English for the first time

[^2]: MARX TO NIKOLAI DANIELSON ,65

[^3]: IN ST PETERSBURG

[^4]: a of Volume I of Capital





**[p. 422]**

you the first 6 livraisons3 of the French edition436 which will be out in a few days. It is necessary to compare both editions because I have added and changed here and there in the French edi- tion.

Your interesting letter572 I have received and shall answer to it in a few days. I have also received the manuscript57* and the article of the Vestnik}

To-day I write in all haste, for one special purpose which is of the most urgent character.

Bakunin has worked secretly since years to undermine the International and has now been pushed by us so far as to throw away the mask and secede openly with the foolish people led by him—the same man who was the manager in the Nechayev affair.529 Now this Bakunin was once charged with the Russian translation of my book,c received the money for it in advance, and instead of giving work, sent or had sent to Lubanin (I think)d who transacted for the publishere with him the affair, a most infamous and compromising letter.574 It would be of the highest utility for me, if this letter was sent me immediately. As this is a mere commercial affair and as in the use to be made of the letter no names will be used, I hope you will procure me that let- ter. But no ime is to be lost. If it is sent, it ought to be sent at once as I shall leave London for the Haag Congress450 at the end of this month.

Yours very truly,

A. Williams'

[^1]: First published, in Russian, in Minuvshiye Reproduced from the original gody, No. 1, St Petersburg, 1908

[^2]: Published in English in full for the first time

[^3]: a instalments - b I. Kaufman, 'To HKa 3pb Hna no AHTHKO-SKOHOMHiec Kofi Kp HTHKH y Kap Aa Map Kca', Bhcmnum Eepomn (Vestnik Yevropy), Vol. Ill, Book 5, May 1872. - c Volume I of Capital - d N. N. Lyubavin - e N. P. Polyakov - f Marx's pseudonym



