---
Volume: 44
Document_Title: "253. Engel s to E. Glaser de Willebrord. 19 August "
Page_Range: "459-460"
---

# 253. Engel s to E. Glaser de Willebrord. 19 August 



**[p. 253]**

ENGELS TO E. GLASER DE WILLEBRORD575

IN BRUSSELS

[Excerpt from a letter]

[London,] 19 August 1872

As you will already know, victory is now ours. The Italians, self-styled Internationalists, have held a Conference at Rimini576 at which the representatives of 21 sections resolved that: The Conference, etc., etc.

It would be advisable to publish this immediately, in the Internationale and the Liberté. Bakunin, whose style is detectable throughout the document, realising that the game was up, has beaten a retreat all along the line and, with his followers, is leaving the International. Bon voyage to Neuchâtel.

But what is even more absurd is that, of the 21 sections which claim the right to convene an International Congress, only one, that of Naples, actually belongs to the International. The remaining 20, in order to safeguard their autonomy, have repeatedly abstained from taking any of the steps prescribed by our General Regulations as conditions of admission. Their principle is 'L'Italia farà da sè'a; they constitute an International outside the International. The three other sections which maintain relations with the General Council—Milan, Turin and Ferrara— did not send delegates to Rimini.

Thus, in addition to the Conseil fédéraliste universel*11 constituted by societies which do not belong to the International and, for that very reason, claim to control it, we now have an anti-authoritarian Congress convened by societies outside the International and claiming to make laws for it.

For the rest, this has happened just at the right moment to open the Spaniards' eyes; in that country we have succeeded in enticing the fox from his lair. We have forced the Alliancists themselves to publish the Rules of the 'eminently secret' Alliance.10 The present (Spanish) Federal Council, with 5 Alliancists out of 8 members, has been unmasked and publicly denounced as perfidious to the International. Everywhere the struggle has broken out between

[^1]: a 'Italy will cope on her own' (the device of the Italian independence fighters in 1848-49).



