---
Volume: 44
Document_Title: "254. Engel s to Wilhelm Liebknecht. 24 August "
Page_Range: "460-461"
---

# 254. Engel s to Wilhelm Liebknecht. 24 August 



**[p. 425]**

Alliancists and Internationalists. The oldest TRADE UNION in the world, that of machine-spinners and weavers in Catalonia, 40,000 strong,5 has come out in support of us and sent Mora, who is one of us, to the Congress450 because, according to his mandate, he knows better than anyone else what the Alliance is like." The Rimini resolution will put paid to the Alliance in Spain.

The Danes are sending two delegates; the Germans 5 or 6 at least. Sorge and Dereure are on their way from America; the schismatics there want to send three.

Lafargue is coming with a mandate from the Portuguese. Another advantage is that the Congress will henceforth be free of public rumpuses. Everything will go off decorously in front of the bourgeois public.

As for the Neuchâtel Congress, it will turn out to be nothing more than a meeting of the Jura Federation, in company with a few Italian sections, and hence an utter fiasco.

At last all is going well, but we must not allow this to lull us to sleep. If the Internationalists do their duty, the Hague Congress will be a great success; it will establish the organisation on a sound basis and will once again enable the Association to develop internally in a peaceful manner while confronting its external enemies with renewed vigour.

254

ENGELS TO WILHELM LIEBKNECHT

London, 24 August 1872

Dear Liebknecht,

I regret that I have to decline your proposal for me to offer myself as a candidate, if only because I have forfeited my status as a Prussian subject, and hence my rights of citizenship in the

[^1]: First published, in the language of the Printed according to the book original (French), in: M. Nettlau, Michael Bakunin. Eine Biographie, Bd. III, Lon- Translated from the French don, 1898 Published in English for the first time

[^2]: IN HUBERTUSBURG538

[^3]: a Mora did not attend the Hague Congress.



