---
Volume: 44
Document_Title: "255. Marx to Ludwig Kugelmann. 26 August "
Page_Range: "461-462"
---

# 255. Marx to Ludwig Kugelmann. 26 August 

German Empire, by having stayed abroad for ten years without permission.

We learned today that the Jurassians will be coming to The Hague450 after all, but that they will withdraw after the first resolutions against the Alliance10 and will then hold their own congress in Neuchâtel. Bakunin seems to have been premature with his instructions to Italy; the Spaniards will have shown him that things cannot be dealt with in such a way and that they would have to go to The Hague, if only to protest. The situation is that the Spanish Federal Council has an Alliance-majority and has operated an electoral procedure which makes it probable that they will send 4 Alliance representatives.579 In contrast, the union of the (40,000-strong) Catalan factory workers577 will send Mora, a supporter of ours.3 The Italians will take good care not to show up after their Rimini resolution.576

Sorge is here, with me, and sends his regards.

Your

F. E.

The Bakuninists are unlikely to provoke a fight. Their cowardice is really without limits, though they are always ready to speak out of turn. But they won't attack unless they are 8 against 1.

255

[London,] 26 August 1872

Dear Kugelmann,

At The Hague450 the delegates must wear blue bands so that the people who come to meet them will recognise them.

[^1]: First published, in Russian, in Marx- Printed according to the original Engels Archives, Vol. I (VI), Moscow, 1932

[^2]: Published in English for the first

[^3]: MARX TO LUDWIG KUGELMANN121

[^4]: IN HANOVER

[^5]: a Mora did not attend the Hague Congress.



