---
Volume: 44
Document_Title: "257. Engels to Maltman Barry. 15 September "
Page_Range: "463-464"
---

# 257. Engels to Maltman Barry. 15 September 



**[p. 428]**

148 Jacob Catsstraat The Hague, Holland Note on inside of envelope that it is for me.

First published in: Marx and Engels, Reproduced from the original Works, First Russian Edition, Vol. XXVI, r , , Moscow, 1935 Published in English for the f time

257

ENGELS TO MALTMAN BARRY581

IN LONDON

[London,] 15 September 1872

Dear Barry,

Marx wishes me to send you a few notes on the Hall of Science men,582 here they are, I hope they will prove sufficient. Marx said he would send you the circular of the General Councila relating to these fellows, but for safety's sake I enclose you a copy which please return.

Yours truly,

About April last a knot of men clubbed together, pretending to represent a few societies which nobody knows, and adopted the grandiloquent name of Universal Federalist Council of the I.W.M.A. and of the sections adhering to it.417 Not one of the societies they pretended to represent belonged to the Internation- al. Not one of themselves belonged to it, on the contrary, two of them had been expelled from it. But this was the very reason why they claimed the right to supersede the then existing General Council and to [take the] direction of the International into their own hands. A circular of that General Council held them up to the ridicule of Europe and they were silent for a time. Now these very same men reappear under the name of Universal Federalist

[^1]: F. Engelsb

[^2]: a K. Marx, 'Declaration of the General Council Concerning the Universal Federalist Council'. - b Engels' signature is witnessed by the copyist.



