---
Volume: 44
Document_Title: "258. Engel s to Friedrich Adolph Sorge. 21 September "
Page_Range: "464-469"
---

# 258. Engel s to Friedrich Adolph Sorge. 21 September 



**[p. 429]**

Congress. We find here again the same Landeck who entered at the last trial of the International in Paris (June 1870) into a solemn engagement with the Prefect of Policea not to occupy himself anymore with politics or with the International,b and [was] since expelled from the London society of French refugees.583 The same Vésinier, author of a whole library of Holywell street0

literature add Louis Napoleon, expelled from the International by a committee of the Brussels Congress in 1868, and from the London society of refugees in 1872. The same Schneider, denounced in the German Press as a disturber of workmen's meetings (the police used next morning to pay for the windows, glasses and furniture smashed by him and his helpmates) and as a swindler.e The same Zielinski, his right hand man, the same Adolphe Smith, etc., we find moreover a few additional preten- ders to fame such as the Pole Mileski who during the conference' translated all speeches into Polish for the exclusive benefit of himself, he being the only Pole present most of the time, and Oudet whose harebrained tomfooleries during the Commune are still in the recollection of many. Add a few German poor workingmen from the East End and you have the whole composition of this Universal Congress of twenty five rogues and fools.

258

ENGELS TO FRIEDRICH ADOLPH SORGE

[London,] 21 September 1872

Dear Sorge,

I hope that you have arrived safely in New York and that Cuno has also survived the terrors of the steerage.

[^1]: First published, in the language of the Reproduced from a handwritten original (English), in: Friedrich Engels. c o P v

[^2]: 1820-1970. Referate. Diskussionen. Dokumente, Hanover, 1971

[^3]: IN HOBOKEN

[^4]: a J. Pietri - b See B. Landeck's statement to the Prefect of Police in Troisième

[^5]: prods de l'Association Internationale des Travailleurs à Paris, p. 4. - c Street in 19th-century London notorious for filth and vice. - d on - e See T. Kalb, G. Beer, 'Wer ist Joseph Schneider?', Der Volksstaat, No. 14, 17 February 1872. - f the conference of April 1872 at which the Universal Federalist Council was established





**[p. 430]**

1. the new Articles 2 and 6 of the Administrative Regulations, Section II, on the General Council";

2. the report of the Commission on the Alliance584; 3. the declaration of the minority585; 4. the resolution about the transfer [of the seat of the General Council] and the election of 12 members of the General Council with plenary powers to co-opt another 3, together with the list of those elected.

So what you still do not have are:

1. the resolution expressing sympathies with the martyrs of the proletariat587;

2. the one about subscriptions, 3. the one about cancelling plenary powers and 4. perhaps the wording of the article in the Rules about politics. I enclose all 4.

The other papers you left behind are 1. incoming items about which nothing was decided, 2. motions that were not accepted, 3. one or two motions on procedural matters which were adopted and, having been put into effect at the Congress, are now disposed of. All these will go into the minutes and are of no interest to you.

It occurs to me that perhaps you do not have 5. Lafargue's proposal for international TRADES UNIONS, so I have translated it from the Spanish and enclose it herewith.

As soon as we have received the report you promised on the mandate debate (which, as you know, was not minuted, owing to the stupidity of the President, who failed to have secretaries nominated), the resolutions will be officially compiled and published.588

Lucain took the Commission's papers with him to Brussels and is now sorting out the statements of the witnesses. As soon as we receive from him the papers, promised to us by the end of the month at the latest, all the evidence about Bakunin and the Alliance will be compiled and printed. We have now received some more very nice material, which could not be laid before the Commission because it arrived too late.

For the correspondence with Germany, Italy, etc., I enclose all the addresses known to me.

[^1]: Next, the minutes of the Congress for publication.589

[^2]: a Cf. K. Marx and F. Engels, 'Resolutions of the General Congress Held at The Hague from the 2nd to the 7th September, 1872'.





**[p. 431]**

Hales raised hell in the Federal Council here, proposing a motion of censure against Marx because he had said that the English workers' leaders had been sold down the river—but a local English and an Irish section have already protested, saying that Marx is in the right. The whole crew—Hales, Mottershead, Eccarius, etc.—are furious that the General Council has been taken out of their hands.590

Guillaume has said in Brussels to Wilmart (who has passed it on to us in writing) that the Spaniards would re-establish the Alliance since it was now more necessary than ever.

West is still stuck here—no money for the return journey. Give my warmest regards to Cuno and tell him to keep in touch with me wherever he might go. Best wishes,

Your

F. Engels

The Dutch say that the main reason they voted with the minority was that they want to be reunited with Belgium and hence have to oblige the Belgians!

Hepner has been arrested and threatened with 4 weeks gaol because, as you know, the Chief of Police in Leipzig has banned the International on his own initiative!

Resolution approved at the first public session:

On subscriptions:

[^1]: The Congress of the International Working Men's Association, assembled at The Hague, expresses in the name of the world proletariat its admiration for the heroic fighters for the emancipation of labour who fell victims of their devotion, and sends fraternal and sympathetic greetings to all those who are at present persecuted by bourgeois reaction in France, Germany, Denmark and the entire world.

[^2]: (Proposed by A. Schwitzguébel and 7 others.)3

[^3]: We propose that the subscription should remain as fixed by the General Rules.

[^4]: ( P r o p o s e d b y E. D u p o n t a n d 3 o t h e r s — a d o p t e d o n S a t u r d a y m o r n i n g . b )

[^5]: O n t h e cancellation of t h e old p l e n a r y p o w e r s :

[^6]: a The texts of the resolutions quoted and the first two comments in brackets are in French in Engels' letter. - b 7 September





**[p. 432]**

I propose that all powers granted by the General Council, the councils, committees and sections in the countries where the International is banned should be cancelled and that the General Council alone should have the right to nominate representatives in those countries.

(Proposed by A. Serraillier and 7 other French delegates and adopted on Saturday.)

The Lafargue motion was passed unanimously on Saturday morning. However, I have only a Spanish version which will not correspond exactly to the official wording.

On behalf of the Portuguese Federation and the New Madrid Federation I propose:

That the new General Council be charged with the special mission of organising international trade associations (TRADES UNIONS).

For this purpose it will, within one month of the conclusion of this Congress, draw up a circular which shall be printed and forwarded to all working men's associations whose addresses are in its possession, whether they are affiliated to the International or not.

In this circular the Council will invite the working men's associations to form an International union of their respective trades.

Every working men's association shall be invited to fix itself the conditions under which it proposes to enter the International Union of its own trade.

The General Council is charged with unifying all the conditions put forward by the associations which have endorsed this idea and to draw up a general plan to be submitted to the provisional acceptance of all the working men's associations wishing to enter International trades unions.

(Supported by 10 others and passed unanimously without debate.)

Germany—everything to the editors of the Volksstaat, Hepner and, at the moment, Rud. Seiffert—the addresses of the Committee, etc., are to be found in the Volksstaat.

Italy: Turin Section (Società Emancipazione del Proletario): 1. Outer envelope: M. Jean Jacques Goss, Concierge de l'église évangélique, Via Principe Tommaso No. 1, Turin; inner envelope: Signor Cesare Bert—Secretary. 2. Signor Luigi Perrini, Viale del Rè 26, Torino. Be on your guard here against that scoundrel Carlo Terzaghi.

Milan Section: (Circolo Operaio*) Secretary, Mauro Gandolfi, Via Solferino 11, Milano (a member of the Alliance, and the Section is rotten. Details from Cuno). Rome Section: 1. Outer envelope: Signor Leonardo Centenari, direttore della Tipografia Rechiedei, Via Monserrato 25, Roma. Inner envelope: Signor Osvaldo

[^1]: The next Congress will then formally ratify the project.

[^2]: a Workers' Circle





**[p. 433]**

Gnocchi-Viani.—Parcels—outer address: alla Libreria dell'Univer- sità, Via Staderari 38-40, inner address to O. G. Viani. Only registered 2 weeks before the Congress.

Ferrara Section: everything to be sent to Enrico Bignami, Periodico La Plebe, Via Cavour 19, Lodi, Lombardia. This and the Turin Section are the best. I know nothing about the Rome Section.

Girgenti* Section, Sicily: Avvocato Antonino Riggio (Bakunin- ist)—have heard nothing from there for ages.

Spain: Consejo Federal de la Région Espanola: Senor Don Julian Valero, Calle de Sorolla 35, Valencia. Inner envelope: Francisco Tomas.

Nueva Federation Madrilena: José Mesa y Leompart, San Pedro 16, 3° (third floor) Madrid (French).

Portugal: José C. Nobre-França, Travessa do Abarracamento de Péniche, No. 4, 2° andar (second floor), Lisboa, Portugal (French).

Serraillier, Auguste, 35 Gaisford Street, Kentish Town, London, N.W.

Brussels: De Paepe, César, Hôpital Saint-Jean, Bruxelles. Geneva: H. Perret or J. Ph. Becker, Temple Unique, Genève. Holland: H. Gerhardt, 472 Runstraat, Amsterdam. Art. 7a of the General Rules, adopted Saturday morning by 28 to 13 (including abstentions), i.e. with more than a two-thirds majority.—

[^1]: In its struggle against the collective power of the propertied classes, the working class cannot act as a class except by constituting itself into a political party, distinct from, and opposed to, all old parties formed by the propertied classes.—This constitution of the working class into a political party is indispensable in order to insure the triumph of the social revolution, and of its ultimate end, the abolition of classes. The combination of forces which the working class has already effected by its economical struggles, ought, at the same time, to serve as a lever for its struggles against the political power of its exploiters. The lords of land and the lords of capital will always use their political privileges for the defence and perpetuation of their economical monopolies, and for the enslavement of labour. The conquest of political power has therefore become the great duty of the working class.

[^2]: First published abridged in Briefe und Printed according to the original Auszüge aus Briefen von Joh. Phil Becker, Jos. Dietzgen, Friedrich Engels, Karl Marx Published in English for the first u. A. an F, A. Sorge und Andere, Stuttgart, time 1906 and in full in: Marx and Engels, Works, First Russian Edition, Vol. XXVI, Moscow, 1935

[^3]: a Modern name: Agrigento.



