---
Volume: 44
Document_Title: "261. Engel s to Friedrich Adolph Sorge. 5 October "
Page_Range: "470-472"
---

# 261. Engel s to Friedrich Adolph Sorge. 5 October 



**[p. 435]**

Enclosed the first instalment of the French translation of my book, Das Kapital.456 I am sending you at the same time the 4 instalments of the 2nd German edition that have appeared so far.396

You must excuse me for not having replied any sooner to your various letters, the reasons being a complete lack of time and a surfeit of work. I shall be pleased to see you at my place one evening (e.g. Wednesday) next week.

Yours very sincerely,

Karl Marx

First published in: Marx and Engels, Printed according to the original Works, Second Russian Edition, Vol. 50, Moscow 1981 Published in English for the first time

261

ENGELS TO FRIEDRICH ADOLPH SORGE

London, 5 October 1872

122 Regent's Park Road, N.W.

Dear Sorge,

On vous taille de la besogne." Enclosed the French translation (because the wording can be done most literally in that language) of 2 articles from the Federation (Alerini's paper).b However, the Belgians are not really so terrifying. According to letters received subsequently they have already taken fright at their own boldness and do not know how to extricate themselves; in addition the disorganisation in the International in Belgium increases daily, which is very useful in view of the need to re-organise every- thing.

In contrast, you cannot simply ignore the resolutions of the Jurassians which, having been passed by a Federal Congress, amount to an open declaration of war.593 Le Conseil général est tenu

[^1]: IN HOBOKEN

[^2]: a You'll have your work cut out for you. - b Presumably 'El Congreso de la Haya' and 'Congreso de la Federaciön del Jura', La Federation, Nos. 162 and 163, 21 and 28 September 1872.





**[p. 436]**

It is a very good thing that these gentlemen have openly declared war and thus given us a sufficient reason to show them the door. After this open declaration it is impossible for a majority of the federations to demand that the matter be brought before a Congress13 especially since at most 4 would vote in favour (they themselves, the Spaniards, Belgians and Dutch), while all the rest would be against. Swift, vigorous action against these eternal troublemakers is, in our view, very much in place as soon as you have the evidence in your hands, and will probably suffice to disperse the threatened Sonderbund.595

Yesterday I sent you Nos. 65, 66 and 67 of the Emancipation. The fact that Guillaume had told Wilmart in Brussels that the Spaniards would re-establish the Alliance since now, after the Hague Congress, it was more necessary than ever, was report- ed by Wilmart himself in a letter to Lafargue (which I have read).

I had intended to enclose the report on Spain, Portugal and Italy to the General Council0 but will not have it ready in time for the post. However, I do enclose my report to Section 6,596 which you can give to Bertrand.

Here Hales has launched a colossal slander campaign against Marx and myself, but it is rebounding on him without our having to lift a finger.590 The pretext was Marx's statement about the corruptness of the English labour leaders. Some London sections and the whole of Manchester have protested most vigorously and Hales has lost his former majority in the FEDERAL COUNCIL, so that he will probably be thrown out entirely soon.

That damned Lucain has still not sent us the papers about the Alliance that he took with him, so we are still unable to make a start/ The documents subsequently received from Switzerland give a full account of the Nechayev trial280 and include some Russian publications of Bakunin's. They are all highly interesting and will cause a fearful scandal. I have never seen such an infamous band of scoundrels in all my life.

[^1]: a The General Council is commissioned to carry the resolutions of the Congress into effect. - b In the original: 'conference'. - c F. Engels, 'Report to the General Council of the I.W.M.A. upon the Situation in Spain, Portugal and Italy'. - d See this volume, p. 430.



