---
Volume: 44
Document_Title: "262. Marx to Maurice Lachâtre. 12 October "
Page_Range: "472-474"
---

# 262. Marx to Maurice Lachâtre. 12 October 



**[p. 437]**

My wife3 discovered after your departure that Emma had accepted money from you for your laundry and asks me to tell you that this was done behind her back, for otherwise she would never have permitted it.

Do not forget the minutes of the mandate debate,588 since without them we cannot include that section in the minutesb; no one here has anything on it.

With every post we are waiting for news from you and signs of life from the new General Council.

Best wishes to Cuno, I hope he will write soon. POOR Hepner has indeed been given 4 weeks gaol because the International is prohibited in Leipzig!

Your

F. Engels

First published abridged in Briefe und Printed according to the original Auszüge aus Briefen von Joh. Phil Becker, Jos. Dietzgen, Friedrich Engels, Karl Marx Published in English for the first u. A. an F. A. Sorge und Andere, Stuttgart, m e

1906, and in full in: Marx and Engels, Works, First Russian Edition, Vol. XXVI, Moscow, 1935

262

MARX TO MAURICE LACHÂTRE

London, 12 October 1872

Dear Citizen,

You will, I am sure, excuse my long silence, which has been caused by an excessive amount of work. I have at last rid myself of the burdensome administrative business which devolved upon me as a member of the General Council of the Interna- tional and which, as the days went by, was becoming more and more incompatible with my theoretical studies. At present I still have various tasks entrusted to me by the Hague Cong-

[^1]: IN SAN SEBASTIAN

[^2]: a Lydia Burns - b This refers to the minutes of the Hague Congress, which were to be published.





**[p. 438]**

ress,580 but after that I shall be able to dispose of my time more freely.

The first series of Capital496 has been well done on the whole—I refer to those things incumbent upon the editor. However I was much shocked at the errata which it contains and which were not in the last proofs corrected by me. As an example I am sending you a bit from instalment II p. 16 which reads:

'Ensuite nous avons vu que dès qu'il s'exprime dans la valeur, tous les caractères qui distinguaient le travail productif de valeurs d'usage disparaissent.'a

In instalment II as published (p. 16) they have this totally meaningless sentence:

'Ensuite nous avons vu que dès que le travail productif s'exprime dans la valeur, tous les caractères qui le distinguaient des valeurs d'usage disparaissent.'b

There are other errors of this kind and I have sent a list of them to Mr Vernouillet, at the same time informing him that I shall pass nothing for press until I have in front of me the whole series of five instalments to be published.

Mr Vernouillet has been good enough to send me Mr Maurice Block's pamphlet (extracted from the Journal des Économistes).597

Here we have a man of brains who doesn't even know what an 'average' is, although he purports to have devoted his whole life to statistics! I wouldn't deny that there may have been a certain amount of ill-will on his part, but on the whole there is more stupidity in him than malice.

The changes it was necessary to make in Mr Roy's translation have taken a great deal of time, but it gets better from the third section onwards.

In Russia my book0 has proved an extraordinary success. As soon as I have a little more time, I shall send you some extracts from the Russian reviews.598 The Russian translation (in a fat volume) was published at the end of April ('72) and I have already been advised by Petersburg that a second edition will be appearing in 1873.860

At The Hague I found Laura very unwell and her health

[^1]: a 'Later on, we have seen that as soon as it finds expression in value, all the characteristics that distinguished labour as a creator of use values disappear'; cf. the corresponding passage in Section 2, Chapter I of the authorised English edition of Capital (present edition, Vol. 35). - b 'Later on, we have seen that so far as productive labour finds expression in value, all the characteristics that distinguished it from use values disappear.' - c Volume I of Capital



