---
Volume: 44
Document_Title: "265. Engels to Theodor Cuno. 29 October "
Page_Range: "476-477"
---

# 265. Engels to Theodor Cuno. 29 October 



**[p. 265]**

ENGELS TO THEODOR CUNO

IN NEW YORK

London, 29 October 1872 122 Regent's Park Road, N.W.

Dear Cuno,

Received your letter of the 8th and the minutes3; many thanks for both.

The Bulletin jurassien, which you will have received,0 and the Internationale of Brussels, which is going off today, will prove to you that we must really get down to it and that it is absolutely essential for Sorge at least to shake off his reservations and agree to an election0 so that not just unity of action but above all action itself can be ensured. If we do not, without further ado, take energetic steps to suspend the Jurassians because of their Congress resolutions, which ride roughshod over the Rules and the Hague resolutions,593 and to expel the members of the anti-authoritarian Congress,599 in so far as they belong to the International at all, and to proclaim and justify such actions, then these people really will become altogether too cocksure. Time is still on our side: the Belgians are frightened by their own initial courage and are vacillating, in Spain the opposition to the Alliance people is growing stronger by the day, they are already calling for an extraordinary Spanish congress to examine the behaviour of the Federal Council and the delegates in The Hague—but all of this will go cold if the impertinent behaviour of the Jurassians is tolerated. And you can see from Hales' letter in the Internationale* that these men will do their utmost.600 Hales is the Jurassians' correspondent and distributes their Bulletin with its filthy articles here gratis to anyone who will take it and he sends it to all the sections.

I must close now to catch the post. Marx and I are overloaded as never before with work on the Congress, preparing things for print, and with correspondence.588 Sorge will have received the

[^1]: a See this volume, p. 430. - b Bulletin de la Federation jurassienne, Nos. 17 and 18, 15 September-1 October 1872. - c to the post of General Secretary of the General Council - d J. Hales, 'Conseil Federal Anglais, Londres, 21 octobre 1872', L'Inter- nationale, No. 198, 27 October 1872.



