---
Volume: 44
Document_Title: "266. Engels to Jenny Longuet. 30 October "
Page_Range: "477-479"
---

# 266. Engels to Jenny Longuet. 30 October 

The business with West amused us greatly. We all send our best regards to Sorge and yourself.

Your

F. Engels

Lafargue and wifea arrived here the day before yesterday.601

First published in Die Gesellschaft, No. 11, Printed according to the original Berlin, 1925 , r , .. Published in English for the first time

266

ENGELS TO JENNY LONGUET602

IN OXFORD

London as usual, October 30th 1872

My dear Jenny,

You must consider me an awfully cruel individual to think that I should be capable to poison, by malice prepensée, even with one drop of vinegar, the sweetness of your honeymoon.603 If Mottershead or Guillaume said such a thing of me, I should not wonder, but you! Indeed I never thought that there was in one of the numbers that little entrefiletb about a certain great man' whom I better not name, and if I had seen it I should have kept the number back or used Russian censorship to tease you a bit.

Your account of Oxford people only gives a sad confirmation to the sad fact that landladies are the same all the world over, indeed one does not know which are the worst, landladies or landlords. It's the difference of retail and wholesale which distinguishes the landlady of Stanhope House from the Marquis of Westminster,0

the principle is the same.

[^1]: a Laura Lafargue - b note; presumably 'Proudhon y las huelgas', L'Emancipaci&n, No. 68, 5 October 1872. - c P. J. Proudhon - d owner of residential areas in London



Now the Lafargues are here601 and you no doubt now and then feel inclined to come over here, I hope you will recollect that there is always plenty of accommodation, both for you and for the Longuet of all Charlies, at our house, and he shall find a bed where he can stretch himself without laying crossways. And as I am on this subject, an idea strikes me. To-morrow night seven sharp we shall have the whole of your house, Lafargues and Ellen a and all, here for dinner, and would it not be a nice surprise if they found you here? I could not well write about this before, as the thing was only finally settled to-day, Mohr being so very uncertain on account of his hard work; but I know you're quite capable of making up your mind even to-morrow morning, and so I hope you will come. And as there are generally such things to be had as return tickets available for three or four days, you might stay a few days here, and perhaps Longuet finds time to come on Saturday to take you back on Sunday or Monday morning. If you leave by 2.30 train (if my old railway guide be still correct) you will be here in very good time, and indeed we might go across to Maitland Parkb before dinner and see how they are getting on. I hope you will ruminate this suggestion to-morrow morning over breakfast and find it excellent.

As to the purs, impurs and demipursc604 I see very little of them, the purs are going to publish a pamphletd containing all their grievances but it is still a mystery to me whether they will say much about us. At all events they are going to organise

une société indépendente où toute tendence anti-révolutionnaire serait exclue.'

Last Sundayf Mohr delivered a lecture before the Knoten.605 I brought a German chemical manufacturer, friend of Schorlem- mer'sg ('not unlike your brothers, but otherwise a typically easy-going son of the Palatinate', as Schorlemmer described him in his unsealed letter!) who permitted himself one or two objections but was pretty well rebuffed by Lessner and a few other working men.

So I am counting on your innate energy to make a bold decision and come here tomorrow; that would be an enormous pleasure.

[^1]: a Helene Demuth - b the area where the Marx family lived - c pure, the impure and the semi-pure - d Internationale et révolution - e an independent society from which all anti-revolutionary tendencies would be excluded - f 27 October - 8 Thus far English in the original. The rest of the letter is in German.



