---
Volume: 44
Document_Title: "267. Engel s to Friedrich Adolph Sorge. 2 November "
Page_Range: "479-481"
---

# 267. Engel s to Friedrich Adolph Sorge. 2 November 



**[p. 444]**

My wife3 and Pumpsb join me in sending you both our best wishes.

Your old

F. Engels

This page has, of course, been written in German especially for Longuet's benefit. Lafargue is quite good at German and could follow Mohr's lecture fairly well.

First published, in the languages of the Printed according to the original original (English and German), in: Fried- ,,. , , . . . . . , „ ,. rich Engels. 1820-1970. Referate. Diskus- Published in English in full for the sionen. Dokumente, Hanover, 1971 f l r s t t i m e

267

ENGELS TO FRIEDRICH ADOLPH SORGE

IN HOBOKEN

London, 2 November 1872 122 Regent's Park Road Dear Sorge,

I have just been asked to inform the General Council officially of the formation of the following two sections:

1. Associazione degli opérai e degli agricoltori della Bassa Lombardia (Sezione di Lodi), Enrico Bignami, Via Cavour 19 (secretary).

2. Consociazione dei liberi Lavoratori Abruzzesi (Sezione di Aquila, in the province of the same name. Correspondence via Lodi for the moment).

The announcement comes from Bignami, who also states that both have adopted Rules that conform to the General Rules. I shall ask for copies and send them to you.606

Bignami is the only fellow in Italy to have taken our side, even though not very vigorously up to now. In his paper, La Plebe, he has printed not only my report on the Hague Congress0 but also

[^1]: Enclosed is my report on Spain.c

[^2]: a Lydia Burns - b Mary Ellen Burns - c F. Engels, 'Report to the General Council of the I.W.M.A. upon the Situation in Spain, Portugal and Italy.' - d F. Engels, 'The Congress at The Hague (Letter to Enrico Bignami)'.





**[p. 445]**

I hear nothing from Turin any more. In Milan Cuno must find at least one contact for us so that we at least get reports. We hear from Ferrara via Lodi; the section was established by Big- nami.

Marx asks me to tell you that at the moment the minutes b are still absolutely necessary here. In view of the lies that Hales, Mottershead and Eccarius are spreading here, as well as those of the Jurassians, etc., on the Continent, it may turn out any day that we need to reply in the form of extracts from these minutes. For you, on the other hand, they can easily be dispensed with for the time being. We are making a copy of the parts with the administrative resolutions together with their motivation and shall send it to you.

To be on the safe side I am again giving you the addresses for Spain, Italy and Portugal. If you have accepted the post, I think it is very sensible to have a single corresponding general secretary, who will only co-opt assistants for languages.60

Best regards to you all.

Your

F. Engels

José Mesa y Leompart, Calle de San Pedro No. 16, 3° (3rd floor), Madrid.

Spanish, Federal Council: In a double envelope (the inner one to be addressed to Francisco Tomas) to Don Julian Valero, Calle de Sorolla 35, Valencia.

Lisbon: Signor Dom J. C. Nobre-França, Travessa do Abar- racamento de Péniche No. 4, 2° andar (2nd floor), Lisboa.

Turin: Inner envelope: Cesare Bert, Secretary of the local section. Outer: Monsieur J. J. Goss, Concierge de l'église évangéli- que, No. 1, Via Principe Tommaso, Turin.

Turin, alternative address: Luigi Perrini, Viale del Rè 21 (without inner envelope, he is an old member).

Report on Italy to follow—on Portugal Lafargue is translating the report sent from there to the Congress.

[^1]: a F. Engels, 'Letters from London.— II. More about the Hague Congress'. - b of the former General Council



