---
Volume: 44
Document_Title: "269. Engel s to Jenny Longuet. 19 November "
Page_Range: "486-487"
---

# 269. Engel s to Jenny Longuet. 19 November 

you brought with you in manuscript turned out to be very useful in this, as it is much better, although still based on Woodhull's English.609 I am taking the opportunity this -provides to put the French translation in order altogether. In addition I have articles to do for Volksstaat, Emancipation and Plebe; and as soon as Lafargue, who is now here, has found somewhere to live, we shall make a start on the Alliance business.623 Lucain still has a lot of papers in Brussels and now writes that he will send them at the end of next week, because he wants to copy them!a

What is that scamp Cuno up to?

Your

F. Engels

First published abridged in Briefe und Printed according to the original Auszüge aus Briefen von Joh. Phil. Becker, Jos. Bietigen, Friedrich Engels, Karl Marx Published in English for the first u. A. an F. A. Sorge und Andere, Stuttgart, time 1906, and in full in: Marx and Engels, Works, First Russian Edition, Vol. XXVI, Moscow, 1935

269

ENGELS TO JENNY LONGUET

[London,] 19 November 1872 122 Regent's Park Road

My dear Jenny,

Mohr tells me you and Longuet are coming over here on Thursday.b Lafargue tells me he will remove to his new residence 'perhaps' on Thursday. So, in order to avoid overcrowding, Liz- zie and myself again place a room or two in our house at your disposal and hope you will avail yourselves of it—Capital lodg- ings, front top bedroom and front parlour, what more can you desire?

Lafargue is just dropping in. I tell him what I am writing, he says he thinks he will have removed by Thursday but on the

[^1]: IN OXFORD

[^2]: a See this volume, p. 430. - b 21 November



