---
Volume: 44
Document_Title: "270. Mar x to Nikolai Danielson. 25 November "
Page_Range: "487-488"
---

# 270. Mar x to Nikolai Danielson. 25 November 

whole seems to coincide with me. I tell him to mention it to Mohr and so I think this business is as good as disposed of, and the rooms will be got ready.

Viele Grüsse an Deinen Mann.

Dein altera

General

First published in: Marx and Engels, Reproduced from the original Works, Second Russian Edition, Vol. 33, Moscow 1964 Published in English for the first time

270

MARX TO NIKOLAI DANIELSON

IN ST PETERSBURG

[London,] 25 November 1872

My dear friend,

If I have not written earlier, and if, even at this moment, I do not send but these few lines, it is because I want you to send me another—if possible—strictly commercial address under which I may write to you.

In consequence of the extradition of Nechayev624 and the intrigues of his master Bakunin, I feel very anxious on your behalf and that of some other friends. Those men are able of every infamy.

I cannot enough express ray gratitude for the interest taken in my work and labours by you and other Russian friends.

Yours most sincerely

Please reply to those lines as soon as possible.

[^1]: The letter sent over to me has been duly received and has done its work.574

[^2]: A. Williamsb

[^3]: First published, in Russian, in Minuvshiye Reproduced from the original gody, No. 1, St Petersburg, 1908

[^4]: Published in English for the first time

[^5]: a Greetings to your husband [Charles Longuet]. Your old - b Marx's pseudonym



