---
Volume: 44
Document_Title: "272. Marx to Nikolai Danielson. 12 December "
Page_Range: "490-493"
---

# 272. Marx to Nikolai Danielson. 12 December 



**[p. 455]**

has some. It would be a very good thing therefore if you could authorise Marx to take possession of all the papers belonging to the International and/or the old General Council, and particularly the minutes.651

A letter of authority for Serraillier for France is absolutely indispensable,6 ' unless you want everything to fall apart once more. Serraillier is continuing to conduct his correspondence energetically and we are finding the money for him to do so, but he is nothing but a private individual as long as he has not received proper authorisation; and for all their autonomy, the French do want to be directed by someone who has been duly authorised by the General Council. We have nobody else but Serraillier for the job here; Dupont is much too unreliable for such an extensive correspondence and is too busy with his patent.

Greetings from Marx together with his family and from my wife.a Lafargue and Longuet are both here now so that père Marx is surrounded by his entire family.

Your

F. E.

Greetings to Cuno. Why does the scamp not write?

272

[London,] 12 December 1872

Dear Friend,

[^1]: First published in Briefe und Auszüge aus Printed according to the original Briefen von Joh. Phil. Becker, Jos. Dietzgen, Friedrich Engels, Karl Marx u. A. an F. A. Published in English for the first Sorge und Andere, Stuttgart, 1906 t l m e

[^2]: MARX TO NIKOLAI DANIELSON165

[^3]: IN ST PETERSBURG

[^4]: From the enclosed you can see the results of the Hague Congress.632 I read out the letter to Lyubavin 574 to the Commission

[^5]: d'enquête0 on the Alliance584 in the strictest confidence and without divulging the name of the addressee. Nevertheless, the secret was

[^6]: a Lydia Burns - b of enquiry





**[p. 456]**

not kept, firstly because the Commission included Splingard, the Belgian lawyer, among its numbers, and he was in reality no more than an agent of the Alliancists; secondly, because Zhukovsky,

Guillaume et Co. had already earlier—as a preventive measure— recounted the story all over the place in their own way and with apologist interpretations. This was how it came about that, in its report to the Congress,3 the Commission was compelled to pass on the facts relative to Bakunin that were contained in the letter to Lyubavin (of course, I had not revealed his name, but Bakunin's friends had already been informed on that score by Geneva). The question that presents itself now is whether the Commission appointed by the Congress to publish the minutes (of which I am a member) may make public use of that letter or not? That is for Lyubavin to decide. However, I may note that—ever since the Congress—the facts have been going the rounds of the European press, and this was none of our doing. I found the whole business all the more distasteful since I had reckoned on the strictest discretion and solemnly demanded it.

As a consequence of the expulsion of Bakunin and Guillaume, the Alliance, which had control of the Association in Spain and Italy, has unleashed a campaign of vilification, etc., against us everywhere. It is joining forces with all the disreputable elements and attempting to force a split into two camps. However, its ultimate defeat is assured. Indeed, the Alliance is only helping us to purge the Association of the unsavoury or feeble-minded elements who have pushed their way in here and there.

It is a fact that Bakunin's friends in Zurich have tried to murder poor Outine. Outine himself is in a very critical state of health at the moment. This scurvy deed has already been reported in a number of papers belonging to the Association (including the Emancipaciôn in Madrid13) and will figure in detail in our official Compte rendu of the Hague Congress.633 The same scurvy gang has made two similar attempts on the lives of their opponents in Spain. Its misdeeds will soon be exposed to the view of the world at large.

The fate of our dear 'MUTUAL FRIEND' C has been of the very greatest interest to my entire family. I have a plan to obtain help for him from Constantinople—through diplomatic channels.63 It may work.

[^1]: a Rapport de la commission d'enquête sur la Société l'Alliance secrète. - b 'Los medios de la Alianza', La Emancipaciôn, No. 71, 26 October 1872. - c Hermann Lopatin





**[p. 457]**

I still have the manuscript you sent me,1 for Outine is not in a position to see to the printing, while Elpidin is just a scoundrel belonging to the gang. It is very interesting.573

I am eagerly looking forward to the promised review (in manuscript),635 as indeed to anything printed you have in this LINE. One of my friends wants to write something on the way my bookb

was received in Russia.

The publication of the French translation436 has been inter- rupted by unpleasant ACCIDENTS, but will be resumed in a few days.

An Italian translation is in preparation.636

Lastly, a request: My son-in-law, Dr Lafargue M.D. (a refugee), would—if possible—be happy to contribute to some Russian Review, etc. ; he could supply articles either on the natural sciences or on the state of affairs in Spain and Portugal (as well as France).637 However, his circumstances would not permit him to do this gratis and he could only submit articles in French.

I should very much like to see a copy of the book by Prof. Sieber (Kiev) on Ricardo's, etc., doctrines of value and capital,0

which also contains a discussion of my book.

Yours very sincerely,

A. Williams d

In Volume II of Capital I shall, in the section on landed property, deal in great detail with the Russian form.638

One last point. I would like to publish something on Cher- nyshevsky's life and personality, etc., so as to create some interest in him in the West. 9 But I need information for it.

[^1]: First published, in Russian, in Minuvshiye Printed according to the original v, No. 1, St Petersburg, 1908

[^2]: Published in English in full for the first time

[^3]: a the manuscript of an unpublished article by N. G. Chernyshevsky, TTncb Ma 6e3i. a^peca' (Letters Without an Address) - b Volume I of Capital - c N. Sieber, Teopin vfi HHOcmu u Kanumana £. Pu Kapdo (D. Ricardo's Theory of Value and Capital). - d Marx's pseudonym



