---
Volume: 44
Document_Title: "273. Engel s to Friedrich Adolph Sorge. 14 December "
Page_Range: "493-494"
---

# 273. Engel s to Friedrich Adolph Sorge. 14 December 



**[p. 273]**

ENGELS TO FRIEDRICH ADOLPH SORGE

IN HOBOKEN

London, 14 December 1872

Dear Sorge,

I confirm my letter of the 7th inst.a and am sending today 1 copy of the Emancipaciôn with the article on Bakunin 640

containing information you too will not have had, and The International Herald with the Congress resolutions.0 That jackass Riley has left out the voting figures.

In Lodi, No. 118 of the Plebe, which contained your Address, has been confiscated and Bignami, the editor, has been arrested.641

It looks as though the Leipzig high treason trial274 may be about to repeat itself there. We shall, of course, make as much capital as possible from the affair; it will appear at once in the Volksstaat and the Emancipaciôn642 as proof of whom the governments regard as the greater threat: the General Council and its adherents or the Alliancists. It is the best thing that could have happened to us in Italy.

You should have some brief reports on the meetings of the General Council printed in the Oestliche Post and in the Ame- rican press, and send the relevant issues to the Volksstaat, Ega- lité and The International Herald, as well as one or two copies here, so that we can use them for Spain and Italy as well as for the French sections; the Danes and Dutch would also print them.

The letter of authority for Serraillier becomes more urgent every day.621 The Jurassians on one side and the Blanquists on the other, are burrowing away all over France and are making progress while Serraillier is already starting not to receive replies from various quarters anymore because he can only write as a private individual. If you continue to delay out of consideration for Dereure, who has been more than suspect since the resignation of the Blanquists,604 or for any other reason, we shall lose the greater

[^1]: a See this volume, p. 453. - b Q. Mesa y Leompart,] 'El Manifesto del Partido comunista ante los sabios de la Alianza', La Emancipaciôn, No. 77, 7 December 1872. - c K. Marx and F. Engels, 'Resolutions of the General Congress Held at The Hague from the 2nd to the 7th September, 1872'.



