---
Volume: 44
Document_Title: "274. Mar x to Friedrich Adolph Sorge. 21 December "
Page_Range: "494-496"
---

# 274. Mar x to Friedrich Adolph Sorge. 21 December 



**[p. 459]**

part of France and the tables will be turned on us at the next Congress. In haste.

Your

F. E.

First published in Briefe und Auszüge aus Printed according to the original Briefen von Joh. Phil. Becker, Jos. Dietzgen, Friedrich Engels, Karl Marx u. A. an Published in English for the first F. A. Sorge und Andere, Stuttgart, 1906 t i m e

274

MARX TO FRIEDRICH ADOLPH SORGE137

IN HOBOKEN

[London,] 21 December 1872

Dear Sorge,

Just a few words in great haste. The ostensible majority on the British Federal Council (consist- ing to a very large extent of SHAM SECTIONS numbering a few individuals and founded by that scoundrel Hales merely for the purpose of sending delegates) has SECEDED from the minority (which alone represents the large English sections in London, as well as in Manchester, Birkenhead, etc.).643 The fellows secretly put together a circular to the Federation3 (will be sent to you), (dated the 10th of this month), in which they summon the sections to a congress in London to make common cause with the Jurassians, with whom Hales has kept up contact ever since The Hague.

Our people—who now constitute the only legal Federal Council—at once sent out printed postcards to all the sections, advising them to delay any decision until they had received their counter-manifesto, to consult about which they all assembled in my house yesterday (to draw up the main points). You will get it

[^1]: a 'To the Branches, Sections and Members of the British Federation of the International Working Men's Association'.





**[p. 460]**

without delay.3 It will be printed at the beginning of next week. They will also adopt a formal resolution to recognise the Hague Congress580 and the General Council.

At the same time Engels, at the request of one of the Manchester sections, has prepared for them a replyb to the circular of the scoundrels (who include among their number that vain idiot Jung, who has been unable to stomach the removal of the General Council from London and who has for a long time now been Hales' TOOL). They will receive it in their meeting today and will print it without delay.

My view is that you should confine yourselves to the role of observers as much as possible for the time being, and leave the battle to the sections on the spot. In the meantime of course circulars like the one to Spain that I found in the Emancipaciânc

i 644 are very good.

Apropos. On my advice The International Herald and its proprietor, Riley (a member of the Federal Council), have gone independent.630 We shall probably agree a contract whereby we shall publish our own international supplement to it once a week. I am sending you a copy today in which Engels and I open a polemic against Hales et Co.d

As for Poland, your letter cannot be sent there. The old General Council was only able to obtain Poland's accession on the condition (essential, given the situation in the country) that it dealt exclusively with Wroblewski, who lets us know what he thinks would be appropriate or necessary.

In this situation you have no choice. You must grant Wröblewski the same unlimited authority as we did, or else renounce Poland's membership.645

Because of the French translation,436 which makes me more work than if I had to do it without the translator, I am so overworked that I have not been able to write to you, as I have wanted for such a long time.

Cuno has promised to provide details of the meeting of the Committee of Enquiry in The Hague.584 Tell him that if he does not do so immediately, we cannot wait for him any longer and that his personal honour is at stake in the matter.

[^1]: a K. Marx, 'Address of the British Federal Council to the Sections, Branches, Affiliated Societies and Members of the International Working Men's Association'. - b F. Engels, 'The Manchester Foreign Section to All Sections and Members of the British Federation'. - c 'Consejo General. A los miembros de la Asociacion en Espana', La Emancipation, No. 78, 14 December 1872. - d K. Marx and F. Engels, 'To the Editor of The International Herald'.



