---
Volume: 44
Document_Title: "277. Engel s to Friedrich Adolph Sorge. 4 January "
Page_Range: "499-503"
---

# 277. Engel s to Friedrich Adolph Sorge. 4 January 



**[p. 464]**

1873

277

ENGELS TO FRIEDRICH ADOLPH SORGE

IN HOBOKEN

London, 4 January 1873a

Dear Sorge,

1. Have received your letters of 3 and 6 December. Cannot understand why the papers, etc., should not have reached you. I wrote to you on 7 and 14 Decemberb about the arrests in Lodi and sent: on 14 December Emancipaciôn and International Herald; on 22 December Emancipaciôn and International Herald; on the 23rd Emancipaciôn and Egalité (Cluseret against the Blanquists, which was good, though it was bad that his name appeared at the end650) and on the 24th, 3 copies of the circular of the Manchester FOREIGN SECTION.0651 There follow today: Emancipaciôn and a further copy of the circular as well as the circular of the minority within the British Federal Council.d

2. So the majority of the British Federal Council has seceded — under the leadership of Hales, Mottershead, Roach and—Jung.643

They have issued a circular' and come out against the Hague Congress, etc. Up to now we have only a single copy, but as soon as we obtain another you shall have it. So it was not the BRITISH FEDERAL COUNCIL but this HOLE AND CORNER MEETING of the majority that called for an English congress on 5 January.652 However, organis- ing a coup d'état among the English workers is not such a simple matter. The minority continued to assemble in its old meeting- place at 7 Red Lion Court, it constituted itself the BRITISH FEDERAL COUNCIL and advised all sections not to make up their minds until

[^1]: a 1872 in the original. - b See this volume, pp. 453-55, 458-59. - c F. Engels, 'The Manchester Foreign Section to All Sections and Members of the British Federation'. - d K. Marx, 'Address of the British Federal Council to the Sections, Branches, Affiliated Societies and Members of the International Working Men's Association'. - e 'To the Branches, Sections and Members of the British Federation of the International Working Men's Association'.





**[p. 465]**

they had heard from it. Immediately after this, as early as 23 December, the circular of the Manchester FOREIGN SECTION, which I had drafted, was despatched, and this was followed on 31 December by that of the minority of the FEDERAL COUNCIL. In the meantime, the West End SECTION here had declared its opposition to the majority, Nottingham followed suit, even before the circular of the minority had reached it, ditto Middlesborough, which immediately removed Jung from office and requested the minority to propose a new delegate for them, ditto the Manchester DISTRICT COUNCIL. All declared themselves to be in favour of the Hague resolutions, and according to private information of Riley's, we can be sure of all the provincial sections, with the exception of Liverpool. So that would put paid to this coup d'état. I am particularly pleased by the prompt justice meted out to Mr Jung. It serves him right for following in the wake of Hales and allowing himself to be used as the tool of his mortal enemy Guillaume. He is now as dead as a doornail.

2.a Belgium. The Belgian Congress s'est bien moqué du Conseil Général? They have declared that they want nothing to do with you and that the Hague resolutions are null and void.653 Shall see whether I cannot send you more precise information on Tues- day'; I do not have the paper with me here.

3. The Spanish Congress6 will come to the same decision since our people did not send any delegates. Unfortunately, Mesa writes to me that many of our supporters are involved in the insurrection,654 and are in prison or in the mountains with the guerillas, which is especially disastrous just at this moment.

4. So you now have 1. the Jurassians, 2. the Belgians, 3. the old Spanish Federation and 4. the present minority sections here who have gone into rebellion. We are now unanimously of the opinion here that there is no case for suspension here, but that the General Council should simply state that such-and-such federa- tions and sections have declared the properly valid rules of the Association to be null and void, that they thereby place themselves outside the International and have ceased to belong to it. This will rule out any talk of a conference, which would still be a possibility in the event of a suspension.

It is obvious that you can only proceed to such measures when you have the official documents in your hands. We shall procure them for you.

[^1]: a Thus in the original. - b has cocked a snook at the General Council. - c 7 January





**[p. 466]**

5. In Portugal all is in perfect order; Lafargue received a letter yesterday saying that I could expect to receive a longer one.

6. Still no word from Denmark. I suspect that the Schweit- zerians have used their Schleswig supporters there to kick up a stink. But there is no opening there for the Alliance.10

7. France. You will have received Serraillier's report. There have been numerous arrests in the South—37 people, 27 have been released again, some of our people are still imprisoned. In Toulouse, incidentally, a conference of our people was in progress at the very time of the arrests.628

8. Italy. The families of the 3 arrested men and of the 6 who fled in Lodi641 are in the gravest need, and Bignami is bombarding me with letters asking for help, since the section has naturally been outlawed by the other Italian sections (of the Alliance). We have sent some money and have used our influence in Spain and Germany. The fact is, however, that not much can be obtained from there; people there have enough such expenses of their own. But something should be done in America. It is of the greatest importance that Lodi should be supported from outside, it is our strongest base in Italy, and the only reliable one, now that nothing more has been heard from Turin. As soon as these people can see that the International is something more than words, it will mean a serious blow for the Alliance, which uses all its money for printing, etc., and never helps people out. Lodi is much more important, and more can be done with less money there than with the Geneva jewellers' strike,655 on which Outine once again, as usual, makes the existence of the International there depend. In this respect, the Genevans resemble the Belgians: they never do anything and always demand everything. What we here and you there can do for the jewellers is a drop in the ocean and will not advance their cause—the days of the great Genevan strike656 are past and will never come back; until the internal affairs of the International have been put in order, we shall not have the means to carry out any strike. On the other hand, a colossal success can be obtained in Italy with half the effort or even less. Just picture the fury of the Alliancists when they suddenly read in the Plebe: Soscrizione per le famiglie, etc., etc. Ricevuto dal Consiglio Generale dell' Internationale, Nuovo Jork*—so-and-so-many lire, and the General Council suddenly provides the Italians with proofs of its existence in this form! So do what you can. The people have been put in

[^1]: a Subscription for the families, etc., etc. Received from the General Council of the International in New York





**[p. 467]**

gaol because of your circular3 and so you owe it to them. You ought to be able to raise some $30-50, but however much or little it is, send them something and soon, if you like with assurances of possible further remittances. If we lose Lodi and the Plebe, we shall no longer have a pied-à-terre in Italy, of that you may be sure.

9. We receive here at best 1 copy of most of the papers of the International and the Alliance, etc., and even then only with difficulty. However, we shall see to it that we procure them for you regularly.

10. Your proclamations are very much TO THE POINT,657 but as long as you correspond in French with people like the Jurassians and the Belgians, and in English with Hales, you will risk having them print your things with all the linguistic errors and Germanisms, which would certainly not be pleasant. You must surely have some people whose mother-tongue is French or English and who would be in a position to look through these things. Our Frenchmen here would have raised hell if we had put their names to Marx's or my French. None of us can be so secure in a foreign language that he can produce a text for publication without having it knocked into shape by a native. Apropos, Mesa says that in your Address to the Spanish Congress you had in a sense acknowledged their right to sit in judgment on the Hague resolutions and had thereby compromised yourselves—since I have not seen the document (it will not come until the next Emancipacian) I do not know what truth there is in this.

11. Serraillier does not know this Argaing either to whom you have sent a letter of authority.658 If he was recommended by Walter, then something is rotten. Walter is an agent of the Blanquists, and is involved in intrigues in Toulouse, Bordeaux, etc. The Blanquists, by the way, have slipped up badly with their manifesto; one by one they are all trying to worm their way back into the International. Moreover, Ranvier has dissociated himself from the whole business.604

12. In Portugal they have a right of coalition, but not the right of association. So the International is not officially constituted there, but, since everything is shipshape, an authorised representa- tive is not needed for the moment, and could only give rise to jealousy and dissension.— It would also be best to leave the Danes to themselves until we find out what is WRONG there.

[^1]: a 'II Consiglio Generale alle Federazioni, alle Società affigliate, alle Sezioni ed a tutti i membri dell'Associazione Internazionale dei lavoratori'.



