---
Volume: 44
Document_Title: "278. Engels to Rudolf Seiffert. Between 15 and 20 January "
Page_Range: "503-504"
---

# 278. Engels to Rudolf Seiffert. Between 15 and 20 January 

13. It serves Cuno right. Practical life in America will soon teach him some manners.659

Best wishes from Marx and me.

Your

F. E.

According to the last Spring-Street session3 in The World— received from you this week—there can, I suppose, be no doubt that there are agents provocateurs among them.

First published abridged in Briefe und Auszüge aus Briefen von Joh. Phil. Becker, Jos. Dietzgen, Friedrich Engels, Karl Marx u. A. an F. A. Sorge und Andere, Stuttgart, 1906 and in full in: Marx and Engels, Works, First Russian Edition, Vol. XXVI, Moscow, 1935

Printed according to the original

Published in English for the first time

278

ENGELS TO RUDOLF SEIFFERT660

[London, between 15 and 20 January 1873]

6 January [1873] (Fink) a few items of printed matter, No. 38 of International Herald? etc.

15 " (ditto) again International Herald? 2 Nos., and other printed matter.

Hope everything arrived safely.

[^1]: [Excerpt]

[^2]: IN LEIPZIG

[^3]: 31 December [1872]—letter to Liebknecht45 and Hepner.661

[^4]: 7 " (Fink) registered letter with article on Prussia.0

[^5]: First published in: Marx and Engels,

[^6]: Works, Second Russian Edition, Vol. 50, Moscow, 1981

[^7]: Printed according to the original

[^8]: Published in English for the first time

[^9]: a of the separatist Federal Council in New York - b containing Marx's and Engels' statement 'To the Editor of The International Herald' - c F. Engels, 'The "Crisis" in Prussia'. - d F. Lessner, '"Honest" John Hales', The International Herald, No. 41, 11 January 1873.



