---
Volume: 44
Document_Title: "279. Mar x to Nikolai Danielson. 18 January "
Page_Range: "504-506"
---

# 279. Mar x to Nikolai Danielson. 18 January 



**[p. 279]**

MARX TO NIKOLAI DANIELSON165

IN ST PETERSBURG

[London,] 18 January 1873

Dear Friend,

I have received, together with your letter, Sieber,a Golovachev,b

and 5 VOLUMES OF CKpeöim Ki [Skrebitsky].c I find it almost embarrassing for you to be put to such expense on my account. My warmest thanks!

The operas also arrived duly and gave my daughter great pleasure. 62 She believed, however, that they had been sent by a Russian lady she knows, and now asks me to convey her thanks to the unknown giver.

The 3ua Hie [Znaniye]d had approached me directly earlier on with a request for contributions,663 but I have no time for such things. As for Lafargue, he will send a trial piece through

637 you.

As to Chernyshevsky, it entirely depends on you whether I confine myself wholly to his scientific work, or touch on his other activities as well.639 In the second volume of my booke he will, of course, only appear as an economist. I am familiar with a major part of his writings.

*As to the mutual friend/ you may be sure that if I take steps634—and I am still waiting for some informations [sic] on that point from Constantinople—they will be of such a nature as not to compromise him or anybody else.

As to Lfyubavin] I should prefer suppressing that whole part of the enquiry to be published rather than expose him to the least danger. On the other hand, boldness is perhaps the best policy. According to something which B[akunin] has published in Switzerland, not in his name, but in that of some of his Slavonian friends,665 they intend giving their own account of the transaction as

[^1]: a N. Sieber, Teopin Mfmuocmu u nanumwia A- Punapdo (D. Ricardo's Theory of Value and Capital). - b [A. A.] G[olovachev], /jecxmb jibm* pe<ßop Mi> 1861-1871 (Ten Years of Reform 1861-1871). - c A. Skrebitsky, Kpecmi MHCKoe dbno a» tiapcmeoeanie u Mnepa- mopa Ang Kcandpa II (The Peasant Cause in the Reign of Alexander II). - d 3na Hie (Knowledge), a journal. - e Capital - f Hermann Lopatin





**[p. 470]**

soon as circumstances will permit them to do so. The indiscretion of their accomplices at The Hague was intentional and, I suppose, was meant as a sort of intimidation.

On the other hand, I cannot judge of the possible consequences of the publication, and, therefore, should wish our friend to communicate [to] me through you his resolution, after having again quietly reconsidered the case.*

The second FASCICLE of the French translation3 will only appear in the course of the next few days.4S6 The délais have been caused by all sorts of INCIDENTS which, in view of the present state of siege in Paris, make every transaction more difficult. The toil involved in revising the translation is incredible. I would probably have had less trouble if I had done the whole thing myself from the start. And moreover, such patched-up jobs are always an amateur job.

The last numbers of the Paris Économiste of last year contain a review of my book3 by Blockb which demonstrates once again how completely bankrupt the theoretical representatives of the MIDDLE CLASS are.

With best wishes for the New Year,

Yours very sincerely,

[^1]: A. Williamsc

[^2]: First published, in Russian, in Minuvshiye Printed according to the original gody, No. 1, St Petersburg, 1908

[^3]: Published in English in full for the first time

[^4]: a of Volume 1 of Capital - b M. Block, 'Les théoriciens du socialisme en Al- lemagne', Journal des Économistes, Nos. 79, 80; July, August 1872. - c Marx's pseudonym



