---
Volume: 44
Document_Title: "280. Engels to Eugen Oswald. 29 January "
Page_Range: "506-507"
---

# 280. Engels to Eugen Oswald. 29 January 



**[p. 280]**

ENGELS TO EUGEN OSWALD

IN LONDON

[London,] 29 January 1873 122 Regent's Park Road

Dear Oswald,

My wife3 and I thank you cordially for your kind invitation, but we are unfortunately not yet in a position to say whether we shall be able to take it up. My wife has again been plagued by all sorts of illnesses ever since Christmas; she is suffering from the after-effects of pleurisy, and so it is very doubtful whether she will be able to go out in the evening—it would be the first time for 2 weeks. For my part, I have promised the German Workers' Society13s that I would, if required, put in an appearance at the meeting on Saturday evening and give a talk, and I shall be unlikely to hear before Friday whether it is due to take place this Saturday or the following one.

When your children came yesterday afternoon I was just working with Marx on something that absolutely had to go off by the first post and so could not get away for a moment. My wife believes that Pumps0 delivered 'A SAUCY MESSAGE' instead of my words:

Sincerely yours,

F. Engels

[^1]: TELL THEM TO GIVE OUR COMPLIMENTS TO M R AND MRS OSWALD, AND THAT WE ARE

[^2]: MUCH OBLIGED [t O t h e m ] , BUT THAT I CANNOT JUST NOW TELL WHETHER WE CAN COME. If this is the case, you now know what happened. Our best regards to Mrs Oswald and to your sister.

[^3]: First published in: Marx and Engels,

[^4]: Works, Second Russian Edition, Vol. 33, Moscow, 1964

[^5]: Printed according to the original

[^6]: Published in English for the first time

[^7]: a Lydia Burns - b 31 January - c Mary Ellen Burns



