---
Volume: 44
Document_Title: "282. Marx to Johann Philipp Becker. 11 February "
Page_Range: "508-509"
---

# 282. Marx to Johann Philipp Becker. 11 February 



**[p. 282]**

MARX TO JOHANN PHILIPP BECKER 137

IN GENEVA

[London,] 11 February 1873

Dear Becker,

The second FASCICLE of the French translation3 has just been published.436 You will have received it, if it has not been intercepted, before the arrival of these lines.

The German instalments to you and to others have obviously been intercepted. In a few weeks the whole first volume will appear396 and I shall have it sent to you through a bookseller. I would be grateful if you could acknowledge receipt.

I can do absolutely nothing for Kostecki. 1. I am myself IN HIGH PRESSURE, I have run myself significantly into debt on behalf of Messieurs les réfugiés français,'who, in consequence, do nothing but heap abuse on my head; 2. Mr Kostecki was by no means sent off because of me, far from it. He could not maintain himself in London and told me that he would go to Galicia and wanted help from the International; I told him that its coffers were empty, but added that something could possibly be done for him once he had arrived in Geneva. 3. All this took place long before the Hague Congress. Kostecki had taken his leave of me, but I met him long afterwards in the street in London and then heard nothing further. Since then everything has changed. Our ties with Galicia, where many Poles have gone from here since then, are active and in good order, and this is true also of other parts of Poland. So no new emissary is required. Moreover, Wroblewski thinks nothing of Kostecki, who is in general held in little regard by our Polish people.

Your

K. M.

[^1]: I shall be writing to you in the next few days about relations within the International.15

[^2]: First published in: Marx and Engels,

[^3]: Works, First Russian Edition, Vol. XXVI, Moscow, 1935

[^4]: Printed according to the original

[^5]: a of Volume I of Capital - b See this volume, p. 489.



