---
Volume: 44
Document_Title: "283. Marx to Friedrich Bolte. 12 February "
Page_Range: "509-512"
---

# 283. Marx to Friedrich Bolte. 12 February 



**[p. 283]**

MARX TO FRIEDRICH BOLTE666

IN NEW YORK

London, 12 February 1873

Dear Friend,

Up to now the first 8 instalments of the German edition of Capital have appeared.145 Since the last part will come out in two or three weeks as well, I shall send the whole thing off at once (i.e. from instalment 5) to you and other friends in New York. As for an English edition, this is no doubt assured now, as a result of the French version.436 Nevertheless, I look forward to it with some concern. The revision of the French translation is causing me more work than if I had done the whole translation myself. So if I am unable to find a completely competent English translator I would have to take the thing into my own hands, and the French edition has already prevented me—and, until I am through with it, will continue to prevent me—from working on the final version of the second volume.

The secessionists in England—Mottershead, Huber, Roach, Alonzo, Jung, Eccarius & Co.— have in recent weeks repeated the farce of the London UNIVERSAL FEDERALIST COUNCIL417 in the form of a so-called Congress of the British Federation.668 The gentlemen consisted only of themselves; two of them, Jung and Pape, had already been unseated by their sections, Middlesborough and Nottingham, and so did not even nominally represent anything. If you add all these HOLE-AND-CORNER SECTIONS together, which these people have invented, they will certainly not come to 50. With the exception of a small notice which Eccarius as a wage-slave of The Times managed to smuggle into that paper," the congress passed unnoticed, but will be exploited by the secessionists on the Continent. Jung's speech at the congress surpasses everything in its stupidity and infamy. It is a gossipy tissue of lies, distortions and idiocy. The vain fellow seems to have suffered a softening of the brain. That is the way things are and one just has to get used

[^1]: Engels and I will, as far as our time permits, contribute to both the German and the Federal paper.667

[^2]: a [J. G. Eccarius,] 'An English International Congress', The Times, No. 27598, 28 January 1873.





**[p. 475]**

to it; the movement wears people out and as soon as they feel themselves to be on the outside, they lapse into meanness and try and persuade themselves that it is someone else's fault that they have become scoundrels.

In my opinion the General Council in New York has made a great mistake by suspending the Jura Federation.669 These people have already left the International by their declaration that the International's Congress and Rules do not exist for them; they have formed the centre of a conspiracy to set up a Counter- International; following their congress at Saint-Imier5" similar congresses have taken place in Cordoba,627 Brussels653 and London, and lastly the Alliancists in Italy will hold a similar congress.6 °

Everyone and every group has the right to withdraw from the International, and when that happens the General Council has only to record their departure officially; it is not in any way its function to suspend them. Suspension is provided for where groups (sections or federations) merely dispute the authority of the General Council, or infringe one or another of its Rules or Regulations. However, the Rules have no article concerning groups which reject the organisation in its entirety—for the simple reason that, according to the Rules, it is self-evident that such groups no longer belong to the International.

This is by no means a pure formality. The secessionists have resolved at their various congresses to convene a general secessionist congress to constitute their new organisation, which would be independent of the International. Such a congress is to take place in the spring or summer.671

At the same time these gentlemen would like to keep a door open in case of failure. This emerges from the bulky circular of the Spanish Alliancists.614 If their congress is a failure, they reserve the right to attend the Geneva Congress,672 a plan which the Italian Alliancist Gambuzzi was naive enough to reveal to me back during his stay in London.

So if the New York General Council does not alter its procedure, what will be the consequences?

The Council will follow up its suspension of the Jura by suspending also the secessionist federations in Spain, Italy, Belgium and England. Result: all the riff-raff will turn up again in Geneva and paralyse all serious work there, just as they did in The Hague, and they will once again compromise the whole work of the Congress for the greater good of the bourgeoisie. The great achievement of the Hague Congress580 was to induce the rot-



**[p. 476]**

These people do no harm when they openly oppose the International, the latter only benefits by it; but as hostile elements within the International they spell the ruin of the movement in all the countries where they have managed to obtain a foot- hold.

The work they and their emissaries cause for us in Europe can scarcely be imagined in New York.

In order to strengthen the International in those countries where the struggle is chiefly being carried on, what is needed above all is vigorous action from the General Council.

Now that the mistake has been made with the Jura, it would perhaps be best simply to ignore the others entirely for the time being (unless our own federations demand the opposite), and then to bide our time until the general secessionist congress, when we can announce that all its CONSTITUENCIES have withdrawn from the International, that they have excluded themselves from it and from now on are to be treated as alien and even hostile associa- tions. Eccarius very naively stated at the London hole-and-cor- ner congress that they must make politics with the bourgeoisie. His soul has been longing to sell itself for some considerable time now.

The news of the great misfortune that has befallen Sorge3 has affected us very deeply. My very best regards to him.

Salut fraternel

Karl Marx

[^1]: First published in Briefe und Auszüge aus Printed according to the text of Briefen von Joh. Phil. Becker, Jos. Dietzgen, the first publication Friedrich Engels, Karl Marx u. A. an F. A. „ , , . , , . ^ ,• • • r ,• r , Sorge und Andere, Stuttgart, 1906 Published in English in full for the first time

[^2]: the death of his daughter



