---
Volume: 44
Document_Title: "291. Engel s to Friedrich Adolph Sorge. 22 March "
Page_Range: "522-523"
---

# 291. Engel s to Friedrich Adolph Sorge. 22 March 



**[p. 290]**

MARX TO NIKOLAI DANIELSON

IN ST PETERSBURG

London, 22 March 1873

My dear Sir,

You would much oblige me in giving me some information on the views of Tschitscherin, relating to the historical development of communal property in Russia; and on his polemics on that subject with Bjeljajew.685 The way in which that form of property was founded (historically) in Russia, is of course a secondary question, and has nothing whatever to do with the value of that institution. Still, the German reactionists like Professor A. Wagner in Berlin, etc., use that weapon put in their hands by Tschitscherin.686 At the same time all historical analogy speaks against Tschitscherin. How should it have come to happen that in Russia the same institution had been simply introduced as a fiscal measure, as a concomitant incident of serfdom, while everywhere else it was of spontaneous growth and marked a necessary phase of development of free peoples?

Yours most truly,

291

ENGELS TO FRIEDRICH ADOLPH SORGE

London, 22 March 1873

Dear Sorge,

I wrote to you on the 20th inst.b and am today sending Emancipaci&n No. 89 and International Herald No. 51.

[^1]: A. Williams3

[^2]: First published, in Russian, in Minuvshiye Reproduced from the original gody, No. 1, St Petersburg, 1908

[^3]: Published in English for the first time

[^4]: IN HOBOKEN

[^5]: a Marx's pseudonym - b See this volume, pp. 481-85.



