---
Volume: 44
Document_Title: "292. Mar x to Johann Philipp Becker. 7 April "
Page_Range: "523-525"
---

# 292. Mar x to Johann Philipp Becker. 7 April 



**[p. 488]**

I forgot to add when talking of the $20 not sent to Lodi that during their period of difficulties, those people had received the following:

from here 50 frs from the Committee of the Social- Democratic Workers' Party, 20 thalers 75 " from Oberwinder in Vienna 50 florins 125 "

Total 250 francs

I thought this was sufficient for a situation with such a favourable outcome: 3 were released after two weeks and only Bignami was in custody for circa 6 weeks.

The resolution of 26 January680 and the Address to the Spaniards have been sent off to Lodi.

As you can see from the Emancipation, the Address to the Spaniards was very well received.687

Best wishes,

Your

F. E.

292

[London,] 7 April 1873

Dear Becker,

If I do not manage to write to you in detail, you must put the blame on my overwork. I shall have no spare time available until the French translation3 is finished and the last page has been printed.436 As for the 2nd German edition," I was glad to send off the last of the proof-sheets the day before yesterday, and have

[^1]: First published in Briefe und Auszüge aus Printed according to the original Briefen von Joh. Phil. Becker, Jos. Dietzgen, Friedrich Engels, Karl Marx u. A. an Published in English for the first F. A. Sorge und Andere, Stuttgart, 1906 time

[^2]: MARX TO JOHANN PHILIPP BECKER165

[^3]: IN GENEVA

[^4]: a of Volume I of Capital



instructed Meissner to send you the whole-volume edition post-free, which is due out in about a week.396 You would oblige me by letting me know when it comes.

Engels asks you to forward the enclosed letter to Goegg45 as soon as possible. It is to do with some information about the Alliance (we are at present engaged in assembling documentary evidence with which to demolish thema). Might I also ask you to send us, if at all possible, the first programme of the public Alliance in Geneva? in which your name appeared among others.

We thought that the Égalité of Geneva must have folded up as we had not seen a copy since Outine's departure from Geneva. At his request I had induced some French friends to become correspondents for it, but our belief in its demise put a stop to everything. So if Perret wishes for reports from here, he must make sure that Engels (122 Regent's Park Road) and myself each receive a copy. We shall pay for it if he so desires.

The General Council will likely decide on Geneva as the venue for the next Congress.672 You must even now start working to ensure a large attendance. This is all the more indispensable as the Alliancist band of rogues is planning to turn up en masse. Of course, they must not be allowed in. The Hague Congress580 must have brought us at least the one advantage that the rabble will be removed from our midst. But for that it is essential for us to have completely reliable local representatives at our disposal.

With best wishes from the whole family.

Your

Karl Marx

[^1]: First published in: Marx and Engels,

[^2]: Works, First Russian Edition, Vol. XXVI, Moscow, 1935

[^3]: Printed according to the original

[^4]: Published in English in full for the first time

[^5]: a This refers to work on the pamphlet The Alliance of Socialist Democracy and the International Working Men's Association. - b Programm der Internationalen Allianz der Sozial-Demokratie



