---
Volume: 44
Document_Title: "293. Engel s to Friedrich Adolph Sorge. 3 May "
Page_Range: "525-530"
---

# 293. Engel s to Friedrich Adolph Sorge. 3 May 



**[p. 293]**

ENGELS TO FRIEDRICH ADOLPH SORGE

IN HOBOKEN

London, 3 May 1873

Dear Sorge,

Have received your letter of the 9th and that of the General Council of the 11th.

1. Serraillier. What Dereure says is utter nonsense.688 The priest story amounts only to this: Pottier, a delegate of the Commune in the 2nd arrondissement, to which Serraillier was assigned, hired out the churches to the priests (le dit délégué loue la boutique nommé Eglise, etc. etc. au nommé pour y exercer le métier de cure3 was the formula) and Pottier collected all the money and used it for Commune and arrondissement business and credited it to the Commune. Serraillier never had a sou of it in his hands. Le Moussu, who rises to the word 'priest' like a hungry fish to the bait, actually intended to have Pottier and Serraillier arrested for this, because, as he expressed it, ceci était un commerce immoral}1

When it comes to bad jokes I am not sure who has produced the best one, Le Moussu or Pottier and Serraillier. But to base serious accusations on such childish grounds is worse than childish. However, the Frenchmen of today are children. What the demonstration of the 22 is supposed to be, I do not know; I suppose it was the attempted resignation of the minority. The row between majority and minority in the Commune is still going on and for everyone with a Blanquist taint it is still an offence even today, and a capital offence moreover, to have belonged to the minority. All this is ancient history for us here; we have heard every conceivable variation on that tune until we are sick of it and would not give a brass farthing for the entire story.

2. Arbeiter-Zeitung—it must indeed be said that the uncouthness of its style could not be surpassed. However, that is American— the entire German-American press writes like that. For the present neither Marx nor myself have a single spare moment to write regular reports; I am up to my eyes in work for the Congress

[^1]: a the aforenamed delegate lets the premises, known as the church, etc., etc., to the person named for the purpose of carrying out the trade of priest - b it was unethical commerce





**[p. 491]**

which is to be tabled in French3 and Marx is immersed in his French translation.436

3. The Viennese. We know no more than has appeared publicly, since neither Oberwinder nor Scheu has written to us direct.689 However, we have our suspicions about Scheu. 1. He is in touch with Vaillant and 2. there are signs that like his friend and predecessor, Neumayr, who has since gone mad, he is in contact with Bakunin. The echo of the latter's resounding phrases can be detected in Scheu's articles and speeches, and you will remember how his brotherb disappeared from The Hague580 as soon as the business with Bakunin came to a head. Up to now no serious allegations against Oberwinder have been made, at least in public. His collaboration on bourgeois papers took place with the foreknowledge and approval of the party and directly served party purposes. If The Times were put at my disposal tomorrow and I could write what I wanted and receive payment for it, I would accept without hesitation. Nobody objected to Eccarius doing this until he reversed the situation and exploited the International in his own financial interests and no longer wrote in its interests but in his own and those of The Times. And since in Austria feudalism has only partly been overcome, the masses are still incredibly stupid and conditions are still about the same as those in Germany before 1848, we naturally do not take it amiss that Oberwinder does not immediately demand the moon with the maximum of radical hullaballoo, but instead pursues the policies we advocated at the end of the Communist Manifesto as being appropriate for Germany at the time. Here and there he may exhibit an excess of petty-bourgeois caution, but in the first place even that has not been proved and in the second, it is no cause for such a tremendous hue and cry. Moreover, Oberwinder is no Austrian and so could be deported at any time. But, as I have said, we do not know the details and so reserve our judgment.

4. Admission requirements.0—Even assuming that formally you are in the right to make all these demands on the individual sections (which is, however, very much open to doubt), up to now no Federal Council has ever imposed these bureaucratically precise conditions, and had it imposed them, they would never have been fulfilled. What a great mistake it was to make such requirements even in France is demonstrated by the article in No. 49 of the

Neuer Social-Demokrat,690 which I am sending you today. I

[^1]: a This refers to work on the pamphlet The Alliance of Socialist Democracy and the International Working Men's Association. - b Heinrich Scheu - c See this volume, pp. 483-84.





**[p. 492]**

informed H e p n e r a straightaway and, having made precise en- quiries yesterday about Dentraygues and Heddeghem, I have despatched the necessary statement to the Volksstaat* 5. W E EXPECT MORE NEWS ABOUT FRANCE BEFORE TAKING ANY STEPS. I do not see that there are any steps you could possibly take. All our sections have been uncovered. Heddeghem was a spy as early as T h e Hague. Dentraygues is not, but for personal reasons and from weakness, he denounced some individuals who had previous- ly beaten him up. A member who wanted to obtain some money for the party had given his watch to Dentraygues, asking him to pawn it. Dentraygues' wife did so and later refused to redeem it or even to h a n d over the pawn-Tic KET. This caused a scandal. A few people—mainly bourgeois—got together, gave Dentraygues a thrashing and then denounced him to the public prosecutor, at whose urgings they confessed that the money had been intended for the use of the International! ! ! This was the real beginning of the whole business—but since H e d d e g h e m had already informed the police in Paris of all this, it could come as a surprise only to the Toulouse police at most. These then are the fellows that Dentraygues denounced, and there was no one else. How the police found out about other things you will see from the Volksstaa U At all events, at the present time the organisation in France is in pieces and will take some time to recover since all communications have broken down. Larroque is in Spain, in San Sebastian. His address: Monsieur Latraque, Calle de la Aduana, No. 2 1 — h e is living there u n d e r that name. For goodness' sake do not send any new letters of authority to France. Larroque has been given 3 years in contumaciam!1

[^1]: 6. STAMPS.682—I hardly ever see Le Moussu, I have got Marx to give him a good kick, but still no answer. It is impossible to do any business with these Frenchmen without wasting whole weeks at a time chasing after them, and I cannot do that.

[^2]: 7. Venue for the Congress. 6 7 2—I hope you have only asked the Swiss for their advice as we did with the Dutch last year. In Switzerland there is only one possible place and that is Geneva. T h e r e we have the mass of workers behind us, and also a hall belonging to the International, the Temple Unique, from which we can simply throw the gentlemen from the Alliance10 out when they present themselves. Apart from Geneva, only Zurich would be possible; but there we have hardly more than the few German workers and not even all of these (vide the Felleisen) and your

[^3]: a F. Engels, 'On the Articles in the Neuer Social-Demokrat (From a Letter to A. Hepner)'. - b F. Engels, 'The International and the Neuer'. - c in his absence



enquiry might even result in the proposal from various sides that the Congress should be held at the centrally situated town of Olten—the chief railway junction in Switzerland, in which case we should really be in the soup. The Alliancists are doing everything in their power to turn up at the Congress in force, whereas on our side everyone is going to sleep. No French delegates can come since the collapse. The Germans, although they have their own quarrel with the Lassalleans, were very disheartened by the Hague Congress, where they expected nothing but fraternity and harmony in contrast to their own squabbles, and have become apathetic. Moreover, the party authorities of the Social-Democratic Workers' Party consist at the moment of nothing but dyed-in-the- wool Lassalleans (Yorck & Co.) who are insisting that both the Party and its paper should be forced into the straitjacket of a Lassalleanism of the most superficial sort. The struggle continues; the Lassalleans wish to take advantage of the time in which Liebknecht and Bebel are in gaol274 so as to get their own way. Little Hepner is putting up vigorous resistance, but he has been as good as forced off the board of the Volksstaat and anyway has been deported from Leipzig.691 The victory of these fellows would be synonymous with the loss of the Party for us—for the moment at least. I have written Liebknecht a very determined letter to this effect49 and am still awaiting a reply.—From Denmark nothing has been seen or heard. My long-held suspicion that the Lassalleans of the Neuer Social-Demokrat have thrown everything into confusion there through their supporters in North Schleswig and have induced people to withdraw from the International,3 is daily confirmed by the Neuer Social-Demokrat, which is much better informed about events in Copenhagen than the Volksstaat.—From England only a few delegates can come and it is very doubtful whether the Spaniards will send one, so it is to be expected that the Congress will be very poorly attended and that the Bakuninists will have more people there than us. The Genevans themselves are doing nothing, the Égalité seems to be defunct, so that even there no great support appears likely—merely the consciousness that there we shall be sitting in our own house and among people who know Bakunin and his gang and can throw them out if need be. So Geneva is the only place possible, and to secure a victory for us, the only necessary condition remaining—though it is an absolutely indispensable one—is that, in accordance with the resolution of 26 January,680 the General Council should now announce the following resignations:

[^1]: a See this volume, p. 466.





**[p. 494]**

1. The Belgian Federation, which has declared that it has nothing to do with the General Council and which has repudiated the Hague resolutions.

2. That part of the Spanish Federation which was represented in Cordoba627 and which contravened the Rules by declaring the payment of dues to the General Council to be optional, and which has also repudiated the Hague resolutions.

3. The English sections and individuals represented at the would-be London congress of 26 January, who have likewise repudiated the Hague resolutions.852

4. The Jura Federation which, at the congress they are due to hold shortly,692 will undoubtedly give us adequate grounds to extend the resolution on suspension.

Lastly, it could be announced that the so-called Italian Federa- tion which was represented at the so-called congress of Bologna670

(instead of Mirandola), is not a member of the International at all since it has never satisfied even a single one of the conditions laid down by the Rules.693

Once this resolution has been published and the General Council has set up a committee in Geneva to make preparations for the Congress and to scrutinise the mandates in advance, a committee consisting e.g. of Becker,3 Perret, Duval and Utin, if he is there, the mass surge forward of the Bakuninists will have been forestalled. As soon as the General Council has issued instructions to the committees that these people cannot be given recognition as delegates until they have been granted admission by the majority of the genuine and acknowledged delegates of the International, all will be well. Even if they were in the majority, they would be innocuous; they could go elsewhere and hold their own congress, but without having brought their majority to bear vis-à-vis ourselves. And that is all we can ask for.

Cordial regards from Marx too.

Your

F. E.

[^1]: First published abridged in Briefe und Printed according to the original Auszüge aus Briefen von Joh. Phil. Becker, Jos. Dietzgen, Friedrich Engels, Karl Marx u. Published in English for the first A. an F. A. Sorge und Andere, Stuttgart, t l m e

[^2]: 1906 and in full in: Marx and Engels,

[^3]: Works, First Russian Edition, Vol. XXVI, Moscow, 1935

[^4]: a Johann Philipp Becker



