---
Volume: 44
Document_Title: "296. Marx to Hugo Heller. 23 May "
Page_Range: "531-532"
---

# 296. Marx to Hugo Heller. 23 May 



**[p. 496]**

I have written to Tussy today17 and am convinced that Mr Lissagaray must pour le moment make bonne mine à mauvais jeu."

Your

K. M.

Regards to MRs.b Shall see Renshaws.

First published in Der Briefwechsel zwischen Printed according to the original F. Engels und K. Marx, Bd. IV, Stuttgart, 10,13 Published in English for the first time

296

MARX TO HUGO HELLER

IN OXFORD

Manchester, 23 May 1873

Dear Friend,

I am staying up here for a day or two, but would rather not put off answering your letter695 until my return to London.

I have sent 2/6d in STAMPS for a membership card to a member of the British Federal Council, Serraillier, so that it will, in a few days' time (the Federal Council meets only once a week), be sent to Oxford.

If Thomas, your friend there, would care to write to me direct, I shall be very glad to get in touch with him.

In a week or two the 2nd German edition of Capital, which came out in instalments, will be published in one volume396 and I should be pleased to present it to you as a memento, and likewise such instalments of the Paris translation as have so far appeared.436

Madame and MR Longuet have asked me to send you their warm regards.

Salut fraternel.

Karl Marx

[^1]: Published for the first time Printed according to the original

[^2]: a make the best of a bad job for the moment; see this volume, p. 499. - b Lydia Burns



