---
Volume: 44
Document_Title: "297. Engels to Marx. 24 May "
Page_Range: "532-533"
---

# 297. Engels to Marx. 24 May 



**[p. 297]**

ENGELS TO MARX

IN MANCHESTER

London, 24 May 1873

Dear Moor,

I wrote to Gumpert the day before yesterday45 and gave him my opinion on your case, together with a brief account of what had happened (of course, I kept quiet about everything to do with the situation at home, merely saying that you had had a lot of vexation in various matters), just so that I should have done my bit to win my bet about the diagnosis. Today I received a letter from his eldest stepson saying that Gumpert wouldn't be back for 8-10 days and that he had sent my letter on to him.

Kept busy by Lafargue until 4.30a; it got too late for me to send off a registered letter, so I shall send it on Monday with money so that you can use the time for excursions if you feel like it.

I also have the £50 here; should I give it to your wife? We shall be finished with Russia in a few days, except for a tiny detail for which I shall have to work my way through the Russian stuff, in doing which I have been constantly interrupted.

Your

F. E.

[^1]: Regards to Mooreb and Schorlemmer.

[^2]: First published in Der Briefwechsel zwischen Printed according to the original F. Engels und K. Marx, Bd. IV, Stuttgart, 29,13 Published in English for the first time

[^3]: a This refers to work on the pamphlet The Alliance of Socialist Democracy and the International Working Men's Association. - b Samuel Moore



