---
Volume: 44
Document_Title: "302. Engel s to Friedrich Adolph Sorge. 14 June "
Page_Range: "542-545"
---

# 302. Engel s to Friedrich Adolph Sorge. 14 June 



**[p. 302]**

ENGELS TO FRIEDRICH ADOLPH SORGE

IN HOBOKEN

London, 14 June 1873

Dear Sorge,

Work on the Alliance' has interrupted my correspondence. In addition the newspapers have only just started to arrive regularly again now that we have ordered them, and so it is only now that I can report properly again.

First, to deal with the points raised in your letters. The ones from the General Councilb are answered in the enclosure.

14 May.—The business about the shortage of funds is as old as the International itself. The Americans were the only ones to pay, and if it hadn't been for you, we would have been unlikely to receive even that.—Postponing the Congress672 is absolutely out of the question; it would mean abandoning the field to the other side and anyway is not at all necessary, as you will see.

23 May.—The people in Geneva I am supposed to be giving a kick do not even answer us. Even old Becker0 does not reply to Marx. Outine is we know not where. We ourselves do not receive the Bulletin jurassien, and only see extracts quoted in the Liberté and the Internationale.

27 May.—The statement on France700—very good!—has gone off in English to the BRITISH FEDERAL COUNCIL and will go off today in French to the Plebe, the Spanish Federal Council and Portugal. BY THE BYE the Portuguese are complaining that they are not receiving anything at all from you and yet they are very, very important for us!—Serraillier has absolutely nothing to write about, since he does not have a single address in France any more; everyone has been caught. However, he will send in a little report on the trials677 for your own report to the Congress—there were trials everywhere where there were sections, in Béziers, Lisieux, etc., etc.—Correspondence for the Arbeiter-Zeitung} Who is to do it? Marx and I are so overworked that Marx has been limited by his doctor to 4 hours work a day because of blood-congestion in the

[^1]: a K. Marx and F. Engels, The Alliance of Socialist Democracy and the International Working Men's Association. - b F. Engels, 'To the General Council of the Inter- national Working Men's Association'. - c Johann Philipp Becker





**[p. 508]**

head, so that I have to deal with everything together with Lafargue. Frankel works in his SHOP until 9 p.m. The others cannot write.—The Hamburgers452 are numbskulls. I shall write and tell Liebknecht.—For Holland the German version of the statement will be adequate.—The Arbeiter-Zeitung should make more use of the Volksstaat.

And now for some news, and this time it is no message of ill-tidings.

1. The British Congress, held in Manchester on 1 and 2 June, was a success.701 26 delegates.—Report from the Tory paper going off by BOOK-POST herewith; ditto 1 issue of the Brussels Inter- nationale. The Federal Council to remain in London, although the locals wanted it transferred to Nottingham. The Eastern Post, hitherto the organ of Jung and Hales, has written a satirical article on the Congress which nevertheless acknowledges it as the real representative of the English International, and since then I observe that they have stopped publishing reports on BOGUS meetings in Hales' house; they seem to have shut up shop. Up to now they had always alternated these reports with reports from all of their 2 sections: Stratford and Limehouse, and Limehouse and Stratford; but this no longer seems to work.—Mottershead turned up in Hyde Park on Whit Mondaya for the TRADES UNION MEETING, completely drunk as usual.— I have not received The International Herald for the past 2 weeks, so that too seems to have folded up. It's no misfortune since there are the other publications of the English press. The new French section here (Dupont and Serraillier) have some chance of starting up a French paper here, though French assurances cannot be relied on very much.

2. The Jurassians have carried out their decisive retreat.692 You will see from the Internationale that they have resolved to propose to their colleagues in the Alliance: not to send representatives to any congress 'que le prétendu Conseil general pourrait être tenté de convoquer'* but to hold a separate congress at a place in Switzerland to be determined by their federations.

Translated that means: we cannot put in an appearance in Geneva, otherwise we shall be thrown out on our ears. So they will meet in some corner of the Jura; after the Olten Congress (see below) they cannot show their faces anywhere else in Switzer- land.—Other reasons are: 1. Bakunin's old reluctance to appear in debates personally, 2. Guillaume's and his own expulsion, which would raise the crucial issue from the very outset in a purely

[^1]: a 9 June - b which the so-called General Council might be tempted to convene





**[p. 509]**

personal form, added to which there is also the fact of Bakunin's

escroquerie,3574 which would immediately finish him off, and 3. the certainty that in reality they are in as bad a way as we are and that internal squabbles have exhausted and irritated their people too. At their great Jura congress only nine sections were represented! In Italy, for all their bluster, they cannot put a single newspaper on its feet, and in Spain, in the movement as it stands, their stock is=0. More, they have had to renege on their own policy of abstention at once, and sent 8 members (10 according to them) into the Cortes.

3. In Rome a committee 'of the International' has been dis- banded. It was called Società del Silenzio, clandestine society, oath of absolute obedience, the sacramental formula at the end of letters—the one proclaimed by Bakunin last year: Salute e liquidazione sociale, anarchia e collectivismoh—in short, the secret Alliance ,0 with its whole bag of tricks. It comes just at the right time.

4. Serraillier has had an exchange in the Liberté with the Blanquists about the French trials702 in which the latter took a very impudent line, but were duly boxed around the ears for it. What really finished them off was that after the letters of authority of those with mandates had been annulled at The Hague and the General Council was alone empowered to issue new ones,0 Cournet and Ranvier issued a new letter of authority to Heddeghem in their names—and while still at The Hague!

5. Swiss workers' congress at Olten70 —70 delegates, 5 Juras- sians, proposed decentralisation, defeated with all votes against their 5—they withdrew at once. But you will have known this long since from the Tagwachtd

I hope that your arm and voice are now recovered and that your prospects for the Congress have also improved. Even if the Congress is not very brilliant, it is nevertheless necessary and with some effort will turn out well. Don't forget that according to the Rules you must convoke it and prepare a programme 2 months in advance, i.e. by 1 July.

Alliance as good as finished—in French; a mammoth task in this tricky language—shall hit out and surprise even you.

[^1]: a swindling - b Greetings and social liquidation, anarchy and collectivism - c K. Marx and F. Engels, 'Resolutions of the General Congress Held at The Hague from the 2nd to the 7th September, 1872. VI. Powers Issued by the General Council, and by Federal Councils'. - d 'Der Kongreß in Olten und die Gewerkschaftsbewegung der Schweiz', Die Tagwacht, No. 23, 7 June 1873.

[^2]: 18-556



