---
Volume: 44
Document_Title: "307. Engel s to Friedrich Adolph Sorge. 26 July "
Page_Range: "553-557"
---

# 307. Engel s to Friedrich Adolph Sorge. 26 July 



**[p. 518]**

but since it cannot be stereotyped without the ensuing instalment VI, I should be glad to have another proof.

Yours ever,

Karl Marx

First published in: Marx and Engels, Printed according to the original Works, First Russian Edition, Vol. XXVI, ^ , , , , _ , xi , M , ,., r „. j j Translated from the trench Moscow, 1935 (the name of the addressee was mistakenly given as Maurice Lachâtre) Published in English for the first time

307

ENGELS TO FRIEDRICH ADOLPH SORGE

IN HOBOKEN

London, 26 July 1873

Dear Sorge,

Neither Marx nor I could have taken on the task without setting off the old hue and cry again: they are up to their old tricks, it is Marx who is behind it all, as usual, and he is just using the New-Yorkers as a front! It was only with difficulty that I could persuade Serraillier to take it on; he has found a position at last that can feed him decently and first had to cover himself there; hence the 3 days' delay.

Have sent an invitation to the Congress to Bignami, who is at liberty once more.641 Have also informed Serraillier, but as I have already mentioned,3 he no longer has any correspondents in France.

Am sending off to you by today's post 2 parcels d 16 copies of Congress resolutions.13 You could have had them long since had

[^1]: I telegraphed yesterday, cost £1,16: ENGELS TO SORGE, BOX 101, HOBOKEN, NEW YORK. Serraillier YES™2 Therefore, send Serraillier instructions and the material at once so that he has enough time to prepare himself and doesn't have to appear without having read the papers. Ditto the money.

[^2]: a See this volume, p. 507. - b K. Marx and F. Engels, 'Resolutions of the General Congress Held at The Hague from the 2nd to the 7th September, 1872'.





**[p. 519]**

you asked. But since you had no French sections, I thought that those I had sent for the use of the General Council would suffice.—8 or 10 have been sent off to Buenos Aires.713

Have still not received any money. The issue of The International Herald with the English transla- tion of the Congress resolutions is no longer to be obtained. Moreover, Riley has seceded and gone over to the republican camp, and the reports of the FEDERAL COUNCIL are appearing once again in The Eastern Post, to the great annoyance of Jung and Hales, whose organ this was up to the time of the Manchester Congress701; the Congress, however, finished them off. For this reason I have not ordered The International Herald for Meyer.3

The statement about the French mandates has gone off to Italy, Portugal and Spain.700

Marx and I would welcome mandates from there. We shall presumably have to go, for various reasons, although we would, of course, prefer to stay here.

Marx will send on the instalments of Capital,145 if he has not done so already. Four instalments of the French translation are out already,436 the publisherb is afraid, and not without reason, that under the present clerical regime it may be confiscated, hence the slow appearance.

Admission for TRADES UNIONS varied. Some paid Id per member, others a lump sum; yet others only enrolled the CENTRAL COUNCIL directly and they too paid a lump sum. In conformity with the relevant article in the Rules, affiliation was approved by simple resolution and a certificate was issued to them.— For lsh. they could receive a printed illustrated version of it to hang on the wall.

The Demokratische Taschenbuch and the Geheimnisse von Europa might be obtainable if further details about the time and place of publication were available; the book-lexica do not stretch to such things and it is hardly worthwhile searching through 20 half-year issues of Hinrich's Bibliographyc in order to discover finally that they are not there (which is all too likely to be the case with books of this sort).

I still have the Geneva money in my pocket, thanks to the impossible instructions you have lumbered me with. How am I to discover an address to send money to for the widows and orphans of the Commune? This part of the money really must be retained here for your further instructions, since we simply cannot carry

[^1]: a Hermann Meyer - b Maurice Lachâtre - c Halbjahrskatalog der im deutschen Buch- handel erschienenen Bücher, Zeitschriften und Landkarten.





**[p. 520]**

out your orders. I would suggest transferring it to Serraillier with a request to devote it to the purpose specified, if at all possible, but otherwise using it for any refugees of the Commune in general. Or else transferring it to the International, which can certainly put it to good use.—The refugees here who have still not been fixed up are a pretty worthless lot. I shall send £10 to Geneva and hold the rest here, pending further instructions from you.714

Oberwinder.3 We are entirely of your opinion as far as we can judge from the published documents.715 Oberwinder has always been a TRIMMER who may have made too much of the backwardness of Austrian conditions in order to have an excuse to act as mediator. Andreas Scheu, on the other hand, is a muddle-headed fellow at best, who wants to stand out as a man who 'goes as far as possible' and whose ambition quite certainly outstrips his abilities. We have long suspected him of being in contact with the Bakuninists, and now, in his programme ( Volksstaat No. 59), he has used the phrase taken directly from Bakunin that all other parties constitute a single reactionary mass vis-à-vis the proletariat.716

We shall reserve our judgment until we learn more. Very suspect too is the fact that Heinrich Scheu, who was present at The Hague, has been here for 4 weeks and only looked up Marx after Mrs Marx had met him in the street. Up to now we have taken care not to discuss the matter with him, otherwise he behaves quite decently and heaps abuse on Bakunin and the Blanquists, but it is peculiar all the same.

Würtz was described to me by Pihl as a vain, importunate fellow who imagines he is indispensable and whose indiscretion in pushing himself forward has done them considerable harm. THE LONG AND THE SHORT OF IT is that, thanks to the Lassalleans in Flensburg and others in North Schleswig, the Danes lean more towards the General Association of German Workers706 and have got them- selves into a mess as a result. Hence their silence. The devil take the socialists of all these peasant countries, they, are always fooled by fine phrases.

Look at our Bakuninists in Spain, for example. On Bakunin's orders they abolished the state in Alcoy (the so-called atrocities were, of course, reactionary inventions), and set up a Comité de salut publich (which includes Severino Albarracin, a member of the Bakuninist Federal Council of Valencia and of the Correspon- dence Commission that has now been established in Cordoba627). So what happens? At the suggestion of some deputies anxious to

[^1]: a See this volume, p. 491. - b Committee of Public Salvation





**[p. 521]**

mediate, peace is concluded; on the one hand, an amnesty, on the other, all resistance is abandoned and the troops move in amidst the jubilation of the bourgeois!717 In Barcelona they are neither strong nor courageous enough to attempt anything of the sort, but wherever they are, they strengthen 'anarchy', general confusion, and—they smooth the way for the Carlists.718

The report on the Alliance3 is in print—I read the first proofs yesterday. It is supposed to be ready in a week but I very much doubt that it will. It will be some 160 pages long, I shall advance circa £40 for the printing costs. Edition of 1,000—price: 2 francs=l/9d sterling. I shall send you the first copies to come off the press. But since the thing simply has to be sold so as to recover our costs, please let me know right away how many copies can be ordered for you over there; we shall then have a few more sent. Could you also look around for a reliable bookseller who would distribute it over there. Because of the additional expenses you will probably have to fix the price at about 60-75 cents in your CURRENCY—c'est votre affaireb—at any rate, we here have to receive l/9d per copy, with the exception of those sold through the bookseller since his discount will have to be subtracted, otherwise we shall not recover our costs. The book will hit the autonomists like a bombshell, and if anyone at all can be broken, it will finish off Bakunin. Lafargue and I wrote it together; only the conclusion is by Marx and myself. We shall send it to the entire press. You yourself will be surprised at the infamies revealed in it; even the people from the Commission0 were quite astonished.

The FEDERAL COUNCIL here proceeds on its somnolent way. Apart from the printed reports I see and hear little of them. At all events, Jung, Hales, Mottershead and Co. are finished as far as their pseudo-International is concerned.

Get some Copenhagen addresses for me through Würtz right away, so that I can send there a few copies of the Alliance report. Have not heard another word from Pihl, so that I do not know if his address is still valid.

Apart from that things are jogging along here. My wifed is in Ramsgate and Mrs Marx was due to go there today too. Jenny Longuet will probably enlarge the family in a week or two (do not

[^1]: a K. Marx and F. Engels, The Alliance of Socialist Democracy and the International Working Men's Association. - b that's your business - c The Commission appointed to prepare for publication the minutes and resolutions of the Hague Congress. Apart from Marx and Engels, it included Eugène Dupont, Léo Frankel, Auguste Serraillier and Benjamin Le Moussu. - d Lydia Burns



