---
Volume: 44
Document_Title: "308. Marx to Nikolai Danielson. 12 August "
Page_Range: "557-558"
---

# 308. Marx to Nikolai Danielson. 12 August 



**[p. 522]**

Dupont too is attempting to exploit his patent in BRASS INSTRUMENTS, but keeps coming up against obstacles, mostly of his own making, since he knows as much about business as my dog. All this between ourselves. You have no idea how sensitive these people are about private communications, moreover their sensitivity is in direct proportion to their own tendency to gossip.

Finally, it would still be best if one of you were to come. How can we possibly represent the General Council here as effectively as this would be done by one of its members?

Your

F. Engels

First published abridged in Briefe und Printed according to the original Auszüge aus Briefen von loh. Phil. Becker, , , . , , . ,. , r i r- Jos. Dietzgen, Friedrich Engels, Karl Marx Published in English for the first u. A. an F. A. Sorge und Andere, Stuttgart, time 1906 and in full in: Marx and Engels,

Works, First Russian Edition, Vol. XXVI, Moscow, 1935

308

MARX TO NIKOLAI DANIELSON

London, 12 August 1873

N. Danielson, Esq.

My dear Sir,

I have since months suffered severely, and found myself, for some time, even in a dangerous state of illness, consequent upon overwork. My head was so seriously affected, that a paralytic strike was to be apprehended, and even now I am not yet able to work more than a few hours. This is the only reason why I have not before acknowledged, and thanked you for, the precious collection of books you were so kind as to send me.720

[^1]: IN ST PETERSBURG



