---
Volume: 44
Document_Title: "309. Marx to Engels. 29 August "
Page_Range: "558-560"
---

# 309. Marx to Engels. 29 August 

You will have received—at least I read your last letter in that sense—3 copies of Das Kapital in one volume. I send you to-day the last livraison3 of the Heftedition.h U5

We are publishing the Revelations on the Alliance'623 (you know the sect of teetotallers call themselves thus in England721), and want to know the cheapest way to send you a somewhat large number of copies. A letter relative to the chiefd of that sanctimonious people is still held in reserve.574

I thank you much for your last long letter and shall make proper use of it. It is of great commercial value for myself.722

Yours most truly,

A. Williams'

First published, in Russian, in Minuvshiye Reproduced from the original No. 1, St Petersburg, 1908 . Published in English for the first time

309

MARX TO ENGELS

[London,] 29 August 1873

Dear FRED,

Serraillier was here this evening. He was full of complaints and very much in two minds about his going to Geneva.724 Quite apart from personal reasons, he says he had only agreed in the first place because he thought we were going. In addition, however, he has now read the mandate, which had been promised him two weeks before the Congress, so he says. He finds that it contains things, such as increasing the POWERS of the COUNCIL, that he could not defend either personally or in the name of the FEDERAL COUNCIL.'

But none of that is the essential point. The FEDERAL COUNCIL has received a letter from Perret which makes it clear

1. that the Fédération Romande wishes to annul the plenary powers granted to the GENERAL COUNCIL by the Hague Congress ;

[^1]: IN RAMSGATE 723

[^2]: a instalment - b edition in serial parts - c K. Marx and F. Engels, The Alliance of Socialist Democracy and the International Working Men's Association. - d Bakunin -

[^3]: e Marx's pseudonym - ' the British Federal Council





**[p. 1913]**

2. that not a single member of the Romance gang in Geneva will accept a mandate from an English section, apart from Duval, and even he will only do so on the condition stated under 1;

3. that, as Perret writes, none of the oafs there is prepared to spend as much as a week at the Congress, which would be essential if the mandate is to go through.

Under these circumstances I am definitely of the opinion that it would be better for Serraillier not to go. T h e scandal rebounds back on us, not him, if he goes—under these circumstances, which could not have been foreseen. In my view he should send a letter enclosing the American papers 7 2 5 and go on to say that ill health prevents him from taking u p the mandates he has received from New York, London, etc. Finally, he should say that the letters he has received in London from the main continental countries have convinced him that in the light of circumstances currently prevailing in France, Germany, Austria, Denmark, Portugal, etc., no bona fide congress is possible.

Telegraph YES right away, if you agree; No, if opposed. I did not wish to commit myself to anything definite without consulting you first.

In view of the circumstances in Switzerland, which have been carefully concealed from us up to the last moment, I think it would be absolutely crazy to send Serraillier. O u r complete abstention, which even at this stage both can and will make an impression on the governments and the bourgeoisie—despite the hullabaloo the papers will create to start with—va au diable,3 if Serraillier turns u p under these circumstances. Salut

Your

K. M.

[^1]: Sorge also writes (perhaps you know already) that the Dutch have informed them that they will also attend the Jura Con- gress,671 and he insists that the Dutch should not be admitted to our (!) Congress, a point which Serraillier, as their mandated representative, is expressly asked to support.

[^2]: MY COMPLIMENTS TO MRS.0

[^3]: First published in Der Briefwechsel zwischen Printed according to the original F. Engels und K. Marx, Bd. IV, Stuttgart, Published in English for the first time

[^4]: a will go to the devil - b Lydia Burns



