---
Volume: 44
Document_Title: "310. Engels to Marx. 30 August "
Page_Range: "560-561"
---

# 310. Engels to Marx. 30 August 



**[p. 310]**

ENGELS TO MARX

IN LONDON

Ramsgate, 30 August 1873

Dear Moor,

If Serraillier won't go, we cannot force him to.724 However, / cannot absolve him of his promise, since I have telegraphed his acceptance," and in any event he must himself come to terms with the General Council.

Against the reasons you give, it must be urged that it is important for us to have a reporter; without Serraillier we shall not receive any account of what takes place, especially in the closed sessions.

What is absolutely essential, however, and our duty to the General Council, is that the two reports enclosed725 which are utterly useless in Geneva in English, should be translated into French in time and sent off to Geneva. In the circumstances you must make sure that this is done. If 3-4 people each do a part at the same time, it can be ready in 1-2 days, and even if it doesn't come out just as one would have wished, the rush excuses everything.

In the circumstances, the sorrier our Congress672 turns out to be the better, of course, and to that extent it is better if Seiraillier doesn't go. But I am in the awkward position of having given assurances that he would attend, assurances that I cannot reverse unilaterally.

Why on earth doesn't even one of those Geneva jackasses write in good time! What a dirty trick, and brought about by the very people who made all the fuss to start with! The others will undoubtedly have the laugh on them and insist that they should indeed eat humble pie and recognise their Congress671 and their new Rules. And Duval, who was in such a fury in The Hague,580

has also joined in the hue and cry—it really is the last straw.

Well, it will all be very jolly. Regards to all.

Your

F. E.

[^1]: First published in Der Briefwechsel zwischen Printed according to the original F. Engels und K. Marx, Bd. IV, Stuttgart, j g 13 Published in English for the first time a See this volume, p. 518.



