---
Volume: 44
Document_Title: "311. Marx to Engels. 30 August "
Page_Range: "561-562"
---

# 311. Marx to Engels. 30 August 



**[p. 311]**

MARX TO ENGELS726

IN RAMSGATE

[London,] 30 August 1873

Dear FRED,

Your telegram45 received; Serraillier arrived later on with Perret's letter to Days in his pocket.727 I couldn't keep it for you because Days, who is secretary of the local FEDERAL COUNCIL, needs to report on it on Tuesday.3 However, Serraillier has promised to make a copie of it for you. The letter is classical; the 'ILLIMITED' POWERS or rather 'pouvoirs illimités' which the La Haye Congress580

granted to the GENERAL COUNCIL, must be withdrawn from it. On this point the Genevois—and ditto Mr Perret—are agreed; for then there is some hope that des sections jurassiennes will go over to them. For years now this same Perret has been writing that these SECTIONS would go over to them if only the GENERAL COUNCIL would proceed more energetically against the Jurassians! And of course everything is always looked at from the most bigoted and most parochial Swiss point of view. Furthermore, Frankel tells me that the same riff-raff are discontented with the resolutions passed at Olden, or whatever the place is called where the local Swiss congress met!70s In the circumstances there can be absolutely no question of going to Geneva672 on account of people like that, people who even refuse to accept mandates from English sections.b

I think you would do well to send a counter-order to Hepner without delay; he will still receive the avisc in time.

Yesterday, A FEW HOURS before I wrote to you, je l'ai échappé belle? and can still feel the effects in all my bones. I drank a spoonful of raspberry vinegar and some of it stuck in my wind-pipe. I had a terrible choking-fit, my face went quite black, etc. Another second or so and I would have departed this life. The first thing that occurred to me post festume was whether it might not be possible to bring about such ACCIDENTS artificially. It would be the most decent and least suspicious method, and moreover a highly expeditious one, of doing away with oneself. It would be a great service to the English if one could recommend the experiment publicly.

[^1]: a 3 September - b See this volume, p. 523. - c message - d I had a narrow escape - e subsequently



