---
Volume: 44
Document_Title: "312. Engels to Marx. 3 September "
Page_Range: "562-564"
---

# 312. Engels to Marx. 3 September 



**[p. 527]**

Madame Longuet will arrive tomorrow, after all sorts of telegrams to and fro—it was very stormy in Boulogne.

Aproposl Lafargue and Le Moussu have definitely split up.719 It took place—the separation, that is—when Le Moussu declared his willingness to do so since reluctance was in evidence on the other side. Le Moussu is now counting on you. I think the separation is a good thing and had become a necessity for both sides, since a lot of time was wasted in this war between the frogs and mice.728

Salut.

Your

K. M.

As for Serraillier, who couldn't work for a week because he was unwell and who would have lost ABOUT another two weeks with the Geneva trip,724 I am very pleased that we have not given him any reason to accuse us later on of having ruined his whole business! You know how, where and when the Frenchman makes a habit of bringing to bear his 'working-class nature' against the 'bourgeois' in his own party.

Have received a letter from França.729

312

ENGELS TO MARX

Ramsgate, 3 September 1873

Dear Moor,

Received your wife's letter this morning, according to which Jennya has successfully put it behind her. Our warmest congratu- lations. There is always some cause for concern the first time and hence a double sense of relief if all goes well.

[^1]: First published in Der Briefwechsel zwischen Printed according to the original F. Engels und K. Marx, Bd. IV, Stuttgart, jgjg Published in English in full for the first time

[^2]: IN LONDON

[^3]: a Jenny Longuet





**[p. 528]**

The Genevans are complete philistines. So everything is to be overturned on the possibility that des sections jurassiennes will return to the fold! I am convinced that they are already up to their tricks with the others and absolutely dying to compromise— had we gone there, we might well have found everything settled in advance. The confidential report of the General Council can hardly be entrusted to such a congress672 in extenso. Incidentally, the others are also making a rather poor beginning with only 30 members!671

I had given my agreement to Le Moussu on 2 matters unconnected with each other3:

1. to advance him the £23 for his patent, whatever the situation;

2. if Lafargue were to leave him in the lurch, or back out of his own accord, or if there were to be a separation in any other form that would not prejudice my relations with Lafargue—then I would enter into negotiations with him and Mooreb on the same basis as they had established with Lafargue previously. It seems to follow from your letter that the terms of the separation were such that Lafargue cannot reproach me with anything if I take his place and go into partnership with Le Moussu. If this is right—and your opinion on this will be entirely sufficient for me—then Moore and Le Moussu can come and visit me in the evening, when I have to be in because of Andrews, and we can talk the matter over. But if he has to have the money for the patent immediately, he must let me know at once, since I would have to go to London right away to see to it.

My congratulations on your NARROW ESCAPE.0 Unfortunately, such fits cannot be produced to order with any certainty. The raspberry vinegar, and even more solid bodies, might have got into your wind-pipe a hundred times over without provoking the same symptoms.

Would you inform Le Moussu of what I said above, if you believe that I can do it with a good conscience vis-à-vis Lafargue? It should be made clear, incidentally, that my offer only refers to Lafargue's position in 'Moore & Le Moussu'. The other affair— the big printing works—should be abandoned for the time being, if only for commercial reasons. We shall have enough on our hands, for the moment at least, with exploiting the patent itself. I shall explain all this when I come.

[^1]: Have written to Hepner.730

[^2]: See this volume, p. 527. - b George Moore - c See this volume, p. 526.



