---
Volume: 44
Document_Title: "316. Marx to Eugen Oswald. 20 September "
Page_Range: "567-568"
---

# 316. Marx to Eugen Oswald. 20 September 



**[p. 532]**

1) because, as stated, I had a previous engagement; 2) because, contrary to your expectation, I do not recollect having heard Miss Carroll's name once before, nor could I get any further information from one or two others I asked.3 And I cannot be expected to take the chair for parties of whom I know nothing or next to nothing.

3) I never took the chair at a public meeting of Englishmen and do not intend doing so. When I once took the chair for you, that was at the meeting of a German private society of which I was a member.

At all events this little incident15 will not have been without its use, if you will see from it the impropriety of proposing people for chairmen using their names without having previously obtained their consent.

Yours fraternally

First published in: Marx and Engels, Reproduced from the original Works, First Russian Edition, Vol. XXVI, , , ,. Moscow, 1935 Published in English for the first time

316

MARX TO EUGEN OSWALD

[London,] 20 September 1873

My dear Oswald,

I have written to Wrôblewski,17 who is as fluent in Russian as he is in Polish, being Lithuanian by birth.

[^1]: IN LONDON

[^2]: a Crossed out in the draft here: 'Suppose even she was what you must have considered her when you recommended her to me, a sincere revolutionist, you still must know that there are a good many different sorts of them and that it would be impossible for any of us to identify ourselves publicly with every one of them. Not knowing anything of Miss Carroll's views, it might very possibly have been my duty to get up at the end of her speech and express my dissent from part of what she had said, and thus do more harm than good.' - b Crossed out in the draft here: 'which for me has no importance whatever'.



