---
Volume: 44
Document_Title: "319. Engel s to Friedrich Adolph Sorge. 25 November "
Page_Range: "571-574"
---

# 319. Engel s to Friedrich Adolph Sorge. 25 November 



**[p. 536]**

something completely unconnected with the general function of the General Council and in my view it should never have left our hands.

I hope that the American PANIC does not get too much out of hand and so have too great a repercussion on England and hence on Europe. General periodic crises are always preceded by such partial ones. If they are too violent they only preempt the general crisis and take the sting out of it.

With cordial greetings from my wife.

Your

Karl Marx

I would be glad to receive any cuttings from the Yankee papers reporting on the crisis.

What is the address of our mutual friend, Weydemeyer's executora?

Next week Engels will send you the 25 copies of the Allianceb

still outstanding.

First published in Briefe und Auszüge aus Printed according to the original Briefen von Joh. Phil. Becker, Jos. Dietzgen, Friedrich Engels, Karl Marx u. A. an F. A. Sorge und Andere, Stuttgart, 1906

319

ENGELS TO FRIEDRICH ADOLPH SORGE

London, 25 November 1873

Dear Sorge,

Having been summoned to Germany by the illness and death of my mother,c7M I returned from there a few days ago and found your letter of 22 October waiting for me. Quite unknowingly you do me an injustice to blame me for keeping you in the dark for so long about decisions and developments here. The facts are these.

[^1]: IN HOBOKEN

[^2]: a Hermann Meyer - b K. Marx and F. Engels, The Alliance of Socialist Democracy and the International Working Men's Association - c Elisabeth Engels





**[p. 537]**

After long hesitation and after receiving lukewarm reports from some places and no news at all from others, Marx and I had come to the conclusion that the Congress672 would become essentially a local Swiss affair and that since no one would be able to come over directly from America, we would do best to stay away too. (An additional factor was that no mandates arrived for either Marx or myself, apart from the alternative one from America.) As soon as this had definitively been agreed, I went off to the seaside at Ramsgate723 to join my family, a break I needed urgently in view of my constant insomnia and nervous irritability. While I was there, Marx wrote to me about the sudden revelations about the treachery of the Genevansa which made it necessary to decide that neither should Serraillier attend the Congress.724 This was pretty clear to me from Marx's letter and I agreed to it on condition that Serraillier should inform you at once.b A few days later I went to London for 24 hours in order to pay the Alliance" printerd and to organise the distribution. I had a look at the relevant documents and became convinced that it would have been the greatest folly for Serraillier to have gone there as your representative. Our absence and his, together with that of every German with one exception^ stamped the Congress as a merely local assembly which still looked respectable enough when compared to the Alliance,671

but which could lay no claim to any moral authority vis-à-vis the International. Furthermore, the general world situation was such that any congress was bound to end badly, as we can see from the fact that by now both the congress of the Alliance and that of the International have completely been forgotten. WELL, I urged Marx to let you know at once and went off again, and until I received your present letter, I assumed that this had been done. For his part, Marx had thought that Serraillier would have given you the first news when he sent back the money and that he could therefore wait until he was in a position to give you information about the results of the Congress, etc.

Instead of that, Serraillier gave the money to Lafargue for safe keeping, as we discovered only last week, and I shall get it from Lafargue in the next few days and take care of the matter. I am very busy looking through the—extremely bad—German transla- tion of the Alliance pamphlet, which has been sent to me—Bracke is bringing it out in Brunswick.735 What I have of your version has

[^1]: a See this volume, pp. 523-24. - b Ibid., p. 525. - c K. Marx and F. Engels, The Alliance of Socialist Democracy and the International Working Men's Association. - d Andrews - e A. Burchardt





**[p. 538]**

been very helpful in correcting the other one. Of course, the matter is urgent and I have to work through it as the manuscript has to go back this week.

Marx and his youngest daughter3 went to Harrogate in Yorkshire yesterday; both of them are to spend some time there convalescing.736 He needed it badly; the severe symptoms he had felt in the spring had vanished, but chronic brain pressure set in, which made him unable to work and unwilling to write, and which, if allowed to go unchecked for too long, might have serious consequences. During the next few days he will go and see our friend Gumpert in Manchester, the only doctor in whom he has complete confidence and who also looked after him in the spring. His condition is another reason why you have had to wait so long for a reply.

Bakunin's answer to the pamphlet has been to send the Journal de Genève and the Jurassians a statement announcing his political demise737: I withdraw—dorénavant je ne troublerai plus personne et je ne demande que ce qu'on me laisse tranquille à mon tour^ He is gravely mistaken in this. Apart from that, not the slightest attempt to reply to anything.

Outine has been here for 4 weeks or so and has told us still more wonderful stories about Bakunin. The fellow has really put his catechism738 into practice; for years now he and his Alliance10

have lived exclusively from blackmail, relying on the fact that nothing could be put into print about this without compromising other people who have to be taken into account. You have no idea what a low-down gang they are. That aside, their pseudo- International is as quiet as a mouse; the pamphlet has exposed their frauds and Messrs Guillaume & Co. will have to let the dust settle first. In Spain they have put an end to themselves, see my article in the Volksstaat.c

The real International is equally silent. I have still not had an answer from Mesa, to whom I wrote in September.45 In Portugal they are all being persecuted and have to watch their step. In Italy a section has been formed in Melegnano,739 a fact I herewith bring to the attention of the General Council; for the address see below. The Plebe is still coming out, but very irregularly and with a strong emphasis on mediation. That is all I have to report. The federation here, having been badly shaken by Jung, Hales & Co., is

[^1]: a Eleanor - b henceforth I shall interfere with no one and in return ask only that others should leave me in peace too. - c F. Engels, 'The Bakuninists at Work'.



