---
Volume: 44
Document_Title: "320. Engel s to Marx. 29 November "
Page_Range: "574-576"
---

# 320. Engel s to Marx. 29 November 

Your

F. Engels

Address for Melegnano: Luigi Zoncada, Melegnano, Provincia de Milano, Italia.

First published in Briefe und Auszüge aus Printed according to the original Briefen von Joh. Phil. Becker, Jos. Dietigen, Friedrich Engels, Karl Marx u. A. an Published in English for the first F. A. Sorge und Andere, Stuttgart, 1906 t i m e

320

ENGELS TO MARX81

IN HARROGATE736

[London,] 29 November 1873

Dear Moor,

Lopatin left for Paris again yesterday evening. He intends to come here in a month or two, at which time Lavrov too will move in with his printing shop, unless he changes his mind on account of the expense, a matter to which I particularly drew Lopatin's attention.

It is unlikely that Lopatin and Outine will ever be very firm friends, their temperaments are not really compatible and the shadow of their first cool encounter in Geneva still weighs down on them. Moreover, Lopatin remains a great Russian patriot and still treats the pycc Koe 4 U o a as something special, having nothing to do with the West, and is hardly grateful to Outine for having initiated us into its mysteries. In addition, Lopatin has just passed through Lavrov's hands and coming fresh, as he does, from the solitude of Siberia,740 may well be fair game for the latter's befuddled dreams of reconciliation.

On the other hand, he is fed up to the back teeth with the

[^1]: a (Russ.) Russian cause





**[p. 540]**

que cela leur donne du prestigeb\

So in my view it is of no great significance whether Lopatin takes Elpidin, for example, not for a sophisticated rogue, but for a simple ass. Even though it was precisely the indiscreet remarks of this same Elpidin to a certain Fedetzki or Feletzki, and the latter's inability to hold his tongue, that put the Russian government wise to Lopatin's presence in Irkutsk and so brought about his arrest.

When Lopatin arrived at Irkutsk, Chernyshevsky was 'quite close by', i.e. 700-800 English miles further on near Nerchinsk, but was straightaway removed to Srednevilyuisk, to the north of Yakutsk, 65° latitude, where, apart from the indigenous Tungus, the only company he has are the non-commissioned officer and the 2 soldiers who guard him.

Having escaped in July, Lopatin remained in hiding in Irkutsk for a month, ending up in the house of the very man who had been ordered to discover his hiding place. He then travelled on his own telega" to Tomsk, disguised as a peasant and doing the driving himself; from there he went by steamer, from Tobolsk by post-horse and finally by train to St Petersburg, still dressed as a peasant. There he stayed in hiding for another month, after which he quietly crossed the frontier by train.

In the nepe BOA 'Kan HTa Aa'd Chapters 2-5 (including machinery and large-scale industry) are by him, i.e. quite a decent chunk. He is now translating from the English for IIOAJIKOBT..'

Yesterday I read the chapter on factory legislation' in the French translation.436 With all due respect for the skill with which this chapter has been rendered into elegant French, I still felt regret at what had been lost from the beautiful chapter. Its vigour and vitality and life have gone to the devil. The chance for an ordinary writer to express himself with a certain elegance has been purchased by castrating the language. It is becoming increasingly impossible to think originally in the strait-jacket of modern

[^1]: a N. G. Chernyshevsky, 'ÜHCb Ma 6e3i> a^peca' (Letters Without an Address). - b because it will add to their prestige - c (Russ.) cart - d (Russ.) translation of Capital - e Polyakov - f Capital, Vol. I, Ch. X, 'The Working-Day'.



