---
Volume: 44
Document_Title: "321. Mar x to Engels. 30 November "
Page_Range: "576-579"
---

# 321. Mar x to Engels. 30 November 



**[p. 541]**

French. Everything striking or vital is removed if only by the need, which has become essential almost everywhere, to bow to the dictates of a pedantic formal logic and change round the sentences. I would think it a great mistake to take the French version as a model for the English translation. In English the power of expression in the original does not need to be toned down; whatever has inevitably to be sacrificed in the genuinely dialectical passages can be made up in others by the greater energy and brevity of the English language.

Apropos, how does Mr Kokosky set about excusing his bad translation735? By claiming that I write in that 'Liebknecht/Marxian style' that is so hard to capture! What a compliment!

Tussy's letter arrived yesterday evening. Shall answer it tomorrow, so that you don't receive everything on one day.

What does Gumpert have to say? Best regards to Tussy.

Your

F. E.

First published in Der Briefwechsel zwischen Printed according to the original F. Engels und K. Marx, Bd. IV, Stuttgart, jgjg Published in English in full for the first time

321

[Harrogate,] 30 November 1873

On Thursday3 I went to see Gumpert whom I found very bald and aged. The poor fellow suffers terribly from haemorrhoidal convolution he has had for ages and for which he at long last intends to have an operation, something which, as he admits himself, always involves a certain degree of danger. I dined at his home (apart from him I could not, of course, see anyone in the

[^1]: MARX TO ENGELS742

[^2]: IN LONDON

[^3]: DEAR FRED,

[^4]: a 27 November

[^5]: 19-556





**[p. 542]**

few hours I had in Manchester) together with his four self-made children and their GOVERNESS.

Gumpert examined me BODILY and found a certain elongation of the liver which according to him I cannot get rid of completely until I go to Carlsbad.3 I have to take the same water as Tussy (they call it Kissingen water here, on account of its resemblance to the real things), but none of the mineral baths. Apart from that my regime and Tussy's are somewhat different. She may only walk in great moderation—a point on which Gumpert is wholly in agreement with Tussy's local doctor, Dr Myrtle (a very sweet- smelling name, the man is a Scot and boasts himself a Jacobite745 to this very day; he should get to know COLONEL Stuart chez Don Carlos); I, on the other hand, am supposed to go on vigorous marches. Gumpert's advice to do very little was scarcely necessary, since up to now I have actually done nothing, not even written letters. I had imagined that two weeks here would suffice, but Gumpert insisted on three. And in fact Tussy will not be able to take a much stronger mineral bath than she has been taking so far until the middle of next week.

Apropos. Gumpert has not received the Alliance pamphletb that I sent him; in general, there have been many complaints in Manchester about the failure of the post to deliver PAPERS and PRINTS. So send him one by return; ditto a copy of your articles on Spainc printed in the Volksstaat, if you have received them yet. Gumpert says that all these things interest him greatly, and that we must help to keep him au courant by sending him things from London, as otherwise he will completely go to seed among the Manchester philistines.

There was a storm here yesterday (although on the whole the air is extremely invigorating) and I caught a bad cold which has kept me indoors today, in accordance with the maxim: Principiis obsta.'

Our lune-de-miell couple, about whom Tussy has already told you, were so horribly bored in the first 3 days—they are called Briggs incidentally—that the young husband prescribed a friend,

[^1]: I am very sorry that the good Lopatin has missed me; but how lucky he has been in his misfortune.740 When he moves to London we shall protect him against Lavrov's SOFT-SAWDER.d

[^2]: a Czech name: Karlovy Vary. - b K. Marx and F. Engels, The Alliance of Socialist Democracy and the International Working Men's Association. - c F. Engels, 'The Bakuninists at Work'. - d See this volume, p. 539. - e Resist the first beginnings (Ovid, Remédia amoris, V, 91-92). - f honeymoon





**[p. 543]**

a devil with a limp, who arrived yesterday. Since then they seem LIVELIER, to judge by the noise they are making. Tussy and I took refuge in chess yesterday evening. Apart from that I have been reading Sainte-Beuve's book on Chateaubriand,* an author I have always disliked. If the man has become so famous in France it must be because he is in every respect the most classical incarnation of French vanité, a vanité not decked out in the light-hearted and frivolous garb of the 18th century, but strutting about in a romantic disguise and newly minted idioms; the spurious profundity, Byzantine exaggeration, the coquettishness with regard to the feelings, the flamboyant schillerising, WORD- PAINTING, theatrical, SUBLIME—in a word it is hotchpotch of lies never before achieved in either form or content.

It is very kind of Mr Kokosky to have invented a Liebknecht/Marxian style.b But it seems to refer to Liebknecht's French style, with which we are unacquainted. His German style is, after all, just as uncouth as that of Mr Kokosky and must please and appeal to him for that very reason.

Now that you are taking a look at the French translation of Capital,436 I would be grateful if you could persevere with it. I think you will find that some passages are superior to the Ger- man.

Your

K. M.

[^1]: MY COMPLIMENTS TO MRS LIZZY. Addio.

[^2]: First published in Der Briefwechsel zwischen Printed according to the original F. Engels und K. Marx, Bd. IV, Stuttgart, . inj3 Published in English in lull tor the first time

[^3]: a C.-A. Sainte-Beuve, Chateaubriand et son groupe littéraire sous l'Empire. - b See previous letter.

[^4]: 19*



