---
Volume: 44
Document_Title: "2. Eleanor Marx to Engels. 12 August 1870 "
Page_Range: "592-593"
---

# 2. Eleanor Marx to Engels. 12 August 1870 



**[p. 2]**

ELEANOR MARX TO ENGELS

IN MANCHESTER

[Ramsgate,] 12 August 1870 36 Hardres Street

My dear Engels,

You will see from the address that we are once more at Ramsgate.53 I suppose you know that last Tuesday3 Mohr and Jenny went to look for houses.—Mama and I left London yesterday, and after a very pleasant journey arrived here safe and sound. I say a pleasant journey, though I dont think Mama thought so. The sea was very rough, the waves washing over the ship and wetting everybody.—All the passengers with the exception of one lady, myself, and several gentlemen, were sea-sick. This lady and I climbed up just by the side of the Captain's deck, and there we sat down. It was great fun. This morning I turned out before six o'clock in the morning and walked about till nine. I intend to go to the sands now and take a good bath.—Yesterday Papa had a letter from Kugelmann.—He writes about that book to which Rossa's likeness is to be prefixed.74 He thanks very much for what you wrote,b but says he has not got the likeness.— Now Jane sent it shortly after your preface was sent—so I suppose they didn't get it. Would you mind sending them your copy—you know that one that was given with The Irishman.—We shall be much obliged to you if you will.—Now I must finish, for I'm in a hurry to go out again, so with best love to all

Believe me to be

Your affectionate

Tussy

[^1]: First published in MEGA, Abt. Ill, Bd. 4, Reproduced from the original Berlin, 1931

[^2]: a 9 August - b F. Engels, 'Notes for the Preface to a Collection of Irish Songs'.



