---
Volume: 44
Document_Title: "4. Jenny Marx to Engels. Around 13 September 1870 "
Page_Range: "594-596"
---

# 4. Jenny Marx to Engels. Around 13 September 1870 

would prefer after all to deal with the 'honest English'. That's the treatment they get from Bonapartist France. This is the thanks for their torchlight processions and demonstrations.

Warmest regards from us all and particularly from me to your dear wife.3

Yours,

Jenny Marx

First published in MEGA, Abt. Ill, Bd. 4, Printed according to the original Berlin, 1931

Published in English for the first time

4

JENNY MARX TO ENGELS

IN MANCHESTER

[London, around 13 September 1870]

Dear Mr Engels,

To come back to the subject of our house,24 I am sorry that you were put to the trouble of writing once again. The position with the wallpapering is as follows: Smith and the other agent said they were prepared to paper the room if you desired it; they both thought, however, that the red wallpaper, once it had been cleaned, mended and generally renovated, would be preferable to any other cheaper one, that it was 3 times as expensive as the one in the FRONT ROOM and that it was a genuine DINING ROOM paper. So I went back with Lenchenb to have another look at it, as I did not trust my own judgment entirely, and Lenchen was definitely of 'Smith's' opinion and still claims that she prefers it to any other. I remained undecided and since I did not really know what to do, I waited for your letter. It might perhaps be best if you could look at it for yourself and made up your own mind. It will only take a day if you want to have a new one. Please let me know what you would like to have. Apart from that, the house seemed in good REPAIR from top to bottom, and neither of us could find anything

[^1]: Warmest thanks for your kind long and interesting letter.45

[^2]: a Lydia Burns - b Helene Demuth





**[p. 560]**

amiss. Two broken windows were just being replaced and also a new robinet* (I can't just think of the German word) on the stone sink in the washhouse. Apart from that everything seemed to be in good order and I think that the man will replace anything still missing without delay. He appeared very willing in every respect.

At any rate, you must stay with us for a few nights and use our house as a base from which to make your ARRANGEMENTS. We shall be able to find room for everyone. For our house is a veritable palace and much too large and dear for us in my view.

Serraillier has written a very interesting letter from Paris which confirms everything we already knew long since about those amiable phrasemongers.b

Serraillier says you can almost get torn in pieces if you tell the truth, and even the better and the best ones are living on their memories of 1792. He is absolutely delighted about Rochefort, whom he has now seen for the second time, and he has enrolled in the home-guard unit du cher Gustave.0 It might be better not to tell Dupont for the moment that Serraillier is helping to defend le sol sacré? He might after all start to suffer from le coeur gros" and want to be off. Et à quoi bon?1 With his quick temper Dupont would make a fine impression. We have had no news from the Lafargues. I am overjoyed that he is SAFE.

Jenny is feeling better, but is greatly affected by the fate of the grrande nation, with which both girlsg are completely infatuated. Time will change all that. Indeed, we have all experienced that enthusiasm.

Your

Jenny Marx

[^1]: Best regards to your dear wifeh from

[^2]: First published in MEGA, Abt. Ill, Bd. 4, Berlin, 1931

[^3]: Printed according to the original

[^4]: Published in English for the first time

[^5]: a tap - b See this volume, p. 77. - c of dear Gustave (Flourens) - d the sacred soil - e a heavy heart - f And what would be the good of it? - 8 Jenny and Eleanor Marx - h Lydia Burns



