---
Volume: 44
Document_Title: "5. Jenny Marx to Peter Imandt. Around 13 June 1871 "
Page_Range: "596-597"
---

# 5. Jenny Marx to Peter Imandt. Around 13 June 1871 



**[p. 5]**

J E N N Y M A R X T O P E T E R I M A N D T 1 0 0

IN DUNDEE

[London, around 13 June 1871] 1 Maitland Park Road

My dear Mr Imandt,

I have just received your letter and make all haste to let you know that Moor is 'ALL RIGHT'. The rumours are just a lot of police fabrications which Stieber has invented in league with those French scoundrels.756 You will be receiving COPIES of the Address of the International3 today. Perhaps you can arrange for something from it to appear in the press. The girlsb have been with Laura for the past 6 weeks.212 They were in Bordeaux at first. But then things got too hot for Lafargue. They made their escape from there and are now close to the Spanish border; SAFE, I hope.

Your brother also wrote briefly yesterday about Moor's arrest. Please tell him what you know. I have my hands full today.

You cannot imagine, dear Mr Imandt, what we have been through, all the misery and anger, during the last few weeks. It took more than 20 years to develop such brave, able, heroic men, and now almost all of them are lost. There is still hope for some, but the best have been murdered. Varlin, Jaclard, Rigault, Tridon.757 And above all the true heroes, who fought on without leaders for 8 days in Villette, Belleville and St Antoine0: workers, both men and women!!d The despicable loudmouths like Félix Pyat will probably save their skins. Others are still in hiding, but I am afraid that the bloodhounds will hunt them down.

With best regards.

Yours,

Jenny Marx

[^1]: First published in: Marx and Engels, Printed according to the original Works, Second Russian Edition, Vol. 33, Moscow, 1964

[^2]: a K. Marx, The Civil War in France. - b Jenny and Eleanor Marx - c working-class quarters in Paris - d In the original, this sentence is given as a postscript.



