---
Volume: 44
Document_Title: "11. Eleanor Marx to Nikolai Danielson. 23 January 1872 "
Page_Range: "610-612"
---

# 11. Eleanor Marx to Nikolai Danielson. 23 January 1872 

I must not forget to tell you that Lafargue has again been disturbed by the police, has been obliged to leave St Sebastian and is now staying at Madrid. So Laura is left alone with her childa in a strange country. We cannot imagine on what pretext Lafargue has again been expelled as the International, of which he formed sections, is not being persecuted at this moment in Spain.

As I wish to post this letter to-day I must say good-bye to you now. Hoping soon to have the long-promised letter from Trautchen and with my best love to her and Käuzchen ,b

Believe me, my dear Doctor,

Very faithfully yours,

Jenny Marx

Not only in Germany books, papers and letters are being continually lost. I do not know whether this is owing to the so-called postboxes in the streets. The next time I send you anything I will post it at the office.0

First published, in Italian, in Movimento Reproduced from the original operaio, No. 2, Milan, 1955

11

ELEANOR MARX TO NIKOLAI DANIELSON

London, 23 January 1872

Dear Sir,

Papa is so very much overworked at the present moment that he begs you will excuse his not writing himself and my doing so for him.—He has so very little time that I am convinced you will for once not mind his not writing himself.—He says I am to tell you that notwithstanding all the work he has to get through, he would have written long since had he not put off doing so from day to day in the hope of being able to correspond directly with you.—A

[^1]: IN ST PETERSBURG

[^2]: a Charles Etienne Lafargue - b Gertrud and Franziska Kugelmann - c A note in the margin in Jenny Marx's hand: 'This Moreau is no doubt a police agent anxious to obtain the portraits of the Communists.'

[^3]: 20*



second edition of Papa's book" is about to appear in Germany, and this has given him much to do, for many changes have been made. A French edition436 is also about to appear, and you can understand what work it is to prepare for all this.— He is up the greater part of the night writing, and all day he does not leave his room—I am much afraid that this will compromise his health.—It is to be hoped that he will soon have finished with these difficult editions. As to Roberti, Papa says I am to tell you that he has seen the essay in the Revue Positive, but never received the book.762—Thus it would be impossible for him to write anything in refutation of the said book—and the essay does not give sufficient matter for attack.—Papa thinks you would do well to retard the Russian edition in no way, but to continue as quickly as possible.860—I am in great hopes that when once a French edition of Das Kapital has appeared, an English one will soon follow763— the English ape everything the French do, only when a thing comes from Paris does it meet with success here.—For instance, the biography and portrait which appeared of Papa in the Illustration have been copied by no end of papers—not only here but in Spain, Italy, Germany, America, etc.—doubtless you also have seen it in Russia.

We are all beginning to feel very anxious about our 'mutual friend'.b—The interest we all take in him makes us fear greatly.740—Alas that he should ever have left England! — It is several months since we heard anything, and the last news was not reassuring.—

Hoping, dear Sir, that you will excuse Papa, and begging you to accept his best compliments,

I am

Yours most faithfully,

Eleanor Marx

[^1]: First published in: Marx and Engels, Reproduced from the original Works, First Russian Edition, Vol. XXVI, Moscow 1935 Published in English for the first time

[^2]: Volume I of Capital - b Hermann Lopatin



