---
Volume: 44
Document_Title: "12. Wilhelm Liebknecht to Luigi Stefanoni. 29 February 1872 "
Page_Range: "612-613"
---

# 12. Wilhelm Liebknecht to Luigi Stefanoni. 29 February 1872 



**[p. 12]**

WILHELM LIEBKNECHT TO LUIGI STEFANONI764

IN FLORENCE

Leipzig, 29 February 1872

Sir,

I have just learnt that your paper has not only published repeated attacks on the International Working Men's Association, but that it has also (in Nos. 1 & 4 of this yeara) translated and endorsed the filthy slanders of the police about the London General Council and Marx in particular, which appeared in the Berlin Neuer Social-Demokrat.b

Since the publication of my previous letter to you, in the Libero Pensiero No. 3,c was suited and perhaps designed to give the impression that I approve of this conduct, I hereby formally request you to inform your readers that I must repudiate any connection with men who aid and abet the European police in their persecution of the International and thus—whether con- sciously or unconsciously—play into the hands of Messrs Bismarck and Bonaparte.

I may tell you furthermore that the regional congress in Chemnitz, to which I referred in the letter published by you, has unanimously come out in favour of the London General Coun- cil.418 In conclusion I would add that a copy of this letter is being sent to my friend and teacher, Karl Marx, for him to make whatever use of it he wishes.

W. Liebknecht

[^1]: First published in Gazzettino Rosa, Printed according to the news- No. 110, 20 April 1872 paper

[^2]: Translated from the Italian

[^3]: Published in English for the first time

[^4]: a 'L'Internazionale e il Consiglio Supremo di Londra', II Libero Pensiero, Nos. 1 and 4, 4 and 25 January 1872. - b J. Schneider, 'An die Socialdemokraten Deutschlands', Neuer Social-Demokrat, No. 67, 3 December 1871; see also items in Nos. 68-70 of Neuer Social-Demokrat of 6, 8 and 10 December 1871. - c on 18 January 1872



