---
Volume: 44
Document_Title: "13. Jenny Marx ( daughter) to Ludwig Kugelmann. 3 May 1872 "
Page_Range: "613-614"
---

# 13. Jenny Marx ( daughter) to Ludwig Kugelmann. 3 May 1872 



**[p. 13]**

JENNY MARX (DAUGHTER) TO LUDWIG KUGELMANN 76°

IN HANOVER

London, 3 May 1872

My dear friend,

Knowing how deep an interest you take in everything that concerns Papa, I hasten to tell you that he has just received the first proof-sheets of the livraisons* to be published in French.436

Unfortunately much time has been lost because M. Lachâtre, the publisher, insisted upon printing in the first livraison a portrait of the author of Das Kapital. Perhaps we ought to excuse Lachâtre for attaching so much importance to the publication of the portrait if we take into consideration the fact that the Russian government has allowed Das Kapital to be printed, but has put its veto upon the issue of the author's likeness!146 However that may be, the fact is that it is owing to the likeness which had to be first taken, then engraved, that a great delay has been occasioned.

The translation of the first part of the book is not so good as we had every reason to hope it would be from the fame of the translator, M. Roy, who has with great success translated Feuer- bach. Papa is obliged to make numberless corrections, he has to re-write not only whole sentences but entire pages. This labour, added to the correcting of the proof-sheets11 from Germany396 and to the overwhelming International business is too much even for Papa, though you know his Arbeitskraft0 is extraordinary. I hope therefore you will pardon him for not writing oftener to you. It is absolutely impossible for him to do so. I greatly fear he will soon fall ill again—as so much work will be unendurable when the hot weather sets in. At the present moment his health is not bad.

I suppose you have seen from the German papers that the International has been fiercely attacked in the House of Com- mons? Enclosed is the answer issued by the General Council0 and which (with the exception of The Eastern Post) not one London paper has had the common fairness to insert.765

[^1]: a instalments (of Volume I of Capital) - b of the second German edition of Volume I of Capital - c capacity for work - d K. Marx, 'Declaration of the General Council of the International Working Men's Association Concerning Cochrane's Speech in the House of Commons'.



