---
Volume: 44
Document_Title: "15. Jenny Marx ( daughter) to Ludwig and Gertrud Kugelmann. 27 June 1872 "
Page_Range: "617-618"
---

# 15. Jenny Marx ( daughter) to Ludwig and Gertrud Kugelmann. 27 June 1872 



**[p. 15]**

JENNY MARX (DAUGHTER) T O LUDWIG A N D

G E R T R U D KUGELMANN 7 6 6

IN HANOVER

[London,] 27 June 1872

My dear friends,

If you knew how often I have sat down to write to you, and how often I have been interrupted before I had written half a dozen lines, I am sure you would forgive me for not having answered your last letter before this.

You, my dear Doctor, will be glad to hear that Mohr is entirely of your opinion with regard to his activity in the International. He is convinced that so long as he remains in the General Council, it will be impossible for him to write the second volume of Das

Kapital, at which he has been unable to work during the last year. Consequently, he has made up his mind to give up his post as secretary immediately after the next Congress. Until that time however, he will have to work terribly hard in the Council and out of it, in order to prepare for the great battle that will be fought out at the Congress, which is to take place in Holland.580

You will have some idea of this work when I tell you that besides writing manifestoes, reading or answering mountains of letters, Mohr is obliged to attend not only the usual weekly sittings at Rathbone Place, but additional ones at our house and that of Engels,767 the last of which lasted from four in the afternoon until one o'clock in the morning. So much for International business. The remaining time (and there is not much of it) is given up to the correction of the proof-sheetsa from Meissner, and the revision of the French translation,436 which unfortunately is so very imperfect, that Mohr has been obliged to re-write the greater part of the first chapter. The first livraison^ consisting only of the portrait of the author, after the enclosed photograph by Mayall— an autograph letter1 and answer from the publisher Lachâtre, will shortly appear, in about a week.—Of the Russian transla- tion, which is excellent, a thousand copies have already been

[^1]: a of the second German edition of Volume I of Capital - b instalment - c See this volume, p. 347.



