---
Volume: 44
Document_Title: "16. Jenny Marx- Longuet to Ludwig and Gertrud Kugelmann. 23 December 1872 "
Page_Range: "618-620"
---

# 16. Jenny Marx- Longuet to Ludwig and Gertrud Kugelmann. 23 December 1872 

And now, my dearest Trautchen,a let me also give you some news. In all probability the marriage so often announced by the presse policière de Paris will take place somewhere about the middle of July—the 18th or 19th. Last week the Gaulois married me for the 20th time. It selected the notorious Landeck as my husband.b

When I am married in good earnest I suppose those idiotic scribblers will let me alone.

I cannot send you M. Longuet's photograph, my dear friends, as I only have a very horrible one, that is being exposed in the shop windows, a caricature made to please the bourgeoisie, and to satisfy them that physically as well as morally the Communeux are the monsters for which they took them. So soon as I have a better likeness I will send it [to] you. What do you think of the enclosed one of Papa? We all greatly admire it and think it superior to the one he had taken at Hanover.—

With best love from all at home to yourselves and Käuzchenc

Believe me as ever

your affectionate friend

Jenny Marx

16

JENNY MARX-LONGUET TO LUDWIG AND

London, 23 December 1872 1 Maitland Park [Road]

My dear friends,

A Merry Christmas and a Happy New Year to you!—All at home join me in that heartfelt wish! I say all at home—for as you

[^1]: First published, in Italian, in Movimento Reproduced from the original operaio, No. 2, Milan, 1955

[^2]: GERTRUD KUGELMANN766

[^3]: IN HANOVER

[^4]: a Gertrud Kugelmann - b Le Gaulois, 18 June 1872. - c Franziska Kugelmann



The Lafargues are also staying at Hampstead, where they intend settling down for a few years. Mama wishes me to tell you that Laura is looking much better now than while staying at the Hague—she is much more cheerful, and we trust, will gradually altogether recover from the terrible shock caused by the death of her dear little boy.a All the other members of our family are well. I trust, my dear friends, you will be able to give me equally good news of yourselves. Do write me soon. You know I take a deep interest in all that concerns you. If you, my dear Trautchen, would only condescend to let me have one letter for every half dozen you write your friend Mrs Tenge I should be satisfied. You see I am not very exacting and not at all jealous!

The French translation of Das Kapital is slowly progressing.436

The next livraison11 will be excellent. Papa has re-written it altogether. The translator, who is a very dull dog, had made a sad mess of it. Unfortunately this sort of correction gives Mohr as much, if not more work, than if he had written the whole thing himself. He works every night till two or three o'clock in the morning. Have you read the articles on the first livraison that have

[^1]: a Charles Etienne Lafargue - b Gertrud Kugelmann - c instalment



