---
Volume: 44
Document_Title: "17. Jenny Marx- Longuet to Ludwig and Gertrud Kugelmann. 12 May 1873 "
Page_Range: "620-622"
---

# 17. Jenny Marx- Longuet to Ludwig and Gertrud Kugelmann. 12 May 1873 

My paper is full—so I have just only time to repeat to you our best wishes for yourselves and dear Fränzchen.0

I remain your sincere friend

Jenny

17

JENNY MARX-LONGUET TO LUDWIG AND

London, 12 May 1873

My dear friends,

I should be really grieved if I thought you had all this time been looking upon me as a faithless friend—but no—you must surely

[^1]: First published in Istorichesky arkhiv. No. 2, Reproduced from the original Moscow, 1959

[^2]: GERTRUD KUGELMANN766

[^3]: IN HANOVER

[^4]: a 'Karl Marx et son analyse de la valeur', La Liberté, Nos. 49 and 51, 8 and 22 December 1872. - b 'composition of value'. There you have the Belgian spirit as it is—the purest beer - c Franziska Kugelmann



I have yet to thank you for your last letters, my dear friends. To you, my dear Doctor, I need not write a line in answer to your opinion of the representatives of the Jura at the Congress.580 Time has taken the trouble to do that for me, and to do' it far more effectually than I could have done. Those miserable intriguers whose sole object is to sow dissension in the Association and to reap the benefit thereof, have been all along treated far too generously by their opponents.—Have you seen the last produc- tion of that infamous lump of vanity, Jung, in the Libertéd? The lies he tells of my husband he has concocted together with a quondam revolutionist who has now settled down as flunkey in an English gentleman's family, and is content to figure as 'calves'. A companion worthy of the illustrious Jung!

There is no truth whatever in the rumour to which you allude of Papa's going to America.—

[^1]: a Shakespeare, As You Like It, Act IV, Scene 1. - b Charles Longuet - c Matthew 6:34 - d H. Jung, 'Monsieur le rédacteur', La Liberté, No. 18, 4 May 1873.



