---
Volume: 44
Document_Title: "18. Charles Longuet to Hugo Heller. 23 June 1873 "
Page_Range: "622-626"
---

# 18. Charles Longuet to Hugo Heller. 23 June 1873 



**[p. 587]**

Kapital}

To you, dear Trautchen," I need not say that I think of you very very often and that I long to see you again,—you and dear Fränzchen.b Does that young lady still recollect a certain by-byc of old? Give her my best love. Mohr sends you and Wenzel many greetings in which my husband and mama join. He will write to you soon.

Very faithfully yours,

Jenny

First published in Istorichesky arkhiv, No. 2, Reproduced from the original Moscow, 1959

18

CHARLES LONGUET TO HUGO HELLER

IN OXFORD

[London,] 23 June 1873 1 Maitland Park Road, Haverstock Hill

My dear Friend,

May I thank you on both my own and my father-in-law's behalf for your kind suggestion; but at this moment we neither of us have anything of importance to convey to Paris. So if the French customs search your pockets or your baggage for petrol, they will be wasting their time.

Do not, however, let this deter you from coming to see us on Friday ,d if you have a moment to spare. In any case I very much hope we shall see you before your return to Oxford.

To the best of my knowledge there has never been a General Clément in the Commune; I presume you must mean Citizen

[^1]: a Gertrud Kugelmann - b Franziska Kugelmann - c Jenny's nickname coined by Marx - d 27 June





**[p. 588]**

My wife and I beg you to convey our respects to Mrs Heller.

With cordial salutations,

Charles Longuet

Published for the first time Printed according to the original

Translated from the French

NOTES

AND INDEXES



