---
Volume: 13
Document_Title: "K. Marx. Declaration of the Prussian Cabinet.- Napoleon's Plans.- Prussia's Policy "
Page_Range: "37-40"
---

# K. Marx. Declaration of the Prussian Cabinet.- Napoleon's Plans.- Prussia's Policy 



**[p. 8]**

Karl Marx

[DECLARATION OF THE PRUSSIAN CABINET.— NAPOLEON'S PLANS.—PRUSSIA'S POLICY]6

The following information, which, if true, is of the highest importance, and a portion only of which has appeared in the European journals, and that in a partial and disguised form, we have received from a most trustworthy source7 at London:

I. On the 3d of February the following declaration on the part of the Prussian Cabinet was dispatched to Paris and London:

" 1 . The explanations of Count Orloff leaving no doubt whatever as to the uselessness of any further attempt at mediation with the St. Petersburg Cabinet, Prussia hereby withdraws her mediation, the opportunity for which can no longer be said to exist.

II. Louis Napoleon has sent a confidential agent (Mr. Brenier) to Turin, with the following message for the King of Piedmont3

and Mr. Cavour: At a given time insurrectionary movements are to break out in Parma, Piacenza, Guastalla, and Modena. Sardinia must then occupy those countries, from which the now reigning princes are to be expelled. Napoleon is to guarantee to the King the incorporation with Sardinia of the three former principalities, and perhaps of Modena, also, in compensation for which territories the County of Savoy is to be ceded to France.9 This

[^1]: "2. Count Orloff's proposals of a formal and binding treaty of neutrality have met with an absolute refusal, communicated to him in a note, Prussia being decided upon observing even without Lhe concurrence of Austria, the most strict neutrality on her pan, which she is determined to enforce by suitable armaments, as soon as the proper moment shall have arrived.

[^2]: "3. Whether Prussia shall propose, in common with Austria, a general arming of the German Confederation, will depend on the conduct of the maritime powers toward Germany."

[^3]: Victor Emmanuel II.— Ed.





**[p. 9]**

Napoleon's!!) or from getting up popular movements generally. This measure, it is proposed, shall be executed instantly in the case of Ttalian disorders breaking out, or if Napoleon concentrates

[^1]: a Frederick William IV.— Ed. Future King of Prussia, William I.— Ed.





**[p. 10]**

Written on February 17, 1854 Reproduced from the newspaper

First published in the New-York Daily Tribune, No. 4022, March 9, 1854 as a leader

