---
Volume: 13
Document_Title: "K. Marx. British Finances "
Page_Range: "213-221"
---

# K. Marx. British Finances 



**[p. 184]**

Karl Marx

BRITISH FINANCES1

London, Tuesday, May 9, 1854

Although the bombardment of Odessa, which appears, after all, to have been a very indifferent affair, highly excites the public mind, there is another bombardment which, at this very moment, works upon it still more powerfully—namely, the bombardment of the public purse. Before entering into an analysis of the financial statement made by Mr. Gladstone in yesterday's sitting of the Commons, we must cast a retrospective glance at his official transactions hitherto.

Mr. Disraeli, when in office, had reduced the interest of Exchequer Bills to l'^d. a day, which was lower than it had ever been before; but Mr. Gladstone, anxious to improve upon his predecessor, went on further, reducing it to Id., neglecting to notice the circumstance that when Mr. Disraeli reduced the interest of Exchequer Bills money was abundant and cheap, while it was scarce and dear when Mr. Gladstone undertook to surpass his rival. Consequently, the great man was called upon to pay three millions of money for Exchequer Bills, which, if left alone, would have floated at the rate of interest at which he found them. This was not all. Having hardly paid off the Exchequer Bills at great public inconvenience, they had to be reissued again at a higher rate of interest. This was the first proof of the transcen- dent genius of the Oxford casuist, who was supposed to unite, as it were, all the talents in his single person, the coalition of all the talents having ejected the Tory Government upon their financial



**[p. 185]**

Mr. Gladstone, not content with dealing with the floating debt, made a still more curious experiment upon the funded debt. In April, 1853, he went down to the House of Commons with a very complicated scheme for the conversion of the South Sea stock and other funds, with an arrangement which might compel him to pay off nine and a half millions at the end of six months and twelve months. It has been very justly remarked that when he did so he had before him the secret dispatches of Sir Hamilton Seymour, and the warnings of Col. Rose and Consul Cunningham, communications which could leave no doubt of the hostile intention of the Russian Government and the proximity of a European war. But your readers will recollect that at the very period when Mr. Gladstone proposed his scheme I foretold its failure,3 and the necessity in which it would place the Government of borrowing, at the end of the financial year, to the amount of five or six millions. I made this statement without any respect to the Eastern complication. Besides, the scholastic air of Mr. Gladstone's scheme not being likely to seduce the stock-jobbing mob of the Exchange, there was wanted no great sagacity to foretell that the harvest must prove a failure, because the extent sowed was far below the average on account of the very wet season; that a bad harvest would cause a drain of bullion; that a drain of bullion could certainly not counteract the already existing tendency to a rise of interest in the money market, and that, with the general money market rising, it was absurd to suppose that the public creditor would allow the interest of his stock to be reduced or not eagerly grasp at the opportunity afforded him by Mr. Gladstone's experiment to insist on the repayment of his stock at par in order to invest it the following day at a net profit. Indeed, at the close of the financial year, Mr. Gladstone was obliged to pay off at par six millions of South Sea annuities which, without his intermeddling, would at this moment only command £85 for every £100 of stock at the Exchange. Thus he not only made needlessly away with six millions of the public funds, but the public incurred by this brilliant operation an actual loss of at least one million,

[^1]: a Marx, "The New Financial Juggle; or Gladstone and the Pennies", "Achievements of the Ministry", "Feargus O'Connor.— Ministerial Defeats.—The Budget", "Riot at Constantinople.—German Table Moving.—The Budget", "Soap for the People, a Sop for The Times.—The Coalition Budget" (see present edition, Vol. 12).— Ed.





**[p. 186]**

The ordinary Exchequer Bill is a security for 12 months, and is generally exchanged or paid off at the end of that time, and its rate of interest fluctuates with the market rate of interest. The Exchequer Bonds, on the contrary, bear a fixed rate of interest for years, and are a terminable annuity, transferable from hand to hand by a simple indorsement, without any cost whatever to either buyer or seller. Upon the whole, they may be described as imitations of railway debentures. When Mr. Gladstone first invented them in 1853, he took power to issue 30,000,000, and so proud he was of his invention that he thought the 30,000,000 would not be sufficient to answer the public demand, and that they would be at a high premium. However, "the public were glutted by very little more than £400,000, or about one-seventh of the amount he expected would be required." In order to raise his loan of 6,000,000, Mr. Gladstone brought out three sorts of Exchequer Bonds, such as have four years to run, such as have five years to run, and such as have six years to run. To make them

[^1]: Mr. Gladstone's speech in the House of Commons on March 6, 1854. The Times, No. 21682, March 7, 1854.— Ed.

[^2]: This refers to Gladstone's speeches in the House of Commons on March 21 and April 11, 1854 published in The Times, No. 21695, March 22 and No. 21713, April 12, 1854.— Ed.

[^3]: c Notice of the Exchequer dated April 21, 1854. The Times, No. 21722, April 22, 1854.— Ed.





**[p. 187]**

Mr. Gladstone, not content to throw upon the market three different sorts of Exchequer commodities, felt himself obliged to bring to the House of Commons not one but two, and perhaps three or four budgets. For contradistinction to the former Chan- cellors of [the] Exchequer he made his financial statement on March 6, before the termination of the financial year with the view, as he said, to make the country clearly understand its position.' The House were then told that there was a surplus of £3,000,000, but that in consequence of the perilous position in which they were placed, they had to incur an increased expenditure of £6,000,000, so that they were to be prepared for a deficiency of three millions this year. Before eight weeks have passed, he comes down to the House and asks for about seven millions more, although certainly in March he ought to have formed more correct estimates of the demands to be made upon the public resources.

The new supplementary estimates he asks for are:



**[p. 188]**

Total £8,100,000

The navy, army and ordnance estimates have already been voted without division on Friday evening,3 and I shall give a short resume of the different items on account of which they were asked for, viz: £300,000 were voted for addition of the army by 14,799 men of all ranks, which would raise the number of land forces to 40,493 above that voted last year, or 142,000 men. The supplementary ordnance estimates amount in the whole to £742,132. The supplementary navy estimates, amounting to £4,553,731 and including a part of the supplementary ordnance estimates, may be classed under the following heads:

I.

1. On account of wages to seamen and marines, 11,000 of whom were added to the navy, 2,500 from the Coast Guard and 8,500 by voluntary enlistment £461,760 (a.) To defray the charges of wages which will come in course

[^1]: of payment in the year ending the 31st of March, 1854, for 5,000 seamen tobe employed for 6 months additional 110,000 (b.) To meet the extra pay, beyond seamen's pay, of the 2,500

[^2]: coast guard men and seamen riggers now employed afloat 51,700 (c.) For raising 5,000 reserve seamen 220,000 (d.) For provisions of 5,000 men, for an additional period of 6

[^3]: months to the 31st of March, 1855 80,000 (e.) For additional victualing, stores required for freight of

[^4]: provisions, and for increase in the prices of several species of stores and provisions 50,000 (/.) For provisions, victualing, stores, etc., for an additional sum

[^5]: of 5,000 men to be employed in the fleet for one year 100,000 (g.) To provide for an additional number of clerks necessary in

[^6]: consequence of the war at the establishments at Whitehall and Somerset House 5,000 (h.) For the additional expense to be incurred for salaries in the

[^7]: several naval, victualing and medical establishments at home 2,000 (i.) For additional wages to artificers and others in the naval

[^8]: establishments abroad 1,000

[^9]: a May 5, 1854.— Ed.





**[p. 189]**

(a.) For the purchase of coal and other fuel for steam vessels 160,000 (b.) For the purchase of stores required to replace those issued to the

fleet 40,000 (c.) For the purchase and repair of steam machinery, it having been decided that the reserve fleet should have the advantage of steam 252,674 (d.) For the purchase of steam vessels, gun boats, etc 244,657 3. For new works, improvements and repairs in the yards 7,000

4. For medicines and medical stores 30,000 5. For miscellaneous services 6,000

Sum total £1,457,031

II.

Items which, although included in the navy estimate, refer rather to the army than the navy. Under this head demanded:

1. For freight of transports on monthly pay including steam vessels, and for the purchase of the same, covering the hire of eight new steam vessels and 86 sailing transports, of which 75 were frigates with cavalry £2,610,200

2. For the freight of ships hired for the conveyance of troops including rations, the Government having taken up 18 steam vessels and 86 sailing transports for the entire year 108,000

Mr. Gladstone proposes to raise new taxes by continuing the double income tax to the end of the war, by increasing the malt duty from 2/9 to 4/-, by augmenting the duty on spirits 1/- per gallon in Scotland and 8d. per gallon in Ireland, and by putting off the fall upon the duty on sugar, which was to occur on the 5th of next July. The resolutions respecting spirits, malt and sugar were passed immediately.

The duty on spirits will cancel itself, because it will greatly reduce the consumption of spirits. The duty on malt is a punishment inflicted on the licensed victualers and their custom- ers, because their official organ, The Morning Advertiser, signalised itself by sounding the trumpet of war. The duty on sugar is

[^1]: Sum total £3,096,700

[^2]: Grand total £4,553,731





**[p. 190]**

The British public has not only to pay for the war against Russia, and also for the quackery and the hair splitting ingenuity of Mr. Gladstone, but besides it has to furnish the Czar with the means of carrying on the war against itself, as Lord John Russell declared on Friday evening,0 that the British Government would continue to pay the principal and the interest of the debt called the Russo-Dutch loan,139 inserted in the treaty of Vienna, one of whose principal arrangements is that Poland should remain an Independent Constitutional Kingdom, that Cracow should be protected as a free town, and that the navigation of all European rivers, consequently of the Danube, should be free.

The distrust in Irish loyalty must be very great, as Lord Palmerston declared that during the present year Her Majesty's Government did not intend to enrol the Irish militia; the same Palmerston having broken up the Russell Cabinet on the pretext that Lord John exasperated Ireland by excluding it from his Militia bill.

Ministers have sustained a virtual defeat on their Railway bill, which contained only some enactments recommended by a Parliamentary Committee sitting on that subject.*1 As the railway interest is powerfully organized, the gallant Mr. Cardwell pre- ferred, in the name of the Ministry, to withdraw his original bill and to substitute for it one framed by the railway directors themselves, which enforces nothing nor adds anything to the stringency of

[^1]: See this volume, p. 117.— Ed.

[^2]: Mr. Gladstone's speech in the House of Commons on March 6, 1854. The Times, No. 21682, March 7, 1854.— Ed.

[^3]: Lord John Russell's speech in the House of Commons on May 5, 1854. The Times, No. 21734, May 6, 1854.— Ed.

[^4]: The debates on the Railway Bill are given according to parliamentary reports in The Times, No. 21733, May 5, 1854.— Ed.





**[p. 191]**

"It appears," says a weekly paper, "that Ministers and Parliament are not strong enough to protect the property of shareholders and the pockets of travellers, or the life and limb of the public, against the right which the railway companies claim to dispose of those valuables at pleasure."

Written on May 9, 1854 Reproduced from the New-York Daily Tribune First published in the New-York Daily

Tribune, No. 4086, May 23; reprint- ed in the New-York Weekly Tribune, No. 663, May 27, 1854

Signed: Karl Marx

