---
Volume: 13
Document_Title: "K. Marx. The Spanish Revolution.- Greece and Turkey "
Page_Range: "338-345"
---

# K. Marx. The Spanish Revolution.- Greece and Turkey 



**[p. 309]**

Karl Marx

[THE SPANISH REVOLUTION.—

GREECE AND TURKEY]223

London, Friday, July 21, 1854

" Ne touchez pas à la Reine" (Touch not the Queen) is an old Castilian maxim, but the adventurous Madame Mufioz3 and her daughter Isabella have too long overstepped the rights of even Castilian Queens not to have outworn the loyal prejudices of the Spanish people.

The pronunciamentos of 1843224 lasted three months; those of 1854 have scarcely lasted as many weeks. The Ministry is dissolved, Count San Luis has fled, Queen Cristina is trying to reach the French frontier, and at Madrid both troops and citizens have declared against the Government.

The revolutionary movements of Spain since the commence- ment of the century offer a remarkably uniform aspect, with the exception of the movements in favor of provincial and local privileges which periodically agitate the northern provinces, every palace-plot being attended by military insurrections, and these invariably dragging municipal pronunciamentos in their train. There are two causes for this phenomenon. In the first place, we find that what we call the State in a modern sense has, from the exclusively provincial life of the people, no national embodiment in opposition to the Court, except in the army. In the second place, the peculiar position of Spain and the Peninsular war225

created conditions under which it was only in the army that everything vital in the Spanish nationality was permitted to concentrate. Thus it happens that the only national demonstra- tions (those of 1812 and of 1822226) proceeded from the army;

[^1]: Maria Cristina.— Ed.





**[p. 310]**

With the exception of the Carlists,227 all parties have raised their cry—Progresistas, partisans of the Constitution of 1837,228 parti- sans of the Constitution of 1812, Unionists (demanding the annexation of Portugal), and Republicans. The news concerning the latter party is to be received with caution, since it has to pass the censure of the Paris police. Beside these party struggles, the rival pretensions of the military leaders are in full development. Espartero had no sooner heard of the success of O'Donnell than he left his retreat at Leganes and declared himself the chief of the movement. But as soon as Caesar Narvaez learned of the appearance of his old Pompey in the field, he forthwith offered his services to the Queen, which were accepted, and he is to form a new Ministry. From the- details I am about to give you, it will be seen that the military has by no means taken the initiative in all places, but that in some they have had to yield to the overpowering pressure of the population.

[^1]: See this volume, p. 305.— Ed.





**[p. 311]**

there has been one at Alicante. In Andalusia, pronunciamentos have taken place at Granada, Seville and Jaen. In Old Castile, there has been a pronunciamento at Burgos; in Leon, at Valladolid; in Biscay, at San Sebastian and Vitoria; in Navarre, at Tolosa, Pamplona and Guipuzcoa; in Aragon, at Saragossa; in Catalonia, at Barcelona, Tarragona, Lerida and Gerona; there is said, also, to have been a pronunciamento in the Islas Baléares. In Murcia, pronunciamentos were expected to take place, according to a letter from Cartagena, dated July 12, which says:

"In consequence of a bando published by the Military Governor of the place, all the inhabitants of Cartagena possessed of muskets and other arms, have been ordered to depose them with the civil authorities within twenty-four hours. On the demand of the Consul of France,0 the Government has allowed the French residents to depose their arms, as in 1848, at the Consulate."

Of all these pronunciamentos, four only deserve particular mention, viz.: those of San Sebastian in Biscay, Barcelona the capital of Catalonia, Saragossa the capital of Aragon, and Madrid.

In Biscay the pronunciamentos originated with the Municipalities, in Aragon with the military. The Municipality of San Sebastian was pronouncing in favor of the insurrection, when the demand for the armament of the people was raised. The city was immediately covered with arms. Not till the 17th could the two battalions garrisoning the town be induced to join. The fusion between the citizens and the military having been completed, 1,000 armed citizens accompanied by some troops set out for Pamplona, and organized the insurrection in Navarre. It was only the appearance of the armed citizens from San Sebastian which facilitated the rising of the Navarrese capital. General Zabala joined the movement afterward and went to Bayonne, inviting the soldiers and officers of the Cordova regiment, who had fled there upon their late defeat at Saragossa, immediately to return to their country and to meet him at San Sebastian. According to some reports he subsequently marched upon Madrid to place himself under the orders of Espartero, while other reports state that he was on the march to Saragossa to join the Aragonese insurgents.6

[^1]: See this volume, p. 306.— Ed.

[^2]: Order.— Ed. Ligier.— Ed. d Le Moniteur universel, No. 201, July 20, 1854.— Ed.

[^3]: e Telegraphic dispatch from Paris of July 21, 1854. The Times, No. 21799, July 21, 1854.— Ed.





**[p. 312]**

At Barcelona the initiative was apparently taken by the military, but the spontaneity of their act becomes very doubtful from the additional information we have received. On the 13th of July, at 7 o'clock P.M., the soldiers occupying the barracks of San Pablo, and of the Buen Suceso, yielded to the demonstrations of the populace and declared their pronunciamento, under the cry of Vive la

Reine; Vive la Constitution; death to the Ministers; away with Cristina! After having fraternized with the mass, and marched along with them over the Rambla, they halted at the Plaza of the Constitution. The cavalry, kept indoors at the Barceloneta3 for the previous six days, because of the distrust it inspired to the Captain-General, made a pronunciamento in its turn. From this moment the whole garrison passed over to the people, and all resistance on the part of the authorities became impossible. At 10 o'clock General Marchesi, the Military Governor, yielded to the general pressure, and at midnight the Captain-General of Catalonia0 announced his resolution to side with the movement. He went to the place of the Ayuntamiento where he harangued the people, filling the place. On the 18th, a junta was formed composed of the Captain-General and other eminent persons, with the cry of the Constitution, the Queen and Morality. Further news from Barcelona states that some workmen had been shot on the order of the new authorities, because they had destroyed machinery and violated property; also, that a Republican Commit- tee convened in a neighboring town, had been arrested0; but it should be recollected that this news passes through the hands of the Second of December229 whose special vocation it is to calumniate republicans and workmen.

[^1]: A suburb of Barcelona situated on the peninsula (partly artificial) which separates the port of Barcelona from the open sea.— Ed.

[^2]: La Rocha.—Ed. This information is given according to the official French Bonapartist newspapers Le Moniteur universel, Nos. 200 and 201, July 19 and 20 and the Journal

[^3]: des Débats, July 21, 1854.— Ed.



asserting the factions to be in flight, and the enthusiastic loyalty of the troops increasing. Count San Luis, who seems to have very correctly judged of the situation at Madrid, announced to the workmen that General O'Donnell and the anarchists would deprive them of all employment, while if the Government succeeded, it would employ all workingmen on the public works for six reals (75 cents) a day. By this stratagem San Luis hoped to enroll the most excitable portion of the Madrilenos under his banner. His success, however, was like that of the party of the National at Paris in 1848.230 The allies he had thus gained soon became his most dangerous enemies—the funds for their support being exhausted on the sixth day. How much the Government dreaded a pronunciamento in the capital is evident from General Lara's (the Governor's) proclamation forbidding the circulation of any news respecting the progress of the insurrection.*1 It appears, further, that the tactics of General Blaser were restricted to the care of avoiding any contact with the insurgents, lest his troops should catch the infection. It is said that the first plan of General O'Donnell was to meet the Ministerial troops on the plains of La

[^1]: a The data from the Madrid Gaceta given here and below have been taken from the reprint in Le Moniteur universel, Nos. 200 and 201, July 19 and 20, 1854.— Ed. A league is equal to 4.83 kilometres.— Ed. c Blaser y San Martin. Bulletin of July 15, 1854, Le Moniteur universel, No. 201, July 20, 1854.— Ed.

[^2]: General Lara's proclamation of June 28, 1854. Le Moniteur universel, No. 185, July 4, 1854.— Ed.





**[p. 314]**

It may be observed, en passant, that the boletines* of General Blaser bear a wonderful resemblance to the orders of the day of the Spanish generals of the sixteenth century, which gave such occasion for hilarity to Francis I, and of the eighteenth century, which Frederick the Great turned into ridicule.

It is plain that this Spanish insurrection must become a source of dissension between the Governments of France and England, and the report given by a French paper that General O'Donnell was concealed previous to the outbreak, in the palace of the British Embassador,b is not likely to lessen the misgivings of Bonaparte on its account. There exists already some commence- ment of irritation between Bonaparte and Victoria; Bonaparte expected to meet the Queen at the embarkation of his troops from Calais, but Her Majesty answered his desire by a visit to the ex-Queen Amélie on the same day. Again, the English Ministers when interpellated about the non-blockade of the White Sea, the Black Sea, and the sea of Azov, alleged as their excuse the alliance with France. Bonaparte retorted by an announcement of those very blockades in the Moniteur, without waiting for the formal consent of England/ Lastly, a bad effect having been produced in France by the embarkation of French troops in British vessels only, Bonaparte published a list of French vessels destined for the same use and applied to it.

The Porte has communicated to the representatives of the four allied powers a noted concerning the authority given to the Greek merchant ships again to enter Turkish ports. This authorization is to be valid for two months, on condition that the Greek Government does not render itself guilty of any act justifying its suspension. If, at the expiration of this term, the Greek Government shall have failed to give satisfactory reparation to the

[^1]: Bulletins.— Ed. Sir John Caradoc.— Ed. This information is taken from Le Moniteur universel, No. 196, July 15, 1854.— Ed.

[^2]: Marx, apparendy, got this information through the Polish or Hungarian refugees in London. The text of the note was published later in the Journal des Débats on July 28, 1854.— Ed.



Shamyl has been officially invested by the Porte with the title of Generalissimo of the army of Circassia and Georgia.

Three dragomans in the service of the French army have been shot at Varna, all of them having been found to correspond with the Russians. Two of them were Greeks and one Armenian. At the moment of his execution, one of them swallowed a paper of a compromising character.

We are informed from Hermannstadt, on the 16th inst., that no engagement has yet taken place in the vicinity of Frateshti.3

The arrival of the allied forces at Rustchuk was, of course, a lie,b

and their whole aim, in the present instance, will be to keep under restraint—as The Times calls it—the barbarous fury of the victorious Turks.c

[^1]: Written on July 21, 1854 Reproduced from the New-York Daily Tribune First published in the New-York Daily Tribune, No. 4148, August 4; reprinted in the New-York Semi-Weekly Tribune, No. 960, August 8 and the New-York Weekly Tribune, No. 674, August 12, 1854

[^2]: Signed: Karl Marx

[^3]: a Le Moniteur universel, No. 202, July 21, 1854.— Ed.

[^4]: See this volume, p. 303.— Ed. c The Times, No. 21799, July 21, 1854, leader.— Ed.



