---
Volume: 13
Document_Title: "K. Marx. In Retrospect , "
Page_Range: "583-589"
---

# K. Marx. In Retrospect , 



**[p. 554]**

Karl Marx

IN RETROSPECT

I

London, December 29.

"The meeting between Count Buol, M. de Bourqueney and Prince Gorchakov at the home of the Earl of Westmorland, the English Ambassador in Vienna, was solely intended to give the Emperor of Russia the desired information as to the meaning of the Triple Alliance of December 2, and as to the conditions under which the three big powers would be ready to open peace negotiations on the basis of the Four Points.3 Prince Gorchakov immediately reported to Petersburg on the information received. The Tsar must accept or reject the preliminary conditions within the next few days. A decisive turning-point will mark the beginning of the new year."

Thus The Morning Post, Lord Palmerston's private moniteur,

It may be a decisive fact that, while politicians are discussing the new Vienna Conference402 with ponderous political wisdom in the leading articles of both daily and weekly press, businessmen are bluntly calling it a "farce" in the stock-exchange columns of the same papers. Thus, for instance, the businessman in the money articleb of today's Morning Post. Indeed the event at Vienna seemed to be a matter of such indifference to the London Stock Exchange that its publication gave neither bears nor bulls,403

neither pessimists nor optimists of the stock exchangeb cause for any action of the least significance. Minor fluctuations in quotations of Government securities during the past three days

[^1]: "The Viennese negotiations," says the Tory Press, "are designed to give Austria a new opportunity to postpone its definitive statement to the Western powers on the date fixed in the Agreement of December 2.'^

[^2]: a See this volume, pp. 579-84.— Ed. Marx used the English term.— Ed.





**[p. 555]**



[^1]: George I and George II.— Ed.





**[p. 556]**

"in war, and in peace, the army is only a Government organ for the advancement of the aristocracy and the support of the Ministry."

And here we come to the crucial point. For the English aristocracy war with Russia is equivalent to the loss of its monopoly of government. Forced since 1830 to conduct its internal policy exclusively in the interests of the industrial and commercial middle classes, the English aristocracy has nevertheless retained possession of all government posts, because it has retained the monopoly of foreign policy and of the army.

This monopoly, however, has remained secure only as long as there was no people's war—and such a war was possible only against Russia—which would make foreign policy the concern of the people. The whole of English diplomacy from 1830 to 1854, therefore, can be reduced to the one principle: to avoid war with Russia at all costs. Hence the continual concessions which have been made to Russia in Turkey, in Persia, in Afghanistan, in Denmark, and, indeed, everywhere in the world, for the past twenty-four years. That the aristocracy has calculated correctly is proved by the actual facts. War with Russia has hardly broken out when even The Times declares:

London, January 1.

[^1]: "The aristocracy is incapable of conducting our wars. The oligarchic state machinery stands in the sharpest contradiction to our social machinery."

[^2]: II

[^3]: "Under the pressure of the present war our military departments [] have completely broken down."0

[^4]: Sidney Herbert's speech in the House of Commons on December 19, 1854. The Times, No. 21929, December 20, 1854.— Ed.

[^5]: b The Times, No. 21938, December 30, 1854, leader.— Ed. c The Times, No. 21939, January 1, 1855, leader.— Ed.





**[p. 557]**

Casting a retrospective glance at the Crimean campaign, we find that Lord Raglan made his first mistake during the battle of the Alma by ordering that the Russian army's left wing, which was covered by the sea, should be outflanked instead of its right. By the latter operation, one section of the Russians would have been pushed towards the sea and the other towards the North Fort, whereas now they have, in fact; been flung on Simferopol, i.e. on the line of retreat most favourable to them. While during the battle of the Alma the Allies took the bull by the horns to no purpose whatever, they shrank from taking that step when circumstances demanded it. The famous "outflanking march to Balaklava" was the abandonment of an attack on the northern front of the fortress; this front, however, is the commanding, and therefore the crucial, point; the North Fort is the key to Sevastopol. Thus the Allies gave up the bolder, and therefore in fact the safer, offensive in. order to secure a strong defensive position.

The same mistake was made by Omer Pasha when he entrenched himself near Kalafat instead of marching from Oltenitza on Bucharest, breaking through the enemy's extended lines. Then came the siege of Sevastopol, proving, at any rate, that as a result of a long peace the art of war has deteriorated to the same degree as, thanks to industrial development, war materials have improved. Never before has there been a war where simple earthworks have played so important a role. It was at Oltenitza that the Russians first had recourse, albeit unsuccessfully, to the



**[p. 558]**



[^1]: Marx used the English word.— Ed.





**[p. 559]**

Written on December 29, 1854 and Printed according to the news- January 1, 1855 paper

First published in the Neue Oder-Zeitung. Published in English for the first Nos. 1 and 5, January 2 and 4, 1855 time

