---
Volume: 13
Document_Title: "K. Marx. The Opening of Parliament :.. "
Page_Range: "629-632"
---

# K. Marx. The Opening of Parliament :.. 



**[p. 600]**

Karl Marx

THE OPENING OF PARLIAMENT

London, January 24. The parliamentary session was opened yesterday. In the House of Lords, Lord Ellenborough gave notice that on Thursday, February 1, he would move for an official account of the number of troops—infantry, cavalry and sailors — sent out to the Crimea, and also the number of killed, wounded, sick and otherwise disabled.3 The Duke of Richmond asked the Secretary for War why those who fought at Balaklava had been passed over in the awarding of medals. Not only those who fought at Balaklava would receive medals, but also all the sailors in the Black Sea area who had not been in combat, thus the Duke of Newcastle, the Secretary for War, trumped the Duke of Rich- mond. The Duke of Richmond, on the other hand, together with Lords Ellenborough and Hardwicke, asserted the truth of the proposition advanced long ago by Adam Smith that the value of fancy goods, hence of medals too, is in inverse proportion to their quantity.1* After this important debate, which lasted about half an hour, the Lords adjourned.

The House of Commons was crowded. But the proceedings did not come up to expectations. Disraeli was not present, and Sir Benjamin Hall spoke. Having begun at a quarter to four, the sitting was over by 6 p.m. The Roman Senate has been admired for the dignified tranquility with which it received the news of the

[^1]: The debates in the House of Lords and the House of Commons on January 23 are given according to The Times, No. 21959, January 24, 1855.— Ed.

[^2]: Adam Smith has: "All sorts of luxuries and curiosities" (An Inquiry into the Nature and Causes of the Wealth of Nations, Vol. I, p. 354).— Ed.





**[p. 601]**

Lord John Russell stated that he could not say if it would be possible to lay on the table any of the documents in question. Such a thing was not parliamentary. With reference to the history of the Four Points, however, he was able to tell his honourable friend, quite in general, the following: At the end of November Russia, through Gorchakov, had declared her acceptance of what is

[^1]: "whether the Ministry has any objection to lay on the table of the House the correspondence that has taken place with foreign Powers with regard to the treaty of the 2d of December, 1851, and especially any document communicated to the Russian Government containing the interpretation put by the British and French governments on the Four Points, not for negotiation but for acceptance",

[^2]: Honorary title of the ancient Roman senator.— Ed. b See this volume, pp. 579-84.— Ed.





**[p. 602]**

The imploring of The Times and the past of Mr. Roebuck are neither of them likely to remove entirely the suspicion that Roebuck will cry, or rather croak, to prevent others from speaking. Thersites, as far as we know, was never used by Ulysses, but Roebuck is certainly being used by the Whigs, who in their own way are as cunning as Ulysses.

[^1]: "on Thursday next he should move for a select committee to inquire into the numbers and condition of our army before Sevastopol, and into the conduct of those departments of the Government whose duty it was to administer to the wants of that army".

[^2]: The Times "implores" Roebuck to "cry aloud and spare not".a

[^3]: Written on January 24, 1855 Printed according to the news- paper First published in the Neue Oder-Zeihine, No. 45, January 27, 1855 ' ' Published in English for the first ' time a The Times, No. 21959, January 24, 1855, leader.— Ed.



