---
Volume: 50
Document_Title: "1892"
Page_Range: "30-105"
---

# 1892



**[p. l]**

ENGELS TO LUDWIG KUGELMANN IN

HANOVER

London, 4 October 1892

Dear Kugelmann,

Very many thanks for the little bit of Leibnitz. 1 As regards Herr Vogt, please send one copy to Bebel and two to me, but if you yourself don’t possess another, it goes without saying that you should keep one and send only one to me. 2

As regards The Knight of the Noble Consciousness and Palmerston, What Has He Done, I have unearthed one more copy of each and these are en- closed herewith.

On the other hand I have only one copy of the Neue Rheinische Zeitung, but no loose issues, and only a few volumes of the Revuec; if I want a complete set I have to borrow it. You had better get Miquel to return you yours. After all he is the only one who might now be endangered by its possession and he’ll be grateful to you for taking it off his hands. However Volume I as well as other individual volumes occasionally crop up in second-hand booksellers’ catalogues.

For the rest, I am keeping tolerably well. But if you are expecting an exhaustive pathological discourse on my somewhat complicated and no doubt also somewhat obscure case, I’m afraid I cannot oblige you. I am in correspondence with many doctors in 5 or 6 countries and all of them

3

[^1]: a K. Marx, Herr Vogt. — b K. Marx, Der Ritter vom edelmütigen Bewusstsein. - c Neue Rheinische Zeitung Politische-ökonomische Revue.





**[p. 4]**

Your

F. Engels

First published in: Printed according to the original Marx and Engels, Works, First Russian Edition, Published in English for the first time Vol. XXIX, Moscow, 1946

2

ENGELS TO HUGO LINDEMANN AND

IN LONDON

122 Regent’s Park Road, N.W.,

London, 6 October 1892

Dear Sirs,

In reply to your favour of 2.X, I have in the past frequently complied with requests of a similar nature from gentlemen who were quite unknown to me, but my experience in these cases has been such that unfortunately I have had to make up my mind to discontinue the practice. 4

As a result of an indisposition, moreover, I expect to be tied to my sofa for a considerable time to come and hence am in no condition to go searching in my library for old, seldom used periodicals.

[^1]: CARL STEGMANN 3

[^2]: a of Capital - b Gertrud and Franziska Kugelmann





**[p. 5]**

Yours very truly, F.

Engels

First published in: Printed according to the original Marx and Engels, Works, Second Russian Edition, Vol. 38, Moscow, 1965

3

ENGELS TO AUGUST BEBEL

IN BERLIN

London, 7 October 1892 Dear August,

First to business. Lafargue sent me a France with the enclosed notice of an interpellation by Millevoye, 5 a Boulangist. 6 He intends to make use of this opportunity to remind the Chamber of everything done by the German Socialists in 1871 and thereafter to maintain or restore good relations between France and Germany, and of what they have had to endure as a result. He would like to have:

les dates des protestations des socialistes allemands, les paroles prononcées au Reichstag et ailleurs, et les condamnations subies a .

Now since the things I have here are incomplete or only to be extracted with untold labour from collections of periodicals buried in numerous packing-cases, during which process I might easily overlook what is most important, you would greatly oblige me and the French if you would take out the most cogent items and send them to me together with dates and references (from the official stenographic report). That is,

[^1]: a The dates of the protests by the German Socialists, the speeches made in the Reichstag and elsewhere, and the sentences served.





**[p. 6]**

2. Your protest in the Reichstag against the annexation 8 and perhaps also one or two cogent passages from the Volksstaat attacking the war and the annexation;

3. A few trenchant excerpts from later Reichstag speeches by you and Liebknecht, along with dates and particulars of the subject of the debate in which they were made;

4. Anything else that seems to you important. Not a great deal is needed. You will know roughly how much is needed for a speech and if you then add 1 or 2 spare quotations, that will do. I should be glad if you would also quote some of your own statements, lest the French should imagine that Liebknecht did it all himself or even say that Liebknecht was an exception and that the others thought differently.

Yesterday we sent you in the Workman’s Times 2 French newspapers with reports on Liebknecht’s speeches and also a piece by Guesde which will have pleased you. a

Lafargue will be drumming up support in Carmaux and other towns in the South until his return on the 16th or 17th of this month, That is when the Chamber reassembles, and he must have the material by then. 9

He writes to say that the patriotic press, all of which, and particularly La France, is in the pay of Russia, has launched furious attacks on Liebknecht. The Russian embassy now pays the newspapers by the job—so much for each individual article accepted. Which is also a sign that the Russians are short of funds. There is no doubt that Liebknecht has raised a furore. I don’t begrudge the old man his popularity and, in two respects, can only hope, 1. that it won’t make him even more obstinate with regard to the editorship of the Vorwärts and, 2. that in the Reichstag the malicious sniping of the German patriots and accusations of high treason, etc., don’t suddenly provoke him into maintaining the opposite, thereby landing not just himself in the cart but us as well. A reporter on the Gaulois quotes him as saying: ‘Were Germany to declare a war of aggression on France, the German Socialists would declare war on their own government, et moi-même je prendrais un fusil pour

[^1]: a J. Guesde, “Vive l’Internationale!” Le Socialiste, 16 October 1892.





**[p. 7]**

Lafargue says that Loubet and the Minister for Public Works, Viette, would go to considerable lengths to bring about an acceptable settlement of the strike at Carmaux 10 and compel the company to climb down, but that Freycinet is against it. The latter has designs on the presidency of the Republic and therefore wants to keep in with the voters of the Right and the Centre.

Otherwise, Lafargue is very satisfied with the Congress. 11 The 12 copies of the Neue Zeit 12 arrived here and were passed on to Tussy. The chaps ought to have sent them to her instead of to me, but as it was a day was lost. Unfortunately there has recently been a change of ownership at the Pall Mall Gazette and we don’t yet know what prospects the paper will now hold out for us.

Your account of the movement among the miners tallies with our experience in this country; here, too, the chaps keep themselves very much apart from the other branches of labour and are progressing more slowly than the rest. But in our case, the fact that there is already a strong workers’ party behind them will eventually see us through; the chaps are bound to join us, once the movement has taken a hold on them. On the other hand there are, both here and in Germany, bad and unreliable leaders who cannot be induced to trust the workers in other branches. In this country, moreover, the petty jealousies existing between the men of one coal-field and another have so far not even permitted the creation of a united guild comprising all mine workers.

I shall do my utmost to stop the French from dispensing with your con- tributions. It is vitally important that occasionally, at any rate, accurate reports on the German movement should appear in Paris and particularly that the public should be made aware of the general political situation in which you people have to carry on the fight. You alone can do that, nor is there any need at all for you to come into conflict with Liebknecht as a result, provided he doesn’t regard contributions to the French paperb as his monopoly. That wouldn’t do at all.

[^1]: a and I myself would take up a musket in order to defend the integrity of French territory. b Le Socialiste





**[p. 8]**

At the moment I am reading Hans Müllera and have not yet finished. It is all stale stuff and long familiar to us. The few bad speeches he quotes are not even skilfully chosen. Had I wanted to make out a case against the petty- bourgeois goings-on in the party or parliamentary group, I should have provided quite different material. The Steamship Subvention alone provides eight times as much as he does and of better quality. 13 He takes a speech made by Liebknecht in 1881 14 during the period of general confusion that followed the promulgation of the Anti-Socialist Law 15 instead of later ones when the political situation makes the pacific, philistine overtones seem far less excusable, and then goes so far as to assert that power is in all circumstances revolutionary and never reactionary. The jackass fails to notice that where there is no reactionary power to be overthrown there can be no question whatever of revolutionary power. After all, you cannot start a revolution against something that can be removed without the least effort.

If there is one thing that sends the self-opinionated students, the men of letters and the would-be literati of the working class into a state of impotent rage, it is the sight of our party calmly continuing along its victorious course without needing the help from these petty panjandrums. If mistakes are made, the party is strong enough to deal with them itself. Witness the undeniably tame philistinism of the majority of the parliamentary group at the time of the Steamship Subvention, wit-ness the traditional tendency of the Party Executive, a tendency which continued to manifest itself for a short while after the Anti-Socialist Law had been repealed, to intervene in a dictatorial manner (and which, moreover, had its counterpart in an identical tendency among the executives of the previous Berlin organisation), etc., etc. Our Party is now so strong that it could, without risk of degeneration, digest not only a goodly number of petty bourgeois but also the “heddicated” and even the worthy Independents, 16 had not the latter given themselves their marching orders.

[^1]: a H. Müller, Der Klassenkampf in der deutschen Sozial Demokratie





**[p. 9]**

Your

F.E.

First published in: Marx and Engels, Works, First Russian Edition, Vol. XXIX, Moscow, 1946

Printed according to the original

Published in English for the first time

4

ENGELS TO LUDWIG KUGELMANN 17

IN HANOVER

London, 10 October 1892 Dear Kugelmann,

Vogt received with thanks. 2 If you send for second-hand booksellers’ catalogues on jurisprudence, political science and modern German history, especially for the period round 1848, you will light on individual copies of the Revuec from time to time. I myself have acquired one or two copies in this way.

Have just finished Chapter 27 of the third volumed; 29-34 present the main difficulty.

Your

F.E.

Published in English for the first time

[^1]: Kindest regards to your wife and daughter. e

[^2]: First published in: Marx and Engels, Works, First Russian Edition, Vol. XXIX, Moscow, 1946

[^3]: Printed according to the original

[^4]: a Julie Bebel - b Kautsky - c Neue Rheinische Zeitung. Politisch-ökonomische Revue - d of Capital- c Gertrud and Franziska Kugelmann





**[p. 5]**

ENGELS TO LAURA LAFARGUE

AT LE PERREUX

London, 14 October 1892

My dear Lohr,

Thanks from Louise and myself for your letters this morning. Had one from Paul from Bordeaux last night. Business first. Enclosed you find

1. Manifest des sozial demokratischen Ausschusses (Executive) Braunschweig 5. September 1870a with a letter from Mohr and myself 18 but which Paul better quote as from Mohr, who, I believe, signed it. This is referred to in the MS. extracts under No. II I (on page 2).

2. First and Second Addresses of the General Council of the International on the War, July 23rd 1870 and Sept. 9th 1870.b With French translation made, I believe, in Geneva; it very likely requires revision both as to correctness and style.

3. A series of MS. extracts received from Bebel who with his wifec set to work at once to supply us with what we wanted.

I think this will be sufficient for Paul’s speech, though I don’t envy you the task of translating all these things, especially the rather lax style of our Reichstag orators.

Anyhow, now Paul is armed and need not depend upon Liebknecht’s promises which are sooner made than kept, as a rule.

I am glad Paul is going to take part again in the debates of the Chambre,d and if he is wise, he will attend the Palais Bourbon 6 assiduously during this last session of the present Parliament. I have some notion that electors want to see and hear something of the parliamentary activity of their deputy, and if they do not, there may be a risk not only of losing his seat, but also of not so easily securing another. After all, as things are now, both in France and Germany, electoral success in many places at least, depends on the votes of a number of hangers-on of the party, men

[^1]: a Manifesto of the Brunswick (Executive) Committee of September 5, 1870. -b See present edition, Vol. 22, pp. 3-8, 263-70.-c Julie Bebel-d Chamber-e The Bourbon Palace (housing the French Chamber of Deputies)





**[p. 11]**

Arndt you describe quite correctly. I see from Liebknecht’s report on his journeya that he gives Arndt a mild slap but a slap anyhow, and probably he will have been told, at Marseille, of the proceedings of Blanquists 20 and Allemanists. 21 Liebknecht seems quite intoxicated with his triumph and, for the moment, plus français que les français eux-mêmes}b Unfortunately he always deals in extremes, and I can only hope that he will not be goaded, by patriotic bullies in the Reichstag, into tumbling head over heels into the opposite extreme. So far, his attitude in his speeches in Mannheim 22 etc. has been all that could be desired.

I understand your news about Roubaix to this effect that the people there will ask Paul to stand for the Chamber next autumn. That would be very good, Roubaix would be a pretty safe seat, while Lille seems rather shaky, to be carried at a period of extra local excitement, but very uncertain, so far, at ordinary periods.

and Carmaux 10 shows not only the progress of our ideas among the working- class, but also the fact of the bourgeois and the government knowing, it. The self-contained attitude of the people there—et encore des méridiouaux, des Gascons gasconnants!e—and the quiet but determined way in which the socialist town-councils proceed without any possibil-ist weakness or concessions, show an immense progress. The more the French are coming to the front, the more I shall be glad. The Continental movement, to be victorious, must be neither all French nor all German,

[^1]: Anyhow, ca marche en Francec (everything but the Journal quotidien!)d

[^2]: a W. Liebknecht, ‘Agitations bericht. Nach Marseille und zurück,’ Vorwärts, 12 October 1892. - b more French than the French themselves —c everything is on the move - d daily paper - e And Southerners into the Bargain, bragging braggarts!





**[p. 12]**

The Socialiste does not contain, in its report, the resolution of the Congrès syndical of Marseille 23 with regard to the Glasgow affair, 24 nor any allusion to it. How is it that this business is enveloped in such mystery?

Aveling’s article, of The Pall Mall Gazette,a is also published in the Workman’s Times. Do you still receive that paper?

Love from Louise and Yours affectionately,

F. Engels

First published, in the language Reproduced from the original of the original (English), in: F. Engels, P. et L. Lafargue, Correspondance, t. II I, 1891-1895, Paris, 1959

6

ENGELS TO PASQUALE MARTIGNETTI

IN BENEVENTO

London, 18 October 1892 Dear Friend,

The business of the duchessb has been cleared up. I only knew the lady by her married name of Mrs Edgren and was unaware that her maiden name was Miss Leffler.

Unfortunately Mrs Aveling had lost the duchessas address and had some difficulty in getting hold of it. That too has now been sorted out. Mrs Aveling has written to her about you warmly recommending you, so

[^1]: a E. Aveling, ‘Discord in The International. Continental Opinion on the British Trades Unionists.’ The Pall Mall Gazette, No. 8598, 11 October 1892 -b of Caianiello





**[p. 13]**

I presume that it is you that I again have to thank for the translation of the last part of my German preface to the Lage, etc. a

I am working on Volume II I of Marx’s Capital, and have to devote every available moment to it—hence must be brief while remaining

Yours,

F. Engels

First published, in the language of Printed according to the original the original (German), in: La corrispondenza di Marx e Engels Published in English for the first time

con italiani, 1848-1895, Milano, 1964

7

ENGELS TO LUDWIG SCHORLEMMER

IN DARMSTADT

London, 18 October 1892

My dear Schorlemmer,

I have your letters of 31 July and the 9th inst. It was my fault that Pumps forgot her Schmollis.b After so long an interval she no longer trusted herself to write in German off her own bat, and so I did it for her. Naturally I knew nothing of her tippling exploits in Darmstadt and put “Sie”. Her husbandc is not to blame, for he knows no German. Pumps is expecting a child any day, her fourth. Her second, a boy, unfortunately died, while her youngest, also a boy and really a very nice humorous little chap, is very delicate and at this moment far from well.

[^1]: Because of what you said about Anschütz 26 I delayed writing this

[^2]: a F. Engels, The Condition of the Working Class in England. -b A little ceremony in which the participants drink to the adoption of Du (thou), the intimate mode of address, Sie (you) being the formal term./Trans./ - c Percy Rosher





**[p. 14]**

Anschutz was, if I’m not mistaken, for a time a pupil of Carl’s in Manchester. As already mentioned; I shall be glad to be of service—in so far as I have the time—but first of all I must know what is required and what kind of biography it is to be.

The executors in Manchesterb are right in wanting to wind up whatever can be wound up without going into the settlement of the copyright questions. That will take time if only because the publishers stand to gain from a certain delay and are therefore in no hurry. I have heard nothing from Roscoe either; doubtless he won’t make a move until he can put forward and accept or reject specific proposals.

I hope your daughter continues to improve and that she has been able to leave her bed in the meantime.

[^1]: Why the old manc didn’t come to Darmstadt I don’t know. Does his

[^2]: a Carl Schorlemmer - b Philipp Klepsch and Ludwig Siebold -c Wilhelm Liebknecht





**[p. 15]**

Yours,

F. Engels

First published in: Printed according to the original Marx and Engels, Works, First Russian Edition, Published in English for the first time Vol. XXIX, Moscow, 1946

8

ENGELS TO CHARLES BONNIER

IN OXFORD

[Draft]

London, mid-October 1892

My dear Bonnier,

I have received Prototc—thank you. First of all, however, a correction. You say:

If the French socialists are not expressly discussing the case of a defensive war in which they would be willing to repel an attack by the Emperor William,d this is because it is well known, recognised and accepted that

[^1]: ‘whereas the French socialists are protesting against the Russian alliance and do not wish to hear about a war with Germany, Bebel in particular and you yourself are quite willing to accept the idea of a defensive war against France and Russia in which the German socialists would take part’, and that ‘these accusations, which are well received in France, irritate Guesde’.

[^2]: a Natalie Liebknecht b Hans Müller - c E. Protot, Chauvins et réacteurs. - d William II





**[p. 16]**

I would also warn you that what M. Protot cites from my article is nothing but gross falsehood.

You say that the brochure is well done. I find it very weak; the end, where this joker poses as an economist is more than grotesque. If he has a strong point, it is the royal disdain which he pours out on his readers. Indeed, one must assume that one’s readers are incurable idiots in order to dare to offer them such a collection of palpable falsehoods (in which you see only snippets) and lies contradicting one another. Is it then sufficient to put on a masque of Dérouléde in order to persuade those who create public opinion in Paris to swallow anything one wishes. Has Boulangism 6 survived Boulanger to the point of being more powerful than during Boulanger’s lifetime?

Such a collection of lies and falsehoods is, in fact, irrefutable. It would require 3,200 pages to reassert the truth against these 32 pages. There is not a single quotation of any significance which is not shamelessly distorted; it was only after comparing several texts that I had the measure of M. Protot’s affrontery.

As for the literary style, I find it lamentable, in striking contrast to the assiduity with which he has collected his material. Clearly another

[^1]: a F. Engels, Socialism in Germany. — b what is acceptable for the French is not acceptable for the German - c The following phrases are crossed out in the draft letter: ‘That such chauvinist stupidities irritate Guesde I can well believe, but that is not my fault, nor that of Bebel. As for the rest, when I sent my article to Paris, I warned my friends of the danger, expressing my fears due to national susceptibilities; but I was told that, on the contrary, this was just what was needed’.





**[p. 17]**

Nor is it, as Vorwärts believes, one of the Unabhängiger.a 16 Their mani- festo (Hans Midler’s Klassenkampf)b is characterised by the lack of care he has taken in selecting his supporting texts.

Nor is it the French police; one senses that they have had a hand in it, but they are not the ones who have so interested themselves in the foreign policy of the Romanian socialists.

If M. Protot accuses the latter of being the enemies of Holy Rus, if he twice quotes the Bucharest Munca (Labour), and divulges that Nadejde de Jassi is ‘Zingaro’,c it is because he is acting in the interests of the Russian embassy, which must have supplied this information, and probably also the information on the German socialists, collected in Berlin by some attaché there.

Thus Protot’s lampoon is not only in the interests of the police, but also in the interests of Russia; it is part and parcel of those frantic efforts that Russia is making to ensure a French alliance. It is Russia, in fact, which needs France. She is so completely exhausted by the social disorganisation caused by the economic transformation that she has been experiencing since 1861, by the ravages of deforestation, by the ruination of agriculture and the cottage industry, by famine and cholera, that she could not wage a war through to the end. Her finances and her credit are in a state of collapse reminiscent of France in 1788; if the western public continues to keep its purse closed, there remain only three alternatives: 1) bankruptcy, 2) the convening of a national assembly to sanction a new loan, which then might succeed in the west; 3) war as a measure of desperation—and in that last case France is necessary: once war were declared, the French army engaged, ten against one, the Tsard would reach an agreement with Williame and Francis Joseph,f who would hasten to meet him, and la belle France would pay the expenses of the banquet of reconciliation.

Published in English for the first time

[^1]: First published in: Printed according to the original Marx and Engels, Works, First Russian Edition, Translated from the French Vol. XXIX, Moscow, 1946

[^2]: a the Independents - b H. Müller, Der Klassenkampf in der deutschen Sozialdemokratie. — c a gipsy - d Alexander II I - e William II - f Francis Joseph I





**[p. 9]**

ENGELS TO VICTOR ADLER

IN VIENNA

London, 23 October 1892 Dear Victor,

There is no need for you to worry about the Trades Unions’ International Congress. 24 In the first place the whole business was probably only a device for getting the anti-Zurich resolution 27 accepted and might well not even be raised by the Parliamentary Committee. 28 Secondly, the attendance of individual Continentals is neither here nor there, seeing that even the Paris bourse du travail 29—still, if no longer altogether, dominated by the Possibilists 30—resolved that the Trades Unions be asked to abandon their plan. So who else might one expect to go? Maybe Mr Gilles, as representative of the German Independents 16 ?!

It would be a great help if the Austrian Trades Unions 31 were to send their resolution to the Parliamentary Committee. I shall ask Aveling for the address which I cannot find.

Yesterday I walked up Primrose Hill for the first time and, provided I’m careful, think I shall have made some slight progress by the end of the week. I shall make a note of Mac Ewen. He is at any rate a CONSULTING SURGEON which means that he can only advise other doctors and not the public direct. But I shall find that out. You have no idea of the extent to which everything here, including medicine, is governed by etiquette and how one breach of that etiquette is infinitely more frowned upon than ten of the sexual code. I recall a dictum of the Mancunian Medico-Ethical Society which sat in judgement over my friend Gumpert in Manchester. While paying a visit of condolence (this was around 1866-67) to a family who were not his patients, he had expressed slight misgivings about their family doctor’s having permitted other children to approach the bodies of two children who had died of scarlet fever. The other doctor lodged a complaint and the verdict was:

THOUGH HE WAS MORALLY RIGHT! Well, again my best thanks—I shall follow your advice.

Tomorrow I shall again write to Stepniak about his work 32. If you haven’t had anything by the end of the fortnight, by 7 or 8 November say,

[^1]: THAT DR GUMPERT HAD COMMITTED A BREACH OF MEDICAL ETIQUETTE,





**[p. 19]**

I am now on Volume II I of Capital. If, just once during the past four years, I had been able to see three clear months ahead of me, it would have been finished long ago. But I never had any such luck. On this occasion I am making time for it by forcibly suppressing and by totally neglecting all my correspondence and other concerns. I found that I had made very good headway with the most difficult passage the last time I tackled it and up till now it’s been going pretty smoothly, though admittedly I have now come up against the chief obstacle which has long been standing in my way. 33 But I work with a will and, so far, with undiminished vigour and doubtless something will come of it this time.

Herewith a document typical of anarchists of Czech nationality. The gentlemen are beginning to bludgeon one another with the principle that voting is a revolutionary act. I am prepared to excuse its deficiencies on the grounds that, not being Germans, the louts were not altogether aware of the full impact their rhetorical flourishes would have on a German.

We were all absolutely delighted by the good news about your wife.a We hope the improvement will continue and that before long you will be able to send us further glad tidings.

Warm regards from Louise.b to you, your wife and your children, and the same also from

Your

F. Engels

Add. of the Parliamentary Committee, C. Fenwick, Esq., M.P., 12, Buckingham Street, Strand, London, W.C.

[^1]: First published in: Victor Adler, Printed according to the book Aufsätze, Reden und Briefe. Erstes Heft: Victor Adler und Published in English for the first time Friedrich Engels, Wien, 1922

[^2]: a Emma Adler - b Kautsky





**[p. 10]**

ENGELS TO CHARLES BONNIER

IN OXFORD

[Draft]

London, 24 October 1892 My dear Bonnier,

In Le Figaro Guesde says:

‘Just as Liebknecht stated that, in the case of aggression by France, he would be obliged to remember that he is German, we would remind the workers’ party, in the case of German aggression, that we are French’.

Thus Guesde and myself are in perfect agreement, and it is with him that you should settle matters.

You speak of an unfortunate phrase by Bebel—which one? You reproach him with so many! If it is the one in Figaro that he would fire at Guesde, it belongs to M. Huret; Bebel writes that it existed only in this gentleman’s fantasy.

You talk of preventing war, and you boast of having voted for Domela 34— with his plan you would crush all the socialist parties in Europe.

It is all very fine to speak of preventing a war, from whichever side it might come. But why allow yourself to believe in illusions. Do the French socialists have some means of preventing the young Williama from declaring war in a moment of madness? Can the German socialists forbid Carnot or some patriotic ministry to commit a similar folly? Furthermore, if it were William or the street-corner revanchists who were the real danger; it is the Russian government which is pulling the strings of these puppets, these by hopes, those by fears. So now prevent it from inciting war!

If war breaks out, those who are defeated will have the opportunity and the duty to bring about a revolution—and that’s that.

Published in English for the first time

[^1]: First published in: Printed according to the original Marx and Engels, Works, First Russian Edition, Translated from the French Vol. XXIX, Moscow, 1946

[^2]: a William II





**[p. 11]**

ENGELS TO PAUL LAFARGUE 35

AT LE PERREUX

London, 3 November 1892

My dear Lafargue,

I am plunged up to the eyes in the 3rd Volume of Capital which must be completed once and for all. I am working on the least edited and most difficult part: banks, credit, etc. 33 I cannot interrupt the work for anything whatsoever, otherwise I should have to start from the beginning all over again. Hence all my correspondence is interrupted and I can write you only a few words.

It is most unfortunate that you believed in Millevoye’s promises, who flouted you like a good politician 36— in future you will know that in politics such people pass for GENTLEMEN. I get letter after letter from Germany in which they complain about your absence at the critical moment and I warn you that it will be difficult to have our people undertake work for debates from which the principal speaker for whom the work is done absents himself. Publication in pamphlet form 9 will not have a hundredth part of the effect of a parliamentary speech; that’s a matter on which our Berlin people are well qualified by experience to pronounce.

You will have seen the reports in the papers of the ghastly effects, in Dahomey, of the new projectiles. 38 A young Viennese doctora who has just arrived here (ex-assistant to Nothnagel) saw the wounds made by the Austrian projectiles in the Nurmitz strike, and he tells us the same thing. There’s no doubt that people in danger of being shot to bits in this manner will want to know why. It’s a capital thing for maintaining peace, but also for curbing the so-called revolutionary inclinations, on whose outbursts our governments count. The era of barricades and street fighting has gone for good; if the military fight, resistance becomes madness.

[^1]: The least you might do would be to send a delegate to Berlin on the 14th,

[^2]: 37 that would enable you to have it out with our people over there. So do try to send someone; it’s an expedition that will pay.

[^3]: a Ludwig Freiberger





**[p. 22]**

I am beginning to go out again a bit. I had nearly three months as a prisoner at home; now I am starting to walk, but little and slowly; but at least I realise that it will soon be over. And about time, as I feel that the lack of exercise in the open air must come to an end. And when I am completely restored, we can, I hope, arrange things so that you and Laura give us the pleasure of spending a few weeks with us. We have so many things to discuss, and it is time Laura saw London again.

Love from Mme Kautsky.

Ever yours,

F. Engels

First published in: Printed according to the original F. Engels, P. et L. Lafargue,

Correspondance, t. II I, 1891-1894, Translated from the French Paris, 1959

12

ENGELS TO LAURA LAFARGUE

AT LE PERREUX

London, 4 November 1892 My dear Löhr,

This morning Meissner sends a remittance for £38—one-third of which £12.13.4d., covers your share and is settled by enclosed cheque which please acknowledge. There are about 400 copies left of Vol. IP and the second edition is in preparation. Fourth edition of Vol. P is out, and 460 copies sold, which wipe off the greater part of the printing etc. cost; only 886 Marks remain to be covered and all the receipts beyond that will be profits to be divided with Meissner.

Third Volumea well in hand and will not leave off until finished. This can-

[^1]: a of Marx’s Capital





**[p. 23]**

Now you ought to take seriously into consideration your impending visit to London; we have talked so much about it that at last it ought to be put into execution. We all should be so glad to see you here again once more.

I am in daily expectation of news that Pumps has had another baby. It’s fully due if not overdue, she herself expected it a month ago, but she is always out of her reckoning.

I wonder whether Jack Burns did say the nonsense about the foreign working men, Huret puts into his mouth in the Figaro? 39

Now then, to work again! The day I finish that section on Banks and Credit, 33 which has been my stumbling block for 4-5 Years (because under 3 months of absolutely free time it can’t be done and these 3 months I could not get)—the day I finish that, there will be some consumption of alcohol— you bet!

Love from Louise.

Ever yours,

F. Engels

First published, in the language Reproduced from the original of the original (English), in: F. Engels, P. et L. Lafargue, Correspondance, t. II I, 1891-1895, Paris, 1959

13

ENGELS TO FRIEDRICH ADOLPH SORGE 40

IN HOBOKEN

London, 5 November 1892 Dear Sorge,

You must forgive my laziness about writing; I have got to finish Volume II P this winter; it must be completed and this won’t be possible unless I

[^1]: a of Capital





**[p. 24]**

Your F.E.

First published in Briefe Printed according to the original und Auszüge aus Briefen von Joh. Phil. Becker, Jos, Dietzgen, Published in English for the first time Friedrich Engels, Karl Marx

u. A. an F. A. Sorge und Andere, Stuttgart, 1906

14

ENGELS TO SERGEI KRAVCHINSKY (STEPNIAK)

IN LONDON

London, 5 November 1892 122 Regent’s Park Road, N.W. My dear Stepniak Thanks for your letter of the 25th October. 41 I find that Adler’s letter to you was left here and has not yet been returned to you, so I enclose it now. Kind regards to Mrs. Stepniak from Mrs. Kautsky and

Yours faithfully F.

Engels



**[p. 25]**

15

ENGELS TO AUGUST BEBEL

IN BERLIN

London, 6 November 1892

Dear August,

All this time I have been slaving away dutifully at Volume II P and not, I’m glad to say, without success. Today I may already be said to be fairly past the main obstacle, the credit system—upon which nothing remains to be done but the technical editing—which, however, is of a complex and time- consuming nature. 33 I have greatly enjoyed the work, firstly because I have discovered so many brilliant new sides to it—ask Louise,b to whom I have read quite a lot of it out loud—and secondly because it has also shown me that, when all’s said and done, my old noddle is still up to the mark, even where relatively difficult things are concerned. The worst havoc the years have wrought is in the sphere of memory whose doors are no longer so easy to find or to open, which means a general slowing down. This is something I can very well put up with, however.

But though I may have broken the back of the work, it’s very far from finished. Besides this section there still remain the two last ones (rather less than 1/3 of the whole) which I haven’t so much as looked at yet, and then comes the final, technical editing of the whole which, while not difficult, is all the more tedious and wearisome for that. It will probably take me the whole of the winter—and then there’ll be the proofs—coinciding with those of the 2nd ed., Vol. II .a

I have made time for it by forcibly suppressing in all my correspon-

[^1]: a of Capital - b Kautsky





**[p. 26]**

Lafargue has still to learn that, amongst bourgeois politicians, promises are made only to be broken. 36 In any case his intentions would have been frustrated by Standing Orders which preclude debate on such questions. He is still rather too much of a tyro on the floor of the Chamber; however he has promised to frequent it more regularly in future. They now want to publish the documents in pamphlet form. 9

I expressed myself badly in speaking of Hans Müller.b I didn’t mean that you, as the Party Executive, should take any notice of his concoction and still less that you should do so in the manner suggested by me. But if a polemic against the angry young man was embarked upon under your aegis, then, etc. it seems to me absolutely essential that the party should criticise its own antecedents on such occasions and thereby learn to do better. True, the blunders committed at the time of the Steamship Subvention, 13 etc., are over and done with, but the same people are still around and some, at least, are capable of acting as before. It all the blunders perpetrated by the parliamentary group and by some of its members are to be concealed under a mantle of love, this would, in my opinion, be tantamount to breeding Independents. 16 Messrs Frohme, Blos, etc., should acquire a thicker skin. Am I wrong in attributing certain motions redolent of ‘Independence’, tabled at the Party Congress by the Solingen people, to the latter’s opposition to Schumacher’s bourgeoisification and philistinisation? 42 A touch of retrospective veracity in the Neue Zeit would do no harm and you, with your tact and expertise, would be the right man for the job—but whether, of course, your position on the Executive doesn’t make this inadvisable is another matter. One way or the other, however, such criticism must eventually be expressed.

Very good. Calm, objective, adhering to the facts which are allowed to speak for themselves and only at the end a few necessary brief words denoting proud self-confidence. We shall have to see if Aveling can’t get some extracts from it into the press. But over here you are virtually boy-

[^1]: It was with pleasure that I read the report of your Executive last night.c

[^2]: a Jocular name for Louise Kautsky - b See this volume, p. 8 - c ‘Bericht des Partei-Vorstandes an den Parteitag, zu Berlin 1892’, Vorwärts, No. 259, 4 November 1892.





**[p. 27]**

44 detest you for refusing either to have secret dealings with them or to join the mutual admiration society which Justice has long been trying to make you accept, now by dangling a carrot, now by cracking a whip. Because of the vast ignorance of the English masses in regard to foreign affairs and their hereditary arrogance which leads them to look on a foreigner as a second-rate human being and everything occurring abroad as of little account, a conspiracy of silence is easily imposed. The Chroniclea is in the hands of the Fabians where labour matters are concerned, Justice has been led by Hyndman to espouse the cause of that rotter Gilles, the Workman’s Times likewise believes that nothing’s any good unless based on a big English-style

TRADES UNION organisation—so where are we to get the thing published? Only in the bourgeois press, as a news item of general interest. If, for the space of no more than a year, we could find a paper willing to open its pages to straightforward accounts of the German movement, the whole business would come to an end. For there is enough latent internationalism, if nurtured, to put paid to the stupid arrogance of the British, at least in the majority of cases. But as it is!

The Workman’s Times is threatening to close down. There’s more to this than meets the eye and we’re trying to find out what. Nothing like that happens over here without jiggery-pokery of some sort.

Now ad vocemb Vollmar. As I see it, the man was attacked most ineptly. The pitfall in this case was the phrase state socialism. That phrase does not express any clear-cut concept but, like ‘social question’, etc., is simply journalese, a mere cliché from which anything or nothing may be interred. To contest the true meaning of such a word is sheer waste of time;

[^1]: a Daily Chronicle — b as regards





**[p. 28]**

Enclosure from the Witch.b Cordial regards to your wife and yourself. We are glad to hear that there’s an early prospect of your visiting us. Could be MOST BENEFICIAL politically over here; we shall do the necessary spadework. We quite agree with you about a weekly. 46 It would be tremendously effective abroad where we still very much feel the loss of the Sozialdemokrat; a good weekly survey of party events would be invaluable abroad.

Published in English for the first time

[^1]: First published in: Marx and Engels, Works, First Russian Edition, Vol. XXIX, Moscow, 1946

[^2]: Printed according to the original

[^3]: a William II - b Louise Kautsky





**[p. 16]**

ENGELS TO PAUL LAFARGUE 35

AT LE PERREUX

London, 12 November 1892

My dear Lafargue,

You do not tell me where I should address my reply, and so I am sending it to Le Perreux.

Herewith I append a cheque for £20 which you have asked, but I must warn you that in the future it will be absolutely impossible for me to make good the shortages of funds, let alone the peculations that might occur within the French party. Each national party ought to see to its own expenses, and one should not hear—in France, above all—this constant complaint that ‘the fees are not remitted’. Such kind of things would never take place if there is just a bit of order; a cashier ought to be subject to some kind of control, and when he falls ill, he is to be replaced, and he is accountable for receipts and expenditures. If some inevitable misfortune assailed you—all right, let it be; but paying for such negligence of responsible agents of the party, that’s tough indeed!

But, after all, the fat is in the fire—so much for that! I have explained to Bebel the entire affair of Millevoye’sa; it seems as if they are calming down on this account; your success at Carmaux and elsewhere must have contributed to that. The fruits of your peregrinations through France begin to ripen, and all of us are pleased to see the progress made in France. Do you realise now what a splendid weapon you in France have had in your hands for forty years in universal suffrage; if only people had known how to use it! It’s slower and more boring than the call to revolution, but it’s ten times more sure, and what is even better, it indicates with the most perfect accuracy the day when a call to armed revolution has to be made; it’s even ten to one that universal suffrage, intelligently used by the workers, will drive the rulers to overthrow legality, that is, to put us in the most favourable position to make the revolution. We should reach a new stage in the 1893 elections, and then there will

[^1]: a See this volume, p. 5





**[p. 30]**

Have you received the report of the German Executive Committee to the Berlin Congressa? It’s magnificent—and it’s war. 47

The paper—oh the paper! 48 If the French bourgeoisie makes the same amount of difficulty before it lends money to the Russian tsar, that would, at least to some extent, make up for the cheated hopes this journal has aroused in us.

Kiss Laura, Kind regards from Mrs Kautsky.

Ever yours,

F. Engels

First published in: Printed according to the original F. Engels, P. et L. Lafargue,

17

ENGELS TO AUGUST BEBEL

IN BERLIN

London, 15 November 1892 Dear August,

Now you see how my work gets interrupted! These absurd Tribune ar- ticles have forced me to intervene. Could you please ensure that the article

[^1]: Correspondance, t. II I, Translated from the French 1891-1895, Paris, 1959

[^2]: a ‘Bericht des Partei-Vorstandes an den Parteitag zu Berlin 1892’, Vorwärts, No. 259, 4 November 1892.





**[p. 31]**

Can you send me another copy of those collected articles on Bakunin? Since my copy is regularly sent to Sorge, I no longer have them here, but it might be necessary for me to refer to them. Instead of working, I have had to look out the old stuff, but it was out of the question to let this tissue of lies go unchallenged. Can you find out who its author was?

Regards to Victor.a Louise will today be sending an account of Trafalgar Square to Vienna. 50

Cordial regards to Mrs Julie,

Your F. E.

[Postscript from Louise Kautsky]

Warm regards to Julie, Victor, Popp and the proper hunter before the Lord.b Have received the Sozialist. Many thanks. Good luck with your work.

Love

Louise

[^1]: First published in: Printed according to the original Marx and Engels, Works, First Russian Edition, Published in English for the first time Vol. XXIX, Moscow, 1946

[^2]: a Adler - b August Bebel





**[p. 18]**

ENGELS TO SERGEI KRAVCHINSKY (STEPNIAK)

IN LONDON

London, 15 November 1892 122

Regent’s Park Road, N.W.

My dear Stepniak,

Suppose you and Mrs Stepniak, Volkhovsky and his little girl all come on Thursdaya and have dinner with us. If you come about 3.30 to 4, we can talk matters over and have dinner at 5. You know it is a long way from your place to this, and unless we arrange as above, you might easily miss your own dinner at home.

Kind regards to Mrs Stepniak from Mrs Kautsky and

Yours faithfully,

F. Engels

19

ENGELS TO AUGUST BEBEL

IN BERLIN

London, 19 November 1892 Dear August,

This time your Party Congress 51 didn’t go off as brilliantly as it did on the last occasion. The debate on the question of salary leaves a very

[^1]: First published in: Marx and Engels, Reproduced from the original Works, Second Russian Edition, Vol. 38, Moscow, 1965 Published in English for the first time

[^2]: a 17 November





**[p. 33]**

If taken too far, your ‘nationalisation’ of the press 53 would have very material drawbacks. It’s absolutely essential for you to have a press in the party which is not directly dependent on the Executive or even the Party Congress, i.e. which is in a position unreservedly to oppose individual party measures within the programme and accepted tactics, and freely to criticise that programme and those tactics, within the limits of party decorum. As the Party Executive, you people ought to encourage a press of this nature— indeed initiate it, for you would then exert far more moral sway over it than if it were to come into being partly against your will. The party is outstripping the strict discipline of earlier days; with 2 or 3 millions and an influx of ‘heddicated’ elements, more latitude is needed than what has hitherto not only sufficed but actually proved a useful restraint. The sooner you people adapt yourselves and the party to this changed situation the better. And the first step is a formally independent party press. It is bound to come about but it would be better if you were to allow it to come about in such a way that it remains under your moral sway from the outset and does not arise in opposition to yourselves.

You people blundered badly—not in Berlin but at Brussels 54— over the question of the May Day celebrations. You must have known at the time what you could promise and perform, and yet you went and promised more than you are now able to perform. I consider your own speech on the subject no whit inferior to Victor’s and readily believe that a stoppage of work in Germany would demand sacrifices out of all proportion to victories and gains. 55 But when the strongest party in the world suddenly



**[p. 34]**

We over here have not yet had the state socialism debate. I must congratulate you on your resolutions. They are really first-rate and I know of only one person who could have improved on them, namely Marx. The resolution on state socialism, like that on anti-Semitism, hits the nail on the head. And it is precisely resolutions of this kind that have in the past been the Achilles’ heel of the German movement; they have been sloppy, indeterminate, nebulous and cliché-ridden—in short, for the most part a disgrace. Fortunately they are so untranslatable that anyone translating them into a foreign language is compelled to read into them a meaning which they themselves do not possess.

Below is a theatre drawn by Louise or Aveling. For the past week the page thus embellished has been repeatedly placed amongst my writing paper, which is why it now has the honour of finding its way to you. 57

[^1]: Enclosed you will finda the twaddle talked by the seven Swabians 58

[^2]: a The enclosed text is missing.





**[p. 35]**

Your

F. E. (in the stage box)

[Postscript from Louise Kautsky]

Love from the Witch herself; my enthusiasm for May Day isn’t quite so extreme.

20

ENGELS TO PAUL LAFARGLUE 35

AT LE PERREUX

London, 22 November 1892 My dear Lafargue,

Thanks for the papers. The Panama business, 60 circumstances aiding and abetting, could well become for the bourgeois republic the Pandora’s

[^1]: First published in: Marx and Engels, Printed according to the original Works, First Russian Edition, Vol. XXIX, Moscow, 1946 Published in English for the first time

[^2]: a Daily Chronicle — b Eduard Bernstein





**[p. 36]**

Sam Moore has just left us. He is going to spend the greater part of his leave in the country with his parents and will be back in January. We shall see him again next Sunday.b

If I am not mistaken I have already told you that Pumps had a little girl on the 13th—both are doing well.

For the last few days I have been well enough again to go out for a quarter of an hour; I hope this will help to restore me altogether.

The Germans have committed a fine blunder over May Day; not in Berlin, but in Brussels. 34 They ought to have reserved the right, at the International Congress, to celebrate the day in their own way and according to circumstances. Their withdrawal creates a deplorable impression and should you give them a good wigging, you’ll be doing no more than your duty. Any other party could have allowed itself this retrogressive move; they, in their position as the main body of the European army, could not make it without great prejudice to the movement as a whole. I entirely approve the reasons which decided them in Berlin: the harm, to them, of a stoppage of work would have been out of all proportion to the advantages to them; but that should have been foreseen, and they should have had the courage at Brussels not to vote for a stoppage.

And what of Laura? When do we see her here? Kiss her for me.

Kindest regards from Louise.

Ever yours,

F.E.

Please keep me posted about the Panama affair with newspapers, it’s

[^1]: a of Marx’s Capital -b 27 November





**[p. 37]**

First published in: Printed according to the original F. Engels, P. et L. Lafargue,

Correspondance, t. II I, 1891-1895, Translated from the French Paris, 1959

21

ENGELS TO JULIE BEBEL

IN BERLIN

London, 29 November 1892

Dear Mrs Bebel,

Of all the letters I got on my birthday, yours is the first I feel impelled to answer. My most sincere thanks. I spent the day ‘in the best of health’, for, even though I am not in full control of my movements and cannot walk as much as I should like to, I nevertheless feel quite robust and everyone says I look very well. This time we turned my birthday into an English May Day celebration, i.e. we brought it forward from the Monday to the previous Sunday.a Louise felt that, as I couldn’t fail to tipple somewhat on an occasion like this, one day would be enough and two days too many. We had a real houseful, our African, Sam Moore, also Bax, the Avelings, Bernsteins, Mottelers, the Russian Volkhovsky, and two working men from the Society

62 ; that, I think, was all. No. I nearly forgot little Inkab who has really filled out on the food she gets in Berlin and whose plumpness suits her very well— now I have tangible proof that people have learned how to eat their fill in Berlin and let no one speak to me in future about starving Berlin!

We still had a small supply of dried woodruff and so Louise and I con- cocted a May cup with the aid of Moselle, red wine and champagne—at this foggy time of year it would hardly be possible to imagine, let alone

[^1]: a 27 November - b Inka Fischer





**[p. 38]**

I should like to have attended that beanfeast in Berlin. Inka tells me that she could not get through to you and Bebel because of the crush so there must have been an enormous number present. 63 Still, I don’t doubt that I’ll witness something of that kind again, if not this year then the next, provided that is, you come over and fetch us. The little Fischer girl sees in you so great a mental affinity with my dear good Lenchen that I can be doubly confident in placing myself in your charge.

As August left only one measly page for your use, I shall reverse the position and he will get only one from me.

With warm regards

Yours,

F. Engels

[^1]: First published in: Marx and Engels, Printed according to the original Works, First Russian Edition, Vol.XXIX, Moscow, 1946 Published in English for the first time

[^2]: a Motteler





**[p. 22]**

ENGELS TO AUGUST BEBEL

IN BERLIN

London, 29 November 1892

Dear August,

Many thanks for your good wishes—I stood the whole thing very well and without any evil after-effects whatever, nor should I be in any way averse to celebrating yet another birthday tomorrow—but so strict a watch is kept on me that I should never be allowed to indulge in such excesses! Your Prussian police are as nothing by comparison with a medical Witcha like this. But I always keep wondering what good it will do and what are the sins that have earned me such conscientious surveillance. Being unable to rid myself of a silly superstitious belief in ‘equalising justice’, I am drinking mineral water and lemonade and doing penance for the aforesaid sins without knowing whether I have actually committed them. More about politics in my next—in a day or twob—but I must see to it that I finish Volume II I.C In France things look remarkably tempestuous; c’est le commencement de la find! The time will again come when the French will have an opportunity to show their good qualities.

Warm regards.

Your F. E.

Thank you so much for the fine gluepot; it will be pressed into service straight away for Volume II I.

Published in English for the first time

[^1]: First published in: Marx and Engels, Works, First Russian Edition, Vol. XXIX Moscow, 1946

[^2]: Printed according to the original

[^3]: a Louise Kautsky - b See this volume, p. 48 end c of Capital — d it is the beginning of the





**[p. 23]**

ENGELS TO AN UNKNOWN CORRESPONDENT 64

London, 29 November 1892 122

Regent’s Park Road, N. W.

My dear Charlie,

Thank you very much for your nice letter and good wishes which I hope may all be fulfilled and as you have done me the honour of being born on the same day as myself, please accept my best congratulations on your birthday and the wish that you may live to be twice as old as I am now. Then you are sure to see something very grand and, worth seeing, and then perhaps you will now and then think of me as one who tried his best to bring about such a change.

With kind regards to your parents and brothers and sisters

Yours faithfully,

F. Engels

24

ENGELS TO THE SOCIAL DEMOCRATIC PARTY

SECRETARIAT 65

IN BERLIN

London, 29 November 1892

Dear Party Secretariat,

This comes with my sincere thanks for your kind good wishes. 66 My request to you, my dear Fischer, is that you also convey these thanks to your people.

[^1]: First published in: Marx and Engels, Reproduced from the original Works, First Russian Edition, Vol. XXIX, Moscow, 1946 Published in English for the first time





**[p. 41]**

As the Hyena has also been brought into this affair, I shall give her the floor.

Your

F. Engels

[Postscript from Louise Kautsky]

It will be difficult, generally speaking, to give Bamberger the floor in London. Press Hyena’s note. 67

[Postscript from Engels]

Yes, but who in fact is the Hyena?

25

ENGELS TO PAUL STUMPF

IN MAINZ

London, 30 November 1892

My dear old Stumpf,

You could have given me no greater pleasure on my seventy-second birthday than by sending me the Ultramontanist 68 confirmation of our victory in the Mainz elections. 69 You Mainz people sometimes tend to be

[^1]: First published in: Marx and Engels, Printed according to original Works, Second Russian Edition, Vol. 38, Moscow, 1965 Published in English for the first time





**[p. 42]**

Apart from that, I should like to send you my best thanks and to say how glad I am that you had been keeping well and have been feeling even ‘better’ since. I too am keeping well. We had the whole Brimstone Gang 72 here on Sunday and a few more besides, all of whom vigorously addressed themselves to the wine cup.a

If we have a few more of these scandals in Paris 60, we may soon be able to re-enact the old comedy of autumn ‘47 in Brussels; the world is beginning to look shaky.

Your old

F. Engels

[^1]: First published in: Marx and Engels, Printed according to the original Works, First Russian Edition, Vol. XXIX, Moscow, 1946 Published in English for the first time

[^2]: a See this volume, pp. 37-38





**[p. 26]**

ENGELS TO NATALIE AND WILHELM LIEBKNECHT

IN BERLIN

London, 1 December 1892

Dear Mrs Liebknecht,

My best thanks for your kind note and good wishes for my seventy-second birthday which we celebrated last Sunday amidst the usual circle of friendsa all of whom remained until the 28th had actually dawned! Winter seems to have set in really early over there if you have already been blessed with snow and a temperature of 10 degrees R. We don’t have such extremes, but rather content ourselves with a pleasing alternation of rain and fog, getting more of both than we should like.

Unfortunately it was not possible to send off this letter in time to give your Willyb my greetings on his birthday. I trust you will be so good as to accept these belated wishes. I thought it probable that your Theodorc to whom, as also to Karl,d please convey my sincere thanks for the good wishes, would be able to take a break from his tedious week in Mittenwald by spending a Sunday with you, and I’m glad to see that this was in fact so. The best of luck to your Karl with his exams. 73 I, who never passed an exam in my life, can nevertheless well imagine how a young man must feel three months before such an event.

The Stadthagen affair has shown that they are still perfectly capable of persecuting us even without the Anti-Socialist Law. 15 That the debate on salary at the Party Congress 52 has caused your family great annoyance I can well believe, but that kind of thing is inevitable in public life. Not everyone is as eager as the German Reichstag to vote grants; in other countries even ministers and, on occasion, crowned heads no less, must expose themselves to unpleasantnesses of this kind. It is a case of everyone trying to prove that ‘where money begins, benevolence ends’. 74 On the other hand, Liebknecht enjoyed a well-earned triumph with the Ems Despatch, 75 which makes up for a good deal, and then again his trip to Marseilles was an ovation from start to finish. 5

[^1]: a See this volume, pp. 37-38 - b Wilhelm Liebknecht jun. - c Theodor K. Liebknecht - d Karl Liebknecht





**[p. 44]**

Take good care of yourself; with best wishes to you and all your family.

Yours,

F. Engels

Dear Liebknecht,

You will have to wait a little while for the sequel to this, as Volume II P admits of no delay. In France it almost seems as though we are back in ‘47, and Panama 60 could well put paid to all the bourgeois cochonnerie.b The scandals of 1847 and of the Second Empire are trivial by comparison. Do write and tell your Paris correspondents to keep you informed about it and to send you the material in newspapers—these are matters you must pursue in person.

Your old F. E.

[^1]: First published in: Marx and Engels, Printed according to the original Works, First Russian Edition, Vol. XXIX, Moscow, 1946 Published in English for the first time

[^2]: a of Capital - b beastliness





**[p. 27]**

ENGELS TO LUDWIG SCHORLEMMER

IN DARMSTADT

London, 1 December 1892 My dear Schorlemmer,

My sincere thanks for your kind good wishes for a day that was happily spent.a Though I may not actually be fit for active service in the ‘glorious army’ as I enter on another year of my life, I am nevertheless in good health and, on the whole, robust and I think you are right in saying that for the time being I shall continue to pull my weight.

To go by your latest information on Anschutz, it would certainly be best if we were to hear no more of him. Old Pflüger—a nephew of mine used to work in his laboratory—is, so far as I can judge, a real philistine and if, on top of that, Anschütz’s father was a Prussian officer, that makes matters even worse, The fact is that it will be difficult to find the right man for Carl’sb biography, one who is not only a chemist but also a Social Democrat, and not only a Social Democrat but also a chemist and, what’s more, a chemist who has made a close study of the history of his discipline since Liebig’s day. Presumably we shall have to wait and see whether we can find that man or whether we must content ourselves with the two aspects of Carl being treated separately. I myself must above all else finally complete Volume II I of Capital and cannot see how I could break off just now—and on top of that there are also the proofs of the 2nd edition of Volume II !

And then, too, we live in very turbulent times, what with the military affair, 76 the impending crisis in Germany, the Panama scandals 60 and the crisis that has already set in in France as well as the crisis over Ireland that will almost certainly occur over here next spring. 77 In times like these my correspondence increases twofold and threefold and if, on top of everything else, one is forbidden on account of one’s eyes to wield a pen by lamplight, how can one possibly manage? And as for daylight here in London in winter! We’re glad if we get four or five hours of it and often there’s none at all— gaslight all day because of the fog.

[^1]: a See this volume, pp. 37-38 - b Carl Schorlemmer; see also this volume, p. 14





**[p. 46]**

With my best compliments to your family,

Yours,

F. Engels

Best wishes from Mrs Kautsky. I almost forgot to tell you that Pumps gave birth to a baby girl a fortnight ago last Sunday; both are doing well.

First published in: Marx and Engels, Printed according to the original Works, First Russian Edition, Vol. XXIX, Moscow, 1946 Published in English for the first time

28

ENGELS TO CHARLES BONNIER 78

IN OXFORD

[Draft]

[London, 3 December 1892]

My dear Bonnier,

Es wird nichts so heiss gegessen, wie es gekocht wird.a You have the ad- mirable habit of serving warm, very warm, but would I not sometimes risk burning my lips? The newspaper, as you know, is not yet being published. 48

You ask me to convey to the Germans a kind of ultimatum from the French. If I undertake to do so, will you guarantee that, in reply to a direct query by Berlin to Paris, Paris without disavowing me entirely would not say that I had exaggerated.

[^1]: a If you don’t cool it, you’ll not be able to drink it.





**[p. 47]**

1) let us first see what will happen here between now and 1st May, and what will happen this 1st May.

2) Between May and August a number of things might happen before Zurich 56 which cannot today be anticipated,

3) and, all the more so, between August 1893 and May 1894. With the military question in Germany, 76 with Panama 60 in France, with the Irish complication in England 77—three acute imminent political crises— with an industrial crisis everywhere, it seems to me that we could put our time to better use than quarrelling over how to mark 1st May, 1894, a day on which, perhaps, we will have better things to do than ‘demonstrate’!

As for your perennial Protot, I couldn’t care less about him, any more than about his fellows, the agents-provocateurs of the German police. When will you adopt a similar attitude?

In any case, it seems to me rather odd that you are prepared to allow the English to disregard the resolutions of Brussels 54 but them alone. 79 What will French logic say to that?a

As for the rest I know only one party which has the right to reproach the Berlin Congress. 51 That is the Austrian party. 81 Until now 1st May in Berlin has been worth far more than those in Paris.

I am writing today to Bebel.b I will tell him of your ultimatum, but for the moment only as your personal opinion.

[^1]: First published in: Marx and Engels, Works, First Russian Edition, Vol. XXIX, Moscow, 1946

[^2]: Printed according to the original Translated from the French Published in English for the first time

[^3]: a The following sentence is crossed out in the draft: ‘The article by Bebel 80 has probably gone to press already, if in Paris they wanted to prevent it.’ - b See next letter.





**[p. 29]**

ENGELS TO AUGUST BEBEL

IN BERLIN

London, 3 December 1892 Dear August,

I was delighted by what you said in your letter of the 22nd about the disinclination you people feel for any further ‘nationalisation’ of the party press. 82 So there’s no need to waste any more words on the subject.

As regards the May Day celebrations, I concede that you were perfectly right so far as the Berlin resolution was concerned. But the fact remains that the general impression you produced in Brussels was that in future you too would celebrate on 1 May and not invoke the permission not to do so that was granted purely by way of an exception.^ So you shouldn’t be surprised by the hullabaloo to which the Berlin resolution has given rise. But your intention of getting Congress to settle on Sunday as the day on which celebrations should be held in future is likely to hit on some snags. Except for the English everyone will be against it, many of the smaller parties out of sheer bravado. It would be a sorry retreat and the last people to join in its official proclamation would be those who secretly reserve the right to do likewise, whether it was proclaimed or not.

Well, yesterday evening I got a rabid letter from Bonnier (he never writes any other kind) in which, having read your article in the Neue Zeit, 83 he declares in the name of the French that, if the first Sunday in May were to be adopted, they would drop the whole business of May Day. ‘Jamais,’ he writes, ‘notre parti n’acceptera (le dimanche) et nous sommes bien décidés à tenir ferme.’’a And he believes you people are playing with fire.

I wrote and told himb 1. that things are never as black as he paints them, 2. asking who had authorised him to speak in the name of the French party, 3. that before May 1893, and between then and August ‘93 in Zurich 56 and between then and May ‘94 much might happen

[^1]: a Our party would never agree (to the Sunday) and we are fully determined to stand firm. - b See this volume, Letter 28





**[p. 49]**

The man is consumed by an irrepressible urge to be up and doing but, such being the case, he shouldn’t have gone to Oxford where he is all on his own with red Wolffa who is completely out of everything. It’s a priceless idea, wanting to direct the European labour movement from Oxford—the last genuine remnant of the Middle Ages still to be found in Europe—but for us it makes an infuriating amount of unnecessary work and I shall protest in no mean terms to Paris about this go-between. The really unfortunate thing is that he’s the only person who understands German save for Laura, and she lives out of town.

For the rest, the Party Congress went off quite well, but subscribing to the resolution 84 despite the sundry rubbish it contains, must have been a bitter pill for Vollmar to swallow.

Ede came to see me, bringing with him a whole bunch of letters from K. Kautsky—who had also written to me—all of them concerned with the Neue Zeit, and wanting me to add my mite. My opinion is that, if you accept the change proposed by Dietz, you should think it out and prepare for it properly, and not go ahead till January, otherwise it will be altogether premature. 85 But speaking generally, I should say that, since becoming a weekly, the Neue Zeit has to some extent relinquished its old character in favour of a new one which it has not been completely successful in assuming. The paper is now being written for two sets of readers and cannot do full justice to either.

If it is to become a popular, part-political, part-literary and artistic and part-learned journal, à la Nation, then it will have to move to Berlin. The political section of a weekly must be written at the hub of things, on the eve of publication, otherwise it will always be lagging behind. And,

[^1]: a Ferdinand Wolff





**[p. 50]**

But if the Neue Zeit undergoes these changes, it will appeal to only one section of its former public and will have to be organised solely for their benefit. It would then no longer be open to those articles from which it has hitherto derived its greatest and most enduring value—the longer, learned papers which run on through 3 to 6 numbers. Hence, alongside the Neue Zeit there would have to be a predominantly learned monthly— if necessary even quarterly—journal with a correspondingly restricted circle of subscribers, and this would have to be offset by raising the price if the paper was to be kept going.

Indeed, it seems to me altogether necessary, if the party publishers wish increasingly to secure a monopoly of party publications, including learned ones, that they should not aim at bulk sales for everything, whether suitable for that purpose or not. An original paper on political economy is bound to be primarily a detailed treatise, nor can it be expected to sell in bulk. Similarly, a genuine historical work, the outcome of independent research, does not lend itself to publication by installments. In short, I think there should be two separate departments, one for bulk sales, the other for ordinary, slower-moving sales through booksellers, in smaller quantities and at a correspondingly higher price.

What happens when an attempt is made to boost sales beyond the limits called for by the nature of the case is something I have learned from my own experience. Though written as popularly as possible, my Anti-Dühring is by no means a book to suit every working man. But along comes Dietz, takes over part of the Zurich edition and then tries to boost sales by remaindering the thing at a reduced price with 11 assorted booksellers. This is not at all to my liking and next time I shall be on my guard. It is the only longer work I have written since 1845 and, whichever

[^1]: a Stuttgart





**[p. 51]**

For the rest, times are growing critical. Every morning when I read the Daily News and such French papers as have arrived, it takes me right back to ‘47. At that time, too, one expected some further scandalous revelations each morning and one was seldom disappointed. The Panama affair 60 beats everything that went on in the way of corruption under Louis-Philippe and under Bonaparte II I. The initial outlay, including bonifications to the press and Parliament, amounted to 83 million francs. This will be the ruin of the bourgeois republic, for the Radicals 86 are as deeply implicated as the Opportunists. 87 On every side attempts are being made to hush things up, of course, but the more they are hushed up the worse they get. Once the revelations were under way and a few people had become irretrievably implicated in the scandal, these had perforce to cover themselves by betraying their accomplices and showing that they had only been swimming with the stream. Already the committee is in possession of such enormously compromising statements that there’s no holding back; a few may slip through the net, but large numbers have already been named and, of course, the fewer the names that are compromised the greater the odium that attaches to the bourgeois republic. Though much may still happen in the meantime, this is nevertheless the beginning of the end. Fortunately all the monarchist parties are completely done for, nor will it be at all easy to find another Boulanger. 6

Herewith an extract from Lafargue’s letter for the Vorwärts—but do ensure that the paper gives no indication whatsoever that the letter emanated from a deputy. 88

What Liebknecht entirely overlooked in the matter of Bismarck’s Ems forgery was that that’s the sort of thing diplomats do in secret but never boast about. 75 But if one of them does happen to boast about it, the breach of etiquette is such as to render him persona non grata. After this it will never again be possible to appoint Mr Bismarck Imperial Chancellor, otherwise any foreign government could refuse to enter into negotiations with a man who not only is not above using such methods, but actually boasts of having used them. The Imperial Government would risk incur-



**[p. 52]**

Many regards to your wife.a

Your F.E.

[Postscript from Louise Kautsky]

Dear August,

It seems to be my fate that my space should be rationed because I once over-stepped the mark and wrote a leader, so rather than look at your last letter, I shall look instead at the pretty inkstand that invites kind, happy thoughts and was inaugurated with the proofs of the second volume of Capital. Thank you very much for it—how good you both are; now that I’m equipped, I am, it seems, likely to run on and to be rapped over the knuckles for so doing. Well, that isn’t what I was intending to write about—all I meant to say was that not once this week have I been able to get round to writing, there having been, alas, so much to prevent me—glass-workers, transport workers, Reumann, Victor,b meeting of the unemployed and, last but not least, the Jews. They are not getting the Vorwärts, August, so could you please make inquiries? Then, some time ago, I asked if you could let me have another copy of the Vorwärts’ report on the Congress, but you probably forgot—I’d like two if at all possible, otherwise one; it’s the report on the Party Conference I want, not the one made by you people at the Conference. Victor enjoyed the time he spent with you and wrote saying that to him it seemed as though the poor Austrians were standing guard in the wet and the cold, whereas you people were sitting snug in your encampment, despite the struggle and the fighting. Then there’s another thing—I still have two English reports on the International Glassworkers’ Congress 89 to spare. Would you like one? It’s very interesting, but you would have to write a few lines about it by way of justification and send a sample copy, and would you please ask Fischer if he might perhaps write something for a Bavarian paper, in which case I would send him the other copy. I would, of course, send them without any strings attached but I feel responsible because it’s the English who have to pay for the whole thing, so I’d be grateful if you’d let me know. I must close, so more anon; it’s time for the post and I must close. With loving kisses to you and Julie,

the Witch

[Postscript from Engels]

[^1]: Please convey my most sincere thanks to the parliamentary group for their kind telegram last Sunday. 90

[^2]: a Julie Bebel - b Adler





**[p. 53]**

First published in: Printed according to the original Marx and Engels, Works, First Russian Edition, Published in English for the first time Vol. XXIX, Moscow, 1946

30

ENGELS TO KARL KAUTSKY

IN STUTTGART

London, 4 December 1892

Dear Baron,

My best thanks for your good wishes in respect of a day that was spent very happily. Alas, tippling still does not agree with me and I shall have to atone for it by abstaining for the next few weeks.

Thank you, too, for sending the prospectus for the new journal—do you know the chaps 91 ? I have never heard of any of them.

I haven’t yet been able so much as to look at Schmidt’s latest on the rate of profita since, until Volume II Ib is finished, I shall have to fend off everything that might entail extra work—there being far too many inter- ruptions as it is.

As for the Neue Zeit, 85 Edec and I have discussed it at length, and yesterday I wrote a long letterd to August on the subject.

It is my opinion that if, as proposed by Dietz and August, the Neue Zeit is to be given a lighter, more popular tone and made ‘more interesting’ from a literary point of view, it will have to move to Berlin. For only there can a political review covering all events up to the eve of publication be catered for on the spot and only there can a wealth of artistic and literary work, which would otherwise come a week too late, be produced

[^1]: a C. Schmidt, ‘Die Durchschnittsprofitrate und das Marx’sche Wertgesetz,’ Die Neue Zeit, 1892/93, Vol. I, Nos. 3 and 4. - b of Capital -c Eduard Bernstein - d See this volume, Letter 29





**[p. 54]**

But in that case the Neue Zeit would have to sacrifice the better part of its contents—and the latter would call for a monthly or quarterly of a more rigorously learned nature than hitherto and which, because intended for a smaller public, would have to be sold at a higher price.

But what if neither is feasible? In that case—and this has only just oc- curred to me—it might perhaps be better to turn the Neue Zeit back into a monthly but with the same capacity as at present, i.e. 104 sheets a year and 8-9 a month. The longer articles could then appear in one, or at most 2, numbers and would, in the second case, have to be subdivided into I, II or I, II , II I, IV installments which would be conducive to their general intelligibility. With 2 sheets a month it’s impossible to break off longer articles at the point the sense requires, since this would almost invariably be precluded by considerations of space and diversity. But in this way you could train your contributors to divide up their things themselves into 2 installments. And then there could be ‘something for everyone’ in every number. But here again, you would have to reckon on a reduced circulation, and hence be obliged to raise the price—or so at least it seems to me.

At all events, before making any experiments you should consider the matter carefully. Once made, a false step is difficult to reverse.

If the weekly Neue Zeit were to move to Berlin it would, in many respects, replace the weekly central organ which might otherwise hold out for another year. Between now and then a great deal may happen. Things are livening up. It looks as though the Panama scandal 60 might mark a turning-point so far as the development of France is concerned. You should pester Lafargue about collecting material for a longish essay on the subject, or supplying you with articles as each particular phase of the scandal reaches its climax. With that sort of material the Neue Zeit would be able to outstrip the dailies even in the matter of factual news.

As for the Vorwärts—the less said the better!

Your

F. Engels



**[p. 55]**

First published in: Printed according to the original Aus der Frühzeit des Marxismus,

Engels Briefwechsel mit Kautsky, Published in English for the first time Prague, 1935

31

ENGELS TO PAUL LAFARGUE 35

AT LE PERREUX

London, 5 December 1892

My dear Lafargue,

Your remarks concerning Bebel compel me to refer back to your letter from Lille. 93 What you say about him is unfair in the extreme. Far from Liebknecht correcting Bebel on any matter whatsoever (an amusing idea to anyone who understands the situation), it’s precisely the contrary that is taking place. It is Liebknecht who is promising wonders, and if the whole thing doesn’t collapse and dissolve, it’s thanks to the work Bebel is doing. If Liebknecht said only agreeable things to you at Marseilles, don’t forget that this is how he behaves with everyone; 5 that he always acts on the impulse of the moment and that consequently he says white here today, but tomorrow somewhere else he will say black, and he will maintain in all good faith that he has not contradicted himself. You complain about the Berlin resolution concerning May 1st, 54 well and good, according to our German press, Liebknecht is reported to have said that at Marseilles he explained the position to you, including the impossibility for the Germans to stop work on May 1st; and that ‘the French’ had fully acknowledged the force of his arguments. If that is true, by what right do you complain of the Berlin resolution? If Liebknecht has erred (for he believes what he says), what have



**[p. 56]**

I fear that behind all this lies the dissatisfaction of our Oxford hermit.a If his impulsive nature makes him unjust to Bebel, who is an ironic and business-like character, the heat he is generating during his compulsory activity in the heart of the only city in the world where the Middle Ages continue in full swing, will drive this aversion to the point of hatred. As it is, I never get a letter from him which does not teem with abuse of Bebel. I grant all that, I give full recognition to the hermit’s good faith and goodwill, but firstly an enthusiast of that kind is a dangerous guide in matters of practical life, particularly when he lives in the isolation of Oxford, consumed by the desire to do something for the movement. And it’s not just something to do that he needs, but positively something important and decisive. You know how he pestered us over the paper. 48 The day before yesterday he sent me a veritable ultimatum in the name of the French Party (he always speaks in its collective name) addressed to the German Party: if the Germans at Zurich propose the postponing of the May celebrations to the first Sunday, the French will withdraw from the demonstration altogether, and there will be, if not war, at least something like the breaking off of diplomatic relations—and goodness knows what else. Anyhow he warns the Germans ‘that they are playing with fire’. However, his French logic allows him to add that if the English insist on demonstrating on the Sunday, the French would see no harm in it!

I answered him fairly ironically that I would communicate his ultimatum to Bebel, but only as his personal opinion.b

Naturally I don’t take Bonnier’s explosions for the attitude of the French Party; on the contrary, even if you authorised him I should not do so; I know him to be quite incapable—with the best will in the world—of expressing other people’s ideas and words without putting in his own. He can’t help it; like Liebknecht, he only knows two shades, black and white; he either loves or hates; and as he cannot love Bebel, he needs must hate him. But you would be monstrously wrong to form your view of the German movement according to his. Laura being in the country cannot gainsay all the gossip about the Germans, and it’s a great pity that he is the only one of you all who understands German.

[^1]: a Charles Bonnier - b See this volume, pp.46-47





**[p. 57]**

Besides, you may remember that recently, as you needed documents with respect to Liebknecht, it was Bebel who immediately set himself to work for you, while Liebknecht—though it concerned him closely—would but confine himself to sending several newspapers to you.

Enough of that. Had it not been to destroy the false judgements about the most perspicacious, the most sensible and the most energetic man in the German party, I would not have written to you at such length. I wanted to write about Panama, 60 but here is the bottom of the 4th page—and so I shall write about that to Laura.c

Ever yours,

F. Engels

[^1]: First published in: Printed according to the original F. Engels, P. et L. Lafargue,

[^2]: Correspondance, t. 111, 1891-1895, Translated from the French Paris, 1959

[^3]: a poetry-music - b instrumental and vocal poetry which is not music - c See next letter.





**[p. 32]**

ENGELS TO LAURA LAFARGUE

AT LE PERREUX

London, 5 December 1892 My dear Löhr,

It’s a long time yet till April, but if it cannot be managed otherwise, well then we must submit and only consider the matter finally settled, affaire bâclée, that you celebrate, both of you, your silver wedding here. And maybe you may manage a few days with us in the meantime, at all events we will consider that an open question still.

If you do not receive this week the Arbeiterinnenzeitung please let us know; Louise will write again. The paper having been handed over to the women altogether has probably caused some irregularities which will soon be set right.

Ah le Panama! 60 I can tell you I am 45 years younger again, and living through a second ‘47. Then La Presse (Girardin’s) brought every day a fresh revelation about some scandal. 61 or some other paper brought a reply to some charge of his; and this went on till it killed Louis Philippe. But those scandals, and even those of the Second Empire dwindle into nothingness compared with this Grand National Steeplechase of Scandals. Louis Bonaparte took jolly good care, when he coaxed the peasants’ money out of their buried hoards, to do so for the benefit of his State loans, which were safe; but here the savings of the small tradesman, the peasant, the domestic servant and above all of the petit rentier,a the loudest howler of all, have gone into irretrievable ruin, and the miracle has been performed of transforming a canal which has not been dug out, into an unfathomable abyss. 1,500 million francs, 60 million pounds sterling, all gone, gone for ever, except what has found its way into the pockets of swindlers, politicians and journalists; and the money got together by swindles and corrupt dodges unequalled even in America. What a base of operations for a Socialistic campaign!

The thing has evidently been based upon its own immensity.

[^1]: a small rentier





**[p. 59]**

To my mind c’est le commencement de la fin.b The bourgeois republic and its politicians can hardly outlive this unparalleled exposure. There are but three possibilities: an attempt at monarchy, another Boulanger, 6 or socialism. The first and the second, if attempted, could only lead to the third, and thus we may be called upon, long before we in consequence of our own action had a right to expect it, to enter upon a career of immense responsibility. I should be glad of it, if it does not come too soon and too suddenly. It will do our Germans good to see that the French have not lost their historical initiative. A country cannot pass through 200 years like what 1648-1848 were for Germany without leaving a small impression of the philistine even on the working class. Our revolution of 48/49 was too short and too incomplete to wipe that out altogether. Of course, the next revolution which is preparing in Germany with a consistency and steadiness unequalled anywhere else, would come of itself in time, say 1898-1904; but revolutionary times, preparing a thoroughgoing crisis, in France, would hasten that process, and moreover, if the thing breaks out in France first, say 1894, then Germany follows suit at once and then the Franco-German Proletarian Alliance forces the hands of England and smashes up in one blow both the triple and the Franco-Russian conspiracies; then we have a revo- lutionary war against Russia—if not even a revolutionary echo from Russia—vogue la Galère!c

Love from Louise who is at a meeting of actors and dramatists for the foundation of a freie Bühne or théâtre libred or what not. 94

[^1]: a panic - b this is the beginning of the end - c be that as it may - d free stage or free theatre





**[p. 60]**

Ever yours,

F.E.

Mendelsons were here last night, spoke a good deal of their visit to Le Perreux.

First published, in the language Reproduced from the original of the original (English), in: F. Engels, P. et L. Lafargue, Correspondance, t. II I, 1891-1895, Paris, 1959

33

ENGELS TO MRS STEPNIAK (KRAVCHINSKY)

IN LONDON

London, 6 December 1892 122

Regent’s Park Road, N.W.

Dear Mrs Stepniak,

Mrs Kautsky showed me your note in which you are kind enough to ask me to spend next Saturday evening with you. I should do so with the greatest pleasure, but unfortunately my locomotive capabilities are still too limited to enable me to undertake such distant expeditions.

I am at present practically confined to the neighbourhood of Primrose Hill, and Mrs Kautsky will be able to tell you that I have been obliged to decline invitations besides yours.

Kind regards to Stepniak from

Yours sincerely,

F. Engels



**[p. 61]**

34

ENGELS TO WILHELM ELLENBOGEN 95

IN VIENNA

London, 7 December 1892 122 Regent’s Park Road, N.W.

Esteemed Comrade,

Many thanks for kindly sending your Geschichte des Arbeiter- Bildungsvereins.a I regard the publication of studies on the history of the Austrian labour movement as a highly rewarding task, the more so since in our fast-moving time some moments, important in themselves, are lost to posterity as they only live on in the memory of the participants and have never been recorded in writing. I, for my part, am again working diligently on Volume 3,b a bit of news which will probably compensate you for my not answering your kind letter in person.

[From Louise Kautsky]

Dear Comrade,

[^1]: Yours faithfullyc

[^2]: F. Engels

[^3]: I enjoyed reading your correction in the latest issue of the Arbeiterzeitung. For that devilish misprint had accused you of bigamy too, something you had completely overlooked in your eagerness to exculpate yourself in the eyes of the female comrades. Also going off today will be the report of the International Glass-Workers Congress, 89 which will surely be of great interest to you. Many

[^4]: aby Wilhelm Ellenbogen - b of Marx’s Capital —c in Engels’ handwriting





**[p. 62]**

Your

Louise Kautsky

First published in Novaya i noveishaya Printed according to the original istoriya, No. 6, Moscow, 1980 Published in English for the first time

35

ENGELS TO PYOTR LAVROV 96

IN PARIS

London, 14 December 1892

My dear Lavrov,

I do not see why I would oppose the publication of the letter from Lopatin about a conversation that he had with me. 97 Therefore do as you like.

I was pleased to learn from Mendelson that you are well. As for me, I have no reason to complain—quite the contrary. For three months now I have been working on the 3rd volume of Capital, and although there is still a great deal to do, this time I have grounds to hope that I will finish it.

As for the Berlin resolution, I am of the opinion that the Germans committed at Brussels the mistake of promising—although indirectly— more than they can fulfil. 54 The 1st May 1890 and ‘91 has shown that in Germany a strike is impractical; the sacrifices were not worth the possible gains. At Hamburg alone the attempt cost more than 100,000 marks. 98 The coincidence that 1st May 1892 was a Sunday led them to forget in Brussels that real world to which the crisis—more acute this time in Germany than elsewhere—has sharply returned them.

The strike on 1st May ‘93 could cost us too dear—in Germany, and, by reaction, elsewhere. A strike in Germany would dry up both funds and



**[p. 63]**

It is the law of the development of parties that a party which has achieved a certain degree of power finds that the very demonstrations which it could not do without in its early days have become impractical.

For the rest, as for the forms, one could have shown a little more regard for the susceptibilities of others. However, what will you—these are the grobe Deutscht who do not know how to sugar the pill.

As regards the rest, it seems to me that Panama 60 is more important than 1st May, given the times. Panama puts me in mind of 1847, when every day one could expect some new scandal. 61 1847 dug the grave of the July Monarchy, and what will 1892 bring?

Yours,

F. Engels

First published, in Russian, Printed according to the original in Voprosy istorü KPSS, Translated from the French No. 7, Moscow, 1965 Published in English for the first time

36

ENGELS TO LAURA LAFARGUE

AT LE PERREUX

London, 20 December 1892

My dear Löhr,

Yesterday we forwarded by Van Oppen and Co’s Express (they have an office in Paris too, but I did unfortunately not note the address) the box with pudding and cake, and hope it will arrive safe (directed to you, Le

[^1]: a unpolished Germans





**[p. 64]**

Before crossing the Channel, the Oxford sagea gave us a call here. I hope I quietened his anxiety about the first of Mayb to some extent, The attempt, in 1890, to chômerc at Hamburg alone cost the party above 100,000 marks 98, and in my opinion it would never do to allow the bourgeois to bleed the German party’s cash and credit ‘à blanc just at the moment when a dissolution of the Reichstag 76 is in the air, and when every farthing would be wanted.

Panama is delightful, 60 The papers you so kindly send me, and old Mother Crawford’s letters—though awfully cut down by the respectable people of the Daily News—form already a pretty comprehensive dossier which I intend to complete up to the—I hope—bitter end. Respectability here, of course, triumphs.

Wenn sich das französische Laster erbricht, setzt sich die englische Tugend zu Tischd—and I’ll be damned if I do not prefer a thousand times that plain open outright French vice to this hypocritical British virtue. Here corruption has been brought into a system and has been endowed with a complete code of étiquette which you have only to keep within, in order to be perfectly bullet-proof against all charges of undue corruption. In France no man would stand a chance in a popular constituency, a town especially, who openly wanted to get into Parliament for the purpose of furthering his own interests; here, anybody who wanted to get in for any other purpose would be considered a fool and a Don Quixote. The English Panama is called Building Society and has more than one head— the savings of the small people have been eaten up in these societies by wholesale, and no great fuss about it.e One M.P. is in here too, Spencer Balfour—he will take the Chiltern Hundreds and retire into private life—while lots of M.P.’s make money by selling their names as directors of all sorts of swindling companies, which is considered perfectly fair so long as it is not pushed to excess.

[^1]: On Fridayf we expect Pumps and her family here, as we have not room

[^2]: a Charles Bonnier - b See this volume, pp. 46-47 - c strike - d When French vice fails, British virtue sits down to a meal - e See this volume, p. 75 - f 23 December





**[p. 65]**

Shall write to Paul after the first rush of the holidays is over.

Ever yours,

F. Engels

[Postscript from Louise Kautsky]a

My dear Laura,

Should I do penance, in sackcloth and ashes? But I’d rather not for I regret all my misdeeds as it is. Because of my not writing I suffer more than you do. After my return the Generalb was no longer his old self and I had hardly any time of my own, but when I did have time I was in no mood for writing. Yet now and again everything turned out very well. I look forward to the spring when we’ll be able to talk to our hearts content. My best regards to the M.P.C

With love and kisses

Your

Louisa

[^1]: First published, in the language Reproduced from the original of the original (English), in: F. Engels, P. et L. Lafargue, Correspondance, t. II I, 1891-1895, Paris, 1959

[^2]: a written in German - b Engels’ nickname - c Paul Lafargue





**[p. 37]**

ENGELS TO AUGUST BEBEL

IN BERLIN

London, 22 December 1892

Dear August,

We recently had the pleasure of seeing Cato Censorius Bonnier here while in transit from Oxford to Paris. I think I made some impression on him by pointing out that 1. his manner of giving ultimatumsa is hardly calculated to promote mutual understanding and 2. that it really might be better if the German party were to preserve its funds and its credit for the eventuality of a dissolution and future elections rather than dissipate both on a stoppage of work on May Day. It’s unfortunate for both French and Germans that this chap should be an indispensable middleman between the two, since Guesde seems reluctant to make use of any one else. But thwarted as it is by the isolation and inactivity of Oxford, his enthusiasm plus his intense urge to be up and doing serves to evoke discord rather than collaboration. And in the present state of Europe what is called for above all else is precisely the harmonious collaboration of Germans and French.

Many thanks for the Reichstag stenographic reports. I shall not be able to read your big speech about the Army until tonight, but I was delighted by what you said about Heinze’s law. 99 So long as prostitution cannot be wholly eradicated, our first bid ought, I think, to be the girls’ total exemption from any kind of extraordinary legislation. Here in England this is more or less the case; there are no ‘morality police’, and no controls or medical examinations, but the police still have tremendous power because it is a punishable offence to keep a disorderly house, and every house in which a girl lives and receives visitors can be treated as such. But although this law is enforced only on rare occasions, the girls are none the less exposed to frightful extortion on the part of policemen. This relative freedom from degrading police restrictions enables the girls to preserve an independent and self- respecting character in a way that

[^1]: a See this volume, pp. 46-47





**[p. 67]**

It is my belief that, in dealing with this matter, we should above all consider the interests of the girls themselves as victims of the present social order, and protect them as far as possible against ending up in the gutter—or at least not actually force them into the gutter by means of legislation and police skulduggery as happens throughout the Continent. In this country the same thing was attempted in a number of garrison towns where controls and medical examinations were introduced, but it didn’t last long; the only good thing the social purity people have done has been to agitate against this.

Medical examinations are absolutely worthless. Wherever they were introduced here, syphilis and gonorrhoea increased. I am convinced that a police surgeon’s instruments are exceedingly effective in transmitting vene- real disease, since he would be unlikely to spend time or trouble on disin- fecting them. Free courses on venereal disease should be made available to the girls, then most of them would probably take precautions themselves. Blaschko has sent us an article on medical controlsa in which he is forced to admit that these are absolutely useless; if he were to draw the logical conclusion from his own assumptions, he would be bound to conclude that prostitution must be freed from all restrictions and the girls be protected

[^1]: a A. Blaschko, ‘Die moderne Prostitution’, Die Neue Zeit, Stuttgart, 1891-1892, Vol. II , Nos. 27, 32.





**[p. 68]**

I hope that Kneipp treatment is doing Dietz good; at all events Nasoa

maintains that the crack-brained parson made him astoundingly healthy. By completely changing the habits of people the routine of whose urban professional lives has made them a bit rigid and set in their ways, and by forcing them to take exercise in the open air, the said cure may, from what I have heard, do them a certain amount of good or, indeed, harm—according to the nature of the case—just as does the ‘water cure’ when it is not as a rule the mineral water that does the trick, but rather the change of routine and the strict diet. But otherwise you are right; amongst our people there is many a one who deems it his duty fervently to embrace any and every new ‘ism’ and, likewise, any disgruntled bourgeois or bureaucratic malcontent, any obscure literary or artistic genius. He may equally well set himself up as the protector of all victims of persecution and injustice, and discover in every ism a theory of world redemption hitherto suppressed by the wicked capitalist world order. It is an excellent way of turning to account and putting on display the very things one has not learnt. One has only to look at what the late-lamented Volksstaat achieved in that sphere!

The Panama business 60 gets nicer every day. As so often in France the affair is taking a quite dramatically exaggerated course. At any moment, or so it seems, the efforts to thrust it out of sight are going to succeed, and then up it springs again where least expected and more vigorously than ever before. Now the situation is such that no hushing up will avail. First the affair was to be hushed up in the courts, whereupon fresh revelations necessitated the setting up of a committee of inquiry; then it was the latter that was to be hamstrung, an attempt that was only partially successful and only to the extent that further legal proceedings of a more serious nature were instituted. And now there’s a spate of fresh revelations and prosecutions of deputies and senators. The ball has been set rolling and is very far from coming to a stop. Standing in the wings are 1. Constans, who knows that he is played out and is anxious to avenge himself, 2. Rochefort and the Boulangists, 6 who also know a great deal, 3. the Orléans family, who would like to make use of all this farcical business to attempt a restoration. All these people know a great deal and can to a large extent prove it. And if the worst comes to the worst, Ch.

[^1]: a Leonhard Tauscher





**[p. 69]**

‘I need the monarchy and shall buy it once and for all; the Republic costs me too much, since every few years I have to buy yet another ravenous crew.’

What wouldn’t that jackass Boulanger give for that now if he hadn’t shot himself! He’d be in clover; indeed, I shouldn’t be surprised if an attempt were made to find another Boulanger. Fortunately this would not be at all easy. The monarchy, too, is down on its luck—the Right voted as one man for the Panama lottery 100 and, what is worse, made propaganda for it in the rural areas, thus landing philistines and peasants in the cart. The 1,700 million francs that were swallowed up consisted to a very large extent of the savings of little men (over 800,000 are said to be involved!), hence the wave of indignation, while the Right (Clerical Monarchists) who at first rejoiced over the Panama scandal, are now turning coy.

How it will all end is obvious—ultimately in our favour. But in a country as incalculable as France it is difficult to predict what intermediate stages there will be. Several, at any rate, before our people really take possession of the stage. Only if there were to be revolution in Paris would the Socialists come to power; for in Paris—cf. the Commune—every revolution is automatically socialist. But Paris is less turbulent than the provinces and that is a good thing, Paris is blasé, not least because the workers, disunited, confused and patriotic (in so far as they sense that Paris is—wrongly, or so they feel—no longer the political hub of the world), can see no way out. Should the scandals continue, there might be a presidential crisis—Carnot has at least connived at a lot of dirty work—and whatever happens there will be parliamentary elections next year. Also a good many municipal elections in Paris. All this will provide more than enough legal loopholes. On the other hand, uncertainty as to the reliability of the army (which is new to general military service and not so hardened to it as Prussia) is a safeguard against coups d’ état, as is the unarmed state of the masses (who this time could not, as always before, turn to the National Guard for guns and ammunition) against attempted uprisings. It therefore seems very probable that the crisis will take a peaceful course. It’s just what we need, however, if we are to have time to reap the benefits of Panama—no violent upheavals and time for the ferment to take effect throughout the country. In the provinces the Marxists have virtually no rivals; in Paris it is, for the time being, quite



**[p. 70]**

At all events, internal developments in France have again become of paramount importance and we shall soon see to what extent the chaps are equal to the tasks by which they are confronted. I must say that, where major crises such as this one are concerned, I have considerable confidence in them. Not in their ability to win instant and striking victories—there may yet be short-lived episodes of a horribly reactionary nature—but in their ability eventually to emerge with honour. Nor, from our point of view, should things happen too quickly. We too require time for growth.

Quite between ourselves, I am over the worst so far as Volume II P is concerned. The difficulties in the most difficult section have been sur- mounted. 33 But until I have been through the last two sections I can say nothing definite about the date of completion. There may still turn out to be individual difficulties that will take some time. But I have sighted land and the worse and most time-consuming part is behind me; this time I shall finish. When you come over here I shall show it to you.

You would in any case do better to come via Calais; it’s hardly any further from Stuttgart and maybe even somewhat nearer than via Ostend.—Cordial regards to you, your wifeb and your children and a Happy Christmas to you.

A uf Wiedersehen,

Your F.E.

Published in English for the first time

[^1]: First published in: Marx and Engels, Works, First Russian Edition, Vol. XXIX, Moscow, 1946

[^2]: Printed according to the original

[^3]: a of Capital- b Julie Bebel





**[p. 38]**

ENGELS TO KARL KAUTSKY 101

IN STUTTGART

London, 24 December 1892

Dear Baron,

I have been trying to persuade August to cross the Channel this winter, if only for a few days, and am not without hope of his concurring. Should he do so, and since he will in any case have to travel via Stuckert,a Ishould be obliged if you could give him Marx’s old Ms., together with such parts of the Ms. as you may have already completed. 102 The rest we shall settle at some future date. For now that there is every prospect of Volume Ill’s long gestation period at last drawing to its close, it’s important that I should have the material for Volume IV at my disposal.

You shall have a more detailed reply to your letter shortly—in the meantime a Happy Christmas and cordial regards from

Your

F. Engels

[^1]: First published in: Printed according to the original Aus der Frühzeit des Marxismus.

[^2]: Engels Briefwechsel mit Kautsky, Published in English for the first time Prague, 1935

[^3]: a Stuttgart





**[p. 39]**

ENGELS TO WILHELM LIEBKNECHT

IN BERLIN

London, 28 December 1892

Dear Liebknecht,

A Happy New Year to you, your wifea and your children. As regards the French, I pointed out to Lafargue more than a week ago that now’s the time.b However, it’s quite possible that the chaps don’t want to expend their powder too soon. To begin with, the Panama affair 60 is still in its early stages, the more important revelations won’t come till after the New Year, and so far nothing serious has been proven, legally speaking, against any living parliamentarian; in January, both Radicals 86 and Monarchists may find themselves well and truly in the soup and then it will be possible to speak up far more effectually. Secondly, there are, in the Chamber, not only Marxists but also Blanquists, 20 Allemanists 21 and free lances à la Cluseret— not to mention complete reprobates such as Lachize and Thivrier who have latched on to our coat-tails—and, with the socialist groups in Parliament differing as they do, it would be easy for the others to give them as good as they got, so to speak. Now an attempt is being made to find a common basis for action. If this succeeds, as seems probable, it will be easier to get something done.

I tender this merely as a possible explanation for the chaps’ silence. In this country we have long had to contend with Bonnier’s enthusiasm. He fairly peppered us with shot over the May Day business. 54 I drew his attention to your statement in the Vorwärts in which you said that at Marseilles you had given the chaps advance notice of what the Germans’ attitude would be on 1 May ‘93, and that they had declared themselves satisfied.c

So they have no right to complain. I then went on to tell him that, what with Panama in Paris, the military business in Berlin 76 and a general industrial crisis into the bargain, there might be something better for us

[^1]: a Natalie Liebknecht -b See this volume, pp. 58-59 -c W. Liebknecht, ‘Agitationsbericht Nach Marseille und zurück’, Vorwärts, No. 239, 12 October 1892.





**[p. 73]**

Your F. E.

[Postscript from Louise Kautsky]

Dear Mrs Natalie,

May I associate myself with the General’sb letter and his good wishes. Having myself answered the question in the affirmative, I wish you, your dear husband, and your children a very Happy New Year.

Sincerely yours,

Louise Kautsky

First published in: Printed according to the original Wilhelm Liebknecht, Briefwechsel

mit Karl Marx und Friedrich Engels, Published in English for the first time The Hague, 1963

40

ENGELS TO FRIEDRICH ADOLPH SORGE 103

IN HOBOKEN

London, 31 December 1892

Dear Sorge,

Just a line or two before the year ends. Your letters of 18 November and 16 December received—many thanks. Did you get the parcel of books I posted to you in September, containing the Condition of the Working

[^1]: a See this volume, p. 47 - b F. Engels’ nickname





**[p. 74]**

Here, in old Europe, things are proceeding at a somewhat livelier pace than in your ‘youthful’ country which still can’t quite extricate itself from the hobbledehoy stage. It is remarkable, though perfectly natural, that in so young a country, which has never known feudalism and has from the outset grown up upon a bourgeois basis, bourgeois prejudices should be so firmly entrenched even in the working class. Indeed it is precisely his opposition to a mother country still garbed in feudalism that leads the American working man to suppose the traditional bourgeois economic system he has inherited to be by its nature something immutably superior and progressive, a non plus ultra. Just as in New England, where puritanism, precisely because it is the raison d’être of the whole colony, has become a traditional heirloom and all but indistinguishable from local patriotism. However much the Americans may twist and turn, they cannot simply discount, as if it were a bill, what is beyond doubt a tremendous future, but will have to wait until it falls due; and precisely because that future is so great, their present must be largely taken up with preparations for it, a task which, as in any young country, is chiefly of a material nature and calls for a degree of conservative thinking, a clinging to traditions connected with the founding of the new nationality. The Anglo- Saxon race—those damned Schleswig-Holsteiners as Marx always called them—is in any case slow in the uptake, a trait its history both in Europe and in America (economic success and, on the whole, peaceful political evolution) has tended to foster. Here momentous events alone can be of any avail and if, in addition to the transfer—now almost complete—of state- owned lands into private hands, industry were to expand under a somewhat less hare-brained tariff policy and foreign markets be conquered, things might also go well for you people. In this country, too, the class struggles were more violent during the period of growth of large-scale industry and petered out precisely at the time of Britain’s undisputed industrial domination in the world; similarly in Germany the growth of large-scale industry since 1850 has coincided with the rise of the socialist movement, and in America things are not likely to turn out any differently. It is the revolutionising of all time- honoured conditions

[^1]: a Both works were written by F. Engels. See vols. 4 and 25 of this edition.





**[p. 75]**

Furthermore, the Americans have long provided the European world with proof of the fact that the bourgeois republic is the republic of capitalist businessmen in which politics is merely a business transaction like any other—something which the ruling bourgeois politicians in France have long known and practiced on the quiet, and whose truth is at last being brought home to the French on a national scale by the Panama scandal. 60 Not that the constitutional monarchies can preen themselves on their virtue, for each has its own little Panama; England, the building society scandals of which one, ‘the Liberator’, has conscientiously ‘liberated’ vast numbers of small depositors of savings amounting to some £8 million 104 ; Germany, the Baare scandals and Lowe’s “Jewish rifles’ 105 (which prove that the Prussian officer is, now as always, a thief, but in a very, very small way—the one thing that is modest about him); Italy, the Banca Romana, already an approximation of Panama, which has bought some 150 deputies and senators 106 and concerning which, so I am told, documents are shortly to be published in Switzerland; Schlüter should keep an eye out for anything about the Banca Romana that appears in the press. And in Holy Russia the Russian Prince Meshchersky waxes in- dignant over the indifference with which the Panama revelations are received in Russia, the only explanation for this being, he says, that Russian virtue has been corrupted by the example of the French, and that ‘we ourselves have more than one Panama here at home’.

However, the Panama affair is the beginning of the end of the bourgeois republic and may soon place us in some very responsible positions. The whole of the opportunist 87 and the better part of the Radical gang 86 are compromised up to the hilt; the government is seeking to hush things up but that is no longer possible, for documentary evidence is in the hands of people who wish to overturn those now in power: 1. The Orleans, 2. the former minister Constans, now out of the running because of revelations about his scandalous past, 3. Rochefort and the Boulangists, 6 4. Cornelius Herz who, being himself deeply involved in all manner of frauds, has plainly taken refuge in London merely in order to buy his way out by compromising his fellows. All these people have more than enough evidence against this thieving crew, but are holding back, firstly and more generally, so as not to expend all their powder at one go and, secondly, in order to give the government and the courts of law time to become hopelessly compromised. This is all grist to our mill; enough information gradually leaks out not only to keep the pot on the boil and



**[p. 76]**

That things have very nearly got to the point at which our chaps in France will be the only possible rulers of the state is evident. But it mustn’t happen too quickly, our people in France being by no means ripe for leadership. As things are now, it is absolutely impossible to say what intermediate stages there will be in the meantime. The old Republican parties are compromised down to the last man, while the Royalists and Clericals, having sold Panama lottery tickets 100 on a vast scale, have identified themselves with that affair— if that idiot Boulanger hadn’t shot himself, he would now be cock of the walk. I should be curious to know whether the old unconscious logic of French history will again assert itself on this occasion. There are going to be a great many surprises. If only during the interval in which the air is being cleared, some general or other doesn’t seize power and foment a war; that is the only danger.

In Germany the party’s undeviating, irresistible advance proceeds at a steady pace. Everywhere small successes provide proof of progress. If the Army Bill 76 is adopted more or less as it stands, there’ll be a new floodtide of malcontents coming to join our ranks. If the bill is thrown out, there’ll be a dissolution, a general election, and we shall get at least fifty seats in the Reichstag which, in a conflict, might often give us the deciding vote. At all events the struggle, while it may, perhaps, also break out in France, can only be fought to a finish in Germany. But it’s a good thing that Volume II Ib is now at last to be completed—not that I can say when that will be. Times are growing unsettled and the wind is rising.

A very Happy New Year from myself and Mrs Kautsky to you and your wife,c

Your

F. Engels

Printed according to the original

Published in English in full for the first time

[^1]: a leaders -b of Capital —c Katharina Sorge

[^2]: First published in: Briefe und Auszüge aus Briefen von Joh. Phil. Becker, Jos. Dietzgen, Friedrich Engels, Karl Marx u. A. an F. A. Sorge und Andere, Stuttgart, 1906





**[p. 41]**

ENGELS TO KARL HENCKELL 107

IN ZURICH

[London, end of 1892]

The Song of Steam, typical of an early, if past, phase of the Labour movement and one which Germany has also experienced.

First published in: Buch der Freiheit. Printed according to the original Gesammelt und herausgegeben von Karl Henckell, Berlin, 1893 Published in English for the first time

