---
Volume: 50
Document_Title: "1. Engels to Ludwig Kugelman 4 October "
Page_Range: "30-31"
---

# 1. Engels to Ludwig Kugelman 4 October 



**[p. l]**

ENGELS TO LUDWIG KUGELMANN IN

HANOVER

London, 4 October 1892

Dear Kugelmann,

Very many thanks for the little bit of Leibnitz. 1 As regards Herr Vogt, please send one copy to Bebel and two to me, but if you yourself don’t possess another, it goes without saying that you should keep one and send only one to me. 2

As regards The Knight of the Noble Consciousness and Palmerston, What Has He Done, I have unearthed one more copy of each and these are en- closed herewith.

On the other hand I have only one copy of the Neue Rheinische Zeitung, but no loose issues, and only a few volumes of the Revuec; if I want a complete set I have to borrow it. You had better get Miquel to return you yours. After all he is the only one who might now be endangered by its possession and he’ll be grateful to you for taking it off his hands. However Volume I as well as other individual volumes occasionally crop up in second-hand booksellers’ catalogues.

For the rest, I am keeping tolerably well. But if you are expecting an exhaustive pathological discourse on my somewhat complicated and no doubt also somewhat obscure case, I’m afraid I cannot oblige you. I am in correspondence with many doctors in 5 or 6 countries and all of them

3

[^1]: a K. Marx, Herr Vogt. — b K. Marx, Der Ritter vom edelmütigen Bewusstsein. - c Neue Rheinische Zeitung Politische-ökonomische Revue.



