---
Volume: 50
Document_Title: "5. Engels to Laura Lafargue 14 October "
Page_Range: "37-39"
---

# 5. Engels to Laura Lafargue 14 October 



**[p. 5]**

ENGELS TO LAURA LAFARGUE

AT LE PERREUX

London, 14 October 1892

My dear Lohr,

Thanks from Louise and myself for your letters this morning. Had one from Paul from Bordeaux last night. Business first. Enclosed you find

1. Manifest des sozial demokratischen Ausschusses (Executive) Braunschweig 5. September 1870a with a letter from Mohr and myself 18 but which Paul better quote as from Mohr, who, I believe, signed it. This is referred to in the MS. extracts under No. II I (on page 2).

2. First and Second Addresses of the General Council of the International on the War, July 23rd 1870 and Sept. 9th 1870.b With French translation made, I believe, in Geneva; it very likely requires revision both as to correctness and style.

3. A series of MS. extracts received from Bebel who with his wifec set to work at once to supply us with what we wanted.

I think this will be sufficient for Paul’s speech, though I don’t envy you the task of translating all these things, especially the rather lax style of our Reichstag orators.

Anyhow, now Paul is armed and need not depend upon Liebknecht’s promises which are sooner made than kept, as a rule.

I am glad Paul is going to take part again in the debates of the Chambre,d and if he is wise, he will attend the Palais Bourbon 6 assiduously during this last session of the present Parliament. I have some notion that electors want to see and hear something of the parliamentary activity of their deputy, and if they do not, there may be a risk not only of losing his seat, but also of not so easily securing another. After all, as things are now, both in France and Germany, electoral success in many places at least, depends on the votes of a number of hangers-on of the party, men

[^1]: a Manifesto of the Brunswick (Executive) Committee of September 5, 1870. -b See present edition, Vol. 22, pp. 3-8, 263-70.-c Julie Bebel-d Chamber-e The Bourbon Palace (housing the French Chamber of Deputies)





**[p. 11]**

Arndt you describe quite correctly. I see from Liebknecht’s report on his journeya that he gives Arndt a mild slap but a slap anyhow, and probably he will have been told, at Marseille, of the proceedings of Blanquists 20 and Allemanists. 21 Liebknecht seems quite intoxicated with his triumph and, for the moment, plus français que les français eux-mêmes}b Unfortunately he always deals in extremes, and I can only hope that he will not be goaded, by patriotic bullies in the Reichstag, into tumbling head over heels into the opposite extreme. So far, his attitude in his speeches in Mannheim 22 etc. has been all that could be desired.

I understand your news about Roubaix to this effect that the people there will ask Paul to stand for the Chamber next autumn. That would be very good, Roubaix would be a pretty safe seat, while Lille seems rather shaky, to be carried at a period of extra local excitement, but very uncertain, so far, at ordinary periods.

and Carmaux 10 shows not only the progress of our ideas among the working- class, but also the fact of the bourgeois and the government knowing, it. The self-contained attitude of the people there—et encore des méridiouaux, des Gascons gasconnants!e—and the quiet but determined way in which the socialist town-councils proceed without any possibil-ist weakness or concessions, show an immense progress. The more the French are coming to the front, the more I shall be glad. The Continental movement, to be victorious, must be neither all French nor all German,

[^1]: Anyhow, ca marche en Francec (everything but the Journal quotidien!)d

[^2]: a W. Liebknecht, ‘Agitations bericht. Nach Marseille und zurück,’ Vorwärts, 12 October 1892. - b more French than the French themselves —c everything is on the move - d daily paper - e And Southerners into the Bargain, bragging braggarts!



