---
Volume: 50
Document_Title: "7. Engels to Ludwig Schorlemmer 18 October "
Page_Range: "40-42"
---

# 7. Engels to Ludwig Schorlemmer 18 October 



**[p. 13]**

I presume that it is you that I again have to thank for the translation of the last part of my German preface to the Lage, etc. a

I am working on Volume II I of Marx’s Capital, and have to devote every available moment to it—hence must be brief while remaining

Yours,

F. Engels

First published, in the language of Printed according to the original the original (German), in: La corrispondenza di Marx e Engels Published in English for the first time

con italiani, 1848-1895, Milano, 1964

7

ENGELS TO LUDWIG SCHORLEMMER

IN DARMSTADT

London, 18 October 1892

My dear Schorlemmer,

I have your letters of 31 July and the 9th inst. It was my fault that Pumps forgot her Schmollis.b After so long an interval she no longer trusted herself to write in German off her own bat, and so I did it for her. Naturally I knew nothing of her tippling exploits in Darmstadt and put “Sie”. Her husbandc is not to blame, for he knows no German. Pumps is expecting a child any day, her fourth. Her second, a boy, unfortunately died, while her youngest, also a boy and really a very nice humorous little chap, is very delicate and at this moment far from well.

[^1]: Because of what you said about Anschütz 26 I delayed writing this

[^2]: a F. Engels, The Condition of the Working Class in England. -b A little ceremony in which the participants drink to the adoption of Du (thou), the intimate mode of address, Sie (you) being the formal term./Trans./ - c Percy Rosher





**[p. 14]**

Anschutz was, if I’m not mistaken, for a time a pupil of Carl’s in Manchester. As already mentioned; I shall be glad to be of service—in so far as I have the time—but first of all I must know what is required and what kind of biography it is to be.

The executors in Manchesterb are right in wanting to wind up whatever can be wound up without going into the settlement of the copyright questions. That will take time if only because the publishers stand to gain from a certain delay and are therefore in no hurry. I have heard nothing from Roscoe either; doubtless he won’t make a move until he can put forward and accept or reject specific proposals.

I hope your daughter continues to improve and that she has been able to leave her bed in the meantime.

[^1]: Why the old manc didn’t come to Darmstadt I don’t know. Does his

[^2]: a Carl Schorlemmer - b Philipp Klepsch and Ludwig Siebold -c Wilhelm Liebknecht



