---
Volume: 50
Document_Title: "8. Engels to Charles Bonnier mid- October "
Page_Range: "42-45"
---

# 8. Engels to Charles Bonnier mid- October 



**[p. 15]**

Yours,

F. Engels

First published in: Printed according to the original Marx and Engels, Works, First Russian Edition, Published in English for the first time Vol. XXIX, Moscow, 1946

8

ENGELS TO CHARLES BONNIER

IN OXFORD

[Draft]

London, mid-October 1892

My dear Bonnier,

I have received Prototc—thank you. First of all, however, a correction. You say:

If the French socialists are not expressly discussing the case of a defensive war in which they would be willing to repel an attack by the Emperor William,d this is because it is well known, recognised and accepted that

[^1]: ‘whereas the French socialists are protesting against the Russian alliance and do not wish to hear about a war with Germany, Bebel in particular and you yourself are quite willing to accept the idea of a defensive war against France and Russia in which the German socialists would take part’, and that ‘these accusations, which are well received in France, irritate Guesde’.

[^2]: a Natalie Liebknecht b Hans Müller - c E. Protot, Chauvins et réacteurs. - d William II





**[p. 16]**

I would also warn you that what M. Protot cites from my article is nothing but gross falsehood.

You say that the brochure is well done. I find it very weak; the end, where this joker poses as an economist is more than grotesque. If he has a strong point, it is the royal disdain which he pours out on his readers. Indeed, one must assume that one’s readers are incurable idiots in order to dare to offer them such a collection of palpable falsehoods (in which you see only snippets) and lies contradicting one another. Is it then sufficient to put on a masque of Dérouléde in order to persuade those who create public opinion in Paris to swallow anything one wishes. Has Boulangism 6 survived Boulanger to the point of being more powerful than during Boulanger’s lifetime?

Such a collection of lies and falsehoods is, in fact, irrefutable. It would require 3,200 pages to reassert the truth against these 32 pages. There is not a single quotation of any significance which is not shamelessly distorted; it was only after comparing several texts that I had the measure of M. Protot’s affrontery.

As for the literary style, I find it lamentable, in striking contrast to the assiduity with which he has collected his material. Clearly another

[^1]: a F. Engels, Socialism in Germany. — b what is acceptable for the French is not acceptable for the German - c The following phrases are crossed out in the draft letter: ‘That such chauvinist stupidities irritate Guesde I can well believe, but that is not my fault, nor that of Bebel. As for the rest, when I sent my article to Paris, I warned my friends of the danger, expressing my fears due to national susceptibilities; but I was told that, on the contrary, this was just what was needed’.





**[p. 17]**

Nor is it, as Vorwärts believes, one of the Unabhängiger.a 16 Their mani- festo (Hans Midler’s Klassenkampf)b is characterised by the lack of care he has taken in selecting his supporting texts.

Nor is it the French police; one senses that they have had a hand in it, but they are not the ones who have so interested themselves in the foreign policy of the Romanian socialists.

If M. Protot accuses the latter of being the enemies of Holy Rus, if he twice quotes the Bucharest Munca (Labour), and divulges that Nadejde de Jassi is ‘Zingaro’,c it is because he is acting in the interests of the Russian embassy, which must have supplied this information, and probably also the information on the German socialists, collected in Berlin by some attaché there.

Thus Protot’s lampoon is not only in the interests of the police, but also in the interests of Russia; it is part and parcel of those frantic efforts that Russia is making to ensure a French alliance. It is Russia, in fact, which needs France. She is so completely exhausted by the social disorganisation caused by the economic transformation that she has been experiencing since 1861, by the ravages of deforestation, by the ruination of agriculture and the cottage industry, by famine and cholera, that she could not wage a war through to the end. Her finances and her credit are in a state of collapse reminiscent of France in 1788; if the western public continues to keep its purse closed, there remain only three alternatives: 1) bankruptcy, 2) the convening of a national assembly to sanction a new loan, which then might succeed in the west; 3) war as a measure of desperation—and in that last case France is necessary: once war were declared, the French army engaged, ten against one, the Tsard would reach an agreement with Williame and Francis Joseph,f who would hasten to meet him, and la belle France would pay the expenses of the banquet of reconciliation.

Published in English for the first time

[^1]: First published in: Printed according to the original Marx and Engels, Works, First Russian Edition, Translated from the French Vol. XXIX, Moscow, 1946

[^2]: a the Independents - b H. Müller, Der Klassenkampf in der deutschen Sozialdemokratie. — c a gipsy - d Alexander II I - e William II - f Francis Joseph I



