---
Volume: 50
Document_Title: "12. Engels to Laura Lafargue 4 November "
Page_Range: "49-50"
---

# 12. Engels to Laura Lafargue 4 November 



**[p. 22]**

I am beginning to go out again a bit. I had nearly three months as a prisoner at home; now I am starting to walk, but little and slowly; but at least I realise that it will soon be over. And about time, as I feel that the lack of exercise in the open air must come to an end. And when I am completely restored, we can, I hope, arrange things so that you and Laura give us the pleasure of spending a few weeks with us. We have so many things to discuss, and it is time Laura saw London again.

Love from Mme Kautsky.

Ever yours,

F. Engels

First published in: Printed according to the original F. Engels, P. et L. Lafargue,

Correspondance, t. II I, 1891-1894, Translated from the French Paris, 1959

12

ENGELS TO LAURA LAFARGUE

AT LE PERREUX

London, 4 November 1892 My dear Löhr,

This morning Meissner sends a remittance for £38—one-third of which £12.13.4d., covers your share and is settled by enclosed cheque which please acknowledge. There are about 400 copies left of Vol. IP and the second edition is in preparation. Fourth edition of Vol. P is out, and 460 copies sold, which wipe off the greater part of the printing etc. cost; only 886 Marks remain to be covered and all the receipts beyond that will be profits to be divided with Meissner.

Third Volumea well in hand and will not leave off until finished. This can-

[^1]: a of Marx’s Capital



