---
Volume: 50
Document_Title: "17. Engels to August Bebel 15 November "
Page_Range: "57-59"
---

# 17. Engels to August Bebel 15 November 



**[p. 30]**

Have you received the report of the German Executive Committee to the Berlin Congressa? It’s magnificent—and it’s war. 47

The paper—oh the paper! 48 If the French bourgeoisie makes the same amount of difficulty before it lends money to the Russian tsar, that would, at least to some extent, make up for the cheated hopes this journal has aroused in us.

Kiss Laura, Kind regards from Mrs Kautsky.

Ever yours,

F. Engels

First published in: Printed according to the original F. Engels, P. et L. Lafargue,

17

ENGELS TO AUGUST BEBEL

IN BERLIN

London, 15 November 1892 Dear August,

Now you see how my work gets interrupted! These absurd Tribune ar- ticles have forced me to intervene. Could you please ensure that the article

[^1]: Correspondance, t. II I, Translated from the French 1891-1895, Paris, 1959

[^2]: a ‘Bericht des Partei-Vorstandes an den Parteitag zu Berlin 1892’, Vorwärts, No. 259, 4 November 1892.





**[p. 31]**

Can you send me another copy of those collected articles on Bakunin? Since my copy is regularly sent to Sorge, I no longer have them here, but it might be necessary for me to refer to them. Instead of working, I have had to look out the old stuff, but it was out of the question to let this tissue of lies go unchallenged. Can you find out who its author was?

Regards to Victor.a Louise will today be sending an account of Trafalgar Square to Vienna. 50

Cordial regards to Mrs Julie,

Your F. E.

[Postscript from Louise Kautsky]

Warm regards to Julie, Victor, Popp and the proper hunter before the Lord.b Have received the Sozialist. Many thanks. Good luck with your work.

Love

Louise

[^1]: First published in: Printed according to the original Marx and Engels, Works, First Russian Edition, Published in English for the first time Vol. XXIX, Moscow, 1946

[^2]: a Adler - b August Bebel



