---
Volume: 50
Document_Title: "19. Engels to August Bebel 19 November "
Page_Range: "59-62"
---

# 19. Engels to August Bebel 19 November 



**[p. 18]**

ENGELS TO SERGEI KRAVCHINSKY (STEPNIAK)

IN LONDON

London, 15 November 1892 122

Regent’s Park Road, N.W.

My dear Stepniak,

Suppose you and Mrs Stepniak, Volkhovsky and his little girl all come on Thursdaya and have dinner with us. If you come about 3.30 to 4, we can talk matters over and have dinner at 5. You know it is a long way from your place to this, and unless we arrange as above, you might easily miss your own dinner at home.

Kind regards to Mrs Stepniak from Mrs Kautsky and

Yours faithfully,

F. Engels

19

ENGELS TO AUGUST BEBEL

IN BERLIN

London, 19 November 1892 Dear August,

This time your Party Congress 51 didn’t go off as brilliantly as it did on the last occasion. The debate on the question of salary leaves a very

[^1]: First published in: Marx and Engels, Reproduced from the original Works, Second Russian Edition, Vol. 38, Moscow, 1965 Published in English for the first time

[^2]: a 17 November





**[p. 33]**

If taken too far, your ‘nationalisation’ of the press 53 would have very material drawbacks. It’s absolutely essential for you to have a press in the party which is not directly dependent on the Executive or even the Party Congress, i.e. which is in a position unreservedly to oppose individual party measures within the programme and accepted tactics, and freely to criticise that programme and those tactics, within the limits of party decorum. As the Party Executive, you people ought to encourage a press of this nature— indeed initiate it, for you would then exert far more moral sway over it than if it were to come into being partly against your will. The party is outstripping the strict discipline of earlier days; with 2 or 3 millions and an influx of ‘heddicated’ elements, more latitude is needed than what has hitherto not only sufficed but actually proved a useful restraint. The sooner you people adapt yourselves and the party to this changed situation the better. And the first step is a formally independent party press. It is bound to come about but it would be better if you were to allow it to come about in such a way that it remains under your moral sway from the outset and does not arise in opposition to yourselves.

You people blundered badly—not in Berlin but at Brussels 54— over the question of the May Day celebrations. You must have known at the time what you could promise and perform, and yet you went and promised more than you are now able to perform. I consider your own speech on the subject no whit inferior to Victor’s and readily believe that a stoppage of work in Germany would demand sacrifices out of all proportion to victories and gains. 55 But when the strongest party in the world suddenly



**[p. 34]**

We over here have not yet had the state socialism debate. I must congratulate you on your resolutions. They are really first-rate and I know of only one person who could have improved on them, namely Marx. The resolution on state socialism, like that on anti-Semitism, hits the nail on the head. And it is precisely resolutions of this kind that have in the past been the Achilles’ heel of the German movement; they have been sloppy, indeterminate, nebulous and cliché-ridden—in short, for the most part a disgrace. Fortunately they are so untranslatable that anyone translating them into a foreign language is compelled to read into them a meaning which they themselves do not possess.

Below is a theatre drawn by Louise or Aveling. For the past week the page thus embellished has been repeatedly placed amongst my writing paper, which is why it now has the honour of finding its way to you. 57

[^1]: Enclosed you will finda the twaddle talked by the seven Swabians 58

[^2]: a The enclosed text is missing.



