---
Volume: 50
Document_Title: "21. Engels to Julie Bebel 29 November "
Page_Range: "64-66"
---

# 21. Engels to Julie Bebel 29 November 



**[p. 37]**

First published in: Printed according to the original F. Engels, P. et L. Lafargue,

Correspondance, t. II I, 1891-1895, Translated from the French Paris, 1959

21

ENGELS TO JULIE BEBEL

IN BERLIN

London, 29 November 1892

Dear Mrs Bebel,

Of all the letters I got on my birthday, yours is the first I feel impelled to answer. My most sincere thanks. I spent the day ‘in the best of health’, for, even though I am not in full control of my movements and cannot walk as much as I should like to, I nevertheless feel quite robust and everyone says I look very well. This time we turned my birthday into an English May Day celebration, i.e. we brought it forward from the Monday to the previous Sunday.a Louise felt that, as I couldn’t fail to tipple somewhat on an occasion like this, one day would be enough and two days too many. We had a real houseful, our African, Sam Moore, also Bax, the Avelings, Bernsteins, Mottelers, the Russian Volkhovsky, and two working men from the Society

62 ; that, I think, was all. No. I nearly forgot little Inkab who has really filled out on the food she gets in Berlin and whose plumpness suits her very well— now I have tangible proof that people have learned how to eat their fill in Berlin and let no one speak to me in future about starving Berlin!

We still had a small supply of dried woodruff and so Louise and I con- cocted a May cup with the aid of Moselle, red wine and champagne—at this foggy time of year it would hardly be possible to imagine, let alone

[^1]: a 27 November - b Inka Fischer





**[p. 38]**

I should like to have attended that beanfeast in Berlin. Inka tells me that she could not get through to you and Bebel because of the crush so there must have been an enormous number present. 63 Still, I don’t doubt that I’ll witness something of that kind again, if not this year then the next, provided that is, you come over and fetch us. The little Fischer girl sees in you so great a mental affinity with my dear good Lenchen that I can be doubly confident in placing myself in your charge.

As August left only one measly page for your use, I shall reverse the position and he will get only one from me.

With warm regards

Yours,

F. Engels

[^1]: First published in: Marx and Engels, Printed according to the original Works, First Russian Edition, Vol.XXIX, Moscow, 1946 Published in English for the first time

[^2]: a Motteler



