---
Volume: 50
Document_Title: "25. Engels to Paul Stumpf 30 November "
Page_Range: "68-70"
---

# 25. Engels to Paul Stumpf 30 November 



**[p. 41]**

As the Hyena has also been brought into this affair, I shall give her the floor.

Your

F. Engels

[Postscript from Louise Kautsky]

It will be difficult, generally speaking, to give Bamberger the floor in London. Press Hyena’s note. 67

[Postscript from Engels]

Yes, but who in fact is the Hyena?

25

ENGELS TO PAUL STUMPF

IN MAINZ

London, 30 November 1892

My dear old Stumpf,

You could have given me no greater pleasure on my seventy-second birthday than by sending me the Ultramontanist 68 confirmation of our victory in the Mainz elections. 69 You Mainz people sometimes tend to be

[^1]: First published in: Marx and Engels, Printed according to original Works, Second Russian Edition, Vol. 38, Moscow, 1965 Published in English for the first time





**[p. 42]**

Apart from that, I should like to send you my best thanks and to say how glad I am that you had been keeping well and have been feeling even ‘better’ since. I too am keeping well. We had the whole Brimstone Gang 72 here on Sunday and a few more besides, all of whom vigorously addressed themselves to the wine cup.a

If we have a few more of these scandals in Paris 60, we may soon be able to re-enact the old comedy of autumn ‘47 in Brussels; the world is beginning to look shaky.

Your old

F. Engels

[^1]: First published in: Marx and Engels, Printed according to the original Works, First Russian Edition, Vol. XXIX, Moscow, 1946 Published in English for the first time

[^2]: a See this volume, pp. 37-38



