---
Volume: 50
Document_Title: "35. Engels to Pyotr Lavrov 14 December "
Page_Range: "89-90"
---

# 35. Engels to Pyotr Lavrov 14 December 



**[p. 62]**

Your

Louise Kautsky

First published in Novaya i noveishaya Printed according to the original istoriya, No. 6, Moscow, 1980 Published in English for the first time

35

ENGELS TO PYOTR LAVROV 96

IN PARIS

London, 14 December 1892

My dear Lavrov,

I do not see why I would oppose the publication of the letter from Lopatin about a conversation that he had with me. 97 Therefore do as you like.

I was pleased to learn from Mendelson that you are well. As for me, I have no reason to complain—quite the contrary. For three months now I have been working on the 3rd volume of Capital, and although there is still a great deal to do, this time I have grounds to hope that I will finish it.

As for the Berlin resolution, I am of the opinion that the Germans committed at Brussels the mistake of promising—although indirectly— more than they can fulfil. 54 The 1st May 1890 and ‘91 has shown that in Germany a strike is impractical; the sacrifices were not worth the possible gains. At Hamburg alone the attempt cost more than 100,000 marks. 98 The coincidence that 1st May 1892 was a Sunday led them to forget in Brussels that real world to which the crisis—more acute this time in Germany than elsewhere—has sharply returned them.

The strike on 1st May ‘93 could cost us too dear—in Germany, and, by reaction, elsewhere. A strike in Germany would dry up both funds and

