---
Volume: 50
Document_Title: "36. Engels to Laura Lafargue 20 December "
Page_Range: "90-93"
---

# 36. Engels to Laura Lafargue 20 December 



**[p. 63]**

It is the law of the development of parties that a party which has achieved a certain degree of power finds that the very demonstrations which it could not do without in its early days have become impractical.

For the rest, as for the forms, one could have shown a little more regard for the susceptibilities of others. However, what will you—these are the grobe Deutscht who do not know how to sugar the pill.

As regards the rest, it seems to me that Panama 60 is more important than 1st May, given the times. Panama puts me in mind of 1847, when every day one could expect some new scandal. 61 1847 dug the grave of the July Monarchy, and what will 1892 bring?

Yours,

F. Engels

First published, in Russian, Printed according to the original in Voprosy istorü KPSS, Translated from the French No. 7, Moscow, 1965 Published in English for the first time

36

ENGELS TO LAURA LAFARGUE

AT LE PERREUX

London, 20 December 1892

My dear Löhr,

Yesterday we forwarded by Van Oppen and Co’s Express (they have an office in Paris too, but I did unfortunately not note the address) the box with pudding and cake, and hope it will arrive safe (directed to you, Le

[^1]: a unpolished Germans





**[p. 64]**

Before crossing the Channel, the Oxford sagea gave us a call here. I hope I quietened his anxiety about the first of Mayb to some extent, The attempt, in 1890, to chômerc at Hamburg alone cost the party above 100,000 marks 98, and in my opinion it would never do to allow the bourgeois to bleed the German party’s cash and credit ‘à blanc just at the moment when a dissolution of the Reichstag 76 is in the air, and when every farthing would be wanted.

Panama is delightful, 60 The papers you so kindly send me, and old Mother Crawford’s letters—though awfully cut down by the respectable people of the Daily News—form already a pretty comprehensive dossier which I intend to complete up to the—I hope—bitter end. Respectability here, of course, triumphs.

Wenn sich das französische Laster erbricht, setzt sich die englische Tugend zu Tischd—and I’ll be damned if I do not prefer a thousand times that plain open outright French vice to this hypocritical British virtue. Here corruption has been brought into a system and has been endowed with a complete code of étiquette which you have only to keep within, in order to be perfectly bullet-proof against all charges of undue corruption. In France no man would stand a chance in a popular constituency, a town especially, who openly wanted to get into Parliament for the purpose of furthering his own interests; here, anybody who wanted to get in for any other purpose would be considered a fool and a Don Quixote. The English Panama is called Building Society and has more than one head— the savings of the small people have been eaten up in these societies by wholesale, and no great fuss about it.e One M.P. is in here too, Spencer Balfour—he will take the Chiltern Hundreds and retire into private life—while lots of M.P.’s make money by selling their names as directors of all sorts of swindling companies, which is considered perfectly fair so long as it is not pushed to excess.

[^1]: On Fridayf we expect Pumps and her family here, as we have not room

[^2]: a Charles Bonnier - b See this volume, pp. 46-47 - c strike - d When French vice fails, British virtue sits down to a meal - e See this volume, p. 75 - f 23 December





**[p. 65]**

Shall write to Paul after the first rush of the holidays is over.

Ever yours,

F. Engels

[Postscript from Louise Kautsky]a

My dear Laura,

Should I do penance, in sackcloth and ashes? But I’d rather not for I regret all my misdeeds as it is. Because of my not writing I suffer more than you do. After my return the Generalb was no longer his old self and I had hardly any time of my own, but when I did have time I was in no mood for writing. Yet now and again everything turned out very well. I look forward to the spring when we’ll be able to talk to our hearts content. My best regards to the M.P.C

With love and kisses

Your

Louisa

[^1]: First published, in the language Reproduced from the original of the original (English), in: F. Engels, P. et L. Lafargue, Correspondance, t. II I, 1891-1895, Paris, 1959

[^2]: a written in German - b Engels’ nickname - c Paul Lafargue



