---
Volume: 50
Document_Title: "44. Engels to Philipp Pauli 11 January "
Page_Range: "106-108"
---

# 44. Engels to Philipp Pauli 11 January 



**[p. 79]**

43

ENGELS TO MARIA MENDELSON 110

IN LONDON

[London,] 10 January 1893 Dear Mme Mendelson

Thank you for your letter. I immediately wrote a short article on the arrests in Paris which left for Berlin that same evening—you will probably see it in Vorwärts in a few days. 111

Ever yours, F. E. Bebel has left this afternoon. Greetings from Mme Kautsky.

Published in English for the first time

44

ENGELS TO PHILIPP PAULI

IN FRANKFURT AM MAIN

London, 11 January 1893 Dear Pauli,

I entirely agree that we should each of us send a contribution to Perkin for the Schorlemmer LABORATORY

[^1]: First published in: Printed according to the original Marx and Engels, Works, First Russian Edition, Translated from the French Vol. XXIX, Moscow, 1946

[^2]: 112 as you suggest; but not by any





**[p. 80]**

Would you therefore be so good as to inquire from Perkin what has been done in this respect and, if you think fit, ask him to inform me of it so that we have some kind of yardstick to go by.

It’s a disgrace that these university chaps should be such jackasses! I even had to put pressure on Roscoe to get him to write the article for Nature.a And the Germans—how proud they could be of Schorlemmer! But he didn’t belong to the you-scratch-my-back-I-scratch-yours clique and that’s why, now he’s dead, he has to suffer for the fact that he was no Panamite of academic learning. Panama left, right and centre, nothing but Panama, 60 even in academic chemistry!

Cordial regards to your wife and children, and likewise to yourself, from

Your old friend, F.

Engels

Pumps and her family came to stay over Christmas and the New Year; the new baby is a very delicate little thing yet, despite the cold, they all got back safe and sound to Ryde.

[^1]: First published abridgedin: Printed according to the original G. Mayer, Friedrich Engels Eine Biographie, Bd. II , Published in English for the first time The Hague, 1934 and in full in: Marx and Engels, Works, First Russian Edition, Vol. XXIX, Moscow, 1946

[^2]: H. E. Roscoe, ‘Carl Schorlemmer’, Nature, Vol. XLVI, 25 August 1892.



