---
Volume: 50
Document_Title: "46. Engels to Friedrich Adolph Sorge 18 January "
Page_Range: "108-112"
---

# 46. Engels to Friedrich Adolph Sorge 18 January 



**[p. 45]**

ENGELS TO MARIA MENDELSON

IN LONDON

[London,] 16 January 1893 Dear Mme Mendelson,

The article in Vorwärts of which you speak was written in Paris.a It seems that the author was told that the 5 arrested Poles belonged to the same socialist school as, among the Russians, Plekhanov and his friends; and the correspon- dent has thus committed the quid pro quo that we have all sadly read.

The article which I sent to Vorwärts is in the following issue (No. II , 13th January). 111

Let us congratulate ourselves nonetheless that this latest base action by the French government has only led to an expulsion.

Mme Kautsky joins her greetings to those of your devoted

F. Engels

46

ENGELS TO FRIEDRICH ADOLPH SORGE 113

IN HOBOKEN

London, 18 January 1893 Dear Sorge,

Today I am sending you two old numbers of the defunct Berliner Volks- Tribüne, the others having got mislaid in the turmoil of Christmas; if I

[^1]: First published in: Printed according to the original Marx and Engels, Works, Translated from the French First Russian Edition, Published in English in full Vol. XXIX, Moscow, 1946 for the first time

[^2]: a ‘Russische Polizei-Allmacht in Frankreich’, Vorwärts, No. 10, 12 January 1893 (in the running headline ‘Politische Uebersicht’).





**[p. 86]**

Over here the Independent Labour Party, 114 about which you will have read in the Workman’s Times, has held a conference in Bradford. Owing to their sectarian attitude the Social Democratic Federation, 44 on the one hand, and the Fabians, 43 on the other, have been unable to absorb the socialist accretions in the provinces, so that the setting up of a third party was no bad thing. But now, such is the extent of those accretions—especially in the industrial districts of the North—that even at this, the first congress, the new party was more strongly represented than either the Social Democratic Federation or the Fabians, if not more strongly than both put together. And since the bulk of its members are undoubtedly first class, since its centre of gravity lies in the provinces rather than in that hive of intrigue, London, and its programme is substantially the same as our own, Aveling did right in joining it and in accepting a position on the Executive. If the petty private ambitions and intrigues of the London panjandrums can be kept under some control, and its tactics are not too misguided, the Independent Labour Party may succeed in enticing away the masses, not only from the Social Democratic Federation but, in the provinces, also from the Fabians, and thus enforcing unity.

The Social Democratic Federation has pushed Hyndman completely into the background. It did so badly as a result of his policy of intrigue that— thanks to the provincial delegates—Hyndman has been utterly discredited in the eyes of his own people. An attempt to regain his popularity on the Unemployed Committee—on which other people sat too—by means of revolutionary ranting (his personal cowardice being

[^1]: a 12th in the Ms. — b Engels inserted this afterwards, in the margin. — c See this volume, pp. 85-





**[p. 83]**

Here in London the Fabians are a bunch of careerists who have sense enough to recognise the inevitability of a social upheaval but are quite in- capable of entrusting this gigantic task solely to the untutored proletariat and are therefore accustomed to take the lead; fear of revolution is their guiding principle. They are the ‘heddicated’ par excellence. Their socialism is municipal socialism; it is the commune not the nation, which, at any rate to start off with, is to be the owner of the means of production. They then proceed to propound this, their socialism, as the extreme but inevitable consequence of bourgeois liberalism—hence their tactics of not directly confronting the Liberals as opponents but of inducing them to draw socialist conclusions, ergo they cheat them in order to PERMEATE LIBERALISM WITH

SOCIALISM and do not put up socialist candidates against the Liberals, but rather foist the former on them by force if not by false pretences. That in so doing they are either betraying and hoodwinking themselves, or else are hoodwinking socialism, they do not, of course, realise.

With great assiduity they have produced, along with all manner of trash, a number of good propaganda pieces—the best of this kind, in fact, the English have produced. But the moment they come to their own brand of tactics and gloss over the class struggle, the rot sets in. Hence, too, their fanatical hatred of Marx and all the rest of us—because of the class struggle.

Needless to say, the chaps have a big middle-class following and therefore funds and, in the provinces, they have many dependable working men who refuse to have anything to do with the Social Democratic Federation. But 5/6 of their provincial members see more or less eye to eye with us and, when it comes to the point, they will definitely desert. In Bradford—where they are represented—they have several times voiced unqualified opposition to the Fabians’ London Executive.

As you see, it is a critical juncture so far as the movement over here is concerned, and something may come of the new organisation. For a short while it looked as though it might come under the wing of



**[p. 84]**

116—see Workman’s Times of November and December—but in the end Champion thought it best to resume his editorship of the Labour Elector and has thus taken up the cudgels against the Workman’s Times and the new party.

It was a shrewd stroke on Keir Hardie’s part to place himself at the head of this new party and yet another blunder on the part of John Burns to remain aloof on this occasion as well, having already done himself a great deal of harm by his total inertia outside of his own constituency. I am afraid be may land himself in an impossible situation.

It goes without saying that, in this instance too, personal ambition is causing men like Keir Hardie, Shaw Maxwell and others to pursue sundry ulterior aims. But the danger inherent in this diminishes in proportion as the party itself grows in strength and numbers, and has, indeed, already receded because of the necessity of not leaving any loopholes for competing sects. In recent years socialism has made enormous headway among the masses in the industrial districts, and I look to those masses to keep the leaders properly in order. Of course there will be blunders and to spare, and also jiggery-pokery of every description; let us only hope we are able to keep them within proper bounds!

At worst the setting up of a new organisation may be regarded as an advantage in that it is easier to achieve unity when there are three competing sects than when there are two which are diametrically opposed to one another.

As regards what you wrote about Poland on 23 December, since the time of Kronstadt the Prussians have been prepared to go to war with Russia and are therefore pro -Polish (indeed have provided proof of this). 117 The said Poles will have sought to exploit this to provoke a war whereby they hope to be liberated with Germany’s help. But that is not at all what Berlin wants and, should they pull off their coup, Caprivi will undoubtedly leave them in the lurch. At the moment a war would be utterly useless to us; we have a sure means of making progress which a war could only disrupt.

Warm regards to your wife and yourself. Mrs Kautsky, who wrote to

