---
Volume: 50
Document_Title: "48. Engels to August Bebel 24 January "
Page_Range: "114-117"
---

# 48. Engels to August Bebel 24 January 



**[p. 87]**

Published in English for the first time

48

ENGELS TO AUGUST BEBEL 119

IN BERLIN

London, 24 January 1893

Dear August,

I continue. Aveling’s verbal accounts have reinforced a suspicion pre- viously entertained by me, namely that Keir Hardie nurtures the secret wish to lead the new party 114 in the same dictatorial fashion as Parnell led the Irish, and that his sympathies incline more towards the Conservative than towards the Liberal opposition party. He has said openly that, come the next elections, there should be a repetition of Parnell’s experiment whereby he forced Gladstone to toe the line and that where no Labour candidate can be put up, people should vote Conservative by way of giving the Liberals a taste of their power. 120 Now this is a policy which, in certain circumstances, I myself have demanded of the English, but to proclaim something of this sort in advance, not as a possible tactical measure, but as tactics to be pursued no matter what the circumstances smacks strongly of Champion. Especially when, at the same time, Keir Hardie refers disparagingly to the extension of the suffrage and other reforms, which alone might be expected to give reality to working-class suffrage over here, as purely political matters which must take second place after social demands—eight hours, industrial safety, etc. Though, renouncing as he does their enforcementhy Labour M.P.s, he fails to explain how these social demands are to be implemented unless by grace of the middle classes, or else by means of indirect pressure exerted by Labour’s casting vote in the elections. I draw your attention to this knotty point in order that you may be informed should occasion arise. For the time being I do not attach any particular importance to the matter since at the very



**[p. 88]**

I look forward very much to seeing the stenographic report of Singer’s speech about the Stock Exchange; in the Vorwärts it read quite excellently.a But in dealing with this subject there is one point which all our chaps tend to overlook. The Stock Exchange is an institution in which the bourgeois exploit, not the workers, but one another; the surplus value that changes hands on the Stock Exchange is already extant surplus value, the product of past exploitation of labour. Only when that process is complete can it serve the hanky-panky on the Stock Exchange. To begin with, the Stock Exchange is merely of indirect interest to us, in the same way as its influence and its repercussions on the capitalist exploitation of labour are merely indirect and exerted in a devious way. To suggest that the workers should take a direct interest in, and wax indignant over, the fleecing on the ‘Change of the Junkers, manufacturers and petty bourgeois is to suggest that the workers should resort to arms to protect the possession by their own immediate exploiters of the surplus value they have filched from those self-same workers. What an idea! But as the finest fruit of bourgeois society, as the breeding ground of extreme corruption, as the forcing house of the Panama 60 and other scandals—and hence, too, as a first-class means for the concentration of capitals, for the disintegration and dissolution of the last remnants of natural cohesion in bourgeois society and, at the same time, for the destruction of all obligatory moral concepts and their inversion into their opposite—as an incomparable element of destruction, as the most powerful accelerator of impending revolution—in this historical sense the Stock Exchange is indeed of immediate interest to us.

I see the Centre 71 has moved that there be a stay of prescription for the period in which the Reichstag suspends prosecutions. Since the Centre is the dominant party the motion seems likely to be carried. 121 Should this happen, it would seem to me inappropriate to make the government a gratuitous present of the above limitation of parliamentary rights without any quid pro quo. The quid pro quo should consist in the express acknowl-

[^1]: a Vorwärts, No. 17, 20 January 1893





**[p. 89]**

The bogey of war has again raised its head. Herewith Dalziel’s despatch from today’s Daily Chronicle—as a youthful competitor of Reuter, Wolff and Havas, Dalziel is more readily open to such reptilian manoeuvres. 122 The affair as such is absurd. The Russians are simply not prepared for war and would have to be quite off their heads to embark on one now. There is, of course, a possibility that, after the failure of the last Parisian loan, 123 they would only be able to obtain money in Paris if war were really imminent or had already broken out—but that would be a counsel of despair. What cannot be completely ruled out is the possibility that the Opportunists 87 and Radicals

86 in France will seek to save themselves from Panama by means of a war or at any rate have this at the back of their minds as a last recourse. But where could they find the pretext that would justify them in the eyes of the world? As I have said before, in the next war England will play a dominant role on account of its naval supremacy. 124 And as it happens, England has just played a nasty trick on the French in Egypt. 125 To gain England’s support, in the present state of tension between the two governments, there would have to be a casus belli which, even to your philistine, would seem a gross provocation, and this Caprivi will not provide.

The more information I gather on this point, the more I am struck by the fact that Bismarck formed the Austrian resp. Triple Alliance. 126 simply in order that he might, on the eve of the now inevitable war, give Austria to Russia in exchange for France: Leave me France and I’ll leave you Austria and Turkey and, what’s more, unleash Italy against Austria via Trieste and Trient.a And he clearly imagined he would pull it off. Reflect for a while on the course of history since 1878 127 and you will, I believe, come round to my view.

To me Tutzauer’s hire-purchase speech in the Reichstag Report (Vorwärts) of the 21st is quite incomprehensible. He wasn’t speaking as a Social Democrat but as a furniture salesman. 128 How could this have hap- pened? The Young 129 will be overjoyed.

Last night there was a concert and ball for the benefit of the Society. 62 I stayed until 11 o’clock and shall now presumably be exempted for a while

[^1]: a Modern name: Trento.



