---
Volume: 50
Document_Title: "50. Engels to Karl Kautsky 26 January "
Page_Range: "118-119"
---

# 50. Engels to Karl Kautsky 26 January 



**[p. 91]**

First published in: Printed according to the original Marx and Engels, Works, First Russian Edition, Translated from the French Vol. XXIX, Moscow, 1946

Published in English for the first time

50

ENGELS TO KARL KAUTSKY

IN STUTTGART

London, 26 January 1893

Dear Baron,

Gine has just told me that you are awaiting an answer from me about Marx’s biography. 130 It had in fact escaped my mind that this was urgent. Please accept my apologies.

I wouldn’t know what to add to the material you mentioned—unless perhaps one or two bits from the sketcha in the Handwörterbuch der Staatswissenschaften that was sent to you. Elster—a cousin of Conrad Schmidt’s who referred him to me—asked me to write something for him, which I did, wholly from our own standpoint, all unsuspecting that be would print it—after he had deleted a few excessively unbourgeois passages. Well, it’s all one to me.

The matter of the Neue Zeit has, of course, been shelved for the time being on account of Dietz’s treatment, apart from the fact of your having spoken to August.b He says it is impossible to revert to a monthly. In which case the external arrangements will doubtless remain pretty well unaltered—and it is up to the editors to make the paper more meaty and more amusing for its readers. At all events it seems to me that any drastic change will have to be put off until Dietz is fit for work again. And you yourself will in any case be swamped with a superfluity of good and well-

[^1]: a F. Engels, Marx, Heinrich Karl. - b See this volume, pp 49-50, 53-54



