---
Volume: 50
Document_Title: "51. Engels to Hermann Engels 26 January "
Page_Range: "119-120"
---

# 51. Engels to Hermann Engels 26 January 



**[p. 92]**

Tussy is tremendously busy agitating; she has been in the Midlands, Edinburgh and Aberdeen and is supposed to be coming here today. When I see her, I shall ask her for some personal reminiscences about Moor. 131

I gave Ede the Brazilian paper, 132 though I told him that the importance of these South American parties is always in inverse proportion to the grandiosity of their programmes.

Ede is gradually recovering from his neurasthenia; he has likewise re- gained his old sprightliness, as is evident from his personal behaviour and also from his article on Wolf to whom he does too much honour.a I believe that what he now needs most of all is something to liven and cheer him up in order that his soundness of judgement may once more gain complete control over his still somewhat excessive aspirations after justice.

Nothing fresh to report otherwise.—Also and, belatedly, a Happy New Year to you.

Your F.E.

First published in: Printed according to the original Aus der Frühzeit des Marxismus. Engels Briefwechsel Published in English for the first time mit Kautsky, Prague, 1935

51

ENGELS TO HERMANN ENGELS

IN BARMEN

London, 26 January 1893 Dear Hermann,

What the deuce is going on? Yesterday there was first of all a telegram from Vienna, then one from Dresden, then, at five o’clock this morning, one from New York and, at 11 this morning, your own—all inquiring

[^1]: -a E. Bernstein, ‘Der neueste Vernichter des Sozialismus’, Die Neue Zeit, Vol. I, Nos. 16, 17, Stuttgart, 1892/93.



