---
Volume: 50
Document_Title: "55. Engels to Maria Mendelson 7 February "
Page_Range: "123-124"
---

# 55. Engels to Maria Mendelson 7 February 

But where on earth were the socialist, deputies during these decisive days? Ours in Germany would never be forgiven if they had not been present at the Colajanni meeting—it would have cost them their mandates!

Yours,

F.E.

First published, in the language Printed according to the original of the original (French), in: Filippo Turati attraverso le lettere di Translated from the French corrispondenti (1880-1925), Bari, 1947 Published in English for the first time

55

ENGELS TO MARIA MENDELSON

LONDON

[London,] 7 February 1893 122 Regent’s Park Road, N. W.

Dear Madame Mendelson,

A thousand thanks for the trouble you have taken to translate the two articles for me. 137 As for the warning—ostrzezenie—I had already deci- phered it with the help of a Polish dictionary that I inherited from Marx. And the Gazeta Robotnicza has really been of unexpected assistance in my Polish studies—you say that the Polish in this newssheet is too German. Then it is like the Russian of Lavrov, and that explains why the Russian of the one and the Polish of the other present me with so few difficulties. I am indeed making progress, and if I had time to apply myself seriously to it for three months, I would venture to garble in Polish.

I will try to make use of your manuscripts—in the meantime I would ask you to let me know if I may publish the facts contained in your letter on the Moscow students and Russian officers—without, of course, revealing the source of my information. 138

