---
Volume: 50
Document_Title: "56. Engels to Vladimir Shmuilov 7 February "
Page_Range: "124-126"
---

# 56. Engels to Vladimir Shmuilov 7 February 



**[p. 97]**

Yours,

F. Engels

First published in: Printed according to the original Marx and Engels, Works, First Russian Edition, Translated from the French Vol. XXIX, Moscow, 1946

Published in English for the first time

56

ENGELS TO VLADIMIR SHMUILOV 40

IN DRESDEN

[Copy]

London, 7 February 1893 122 Regent’s Park Road, N. W. Dear Comrade, My best thanks for your kind hope that I should attain my nineties. If I remained as I am now, I should have no objection but were I, like so many, to degenerate physically and mentally as well, I would really rather not. Were that the case, I should prefer to be counted out.

As to your requests regarding Marx’s biography, 140 I am afraid that there is little I can do to meet them. Moreover I lack the time, being engaged on the 3rd volume of Capital and unable to take time off from it.

Ada I. There is nothing I can recommend over and above the biographical material already in your possession. Nothing reliable, at any rate.

Ad II . Marx’s practical activities between 1844 and 1849 were in part devoted to the working men’s associations, especially the Brussels associa- tion between 1846 and 1848, and to the League. 141 It is only on these last that you will find anything in print, namely in our prefaces to the Manifesto (LATEST Berlin edition, 1892) and in the Revelations Concerning the Communist Trial along with my introductiona thereto, Zurich edition,

[^1]: a as to





**[p. 98]**

Ad II I. You will have to get hold of The Holy Family by fair means or foul. In no circumstances will I let my own copy out of my hands and to supply particulars of the contents is an impossible task. Nor would it do any good to write out for you the main passages. You must be familiar with the whole. It surely ought to be possible to pick one up in Berlin.

As to the genesis of historical materialism, you will, in my opinion, find everything you want in my Feuerbach (Ludwig Feuerbach and the End of Classical German Philosophy)—the appendix by Marx is, of course, itself the genesis! Also in the prefaces to the Manifesto (new Berlin edition, 1892) and to the Revelations Concerning the Communist Trial.

Marx quietly elaborated the theory of surplus value in the fifties, all on his own, and resolutely refused to publish anything on the subject until he was in absolutely no doubt about each of his conclusions. Hence the non- appearance of the 2nd and subsequent instalments of A Contribution to the Critique of Political Economy. 142

I am sending you the Splits and Alliance by post and hope these will suffice. Unfortunately that is all I can do for you.

Kindest regards to Gnardnauer and all the comrades over there.

[^1]: a F. Engels, On the History of the Communist League. — b W. Eichhoff, Die Internationale Arbeiterassociation. Ihre Gründung, Organization, politisch-sociale Thätigkeit und Aus breitung. —c E. E. Fribourg, LAssociation internationale des travailleurs. — d E. de Laveleye, Le Socialisme contemporain. - e [J.] Zacher, Die Rothe Internationale. - f K. Marx and F. Engels, Fictitious Splits in the International’and The Alliance of Socialist Democracy and the International Working Men’s Association.



