---
Volume: 50
Document_Title: "60. Engels to Nikolai Danielson 24 February "
Page_Range: "136-139"
---

# 60. Engels to Nikolai Danielson 24 February 



**[p. 109]**

If Wachs is tall, he’s not the right chap. He was, so far as I can remember, about the same size as yourself, with brown hair. But where all these waxen majors come from, I cannot conceive.b

The Witchc has just finished, so I must fall in and await orders—warm regards to your wife and yourself,

Your F. E.

First published in: Printed according to the original Marx and Engels, Works, First Russian Edition, Published in English for the first time Vol. XXIX, Moscow, 1946

60

ENGELS TO NIKOLAI DANIELSON 164

IN ST. PETERSBURG

London, 24 February 1893 My dear Sir,

Pardon my long silence. It was not voluntary, I have to make an effort—a supreme effort—to finish Vol. II Id this winter and spring. In order to attain that, I have to forbid myself all extra-work and even all correspondence that is not absolutely necessary. Otherwise nothing would have detained me from continuing with you the discussion of our highly interesting and important problem. 165

I have now finished—all but a few formal matters—the rédactione of Section V (Banks and Credit), the most difficult of all, both from the state of the subject and from the state of the manuscript. Now remain but two sections—1/3 of the whole—of these the one—rent of land—is

[^1]: a See this volume, p. 102 - b A play of words in the original: the name Wachs is derived from the word ‘wächsern’ meaning ‘waxen’. See this volume, p. 101 - c jocular name for Louise Kautsky - a of Marx’s Capital -c editing





**[p. 110]**

Maintenant revenons à nos moutons.b We seem to be agreed upon all points except one, which you tackle in both your letters of 3d October and 27 January, though in each from a different point of view.

In the first you ask: was the economic change, which after 1854 had become unavoidable, 166 of such a nature that it must, instead of developing the historical institutions of Russia, on the contrary attack them in their root? In other words, could not the rural commune be taken for the basis of the new economic development?

And, January 27th, you express the same idea in this form: the grande industriec had become a necessity for Russia, but was it unavoidable that it was developed in a capitalistic form?

Well, in, or about, 1854 Russia started with the commune on the one hand, and the necessity of the grande industrie on the other. Now, if you take the whole state of your country into account, as it was at that date, do you see any possibility of the grande industrie being grafted on the peasants’ commune in a form which would, on the one hand, make the development ofthat grande industrie possible, and on the other hand raise the primitive commune to the rank of a social institution superior to anything the world has yet seen? And that while the whole Occidentd was still living under the capitalist régime?. It strikes me that such an evolution, which would have surpassed anything known in history, required other economical, political and intellectual conditions than were present at that time in Russia.

No doubt the commune and to a certain extent the artel, contained germs which under certain conditions might have developed and saved Russia the necessity of passing through the torments of the capitalistic ré-

[^1]: a of Section VI (see present edition, Vol. 37) - b Literally: let’s return to our muttons; an expression from the French medieval farce, meaning: let’s return to the subject of our conversation. - c large-scale industry - d West





**[p. 111]**

If we in the West had been quicker in our own economic development, if we had been able to upset the capitalistic regime some ten or twenty years ago, there might have been time yet for Russia to cut short the tendency of her own evolution towards capitalism. Unfortunately we are too slow, and those economic consequences of the capitalistic system which must bring it up to the critical point, are only just now developing in the various countries about us: while England is fast losing her industrial monopoly, France and Germany are approaching the industrial level of England, and America bids fair to drive them all out of the world’s market both for industrial and for agricultural produce. The introduction of an, at least relative, free trade policy in America is sure to complete the ruin of England’s industrial monopoly, and to destroy, at the same time, the industrial export trade of Germany and France; then the crisis must come, tout ce qu’il y a de plus fin de siècle.d But in the meantime, with you, the commune fades away, and we can only hope that the change to a better system, with us, may come soon enough to save, at least in some of the remoter portions of your country, institutions which may, under these circumstances, be called upon to fulfil a great future, But facts are facts, and we must not forget that these chances are getting less and less every year.

For the rest I grant you that the circumstance of Russia being the last country seized upon by the grande capitalist grande industrie, and at the

[^1]: a The reference is to the letter Marx wrote to the editors of the Otechestvenniye Zapiski (see present edition, Vol. 24, pp. 196-201). - b K. Marx and F. Engels, ‘Preface to the Second Russian Edition of the Manifesto of the Communist Party (see present edition, Vol. 24, p. 426). - c Phrase in Russian in the original. - a which signifies better than anything else the end of the world



