---
Volume: 50
Document_Title: "61. Engels to Paul Lafargue 25 February "
Page_Range: "139-142"
---

# 61. Engels to Paul Lafargue 25 February 



**[p. 112]**

Always yours

P. W. R. 167

Address Mrs Kautsky, please, not Mrs Roscher.

First published in Russian, in Reproduced from the original Minuvshiye gody, No. 2, St. Petersburg, 1908

61

ENGELS TO PAUL LAFARGUE 35

AT LE PERREUX

London, 25 February 1893 My dear Lafargue,

How time passes! Old Harney reminds me this morning that yesterday was the anniversary of the February revolution. ‘Long Live the Republic!’ Lord, we have so many other anniversaries to celebrate now that one forgets these semi-bourgeois occasions. And to think that in five years it will be a half century since that one took place. At the time we were all en-

[^1]: a overthrow - b word in Russian in original





**[p. 113]**

Your speech was very good and I regret only one thing: that it was not delivered two months ago. 168 But better late than never.a It doesn’t surprise me that the Chamber and the press found it ill-timed; if we were to wait upon their placetb we should never open our mouths. As for the Millerand & Co. Radical Socialists, it is absolutely essential that the alliance with them should be based on the fact that our Party is a separate Party, and that they recognise that. 169 Which in no way rules out joint action in the forthcoming elections, provided that the distribution of seats to be jointly contested is made in accordance with the actual state of the respective forces; those gentlemen are in the habit of claiming the lion’s share.

Do not let the fact that your speeches in the Chamber do not create as much stir as formerly discourage you. Look at our people in Germany: they were booed for years on end, and now the 36 dominate the Reichstag. Bebel writes saying: if we were eighty or a hundred (out of 400 members), the Reichstag would become an impossibility. There is not a debate, no matter what the subject, in which we do not intervene and we are listened to by all the parties. The debate on the socialist organisation of the future lasted five days, 143 and Bebel’s speechc was wanted in three and a half million copies. Now they are having the whole debate published in pamphlets’ 1 at five sous, and the effect, already tremendous, will be doubled!

You are absolutely right to prepare for the elections. We ought to conquer at least 20 seats. You have the immense advantage of knowing, from the municipal elections, the minimum extent of your strength in each locality; for I am sure that, since last May, you have appreciably increased it. 170 That will help you greatly in distributing candidatures between yourselves and the Radical Socialists. But possibly you would prefer to put up your candidates wherever you stand a chance, with the proviso to withdraw them, if necessary, in favour of the Radicals, for the second ballot, in the event of the latter having polled more votes.

The most important thing in the elections is to establish once and for

[^1]: a See this volume, pp.105-06 - b invitation - c A. Bebel, Zukunftsstaad und Sozialdemokratie. Eine Rede des Reichstagsabgeordneten August Bebel in der Sitzung des deutschen Reichstags vom 3. Februar, 1893. - d Der sozialdemokratische ‘Zukunftsstaat’ Verhandlungen des Deutschen Reichstags am 31. Januar, 3., 4., 6. und 7. Februar 1893 Veröffentlicht nach dem offiziellen stenographischen bericht.





**[p. 114]**

Panama 60 is not finished, not by a long chalk. And it is a disgrace that the trouble and honour of making disclosures should be left to the Royalists and their dubious allies. They could not have a better battle cry than: Down with the robbers, and if the great mass of the stupid countryside takes their part against the Republicans, it is to the cowardice of the Radical Republicans 86 that they will owe this triumph. You say that the republic is not in danger, that the deputies have returned from the recess with this certainty; well, then, they should strike for all they are worth and not let themselves be confused with the robbers by their silence. You are quite right: the political ineptitude of the whole bourgeoisie defies the imagination.

The only country where the bourgeoisie still has a little common sense is England. Here the formation of the Independent Labour Party 114(though still in embryo) and its conduct in the Lancashire and Yorkshire electionsa have put a match to the government’s backside; it is stirring itself, doing things unheard-of for a Liberal Government. The Registration Bill 162 unifies the suffrage for all parliamentary, municipal, etc., elections, 2) adds at least 20 to 30 per cent to the working-class vote, 3) removes the cost of election expenses from the candidates’ shoulders and places it on those of the government. The payment of an honorarium to M.P.s is promised for the next session; and there are also a whole number of juridical and economic measures for the benefit of workers. In short, the Liberals recognise that, to make sure of governing at the present time, they can do nothing but increase the political power of the working class who will naturally kick them out afterwards.

[^1]: a See this volume, pp.82-3, 87



