---
Volume: 50
Document_Title: "63. Engels to Thomas Cook and Son 3 March "
Page_Range: "143-144"
---

# 63. Engels to Thomas Cook and Son 3 March 



**[p. 116]**

And this is, about your silver wedding here on the 2nd of April. You know you have promised, and I keep you to your word. Now as it is as likely as not, or rather more likely, that Paul will have to go to the Brussels Conference, March 26th, 172 would it not be the best if you came direct from Paris about the same time he goes to Brussels and left him to come over from thence? Unless you prefer going with him and having a look at your native place which I am told has much improved in order to show itself worthy of the honour you conferred on it.

Anyhow it seems to me that it is getting time to make some preparations for the happy event, and so, not being able, or rather having forgotten to add this postscript to my last letter to you, I now tack it to the letter for Paul and hope you will take it into your most serious consideration and let us know your pleasure as soon as may be convenient.

Love from Louise and

Your ancient admirer F.

Engels

63

ENGELS TO THOMAS COOK AND SON 174

IN LONDON

[Eastbourne], after 3 March 1893 Dear Sirs,

[^1]: First published in Reproduced from the original Cahiers internationaux, No. 78, Paris, 1956

[^2]: Your letter of the 3rd has been forwarded to me here. 175 The gentleman in questiona is a young physician and member of the University of Vienna, Austria, where he graduated and practised with distinction.

[^3]: a Ludwig Freyberger



