---
Volume: 50
Document_Title: "70. Engels to Friedrich Adolph Sorge 18 March "
Page_Range: "151-154"
---

# 70. Engels to Friedrich Adolph Sorge 18 March 



**[p. 70]**

ENGELS TO FRIEDRICH ADOLPH SORGE 186

IN HOBOKEN

London, 18 March 1893 Dear Sorge,

We have just spent a fortnight by the sea at Eastbourne 175 where we had magnificent weather and whence we have returned greatly refreshed. Now we can get down to work again. But in fact the visiting season is once more upon us—next Sunday (tomorrow week) there’s the Brussels Conference on the Zurich Congress, 172 when Bebel will nip over here for a few days 183 the Lafargues will be coming at the same time and I am glad to have again inveigled the young man over here so that he and I can discuss French affairs at some length. All the same I ought still to have enough time left to finish off Volume II P since I am now over the worst.

The matter of the Socialiste has now been settled. It would seem that a crash is the only solution to the silver business in America. 187 For Cleveland does not, it seems, have either the strength or the courage to smash this vicious circle of corruption. And it really would be a good thing if there were to be a crisis. A nation—a young nation—so proud of its ‘practice’ and at the same time so frightfully bone-headed in the matter of theory as America can only eradicate so ingrained an idée fixe at the cost of damage to itself. The plausible idea that, if one has no money when one needs it, this is because there is not enough money in the world at large, is a childish notion common both to the PAPER CURRENCY nonsense à la Kellogg and to the silver nonsense, and the surest cure for it is experimentation and bankruptcy which last might also prove quite beneficial to ourselves in other respects. Provided only some sort of tariff reform is achieved this autumn, there will be no need for you to repine, for the rest will surely follow. The main thing is that American industry is becoming capable of competing on the world market.

Over here things are going very well. The masses are undoubtedly on the move, and of this you will find details in Aveling’s admittedly somewhat long-winded reports in the Volkszeitung. The best evidence of this

[^1]: a of Capital





**[p. 125]**

The same thing is happening where the Fabians 43 are concerned. As in the case of the Social Democratic Federation, their own branches in the provinces have outgrown them; in this, as in the Chartist movement, Lancashire and Yorkshire are again taking the lead. Men like Sidney Webb, Bernard Shaw, etc., who WANTED TO PERMEATE THE LIBERALS WITH

SOCIALISM, must now submit to being permeated BY THE SPIRIT OF THE

WORKINGMEN MEMBERS OF THEIR OWN SOCIETY. They fret and fume but IT’S

NO USE—either they remain on their own, officers without soldiers, or they conform. The first seems more likely and is also more desirable.

The Independent Labour Party 114—as the latest arrival—has brought with it fewer ingrained prejudices, contains good elements, the working men of the North being the arbiters, and to that extent is the most genuine expression of the present movement, True, there are amongst the leaders all kinds of odd individuals and even many of the best, as in America where you are, have acquired the parliamentary system’s deplorable habit of cliquism, but they have the support of the masses who will either teach them how to behave or throw them overboard. They still make blunders and plenty of them, but the worst perils are over and I now look for rapid progress which will not be without its repercussions in America.

[^1]: In Germany the situation has almost reached crisis point. According to the last reports on the sessions of the Military Committee a compromise would hardly seem possible. 76 The government is making it impossible for the gentlemen of the Centre 71 and the Free Thinkers 149 to change sides,a and a majority cannot be obtained without 40 or 50 of their number. So

[^2]: a See this volume, p. 101





**[p. 126]**

A young man from Texas, F. Wiesen of Baird, wanted me to make a statement deploring the nomination of candidates ‘for President’ as a denial of the revolutionary principle, since the intention was to abolish the Presidency, I sent him the enclosed answer.b Should a garbled Version be made public, be so good as to get the Volkszeitung to print this.

I trust you and your wife are now enjoying better health. Warm regards to you both from Mrs Kautsky and

Your

F. Engels

We have sent you the debate on the future organization of society. 143

Newspapers may have been somewhat irregular while we were away, but should be complete.

Printed according to the original

[^1]: First published, slightly abridged, in: Stuttgart, 1906 and, in full, in English, Briefe und Auszüge aus Briefen von Joh. in Science and Society, Vol. II , Phil. Becker, Jos. Dietzgen, Friedrich Engels, No. 3, New York, 1938 Karl Marx u. A. an F. A. Sorge und Andere,

[^2]: a William II - b See this volume, p. 119



