---
Volume: 50
Document_Title: "71. Engels to Karl Kautsky 20 March "
Page_Range: "154-156"
---

# 71. Engels to Karl Kautsky 20 March 



**[p. 71]**

ENGELS TO KARL KAUTSKY

IN STUTTGART

London, 20 March 1893 Dear Baron,

Lessner’s articlea reads very well though it certainly cost Ede a vast amount of work to lick it into some sort of literary shape. As to the Neue Rheinische Zeitung’s review, I once remarked—the notion suddenly came into my head—that it would be by no means a bad idea if the whole thing were to be reprinted en bloc and that this might be suggested to Dietz. On further consideration I realised, of course, that there were sundry snags and that it would saddle me with more work than I could properly take on until Volume II P was finished, so I thought no more about it. But Lessner seems to throw himself into literature with the same impetuosity as once he did into painting.

As a matter of principle I have ceased to read anything further on the rate of profit, not having read either little Schmidt’s second articlec or that by Lande.d These must wait until I get to the preface to Vol. II I. In the meantime your irrepressible private adversary, Stiebeling, has again sent me his latest opus,e hoping—though probably in vain—that I shall accord it a kindly notice.

As to the source of the nonsensical report about my illness, I am com- pletely in the dark, but there was not the least occasion for it. Nor can I discover where it first appeared or in what paper, so I have no clue whatever to go by. Still, we have cracked divers bottles in honour of my serious loss of strength and my hourly awaited demise.f

Five of the seven sections of Vol. II I have been finished but for the— formal—final editing; the main difficulty, the section on credit, 33 has

[^1]: a F. Leßner, ‘Erinnerungen eines Arbeiters an Karl Marx. Zu dessen zehnjährigem Todestage, 14. März 1893’, Die Neue Zeit, No, 24, Stuttgart, 1892/93. - b of Capital - c C. Schmidt, ‘Die Durchschnittsprofitrate und das Marx’sche Werthgesetz’, Die Neue Zeit, Nos. 3, 4, Stuttgart, 1892/93. - d H. Lande, ‘Mehrwerth und Profit. Ein ökonomischer Versuch’, Die Neue Zeit, Nos. 19, 20, Stuttgart, 1892/93. -e G. Stiebeling, Das Problem der Durchschnitts=Profitrate. Kritik einer Kritik mit einem Nachtrag. — f See this volume, pp. 92-93, 107





**[p. 128]**

Had I known that you were still prepared to continue working on the Theories of Surplus Valued, 102 I should have let you keep it, but having heard nothing for years and as I need the Ms. occasionally for purposes of comparison in connection with Vol. II I, I wrote asking you for it. In view of your other activities there would, after all, have probably been considerable uncertainty about when you might be done with this and subsequent instalments.b We shall settle this account shortly.

The manifold plans regarding the Neue Zeit would seem to have been consigned to oblivion—let us hope it will carry on, even without such violent revolutions, But it still seems to me that the fundamental shortcoming lies in the fact that the contents are aimed at one kind of reader, while the price is based on another.c

Over here the movement is making excellent progress. The danger of sectarianism—presented both by the Social Democratic Federation 44 and by the Fabians 43—has been largely averted; the Independent Labour Party 114 will either absorb them or spur them on and get rid of their useless leaders. The masses, especially in the North, in the industrial areas, are finally and indubitably on the move. Blunders and dirty tricks there will still be in plenty, but that can be dealt with. The day before yesterday Aveling was in Manchester where the Executive of the Independent Labour Party were holding their first meeting. The resolutions were quite satisfactory. Aveling was chosen to represent it in Brussels 172 and later also in Zurich, 56 along with Keir Hardie and Shaw Maxwell. No doubt you will be hearing more from Ede. (This is in confidence, of course; I don’t know what the chaps intend to publish.)

Kindest regards.

Your F.E.

[^1]: First published in: Printed according to the original Aus der Frühzeit des Marxismus.

[^2]: Engels Briefwechsel mit Kautskys, Published in English for the first time Prag, 1935

[^3]: a Section VI, Capital, Vol. II I (see present edition, Vol. 37) - b See Engels, letter to K. Kautsky of 24 December 1892 (present edition, Vol. 49) and this volume, p. 71 - c See this volume, p. 50



