---
Volume: 50
Document_Title: "76. Engels to George William Lamplugh 11 April "
Page_Range: "160-161"
---

# 76. Engels to George William Lamplugh 11 April 



**[p. 133]**

You are totally unknown not only to me but also to the Lafargues, and you will understand that it wouldn’t do to entrust a total stranger with a matter as important and as difficult as the French translation of Volume II of Capital.

Apart from a thorough knowledge of the German language, it also calls for an equally thorough grounding in economics, and this, unfortunately, is to be found only very rarely amongst young socialists. That is something that would also have to be discussed beforehand.

Next, you seek my collaboration—and on this score all I can say to you is that for years to come my time will be fully occupied with projects that are of at least equal importance.

Most important of all, however, and this alone might give actuality to your inquiry, is that there should be a publisher for the translation. If you have one, that and nothing else would repay the trouble involved in taking the other questions into consideration.

Yours very truly

First published in: Printed according to the original Marx and Engels, Works, First Russian Edition, Published in English for the first time Vol. XXIX, Moscow, 1946

76

ENGELS TO GEORGE WILLIAM LAMPLUGH 192

IN PORT ERIN (ISLE OF MAN)

London, 11th April 1893 122 Regent’s Park Road, N. W. My dear Lamplugh, Thank you for dropping the formalities. I, as you see, do the same. We should have been very glad to see you and your wife and children here, but I know what London is to a man who visits it with his complete family and so we’ll excuse you this time, but this is the last time we do excuse you.

