---
Volume: 50
Document_Title: "79. Engels to Laura Lafargue 25 April "
Page_Range: "163-165"
---

# 79. Engels to Laura Lafargue 25 April 



**[p. 136]**

Only then will the French socialists be able to recover throughout the world the standing that is theirs by right, and the important position that they must occupy in the general interest.

Yours sincerely,

F. Engels

First published in: Printed according to the book A. Zévaès, De l’introduction

du marxisme en France, Translated from the French Paris, 1947

Published in English for the first time

79

ENGELS TO LAURA LAFARGUE

AT LE PERREUX

London, 25 April 1893 My dear Laura,

As for the last few days we have neither heard from you nor seen any papers with your handwriting on them, we are beginning to be anxious about your health, and the enclosed letter from Rave with the influenza atmosphere it breathes, is not encouraging either. It is this letter which puts the pen into my hands to-day. I don’t know anything about any of the points he mentions.

1. Herewith a portrait—but could they not secure the clichéa of the one which appeared in the Illustration 196 (believe) about last May? that would be cheaper.

[^1]: 195 At all events, I do not want to write to him anything which may interfere with what you have been good enough to do in the matter. Therefore

[^2]: a negative





**[p. 137]**

3. The proof-sheets are no use to me. I write to him 25 that I sent his letter to you, to settle all points, and that I shall be quite satisfied if he sends the proofs to you.

I returned last night from Manchester, where I assisted at the funeral of poor Gumpert (he was cremated). He fell ill, as you heard while here, last December of angina pectoris, which, brought on embolism of the brain with partial paralysis, and succumbed last Thursdaya to a fresh attack, after fearful sufferings.

May Day here is as confused as in Paris. The Eight Hours Committee and the Trades Council 197 are sure to have a separate demonstration each. And in this critical period Aveling falls ill, the Hull Dock Strike 198 intervenes and may lead to a general Dock and Shipping Strike all over the kingdom, giving Tussy more to do than she can manage—so that nobody knows how matters will go.

I hope you received Louise’sb letter sent on Saturday,c and I hope more- over soon to learn that you have got over your fit of influenza.

Salut au citoyen Représentant,d if he is about. Love from Louise and from

Yours affectionately F.

Engels

[^1]: First published, in the language Reproduced from the original of the original (English), in: F. Engels, P. et L. Lafargue, Correspondance, t. II I, 1891-1895, Paris, 1959

[^2]: a 20 April - b Kautsky - c 22 April - d Greetings to the citizen deputy (Paul Lafargue)



