---
Volume: 50
Document_Title: "88. Engels to Filippo Turati 6 June "
Page_Range: "176-178"
---

# 88. Engels to Filippo Turati 6 June 



**[p. 87]**

ENGELS TO HERMANN BAHR

IN LONDON

[Draft]

[London, beginning of June 1893] Dear Sir,

I regret that I am unable to comply with your request. 216 In the first place, it so happens that my party comrades in Germany are conducting an election campaign against, among others, anti-Semitic candidates, 217 which means that at this juncture party interests preclude my expressing an impartial opinion about anti-Semitism.

In the second place, I believe that my party comrades in Vienna and in Austria generally would never forgive me were I to allow myself to be interviewed for the Deutsche Zeitung.

I remain, Sir, etc.

88

ENGELS TO FILIPPO TURATI

IN MILAN

London, 6 June 1893 Dear citizen Turati,

Thank you very much for the information you were good enough to send me on the subject of the Domanico project. 218 I would very much like to reply to him as a young girl in Bellagio 219 replied to me more than fifty years ago when I said to her: ‘Bella tosa, damm un

[^1]: First published in: Printed according to the original Marx and Engels, Works, First Russian Edition, Published in English for the first time Vol. XXIX, Moscow, 1946





**[p. 150]**

Is the edition of Capital in the Economist’s Library in Turin to which you refer an Italian edition? I would be very interested in it, since that is something of which I have been unaware up till now; would you be so kind as to let me have the full title? and the name of the translator and the editor? so that I can get hold of a copy of this translation in order to say a few words about it in a new German edition or in the preface to the 3rd volume.

As for Deville’s resume, I have reviewed the first part, but not the second half, the editor was too rushed. That is why Deville has sometimes presented as absolute theses of Marx which he had posited only as relative, as valid on certain conditions or with certain restrictions. However, that is the only fault I can find. 220

The second edition of the 2nd volume of Capital will soon appear. I am reading the proofs of the last part, and it will not be long before it is pub- lished. There are only the printing errors to be corrected, but in a book of this kind that is always important.

Thank you for the translation of the Manifesto. 108

Best regards to Mme Kulishov and to yourself from Mme Kautsky and yours truly,

F. Engels

Published in English for the first time

[^1]: First published in the language Printed according to the original of the original (French), in Annali, an. I, Milano, 1958 Translated from the French

[^2]: a ‘Kiss me, my sweetheart’—’tomorrow’. A play on words: ‘domani’ means ‘tomorrow’ and Domanico is a surname. - b See next letter.



