---
Volume: 50
Document_Title: "94. Engels to Paul Lafargue 29 June "
Page_Range: "187-188"
---

# 94. Engels to Paul Lafargue 29 June 



**[p. 160]**

Liberalism has completely abdicated in Germany. There is no real opposition outside our Party. William will have his soldiers, his taxes and— his Socialists in the army and outside the army, in ever-growing numbers. The final figure of the socialist votes will not be known for 10-15 days; Bebel thinks it will not be above 2 million; the season was against us, many workers are scattered in the countryside during the summer and omitted from the register, he estimates the resulting deficit for us at more than 100,000 votes.

The Amiens, amende honorable is splendid! There’s no one like the French for these strokes of genius against obsolete laws. 231

Love to Laura and to you from Louise. Kiss Laura for me.

Ever yours,

F. E.

First published in: Printed according to the original Cahiers internationaux, No. 78, Paris, 1956 Translated from the French

94

ENGELS TO PAUL LAFARGUE 35

AT LE PERREUX

London, 29 June 1893 My dear Lafargue,

I am writing to Bebel and explaining the situation to him; 25 there are certainly many reasons in favour of a postponement of the Congress to a later date. 232 But

1. November is out of the question, nobody goes to Zurich in winter when it is raining and cold. Further, your Chamber, the Reichstag and the British Parliament will be in session then. So give up that date. Another can be settled later.

2. It would be regrettable if the French Marxists and the Germans, and they alone, proposed an adjournment. But it would be quite another mat-

