---
Volume: 50
Document_Title: "95. Engels to Filippo Turati 12 July "
Page_Range: "188-190"
---

# 95. Engels to Filippo Turati 12 July 



**[p. 161]**

3. The Swiss will have to submit your request to the others and take their advice—at any rate they will plead that necessity, seeing that Seidel, the secretary of the committee, 27 is a fanatical anti-Marxist and intrigues with all our opponents here and in France.

You will have some difficulty in persuading the Blanquists 20 and the two kinds of Possibilists 30 to support your motion, but it is very important. If the others are satisfied with the dates 6-12 August, you are hardly likely to succeed on your own.

Ever yours, in haste,

F. Engels

First published in: Printed according to the original F. Engels, P. et L. Lafargue,

Correspondance, t. II I, 1891-1895, Translated from the French Paris, 1959

95

ENGELS TO FILIPPO TURATI

IN MILAN

London, 12 July 1893 Dear citizen Turati,

Thank you. I have compared some passages, particularly in the 1st and penultimate chapters (general tendency of capitalist accumulation). As you say, it is translated entirely from the French text, which continues to be more popular than the German. The passages I compared were translated fairly accurately, which is not very difficult given that the two languages are so closely related, and the greater freedom of movement offered by Italian in comparison to French.

[^1]: On Saturdaya sent back to you, by registered mail, the Italian Capital.b

[^2]: a 8 July -b See this volume, pp. 149-151





**[p. 162]**

The ‘last part’ of which I spoke in my letterb is, of course, from the 2nd volume, 2nd edition, which will appear closer to September. The 3rd volume is still giving me trouble, but happily the end is in sight. However, I have not achieved my goal of finishing this work before my summer holidays. And that may cause a further delay of several months.

As for the French edition of the 2nd and 3rd volumes, it would be rather difficult to find the translator they require. It’s a job which a few people would be willing and capable and persevering to bring to completion. The 2nd has 500 pages, and the 3rd will have 1,100-1,200.

Poor Martignetti! Is there no way of rescuing him from this benedettoc

hole of Benevento, and finding him some occupation in a place where he could also learn the literary language of his country? He displays extraor- dinary assiduity and willingness. He translates for me with a fanaticism worthy of a better cause; but it seems he has little success in business affairs, and an unlucky star has followed him everywhere.

Will we see each other in Zurich? 189 Good Lord, if all goes well I might be able to be in Zurich at least for the last day of the Congress; that is my plan; however, as it does not entirely depend on me but on a combination of more or less fortuitous circumstances, it is very uncertain, and we would both probably do well not to speak of it. If there is something which frightens me, it is your threat to speak to me en Meneghino.d In 1841 I spoke it passably well, and understood it perfectly. 219 However, when, about thirty years later, I found myself at Como 233 for a day or two, I did not understand a single word; my ear had completely lost the habit. Thus I can say in all truth that I still speak a few words of your so very expressive dialect, but I understand nothing at all. As for your French, it is still better than mine, and in any case nothing prevents you from writing to me in Italian.

Do you read English? If you do, I could send you a newspaper from time to time.

Yours,

F. Engels

[^1]: Salut cordiale

[^2]: a copyright -b See this volume, p. 151 -c damn -d Milan dialect -e Heartfelt greetings



