---
Volume: 50
Document_Title: "98. Engels to Laura Lafargue 20 July "
Page_Range: "198-200"
---

# 98. Engels to Laura Lafargue 20 July 



**[p. 171]**

LIVE WITHIN THEIR INCOMES AND LAY BEYOND SOMETHING FOR A RAINY DAY is quite outside my experience. It has never yet happened, or at most by way of an exception, and certainly not in the case of the class as such. After all, these people have existed for the past two hundred years thanks solely to the assistance of the state which has seen them through every crisis

Yours,

Friedrich Engels

First published in Monatsschrift für Printed according to the magazine Christliche Social-Reform, Heft 3, Vienna-Leipzig, 1897 Published in English in full for the first time

98

ENGELS TO LAURA LAFARGUE

AT LE PERREUX

London, 20 July 1893 My dear Löhr,

D’aborda thanks for translation of the Chronicle Interview—though it was hardly worth while. 239 And then an inquiry.

Some time ago Bonnier sent me a letter from a Diamandy (Roumanian) asking me to write for a new Reviewb of his and announcing me that they had anticipated my permission and translated for the 1st No., which they would send, the chapter on Barbarism and Civilisation. 240 I waited but received nothing. Then, a few days ago, I wrote, saying that I had not had the review 25 but anyhow had no time to write for him.

[^1]: a First of all - b L’Ere nouvelle





**[p. 172]**

What funny people the French government and Parliament are! Panama 60

passes off with a fizz instead of an explosion, the coup d’état against the bourse du travaild leaves the workpeople blasés and passes off quietly, but the Siamese humbug sends the very same parliamentary patriots off in a blaze of enthusiasm for Colonial Conquest—the same men who a few years ago almost killed Ferry ‘the Tonkinois’ because he tried to engage them on the same line! 241 Verily the bourgeoisie has outlived itself everywhere.

To-morrow Louise and I are going, for a week, to Eastbourne (address as before, 28 Marine Parade), as I feel the want of a little recruiting of strength before undertaking my trip to Germany. 189 Last year’s disappointment has made me careful; I don’t want to be laid up again lame in an armchair for six weeks. We leave Eastbourne Friday 28th July and London for Continent 1st August—meet Bebel and wife in Cologne and go via Strasburg to Switzerland where I shall meet my brothere and expect to be in Zürich for close of Congress 12th or 13th August. Thence with Bebel to Vienna and Berlin.

Will Paul and you be in Zürich? The Swiss got letters from other Parisian organisations, that the elections very likely would not be in August, in spite of all newspaper reports, but only in September; 156 that and the English objections decided against the application for adjournment. 232

Post-time—9 o’clock, though perhaps this will not reach you till Saturday morning!

[^1]: a off-print - b Lafargue, Le matérialisme économique de Karl Marx. - c unpredictable - d Labour Exchange 29 - e Hermann Engels



