---
Volume: 50
Document_Title: "99. Engels to Filippo Turati 20 July "
Page_Range: "200-201"
---

# 99. Engels to Filippo Turati 20 July 



**[p. 173]**

ever thankful ‘Translated-one’.

F. Engels

First published, in the language Reproduced from the original of the original (English), in: F. Engels, P. et L. Lafargue, Correspondance, t. II I, 1891-1895, Paris, 1959

99

ENGELS TO FILIPPO TURATI 242

IN MILAN

London, 20 July 1893 Dear citizen Turati,

I hasten to reply to your letter of 17th, which I received yesterday evening. Mme Marx-Aveling is executor under Marx’s will; as for the literary part of the inheritance, I am responsible. Neither of us has ever heard talk of any Unione tipografica-editrice of Turin, and even less have we ever sold to this society ‘property rights for the works of Marx’ which (fortunately) belong to us entirely to this day. Not a single soldo of money from this Union has ever touched our hands. 243

As regards the 1st volume of Capital, these property rights include the German and French editions. In accord with the relevant international trea- ties, everyone is now free to do any translations; we cannot oppose this. If anyone asks for our authorisation, this is a purely voluntary act on their part.

It is not altogether impossible that the Union has entered into some kind of contract with the editor of the French edition, M. Lachâtre, but it is highly unlikely. I know nothing of it. However, even if this is the case, M. Lachâtre could only. sell that which is his property, and at the very most that was the French edition. Thus the Union could do no more than oppose an Italian translation from the French.

However, now the book by Deville has been published and is freely circulating in France. If in France no one has attempted to bring a charge

