---
Volume: 50
Document_Title: "100. Engels to Wilhelm Liebknecht 27 July "
Page_Range: "201-202"
---

# 100. Engels to Wilhelm Liebknecht 27 July 



**[p. 174]**

Thus it is ridiculous, unless the legislation in Italy is wholly out of line. However, as the Code Napoléon has served as the basis for civil legislation in almost the whole of Western Europe, I do not think I am mistaken to see the case from this point of view.

What is amusing is the affrontery of these gentlemen: ‘we purchased from the heirs to this property, etc’ Clearly they have succeeded in this on other occasions.

As for Zurich, the situation is still as it was when I last wrote to youa; let us all hope for the best!

Greetings to Mme Anna and yourself from Mme Kautsky and from yours truly,

F. Engels

First published, in the language of the Printed according the original original (French), in: Annali, an. I, Milano, 1958 Translated from the French Published in English for the first time

100

ENGELS TO WILHELM LIEBKNECHT

IN BERLIN

Eastbourne, 27 July 1893 Dear Liebknecht,

The day after tomorrow, i.e. the 30th of this month, is your and your wife’s Silver Wedding and so I am writing to send you my very best wishes on this joyous occasion. May it find you both in excellent shape and be a day of unalloyed pleasure and may you be granted a life of health and happiness for the 25 years that remain until your Golden Wedding.

Whenever a festive occasion of this kind comes the way of one of us old

[^1]: a See this volume, p. 162



