---
Volume: 50
Document_Title: "101. Engels to Natalie Liebknecht 27 July "
Page_Range: "202-204"
---

# 101. Engels to Natalie Liebknecht 27 July 



**[p. 175]**

Bebel will be giving you and your wife on our behalf—Louise Kautsky’s and mine—a small memento of your celebration, which I trust you will kindly accept and remember us by.

With cordial regards and good wishes from

Your

F. Engels

First published in: Printed according to the original Marx and Engels, Works, First Russian Edition, Published in English for the first time Vol. XXIX, Moscow, 1946

101

ENGELS TO NATALIE LIEBKNECHT

IN BERLIN

Eastbourne, 27 July 1893 Dear Mrs Liebknecht,

I was delighted to receive the picture of the house in Bruch where I was born and spent my childhood. 244 The photograph is a very good one and shows every detail with which so many of my memories are associated. It was very nice of Liebknecht to have it taken, and I would ask you to thank him most kindly on my behalf.



**[p. 176]**

It is typical of the Prussians to persecute your Karl in this way; the bureaucrats are incapable of forgiving him his father. 246

And now once again my hearty congratulations on your Silver Wedding and warm regards to you and your sons.a

Yours ever, F.

Engels

[Postscript from Louise Kautsky]

In company with the Avelings and other friends we shall drink a toast to you both with a ‘68 port next Sunday.b Your very good health!!

From your

Louise Kautsky

[^1]: First published in: Printed according to the original Marx and Engels, Works, First Russian Edition, Published in English for the first time Vol. XXIX, Moscow, 1946

[^2]: a Karl and Theodor -b 23 July



