---
Volume: 50
Document_Title: "105. Engels to Laura Lafargue 21 August "
Page_Range: "207-210"
---

# 105. Engels to Laura Lafargue 21 August 



**[p. 105]**

ENGELS TO LAURA LAFARGUE

AT LE PERREUX

Merkurstr. 6, Zürich-Höttingen

21 August 1893

My dear Löhr,

I have been in Switzerland for some weeks. 189 Louise, Dr. Freyberger and I left August 1st via Hook of Holland, met Bebel and his wife at Cologne, passed one night at Mainz, the next at Strasburg, the third at Zürich. Thence I went to Thusis in Graubünden where I met my brother 11and family and stayed a week, returned to Zürich just in time for the closing of the congress and am now staying with my cousin Mrs. Beust.

As to the elections of yesterday, 208 we are in complete uncertainty and shall be so until this afternoon—no papers being published in Zürich on Monday mornings. So anything to be said on that subject must be delayed until end of this letter.

I found Germany completely metamorphosed. Steam chimneys all over the country, but where I passed, not numerous enough over a small district, to create a nuisance by their smoke. Cologne and Mainz are transformed. The old town is there still where it was, but around or aside of it has arisen a larger and newer town with splendid buildings disposed according to a well- arranged plan, and with large industrial establishments occupying distinct quarters so as not to interfere with the aspect or the comfort of the rest. Cologne has made most progress, having nearly trebled its inhabitants—the Ring is a splendid street, there is nothing equal to it in all England. Mainz is growing, but at a slower rate. In Strasburg you see too distinctly the separation between the old town and the new district formed by university and government buildings, an external addition, not a natural growth.

Paul naturally will be most curious to hear about Alsace. Well, the French may rest satisfied. In Strasburg, to my astonishment, I heard nothing but German spoken. Only once, two girls, Jewesses, who passed me,

[^1]: a Hermann Engels





**[p. 181]**

Such arrant fools as these Prussians you never saw. They flattered the nobility and bourgeois who, they ought to have known, were hopelessly frenchified, and bullied the peasants and workmen, who, at least in language, had retained some remnant of German nationality. The country is under the thumb of maires,** gendarmes, tax-gatherers, appointed by the central government and mostly imported from abroad, who do as they like and live among themselves, separated from and detested by the people.

All the old oppressive laws of the French Second Empire 248 are scrupu- lously maintained and enforced, and sometimes even improved upon by old ordinances dating from the ancien régime and unearthed by learned functionaries who have discovered that the revolution has forgotten to state expressly that they are repealed! Moreover, all the chicanery innate to Prussian officials, is imported and improved upon. The consequences are natural. When I asked my friend: then, evidently, if the French by some chance or other were to return, nine-tenths of the people would receive them with open arms, he said that was so.

In Strasburg the old bourgeoisie keep quite to themselves and do not mix in any way with the intruders. With the rest of the people, Bebel is very popular, wherever he was recognised, they came to the shop doors and saluted him. You may be sure he will bring the state of things in Alsace before the Reichstag in a fashion different from that of those asses of protestataires who seem to rejoice in every fresh measure of oppression,

[^1]: a Modern name: Mulhouse. ** Chief executives, Mayors





**[p. 182]**

(This moment a telegram from Roubaix to Greulich’s house that Guesde is elected. Hurrah! Hope to hear this afternoon about Paul’s victory. 249

As to the Congress 229 it was a pity that our people had not at least 5-6 men here. 250 The one effect has been obtained: Blanquists 20 and Allemanists 21 have made themselves eternally ridiculous and contemptible devant le monde socialiste.a But now this falls on French socialism generally; now the others speak simply of ‘the French’, and that is very unlucky indeed. Had there been even a small minority of Marxists, that would not be the case. But if you find in English and continental socialist papers the French Socialists treated as a set of chaps who do not know their own minds for two minutes together, and who will vote by acclamation the greatest piece of nonsense if thereby they think they can aggravate ‘les allemands’,b You need not be astonished. I have heard Swiss Socialists (and the German Swiss have very strong French sympathies) declare that now it was evident that chauvinism was ineradicable in the French mind, and I had to tell them what things—gall and wormwood to every chauvinc- had been able to say in French in your Almanac,d without any bad results anywhere. So you see the fiasco of these spouters falls upon all France, our people included. And Jaclard with his peevish articles in Justice makes it worse still. Well, I hope the elections will put us in a position to show to all Europe that Jaclard and Allemane ne sont pas la France.e And yet I believe Jaclard voted in very many cases with Bonnier and the small vanishing minority.

The women were splendidly represented. Besides Louise, Austria sent little Dworzak, a charming little girl in every respect; I fell quite in love with her and whenever Labriolaf gave me a chance, eloped with her from the entanglements of his ponderous conversation. These Viennoises sont des Parisiennesnées, mais des Parisiennes d’il y a cinquante ans.g Regular grisettes. Then the Russian women, there were four or five with wonderfully beautiful leuchtende Augend and there were besides Vera Zasulich and Anna Kulischoff. Then Clara Zetkin with her enormous capacity for

[^1]: a in the eyes of the socialist world - b the Germans -c chauvinist - d F. Engels, ‘Socialism in Germany’. - e are not France - f Antonio Labriola — g Viennese women are born Parisians, but the Parisians of 50 years ago - h shining eyes



