---
Volume: 50
Document_Title: "108. Engels to Laura Lafargue 18 September "
Page_Range: "213-215"
---

# 108. Engels to Laura Lafargue 18 September 



**[p. 186]**

Correspondance, t. II I, 1891-1895, Paris, 1959

108

ENGELS TO LAURA LAFARGUE 253

AT LE PERREUX

Berlin W., den 18 September 1893

Grossgörschen- Strasse 22 a.

My dear Lohr,

Enfin!a Arrived here Saturday night, after 6 days in Vienna and 1 in Prague 189 (where we met your old adorer Rudolf Meyer). Vienna is an extremely beautiful town, with glorious boulevards (Ringstrasse), and the immense square between Rathhaus and—vis-à-vis—new Burgtheater, with Parliament to the right and University to the left, is unequalled in the world. But Vienna is too big for its people, they are only beginning to learn the use of these boulevards; in about 10 years everything will be ten times finer, because 10 times more alive with people.

Altogether the Continent has undergone a complete revolution since I last saw it. 254 Everywhere life, activity, development, compared to which England appears stationary. Of Berlin I have not seen much (not a square foot as yet of the Berlin I left in 1842, 255 as what I have seen so far, is all new addition) but it is indeed externally splendid, though, I fear, internally full of discomfort. Bebel (where Louise and I are staying) has a very pretty and comfortable floor, but Libraryb where we spent last evening lives in a set of apartments so awfully arranged by the builder that it horrified me. Here in Berlin they have invented the ‘Berliner Zimmer’, a room with hardly a trace of a window, and that is where the Berliners

[^1]: a At last! - b jocular name for W. Liebknecht given to him by Marx’s daughters





**[p. 187]**

Yesterday we were in the Freie Volksbühne 256—the Lessing Theater, one of the nicest and best of Berlin had been hired for the occasion. The seats are drawn for as in a lottery by the subscribers and you see working men and girls in the stalls and boxes, while bourgeois may be relegated to the gods. The public is of an attention, a devotion, I might say, an enthusiasm sans égale.c Not a sign of applause until the curtain falls—then a veritable storm. But in pathetic scenes—torrents of tears. No wonder the actors prefer this public to any other. The piece was rather good and the acting far superior to what I had expected. The Kleinburgereid of old has disappeared from the German stage, both in the acting and in the character of the pieces. I will send you a short review of the latter.

In Vienna I had to appear twice before the ‘party’. 257 I am quite enchanted with them. As lively and as sanguine as the French, but slightly more solid. The women especially are charming and enthusiastic; they work very hard, thanks, to a very great extent, to Louise. Adler has done wonders; the tact, the constant vigilance and activity, with which he holds the party together (not an easy thing with such lively people as the Viennese), are beyond praise, and if you consider moreover the difficulties of his private position— a wife ill with nervous ailments, three children and interminable pecuniary difficulties arising therefrom—it is almost inconceivable how he can keep his head above water. And these Austrians—a mixture of all races, Celtic, Teutonic, Slavonic—are far less manageable than our North Germans.

Library looks very well, collecting the elements of a paunch; his wife made a Bowie for us with wine and fruit; there was a rather numerous com- pany. He lives au quatrième and outside Berlin proper, in Charlottenburg, but his apartment costs him some 1,800 Marks = 2,250 fr.

[^1]: a squalid hole - b overlooking the courtyard - c without its equal - d provincialism - e on the fourth floor



