---
Volume: 50
Document_Title: "112. Engels to Hermann Blocher 3 October "
Page_Range: "221-222"
---

# 112. Engels to Hermann Blocher 3 October 



**[p. 112]**

ENGELS TO HERMANN BLOCHER

IN BASLE

London, 3 October 1893 122 Regent’s Park Road, N. W.

Dear Sir, Not until today, immediately after my return to this country, 189 have I been able to reply to your letter of 11 August. 266

There are several copies of The Holy Family 1 in Berlin, while in Switzerland Dr Conrad Schmidt, lecturer at Zurich University, Klus- Hegibachstrasse, Hirslanden, might be able to help you get hold of one.

As regards Bruno Bauer’s career up till 1843, his fortunes and opinions, you might find some information in Ruge’s Hallische, subsequently Deutsche Jahrbücher; likewise in Bruno’s own writings. Also, in regard to the years 1844-46, in his works and his Allgemeine Literatur-Zeitung. After 1843 both Marx and I completely lost touch with the Bauers who didn’t come to London until some time towards the end of the 50s— Edgar for a prolonged stay, Bruno for a visit, at which time Marx saw them again. However, so far as I know, Bruno never had anything to do with either the materialist view of history or scientific socialism, but if he ever had, this could only be discovered from Bruno’s later writings, those of the ‘50s and ‘60s. It could hardly be denied that Marx’s views exerted a certain amount of influence upon Bruno’s subsequent works on early Christianity, but on the whole Bruno’s conception of historical causation remained primarily idealistic.

It is my opinion that no one could successfully write a book about Bruno without spending a long time in Berlin where all the material has accumulated.

Very sincerely yours,

F. Engels

[^1]: a K. Marx and F. Engels, The Holy Family, or Critique of Critical Criticism. Against Bruno Bauer and Company.



