---
Volume: 50
Document_Title: "115. Engels to Victor Adler 11 October "
Page_Range: "226-230"
---

# 115. Engels to Victor Adler 11 October 



**[p. 115]**

ENGELS TO VICTOR ADLER

IN VIENNA

London, 11 October 1893

Dear Victor,

We arrived back here on 29 September 189 with mounting recklessness, attacked the pile of work we found waiting for us.

Though I was unable to discover Comrade Höger’s ‘whole series of boulevards’ in Berlin, there can be no doubt that, so far as appearances go, it is a very fine city; even in working-class districts all one sees are palatial façades. But what lies behind those façades is better passed over in silence. The poverty of working-class districts is, of course, universal, but what I found particularly overwhelming was the ‘Berlin living-room’,a a place unimaginable anywhere else in the world, a refuge of darkness and stale air as also of your Berlin philistine who feels perfectly at home there. Golly! There was nothing of the kind in August’s apartment, which was the only one I liked, but in any of the others I’d go off my head.

However in writing this letter it was not my object to send you the above cri de cœur, but rather to congratulate you and the Viennese.

First, your Schwender speech 269 which shows once again how sure is your grasp of the difficult and complex conditions in Austria, and how firm a hold you keep on the clue in the labyrinth. And at this particular juncture that is of the utmost importance.

In the second place I must especially congratulate you and the Austrians generally on the resounding victory won as a result of your agitation for suffrage, namely Taaffe’s Electoral Reform Bill. 270 And here I must enlarge somewhat.

Having taken a look at your country, people and government I have come to realise ever more clearly that really outstanding victories are within our grasp there. An industry that is growing rapidly but which, because of years of high protective tariffs, still largely continues to operate

[^1]: a See this volume, p. 187





**[p. 200]**

Above all this there hovers a government whose absolutist proclivities are subject to few formal, and these for the most part only fictive, restraints; nor, in practice, does it encounter many obstacles. For it is by its nature conservative and so, too, is your aristocrat, your bourgeois and your philistine bon vivant. The peasant, however, in his rural isolation, cannot achieve any organised opposition. What is wanted of the government is that it should live and let live, and this is something at which the Austrian government has always been adept. Hence the fabrication—explicable also on other grounds—of laws and regulations that exist only on paper, hence, too, the extremes to which that process is taken, its elevation into a principle and the astonishing administrative slippiness which, I must say, exceeded anything I could have imagined.

Well then, in a stagnant political situation such as this, one in which the government, despite its extraordinarily advantageous position vis-à-vis the individual classes, is nevertheless perpetually getting into hot water: 1. because those classes are split up into umpteen nationalities and hence, contrary to all the rules of strategy, march united (against the workers) but fight divided (i.e., against one another), 2. because of

[^1]: a high financiers





**[p. 201]**

Here, therefore, we have a situation more propitious to rapid success than in any other country, even in Germany where, though development has been more rapid and the party is stronger, yet resistance is far more determined. Add to that the fact that Austria, a great power in decline, still feels ill at ease in Europe, a feeling that has always been foreign to Prussia, a small power in the ascendant. And, having joined the ranks of the ‘modern’ states in 1866, Austria also feels ashamed of internal weaknesses—which it need not have done when still an avowedly reactionary state. Indeed, the less a country wants to be a genuinely modern state, the greater will be its desire to be regarded as such, and the more strongly reaction rears its head in Prussia— where it is under far greater restraint than in Austria—the more liberal will be the attitude adopted by Austria out of malicious glee.

Now, the situation in Europe—I mean the internal situation of the in- dividual states—is approximating ever more closely to that of 1845. The proletariat is increasingly coming to hold the same position as the bour- geoisie did then. At that time it was Switzerland and Italy who set things off; Switzerland with her internal strife between democratic and Catholic cantons which came to a head in the Sonderbund War; 273 Italy with Pio Nono’s 274 liberal endeavours and the liberal-nationalist changes in Tuscany, the small duchies, Piedmont, Naples and Sicily. The Sonderbund War and the bombardment of Palermo 275 were, as everyone knows, the immediate precursors of the February revolution of 1848 in Paris.

Today, when the crisis might come to a head only five or six years hence, Belgium would seem to be taking over the role of Switzerland,



**[p. 202]**

Such, more or less, is the tenor of what I expounded to Louise yesterday afternoon as my view of Austria’s immediate mission. And at 8 p.m. the Evening Standard brought the news—still in rather indefinite terms—of Taaffe’s capitulation,a while today we are given the Bill, at any rate in very general outline. Well, now the ball really has got rolling, and you people will see to it that it doesn’t stop. I don’t want to say anything about the Bill until I am rather better informed, but of one thing I feel sure, namely that Taaffe would like, à la Bismarck, to split the now undivided urban Liberal vote and play off the workers against the bourgeoisie. Not that we have any objection; the Liberal and other bourgeois parties will try and restrict enfranchisement still further, and you might thus find yourselves in the pleasant position of supporting the worthy Taaffe against his parliament. At all events, it’s a bonus that is not to be sneezed at and, before I come back, you will doubtless be duly installed as a deputy in the Diet. The Daily Chronicle’is already talking of 20 safe seats for Labour. With 20, or even less than 20, the Diet will be a very different kind of body from what it has been hitherto, and the gentlemen will be amazed at the life that this will inject into the ramshackle old place. And if a few Czechs should happen to get in alongside our German chaps, it will put something of a damper on the squabbling over nationalities, and enable Young Czechs and Old Czechs 277 and German Nationals to see each other in an altogether new light. And here one might say that the entry of the first social-Democrats into the Diet, will mark the beginning of a new era in Austria.

And it is you people who have brought this about and, because of the dawning of this new era, we all of us rejoice that we shall have in the Diet a man with so incisive an intellect as yourself.

Warm regards from Louise and

Your

[^1]: a 10 October 1893



