---
Volume: 50
Document_Title: "118. Engels to Laura Lafargue 14 October "
Page_Range: "238-239"
---

# 118. Engels to Laura Lafargue 14 October 



**[p. 118]**

ENGELS TO LAURA LAFARGUE

AT LE PERREUX

London, 14 October 1893

My dear Löhr, I have received 3 copies of the French Origine de la famille etc. To my surprise the words ‘entièrement revue par M-me Laura Lafargue’’a which were on the proof of the title, do not appear there now. Is this, as I suppose, a little treachery of Rave? If so I shall protest.

Voilà Fortin of Beauvais who informs me that he intends translating.

1. The Kritik der Hegclsehen Rechtsphilosophie in the Deutsch- Französische Jahrbücher (by Mohr, 1844) and

2. the 3 Chapters Gewaltstheorièb of my Anti-Dühring. I have absolutely no time to revise his work—and No. 1 is immensely difficult. And rather than revise Fortin’s work (which you know from experience) maybe you’d rather do the whole thing yourself. The first— Mohrs epigrammatic style—I consider him uncommonly unfit to render. Nobody but you could do that.

He intends publishing them in the Ere Nouvelle. What do you think I had better say to him? Glorious victory in Austria. Taaffe proposes an electoral law 270 which is tantamount to universal suffrage at least in towns and industrial districts—so says Adler. Taaffe’s policy is to break the power of the German Liberal Party (representing the German and Jewish bourgeoisie) and probably, too, to let as many Socialists replace Liberal Bourgeois as may be necessary to drive the other parties to a closer union and thus to give to him a working majority. The Lower House in Austria is composed of 85 representatives of the large landed proprietors, 21 of the Chamber of Commerce (these 106 are not affected by the new bill), 97 of the towns and 150 of the country districts (both of these will be elected according to the new bill).

For the present the country districts will send about the same Catholic

[^1]: a ‘completely revised by Mme Laura Lafargue’ - b Theory of Force.



