---
Volume: 50
Document_Title: "119. Engels to Nikolai Danielson 17 October "
Page_Range: "239-242"
---

# 119. Engels to Nikolai Danielson 17 October 



**[p. 212]**

Kind regards from Louise.

Ever yours RE.

First published, in the Reproduced from the original language of the original (English), in: F. Engels, P. et L. Lafargue, Correspondance, t. II I, 1891-1895, Paris, 1959

119

ENGELS TO NIKOLAI DANIELSON 281

IN ST. PETERSBURG

London, 17 October 1893 My dear Sir,

When I received your letter of July 26th announcing your return home, I was on the point myself of going abroad for two months and am only just returned. 189 This is the reason of my long silence.

Many thanks for the copies of the Outlinef three of which I have for-

[^1]: a Outlines of Our Post-Reform Economy (1893). [Written in Russian in original.]





**[p. 213]**

‘we in Russia are arguing over the ‘fate of capitalism here’.b

In the Berlin Sozialpolitische Centralblatt 1 a Mr. P. v. Struve has a long article on your book.c I must agree with him in this one point, that for me, too, the present capitalistic phase of development in Russia appears an unavoidable consequence of the historical conditions as created by the Crimean War, the way in which the change of 1861 in agrarian conditions was accomplished, and the political stagnation in Europe generally. Where he is decidedly wrong, is in comparing the present state of Russia with that of the United States, in order to refute what he calls your pessimistic views of the future. He says, the evil consequences of modern capitalism in Russia will be as easily overcome as they are in the United States. There he quite forgets that the United States are modern, bourgeois, from the very origin; that they were founded by petits bourgeois and peasants who ran away from European feudalism in order to establish a purely bourgeois society. Whereas in Russia, we have a groundwork of a primitive communistic character, a pre-civilisation Gentilgesellsehaft,d crumbling to ruins, it is true, but still serving as the groundwork, the material upon which the capitalistic revolution (for it is a real social revolution) acts and operates. In America, Geldwirthschaff has been fully established for more than a century, in Russia, Naturalwirtschaft was all but exclusively the rule. Therefore it stands to reason that the change, in Russia, must be far more violent, far more incisive, and accompanied by immensely greater sufferings than it can be in America.

But for all that it still seems to me that you take a gloomier view of the case than the facts justify. No doubt, the passage from primitive agrarian communism to capitalistic industrialism cannot take place without terrible dislocation of society, without the disappearance of whole classes and their transformation into other classes; and what enormous suffering, and waste of human lives and productive forces that necessarily implies,

[^1]: a Josif Goldenberg - b [phrase in Russian], II I. Jobrgang, No. 1, Oct. 2, 1893. [Note by Engels, in the original, Oct. 1, which is a misprint.] - c P. Struve, ‘Zur Beurtheilung der Kapitalistischen Entwickelung Russlands’, Sozialpolitisches Centralblatt, No. 1, 2 October, 1893. - d gentile society - c money economy - f natural economy





**[p. 214]**

You yourself admit that

‘the social conditions in Russia after the Crimean War were not favorable to the development of the form of production inherited by us from our past history’.

I would go further, and say, that no more in Russia than anywhere else would it have been possible to develop a higher social form out of primitive agrarian communism unless that higher form was already in existence in another country, so as to serve as a model. That higher form being, wherever it is historically possible, the necessary consequence of the capitalistic form of production and of the social dualistic antagonism created by it, it could not be developed directly out of the agrarian commune, unless in imitation of an example already in existence somewhere else. Had the West of Europe been ripe, 1860-70, for such a transformation, had that transformation then been taken in hand in England, France etc., then the Russians would have been called upon to show what could have been made out of their Commune, which was then more or less intact. But the West remained stagnant, no such transformation was attempted, and capitalism was more and more rapidly developed. And as Russia had no choice but this: either to develop the Commune into a form of Production, from which it was separated by a number of historical stages, and for which not even in the West the conditions were then ripe—evidently an impossible task—or else to develop into Capitalism, what remained to her but the latter chance?

As to the Commune, it is only possible so long as the differences of wealth among its members are but trifling. As soon as these differences become great, as soon as some of its members become the debt-slaves of the richer members, it can no longer live. The big peasants and village exploiters’ 3

[^1]: a [In Russian] — b [In Russian]



