---
Volume: 50
Document_Title: "120. Engels to Laura Lafargue 18 Ocober "
Page_Range: "242-244"
---

# 120. Engels to Laura Lafargue 18 Ocober 



**[p. 215]**

Yours ever

When Vol. II Ib in the press, will take care to send you advance sheets.

First published, in Russian, Reproduced from the original in Minuvshiye gody, No. 2, St. Petersburg, 1908

120

ENGELS TO LAURA LAFARGUE

AT LE PERREUX

London, 18 October 1893 My dear Löhr,

Liebknecht informs me that the honorarium for Paul’s letters having to be voted by the Parteivorstand,c he is as yet not in a position to reply. This is excusable. When we left Berlin, the Parteivorstandc was overwhelmed with very important business; then Liebknecht and Bebel had to leave for agitating tournées in Saxony where to-morrow the elections for the Saxon Landtag take place. Immediately upon that follows the Cologne Parteitag, 279 again taking the members of the Vorstand away from their regular activity.

[^1]: a May destiny take its course! - b of Capital -c Party Executive Committee





**[p. 216]**

To Fortin I write25 saying that he has to keep his hands off Dühring, and that the article of Mohr’s is almost impossible to be translated, and moreover that I cannot undertake to revise his work.d I told him you were ‘in possession’ of Dühring and that you had revised Rave! I further told him you did not know the article of Mohr, perhaps he might let you have his copy to look it over; but nothing more; no hopes that you would or might do the work of revision for him.

I am very sorry you deleted your name from that title-page.f It would be a capital handle to work in connection with getting publishers, and paying ones, for your other translations. You have no business to be ashamed of your own good work, or to allow Rave to adorn himself with other bird’s feathers. There is no reason whatever for you to ‘keep in the background’. And this kind of work nowadays ought to bring in money to you—surely Rave is paid, and paid handsomely for his bad work which has to be licked into decent shape by you— and I do not see why you should not reap where you have sown.

Love from Louise Ever

yours

F. Engels

[^1]: First published, in the language Reproduced from the original of the original (English), in: F. Engels, P. et L. Lafargue, Correspondance, t. III, 1891-1895, Paris, 1959

[^2]: a Party Congress — b we may not go to Cologne, not having received the address of the German Party - c The Central Reception Office is at: Hotel Durst (thirst—the name is an omen!)—formerly Gasthof zur Post, Marzellenstrasse 5, near the central railway station and the Cathedral. - d See this volume, p. 221 -e F. Engels, Anti-Dühring-f See this volume, p. 211



