---
Volume: 50
Document_Title: "122. Engels to Laura Lafargue 27 October "
Page_Range: "248-249"
---

# 122. Engels to Laura Lafargue 27 October 



**[p. 122]**

ENGELS TO LAURA LAFARGUE

AT LE PERREUX

London, 27 October 1893

My dear Löhr, Though Fortin is a business-man, yet with the help of a Roumanian (with business habits partly of a Polish Jew, partly of a spendthrift boyar) he succeeds in creating a very fair muddle.

I wrote to Fortin 25 that you did not know the Kritik der Rechtsphilosophiea

but if he thought proper, he might send you his copy of the Deutsch- Französische Jahrbücher so that you might read it and form an idea as to the advisability—both an to contents and to form—of its being submitted to the French working people. Diamandy, in his eagerness to get stuff for his review,b rushes at you and transforms, moreover, the one article into plusieursc (business principles of the Polish Jew, to ask much so as to be able to rebate) as for instance:

— Was kostet die Elle von dem Stoff? — Fünfzehn Groschen. — Fünfzehn sagt er, zwölfeinenhalben meint er, zehn wird er nehmen, sieben und einen halben ist die Sache werth, fünf macht ich ihm geben, werd’ ich ihm bieten zwei und einen halben Groschen!d

Voilà ce que c’est.e Let Fortin first send you his copy and then you will see what you will see.

As to the Gewalttheorief not a line in Fortin’s letter led me to conclude that the thing had been already done and I don’t believe it either. To make you believe that you are en face d’un fait accompli, is another of these Oriental tricks which they consider perfectly justifiable in the service of the

‘Fifteen pence.’ ‘He says fifteen, he means twelve-and-a-half, he would take ten, the thing’s worth

[^1]: a See this volume, p. 211 — b L’Ere nouvelle— c several - d ‘How much is a yard of that stuff?’

[^2]: seven-and-a-half, I’d be prepared to give him five, so I’ll offer him tuppence ha’ penny!’ - e This is the thing. - f ‘Theory of Force’ (see F. Engels, Anti-Dühring, present edition, Vol. 25, pp. 146-71).



