---
Volume: 50
Document_Title: "123. Engels to Ferdinand Wolff [ end] October "
Page_Range: "249-250"
---

# 123. Engels to Ferdinand Wolff [ end] October 



**[p. 222]**

Diamandy served me exactly the same with regard to the translation of the Ursprung for the Ère Nouvelle.

I had a few lines from Bebel to-day about Paul’s affair.b The delay was caused by 1. the Saxon elections; 2. the Cologne Congress 279 which prevented full meetings of the Executives, and overwhelmed them with business. As soon as both Bebel and Liebknecht shall have returned to Berlins, the matter will be settled. But Bebel says at the same time, there is a great distrust of Paris correspondents of French nationality, as hitherto everyone of them has ceased to write reports at the very moment when French affairs became highly interesting—they then looked after their own business and left the Vorwärts to shift for themselves. I shall do my best to persuade them that now Paul has no longer a free pass an the railways, this will cease as far as he is concerned, but I do hope that our Paris friends will at last learn to treat business as business and engagements as things to be fulfilled—at least as a rule.

Kind regards from Louise.

Ever yours,

F. Engels

123

ENGELS TO FERDINAND WOLFF 287

IN OXFORD [Draft]

[London,] end of October 1893

You write to say that ‘I have disclosed’. I do not know what hoary piece of gossip you are referring to and indeed this is a matter of the

[^1]: First published, it the language Reproduced from the original of the original (English): in: F. Engels, P. et L. Lafargue, Correspondance, t. II I, 1891-1895, Paris, 1959

[^2]: a Origin, see this volume, pp. 211 - b See this volume, pp. 208-9, 215



