---
Volume: 50
Document_Title: "125. Engels to Victor Adler 10 November "
Page_Range: "254-256"
---

# 125. Engels to Victor Adler 10 November 



**[p. 227]**

At any rate, all kinds of changes are taking place in our party press, I am curious to know what will become of the Neue Zeit; 85 its reversion to a monthly was at all events a bold move. I don’t believe that in the long run the weekly will prove a serious competitor.

So the best of luck when you visit Vienna. When you get there you might pay my respects to the Lowenbräu next to the Burgtheater; it used to be our midday headquarters.

With regards from household to household.

Your, F.E.

125

ENGELS TO VICTOR ADLER

IN VIENNA

London, 10 November 1893

Dear Victor,

I am sending you herewith part of a letter from August. I do not share his misgivings, for it seems to me that such possibilities are too remote

[^1]: First published in the book: Printed according to the original Aus der Frühzeit des Marxismus.

[^2]: Engels Briefwechsel mit Kautsky, Published in English for the first time Prague, 1935





**[p. 228]**

My letter of 11 Octobera crossed with yours of the same date. You will have seen that we are fully in agreement as regards our general view of the situation in Austria, a situation that seems to me rather more favourable now than it was then. Electoral reform, taking Taaffe’s Bill as the minimum, will no longer be relegated to the background in Vienna. The Emperorb has approved it and the Emperor cannot back down. He, however, is far more representative of Austria than the Diet. It would seem that the new-born coalition goverment is already expiring, but even if this is not the case, it will come to grief at the first sign of positive action. Even if, as August supposes, it were to marshall the forces of Baernreitherism, 294 that would be no more than a very temporary expedient and would not prevent a collapse, should the question of action arise in some other quarter. This much is certain; Austria is now in the van of the European political movement, while we others limp along behind—even those countries that already have universal suffrage will not be able to elude the impulse provided by Austria. At Ronacher they wanteds set-to. 295 If you succeed it keeping the chaps on a tight rein, you can’t go wrong. The one thing that might bring Windischgrätz, Plener and Jaworski together would be a set-to in Vienna and a victory combined with a fusillade.

Over here we’re doing very nicely, In matters of serious reform the Liberal government is proving an abject failure. Even the Fabian society 43 has foresworn its allegiance and disavowed its whole policy of permeation. See the article by Autolycus (Burgess) on page one of the Workman’s Timesc on the Fabian manifesto which appeared in the Fortnightly Review.d If the Liberals can’t do any better, there’ll be a mass of Labour candidates come the next elections, and between thirty and forty will probably get in. In the municipal elections on 1 November the working men of the North began to take stock of themselves and scored a good many successes.

Regards from Louise and yours,

F. E.

[^1]: a 10 Oct. in the original, which is a misprint, see this volume, p. 199 - b Francis Joseph I -c [J. Burgess] Autolycus, ‘In a White Sheet’, Workman’s Times, 11 November 1893. - d ‘To Your Tents, oh Israel!’, The Fortnightly Review, No. 323, New Series, 1 November 1893.



