---
Volume: 50
Document_Title: "130. Engels to Friedrich Adolph Sorge 2 December "
Page_Range: "262-264"
---

# 130. Engels to Friedrich Adolph Sorge 2 December 



**[p. 130]**

ENGELS TO FRIEDRICH ADOLPH SORGE 184

IN HOBOKEN

London, 2 December 1893 122 Regent’s Park Road, N. W.

Dear Sorge, Many thanks to you and your wife for your good wishes and for your letter of 19 November.

I am very sorry to hear that you are suffering from gout and hope that it will recede as time goes on; it’s an insidious complaint.

The repeal of the silver purchase law 187 has saved America from a serious financial crisis and will help to promote an industrial recovery. But I am not sure whether it might not have been better had there really been a crash. The phrase ‘cheap money’ seems to be deeply engraved in the minds of your Western farmers. In the first place, when they suppose that, if there be ample means of circulation in a country, the rate of interest must fall, they are confusing means of circulation with disposable money capital, a matter upon which considerable light will be shed in Volume II I.a And, secondly, all debtors find it convenient to incur debts in good currency and subsequently pay them off in depreciated currency. Hence every indebted Prussian Junker clamours for bimetallism 299 that would rid him of his debts in disguised, Solonic fashion. 300 Had it been possible to postpone silver reform in the United States until there had been time for the consequences of this foolishness to redound on the farmers also, it would have dinned some sense into many a thick skull.

Tariff reform, 301 however slowly it may be put into operation, would already seem to have given rise to a kind of panic among the manufacturers of New England. I have learnt—both from private sources and the newspapers—that large numbers of workers are being laid off. But all this will die down the moment the Bill goes through and puts an end to the uncertainty. I am convinced that, in all the larger branches of industry, America can boldly go into competition with England.

As regards the German Socialists in America, things are pretty dire.

[^1]: a K. Marx, Capital, Vol. II I, Chapters XXIX-XXXIV.





**[p. 236]**

In the first place the constitution, based as in England on party gov- ernment, whereby any vote not given to a candidate put up by one of the two government parties is regarded as lost. And neither an American nor an Englishman, since he wishes to influence the body politic, will throw away his vote.

Then, and more especially, immigration, which splits the workers into two groups, native-born and foreign, and the latter again into 1. Irish, 2. Germans, 3. a number of smaller groups, each speaking only its own lan- guage—Czechs, Poles, Italians, Scandinavians, etc. And, in addition, the negroes. To form a party of one’s own out of all these calls for exceptionally strong incentives. Every now and again a powerful élan may suddenly make itself felt, but all the bourgeoisie has to do is to stick it out passively, whereupon the dissimilar working-class elements will disintegrate again.

3. Finally, the protective tariff system and the steady growth of the domestic market must have exposed the workers to a prosperity unlike anything that has been experienced for many years in Europe, (with the exception of Russia where, however, it is not the workers who reap the benefit but the middle classes).

A country like America, when really ripe for a socialist labour party, is certainly not going to be deterred by a handful of German socialist doctrinaires.

This is between ourselves. Progress will, I hope, now be rapid.

[^1]: Part I of Vol. II I (246 ms. pages out of approx. 1855) is ready for press.a

[^2]: a K. Marx, Capital, Vol. II I, Book II I, Chapters I-VII .



