---
Volume: 50
Document_Title: "131. Engels to Hermann Schlüter 2 December "
Page_Range: "264-265"
---

# 131. Engels to Hermann Schlüter 2 December 



**[p. 237]**

Yours,

F. Engels

L. Kautsky, who will reply shortly, thanks you for your kindness, and has already written re the Arbeiter-Zeitung (Vienna); the Pionierkalender has not arrived.

First published, abridged in Briefe und Auszüge aus Briefen von Job. Phil. Becker, Jos. Dietzgen, Friedrich Engels, Karl Marx u. A. an F. A. Sorge und Andere, Stuttgart 1906 and in full, in Russian, in: Marx and Engels,

Works, First Russian Edition, Vol. XXIX, Moscow, 1946

Printed according to the original

Published in English in full for the first time

131

ENGELS TO HERMANN SCHLII TER 302

IN HOBOKEN No. 1

[London], 2 December 1893 Dear Schlüter, Many thanks for your good wishes and for Census Compendium I which was most welcome and of which No. II will be more welcome still.a So the Americans are no longer as liberal as they used to be, and even a big journal does not get such things merely for the asking! All is well over here; I am once more at work on Vol. II Ib and it is with pleasure that I look back on the trip I made this summer. 189 You people are now at last about to rid yourselves of bimetallism 299 and the Mc Kinley tariff and this should give a considerable boost to progress over there. Although a thorough-going collapse of silver 187 might have gone a long way towards

[^1]: a Department of the Interior, Census Office. Compendium of the Eleventh Census: 1890, Parts I-II , Washington, 1892-1894. - b of Capital



