---
Volume: 50
Document_Title: "135. Engels to Laura Lafargue 19 December "
Page_Range: "269-272"
---

# 135. Engels to Laura Lafargue 19 December 



**[p. 134]**

ENGELS TO PAUL ARNDT

IN LOUDON

[Draft]

[London,] 5 December 1893 Dear Mr Arndt,

I, too, can understand that you should have preferred not to call on me on a Sunday since, in view of various things that have happened in the meantime, I cannot possibly consort with you on the same easy footing as hitherto.

However, if you wish to speak to me, I shall be at home the day after tomorrow, Thursday, from 8 pm. onwards.

Yours faithfully,

F.E.

First published, in Russian, Printed from the original in: Marx and Engels, Works, Second Russian Edition, Published in English for the first time Vol. 39, Moscow, 1966

135

ENGELS TO LAURA LAFARGUE

AT LE PERREUX

London, 19 December 1893 122 Regent’s Park Road, N. W.

My dear Löhr, If I have not before replied to your letter of just a month ago, there were 2 causes for it:

1) because I was bound to finish, before Christmas, the final redactiona

[^1]: a editing





**[p. 243]**

2) because I had submitted to Bebel another plan 25 for the German translation, etc. of Paul’s articles, 13 and was waiting for a reply. Nothing however has come of it and so, vogue la galèrec on the present tack, which, as far as I can hear, has taken something like a final shape, and so it may be as well to leave things alone. Liebknecht is rather a queer customer to deal with in these matters of his redaction. We expect him here after the new year.

Now then, ein anderes Bild.d Yesterday we forwarded to you a box with the pudding, Paul’s cake etc., grande vitessee to be there about Wednesday or Thursday—Continental Daily Parcels Express, carriage paid, which, we hope, will arrive safely and suit your tastes. Bonnier ought to have a slice of the pudding for he came in for the stirring and he did stir it with might and main. He is improving vastly, shaking off his Germanisms and becoming actually French. Some time ago I went over to Oxford for a day, to look at the place and also at poor old Rotef Wolffg—your earliest admirer, for he admired you before you were 2 years old in Brussels. Poor devil, he is quite cracked again. He had written something about Bucher in the Neue Zeit,h and since then whenever a Wolf or Wolff (and you know they are as plentiful as the Smiths and Jones’s) is alluded to, he imagines that this is meant for him, and so he makes it out that there is a complete conspiracy to pretend that he does not know Latin—and you know, not to know Latin is the awfullest crime a man can be guilty of in Oxford. But is it not a melancholy irony of fate, that one of the most spirituel 1 of men should end his career in the belief that he is the Massmann, not of a Heine, but of an imaginary conspiracy of second and third rate German literati! Then he is 81 years old—so, apart from other considerations, hardly any hope of recovery from this fixed idea which nobody can root out of his mind.

Your description of Guesde’s elated status amused me very much. 307 I had seen something of it from the pompous proclamations he had issued from his new Jerusalem of the North, and was only glad they were not

[^1]: a of Capital- b See this volume, pp. 231-32 -c let’s chance it- d a different story -e express -f Red - g See this volume, pp. 222-23 - h F. Wolff, ‘Bucher, Bismarck und v. Poschinger’, Die Neue Zeit, Nos. 42 and 43, Vol. II - i witty





**[p. 244]**

308 until this victorious career is all of a sudden, by Vaillant’s bomb, 309 changed into a concentration to the rear, and the new members of the majority deprived of all the idealistic delusions they had brought with them from the provinces and turned into docile panamitard opportunists. 60

Upon the whole I think it is rather useful to us. I cannot help imagining that amongst these 54 who have been many of them suddenly converted to what they call socialism, there cannot be that cohesion which is wanted for a serious fight. Let alone the old dissensions between the real old socialists ‘de la veille’ d within the group, dissensions which it will take some time to overcome once for all. If this heterogeneous lot of 54 had been kept in the front rank of the chambre for any length of time, it must, either have split up, or else the old Radical wing—Millerand and Co.—must have become the determining element. As it is, time will be given to the various components of the group to make closer acquaintance with each other, to consolidate the group, and to eliminate, if necessary, one after another those elements which really have joined the group only by mistake. At all events, in the Dupuy— Casimir Périer campaign Millerand and Jaurès took the lead entirely, and that will never do in the long run, though I fully approve of Guesde and Vaillant having, so far, and under the present circumstances, kept in the background.

Paul’s letters to the Vorwärts so far are very good, we look for them every week. And they are not quite so badly germanised as I have seen others done.

That Feuerbach must have given you a deal of trouble. 310 But from what I have seen of your work, I feel certain you have ‘taken’ all obstacles ‘fly-

[^1]: a sometimes French good sense has no common sense - b C. Zetkin , ‘Die Wahlen in Frankreich’, Die Neue Zeit, No. 52, 1892-93, Vol. II - c elected - d of yesterday



