---
Volume: 50
Document_Title: "139. Engels to Friedrich Adolph Sorge 30 December "
Page_Range: "275-279"
---

# 139. Engels to Friedrich Adolph Sorge 30 December 



**[p. 138]**

ENGELS TO WILHELM LIEBKNECHT

IN BERLIN

London, 21 December 1893

Dear Liebknecht,

Yesterday evening I sent you an article on Italy. I would ask you NOT to print it until further notice. I fear I have misinterpreted the permission given me to publish it, which, apparently, does NOT extend to the stuff about the privy purse. Since the matters in question could land my sourcea in a most serious predicament and might deprive me of the source itself, I am also sending you a telegram. If you receive no further word from me, you can bring the ms. back with you in January and we shall then re-edit it.

Once again my kindest regards to you all.

Yours,

F.E.

139

ENGELS TO FRIEDRICH ADOLPH SORGE

IN HOBOKEN

London, 30 December 1893 122 Regent’s Park Road, N. W.

Dear Sorge, Your postcards of 29 November and 17 December received with

[^1]: First published, in Russian, Printed according to the original in: Marx and Engels, Works, First Russian Edition, Published in English for the first time Vol. XXIX, Moscow, 1946

[^2]: a Antonio Labriola





**[p. 249]**

You will have noticed, not without some surprise, that a Socialist group of between fifty-four and sixty men (they themselves don’t seem to know exactly how many) has established itself in the French Chamber. Immediately after the elections 208 they numbered, at a generous count, twenty-four, twelve of whom had been elected on the strength of the Marxist platform. However, of these only six presented themselves at the Paris Party Congress and hitherto only four have agreed, in accordance with the congress resolution, to pay a part of their parliamentary salary into the party treasury. 283 (Which is not yet the same thing as actually paying it in—in France it was being said as early as 1870 that les cotisations ne rentrent pas!a) Well, thanks to the adhesion of the radicaux socialistesb of the Millerand-Jaurès group, there are now all of a sudden nearly sixty who have resolved to include the socialisation of the means of production as one of the aims—more immediate for some, for others, however, very remote—of their programme. Concentration is now the battle-cry in France. If in the past this meant a concentration républicaine (i.e. the subordination of all Republicans to the right wing, the Opportunists 87), it now means a concentration socialiste and I only hope this does not mean the subordination of all Socialists to the Millerandists whose practical programme is assuredly more radical than socialist.

The first result of this alliance is that our people have as good as lost the chance of acquiring a daily of their own. Millerand’s Petite République Française already occupies that position, so it will be difficult to produce an organ to compete with it—finance is more difficult to obtain and the others would complain that it would mean splitting the party! The more so as the Petite République Française is crafty enough to open its columns to any socialist group.

Nevertheless messieurs les Français, intoxicated once again by victory, are crowing away for the benefit of all and sundry and would like to resume their place at the forefront of the movement. They have tabled a motion demanding that the standing army be changed into an army of

[^1]: The second is that in the group’s meetings the Millerandists command an absolute majority (ca. 30 against 24 at the most—Marxists (12), Allemanists

[^2]: 21 (3-5), Broussists 30 (2) and Blanquists 20 (4-6)).

[^3]: a contributions are not paid - b Radical Socialists





**[p. 250]**

Well, we shall have to wait and see. With these unpredictable Frenchmen it is always possible that lasting progress will result from this sudden and momentary success. But it would really be better for us to wait and see.

Next, I have to tell you—but this is strictly between ourselves—that yesterday the first third of the ms. of Volume II P was packed in strong oil- cloth (as was in its day that notorious forgery, the Cologne minute-book 315) and will shortly be sent to the printers. The last two-thirds are still in need of the final—mostly technical—editing. If all goes well the book will come out in September.

Now for something else. Prof. Labriolac of Rome, with whom I have corresponded for several years and whom I met in Zurich, 189 is giving a course of lectures at the university there on the genesis of Marxist theory. He is a strict Marxist. To this end he has procured all the necessary literature but has never managed to set eyes on the Holy Family, although he has advertised in the Leipzig Buchändlerblatd and elsewhere to the effect that he will pay ‘any price’ for it. There was some prospect of his getting a copy on loan from Switzerland, but its ownere has suddenly vanished and is said to be travelling in Hungary. He is now urging me to do whatever I can to procure him a copy for three or four weeks. But I myself have only one and if that is lost it will be absolutely impossible for me to arrange for the inclusion of the new, later edition in the projected Collected Works. 316

[^1]: a See next letter. b of Capital- c Antonio Labriola - d Börsenblatt für den Deutschen Buchhandel und die mit ihm verwandten Geschäftszweige —c Paul Ernst





**[p. 251]**

My Feuerbach is being translated into French by Laura Lafargue and will shortly be coming out in Paris. 310

Warm regards to your wife and you from Louise Kautsky and yours,

F.E.

I hope your health has improved. Louise Kautsky asks me to say that the papera you send to Vienna arrives regularly. Thank you for the greetings card.

Published in English for the first time

[^1]: First published, abridged, in Briefe und Auszüge aus Briefen von Job. Phil. Becker, Jos. Dietz Friedrich Engels, Karl Marx u. A. an F. A. Sorge und Andere, Stuttgart, 1906 and in full, in Russian, in: Marx and Engels, Works, First Russian Edition, Vol. XXIX, Moscow, 1946

[^2]: Printed according to the original

[^3]: a Woman’s Journal



