---
Volume: 50
Document_Title: "141. Engels to Pyotr Lavrov 4 January "
Page_Range: "281-282"
---

# 141. Engels to Pyotr Lavrov 4 January 



**[p. 254]**

I am sending a copy of my articles to Vaillant, too. Now then, if you could reach agreement with the Germans and the Italians for tabling a motion aimed at calling for a congress on disarmament and the transition—by simultaneous stages laid down in advance— to a militia system, that would be a splendid thing and have a big effect. But for mercy’s sake don’t spoil it by openly taking the initiative without preliminary consultation with the others. The conditions of internal policy as well as those governing each parliament are so different from each other that a certain manner of proceeding may be excellent for one country and utterly impossible or even disastrous in another.

The anarchist bomb 309 will become a thing of the past as have the glorious 2,500 francs of the Germans. 278 This will have an effect vis-à-vis the police; look at the Madrid verdict in the Munoz case where the police was found guilty, too; 318 and in France it risks being openly implicated in the affair of bombs; if it slips off this time, it might be glad. This pitcher has been going to the well long enough, and it is about to be broken at last.

I hope that Laura has received her manuscript. 310 Kiss Laura on my behalf. Greetings from Louise.

Ever yours,

F. Engels

141

ENGELS TO PYOTR LAVROV

IN PARIS

London, 4 January 1894 122 Regent’s Park Road, N. W.

My dear Lavrov, Thank you for your card—please accept my best wishes for the New

[^1]: First published in: Printed according to the original F. Engels, P. et L. Lafargue,

[^2]: Correspondance, t. II I, Paris, 1959 Translated from the French



