---
Volume: 50
Document_Title: "142. Engels to Giuseppe Canepa 9 January "
Page_Range: "282-284"
---

# 142. Engels to Giuseppe Canepa 9 January 



**[p. 255]**

It would seem that, despite the harmony between Carnot and the tsar,a it will be the French, and not the outlawed Russians who will suffer perse- cutions and tribulations, the inevitable effect of anarcho-police bombs. 319 So much the better. After all, there are signs that even the Parisian philis-tine would seem to be feeling just a little shame for his hysterical actions of last October.

Could you let me have the address of Mr. Rapoport, who has just returned to Switzerland?

Best regards from

F. Engels

There is finally some hope that you will receive the 3rd volume of Capital before the end of the year. The Russian translation will be done as for the 2nd volume. I will send the proofs to Danielson.

First published in Russian Printed according to the original in: Marx and Engels, Works, First Russian Edition, Translated from the French Vol. XXIX, Moscow, 1946

Published in English for the first time

142

ENGELS TO GIUSEPPE CANEPA

IN DIANO MARINA

[Draft]

[London, 9 January 1894] Dear citizen,

Please excuse me for writing to you in French. Over the last twenty years I have lost whatever little ability I had in the use of Italian.

[^1]: I have tried to find a short epigraph of the kind you wish 320 from the

[^2]: a Alexander II I





**[p. 256]**

It is almost impossible to sum up the spirit of the new age of the future in just a few words without lapsing into either utopianism or empty words.

Please accept my apologies if the quotation I offer is not wholly satis- factory. However, as you must be ready for the 21 (a date that augurs well, the execution of citizen Louis Capet), there is no time to lose.

E con distinti saluti

Suoc

First published, abridged, in Italian in a weekly L’Era nuova No. 1, 4 March 1894 and in full in Russian in: Marx and Engels, Works, First Russian Edition, Vol. XXIX, Moscow, 1946

Printed according to the draft manuscript collated with the text in the weekly reprinted in the book: K. Marx, F. Engels, Scriti italiani, Milano-Roma, 1955

Translated from the French

Published in English for the first time

[^1]: a Dante - b “In place of the old bourgeois society, with its classes and class antagonisms, we shall have an association, in which the free development of each is the condition for the free development of all” (K. Marx and F. Engels, Manifesto of the Communist Party, this edition, Vol. 6, p. 506). - c Respectfully yours



