---
Volume: 50
Document_Title: "143. Engels to Karl Kautsky 9 January "
Page_Range: "284-285"
---

# 143. Engels to Karl Kautsky 9 January 



**[p. 143]**

ENGELS TO KARL KAUTSKY

IN STUTTGART

London, 9 January 1894 122 Regent’s Park Road, N. W. Dear Baron, Ede has doubtless already told you of the despatch of part of the ms. of Volume II I (approx. 1/3 of a cubic foot). Now that it has safely arrived in Hamburg, I am able to give you a short review of it for the Neue Zeit and this I enclose.a Please send a copy with the article side-lined to Otto Meissner’s Verlag, Hamburg.

Work is continuing on the second third which I hope will soon be ready. Your good wishes for Xmas as well as for the New Year were gratefully reciprocated in thought if not in words.

Dietz will be interested to hear that Laura Lafargue is translating my Feuerbach into French for the Ère nouvelle 310 and subsequent publication as an off-print. I have already looked over the first part. She translates deftly and conscientiously.

Rave, who is less deserving of such praise, has again written to me; he has had a go at your Thomas Morus,d mais c’est bien indigeste!e For the man does not, in fact, possess an adequate knowledge of German, although he is an Alsatian and by rights should probably be called Rawe.

I’m glad that Victor should have promptly extracted the best bits from your latest article and made them available to the Viennese. 321 They were quite admirably suited to the situation there. According to Victor’s last letter, all danger of anything silly being done is now past. In fact both the Czech and the trades union congresses have shelved the question of a GENERAL STRIKE 322 until the Party Conference 323 and Victor will

[^1]: I shall now probably be able to get hold of the Berne Convention.b 303 I am anxious to see Cunow’s book.c The man has done a great deal of swotting in his field and keeps his eyes open.

[^2]: a On the Contents of the Third Volume of Capital’. - b See this volume, p. 240 - c H. Cunow, Die Verwandtschafts-Organisationen der Australneger, Stuttgart, 1894 - d K. Kautsky, Thomas More und seine Utopie, Stuttgart, 1888 - e but it’s pretty heavy!



