---
Volume: 50
Document_Title: "145. Engels to George William Lamplugh 10 January "
Page_Range: "286-287"
---

# 145. Engels to George William Lamplugh 10 January 



**[p. 145]**

ENGELS TO GEORGE WILLIAM LAMPLUGH, G. W. 324

IN LONDON

London, 10 January 1894 122 Regent’s Park Road, N. W.

My dear Lamplugh,

Your parcel was an agreeable surprise indeed. Many thanks! I am almost ashamed to confess that in my ignorance I had fancied the Anatomy of Melancholy to be one of the serious psychological disquisitions of the 18th century, which I hold in horror. Now I find that it, too, is a product of the grandest epoch of English literature, the beginning of the 17th century. I turn to it with pleasure, and have already seen enough to assure me that it will prove a constant source of enjoyment.

This reminds me that I have forgotten to let you have the only two works of mine that have been published in Englisha—I have made free to send them, to you by post and hope you will do me the favour of accepting them.

Dakyns told me on Sunday you were afraid of your little boy getting the influenza. Although there is more about of this beastly complaint than is desirable, I hope the danger has blown over.

Reciprocating your kind wishes for the New Year and with kind regards to Mrs Lamplugh.

I remain yours faithfully F.

Engels

[^1]: First published in Russian, in, Reproduced from the original Letopisi marksizma, Book I,

[^2]: 1926 Published in English for the first time

[^3]: a F. Engels, The Condition of the Working-Class in England; Socialism: Utopian and Scientific



