---
Volume: 50
Document_Title: "150. Engels to W. Borgius 25 January "
Page_Range: "291-295"
---

# 150. Engels to W. Borgius 25 January 



**[p. 1926]**

in English for the first time

149

ENGELS TO ALBERT DELON 328

IN NIMES

[Note]

London, about 21 January 1894

Should first read the second volume and then refer back. To go by his letter to Diamandi, his German still isn’t perfect but he’s still working at it, in particular the terminology of political economy.

First published, in Russian, in: Marx and Engels, Works, Second Russian Edition, Vol. 39, Moscow, 1966

Printed according to the original

Published in English for the first time

150

ENGELS TO W. BORGIUS 329

London, 25 January 1894

Dear Sir,

Herewith the answers to your questions.

1. By economic relations, considered by us to be the determinant upon which the history of society is based, we understand the manner in which men of a certain society produce the necessities of life, and exchange

[^1]: IN BRESLAUa

[^2]: a Now Wroclaw





**[p. 265]**

If, as you say, technology is indeed largely dependent on the state of sci- ence, then how much more is not the latter dependent on the state and the requirements of technology? If society has a technological requirement, the latter will do more to promote science than ten universities. Hydrostatics (Torricelli, etc.) owes its existence solely to the need to regulate mountain streams in Italy in the sixteenth and seventeenth centuries. Only since the discovery of its technological uses have we known anything rational about electricity. Unfortunately historiographers in Germany have got into the habit of writing about the sciences as though they had appeared out of the blue.

2. We see economic conditions as that which, in the final analysis, determines historical development. But the human race is itself an economic factor. Here, however, there are two points which should not be overlooked:

a) Political, juridical, philosophical, religious, literary, artistic, etc., development is based on economic development. But each of these also reacts upon the others and upon the economic basis. This is not to say that the economic situation is the cause and that it alone is active while everything else is mere passive effect, but rather that there is reciprocal action based, in the final analysis, on economic necessity which invariably prevails. The state, for instance, exerts its influence through protective tariffs, free trade, good or bad fiscal systems, and even your German philistine’s mortal weariness and impotence, consequent upon Germany’s impoverished economic condition between 1648 and 1830, and expressing itself first in Pietism and then in sentimentality and cringing servility

[^1]: a the force of inertia





**[p. 266]**

b) While men may make their own history, they have not hitherto done so with a concerted will in accordance with a concerted plan, not even in a given and clearly delimited society. Their aspirations are at variance, which is why all such societies are governed by necessity of which the counterpart and manifestation is chance. The necessity which here invariably prevails over chance is again ultimately economic. This brings us to the question of what are known as great men. The fact that such and such a man, and he alone, should arise at a particular time in any given country, is, of course, purely fortuitous. But if we eliminate him, a replacement will be called for and such a replacement will be found—tant bien que mal,a but found he will ultimately be. That Napoleon, this particular Corsican, was the military dictator rendered necessary by a French Republic bled white by her own wars, was fortuitous; but that, in the absence of a Napoleon, someone else would have taken his place is proved by the fact that the moment someone becomes necessary—Caesar, Augustus, Cromwell, etc.—he invariably turns up. If it was Marx who discovered the materialist view of history, the work of Thierry, Mignett Guizot and every English historiographer prior to 1850 goes to show that efforts were being made in that direction, while the discovery of the same view by Morgan shows that the time was ripe for it and that it was bound to be discovered.

The same thing applies to all fortuitous and seemingly fortuitous events in history. The further removed is the sphere we happen to be investigating from the economic sphere and the closer to the purely abstract, ideological sphere, the more likely shall we be to find evidence of the fortuitous in its development, and the more irregular will be the curve

[^1]: a for better or for worse





**[p. 267]**

In Germany the greatest obstacle to accurate interpretation is the ir- responsible neglect of economic history in literature. It is so difficult, not only to rid oneself of the historical ideas drummed into one at school, but actually to get together the material necessary for the purpose. Who, for instance, has so much as read old G. von Gülich whose dry catalogue of material nevertheless contains so much that throws light on innumerable political facts!

Come to that, I believe that the fine example provided by Marx in the 18. Brumaire0 should, precisely because it is a practical example, go a long way towards answering your questions. I also think that I touched on most of these points in the Anti-Dühring Chapters 9-11 and II , 2-4, also II I, and in the introduction, and again in the final section of the Feuerbach.d

Please do not take every word I have said above for gospel, but rather consider them in their general context; I am sorry not to have had the time to write to you in such careful detail as I should have had to do for publication.

Would you kindly convey my compliments to Mr e and thank him for sending me the e which greatly amused me.

Yours very sincerely,

F. Engels

[^1]: First published in the magazine Printed according to the magazine Der Sozialistische Akademiker, No. 20, 1895 Published in English for the first time

[^2]: a G. von Gülich, Geschichtliche Darstellung des Handels, der Gewerbe und des Ackerbaus handeltreibenden Staaten unsrer Zeit, Bd. 1-5, Jena, 1830-1845 - b K. Marx, The Eighteenth Brumaire of Louis Bonaparte. - c F. Engels, Anti-Dühring. Herr Eugen Dühring’s Revolution in Science. — d F. Engels, Ludwig Feuerbach and the End of Classical German Philosophy- e omitted in MS.



