---
Volume: 50
Document_Title: "152. Engels to Karl Kautsky 13 February "
Page_Range: "296-297"
---

# 152. Engels to Karl Kautsky 13 February 



**[p. 269]**

152

ENGELS TO KARL KAUTSKY

IN STUTTGART

[Eastbourne], 13 February 1894

Dear Baron,

Am back in Eastbourne 333 again because of my usual lame leg, but it’s already on the mend. Shall remain here until at least the 23rd of this month; if you should write, the address will be 28, Marine Parade, Eastbourne. Victor has snatched the Critica Sociale article away from under your nose and is translating it. 334 At the moment I’ve got no time at all since I am having to proof correct the whole of the rest of Volume II I,a and page proofs rain down on me as inexorably as blows in the Cameroons. 335

I do not consider the term ‘communism’ suitable for general use today; rather it should be reserved for cases in which a more exact description is required, and even then it would call for an explanatory note, having virtually fallen out of use for the past thirty years. 336

At the moment I consider Burns to be better and Jaurès to be less im- portant than commonly made out to be.

Warm regards from one household to the other.

Yours,

F.E.

[^1]: Ask Dietz to send the 8 marks with the next larger consignment to Vienna.

[^2]: 282

[^3]: First published in: Printed according to the original Aus der Frühzeit des

[^4]: Marxismus. Engels Briefwechsel Published in English for the first time mit Kautsky, Prague, 1935

[^5]: a of Capital



