---
Volume: 50
Document_Title: "155. Engels to Friedrich Adolph Sorge 23 February "
Page_Range: "298-301"
---

# 155. Engels to Friedrich Adolph Sorge 23 February 



**[p. 154]**

ENGELS TO EDUARD BERNSTEIN 338

IN LONDON

[Eastbourne,] 333 22 February 1894

Dear Ede,

Thank you for your letter and for the offer of G. Bruno. 339 But just now I am busy with Chapter 4la (ground rent) and hope to polish off a few more chapters before my return on Thursday, a week today. So I should like to save up the book until I come back, when I should certainly be glad to read it. We have been sent the Frankfurter Zeitung feuilleton, ‘Bebel und Vo Umar’.b The weather here is unfortunately too cold for me to be able to sit out of doors very much and I am not yet really in a condition to do any walking. Until next week, then.

Kindest regards to Gine, Kätec and yourself.

Yours F.E.

155

ENGELS TO FRIEDRICH ADOLPH SORGE 113

IN HOBOKEN

Eastbourne, 23 February 1894

Dear Sorge,

Because of temporary lameness I am again spending a few weeks

[^1]: First published, in Russian, Printed according to the original in: Marx-Engels Archives, Vol. I,

[^2]: 1924 Published in English for the first time

[^3]: a Of the third volume of Capital (see Vol. 25 of this edition, pp. 698-705). - b G. Brandes, ‘Bebel und Vollmar’, Frankfurter Zeitung, 4 February 1894 - c Regina Bernstein and Käte Schattner





**[p. 272]**

You will have received the card announcing Louise’s marriage. Her husband, Dr Freyberger, is a young Viennese doctor who gave up his career at Vienna University because they refused to let him tell the workers about the social causes of their illnesses; he has now established himself here and has already shown the English that more medicine is to be learned on the Continent than in this country. For the time being we shall all continue to live together at Regent’s Park Road.

The Holy Family has arrived safely in Rome and will be returned to me in the middle of March, when it will at once be sent on to you.a

Our strange socialist group in the French Chamber is still something of a mystery. It is not yet very clear how many of them there are or what their standpoint is. Guesde tables vast numbers of Bills none of which, needless to say, goes through. Jaurès is unlikely to see a repetition of his first sensational victories, since the immediate effect of the anarchist gentry’s bombing exploits 309 has been to provide the Ministry and the cause of law and order with a solid majority.

In this country the official politicians, both Liberal and Conservative, are in a state of complete disarray. The Liberals can maintain their position only by making fresh political and social concessions to the workers, for which, however, they lack the courage. Thus, they are trying to do so with an election cry against the house of lords instead of proposing payment of members, payment of election expenses by the government, and second ballot. I.e. instead of offering the workers more power vis-à-vis the Commons and the lords, all they want is to give the Commons more power vis-à-vis the lords, and that is something the workers are no longer prepared to swallow. But in any case there will be a general election here this summer and, unless the Liberals really take their courage in both hands and make genuine concessions to the workers, they will suffer defeat and go to pieces; at present they are held together only by Gladstone who might kick the bucket any day. Then there will be a middle-class democratic party with pro- Labour tendencies, and what is left of the Liberals will go over to Chamberlain. And all this has come about simply as a result of pressure from a working class that is still disunited and only partially conscious. If, in due course, it attains full consciousness, things will take an altogether different turn.

[^1]: a See this volume, pp. 250, 282, 299





**[p. 273]**

In Austria, too, something is to be anticipated. The funny part of it is that Socialists there are looking for support to the Emperor 1 who, by giving his blessing to Taaffe’s proposal for electoral reform, 270 has declared himself in favour of something that comes close to universal suffrage, in the genuine belief that this is a necessary counterpart to general conscription. The coalition government won’t succeed in doing anything or, if it does succeed in enacting an electoral Bill, this will be regarded simply as a bonus, while the movement, with the Emperor’s tacit consent, will proceed on its way at any rate until such time as Taaffe’s reform is put through. And then our chaps will see to the rest.

In short things are proceeding very merrily everywhere, and prospects for the fin de siècle look better every day.

To judge by appearances, the Workman’s Times is at the point of death. Nor is the INDEPENDENT LABOUR PARTY 114 very much more lively; it’s strange how slow and circuitously everything proceeds over here.

Many regards to you and your wife from the two Freybergers and

Yours,

F. Engels

Printed according to the original

[^1]: First published abridged in Briefe und Auszüge aus Briefen von ]oh. Phil. Becker, Jos. Dietzgen, Friedrich Engels, Karl Marx u. A. an F. A. Sorge und Andere, Stuttgart, 1906 and in full, in Russian, in: Marx and Engels, Works, First Russian Edition, Vol. XXIX, Moscow, 1946

[^2]: Published in English in full for the first time

[^3]: a Franz Joseph I — b end of the century



