---
Volume: 50
Document_Title: "159. Engels to Victor Adler 20 March "
Page_Range: "305-307"
---

# 159. Engels to Victor Adler 20 March 



**[p. 278]**

Socialism, Scientific and Utopian etc. Again, the value of these things varies greatly. There is also a multitude of shorter propaganda pamphlets of very varied quality, some being really good, some deplorably bad; none are easily obtainable through book shops. Most were published by the SOCIAL DEMOCRATIC FEDERATION 44 and the FABIAN SOCIETY. 43

There is no journal similar to the Neue Zeit in this country. The socialist weeklies are:

Justice (organ of the SOCIAL DEMOCRATIC FEDERATION), publisher H. Quelch, 37a, Clerkenwell Green, London, E. C.

Workman’s Times, 59, Tile St., Manchester (MANCHESTER LABOUR PRESS SOCIETY).

That is about all the information I can give you. I fear, however, that the sort of Englishmen you meet in Wiesbaden will be unlikely to provide many suitable candidates for our party.

Yours very truly,

F. Engels

159

ENGELS TO VICTOR ADLER

IN VIENNA

London, 20 March 1894

Dear Victor,

A short while ago you asked me about translating the article in the Critica Sociale on the position, etc., of Italy. 334 Louise at once wrote a postcard on my behalf saying THAT YOU WERE WELCOME TO IT and I confirmed this a day or two later in a letter to you. 25 Soon afterwards an inquiry arrived from K. Kautsky who wanted to know if I

[^1]: First published, in Russian, Printed according to the original in: Marx and Engels, Works, First Russian Edition. Published in English for the first time Vol. XXIX, Moscow, 1946





**[p. 279]**

But the article has not, in the meantime, appeared in the Arbeiter-Zeitung, and that puts me in an awkward position vis-à-vis K. Kautsky. So could you please let me know what is happening about it? I must say this makes me feel like the English landlady who, having on the one hand a nubile daughter and, on the other, a susceptible German lodger, demanded of the latter at the first sign of a flirtation: “WHAT ARE YOUR INTENTIONS WITH REGARD TO MY DAUGHTER?” But the fact that K. Kautsky has entered into competition with you will doubtless exonerate me.

Over here things are tending towards a general election 345 and everything that happens is done by way of preparation for it. The Liberals are as craven as ever. They must know that they can only retain their position by increasing the political power of the workers and yet they hesitate and flounder about nervously. Neither a cut-and-dried extension of the suffrage, nor the elimination of a property qualification which consists in burdening the candidate with all the election expenses while failing to give him a salary, nor any provision in the shape of a second ballot for the putting up of a third candidate (alongside those of the two official parties). At the same time they want to abolish the house of lords but don’t lift a finger to produce a Lower House with the courage and ability to do this. The Tories for their part are making mistake after mistake. For two years they have been turning Parliament into a complete farce on the pretext of smashing HOME RULE;

171 with the Liberals, who took this lying down, they have played, and continue to play, Old Harry, as Randy Churchill demonstrated last night, 346 although, with elections in the offing, this is a risky business and might seriously shake the peace-loving [?]b British philistine’s faith in the Conservatives. Furthermore, Salisbury attempted to make the PARISH COUNCILS BILL 163 an occasion for playing a dirty trick on his Liberal Unionist allies, 206 Devonshire and Chamberlain, and exploiting them for purely TORY ends, so that the said alliance is no longer as steadfast as heretofore. In short, things are getting into a frightful tangle, and at the moment it is difficult to guess what the outcome will be.

My congratulations on the way you lulled the general strike to sleep

[^1]: a See this volume, p. 269 — b sic in printed text



