---
Volume: 50
Document_Title: "162. Engels To Friedrich Adolph Sorge 21 March "
Page_Range: "309-311"
---

# 162. Engels To Friedrich Adolph Sorge 21 March 



**[p. 162]**

ENGELS TO FRIEDRICH ADOLPH SORGE 113

IN HOBOKEN

London, 21 March 1894 122 Regent’s Park Road, N. W.

Dear Sorge,

I have today sent back to you with many thanks The Holy Family by BOOK POST, REGISTERED, following its safe return from the trip to Rome.a

Immediately after Easter I shall send you a parcel containing the Bax- Morris bookb and Bernstein’s Berlin Complete Edition of Lassalle Works.c

Auntie Motteler has just been here in company with Gertrud Liebknecht. Apparently the latter wants to move in temporarily with the former. What Liebknecht intends to do about her (she says he wants her to go back) remains a secret—doubtless also to himself. His eldest daughter, Mrs Geiser, is living in the worst possible circumstances and his wife and Gertrud are at daggers drawn. I don’t in fact believe he has actually insisted that she return.

Have you seen the novel Helena by old Mother Kautsky in the Vorwärts? She has peopled her stage with a crowd of living party members, including Motteler and his wife. It is a poor imitation of the popular novels of Gregor Samarowd (Spy Meding). I shall be interested to see whether it is passed over in silence and am somewhat surprised that the Vorwärts should have taken it. The paper’s feuilleton is censored by Mother Natalie Liebknecht.

The Pionierkalender received with thanks. Over here the dissolution of Parliament draws on apace. At the new elec- tions 345 more Labour candidates will be put up than ever before, though not nearly enough, and I’m not sure whether a whole crowd of them won’t

[^1]: a See this volume, p. 272 - b W. Morris and E. B. Bax, Socialism, its Growth and Outcome, London, New York, 1893 - CF. Lassalle, Reden und Schriften, Berlin, 1892-1893-d Samarinin the MS





**[p. 283]**

In Austria, Belgium and Holland electoral reform has also been the order of the day. Before long there will be no European parliament without labour representatives. In Austria the cause is progressing very well. Adler is leading the movement with quite outstanding address and the Party Conference on Sunday 323 will also help.

Once the tariff business 301 has to some extent been sorted out on your side of the Atlantic and the duty on raw materials been abolished, the crisis will probably recede and the superiority of American industry over that of Europe will undoubtedly make itself felt. Only then will matters take a serious turn here in England, but then they will go with a bang.

I finished the first two thirds of Volume II P sooner than I had expected

[^1]: a of Capital



