---
Volume: 50
Document_Title: "165. Engels To Benno Karpeles 29 March "
Page_Range: "315-316"
---

# 165. Engels To Benno Karpeles 29 March 



**[p. 288]**

In the meantime, I draw your attention to Austria. There a great battle is in the making. The ruling classes, the feudal nobility and the bourgeoisie, have exhausted their resources. An electoral reform is now inevitable. They are trying to arrange things so that the working class will not have too many representatives in parliament. But the workers are determined, they are forcing the bourgeois to retreat step by step, until they concede universal suffrage. After Zurich I visited Vienna; judging by what I saw there, the Austrian socialists have a great future.b

When I had reached this point, I received your letter dated 22 March. Unfortunately I am unable to send you a few lines for 1st May, since I have to finish the final editing of the third volume of Das Kapital, and am obliged to refuse any kind of collaboration, be it in connection with 18th March, or with 1st May. And what I have refused to the French, the Germans, the Austrians and others, I also cannot do for you.

Affectionately yours.

First published in Russian in: Marx and Engels, Works, First Russian Edition, Vol. XXIX, Moscow, 1946

Printed according to the original

Translated from the French and the Spanish

165

ENGELS TO BENNO KARPELES

IN VIENNA

London, 29 March 1894 122 Regent’s Park Road, N. W.

Dear Sir,

I am in receipt of your esteemed note of the 19th inst. (postmarked Rome) and have also just received the first half volume of your book 354

[^1]: Published in full in English for the first time

[^2]: a The following phrase “we are the only party capable” is crossed out by Engels. -b The text that follows is in Spanish.



