---
Volume: 50
Document_Title: "168. Engels to Filippo Turati 12 April "
Page_Range: "320-321"
---

# 168. Engels to Filippo Turati 12 April 



**[p. 168]**

ENGELS TO FILIPPO TURATI 359

IN MILAN

London, 12 April 1894 122 Regent’s Park Road, N. W.

Dear Turati,

I am sending you by post the Anglo-American edition {Discourse on Free Trade. 358 K. Marx) of your discourse, and the German translation of The Poverty of Philosophy, where you will find this speech in the appendix.a As for the French text, this is to be reprinted in the Paris L’Ère Nouvelle. 357 There is only one copy of the French text, namely mine, and if it is lost there will be no way to replace it. I therefore still do not know how to send it to Paris, for if I have a copy made here, this will mean loss of time, and I have too much experience of the post to entrust the original to it.

The 2nd volume of Capital came but in Hamburg, published by Otto Meissner, as the 1st was, in 1893 (2nd edition). If I am not mistaken, the price is 6 marks. The same publishers are to issue the 3rd volume in September, to the great pleasure of the illustrious Achille Loria, a charlatan who warned everyone that Marx had never written this 3rd volume, but was always referring the reader to it simply to make a fool of him. 360

Kindest regards from myself and Mme Freyberger (ex Kautsky, she has just married a young Austrian doctor living here) to Mme Kulishov.

Yours,

F. Engels

English for the first time

[^1]: First published in the language of the original (French) in: Annali, an. 19 Milano, 1958

[^2]: Printed according to the original

[^3]: Translated from the French Published in

[^4]: a K. Marx, The Poverty of Philosophy.



