---
Volume: 50
Document_Title: "174. Engels to Adolph Sorge 12 May "
Page_Range: "326-329"
---

# 174. Engels to Adolph Sorge 12 May 



**[p. 299]**

Engels

Greetings to Mme Anna Kulishov and you from Louise Kautsky- Freyberger and myself.

First published, in the Printed according to the original language of the original (French), in: Annali, Translated from the French an. I, Milano, 1958

Published in English for the first time

174

ENGELS TO FRIEDRICH ADOLPH SORGE 366

IN HOBOKEN

London, 12 May 1894 122 Regent’s Park Road, N. W.

Dear Sorge,

Yesterday we sent to you through G.W. Wheatley & Co (New York ADDRESS, U.S. Express Co., 49, Broadway) a parcel containing Morris-Bax and the Berlin Lassalle in fifty parts, which I trust will reach you before long.

CARRIAGE PAID. On the same day the remainder of the ms. of Volume II Ib went off to Hamburg, thereby removing a heavy load from my mind. The two final sections made me ‘sweat good and proper’.c There will be sixty sheets of which twenty have already been set up in type.

I was greatly relieved to hear that the Holy Family had safely returned into your keeping after its strange Odyssey.d On the other hand the news about your eyes is most distressing. I hope you will consult a good specialist, for a lot can be done if steps are taken in good time. For the past fifteen years I too have had trouble with my eyes off and on. Having taken medical

[^1]: a W. Morris and E. B. Bax, Socialism, its Growth and Outcome, London, New York, 1893; F. Lassalle, Reden und Schriften, Bd. 1-3, Berlin, 1892-1893 - b of Capital- c See K. Marx, Capital, Vol. II I, Ch. 37-42 and 48-52 - d See this volume, pp. 250, 272, 282





**[p. 300]**

Not long ago I caught a cold, which left me in no doubt that I am now an old man at last. On this occasion, what I had previously been able to treat as a minor annoyance, pretty well laid me low for a week and kept me under draconian medical supervision for a whole fortnight after that. Even now, I am expected to take care of myself for another fortnight, no less. It was a mild form of bronchitis which is not to be taken lightly in the case of the elderly, especially when, like myself, they have continued to tipple away merrily. Needless to say, I find this business of taking care of myself thoroughly distasteful, but Freyberger was, after all, quite right to prescribe it for me and, as to seeing that I carry it out, that is the province of Argus-eyed Louise who has doubled and tripled her vigilance. I think I have already written and told you a that we left our domestic arrangements as little changed as possible when we took in the young husband as a boards and lodger. All very nice and jolly, it is true, but only, alas, so long as one is in good health. Never in my born days have I been so plagued with medical attention as during this past month and I can only console myself with the thought that it was all done for my own good.

Dietzgen and wife were here for an hour or two on Sunday afternoon but unfortunately missed Tussy. I have given him recommendations to Bebel and Kautsky. They were very nice people.

I hope that your sonb has since found a situation. With his knowledge of business, and having by now doubtless rid himself of a good many illusions as a result of practical experience, a bright young man like that should always fall on his feet in America.

Things are little changed over here. There is no chance of achieving any kind of unity amongst the labour leaders. But the masses are nevertheless moving ahead, Slowly it is true, and only now striving to acquire consciousness, yet the process is unmistakeable. It will be the same here as in France and, before that, in Germany: Unification will be forced upon them as soon as a number of independent working men (especially those who have been elected without the help of the Liberals) secure seats in Parliament. This the Liberals are doing their utmost to prevent. They are not 1. extending the franchise to the people who—on paper—already have it, but are, on the contrary, 2. ensuring that the registers of electors

[^1]: a See this volume, p. 284 — b Adolph Sorge





**[p. 301]**

This will be the undoing of the Liberals. Their lack of courage is alienating the country’s Labour voters, dissipating their small majority in Parliament, and, unless they make some very bold moves at the eleventh hour, they will probably be done for. Thereupon the Tories will take the helm and carry out what the Liberals intended—not merely to promise—actually to do. And in that case an independent Labour party is pretty well assured.

The Social Democratic Federation 44 over here and your German- American Socialists 367 share the distinction of being the only parties that have contrived to reduce Marx’s theory of development to a rigid orthodoxy which the working man is not expected to arrive at by virtue of his own class consciousness; rather it is to be promptly and without preparation rammed down his throat as an article of faith. Hence they have both remained mere sects, having come, as Hegel puts it, from nothing by way of nothing to nothing.a I have not yet had time to read Schlüter’s controversy with your Germans, but shall tackle it tomorrow. Judging by the Volkszeitung’s earlier articles, it would seem that the right note has been struck.

Give my warm regards to your wife and let us have some better news from you soon. Warm regards.

Yours,

F. E.

[^1]: a G. W. F. Hegel, Wissenschaß der Logik



