---
Volume: 50
Document_Title: "175. Engels to Boris Krichevsky 20 May "
Page_Range: "329-330"
---

# 175. Engels to Boris Krichevsky 20 May 



**[p. 302]**

First published abridged in: Briefe und Auszüge aus Briefen

von ]oh. Phil. Becker, Jos. Dietzgen, Friedrich Engels, Karl Marx u. A. an F. A. Sorge und Andere, Stuttgart, 1906 and in full, in Russian, in: Marx and Engels, Works,

175

ENGELS TO BORIS KRICHEVSKY

IN WEGGIS

[Draft]

[London,] 20 May 1894

Dear Sir,

I note from your letter of the 10th inst. that you have made and already sent to the printers a Russian translation of my works on Russia which recently appeared in Berlin, just as you did previously in the case of other writings by Marx and myself. 368

I must needs draw your attention to the fact that, in accordance with the Berne Convention 303 Introduction to Wage Labour and Capital by Marx (1891) as well as the above-mentioned works are my literary property and that translations of them into foreign languages may not be published in the countries of the Union without my permission. Even though the matter of fees may play only a subordinate or no role at all in cases such as these, or where genuine party undertakings are concerned, I am nevertheless obliged to assert my rights in the interests of the cause, for otherwise it would mean my assuming joint responsibility for the publication of translations by unqualified or otherwise incompetent persons. And since I have already committed myself to a third party, I am under a twofold obligation.

So far as I am aware, it has hitherto been customary in the party, even in the case of translations of works unprotected by the Berne Convention, to show consideration for the writer by applying to him for authorisation.

First Russian Edition, Vol. XXIX, Moscow, 1946

Printed according to the original

Published in English in full for the first time

