---
Volume: 50
Document_Title: "176. Engels to Georgi Plekhanov 21 May "
Page_Range: "330-332"
---

# 176. Engels to Georgi Plekhanov 21 May 



**[p. 303]**

My objection to the publication of an unauthorised Russian translation of my works on Russia from Internationales aus dem ‘Volksstaat’ is all the greater in that I have already made over the translation rights in the Russian language for these and other works, namely to Mrs Vera Zasulich.

This disposes once and for all with your inquiry regarding my preface.

Yours very truly

First published, in Russian, Printed according to the original in: Marx and Engels, Works, Second Russian Edition, Published in English for the first time Vol. 39, Moscow, 1966

176

ENGELS TO GEORGI PLEKHANOV 369

IN MORNEX (France)

London, 21 May, 1894

My dear Plekhanov,

First of all, please spare me ‘mentor’—my name is simply Engels. Next, thank you for your information. I have sent a registered letter to M. Krichevsky to say that the introduction to Wage Labour and Capital,a and also the articles on Russia in Articles on International Themes from the Newspaper ‘Volksstaat’ 370 are, according to the Berne Convention, 303 my literary property, and that any translation requires my consent; that I am obliged, in the interests of the cause, to stand upon my rights in order to prevent translations by incapable or otherwise incompetentb (or

[^1]: a These words are written by Engels in Russian. See previous letter. - b A German word as given in parenthesis ‘unbefungt’ (meaning unauthorised).





**[p. 304]**

If he now persists in publishing, we shall see; in any case, please let me know if it appears, and send me a copy.

As he also announces a translation of Kautsky’s Erfurt Programme,a I felt obliged to warn the latter of the methods being used in my regard. 25 I told him nothing of what you wrote to me, but I told him that dishonesty was involved, and that he should get in touch with you to learn more.

I hoped to see Mendelson yesterday evening, but I hear that his wife is ill. If I can, I shall go to see him this week.

Thank you in advance for the copy of your Chernyshevsky.b I await it impatiently.

Here things are moving, albeit slowly and in zigzags. Take, for example, Mawdsley, the leader of the Lancashire textile workers. He is a Tory, a conservative in politics, and a pious believer in religion. Three years ago, these people were furious over the 8 hours day, and now they themselves insist on it. In a recent manifesto, Mawdsley, who a year ago was a vehement opponent of any separate politics by the working class, declares that the textile workers should think about direct representation in parliament, and a workers’ newspaper in Manchester calculates that the textile workers in the county of Lancashire alone would control twelve seats in parliament. You will see: it is the trade-unions that will enter parliament; it is not the class but the branch of industry which is asking to be represented. But that is also a step forward. First let us break the subordination of the workers to the two large bourgeois parties by having textile workers in parliament, as we already have miners. When there are a dozen branches of industry represented, class consciousness will explode of its own accord.

To complete the comedy, in this same manifesto Mawdsley requests bi- metallism 299 in order to preserve the supremacy of English cotton fabrics on the Indian market!

[^1]: a phrase in Russian - b G. W. Plekhanov, N. G. Tschernyschewski. Eine literar-historische Studie, Stuttgart, 1894.



