---
Volume: 50
Document_Title: "177. Engels to Stanislav Mendelson 22 May "
Page_Range: "332-334"
---

# 177. Engels to Stanislav Mendelson 22 May 



**[p. 305]**

My greetings to Axelrod and his family,

Yours,

F. Engels

Printed according to the original

Translated from the French Published in English in full for the first time

177

ENGELS TO STANISLAV MENDELSON

IN LONDON

[London,] 22 May 1894 122 Regent’s Park Road, N. W.

My dear Mendelson, I have received a long letter from Georgi Plekhanov which contains many things with regard to you and the Polish movement. I intended to read it to you last Sunday, but I have learned that Mme Mendelson was taken ill and that therefore you had to stay at home. If this be convenient to you, I shall come to see you the day after tomorrow, Thursday, from 2 to 2.30 in the afternoon, together with Mme Freyberger, who would like to see how Mme Mendelson is feeling.

Yours truly,

F. Engels

Our compliments to Mme Mendelson, who, we hope, is doing better.

First published in Russian in a collection Gruppa ‘Osvobozhdeniye truda’, No. 2, 1924



**[p. 306]**

Published in English for the first time

178

ENGELS TO GEORGI PLEKHANOV

IN MORNEX (France)

London, 22 May 1894 122 Regent’s Park Road, N. W.

My dear Plekhanov,

Yesterday, shortly after my letter to you had left, Bernstein and Kautsky arrived at my house. That has inevitably changed my plans. I thought that I ought—even without waiting for your express permission—to read them your letter, and put them both in a position to judge for themselves of the Krichevsky business. The impression this created on them will, I believe, be everything you could have desired. Indeed, however much one might wish to remain neutral in issues and disputes within the Russian emigre community, one cannot excuse the behaviour of Krichevsky as regards the translation of the Soziales aus Russland 368 after learning about the translation undertaken by Vera Zasulich.a As for the rest, these gentlemen knew Karl Kautsky had given his consent to the translation of his Erfurt Programmeb; however, he thought that it was to be printed in Russia, or at least, he had not the slightest idea that it would be published in Switzerland.

Ignatievc is, so Kautsky told me, the pseudonym of Helfond (or some name similar to that), who is in Stuttgart. You probably know him. However, as I do not have Kautsky’s authorisation to use this information, I would ask you to treat it as strictly confidential. According to Kautsky and Bernstein, it would seem that Helfond is an honourable fellow who has fallen into Jogiches’ trap by accident rather than malicious intent.

[^1]: a See this volume, p. 303 - b in Russian -c in Russian in the original.



