---
Volume: 50
Document_Title: "178. Engels to Georgi Plekhanov 22 May 306. 179. Engels to Boris Krichevsky 31 May "
Page_Range: "334-335"
---

# 178. Engels to Georgi Plekhanov 22 May 306. 179. Engels to Boris Krichevsky 31 May 



**[p. 307]**

F.E.

First published in Printed according to the original Russian in: Gruppa ‘Osvobozhdeniye Truda’, Translated from the French No. 2, 1924

Published in English for the first time

179

ENGELS TO BORIS KRICHEVSKY

IN WEGGIS

[Draft]

London, 31 May 1894 Dr B. Krichevsky, Weggisa

You have my permission to sell off the copies already in print of your Russian edition of Wage Labour and Capital along with my introduction, and I note with satisfaction that you will refrain from publishing my other works. 368

Apart from that, I thank you for your letter of the 25th which I look upon as a most valuable contribution to the characterisation of certain trends amongst the Russian émigrés. Any inclination I might have to discuss its contents is tempered by the consideration that you yourself probably do not expect to impress anybody with these time-worn catchphrases à la Nechayev, since you yourself are doubtless aware how ludicrous it is to seek to act the Social Democrat while behaving like an anarchist.

But when you say ‘that we could have had no inkling that you had already made over the translation rights to someone else’, you might really have spared yourself that downright falsehood. You knew long before you wrote your letter of the 10th of May that V. Zasulich and Plekhanov were preparing a Russian translation of ‘On Social Relations in Russia’. In view of the character of these people and the friendly relationship I have enjoyed with them for many years, it goes without saying that they would

[^1]: a See also this volume, p. 302



