---
Volume: 50
Document_Title: "180. Engels to Nikolai Danielson 1 June "
Page_Range: "335-336"
---

# 180. Engels to Nikolai Danielson 1 June 



**[p. 308]**

First published, in Russian, Printed according to the original in: Marx and Engels, Works, First Russian Edition, Published in English for the first time Vol. XXIX, Moscow, 1946

180

ENGELS TO NIKOLAI DANIELSON

IN ST. PETERSBURG

London, 1 June 1894

My dear Sir,

Last week I forwarded to you sheets 7 to 16 incl. of Vol. II P and hope you have received them. They were registered, and my name as sender at the back (L. K.b). 371

I am glad to learn of the success of the ‘Essays’.c I hope a new edition is in the press. I should be very glad if I could find a German translator for the book, unfortunately most of the translation work from Russian into German is done by ladies, generally not well prepared for economic work.

With many thanks I received the Russian ‘Origin’ etc., 372 the translation, as far as I have read, seems to me very well done, and on the whole the censorship seems to have dealt leniently with the book.

The sheets were sent rather late, but it was the fault of the publisher who delayed them a long time. It is very hard work reading the proofsheets of a book like this. You will find in the sheets sent the solution of the question how the different rates of surplus value are equalised into one and the same average rate of profits, the law of the tendency of that rate of profits constantly to fall, and the mode in which commercial capital participates in the distribution of surplus value. This comes to a conclusion in Sheet

[^1]: a of Capital- b Louise Kautsky - c Nikolai-on. [Danielson], Outlines of our Post-Reform National Economy, 1893 [title in Russian]



