---
Volume: 50
Document_Title: "181. Engels to Paul Lafargue 2 June "
Page_Range: "336-338"
---

# 181. Engels to Paul Lafargue 2 June 



**[p. 309]**

The last of the Manuscript is in the printer’s hands. But I only now find what an enormous amount of arrears of work I have on my hands, as everything not absolutely necessary had to be put back in order to finish Vol. 3rd. This must be my excuse if I do not now recur to some of the economic questions previously discussed between us. As it is, I think we both have plenty of work on our hands and better leave that discussion for another time.

Yours very sincerely

L. K.

The volumes on industrial and agricultural development of Russia (Chicago Exhibition) 373 have reached me. Please accept my hearty thanks. They are very useful indeed, especially when compared with the ‘Essays’.

First published, in Russian, Reproduced from the original in Minuvshiye gody, No. 2, 1908

Published in English for the first time

181

ENGELS TO PAUL LAFARGUE 35

AT LE PERREUX

London, 2 June 1894

My dear Lafargue, Herewith the cheque for £20. Please acknowledge receipt. The last bit of the manuscript of Vol. II P is at the printer’s. What a

[^1]: a K. Marx, Capital





**[p. 310]**

Your description of fashionable socialism in France gave me a good laugh. But it could turn out to be a serious matter. If you had a strong, steady army like the two million German voters, well and good; that would control the heterogeneous mass of newcomers. But with a Party split into Marxists, Blanquists, 20 Allemanists, 21 Broussists 30, and several other ists, not to mention the ex-Radicals 86 of the Millerand stamp who boss all the others in the Chamber, it is very hard to say where this new fashion is going to lead you. You compare it to Boulangism 6: Boulangism, after a few months’ spree, ended in the mire and in ignominy. In a movement of this kind it is pretty well certain that phrase-mongers like Jaurès, who already arrogate to themselves the sole right to speak for you all in the Chamber, will boss things.

Today they have the ear of the House where they silence our people, tomorrow they will have the ear of the nation.

It is always on the cards that the whole thing will not turn out too badly, and even well; but, in the meantime, you will go through some curious experiences, and I am glad for us all that there is a solid combat corps in Germany whose actions will decide the battle. This socialist mania which is emerging in your country may lead to a decisive struggle in which you will win the first victories; the revolutionary traditions of the country and of the capital, the character of your army, reorganised since 1870 on a far more popular basis—all this makes such an eventuality possible. But to ensure victory, to destroy the foundations of capitalist society, you will need the active support of a much stronger, more numerous, more tried and more conscious socialist party than you have at your command. It would mean the achievement of what we have foreseen and predicted for many years. The French give the signal, open fire, and the Germans decide the battle.

In the meantime, we are nowhere near that and I am very curious to see how the confused enthusiasm surrounding you will resolve itself.

Even Carl Hirsch noted in the Rheinische Zeitung that behind all this noise over Turpin 374 there are but bourse speculators. It is only the English press that is forbidden to say this and consequently, it pretends to see in that an affair of high and low politics. Here one is sure that behind

