---
Volume: 50
Document_Title: "182. Engels to Witold Jodko- Narkevich 5 June "
Page_Range: "338-339"
---

# 182. Engels to Witold Jodko- Narkevich 5 June 



**[p. 311]**

The other day Kautsky came to us—he has been four times to us. Louise and her husband received him in the most amiable manner; if someone was embarrassed, it was not they.

As to your medallion (that is to say, mine), this will make difficulties. Once I was foolish enough to have myself photographed in profile, but this will never happen to me again. I have such a foolish look that I would rather not have my portrait in profile go down to posterity. However, I would be pleased to see the medallion of Marx (send it also for Tussy, please!), and I am quite curious if your artist has succeeded in reproducing the nose which, in profile, has really impossible lines.

Kiss Laura on my behalf! Greetings from Louise and Ludwig. The latter continues trying to get English physicians to see how much their colleagues on the continent are superior in real science, anatomy, physiology, pathology, etc.

Cordially yours,

F. Engels

182

ENGELS TO WITOLD JODKO-NARKEVICH

IN LONDON

[London,] 5 June 1894 122 Regent’s Park Road, N. W.

My dear Jodko, I cannot recall exactly whether you have translated and published

[^1]: First published in part in: Printed according to the original Le Socialiste, No. 115, 24 November

[^2]: 1900 and in full in: F. Engels, Translated from the French P. et L. Lafargue, Correspondance, t. II I, Paris, 1959



