---
Volume: 50
Document_Title: "189. Engels to Ludwig Schorlemmer 5 July "
Page_Range: "345-346"
---

# 189. Engels to Ludwig Schorlemmer 5 July 



**[p. 318]**

I told Liebknecht Paul’s letters were das beste im ganzen ‘Vorwärts’a but he won’t believe it—it’s true all the same; his letter today about Carnotb is very good again, calm and clear judgment, none of the spasmodic paragraphs which the Vorwärts is so fond of launching on English and French politics.

Cannot you send me a few Petite Républiques? Just now the Jaures and Millerands are on their trial, and I am very much interested in seeing how they behave.c My confidence in their political and economical intellect does not exactly increase; but I shall only be too glad if they could prove me in the wrong.

Liebknecht left on Monday evening, had to speak at Aix la Chapelle on Tuesday.

Yesterday 10 sheets 3rd Vol. Capital which we had forwarded to Petersburg for translation were returned: ‘Défendu’!d

I must close—another proof-sheet to be got ready and then I have to go to town.

Love to you all

Ever yours F.

Engels

original

189

ENGELS TO LUDWIG SCHORLEMMER

IN DARMSTADT

London, 5 July 1894 122 Regent’s Park Road, N. W. My

Dear Schorlemmer,

Now that the final manuscript of Volume II I of Capital is in the print-

[^1]: t. II I, 1891-1895. Paris, 1959 Reproduced from the

[^2]: a the best thing in the whole of Vorwärts - b [P. Lafargue,] Gallus, ‘Präsident Carnot’, Vorwärts, No. 151, 3 July 1894 - c See this volume, p. 262 - d Prohibited

[^3]: First published, in the language of the original (English), in: F. Engels, P. et L. Lafargue, Correspondance,



