---
Volume: 50
Document_Title: "190. Engels to Editor of the Neue Zeit 9 July "
Page_Range: "346-348"
---

# 190. Engels to Editor of the Neue Zeit 9 July 



**[p. 319]**

There are certain snags about the continuation of Carl’s major work, brought out by the Vieweg Verlag, and this also applies to all the rest of his other stuff held by that firm. When I went down to Manchester I took a look at the contracts which stipulate that if, for instance, Carl were to die before completion of the whole, Vieweg might have the work completed by a person of his own choosing. This is the reason for his silence and also for his failure to publish the work left behind by Carl; he obviously wishes to retain a completely free hand. Nor can he be expected to pay any further royalties. For 1. by the terms of the contract, he will pay only for mos. that are ready for press, i.e. no unfinished stuff, and 2. will pay no royalties in respect of new editions to which no changes have been made.

In short, Vieweg can do exactly as he likes and will, if he is to bring out Vol. V, in any case have to find another author for the German edition. 311

As regards Carl’s work on the history of chemistry, Siebold has written to tell me that, because of constant illness, he has not yet been able to prepare the ms. for press, nor has he yet completed his English translation. 313 The poor devil has had rotten luck with his health, his nerves being again in a very poor state, and will need a long rest and plenty of fresh air if he is to recover. As far as money matters are concerned there is no need for you to worry; they are in good hands and, as things are now, Roscoe is also in control of this aspect so that ultimately one must content oneself with the particulars he supplies in respect of payments made for work such as revision, etc. It is possible that Roscoe’s task has been made somewhat easier by his having dealt with Siebold direct instead of with myself as promised, but it won’t make much difference since I should in any case have had to refer him to Siebold and Klepsch in respect of all settlements and should, in the end, have had to make do with his assurances. A vital factor here is that, with the rapid advances made in chemistry, any textbook becomes out of date within a year unless constantly revised and thus, where this sort of literature is concerned, only a living author can keep his end up vis-à-vis either publishers or readers.

I had hoped I might again visit Germany this summer but shall not be able to, the reason being that precisely during the summer months and because of matters connected with my lease I must remain in the vicinity of London so as to be able to return there at any moment should need



**[p. 320]**

You will shortly be able to read two chapters from Vol. II I of Capitala in the Neue Zeit, and possibly something of mine as well.b

Liebknecht left on Monday, having been here for over a week. It is tremendously hot as it is no doubt where you are. In Paris the heat is said to be intolerable.

Many regards from

Yours,

F. Engels

First published, in Russian, Printed according to the original in: Marx and Engels, Works, First Russian Edition, Published in English for the first time Vol. XXIX, Moscow, 1946

190

ENGELS TO THE EDITOR OF THE NEUE ZEIT

IN STUTTGART

[London,] 9 July 1894

At the request of Mr K. Kautsky and in reply to his inquiry from Hirsau on 7.7.94, I beg to inform you that Chapter of Das Kapital, p. 359, lines 9 and 10 from the top, should read: ‘Welchen Rohprofit es ihm als fungierendes— Kapital abwirft’ [‘what gross profit it yields to him as functioning capital’.] Likewise, on p. 368, line 3 from the top, the expression fungierendes Kapital’ [‘functioning capital’] is correct.

Further, on p. 363, line 14 from the top, a comma may, in fact, be inserted after desselben [‘of it’] in the sentence: ‘in Form von denen das gesamte Kapital, abgesehen von dem in Geld existierenden relativ kleinen

[^1]: a See this volume, p. 314 - b F. Engels, On the History of Early Christianity.



