---
Volume: 50
Document_Title: "194. Engels to Karl Kautsky 28 July "
Page_Range: "355-357"
---

# 194. Engels to Karl Kautsky 28 July 



**[p. 193]**

ENGELS TO JULIUS MOTTELER

IN LONDON

[London,] 21 July 1894

Dear Julius,

Herewith a letter from Siegel which I have been asked to pass on to you.

384 I have written to the Executive Committee about the 300 marks. 25 Should you be able to do something in the Club 62 here, or anything else for the chaps, it would be a good deed; in the meantime I have sent them a pound.

Kindest regards to your wife. Our house is in mourning, the canary hen having died while sitting on her four eggs—from a stroke, it would seem.

Yours,

F.E.

194

ENGELS TO KARL KAUTSKY 385

IN STUTTGART

London, 28 July 1894 122 Regent’s Park Road, N. W.

Dear Baron,

There is no hurry about printing the article.a Once I have seen to the proofs you can print it when you wish, in September, say, or even October. I have been mulling the thing ever ever since 1841 when I read a lecture

[^1]: First published in Russian Printed according to the original in: Marx and Engels, Works, Second Russian Edition, Published in English for the first time Vol. 39, Moscow, 1966

[^2]: a F. Engels, On the History of Early Christianity.





**[p. 329]**

1. If I have expressed myself correctly in other respects, I certainly would not describe serfs and small peasantsa as being amongst the earliest adherents of Christianity; rather I should number them amongst those classes where it might expect to find adherents. And to these they quite certainly belonged— especially in the 2nd and 3rd centuries. There is no doubt that, from the time Christianity first spread from Judaea to Northern Syria and Asia Minor and Greece, Egypt and Italy, it was in the towns that it developed and found its earliest adherents.

2. You ask whether the millennium is of this world or of the next. That depends on how one interprets it. I call the next world that which comes after death. And on this point Revelation leaves one in absolutely no doubt whatever. The millennium is reserved only for the martyrs and at best for such Christians as happen to be still living when it comes about, and to that extent, for the latter, it is of this world, whereas for the martyrs, who are only then resurrected from the dead, it is of the next. So it’s the old story: You PAYS YOUR MONEY AND YOU TAKES YOUR CHOICE. TO my mind what decides the issue is the fact that it is impossible unless one has a concept of immortality and a belief in reward and punishment in the next world. Even less of this world is the New Jerusalem which is to come after the millennium and the Last Judgement.

But the so-called Pauline Epistles also have it that those believers still living at Christ’s second coming are to be ‘changed’, i.e. transformed and magnified from mortals into immortals.

That the millennium was here depicted in earthly colours goes without saying. Even Revelation cannot rest content with such heavenly delights as sitting with a bare bottom on a damp cloud, twanging a harp with more or less gory hands and singing hymns to all eternity.

The preface to Volume II Ib has 1. not yet been written and 2. I cannot give it to you. This solution of the rate of profit and price question and of

[^1]: a As can be judged from Kautsky’s letter of 23 July 1894, to which Engels is replying, there is apparently a slip of the pen here: Kleinbauern. Kleinbürger (petty bourgeois) in the ms. - b of Capital



