---
Volume: 50
Document_Title: "195. Engels to Laura Lafargue 28 July "
Page_Range: "357-360"
---

# 195. Engels to Laura Lafargue 28 July 



**[p. 330]**

Save for Sorge and Schlüter there are no intelligent correspondents to be found anywhere in America, because the Germans there stick obstinately to the same sectarian attitude towards the workers as is stubbornly adhered to by the Social Democratic Federation 44 over here. Instead of seeing in the movements of the Americans the propulsive element which, even though it may take wrong or circuitous paths, is bound in the end to lead to the same goal as the one they themselves brought with them from Europe, they see only the wrong paths, treat the blind, foolish Americans with arrogant condescension, boast of their own orthodox superiority, repel the Americans instead of attracting them and, as a result, have themselves remained a small, impotent sect. Hence it has come about that their writers have also relapsed into pure ideology and place a false and narrow interpretation on conditions as a whole. Little Hepner, for one, could always be said to have lived in a world of fantasy and when he gets sentimental his stuff beggars description. I once read a comedy of his—though the funny bits were pretty good, the serious love scenes contained so much gush that one became convulsed with laughter.

Kindest regards from one household to another.

Yours,

F.E.

Printed according to the original

195

ENGELS TO LAURA LAFARGUE

AT LE PERREUX

London, 28 July 1894 122 Regent’s Park Road, N. W.

My dear Löhr, This morning I had a letter from Paul, but much obliged as I am to

[^1]: First published in: Aus der Frühzeit den Marxismus. Engels Briefwechsel mit Kautsky, Prag, 1935

[^2]: Published in English in full for the first time





**[p. 331]**

You ask about Pumps. I have hardly heard from them for months past. Percy had lost, or given up, the agency for his brothers in the Isle of Wight; he had spent a lot of money (not his own) but induced me to become surety for him for a loan to enable him to look out for other agencies in the same line of business, where he said he could make it pay. All at once, in June, I am informed by him that, in consequence of some arrangement with his family, he is going to sell up his furniture and come back to London; on my remonstrating, I am told it is now too late and the plan must be carried out. Then I heard that they were at a school in Kent where their little boy is, and at last, last Monday, they turned up here. As far as I can learn, the family arrangement is all moonshine, at least it leaves him in the same shiftless position as before, After all I have done for them, I am not going to quietly submit to such treatment, and did not receive them very heartily. What Percy is going to do and how this is to end, is more than I know. The children are at schools. Lily at Herne Bay and is said to be getting on well; the boy is near Sittingbourne, very delicate, and ailing again while Pumps was there last week. The youngest girl is with them.

Thanks to you for the article of Jaurès in the Revue Socialiste;a it seems awfully shallow as far as I can see, but the man looks after all as if he was learning a bit, so we will not give up all hopes. The Petite République is indeed awful reading—the discursive matter as well as the soi-disantb reports of facts, and you will not be astonished to learn that I do no longer long for it, unless it given real news, real reports, or articles from Jaurès (whose evolution I should like to follow) and Millerand. Les élucubrations de MM. Rouanet, Fournière, Viviani etc. ne me laissent que tro froid.c

[^1]: a J. Jaurès, ‘Introduction à la Morale Sociale de Benoît Malon,’ La Revue Socialiste, t. XIX, June 1894. - b so-called — c Disquisitions of Messieurs Rouanet, Fournière, Viviani etc. leave me indifferent.





**[p. 332]**

My congratulations to Paul on the Delagrave acquisition. 386 May this lead to further business!

Where do I go this summer? alas all hope of going to Le Perreux is knocked on the head by that beautiful new law! 383 And the worst of it is that this time the old English lawyer’s saying becomes applicable to France: the law is there, and what the courts will make of it, is more than we know. My impression is that the government will not lose much time before it sees that a precedent is established of the application of that law to Socialism, and to the inclusion of Socialism under the heading of anarchism. The Cour de cassationc is quite capable of that. The German Socialist law 15 kept me from Germany thirteen years, let us hope this new law will not last long enough to prevent me from coming to France once more in my life.

Paul is not quite so enthusiastic about the situation in in France as ce cher Bonnier who considers the whole debate—result and all—an unmitigated triumph for French Socialism; but still his way of looking at the subject seems to me rather couleur de rose. The main advantage I consider indeed to be the irrefutable proof that our party is the only real and serious opposition party in France as well as in Germany; and that the French Radicals 86 are no more serious in their pretended opposition than the German Richters & Co. From that, as Paul says, a real union of all Socialist elements must grow; and the persecution now initiated will hasten it; and if this unification, under the auspices of Jaurès, Millerand & Co, and their lot,d means a lowering of the standard of the official expression of the party, un abaissement de niveau intellectuel et politique,e this comes from the previous indulging in revolutionary phraseology, as Paul also sees very clearly, and is but the necessary consequence of it.

Love from Louise. Freyberger who sends his kind regards has just been re-

[^1]: a K. Marx and F. Engels, Manifesto of the Communist Party - b in the interests of the French language and the authors of the Manifesto - c Court of appeal - d See this volume, p. 318 - c a lowering of theoretical and political level



