---
Volume: 50
Document_Title: "196. Engels to Filippo Turati 31 July "
Page_Range: "360-361"
---

# 196. Engels to Filippo Turati 31 July 



**[p. 333]**

à Paul.

Ever yours

F.E.

First published in Russian Reproduced from the original in: Marx and Engels, Works, Second Russian Edition, Published in English for the first time Vol. 39, Moscow, 1966

196

ENGELS TO FILIPPO TURATI 387

IN MILAN

London, 31 July 1894 122 Regent’s Park Road, N. W.

My dear Turati,

A certain Mr Pasquali has arrived here a couple of days ago saying that he has been banished for the Sicily business 388 and was obliged to leave Paris, where he was a correspondent for Punto Nero (and in possession of authorisation from the editorial board), but had been threatened by the police.

In Turin he was a preacher or missionary of the English sect of Baptists, and showed me the letter from his ecclesiastical superior in which he was removed from this post because of his socialism.

He will need assistance since, even if he seriously looked for work, he does not speak a word of English.

As in other countries we have had some curious experiences with ex-ec- clesiastics of Christian, Jewish and other religions. I and my other friends here would be obliged to you if you could give us some information on this man, who claims to know you.

Has he indeed been banished from Italy? Has he indeed been obliged to leave Paris to escape pursuit? Has he indeed played a role, and if so, what, in the events in Sicily and in the socialist movement in Italy in general?

