---
Volume: 50
Document_Title: "203. Engels to Eduard Bernstein 6 September "
Page_Range: "372-373"
---

# 203. Engels to Eduard Bernstein 6 September 



**[p. 345]**

Pirst published abridged in English, Printed according to the original in the Labour Monthly No. 11, 1955 and, in French, in Cahiers du Communisme, Translated from the French No. 11, 1955 and in full in F. Engels, P. et L. Lafargue, Correspondance, t. II I, Paris, 1959

203

ENGELS TO EDUARD BERNSTEIN

IN LONDON

Eastbourne, 6 September 1894

4 Royal Parade

Dear Ede,

I shall write and tell Schlüter 25 that you haven’t the time and that he can reprint the piece from the Neue Zeit.

As to Edwards, I would in your place first inquire from the Avelings as to why they refused and what they know about the man. In English the expression ‘DON’T KNOW HIM’ is not wholly unequivocal. If you are prepared to sacrifice the time, it would certainly be quite a good idea, if you prevent an Arndt, say, or a Hyndman, from writing the article. On the other hand contributing to an annual of this sort which has suddenly been brought into being by someone you don’t know can involve you in some unpleasant experiences. The chap can’t take it amiss if you ask him

[^1]: The errata can wait until I return on 18 September. 393 The prefacec won’t be finished until later, but you can come and see it at my house before it goes off. You will find the part on the rate of profit in the book proper. There is nothing new on the subject in the preface, merely a critique of the attempts at solving it. 4° 7

[^2]: a F. Engels, On the History of Early Christianity. - b K. Marx, Capital.-c Preface to Vol. II I of Capital



