---
Volume: 50
Document_Title: "206. Engels to Karl Kautsky 23 September "
Page_Range: "375-377"
---

# 206. Engels to Karl Kautsky 23 September 



**[p. 348]**

Paul’s articles in the Neue Zeit- are on the whole very good.a There are some historical views in them that do him great credit. The exposition of the causation and course of French history since 1871 is the best I have yet seen. I have learned a good deal from them.

But the considérant of the Nantes agricultural programme, 406 which declares it the duty of the Socialists to maintain and defend the peasants’ property, and even the fermiers and métayers who employ labourers, is more than most people outside France will be able to swallow.

Kind remembrances from the Freybergers. Ever yours

F. Engels

First published, in Russian, Reproduced from the original in: Marx and Engels, Works, Second Russian Edition, Published in English for the first time Vol. 39, Moscow, 1966

206

ENGELS TO KARL KAUTSKY 410

IN STUTTGART

London, 23 September 1894 122 Regent’s Park Road, N. W.

Dear Baron,

Your appeal for documents on the Internationalb reached me while I was still in Eastbourne. Unfortunately I couldn’t ask Ede to look out something for you, as I had brought the keys to my cupboards with me and he would have had to search through several of them—I myself

[^1]: a P. Lafargue, ‘Der Klassenkampf in Frankreich’, Die Neue Zeit, Nos. 46, 479 48, 49, 1893-94, Vol. II - b See this volume, p. 346





**[p. 349]**

Many thanks for the Entwicklung in Armenian. Luckily I can’t read it. As regards the fee for Marx’s chapters, kindly deduct this from, or alternatively charge it against, the fee for my own article and remit it to me for the heirs. Should mine be insufficient, kindly set off the difference against future contributions. 411

Needless to say copies of the complete issue will do just as well as off- prints of the article. I only need them for one or two quite specific incidental purposes.

The payment of fees to the Austrians remains in force until further notice. The Italians are beginning to fill me with dread. Yesterday that blath-erer Enrico Ferri sent me all his recent writings along with an over-cordial letter which only served to make me feel less cordial towards him than ever. And yet one is expected to send the chap a courteous reply! His book on Darwin- Spencer-Marxd is an atrocious hotchpotch of insipid rubbish. The Italians will long continue to suffer from this their younger generation of heddicated bourgeois. I shall doubtless soon have to do something to put an end to the ominous increase in my popularity (which the chaps are not fostering

The war between China and Japan 409 signifies the end of the old China and with it the total if gradual revolution of the entire economic base until the old ties between agriculture and rural industry have been dissolved

[^1]: WITHOUT A CONSIDERABLE EYE TO BUSINESS). Meanwhile I shall make a bit of an example of Achille Loria in the preface to the 3rd volume.e

[^2]: a E. Bernstein, ‘Der dritte Band des Kapital’, Die Neue Zeit, Nos, 11-14, 16, 17, 209 1894-95, Vol. I - b Schattner - c F. Engels, Socialism: Utopian and Scientific -d E. Ferri, Socialismo e scienza positiva (Darwin, Spencer, Marx), Roma, 1894 - e P. Engels, Preface [to K. Marx’s Capital, Vol. II I]



