---
Volume: 50
Document_Title: "207. Engels to Emile Vandervelde 21 October "
Page_Range: "377-379"
---

# 207. Engels to Emile Vandervelde 21 October 



**[p. 350]**

Many regards from one household to the other.

Yours,

F.E.

We shall shortly be moving to 41 Regent’s Park Road, nearer to St Mark’s Church; more details anon.

First published in: Printed according to the original Aus der Frühzeit des Marxismus.

Engels Briefwechsel mit Published in English in full Kautsky, Prag, 1935 for the first time

207

ENGELS TO EMILE VANDERVELDE

IN BRUSSELS

[Draft]

[London, after 21 October 1894]

Dear citizen Vandervelde,

Allow me to express my congratulations to you personally on your elec- tion, and also to our Belgian comrades in general on their splendid successes these last two Sundays. 412 This second victory of the Belgian proletariat is of great importance for us all.b Small countries such as Belgium and Switzerland are our modern political laboratories, the testing ground

[^1]: a ruin - b The following phrase is crossed out by Engels: “If a small country like yours is not destined to resolve the great problems of our epoch on its own”





**[p. 351]**

At the moment we are, it seems to me, in a period of high tide, a period which dates from the suffrage victory of the Belgian workers. 276 After Belgium, Austria joined the suffrage movement; following Austria, pro- letarian Germany has just requested that universal suffrage be extended from the Reichstag to the parliaments of the federal states. The repressive laws launched against the worker parties in France 383 and Italy, 401 similar laws being prepared in Germany, will have no more success than the violent measures of the Austrian government. Today the socialist movement everywhere is more powerful than the so-called public force.b

As for the Belgian workers, 14th October assures them an even stronger position. For the first time they have learned to know precisely their own forces and those of the enemy; thus henceforth they will be able to base their tactical decisions on knowledge of the situation; and you and the other socialist representatives will be able to raise your heads still higher, and will be listened to with considerably more attention following official recognition of the fact that you are the mouthpiece of 350,000 Belgian citizens. It is with you that the Belgian proletariat is making its ‘joyous entry’ into parliament, an entry that is joyous not only for you, but for the proletarians of the whole of Europe!

Published in English for the first time

[^1]: First published in Russian in: Printed according to the original Marx and Engels, Works, First Russian Edition, Vol. XXIX, Translated from the French Moscow, 1946

[^2]: a of 1848 in France - b the following words are crossed out by Engels “This splendid victory of the Belgian socialists marks a new stage”



