---
Volume: 50
Document_Title: "212. Engels to Friedrich Adolph Sorge 10 November "
Page_Range: "382-386"
---

# 212. Engels to Friedrich Adolph Sorge 10 November 



**[p. 212]**

ENGELS TO FRIEDRICH ADOLPH SORGE 417

IN HOBOKEN

London, 10 November 1894 41 Regent’s Park Road, N. W.

Dear Sorge,

From the above address you will see that I have moved house. After Louise’s marriage our old home had become rather too cramped and, since the consequences of that marriage soon manifested themselves, we could no longer make do. We therefore took a larger house which became available a little further down the road, close by the gates into Regent’s Park and, after a great bother, moved in four weeks ago—bother with house agents, solicitors, contractors, furniture salesmen, etc., and it’s not yet over, my books being still in great disarray. Downstairs we have our communal living-rooms, on the first floor my study and bedroom, on the second Louise, her husband, the baby daughter, born on Tuesday the 6th of this month, and nursery maid, on the third floor the two housemaids, lumber-room and visitor’s room. My study is at the front, has three windows and is so big that I can accommodate nearly all my books (eight cases full) in it and yet, despite its size, very nice and easy to heat. In short, we are a lot better off. In the circumstances Louise and her baby are very well, and everything went off swimmingly.

Today, you will get two fat parcels, 3 copies of the (Berlin) Sozialdemokrat, 3 of the Pest Volksstimme, the rest of the proceedings of the Party Conference in the Vorwärts 418 and a Critica Sociale containing a letter by me. 1 Because of the removal, we have not been able to send things quite so regularly. The Workman’s Times no longer exists, more’s the pity. Tussy’s articles in it were the only ones in which the truth about the Continental movement was neither withheld from the English workers nor falsified.

The movement in this country continues to resemble the American one except in being a little more advanced than yours, The instinct of the

[^1]: a F. Engels, ‘International Socialism and Italian Socialism’





**[p. 356]**



[^1]: a Queen Victoria - b Edward Albert, Prince of York





**[p. 357]**

On the Continent success has kindled an appetite for more success, and peasant-catching in the literal sense of the terma is coming to be all the rage. First the French declare at Nantes, through Lafargue, 419 not only that it is no business of ours (I had already written and told them as muchb) to precipitate the ruin of the small peasant by direct intervention, a task that may safely be entrusted to capitalism, but also that it behoves us actually to protect the small peasant against taxation, usury and the big landowner. But we cannot go along with this, firstly because it is stupid and secondly because it is impossible. Next, Vollmar 418 goes to Frankfurt and actually proposes to bribe your peasant as such; nor is the peasant with whom he is concerned in Upper Bavaria, your small, debt-ridden Rhenish chap, but your middling if not big peasant who exploits his farmhands, male and female, and sells cattle and grain in quantity. And that would not be feasible unless one were to abandon the whole principle of the thing. We can only win over the Alpine peasants and the big peasants of Lower Saxony and Schleswig-Holstein at the cost of betraying their ploughboys and day labourers, and in so doing we should lose politically more than we should gain. The Frankfurt Party Conference failed to come to any decision on this question and that is a good thing, in as much as the matter will now be properly gone into; the people who attended it knew far too little about peasants, or rural conditions, which vary so greatly from province to province, to do anything more than form resolutions out of thin air. But the matter will have to be settled sooner or later.

[^1]: a In German peasant-catching {Bauernfängerei) also means confidence trick. - b See this volume, p. 348





**[p. 358]**

Following the electoral victories in Belgium, 412 the Belgians and French are making arrangements for the socialist parliamentarians in the various countries to keep in regular touch with each other and hold periodic conferences. Whether anything will come of this is questionable. At the moment the fifty French parliamentarians (among them some twenty-six Radical 86 converts of a somewhat dubious kind) are very pleased with themselves, but there are snags. Amongst the twenty-four old Socialists a fierce but silent struggle is going on between the Marxists on the one hand and the Blanquists 20 and Allemanists 21 (Possibilists 30) on the other; whether it will result in an open breach is hard to say.

Besides other socialist papers, I am now also sent the Romanian one (Munca) and the Bulgarian (formerly Rabotnik (Working Man), now (Socialist), and am gradually familiarising myself with those languages, The Romanians are going to bring out a daily in Bucharest.a

More than any other world event, the death of the Russian Tsar is likely to bring about a change, either as a result of an internal movement or as a result of a financial crisis and the impossibility of obtaining money abroad. I cannot suppose that the existing system will continue to subsist if it brings to the throne an idiot whose health, both physical and mental, has been shattered by onanism. (This fact is notorious in all the faculties of medicine. Krause, a professor at Dorpat,b who attended Nicholas, informed Tsar Alexander at the latter’s request that this—onanism—was the immediate cause of the illness, was boxed over the ears for his pains, resigned, returned the Order of Vladimir sent him after his departure, and went back to Germany where he related the story.) If the fun begins in Russia, however, young William, too, will become aware that something novel is afoot. For then a liberal wind will blow through Europe—a wind which now can only be of benefit to us.

The war in China 409 has given the coup de grâce to the old China. Isolation has become impossible, for the introduction of railroads, steam

[^1]: a Lumea noua. - b Modern name: Tartu



