---
Volume: 50
Document_Title: "213. Engels to Laura Lafargue 12 November "
Page_Range: "386-389"
---

# 213. Engels to Laura Lafargue 12 November 



**[p. 359]**

I hope you and your wife are feeling better than when you wrote last. Though I am not feeling at all bad myself, one does notice after a while how wide is the gap between 73 and 37.

Cordial regards to yourself and your wife,

Yours,

F.E.

First Russian Edition, Vol. XXIX, Moscow, 1946

Printed according to the original

Published in English in full for the first time

213

ENGELS TO LAURA LAFARGUE

AT LE PERREUX

London, 12 November 1894 41 Regent’s Park Road, N. W.

My dear Lö hr,

First published abridged in: Briefe und Auszüge aus Briefen von Joh. Phil. Becker, Jos. Dietzgen, Friedrich Engels, Karl Marx u.A. an F.A. Sorge und Andere, Stuttgart, 1906 and in full, in Russian, in: Marx and Engels, Works,

[^1]: Qui s’excuse s’accuse,a you began your letter of 24th October, and your

[^2]: a one who offers excuses accuses oneself





**[p. 360]**

However this morning I hunted up the October and September Nos. of that revue from my higgledy-piggledy books and compared them with the original. Je vous en fais mes complimentsc—this is better then even the Feuerbach! 310 It is the first French translation of the old Manifest I read with real and unbroken pleasure. Unfortunately the November No. which contains the Conclusion has not yet come to hand, so I cannot look them over. A few suggestions follow, they are very unimportant.

You may well say trois déménagements valent un incendiéd more than once I felt inclined to throw all my books into the fire, and house and all, such a bother it was. But now I expect the worst is over—that is to say the only little evil to contend with now is a flooded coal cellar and a sweating wine cellar! But that, too, must at last be vanquished.

The Czare is dead, vive lé Czar,f and indeed the poor beggar does require all the encouragement the French bourgeoisie and press can give him by their shouts. He is next door to an idiot, weakly in mind and body, and promises just that vacillating reign of a man a mere playball of other people’s cross-purpose-intrigues which is wanted to break up finally the Russian despotic system. Financial difficulties will help. Mother Crawford let it out the other day that France now holds not less than eight milliards of Russian Rentesg which accounts for the failure of the

[^1]: a exiles -b K. Marx and F. Engels, Manifesto of the Communist Party. -c My compliments to you - d three removals amount to one fire - e Alexander II I - f Nicholas II - g loans





**[p. 361]**

Many thanks for your offer to translate my Urchristentum; 420 but do you really think that theological subject—especially II and II I—attractive enough for French readers? I have my very strong misgivings. The I article might perhaps pass: les Internationaux sous l’empire des Césarsb or something like it—however that I leave entirely to you.

Bebel confirms in a letter today that Vollmar had said in Frankfurt, 418 had expressly approved the new programme agricole of Nantes; 406 now the only thing I wrote to anybody about it was to youc: that I was afraid the French would stand alone with their appeal to support, in this present condition, the petits propriétaires and even les fermiers qui sont obligés d’exploiter des ouvriers.d So Vollmar’s assertion is an invention of his own. Unfortunately it will compel me to reply in public 421 and in order to avoid provoking fresh misunderstandings, I shall be obliged to speak of the peasant question more fully, and then I cannot pass by the Nantes debates. I shall send it to the Neue Zeit,e perhaps you will find that more interesting than Christianity.f

This is how one gets always interrupted! This confounded peasant question will take me another week. And yet I have my hands full with work urgently needed, even before I come to start what I ought to do: the history of Mohr’s part in the International. And that leads me to something: in the Berlin (anarchist) Sozialist they publish from the Société Nouvelle a letter of Bakounine—very long—in which he gives his version of the Hague affair 115 etc.g Is that to be had in Paris? Or does it appear in Brussels? The German text I have only received in fragments, possibly in

[^1]: a simpletons - b the Internationals during the Caesars’ empire - c See this volume, p. 348 - d small proprietors and even farmers who are obliged to exploit labourers — e F. Engels, The Peasant Question in France and Germany —f F. Engels, On the History of Early Christianity -g M. Bakunin, ‘Ein unbekanntes Schreiben’, Der Sozialist, Nos. 40, 41, 44, 45, 46, 48, 49, September 29, October 6, 27, November 3, 10, 24, December l, 1894—



