---
Volume: 50
Document_Title: "214. Engels to August Bebel and Paul Singer 14 November "
Page_Range: "389-390"
---

# 214. Engels to August Bebel and Paul Singer 14 November 



**[p. 362]**

Paul says he wants to dedicate to me his Evolution de la propriété. 568

Very much obliged to him. In general I would rather remain undedicated, but I leave it entirely to him.

Praise no one happy before his death, said Solon. He must have foreseen the case of my présidence d’honneura over the présidence effectivea of Regnard! Who ever would have thought that! of all men, Regnard!

Ever yours F.E.

September No.

Page 4 - alinéa 2, Verkehrsmittel is given moyens de communication.c

Verkehr we used in the Manifesto generally in the sense of Handelsverkehr,d

and later on it is always translated correctly échange. In this passage échange would be better, though it is of no importance.

Page 7 alinéa 1: La Bourgeoisie, the e left out in the text. Page 10: alinéa 2: der Hausbesitzer,e der Krämer,f is rendered: le petit propriétaireg; would it not be more textual to say: le propriétaire,g le boutiquier,f le prêteur sur gagesh?

Page 12, line 5: misprint: garantie locale for: légale. Page 15, “ 3: Courgeoisie instead of Bourgeoisie:. You see I must take refuge in common misprints in order to find fault! with the text in the October No. I cannot even manage to do that.

Published in English for the first time

214

ENGELS TO AUGUST BEBEL AND PAUL SINGER

IN BERLIN

London, 14 November 1894

To August Bebel & Paul Singer

The thousand pounds I have bequeathed to you for ‘electoral pur-

[^1]: First published, in Russian, Reproduced from the original in Istoriya SSSR, No. 5, 1965

[^2]: a honorary presidency - b actual presidency - c means of communication - d trade relations -e landlord -f shopkeeper -g small proprietor -h usurer



