---
Volume: 50
Document_Title: "220. Engels to Paul Lafargue 22 November "
Page_Range: "395-398"
---

# 220. Engels to Paul Lafargue 22 November 



**[p. 368]**

Apropos, could you, when convenient, insert the enclosed review 427 in such a way that people don’t realise it emanates from me? I don’t want to put a correction in the Vorwärts, or Liebknecht would again append some rigmarole or other, and yet I cannot allow the thing to pass.

Congratulations on son no. II I—as you will have heard, we have also had a lying-in here; Louise having born a strong girl, everything went off all right and the baby girl ought to be called ‘tippling Amalie’!

Yours,

F.E.

First published in: Printed according to the original Aus der Frühzeit des Marxismus

Engels Briefwechsel mit Kautsky Published in English for the first time Prag, 1935

220

ENGELS TO PAUL LAFARGUE 35

AT LE PERREUX

London, 22 November 1894

My dear Lafargue, I have found your report in the Sozialdemokrat. 419 That was lucky, for it has allowed me to put the responsibility for quite a few things on a somewhat careless editorship and to conclude that, although I did not agree with what the Nantes resolution 406 said, I think I agree with what it tried to say. At the same time I have tried to be as friendly as possible; but in view of the way this resolution is being abused in Germany, it is no good remaining silent about it.

The fact is you allowed yourself to lean a bit too much towards the opportunist tendency. At Nantes you came near to sacrificing the future of the Party to a momentary triumph. There is still time to call a halt: if my articlea can contribute towards this, I shall be happy. In Germany—

[^1]: a F. Engels, ‘The Peasant Question in France and Germany’





**[p. 369]**

For some while I have not seen your letters in Vorwärts, and I thought there was some misunderstanding; last Wednesday I was happy to receive a number of ‘Gallus’.a If there are difficulties with the editorial board, let me know, perhaps I could be of some use to you.

If the Russian Government is spending money to strengthen its currency, that is an infallible sign that a new loan is in the air; the French are the only ones who might be tempted; let’s hope they aren’t. But when Russia needs gold, she must naturally try to get it!

Loria will be even more pleased when he reads the preface,b he is treated there as he deserves and without the least regard for ‘il primo economista dell’ Italia’.c

Ministers fall like lead soldiers. The poor young man had to keep quiet and lie low for over eight months; he can’t stand it any longer, he blows up—and there you are! At a time when we are winning a quarter of Belgium, 412 when electoral reform in Austria is about to send our people into Parliament, when in Russia everything is in a state of uncertainty about the future—the young man gets it into his head to outdo Crispi and Casimir Périer! You can tell the effect this will have in Germany from the fact that at the Frankfurt Congress

[^1]: Young Williamd is behaving admirably. He gets it into his head to combat ‘subversive tendencies’ 428 ‘and starts by subverting his own government. 429

[^2]: 418 the delegates, or at least many of them, called for a new repressive law as the best means for the Party to gain ground!

[^3]: a [P. Lafargue] Gallus, ‘Der landwirtschaftliche Kredit in Frankreich’, Vorwärts, No. 259, 6 November 1894. -b F. Engels, - c Preface [to K. Marx’s Capital, Vol. II I] -d ‘the foremost Italian economist’ — e William II





**[p. 370]**

Kiss Laura for me.

Ever yours,

F. E

Louise and the child are well, she and Freyberger send their greetings.

[^1]: First published in part in: Printed according to the original Le Socialiste No. 115, 24 November,

[^2]: 1900 and in full in F. Engels, Translated from the French P. et L. Lafargue, Correspondance, t. II I, Paris, 1959

[^3]: a Rudolf - b Francis Joseph - c Francis Ferdinand - d in France - e Alfred von Windischgrätz



