---
Volume: 50
Document_Title: "224. Engels to Mrs Karpeles 30 November "
Page_Range: "403-404"
---

# 224. Engels to Mrs Karpeles 30 November 



**[p. 376]**

According to you, what is at stake is ‘the bringing about of effective action’. Very nice, too, but when exactly is the action going to start?a

First published, in Russian, abridged in the newspaper Pravda, No. 195, 17 July 1931 and in full in: Marx and Engels, Works. First Russian Edition, Vol. XXIX, Moscow, 1946

Printed according to a typewritten copy collated with the text in: W. Liebknecht, Briefwechsel mit Karl Marx und Friedrich Engels, The Hague, 1963

Published in English for the first time

224

ENGELS TO MRS KARPELES

IN VIENNA

[London,] 30 November 1894 41 Regent’s Park Road, N. W.

Dear Madam,

May I tender my warmest thanks for the delightful present you were so kind as to send me for my birthday? I value it all the more highly, not only for being your own handiwork, but also and above all for your having found leisure to do it at a time when you already had enough and more than enough to do for the little one that is on its way. For during that self-same time I was again afforded an opportunity of seeing, here in my own house, what a multitude of cares and preoccupations the expectation of motherhood involves.b I have all the more reason to pride myself in a present made for me at such a time.

I put it to use at once, on my birthday, when I took a short siesta. One sleeps upon it as sweetly as the proverbial ‘quiet conscience’ upon a ‘good pillow’. In fact I feel pretty sure that it would be able to cope without dif- ficulty even with a pretty uneasy conscience.

[^1]: a the end of this letter is not extant - b Engels is referring to Louise Freyberger’s expectant child



