---
Volume: 50
Document_Title: "227. Engels to Friedrich Adolph Sorge 12 December "
Page_Range: "408-409"
---

# 227. Engels to Friedrich Adolph Sorge 12 December 



**[p. 381]**

Published in English for the first time

227

ENGELS TO FRIEDRICH ADOLPH SORGE

IN HOBOKEN

London, 12 December 1894

Dear Sorge,

Today one copy of Marx’s Capital, Vol. II I, has gone off to you by reg- istered Book Post. I trust you will get it.

‘What has earned us such an undeserved stroke of luck as the ‘lese- majestie’ suit brought at little Willie’sa behest against our chaps for having remained seated in the Reichstag, is beyond my comprehension. 436 No one could have done us a greater service. Little Willie and ‘Mr von Kö ller, Whatever they do there’s worse to foller’ are a fine pair and as if cut out to get everything into a mess and us—out of it.

Bebel has emerged victorious. In the first place, after Bebel’s articles Vollmar broke off the controversy, 434 in the second, his appeal to the Executive was most resolutely rejected and, in the third, he appealed to the parliamentary group but the latter, having been declared incompetent by Bebel, admitted its incompetence, which means that the matter will come up before the next Party Conference, when Bebel can be certain of a majority of two-thirds or three-quarters.

It is the third campaign Vollmar has fought for a leading position in the party outside of Bavaria. On the first occasion he demanded that we should actively support Caprivi and become government socialists. 437 On the second, that we should go in for state socialism and assist the present German Empire in its socialist experiments. 438 On both he got a flea in his ear. And now he has got another.

[^1]: a William II



