---
Volume: 50
Document_Title: "228. Engels to Victor Adler 14 December "
Page_Range: "409-412"
---

# 228. Engels to Victor Adler 14 December 



**[p. 382]**

Yours,

F. E.

Out of gratitude to Schlüter for sending me the CENSUS REPORTS, A etc., I have also sent him a copy of Volume II Ib by registered BOOK POST. But since I do not know whether his address, 935 Washington, still holds good, I have sent it to him care of the Volkszeitung, P. 0. Box 1512, N. Y. City. Would you be so good as to let him know this?

First published abridged in: Briefe und Auszüge aus Briefen von Joh. Phil. Becker, Jos. Dietzgen, Friedrich Engels, Karl Marx u. A, an F. A. Sorge und Andere, Stuttgart, 1906 and In full, in Russian, in: Marx and Engels, Works, First

Russian Edition, Vol. XXIX, Moscow, 1946

Printed according to the original

Published in English for the first time

228

ENGELS TO VICTOR ADLER

IN VIENNA

London, 14 December 1894 41 Regent’s Park Road, N. W.

Dear Victor,

Your letters of 12 and 26 safely received. So the K. Kautsky business has been settled. Best thanks for your good wishes for my birthday. I can assure you that it has been brought home to me and impressed upon my

[^1]: a Department of the Interior, Census Office. Compendium of the Eleventh Census: 1890, Parts I- II , Washington, 1892-1894 - b of Capital





**[p. 383]**

I need hardly tell you how pleased I was about the resolute stand Bebel adopted after the feeble Party Conference. 425 I was also pleased to have been indirectly compelled by Vollmar to throw in a word or two on this account.a We have in fact been victorious all along the line. First, Vollmar’s exit from the lists after Bebel’s four articles 434 in itself an unequivocal retreat, then the rebuff administered by the Executive; then the repudiation by the par- liamentary group of the claim that it, rather than the Party Conference, should act as arbiter. I.e. Vollmar has suffered defeat after defeat in this, his third unsuccessful campaign. That should suffice even an erstwhile papal Zouave. 439 I have written Liebknecht two letters about this,b from which he will have derived little pleasure. The man is becoming ever more obstructive. He still claims to have the best nerves in the party—no great shakes, to go by his rotten speech in the Reichstag the day before yesterday. 440 Nor, it seems, has this gone unnoticed in government circles where an attempt is clearly being made to help him onto his legs again by accusing him of lese -majestie,

436 allegedly committed a posteriori.

feeble-minded, weak-willed old gentleman, and nothing but Mr von Köllers man of straw. Köller himself is a typical Junker—vain, forceful and narrow- minded, and is capable of presenting himself to Little Willie as the man who will put paid to ‘subversion’ and carry out to the very letter His Majesty’s intentions with regard to the restoration of the royal prerogative. And William is capable of saying in reply: ‘You are a man after my own heart!’ If that’s how matters stand—and every day brings fresh indications that it is— then vogue la galere!e We’ll be in for a merry time.

[^1]: That affair proves, by the way, either that Williamc and von Köller are completely crazy or that they are deliberately trying to engineer a coup d’état. Hohenlohe’s speech has demonstrated that he is an utterly gormless,d

[^2]: a F. Engels, The Peasant Question in France and Germany —b See this volume, pp. 373 -75 ; the editors do not possess the second letter. - c William II - d lacking awareness, dull, stupid, uncomprehending - e let the worst happen





**[p. 384]**

Months ago, in September or early October, she wrote to you saying: ‘There is now a group of people who, though not members of the party, nevertheless have confidence in you and in particular believe that you are the man to help the daily Arbeiter-Zeitung 377 along the road to financial success as well, always providing that you are given the leading position.’ They are therefore prepared to assign to you a considerable sum for the daily Arbeiter- Zeitung—amounting, I understand, to some 5,000 fl., on condition that:

1. You accept the senior position on the paper. 2. The thing is treated purely as a business investment and interest is regularly paid.

3. All negotiations, payments, etc., are dealt with by you in Vienna and by Louise over here.

These, to the best of my recollection, were the conditions upon which the offer was made. ‘Well, there has been no response of any kind from you, either to the above or to any of Louise’s subsequent letters. Last week she wrote again, asking for an immediate reply which had to be here by Tuesday, the 11th, at the latest. In vain. Now this can only mean one of two things: Either you in your correspondence are so enmeshed in a web of postal and other kinds of intrigue that it is virtually impossible to get a letter to you, or your disinclination to answer letters is such that you would rather forego the money that has been offered you than write to Louise.

Either way we have got to know where we stand. The chaps are pressing for a decision for, if you refuse the money, they will invest it elsewhere. We have therefore been compelled to send this letter to Mrs Anna Pernerstorfer, with the request that she deliver it to you in person and to no one else. We would now ask you—-for the very last time—if you would kindly let us know whether or not you wish to negotiate with us and or Louise regarding the money. If you do, you must tell her how letters are to be addressed to you, whereupon we shall send a reply by ‘registered’ mail.

