---
Volume: 50
Document_Title: "232. Engels to Paul Lafargue 18 December "
Page_Range: "416-418"
---

# 232. Engels to Paul Lafargue 18 December 



**[p. 389]**

1) Dühring,a 3rd edition—I had only 6 copies, which I sent to no one except Mme Lafargue and Mme Aveling. The rest have been taken, as always happens. I have found one more copy which I will send to you immediately.

2) Capital, 3rd volume. If it is on sale in Paris and elsewhere, this is be- cause the editor has displayed exemplary avarice towards me. There were copies in Rome before I had received a single one! However, I am expecting another delivery in a few days, and then I will be able to send you the copy long since intended for you.

I hope you are keeping well—as for me, I cannot complain, but I am beginning to realise that 74 is not 47. However, events should help us to maintain our vital forces, the whole of Europe is warming up, crises are brewing everywhere, particularly in Russia. The situation cannot last much longer over there. So much the better.

Yours

F. Engels

Please note the change of address!

in: K. Marx and F. Engels,

Published in English for the first time

232

ENGELS TO PAUL LAFARGUE 35

AT LE PERREUX

London, 18 December 1894

41 Regent’s Park Road

My dear Lafargue,

I am returning Lavrov’s letter to Laura. I replied to him at once to say

[^1]: First published, in Russian, Printed according to the original

[^2]: Works, First Russian Edition, Translated from the French Vol. XXIX, Mosoow, 1946

[^3]: a F. Engels, Anti-Dübring





**[p. 390]**

Meissner supplied me, and still supplies me, after he has supplied everyone else. I am also sending you a copy for Deville.

As I said: the (Nantes) programme 406 itself has only one pointless clause: the reduction of LEGAL rates of interest, i.e., the revival of the ancient laws against usury whose total uselessness was demonstrated 2,000 years ago. You cannot effectively reduce the rates of interest paid by mortgaged peasants without turning all mortgages on property into debts against the State, in which case you are free to reduce the interest—except that you lose money yourself, when it falls due. And also the clause on hunting, as it is drafted, is self-contradictory.

Not only is young Williamc cracked, but this time he is pushing things to a crisis. The new chancellord is simply a man of straw, the moving spirit in the new government is Köller (der macht as immer döller,e as Kladderadatsch said of him years ago). They are provoking a conflict with the Reichstag. They are going to prosecute Liebknecht for lese-majesty after the closure. 436 They are pressing for a dissolution which will mean a recalcitrant Reichstag in Berlin and then—a little coup d’état. We may look forward to some nice happenings in Germany if everything turns out as these gentlemen visualise.

In Italy, too, the monarchy is hard pressed. The Crown Princef is involved in the Banca Romana to the tune of 300,000 francs, the Kingg in the name of various nominees, for very much larger amounts. All that is well known. Crispi is mortally wounded by Giolitti’s sensational move 445—the whole of Parliament as well as all the higher officials are compromised by it, and in simple-minded Italy they are still so Catholic, that is to say, pagan, that all this is done in broad daylight and there is no means of concealing the corruption, of which, on the contrary, they boast—until there is a crisis.

And then, Russia—the unknown, where only one thing is certain: that the present regime will not be able to stand a change of tsar, and there will be a crisis there too.

What you say about the effect produced by the little scene in the Reichstag goes for England as well. All the years of work, all the electoral and real victories count for nothing; a little melodramatic scene—that is

[^1]: a K. Marx, Capital, Vol. II I. -b See previous letter. -c William II - d Prince zu Hohenlohe - e Who lets himself go more and more. - f Vittorio Emmanuele - g Umberto I



