---
Volume: 50
Document_Title: "237. Engels to Laura Lafargue 29 December "
Page_Range: "421-424"
---

# 237. Engels to Laura Lafargue 29 December 



**[p. 394]**

Good luck and success to the daily Arbeiter-Zeitung!

Yours

Printed according to the original collated with the newspaper

Published in English for the first time

237

ENGELS TO LAURA LAFARGUE

AT LE PERREUX

London, 29 December 1894 41 Regent’s Park Road, N. W.

My dear Löhr,

Thanks for your news of the 23rd about the Allemanists 21 and their dissensions—this sets me up again as far as the personalia of the Parisian movement are concerned. I hope the whole set of Allemanists will soon be smashed up and whatever is decent among them joining our people who, if they wait patiently, seem to stand the best chance of absorbing gradually all the rest.

May the new dailies flourish 449 and soon bring forth a Parisian daily! As to the preface to the French Manifest,a my proposal would be that

First published abridged in the Arbeiter-Zeitung. No. 1, 1 January 1895 and in full, in Russian, in: Marx and Engels, Works, First Russian Edition, Vol. XXIX, Moscow, 1946

[^1]: a K. Marx and F. Engels, Manifesto of the Communist Party





**[p. 395]**

Last Sunday Tussy being in Manchester sent me your letter to her about Vol. IV. 443 I am quite willing and shall be glad to assist her if she will undertake the work of writing out the original Manuscript.

As to what you say about Mohr’s papers and their treatment in case of my death, the matter is simple enough. All these things I hold in trust for you, that you know; and consequently on my death they revert to you. In the last will I made (when Sam Moore was here last time but one) there is no special provision, but in the instructions to my executors accompanying it, there is a distinct direction to them, to hand over to Tussy, as the administrator of the will, the whole of Mohr’s Manuscripts that are in his own handwriting, also all letters addressed to him with the sole exception of my own correspondence with him.b And as Tussy seems to have some doubt about the matter, I shall as soon as Sam Moore comes back in Summer ask him to draw up a new will in which this is distinctly and unmistakably declared. If you have any other wish please let me know.

Adler writes about Paul’s correspondence for the daily Arbeiter Zeitung: ‘was Lafargue anlangt so habe ich nichts gegen französische Korrespondenzen, ich werde viel übersetzen müssen. Natürlich wird Frankel regelmässig schreiben—Lafargue ist ein Korrespondent wie ich es für den Vorwärts bin, selten, aber dann lang. Nun wäre mir ja mit seinen geistsprühenden Artikeln sehr gedient, wenn ich nicht fürchtete dass er mir dieselben schickt wie an Vorwärts und Echo.c Kannst Du arrangieren dass er mir etwa zweimal im Monat oder bei besondern Anlässen schreibt, so wäre es mir ein grosser Gefallen, wir können nur nicht viel zahlen, 20 fr. für den Artikel müsste ihm genügen.’d

[^1]: a See this volume, p. 371 - b See this volume, pp. 364 - c Hamburger Echo — d ‘As regards Lafargue, I have nothing against French correspondence, I shall have a lot to translate. Naturally Frankel will write regularly—Lafargue is a correspondent of the kind that I am for Vorwärts, infrequent, but then long-writing. Of course his scintillating articles would be very welcome if I were not afraid that he would send me the same as those for Vorwärts and Echo. Can you arrange for him to write for me, say twice a month or on special occasions; that would be a great help to me, only we cannot pay much, he would have to make do with 20 francs an article.’





**[p. 396]**

We have not been able to see anything in the English papers about G. Richard’s election. 451 Is he en ballottage? Your figures 1,802 votes do not look very encouraging.

In Germany we shall have a busy year. We drank the Umsturz-Kaisers

428jolly good health on Christmas day so he will now perhaps be satisfied.

A very happy and pleasant New Year to you and Paul from all of us here!

Ever yours

F. Engels

First published, in the language Reproduced from the original of the original (English), in: F. Engels, P. et L. Lafargue, Correspondance, t. II I (1891-95), Paris, 1959

[^1]: The seaside at Eastbourne



