---
Volume: 50
Document_Title: "239. Engels to Ludwig Kugelmann 1 January "
Page_Range: "425-426"
---

# 239. Engels to Ludwig Kugelmann 1 January 



**[p. 239]**

ENGELS TO LUDWIG KUGELMANN

IN HANOVER

London, 1 January 1895 41 Regent’s Park Road, N. W.

Dear Kugelmann,

I am most grateful to you, your wife and your daughter for your kind good wishes which I sincerely reciprocate. But now we had better get down to business straight away, as I am overwhelmed with correspondence, etc. 453

If I understood you aright, the collection in America was mainly to do with Marx’s articles in the Tribune. I have two collections of these over here, of which one at any rate is incomplete and probably both, since the Tribune also published Marx’s articles as unsigned leaders. A third collection could therefore only be of use to me for the purpose of completing the set and that was why I suggested at the time that it should be temporarily housed in the archives where I could always have access to it when necessary.

But you now speak of earlier things, i.e. stuff from the period up till 1851, and that, of course, is quite a different matter and not what I had understood you to say in Berlin. 454 These things are in fact of the utmost value and it is only the lack of them that has prevented me from bringing out a complete edition of these lesser works as well as of the articles by Marx and myself that appeared between 1842 and 1852. It has long been my wish to publish these things, once I am in some sort of a position to do so and if, therefore, you can place as many of them as possible at my disposal, you will be making your own contribution towards that end. In which case I shall resume my search for a copy of the Rheinische Zeitung of 1842, chiefly with regard to Marx’s articles.

Please tell me again where the collection originated and, if you cannot at once get hold of the things themselves, kindly procure for me, if possible, a list of the books, periodicals, etc., contained therein, but excluding the Tribune articles. 455

Since the beginning of last year Mrs Kautsky has not been Mrs Kautsky

