---
Volume: 50
Document_Title: "240. Engels to Hermann Schluter 1 January "
Page_Range: "426-428"
---

# 240. Engels to Hermann Schluter 1 January 



**[p. 399]**

So once again a Happy New Year and kindest regards to you all from Louise and myself.

Yours,

F. Engels As regards the misprint, which is itself a misprint, I shall look into the matter. 456

First published in: Printed according to the original Marx and Engels, Works, First Russian Edition, Published in English for the first time Vol. XXIX, 1946

240

ENGELS TO HERMANN SCHLII TER 184

IN HOBOKEN

London, 1 January 1895 41 Regent’s Park Road, N. W.

Dear Schlüter,

Your letter of 11 August still remains unanswered, nor have I yet thanked you for the Census Compendiuma which arrived safely. I have, however, been overwhelmed with all manner of work, while urgent party

[^1]: a Department of the Interior. Census Office. Compendium of the Eleventh Census: 1890.





**[p. 400]**

As Sorge will have told you, I have sent you a copy of Volume II I of Capital addressed to the Volkszeitung, as I didn’t know whether your Hoboken address still held good. At all events the Volkszeitung seemed safer to me. I could not, however, pass on your commission to Ede, he having long since been engaged for the same purpose by the Neue Zeit. 457 I ought really to have advised you of this—please accept my apologies.

Over here things are much the same as with you. Amongst the masses the socialist instinct is becoming ever stronger, but whenever it behoves them to translate their instinctive impulses into clear ideas and demands, the chaps at once go their several ways, some to the Social Democratic Federation, 44 others to the Independent Labor Party, 114 while the rest stay put in the Independent Labour Party, Trades Unions Organization etc., etc. In short, not a party but so many sects. The leaders are nearly all of them pretty unreliable fellows, while the candidates for the supreme leadership, though thick on the ground, are by no means eminently fitted for the post. At the same time we have the two big bourgeois parties who are standing by, purse in hand, to see whom they can buy. Moreover, what is known as ‘democracy’ over here is much restricted by indirect barriers. Periodicals are shockingly expensive, ditto candidatures for Parliament, ditto life as a Member of Parliament—if only on account of the vast correspondence this entails. To revise the deplorably kept registers of electors also costs a great deal of money and hitherto none but the two official parties have been able to defray that cost. Hence it is unlikely that anyone who does not support either of those parties will appear on the register. People over here are far behind the Continent in all these matters and, what’s more, they are beginning to notice it; again, there is no second ballot, a relative majority or, as you Americans would say,

PLURALITY, being enough. It is a situation in which everything is organised on the basis of only two parties and, until a third party is strong enough to be a match for them, the most it will be able to do is turn the scales. In the same way there is little likelihood of the Trades Unions over here bringing off something on the lines of the Berlin beer boycott 458—a court of arbitration such as was secured over

