---
Volume: 50
Document_Title: "241. Engels to Karl Kautsky 3 January "
Page_Range: "428-430"
---

# 241. Engels to Karl Kautsky 3 January 



**[p. 401]**

On the other hand—as in the case of America—once the workers over here know what they want, the state, the land, industry and everything else will be theirs. This is intended for you alone, not for the Volkszeitung. Louise sends her kindest regards and both of us wish you a very Happy New Year.

Yours,

F. Engels

First published in: Marx and Engels, Printed according to the original Works, First Russian Edition, Vol. XXIX, 1946

241

ENGELS TO KARL KAUTSKY

IN STUTTGART

London, 3 January 1895

Dear Baron,

Firstly, a very Happy New Year from one household to the other, and, secondly, my thanks for the amusing report of the MARE’S NEST discovered by Liebknecht. Hardly had I read the first couple of lines of your account than I realised that it could only refer to the old business with Schweitzer and for me that gave twice the savour to the humour of the situation. 459

Incidentally it will be sufficient if you make a note in your own copy of the variations of the original from the printed text and let me have them some time or other for insertion in mine. I would rather not enter into correspondence with Liebknecht about the copyright of the original ms., for it is improbable that it would get us anywhere.

[^1]: Parts of Fireman’s articlea are, I agree, rendered so complex by his mis-

[^2]: a P. Fireman, Kritik der Marx’schen Werttheorie. In Jahrbücher für Nationalökonomie und Statistik. 3. Folge, Bd. 3, 1892





**[p. 402]**

It would seem that you will be having a thoroughly lively year in Germany. If Mr von Köller carries on in this way, 460 no thing is impos- sible—conflict, dissolution, granting concessions, coup d’état. Obviously he would also be content with less. The Junkers would be happy enough with more generous douceurs, but to obtain these he will have to appeal to certain cravings for personal domination and pander to them to the point at which elements of resistance are also brought into play, and it is here that chance— i.e. what is involuntary, incalculable—comes into play. And to secure those douceurs he will have to raise the spectre of conflict—if he goes a step further, the original aim, the douceur, will become of secondary importance and then it will be a case of Crown versus Reichstag, of bend or break, and that’s when the fun may begin. At the moment I am reading Gardiner’s Personal Government of Charlesa in which the parallels with present-day Germany are so close as to be almost absurd. As, for instance, the arguments over immunity from the consequences of actions performed in Parliament. Were Germany a Latin country, a revolutionary conflict would be inevitable, but as it is, you can’t be certain about nowt, as Jollymeiera used to say.

Meanwhile the business of the peasants has quietly fizzled out, though August’s attack was most meritorious nevertheless and made good much of which had been omitted at Frankfurt. 425

The worthy Bavarian socialists who favour reserved rights will be in no hurry to burn their fingers again.

Amongst the various small factions over here things are, for the moment, jogging along in the usual dilatory way. Though their mutual squabbles are no longer so heated, the intrigues behind the scenes are being conducted with proportionately greater zeal. The masses, on the other hand, who are being instinctively drawn towards socialism, are experiencing a growing urge for conscious and unified action. Though less

[^1]: a Carl Schorlemmer



