---
Volume: 50
Document_Title: "243. Engels to Paul Stumpf 3 January "
Page_Range: "432-434"
---

# 243. Engels to Paul Stumpf 3 January 



**[p. 405]**

Yours

F. Engels

First published in: Marx and Engels, Printed according to the original Works, First Russian Edition, Vol. XXIX, 1946 Published in English for the first time

243

ENGELS TO PAUL STUMPF

IN MAINZ

London, 3 January 1895 41 Regent’s Park Road, N. W.

Dear Old Man,

As you see, I reciprocate your congratulations on the completion of my 74th year (you were kind enough to make me a year younger (than I am) with a resounding Happy New Year. Let us hope that, come the next one, we shall both of us still be hale and hearty; for I have a great desire just to take one peek into the new century, though by the first of January 1901 or thereabouts, I shall be a complete wreck, and then let happen what may.

I was not unduly disturbed about the row in the party. 463 It is much better that things of this kind should crop up from time to time and be properly thrashed out than that people should don their nightcaps. For the very fact that the party has steadily and inexorably grown and expanded has meant that the new elements are more difficult to absorb than their predecessors. The working men of the big cities, i.e. the most intelligent and wideawake, are already ours and what we are now getting are either the working men of the small towns and rural areas, or students, salesmen, etc., or again, those struggling to keep their heads above water,



**[p. 406]**

As you can see from my address, I have, as we used to say, moved a few doors along. This house is much better and more convenient and is very close to the park entrance.

I hope that the ‘Heilig Geist’ where we downed a good few glasses in our time, is still flourishing. 465 I should like to cool off on some hot summer’s day in its Gothic vaults. But who knows what may not happen? One should never say die.

Well, once again a Happy New Year and warm regards from

Yours

F. Engels

