---
Volume: 50
Document_Title: "252. Engels to Friedrich Adolph Sorge 16 January "
Page_Range: "448-451"
---

# 252. Engels to Friedrich Adolph Sorge 16 January 



**[p. 421]**

Kiss Laura for me.

Ever yours,

F. E. Monday [14 January 1895]a: received Le Temps and copies of Petite République. Thanks. First Gérault-Richard and now Rouanet, that’s nice! 482 What luck if this leads to a crisis, to a dissolution and a more and more revolutionary situation in your country and in Germany!

Monday: Aveling told us yesterday that the Labour Leader is on its last legs, the chief backer (said to be Passnevre Edwards, a rich Liberal Unionist) will not put up any more money.

Louise asks me to thank you for the charming card of congratulation which you and Laura sent her.

First published in: Printed according to the original F. Engels, P. et L. Lafargue,

Correspondance, t. II I, Paris, 1959 translated from the French

252

ENGELS TO FRIEDRICH ADOLPH SORGE 113

IN HOBOKEN

London, 16 January 1895 41 Regent’s Park Road, N. W.

Dear Sorge,

475 together with the suggestion that I should get the Neue Zeit to print it!! I replied 25 to the effect that its columns were not at my disposal

[^1]: Have received card of 6th and letters of 19th and 31st Dec. Many thanks. And may I again heartily reciprocate your and your wife’s good wishes for the New Year.

[^2]: By way of a New Year’s greeting Stiebeling sent me his grotesque riposte

[^3]: a These last three paragraphs are written in the margin of this letter.





**[p. 422]**

I cannot understand how it was that you should have failed to receive Volume II Ib until five days after Schlüter had got his. I posted both at the same time on 12 Dec. and the receipts for both are still joined together. I enclose them herewith in case you should wish to lodge a complaint,

I have for some time been aware of the temporary decline of the move- ment in America and it is not the German socialists who will stem it. Though America is the youngest it is also the oldest country in the world. In the same way as you have, over there, the most antiquated furniture designs alongside your own vernacular ones or, in Boston, cabs such as I last saw in London in 1838 and, in the mountains, seventeenth century STAGE COACHES, alongside

PULLMAN CARS, so too you continue to sport all the old mental trappings which Europe has already discarded. Everything that is outmoded here may persist in America for another generation or two. Karl Heinzen, for instance, not to mention religious and spiritualist superstition. Thus you still have old Lassalleans amongst you, while a man like Sanial, who would now seem passé in France, is still able to play a role over there. This may be attributed on the one hand to the fact that, over and above its concern for material production and the accumulation of wealth, America is only now beginning to find time for untramelled intellectual work and the preliminary training this demands; on the other hand, it may also be attributed to the dual nature of America’s development, still engaged as it is on the one hand in the primary task of reclaiming the vast area of untamed country, while being already compelled on the other to compete for first place in industrial production. Hence the UPS AND DOWNS of the movement, according to which point of view takes precedence in the average person’s mind—that of the urban working man or that of the peasant engaged in reclamation. In a couple of years’ time all this will change and then we shall witness a great step forward. The evolution of the Anglo-Saxon RACE with its ancient Teutonic freedom happens to be quite exceptionally slow, pursuing as it does a zig-zag course (small zig-zags here in England, colossal ones on your side of the Atlantic) and tacking against the wind, but making headway none the less.

[^1]: a See this volume, p. 415 - b Capital





**[p. 423]**

and are egging him on to dissolve the Reichstag and stage a coup d’état. At the same time, however, these gentlemen, Köller & Co., despite their ostentatious catchwords, are so poorly endowed with courage that they are already prey to all manner of forebodings, and it may well be asked whether they will not take fright when the moment for action comes.

And as for France! There, as in Italy, the bourgeoisie precipitated itself head first into corruption in a manner that would put America to shame. For the past three years all efforts in both countries have been directed towards finding a bourgeois government—admittedly not free from corruption—but whose immediate involvement in public scandal is nevertheless so slight that a parliament could support it without unduly violating the commonest decencies. In Italy Crispi will hang on for a little while longer only because the Kingb and the Crown Princec are as deeply implicated in the banking scandals as he is himself.d In France, our forty-five or fifty socialist deputies have just toppled their third Ministry on the count of actual corruption, and Casimir-Périer has gone tumbling after. 484 Presumably his intention is to pose as the one and only saviour of

[^1]: a the King’s will is supreme law. - b Umberto I —c Victor Emmanuel — d See this volume, p. 390



