---
Volume: 50
Document_Title: "253. Engels to Laura Lafargue 19 January "
Page_Range: "451-453"
---

# 253. Engels to Laura Lafargue 19 January 



**[p. 424]**

I was very pleased to hear that you and your wife are feeling better. Let us hope the improvement continues.

Many regards to you and your wife from the Freybergers and

Yours

F. Engels

First published abridged in: Briefe und Auszüge aus Briefen von ]oh. Phil. Becker, Jos. Dietzgen, Friedrich Engels, Karl Marx u. A. an F. A. Sorge und Andere, Stuttgart, 1906 and, in full, in: Marx and Engels, Works,

First Russian Edition, Vol. XXIX, 1946

Printed according to the original

Published in English in full for the first time

253

ENGELS TO LAURA LAFARGUE

AT LE PERREUX

London, 19 January 1895 41 Regent’s Park Road N. W. My dear Löhr,

Your last letter has indeed startled me. 485 I have tried, not very success- fully, to recollect the terms used in my letter to you of December 29tha; still, in what I do remember there is not a word which ought to offend you. And indeed, if there is anything in the tone of that letter which you think strange, it is there entirely against my will and intention.

It never could occur, nor has it ever occurred to me for a moment to

[^1]: a See this volume, pp. 394-96





**[p. 425]**

I did indeed feel nettled at the way Tussy caused the question to be submitted to me, and, under the circumstances, thought I was bound to speak to her about it. When I did, I told her, not once, but three or four times over, that I had not one word to say against your letter, neither as to the subject matter, nor as to the terms used. Anyhow, Tussy and I had an explanation, which as far as I know, settled everything connected with that subject, and left us as good friends as before; and I should regret very much if, through any unguarded words of mine, or through some other circumstance, that little incident had thrown its shadow as far as Le Perreux.

In the meantime things have come to a crisis in your neighbourhood. I intended to write at some length about that, but Bebel all at once asked me for historical materials as to the various and pretty frequent riots here in England which are settled without ever attempting to encumber the Statute Book with increased penal laws or exceptional legislation. He is in the Committee on the Umsturzvorlage 428 and wants it for them, so I had to leave everything else alone and get it off by this day’s post before the usual Sunday delays in postal communication retard it.

Anyhow our 50 French Socialist members are in luck. In less than 18 months they have upset three ministries and one president. 484 That shows what a Socialist minority can do in a parliament which, like the French or English, is the really supreme power in the country. A similar power our men in Germany can get by a revolution only; still, the break-up of the Centre party 71 would make them the arbiters of the house and give them the balance of power.

What a miserable retreat is that of Casimir’sa! After the brag with which he came in, to skedaddle at the first serious difficulty! 486 It looks as if our bourgeois heroes had individually degenerated quite as much as their class has done collectively.

[^1]: a Casimir-Périer



