---
Volume: 50
Document_Title: "254. Engels to Paul Lafargue 22 January "
Page_Range: "453-456"
---

# 254. Engels to Paul Lafargue 22 January 



**[p. 426]**

The greatest success, however, seems to me to be this, that the scandalous affairs of the opportunist majority have been again exposed, that Raynal has been nailed down, and that it seems impossible to have the subject burked again. 487 The evidence of the corruption of all other parties must work wonders in favour of ours, especially in France, and ought to secure us immense and unhoped for successes at the next general election which cannot be very distant now, for who can govern with the present Chamber?

Ça chauffe!b and neither Félix Faure nor young Williamc will be able to put out the fire.

I shall write to Paul as soon as ever I get a moment’s time. Thanks for the papers which I have sent on to Tussy after using them.

Ever yours,

F. Engels

First published, in the language Correspondance, t. II I, 1959 of the original (English), in: F. Engels, P. et L. Lafargue, Reproduced from the original

254

ENGELS TO PAUL LAFARGUE 35

AT LE PERREUX

London, 22 January 1895

My dear Lafargue,

How lucky you are, you French! You bring down a Ministerd; then the whole Cabinet follows him and by way of aftereffect the President of

[^1]: a Reference to Pierre-Jean de Béranger’s Le vieux Célibataire - b It’s getting hot! -c William II -d Charles Dupuy





**[p. 427]**

Mr Faure may do what he likes, he cannot halt this process of forming into two opposing camps, nor the confusion which is necessarily born of this interplay of opposing forces, attraction and repulsion, within the milieu of the bourgeois parties. That is precisely the milieu we need, and which the existence of a socialist group creates everywhere, however little power it may have in Parliament. You will race ahead; it is the Party’s progress itself that will first subdue and then eliminate the intestine and traditional quarrels.

The addition of 30 Radicals has brought you luck, without them the group would not have had cohesion. Without Millerand you would not have been able to take advantage of the political situations as you have done. And Jaurès, indeed, seems full of goodwill—if he develops rather slowly it is perhaps a good thing for him and for us. Though frankly, in economic matters he needs further schooling. His Bills for immediate reforms in the Petite République 489 article are not quite as wild as his Bill for a corn monopoly, 13 but they are calling on the bourgeois for sacrifices incompatible with the advance of capitalist industry, so that in their eyes they are tantamount to immediate expropriation; whereas, on the other

[^1]: a Gean Casimir-Périer - b See this volume, p. 275





**[p. 428]**

The presidential crisis furthermore will have a capital effect on European politics. The Franco-Russian alliance is becoming more and more lenitive, insofar as the Russian hope of seeing the restoration of the monarchy emerge from the presidential crisis suffers repeated disillusionment. At the same time the Triple Alliance 126 has ceased to exist except on paper; bankrupt Italy slips through its fingers, Austria is only retained: by fear of war with Russia, for which she would foot the bill; this danger vanishes as Russia loses the chance of using the French army when she sees fit; young Williama has made himself far more disagreeable to his friends than to his enemies. So that, with the complete revolution in weapons since 1870 and, in consequence, of tactics, there is a total uncertainty about the outcome of a war where so many imponderables are involved and regarding which all the calculations made in advance are based on fictitious quantities. In these circumstances we seem to be assured of peace and even the most frenzied bourgeois chauvinists of the Déroulède type can keep calm: the Prussians have taken over responsibility in Alsace for maintaining and nourishing French patriotism.

Herewith cheque for twenty pounds; if that can do you until the beginning of April, I should be glad; at that time I shall have certain payments coming in which will allow me to be more liberal. But, if needs be, I could perhaps, after all, send you ten pounds in March—we’ll see.

Greetings from the Freybergers. Kiss Laura very warmly for me.

Ever yours,

F. E.

[^1]: I am sending you a report of the Norwich Trades Union Congress. 396

[^2]: a William II



