---
Volume: 50
Document_Title: "255. Engels to Ferdinand Tonnies 24 January "
Page_Range: "456-458"
---

# 255. Engels to Ferdinand Tonnies 24 January 



**[p. 429]**

Correspondance, t. II I, Translated from the French Paris, 1959

255

ENGELS TO FERDINAND TONNIES

IN KIEL

London, 24 January 1895 41 Regent’s Park Road, N. W.

Dear Sir,

I still have to thank you for your kindness in sending me your critique of Barth ‘s book and your interesting article on Pestalozzi. 490 I would beg you to excuse the delay which was occasioned by an excess of work, the latter being aggravated by my having moved house (please note the change of address).

I should say that you have let Mr Barth off rather lightly; he would, at any rate, have fared far worse at my hands. However, in literary debate one has to get used to the fact that, lawyer-fashion, one’s opponent suppresses what doesn’t suit his book and introduces extraneous matter if he thinks this will enable him to pull the wool over his reader’s eyes. But in Mr Barth’s case this is done in a manner and to an extent that cannot but lead one to ask whether what we have here is simple ignorance and boneheadedness or deliberate, wilful distortion. To take only his chapter on Marx—how does one explain the horrendous misinterpretations, nearly all of which are incomprehensible in a man who does, after all, claim to have read my Anti- Dühring and Feuerbacha which should have constituted a perfectly adequate antidote? And what can one say about the absurd causal nexus attributed to me on p. 135.

‘In France Calvinism had been conquered, which is why in the eighteenth century, Christianity had become incapable of serving as an ideo-

[^1]: a F. Engels, Ludwig Feuerbach and the End of Classical German Philosophy.





**[p. 430]**

I am interested by what you have to say about August Comte. So far as this ‘philosopher’ is concerned, there still remains, in my opinion, a fair amount of work to be done. For five years Comte was secretary and con- fidant of Saint-Simon. The latter positively suffered from an over-fertile intellect; he was at once a genius and a mystic. Lucid analysis, classification, systematisation, none of this was his cup of tea. Thus in Comte he got hold of a man intended, perhaps, to present this proliferation of ideas to the world in orderly fashion after the Master’s death; Comte’s mathematical training and mode of thought may have made him seem peculiarly suited to the purpose as compared with the other, visionary disciples. But then Comte suddenly broke with the ‘Master’ and withdrew from the school. After quite a while he re-emerged with his ‘positive philosophy’.b In this system there are three characteristic elements; 1. A series of brilliant ideas nearly all of which, however, suffer to a greater or lesser extent from inadequate development; 2. A correspondingly narrow, philistine outlook in stark contrast to that brilliance; 3. A religious system of undoubtedly Saint-Simonian origin but stripped of all mysticism, hierarchically organised and utterly flat—with, at its head, a pope, no less. Thus Huxley was able to say of Comtism 491 that it was Catholicism without Christianity.c

Now I am willing to bet that No. 3 supplies the key to the otherwise incomprehensible inconsistency of Nos 1 and 2; namely, that Comte derived all his brilliant ideas from Saint-Simon but he assembled them in a manner peculiar to himself and by so doing bowdlerised them. By stripping them of the mysticism with which they were imbued, he simultaneously degraded them to a lower level, giving them a philistine slant in accordance with his own lights. A great many of them can be easily traced back to their Saint- Simonian source and I feel sure that certain others would admit of the same treatment if only someone could be found who would seriously apply himself to the task. This fact would assuredly have been discovered long since had not Saint-Simon’s own writings been

[^1]: a F. Engels, Ludwig Feuerbach and the End of Classical German Philosophy.a See present edition, Vol. 26, p. 396 - b A. Comte, Cours de philosophie Positive — c See Th. Henry Huxley, On the Physical Basis of Life. In The Fortnightly Review, No. XXVI, Vol. V, 1 February 1869



