---
Volume: 50
Document_Title: "256. Engels to Ludwig Kugelmann 25 January "
Page_Range: "458-459"
---

# 256. Engels to Ludwig Kugelmann 25 January 



**[p. 431]**

There is one further point I should like to put right, namely the note on p. 513. 492 Marx was never Secretary General to the International but merely Secretary for Germany and Russia. And none of the Comtists in London participated in the founding of the International. At the time of the Commune, Professor E. Beesly did yeoman service in defending the International in the press against the violent attacks then being made upon it, and Frederic Harrison also publicly defended the Commune. 493 But a few years later the Comtists’ attitude towards the labour movement grew perceptibly cooler; Labour was becoming too powerful and, if a proper balance was to be maintained between capitalists and workers (both being, of course, producteur0 in the sense understood by Saint-Simon 494), the former should again, it was felt, be given support, since which time the Comtists have kept quite mum on the subject of the labour question.

Yours sincerely, F. Engels

Printed according to the original

Published in English in full for the first time

256

ENGELS TO LUDWIG KUGELMANN 473

IN HANOVER

[London,] 25 January 1895

Dear Kugelmann,

I cannot yet give you an indication of the compendiums, 495 etc., in which the articles in question may be found, for 1. I shall first have to

First published abridged in; G. Mayer, Eine Biographie, Bd. II , The Hague, 1934 and, in full, in Russian, in Bolsheviks, No. 14, 1935

[^1]: a Saint-Simonian school and religion. - b producers



