---
Volume: 50
Document_Title: "258. Engels to Wilhelm Ellenbogen 28 January "
Page_Range: "462-463"
---

# 258. Engels to Wilhelm Ellenbogen 28 January 



**[p. 435]**

Yours,

F.E.

First published abridged in Printed according to the book Arbeiter-Zeitung, No. 327, 28 November 1920 and in full Published in English in full in: Victor Adlers Aufsätze, for the first time Reden und Briefe. Erstes Heft:

Victor Adler und Friedrich Engels, Vienna, 1922

258

ENGELS TO WILHELM ELLENBOGEN 502

IN VIENNA

London, 28 January 1895 41 Regent’s Park Road, N. W.

Esteemed Comrade,

Unfortunately for somewhat over a year I have been forced to make it my duty politely but firmly to decline all invitations to contribute to festive messages, etc., in particular periodically recurring ones, or to send messages of greetings on holidays (18 March, May Day, etc.), the only deviation from this rule being certain exceptional occasions, which promise an immediate specific effect. When you were bringing out the first issue of the daily in Vienna, I believed congratulations to be indicated.a If I sent you two lines for the May Day address, I would be compelled to do the same for the Czechs, Hungarians, Italians, Germans, Romanians and who knows what other nations and, moreover, probably send in addresses for the various May Day meetings, leave alone anniversaries like the 13thb and 18th of March.

[^1]: a F. Engels, ‘Message of Greetings to the Austrian Workers on the Daily Publication of the Arbeiter-Zeitung’. - b Probably a slip of the pen. Should be 14 March, the day of Karl Marx’s death.



