---
Volume: 50
Document_Title: "261. Engels to Richard Fischer 2 February "
Page_Range: "464-466"
---

# 261. Engels to Richard Fischer 2 February 



**[p. 260]**

ENGELS TO WITOLD JODKO-NARKIEWICZ

IN LONDON

[London,] 2 February 1895 41 Regent’s Park Road, N. W.

Dear Comrade, Unfortunately I can give you absolutely no hint as to how the German comrades might view the proposal regarding the addition to the name of the next congress. 506 So far as I myself am concerned, I think that on this occasion one might oblige the Trades Unions, since the congress will be held on English soil where the Trades Unions have, after all, always got the bulk of organised labour behind them, so that a congress in which they played no part would create a bad impression. At the same time it cannot but be of importance to us to encourage the trend that is driving Trades Unions more and more into the socialist camp. Kindest regards.

Yours,

F. Engels

Dr and Mrs Freyberger also send you their kindest regards.

261

ENGELS TO RICHARD FISCHER

IN BERLIN

London, 2 February 1895 41 Regent’s Park Road, N. W.

Dear Fischer,

You and the others have an odd way of holding a pistol to a fellow’s

[^1]: First published, in the language Printed according to the original of the original (German), in: Z pola walki, No. 4 (12), 1960 Published in English for the first time





**[p. 438]**

So tell me first of all what format and type you are using and how large the edition is to be, also the selling price, for on this occasion I shall, for various reasons, only sell you the right to one edition of a specific size. Meanwhile I shall have a word with Tussy; as soon as I get your reply, I shall let you know for certain.

If you cannot advise me of the exact selling price, it will be sufficient if you say how much you propose to charge per printed sheet.

I assume that you have a copy of the Neue Rheinische Zeitung—Revue from which to reprint. For I myself do not possess one of my own and if I did I couldn’t let it out of my hands.

Now for another matter. When the Vorwärts set up its bookselling side, Augusta wrote to say that I would be sent two copies of all your publications. Of late, however, that has been very far from the case. For instance, I have not received your latest edition of the Manifesto, or indeed either of the Berlin editions. 508 I am still short of sundry lesser pieces and am listing those that immediately spring to mind. You would greatly oblige me by sending them to me, namely your reprint of the Subversion Debate in two parts’b and a couple of copies of the most recent edition of the Communist Manifesto.— As regards the other things I am short of, I have just seen from your list that you are not to blame, since you were not the publisher. Apart from the above I am still short of

“ “ Brusselsd “ 1891 228 and one on Zurich 229 if it was you who published it. 509

[^1]: Minutes of the Wydenc Congress, 1880 343

[^2]: a Bebel - b Umsturz und Sozialdemokratie. Verhandlungen des Deutschen Reichstags am 17. Dezember 1894 und 8-12. Januar 1895 nach dem offiziellen stenographischen Bericht. - c

[^3]: Protokoll des Kongresses zu Wyden 1880. Berlin, 1893. -d Verhandlungen und Beschlüsse des Internationalen Arbeiter-Kongresses zu Brüssel (16-22. August 1891). Berlin, 1893 — e Protokoll des Internationalen Sozialistischen Arbeiterkongresses in der Tornhalle Zürich vom. 6. bis 12. August 1893.



