---
Volume: 50
Document_Title: "265. Engels to Richard Fischer 13 February "
Page_Range: "471-472"
---

# 265. Engels to Richard Fischer 13 February 



**[p. 444]**

Yours,

F. Engels

The various pamphlets—two lots—arrived safely. Very many thanks.

First published in: Marx and Engels, Printed according to the original Works, First Russian Edition, Vol. XXIX, 1946 Published in English for the first time

265

ENGELS TO RICHARD FISCHER

IN BERLIN

London, 13 February 1895

Dear Fischer,

I enclose the titles for the pamphleta as well as for the chapters. In order to complete the three articles it will be necessary to add the passages on France from the 5th and 6th (double) issue as a 4th chapter. 513 Arranged, that is, as set out on the encl. sheet; first (in square brackets) my few introductory words, then the passage on pp. 150/153b as shown, then a line of dots indicating the omission and, by way of conclusion, the main passage on pp. 160-171.c That will provide a perfectly respectable chapter and, with the abolition of universal suffrage which served Bonaparte as a pretext in Dec. 1851, round off the whole with a pertinent conclusion without which it would remain a fragment. Tomorrow I shall get on with the introduction to the whole.d In Germany matters are really coming to a head quite nicely. I can hardly imagine that the Centre 71 would deliberately saw off the branch it was sitting on. But the foolishness of our opponents increases from day

[^1]: a K. Marx, The Class Struggles in France, 1848 to 1850. - b See present edition, Vol. 10, pp. 507-10, 132-35. - c See present edition, Vol. 10, pp. 516-25, 135-45. - d F. Engels, Introduction to Karl Marx’s ‘The Class Struggles in France, 1848 to 1850’, 1895 - See present edition, Vol.27, pp. 506-524.



