---
Volume: 50
Document_Title: "268. Engels to Georgi Plekhanov 26 February "
Page_Range: "476-478"
---

# 268. Engels to Georgi Plekhanov 26 February 



**[p. 449]**

p. 34” What holy indignation was provoked after 1830 in the pious nursery that was Germany at the time by, as Heine called it, Saint Simon’s reinstatement of the flesh! The most shocked were the aristocratic estates who dominated at the time (I’m not speaking of the aristocratic class, given that in 1830 classes did not yet exist in our country) who, etc.

same page, last word conception—doesn’t this word lend itself too well to a play on words here?

First published, abridged, in Voprosy philosopha No. 5, Moscow, 1965 and in full in: Marx and Engels, Works, Second Russian Edition, Vol. 39, Moscow, 1966

Printed according to the original

Translated from the French Published in

English for the first time

268

ENGELS TO GEORGI PLEKHANOV

IN GENEVA

London, 26 February, 1895 41 Regent’s Park Road, N. W.

My dear Plekhanov,

Everything was arranged eight days ago, Veraa wrote to me and said that she would be delighted to be treated by Freyberger. He went to see her eight days ago yesterday, and has since been twice. He discovered that she had a severe case of bronchitis, and has prescribed the necessary medicines. However, he says that what she needs most is a different diet.

[^1]: Zasulich - * See p. 453, Vol. 27 - ** See p. 459, Vol. 27





**[p. 450]**

Now, since you have made me more or less responsible for the state of her health, you must tell me if she has need of money. If she has, I would ask you to permit me to offer you some for her, however little, at least during her illness, I will send you, say, five pounds to begin with, that you can persuade her to accept as coming from you, so that I do not come into it at all. You could tell her that you have sent her this money to remove any excuse for refusing to change her diet, and that Freyberger has said that she must do so. Or perhaps you can find another excuse.

I will not have the time to read the critical review of my booka in Russian Heritage.b I have already seen enough on this subject in the issue for January 1894. 520 As for Danielson, I fear that there is nothing to be done with him. I sent him by letter post 25 the Russian material from Internationales aus dem Volketaat, and in particular the 1894 appendix, which was written, in part, directly with him in view. 522 He has received it but, as you see, it is useless. There is no way of discussing with this generation of Russians to which he belongs, and which still believes in the spontaneous-communist mission which distinguishes Russia, the true Holy Russ,c from other profane peoples.

As for the rest, in a country such as yours, where largescale modern industry is grafted onto the primitive peasant commune, and where all the intermediary stages of civilisation are represented simultaneously, in a country which, in addition, is surrounded more or less effectively by an intellectual wall of China erected by despotism, it is scarcely surprising if the most bizarre and impossible combinations of ideas are produced. Take the poor devil Flerovsky, who imagines that tables and beds think, but have no memory. It is a phase the country must pass through. Little by little, with the growth of the towns, the isolation of men of talent will disappear, and with it these mental aberrations caused by loneliness, the inconsistency of the patchy knowledge of these curious thinkers, and also a little, in the Narodniki,d by the despair of seeing their hopes evaporate. Indeed, one ex- terrorist Narodnikd would end quite appropriately by becoming a tsarist.

[^1]: a F. Engels, The Origin of the Family, Private Property and the State. -b The magazine title is written by Engels in Russian. - c [in Russian] - d [in Russian]



