---
Volume: 50
Document_Title: "269. Engels to Julius Motteier 2 March "
Page_Range: "478-480"
---

# 269. Engels to Julius Motteier 2 March 



**[p. 451]**

Jaurès is on the right road. He is learning Marxism, and he should not be hurried too much. However, he has already made good progress, much more than I had dared hope. 518 As for the rest, let us not require too much orthodoxy! The party is too large, and the theory of Marx has become too widespread for relatively isolated muddle headed persons to do too much harm in the West. In your part of the world it is different, as it was with us in 1845-59.

I share your opinion as regards Nicholas. 13 The ‘Zemsky Sobor’c will come despite this little gentleman. 523

Freyberger has just returned, and tells me that Vera is a great deal better, and that up to the present he has discovered nothing more than chronic and neglected bronchial catarrh.

Yours,

F.E.

269

ENGELS TO JULIUS MOTTELER 515

IN LONDON

[London,] 2 March 1895 41 Regent’s Park Road, N. W.

[^1]: First published, in Russian, in: Printed according to the original Gruppa ‘Osvobozkdeniye truda’, No, 2, 1924 Translated from the French Published in English in full for the first time

[^2]: Dear Julius, I am returning Meyer’sd letter herewith, also one written to me by

[^3]: a famous - b Nicholas II - c [in Russian] - d Johann Meyer





**[p. 452]**

Even if the Society 62 is unable to do anything else, it could at least take care of the poor devil to the extent of getting him out of the seamen’s district and helping him to find lodgings in which he wouldn’t be so exploited and from which he could look around for work; and surely the chaps could give him a modicum of assistance. He should, at any rate, have an address to which letters could be sent. Anything that goes to his present diggings probably falls into the clutches of the landlord. In view of your illness and the Coheniad, 524 I would have come to see you myself about this business, but I am again suffering from one of those attacks I get in the spring and which temporarily prevent me from walking.

Apropos of which, I should like to say how very sorry I am that you and your wife should be ill. I wish you a speedy recovery and congratulate you on the merciless thrashing you inflicted on the great anarchist.b Let him take to his bed again alongside Kropotkin.

Many regards to you and your wife from

Yours,

F. Engels

[^1]: First published in: Marx and Engels, Printed according to the original Works, First Russian Edition, Vol. XXIX, 1946 Published in English for the first time

[^2]: a See this volume, p. 445 - b Alexander Cohen



