---
Volume: 50
Document_Title: "271. Engels to Nikolai Danielson 5 March "
Page_Range: "482-484"
---

# 271. Engels to Nikolai Danielson 5 March 



**[p. 455]**

Yours sincerely,

F. Engels

First published in: Printed according to the original Marx and Engels, Works, First Russian Edition, Translated from the French Vol. XXIX, 1946 Published in English for the first time

271

ENGELS TO NIKOLAI DANIELSON

IN ST. PETERSBURG

London, 5 March 1895 41 Regent’s Park Road, N. W.

My dear Sir, I am very sorry, in reply to your kind letter of Jan. 29th, to inform you that our authorb has not left any manuscripts relating to his views upon, and deductions from the state of landed property in Russia such as might be useful to the Russian translator. 527 All I have been able to find

[^1]: a Nicholas II - b Karl Marx





**[p. 456]**

I enclose you a letter received from Berlin for you, and am requested by the Mr. Engels mentioned in it to complete it by the following bits of information. Mr. Engels received some time ago an inquiry from a Dr. Lux who writes on economic subjects: whether the Essaysa were worth translating, and if so, would he do something to assist the publication of a German translation? to which he replied, that he was very desirous of seeing a German translation brought out, and that not only would he recommend the same for publication to Dietz, but also very gladly write an article upon it, when brought out, in the Neue Zeit, pointing out the importance of the results of your inquiries, but at the same time also stating that he differed from some of the conclusions arrived at by you. At the same time he stated, that he, Engels, had no right whatever to authorise a translation, but that the translator, a friend of Dr. Lux, had better apply to you direct for your permission. To avoid indiscretion, he insisted that the letter to you should be sent through him.

The translator, a young Russianb in Berlin, was said to be capable of undertaking the work (Dr. Lux’s wife is a Russian lady), and Dr. Lux has promised to revise the German text in order to insure correctness. The translator is also said to have occupied himself with economical subjects, so as to be no stranger to the contents of your book.

The letter enclosed seems to assume that your consent has already been given, at least I cannot find in it any trace of a formal request to you to that effect. I know that some young Russians abroadc are of opinion that such is an unnecessary formality, but such is not my opinion, and if you feel inclined to entertain at all Mr. Konov’s proposal, I think a hint in that direction might do the young man good.

As to myself I know nothing at all of the intended translation.

If you will kindly send me your reply to Mr Konov, I will see that it is forwarded at once. 528

Yours very sincerely

[^1]: L. K.d

[^2]: a Nikolai-on. [Danielson N. Fr.], Essays (see FN p. 308) - b Andrei Konov - c [word in Russian] - d Engels used Louise Kautsky’s initials for his pen-name.



