---
Volume: 50
Document_Title: "273. Engels to Werner Sombart 11 March "
Page_Range: "487-489"
---

# 273. Engels to Werner Sombart 11 March 



**[p. 273]**

ENGELS TO WERNER SOMBART

IN BRESLAU

London, 11 March 1895 41 Regent’s Park Road, N. W.

Dear Sir,

In replying to your note of the 14th of last month, I should like to thank you for so kindly sending me your book on Marxa; I had already read it with great interest in the volume of the Archivb which Dr H. Braun was good enough to send me and was glad at long last to find such appreciation of Capitalc at a German university. Needless to say, I cannot identify myself with all the expressions into which you have transposed Marx’s exposition. In particular, it seems to me that the definitions of the concept of value, given by you on pp. 576 and [5] 77, are rather too generalised; for one thing, I should delimit them historically by expressly confining them to the economic phase in which alone there has and could have been any question of value hitherto—to the social forms in which exchange of commodities and production of commodities exist; primitive communism was innocent of value. And in the second place the proposition would also seem to me to be susceptible of a conceptually narrower formulation. But this would take us too far afield and on the whole you are certainly right in what you say.

On p. 586, however, you appeal directly to me and I could not but laugh at the unconcerned way in which you hold a pistol to my head. But you need not worry—I am not going to ‘contradict you flat’. The conceptual transitions whereby Marx arrives at the general and equal rate of profit from the various values produced in individual capitalist concerns, namely s/c = s/(c+v), are wholly foreign to the consciousness of the individual capitalist. In so far as they have any historical parallel or any reality outside our own heads, this consists in, say the fact that the individual constituents of the amount of surplus value produced by capitalist

[^1]: a W. Sombart, ‘Zur Kritik des ökonomischen Systems von Karl Marx’ — b Archiv für soziale Gesetzgebung und Statistik. - c Volume II I





**[p. 461]**

As Marx sees it, the whole of past history, so far as major events are concerned, is an unconscious process, i.e. those events and the consequences thereof are not deliberate; either the supernumeraries of history have wanted something that was the diametrical opposite of what was achieved, or else that achievement entailed consequences quite other than those that had been foreseen. If we apply this to political economy, we find that each individual capitalist is in pursuit of bigger profits for himself. Bourgeois economics reveals that this pursuit of bigger profits on the part of each individual capitalist results in a general and equal rate of profit, an approximately equal rate of profit for all. But neither capitalists nor bourgeois economists are aware that the real purpose of that pursuit is the equal percentual distribution of the total surplus value over capital as a whole.

But how did this process of equalisation really come about? That is a very interesting point about which Marx himself has little to say. But Marx’s whole way of thinking [Auffassungsweise] is not so much a doctrine as a method. It provides, not so much ready-made dogmas, as aids to further investigation and the method for such investigation. Here, then, is a piece of work to be done which Marx himself did not attempt in his first draft. Here, for a start, we have the statements on pp. 153-156, II I, Ia which also have some bearing on your rendering of the concept of value and prove that that concept has, or had, more reality than you ascribe to it. In the early days of exchange when products gradually changed into commodities, exchanges were made in proportion to value. For the labour

[^1]: a See present edition, Vol. 37, pp.174-76; see also, pp. 882-84



