---
Volume: 50
Document_Title: "274. Engels to Conrad Schmidt 12 March "
Page_Range: "489-494"
---

# 274. Engels to Conrad Schmidt 12 March 



**[p. 462]**

Finally, I must again thank you for the high esteem in which you must hold me if you take the view that I could have turned Volume II I into something better than it is. But I am unable to share that opinion and believe I have done my duty by presenting Marx in Marx’s own words, even at the risk of expecting the reader to do rather more thinking for himself.

Yours very truly,

F. Engels

First published in: Beiträge zur Geschichte der deutschen Arbeiterbewegung, No. 3, 1961

Printed according to the original

274

ENGELS TO CONRAD SCHMIDT 417

IN ZURICH

London, 12 March 1895 41 Regent’s Park Road, N. W.

Dear Schmidt,

I have before me your two letters of the 13th of November last and of the 1st of this month. Let me begin with the most recent, No. 2.



**[p. 463]**

Your letter, I think, sheds some light on why you allowed yourself to be side-tracked when it came to the rate of profit. In it I find you lapsing into detail in just the same way, and for this I blame the eclectic method of philosophising endemic at German universities since 1848, a method which loses sight of the whole, and all too often goes astray by indulging in almost endless and unprofitable speculation on minutiae. Now it so happens that your earlier studies of classical philosophy revolved primarily around Kant, and Kant was more or less compelled by the then state of philosophising in Germany and by his own antipathy to Wolf’s pedantic Leibnizianism to make what appeared to be formal concessions to Wolfian speculation. It is thus I explain your tendency, also apparent from your epistolatory digression on the law of value, to become engrossed in minutiae; hence your occasional failure, or so it seems to me, to see the wood for the trees, which is why you reduce the law of value to a fiction, a necessary fiction, in much the same way as Kant reduced the existence of God to a postulate of practical reason.

Your objections to the law of value apply to all concepts regarded from the standpoint of reality. The identity of thinking and being, to use a Hegelian expression, corresponds in all respects to your example of the circle and the polygon. In other words, the concept of an object and its reality run side by side like two asymptotes which, though constantly

[^1]: a Vol. II I of Capital





**[p. 464]**

Is it otherwise with the general rate of profit? At no time is it more than an approximation. Should it ever prove to be absolutely identical in two separate undertakings and should both achieve exactly the same rate of profit in a given year, it would be purely fortuitous; in reality rates of profit vary from business to business and year to year, according to circumstances, while the general rate exists only as the average achieved by a large number of businesses over a succession of years. If, however, we were to insist that the rate of profit—say, 14.876934 be exactly the same down to the last decimal point in every business every year, on pain of being reduced to a fiction, we should be grossly mistaking the nature of the rate of profit and of economic laws generally—they none of them have any reality save as an approximation, a tendency, an average, but not as immediate reality. This is due partly to the fact that their action is frustrated by the simultaneous action of other laws, but also to some extent by their nature as concepts.

Or take the law of wages, the realisation of the value of the power of labour, a value which is only, and even then not always, realised as an av- erage and varies from locality to locality, indeed from branch to branch, according to the standard of living customary in each. Or ground rent, which represents the surplus profit, in excess of the general rate, arising from a monopolisation of a natural force. Here, too, real surplus profit and real rent do not by any means automatically correspond, but do so only approximately and on an average.

Exactly the same thing applies to the law of value and the distribution of surplus value through the rate of profit.

1. Both come closest to full realisation only in as much as capitalist production has everywhere been fully implemented, i.e. society has been

[^1]: a self-evidently





**[p. 465]**

2. Profit, including rent, has a number of constituents: a) profit from sharp practice which you discount in your algebraic sum; b) profit from an increase in value of stocks (e.g. what is left of the previous harvest when the next one fails). In theory this ought also to equalise out, so long as it has not already been discounted by a fall in the value of other commodities, for either the capitalist buyer’s contribution must be equal to the seller’s gain, or else, where means of subsistence for workers are concerned, wages must eventually rise. The most significant of these rises in value are, however, not lasting ones, hence equalisation takes place only over an average of years and in very incomplete form and, as is well known, at the expense of the workers; they produce more surplus value because their labour power is not paid for in full;

c) the total amount of surplus value from which, however, we must again deduct that portion that is presented to the buyer, especially at times of crisis when overproduction is reduced to its true content of socially necessary labour.

From this it necessarily follows that the total profit and the total surplus value can correspond only approximately. If, however, you also consider that neither the total surplus value nor the total capital are constant quantities but variables which change from day to day, then any correspondence between the rate of profit and Σs/Σ(c+v), other than an approximate progression, and any coincidence of the total price and total value other than one which constantly tends towards, and yet as constantly tends away from, unity, will be seen to be a sheer impossibility. In other words, the unity of concept and phenomenon turns out to be an essentially endless process, and so indeed it is, in this case as in every other.

Has feudalism, then, ever corresponded to its concept? Having begun in the Kingdom of the Western Franks, 537 been further developed in Normandy by the Norwegian invaders, and taken a stage further in England and the south of Italy by the Norman French, it came closest to its concept—in the ephemeral Kingdom of Jerusalem, a relic of which, the Assises de Jérusalem, 538

the most classical expression of the feudal order. Was that order a fiction merely because it was in Palestine alone that it achieved a short-lived exis-



**[p. 466]**

Or are the concepts that prevail in the natural sciences fictive because they by no means always correspond to reality? From the moment we accept the theory of evolution, all our concepts of organic life correspond only approximately to reality. Otherwise there would be no change; if the day should ever come when concept and reality coincide completely in the organic world, evolution will cease. The concept ‘fish’ embraces life under water and breathing through gills; how is it possible to evolve from fish to amphibian without infringing that concept? And infringed it has been; we know of a whole number of fish whose air-bladders have evolved into lungs and which are thus able to breathe air. How is it possible to evolve from oviparous reptile to viviparous mammal without bringing one or both concepts into conflict with reality? And in fact we have, in the monotremata, an entire sub-class of oviparous mammals—in Manchester in 1843, I saw the eggs of a duck-billed platypus and, in my narrow-minded arrogance, cast scorn on the folly of supposing that a mammal could lay eggs, and now it has been proven! So do not treat the concept of value in the same manner as has obliged me to proffer my belated apologies to the duck-billed platypus!

In Sombart’s otherwise excellent article on Volume II P I have also found a similar tendency to emasculate the theory of value; evidently he, too, had hoped to find a rather different solution. 15

Your article in the Centralblatt, however, is first-rate,c and your dem- onstration—by quantitative determination—of the specific differences between Marx’s theory of the rate of profit and that of the earliest political economists, is very well done. In his wisdom, the illustrious Loria sees Volume II I as nothing less than an abandonment of the theory of value,d and thus your article is a cut-and-dried reply. There are now two more interested parties, Labriola in Rome, and Lafargue, the latter having joined battle with Loria in the Critica Sociale. 539 If, therefore, you could send a copy to Prof. Antonio Labriola, Corso Vittorio Emmanuele 251, Rome, he would do his best to get an Italian translation of it published; and a second copy to Paul Lafargue, Le Perreux, Seine, France, would give the

[^1]: a W. Sombart, ‘Zur Kritik der ökonomischen Systems von Karl Marx’. In: Archiv für soziale Gesetzgebung und Statistik, Bd. 7, H. 4. -b See this volume, p. 461 -c C. Schmidt, ‘Der dritte Band des Kapital’. In: Sozialpolitisches Centralblatt, 25. Februar 1895 - d A. Loria, ‘L’opera postuma di Carlo Marx.’ In: Nuova Antologia, Anno XXX, fascicolo II I, 1 febbraio 1895



