---
Volume: 50
Document_Title: "276. Engels to Victor Adler 16 March "
Page_Range: "495-497"
---

# 276. Engels to Victor Adler 16 March 



**[p. 468]**

Yours,

F.E.

First published in: Aus der Printed according to the original Frühzeit des Marxismus. Engels Briefwechsel mit Kautsky, Published in English for the first time Prag, 1935

276

ENGELS TO VICTOR ADLER 417

IN VIENNA

London, 16 March 1895

Dear Victor,

Herewith by return the information you request. Sombart’s article is very good,a except that his view of the law of value is impaired by some disappointment over the solution to the rate of profit question. He clearly expected a miracle, instead of which he merely found what was rational and that is anything but miraculous. Hence his reduction of the significance of the law of value to the domination of the productive force of labour as the determining economic power. This is all much too generalised and imprecise.—Little Conrad Schmidt’s article in the Sozial politisches Centralblatt is very good.b Eduard Bernstein’s articles were very muddle- headedc; the man is still neurasthenic and, what is more, scandalously over- worked. Having too many other things on hand, he left the article on one side and then was suddenly dunned for it by K. Kautsky.

Since you want to swot away at Capital II and II I while you’re in quod,

[^1]: 542 let me give you a few hints to lighten your task.

[^2]: a W. Sombart, ‘Zur Kritik des ökonomischen Systeme von Karl Marx,’ In: Archiv für soziale Gesetzgebung und Statistik, Bd. 7, Heft 4 - b C. Schmidt, ‘Der dritte Band des Kapital’. In: Sozialpolitisches Centralblatt, 25 Februar 1895 - c E. Bernstein, ‘Der dritte Band des Kapital’. In: Neue Zeit, 1 Bd., Nr. 11-149 16, 17 und 20, 13 Jg. 1894/95





**[p. 469]**

Part II . Chaps 7-9 are important. 10 and 11 exceptionally so. Likewise 12, 13 and 14. On the other hand 15, 16 and 17 need only be read cursorily to begin with.

Part II I. Is an absolutely first-rate exposé of a subject which has not been dealt with since the days of the physiocrats, namely the entire circulation of commodities and money in capitalist society—brilliant as to content, but terribly ponderous as to form, firstly because put together from two versions using two different methods and, secondly, because version 2 was completed under duress, namely an illness involving chronic insomnia. If I were you, I should keep that to the very last, after an initial reading of Volume II I. Also, it is the one you can most easily dispense with so far as your work is concerned.

Now for Volume II I. Important in Part I are Chaps 1-4; on the other hand, Chaps 5, 6 and 7 are less important so far as the general context is concerned, so not very much time should be spent on them to start off with.

Part II . Most important are Chaps 8, 9, 10. 11 and 12 to be treated cursorily.

Part II I. Most important, the whole of it, 13-15. Part IV. Likewise most important, though 16-20 also easy to read. Part V. Most important, Chaps 21-27. Less so, Chap 28. Chap. 29 important. Chaps 30-32 not, on the whole, important for your purposes, but Chaps 22 and 34 important as soon as they turn to paper money, etc., 35 important as regards international rates of exchanges; 36 of great interest to you, and also easy to read.

Part VI. Ground Rent. 37 and 38 important. 39 and 40 less so, but nevertheless not to be skipped. 41-43 demand rather less attention. (Differential rent II , individual cases.) 44-47 are again important and also, on the whole, easy to read.

Part VII very fine; unfortunately truncated and, moreover, strongly symptomatic of insomnia.

So if you make a thorough study of the essentials by following the above, and devote less attention initially to what is of lesser importance (preferably having first reread the essential bits of Vol. I), you will get a

