---
Volume: 50
Document_Title: "277. Engels to Carl Hackenberg 16 March "
Page_Range: "497-500"
---

# 277. Engels to Carl Hackenberg 16 March 



**[p. 470]**

Your news about the papera pleased us very much. The main thing is political efficacity; financial efficacity is bound to follow, and will be achieved far more easily and quickly once the former is assured. It is with pleasure I detect your hand in the notes on electoral reform on the front page

532—there you have the FULCRUM for the efficacity you need.

As a result of the old trouble which comes to plague me periodically, es- pecially in springtime, I am again somewhat lame but less so than usual, the attack being milder and, in about a fortnight I should, I think, be rid of it without any need for sea air as in 1893 and 1894.

The movement over here may be summed up as follows: Amongst the masses, progress is steady if instinctive, and the tendency is adhered to; the moment it comes to giving conscious expression to that instinct and to that impulsive tendency, however, their sectarian leaders set about it in so stupid and narrow-minded a way as to make one feel like hitting out left, right and centre. But I suppose it’s just the typical Anglo-Saxon way of going about things.

Many regards,

Yours,

F.E.

First published in Printed according to the magazine Der Kampf, Jg. I, Heft 6,

1 March 1908 Published in English in full for the first time

277

ENGELS TO CARL HACKENBERG 543

IN BARMEN

London, 16 March 1895 41 Regent’s Park Road, N. W.

Dear Sir,

Following are my brief answers to your questions:

a Arbeiter-Zeitung



**[p. 471]**

2) 1 know-nothing about this. 545 3) ditto. 546 4) We got to know Becker as belonging to the more moderate trend in the democratic party.

5) I believe Becker also gave talks in the Democratic Association 547 (the Eiser Hall) from time to time, but I hardly ever went there. W. Wolff, F. Wolff and Dronke attended more frequently on behalf of our editorial boardb than did Marx or I.

6) I do not know what associations you mean. On the whole, the Workers’ Union 548 and the Democratic Association worked hand in hand in Cologne, although the former was more radical than the latter. As for what had been going on before our arrival, at the time when the Workers’ Union had been led by Dr. Gottschalk, I can say nothing definite about it.

7) If by the Central Association 549 you mean the central section of democratic associations, led by the Frankfurt Left, I must say the Rhenish democrats soon lost trust in it and made themselves independent.

8) We were on the same good terms with Becker as with the other bourgeois democratic leaders in Cologne, without making a secret of the fact that we were going considerably further than they and without expecting them to unconditionally support the stance taken by the Neue Rheinische Zeitung. The majority of them, Becker included, were not contributors to the paper, except, at the most, for publishing short, usually signed, articles from time to time in the local news section (then printed ‘under the line’). You will often come across the initials H. B. 550 there. After the onset of reaction, in the autumn of 1848, democracy became more radical and Becker also drew closer to us. But he did not work more for the paper then either.

9) I’ve no knowledge of this at all. 551 I was already gone by then, we left Cologne in May.

10) After we had gone, Becker and Heinrich Burgers founded the Westdeutsche Zeitung, one might say on the inheritance of the Neue Rheinische Zeitung? 552

[^1]: 11) I have no further material on the Communist trial 553 concerning

[^2]: a Hermann Heinrich Becker - b of the Neue Rheinische Zeitung





**[p. 472]**

12) I know of no attempts to free Becker while he was on remand. If anything of the kind was contemplated, certainly good care was taken not to mention it in letters to London, for it would hardly have escaped the notice of the Prussian postal service.

For the rest, I regret to be unable to give you any further information. I hope you have the latest edition (Zurich 1885) of Marx’s revelations con- cerning the Cologne trial,a with my introduction.b If not, you may obtain a copy from the bookshop of Vorwärts, 2 Beuthstrasse, Berlin; the earlier editions are incomplete.

Incidentally, Becker’s involvement with the League was only an episode in his life, caused by the then rampant reaction. With the return of calmer times he again became what he had been previously, a bourgeois democrat, and, as you will know, went through all the changes undergone by German, and particularly Prussian, bourgeois democracy. This attitude stemmed from his whole nature, so I am far removed from seeing any sort of careerism in it; on the contrary, if he had tried to remain more radical and carry the communist episode on, he would have missed his calling. In this he differed, very favourably, from Miquel.

I hope these notes will be of use to you.

F. Engels

[^1]: First published in Printed according to the original Beiträge Zur Geschichte der Arbeiterbewegung, No. 5, 1973 Published in English for the first time

[^2]: a K. Marx, Revelations Concerning the Communist Trial in Cologne - b F. Engels, On the History of the Communist League



