---
Volume: 50
Document_Title: "278. Engels to Pablo Iglesias 16 March "
Page_Range: "500-501"
---

# 278. Engels to Pablo Iglesias 16 March 



**[p. 278]**

ENGELS TO PABLO IGLESIAS

IN MADRID

[Draft]

London, 16 March 1895

Dear friend Iglesias,

I could not answer your letter of 19 October 1894 earlier because I did not know whether or not you had come out of Malaga prison; 554 nor could I answer your letter of 1 February, being busy finishing some publicationsa for our people in Berlin which had to be circulated before the new repressive draft laws 428 became law.

Before I got your letter of 19 October, friends in Barcelona had asked Comrade Eleanor Marx-Aveling to inform the British Trades-Unions of the Malaga strikers’ situation, and she had done all she could, so that nothing more is left for me to do. And as you know, some of the Trades-Unions helped.

As regards really socialist organisations in England, they are so disunited and so poor that no help can be expected from them.

I have been following the progress of this strike with great interest, admiring the workers’ tenacity and courage. Marquis de Larios’ name reminds me of an episode that occurred about 1850.

At that time there was a firm of Larios Bros. (Jews) in Gibraltar. A British merchant used to send his goods to the firm on commission to be smuggled to other merchants on Spanish territory. Those goods were constantly seized by Spanish Customs, and Larios Bros, would pay the Englishman the guaranteed sum in insurance, as is customary in this kind of business. But that did not suit the Englishman, for he lost his customers in Spain and a substantial amount of profit. He arrived in Gibraltar to see for himself why those accidents always befell his goods but never those of others. However, he could not find out the reason. One day as he was taking a walk in the city, he saw a cart lose a wheel and some boxes with goods fall to the ground and burst open. The boxes were

[^1]: a See this volume, p. 444



