---
Volume: 50
Document_Title: "279. Engels to Carl Hirsch 19 March "
Page_Range: "501-504"
---

# 279. Engels to Carl Hirsch 19 March 



**[p. 474]**

The enraged Englishman descended on Larios. ‘I’ll disclose all that, I’ll make a scandal, I’ll have you put on trial!’ ‘Why get excited, sir? We will pay you for your goods and make the amends you want.’ After much argument, the Englishman was paid a definite sum, and Larios Bros. signed the following statement:

‘We, Larios Bros., are the greatest swindlers there are here in the city of Gibraltar, and we advise everybody against doing business with us, for they can rest assured that we would cheat them.

‘Gibraltar, (date).

‘Larios Bros.’ The statement was posted for general information in the Bourse of Gibraltar, where old Larios continued for another twenty years to buy and sell goods.

Would the marquis be a relative of the Larios of Gibraltar?

Published in English for the first time

279

ENGELS TO CARL HIRSCH

IN COLOGNE

London, 19 March 1895 41 Regent’s Park Road, N. W.

Dear Hirsch,

[^1]: First published, in Russian, Printed according to the original in: K. Marx and F. Engels,

[^2]: Works, First Russian Edition, Translated from the Spanish Vol. XXIX, 1946

[^3]: I am willing to oblige you, 555 but only on two conditions: 1. that the





**[p. 475]**

P. 4. Onesided}. This is far less the case in big industry than in manu- facture. On the contrary, big industry does to a large extent eliminate the disabling effect of manufacture, although it produces a similar effect of its own, which last may be exacerbated by the intensification of labour. From what I know of big industry, I should say that in your case this point is given more emphasis than is justified by the circumstances. The division of labour is, and will continue to be, the chief cause of the disablement of labour.

P. 6. - ‘in every case overproduction, crises’. May, has a tendency to— realisation by no means inevitable. ‘Spiral movement’—seems to me too general a term. What mode of production have you in mind here? ‘The minimum of socially necessary labour time’—if this is supposed to be the time needed to produce the gross social product, it is meaningless so far as capitalist society is concerned, since in its apportionment among individual workers, the industrial reserve army is wholly left out of account.

P. 15. ‘Everywhere’ (etc., up till the end of the sentence)—this is ex- pressed very obscurely, to say the least and, as it stands, is a contradiction. First, the increase in the products of labour is said to give rise to ‘a gain as such’ and then to a ‘loss of value, which is at least a possibility’. This will not do unless explanatory and delimiting intermediate links are provided.

P. 18. ‘The capital of the working man is his own person.’ That sounds very nice, but in this context the word capital loses every vestige of meaning. Why the devil must you go and translate things that are sensible into nonsensical philistine cliches? What you say here is quite beyond my comprehension. Similarly on p. 18, no. 2. The concentration of labour re- sulting from improvements in machinery is all of a sudden supposed to be unhealthy. It may be so, and very often is, in the capitalist system but of itself it is no more unhealthy than is eating and digesting on the following page. Not only will it not cease, but we shall be able to augment it considerably because, with it, we shall get compensation for the workers. Other



**[p. 476]**

Now, do your best in the Cologne by-election 556 so that we may at least win here. And if by chance you should be writing to me again, let me know if the old house, behind Hutmacher, where the Neue Rheinische Zeitung used to be, is still no. 17 and whether the owner of the sweatshop who now lives there is called Salomon or Lewi—I have forgotten.

So far you have been conducting your battle with the Centre 71 quite nicely, but it seems to me that you might castigate the conduct of the Liebers et al in the Reichstag rather more often in your leading articles. 557

Many regards,

Yours,

F.E.

[^1]: First published in: Printed according to a Marx and Engels, Works, typewritten copy First Russian Edition, Vol. XXIX, 1946 Published in English for the first time



