---
Volume: 50
Document_Title: "285. Engels to Karl Kautsky 1 April "
Page_Range: "513-514"
---

# 285. Engels to Karl Kautsky 1 April 



**[p. 285]**

ENGELS TO KARL KAUTSKY 568

IN STUTTGART

London, 1 April 1895

Dear Baron,

Postcard received. I was amazed to see today in the Vorwärts an excerpt from my ‘Introduction’ that had been printed without my prior knowledge and tricked out in such a way as to present me as a peace-loving proponent of legality quand même.a 569 Which is all the more reason why I should like it to appear in its entirety in the Neue Zeit in order that this disgraceful impression may be erased. I shall leave Liebknecht in no doubt as to what I think about it and the same applies to those who, irrespective of who they may be, gave him this opportunity of perverting my views and, what’s more, without so much as a word to me about it.

Platter received with thanks. 541 Of very minor importance, though the man is coming increasingly into line. If things go on like this, we soon shan’t be able to stir for all these professors. It is absolutely capital that J. Wolf should also have replied. 570 I shall lay him alongside the others, together with Stiebeling and Loria. Sic transit gloria mundi.b

Kindest regards from one household to the other.

Yours

F. E.

We get two copies of Deutsche Worte, one for Freyberger and one for myself.

[^1]: First published abridged in: Printed according to the original Neue Zeit, Bd. I, No. 11 1908 and in full in: Aus der Frühzeit Published in English in full des Marxismus. Engels Briefwechsel for the first time mit Kautsky, Prag, 1935

[^2]: a come what may - b Thus passes away the glory of the world (words from the ritual of the Pope’s inauguration.)



