---
Volume: 50
Document_Title: "288. Engels to Richard Fischer 5 April "
Page_Range: "517-519"
---

# 288. Engels to Richard Fischer 5 April 



**[p. 490]**

However, things are warming up in Germany, it promises a splendid end to the century. Young William’sa ‘indignation’ 564 is highly amusing. You may be sure our people will answer him in the Reichstag where there is no lese-majesty.

I intended to say a lot of other things to you as well, but I cannot bring them to mind at the moment when I need them. I am gradually aging. So, as I must write a few lines still to Laura before the post goes, goodbye! Greetings from the Freybergers (whose little girl gets on wonderfully well) and from your

F. Engels

First published abridged in: Printed according to the original Socialiste, No. 115, 24 novembre

1900 and in full in: F. Engels, Translated from the French P. et L. Lafargue, Correspondance, t. II I, Paris, 1959

288

ENGELS TO RICHARD FISCHER

IN BERLIN

London 5 April 1895 41 Regent’s Park Road, N. W.

Dear Fischer,

[^1]: You will have got my letter of the 3rd. 25 Your postcard arrived this morning. So another snag has cropped up. 577 I would ask you to seek legal

[^2]: a William II





**[p. 1946]**

If there is no recourse to law—which would first have to be established so that we can act accordingly—it would be best if you were to get copies made of all the articles—three—in the library and send me duplicates, so that I could look through them quickly and write an introduction. There are three articles.

1. On the proceedings of the Rhine Province Assembly, 2. On thefts of wood, 3. On the condition of the wine growers on the Mosel. 578 You would then have to issue an announcement straight away to the effect that they would be brought out by you and edited by me, along with an introduction and notes (if any).

So far as the Russians are concerned, it is normal practice to encroach upon an author’s rights without so much as your leave ‘in the interests of propaganda’, not to speak of the interests, as is frequently the case, of their own private printing-shop and publishing house, as opposed to those of others. 579 Up till now, however, I have not been accustomed to that kind of thing when dealing with Germans.

Had I only known what I had merely suspected, namely that the old Rheinische Zeitung is in the Berlin Library, I should have gone there back in 1893 580 and looked it out, in which case we should have made a good deal more progress in regard to other matters too.

Is Baake a brother of Kurt Baake’s? Regards to everyone.

Yours,

F.E.

[^1]: First published in: Marx Printed according to the original and Engels, Works, First Russian Edition, Vol. XXIX, Published in English for the first time



