---
Volume: 50
Document_Title: "291. Engels to Hermann Engels 12 April "
Page_Range: "521-522"
---

# 291. Engels to Hermann Engels 12 April 



**[p. 291]**

ENGELS TO HERMANN ENGELS

IN BARMEN

London, 12 April 1895 41 Regent’s Park Road, N. W.

Dear Hermann,

I have heard nothing further about the sherry since it was despatched.a All I know is that immediately after the hard weather the two Cologne steamers Energie and Industrie were reported as having arrived here—departures are difficult to keep track of in the newspapers and I don’t therefore know whether both have sailed—and if so when. If the wine doesn’t turn up in the course of next week, please send me a postcard and I shall then make inquiries.

The news that the wedding had gone off so merrily and that the loving coupleb had enjoyed their honeymoon pleased me enormously. It is all right about the 80 marks. I hope that by now you have quite shaken off your influenza. Luckily I have recovered from mine and am gradually beginning to get out and about again.

Very many thanks for the information re the Schaaffhausens. I shall be glad to take up the allotment of 1000 marks—à 120%. The initial payment of 700 marks will be amply covered by my balance as at 30.4.94, even after deduction of the £40 ()c per P.P. & Co., while accrued interest and the last Schaaffhausen dividend ought to be just about enough for the remaining payment of 500 marks. Should a few more marks be needed, you might be so good as to advance them to me pending the next dividend—i.e. assuming that I have not overlooked anything in the above calculation, in which case kindly advise me.

The conversion into bonds à 1,000 marks would also be perfectly ac- ceptable to me if it could be done without leaving a tiresome or unproductive balance, something that can’t be managed just now when all bonds must be in denominations of 1,000 or 450. So if the thing is impossible it

[^1]: a See this volume, pp. 416, 441, 478 - b Arthur Schuchard and Elsbeth Schuchard (née Engels) -c Ms. damaged



