---
Volume: 50
Document_Title: "292. Engels to Krystyu Rakovski 13 April "
Page_Range: "522-523"
---

# 292. Engels to Krystyu Rakovski 13 April 



**[p. 495]**

Well, you now have the prompt answer you wanted. For the past four days we have been having wonderful spring weather; overnight everything began sprouting and burgeoning and the warm sun in the day time is quite untypical of a normal English April with its grey skies and biting north-easters.

For the first time in my life I paid a dentist 10/6d last Mondaya for pulling out a couple of old stumps. Now I only have seventeen teeth left, all of them in front and all of them so far complete, but nothing at the back, so I may have to be fitted with a set of false teeth!

Love to you all.

Yours,

Friedrich

First published in: Printed according to the original Deutsche Revue, Jg. 46, Bd. II I, 192 Published in English for the first time

292

ENGELS TO KRYSTJU RAKOWSKI

IN NANCY

London, 13 April 1895 41 Regent’s Park Road, N. W.

Dear citizen,

I am answering at once your request to drop a line to the Bulgarian comrades. Being overburdened with work, I answered in the negative the requests directed to me by the comrades both on the occasion of 18 March and on that of May Day. I also sent a negative reply last weekb to the British Social-Democratic Federation. 44 You will see that if I were to comply with your request, I should have to comply with the requests of roughly forty groups from ten to twenty different countries, which is

[^1]: 8 April -b See this volume, p. 487



