---
Volume: 50
Document_Title: "293. Engels to Richard Fischer 15 April "
Page_Range: "523-525"
---

# 293. Engels to Richard Fischer 15 April 



**[p. 496]**

F. Engels

First published, in Bulgarian, in Sotsialist, Nos. 54 and 55, 19 April 1895

Printed according to the newspaper text

Translated from the Bulgarian

Published in English for the first time

293

ENGELS TO RICHARD FISCHER

139

IN BERLIN

London, 15 April 1895 41 Regent’s Park Road, N. W.

Dear Fischer,

The 400 marks received with thanks. I shall change them tomorrow and distribute them to the heirs. 583

So the position as regards the essays in the old Rheinische Zeitung is as I feared.a The copyright has lapsed and only by acting swiftly can we restore our title to it. It will therefore be perfectly in order if you at once announce that the articles will be published by you and edited and annotated by me. Possibly under the title:

Karl Marx’s Early Writings. Three Essays from the (First) ‘Rheinische Zeitung’ of 1842. I. The Rhine Province Assembly on Freedom of the Press. II . The Same on the Law relating to Thefts of Wood. II I. The Condition of the Wine-Growers on the Mosel. Edited and with an Introduction by F. Engels. 578

[^1]: a See this volume, pp. 490-91





**[p. 497]**

Now as to your great scheme, 585 I think you would do best to shelve it until the fate of the Subversion Bill 428 has been decided. A library which re- issues historical documents and writings from earlier periods cannot tolerate any kind of censorship—quite literally or not at all. Still less could I consent to Marx’s and my own early works being subjected to a process of emasculation, however wild, in order to conform to the conditions temporarily obtaining in the press. But in view of the fact that we used to write in a very unrestrained way and were forever justifying things which, in the territories of the German Empire, are regarded either as a crime or an offence, a re-issue in Berlin after the passing of that exemplary Bill would be quite impossible without numerous deletions.

Secondly, however, I have a scheme for again presenting Marx’s and my lesser writings to the public in a complete edition—not, that is to say, by instalments but all at one go, in whole volumes. I have already been in correspondence with Augusta on the subject and we are still discussing it. So you might have a word with him when he gets back. I am by no means certain that an enterprise like this is really your cup of tea, nor do I know whether you, i.e. the publishing side of the Vorwärts, are the best people for the job—quite aside from the harassment of the press which has already inclined me to believe that we may be forced to have recourse to a publisher outside the German Empire.

Marx would never have consented to the issue of a work by instalments. In the case of the 2nd Ed. of Capital I he once allowed Meissner to bring out seven big instalments, each of some seven sheets, but that was as much as he could stomach. 586 To chop up books such as The Holy Family, Herr

[^1]: a Bebel



