---
Volume: 50
Document_Title: "294. Engels to Laura Lafargue 17 April "
Page_Range: "525-527"
---

# 294. Engels to Laura Lafargue 17 April 



**[p. 498]**

The Tribune articles exist only in English. 587 We survived the holiday without too many mishaps and the weather was really beautiful. Otherwise no news. As soon as you have a copy of one of the three articles from the Rheinische Zeitung, please send it to me straight away so that I can set to work. By registered book post or, if not, in some other manner with adequate regard for safety precautions.

Many regards to everyone.

Yours

F.E.

First published abridged in: Marx and Engels, Works, First Russian Edition, Vol. I, Preface, 1928 and in full: ibid., Vol. XXIX, 1946

Printed according to the original

Published in English in full for the first time

294

ENGELS TO LAURA LAFARGUE

AT LE PERREUX

London, 17 April 1895 41 Regent’s Park Road, N. W.

My dear Löhr,

Yesterday I sent you cheque for £6.9.9., your share of honorarium for the Klassenkämpfe.b To-day I return registered, book post, your translation with thanks and suggestions. 517 In one passage I had to make an alteration, you yourself had marked it as unintelligible, which indeed it was owing to omission of a word in the German text. The alteration is at the back of the page and requires a little frenchifying at your hands. I hope all your trouble will be rewarded by the French reading public!

[^1]: a See this volume, p. 491 - b See this volume, pp. n421, 517





**[p. 499]**

For the Lassalle letters 284 and ulterior plans of republication of old affairs, we shall have to await the fate of the Coercion Bill 428 before the Reichstag; if that passes, I do not see how we can safely proceed to work, at least in Berlin. Maybe Stuttgart may remain more favourable—anyhow qui vivra verra.d

I hope you send the Devenir social also to Madrid—our friends there are almost entirely dependent, for foreign reading, on French literature, and it strikes me they get to see more from other sects’ publications than from ours. For if the management of the Socialiste is to serve as a pattern, woe be unto us! The Vorwärts announces the complete reorganisation of that illustrious paper, published ‘mit Ausschluss der Oeffentlichkeit’,e and that Chauvin has remodelled the publishing department 588—if so, il est tellement chauvinf that nobody here has seen a trace of it. But then, the Vorwärts seems to know of France only the Boulevard Bonne Nouvelle, and if the nouvelles ne sont pas assez bonnes, il les fabrique lui-même.g

Many thanks for your news about Sganarelle, they are quite sufficient for the éclairage de ma têteh upon the subject. 589

I had in my head only the Sganarelle of the Médecin volant and Don Juan.

[^1]: a Hans Baake - b authorised person - c See this volume, p. 497 - d wait and see - e in camera - f he is so chauvinist - g news is not interesting enough, he invents it himself - h enlightenment of my mind



