---
Volume: 50
Document_Title: "299. Engels to Franz Mehring 9 May "
Page_Range: "532-533"
---

# 299. Engels to Franz Mehring 9 May 



**[p. 505]**

299

ENGELS TO FRANZ MEHRING

IN BERLIN

London, 9 May 1895 41 Regent’s Park Road, N. W.

Dear Mr Mehring,

Very many thanks for your long and informative letter plus enclosures, which I shall reply to at length as soon as my cranium permits. Unfortunately for the past week a rheumatic condition of the scalp has been encircling and compressing it as though with a band of iron. I hope to have got over it by next week along with the attendant insomnia. Meanwhile I agree to your proposal that the only articles from the Rheinische Zeitung that should be published in their entirety are the two long ones and those on Communisma (as also the article from the Anekdotab). It would only be necessary to copy from the remainder such passages as you might be so good as to indicate as being the most pregnant (along with particulars of the context). As regards the Mosel articles, 584 it would be desirable if my introduction included a brief outline both of the course of the debate and of the contents. Would you be kind enough to acquaint Fischer with the foregoing? Once again my best thanks and until my next, which has to do with one minor detail,

I remain Yours sincerely F. Engels

[^1]: a K. Marx, Proceedings of the Sixth Rhine Province Assembly. First Article. Debates on Freedom of the Press and Publication of the Proceedings of the Assembly of the Estates; Proceedings of the Sixth Rhine Province Assembly. Third Article. Debates on the Law on Thefts of Wood and Communismus and the Augsburg Allgemeine Zeitung’. — b K. Marx, Comments on the Latest Prussian Censorship Instruction.



