---
Volume: 50
Document_Title: "303. Engels to Carl Hirsch 20 May "
Page_Range: "536-537"
---

# 303. Engels to Carl Hirsch 20 May 



**[p. 509]**

First published in: Printed according to the original Marx and Engels, Works, Second Russian Edition, Published in English for the first time Vol. 50, Moscow, 1981

303

ENGELS TO CARL HIRSCH

IN COLOGNE

London, 20 May 1895 41 Regent’s Park Road, N. W.

Dear ()a You have set us a difficult task. We are to seek out ‘the journalist Tollittb England’ as also those ‘English papers’ containing the relevant details about Brauweiler. 598 In the first place, the English daily press does not even mention the name Braunweiler in its accounts of the case. The report of a Parliamentary Committee is not, however, published until its work has been completed. So the item must doubtless have emanated from some obscure trade paper and will therefore be impossible to trace in this country. In the second place, no one here knows the journalist Tollitt, who according to some is called Pollitt. Dr Freyberger tried in vain to track him down at the NATIONAL LIBERAL CLUB which has a vast number of journalists amongst its members. We have now taken further steps in order to discover the man if possible—it seems quite clear that he does not live in London or work for the political press; more likely he is in some trade branch—though that will take time. But it is very naive of you to expect that he would appear over there as witness on your behalf. After all, he himself says that he got into the prisons by stealth, and consequently be would at once be thrown into jug in Cologne for bribery of officials or something of the kind, and put on trial. Hofrichter’s

[^1]: a Ms. damaged — b reference is to James Pollitt



