---
Volume: 50
Document_Title: "304. Engels to Karl Kautsky 21 May "
Page_Range: "537-541"
---

# 304. Engels to Karl Kautsky 21 May 



**[p. 510]**

Bernstein was away from London during that week and Beer has no connections whatever in the circles in which Tollitt must be sought.

As soon as we discover anything further we shall let you know.a But time is damned short. Where did you get the item from ? Keep on inquiring over there until you have found out how and through whom it got into the German press. That would provide a clue.

Many regards.

Yours,

F. Engels

First published in: Marx and Engels, Printed according to the original Works, First Russian Edition, Vol. XXIX, 1946 Published in English for the first time

304

ENGELS TO KARL KAUTSKY 599

IN STUTTGART

London, 21 May 1895 41 Regent’s Park Road, N. W.

Dear Baron,

I should have replied at once to your letter of the 6th had not a nasty inflammation of the glands in my neck, accompanied by much pain and inevitable loss of sleep, rendered me almost wholly incapable of work during the past two weeks. But now you are to be kept waiting no longer.

At the time in question you took it upon yourselves to produce a

[^1]: a See this volume, p. 514





**[p. 511]**

What did pique me, however, if only for a moment, was the strange se- cretiveness with which you withheld from me a matter about which all the rest of the world was talking. It was only from third persons that I learned of the whole enterprise, and it was only from the printed prospectus that I learned of the general outline of the scheme, Not a word either from you or from Ede; it was as though you had a guilty conscience. At the same time all manner of people kept surreptitiously inquiring what connection I had with the thing, whether I had refused to collaborate, etc. And then at length, when silence could no longer be maintained, the good Ede got round to mentioning the subject with a sheepishness and embarrassment that would have been worthy of a worse cause—though nothing wrong had been done save for this absurd play-acting which, in the meantime, as Louise can testify, has enlivened many a dull hour for me.

Well and good. You have presented me with a fait accompli; a History of Socialism on which I have not collaborated. I have accepted the fact without complaint from the very start. But that fact is of your own making, nor can you do away with or ignore it, should this ever happen to suit your purpose. And neither can I do away with it. If, on mature reflection, you chose to slam the front door in my face at a time when my advice and help might have been of material use to you, please do not expect of me that I should now slink in through some little back door in order to help you out of a quandary. I must admit that, had the roles been reversed, I should have reflected for a very, very long time before coming to you with a request such as this one. 600 Is it really so terribly difficult to see that everyone must bear the consequences of his own actions? As YOU MADE YOUR BED so YOU MUST LIE IN IT. If there is no room for me here, it is only because you wanted it so.

Well, that settles that. And now you would oblige me by considering this reply as irrevocable. Let us both regard the whole incident as finished



**[p. 512]**

Meanwhile I am engaged in producing another piece for the Neue Zeit which should gladden your heart—Ergänzungen und Nachtäge zum ‘Kapital’, Buch II I, No. 1: Law of Value and Rate of Profit. Reply to the Objections of Sombart and C. Schmidt. No. 2—the role of the Stock Exchange which has changed very considerably since Marx wrote about it in 1865—will follow later. 534 A sequel will follow if required and should time permit. The first article would have been finished had I had nothing else on my mind.

Of your book,a I can say that it improves the further into it one gets. To judge by the original plan, your treatment of Plato and early Christianity still leaves something to be desired. You do very much better on the medieval sects, after which you go from strength to strength; and are at your beat on the Taborites, 563 Münzer and then the Anabaptists. 562 Alongside a great many more important economic analyses of political events there are also some commonplaces which would seem to indicate a gap in your studies. I have learnt a great deal from your book which is indispensible preliminary reading for my new edition of The Peasant War. 235 It would seem to me to have two main faults—1. Very inadequate research into the development and role of the déclassé, almost pariah-like elements who had no place whatever in the feudal system and who were the inevitable outcome of urban development,, It is they who in all cases formed the lowest stratum of urban population in the Middle Ages—devoid of rights and set apart from village communities, craft guilds and feudal dependence. Though difficult, this should serve as your main basis, for by degrees, with the dissolution of the feudal bonds, these elements became the pre-proletariat which, in 1789, was responsible for the revolution in the faubourgs’ 3 of Paris and absorbed all the outcasts of feudal and guild society. You talk of proletarians—a term which is inapt—amongst whom you comprise weavers whose importance you quite rightly stress—but you can count them among your ‘proletariat’ only after, and in so far as, déclassé journeymen weavers came into existence outside of the guilds. There is still much room for improvement here.

2. You have not fully grasped the position of Germany—her international economic position in so far as it is possible to speak of any such

[^1]: a Kautsky, Von Plato bis zu den Wiedertäufern —b suburbs





**[p. 513]**

In an attempt to remain popular your style is now that of the leader writer, now that of the dominie. This you should be able to avoid. Again, is it for Janssen’s sake that you still refuse to see the pun in which Ulrich von Hütten is indulging with his obscuri viri? The joke lies in the fact of its meaning both—obscure or obscurantist—and that is what Hutten was trying to say. 602

But that is all by the way. You and Ede have both been working on a completely new subject, and you cannot expect to attain perfection straight away. You should be glad to have produced a book that is presentable, even at this stages when it is, as it were, in its initial draft form. Now, however, you are both honour-bound not to allow the ground you have broken to lie fallow but to continue with your researches so that, in a few years’ time, you will be able to bring out a new edition capable of meeting every requirement.

Someone in St Petersburg has sent me a Russian translation of your old piece on marriage and the familya (Kosmos) .b I don’t know who did it. I shall send it to you.

Many regards from one household to the other,

Yours,

F. Engels

One more thing. I have suggested to Sorge that, when he has finished his articles on the American movement, these should be published as an off- print. 603 He is agreeable but says there will have to be a great deal of revision and many corrections and additions, for which he is unlikely

[^1]: a K. Kautsky, Die Entstehung der Ehe und der Familie. In Kosmos, 6. Jg. 12 Bd. - b [Kautsky— title of work in Russan]



