---
Volume: 50
Document_Title: "305. Engels to Editors of Rheinische Zeitung 22 Msy "
Page_Range: "541-542"
---

# 305. Engels to Editors of Rheinische Zeitung 22 Msy 



**[p. 514]**

First published abridged in: Printed according to the original Neue Zeit, Bd. II , Nr. 47, 1894-95 and in full, in Russian, in: Published in English in full Istorik-Marksist, No. 2, 1936 for the first time

305

ENGELS TO THE EDITORS OF THE RHEINISCHE ZEITUNG 598

IN COLOGNE

London, 22 May 1895 41 Regent’s Park Road, N. W.

Dear Editors,

The man has been found, is called James Pollitt, and is ready to do any- thing within reason. Has already supplied us with all the material to be had. The articles are in The Hardwareman, 11 and 18 May—stenographic reports of the sessions of the BOARD OF TRADE COMMITTEE on convict labour abroad, at which his statements were made. These are being sent to you in the original with translations of the passages relating to Braunweiler. He will further supply us with samples of the commodities produced in Braunweiler and sold over here, and also an affidavit as to the accuracy both of his statements before the Committee and of the excerpts quoted by you.

But since the material is very ample and would not lend itself to being paraphrased in a letter in such a way as to put you in a position to make full use of it in court, a personal discussion is urgently called for. This morning I therefore telegraphed Hirsch, 37 Hämergasse, Cologne: ‘Most important that Hirsch, Hofrichter or lawyer come over here forthwith Engels’. 133

