---
Volume: 50
Document_Title: "306. Engels to Richard Fischer 29 May "
Page_Range: "542-543"
---

# 306. Engels to Richard Fischer 29 May 



**[p. 515]**

I enclose a note of the expenses that have arisen so far and shall later let you have a full account of them.

The man who gets his London agent, S. A. Rothschild, to sell the Braunweiler products for him in this country is called Christian Abner and lives in Cologne. He would be your most important witness. He would have to be asked to declare on oath what commodities he obtains from Braunweiler and exports to England. Pollitt followed the fully laden waggons from the institution in Braunweiler to his place of business in Cologne. Abner has, in fact, had statements printed in English to the effect that he does not sell the products of convict labour, for he maintains that Braunweiler is not a prison but merely a house of correction. But such distinctions cut no ice over here.

More tomorrow, if no one has turned up by then. Kindest regards from

Yours,

F. Engels

306

ENGELS TO RICHARD FISCHER

IN BERLIN

[London,] 29 May 1895

Dear Fischer,

Thanks for the package. Am not yet in a fit state to deal with it. In the meantime I would ask you to send me in addition a copy of all the articles on the Mosel wine-growers. 584 For Hofrichter of Cologne has been here

[^1]: First published in: Marx and Printed according to the original Engels, Works, First Russian Edition, Vol. XXIX, 1946 Published in English for the first time



