---
Volume: 50
Document_Title: "310. Engels to Filippo Turai 28 June "
Page_Range: "545-547"
---

# 310. Engels to Filippo Turai 28 June 



**[p. 518]**

Published in English for the first time

309

ENGELS TO BOLESLAW ANTONIJEDRZEJOWSKI

IN LONDON

Eastbourne, 28 June 1895 4 Royal Parade

Dear Comrade,

In reply to your inquiry of the 25th of this month, which has been for- warded to me here, I beg to inform you that I should have no objection at all to your translating my article in the Commonwealth and publishing it in the way you suggest. 607

Yours faithfully, F. Engels B. A. Jedrzejowski, Editor, Przedswit

Published in English for the first time

310

ENGELS TO FILIPPO TURATI

[Draft]

Eastbourne, 28 June 1895

4 Royal Parade Dear citizen Turati,

To write a summary of the three volumes of Capital is one of the most

[^1]: First published, in the language of the original (German), in: Z pola walki, No. 4 (12), 1960

[^2]: Printed according to the original

[^3]: IN MILAN 608





**[p. 519]**

As for the other Labriola,c the malicious tongue which you attribute to him may have a certain justification in a country such as Italy, where the socialist party, 340 like all the other parties, has been invaded, like a plague of locusts, by that ‘declassed bourgeois youth’, of which Bakunin was so proud.

Result: rampant literary dilettantism which only too often lapses into sensationalism and is inevitably followed by a spirit of camaraderie domi- nating the press. It is not our fault that this is the state of affairs, but you are subjected to this environment, as is everyone else. I would speak at greater length about Labriola but when I find that bits and pieces from my private letters have been reproduced in the Critica Sociale without my knowledge,

610 you must agree that it is better if I remain silent. For the rest, after all the quarrels and controversies, the party would seem to have behaved in general at the last elections as the situation required: independent confirmation at the 1st round when that did not help the Crispinis, support for the radicals and republicans at elections where our candidates had no chance of winning. 611 Warmest greetings from Dr and Mme Aveling, who are here with me, and also from myself, to you and citizen Anna Kulishov.

Yours,

F.

Please continue to address my letters to London.

[^1]: a Arturo Labriola - b Arturo Labriola, La teoria marxista del valore e il saggio medio del profitto and La conclusioni postume di Marx sulla teoria del valore, in: Critica Sociale, Nos. 3 and 5, February I and March 1, 1895 - c Antonio Labriola



