---
Volume: 50
Document_Title: "318. Engels to Eleanor Marx- Aveling 9 July "
Page_Range: "552-553"
---

# 318. Engels to Eleanor Marx- Aveling 9 July 



**[p. 318]**

ENGELS TO ELEANOR MARX-AVELING

IN LONDON

Eastbourne, 9 July 1895

4 Royal Parade

My dear Tussy,

Thanks for Johnnie’sa letter returned herewith. Of course the boy is right in sticking to the house. Edgarb seems a downright Normand, looking after momentary advantage. More’s the pity.

Edward’s reply to Glasgow is all right. 617 The solution is to be found Labor Leader, 6 July page 2, Keir Hardie against Edward Aveling in the Jeunesse Socialiste. 614 Now the noble nature of Keir Hardie shines out bril- liant. While E. Aveling attacks him, Keir Hardie generously finds him a candidature, which if E. Aveling accepted, Keir Hardie could on general grounds get cancelled by the Executive Council.

I was pretty fairly going on till Sunday night, since then had two bad nights and days, maybe partly from the acceleration, by the sea air, of the processus of elimination going on in my neck, but chiefly from the decreasing effects of the anaesthetics which I now have been using daily and in increasing quantities for about eight weeks. On the other hand I have found out several weak sides of my capricious appetite and take lait de poulec with brandy, custards with stewed fruits, oysters up to nine a day etc.

Love to you both F.E.

[^1]: First published in: Printed according to the original Marx and Engels, Works, Second Russian Edition, Published in English for the first time Vol. 39, Moscow, 1966

[^2]: a Jean Longuet - b Longuet - c milk egg-flip



