---
Volume: 50
Document_Title: "319. Engels to Laura Lafargue 23 July "
Page_Range: "553-556"
---

# 319. Engels to Laura Lafargue 23 July 



**[p. 1959]**

ENGELS TO LAURA LAFARGUE

AT LE PERREUX

Eastbourne, 23 July 1895

My dear Löhr,

To-morrow we return to London. There seems to be at last a crisis ap- proaching in my potato field on my neck, so that the swellings may be opened and relief secured. At last! so there is hope of this long lane coming to a turning. And high time it is for with my deficient appetite, etc. I have been pulled down considerably.

The elections here have come off as I said: a large Tory majority, the Liberals hopelessly beaten and I hope in full dissolution. 345 The brag of Independent Labour Party 114 and Social Democratic Federation 44 face to face with a reality of some 82,000 votes for Labour Candidates up to now (hardly any yet to come) and the loss of K. Hardie’s seat. Still that was more than they had a right to expect.

Victor Adler is here. Have you or Paul any questions to ask him about Paul’s arrangement with the Arbeiter-Zeitung or can I be of any use in any way to you with him?

I am not in strength to write long letters, so good bye. Here’s your good health in a bumper of lait de pouleb fortified by a dose of cognac vieux.c

Ever yours

F. Engels

[^1]: Amitiés à Pauld

[^2]: First published, in the language Reproduced from the original of the original (English), in: F. Engels, P. et L. Lafargue,

[^3]: Correspondance, t. II I, Paris,

[^4]: a See this volume, pp. 419 - b milk egg-flip -c old brandy - d Regards to Paul



LETTERS

WILL AND CODICIL OF ENGELS



