---
Volume: 36
Document_Title: "II. Second Stage. Function of Productive Capital "
Page_Range: "48-52"
---

# II. Second Stage. Function of Productive Capital 

The second complaint is more characteristic. It is to the effect that even if one has money, not enough labour power is to be bought at any time. The reason is that the Russian farm labourer, owing to the common ownership of land in the village community, has not yet been fully separated from his means of production and hence is not yet a "free wage labourer" in the full sense of the word. But the exist- ence of the latter on a social scale is a sine qua non for M — C, the con- version of money into commodities, to be able to represent the trans- formation of money capital into productive capital.

It is therefore quite clear that the formula for the circuit of money capital, M — C P C — M ' , is the matter-of-course form of the circuit of capital only on the basis of already developed capitalist pro- duction, because it presupposes the existence of a class of wage la- bourers on a social scale. We have seen that capitalist production does not only create commodities and surplus value, but also reproduces to an ever increasing extent the class of wage labourers, into whom it transforms the vast majority of direct producers. Since the first condi- tion for its realisation is the permanent existence of a class of wage la- bourers, M — C P C — M' presupposes a capital in the form of productive capital, and hence the form of the circuit of productive capital.

The circuit of capital, which we have here considered, begins with the act of circulation M — C, the transformation of money into com- modities— purchase. Circulation must therefore be complemented by the antithetical metamorphosis C — M, the transformation of commodities into money — sale. But the direct result of M — C < j^p is the interruption of the circulation of the capital value advanced in the farm of money. By the transformation of money capi- tal into productive capital the capital value has acquired a bodily form in which it cannot continue to circulate but must enter into con- sumption, viz., into productive consumption. The use of labour po- wer, labour, can be materialised only in the labour process. The capi- talist cannot resell the labourer as a commodity because he is not his chattel slave and the capitalist has not bought anything except the right to use his labour power for a certain time. On the other hand the capitalist cannot use this labour power in any other way than by

[^1]: II. SECOND STAGE. FUNCTION OF PRODUCTIVE CAPITAL





**[p. 41]**

utilising means of production to create commodities with its help. The result of the first stage is therefore entrance into the second, the productive stage of capital.

The movement is represented by M — C < ^ P P, in which the dots indicate that the circulation of capital is interrupted, while its circular movement continues, since it passes from the sphere of the circulation of commodities into that of production. The first stage, the transformation of money capital into productive capital, is there- fore merely the harbinger and introductory phase of the second stage, the functioning of productive capital.

M — C <MP presupposes that the individual performing this act not only has at his disposal values in any use form, but also that he has them in the form of money, that he is the owner of money. But the act consists precisely in giving away money, and the individual can remain the owner of money only in so far as the latter flows back imp- licitly to him through that very act. But money can return to him only through the sale of commodities. Hence the above act presupposes his existence as a producer of commodities.

M — L. The wage labourer lives only by the sale of his labour power. Its preservation — his self-preservation — requires daily consumption. Hence payment for it must be continually repeated at rather short intervals in order that he may be able to repeat acts L — M — C or C — M — C, repeat the purchases needed for his self- preservation. For this reason the capitalist must always meet the wage labourer in the capacity of a money capitalist, and his capital as money capital. On the other hand if the wage labourers, the mass of direct producers, are to perform the act L — M — C, they must con- stantly be faced with the necessary means of subsistence in purchas- able form, i. e., in the form of commodities. Consequently this state of affairs necessitates a high degree of development of the circulation of products in the form of commodities, hence also of the volume of com- modities produced. When production by means of wage labour be- comes universal, commodity production is bound to be the general form of production. The production of commodities, once it is as- sumed to be general, carries in its wake an ever increasing division of social labour, that is to say an ever growing differentiation of the products which are produced in the form of commodities by a defi- nite capitalist, ever greater division of complementary processes of production into independent processes. M — MP therefore develops to the same extent as M — L does, that is to say the production of



**[p. 42]**

means of production is divorced to that extent from the production of commodities whose means of production they are. And the latter themselves stand opposed to every producer of commodities as.com- modities which he does not produce but buys for his particular pro- cess of production. They come from branches of production which, operated independently, are entirely divorced from his own, enter into his own branch as commodities, and must therefore be bought. The material conditions of commodity production face him more and more as products of other commodity producers, as commodities. And to the same extent the capitalist must assume the role of money capitalist, in other words there is an increase in the scale on which his capital must assume the functions of money capital.

On the other hand, the same conditions which give rise to the basic condition of capitalist production, the existence of a class of wage workers, facilitate the transition of all commodity production to capi- talist commodity production. As capitalist production develops, it has a disintegrating, resolvent effect on all older forms of production, which, designed mostly to meet the direct needs of the producer, transform only the excess produced into commodities. Capitalist pro- duction makes the sale of products the main interest, at first appar- ently without affecting the mode of production itself. Such was for in- stance the first effect of capitalist world commerce on such nations as the Chinese, Indians, Arabs, etc. But, secondly, wherever it takes root capitalist production destroys all forms of commodity production which are based either on the self-employment of the producers, or merely on the sale of the excess product as commodities. It first makes the production of commodities general and then, by degrees, trans- forms all commodity production into capitalist production.3)

Whatever the social form of production, labourers and means of production always remain factors of it. But in a state of separation from each other either of these factors can be such only potentially. For production to go on at all they must unite. The specific manner in which this union is accomplished distinguishes the different econo- mic epochs of the structure of society from one another. In the present case, the separation of the free worker from his means of production is the starting-point given, and we have seen how and under what con- ditions these two elements are united in the hands of the capitalist, namely, as the productive mode of existence of his capital. The actual

[^1]: End of Manuscript VII. Beginning of Manuscript VI.





**[p. 43]**

process which the personal and material creators of commodities en- ter upon when thus brought together, the process of production, be- comes therefore itself a function of capital, the capitalist process of production, the nature of which has been fully analysed in the first book of this work. Every enterprise engaged in commodity produc- tion becomes at the same time an enterprise exploiting labour power. But only the capitalist production of commodities has become an epoch-making mode of exploitation, which, in the course of its histor- ical development, revolutionises, through the organisation of the la- bour process and the enormous improvement of technique, the entire economic structure of society in a manner eclipsing all former epochs.

The means of production and labour power, in so far as they are forms of existence of advanced capital value, are distinguished by the different roles assumed by them during the process of production in the creation of value, hence also of surplus value, into constant and variable capital. Being different components of productive capital they are furthermore distinguished by the fact that the means of pro- duction in the possession of the capitalist remain his capital even out- side of the process of production, while labour power becomes the form of existence of an individual capital only within this process. Whereas labour power is a commodity only in the hands of its seller, the wage labourer, it becomes capital only in the hands of its buyer, the capitalist who acquires the temporary use of it. The means of pro- duction do not become the material forms of productive capital, or productive capital, until labour power, the personal form of existence of productive capital, is capable of being embodied in them. Human labour power is by nature no more capital than are the means of pro- duction. They acquire this specific social character only under defi- nite, historically developed conditions, just as only under such condi- tions the character of money is stamped upon precious metals, or that of money capital upon money.

Productive capital, in performing its functions, consumes its own component parts for the purpose of transforming them into a mass of products of a higher value. Since labour power acts merely as one of its organs, the excess of the product's value engendered by its surplus labour over and above the value of productive capital's constituent elements is also the fruit of capital. The surplus labour of labour pow- er is the gratuitous labour performed for capital and thus forms sur- plus value for the capitalist, a value which costs him no equivalent re- turn. The product is therefore not only a commodity, but a commo-

