---
Volume: 36
Document_Title: "IV. The Circuit as a Whole . . . "
Page_Range: "62-78"
---

# IV. The Circuit as a Whole . . . 



**[p. 54]**

that both of them, money capital as well as commodity capital, are modes of existence of capital. The one is capital in money form, the other in commodity form. The specific functions that distinguish them cannot therefore be anything else but differences between the functions of money and of commodities. Commodity capital, as the direct product of the capitalist process of production, is reminiscent of its origin and is therefore more rational and less incomprehensible in form than money capital, in which every trace of this process has vanished, as in general all special use forms of commodities disappear in money. It is therefore only when M' itself functions as commodity capital, when it is the direct product of a productive process instead of being the converted form of this product, that it loses its bizarre form, that is to say, in the production of the money material itself. In the production of gold for instance the formula would be M — C <M'P P M' (M + m), where M' would figure as a commodity product, because P furnishes more gold than was advanced for the elements of production of the gold in the first M, the money capital. In this case the irrational nature of the expression M M' (M + m) disappears. Here a part of a sum of money appears as the mother of another part of the same sum of money.

We have seen that the process of circulation is interrupted at the end of its first phase, M — C <^P, by P, in which the commodities L and MP bought in the market are consumed as the material and value components of productive capital. The product of this con- sumption is a new commodity, C , altered in respect of substance and value. The interrupted process of circulation, M — C, must be com- pleted by C — M. But the bearer of this second and concluding phase of circulation is C , a commodity different in substance and value from the original C. The circulation series therefore appears as 1) M — C,; 2) C 2 — M', where in the second phase of the first commodity, C,, another commodity of greater value and different use form, C'2, is sub- stituted during the interruption caused by the functioning of P, the production of C from the elements of C, the forms of existence of pro- ductive capital P. However, the first form of appearance in which capital faced us (Buch I, Kap. IV, l), a M — C — M' (extended: 1) M —

[^1]: IV. THE CIRCUIT AS A WHOLE

[^2]: a English edition: Vol. I, Ch. IV (present edition, Vol. 35).



'V^VÄ^J.Y ^ ' ^ ^ ^ . ^ ,V?-^IW* ~5*w U*J fe M-^Ä-» - ^*y Z£~~a'

•fa*. J - -- - w W

1 *-^.-„A\_ ^^Uj^U

tlo«->YHM - - * - « * - Y ^ _ » ^ j ^ u ^ . , 3 ^j^v^-V. —A->~.°l~""

ft- ». M I N- <*-'

ï^^ZTI---K ï a^ ^>^.,>i S*cnu^^^v^:T^^ UHU. j.

v*.^Jl AJ

[^1]: v v > v i - wf WJi-.-* ^ v w ^ U ^ - f ,

[^2]: Facsimile of a page of the manuscript of Capital, Volume II, by Karl Marx







**[p. 57]**

C,; 2) Ct — M') shows the same commodity twice. Both times it is the same commodity into which money is transformed in the first phase and reconverted into more money in the second phase. In spite of this essential difference, both circulations share this much: that in their first phase money is transformed into commodities, and in the second commodities into money, that the money spent in the first phase re- turns in the second. On the one hand both have in common this re- flux of the money to its starting-point, on the other hand also the ex- cess of the returning money over the money advanced. To that extent the formula M — C C — M' is contained in the general formula M — C — M ' .

It follows furthermore that each time equally great quantities of si- multaneously existing values face and replace each other in the two metamorphoses M — C and C — M' belonging in circulation. The change of value pertains exclusively to the metamorphosis P, the pro- cess of production, which thus appears as a real metamorphosis of capital, as compared with the merely formal metamorphoses of circula- tion.

Let us now consider the total movement, M — C P C — M', or, M — C<MP P C (C + c) — M' (M + m), its more expand- ed form. Capital here appears as a value which goes through a series of interconnected, interdependent transformations, a series of meta- morphoses which form just as many phases, or stages, of the process as a whole. Two of these phases belong in the sphere of circulation, one of them in that of production. In each one of these phases capital value has a different form for which there is a correspondingly dif- ferent, special function. Within this movement the advanced value does not only preserve itself but grows, increases in magnitude. Finally, in the concluding stage, it returns to the same form which it had at the beginning of the process as a whole. This process as a whole constitutes therefore the process of moving in circuits.

The two forms assumed by capital value at the various stages of its circulation are those of money capital and commodity capital. The form pertaining to the stage of production is that of productive capital. The capital which assumes these forms in the course of its total circuit and then discards them and in each of them performs the function corres- ponding to the particular form, is industrial capital, industrial here in the sense that it comprises every branch of industry run on a capitalist basis.

Money capital, commodity capital, and productive capital do not

therefore designate independent kinds of capital whose functions form the content of likewise independent branches of business separ- ated from one another. They denote here only special functional forms of industrial capital, which assumes all three of them one after the other.

Capital describes its circuit normally only so long as its various phases pass uninterruptedly into one another. If capital stops short in its first phase M — C, money capital assumes the rigid form of a hoard; if it stops in the phase of production, the means of production lie without functioning on the one side, while labour power remains un- employed on the other; and if capital is stopped short in its last phase C — M', piles of unsold commodities accumulate and clog the flow of circulation.

However, it is in the nature of things that the circuit itself necessi- tates the fixation of capital for certain lengths of time in its various phases. In each of its phases industrial capital is tied up with a defi- nite form: money capital, productive capital, commodity capital. It does not acquire the form in which it may enter a new transformation phase until it has performed the function corresponding to each par- ticular form. To make this plain, we have assumed in our illustration that the capital value of the quantity of commodities created at the stage of production is equal to the total sum of the value originally advanced in the form of money; or, in other words, that the entire capital value advanced in the form of money passes on in bulk from one stage to the next. But we have seen (Buch I, Kap. VI) a that a part of the constant capital, the labour instruments proper (e. g., machine- ry), continually serve anew, with more or less numerous repetitions of the same processes of production, hence transfer their values piece- meal to the products. It will be seen later to what extent this circum- stance modifies the circular movement of capital. For the present the following suffices: In our illustration the value of the productive capi- tal amounting to £ 422 contained only the average wear and tear of factory buildings, machinery, etc., that is to say only that part of value which they transferred to the yarn in the transformation of 10,600 lbs of cotton into 10,000 lbs of yarn, which represented the product of one week's spinning of 60 hours. In the means of produc- tion, into which the advanced constant capital of £372 was trans- formed, the instruments of labour, buildings, machinery, etc., figured as

[^1]: a English edition: Vol. I, Ch. VIII (present edition, Vol. 35).



S^ •,<— / V v ' / f * i ' ' ^ - ii-^-g^u V.—-, ^

^Y4A!Ùy SS\k^*>'Xy<Ä-, 4~ï-C-^2~--2

Ä - ~ ~ ' V ^ J ^ V - * . . A ^ ^ - - ^^X^~Y.

oft. G&e**<3iu>^*s ?Oi{£S-/})

[^1]: Facsimile of a page of the manuscript of Capital, Volume II, edited and copied by Frederick Engels







**[p. 61]**

if they had only been rented in the market at a weekly rate. But this does not change the gist of the matter in any way. We have but to multiply the quantity of yarn produced in one week, i. e., 10,000 lbs of yarn, by the number of weeks contained in a certain number of years, in order to transfer to the yarn the entire value of the instru- ments of labour bought and consumed during this period. It is then plain that the advanced money capital must first be transformed into these instruments, hence must have gone through the first phase M — C before it can function as productive capital P. And it is likewise plain in our illustration that the capital value of £422, embodied in the yarn during the process of production, cannot become a part of the value of the 10,000 lbs of yarn and enter the circulation phase C — M' until it is ready. It cannot be sold until it has been spun.

In the general formula the product of P is regarded as a material thing different from the elements of the productive capital, as an ob- ject existing apart from the process of production and having a use form different from that of the elements of production. This is always the case when the result of the productive process assumes the form of a thing, even when a part of the product re-enters the resumed produc- tion as one of its elements. Grain for instance serves as seed for its own production, but the product consists only of grain and hence has a shape different from those of related elements such as labour power, implements, fertiliser. But there are certain independent branches of industry in which the product of the productive process is not a new material product, is not a commodity. Among these only the commu- nications industry, whether engaged in transportation proper, of goods and passengers, or in the mere transmission of communications, letters, telegrams, etc., is economically important.

''The manufacturer may first produce articles and then look for consumers". //his product, thrust out of the process of production when finished, passes into circulation as a commodity separated from it//.

The result, whether men or goods are transported, is a change in

[^1]: A. Chuprov61 says on this score:

[^2]: "Production and consumption thus appear as two acts separated in space and time. In the transportation industry, which does not create any new products but merely transfers men and things, these two acts coincide; its services" //change of place// "are consumed the moment they are produced. For this reason the area within which rail- ways can sell their services extends at best 50 versts" (53 kilometres) "on either side of their tracks." 16

[^3]: 61 A. Cuprov: ^eleznodoroznoje cfwzjajstvo, Moskva, 1875, pp. 69, 70.





**[p. 62]**

their whereabouts. Yarn, for instance, may now be in India instead of in England, where it was produced.

However, what the transportation industry sells is change of loca- tion. The useful effect is inseparably connected with the process of transportation, i. e., the productive process of the transport industry. Men and goods travel together with the means of transportation, and this travelling, this locomotion, constitutes the process of production effected by these means. The useful effect can be consumed only dur- ing this process of production. It does not exist as a utility different from this process, a use thing which does not function as an article of commerce, does not circulate as a commodity, until after it has been produced. But the exchange value of this useful effect is determined, like that of any other commodity, by the value of the elements of pro- duction (labour power and means of production) consumed in it plus the surplus value created by the surplus labour of the labourers em- ployed in transportation. This useful effect also entertains the very same relations to consumption that other commodities do. If it is con- sumed individually its value disappears during its consumption; if it is consumed productively so as to constitute by itself a stage in the pro- duction of the commodities being transported, its value is transferred as an additional value to the commodity itself. The formula for the transport industry would therefore be M — C<^ P ••• P — M', since it is the process of production itself that is paid for and consumed, not a product separate and distinct from it. Hence this formula has al- most the same form as that of the production of precious metals, the only difference being that in this case M' represents the converted form of the useful effect created during the process of production, and not the bodily form of the gold or silver produced in this process and extruded from it.

Industrial capital is the only mode of existence of capital in which not only the appropriation of surplus value, or surplus product, but simultaneously its creation is a function of capital. Therefore with it the capitalist character of production is a necessity. Its existence im- plies the class antagonism between capitalists and wage labourers. To the extent that it seizes control of social production, the technique and social organisation of the labour process are revolutionised and with them the economico-historical type of society. The other kinds of capital, which appeared before industrial capital amid conditions of social production that have receded into the past or are now suc- cumbing, are not only subordinated to it and the mechanism of their



**[p. 63]**

functions altered in conformity with it, but move solely with it as their basis, hence live and die, stand and fall with this basis. Money capital and commodity capital, so far as they function as vehicles of particu- lar branches of business, side by side with industrial capital, are noth- ing but modes of existence of the different functional forms now as- sumed, now discarded by industrial capital in the sphere of circula- tion— modes which, due to social division of labour, have attained independent existence and been developed one-sidedly.

The circuit M M' on the one hand intermingles with the general circulation of commodities, proceeds from it and flows back into it, is a part of it. On the other hand it forms an independent movement of the capital value for the individual capitalist, a movement of its own which takes place partly within the general circulation of commodi- ties, partly outside of it, but which always preserves its independent character. First, because its two phases that take place in the sphere of circulation, M — C and C — M', being phases of the movement of capital, have functionally definite characters. In M — C, C is mate- rially determined as labour power and means of production; in C — M', the capital value is realised plus the surplus value. Secondly, be- cause P, the process of production, embraces productive consump- tion. Thirdly, because the return of the money to its starting-point makes of the movement M M' a circuit complete in itself.

Every individual capital is therefore, on the one hand, in its two circulation halves M — C and C — M', an agent of the general circu- lation of commodities, in which it either functions or lies concate- nated as money or as a commodity, thus forming a link in the general chain of metamorphoses taking place in the world of commodities. On the other hand it describes within the general circulation its own in- dependent circuit in which the sphere of production forms a transi- tional stage and in which this capital returns to its starting-point in the same form in which it left that point. Within its own circuit, which includes its real metamorphosis in the process of production, it changes at the same time the magnitude of its value. It returns not simply as money value, but as augmented, increased money value.

Let us finally consider M — C P C — M' as a special form of the circular course of capital, alongside the other forms which we shall analyse later. We shall find that it is distinguished by the follow- ing features:

1. It appears as the circuit of money capital, because industrial capi- tal in its money form, as money capital, forms the starting-point and



**[p. 64]**

the point of return of its total process. The formula itself expresses the fact that the money is not expended here as money but is merely ad- vanced, hence is merely the money form of capital, money capital. It expresses furthermore that exchange value, not use value, is the de- termining aim of this movement. Just because the money form of value is the independent, tangible form in which value appears, the form of circulation M M', the initial and terminal points of which are real money, expresses most graphically the compelling motive of capitalist production — money-making. The process of production appears merely as an unavoidable intermediate link, as a necessary evil for the sake of money-making. //All nations with a capitalist mode of production are therefore seized periodically by a feverish at- tempt to make money without the intervention of the process of pro- duction.//

2. The stage of production, the function of P, represents in this cir- cuit an interruption between the two phases of circulation M — G C — M', which in its turn represents only the intermediate link in the simple circulation M — C — M'. The process of production appears in the form of a circuit-describing process, formally and explicitly as that which it is in the capitalist mode of production, as a mere means of expanding the advanced value, hence enrichment as such as the purpose of production.

3. Since the series of phases is opened by M — C, the second link of the circulation is C — M'. In other words, the starting-point is M, the money capital that is to be self-expanded; the terminal point is M', the self-expanded money capital M + m, in which M figures as realised capital along with its offspring m. This distinguishes the circuit of M from that of the two other circuits P and C , and does so in two ways. On the one hand by the money form of the two extremes. And money is the independent, tangible form of existence of value, the value of the product in its independent value form, in which every trace of the use value of the commodities has been extinguished. On the other hand the form P P does not necessarily become P P' (P + p), and in the form C C no difference whatever in value is visible between the two extremes.— It is, therefore, characteristic of the formula M — M' that for one thing capital value is its starting-point and expanded capital value its point of return, so that the advance of capital value appears as the means and expanded capital value as the end of the entire operation; and that for another thing this relation is expressed in money form, in the independent value form, hence



**[p. 65]**

money capital as money begetting money. The generation of surplus value by value is not only expressed as the Alpha and Omega of the process, but explicitly in the form of glittering money.

4. Since M', the money capital realised as a result of C — M', the complementary and concluding phase of M — C, has absolutely the same form as that in which it began its first circuit, it can, as soon as it emerges from the latter, begin the same circuit over again as an in- creased (accumulated) money capital: M' = M + m. And at least it is not expressed in the form M M' that, in the repetition of the circuit, the circulation of m separates from that of M. Considered in its one- time form, formally, the circuit of money capital expresses therefore simply the process of self-expansion and of accumulation. Consump- tion is expressed in it only as productive consumption, by M — C<f Jf P, and it is only this consumption that is included in this cir- cuit of individual capital. M — L is L — M or C — M on the part of the labourer. It is therefore the first phase of circulation which brings about his individual consumption, thus: L — M — C (means of sub- sistence). The second phase, M — C, no longer falls within the circuit of individual capital, but is initiated and premised by it, since the la- bourer must above all live, hence maintain himself by individual con- sumption, in order to be always in the market as material that the capitalist can exploit. But this consumption itself is here only assumed as a condition for the productive consumption of labour power by capital, hence only to the extent that the worker maintains and repro- duces himself as labour power by means of his individual consump- tion. However the MP, the commodities proper which enter into the circuit of capital, are nutriment for the productive consumption only. The act L — M promotes the individual consumption of the labourer, the transformation of the means of subsistence into his flesh and blood. True, the capitalist must also be there, must also live and con- sume to be able to perform the function of a capitalist. To this end, he has, indeed, to consume only as much as the labourer, and that is all this form of the circulation process presupposes. But even this is not formally expressed, since the formula concludes with M', i. e., a result which can at once resume its function of money capital, now aug- mented.

C — M' directly contains the sale of C; but C — M', a sale on the one part, is M — C, a purchase, on the other part, and in the last analysis a commodity is bought only for its use value, in order to enter (leav- ing intermediate sales out of consideration) the process of consump-



**[p. 66]**

tion, whether this is individual or productive, according to the nature of the article bought. But this consumption does not enter the circuit of individual capital, the product of which is G. This product is elimi- nated from the circuit precisely because it is a commodity for sale. C is expressly designed for consumption by others than the producer. Thus we find that certain exponents of the mercantile system6

(which is based on the formula M — C P C — M') deliver lengthy sermons to the effect that the individual capitalist should consume only as much as the labourer, that the nation of capitalists should leave the consumption of their own commodities, and the consump- tion process in general, to the other, less intelligent nations but that they themselves should make productive consumption their life's task. These sermons frequently remind one in form and content of ana- logous ascetic expostulations of the fathers of the church.

Capital's movement in circuits is therefore the unity of circulation and production; it includes both. Since the two phases M — C and C — M' are acts of circulation, the circulation of capital is a part of the general circulation of commodities. But as functionally they are definite sections, stages in capital's circuit, which pertains not only to the sphere of circulation but also to that of production, capital goes through its own circuit in the general circulation of commodities. The general circulation of commodities serves capital in the first stage as a means of assuming that shape in which it can perform the function of productive capital; in the second stage it serves to strip off the com- modity function in which capital cannot renew its circuit; at the same time it opens up to capital the possibility of separating its own circuit from the circulation of the surplus value that accrued to it.

The circuit of money capital is therefore the most one-sided, and thus the most striking and typical form in which the circuit of indus- trial capital appears, the capital whose aim and compelling motive — the self-expansion of value, the making of money, and accumula- tion— is thus conspicuously revealed (buying to sell dearer). Owing to the fact that the first phase is M — C it is also revealed that the constituents of productive capital originate in the commodity market, and in general that the capitalist process of production depends on circulation, on commerce. The circuit of money capital is not merely the production of commodities; it is itself possible only through circu- lation and presupposes it. This is plain, if only from the fact that the



**[p. 67]**

form M belonging in circulation appears as the first and pure form of advanced capital value, which is not the case in the other two circuit forms.

The circuit of money capital always remains the general expression of industrial capital, in so far as it always includes the self-expansion of the advanced value. In P P, the money expression of capital ap- pears only as the price of the elements of production, hence only as a value expressed in money of account and is fixed in this form in bookkeeping.

M M' becomes a special form of the industrial capital circuit in so far as newly active capital is first advanced in the form of money and then withdrawn in the same form, either in passing from one branch of business to another or in retiring industrial capital from a business. This includes the functioning as capital of the surplus value first ad- vanced in the form of money, and becomes most evident when sur- plus value functions in some other business than the one in which it originated. M M' may be the first circuit of a certain capital; it may be the last; it may be regarded as the form of the total social capital; it is the form of capital that is newly invested, either as capital newly ac- cumulated in the form of money, or as some old capital which is en- tirely transformed into money for the purpose of transfer from one branch of industry to another.

Being a form always contained in all circuits, money capital per- forms this circuit [M M'] precisely for that part of capital which produces surplus value, viz., variable capital. The normal form of ad- vancing wages is payment in money; this process must be renewed in comparatively short intervals, because the labourer lives from hand to mouth. The capitalist must therefore always confront the labourer as money capitalist, and his capital as money capital. There can be no direct or indirect balancing of accounts in this case such as we find in the purchase of means of production and in the sale of produced commodities (so that the greater part of the money capital actually figures only in the form of commodities, money only in the form of money of account and finally in cash only in the balancing of ac- counts). On the other hand, a part of the surplus value arising out of variable capital is spent by the capitalist for his individual consump- tion, which pertains to the retail trade and, however circuitous the route may be, this part is always spent in cash, in the money form of surplus value. It does not matter how large or small this part of sur- plus value is. Variable capital always appears anew as money capital



**[p. 68]**

invested in wages (M — L) and m as surplus value spent to defray the cost of the individual consumption of the capitalist. Hence M, ad- vanced variable capital value, and m, its increment, are necessarily held in the form of money to be spent in this form.

The formula M — C P . . . C — M', with its result M' = M + m, is deceptive in form, is illusory in character, owing to the existence of the advanced and self-expanded value in its equivalent form, money. The emphasis is not on the self-expansion of value but on the money form of this process, on the fact that more value in money form is finally drawn out of the circulation than was originally advanced to it; hence on the multiplication of the mass of gold and silver belonging to the capitalist. The so-called monetary system ' 7 is merely an ex- pression of the irrational form M — C — M', a movement which takes place exclusively in circulation and therefore can explain the two acts: 1) M — C, 2) C — M' in no other way than as a sale of C above its value in the second act and therefore as C drawing more money out of the circulation than was put into it by its purchase. On the other hand M — C . . . P . . . C — M', fixed as the exclusive form, consti- tutes the basis of the more highly developed mercantile system, in which not only the circulation of commodities but also their produc- tion appears as a necessary element.

The illusory character of M — C P C — M' and the correspond- ingly illusory interpretation exists whenever this form is fixed as oc- curring once, not as fluent and ever renewed; hence whenever this form is considered not as one of the forms of the circuit but as its ex- clusive form. But it itself points toward other forms.

In the first place this entire circuit is premised on the capitalist character of the process of production, and therefore presupposes this process together with the specific social conditions brought about by it as the basis. M — C = M — C <M P; but M — L assumes the existence of the wage labourer, and hence the means of production as part of productive capital. It assumes therefore that the process of la- bour and self-expansion, the process of production, is a function of capital.

In the second place, if M M' is repeated, the return to the money form appears just as evanescent as the money form in the first stage. M — C disappears to make room for P. The constantly recurrent ad- vance in the form of money and its constant return in the form of money appear merely as fleeting moments in the circuit.

In the third place

A M — C . . . P . . . C —M'. M — C . . . P . . . C —M'. M — CPetc.

Beginning with the first repetition of the circuit, the circuit P C — M'. M — C P appears before the second circuit of M is complet- ed, and all subsequent circuits may thus be considered under the form of P C — M — C P, so that M — C, being the first phase of the first circuit, is merely the passing preparation for the constantly repeated circuit of the productive capital. And this indeed is so in the case of industrial capital invested for the first time in the form of money capital.

On the other hand before the second circuit of P is completed, the first circuit, that of commodity capital, C — M". M — C P C (ab- ridged C C ) has already been made. Thus the first form already contains the other two, and the money form thus disappears, so far as it is not merely an expression of value but an expression of value in the equivalent form, in money.

Finally, if we consider some newly invested individual capital de- scribing for the first time the circuit M — C P C — M', then M — C is the preparatory phase, the forerunner of the first process of pro- duction gone through by this individual capital. This phase M — C is consequently not presupposed but rather called for or necessitated by the process of production. But this applies only to this individual capital. The general form of the circuit of industrial capital is the circuit of money capital, in so far as the capitalist mode of production is taken for granted, hence in social conditions determined by capitalist production. Therefore the capitalist process of production is assumed as aprius* if not in the first circuit of the money capital of a newly in- vested industrial capital, then outside of it. The continuous existence of this process of production presupposes the constantly renewed cir- cuit P P. Even in the first stage, M — C <„ P, this premise plays a part, for this assumes on the one hand the existence of the class of wage labourers; and then, on the other, that which is M — C, the first stage, for the buyer of means of production, is C — M' for their seller; hence C presupposes commodity capital, and thus the commodities themselves as a result of capitalist production, and thereby the func- tion of productive capital.

[^1]: a a precondition



