---
Volume: 36
Document_Title: "Chapter II. The Circuit of Productive Capital "
Page_Range: "78-100"
---

# Chapter II. The Circuit of Productive Capital 



**[p. 70]**

C h a p t e r II

THE CIRCUIT OF PRODUCTIVE CAPITAL

The circuit of productive capital has the general formula P C — M ' — C P. It signifies the periodical renewal of the functioning of productive capital, hence its reproduction, or its process of produc- tion as a process of reproduction aiming at the self-expansion of value; not only production but a periodical reproduction of surplus value; the function of industrial capital in its productive form, and this function performed not once but periodically repeated, so that the renewal is determined by the starting-point. A portion of C may (in certain cases, in various branches of investment of industrial capi- tal) re-enter directly as means of production into the same labour process out of which it came in the shape of a commodity. This mere- ly saves the transformation of the value of this portion into real money or token money or else the commodity finds an independent expression only as money of account. This part of value does not enter into the circulation. Thus values enter into the process of production which do not enter into the process of circulation. The same is true of that part of C which is consumed by the capitalist in natura as part of the surplus product. But this is insignificant for capitalist production. It deserves consideration, if at all, only in agriculture.

Two things are at once strikingly apparent in this form. For one thing, while in the first form, M M', the process of pro- duction, the function of P, interrupts the circulation of money capital and acts only as a mediator between its two phases M — C and C — M', here the entire circulation process of industrial capital, its entire movement within the phase of circulation, constitutes only an inter- ruption and consequently only the connecting link between the pro- ductive capital, which as the first extreme opens the circuit, and that which closes it as the other extreme in the same form, hence in the form in which it starts again. Circulation proper appears but as an in- strument promoting the periodically renewed reproduction, rendered continuous by the renewal.

For another thing, the entire circulation presents itself in a form which is the opposite ofthat which it has in the circuit of money capi- tal. There it was: M — C — M (M — C. C — M), apart from the de-



**[p. 71]**

termination of value; here it is, again apart from the value determina- tion: C — M — C (C — M. M — C), i. e., the form of the simple circu- lation of commodities.

I. SIMPLE REPRODUCTION

Let us first consider the process C — M ' — C , which takes place in the sphere of circulation between the two extremes P P.

The starting-point of this circulation is commodity capital: C/ = C + c = P + c. The function of commodity capital C — M' (the realisation of the capital value contained in it = P, which now exists as the constituent part C of C , as well as of the surplus value con- tained in it, which exists as a constituent part of the same quantity of commodities and has the value c) was examined in the first form of the circuit. But there this function formed the second phase of the interrupted circulation and the concluding phase of the entire circuit. Here it forms the second phase of the circuit but the first phase of the circulation. The first circuit ends with M', and since M' as well as the original M can again open the second circuit as money capital, it was not necessary at first to see whether M and m (surplus value) con- tained in M' continue in their course together or whether each of them pursues its own course. This would only have become necessary if we had followed up further the first circuit in its renewed course. But this point must be decided in the circuit of the productive capital, because the determination of its very first circuit depends on it and because C — M' appears in it as the first phase of the circulation, which has to be complemented by M — C. It depends on this decision whether the formula represents simple reproduction or reproduction on an extend- ed scale. The character of the circuit changes according to the deci- sion made.

Let us, then, consider first the simple reproduction of productive capital, assuming that, as in the first chapter, conditions remain con- stant and that commodities are bought and sold at their values. On this assumption the entire surplus value enters into the individual consumption of the capitalist. As soon as the transformation of the commodity capital C into money has taken place, that part of the money which represents the capital value continues to circulate in the circuit of industrial capital; the other part, which is surplus value changed into money, enters into the general circulation of commodi-



**[p. 72]**

ties, constitutes a circulation of money emanating from the capitalist but taking place outside of the circulation of his individual capital. In our illustration we had a commodity capital C of 10,000 lbs of yarn, valued at £500; £422 of this represent the value of the produc- tive capital and continue, as the money form of 8,440 lbs of yarn, the capital circulation begun by C , while the surplus value of £78, the money form of 1,560 lbs of yarn, the excess of the commodity prod- uct, leaves this circulation and describes a separate course within the general circulation of commodities.

c(:)=

M'(3-c

< M P

m — c represents a series of purchases by means of money which the capitalist spends either for commodities proper or for personal services to his cherished self or family. These purchases are made piecemeal at various times. The money therefore exists temporarily in the form of a supply, or hoard, destined for current consumption, since money whose circulation has been interrupted assumes the form of a hoard. Its function as a medium of circulation, which includes its transient form of a hoard, does not enter the circulation of capital in its money form M. This money is not advanced but spent.

We have assumed that the total advanced capital always passes wholly from one of its phases to the other; and so here too we assume that the commodities produced by P represent the total value of the productive capital P = £ 422 + £ 78 of surplus value created in the process of production. In our illustration, which deals with a discrete commodity, the surplus value exists in the form of 1,560 lbs of yarn; if computed on the basis of one pound of yarn, it would exist in the form of 2.496 ounces of yarn. But if the commodity were for instance a machine valued at £ 500 and having the same value composition, one part of the value of this machine, = £ 78, would be surplus value, but these £ 78 would exist only in the machine as a whole. This machine cannot be divided into capital value and surplus value with- out breaking it to pieces and thus destroying its value together with its use value. For this reason the two value components can be repre- sented only ideally as components of the commodity, not as indepen- dent elements of the commodity C , like any pound of yarn, which represents a separable independent element of the 10,000 lbs of com-



**[p. C]**

modity. In the first case the aggregate commodity, the commodity capital, the machine, must be sold in its entirety before m can enter upon its separate circulation. On the other hand when the capitalist has sold 8,440 lbs, the sale of the remaining 1,560 lbs would represent a wholly separate circulation of the surplus value in the form of c (1,560 lbs of yarn)—m (£78)—c (articles of consumption). But the elements of value of each individual portion of the 10,000 lbs of yarn, the product, can be represented by parts of the product as well as by the total product. Just as the latter, 10,000 lbs of yarn, can be divided into the value of the constant capital (c), 7,440 lbs of yarn worth £372, variable capital value (v) of 1,000 lbs of yarn worth £50, and surplus value (s) of 1,560 lbs of yarn worth £ 78, so every pound of yarn may be divided into c = to 11.904 ounces worth 8.928 d., v = to 1.600 ounces of yarn worth 1.200 d., and s = to 2.496 ounces of yarn worth 1.872 d. The capitalist might also sell various por- tions of the 10,000 lbs of yarn successively and successively consume the successive portions of the surplus value elements contained in them, thus realising, also successively, the sum of c + v. But in the fi- nal analysis this operation likewise premises the sale of the entire lot of 10,000 lbs, that therefore the value of c and v will be replaced by the sale of 8,440 lbs (Buch I, Kap. VII, 2a).

However that may be, by means of C — M' both the capital value and surplus value contained in C acquire a separable existence, the existence of different sums of money. In both cases M and m are really a converted form of the value which originally in C had only a peculiar, an ideal expression as the price of the commodity.

c — m — c represents the simple circulation of commodities, the first phase of which, c — m, is included in the circulation of commod- ity capital, C — M', i.e., included in the circuit of capital; its com- plementary phase m — c falls, on the contrary, outside of this circuit, being a separate act in the general circulation of commodities. The circulation of C and c, of capital value and surplus value, splits after the transformation of C into M'. Hence it follows:

First, while the commodity capital is realised by M' = C — ( M + m), the movement of capital value and surplus value, which in C — M' is still united and carried on by the same quantity of commodities, becomes separable, both of them henceforth possessing independent forms as separate sums of money.

[^1]: a English edition: Vol. I, Ch. IX, 2 (present edition, Vol. 35).





**[p. 74]**

Secondly, if this separation takes place, m being spent as the rev- enue of the capitalist, while M as a functional form of capital value continues its course determined by the circuit, the first act, C — M', in connection with the subsequent acts, M — C and m — c, may be rep- resented as the two different circulations C — M — C and c — m — c; and both of these series, so far as their general form is concerned, be- long in the usual circulation of commodities.

By the way, in the case of continuous, indivisible commodities, it is a matter of practice to isolate the value constituents ideally. For in- stance in the London building business, which is carried on mainly on credit, the building contractor receives advances in accordance with the stage of construction reached. None of these stages is a house, but only a really existing constituent part of an inchoate future house; hence, in spite of its reality, it is but an ideal fraction of the entire house, but real enough to serve as security for an additional advance (see on this point Chapter XII belowa).

Thirdly, if the movement of capital value and surplus value, which still proceeds unitedly in C and M, is separated only in part (a por- tion of the surplus value not being spent as revenue) or not at all, a change takes place in the capital value itself within its circuit, before it is completed. In our illustration the value of the productive capital was equal to £422. If that capital continues M — C, as, say, £480 or £ 500, then it strides through the latter stages of its circuit with an in- crease of £ 58 or £ 78 over its initial value. This may also go hand in hand with a change in the composition of its value.

C — M', the second stage of the circulation and the final stage of circuit I (M M'), is the second stage in our circuit and the first in the circulation of commodities. So far as the circulation is concerned, it must be complemented by M' — C . But not only has C — M' the process of self-expansion already behind it (in this case the function of P, the first stage), but its result, the commodity C , has already been realised. The process of the self-expansion of capital and the realisa- tion of the commodities representing the expanded capital value are therefore completed in C — M'.

And so we have premised simple reproduction, i. e., that m — c sep- arates entirely from M — C. Since both circulations, c — m — c as well as C — M — C, belong in the circulation of commodities, so far as their general form is concerned (and for this reason do not show

[^1]: a See this volume, pp. 235-36.





**[p. 75]**

any value differences in their extremes), it is easy to conceive the proc- ess of capitalist production, after the manner of vulgar economy, as a mere production of commodities, of use values designed for con- sumption of some sort, which the capitalist produces for no other pur- pose than that of getting in their place commodities with different use values, or of exchanging them for such, as vulgar economy erro- neously states.

C acts from the very outset as commodity capital, and the purpose of the entire process, enrichment (the production of surplus value), does not by any means exclude increasing consumption on the part of the capitalist as his surplus value (and hence his capital) increases; on the contrary, it emphatically includes it.

Indeed, in the circulation of the revenue of the capitalist, the pro- duced commodity c (or the fraction of the produced commodity C ideally corresponding to it) serves only to transform it, first into money, and from money into a number of other commodities serving private consumption. But we must not, at this point, overlook the tri- fling circumstance that c is commodity value which did not cost the capitalist anything, an incarnation of surplus labour, for which rea- son it originally stepped on the stage as a component part of commod- ity capital C . This c is, by the very nature of its existence, bound to the circuit of capital value in process, and if this Circuit begins to stagnate or is otherwise disturbed, not only is the consumption of c re- stricted or entirely arrested, but also the disposal ofthat series of com- modities which serve to replace c. The same is true when C — M' ends in failure, or only a part of C can be sold.

We have seen that c — m — c, representing the circulation of the revenue of the capitalist, enters into the circulation of capital only so long as c is a part of the value of C, of capital in its functional form of commodity capital; but, as soon as it acquires independence through m — c, hence throughout the form c — m — c, the circulation ofthat revenue does not enter into the movement of the capital advanced by the capitalist, although it stems from it. This circulation is connected with the movement of advanced capital inasmuch as the existence of capital presupposes the existence of the capitalist, and his existence is conditioned on his consuming surplus value.

Within the general circulation C , for example yarn, functions only as a commodity; but as an element in the circulation of capital it per- forms the function of commodity capital, a form which capital value al- ternately assumes and discards. After the sale of the yarn to a merch-



**[p. 76]**

ant, it is extruded out of the circular movement of the capital whose product it is, but nevertheless, as a commodity, it moves always in the sphere of the general circulation. The circulation of one and the same mass of commodities continues, in spite of the fact that it has ceased to be a phase in the independent circuit of the spinner's capital. Hence the real definitive metamorphosis of the mass of commodities thrown into circulation by the capitalist, C — M, their final exit into con- sumption may be completely separated in time and space from that metamorphosis in which this mass of commodities functions as his commodity capital. The same metamorphosis which has been accom- plished in the circulation of capital still remains to be accomplished in the sphere of the general circulation.

This state of things is not changed a bit if this yarn enters the cir- cuit of some other industrial capital. The general circulation com- prises as much the intertwining of the circuits of the various indepen- dent fractions of social capital, i. e., the totality of the individual capi- tals, as the circulation of those values which are not thrown on the market as capital but enter into individual consumption.

The relation between a circuit of capital forming part of a general circulation and a circuit forming links in an independent circuit is shown further on when we examine the circulation of M' = M + m. M as money capital continues capital's circuit; m, being spent as revenue (m — c), enters into the general circulation, but comes flying out of the circuit of capital. Only that part enters the latter circuit which performs the function of additional money capital. In c — m — c money serves only as coin; the object of this circulation is the individual consumption of the capitalist. It is typical of the idiocy of vulgar economy that it gives out this circulation, which does not enter into the circuit of capital — the circulation ofthat part of the value produced which is consumed as revenue — as the characteristic cir- cuit of capital.

In the second phase, M — C, the capital value M = P (the value of the productive capital that at this point opens the circuit of industrial capital) is again present, delivered of its surplus value, therefore hav- ing the same magnitude of value as it had in the first stage of the cir- cuit of money capital M — C. In spite of the difference in place the function of the money capital into which the commodity capital has now been transformed is the same: its transformation into MP and L, into means of production and labour power.

In the functioning of commodity capital C — M', the capital value,



**[p. 77]**

simultaneously with c — m, has consequently gone through the phase C — M and enters now into the complementary phase M — C <MP- Its complete circulation is therefore C — M — C <M P.

First: Money capital M appeared in Form I (circuit M M') as the original form in which capital value is advanced; it appears here from the outset as a part ofthat sum of money into which commodity capi- tal transformed itself in the first circulation phase C — M', therefore from the outset as the transformation of P, the productive capital, through the medium of the sale of commodities, into the money form. Money capital exists here from the outset as that form of capital value which is neither its original nor its final one, since the phase M — C, which concludes the phase C — M, can only be performed by again discarding the money form. Therefore that part of M — C which is at the same time M — L appears now no longer as a mere advance of money by the purchase of labour power, but as an advance by means of which the same 1,000 lbs of yarn, valued at £50, which form a part of the commodity value created by labour power, are advanced to la- bour power in the form of money. The money advanced here to the labourer is only a converted equivalent form of a part of the commo- dity value produced by himself. And for that reason if no other the act M — C, so far as it means M — L, is by no means simply a replace- ment of a commodity in the form of money by a commodity in the use form, but it includes other elements which are independent of the general commodity circulation as such.

M' appears as a converted form of C , which is itself a product of a previous function of P, the process of production. The entire sum of money M' is therefore a money expression of past labour. In our illus- tration, 10,000 lbs of yarn = £500 are the product of the spinning process. Of this quantity, 7,440 lbs of yarn are = to the advanced constant capital c = £372; 1,000 lbs of yarn are = to the advanced vari- able capital v = £50; and 1,560 lbs of yarn = the surplus value s = £78. If of M' only the original capital of £422 is again advanced, other conditions remaining the same, then the labourer is advanced the following week, in M — L, only a part of the 10,000 lbs of yarn produced in the given week (the money value of 1,000 lbs of yarn). As a result of C — M, money is always the expression of past labour. If the complementary act M — C takes place at once in the commodity market, i. e., M is given in return for commodities existing in the mar- ket, this is again a transformation of past labour, from one form (mon- ey) into another form (commodities). But M — C differs in the mat-



**[p. 78]**

ter of time from C — M. They may exceptionally take place at the same time, for instance when the capitalist who performs M — C and the capitalist to whom this act means C — M ship their commodities to each other at the same time and M is used only to square the bal- ance. The difference in time between the performance of C — M and M — C may be more or less considerable. Although M, as the result of C — M, represents past labour, it may, in the act M — C, represent the converted form of commodities which are not as yet in the mar- ket, but will be thrown upon it in the future, since M — C need not take place until C has been produced anew. M may likewise stand for commodities which are produced simultaneously with the C whose money expression it is. For instance in the exchange M — C (pur- chase of means of production) coal may be bought before it has been mined. In so far as m figures as an accumulation of money, is not spent as revenue, it may stand for cotton which will not be produced until the following year. The same holds good on spending the reve- nue of the capitalist, m — c. It also applies to wages, to L = to £50. This money is not only the money form of the past labour of the la- bourers but at the same time a draft on simultaneous or future labour which is just being realised or should be realised in the future. The la- bourer may buy with his wages a coat which will not be made until the following week. This applies especially to the vast number of necessary means of subsistence which must be consumed almost as soon as they have been produced to prevent spoilage. Thus the labourer receives, in the money which is paid to him as his wages, the convert- ed form of his own future labour or that of other labourers. By giving the labourer a part of his past labour, the capitalist gives him a draft on his own future labour. It is the labourer's own simultaneous or fu- ture labour that constitutes the not yet existing supply out of which he will be paid for his past labour. In this case the idea of hoarding disappears altogether.a

Secondly: In the circulation C — M — C <j Jj P the same money changes place twice; the capitalist first receives it as a seller and passes it on as a buyer; the transformation of commodities into the money form serves only for the purpose of retransforming it from the money form into the commodity form; the money form of capital, its exist- ence as money capital, is therefore only a transient phase in this move- ment; or, so far as the movement is fluent, money capital appears

[^1]: a Here Marx made the following note in the manuscript (in square brackets): "All this, however, belongs to the last part of the second book."





**[p. 79]**

only as a medium of circulation when it serves as a means of pur- chase; it acts as a paying medium proper when capitalists buy from one another and therefore only have to square accounts.

Thirdly: The function of money capital, whether it is a mere circu- lating medium or a paying medium, effects only the replacement of C by L and MP, i. e., the replacement of the yarn, the commodity which represents the result of the productive capital (after deducting the surplus value to be used as revenue), by its elements of produc- tion, in other words, the retransformation of capital value from its form as a commodity into the elements that build this commodity. In the last analysis, the function of money capital promotes only the re- transformation of commodity capital into productive capital.

In order that the circuit may be completed normally, C must be sold at its value and in its entirety. Furthermore, C — M — C in- cludes not merely replacement of one commodity by another, but re- placement with value relations remaining the same. We assume that this takes place here. As a matter of fact, however, the values of the means of production vary. It is precisely capitalist production to which con- tinuous change of value relations is peculiar, if only because of the ever changing productivity of labour that characterises this mode of production. This change in the value of the elements of production will be discussed later on,a and we merely mention it here. The trans- formation of the elements of production into commodity products, of P into C , takes place in the sphere of production, while the retransfor- mation from C into P occurs in the sphere of circulation. It is brought about by a simple metamorphosis of commodities, but its content is a phase in the process of reproduction, regarded as a whole. C — M — G, being a form of the circulation of capital, involves a function- ally determined exchange of matter. The transformation C — M — C requires further that C should be equal to the elements of production of the commodity quantum C , and that these elements should retain their original value relations to one another. It is there- fore assumed that the commodities are not only bought at their re- spective values, but also do not undergo any change of value during the circular movement. Otherwise this process cannot run normally.

In M M', M represents the original form of the capital value, which is discarded only to be resumed. In P C — M ' — C P, M represents a form which is only assumed in the process and which is discarded before this process is over. The money form appears here

[^1]: See Section V of Chapter XV of this volume.





**[p. 80]**

only as a transient independent form of capital value. Capital in the form of C is just as anxious to assume the money form as it is to dis- card it in M', after barely assuming that garb in order again to trans- form itself into productive capital. So long as it remains in the garb of money, it does not function as capital and its value does not therefore expand. The capital lies fallow. M serves here as a circulating me- dium, but as a circulating medium of capital. a The semblance of in- dependence which the money form of capital value possesses in the first form of its circuit (the form of money capital) disappears in this second form, which thus is a criticism of Form I and reduces it to merely a special form. If the second metamorphosis, M — C, meets with any obstacles (for instance if there are no means of production in the market) the circuit, the flow of the process of reproduction, is interrupt- ed quite as much as when capital is held fast in the form of commod- ity capital. But there is this difference: It can remain longer in the money form than in the transitory form of commodities. It does not cease to be money, if it does not perform the functions of money capi- tal; but it does cease to be a commodity, or a use value in general, if it is delayed too long in the exercise of its function of commodity capi- tal. Furthermore, in its money form it is capable of assuming another form in place of"its original one of productive capital, while it cannot budge at all if held in the form of C .

C — M' — C includes acts of circulation only for C in accordance with its form, acts which are phases of its reproduction; but the real reproduction of C, into which C transforms itself, is necessary for the performance of C — M ' — C . This however is conditioned on pro- cesses of reproduction which lie outside of the process of reproduction of the individual capital represented by C .

In Form I the act M — C <MP prepares only the first transfor- mation of money capital into productive capital; in Form II it pre- pares the retransformation from commodity capital into productive capital; that is to say, so far as the investment of industrial capital re- mains the same, retransformation of the commodity capital into the same elements of production as those from which it originated. Con- sequently here as well as in Form I, that act appears as a preparatory phase of the process of production, but as a return to it, as a renewal of it, hence as a precursor of the process of reproduction, hence also of a repetition of the process of self-expansion of value.

[^1]: a Here Marx made the following note in the manuscript: "Against Tooke."





**[p. 81]**

It must be noted once more that M — L is not a simple exchange of commodities but the purchase of a commodity, L, which is to serve for the production of surplus value, just as M — MP is only a proce- dure which is materially indispensable for the attainment of this end.

With the completion of M — C < ^JP M is reconverted into pro- ductive capital, into P, and the circuit begins anew.

The expanded form of P C — M ' — C P is therefore:

The transformation of money capital into productive capital is the purchase of commodities for the production of commodities. Con- sumption falls within the circuit of capital itself only in so far as it is productive consumption; its premise is that surplus value is produced by means of the commodities so consumed. And this is something very different from production and even commodity production, which has for its end the existence of the producer. A replacement — commodity by commodity — thus contingent on the production of surplus value is quite a different matter from a bare exchange of prod- ucts brought about merely by means of money. But the economists take this matter as proof that no overproduction is possible.

Apart from the productive^ consumption of M, which is trans- formed into L and MP, the circuit contains the first member M — L, which signifies, from the standpoint of the labourer, L — M = C — M. In the labourer's circulation, L — M — C, which in- cludes his consumption, only the first member falls within the circuit . of the capital as a result of M — L. The second act, namely M — C, does not fall within the circulation of individual capital, although it springs from it. But the continuous existence of the working class is necessary for the capitalist class, and so is therefore the consumption of the labourer made possible by M — C.

The only condition which the act C — M' stipulates for capital value to continue its circuit and for surplus value to be consumed by the capitalist is that C shall have been converted into money, shall have been sold. Of course, C is bought only because the article is a use value, hence serviceable for consumption of any kind, productive or individual. But if C continues to circulate for instance in the hands of the merchant who bought the yarn, this at first does not in the least affect the continuation of the circuit of the individual capital which



**[p. 82]**

produced the yarn and sold it to the merchant. The entire process continues and with it the individual consumption of the capitalist and the labourer made necessary by it. This point is important in a dis- cussion of crises.

For as soon as C has been sold, been converted into money, it can be reconverted into the real factors of the labour process, and thus of the reproductive process. Whether C is bought by the ultimate con- sumer or by a merchant for resale does not affect the case. The quantity of commodities created in masses by capitalist production depends on the scale of this production and on the need for constantly expanding this production, and not on a predestined circle of supply and de- mand, on requirements that have to be satisfied. Mass production can have no other direct buyer, apart from other industrial capitalists, than the wholesaler. Within certain limits, the process of reproduc- tion may take place on the same or on an extended scale even when the commodities expelled from it did not really enter individual or productive consumption. The consumption of commodities is not in- cluded in the circuit of the capital from which they originated. For in- stance, as soon as the yarn is sold the circuit of the capital value repre- sented by the yarn may begin anew, regardless of what may next be- come of the sold yarn. So long as the product is sold, everything is taking its regular course from the standpoint of the capitalist pro- ducer. The circuit of the capital value he is identified with is not interrupted. And if this process is expanded — which includes in- creased productive consumption of the means of production — this repro- duction of capital may be accompanied by increased individual con- sumption (hence demand) on the part of the labourers, since this proc- ess is initiated and effected by productive consumption. Thus the production of surplus value, and with it the individual consumption of the capitalist, may increase, the entire process of reproduction may be in a flourishing condition, and yet a large part of the commodities may have entered into consumption only apparently, while in reality they may still remain unsold in the hands of dealers, may in fact still be lying in the market. Now one stream of commodities follows another, and finally it is discovered that the previous streams had been absorbed only apparently by consumption. The commodity capitals compete with one another for a place in the market. Late- comers, to sell at all, sell at lower prices. The former streams have not yet been disposed of when payment for them falls due. Their owners must declare their insolvency or sell at any price to meet their obliga-



**[p. 83]**

tions. This sale has nothing whatever to do with the actual state of the demand. It only concerns the demand for payment, the pressing necessity of transforming commodities into money. Then a crisis breaks out. It becomes visible not in the direct decrease of consumer demand, the demand for individual consumption, but in the decrease of exchanges of capital for capital, of the reproductive process of capital.

If the commodities MP and L, into which M is transformed to per- form its function of money capital, of capital value destined to be re- transformed into productive capital — if those commodities are to be bought or paid for on different terms, so that M — C represents a se- ries of successive purchases and payments, then a part of M performs the act M — C, while another part persists in the form of money and does not serve to perform simultaneous or successive acts of M — C until such time as the conditions of this process itself may determine. This part is only temporarily withheld from circulation, in order to go into action, perform its function, in due time. This storing of it is then in its turn a function determined by its circulation and intended for circulation. Its existence as a fund for purchase and payment, the suspension of its movement, the interrupted state of its circulation, will then constitute a state in which money exercises one of its func- tions as money capital. As money capital; for in this case the money temporarily remaining at rest is itself a part of money capital M (of M' — m = M), of that portion of the value of commodity capital which is = to P, to that value of productive capital from which the cir- cuit starts. On the other hand all money withdrawn from circulation has the form of a hoard. Money in the form of a hoard therefore be- comes here a function of money capital, just as in M — C the function of money as a means of purchase or payment becomes a function of money capital. This is so because capital value exists here in the form of money, because the money state here is a state in which industrial capital finds itself at one of its stages and which is prescribed by the interconnections within the circuit. At the same time it is here proved true once more that money capital within the circuit of industrial cap- ital performs no other functions than those of money and that these money functions assume the significance of capital functions only by virtue of their interconnections with the other stages of this circuit.

The representation of M' as a relation of m to M, as a capital rela- tion, is not directly a function of money capital, but of commodity cap- ital C , which in its turn, as a relation of c and C, expresses but the

result of the process of production, of the self-expansion of capital value which took place in it.

If the continuation of the process of circulation meets with obsta- cles, so that M must suspend its function M — C on account of exter- nal circumstances, such as the conditions of the market, etc., and if it therefore remains for a shorter or longer time in its money form, then we have once more money in the form of a hoard, which happens also in simple commodity circulation whenever the transition from C — M to M — C is interrupted by external circumstances. It is an invol- untary formation of a hoard. In the case at hand money has the form of fallow, latent money capital. But we will not discuss this point any further for the present.

In either case however persistence of money capital in its money state appears as the result of interrupted movement, no matter whether this is expedient or inexpedient, voluntary or involuntary, in accordance with its functions or contrary to them.

II. ACCUMULATION AND REPRODUCTION ON AN EXTENDED SCALE

Since the proportions which the expansion of the productive proc- ess may assume are not arbitrary but prescribed by technology, the realised surplus value, though intended for capitalisation, frequently can only by dint of several successive circuits attain such a size (and until then must therefore be accumulated) as will suffice for its effec- tive functioning as additional capital or for entrance into the circuit of functioning capital value. Surplus value thus congeals into a hoard and in this form constitutes latent money capital — latent because it cannot act as capital so long as it persists in the money form. 6a) The formation of a hoard thus appears here as a factor included in the process of capitalist accumulation, accompanying it but nevertheless essentially differing from it; for the process of reproduction itself is not expanded by the formation of latent money capital. On the contrary, latent money capital is formed here because the capitalist producer cannot directly expand the scale of his production. If he sells his sur-

[^1]: 6a' The term "latent" is borrowed from the idea of latent heat in physics, which has now been almost replaced by the theory of the transformation of energy. Marx there- fore uses in the third part (a later version) another term, borrowed from the idea of po- tential energy, viz: "potential", or analogous to the virtual velocities of D'Alembert, "virtual capital".— F.E.





**[p. 85]**

plus product to a producer of gold or silver, who puts new gold or sil- ver into circulation or, what amounts to the same thing, to a merchant who imports additional gold or silver from foreign countries for a part of the national surplus product, then his latent money capital forms an increment of the national gold or silver hoard. In all other cases, the £78 for instance, which were a circulating medium in the hands of the purchaser, assume only the form of a hoard in the hands of the capitalist. Hence all that has taken place is a different distribution of the national gold or silver hoard.

If in the transactions of our capitalist the money serves as a means of payment (the commodities having to be paid for by the buyer on longer or shorter terms), then the surplus product intended for capi- talisation is not transformed into money but into creditor's claims, into titles of ownership of an equivalent which the buyer may already have in his possession or which he may expect to possess. It does not enter into the reproductive process of the circuit any more than does money invested in interest-bearing securities, etc., although it may enter into the circuits of other individual industrial capitals.

The entire character of capitalist production is determined by the self-expansion of the advanced capital value, that is to say, in the first instance by the production of as much surplus value as possible; in the second place however (see Buch I, Kap. XXII) a by the production of capital, hence by the transformation of surplus value into capital. Ac- cumulation, or production on an extended scale, which appears as a means for constantly more expanded production of surplus value — hence for the enrichment of the capitalist, as his personal aim — and is comprised in the general tendency of capitalist production, be- comes later, however, as was shown in the first book, by virtue of its de- velopment, a necessity for every individual capitalist. The constant augmentation of his capital becomes a condition of its preservation. But we need not revert more fully to what was previously expounded.

We considered first simple reproduction, assuming that the entire surplus value is spent as revenue. In reality under normal conditions a part of the surplus value must always be spent as revenue, and another part must be capitalised. And it is quite immaterial whether a certain surplus value produced in any particular period is entirely consumed or entirely capitalised. On the average — and the general formula can represent only the average movement — both cases oc-

[^1]: * English edition: Vol. I, Ch. XXIV (present edition, Vol. 35).





**[p. 86]**

cur. But in order not to complicate the formula, it is better to assume that the entire surplus value is accumulated. The formula P C — M'—C'<pjjp P' stands for productive capital, which is repro- duced on an enlarged scale and with greater value, and which as augmented productive capital begins its second circuit, or, what amounts to the same, renews its first circuit. As soon as this second circuit is begun, we once more have P as the starting-point; only this P is a larger productive capital than the first P was. Hence, if in the formula M M' the second circuit begins with M', M' functions as M, as an advanced money capital of a definite magnitude. It is a larger money capital than the one with which the first circular movement was opened, but all reference to its augmentation by the capitalisa- tion of surplus value ceases as soon as it assumes the function of ad- vanced money capital. This origin is expunged in its form of money capital, which begins its circuit. This also applies to P' as soon as it functions as the starting-point of a new circuit.

If we compare P P' with M M', or with the first circuit, we find that they have not the same significance at all. M M', taken by itself as an isolated circuit, expresses only that M, the money capital (or in- dustrial capital in its circuit as money capital), is money generating money, value generating value, in other words, produces surplus value. But in the P circuit the process of producing surplus value is al- ready completed upon the termination of the first stage, the process of production, and after going through the second stage (the first stage of the circulation), C — M', the capital value + surplus value already exist as realised money capital, as M', which appeared as the last ex- treme in the first circuit. That surplus value has been produced is de- picted in the first-considered formula P P (see expanded formula, p. 47)a by c — m — c, which, in its second stage, falls outside of the circulation of capital and represents the circulation of surplus value as revenue. In this form, where the entire movement is represented by P P, where consequently there is no difference in value between the two extremes, the self-expansion of the advanced value, the produc- tion of surplus value, is therefore represented in the same way as in M M', except that the act C — M', which appears as the last stage in M M' and as the second stage of the circuit, serves as the first stage of the circulation in P P.

In P P', P' does not indicate that surplus value has been produced

[^1]: See this volume, p. 81.





**[p. 87]**

but that the produced surplus value has been capitalised, hence that capital has been accumulated and that therefore P', in contrast to P, consists of the original capital value plus the value of the capital accu- mulated because of the capital value's movement.

M', as the simple close of M M', and also C , as it appears within all these circuits, do not if taken by themselves express the movement but its result: the self-expansion of capital value realised in the form of commodities or money, and hence capital value as M + m, or C + c, as a relation of capital value to its surplus value, as its offspring. They express this result as various circulation forms of the self-expanded cap- ital value. But neither in the form of C nor of M' is the self-expansion which has taken place itself a function of money capital or of commod- ity capital. As special, differentiated forms, modes of existence cor- responding to special functions of industrial capital, money capital can perform only money functions and commodity capital only com- modity functions, the difference between them being merely that be- tween money and commodity. Similarly industrial capital in its form of productive capital can consist only of the same elements as those of any other labour process which creates products: on the one hand ob- jective conditions of labour (means of production), on the other pro- ductively (purposively) functioning labour power. Just as industrial capital can exist in the sphere of production only in a composition which corresponds to the production process in general, hence also to the non-capitalist production process, so it can exist in the sphere of circulation only in the two forms corresponding to it, viz., that of a commodity and of money. But just as the totality of the elements of production announces itself at the outset as productive capital by the . fact that the labour power is labour power that belongs to others and that the capitalist purchased it from its proprietor, just as he pur- chased his means of production from other commodity owners; just as therefore thé process of production itself appears as a productive function of industrial capital, so money and commodities appear as forms of circulation of the same industrial capital, hence their func- tions appear as the functions of its circulation, which either introduce the functions of productive capital or emanate from them. Here the money function and the commodity function are at the same time functions of money capital and commodity capital, but solely because they are interconnected as forms of functions which industrial capital has to perform at the different stages of its circuit. It is therefore wrong to attempt to derive the specific properties and functions



**[p. 88]**

which characterise money as money and commodities as commodities from their quality as capital, and it is equally wrong to derive on the contrary the properties of productive capital from its mode of exist- ence in means of production.

As soon as M' or C have become fixed as M + m or C + c, i. e., as the relation between the capital value and surplus value, its offspring, this relation is expressed in both of them, in the first case in the money form, in the second case in the commodity form, which does not change matters in the least. Consequently this relation does not have its origin in any properties or functions inherent in money as such or commodities as such. In both cases the characteristic property of cap- ital, that of being a value generating value, is expressed only as a re- sult. C is always the product of the function of P, and M' is always mere- ly the form of C changed in the circuit of industrial capital. As soon therefore as the realised money capital resumes its special function of money capital, it ceases to express the capital relation contained in M' = M + m. After M M' has been passed through and M' begins the circuit anew, it does not figure as M' but as M even if the entire surplus value contained in M' is capitalised. The second circuit begins in our case with a money capital of £500, instead of £422, as in the first circuit. The money capital, which opens the circuit, is -£ 78 larger than before. This difference exists on comparing the one circuit with the other, but no such comparison is made within each particular cir- cuit. The £ 500 advanced as money capital, £ 78 of which formerly existed as surplus value, do not play any other role than would some other £ 500 with which another capitalist inaugurates his first circuit. The same happens in the circuit of the productive capital. The in- creased P' acts as P on recommencing, just as P did in the simple re- production P P.

In the stage M'—C'<^IP, the augmented magnitude is indicated only by C , but not by 1/ or MP'. Since C is the sum of L and MP, C indicates sufficiently that the sum of L and MP contained in it is greater than the original P. In the second place, the terms 1/ and MP' would be incorrect, because we know that the growth of capital in- volves a change in the constitution of its value and that as this change progresses the value of MP increases, that of L always decreasing relatively and often absolutely.



**[p. 89]**

III. ACCUMULATION OF MONEY

Whether or not m, the surplus value turned into money, is imme- diately added to the capital value in process and is thus enabled to enter the circuit together with capital M now having the magnitude M', depends on circumstances which are independent of the mere existence of m. If m is to serve as money capital in a second indepen- dent business, to be run side by side with the first, it is evident that it cannot be used for this purpose unless it is of the minimum size re- quired for it. And if it is intended to be used for the expansion of the orig- inal business, the relations between the material factors of P and their value relations likewise demand a minimum magnitude for m. All the means of production employed in this business have not only a qualitative but also a definite quantitative relation to one another, are proportionate in quantity. These material relations as well as the pertinent value relations of the factors entering into the productive capital determine the minimum magnitude m must possess to be ca- pable of transformation into additional means of production and la- bour power, or only into the former, as an accretion to the productive capital. Thus the owner of a spinning-mill cannot increase the number of his spindles without at the same time purchasing a corresponding number of carders and roving frames, apart from the increased ex- penditure for cotton and wages which such an expansion of his busi- ness demands. To carry this out the surplus value must therefore have reached a considerable figure (generally calculated to be £1 per newly installed spindle). If m does not reach this minimum size the circuit of the capital must be repeated until the sum of m successively produced by it can function together with M, hence M ' — C <MP- Even mere changes of detail, for instance in the spinning machinery, introduced to make it more productive, require greater expenditures for spinning material, more roving machinery, etc. In the meantime m is accumu- lated, and its accumulation is not its own function but the result of re- peated P P. Its own function consists in persisting in the money state until it receives sufficient increment from the repeated surplus- value-creating circuits, i. e., from outside, to possess the minimum magnitude necessary for its active function, the magnitude in which alone it can really enter as money capital — in the case at hand as the accumulated part of the functioning money capital M — into the function of M. But in the interim it is accumulated and exists only in the shape of a hoard in process of formation, of growth. Hence the ac-

cumulation of money, hoarding, appears here as a process by which real accumulation, the extension of the scale on which industrial capi- tal operates, is temporarily accompanied. Temporarily, for so long as the hoard remains in the condition of a hoard, it does not function as capital, does not take part in the process of creating surplus value, re- mains a sum of money which grows only because money, come by without its doing anything, is thrown into the same coffer.

The form of a hoard is simply the form of money not in circula- tion, of money whose circulation has been interrupted and which is therefore fixed in its money form. As for the process of hoarding, it is common to all commodity production and figures as an end in itself only in the undeveloped, pre-capitalist forms of this production. In the present case, however, the hoard appears as a form of money cap- ital and the formation of a hoard as a process which temporarily ac- companies the accumulation of capital because and so far as the money here figures as latent money capital; because the formation of a hoard, the state of being a hoard, in which the surplus value exist- ing in money form finds itself, is a functionally determined prepara- tory stage gone through outside of the circuit described by the capital and required for the transformation of the surplus value into really functioning capital. By its definition it is therefore latent money capital. Hence the size it must acquire before it can take part in the process is determined in each case by the value constitution of the productive capital. But so long as it remains in the condition of a hoard it does not yet perform the functions of money capital but is still idle money capital; not money capital whose function has been interrupted, as was the case before, but money capital not yet capable of performing it.

We are here discussing the accumulation of money in its original real form of an actual hoard of money. It may also exist in the form of mere outstanding money, of claims on debtors by capitalists who have sold C . As for other forms in which this latent money capital may exist in the meantime even in the shape of money-breeding money, such as interest-bearing bank deposits, bills of exchange or securities of any description, these do not belong here. Surplus value realised in the form of money in such cases performs special capital functions outside the circuit described by the industrial capital which originated it — functions which in the first place have nothing to do with that circuit as such but which in the second place presuppose capital functions which differ from the functions of industrial capital and which have not yet been developed here.



**[p. 91]**

IV. RESERVE FUND

In the form we have just discussed, the hoard, in which the surplus value exists, is a fund for the accumulation of money, the money form temporarily assumed by capital accumulation and to that extent a condition of this accumulation. However this accumulation fund can also perform special services of a subordinate nature, that is to say can enter into capital's movement in circuits without this process as- suming the form of P P', hence without an expansion of capitalist reproduction.

If the process C — M' is prolonged beyond its normal duration, if therefore the commodity capital is abnormally delayed in its transfor- mation into the money form or if, for instance, after the completion of this transformation, the price of the means of production into which the money capital must be transformed has risen above the level pre- vailing at the beginning of the circuit, the hoard functioning as accu- mulation fund can be used in the place of money capital or of part of it. Thus the money-accumulation fund serves as a reserve fund for counterbalancing disturbances in the circuit.

As such a reserve fund it differs from the fund of purchasing or paying media discussed in the circuit P P. These media are a part of functioning money capital (hence forms of existence of a part of cap- ital value in general going through the process) whose parts enter upon their functions only at different times, successively. In the contin- uous process of production, reserve money capital is always formed, since one day money is received and no payments have to be made until later, and another day large quantities of goods are sold while other large quantities are not due to be bought until a subsequent date. In these intervals a part of the circulating capital exists contin- uously in the form of money. A reserve fund on the other hand is not a constituent part of capital already performing its functions, or, to be more exact, of money capital. It is rather a part of capital in a prelim- inary stage of its accumulation, of surplus value not yet transformed into active capital. As for the rest, it needs no explaining that a capi- talist in financial straits does not concern himself about what the par- ticular functions of the money he has on hand are. He simply employs whatever money he has for the purpose of keeping his capital circu- lating. For instance in our illustration M = £422, M' = £500. If a part of the capital of £422 exists as a fund of means of payment and purchase, as a money reserve, it is intended, other conditions remaining the

