---
Volume: 36
Document_Title: "IV. Reserve Fund "
Page_Range: "99-100"
---

# IV. Reserve Fund 



**[p. 91]**

IV. RESERVE FUND

In the form we have just discussed, the hoard, in which the surplus value exists, is a fund for the accumulation of money, the money form temporarily assumed by capital accumulation and to that extent a condition of this accumulation. However this accumulation fund can also perform special services of a subordinate nature, that is to say can enter into capital's movement in circuits without this process as- suming the form of P P', hence without an expansion of capitalist reproduction.

If the process C — M' is prolonged beyond its normal duration, if therefore the commodity capital is abnormally delayed in its transfor- mation into the money form or if, for instance, after the completion of this transformation, the price of the means of production into which the money capital must be transformed has risen above the level pre- vailing at the beginning of the circuit, the hoard functioning as accu- mulation fund can be used in the place of money capital or of part of it. Thus the money-accumulation fund serves as a reserve fund for counterbalancing disturbances in the circuit.

As such a reserve fund it differs from the fund of purchasing or paying media discussed in the circuit P P. These media are a part of functioning money capital (hence forms of existence of a part of cap- ital value in general going through the process) whose parts enter upon their functions only at different times, successively. In the contin- uous process of production, reserve money capital is always formed, since one day money is received and no payments have to be made until later, and another day large quantities of goods are sold while other large quantities are not due to be bought until a subsequent date. In these intervals a part of the circulating capital exists contin- uously in the form of money. A reserve fund on the other hand is not a constituent part of capital already performing its functions, or, to be more exact, of money capital. It is rather a part of capital in a prelim- inary stage of its accumulation, of surplus value not yet transformed into active capital. As for the rest, it needs no explaining that a capi- talist in financial straits does not concern himself about what the par- ticular functions of the money he has on hand are. He simply employs whatever money he has for the purpose of keeping his capital circu- lating. For instance in our illustration M = £422, M' = £500. If a part of the capital of £422 exists as a fund of means of payment and purchase, as a money reserve, it is intended, other conditions remaining the

