---
Volume: 36
Document_Title: "3. Money "
Page_Range: "147-148"
---

# 3. Money 



**[p. 139]**

comes the more necessary the more the process assumes a social scale and loses its purely individual character. It is therefore more necessa- ry in capitalist production than in the scattered production of han- dicraft and peasant economy, more necessary in collective production than in capitalist production. But the costs of bookkeeping drop as production becomes concentrated and bookkeeping becomes social. We are concerned here only with the general character of the costs of circulation, which arise out of the metamorphosis of forms alone. It is superfluous to discuss here all their forms in detail. But how forms which belong in the sphere of pure changes of the form of value and hence originate from the particular social form of the process of pro- duction, forms which in the case of the individual commodity pro- ducer are only transient, barely perceptible elements, run alongside his productive functions or become intertwined with them — how these can strike the eye as the huge costs of circulation can be seen from just the money taken in and paid out when these operations have become independent and concentrated on a large scale as the exclusive function of banks, etc., or of cashiers in individual busi- nesses. But it must be firmly borne in mind that these costs of circula- tion are not changed in character by their change in appearance.

Whether a product is fabricated as a commodity or not, it is always a material form of wealth, a use value intended for individual or pro- ductive consumption. Its value as a commodity is ideally expressed in its price, which does not change its actual use form in the least. But the fact that certain commodities like gold and silver function as money and as such reside exclusively in the process of circulation (even in the form of hoards, reserve funds, etc., they remain in the sphere of circulation, although latently) is a pure product of the par- ticular social form of the process of production, the process of produc- tion of commodities. Since under capitalist production products as- sume the general form of commodities, and the overwhelming mass of products is created as commodities and must therefore assume the form of money, and since the vast bulk of the commodities, the part of social wealth functioning as commodities, grows continually, it fol- lows that the quantity of gold and silver functioning as means of cir- culation, paying medium, reserve fund, etc., likewise increases. These commodities performing the function of money enter into neither in-

[^1]: 3. MONEY



