---
Volume: 36
Document_Title: "II. Costs of Storage "
Page_Range: "148-149"
---

# II. Costs of Storage 



**[p. 140]**

dividual nor productive consumption. They represent social labour fixed in a form in which it serves as a mere circulation machine. Be- sides the fact that a part of the social wealth has been condemned to assume this unproductive form, the wearing down of the money de- mands its constant replacement, or the conversion of more social la- bour, in the form of products, into more gold and silver. These replace- ment costs are considerable in capitalistically developed nations, because in general the portion of wealth tied up in the form of money is tremendous. Gold and silver as money commodities mean circula- tion costs to society which arise solely out of the social form of produc- tion. They are faux frais of commodity production in general, and they increase with the development of this production, especially of capitalist production. They represent a part of the social wealth that must be sacrificed to the process of circulation.13'

II. COSTS OF STORAGE

Costs of circulation, which originate in a mere change of form of value, in circulation, ideally considered, do not enter into the value of commodities. The parts of capital expended as such costs are merely deductions from the productively expended capital so far as the capi- talist is concerned. The costs of circulation which we shall consider now are of a different nature. They may arise from processes of pro- duction which are only continued in circulation, the productive char- acter of which is hence merely concealed by the circulation form. On the other hand they may be, from the standpoint of society, mere costs, unproductive expenditure of living or objectified labour, but for that very reason they may become productive of value for the indivi- dual capitalist, may constitute an addition to the selling price of his commodities. This already follows from the fact that these costs are different in different spheres of production, and here and there even for different individual capitals in one and the same sphere of produc- tion. By being added to the prices of commodities they are distributed in proportion to the amount to be borne by each individual capitalist. But all labour which adds value can also add surplus value, and will

[^1]: 13*"The money circulating in a country is a certain portion of the capital of the country, absolutely withdrawn from productive purposes, in order to facilitate or in- crease the productiveness of the remainder. A certain amount of wealth is, therefore, as necessary in order to adopt gold as a circulating medium, as it is to make a machine in order to facilitate any other production"* [Economist, Vol. V, p. 520).



