---
Volume: 36
Document_Title: "2. The Commodity Supply Proper "
Page_Range: "155-160"
---

# 2. The Commodity Supply Proper 



**[p. 147]**

houses to Manchester, so that the manufacturer can renew his supply in comparatively small portions, as and when needed. But in that case the cotton remains in so much larger quantities as commodity supply in the hands of the Liverpool merchants. It is therefore merely a change in the form of the supply, and this Lalor and others over- looked. And if you consider the social capital, the same quantity of pro- ducts exists in either case in the form of supply. The quantity required for a single country during the period of, say, one year decreases as transportation improves. If a large number of sailing vessels and steam- ers ply between America and England, England's opportunities to renew its cotton supply are increased while the average quantity to be held in storage in England decreases. The same effect is produced by the development of the world market and the consequent multiplica- tion of the sources of supply of the same merchandise. The article is supplied piecemeal from various countries and at various intervals.

2. THE COMMODITY SUPPLY PROPER

We have already seen that under capitalist production the product assumes the general form of a commodity, and the more so the more that production grows in size and depth. Consequently, even if pro- duction retains the same volume, the far greater part of the products exists in the shape of commodities, compared with either the former modes of production or the capitalist mode of production at a less de- veloped stage. But every commodity — therefore also every commod- ity capital, which is only commodity, but commodity serving as the form of existence of capital value — constitutes an element of the commodity supply, unless it passes immediately from its sphere of pro- duction into productive or individual consumption, that is, while it lies in the market in the interval. If the volume of production remains the same, the commodity supply (i. e., this isolation and fixation of the commodity form of the product) grows therefore of itself concomi- tantly with capitalist production. We have seen above that this is merely a change of form of the supply, that is to say, the supply in the form of commodities increases on the one hand because on the other the supply in the form intended directly for production or consump- tion decreases. It is merely a changed social form of the supply. If at the same time it is not only the relative magnitude of the commodity supply compared with the aggregate social product that increases but also its absolute magnitude, that is so because the mass of the aggre-



**[p. 148]**

gate product grows with the growth of capitalist production.

With the development of capitalist production, the scale of produc- tion is determined less and less by the direct demand for the product and more and more by the amount of capital available in the hands of the individual capitalist, by the urge for self-expansion inherent in his capital and by the need of continuity and expansion of the process of production. Thus in each particular branch of production there is a necessary increase in the mass of products available in the market in the shape of commodities, i. e., in search of buyers. The amount of ca- pital fixed for a shorter or longer period in the form of commodity capital grows. Hence the commodity supply also grows.

Finally the majority of the members of society are transformed into wage labourers, into people who live from hand to mouth, who re- ceive their wages weekly and spend them daily, who therefore must have their means of subsistence made available to them in the shape of a supply. Although the separate elements of this supply may be in continuous flow, a part of them must always stagnate in order that the supply as a whole may remain in a state of flux.

All these moments have their origin in the form of production and in the incident change of form which the product must undergo in the process of circulation.

Whatever may be the social form of the products supply, its preser- vation requires outlays for buildings, vessels, etc., which are facilities for storing the product; also for means of production and labour, more or less of which must be expended, according to the nature of the product, in order to combat injurious influences. The more con- centrated socially the supply is, the smaller relatively are the costs. These outlays always constitute a part of the social labour, in either objectified or living form — hence in the capitalist form outlays of cap- ital— which do not enter into the formation of the product itself and thus are deductions from the product. They are necessary, these unproductive expenses of social wealth. They are the costs of preserv- ing the social product regardless of whether its existence as an ele- ment of the commodity supply stems merely from the social form of production, hence from the commodity form and its necessary change of form, or whether we regard the commodity supply merely as a spe- cial form of the supply of products, which is common to all societies, although not in the form of a commodity supply, that form of products supply belonging in the process of circulation.



**[p. 149]**

It may now be asked to what extent these costs enter into the val- ues of commodities.

If the capitalist has converted the capital advanced by him in the form of means of production and labour power into a product, into a definite quantity of commodities ready for sale, and these commodi- ties remain in stock unsold, then we have a case of not only the stag- nation of the process of self-expansion of his capital value during this period. The costs of preserving this supply in buildings, of additional labour, etc., mean a positive loss. The buyer he would ultimately find would laugh in his face if he were to say to him: "I could not sell my goods for six months, and their preservation during that period did not only keep so and so much of my capital idle, but also cost me so and so much extra expense." " Tant pis pour vous!"* the buyer would say. "Right here alongside of you is another seller whose wares were completed only the day before yesterday. Your articles are shop-worn and probably more or less damaged by the ravages of time. Therefore you will have to sell cheaper than your competitor."

The conditions under which a commodity exists are not in the least affected by whether its producer is the real producer or a capitalist producer, hence actually only the representative of the real producer. He has to turn his product into money. The expenses incurred by him because of the fixation of the product in the form of commodities are a part of his individual speculations with which the buyer of the com- modities has no concern. The latter does not pay him for the time of circulation of his commodities. Even when the capitalist keeps his goods intentionally off the market, in times of an actual or anticipat- ed revolution in values, it depends on the advent of this revolution in values, on the correctness or incorrectness of his speculation, whether he will recover his additional costs or not. But the revolution in values does not ensue in consequence of his additional costs. Hence in so far as the formation of a supply entails a stagnation of circulation, the ex- pense incurred thereby does not add to the value of the commodities. On the other hand there cannot be any supply without a stay in the sphere of circulation, without capital staying for a longer or shorter time in its commodity form; hence no supply without stagnation of circulation, just as no money can circulate without the formation of a money reserve. Hence no commodity circulation without commo- dity supply. If the capitalist does not come face to face with this neces-

[^1]: So much the worse for you!





**[p. 150]**

sity in C — M', he will encounter it in M — C; if not with regard to his own commodity capital, then with regard to that of other capita- lists, who produce means of production for him and means of subsist- ence for his labourers.

Whether the formation of a supply is voluntary or involuntary, that is to say, whether the commodity producer keeps a supply inten- tionally or whether his products form a supply in consequence of the sales resistance offered by the conditions of the process of circulation itself cannot affect the matter essentially, it would seem. But for the solution of this problem it is useful to know what distinguishes volun- tary from involuntary supply formation. Involuntary supply forma- tion arises from, or is identical with, a stagnation of the circulation which is independent of the knowledge of the commodity producer and thwarts his will. And what characterises the voluntary formation of a supply? In both instances the seller seeks to get rid of his commod- ity as fast as ever. He always offers his product for sale as a commod- ity. If he were to withdraw it from sale, it would be only a potential

(ôuvduei), not an actual (évepyeia) element of the commodity sup- ply. To him the commodity as such is as much a depository of ex- change value as ever and as such can act only by and after stripping off its commodity form and assuming the money form.

The commodity supply must be of a certain volume in order to sat- isfy the demand during a given period. A continual extension of the circle of buyers is counted upon. For instance, in order to last for one day, a part of the commodities in the market must constantly remain in the commodity form while the remainder is fluent, turns into money. True, the part which stagnates while the rest is fluent de- creases steadily, just as the size of the supply itself decreases until it is all sold. The stagnation of commodities thus counts as a requisite con- dition of their sale. The volume must furthermore be larger than the average sale or the average demand. Otherwise the excess over these averages could not be satisfied. On the other hand the supply must constantly be renewed, because it is constantly being drawn on. This renewal cannot come from anywhere in the last instance except from production, from a supply of commodities. It is immaterial whether this comes from abroad or not. The renewal depends on the periods required by the commodities for their reproduction. The commodity supply must last all that time. The fact that it does not remain in the hands of the original producer but passes through various reservoirs, from the wholesaler to the retailer, changes merely the appearance



**[p. 151]**

and not the nature of the thing. From the point of view of society, a part of the capital retains in both instances the form of a commodity supply until the commodities enter productive or individual con- sumption. The producer himself tries to keep a stock corresponding to his average demand in order not to depend directly on production and to ensure for himself a steady clientele. Purchase periods corres- ponding to the periods of production are formed and the commodities constitute supplies for longer or shorter times, until they can be re- placed by new commodities of the same kind. Constancy and continuity of the process of circulation, and therefore of the process of reproduc- tion, which includes the process of circulation, are safeguarded only by the formation of such supplies.

It must be remembered that C — M' may have been transacted for the producer of C, even if C is still in the market. If the producer were to keep his own commodities in stock until they are sold to the ultimate consumer, he would have to set two capitals in motion, one as the producer of the commodities and one as a merchant. As far as the commodity itself is concerned, whether we look upon it as an indi- vidual commodity or as a component part of social capital, it is im- material whether the costs of forming the supply must be borne by its producer or by a series of merchants, from A to Z.

Since the commodity supply is nothing but the commodity form of the product which at a particular level of social production would exist either as a productive supply (latent production fund) or as a consumption fund (reserve of means of consumption) if it did not exist as a commodity supply, the expenses required for its preserva- tion, that is, the costs of supply formation — i. e., objectified or living labour spent for this purpose — are merely expenses incurred for maintaining either the social fund for production or the social fund for consumption. The increase in the value of commodities caused by them distributes these costs simply pro rata over the different commod- ities, since the costs differ with different kinds of commodities. And the costs of supply formation are as much as ever deductions from the social wealth, although they constitute one of the conditions of its existence.

Only to the extent that the commodity supply is a premise of com- modity circulation and is itself a form necessarily arising in commod- ity circulation, only in so far as this apparent stagnation is therefore a form of the movement itself, just as the formation of a money reserve is a premise of money circulation — only to that extent is such stagna-

