---
Volume: 36
Document_Title: "I. The Working Period Equal to the Circulation Period "
Page_Range: "274-278"
---

# I. The Working Period Equal to the Circulation Period 



**[p. 266]**

product would, according to our assumptions, have to be £10,000 in- stead of £5,000. But in order to have £1,000 continuously in the pro- cess of production, £2,000 would have to be advanced. The econo- mists, who as a general rule have nothing clear to say in reference to the mechanism of the turnover, always overlook this main point, to wit, that only a part of the industrial capital can actually be engaged in the process of production if production is to proceed uninterrupt- edly. While one part is in the period of production, another must al- ways be in the period of circulation. Or in other words, one part can perform the function of productive capital only on condition that another part is withdrawn from production proper in the form of commodity or money capital. In overlooking this, the significance and role of money capital is entirely ignored.

We have now to ascertain what differences in the turnover arise if the two sections of the period of turnover, the working period and the circulation period, are equal, or if the working period is greater or smaller than the circulation period, and, furthermore, what effect this has on the tie-up of capital in the form of money capital.

We assume the capital advanced weekly to be in all cases £100, and the period of turnover 9 weeks, so that the capital to be advanced for each period of turnover is £900.

Although this case occurs in reality only as an accidental excep- tion, it must serve as our point of departure in this investigation, be- cause here relations shape themselves in the simplest and most intelli- gible way.

The two capitals (capital I advanced for the first working period, and additional capital II, which functions during the circulation period of capital I) relieve one another in their movements without crossing. With the exception of the first period, either of the two capitals is therefore advanced only for its own period of turnover. Let the period of turnover be 9 weeks, as indicated in the follow- ing illustrations, so that the working period and the circulation period are each 4'/ 2 weeks. Then we have the following annual diagram.

[^1]: I. THE WORKING PERIOD EQUAL TO THE CIRCULATION PERIOD





**[p. 267]**

Table I

CAPITAL I

Periods of Tu Working Periods Periods of Circula

I. lst-9th II. 10th-I8th III. 19th-27th

IV. 28th-36th

V. 37th-45th

week

VI. 46th-(54th)

lst-4th '/2 week 10th-13th '/2 19th-22nd '/2 28th-31st '/2 37th-40th 72 46th-49th '/2

£450 £450 £450 £450 £450 £450

/2-9th ,2-18th 4th '/. 13th Vi. 22nd '/2-27th 31st '/2-36th 40th '/2-45th 49th '/2-(54th)

week

CAPITAL II

Periods of Turnover Working Periods Advance Periods of Circulation

I. 4th 72-13th 72week II. 13th '/2-22nd '/2 III. 22nd V2-31st '/2 IV. 31st '/2-40th V2

V. 40th '/2-49th V2 VI. 49th '/2-(58th V2)

4th '/2-9th v 13th 72-18th 22nd 72-27th 31st 72-36th 40th 72-45th 49th 72-(54th)

reek £ 450 10th-13th 72 week £ 450 19th-22nd 72 „ £ 450 28th-31st '/2 £ 450 37th-40th 72 £ 450 46th-49th 72 £ 450 (55th-58th 72) „

[^1]: Within the 51 weeks which here stand for one year, capital I runs through six full working periods, producing 6 x 450 = £2,700 worth of commodities, and capital II producing in five full working periods 5 x 450 = £2,250 worth of commodities. In addition, capital II produced, within the last 1 ' /2 weeks of the year (middle of the 50th to the end of the 51st week), an extra £150 worth. The aggregate prod- uct in 51 weeks is worth £5,100. So far as the direct production of surplus value is concerned, which takes place only during the work- ing period, the aggregate capital of £900 would have been turned over 52/3 times (5 2/3 x 900 = £5,100). But if we consider the real turnover, capital I has been turned over 5 2/3 times, since at the close of the 51st week it still has 3 weeks to go of its sixth period of turnover; 5 2/ 3 x 450 = £2,550; and capital II turned over 5 '/e times, since it has completed only 1 xj2 weeks of its sixth period of turnover, so that 7 'l2 weeks of it run into the next year; 5 '/e x 450 = £2,325; real aggregate turnover: £4,875.

[^2]: 3 ' The weeks falling within the second year of turnover are put in parenth-





**[p. 268]**

Let us consider capital I and capital II as two capitals wholly inde- pendent of one another. They are entirely independent in their move- ments; these movements complement one another merely because their working and circulating periods directly relieve one another. They may be regarded as two totally independent capitals belonging to different capitalists.

Capital I has completed five full turnovers and two-thirds of its sixth turnover period. At the end of the year it has the form of com- modity capital, which is 3 weeks short of its normal realisation. Dur- ing this time it cannot enter into the process of production. It func- tions as commodity capital, it circulates. It has completed only ~j3 of its last period of turnover. This is expressed as follows: It has been turned over only 2/3 of a time, only 2/:( of its total value have performed a complete turnover. We say that £450 complete their turnover in 9 weeks, hence £300 do in 6 weeks. But in this mode of expression the organic relations between the two specifically different components of the turnover time are ignored. The exact meaning of the expression that the advanced capital of £450 has made 52/;! turnovers is merely that it has accomplished five turnovers fully and only 2/:i of the sixth. On the other hand the expression that the turned-over capital = 5 2/:i times the advanced capital — hence, in the above case, 52/s x £450 = £2,550 — is correct, meaning that unless this capital of £450 were complemented by another capital of £450, one portion of it would have to be in the process of production while another in the process of circulation. If the time of turnover is to be expressed in terms of the quantity of capital turned over, it can always be expressed only in terms of a quantity of existing value (in fact, of finished product). The circumstance that the advanced capital is not in a condi- tion in which it may re-open the process of production finds expression in the fact that only a part of it is in a state capable of production or that, in order to be in a state of uninterrupted production, the capital would have to be divided into a portion which would be continually in the period of production and into another which would be continually in the period of circulation, depending upon the relation of these periods to each other. It is the same law which determines the quantity of the constantly functioning productive capital by the ratio of the time of circulation to the time of turnover.

By the end of the 51st week, which we regard here as the end of the year, £150 of capital II have been advanced to the production of an unfinished lot of goods. Another part of it exists in the form of cir-

culating constant capital — raw materials, etc.— i.e., in a form in which it can function as productive capital in the production process. But a third part of it exists in the form of money, at least the amount of the wages for the remainder of the working period (3 weeks), which is not paid, however, until the end of each week. Now, although at the beginning of a new year, hence of a new turnover cycle, this por- tion of the capital is not in the form of productive capital but in that of money capital, in which it cannot take part in the process of pro- duction, at the opening of the new turnover circulating variable capi- tal, i. e., living labour power, is nevertheless active in the process of production. This is due to the fact that labour power is not paid until the end of the week, although bought at the beginning of the working period, say, per week, and so consumed. Money serves here as a means of payment. For this reason it is still as money in the hands of the capitalist, on the one hand, while, on the other hand, labour pow- er, the commodity into which money is being transformed, is al- ready active in the process of production, so that the same capital value appears here doubly.

If we look merely at the working periods,

capital I produces 6 x 450 = £2,700 capital II " 5 '/3 x 450 = £2,400

hence together 52^ x 900 = £5,100.

Hence the total advanced capital of £900 has functioned 52/3 times throughout the year as productive capital. It is immaterial for the production of surplus value whether there are always £450 in the production process and always £450 in the circulation process, or whether £900 function 4'/ 2 weeks in the process of production and the following 4 '/2 weeks in the process of circulation.

On the other hand, if we consider the periods of turnover, there has been turned over:

capital I, 5 ^ x 4 5 0 = £2,550 capital iï, 5 V6x 450 = £2,325

For the number of turnovers of the total capital is equal to the sum of the amounts turned over by I and II, divided by the sum of I and II.

[^1]: hence the total capital 55/12x900 = £4,875.



