---
Volume: 36
Document_Title: "II. The Working Period Greater Than the Period of Circulation "
Page_Range: "278-283"
---

# II. The Working Period Greater Than the Period of Circulation 



**[p. 270]**

It is to be noted that if capitals I and II were independent of each other they would nevertheless form merely different independent por- tions of the social capital advanced in the same sphere of production. Hence if the social capital within this sphere of production were com- posed solely of I and II, the same calculation would apply to the turnover of the social capital in this sphere as applies here to the two constituent parts I and II of the same private capital. Going further, every portion of the entire social capital invested in any particular sphere of production may be so calculated. But in the last analysis, the number of turnovers made by the entire social capital is equal to the sum of the capitals turned over in the various spheres of produc- tion divided by the sum of the capitals advanced in those spheres.

It must further be noted that just as capitals I and II in the same private business have here, strictly speaking, different turnover years (the cycle of turnover of capital II beginning 4- '/2 weeks later than that of capital I, so that the year of I ends 4 '/2 weeks earlier than that of II), so the various private capitals in the same sphere of production begin their operations at totally different periods and therefore con- clude their turnover years at different times of the year. The same cal- culation of averages that we employed above for I and II suffices also here to bring down the turnover years of the various independent portions of the social capital to one uniform turnover year.

The working and turnover periods of capitals I and II cross one another instead of relieving one another. Simultaneously some capi- tal is set free. This was not so in the previously considered case.

But this does not alter the fact that, as before, 1) the number of working periods of the total capital advanced is equal to the sum of the value of the annual product of both advanced portions of capital divided by the total capital advanced, and 2) the number of turn- overs made by the total capital is equal to the sum of the two amounts turned over divided by the sum of the two advanced capitals. Here too we must consider both portions of capital as if they performed turnover movements entirely independent of each other.

[^1]: II. THE WORKING PERIOD GREATER THAN THE PERIOD OF CIRCULATION





**[p. 5]**

Thus, we assume once more that £100 are" to be advanced weekly to the labour process. Let the working period last 6 weeks, requiring therefore every time an advance of £600 (capital I). Let the period of circulation be 3 weeks, so that the period of turnover is 9 weeks, as be- fore. Let capital II of £300 step in during the three-week circulation period of capital I. Considering both capitals as independent of each other, we find the schedule of the annual turnover to be as follows:

Table II

CAPITAL I, £600

Periods of Turnover Working Periods Advance Periods of Circulation

I. Ist-9th week lst-6th week £ 600 7th-9th week II. 10th-18th „ 10th-15th „ £ 600 16th-18th „ III. 19th-27th „ 19th-24th „ £ 600 25th-27th „ IV. 28th-36th „ 28th-33rd „ £ 600 34th-36th „ V. 37th-45th „ 37th-42nd „ £ 600 43rd-45th „ VI. 46th-(54th) „ 46th-51st „ £ 6 0 0 (52nd-54th) „

The process of production continues uninterruptedly the whole year round on the same scale. The two capitals I and II remain entirely sep- arate. But in order to represent them as separate, we had to tear apart their real intersections and intertwinings, and thus also to change the number of turnovers. For according to the above table the amounts turned over would be:

by capital I, 5 2/3 x 600 = £3,400 and by capital II, x 300 = £1,500

hence by the total capital 54/n x 900 = £4,900.

[^1]: ADDITIONAL CAPITAL II, £ 300

[^2]: Periods of Turnover Working Periods Advance Periods of Circulation

[^3]: I. 7th-15th week 7th-9th week £ 300 10th-15th week II. 16th-24th „ 16th-18th „ £ 300 19th-24th III. 25th-33rd „ 25th-27th „ £ 300 28th-33rd IV. 34th-42nd „ 34th-36th „ £ 300 37th-42nd V. 43rd-51st „ 43rd-45th „ £ 300 46th-51st





**[p. 272]**

But this is hot correct, for, as we shall see, the actual periods of pro- duction and circulation do not absolutely coincide with those of the above schedule, in which it was mainly a question of presenting capi- tals I and II as independent of each other.

In reality, for example, capital II has no working and circulating periods separate and distinct from those of capital I. The working period is 6 weeks, the circulation period 3 weeks. Since capital II amounts to only £300, it can suffice only for a part of the working period. This is indeed the case. At the end of the 6th week a product valued at £600 passes into circulation and returns in money form at the close of the 9th week. Then, at the opening of the 7th week, capi- tal II begins its activity, and covers the requirements of the next working period, the 7th to 9th week. But according to our assumption the working period is only half up at the end of the 9th week. Hence capital I of £600 having just returned, at the beginning of the 10th week, once more enters into operation and with its £300 supplies the advances needed for the 10th to 12th week. This disposes of the sec- ond working period. A product value of £600 is in circulation and will return at the close of the 15th week. At the same time, £300, the amount of the original capital II, are set free and are able to function in the first half of the following working period, that is to say, in the 13th to 15th week. After the lapse of these weeks the £600 return; £300 of them suffice for the remainder of the working period, and £300 remain for the following working period.

The thing therefore works as follows:

First period of turnover: lst-9th week.

1st working period: lst-6th week. Capital I, £600, performs its function. 1st period of circulation: 7th-9th week. End of 9th week, £600 re- turn.

Second period of turnover: 7th-15th week. 2nd working period: 7th-12th week.

First half: 7th-9th week. Capital II, £300, performs its function. End of 9th week, £600 return in money form (capital I).

Second half: 10th-12th week. £300 of capital I perform their function. The other £300 of capital I remain freed. 2nd period of circulation: 13th-15th week.

End of 15th week, £600 (half taken from capital I, half from cap- ital II) return in the form of money.

Third period of turnover: 13th-21st week. 3rd working period: 13th-18th week.

First half: 13th-15th week. The freed £300 perform their func- tion. End of 15th week, £600 return in money form. Second half: 16th-18th week, £300 of the returned £600 func- tion, the other £300 again remain freed. 3rd period of circulation: 19th-21st week at the close of which £600 again return in money form. In these £600 capital I and capital II are now indistinguishably fused.

And so there are eight full turfiover periods of a capital of £600 (I: lst-9th week; II: 7th-15th; III: 13th-21st; IV: 19th-27th; V: 25th-33rd; VI: 31st-39th; VII: 37th-45th; VIII: 43rd-51st week) to the end of the 51st week. But as the 49th-51st weeks fall within the eighth period of circulation, the £300 of freed capital must step in and keep production going. Thus the turnover at the end of the year is as follows: £600 have completed their circuit eight times, making £4,800. In addition we have the product of the last 3 weeks (49th- 51st), which, however, has completed only one-third of its circuit of 9 weeks, so that in the sum turned over it counts for only one-third of its amount, £100. If, then, the annual product of 51 weeks = £5,100, the capital turned over is only 4,800 + 100 = £4,900. The total capi- tal advanced, £900, has therefore been turned over 5 4/9 times, a trifle more than in the first case.

In the present example we assumed a case in which the working time = 2/3 and the circulation time = V3 of the period of turnover, i. e., the working time was a simple multiple of the circulation time. The question now is whether capital is likewise set free, in the way shown above, when this assumption is not made.

Let us assume a working time = 5 weeks, a circulation time = 4 weeks, and a capital advance = £100 per week.

First period of turnover: lst-9th week.



**[p. 274]**

1st working period: lst-5th week. Capital I = £500 performs its

function. 1st circulation period: 6th-9th week. End of 9th week, £500 return

in money form.

Second period of turnover: 6th-14th week. 2nd working period: 6th-10th week.

First section: 6th-9th week. Capital II = £400, performs its function. End of 9th week, capital I = £500 returns in money form. Second section: 10th week. £100 of the returned £500 perform their function. The remaining £400 are set free for the following working period. 2nd circulation period: 11th-14th week. End of 14th week, £500

return in money form.

Up to the end of the 14th week (11th-14th), the £400 set free above perform their function; £100 of the £500 then returned fill the requirements of the third working period (11th-15th week), so that £400 are once more released for the fourth working period. The same thing is repeated in every working period; at its beginning £400 are ready at hand, sufficing for the first 4 weeks. End of the 4th week, £500 return in money form, only £100 of which are needed for the last week, while the other £400 remain free for the next working period.

Let us further assume a working period of 7 weeks, with a capi- tal I of £700; a circulation period of 2 weeks, with a capital II of £200.

In that case the first period of turnover lasts from the 1st to the 9th week; its first working period from the 1st to the 7th week, with an ad- vance of £700, its first circulation period from the 8th to the 9th week. End of the 9th week, £700 flow back in money form.

The second period of turnover, from the 8th to the 16th week, con- tains the second working period of the 8th to the 14th week. The re- quirements of the 8th and 9th weeks of this period are covered by cap- ital II. End of the 9th week, the above £700 return. Up to the close of this working period (10th-14th week), £500 of this sum are used up; £200 remain free for the next working period. The second circu- lation period lasts from the 15th to the 16th week. End of the 16th week, £700 return once more. From now on, the same thing is repeat-

