---
Volume: 36
Document_Title: "III. The Working Period Smaller Than the Circulation Period "
Page_Range: "283-287"
---

# III. The Working Period Smaller Than the Circulation Period 



**[p. 275]**

ed in every working period. The need for capital during the first two weeks is covered by the £200 set free at the close of the preceding working period; at the close of the second week £700 return; but only 5 weeks remain of the working period, so that it can consume only £500; therefore £200 always remain free for the next working period.

We find, then, that in the given case, where the working period has been assumed to be greater than the circulation period, a money cap- ital will at all events have been set free at the close of each working period, which is of the same magnitude as capital II advanced for the circulation period. In our three illustrations capital II was £300 in the first, £400 in the second, and £200 in the third. Accordingly, the capital set free at the close of each working period was £300, £400 and £200 respectively.

III. THE WORKING PERIOD SMALLER THAN THE CIRCULATION PERIOD

We begin by assuming once more a period of turnover of 9 weeks, of which 3 weeks are assigned to the working period with an available capital I of £300. Let the circulation period be 6 weeks. For these 6 weeks, an additional capital of £600 is required, which we may di- vide in turn into two capitals of £300, each of them meeting the re- quirements of one working period. We then have three capitals of £300 each, of which £300 are always engaged in production, while £600 circulate.

[^1]: Table III CAPITAL I

[^2]: Periods of Turnover Working Periods Periods )[ Circulation

[^3]: I. lst-9th week lst-3rd week 4th-9th week II. 10th-18th ,, 10th-12th 13th-18th ,, III. 19th-27th ,, 19lh-21st 22nd-27th ,, IV. 28th-36th „ 28th-30th 31st-36th .- V. 37th-45th ,, 37th-39th 40th-45th ,, VI. 46th-(54th) ,, 46th-48th 49th-(54ih ,,





**[p. 276]**

CAPITAL II

Periods of Turnover Working Periods Periods of Circulation

I. 4th-12th week 4th-6th week 7th-12th week

II. 13th-21st >> 13th-15th 16th-21st „ III. 22nd-30th ,, 22nd-24th 25th-30th „ IV. 31st-39th ,, 31st-33rd 34th-39th „ V. 40th-48th „ 40th-42nd 43rd-48th ,, VI. 49th-(57th) " 49th-51st (52nd-57th) "

CAPITAL III

Periods of Turnover Working Periods Periods of Circulation

I. 7th-15th week 7th-9th week 10th-15th week II. 16th-24th ,, 16th-18th 19th-24th ,, III. 25th-33rd ,, 25th-27th 28th-33rd „ IV. 34th-42nd „ 34th-36th 37th-42nd „ V. 43rd-51st » 43rd-45th 46th-51st »

We have here the exact counterpart of Case I, with the only differ- ence that now three capitals relieve one another instead of two. There is no intersection or intertwining of capitals. Each one of them can be traced separately to the end of the year. Just as in Case I, no capital is set free at the close of a working period. Capital I is completely laid out at the end of the 3rd week, returns entirely at the end of the 9th, and resumes its functions at the beginning of the 10th week. Similarly with capitals II and III. The regular and complete relief excludes any release of capital.

The total turnover is as follows:

capital I capital II capital III

Total capital £900 x 5 73 = £4,800.

Let us now also take an illustration in which the circulation period is not an exact multiple of the working period. For instance, working period — 4 weeks, circulation period — 5 weeks. The corresponding amounts of capital would then be: capital I — £400; capital II — £400; capital III — £100. We present only the first three turnovers.

[^1]: £300x5 2/ 3 = £1,700 £ 3 0 0 x 5 73 = £1,600 £ 3 0 0 x 5 =£1,500





**[p. 277]**

Table IV

CAPITAL I

Periods of Turnover Working Periods Periods of Circulation

I. II. III.

lst-9th week 9th-17th 17th-25th

lst-4th week 9th, 10th-12th „ 17th, 18th-20th „

5th-9th week 13th-17th 21st-25th

CAPITAL II

Periods of Turnover Working Periods Periods of Circulation

I. II. III.

5th-13th week 13th-21st 21st-29th

5th-8th week 13th, 14th-16th „ 21th, 22nd-24th „

9th-13th week 17th-21st 25th-29th

CAPITAL III

Periods of Turnover Working Periods Periods of Circulation

There is in this case an intertwining of capitals in so far as the working period of capital III, which has no independent working period, because it suffices for only one week, coincides with the first working week of capital I. On the other hand an amount of £100, equal to capital III, is set free at the close of the working period of both capital I and II. For if capital III fills up the first week of the second and all succeeding working periods of capital I and £400, the entire capital I, return at the close of this first week, then only 3 weeks and a corresponding capital investment of £300 will remain for the rest of the working period of capital I. The £100 thus set free suffice for the first week of the immediately following working period of capi- tal II; at the end ofthat week the entire capital II of £400 returns. But since the working period already started can absorb only another £300, £100 are once more disengaged at its close. And so forth. We have, then, a release of capital at the close of a working period when- ever the circulation period is not a simple multiple of the working

[^1]: I. II. III.

[^2]: 9th-17th week 17th-25th 25th-33rd

[^3]: 9th week 17th 25th

[^4]: 10th-17th week 18th-25th 26th-33rd





**[p. 278]**

period. And this liberated capital is equal to that portion of the capi- tal which has to fill up the excess of the circulation period over the working period or over a multiple of working periods.

In all cases investigated it was assumed that both the working period and the circulation period remain the same throughout the year in any of the businesses here examined. This assumption was nec- essary if we wished to ascertain the influence of the time of circula- tion on the turnover and advancement of capital. That in reality this assumption is not so unconditionally valid, and that it frequently is not valid at all does not alter the case in the least.

In this entire part we have discussed only the turnovers of the circulating capital, not those of the fixed, for the simple reason that the question at issue has nothing to do with fixed capital. The instru- ments of labour, etc., employed in the process of production form only fixed capital, inasmuch as their time of employment exceeds the period of turnover of the circulating capital; inasmuch as the period of time during which these instruments of labour continue to serve in perpetually repeated labour processes is greater than the period of turnover of the circulating capital, and hence equal to n periods of turnover of the circulating capital. Regardless of whether the total time represented by these n periods of turnover of the circulating cap- ital is longer or shorter, that portion of the productive capital which was advanced for this time in fixed capital is not advanced anew dur- ing its course. It continues its functions in its old use form. The differ- ence is merely this: In proportion to the varying length of a single working period of'each period of turnover of the circulating capital, the fixed capital gives up a greater or smaller part of its original value to the product ofthat working period, and, proportionally to the dura- tion of the circulation time of each period of turnover, this value part of the fixed capital given up to the product returns quicker or slower in money form. The nature of the subject we are discussing in this part — the turnover of the circulating portion of productive capital — derives from the very nature of this portion. The circulating capital employed in a working period cannot be applied in a new working period until it has completed its turnover, until it has been transformed into commodity capital, from that into money capital, and from that back into productive capital. Hence, in order that the first work- ing period may be immediately followed by a second, capital must be advanced anew and converted into the circulating elements of pro- ductive capital, and its quantity must be sufficient to fill the void oc-

