---
Volume: 36
Document_Title: "II. The Turnover of the Individual Variable Capital "
Page_Range: "315-320"
---

# II. The Turnover of the Individual Variable Capital 



**[p. 307]**

ined by us. As soon as these £ 500 have completed one circuit A makes them start anew the same circuit; by its very nature capital preserves its character of capital only because it always functions as capital in successive production processes. It is, moreover, never advanced for more than 5 weeks. Should the turnover last longer, it proves in- adequate. Should the turnover be curtailed, a part becomes superflu- ous. Not ten capitals of £ 500 are advanced, but one capital of £ 500 is advanced ten times at successive intervals. The annual rate of surplus value is therefore not calculated for ten advances of a capital of £500 or for £ 5,000, but for one advance of a capital of £ 500. It is the same as if 1 taler circulates ten times and yet never represents more than one single taler in circulation, although it performs the function of 10 talers. But in the pocket which holds it after each change of hands it retains the same identical value of 1 taler as before.

In the same way capital A indicates at each successive return, and likewise on its return at the end of the year, that its owner has oper- ated always with the same capital value of £ 500. Hence only £ 500 re- turn to him each time. His advanced capital is therefore never more than £ 500. Hence the advanced capital of £ 500 forms the denomi- nator of the fraction which expresses the annual rate of surplus value. We had for it the above formula S' = 5-Ï2 = s'n. Since the real rate

V But by its ten-fold turnover and thus the ten-fold renewal of its ad- vance, the capital of £ 500 performs the function of a ten times larger capital, of a capital of £5,000, just as 500 talers which circulate ten times per year perform the same function as 5,000 talers which circu- late only once.

"Whatever the form of the process of production in a society, it must be a continuous process, must continue to go periodically through the same phases When viewed, therefore, as a connected whole, and as flowing on with incessant renewal, every social process of production is, at the same time, a process of reproduction As a periodic increment of the capital advanced, or periodic fruit of capi-

[^1]: V of surplus value s' = —, the quantity of surplus value divided by

[^2]: V . the variable capital which produced it, we may substitute ~ for the value of s' in s'n, and get the other formula S' = —.

[^3]: II. THE TURNOVER OF THE INDIVIDUAL VARIABLE CAPITAL





**[p. 308]**

tal in process, surplus value acquires the form of a revenue flowing out of capital" (Buch I, Kap. XXI, pp. 588, 589).a

In the case of capital A we have 10 five-week turnover periods. In the first period of turnover £ 500 of variable capital are advanced; i. e., £ 100 are weekly converted into labour power, so that £500 are spent on labour power at the end of the first turnover period. These £ 500, originally a part of the total capital advanced, have ceased to be capital. They are paid out in wages. The labourers in their turn pay them out in the purchase of means of subsistence, consuming means of subsistence worth £500. A quantity of commodities ofthat value is therefore annihilated (what the labourer may save up in money, etc., is not capital either). As far as concerns the labourer, this quantity of commodities has been consumed unproductively, except inasmuch as it preserves the efficacy of his labour power, an instru- ment indispensable to the capitalist.

In the second place, however, these £500 have been transformed, for the capitalist, into labour power of the same value (or price). La- bour power is consumed by him productively in the labour process. At the end of 5 weeks a product valued at £ 1,000 has been created. Half of this, £500, is the reproduced value of the variable capital ex- pended in payment of labour power. The other half, £500, is newly produced surplus value. But the 5-weekly labour power, through ex- change for which a portion of the capital was converted into variable capital, is likewise expended, consumed, although productively. The labour which was active yesterday is not the same that is active today. Its value plus that of the surplus value created by it exists now as the value of a thing distinct from labour power, to wit, of a product. But by converting the product into money, that portion of its value which is equal to the value of the variable capital advanced can once more be exchanged for labour power and thus again function as variable capital. The fact that the same workmen, i. e., the same bearers of la- bour power, are given employment not only by the reproduced capi- tal value but also by that which has been reconverted into the form of money is immaterial. It is possible for the capitalist to hire different workmen for the second period of turnover.

In actual fact therefore a capital of £5,000, and not of £500, is ex- pended successively in wages during the ten periods of turnover of 5 weeks each, and these wages will again be spent by the labourers to

[^1]: a English edition: Vol. I, Ch. XXIII (present edition, Vol. 35).





**[p. 309]**

buy means of subsistence. The capital of £5,000 so advanced is con- sumed. It ceases to exist. On the other hand labour power worth £ 5,000, not £ 500, is incorporated successively in the productive pro- cess and reproduces not only its own value of £5,000, but produces over and above that a surplus value of £5,000. The variable capital of £ 500 advanced during the second period of turnover is not the identical capital of £ 500 that had been advanced during the first period of turnover. That has been consumed, spent in wages. But it is replaced by new variable capital of £500, which was produced in the first period of turnover in the form of commodities, and reconverted into money. This new money capital of £500 is therefore the money form of the quantity of commodities newly produced in the first period of turnover. The fact that an identical sum of money, £ 500, is again in the hands of the capitalist, i. e., apart from the surplus value, precisely as much money capital as he had originally advanced, con- ceals the circumstance that he is operating with a newly produced cap- ital. (As for the other constituents of value of the commodity capital, which replace the constant parts of capital, their value is not newly produced, but only the form is changed in which this value exists.)

Let us take the third period of turnover. Here it is evident that the capital of £ 500, advanced for a third time, is not an old but a newly produced capital, for it is the money form of the quantity of commod- ities produced in the second, not the first, period of turnover, i. e., of that portion of this quantity of commodities whose value is equal to that of the advanced variable capital. The quantity of commodities produced in the first period of turnover is sold. A part of its value equal to the variable portion of the value of the advanced capital was transformed into the new labour power of the second period of turn- over; it produced a new quantity of commodities, which were sold in their turn and a portion of whose value constitutes the capital of £500 advanced in the third turnover period.

And so forth during the ten periods of turnover. In the course of these, newly produced quantities of commodities (whose value, inas- much as it replaces variable capital, is also newly produced, and does not merely re-appear as in the case of the constant circulating part of the capital) are thrown upon the market every 5 weeks, in order to in- corporate ever new labour power in the process of production.

Therefore what is accomplished by the ten-fold turnover of the ad- vanced variable capital of £500 is not that this capital of £500 can be productively consumed ten times, or that a variable capital lasting



**[p. 310]**

for 5 weeks can be employed for 50 weeks. Rather, 10 x £ 500 of vari- able capital is employed in the 50 weeks, and the capital of £500 al- ways lasts only for 5 weeks and must be replaced at the end of the 5 weeks by a newly produced capital of £500. This applies equally to capitals A and B. But at this point the difference begins.

At the end of the first period of 5 weeks a variable capital of £500 has been advanced and expended by B as well as A. Both A and B have converted its value into labour power and replaced it by that portion of the value of the product newly created by this labour power which is equal to the value of the advanced variable capital of £500. For both B and A the labour power has not only replaced the value of the expended variable capital of £ 500 by a new value of the same amount, but also added a surplus value which, according to our as- sumption, is of the same magnitude.

But in the case of B the value product, which replaces the advanced variable capital and adds to it a surplus value, is not in the form in which it can function anew as productive, or variable, capital. It is in such a form in the case of A. And up to the end of the year B does not possess the variable capital expended in the first 5 and every subse- quent 5 weeks, although it has been replaced by newly produced value plus surplus value, in the form in which it can again function as productive, or variable, capital. True, its value is replaced by new value, hence renewed, but the form of its value (in this case the abso- lute form of value, its money form) is not renewed.

For the second period of 5 weeks (and thus for every succeeding 5 weeks of the year) another £500 must again be available, the same as for the first period. Hence, regardless of credit relations, £5,000 must be available at the beginning of the year as a latent advanced money capital, although they are really expended, turned into labour power, only gradually, in the course of the year.

But because in the case of A the circuit, the turnover of the ad- vanced capital, is consummated, the replacement value after the lapse of the first 5 weeks is already in the form in which it can set new labour power in motion for a term of 5 weeks — in its original form, the money form.

In the cases of both A and B new labour power is consumed in the second 5-week period and a new capital of £500 is spent in payment of this labour power. The means of subsistence of the labourers, paid with the first £ 500, are gone; at all events their value had vanished from the hands of the capitalist. With the second £ 500 new labour



**[p. 311]**

power is bought, new means of subsistence withdrawn from the mar- ket. In short, it is a new capital of £500 that is being expended, not the old. But in the case of A this new capital of £500 is the money form of the newly produced substitute for the value of the formerly expended £500, while in the case of B, this substitute is in a form in which it cannot function as variable capital. It is there, but not in the form of variable capital. For the continuation of the process of pro- duction for the next 5 weeks an additional capital of £ 500 must therefore be available and advanced in the here indispensable form of money. Thus, during 50 weeks, both A and B expend an equal amount of variable capital, pay for and consume an equal quantity of labour power. But B must pay for it with an advanced capital equal to its total value of £ 5,000, while A pays for it successively with the ever renewed money form of the value substitute, produced every 5 weeks, for the capital of £500 advanced for every 5 weeks. In no case is more money capital advanced here than is required for 5 weeks, i. e., never more than that advanced for the first 5 weeks, viz., £500. These £500 last for the entire year. It is therefore clear that, the degree of exploitation of labour and the real rate of surplus value being the same, the annual rates [of surplus value] of A and B must be inversely proportional to the magnitudes of the variable money capitals which have to be advanced in order to set in motion the same amount of labour power during the year.

A: ^ = 1 , 0 0 0 % ; B : ^ = 1 0 0 % . 500 v 5,000 v

But 500v: 5,000v = 1:10 = 100% : 1,000%.

The difference is due to the difference in the periods of turnover, i. e., the periods in which the value substitute of the variable capital em- ployed for a definite time can function anew as capital, hence as a new capital. In the case of B as well as A, there is the same replace- ment of value for the variable capital employed during the same peri- ods. There is also the same increment of surplus value during the same periods. But in the case of B, while every 5 weeks there is a re- placement of the value of £500 and a surplus value of £500, this value substitute does not constitute a new capital, because it does not exist in the form of money. In the case of A the old capital value is not only replaced by a new one, but is rehabilitated in its money form, hence replaced as a new capital capable of performing its function.

