---
Volume: 36
Document_Title: "I. Simple Reproduction "
Page_Range: "330-350"
---

# I. Simple Reproduction 



**[p. 322]**

mass of existing capital to maintain and perpetuate which (or rather the command of the products of yearly labour which it serves as the means of engrossing) in its present state of forced division, are all the horrible machinery, the vices, crimes, and miseries of insecurity, sought to be perpetuated. As nothing can be accumulated without first sup- plying necessaries, and as the great current of human inclination is to enjoyment; hence the comparatively trifling amount of the actual wealth of society at any particu- lar moment. 'Tis an eternal round of production and consumption. From the amount of this immense mass of annual consumption and production, the handful of actual ac- cumulation would hardly be missed; and yet it is to this handful, and not to the mass of productive powers that attention has chiefly been directed. This handful, however, having been seized upon by a few, and been made the instrument of converting to their use the constantly recurring annual products of the labour of the great majority of their fellow creatures; hence, in the opinion of these few, the paramount importance of such an instrument About one-third part of the annual products of the labour of these countries is now abstracted from the producers, under the name of public burdens, and unproductively consumed by those who give no equivalent, that is to say, none satisfac- tory to the producers With the accumulated masses, particularly when held forth in the hands of a few individuals, the vulgar eye has been always struck. The annually produced and consumed masses, like the eternal and incalculable waves of a mighty riv- er, roll on and are lost in the forgotten ocean of consumption. On this eternal con- sumption, however, are dependent, not only for almost all gratifications, but even for existence, the whole human race. The quantity and distribution of these yearly prod- ucts ought to be the paramount objects of consideration. The actual accumulation is altogether of secondary importance, and derives almost the whole ofthat importance from its influence on the distribution of the yearly productions Actual accumulations and distributions have been always considered" (in Thompson's works) "in reference, and subordinate, to the power of producing. In almost all other systems, the power of producing has been considered in reference, and subordinate, to actual accumulations, and to the perpetuating of the existing modes of distribution. In comparison to the pres- ervation of this actual distribution, the ever recurring misery or happiness of the whole human race has been considered as unworthy of regard. To perpetuate the results of force, fraud, and chance, has been called security; and to the support of this spurious security, have all the productive powers of the human race been unrelentingly sacri- ficed" (ibid., pp. 440-43).

For reproduction only two normal cases are possible, apart from disturbances, which interfere with reproduction even on a fixed scale. There is either reproduction on a simple scale. Or there is capitalisation of surplus value, accumulation.

In the case of simple reproduction the surplus value produced and realised annually, or periodically, if there are several turnovers dur-

[^1]: I. SIMPLE REPRODUCTION





**[p. 323]**

ing the year, is consumed individually, i. e., unproductively, by its owner, the capitalist.

The circumstance that the value of the product consists in part of surplus value and in part ofthat portion of value which is formed by the variable capital reproduced in the product plus the constant capi- tal consumed by it, does not alter anything whatever either in the quantity or in the value of the total product, which constantly steps into circulation as commodity capital and is just as constantly with- drawn from it, in order to be productively or individually consumed, i. e., to serve as means of production or consumption. If constant cap- ital is left aside, only the distribution of the annual product between the labourers and the capitalists is affected thereby.

Even if simple reproduction is assumed, a portion of the surplus value must therefore always exist in the form of money and not of products, because otherwise it could not be converted for purposes of consumption from money into products. This conversion of the sur- plus value from its original commodity form into money must be further analysed at this place. In order to simplify the matter, we shall presuppose the most elementary form of the problem, namely the exclusive circulation of metal coin, of money which is a real equiv- alent.

According to the laws of the simple circulation of commodities (de- veloped in Buch I, Kap. IIP), the mass of the metal coin existing in a country must not only be sufficient to circulate the commodities, but must also suffice to meet the currency fluctuations, which arise partly from fluctuations in the velocity of the circulation, partly from a change in the prices of commodities, partly from the various and varying proportions in which the money functions as a medium of payment or as a medium of circulation proper. The proportion in which the existing quantity of money is split into a hoard and money in circulation varies continually, but the total quantity of money is al- ways equal to the sum of the money hoarded and the money circulat- ing. This quantity of money (quantity of precious metal) is a grad- ually accumulated hoard of society. Since a portion of this hoard is consumed by wear and tear, it must be replaced annually, the same as any other product. This takes place in reality by a direct or indi- rect exchange of a part of the annual product of a particular country for the product of countries producing gold and silver. However, this

[^1]: a See present edition, Vol. 35.



international character of the transaction conceals its simple course. In order to reduce the problem to its simplest and most lucid expres- sion, it must be assumed that the production of gold and silver takes place in that particular country itself, that therefore the production of gold and silver constitutes a part of the total social production within every country.

Apart from the gold and silver produced for articles of luxury, the minimum of their annual production must be equal to the wear of metal coin annually occasioned by the circulation of money. Further- more, if the sum of the values of the annually produced and circulat- ing quantity of commodities increases, the annual production of gold and silver must likewise increase, inasmuch as the increased sum of the values of the circulating commodities and the quantity of money required for their circulation (and the corresponding formation of a hoard) are not made good by a greater velocity of money currency and a more comprehensive function of money as a medium of pay- ment, i. e., by a greater mutual balancing of purchases and sales with- out the intervention of actual money.

A portion of the social labour power and a portion of the social means of production must therefore be expended annually in the pro- duction of gold and silver.

The capitalists who are engaged in the production of gold and silver and who, according to our assumption of simple reproduction, carry on their production only within the bounds of the annual average wear and tear and the annual average consumption of gold and silver entailed thereby, throw their surplus value — which they consume annually, according to our assumption, without capitalising any of it — directly into circulation in the money form, which is its natural form; unlike the other branches of production, where it is the con- verted form of the product.

Furthermore, as far as wages are concerned — the money form in which the variable capital is advanced — they are also not replaced by the sale of the product, by its conversion into money, but by a prod- uct itself whose natural form is from the outset that of money.

Finally, the same applies also to that portion of the product of pre- cious metals which is equal to the value of the periodically consumed constant capital, both the constant circulating and the constant fixed capital consumed during the year.

Let us consider the circuit, or turnover, of the capital invested in the production of precious metals first in the form of M — C

PM'. Since C in M — C consists not only of labour power and means of production but also of fixed capital, only a part of whose value is con- sumed in P, it is evident that M', the product, is a sum of money equal to the variable capital laid out in wages plus the circulating constant capital laid out in means of production plus a portion of the value equivalent to the worn-out fixed capital plus the surplus value. If the sum were smaller, the general value of gold remaining the same, then the mine would be unproductive or, if this got to be gen- erally the case, the value of gold compared with the value of commodi- ties that remains unchanged would subsequently rise; i. e., the prices of commodities would fall, so that henceforth the amount of money laid out in M — C would be smaller.

If we consider at first only the circulating portion of capital ad- vanced in M, the starting-point of M — C P M', we find that a cer- tain sum of money is advanced, thrown into circulation for the pay- ment of labour power and the purchase of materials of production. But this sum is not withdrawn from circulation by the circuit of this capital, in order to be thrown into it anew. The product is money even in its natural form; there is no need therefore of transforming it into money by means of exchange, by a process of circulation. It passes from the process of production into the sphere of circulation, not in the form of commodity capital which has to be reconverted into money capital, but as a money capital which is to be reconverted into productive capital, i. e., which is to buy fresh labour power and materials of production. The money form of the circulating capital consumed in labour power and means of production is replaced, not by the sale of the product, but by the natural form of the product it- self; hence, not by once more withdrawing its value from circulation in money form, but by additional, newly produced money.

Let us suppose that this circulating capital is £500, the period of turnover 5 weeks, the working period 4 weeks, the period of circula- tion only 1 week. From the outset, money for 5 weeks must be partly advanced for a productive supply and partly be ready to be paid out gradually in wages. At the beginning of the 6th week, £400 will have returned and £100 will have been released. This is constantly repeat- ed. Here, as in previous cases, £100 will always be found in released form during a certain time of the turnover. But they consist of addi- tional, newly produced, money, the same as the other £400. We have in this case 10 turnovers per year and the annual product is £5,000 in gold. (The period of circulation is not constituted, in this case, by the



**[p. 326]**

time required for the conversion of commodities into money, but by that required for the conversion of money into the elements of pro- duction.)

In the case of every other capital of £500 turned over under the same conditions, the ever renewed money form is the converted form of the commodity capital produced, a capital which is thrown into circulation every 4 weeks and which by its sale — that is to say, by a periodical withdrawal of the quantity of money it represented when it originally entered into the process — assumes this money form anew over and over again. Here, on the contrary, in every turnover period a new additional sum of £500 in money is thrown from the process of production itself into circulation in order to withdraw from it continually materials of production and labour power. This money thrown into circulation is not withdrawn from it again by the circuit which this capital describes, but is rather increased by quanti- ties of gold constantly produced anew.

Let us look at the variable portion of this circulating capital and as- sume that it is, as before, £100. Then these £100 would be sufficient in the ordinary production of commodities, with 10 turnovers, to pay continually for the labour power. Here, in the production of gold, the same amount is sufficient. But the £100 of the reflux, with which the labour power is paid every 5 weeks, are not a converted form of its product but a portion of this ever renewed product itself. The pro- ducer of gold pays his labourers directly with a portion of the gold they themselves produced. The £1,000 thus expended annually in la- bour power and thrown by the labourers into circulation do not re- turn therefore via this circulation to their starting-point.

Furthermore, so far as the fixed capital is concerned, it requires the investment of a comparatively large money capital on the original es- tablishment of the business, and this capital is thus thrown into circu- lation. Like all fixed capital it returns only piecemeal in the course of years. But it returns as a direct portion of the product, of the gold, not by the sale of the product and its consequent conversion into money. In other words, it gradually assumes its money form not by a with- drawal of money from the circulation but by an accumulation of a corresponding portion of the product. The money capital so re- stored is not a quantity of money gradually withdrawn from the circula- tion to compensate for the sum originally thrown into it for the fixed capital. It is an additional sum of money.

Finally, as concerns the surplus value, it is likewise equal to a cer-



**[p. 327]**

tain portion of the new gold product, which is thrown into circu- lation in every new period of turnover in order to be unproductively expended, according to our assumption, on means of subsistence and articles of luxury.

But according to our assumption, the entire annual production of gold — which continually withdraws labour power and materials of production, but no money, from the market, while continuously add- ing fresh quantities of money to it — merely replaces the money worn out during the year, hence only keeps intact the quantity of social money which exists constantly, although in varying portions, in the two forms of hoarded money and money in circulation.

According to the law of the circulation of commodities, the quan- tity of money must be equal to the amount of money required for cir- culation plus a certain amount held in the form of a hoard, which in- creases or decreases as the circulation contracts or expands, and serves especially for the formation of the requisite reserve funds of means of payment. What must be paid in money in so far as there is no bal- ancing of accounts — is the value of the commodities. The fact that a portion of this value consists of surplus value, that is to say, did not cost the seller of the commodities anything, does not alter the matter in any way. Let us suppose that the producers are all independent owners of their means of production, so that circulation takes place between the immediate producers themselves. Apart from the con- stant portion of their capital, their annual value product might then be divided into two parts, analogous with capitalist conditions: Part a, replacing only the necessary means of subsistence, and part b, con- sumed partly in articles of luxury, partly for an expansion of produc- tion. Part a then represents the variable capital, part b the surplus value. But this division would remai|n without influence on the mag- nitude of the sum of money required for the circulation of their total product. Other circumstances remaining equal, the value of the cir- culating mass of commodities would be the same, and thus also the amount of money required for that value. They would also have to have the same money reserves if the turnover periods are equally divid- ed, i. e., the same portion of their capital would always have to be held in the form of money, because their production, according to our assumption, would be commodity production, the same as before. Hence the fact that a portion of the value of the commodities consists of surplus value would change absolutely, nothing in the quantity of the money required for the running of the business.



**[p. 328]**

An opponent of Tooke, who clings to the formula M — C — M', asks him how the capitalist manages always to withdraw more money from circulation than he throws into it. Mind you! The question at issue here is not the formation of surplus value. This, the only secret, is a matter of course from the capitalist standpoint. The sum of values employed would not be capital if it did not enrich itself by means of surplus value. But as it is capital by assumption, surplus value is taken for granted.

The question, then, is not where the surplus value comes from but whence the money comes into which it is turned.

But in bourgeois economics, the existence of surplus value is self- understood. It is therefore not only assumed but also connected with the further assumption that a part of the mass of commodities thrown into circulation is a surplus product, hence representing a value which the capitalist did not throw into circulation as part of his capi- tal; that, consequently, with his product the capitalist throws into cir- culation a surplus over and above his capital, and that he withdraws this surplus from it.

The commodity capital, which the capitalist throws into circula- tion, has a greater value (it is not explained and remains obscure where this comes from, but from the standpoint of this capitalist c'est un fait3) than the productive capital which he withdrew from circula- tion in the form of labour power plus means of production. On the basis of this assumption it is evident why not only capitalist A, but also B, C, D, etc., are always able to withdraw more value from circu- lation by the exchange of their commodities than the value of the cap- ital originally and repeatedly advanced by them. A, B, C, D, etc., continuously throw a greater commodity value into circulation in the form of commodity capital — this operation is as many-sided as the various independently functioning capitals — than they withdraw from it in the form of productive capital. Hence they have constantly to divide among themselves a sum of values (i. e., everyone, on his part, has to withdraw from circulation a productive capital) equal to the sum of values of the productive capitals they respectively ad- vanced; and just as constantly they have to divide among themselves a sum of values which they all, from all sides, throw into circulation in the form of commodities representing the respective excesses of the commodity values above the values of their elements of production.

[^1]: a it is a fact





**[p. 329]**

But the commodity capital must be turned into money before its re- conversion into productive capital and before the surplus value con- tained in it is spent. Where does the money for this purpose come from? This question seems difficult at the first glance, and neither Tooke nor any one else has answered it so far.

Let the circulating capital of £500 advanced in the form of money capital, whatever its period of turnover, now stand for the total circu- lating capital of society, that is, of the capitalist class. Let the surplus value be £100. How can the entire capitalist class manage to draw continually £600 out of circulation, when it continually throws only £500 into it?

After the money capital of £500 has been converted into produc- tive capital, the latter transforms itself within the process of produc- tion into commodities worth £600 and there are in circulation not only commodities valued at £500, equal to the money capital origin- ally advanced, but also a newly produced surplus value of £100.

This additional surplus value of £100 is thrown into circulation in the form of commodities. No doubt about that. But such an operation does not by any means furnish the additional money for the circula- tion of this additional commodity value.

It will not do to obviate this difficulty by plausible subterfuges. For instance: So far as the constant circulating capital is concerned, it is obvious that not all invest it simultaneously. While capitalist A sells his commodities, so that his advanced capital assumes the form of money, there is on the other hand the available money capital of the buyer B which assumes the form of his means of production — precisely what A is producing. By the same act through which A re- stores the money form to his produced commodity capital, B returns his capital to its productive form, transforms it from money form into means of production and labour power; the same amount of money functions in the two-sided process as in every simple purchase C — M. On the other hand when A reconverts his money into means of production, he buys from C, and this man pays B with it, etc., and thus the transaction would be explained. But:

None of the laws established with reference to the quantity of the circulating money in the circulation of commodities (Buch I, Kap. Ill a), are changed in any way by the capitalist character of the process of production.

[^1]: a See present edition, Vol. 35.



Hence, when one says that the circulating capital of society to be advanced in the form of money amounts to £500, one has already taken into account that this is on the one hand the sum simulta- neously advanced, and that on the other hand it sets in motion more productive capital than £500 because it serves alternately as the money fund of various productive capitals. This manner of explana- tion, then, assumes the money, whose existence it is called upon to ex- plain, as already existing.—

It might be further said: Capitalist A produces articles which capi- talist B consumes individually, unproductively. B's money therefore turns A's commodity capital into money and thus the same sum of money serves to realise B's surplus value and A's circulating constant capital. But in that case the question that still awaits solution is as- sumed still more directly to have been solved, namely: where does B get the money that makes up his revenue? How did he himself realise this portion of the surplus value of his product?

It might also be said that the part of the circulating variable capi- tal which A steadily advances to his labourers returns to him steadily from the circulation, and only a varying part of it always stays with him for the payment of wages. But a certain time elapses between the expenditure and the reflux, and meanwhile the money paid out for wages might, among other uses, serve for the realisation of surplus value.

But we know in the first place that the longer this time the greater must be the supply of money which capitalist A has to keep constantly in petto. In the second place the labourer spends the money, buys com- modities for it and thus converts into money pro tanto the surplus value contained in them. Consequently the same money that is advanced in the form of variable capital serves pro tanto also the purpose of turning surplus value into money. Without penetrating any further into the question at this point, let this suffice: the consumption of the entire capitalist class and its retainers keeps step with that of the working class; hence simultaneously with the money thrown into circulation by the labourers the capitalists too must throw money into it, in order to spend their surplus value as revenue; hence money must be with- drawn from circulation for it. This explanation would serve merely to reduce, but not eliminate, the quantity of money required.

Finally, it might be said: A large amount of money is constantly thrown into circulation when fixed capital is first invested, and it is recovered from the circulation only gradually, piecemeal, after



**[p. 331]**

a lapse of years, by him who threw it into circulation. Cannot this sum suffice to convert the surplus value into money?

The answer to this must be that perhaps the sum of £500 (which includes hoard formation for needed reserve funds) implies its em- ployment as fixed capital, if not by him who threw it into circulation, then by somebody else. Besides, it is already assumed in regard to the amount expended for the procurement of products serving as fixed capital that the surplus value contained in them is also paid, and the question is precisely where this money comes from.

The general reply has already been given: If a mass of commodities worth x times £1,000 has to circulate, it changes absolutely nothing in the quantity of the money required for this circulation whether the value of this mass of commodities contains any surplus value or not, whether this mass of commodities has been produced capitalistically or not. The problem itself therefore does not exist. All other conditions being given, such as velocity of the currency of money, etc., a definite sum of money is required in order to circulate commodities worth x times £1,000 quite independently of how much or how little of this value falls to the share of the direct producers of these commodities. So far as any problem exists here, it coincides with the general prob- lem: Where does the money required for the circulation of the com- modities of a country come from?

However, from the point of view of capitalist production, the sem- blance of a special problem does indeed exist. In the present case it is the capitalist who appears as the point of departure, who throws money into circulation. The money which the labourer expends for the payment of his means of subsistence existed previously as the money form of the variable capital and was therefore thrown origin- ally into circulation by the capitalist as a means of buying or paying for labour power. The capitalist furthermore throws into circulation the money which constitutes originally the money form of his con- stant, fixed and circulating, capital; he expends it as a means of pur- chase or payment for instruments of labour and materials of produc- tion. But beyond this the capitalist no longer appears as the starting- point of the quantity of money in circulation. Now, there are only two points of departure: the capitalist and the labourer. All third cat- egories of persons must either receive money for their services from these two classes or, to the extent that they receive it without any ser- vices in return, they are joint owners of the surplus value in the form of rent, interest, etc. That the surplus value does not all stay in the



**[p. 332]**

pocket of the industrial capitalist but must be shared by him with other persons, has nothing to do with the present question. The ques- tion is how he turns his surplus value into money, not how the pro- ceeds are later divided. For our purposes the capitalist may as well still be regarded as the sole owner of the surplus value. As for the la- bourer, it has already been said that he is but the secondary, while the capitalist is the primary, starting-point of the money thrown by the labourer into circulation. The money first advanced as variable capital is going through its second circulation when the labourer spends it to pay for means of subsistence.

The capitalist class remains consequently the sole point of departure of the circulation of money. If it needs £400 for the payment of means of production and £100 for the payment of labour power, it throws £500 into circulation. But the surplus value incorporated in the prod- uct, with a rate of surplus value of 100%, is equal in value to £100. How can the capitalist class continually draw £600 out of circulation, when it continually throws only £500 into it? Nothing comes from nothing. The capitalist class as a whole cannot draw out of circula- tion what was not previously thrown into it.

We disregard here the fact that the sum of £400 may suffice, when turned over ten times, to circulate means of production valued at £4,000 and labour power valued at £1,000, and that the other £100 may likewise suffice for the circulation of £1,000 worth of surplus value. The ratio of the sum of money to the value of the commodities circulated by it is immaterial here. The problem remains the same. Unless the same pieces of money circulate several times, a capital of £5,000 must be thrown into circulation, and £1,000 is required to convert the surplus value into money. The question is where this money comes from, whether it is £1,000 or £100. In any event it is in excess of the money capital thrown into circulation.

Indeed, paradoxical as it may appear at first sight, it is the capital- ist class itself that throws the money into circulation which serves for the realisation of the surplus value incorporated in the commodities. But, nota bene, it does not throw it into circulation as advanced money, hence not as capital. It spends it as a means of purchase for its individ- ual consumption. The money is not therefore advanced by the capi- talist class, although it is the point of departure of its circulation.

Let us take some individual capitalist who is starting in business, a farmer for instance. During the first year, he advances a money capi- tal of, say, £5,000, paying £4,000 for means of production, and



**[p. 333]**

£1,000 for labour power. Let the rate of surplus value be 100%, the amount of surplus value appropriated by him £ 1,000. The above £5,000 comprise all the money he advances as money capital. But the man must also live, and he does not take in any money until the end of the year. Take it that his consumption amounts to £1,000. These he must have in his possession. He may say that he has to advance himself these £1,000 during the first year. But this advance, which here has only a subjective meaning, denotes nothing else but that he must pay for his individual consumption during the first year out of his own pocket instead of defraying it out of the gratuitous production of his labourers. He does not advance this money as capital. He spends it, pays it out for an equivalent in means of subsistence which he consumes. This value has been spent by him in money, thrown into circulation and withdrawn from it in the form of commodity val- ues. These commodity values he has consumed. He has thus ceased to bear any relation to their value. The money with which he paid for this value exists now as an element of the circulating money. But he has withdrawn the value of this money from circulation in the form of products, and this value is now destroyed together with the products in which it existed. It's all gone. But at the end of the year he throws commodities worth £6,000 into circulation and sells them. By this means he recovers: 1) his advanced money capital of £5,000; 2) the surplus value of £1,000 turned into money. He has advanced as capi- tal, has thrown into circulation, £5,000, and he withdraws from it £6,000 — £5,000 of which cover his capital, and £1,000 his surplus value. The last £1,000 are turned into money with the money which he himself has thrown into circulation, which he did not advance, but spent as a consumer, not as a capitalist. They now return to him as the money form of the surplus value produced by him. And hence- forth this operation is repeated every year. But beginning with the second year, the £1,000 which he spends are constantly the converted form, the money form, of the surplus value produced by him. He spends them annually and they return to him annually.

If his capital were turned over more frequently a year, it would not alter this state of affairs, but would affect the length of time, and hence the amount which he would have to throw into circulation for his individual consumption over and above his advanced money capital.

This money is not thrown into circulation by the capitalist as capi-



**[p. 334]**

tal. But it is a decided trait of the capitalist to be able to live on means in his possession until surplus value begins to return.

In the present case we assumed that the sum of money which the capitalist throws into circulation to pay for his individual consump- tion until the first return of his capital is exactly equal to the surplus value which he produced and hence must turn into money. This is obviously an arbitrary assumption so far as the individual capitalist is concerned. But it must be correct when applied to the entire capitalist class if simple reproduction is assumed. It only expresses the same thing as the assumption, namely that the entire surplus value, and it alone — hence no fraction of the original capital stock — is consumed unproductively.

It had been previously assumed that the total production of pre- cious metals (taken to be equal to £500) sufficed only for the replace- ment of the wear and tear of the money.

The capitalists producing gold possess their entire product in gold — that portion which replaces constant capital as well as that which replaces variable capital, and also that consisting of surplus value. A portion of the social surplus value therefore consists of gold, and not of a product which is turned into gold only in the process of circulation. It consists from the outset of gold and is thrown into cir- culation in order to draw products out of it. The same applies here to wages, to variable capital, and to the replacement of the advanced constant capital. Hence, whereas one part of the capitalist class throws into circulation commodities greater in value (greater by the amount of the surplus value) than the money capital advanced by them, another part of the capitalists throws into circulation money of greater value (greater by the amount of the surplus value) than that of the commodities which they constantly withdraw from circulation for the production of gold. Whereas one part of the capitalists con- stantly pumps more money out of circulation than it pours into it, the part that produces gold constantly pumps more money into it than it takes out in means of production.

Although a part of this product of £500 in gold is surplus value of the gold producers, the entire sum is, nonetheless, intended only to re- place the money necessary for the circulation of the commodities. It is immaterial for this purpose how much of this sum turns into money the surplus value incorporated in the commodities, and how much of it their other value constituents.

Transferring the production of gold from one country to another

produces no change whatever in the matter. One part of the social la- bour power and the social means of production of country A is con- verted into a product, for instance linen, valued at £500, which is ex- ported to country B in order to buy gold there. The productive capi- tal thus employed in the country A throws no more commodities — as distinct from money — upon the market of country A than it would if it were employed directly in the production of gold. This product of A represents £500 in gold and enters into the circulation of this coun- try only as money. That portion of the social surplus value which is contained in this product exists for country A directly in the form of money, and never in any other form. Although for the gold- producing capitalists only a part of the product represents surplus value, and another part the replacement capital, still the question of how much of this gold, outside the circulating constant capital, re- places variable capital and how much of it represents surplus value de- pends exclusively on the respective ratios of wages and surplus value to the value of the circulating commodities. The part which forms surplus value is distributed among the diverse members of the capi- talist class. Although that part is continually spent by them for individ- ual consumption and recovered by the sale of new products — it is precisely this purchase and sale that circulates among them the money required for the conversion of the surplus value into money — there is nevertheless a portion of the social surplus value in the form of money, even if in varying proportions, in the pockets of the capital- ists, just as a portion of the wages stays at least during part of the week in the pockets of the labourers in the form of money. And this part is not limited by that part of the money product which originally forms the surplus value of the gold-producing capitalists, but, as we have said, is limited by the proportion in which the above product of £500 is generally distributed between capitalists and labourers, and in which the commodity supply to be circulated consists of surplus value and the other constituents of value.

However, that portion of surplus value which does not exist in other commodities but alongside of them in the form of money, consists of a portion of the annually produced gold only to the extent that a por- tion of the annual production of gold circulates for the realisation of the surplus value. The other portion of money, which is continually in the hands of the capitalist class in varying portions, as the money form of their surplus value, is not an element of the annually pro-



**[p. 336]**

duced gold, but of the mass of money previously accumulated in the country.

According to our assumption the annual production of gold, £500, just covers the annual wear of money. If we keep in mind only these £500, and ignore that portion of the annually produced mass of com- modities which is circulated by means of previously accumulated money, the surplus value produced in commodity form will find in the circulation process money for its conversion into money for the simple reason that on the other side surplus value is annually pro- duced in the form of gold. The same applies to the other parts of the gold product of £500 which replace the advanced money capital.

Now, two things are to be noted here. In the first place, it follows that the surplus value spent by the capi- talists as money, as well as the variable and other productive capital advanced by them in money, is actually the product of labourers, namely of the labourers engaged in the production of gold. They pro- duce anew not only that portion of the gold product which is "ad- vanced" to them as wages but also that portion of the gold product in which the surplus value of the capitalist gold producers is directly represented. Finally, as for that portion of the gold product which re- places only the constant capital value advanced for its production, it re-appears in the form of money (or product in general) only through the annual work of the labourers. When the business started, it was originally expended by the capitalist in the form of money, which was not newly produced but formed a part of the circulating mass of so- cial money. But to the extent that it is replaced by a new product, by additional gold, it is the annual product of the labourer. The advance on the part of the capitalist appears here, too, merely as a form which owes its existence to the fact that the labourer is neither the owner of his own means of production nor able to command, during produc- tion, the means of subsistence produced by other labourers.

In the second place, however, as far as concerns that mass of money which exists independently of this annual replacement of £500, partly in the form of a hoard and partly in the form of circulating money, things must be, i. e., must have been originally, with it just as they are annually with regard to these £500. We shall return to this point at the close of this sub-section. a But before then we wish to make a few additional remarks.

[^1]: a See this volume, p. 342.





**[p. 337]**

We have seen during our study of the turnover that, other circum- stances remaining equal, changes in the length of the periods of turn- over require changes in the amounts of money capital, in order to carry on production on the same scale. The elasticity of the money circulation must therefore be sufficient to adapt itself to this alterna- tion of expansion and contraction.

If we furthermore assume other circumstances as remaining equal — including the length, intensity, and productivity of the work- ing day — but a different division of the value of the product between wages and surplus value, so that either the former rises and the latter falls, or vice versa, the mass of the circulating money is not affected thereby. This change can take place without any expansion or con- traction of the mass of money in circulation. Let us consider particu- larly the case in which there is a general rise in wages, so that, under the assumptions made, there will be a general fall in the rate of sur- plus value, but besides this, also according to our assumption, there will be no change in the value of the circulating mass of commodities. In this case there naturally is an increase in the money capital which must be advanced as variable capital, hence in the amount of money which performs this function. But the surplus value, and therefore also the amount of money required for its realisation, decreases by exactly the same amount by which the amount of money required for the function of variable capital increases. The amount of money re- quired for the realisation of the commodity value is not affected thereby, any more than this commodity value itself. The cost price of the commodity rises for the individual capitalist but its social price of production remains unchanged. What is changed is the proportion in which, apart from the constant part of the value, the price of the pro- duction of commodities is divided into wages and profit.

But, it is argued, a greater outlay of variable money capital (the value of the money is, of course, considered constant) implies a larger amount of money in the hands of the labourers. This causes a greater demand for commodities on the part of the labourers. This, in turn, leads to a rise in the price of commodities.— Or it is said: If wages rise, the capitalists raise the prices of their commodities.— In either case, the general rise in wages causes a rise in commodity prices.



**[p. 338]**

Hence a greater amount of money is needed for the circulation of the commodities, no matter how the rise in prices is explained.

Reply to the first formulation: in consequence of a rise in wages, the demand of the labourers for the necessities of life will rise particularly. Their demand for articles of luxury will increase to a lesser degree, or a demand will develop for things which formerly did not come within the scope of their consumption. The sudden and large-scale increase in the demand for the necessary means of subsistence will doubtless raise their prices immediately. The consequence: a greater part of the social capital will be employed in the production of necessities of life and a smaller in the production of luxuries, since these fall in price on account of the decrease in surplus value and the consequent decrease in the demand of the capitalists for these articles. On the other hand as the labourers themselves buy articles of luxury, the rise in their wages — within these limits — does not promote an increase in the prices of the necessities of life but simply displaces buyers of luxuries. More luxuries than before are consumed by labourers, and relatively fewer by capitalists. Voilà tout.* After some oscillations the value of the mass of circulating commodities is the same as before.—As for the momentary fluctuations, they will not have any other effect than to throw unemployed money capital into domestic circulation, capital which hitherto sought employment in speculative deals on the stock-exchange or in foreign countries.

Reply to the second formulation: If it were in the power of the capi- talist producers to raise the prices of their commodities at will, they could and would do so without a rise in wages. Wages would never rise if commodity prices fell. The capitalist class would never resist the TRADE-UNIONS, if it could always and under all circumstances do what it is now doing by way of exception, under definite, special, so to say, local, circumstances, to wit, avail itself of every rise in wages in order to raise prices of commodities much higher yet and thus pocket great- er profits.

The assertion that the capitalists can raise the prices of luxuries, be- cause the demand for them decreases (in consequence of the reduced demand of the capitalists whose means for purchasing such articles have decreased) would be a very unique application of the law of sup- ply and demand. Since it is not a mere displacement of luxury buyers, a displacement of capitalists by labourers — and so far as this dis-

[^1]: That's all.





**[p. 339]**

placement does occur, the demand of the labourers does not stimulate a rise in the prices of the necessities of life, for the labourers cannot spend that portion of their increased wages for necessities which they spend for luxuries — the prices of luxuries fall in consequence of re- duced demand. Capital is therefore withdrawn from the production of luxury articles, until their supply is reduced to dimensions corre- sponding to their altered role in the process of social production. With their production thus reduced, they rise in price — their value other- wise unchanged — to their normal level. So long as this contraction, or this process of levelling, lasts and the prices of necessities rise, as much capital is supplied to the production of the latter as is with- drawn from the other branch of production, until the demand is satis- fied. Then the equilibrium is restored and the end of the whole pro- cess is that the social capital, and therefore also the money capital, is divided in a different proportion between the production of the neces- sities of life and that of luxury articles.

The entire objection is a bugbear set up by the capitalists and their economic sycophants.

The facts which serve as the pretext for this bugbear are of three kinds:

1) It is a general law of money circulation that, other things being equal, the quantity of money in circulation increases with a rise in the sum of the prices of circulating commodities, irrespective of whether this augmentation of the totality of prices applies to the same quan- tity of commodities or to a greater quantity. The effect is then con- fused with the cause. Wages rise (although the rise is rare, and propor- tional only in exceptional cases) with the rising prices of the necessi- ties of life. Wage advances are the consequence, not the cause, of ad- vances in the prices of commodities.

2) In the case of a partial, or local, rise of wages — that is, a rise only in some branches of production — a local rise in the prices of the products of these branches may follow. But even this depends on many circumstances. For instance that wages were not abnormally depressed and that therefore the rate of profit was not abnormally high; that the market for these goods is not narrowed by the rise in prices (hence a contraction of their supply previous to raising their prices is not necessary), etc.

3) In the case of a general rise in wages the price of the produced commodities rises in branches of industry where the variable capital



**[p. 340]**

preponderates, but falls on the other hand in branches where the con- stant, or fixed, capital preponderates.

We found in our study of the simple circulation of commodities (Buch I, Kap. Ill, 2a) that, though the money form of any definite quantity of commodities is only transient within the process of circu- lation, still the money transiently in the hands of one man during the metamorphosis of a certain commodity necessarily passes into the hands of another, so that in the first instance commodities are not only exchanged all-sidedly, or replace one another, but this replace- ment is promoted and accompanied by an all-sided precipitation of money. "When one commodity replaces another, the money commo- dity always sticks to the hands of some third person. Circulation sweats money from every pore" (Buch I, S. 92a). The same identical fact is expressed, on the basis of the capitalist production of commodi- ties, by a portion of capital constantly existing in the form of money capital, and a portion of surplus value constantly being found in the hands of its owners, likewise in the form of money.

Apart from this, the circuit of money — that is, the return of money to its point of departure — being a phase of the turnover of capital, is a phenomenon entirely different from, and even the opposite of, the currency of money,33! which expresses its steady departure from the start- ing-point by changing hands again and again (Buch I, S. 94.b)

[^1]: 33 Although the Physiocrats still confuse these two phenomena, they were the first to emphasise the reflux of money to its starting-point as the essential form of circulation of capital, as that form of circulation which promotes reproduction. "Cast a glance at the Tableau Economique and you will see that the productive class provides the money with which the other classes buy products from it, and that they return this money to it when they come back next year to make the same purchases You see, then, no other circle here but that of expenditure followed by reproduction, and of reproduction fol- lowed by expenditure, a circle described by the circulation of money, which measures expenditure and reproduction" (Quesnay, Dialogues sur le Commerce et sur les Travaux des Artisans, Daire édition, Pkysiocrales, I, pp. 208, 209). "It is this continual advance and return of capitals which should be called the circulation of money, this useful and fertile circulation which gives life to all the labours of society, which maintains the acti- vity and life of the body politic, and which is quite rightly compared to the circulation of blood in the animal body" (Turgot, Réflexions, etc., Oeuvres, Daire édition, I, p. 45). [Marx quotes in French.]

[^2]: a English edition: Vol. I, Ch. III., 2a (present edition, Vol. 35). - b Ibid., 2b.





**[p. 341]**

Nevertheless, an accelerated turnover implies eo ipso an accelerated currency.

First concerning the variable capital: If a certain money capital of, say, £ 500 is turned over in the form of variable capital ten times a year, it is evident that this aliquot part of the quantity of money in circulation circulates ten times its value, or £5,000. It circulates ten times a year between the capitalist and the labourer. The labourer is paid, and pays, ten times a year with the same aliquot part of the cir- culating quantity of money. If the same variable capital were turned over only once a year, the scale of production remaining the same, there would be only one turnover of £5,000.

Furthermore: Let the constant portion of the circulating capital be equal to £ 1,000. If the capital is turned over ten times, the capitalist sells his commodity, and therefore also the constant circulating por- tion of its value, ten times a year. The same aliquot part of the circu- lating quantity of money (equal to £ 1,000) passes ten times per an- num from the hands of its owners into those of the capitalist. This money changes hands ten times. Secondly, the capitalist buys means of production ten times a year. This again makes ten circulations of the money from one hand into another. With a sum of money amounting to £ 1,000, the industrial capitalist sells £ 10,000 worth of commodities, and again buys £ 10,000 worth of commodities. By means of 20 circulations of £ 1,000 in money a commodity supply of £20,000 is circulated.

Finally, with an acceleration of the turnover, the portion of money which realises the surplus value also circulates faster.

But, conversely, an acceleration in money circulation does not nec- essarily imply a more rapid turnover of capital, and therefore of money, i.e., it does not necessarily imply a contraction and more rapid renewal of the reproduction process.

A more rapid circulation of money takes place whenever a larger number of transactions are performed with the same amount of money. This may also take place under the same periods of capital re- production as a result of changes in the technical facilities for the cir- culation of money. Furthermore, there may be an increase in the number of transactions in which money circulates without represent- ing actual exchanges of commodities (marginal transactions on the stock-exchange, etc.). On the other hand some circulations of money may be entirely eliminated. For instance where the agriculturist is himself a landowner, there is no circulation of money between the

