---
Volume: 36
Document_Title: "I. The Subject Investigated "
Page_Range: "357-360"
---

# I. The Subject Investigated 



**[p. 349]**

P a r t III

THE REPRODUCTION AND CIRCULATION OF THE AGGREGATE SOCIAL CAPITAL

C h a p t e r XVIII 3 4'

INTRODUCTION

I. THE SUBJECT INVESTIGATED

The direct process of the production of capital is its labour and self- expansion process, the process whose result is the commodity product and whose compelling motive is the production of surplus value.

The process of reproduction of capital comprises this direct process of production as well as the two phases of the circulation process proper, i. e., the entire circuit which, as a periodic process — a process which constantly repeats itself in definite periods — constitutes the turnover of capital.

Whether we study the circuit in the form of M M' or that of P P, the direct process of production P itself always forms but one link in this circuit. In the one form it appears as a promoter of the process of circulation; in the other the process of circulation appears as its promoter. Its continuous renewal, the continuous re-appearance of capital as productive capital, is in either case determined by its trans- formations in the process of circulation. On the other hand the contin- uously renewed process of production is the condition of the trans- formations which the capital undergoes ever anew in the sphere of circulation, of its alternate appearance as money capital and commod- ity capital.

Every individual capital forms, however, but an individualised fraction, a fraction endowed with individual life, as it were, of the aggregate social capital, just as every individual capitalist is but an individual element of the capitalist class. The movement of the social capital consists of the totality of the movements of its individualised fractional parts, the turnovers of the individual capitals. Just as the

[^1]: '' From Manuscript II.



metamorphosis of the individual commodity is a link in the series of metamorphoses of the commodity world — the circulation of commod- ities— so the metamorphosis of the individual capital, its turnover, is a link in the circuit described by social capital.

This total process comprises both the productive consumption (the direct process of production) together with the conversions of form (materially considered, exchanges) which bring it about, and the in- dividual consumption together with the conversions of form or ex- changes by which it is brought about. It includes on the one hand the conversion of variable capital into labour power, and therefore the incorporation of labour power in the process of capitalist production. Here the labourer acts as the seller of his commodity, labour power, and the capitalist as its buyer. But on the other hand the sale of the commodities embraces also their purchase by the working class, hence their individual consumption. Here the working class appears as buyer and the capitalists as sellers of commodities to the labourers.

The circulation of the commodity capital includes the circulation of surplus value, hence also the purchases and sales by which the cap- italists effect their individual consumption, the consumption of sur- plus value.

The circuit of the individual capitals in their aggregate as social cap- ital, hence considered in its totality, comprises not only the circula- tion of capital but also the general circulation of commodities. The latter can originally consist of only two components: 1) the circuit of capital proper and 2) the circuit of the commodities which enter into individual consumption, consequently of the commodities for which the labourer expends his wages and the capitalist his surplus value (or a part of it). At any rate, the circuit of capital comprises also the cir- culation of the surplus value, since the latter is a part of the commod- ity capital, and likewise the conversion of the variable capital into labour power, the payment of wages. But the expenditure of this sur- plus value and wages for commodities does not form a link in the cir- culation of capital, although at least the expenditure of wages is es- sential for this circulation.

In Book I the process of capitalist production was analysed as an individual act as well as a process of reproduction: the production of surplus value and the production of capital itself. The changes of form and substance experienced by capital in the sphere of circula- tion were assumed without dwelling upon them. It was presupposed therefore that on the one hand the capitalist sells the product at its



**[p. 351]**

value and on the other that he finds within the sphere of circulation the objective means of production for restarting or continuing the process. The only act within the sphere of circulation on which we dwelt there was the purchase and sale of labour power as the fun- damental condition of capitalist production.

In the first part of this Book II, the various forms were considered which capital assumes in its circuit, and the various forms of this cir- cuit itself. The circulation time must now be added to the working time discussed in Book I.

In the second part, the circuit was studied as being periodic, i. e., as a turnover. It was shown on the one hand in what manner the vari- ous constituents of capital (fixed and circulating) accomplish the cir- cuit of forms in different periods of time and in different ways; on the other hand the circumstances were examined by which the different lengths of the working period and circulation period are conditioned. The influence was shown which the period of the circuit and the differ- ent proportions of its component parts exert upon the dimensions of the production process itself and upon the annual rate of surplus value. Indeed, while it was the successive forms continually assumed and discarded by capital in its circuit that were studied in Part I, it was shown in Part II how a capital of a given magnitude is simulta- neously, though in varying proportions, divided, within this flow and succession of forms, into different forms: productive capital, money capital, and commodity capital, so that they not only alternate with one another, but different portions of the total capital value are con- stantly side by side and function in these different states. Especially money capital came forward with distinctive features not shown in Book I. Certain laws were found according -to which diverse large components of a given capital must be continually advanced and re- newed— depending on the conditions of the turnover — in the form of money capital in order to keep a productive capital of a given size constantly functioning.

But in both the first and the second parts it was always only a ques- tion of some individual capital, of the movement of some individual- ised part of social capital.

However the circuits of the individual capitals intertwine, presup- pose and necessitate one another, and form, precisely in this interlac- ing, the movement of the total social capital. Just as in the simple cir- culation of commodities the total metamorphosis of a commodity ap- peared as a link in the series of metamorphoses of the world of com-

