---
Volume: 36
Document_Title: "I. The Physiocrats "
Page_Range: "365-368"
---

# I. The Physiocrats 



**[p. 357]**

form of money, is not eliminated by the form of this money itself, whether it is metal money, credit money, token money, etc. The sec- ond condition is in no way affected by what money medium or in what form of production labour, means of subsistence, and means of production are withdrawn without the return of some equivalent to the circulation.

C h a p t e r XIX35)

FORMER PRESENTATIONS OF THE SUBJECT

I. THE PHYSIOCRATS

Quesnay's Tableau 'économique4'9 shows in a few broad outlines how the annual result of the national production, representing a definite value, is distributed by means of the circulation in such a way that, other things being equal, simple reproduction, i. e., reproduction on the same scale, can take place. The starting-point of the period of pro- duction is properly the preceding year's harvest. The innumerable in- dividual acts of circulation are at once brought together in their char- acteristic social mass movement — the circulation between great functionally determined economic classes of society. We are here interested in the following: A portion of the total product—being, like every other portion of it, a use object, it is a new result of last year's labour — is at the same time only the depository of old capital value re-appearing in the same natural form. It does not circulate but remains in the hands of its producers, the class of farmers, in order to resume there its service as capital. In this portion of the year's prod- uct, the constant capital, Quesnay includes impertinent elements, but he strikes upon the main thing, thanks to the limitations of his ho- rizon, within which agriculture is the only sphere of investment of hu- man labour producing surplus value, hence the only really produc- tive one from the capitalist point of view. The economic process of re- production, whatever may be its specific social character, always be- comes intertwined in this sphere (agriculture) with a natural process of reproduction. The obvious conditions of the latter throw light on those of the former, and keep off a confusion of thought which is called forth by the mirage of circulation.

Beginning of Manuscript VIII.



**[p. 358]**

The label of a system differs from that of other articles, among other things, by the fact that it cheats not only the buyer but often also the seller. Quesnay himself and his immediate disciples believed in their feudal shop-sign. So do our academic pedants even this day and hour. But as a matter of fact the system of the Physiocrats is the first systematic conception of capitalist production. The representa- tive of industrial capital — the class of farmers — directs the entire eco- nomic movement. Agriculture is carried on capitalistically, that is to say, it is the enterprise of a capitalist farmer on a large scale; the di- rect cultivator of the soil is the wage labourer. Production creates not only articles of use but also their value; its compelling motive is the procurement of surplus value, whose birthplace is the sphere of pro- duction, not of circulation. Among the three classes which figure as the vehicles of the social process of reproduction brought about by the circulation, the immediate exploiter of "productive" labour, the pro- ducer of surplus value, the capitalist farmer, is distinguished from those who merely appropriate the surplus value.

The capitalist character of the physiocratic system excited opposi- tion even during its florescence: on the one side it was challenged by Linguet50 and Mably, on the other by the champions of the small freeholders.

Adam Smith's retrogression36) in the analysis of the process of re- production is so much the more remarkable because he not only elab- orates upon Quesnay's correct analyses, generalising his "avances primitives" and "avances annuelles" for instance and calling them re- spectively "fixed" and "circulating" capital,37' but even relapses in spots entirely into physiocratic errors. For instance in order to dem- onstrate that the farmer produces more value than any other sort of capitalist, he says:

[^1]: 36; Kapital, Band I, 2. Ausgabe, S. 612, Note 32.a

[^2]: 37i Some Physiocrats had paved the way for him even here, especially Turgot. The latter uses the term capital for avances more frequently than Quesnay and the other Physiocrats and identifies still more the avances, or capitaux, of the manufacturers with those of the farmers. For instance: "Like these" (the entrepreneurs-manufacturers), "they" (lesfermiers, i.e., the capitalist farmers) "must receive in addition to returning capi- tals, etc." (Turgot, Oeuvres, Daire édition, Paris, 1844, Vol. I, p. 40).

[^3]: English edition: Vol. I, Ch. XXIV, 2 (present edition, Vol. 35).





**[p. 359]**

"No equal capital puts into motion a greater quantity of productive labour than that of the farmer. Not only his labouring servants, but his labouring cattle are produc- tive labourers." //Fine compliment for the labouring servants!// "In agriculture too na- ture labours along with man; and though her labour costs no expense, its produce has its value, as well as that of the most expensive workmen. The most important operations of agriculture seem intended not so much to increase, though they do that too, as to direct the fertility of nature towards the production of the plants most profitable to man. A field overgrown with briars and brambles may frequently produce as great a quantity of vegetables as the best cultivated vineyard or corn field. Planting and tillage fre- quently regulate more than they animate the active fertility of nature; and after all their labour, a great part of the work always remains to be done by her. The labourers and labouring cattle" (!), "therefore, employed in agriculture, not only occasion, like the workmen in manufactures, the reproduction of a value equal to their own con- sumption, or to the capital which employs them, together with its owners' profits; but of a much greater value. Over and above the capital of the farmer and all its profits, they regularly occasion the reproduction of the rent of the landlord. This rent may be considered as the produce of those powers of nature the use of which the landlord lends to the farmer. It is greater or smaller according to the supposed extent of those powers, or, in other words, according to the supposed natural or improved fertility of the land. It is the work of nature which remains after deducting or compensating everything which can be regarded as the work of man. It is seldom less than a fourth, and fre- quently more than a third of the whole produce. No equal quantity of productive la- bour employed in manufactures can ever occasion so great a reproduction. In them na- ture does nothing; man does all; and the reproduction must always be in proportion to the strength of the agents that occasion it. The capital employed in agriculture, there- fore, not only puts into motion a greater quantity of productive labour than any equal capital employed in manufactures, but in proportion, too, to the quantity of produc- tive labour which it employs, it adds a much greater value to the annual produce of the land and labour of the country, to the real wealth and revenue of its inhabitants" (Book II, Ch. 5, p. 242).

Adam Smith says in Book II, Ch. 1:

Here, then, capital = capital value; it exists in a "fixed" form.

The absurdity of the thing lies here in the fact that Smith does not, like Quesnay before him, see the re-appearance of the value of con- stant capital in a renewed form, and hence fails to see an important ele- ment of the process of reproduction, but merely offers one more illus- tration, and a wrong one at that, of his distinction between circulat- ing and fixed capital.— In Smith's translation of "avances primitives" and "avances annuelles" as "fixed capital" and "circulating capital",

[^1]: "The whole value of the seed, too, is properly a fixed capital.

[^2]: "Though it [the seed] goes backwards and forwards between the ground and the granary, it never changes masters, and therefore does not properly circulate. The farmer makes his profit, not by its sale, but by its increase" (p. 186).



