---
Volume: 36
Document_Title: "1. Smith's General Points of View "
Page_Range: "368-376"
---

# 1. Smith's General Points of View 



**[p. 360]**

II. ADAM SMITH

1. SMITH'S GENERAL POINTS OF VIEW

Adam Smith says in Book I, Ch. 6, p. 42:

"In every society the price of every commodity finally resolves itself into some one or other, or all of those three parts" (wages, profit, rent); "and in every improved so- ciety, all the three enter more or less, as component parts, into the price of the far great- er part of commodities." 38'

Or, as he continues, p. 43:

Below we shall discuss in greater detail this doctrine of Adam Smith concerning "the component parts of the price of commodi- ties", or of "all exchangeable value".

He says furthermore:

[^1]: "Wages, profit, and rent, are the three original sources of all revenue as well as of all exchangeable value."

[^2]: "Since this is the case, it has been observed, with regard to every particular com- modity, taken separately; it must be so with regard to all the commodities which com- pose the whole annual produce of the land and labour of every country, taken com- plexly. The whole price or exchangeable value of that annual produce, must resolve it- self into the same three parts, and be parcelled out among the different inhabitants of the country, either as the wages of their labour, the profits of their stock, or the rent of their land" (Book II, Ch. 2, p. 190).

[^3]: 381 In order that the reader may not misconstrue the meaning of the phrase "the price of the far greater part of commodities", the following shows how Adam Smith himself explains this term. For instance, no rent enters into the price of sea fish, only wages and profit; only wages enter into the price of Scotch pebbles. He says: "In some parts of Scotland a few poor people make a trade of gathering, along the sea-shore, those little variegated stones commonly known by the name of Scotch Pebbles. The price which is paid to them by the stone-cutter is altogether the wages of their labour; neither rent nor profit makes any part of it."





**[p. 361]**

After Adam Smith has thus resolved the price of all commodities individually, as well as "the whole price or exchangeable value of the annual produce of the land and labour of every country", into wages, profit and rent, the three sources of revenue for wage labour- ers, capitalists and landowners, he must needs smuggle in a fourth element by a circuitous route, namely the element of capital. This is accomplished by drawing a distinction between gross and net reve- nue:

"The gross revenue of all the inhabitants of a great country comprehends the whole annual produce of their land and labour; the neat revenue, what remains free to them af- ter deducting the expense of maintaining; first, their fixed; and secondly, their circulating capi- tal; or what, without encroaching upon their capital, they can place in their stock re- served for immediate consumption, or spend upon their subsistence, conveniences, and amusements. Their real wealth too is in proportion, not to their gross, but to their neat revenue" (ibid., p. 190).

On this we comment as follows:

1 ) Adam Smith expressly deals here only with simple reproduction, not reproduction on an extended scale, or accumulation. He speaks only of expenses for MAINTAINING"1 the capital in operation. The "neat" income is equal to that portion of the annual product, whether of so- ciety or of the individual capitalist, which can pass into the "fund for consumption", but the size of this fund must not ENCROACH UPON CAPITAL in operation. One portion of the value of both the individual and the social product, then, is resolved neither into wages nor into profit nor into rent, but into capital.

2) Adam Smith flees from his own theory by means of a play upon words, the distinction between gross and net revenue. The individual capitalist as well as the entire capitalist class, or the so-called nation, receive in place of the capital consumed in production a commodity product whose value — it can be represented by the proportional parts of this product — replaces on the one hand the expended capital value and thus forms an income, or still more literally, revenue {reve- nu, past participle of revenir—to come back), but, nota bene, a revenue upon capital, or income upon capital; on the other hand components of the value product which are "parcelled out among the diffe- rent inhabitants of the country, either as the wages of their labour,

[^1]: " In the original, this English word is given in parentheses after its German equi- valent. - b In the original, these English words are given in parentheses after their German equivalent.





**[p. 362]**

"The lowest ordinary rate of profit must always be something more than what is sufficient to compensate the occasional losses to which every employment of stock is ex- posed. It is this surplus only which is neat or clear profit."

//What capitalist understands by profit, necessary expenditure of capital?//

"What is called gross profit comprehends frequently, not only this surplus, but what is retained for compensating such extraordinary losses" (Book I, Ch. 9, p. 72).

But this means nothing else than that a part of the surplus value, considered as a part of the gross profit, must form an insurance fund for the production. This insurance fund is created by a portion of the surplus labour, which to that extent produces capital directly, that is to say, the fund intended for reproduction. As regards the expense for "maintaining" the fixed capital, etc. (see the above quotations), the replacement of the consumed fixed capital by a new one is not a new outlay of capital, but only a renewal of the old capital value in a new form. And as far as the repair of the fixed capital is concerned, which Adam Smith counts likewise among the costs of maintenance, this ex- pense goes in with the price of the capital advanced. The fact that the capitalist, instead of having to invest this all at one time, invests it gradually, as required, during the functioning of the capital, and can invest it out of profits already pocketed, does not change the source of this profit. The value constituent from which it derives proves only that the labourer delivers surplus labour for the insurance fund as well as for the repair fund.51

Adam Smith then tells us that one should exclude from the net reve- nue, i. e., from the revenue in its specific meaning, the entire fixed cap-



**[p. 363]**

ital, and also the entire portion of the circulating capital which is re- quired for the maintenance and repair of the fixed capital, and for its renewal, in fact all capital not in a bodily form intended for the con- sumption fund.

"The whole expense of maintaining the fixed capital, must evidently be excluded from the neat revenue of the society. Neither the materials necessary for supporting their useful machines and instruments of trade nor the produce of the labour neces- sary for fashioning those materials into the proper form, can ever make any part of it. The price ofthat labour may indeed make a part of it; as the workmen so employed may place the whole value of their wages in their stock reserved for immediate consumption. But in other sorts of labour, both the price" //i. e., the wages paid for this labour// "and the produce" //in which this labour is incorporated// "go to this stock, the price to that of the workmen, the produce to that of other people, whose subsistence, conveniences, and amusements, are augmented by the labour of those workmen" (Book II, Ch. 2, pp. 190, 191).

Adam Smith comes here upon a very important distinction be- tween the labourers employed in the production of means of production and those employed in the immediate production of articles of con- sumption. The value of the commodities produced by the first-named contains a constituent part which is equal to the sum of the wages, i. e., equal to the value of the part of capital invested in the purchase of labour power. This part of value exists bodily as a certain quota of the means of production produced by the labourers. The money re- ceived by them as wages is their revenue, but their labour has not produced any goods which are consumable, either for themselves or for others. Hence these products are not an element ofthat part of the annual product which is intended to form a social consumption fund, in which alone a "neat revenue" can be realised. Adam Smith forgets to add here that the same thing that applies to wages is also true of that constituent of the value of the means of production which, being surplus value, forms the revenue (first and foremost) of the industrial capitalist under the categories of profit and rent. These value compo- nents likewise exist in means of production, articles which cannot be consumed. They cannot raise articles of consumption produced by the second kind of labourers in a quantity corresponding to their price until they have been converted into money; only then can they transfer those articles to the individual consumption fund of their owners. But so much the more should Adam Smith have seen that that part of the value of the annually begotten means of production which is equal to the value of the means of production functioning

With regard to the second kind of labourers — who directly pro- duce articles of consumption — Adam Smith's definitions are not quite exact. For he says that in these kinds of labour, both the price of labour and the product GO TO a the stock reserved for immediate con- sumption,

"the price" (i. e., the money received in wages) "to that of the workmen, the produce to THAT OF OTHER PEOPLE* whose subsistence, conveniences and amusements, are augmented by the labour of those workmen".

But the labourer cannot live on the "price" of his labour, the money in which his wages are paid; he realises this money by buying articles of consumption with it. These may in part consist of classes of com- modities produced by himself. On the other hand his own product may be such as goes only into the consumption of the exploiters of la- bour.

After Adam Smith has thus entirely excluded the fixed capital from the "neat revenue" of a country, he continues:

It is sheer tautology to say that that portion of the circulating capi- tal which does not serve for the production of means of production

[^1]: "But though the whole expense of maintaining the fixed capital is thus necessarily excluded from the neat revenue of the society, it is not the same case with that of main- taining the circulating capital. Of the four parts of which this latter capital is com- posed, money, provisions, materials, and finished work, the three last, it has already been observed, are regularly withdrawn from it, and placed either in the fixed capital of the society, or in their stock reserved for immediate consumption. Whatever portion of those consumable goods is not employed in maintaining the former" //the fixed capi- tal// "goes all to the latter" // the fund for immediate consumption//, "and makes a part of the neat revenue of the society. The maintenance of those three parts of the circulating capital, therefore, withdraws no portion of the annual produce from the neat revenue of the society, besides what is necessary for maintaining the fixed capital" (Book II, Ch. 2, pp. [191,] 192).

[^2]: a In the original, these English words are given in parentheses after their German equiv- alent.





**[p. 365]**

goes into that of articles of consumption, in other words, into that part of the annual product which is intended to form society's con- sumption fund. However, the immediately following passage is im- portant:

"The circulating capital of a society is in this respect different from that of an indi- vidual. That of an individual is totally excluded from making any part of his neat reve- nue, which must consist altogether in his profits. But though the circulating capital of every individual makes a part ofthat of the society to which he belongs, it is not upon that account totally excluded from making a part likewise of their neat revenue. Though the whole goods in a merchant's shop must by no means be placed in his own stock reserved for immediate consumption, they may in that of other people, who, from a revenue derived from other funds, may regularly replace their value to him, together with its profits, without occasioning any diminution either of his capital or of theirs" (ibid).

And so we learn here that:

1) Just as the fixed capital, and the circulating capital required for its reproduction (he forgets the function) and maintenance, are totally excluded from the net revenue of every individual capitalist, which can consist only of his profit, so is the circulating capital em- ployed in the production of articles of consumption. Hence that por- tion of his commodity product which replaces his capital cannot re- solve itself into constituents of value which form any revenue for him.

2) The circulating capital of every individual capitalist constitutes a part of society's circulating capital, the same as every individual fixed capital.

3) The circulating capital of society, while representing only the sum of the individual circulating capitals, has a character different from that of the circulating capital of every individual capitalist. The latter circulating capital can never form a part of his own revenue; how- ever a portion of the first-named circulating capital (namely that consisting of consumable goods) may at the same time form a portion of the revenue of society or, as he has expressed it above, it must not nec- essarily reduce the net revenue of society by a portion of the annual product. Indeed, that which Adam Smith here calls circulating capi- tal consists of the annually produced commodity capital, which is thrown into circulation annually by the capitalists producing articles of consumption. This entire annual commodity product of theirs con- sists of consumable goods and therefore forms the fund in which the net revenues of society (including wages) are realised or expended. Instead of choosing for his illustration the goods in a merchant's shop,



**[p. 366]**

Adam Smith should have selected the masses of goods stored away in the warehouses of the industrial capitalists.

Now if Adam Smith had welded together the snatches of thought which forced themselves upon him at first in the study of the repro- duction of that which he calls fixed, and now of that which he calls circulating capital, he would have arrived at the following result:

I. The annual product of society consists of two departments; one of them comprises the means of production, the other the articles of consumption. Each must be treated separately.

II. The aggregate value ofthat part of the annual product which consists of means of production is divided as follows: One portion of the value represents only the value of the means of production consumed in the fabrication of these means of production; it is but capital value re-appearing in a renewed form; another portion is equal to the value of the capital laid out in labour power, or equal to the sum of the wages paid by the capitalists in this sphere of production. Finally, a third portion of the value is the source of profits, including ground rent, of the industrial capitalists in this category.

The first constituent part, according to Adam Smith the repro- duced portion of the fixed capital of all the individual capitals employed in this first department, is "totally excluded from making any part of the neat revenue", either of the individual capitalist or of society. It always functions as capital, never as revenue. To that extent the "fixed capital" of every individual capitalist is in no way different from the fixed capital of society. But the other portions of the value of the an- nual product of society consisting of means of production — portions of value which therefore exist in aliquot parts of this aggregate quan- tity of means of production — form indeed simultaneously revenues for all agents engaged in this production, wages for the labourers, profits and rents for the capitalists. But they form capital, not revenue,ybr so- ciety, although the annual product of society consists only of the sums of the products of the individual capitalists who belong to that so- ciety. By nature they are generally fit to function only as means of production, and even those which, if need be, might be able to func- tion as articles of consumption are intended for service as raw or aux- iliary materials of new production. But they serve as such — hence as capital — not in the hands of their producers, but in those of their users, namely:

III. The capitalists of the second department, the direct producers of articles of consumption. They replace for these capitalists the capital



**[p. 367]**

consumed in the production of articles of consumption (so far as this capital is not converted into labour power, and hence is not the sum of the wages of the labourers of this second department), while this consumed capital, which now exists in the form of articles of con- sumption in the hands of the capitalists producing them, in its turn — socially speaking— forms the consumption fund in which the capitalists and labourers of the first department realise their revenue.

If Adam Smith had continued his analysis to this point but little would have been lacking for the solution of the whole problem. He al- most hit the nail on the head, for he had already observed that cer- tain value parts oï one kind (means of production) of the commodity capitals constituting the total annual product of society indeed form revenue for the individual labourers and capitalists engaged in their production, but do not form a constituent part of the revenue of so- ciety; while a value part of the other kind (articles of consumption), al- though representing capital value for its individual owners, the capi- talists engaged in this sphere of investment, is only a part of the social revenue.

But this much is evident from the foregoing: First: Although the social capital is only equal to the sum of the in- dividual capitals, and for this reason the annual commodity product (or commodity capital) of society is equal to the sum of commodity products of these individual capitals; and although therefore the anal- ysis of the value of the commodities into its component parts, valid for every individual commodity capital, must also be valid for the commodity capital of all society — and actually proves valid in the end — the form of appearance which these component parts assume in the aggregate social process of reproduction is different.

Second: Even on the basis of simple reproduction there takes place not merely a production of wages (variable capital) and surplus value, but direct production of new constant capital value, although the working day consists of only two parts, one in which the labourer replaces the variable capital, in fact producing an equivalent for the purchase of his labour power, and another in which he produces sur- plus value (profit, rent, etc.).

The daily labour which is expended in the reproduction of means of production — and whose value is composed of wages and surplus value — realises itself in new means of production which replace the constant part of capital laid out in the production of articles of con- sumption.

