---
Volume: 36
Document_Title: "2. Adam Smith Resolves Exchange Value into v + s "
Page_Range: "376-379"
---

# 2. Adam Smith Resolves Exchange Value into v + s 



**[p. 368]**

The main difficulties, the greater part of which has been solved in the preceding text, are not encountered in studying accumulation but simple reproduction. For this reason, Adam Smith (Book II) and Quesnay {Tableau économique) before him make simple reproduction their starting-point, whenever it is a question of the movement of the annual product of society and its reproduction through circulation.

2. ADAM SMITH RESOLVES EXCHANGE VALUE INTO V + S

Adam Smith's dogma that the price or "EXCHANGEABLE VALUE" a of any single commodity — and therefore of all commodities in the ag- gregate constituting the annual product of society (he rightly assumes capitalist production everywhere)—is made up of three "COMPONENT PARTS" a or "RESOLVES ITSELF INTO" a wages, profit, and rent, can be reduced to this: that the commodity value = v + s, i. e., is equal to the value of the advanced variable capital plus the surplus value. And we may undertake this reduction of profit and rent to a common unit called s with the express permission of Adam Smith, as shown by the follow- ing quotations, in which we at first leave aside all minor points, i. e., any apparent or real deviation from the dogma that commodity value consists exclusively of those elements which we call v + s.

In manufacture:

That portion of the capital (STOCK) which is laid out

Adam Smith says explicitly in the chapter just quoted:

[^1]: "The value which the workmen add to the materials resolves itself into two parts, of which the one pays their wages, the other the profits of their employer upon the whole stock of materials and wages which he advanced" (Book I, Ch. 6, p. 41).

[^2]: "Though the manufacturer //the manufacturing worker// has his wages advanced to him by his master, he, in reality, costs him no expense, the value of those wages being generally restored" (RESERVED), "together with a profit, in the improved value of the subject upon which his labour is bestowed" (Book II, Ch. 3, p. 221).

[^3]: "in maintaining productive hands after having served in the function of a capital to him //the employer// "constitutes a revenue to them" //the labourers// (Book II, Ch. 3, p. 223).

[^4]: a In the original, these English words are given in parentheses after their German equiv- alent.





**[p. 369]**

"The whole annual produce of the land and labour of every country NATURALLY a

divides itself into two parts. One of them, and frequently the largest, is, in the first place, destined for replacing a capital, or for renewing the provisions, materials, and fin- ished work, which had been withdrawn from a capital; the other for constituting a rev- enue either to the owner of this capital, as the profit of his slock; or to some other per- son, as the rent of his land" (p. 222).

Only one part of the capital, so Adam Smith has just informed us, forms at the same time a revenue for somebody, namely that which is invested in the purchase of productive hands. This part — the vari- able capital — first "serves in the function of a capital" in the hands of its employer and for him and then it "constitutes a revenue" for the productive labourer himself. The capitalist transforms a portion of his capital value into labour power and precisely thereby into vari- able capital; it is only due to this transformation that not alone this portion of capital but his entire capital functions as industrial capital. The labourer—the seller of labour power — receives its value in the form of wages. In his hands labour power is but a saleable commod- ity, a commodity by the sale of which he lives, which therefore is the sole source of his revenue; labour power functions as a variable capital only in the hands of its buyer, the capitalist, and the capitalist ad- vances its purchase price only apparently, since its value has been previously supplied to him by the labourer.

After Adam Smith has thus shown us that the value of a product in manufacture = v + s (s standing for the profit of the capitalist), he tells us that in agriculture the labourers besides

The fact that the rent passes into the hands of the landlord is wholly immaterial for the question under consideration. Before it can pass into his hands, it must be in those of the farmer, i. e., of the indus- trial capitalist. It must form a component part of the value of the prod- uct before it becomes a revenue for anyone. Rent as well as profit are therefore, according to Adam Smith himself, but component parts of surplus value and these the productive labourer reproduces contin- ually together with his own wages, i. e., with the value of the vari- able capital. Hence rent and profit are parts of the surplus value s,

[^1]: "the reproduction of a value equal to their own consumption, or to the " //vari- able// "capital which employs them, together with its owners' profits" — furthermore, "over and above the capital of the farmer and all its profits regularly oc- casion the reproduction of the rent of the landlord" (Book II, Ch. 5, p. 243).

[^2]: a In the original, this English word is given in parentheses after its German equivalent.



and thus, with Adam Smith, the price of all commodities resolves it- self into v + s.

The dogma that the price of all commodities (hence also of the an- nual commodity product) resolves itself into wages plus profit plus ground rent, assumes even in the intermittent esoteric constituents of Smith's work the form that the value of every commodity, hence also that of society's annual commodity product, = v + s, = the capital value laid out in labour power and continually reproduced by the la- bourers, plus the surplus value added by the labourers through their work.

This final result of Adam Smith reveals to us at the same time — see further down — the source of his one-sided analysis of the compo- nent parts into which the value of a commodity resolves itself. The circumstance that they are at the same time different sources of reve- nue for different classes engaged in production has nothing to do with the determination of the magnitude of each of these component parts and of the sum of their values.

All kinds of quid pro quo's are jumbled together when Adam Smith says:

1 ) All members of society not directly engaged in reproduction, with or without labour, can obtain their share of the annual commod- ity product — in other words, their articles of consumption — primarily only out of the hands of those classes to which the product first accrues — productive labourers, industrial capitalists, and land- lords. To diat extent their revenues are materially derived from wages (of the productive labourers), profit, and rent, and appear there- fore as derivative vis-à-vis those primary revenues. But on the other hand the recipients of these revenues, derived in this sense, draw them by virtue of their social functions — as a king, priest, professor, prosti- tute, soldier, etc., and they may, therefore, regard these functions as the original sources of their revenue.

2) —and here Adam Smith's ridiculous blunder reaches its climax. After starting by correctly defining the component parts of the value of the commodities and the sum of the value product incorporated in them, and then demonstrating how these component parts form so

[^1]: "Wages, profit, and rent, are the three original sources of all revenue as well as of all exchangeable value. All other revenue is ultimately derived from some one or other of these" (Book I, Ch. 6, p. 43).



