---
Volume: 36
Document_Title: "3. The Constant Part of Capital "
Page_Range: "379-384"
---

# 3. The Constant Part of Capital 



**[p. 371]**

many different sources of revenue,39' after thus deriving the revenues from the value, he proceeds in the opposite direction — and this re- mains the predominant conception with him — and turns the reve- nues from "COMPONENT PARTS" a into "original sources of all exchange- able value", thereby throwing the doors wide open to vulgar econ- omy. (See our Roscher.b)52

3. THE CONSTANT PART OF CAPITAL

Let us now see how Adam Smith tries to spirit the constant part of the capital value away from the commodity value.

"In the price of corn, for example, one part pays the rent of the landlord."

The origin of this constituent of value has no more to do with the circumstance that it is paid to the landlord and forms a revenue for him in the shape of rent than the origin of the other constituents of value has to do with the fact that as profit and wages they form sources of revenue.

This entire price, i. e., the determination of its magnitude, is abso- lutely independent of its distribution among three kinds of people.

[^1]: "Another [part] pays the wages or maintenance of the labourers" //"and labour- ing cattle!" he adds// "employed in producing it, and the third pays the profit of the farmer. These three parts seem" //they seem indeed// "either immediately or ulti- mately to make up the whole price of corn."40'

[^2]: "A fourth part, it may perhaps be thought, is necessary for replacing the stock of the farmer, or for compensating the wear and tear of his labouring cattle, and other in-

[^3]: 39) I reproduce this sentence verbatim from the manuscript, although it seems to contradict, in its present context, both what precedes and immediately follows. This apparent contradiction is resolved further down in No. 4: Capital and Revenue in Adam Smith.— F.E.

[^4]: 401 We ignore the fact that Adam Smith was here particularly unfortunate in the choice of his example. The value of the corn resolves itself into wages, profit, and rent only because the food consumed by the labouring cattle is depicted as wages of the la- bouring cattle, and the labouring cattle as wage labourers, so that the wage labourer on his part is also depicted as labouring cattle. //Added from Manuscript 11.//

[^5]: a In the original, these English words are given in parentheses after their German equi- valent. - b W. Roscher, System der Volkswirtschaft. Band I: Die Grundlagen der Natio- nalökonomie. Dritte, vermehrte und verbesserte Auflage, Stuttgart und Augsburg, 1858.





**[p. 372]**

struments of husbandry. But it must be considered that the price of any instrument of husbandry, such as a labouring horse, is itself made up of the same three parts: the rent of the land upon which he is reared, the labour of tending and rearing him, and the profits of the farmer who advances both the rent of this land, and the wages of this la- bour. Though the price of the corn, therefore, may pay the price as well as the mainte- nance of the horse, the whole price still resolves itself either immediately or ultimately into the same three parts of rent, labour" //he means wages//, "and profit" (Book I, Ch. 6, p. 42).

This is verbatim all that Adam Smith has to say in support of his as- tonishing doctrine. His proof consists simply in the repetition of the same assertion. He admits, for instance, that the price of corn does not only consist of v + s, but also of the price of the means of produc- tion consumed in the production of corn, hence of a capital value not invested in labour power by the farmer. But, he says, the prices of all these means of production resolve themselves into v + s, the same as the price of corn. He forgets, however, to add: and, moreover, into the prices of the means of production consumed in their own creation. He refers us from one branch of production to another, and from that to a third. The contention that the entire price of commodities re- solves itself "immediately" or "ULTIMATELY" a into v + s would not be a hollow subterfuge only if he were able to demonstrate that the com- modities whose price resolves itself immediately into c (price of con- sumed means of production) + v + s, are ultimately compensated by commodities which completely replace those "consumed means of production", and which are themselves produced by the mere outlay of variable capital, i. e., by a mere investment of capital in labour pow- er. The price of these last commodity products would then be im- mediately v + s. Consequently the price of the former, c + v + s, where c stands for the constant part of capital, would also be ultimate- ly resolvable into v + s. Adam Smith himself did not believe that he had furnished such a proof by his example of the collectors of SCOTCH PEBBLES'3, who, according to him, 1) do not generate surplus value of any description, but produce only their own wages, and 2) do not em- ploy any means of production (they do, however, employ them, such as baskets, sacks, and other containers for carrying the pebbles).

We have already seen above that Adam Smith himself later on overthrows his own theory, without however being conscious of his contradictions. But their source is to be found precisely in his scien-

[^1]: a In the original, this English word is given in parentheses after its German equiva- lent. - b See this volume, p. 360, footnote38).





**[p. 373]**

tific premises. The capital converted into labour produces a greater value than its own. How? Says Adam Smith: by the labourers impart- ing during the process of production to the things on which they work a value which forms not only an equivalent for their own purchase price, but also a surplus value (profit and rent) apportioned not to them but to their employers. But that is all they accomplish, and all they can accomplish. And what is true of the industrial labour of one day is true of the labour set in motion by the entire capitalist class during one year. Hence the aggregate mass of the annual value pro- duced by society can resolve itself only into v + s, into an equivalent by which the labourers replace the capital value expended for the purchase of their own labour power, and into an additional value which they must deliver over and above this to their employers. But these two elements of commodity value form at the same time sources of revenue for the various classes engaged in reproduction: the first is the source of wages, the revenue of the labourers; the second that of surplus value, a portion of which is retained by the industrial capital- ist in the form of profit, while another is given up by him as rent, the revenue of the landlord. Where, then, should yet another part of value come from, when the annual value product contains no other elements than v + s? We are proceeding here from simple reproduc- tion. Since the entire quantity of annual labour resolves itself into la- bour needed for the reproduction of the capital value laid out in la- bour power, and into labour needed for the creation of surplus value, where should the-labour for the production of a capital value not laid out in labour power come from?

The case is as follows:

1) Adam Smith determines the value of a commodity by the amount of labour which the wage labourer ADDsa to the subject of la- bour. He says literally: "to the materials", since he is dealing with manufacture, which itself is working up products of labour. But this does not alter the matter. The value which the labourer adds to a thing (and this "ADDS" is the expression of Adam Smith) is entirely independent of whether or not this object to which value is added had itself any value before this addition. The labourer therefore produces a value in the form of a commodity. This, according to Adam Smith, is partly an equivalent for his wages, and this part, then, is deter- mined by the magnitude of value of his wages; depending on that mag-

[^1]: a In the original, this English word is given in parentheses after its German equiva- lent.





**[p. 374]**

nitude he has to add labour in order to produce or reproduce a value equal to that of his wages. On the other hand the labourer adds more labour over and above the limit so drawn, and this creates surplus value for the capitalist employing him. Whether this surplus value re- mains entirely in the hands of the capitalist or parts of it are yielded by him to third persons, does not in the least alter either the qualita- tive (that it is at all surplus value) or the quantitative (magnitude) determination of the surplus value added by the wage labourer. It is value the same as any other portion of the value of the product, but it differs in that the labourer has not received any equivalent for it, nor will receive any later on, in that, on the contrary, this value is ap- propriated by the capitalist without any equivalent. The total value of a commodity is determined by the quantity of labour expended by the labourer in its production; one portion of this total value is deter- mined by the fact that it is equal to the value of the wages, i. e., an equivalent for them. The second part, the surplus value, is, therefore, necessarily likewise determined as equal to the total value of the prod- uct minus that part of its value which is equivalent to the wages; hence equal to the excess of the value produced in the making of the commodity over that part of the value contained in it which is an equivalent for his wages.

2) That which is true of a commodity produced in some individ- ual industrial establishment by any individual labourer is true of the annual product of all branches of business as a whole. That which is true of the day's work of some individual productive labourer is true of the year's work set in motion by the entire class of productive la- bourers. It "fixes" (Adam Smith's expression) in the annual product a total value determined by the quantity of the annual labour expend- ed, and this total value resolves itself into one portion determined by that part of the annual labour wherewith the working class creates an equivalent of its annual wages, in fact, these wages themselves; and into another portion determined by the additional annual labour by which the labourer creates surplus value for the capitalist class. The annual value product contained in the annual product consists there- fore of but two elements: namely, the equivalent of the annual wages received by the working class, and the surplus value annually provid- ed for the capitalist class. Now, the annual wages are the revenue of the working class, and the annual quantity of surplus value the reve- nue of the capitalist class; hence both of them represent the relative shares in the annual fund for consumption (this view is correct when



**[p. 375]**

describing simple reproduction) and are realised in it. There is, then, no room left anywhere for the constant capital value, for the repro- duction of the capital functioning in the form of means of production. And Adam Smith states explicitly in the introduction to his work that all portions of the value of commodities which serve as revenue coin- cide with the annual product of labour intended for the social fund for consumption:

"To explain in what has consisted the revenue of the great body of the people, or what has been the nature of those funds, which have SUPPLIED their annual consumption, is the object of these first Four Books" (p. 12).

And in the very first sentence of the introduction we read:

"The annual labour of every nation is the fund, which originally supplies it with all the necessaries and conveniences of life which it annually consumes, [and] which con- sists always either in the immediate produce of that labour, or in what is purchased with that produce from other nations" (p. 11).

Now Adam Smith's first mistake consists in equating the value of the annual product to the newly produced annual value. The latter is only the product of labour of the past year; the former includes, besides, all elements of value consumed in the making of the annual product, but which were produced in the preceding and partly even earlier years: means of production whose value merely re-appears — which, as far as their value is concerned, have been neither produced nor reproduced by the labour expended in the past year. By this confusion Adam Smith spirits away the constant portion of the value of the annual product. This confusion rests on another error in his fundamental conception: he does not distinguish the two-fold nature of labour itself: of labour which creates value by expending labour power, and of labour as concrete, useful work which creates articles of use (use values). The total quantity of the commodities fabricated annually, in other words, the total annual product is the product of the useful labour ac- tive during the past year; it is only due to the fact that socially em- ployed labour was spent in a ramified system of useful kinds of labour that all these commodities exist; it is due to this fact alone that the value of the means of production consumed in the production of com- modities and re-appearing in a new natural form is preserved in their total value. The total annual product, then, is the result of the useful labour expended during the year; but only a part of the value of the

[^1]: a In the original, this English word is given in parentheses after its German equivalent.



