---
Volume: 36
Document_Title: "4. Capital and Revenue in Adam Smith "
Page_Range: "384-391"
---

# 4. Capital and Revenue in Adam Smith 

annual product has been created during the year; this part is the an- nual value product, in which the quantity of labour set in motion dur- ing the year is represented.

Hence, if Adam Smith says in the passage just cited:

"The annual labour of every nation is the fund which originally supplies it with all the necessaries and conveniences of life which it annually consumes, etc.",

he takes the one-sided standpoint of solely useful labour, which has indeed given all these means of subsistence their consumable form. But he forgets that this was impossible without the assistance of in- struments and subjects of labour supplied by former years, and that, therefore, the "annual labour", while it created value, did not create all the value of the products fabricated by it; that the value newly produced is smaller than the value of the product.

While we cannot reproach Adam Smith for going in this analysis no farther than all his successors (although a step in the right direc- tion could already be discerned among the Physiocrats), he subse- quently gets lost in a chaos and this mainly because his "esoteric" conception of the value of commodities in general is constantly con- travened by exoteric conceptions, which on the whole prevail with him, and yet his scientific instinct permits the esoteric standpoint to re-appear from time to time.

That portion of the value of every commodity (and therefore also of the annual product) which is but an equivalent of the wages is equal to the capital advanced by the capitalist for labour power, i. e., is equal to the variable portion of the total capital advanced. The cap- italist recovers this portion of the capital value through a portion of the newly produced value of the commodities supplied by the wage labourers. Whether the variable capital is advanced in the sense that the capitalist pays the labourer in money for his share in a product which is not yet ready for sale or which, though ready, has not yet been sold by the capitalist, or whether he pays him with money al- ready obtained by the sale of commodities previously supplied by the labourer, or whether he has drawn this money in advance by means of credit — in all these cases the capitalist expends variable capital, which passes into the hands of the labourers in the form of money, and on the other hand he possesses the equivalent of this capital value

[^1]: 4. CAPITAL AND REVENUE IN ADAM SMITH





**[p. 377]**

in that portion of the value of his commodities in which the labourer has produced anew his share of its total value, in other words, in which he has produced the value of his own wages. Instead of giving him this portion of the value in the bodily form of his own product, the capitalist pays it to him in money. For the capitalist the variable portion of his advanced capital value now exists in the form of com- modities, while the labourer has received the equivalent for his sold labour power in the form of money.

Now while that portion of the capital advanced by the capitalist, which has been converted by the purchase of labour power into vari- able capital, functions in the process of production itself as operative labour power and by the expenditure of this power is produced anew as a new value, in the form of commodities, i.e., is reproduced — hence a reproduction, or new production, of advanced capital val- ue— the labourer spends the value, or price, of his sold labour power on means of subsistence, on means for the reproduction of his labour power. An amount of money equal to the variable capital forms his income, hence his revenue, which lasts only so long as he can sell his labour power to the capitalist.

The commodity of the wage labourer — his own labour power — serves as a commodity only to the extent that it is incorporated in the capital of the capitalist, acts as capital; on the other hand the capital expended by the capitalist as money capital in the purchase of labour power functions as a revenue in the hands of the seller of labour pow- er, the wage labourer.

Various processes of circulation and production intermingle here, which Adam Smith does not distinguish.

First: Acts pertaining to the process of circulation. The labourer sells his commodity — labour power — to the capitalist; the money with which the capitalist buys it is from his point of view money in- vested for the production of surplus value, hence money capital; it is not spent but advanced. (This is the real meaning of "advance" — the avance of the Physiocrats — no matter where the capitalist gets the money. Every value which the capitalist pays out for the purposes of the production process is advanced from his point of view, regardless of whether this takes place before or post festum; it is advanced to the process of production itself.) The same takes place here as in every other sale of commodities: The seller gives away a use value (in this case his labour power) and receives its value (realises its price) in

money; the buyer gives away his money and receives in return the commodity itself—in this case labour power.

Second: In the process of production the purchased labour power now forms a part of the functioning capital, and the labourer himself serves here merely as a special natural form of this capital, distin- guished from its elements existing in the natural form of means of pro- duction. During the process, by expending his labour power, the la- bourer adds value to the means of production which he converts into products equal to the value of his labour power (exclusive of surplus value); he therefore reproduces for the capitalist in the form of com- modities that portion of his capital which has been, or has to be, ad- vanced by him for wages, produces for him an equivalent of the lat- ter; hence he produces for the capitalist that capital which the latter can "advance" once more for the purchase of labour power.

Third: In the sale of a commodity one portion of its selling price re- places the variable capital advanced by the capitalist, whereby on the one hand he is enabled anew to buy labour power, and the labourer on the other hand to sell it anew.

In all purchases and sales of commodities — so far as only these transactions are under discussion — it is quite immaterial what be- comes of the proceeds the seller receives for his commodities, and what becomes of the bought articles of use in the hands of the buyer. Hence, so far as the mere process of circulation is concerned, it is quite immaterial that the labour power bought by the capitalist re- produces capital value for him, and that on the other hand the money received by the labourer as the purchase price of his labour power constitutes his revenue. The magnitude of value of the labourer's arti- cle of commerce, his labour power, is not affected either by its form- ing "revenue" for him or by the fact that the use of this article of com- merce by the buyer reproduces capital value for this buyer.

Since the value of the labour power — i.e., the adequate selling price of this commodity — is determined by the quantity of labour re- quired for its reproduction, and this quantity of labour itself is here determined by that needed for the production of the necessary means of subsistence of the labourer, hence for the maintenance of his exist- ence, the wages become the revenue on which the labourer has to live.

It is entirely wrong, when Adam Smith says (p. 223):

[^1]: "That portion of the stock which is laid out in maintaining productive hands after





**[p. 379]**

having served in the function of a capital to him" //the capitalist// "constitutes a rev- enue to them" //the labourers//.

The money with which the capitalist pays for the labour power pur- chased by him "serves in the function of a capital to him", since he thereby incorporates labour power in the material constituents of his capital and thus enables his capital to function altogether as produc- tive capital. We must make this distinction: The labour power is a commodity, not capital, in the hands of the labourer, and it consti- tutes for him a revenue so long as he can continuously repeat its sale; it functions as capital after its sale, in the hands of the capitalist, during the process of production itself. That which here serves twice is labour power: as a commodity which is sold at its value, in the hands of the labourer; as a power-producing value and use value, in the hands of the capitalist who has bought it. But the labourer does not receive the money from the capitalist until after he has given him the use of his labour power, after it has already been realised in the value of the product of labour. The capitalist possesses this value before he pays for it. Hence it is not the money which functions twice: first, as the money form of the variable capital, and then as wages. On the con- trary it is labour power which has functioned twice: first, as a commod- ity in the sale of labour power (in stipulating the amount of wages to be paid, money acts merely as an ideal measure of value and need not even be in the hands of the capitalist); secondly, in the process of pro- duction, in which it functions as capital, i. e., as an element, in the hands of the capitalist, creating use value and value. Labour power already supplied, in the form of commodities, the equivalent which is to be paid to the labourer, before it is paid by the capitalist to the la- bourer in money form. Hence the labourer himself creates the fund out of which the capitalist pays him. But this is not all.

The money which the labourer receives is spent by him in order to maintain his labour power, or — viewing the capitalist class and the working class in their totality — in order to preserve for the capitalist the instrument by means of which alone he can remain a capitalist.

Thus the continuous purchase and sale of labour power perpetu- ates on the one hand labour power as an element of capital, by virtue of which the latter appears as the creator of commodities, articles of use having value, by virtue of which, furthermore, that portion of cap- ital which buys labour power is continually restored by labour pow- er's own product, and consequently the labourer himself constantly



**[p. 380]**

creates the fund of capital out of which he is paid. On the other hand the constant sale of labour power becomes the source, ever renewing itself, of the maintenance of the labourer, and hence his labour power appears as that faculty through which he secures the revenue by which he lives. Revenue in this case signifies nothing else than an ap- propriation of values effected by ever repeated sales of a commodity (labour power), these values serving only for the continual reproduc- tion of the commodity to be sold. And to this extent Smith is right when he says that the portion of the value of the product created by the labourer himself, for which the capitalist pays him an equivalent in the form of wages, becomes the source of revenue for the labourer. But this does not alter the nature or magnitude of this portion of the value of the commodity any more than the value of the means of pro- duction is changed by the fact that they function as capital values, or the nature and length of a straight line are changed by the fact that it serves as the base of some triangle or as the diameter of some ellipse. The value of labour power remains quite as independently def- inite as that of those means of production. This portion of the value of a commodity neither consists of revenue as an independent factor constituting this value part nor does it resolve itself into revenue. While this new value constantly reproduced by the labourer consti- tutes a source of revenue for him, his revenue conversely is not a consti- tuent of the new value produced by him. The magnitude of the share paid to him of the new value created by him determines the value magnitude of his revenue, not vice versa. The fact that this part of the newly created value forms a revenue for him, indicates merely what becomes of it, shows the character of its application, and has no more to do with its formation than with that of any other value. If my re- ceipts are ten talers a week that changes nothing in the nature of the value of the ten talers, nor in the magnitude of their value. As in the case of every other commodity so in that of labour power its value is determined by the amount of labour necessary for its reproduction; that the amount of this labour is determined by the value of the la- bourer's necessary means of subsistence, hence is equal to the labour required for the reproduction of the very conditions of his life — that is peculiar for this commodity (labour power), but no more peculiar than the fact that the value of labouring cattle is determined by the value of the means of subsistence necessary for its maintenance, i. e., by the amount of human labour necessary to produce these means of subsistence.



**[p. 381]**

But it is this category of "revenue" which is to blame for all the harmful confusion in Adam Smith. The various kinds of revenue form with him the "COMPONENT PARTS"* of the annually produced, newly created commodity value, while, vice versa, the two parts into which this commodity value resolves itself for the capitalist—the equivalent of his variable capital advanced in the form of money when purchas- ing labour, and the other portion of the value, the surplus value, which likewise belongs to him but did not cost him anything — form sources of revenue. The equivalent of the variable capital is advanced again for labour power and to that extent forms a revenue for the la- bourer in the shape of wages; since the other portion, the surplus value, does not serve to replace any advance of capital for the capital- ist, it may be spent by him in articles of consumption (both necessities and luxuries) or consumed as revenue instead of forming capital value of any description. Commodity value itself is the preliminary condition of this revenue, and its component parts differ, from the point of view of the capitalist, only to the extent that they constitute either an equivalent/or or an excess over the variable capital value ad- vanced by him. Both of them consist of nothing but labour power ex- pended during the production of commodities, rendered fluent in la- bour. They consist of outlay, not income or revenue — of outlay of la- bour.

In accordance with the quid pro quo, by which the revenue becomes the source of commodity value instead of the commodity value being the source of revenue, the value of commodities now has the appear- ance of being "composed" of the various kinds of revenue; these reve- nues are determined independently of one another, and the total value of commodities is determined by the addition of the values of these revenues. But now the question is how to determine the value of each of these revenues which are supposed to form commodity value. In the case of wages it can be done, for wages represent the value of their commodity, labour power, and this value is determinable (the same as that of all other commodities) by the labour required for the reproduction of this commodity. But surplus value, or, as Adam Smith has it, its two forms, profit and rent, how are they determined? Here Adam Smith has but empty phrases to offer. At one time he rep- resents wages and surplus value (or wages and profit) as component parts of the value, or price, of commodities; at another, and almost

[^1]: After these English words Marx gives their German equivalent.





**[p. 382]**

in the same breath, as parts into which the price of commodities "RE- SOLVES ITSELF"3; but this means on the contrary that the commodity value is the thing given first and that different parts of this given value fall in the form of different revenues to the share of different persons engaged in the production process. This is by no means iden- tical with the notion that value is composed of these three "compo- nent parts". If I determine the lengths of three different straight lines independently, and then form out of these three lines as "component parts" a fourth straight line equal to their sum, it is by no means the same procedure as when I have some given straight line before me and for some purpose divide it, "resolve" it, so to say, into three differ- ent parts. In the first case, the length of the line changes throughout with the lengths of the three lines whose sum it is; in the second case, the lengths of the three parts of the line are from the outset limited by the fact that they are parts of a line of the given length.

As a matter of fact, if we adhere to that part of Smith's exposition which is correct, namely, that the value newly created by the annual labour and contained in the annual social commodity product (the same as in every individual commodity, or every daily, weekly, etc., product) is equal to the value of the variable capital advanced (i. e., to the value part intended to purchase new labour power) plus the surplus value which the capitalist can realise in means of his individ- ual consumption — simple reproduction being assumed and other circumstances remaining the same; if we furthermore keep in mind that Adam Smith lumps together labour, so far as it creates value and is an expenditure of labour power, and labour, so far as it creates use value, i.e., is expended in a useful, appropriate manner — then the entire conception amounts to this: The value of every commodity is the product of labour; hence this is also true of the value of the prod- uct of the annual labour or of the value of society's annual commod- ity product. But since all labour resolves itself 1) into necessary la- bour time, in which the labourer reproduces merely an equivalent for the capital advanced in the purchase of his labour power, and 2) into surplus labour, by which he supplies the capitalist with a value for which the latter does not give any equivalent, hence surplus value, it follows that all commodity value can resolve itself only into these two component parts, so that ultimately it forms a revenue for the work-

[^1]: a In the original, these English words are given in parentheses after their German equiv- alent.



