---
Volume: 36
Document_Title: "5. Recapitulation "
Page_Range: "391-396"
---

# 5. Recapitulation 



**[p. 383]**

ing class in the form of wages, and for the capitalist class in the form of surplus value. As for the constant capital value, i. e., the value of the means of production consumed in the creation of the annual product, it cannot be explained how this value gets into that of the new prod- uct (except for the phrase that the capitalist charges the buyer with it in the sale of his goods), but ULTIMATELY,a since the means of produc- tion are themselves products of labour, this portion of value can, in turn, consist only of an equivalent of the variable capital and of sur- plus value, of a product of necessary labour and of surplus labour. The fact that the values of these means of production function in the hands of their employers as capital values does not prevent them from having "originally", in the hands of others if we go to the bottom of the matter—even though at some previous time — resolved them- selves into the same two portions of value, hence into two different sources of revenue.

One point herein is correct: that the matter presents itself differ- ently in the movement of social capital, i. e., of the totality of individ- ual capitals, from the way it presents itself for each individual capi- tal considered separately, hence from the standpoint of each individ- ual capitalist. For the latter the value of commodities resolves itself into 1) a constant element (a fourth one, as Adam Smith says), and 2) the sum of wages and surplus value, or wages, profit, and ground rent. But from the point of view of society the fourth element of Adam Smith, the constant capital value, disappears.

The absurd formula that the three revenues, wages, profit, and rent, form the three "component parts" of the value of commodities originates with Adam Smith from the more plausible idea that the value of commodities "RESOLVES ITSELF" b into these three component parts. This is likewise incorrect, even granted that the value of com- modities is divisible only into an equivalent of the consumed labour power and the surplus value created by it. But the mistake rests here too on a deeper, a true foundation. Capitalist production is based on the fact that the productive labourer sells his own labour power, as

[^1]: 5. RECAPITULATION

[^2]: " In the original, this English word is given after its German equivalent. - b In the original, these English words are given before their German equivalent.



his commodity, to the capitalist, in whose hands it then functions merely as an element of his productive capital. This transaction, which pertains to circulation — the sale and purchase of labour power — not only inaugurates the process of production, but also determines implicitly its specific character. The production of a use value, and even that of a commodity (for this can be carried on also by independ- ent productive labourers), is here only a means of producing abso- lute and relative surplus value for a capitalist. For this reason we have seen in the analysis of the process of production that the production of absolute and relative surplus value determines 1) the duration of the daily labour process and 2) the entire social and technical configura- tion of the capitalist process of production. Within this process there is realised the distinction between the mere conservation of value (of the constant capital value), the actual reproduction of advanced value (equivalent of labour power), and the production of surplus value, i. e., of value for which the capitalist has neither advanced an equivalent previously nor will advance one post festum.

The appropriation of surplus value — a value in excess of the equiv- alent of the value advanced by the capitalist — although inaugurat- ed by the purchase and sale of labour power, is an act performed within the process of production itself, and forms an essential element of it.

The introductory act, which constitutes an act of circulation — the purchase and sale of labour power — itself rests on a distribution of the elements of production which preceded and presupposed the dis- tribution of the social products, namely on the separation of labour pow- er as a commodity of the labourer from the means of production as the property of non-labourers.

However this appropriation of surplus value, or this separation of the production of value into a reproduction of advanced value and a production of new value (surplus value) which does not replace any equivalent, does not alter in any way the substance of value itself or the nature of the production of value. The substance of value is and remains nothing but expended labour power — labour independent of the specific, useful character of this labour—and the production of value is nothing but the process of this expenditure. A serf for instance expends his labour power for six days, labours for six days, and the fact of this expenditure as such is not altered by the circumstance that he may be working three days for himself, on his own field, and three days for his lord, on the field of the latter. Both his voluntary labour



**[p. 385]**

for himself and his forced labour for his lord are equally labour; so far as this labour is considered with reference to the values, or to the use- ful articles created by it, there is no difference in his six days of labour. The difference refers merely to the different conditions by which the expenditure of his labour power during both halves of his labour time of six days is called forth. The same applies to the necessary and sur- plus labour of the wage labourer.

The process of production expires in the commodity. The fact that labour power was expended in its fabrication now appears as a mate- rial property of the commodity, as the property of possessing value. The magnitude of this value is measured by the amount of labour ex- pended; the value of a commodity resolves itself into nothing else be- sides and is not composed of anything else. If I have drawn a straight line of definite length, I have, to start with, "produced" a straight line (true, only symbolically, as I know beforehand) by resort to the art of drawing, which is practised in accordance with certain rules (laws) independent of myself. If I divide this line into three sections (which may correspond to a certain problem), every one of these sec- tions remains a straight line, and the entire line, whose sections they are, does not resolve itself by this division into anything different from a straight line, for instance into some kind of curve. Neither can I di- vide a line of a given length in such a way that the sum of its parts is greater than the undivided line itself; hence the length of the undivid- ed line is not determined by any arbitrarily fixed lengths of its parts. Vice versa, the relative lengths of these parts are limited from the out- set by the size of the line whose parts they are.

In this a commodity produced by a capitalist does not differ in any way from that produced by an independent labourer or by communi- ties of working people or by slaves. But in the present case the entire product of labour, as well as its entire value, belongs to the capitalist. Like every other producer he has to convert his commodity by sale into money before he can manipulate it further; he must convert it into the form of the universal equivalent.

Let us examine the commodity product before it is converted into money. It belongs wholly to the capitalist. On the other hand as a useful product of labour, a use value, it is entirely the product of a past labour process. Not so its value. One portion of this value is but the value of the means of production expended in the production of the commodity and re-appearing in a new form. This value has not been produced during the process of production of this commodity, for the



**[p. 386]**

means of production possessed this value before the process of produc- tion, independently of it; they entered into this process as the vehicles of this value; it is only its form of appearance that has been renewed and altered. This portion of the value of the commodity constitutes for the capitalist an equivalent of the portion of his constant capital value advanced and consumed in the production of the commodity. It existed previously in the form of means of production; it exists now as a component part of the value of the newly produced commodity. As soon as this commodity has been turned into money, the value now existing in the form of money must be reconverted into means of production, into its original form determined by the process of pro- duction and its function in it. Nothing is altered in the character of the value of a commodity by the function of this value as capital.

A second portion of the value of a commodity is the value of the la- bour power which the wage labourer sells to the capitalist. It is deter- mined, the same as the value of the means of production, independ- ently of the process of production into which labour power is to en- ter, and it is fixed in an act of circulation, the purchase and sale of la- bour power, before the latter enters the process of production. By means of his function—the expenditure of his labour power — the wage labourer produces a commodity value equal to the value which the capitalist has to pay him for the use of his labour power. He gives this value to the capitalist in the form of a commodity and is paid for it by him in money. That this portion of the commodity value is for the capitalist but an equivalent for the variable capital which he has to advance in wages does not alter in any way the fact that it is a com- modity value newly created during the process of production and consisting of nothing but what surplus value consists of, namely, past expenditure of labour power. Nor is this truth affected by the fact that the value of the labour power paid by the capitalist to the la- bourer in the form of wages assumes the form of a revenue for the la- bourer, and that not only labour power is continually reproduced thereby but also the. class of wage labourers as such, and thus the ba- sis of the entire capitalist production.

However, the sum of these two portions of value does not comprise the whole of commodity value. There remains an excess over both of them — the surplus value. This, like the portion of value which re- places the variable capital advanced in wages, is a value newly created by the labourer during the process of production-—congealed labour. But it does not cost the owner of the entire product, the capitalist,

anything. This circumstance actually permits the capitalist to con- sume the surplus value entirely as revenue, unless he has to surrender parts of it to other participants — such as ground rent to the landlord, in which case such portions constitute a revenue of such third persons. This same circumstance was the compelling motive that induced our capitalist to engage at all in the manufacture of commodities. But nei- ther his original benevolent intention of snatching surplus value, nor its subsequent expenditure as revenue by him or others affects the sur- plus value as such. They do not impair the fact that it is congealed unpaid labour, nor the magnitude of this surplus value, which is de- termined by entirely different conditions.

However, if Adam Smith wanted to occupy himself, as he did, with the role of the various parts of this value in the total process of repro- duction, even while he was investigating the value of commodities, it would be evident that while some particular parts function as reve- nue, others function just as continually as capital — and conse- quently, according to his logic, should have been designated as con- stituent parts of the commodity value, or parts into which this value resolves itself.

Adam Smith identifies the production of commodities in general with capitalist commodity production; the means of production are to him from the outset "capital", labour is from the outset wage labour, and therefore

In short, the various factors of the labour process — both objective and personal — appear from the first with the masks characteristic of the period of capitalist production. The analysis of the value of com- modities therefore coincides directly with the consideration of the ex- tent to which this value is on the one hand a mere equivalent of capi- tal laid out, and on the other, to what extent it forms "free" value, value not replacing any advanced capital value, or surplus value. Compared from this point of view, parts of commodity value thus transform themselves imperceptibly into its independent "component parts", and finally into the "sources of all value". A further conclu-

[^1]: "the n u m b e r of useful and productive labourers is everywhere in proportion TO THE QUANTITY OF CAPITAL STOCK WHICH IS EMPLOYED IN SETTING THEM TO WORK a " (Introduction, p. 12).

[^2]: a In the original, these English words are given in parentheses after their G e r m a n equiv- alent.



