---
Volume: 36
Document_Title: "III. Later Economists "
Page_Range: "396-398"
---

# III. Later Economists 



**[p. 388]**

sion is that commodity value is composed of, or "resolves itself into, revenues of various kinds, so that the revenues do not consist of com- modity values but the commodity value consists of "revenues". As lit- tle, however, as the nature of a commodity value as such, or of money as such, is changed through their functioning as capital value, just so little is the nature of a commodity value changed on account of its functioning later as a revenue for some particular person. The com- modity with which Adam Smith has to deal is from the outset com- modity capital (which comprises surplus value in addition to the cap- ital value consumed in the production of the commodity); it is there- fore a commodity produced capitalistically, the result of the capitalist process of production. It would have been necessary, then, to analyse first this process, and also the process of self-expansion and of the for- mation of value, which it includes. Since this process is in its turn prem- ised by the circulation of commodities, its description requires also a preliminary and independent analysis of the commodity. However, even where Adam Smith at times hits "esoterically" upon the correct thing he always takes into consideration the formation of value only as incidental to the analysis of commodities, i. e., to the analysis of commodity capital.

Ricardo reproduces the theory of Adam Smith almost verbatim:

In fact Ricardo fully accepted the theory of Adam Smith concern- ing the resolution of the price of commodities into wages and surplus value (or variable capital and surplus value). The points of dispute with him are 1) the component parts of the surplus value: he elimin- ates ground rent as an essential element of it; 2) Ricardo splits the price of the commodity into these component parts. The magnitude of value is, then, the prius. The sum of component parts is assumed as

[^1]: III. LATER ECONOMISTS41

[^2]: "It must be understood that all the productions of a country are consumed; but it makes the greatest difference imaginable whether they are consumed by those who re- produce, or by those who do not reproduce another value. When we say that revenue is saved, and added to capital, what we mean is, that the portion of revenue, so said to be added to the capital, is consumed by productive instead of unproductive labourers" (Principles, p. 163).

[^3]: 4I) From here to the end of the chapter, a supplement from Manuscript II.





**[p. 389]**

a given magnitude, it is the starting-point, while Adam Smith fre- quently acts to the contrary, against his own better judgement, by postfestum deducing the magnitude of value of the commodity through the sum of the component parts.

Ramsay makes the following remark against Ricardo:

"He seems always to consider the whole produce as divided between wages and profits, forgetting the part necessary for replacing fixed capital" (An Essay on the Distri- bution of Wealth, Edinburgh, 1836, p. 174).

By fixed capital Ramsay means the same thing that I mean by con- stant capital:

"Fixed capital exists in a form in which, though assisting to raise the future com- modity, it does not maintain labourers" (p 59).

Adam Smith opposed the necessary conclusion of his resolution of the value of commodities, and therefore also of the value of the social annual product into wages and surplus value and therefore into mere revenue — the conclusion that in this event the entire annual product might be consumed. It is never the original thinkers that draw the absurd conclusions. They leave that to the Says and Mac Cullochs.

Say, indeed, settles the matter easy enough. That which is an ad- vance of capital for one, is or was a revenue and net product for another. The difference between the gross and the net product is purely subjective, and

Among others, Proudhon has appropriated this discovery of Say. Storch, who likewise accepts Adam Smith's doctrine in principle, finds however that Say's practical application of it does not hold wa- ter.

[^1]: "thus the total value of all products has been distributed in society as revenue" (Say, Traité d'Economie Politique, 1817, II, p. 64). "The total value of every product is composed of the profits of the landowners, the capitalists, and those who ply industrial trades" //wages figure here as profits des industrieux! jf, "who have contributed towards its production. This makes the revenue of society equal to the gross value produced, not equal to the net product of the soil, as was believed by the sect of the economists" //the Physiocrats// (p. 63).

[^2]: "If it is admitted that the revenue of a nation is equal to its gross product, i. e., that no capital" //it should say: no constant capital// "is to be deducted, then it must also be admitted that this nation may consume unproductively the entire value of its annual



