---
Volume: 36
Document_Title: "I. The Formulation of the Question "
Page_Range: "398-402"
---

# I. The Formulation of the Question 



**[p. 390]**

product without the least detriment to its future revenue The products which represent the" //constant// "capital of a nation are not consumable" (Storch, Considérations sur la nature du revenu national, Paris, 1824, pp. 147, 150).53

However, Storch forgot to tell us how the existence of this constant portion of capital harmonises with the Smithian analysis of prices ac- cepted by him, according to which the value of commodities contains only wages and surplus value, but no part of any constant capital. He realises only through Say that this analysis of prices leads to absurd results, and his own last word on the subject is

"that it is impossible to resolve the necessary price into its simplest elements" {Cours d'Economie Politique, Pétersbourg, 1815, II, p. 141).

Sismondi, who occupies himself particularly with the relation of cap- ital to revenue, and in actual fact makes the peculiar formulation of this relation the differentia specified of his Nouveaux Principes, did not say one scientific word, did not contribute one iota to the clarification of the problem.

Barton, Ramsay, and Cherbuliez 54 attempt to go beyond Smith's formulation. They founder because they pose the problem one- sidedly from the outset by failing to make clear the distinction be- tween constant and variable capital value and between fixed and cir- culating capital.

John Stuart Mill likewise reproduces, with his usual pomposity, the doctrine handed down by Adam Smith to his followers.

As a result, the Smithian confusion of thought persists to this hour, and his dogma is one of the orthodox articles of faith of political econ- omy.

C h a p t e r XX

If we study42' the annual function of social capital — hence of the total capital of which the individual capitals form only fractional parts, whose movement is their individual movement and simulta- neously an integrating link in the movement of the total capital — and

[^1]: SIMPLE REPRODUCTION

[^2]: I. THE FORMULATION OF THE QUESTION

[^3]: From Manuscript II.





**[p. 391]**

its results, i.e., if we study the commodity product furnished by so- ciety during the year, then it must become apparent how the process of reproduction of the social capital takes place, what characteristics distinguish this process of reproduction from the process of reproduc- tion of an individual capital, and what characteristics are common to both. The annual product includes those portions of the social prod- uct which replace capital, namely social reproduction, as well as those which go to the consumption fund, those which are consumed by labourers and capitalists, hence both productive and individual consumption. It comprises also the reproduction (i. e., maintenance) of the capitalist class and the working class, and thus the reproduc- tion of the capitalist character of the entire process of production.

m — c which we have to analyse, and consumption necessarily plays a role in it; for the point of departure, C'= C + c, the commodity capital, embraces both the constant and variable capital value, and the sur- plus value. Its movement therefore includes both individual and pro- ductive consumption. In the circuits M — C P C — M ' and P C — M'— C P, the movement of the capital is the starting and fin- ishing point. And of course this includes consumption, for the com- modity, the product, must be sold. When this has assumedly been done it is immaterial for the movement of the individual capital what becomes of this commodity subsequently. On the other hand in the movement of C C the conditions of social reproduction are discerni- ble precisely from the fact that it must be shown what becomes of every portion of value of this total product, C . In this case the total process of reproduction includes the process of consumption brought about by the circulation quite as much as the process of reproduc- tion of the capital itself.

For our present purpose this process of reproduction must be stud- ied from the point of view of the replacement of the value as well as the substance of the individual component parts of C . We cannot rest content any longer, as we did in the analysis of the value of the prod- uct of the individual capital, with the assumption that the individual capitalist can first convert the component parts of his capital into money by the sale of his commodities, and then reconvert them into productive capital by renewed purchase of the elements of produc- tion in the commodity market. Inasmuch as those elements of pro It is evidently the circulation formula C -



**[p. 392]**

duction are by nature material, they represent as much a constituent of the social capital as the individual finished product, which is ex- changed for them and replaced by them. Contrariwise the movement of that portion of the social commodity product which is consumed by the labourer in expending his wages, and by the capitalist in ex- pending his surplus value, not only forms an integral part of the movement of the total product but intermingles with the movements of the individual capitals, and therefore this process cannot be ex- plained by merely assuming it.

The question that confronts us directly is this: How is the capital consumed in production replaced in value out of the annual product and how does the movement of this replacement intertwine with the consumption of the surplus value by the capitalists and of the wages by the labourers? It is then first a matter of reproduction on a simple scale. It is furthermore assumed that products are exchanged at their values and also that there is no revolution in the values of the compo- nent parts of productive capital. The fact that prices diverge from val- ues cannot, however, exert any influence on the movement of the so- cial capital. On the whole, there is the same exchange of the same quantities of products, although the individual capitalists are in- volved in value relations no longer proportional to their respective ad- vances and to the quantities of surplus value produced singly by every one of them. As for revolutions in value, they do not alter anything in the relations between the value components of the total annual prod- uct, provided they are universally and evenly distributed. To the ex- tent however that they are partially and unevenly distributed, they represent disturbances which, in the first place, can be understood as such only as far as they are regarded as divergences from unchanged value relations; but, in the second place, once there is proof of the law according to which one portion of the value of the annual product re- places constant, and another portion variable capital, a revolution ei- ther in the value of the constant or that of the Variable capital would not alter anything in this law. It would change merely the relative magnitudes of the portions of value which function in the one or the other capacity, because other values would have taken the places of the original ones.

So long as we looked upon the production of value and the value of the product of capital individually, the bodily form of the commodi- ties produced was wholly immaterial for the analysis, whether it was machines, for instance, corn, or looking glasses. It was always but



**[p. 393]**

a matter of illustration, and any branch of production could have served that purpose equally well. What we dealt with was the immedi- ate process of production itself, which presents itself at every point as the process of some individual capital. So far as the reproduction of capital was concerned, it was sufficient to assume that that portion of the product in commodities which represents capital value finds an opportunity in the sphere of circulation to reconvert itself into its ele- ments of production and thus into its form of productive capital; just as it sufficed to assume that both the labourer and the capitalist find in the market those commodities on which they spend wages and surplus value. This merely formal manner of presentation is no longer adequate in the study of the total social capital and of the value of its products. The reconversion of one portion of the value of the product into capital and the passing of another portion into the individual consumption of the capitalist as well as the working class form a movement within the value of the product itself in which the result of the aggregate capital finds expression; and this movement is not only a replacement of value, but also a replacement in material and is therefore as much bound up with the relative proportions of the value components of the total social product as with their use value, their material shape.

Simple43' reproduction, reproduction on the same scale, appears as an abstraction, inasmuch as on the one hand the absence of all accu- mulation or reproduction on an extended scale is a strange assump- tion in capitalist conditions, and on the other hand conditions of pro- duction do not remain exactly the same in different years (and this is assumed). The assumption is that a social capital of a given magni- tude produces the same quantity of commodity value this year as last, and supplies the same quantum of wants, although the forms of the commodities may change in the process of reproduction. However, as far as accumulation does take place, simple reproduction is always a part of it, and can therefore be studied by itself, and is an actual fac- tor of accumulation. The value of the annual product may decrease, although the quantity of use values may remain the same; or the value may remain the same although the quantity of the use values may decrease; or the quantity of value and of the reproduced use val- ues may decrease simultaneously. All this amounts to reproduction

[^1]: From Manuscript VIII.



