---
Volume: 36
Document_Title: "VI. The Constant Capital of Department I "
Page_Range: "428-432"
---

# VI. The Constant Capital of Department I 

realisation of its surplus value (correspondingly also for the circula- tion of its capital, constant and variable) not only fails to appear paradoxical, but stands forth as a necessary condition of the entire mechanism. For there are here only two classes: the working class dis- posing only of its labour power, and the capitalist class, which has a monopoly of the social means of production and money. It would rather be a paradox if the working class were to advance in the first instance from its own resources the money required for the realisation of the surplus value contained in the commodities. But the individual capitalist makes this advance only by acting as a buyer, expending money in the purchase of articles of consumption or advancing money in the purchase of elements of his productive capital, whether of la- bour power or means of production. He never parts with his money unless he gets an equivalent for it. He advances money to the circula- tion only in the same way as he advances commodities to it. He acts in both instances as the initial point of their circulation. The actual process is obscured by two circumstances:

1) The appearance in the process of circulation of industrial capital of merchant''s capital (the first form of which is always money, since the merchant as such does not create any "product" or "commodity") and of money capital as an object of manipulation by a special kind of capitalists.

2) The division of surplus value — which must always be first in the hands of the industrial capitalist — into various categories, the ve- hicles of which there appear, aside from the industrial capitalist, as the landlord (for ground rent), the usurer (for interest), etc., as well as the government and its employees, rentiers, etc. These gentry ap- pear as buyers vis-à-vis the industrial capitalist and to that extent as converters of his commodities into money; they too throw "money" pro parte into the circulation and he gets it from them. But it is always forgotten from what source they derived it originally, and continue deriving it ever anew.

It remains for us to analyse the constant capital of department I = 4,000c. This value is equal to the value — appearing anew in the

[^1]: VI. THE CONSTANT CAPITAL OF DEPARTMENT I«"

[^2]: From here, Manuscript II.





**[p. 421]**

commodity product I—of the means of production consumed in the creation of this quantity of commodities. This re-appearing value, which was not produced in the process of production of I, but entered into it during the preceding year as constant value, as the given value of its means of production, exists now in the entire part of commodity mass I not absorbed by category II. And the value of this quantity of commodities thus left in the hands of the I capitalists = 2/3 of the value of their entire annual commodity product. In the case of the in- dividual capitalist producing some particular means of production we could say: He sells his commodity product; he converts it into money. By converting it into money he has also reconverted into money the constant portion of the value of his product. With this por- tion of value converted into money he then buys his means of produc- tion once more from other sellers of commodities or transforms the constant portion of the value of his product into a natural form in which it can resume its function of productive constant capital. But now this assumption becomes impossible. The capitalist class of I comprises the totality of the capitalists producing means of produc- tion. Besides, the commodity product of 4,000, which is left in their hands, is a portion of the social product which cannot be exchanged for any other, because no such other portion of the annual product re- mains. With the exception of these 4,000, all the remainder has been disposed of. One portion has been absorbed by the social consump- tion fund, and another portion has to replace the constant capital of department II, which has already exchanged everything it could dis- pose of in an exchange with department I.

The difficulty is solved very easily if we remember that the entire commodity product I in its natural form consists of means of produc- tion, i. e., of the material elements of the constant capital itself. We meet here the same phenomenon which we witnessed before under II, only in a different aspect. In the case of II the entire commodity prod- uct consisted of articles of consumption. Hence one portion of it, measured by the wages plus surplus value contained in this product, could be consumed by its own producers. Here, in the case of I, the entire product consists of means of production, of buildings, machin- ery, vessels, raw and auxiliary materials, etc. One portion of them, namely that replacing the constant capital employed in this sphere, can therefore immediately function anew in its natural form as a com- ponent of the productive capital. So far as it goes into circulation, it circulates within class I. In II a part of the commodity product is in-

dividually consumed in natura by its own producers while in I a por- tion of the product is productively consumed in natura by its capitalist producers.

In the part of the commodity product I = 4,000c the constant capi- tal value consumed in this category re-appears, and does so in a nat- ural form in which it can immediately resume its function of produc- tive constant capital. In II that portion of the commodity product of 3,000 whose value is equal to the wages plus the surplus value ( = 1,000) passes directly into the individual consumption of the capi- talists and labourers of II, while on the other hand the constant capi- tal value of this commodity product (= 2,000) cannot re-enter the productive consumption of the II capitalists but must be replaced by exchange with I.

In I, on the contrary, that portion of its commodity product of 6,000 whose value is equal to the wages plus the surplus value ( = 2,000) does not pass into the individual consumption of its produc- ers, and cannot do so on account of its natural form. It must first be exchanged with II. Contrariwise the constant portion of the value of this product = 4,000 exists in a natural form in which — taking the capitalist class I as a whole — it can immediately resume its function of constant capital ofthat class. In other words, the entire product of department I consists of use values which, on account of their natural form, can under a capitalist mode of production serve only as ele- ments of constant capital. Hence one-third (2,000) of this product of 6,000 replaces the constant capital of department II, and the other two-thirds the constant capital of department I.

The constant capital I consists of a great number of different groups of capital invested in the various branches of production of means of production, so much in iron works, so much in coal-mines, etc. Every one of these groups of capital, or every one of these social group capitals, is in its turn composed of a larger or smaller number of independently functioning individual capitals. In the first place, the capital of society, for instance 7,500 (which may mean millions, etc.), is composed of various groups of capital; the social capital of 7,500 is divided into separate parts, every one of which is invested in a special branch of production; each portion of the social capital value invested in some particular branch of production consists, so far as its natural form is concerned, partly of means of production re- quired in that particular sphere of production, partly of the labour pow- er needed in that business and trained accordingly, variously modi-



**[p. 423]**

fied by division of labour, according to the specific kind of labour to be performed in each individual sphere of production. The portion of social capital invested in each particular branch of production in its turn consists of the sum of the individual capitals invested in it and functioning independently. This patently applies to both depart- ments, I as well as II.

As for the constant capital value re-appearing in I in the form of its commodity product, it re-enters in part as means of production into the particular sphere of production (or even into the individual busi- ness) from which it emerges as product; for instance corn into the pro- duction of corn, coal into the production of coal, iron in the form of machines into the production of iron, etc.

However since the partial products constituting the constant capi- tal value I do not return directly to their particular or individual sphere of production, they merely change their place. They pass in their natural form to some other sphere of production of department I, while the product of other spheres of production of department I replaces them in natura. It is merely a change of place of these prod- ucts. All of them re-enter as factors replacing constant capital in I, only instead of the same group of I they enter another. Since an ex- change takes place here between the individual capitalist of I, it is an exchange of one natural form of constant capital for another natural form of constant capital, of one kind of means of production for other kinds of means of production. It is an exchange of the different individ- ual parts of constant capital I among themselves. Products which do not serve directly as means of production in their own sphere are transferred from their place of production to another and thus mu- tually replace one another. In other words (similarly to what happens in the case of the surplus value II), every capitalist I draws from this quantity of commodities, proportionally to his share in the constant capital of 4,000, the means of production required by him. If produc- tion were social instead of capitalist, these products of department I would evidently just as regularly be redistributed as means of pro- duction to the various branches of this department, for purposes of re- production, one portion remaining directly in that sphere of produc- tion from which it emerged as a product, another passing over to other places of production, thereby giving rise to a constant to- and-fro movement between the various places of production in this department.

