---
Volume: 36
Document_Title: "VII. Variable Capital and Surplus Value in Both Departments. "
Page_Range: "432-435"
---

# VII. Variable Capital and Surplus Value in Both Departments. 

VII. VARIABLE CAPITAL AND SURPLUS VALUE IN BOTH DEPARTMENTS

The total value of the annually produced articles of consumption is thus equal to the variable capital value II reproduced during the year plus the newly produced surplus value II (i.e., equal to the value produced by II during the year) plus the variable capital value I reproduced during the year and the newly produced surplus value I (i. e., plus the value created by I during the year).

On the assumption of simple reproduction the total value of the an- nually produced articles of consumption is therefore equal to the an- nual value product, i. e., equal to the total value produced during the year by social labour, and this must be so, because in simple repro- duction this entire value is consumed.

The total social working day is divided into two parts: 1) necessary labour, which creates in the course of the year a value of l,500v; 2) surplus labour, which creates an additional value, or surplus value, of 1,500s. The sum of these values, 3,000, is equal to the value of the annually produced articles of consumption — 3,000. The total value of the articles of consumption produced during the year is therefore equal to the total value produced by the total social working day during the year, equal to the value of the social variable capital plus the social surplus value, equal to the total new product of the year.

But we know that even if these two magnitudes of value are equal, this in no way means that the total value of commodities II, the arti- cles of consumption, has been produced in this department of social production. They are equal because the constant capital value re- appearing in II is equal to the value newly produced by I (value of variable capital plus surplus value); therefore I(v+s) can buy the part of the product of II which represents the constant capital value for its producers (in department II). This shows, then, why the value of the product of capitalists II, from the point of view of society, may be re- solved into v + s although for these capitalists it is divided into c + v + s. This is so only because IIC is here equal to I(v+St, and be- cause these two components of the social product interchange their natural forms by exchange, so that after this transformation IIC exists once more in means of production and I(v+S) in articles of consump- tion.



**[p. 425]**

And it is this circumstance which induced Adam Smith to main- tain that the value of the annual product resolves itself into v + s. This is true 1) only for that part of the annual product which consists of ar- ticles of consumption, and 2) it is not true in the sense that this total value is produced in II and that the value of its product is equal to the value of the variable capital advanced in II plus the surplus value produced in II. It is true only in the sense that II(c+v+s) = II(V+S) + I(v+S), or because IIC = I(v+s).

It follows furthermore: The social working day (i.e., the labour expended by the entire working class during the whole year), like every individual working day, breaks up into only two parts, namely into necessary labour and surplus labour, and the value produced by this working day conse- quently likewise resolves itself into only two parts, namely into the value of the variable capital, or that portion of the value with which the labourer buys the means of his own reproduction, and the surplus value which the capitalist may spend for his own individual con- sumption. Nevertheless, from the point of view of society, one part of the social working day is spent exclusively on the production of new con- stant capital, namely of products exclusively intended to function as means of production in the labour process and hence as constant cap- ital in the accompanying process of self-expansion of value. Accord- ing to our assumption the total social working day presents itself as a money value of 3,000, of which only V3 = 1,000 is produced in de- partment II which manufactures articles of consumption, that is, the commodities in which the entire value of the variable capital and the entire surplus value of society are ultimately realised. Thus, accord- ing to this assumption, 2/3 of the social working day are employed in the production of new constant capital. Although from the stand- point of the individual capitalists and labourers of department I these 2/3 of the social working day serve merely for the production of vari- able capital value plus surplus value, the same as the last third of the social working day in department II, still from the point of view of so- ciety and likewise of the use value of the product, these 2/3 of the so- cial working day produce only replacement of constant capital in the process of productive consumption or already so consumed. Also when viewed individually, these 2/3 of the working day, while produc- ing a total value equal only to the value of the variable capital plus surplus value for the producer, nevertheless do not produce any use

values of a kind on which wages or surplus value could be expended; for their products are means of production.

It must be noted in the first place that no portion of the social working day, whether in I or in II, serves for the production of the value of the constant capital employed and functioning in these two great spheres of production. They produce only additional value, 2,000 I(v+s) + 1,000 II(v+s), in addition to the value of the constant cap- ital = 4,000 Ic + 2,000 IIC. The new value produced in the form of means of production is not yet constant capital. It merely is intended to function as such in the future.

The entire product of II — the articles of consumption — viewed concretely as a use value, in its natural form, is a product of the one- third of the social working day spent by II. It is the product of labour in its concrete form — such as the labour of weaving, baking, etc., performed in this department — the product of this labour, inasmuch as it functions as the subjective element of the labour process. As to the constant portion of the value of this product II, it re-appears only in a new use value, in a new natural form, the form of articles of con- sumption, while it existed previously in the form of means of produc- tion. Its value has been transferred by the labour process from its old natural form to its new natural form. But the value of these 2/3 of the product value = 2,000 has not been produced in this year's self- expansion process of II.

Just as from the point of view of the labour process, the product of II is the result of newly functioning living labour and of the assumed means of production assigned to it, in which that labour materialises itself as in its objective conditions, so, from the point of view of the process of self-expansion, the value of the product of II = 3,000 is composed of a new value (500v + 500s = 1,000) produced by the newly added 1/3 of the social working day and of a constant value in which are objectified 2/3 of a past social working day that had elapsed before the present process of production of II here under considera- tion. This portion of the value of the II product finds expression in a portion of the product itself. It exists in a quantity of articles of con- sumption worth 2,000 = 2/3 of a social working day. This is the new use form in which this value portion re-appears. The exchange of part of the articles of consumption equal to 2,000 IIC for means of production of I = I (l,000v + l,000s) thus really represents an exchange of two- thirds of an aggregate working day — which do not constitute any portion of this year's labour, and elapsed before this year — for 2/3 of

