---
Volume: 36
Document_Title: "IX. A Retrospect to Adam Smith, Storch, and Ramsay "
Page_Range: "440-444"
---

# IX. A Retrospect to Adam Smith, Storch, and Ramsay 



**[p. 432]**

variable capital plus surplus value, while the constant part of the value is transferred to the product owing to the concrete character of the newly added labour.

Considered socially, that portion of the social working day which produces means of production, hence adding new value to them as well as transferring to them the value of the means of production con- sumed in their manufacture, creates nothing but new constant capital intended to replace that consumed in the shape of old means of pro- duction in both departments I and II. It creates only product intend- ed for productive consumption. The entire value of this product, then, is only value which can function anew as constant capital, which can only buy back constant capital in its natural form, and which, for this reason, resolves itself, considered socially, neither into variable capital nor surplus value.

On the other hand that part of the social working day which pro- duces articles of consumption does not create any portion of the social replacement capital. It creates only products intended, in their nat- ural form, to realise the value of the variable capital and surplus value of I and II.

Speaking from the point of view of society, and therefore considering the aggregate product of society, which comprises both the reproduc- tion of social capital and individual consumption, we must not lapse into the manner copied by Proudhon from bourgeois economy and look upon this matter as though a society with a capitalist mode of production, if viewed en bloc, as a totality, would lose this its specific historical and economic character. No, on the contrary. We have, in that case, to deal with the aggregate capitalist. The aggregate capital appears as the capital stock of all individual capitalists combined. This joint-stock company has in common with many other stock com- panies that everyone knows what he puts in, but not what he will get out of it.

STORCH, AND RAMSAY

The aggregate value of the social product amounts to 9,000 = 6,000c + l,500v + l,300s; in other words: 6,000 reproduce the value of the means of production and 3,000 that of the articles of consumption. The value of the social revenue (v + s) amounts there-

[^1]: IX. A RETROSPECT TO ADAM SMITH,





**[p. 433]**

fore to only lj3 of the value of the aggregate product, and the totality of consumers, labourers as well as capitalists, can draw commodities, products out of the total social product and incorporate them in their consumption fund only to the amount of this lji . On the other hand 6,000, or 2/3 of the value of the product, are the value of the constant capital which must be replaced in natura. Means of production to this amount must therefore again be incorporated in the production fund. Storch recognised this as essential without being able to prove it:

"It is clear that the value of the annual product is divided partly into capital and part- ly into profits, and that each one of these portions of the value of the annual product is regularly employed in buying the products which the nation needs both for the mainte- nance of its capital and for replacing its consumption fund The products which constitute the capital of a nation are not to be consumed"* (Storch, Considerations sur la na- ture du revenu national, Paris, 1824, pp. 134-35, 150).

Adam Smith, however, has promulgated this astounding dogma, which is believed to this day, not only in the previously mentioned form, according to which the entire value of the social product resolves itself into revenue, into wages plus surplus value, or, as he ex- presses it, into wages plus profit (interest) plus ground rent, but also in the still more popular form, according to which the consumers must "ULTIMATELY"15 pay to the producers the entire value of the product. This is to this day one of the best-established commonplaces, or rather eternal truths, of the so-called science of political economy. This is il- lustrated in the following plausible manner: Take any article, for in- stance a linen shirt. First, the spinner of linen yarn has to pay the flax-grower the entire value of the flax, i. e., the value of flax-seed, fer- tilisers, labouring cattle feed, etc., plus that part of the value which the fixed capital, such as buildings, agricultural implements, etc., of the flax-grower gives up to the product; the wages paid in the produc- tion of the flax; the surplus value (profit, ground rent) embodied in the flax; finally the carriage costs of the flax from its place of produc- tion to the spinnery. Next, the weaver has to reimburse the spinner of the linen yarn not only for the price of the flax, but also for that por- tion of the value of machinery, buildings, etc., in short of the fixed cap- ital, which is transferred to the flax; furthermore, all the auxiliary materials consumed in the spinning process, the wages of the spin- ners, the surplus value, etc., and so the thing goes on with the

[^1]: a Marx quotes Storch in French. - b In the original, this English word is given in parentheses after its German equivalent.



bleacher, the transportation costs of the finished linen, and finally the shirt manufacturer, who has to pay the entire price of all preceding producers, who supplied him only with his raw material. In his hands a further addition of value takes place, partly through the value of constant capital consumed in the manufacture of shirts in the shape of instruments of labour, auxiliary materials, etc., and partly through the labour expended, which adds the value of the shirt makers' wages plus the surplus value of the shirt manufacturer. Now let this entire product in shirts cost ultimately £100 and let this be the aliquot part of the value of the total annual product expended by society on shirts. The consumers of the shirts pay these £100, i. e., the value of all the means of production contained in the shirts, and of the wages plus surplus value of the flax-grower, spinner, weaver, bleacher, shirt manufacturer, and all carriers. This is absolutely correct. Indeed, every child can see that. But then it says: That's how matters stand with regard to the value of all other commodities. It should say: That's how matters stand with regard to the value of all articles of consumption, with regard to the value ofthat portion of the social prod- uct which passes into the consumption fund, i. e., with regard to that portion of the value of the social product which can be expended as revenue. True enough, the sum of the values of all these commodities is equal to the value of all the means of production (constant portions of capital) used up in them plus the value created by the labour last added (wages plus surplus value). Hence the totality of the consumers can pay for this entire sum of values because, although the value of each individual commodity is made up of c -f- v + s, nevertheless the sum of the values of all commodities passing into the consumption fund, taken at its maximum, can be equal only to that portion of the value of the social product which resolves itself into v + s, in other words, equal to that value which the labour expended during the year has added to the existing means of production — to the value of the constant capital. As for the value of the constant capital, we have seen that it is replaced out of the mass of social products in a two-fold way. First, through an exchange by capitalists II, who produce arti- cles of consumption, with capitalists I, who produce the means of pro- duction for them. And here is the source of the saying that what is cap- ital for the one is revenue for the other.55 But this is not the actual state of affairs. The 2,000 IIC existing in the shape of articles of con- sumption worth 2,000 constitute a constant capital value for the capi-



**[p. 435]**

talist class of II. They therefore cannot consume this value themselves, although the product in accordance with its natural form is in- tended for consumption. On the other hand, the 2,000 I(v+s) are wages plus surplus value produced by capitalist and working class I. They exist in the natural form of means of production, of things in which their own value cannot be consumed. We have here, then, a sum of values to the amount of 4,000, one half of which, before and after the exchange, replaces only constant capital, while the other half forms only revenue.

In the second place, the constant capital of department I is replaced in natura, partly by exchange among capitalists I, partly by replace- ment in natura in each individual business.

The phrase that the value of the entire annual product must ulti- mately be paid by the consumer56 would be correct only if consumer were taken to comprise two vastly different kinds: individual consum- ers and productive consumers. However that one portion of the product must be consumed productively means nothing but that it must function as capital and not be consumed as revenue.

If we divide the value of the aggregate product = 9,000 into 6,000c + l,500v + l,500s and look upon the 3,000(v+s) only in its qual- ity of revenue, then, on the contrary, the variable capital seems to dis- appear and capital, socially speaking, to consist only of constant capi- tal. For that which appeared originally as l,500v has resolved itself into a portion of the social revenue, into wages, the revenue of the working class, and its character of capital has thus vanished. This conclusion is actually drawn by Ramsay. According to him, capital, socially considered, consists only of fixed capital, but by fixed capital he means the constant capital, that quantity of values which consists of means of production, whether these means of production are in- struments or materials of labour, such as raw materials, semi-finished products, auxiliary materials, etc. He calls the variable capital circu- lating capital:

[^1]: * "Circulating capital consists exclusively of subsistence and other necessaries ad- vanced to the workmen, previous to the completion of the produce of their labour Fixed capital alone, not circulating, is properly speaking a source of national wealth Cir- culating capital is not an immediate agent in production, nor even essential to it at all, but merely a convenience rendered necessary by the deplorable poverty of the mass of the people Fixed capital alone constitutes an element of cost of production in a na- tional point of view"* (Ramsay, I.e., pp. 23-26, passim).



