---
Volume: 36
Document_Title: "XI. Replacement of the Fixed Capital "
Page_Range: "456-460"
---

# XI. Replacement of the Fixed Capital 

able capital. (In the case of the variable capital partly by means of a direct and partly by means of an indirect reflux.)

XI. REPLACEMENT OF THE FIXED CAPITAL

In the analysis of the exchanges of the annual reproduction the fol- lowing presents great difficulty. If we take the simplest form in which the matter may be presented, we get:

(I) 4,000c+ l,000v+ l,000s + (II) 2,000c+ 500v+ 500s= 9,000.

This resolves itself finally into:

4,000 I c+ 2,000 IIC+ 1,000 I v+ 500 IIV+ 1,000 I,+ + 500 II S= 6,000f+ l,500v+ 1,500,= 9,000.

One portion of the value of the constant capital, which consists of instruments of labour in the strict meaning of the term (as a distinct section of the means of production), is transferred from the instru- ments of labour to the product of labour (the commodity); these in- struments of labour continue to function as elements of the produc- tive capital, doing so in their old natural form. It is their wear and tear, the diminution in value gradually experienced by them during their continual functioning for a definite period, which re-appears as an element of the value of the commodities produced by means of them, which is transferred from the instrument of labour to the prod- uct of labour. With regard to the annual reproduction therefore only such component parts of fixed capital will from the first be given consideration as last longer than a year. If they are completely worn out within the year they must be completely replaced and renewed by the annual reproduction, and the point at issue does not concern them at all. It may happen in the case of machines and other more durable forms of fixed capital — and it frequently does happen — that certain parts of them must be replaced lock, stock and barrel within one year, although the building or machine in its entirety lasts much longer. These parts belong in one category with the elements of fixed capital which are to be replaced within one year.

This element of the value of commodities must not be confused with the costs of repair." If a commodity is sold, this value element is turned into money, the same as all others. But after it has been turned

[^1]: a See this volume, pp. 172-84.





**[p. 449]**

into money, its difference from the other elements of value becomes apparent. The raw and auxiliary materials consumed in the produc- tion of commodities must be replaced in natura in order that the repro- duction of commodities may begin (or that the process of production of commodities in general may be continuous). The labour power spent on them must also be replaced by fresh labour power. Conse- quently the money realised on the commodities must be continually reconverted into these elements of the productive capital, from the money form into the commodity form. It does not alter the matter if raw and auxiliary materials for instance are bought at certain inter- vals in larger quantities — so that they constitute productive sup- plies— and need not be bought anew during certain periods; and therefore — as long as they last—the money coming in through the sale of commodities, inasmuch as it is meant for this purpose, may ac- cumulate and this portion of constant capital thus appears tempora- rily as money capital whose active function has been suspended. It is not a revenue capital; it is productive capital suspended in the form of money. The renewal of the means of production must go on all the time, although the form of this renewal — with reference to the circu- lation— may vary. The new purchase, the circulation operation by which they are renewed or replaced, may take place at more or at less prolonged intervals: then a large amount may be invested at one stroke, compensated by a corresponding productive supply. Or the intervals between purchases may be small: then follows a rapid suc- cession of money expenditures in small doses, of small productive sup- plies. This does not alter the matter itself. The same applies to labour power. Where production is carried on continuously throughout the year on the same scale — continuous replacement of consumed la- bour power by new. Where work is seasonable, or different portions of labour are applied at different periods, as in agriculture — corresponding purchases of labour power, now in small, now in large amounts. But the money proceeds realised from the sale of commodi- ties, so far as they turn into money that part of the commodity value which is equal to the wear and tear of fixed capital, are not reconvert- ed into that component part of the productive capital whose diminu- tion in value they cover. They settle down beside the productive capi- tal and persist in the form of money. This precipitation of money is re- peated, until the period of reproduction consisting of great or small numbers of years has elapsed, during which the fixed element of con- stant capital continues to function in the process of production in its

old natural form. As soon as the fixed element, such as buildings, machinery, etc., has been worn out, and can no longer function in the process of production, its value exists alongside it fully replaced by money, by the sum of money precipitations, the values which had been gradually transferred from the fixed capital to the commodities in whose production it participated and which had assumed the form of money as a result of the sale of these commodities. This money then serves to replace the fixed capital (or its elements, since its various ele- ments have different durabilities) in natura and thus really to renew this component part of the productive capital. This money is there- fore the money form of a part of the constant capital value, of its fixed part. The formation of this hoard is thus itself an element of the capi- talist process of reproduction; it is the reproduction and storing up — in the form of money — of the value of fixed capital, or its several ele- ments, until the fixed capital has ceased to live and in consequence has given off its full value to the commodities produced and must now be replaced in natura. But this money loses only its form of a hoard and hence resumes its activity in the process of reproduction of capital brought about by the circulation as soon as it is reconverted into new elements of fixed capital to replace those that died off.

Just as simple commodity circulation is in no way identical with a mere exchange of products, the conversion of the annual commodity product can in no way resolve itself into a mere unmediated mutual exchange of its various components. Money plays a specific role in it, which finds expression particularly in the manner in which the value of the fixed capital is reproduced. (How different the matter would present itself if production were collective and no longer possessed the form of commodity production is left to a later analysis.)

Should we now return to our fundamental scheme, we shall get the following for class II: 2,000c+ 500v+ 500s. All the articles of con- sumption produced in the course of the year are in that case equal in value to 3,000; and every one of the different commodity elements in the total sum of the commodities is composed, so far as its value is concerned, of 2/3c+ ll Sv+ 'l6s, or, in percentages, 662/3c+ 162/3v + 162/3s. The various kinds of commodities of class II may contain different proportions of constant capital. Likewise the fixed portion of the constant capital may be different. The duration of the parts of the fixed capital and hence the annual wear and tear, or that portion of value which they transfer pro rata to the commodities



**[p. 451]**

in the production of which they participate, may also differ. But that is immaterial here. As to the process of social reproduction, it is only a question of exchange between classes II and I. These two classes here confront each other only in their social, mass relations. There- fore the proportional magnitude of part c of the value of commodity product II (the only one of consequence in the question now being discussed) gives the average proportion if all the branches of produc- tion classed under II are embraced.

Every kind of commodity (and they are largely the same kinds) whose aggregate value is classed under 2,000c+ 500v+ 500s is there- fore equal in value to 662/3%c + 162/3%v+ 162/3%s. This applies to every 100 of the commodities, whether classed under c, v or s.

The commodities in which the 2,000c are incorporated may be further divided, in value, into:

1) 1,33373c + 3331/3v+333,/3s=2,000c; similarly 500v may be divided into:

2) 33373c+8373v+8373,= 500v; and finally 500s may be divided into:

In other words, the entire share of commodity mass II that repre- sents constant capital value and therefore is reconvertible either into its natural or its money form, exists in 2,000c. Everything referring to the exchange of the constant value of commodities II is therefore con- fined to the movement of 2,000 IIC. And this exchange can be made only with I (l,000v+ l,000s).

Similarly, as regards class I, everything that bears on the exchange of the constant capital value ofthat class is to be confined to a consid- eration of 4,000 Ic.

[^1]: 3) 3337 3 c+837 3 v+837 3 s=500 s. Now, if we add the c's in 1, 2 and 3 we get l,33373r + 33373r+ 33373c= 2,000. Similarly, 33373v+ 8373v + 83'/3v= 500. And the same in the case of s. The addition gives the same total value of 3,000, as above.

[^2]: The entire constant capital value contained in the commodity mass II representing a value of 3,000 is therefore comprised in 2,000c, and neither 500v nor 500s hold an atom of it. The same is true of v and s respectively.



