---
Volume: 36
Document_Title: "3. Results "
Page_Range: "474-477"
---

# 3. Results 

ported to realise the money excess in Is. If, conversely, IIC (1) is smaller than IIC (2), commodities II (articles of consumption) will have to be exported to realise the depreciation part of IIC in means of production. Consequently in either case foreign trade is necessary. Even granted that for a study of reproduction on an unchanging scale it is to be supposed that the productivity of all lines of industry, hence also the proportional value relations of their commodities, re- main constant, the two last-named cases, in which IIC (1) is either greater or smaller than IIC (2), will nevertheless always be of interest for production on an enlarged scale where these cases may infallibly be encountered.

3. RESULTS

The following is to be noted with reference to replacement of fixed capital:

If—all other things, and not only the scale of production, but above all the productivity of labour, remaining the same — a greater part of the fixed element of IIC expires than did the year before, and hence a greater part must be renewed in natura, then that part of the fixed capital which is as yet only on the way to its demise and is to be replaced meanwhile in money until its day of expiry, must shrink in the same proportion, inasmuch as it was assumed that the sum (and the sum of the value) of the fixed part of capital functioning in II re- mains the same. This however brings with it the following circum- stances. First: If the greater part of commodity capital I consists of elements of the fixed capital of IIC, then a correspondingly smaller portion consists of circulating component parts of IIC, because the to- tal production of I for IIC remains unchanged. If one of these parts in- creases the other decreases, and vice versa. On the other hand the to- tal production of class II also retains the same volume. But how is this possible if its raw materials, semi-finished products, and auxiliary ma- terials (i. e., the circulating elements of constant capital II) decrease? Second: The greater part of fixed capital IIC, restored in its money form, flows to I to be reconverted from its money form into its natural form. So there is a greater flow of money to I, aside from the money circu- lating between I and II merely for the exchange of their commodities; more money which is not instrumental in effecting mutual commod- ity exchange, but acts only one-sidedly in the function of a means of



**[p. 467]**

purchase. But then the mass of commodities of IIC, which is the bearer of the wear and tear equivalent — and thus the mass of com- modities II that must only be exchanged for money I and not for commodities I — would also shrink proportionately. More money would have flown from II to I as mere means of purchase, and there would be fewer commodities II in relation to which I would have to function as a mere buyer. A greater portion of Is — for Iv is already converted into commodities II — would not therefore be convertible into commodities II, but would persist in the form of money.

The opposite case, in which the reproduction of demises of fixed cap- ital II in a certain year is less and on the contrary the depreciation part greater, needs no further discussion.

There would be a crisis — a crisis of overproduction — in spite of reproduction on an unchanging scale.

In short, if under simple reproduction and other unchanged condi- tions— particularly under unchanged productive power, total vol- ume and intensity of labour — no constant proportion is assumed be- tween expiring fixed capital (to be renewed) and fixed capital still continuing to function in its old natural form (merely adding to the products value in compensation of its depreciation), then, in the one case the mass of circulating component parts to be reproduced would remain the same while the mass of fixed component parts to be repro- duced would be increased. Therefore the total production I would have to grow or, even aside from money relations, there would be a deficit in reproduction.

In the other case, if the size of fixed capital II to be reproduced in natura should proportionately decrease and hence the component part of fixed capital II, which must now be replaced only in money, should increase in the same ratio, then the quantity of the circulating component parts of constant capital II reproduced by I would re- main unchanged, while that of the fixed component parts to be repro- duced would decrease. Hence either decrease in aggregate produc- tion of I, or excess (as previously deficit) and excess that is not to be converted into money.

True, the same labour can, in the first case, turn out a greater prod- uct through increasing productivity, extension or intensity, and the deficit could thus be covered in that case. But such a change would not take place without a shifting of capital and labour from one line of production of I to another, and every such shift would call forth momentary disturbances. Furthermore (in so far as extension and in-



**[p. 468]**

tensification of labour would mount), I would have for exchange more of its own value for less of IPs value. Hence there would be a de- preciation of the product of I.

The reverse would take place in the second case, where I must cur- tail its production, which implies a crisis for its labourers and capital- ists, or produce an excess, which again spells crisis. Such excess is not an evil in itself, but an advantage; however it is an evil under cap- italist production.

Foreign trade could help out in either case: in the first case in order to convert commodities I held in the form of money into articles of consumption, and in the second case to dispose of the commodity ex- cess. But since foreign trade does not merely replace certain elements (also with regard to value), it only transfers the contradictions to a wider sphere and gives them greater latitude.

Once the capitalist form of reproduction is abolished, it is only a matter of the volume of the expiring portion — expiring and there- fore to be reproduced in natura — of fixed capital (the capital which in our illustration functions in the production of articles of consump- tion) varying in various successive years. If it is very large in a certain year (in excess of the average mortality, as is the case with human beings), then it is certainly so much smaller in the next year. The quantity of raw materials, semi-finished products, and auxiliary ma- terials required for the annual production of the articles of consump- tion— provided other things remain equal — does not decrease in consequence. Hence the aggregate production of means of produc- tion would have to increase in the one case and decrease in the other. This can be remedied only by a continuous relative overproduction. There must be on the one hand a certain quantity of fixed capital produced in excess of that which is directly required; on the other hand, and particularly, there must be a supply of raw materials, etc., in excess of the direct annual requirements (this applies especially to means of subsistence). This sort of overproduction is tantamount to control by society over the material means of its own reproduction. But within capitalist society it is an element of anarchy.

This illustration of fixed capital, on the basis of an unchanged scale of reproduction, is striking. A disproportion in the production of fixed and circulating capital is one of the favourite arguments of the econo- mists in explaining crises. That such a disproportion can and must arise even when the fixed capital is merely preserved, that it can and must do so on the assumption of ideal normal production on the basis

