---
Volume: 36
Document_Title: "XII. The Reproduction of the Money Material "
Page_Range: "477-488"
---

# XII. The Reproduction of the Money Material 



**[p. 469]**

of simple reproduction of the already functioning social capital is something new to them.

XII. THE REPRODUCTION OF THE MONEY MATERIAL

One factor has so far been entirely disregarded, namely the annual reproduction of gold and silver. As mere material for articles of lux- ury, gilding, etc., there is as little occasion for special mention of them as there is of mentioning any other products. But they play an important role as money material and hence as potential money. For the sake of simplicity we here regard only gold as material for money.

According to older data the entire annual production of gold amounted to 800,000-900,000 lbs, equal roundly to 1,100 or 1,250 million marks. But according to Soetbeer53) it amounted to only 170,675 kilograms, valued at roundly 476 million marks, based on the average for 1871 to 1875. Of this amount Australia supplied roundly 167, the United States 166, and Russia 93 million marks. The re- mainder is distributed over various countries in amounts of less than 10 million marks each. During the same period, the annual produc- tion of silver amounted to somewhat less than 2 million kilograms, val- ued at 354'/2 million marks. Of this amount, Mexico supplied roundly 108, the United States 102, South America 67, Germany 26 million, etc.

Among the countries with predominantly capitalist production only the United States is a producer of gold and silver. The capitalist countries of Europe obtain almost all their gold, and by far the great- er part of their silver, from Australia, the United States, Mexico, South America, and Russia.

But we take it that the gold mines are in a country with capitalist production whose annual reproduction we are here analysing, and for the following reasons:

Capitalist production does not exist at all without foreign com- merce. But when one assumes normal annual reproduction on a given scale one also assumes that foreign commerce only replaces home prod- ucts by articles of other use or natural form, without affecting value relations, hence without affecting either the value relations in which the two categories, "means of production" and "articles of consump-

[^1]: " Ad. Soetbeer, Edelmetall-Produktion, Gotha, 1879 [S. 112].



don", mutually exchange, or the relations between constant capital, variable capital, and surplus value, into which the value of the prod- uct of each of these categories may be divided. The involvement of foreign commerce in analysing the annually reproduced value of prod- ucts can therefore only confuse without contributing any new ele- ment of the problem, or of its solution. For this reason it must be entire- ly discarded. And consequently gold too is to be treated here as a direct element of annual reproduction and not as a commodity ele- ment imported from abroad by means of exchange.

The production of gold, like that of metals generally, belongs in class I, the category which embraces the production of means of pro- duction. Supposing the annual production of gold is equal to 30 (for convenience's sake; actually the figure is much too high compared to the other figures of our scheme). Let this value be divisible into 20c + 5V + 5S; 20c are to be exchanged for other elements of Ic and this is to be studied latera; but the 5V + 5S (I) are to be exchanged for ele- ments of IIC, i.e., articles of consumption.

As for the 5V, every gold-producing establishment begins by buying labour power. This is done not with gold produced by this particular enterprise, but with a portion of the money supply in the country. The labourers buy with these 5V articles of consumption from II, and the latter buys with this money means of production from I. Let II buy gold from I to the amount of 2 as commodity material, etc. (compo- nent part of its constant capital), then 2V flow back to gold producers I in money which has already belonged to the circulation. If II does not buy any more material from I, then I buys from II by throwing its gold into circulation as money, since gold can buy any commodity. The difference is only that I does not act here as a seller, but only as a buyer. Gold miners I can always get rid of their commodity; it is al- ways in a directly exchangeable form.

Let us assume that some producer of yarn has paid 5V to his labour- ers, who create for him in return — aside from the surplus value — a yarn product = 5. For 5 the labourers buy from IIC, and the latter buys yarn from I for 5 in money, and thus 5V flow back in money to the spinner of yarn. Now in the case assumed I g (as we shall desig- nate the producers of gold) advances to his labourers 5V in money which previously belonged to the circulation. The labourers spend it for necessities of life, but only 2 of the 5 return from II to I g. How-

[^1]: See Engels' footnote 55) on p. 472 of this volume.





**[p. 471]**

ever I g can begin the process of reproduction anew, just as well as the producer of yarn. For his labourers have supplied him with 5 in gold, 2 of which he sold and 3 of which he still has, so that he has but to coin54' them, or turn them into banknotes to have his entire variable capital again directly in his hands in money form, without the further intervention of II.

Even this first process of annual reproduction has wrought a change in the quantity of money actually or virtually belonging to the circulation. We assumed that IIC bought 2V (I g) as material, and that I g has again laid out 3 — as the money form of his variable capi- tal— within II. Hence 3 of the mass of money supplied by the new gold production remained within II and did not return to I. Accord- ing to our assumption, II has satisfied its requirements in gold mate- rial. The 3 remain in its hands as a gold hoard. Since they cannot constitute any element of its constant capital, and since II had pre- viously enough money capital for the purchase of labour power; since furthermore these additional 3 g, with the exception of the deprecia- tion element, have no function to perform within IIC, for a portion of which they were exchanged (they could only serve to cover the depre- ciation element pro tanto, if IIC (1) should be smaller than IIC (2), which would be accidental); on the other hand, however, namely with the exception of the depreciation element, the entire commodity product IIC, must be exchanged for means of production I(v + S) — this money must be transferred in its entirety from IIC to IIS, no mat- ter whether it exists in necessities of life or articles of luxury, and vice versa, corresponding commodity value must be transferred from IIS to IIC. Result: A portion of the surplus value is stored up as a money hoard.

In the second year of reproduction, provided the same proportion of annually produced gold continues to be used as material, 2 will again flow back to I g, and 3 will be replaced in natura, i. e., will be re- leased again in II as a hoard, etc.

With reference to the variable capital in general: The capitalist I g, like every other capitalist, must continually advance this capital in money for the purchase of labour power. But so far as this v is con- cerned, it is not he but his labourers who have to buy from II. It can

[^1]: 54 ' "A considerable quantity of GOLD BULLION* is taken direct to the mint at San Francisco by the owners." Reports of H. M. Secretaries of Embassy and Legation, 1879, Part III, p. 337.

[^2]: " In the original, this English term is given in parentheses after its German equivalent.





**[p. 472]**

therefore never happen that he should act as a buyer, throwing gold into II without the initiative of II. But to the extent that II buys ma- terial from him, and must convert constant capital IIC into gold mate- rial, a portion of (I g)v flows back to him from II in the same way that it does to other capitalists of I. And so far as this is not the case, he re- places his v in gold directly from his product. But to the extent that the v advanced in money does not flow back to him from II, a portion of the already available means of circulation (received from I and not returned to I) is converted in II into a hoard and for that reason a portion of its surplus value is not expended for articles of consump- tion. Since new gold-mines are continually opened or old ones re- opened, a certain portion of the money to be laid out by I g in v is al- ways part of the money existing prior to the new gold production; it is thrown by I g through his labourers into II, and unless it returns from II to I g it forms there an element of hoard formation.

But as for (I g)s, I g can always act here as buyer. He throws his s in the shape of gold into circulation and withdraws from it in return ar- ticles of consumption IIC. In II the gold is used in part as material, and thus functions as a real element of the constant constituent por- tion c of the productive capital. When this is not the case it becomes once more an element of hoard formation as a part of IIS persisting in the form of money. We see, then, aside from Ic which we reserve for a later analysis,55' that even simple reproduction, excluding accumu- lation proper, namely reproduction on an extended scale, necessarily includes the storing up, or hoarding, of money. And as this is an- nually repeated, it explains the assumption from which we started in the analysis of capitalist production, namely, that at the beginning of the reproduction a supply of money corresponding to the exchange of commodities is in the hands of capitalist classes I and II. Such an ac- cumulation takes place even after deducting the amount of gold be- ing lost through the depreciation of money in circulation.

It goes without saying that the more advanced capitalist produc- tion, the more money is accumulated in all hands, and therefore the smaller the quantity annually added to this hoard by the production of new gold, although the absolute quantity thus added may be consid- erable. We revert once more in general terms to the objection3 raised

[^1]: 55' The study of the exchange of newly produced gold within the constant capital of department I is not contained in the manuscript.— F.E.

[^2]: See this volume, p. 328-29.





**[p. 473]**

against Tooke: How is it possible that every capitalist draws a sur- plus value in money out of the annual product, i. e., draws more money out of the circulation than he throws into it, since in the long run the capitalist class itself must be regarded as the source of all the money thrown into circulation?

We note on this point by summarising the ideas developed pre- viously (in Chapter XVII):

1) The only assumption essential here, namely, that in general there is money enough for the exchange of the various elements of the mass of the annual reproduction, is not affected in any way by the fact that a portion of the commodity value consists of surplus value. Supposing that the entire production belonged to the labourers them- selves and that their surplus labour were therefore only surplus la- bour for themselves, not for the capitalists, then the quantity of circu- lating commodity values would be the same and, other things being equal, would require the same amount of money for their circulation. The question in either case is therefore only: Where does the money come from to make possible the exchange of this total of commodity values? It is not at all: Where does the money come from to turn the surplus value into money?

It is true, to revert to it once more, that every individual commod- ity consists of c + v + s, and the circulation of the entire quantity of commodities therefore requires on the one hand a definite sum of money for the circulation of the capital c + v and on the other hand another sum for the circulation of the revenue of the capitalists, the surplus value s. For the individual capitalist, as well as for the entire capitalist class, the money in which they advance capital is different from the money in which they spend their revenue. Where does the latter money come from? Simply from the mass of money in the hands of the capitalist class, hence by and large from the total mass of money in society, a portion of which circulates the revenue of the cap- italists. We have already seen above that every capitalist establish- ing a new business recoups the money which he spent for his mainte- nance in articles of consumption as money serving to convert his sur- plus value into money, once his business is fairly under way. But gen- erally speaking the whole difficulty has two sources:

In the first place, if we analyse only the circulation and the turn- over of capital, thus regarding the capitalist merely as a personification of capital, not as a capitalist consumer and man about town, we see indeed that he is continually throwing surplus value into circulation



**[p. 474]**

as a component part of his commodity capital, but we never see money as a form of revenue in his hands. We never see him throwing money into circulation for the consumption of surplus value.

In the second place, if the capitalist class throws a certain amount of money into circulation in the shape of revenue, it looks as if it were paying an equivalent for this portion of the total annual product, and this portion thereby ceases to represent surplus value. But the surplus product in which the surplus value is represented does not cost the cap- italist class anything. As a class, the capitalists possess and enjoy it gratuitously, and the circulation of money cannot alter this fact. The alteration brought about by this circulation consists merely in the fact that every capitalist, instead of consuming his surplus product in na- tura, a thing which is generally impossible, draws commodities of all sorts up to the amount of the surplus value he has appropriated out of the general stock of the annual surplus product of society and appro- priates them. But the mechanism of the circulation has shown that while the capitalist class throws money into circulation for the pur- pose of spending its revenue, it also withdraws this money from the circulation, and can continue the same process over and over again; so that, considered as a class, capitalists remain as before in possession of the amount of money necessary for the conversion of surplus value into money. Hence, if the capitalist not only withdraws his surplus value from the commodity market in the form of commodities for his consumption fund, but at the same time gets back the money with which he has paid for these commodities, he has evidently withdrawn the commodities from circulation without paying an equivalent for them. They do not cost him anything, although he pays money for them. If I buy commodities for one pound sterling and the seller of the commodities gives me the pound back for surplus product which I got for nothing, it is obvious that I received the commodities gratis. The constant repetition of this operation does not alter the fact that I constantly withdraw commodities and constantly remain in posses- sion of the pound, although I part with it temporarily to purchase commodities. The capitalist constantly gets this money back as a money equivalent of surplus value that has not cost him anything.

We have seen that with Adam Smith the entire value of the social product resolves itself into revenue, into v + s, so that the constant capital value is set down as zero. It follows necessarily that the money required for the circulation of the yearly revenue must also suffice for the circulation of the entire annual product, that therefore in our il-



**[p. 475]**

Let us listen to Smith and Tooke themselves. Smith says in Book II, Ch. 2:

"The circulation of every country may be considered as divided into two different branches: the circulation of the dealers with one another, and the circulation between the dealers and the consumers. Though the same pieces of money, whether paper or metal, may be employed sometimes in the one circulation and sometimes in the other; yet as both are constantly going on at the same time, each requires a certain stock of money of one kind or another, to carry it on. The value of the goods circulated between the different dealers never can exceed the value of those circulated between the dealers and the consumers; whatever is bought by the dealers, being ultimately destined to be sold to the consumers. The circulation between the dealers, as it is carried on by whole- sale, requires generally a pretty large sum for every particular transaction. That be- tween the dealers and the consumers, on the contrary, as it is generally carried on by retail, frequently requires but very small ones, a shilling, or even a halfpenny, being of- ten sufficient. But small sums circulate much faster than large ones Though the an- nual purchases of all the consumers, therefore, are at least" //this "at least" is rich// "equal in value to those of all the dealers, they can generally be transacted with a much smaller quantity of money;" etc.

Th. Tooke remarks to this passage from Adam Smith (in An Inquiry into the Currency Principle, London, 1844, pp.34 to 36 passim62):

[^1]: "There can be no doubt that the distinction here made is substantially correct the interchange between dealers and consumers including the payment of wages, which constitute the PRINCIPAL MEANS'1 of the consumers All the transactions be- tween dealers and dealers, by which are to be understood all sales from the producer or importer, through all the stages of intermediate processes of manufacture or otherwise to the retail dealer or the exporting merchant, are resolvable into movements or trans- fers of capital. Now transfers of capital do not necessarily suppose, nor do actually as a matter of fact entail, in the great majority of transactions, a passing of money, that is, banknotes or coin— I mean bodily, and not by fiction — at the time of transfer The total amount of the transactions between dealers and dealers must, in the last resort, be determined and limited by the amount of those between dealers and consumers."

[^2]: a In the original, the words "principal means" are given in parentheses after their Ger-

[^3]: man equivalent.



2) Every industrial capital, on beginning its career, throws at one fling money into circulation for its entire fixed constituent part, which it recovers but gradually, in the course of years, by the sale of its an- nual product. Thus it throws at first more money into circulation than it draws from it. This is repeated at every renewal of the entire capital in natura. It is repeated every year for a certain number of en- terprises whose fixed capital is to be renewed in natura. It is repeated piecemeal at every repair, every only partial renewal of the fixed cap- ital. While, then, on the one hand more money is withdrawn from circulation than is thrown into it, the opposite takes place on the other hand.

In all lines of industry whose production period — as distinguished from its working period — extends over a longer term, money is contin- ually thrown into circulation during this period by the capitalist producers, partly in payment for labour power employed, partly in the purchase of means of production to be consumed. Means of pro- duction are thus directly withdrawn from the commodity market, and articles of consumption, partly indirectly, by the labourers spending their wages, and partly directly, by the capitalists, who do not by any means suspend their consumption, although they do not simultaneously throw any equivalent in commodities on the market. During this period the money thrown by them into circulation serves to convert commodity value, including the surplus value embodied in it, into money. This factor becomes very important at an advanced stage of capitalist production in the case of long-drawn out en- terprises, such as are undertaken by stock companies, etc., for in- stance the construction of railways, canals, docks, large municipal buildings, iron shipbuilding, large-scale drainage of land, etc.

3) While the other capitalists, aside from the investment in fixed capital, draw more money out of the circulation than they threw into it on purchasing the labour power and the circulating elements, the gold- and silver-producing capitalists throw only money into the cir- culation, aside from the precious metal which serves as raw material,



**[p. 477]**

while they withdraw only commodities from it. The constant capital, with the exception of the depreciated portion, the greater portion of the variable capital and the entire surplus value, save the hoard which may be accumulating in their own hands, are all thrown into circulation as money.

4) On the one hand all kinds of things circulate as commodities which were not produced during the given year, such as land lots, houses, etc.; furthermore goods whose period of production exceeds one year, such as cattle, timber, wine, etc. For this and other phenom- ena it is important to establish that aside from the quantity of money required for the immediate circulation there is always a cer- tain quantity in a latent non-functioning state which may start func- tioning if the impulse is given. Furthermore, the value of such prod- ucts circulates often piecemeal and gradually, like the value of houses in the rents over a number of years.

On the other hand not all movements of the process of reproduc- tion are effected through the circulation of money. The entire process of production, once its elements have been procured, is excluded from circulation. All products which the producer himself consumes di- rectly, whether individually or productively, are also excluded. Under this head comes also the feeding of agricultural labourers in kind.

Therefore the quantity of money which circulates the annual prod- uct, exists in society, having been gradually accumulated. It does not belong to the value produced during the given year, except per- haps the gold used to make good the loss of depreciated coins.

This exposition presupposes the exclusive circulation of precious metals as money, and in this circulation the simplest form of cash purchases and sales; although money can function also as a means of payment, and has actually done so in the course of history, even on the basis of circulating plain metal coin, and though a credit system and certain aspects of its mechanism have developed upon that basis.

This assumption is not made from mere considerations of method, although these are important enough, as demonstrated by the fact that Tooke and his school, as well as their opponents, were con- tinually compelled in their controversies concerning the circulation of banknotes to revert to the hypothesis of a purely metallic circulation. They were forced to do so post festum* and did so very superficially,

[^1]: a See this volume, p. 314.





**[p. 478]**

But the simplest study of money circulation presented in its primitive form — and this is here an immanent element of the process of annual reproduction — demonstrates:

a) Developed capitalist production, and hence the domination of the wage system, being assumed, money capital obviously plays a prominent role, since it is the form in which the variable capital is advanced. In step with the development of the wage system, all prod- ucts are transformed into commodities and must therefore - with a few important exceptions — pass in their entirety through the trans- formation into money as one phase of their movement. The quantity of circulating money must suffice for this conversion of commodities into money, and the greater part of this mass is furnished in the form of wages, of the money which is advanced by the industrial capitalists as the money form of the variable capital in payment for labour pow- er, and which mainly functions in the hands of the labourers only as a medium of circulation (means of purchase). It is quite the opposite of natural economya such as is predominant under every form of bondage (including serfdom), and still more so in more or less primi- tive communities, whether or not they are attended by conditions of bondage or slavery.

In the slave system, the money capital invested in the purchase of la- bour power plays the role of the money form of the fixed capital, which is but gradually replaced as the active period of the slave's life expires. Among the Athenians, therefore, the gain realised by a slave owner directly through the industrial employment of his slave, or in- directly by hiring him out to other industrial employers (e. g., for min- ing), was regarded merely as interest (plus amortisation) on the ad- vanced money capital, just as the industrial capitalist under capitalist production places a portion of the surplus value plus the depreciation of his fixed capital to the account of interest and replacement of his fixed capital. This is also the rule with capitalists offering fixed capital (houses, machinery, etc.) for rent. Mere household slaves, whether they perform necessary services or are kept as luxuries for show, are not considered here. They correspond to the modern servant class. But the slave system too — so long as it is the dominant form of pro-

[^1]: a "Natural economy" in the sense of the relative absence of commodity ex-

[^2]: change; see this volume, pp. 120-22.





**[p. 479]**

ductive labour in agriculture, manufacture, navigation, etc., as it was in the developed states of Greece and in R o m e - preserves an element of natural economy. The slave market maintains its supply of the commodity labour power by war, piracy, etc., and this rapine is not promoted by a process of circulation, but by the actual appropriation of the labour power of others by direct physical compulsion. Even in the United States, after the conversion of the buffer territory between the wage labour states of the North and the slavery states of the South into a slave-breeding region for the South, where the slave thrown on the market thus became himself an element of the annual reproduc- tion, this did not suffice for a long time, so that the African slave trade was continued as long as possible to satisfy the market.

b) The fluxes and refluxes of money taking place spontaneously on the basis of capitalist production in the exchange of the annual prod- uct; the one-time advances of fixed capitals to the full extent of their value and the successive extraction of this value from the circulation in the course of years, in other words, their gradual reconstitution in money form by the annual formation of hoards, a hoarding which is essentially different from the parallel accumulation of hoards based on the annual production of new gold; the different lengths of time for which, depending on the duration of the production period of the commodities, money must be advanced, and consequently always hoarded anew before it can be recovered from the circulation by the sale of the commodities; the different lengths of time for which money must be advanced, if only resulting from the different distances of the places of production from their markets; furthermore the differences in the magnitude and period of the reflux according to the condition or relative size of the productive supplies in the various lines of busi- ness and in the individual businesses of the same line, and hence the lengths of periods for which the elements of constant capital are bought, and all this during the year of reproduction— all these differ- ent aspects of spontaneous movement had only to be noted, and made conspicuous, through experience, in order to give rise to a me- thodical use of the mechanical appliances of the credit system and to a real fishing out of available loanable capitals.

To this must be added the difference between those lines of business whose production proceeds under otherwise normal conditions contin-

