---
Volume: 36
Document_Title: "1. The Formation of a Hoard "
Page_Range: "499-503"
---

# 1. The Formation of a Hoard 



**[p. 491]**

If we were to conceive the process of circulation between the vari- ous parts of the annual reproduction as taking place in a straight line — which would be wrong as it always consists with a few excep- tions of mutually opposite movements — then we should have to start from the producer of gold (or silver) who buys without selling, and to assume that all others sell to him. In that case the entire yearly social surplus product (the bearer of the entire surplus value) would pass into his hands, and all the other capitalists would distribute among themselves pro rata his surplus product, which naturally exists in the form of money, the natural embodiment in gold of his surplus value. For that portion of the product of the gold producer which has to make good his active capital is already tied up and disposed of. The surplus value of the gold producer, created in the form of gold, would then be the sole fund from which all other capitalists would draw the material for the conversion of their annual surplus product into money. The magnitude of its value would then have to be equal to the entire annual surplus value of society, which must first assume the guise of a hoard. Absurd as these assumptions would be, they would do nothing more than explain the possibility of a universal simulta- neous formation of a hoard, and would not get reproduction itself one step further, except on the part of the gold producer.

Before we resolve this seeming difficulty we must distinguish be- tween the accumulation in department I (production of means of production) and in department II (production of articles of con- sumption). We shall start with I.

It is evident that both the investments of capital in the numerous branches of industry constituting class I and the different individual investments of capital within each of these branches of industry, ac- cording to their age, i. e., the space of time during which they already have functioned, quite aside from their volumes, technical conditions,

[^1]: I. ACCUMULATION IN DEPARTMENT I

[^2]: 1. THE FORMATION OK A HOARD





**[p. 492]**

For instance, let A sell 600 ( = 400c + 100v + 100s) to B (who may represent more than one buyer). A sells 600 in commodities for 600 in money, of which 100 are surplus value which he withdraws from cir- culation and hoards in the form of money. But these 100 in money are but the money form of the surplus product, which was the bearer of a value of 100. The formation of a hoard is no production at all, hence not an increment of production, either. The action of the capi- talist consists here merely in withdrawing from circulation the 100 in money he grabbed by the sale of his surplus product, holding on to it and impounding it. This operation is carried on not alone by A, but at numerous points along the periphery of circulation by other capi- talists, A', A", A"', all of them working with equal zeal at this sort of hoard formation. These numerous points at which money is withdrawn from circulation and accumulated in numerous individual hoards or potential money capitals appear as so many obstacles to circulation, because they immobilise the money and deprive it of its capacity to circulate for a certain length of time. But it must be borne in mind that hoarding takes place in the simple circulation of commodities long before this is based on capitalist commodity production. The quantity of money existing in society is always greater than the part of it in actual circulation, although this swells or subsides according to circumstances. We find here again the same hoards, and the same formation of hoards, but now as an element immanent in the capital- ist process of production.

One can understand the pleasure experienced when all these po- tential capitals within the credit system, by their concentration in the hands of banks, etc., become disposable, "LOANABLE CAPITAL", money cap-



**[p. 493]**

ital, which indeed is no longer passive and music of the future,64 but active capital growing rank.

However, A accomplishes the formation of a hoard only to the ex- tent that he acts only as a seller, so far as his surplus product is con- cerned, and not afterward as a buyer. His successive production of sur- plus products, the vehicles of his surplus value to be converted into money, is therefore the premise of his forming a hoard. In the present case, where we are examining only the circulation within category I, the natural form of the surplus product, as that of the total product of which it is a part, is the natural form of an element of constant capital I, that is to say, it belongs in the category of means of production creating means of production. We shall see presently what becomes of it, what function it performs, in the hands of buyers B, B', B"', etc.

It must be noted at this point first and foremost that although withdrawing money to the amount of his surplus value from circula- tion and hoarding it, A on the other hand throws commodities into it without withdrawing other commodities in return. The capitalists B, B', B", etc., are thereby enabled to throw money into circulation and withdraw only commodities from it. In the present case these commod- ities, according to their natural form and their destination, enter into the constant capital of B, B", etc., as fixed or circulating element. We shall hear more about this anon when we deal with the buyers of the surplus product, with B, B', etc.

Let us note by the way: Once more we find here, as we did in the case of simple reproduction, that the exchange of the various compo- nent parts of the annual product, i.e., their circulation (which must comprise at the same time the reproduction of the capital, and indeed its restoration in its various determinations, such as constant, vari- able, fixed, circulating, money and commodity capital) does not by any means presuppose mere purchase of commodities supplemented by a subsequent sale, or a sale supplemented by a subsequent pur- chase, so that there would actually be a bare exchange of commodity for commodity, as political economy assumes, especially the free- trade school since the Physiocrats and Adam Smith. We know that the fixed capital, once the expenditure for it is made, is not renewed during the entire period of its function, but continues to act in its old form, while its value is gradually precipitated in the form of money. Now we have seen that the periodical renewal of fixed capital IIC (the

entire capital value IIC being converted into elements worth I(v+s)) presupposes on the one hand the mere purchase of the fixed part of IIC, reconverted from the form of money into its natural form, to which corresponds the mere sale of Is; and presupposes on the other hand the mere sale on the part of IIC, the sale of its fixed (depreciation) part of the value precipitated in money, to which corresponds the mere purchase of Is. In order that the exchange may take place normally in this case, it must be assumed that the mere purchase on the part of IIC is equal in magnitude of value to the mere sale on the part of IIC, and that in the same way the mere sale of Is to IIC, section 1, is equal to its mere purchase from IIC, section 2 (p. 440).a Otherwise simple reproduction is disturbed. A mere purchase here must be offset by a mere sale there. It must likewise be assumed in this case that the mere sale ofthat portion of Is which forms the hoards of A, A', A" is bal- anced by the mere purchase of that portion of Is which converts the hoards of B, B' and B" into elements of additional productive capital.

So far as the balance is restored by the fact that the buyer acts later on as a seller to the same amount of value, and vice versa, the money returns to the side that advanced it on purchasing, and which sold be- fore it bought again. But the actual balance, so far as the exchange of commodities itself, the exchange of the various portions of the annual product is concerned, demands that the values of the commodities ex- changed for one another be equal.

But inasmuch as only one-sided exchanges are made, a number of mere purchases on the one hand, a number of mere sales on the oth- er — and we have seen that the normal exchange of the annual prod- uct on the basis of capitalism necessitates such one-sided metamor- phoses— the balance can be maintained only on the assumption that in amount the value of the one-sided purchases and that of the one- sided sales tally. The fact that the production of commodities is the general form of capitalist production implies the role which money is playing in it not only as a medium of circulation, but also as money capital, and engenders certain conditions of normal exchange pecu- liar to this mode of production and therefore of the normal course of reproduction, whether it be on a simple or on an extended scale — conditions which change into so many conditions of abnormal course, into so many possibilities of crises, since a balance is itself an accident owing to the spontaneous nature of this production.

[^1]: a See this volume, pp. 462-64.



