---
Volume: 36
Document_Title: "2. The Additional Constant Capital "
Page_Range: "503-509"
---

# 2. The Additional Constant Capital 



**[p. 495]**

The constant supply of labour power on the part of working class I, the reconversion of a portion of commodity capital I into the money form of variable capital, the replacement of a portion of commodity capital II by natural elements of constant capital IIC — all these nec- essary premises demand one another, but they are brought about by a very complicated process, including three processes of circulation which occur independently of one another but intermingle. This proc- ess is so complicated that it offers ever so many occasions for running abnormally.

The surplus product, the bearer of surplus value, does not cost its appropriators, capitalists I, anything. They are by no manner of means obliged to advance any money or commodities in order to ob- tain it. Even among the Physiocrats an advance {avance) was the gen- eral form of value embodied in elements of productive capital. Hence what capitalists I advance is nothing but their constant and variable capital. The labourer not only preserves by his labour their

[^1]: 2. THE ADDITIONAL CONSTANT CAPITAL



It follows, then, that, considering the matter merely from the angle of volume of values, the material substratum of extended reproduc- tion is produced within simple reproduction. It is simply surplus la- bour of working class I expended directly in the production of means of production, in the creation of virtual additional capital I. The for- mation of virtual additional money capital on the part of A, A' and A" (I) — by the successive sale of their surplus product which was formed without any capitalist expenditure of money — is therefore sim- ply the money form of additionally produced means of production I.

Consequently production of virtual additional capital expresses in



**[p. 497]**

our case (we shall see that it may also be formed in a quite different way) nothing but a phenomenon of the process of production itself, production, in a particular form, of elements of productive capital.

The production of additional virtual money capital on a large scale, at numerous points of the periphery of circulation, is therefore but a result and expression of multifarious production of virtually ad- ditional productive capital, whose rise does not itself require addi- tional expenditure of money on the part of the industrial capitalist.

The successive transformation of this virtually additional produc- tive capital into virtual money capital (hoard) on the part of A, A', A", etc. (I), occasioned by the successive sale of their surplus product — hence by repeated one-sided sale of commodities without a supple- menting purchase — is accomplished by a repeated withdrawal of money from circulation and a corresponding formation of a hoard. Except in the case where the buyer is a gold producer, this hoarding does not in any way imply additional wealth in precious metals, but only a change in the function of money previously circulating. A while ago it functioned as a medium of circulation, now it functions as a hoard, as virtually new money capital in the process of forma- tion. Thus the formation of additional money capital and the quan- tity of the precious metals existing in a country are not in any causal relation to each other.

Hence it follows furthermore: The greater the productive capital already functioning in a country (including the labour power, the producer of the surplus product, incorporated in it), the more devel- oped the productive power of labour and thereby also the technical means for the rapid expansion of the production of means of produc- tion— the greater therefore the quantity of the surplus product both as to its value and as to the quantity of use values in which it is repre- sented— so much the greater is

1) the virtually additional productive capital in the form of a sur- plus product in the hands of A, A', A", etc., and

2) the quantity of this surplus product transformed into money, and hence that of the virtually additional money capital in the hands of A, A', A". The fact that Fullarton for instance does not want to hear of overproduction in the ordinary sense but only of the overproduc- tion of capital, meaning money capital, again shows how extremely little of the mechanism of their own system even the best bourgeois economists understand.

Whereas the surplus product, directly produced and appropriated

by the capitalists A, A', A" (I), is the real basis of the accumulation of capital, i. e., of extended reproduction, although it does not actually function in this capacity until it reaches the hands of B, B', B", etc. (I), it is on the contrary absolutely unproductive in its chrysalis stage of money — as a hoard and virtual money capital in process of gradual formation — runs parallel with the process of production in this form, but lies outside of it. It is a DEADWEIGHT3 of capitalist production. The eagerness to utilise this surplus value accumulating as virtual money capital for the purpose of deriving profits or revenue from it finds its object accomplished in the credit system and "papers". Money capi- tal thereby gains in another form an enormous influence on the course and the stupendous development of the capitalist system of production.

The surplus product converted into virtual money capital will grow so much more in volume, the greater was the total amount of al- ready functioning capital whose functioning brought it into being. With the absolute increase of the volume of the annually reproduced virtual money capital its segmentation also becomes easier, so that it is more rapidly invested in any particular business, either in the hands of the same capitalist or in those of others (for instance mem- bers of the family, in the case of a partition of inherited property, etc.). By segmentation of money capital is meant here that it is wholly detached from the parent stock in order to be invested as a new money capital in a new and independent business.

While the sellers of the surplus product, A, A', A", etc. (I), have ob- tained it as a direct outcome of the process of production, which does not envisage any additional acts of circulation except the advance of constant and variable capital required also in simple reproduction; and while they thereby construct the real basis for reproduction on an extended scale, and in actual fact manufacture virtually additional capital, the attitude of B, B', B", etc. (I), is different. 1) Not until it reaches the hands of B, B', B", etc. (I), will the surplus product of A, A', A", etc., actually function as additional constant capital (we leave out of consideration for the present the other element of productive capi- tal, the additional labour power, in other words, the additional vari- able capital). 2) In order that that surplus product may reach their hands an act of circulation is wanted — they must buy it.

[^1]: a In the original, these English words are given in parentheses after their Ger- man equivalent.





**[p. 499]**

In regard to point 1, it should be noted here that a major portion of the surplus product (virtually additional constant capital), although produced by A, A', A" (I) in a given year, may not function as indus- trial capital in the hands of B, B', B" (I) until the following year or still later. With reference to point 2, the question arises: Whence comes the money needed for the process of circulation?

Since the products created by B, B', B", etc. (I), re-enter in natura into their own process, it goes without saying that pro tanto a portion of their own surplus product is transferred directly (without any intervention of circulation) to their productive capital and becomes an additional element of constant capital. And pro tanto they do not effect the conversion of the surplus product of A, A', etc. (I), into money. Aside from this, where does the money come from? We know that B, B', B", etc. (I), have formed their hoard in the same way as A, A', etc., by the sale of their respective surplus products. Now they have arrived at the point where their hoarded, only virtual, money capital is to function effectively as additional money capital. But this is merely going round in circles. The question still remains: Where does the money come from which the B's (I) before withdrew from circulation and accumulated?

We know from the analysis of simple reproduction that capitalists I and II must have a certain amount of money at hand in order to be able to exchange their surplus product. In that case the money which served only as revenue to be spent for articles of consumption re- turned to the capitalists in the same measure in which they had ad- vanced it for the exchange of their respective commodities. Here the same money re-appears, but performing a different function. The A's and B's (I) supply one another alternately with the money for converting surplus product into additional virtual money capital, and throw the newly formed money capital alternately back into circulation as a means of purchase.

The only assumption made in this case is that the amount of money in the country in question (the velocity of circulation, etc., being con- stant) should suffice for both the active circulation and the reserve hoard. As we have seen this is the same assumption as had to be made in the case of the simple circulation of commodities. Only the func- tion of the hoards is different in the present case. Furthermore, the available amount of money must be larger, (1) because under capitalist production all the products (with the exception of newly produced precious metals and the few products consumed by the producer him-

If this is generally true of the first phase of capitalist production, in which even the credit system is mostly accompanied by metallic cir- culation, so it applies to the most developed phase of the credit system as well, to the extent that metallic circulation remains its basis. On the one hand an additional production of precious metals, being al- ternately abundant or scarce, may here exert a disturbing influence on the prices of commodities not only at long, but also at very short intervals. On the other hand the entire credit mechanism is contin- ually occupied in reducing the actual metallic circulation to a rela- tively more and more decreasing minimum by means of sundry opera- tions, methods, and technical devices. The artificiality of the entire machinery and the possibility of disturbing its normal course increase to the same extent.

The different B's, B"s, B"'s, etc. (I), whose virtual new money capital enters upon its function as active capital, may have to buy their prod- ucts (portions of their surplus product) from one another, or to sell them to one another. Pro tanto the money advanced by them for the circulation of their surplus product flows back under normal condi- tions to the different B's in the same proportion in which they had ad- vanced it for the circulation of their respective commodities. If the money circulates as a means of payment, then only balances are to be squared so far as the mutual purchases and sales do not cover one another. But it is important first and foremost to assume here, as everywhere, metallic circulation in its simplest, most primitive form, because then the flux and reflux, the squaring of balances, in short all elements appearing under the credit system as consciously regulated processes, present themselves as existing independently of the credit system, and the matter appears in primitive form instead of the later, reflected form.

