---
Volume: 36
Document_Title: "2. Second Illustration "
Page_Range: "522-528"
---

# 2. Second Illustration 

to 8,784c + 2,782v = 11,566; in other words, in the ratio of 100:160. The total surplus value was originally 1,750; it is now 2,782. The con- sumed surplus value was originally 500 for I and 600 for II, a total of 1,100. The previous year it was 732 for I and 745 for II, a total of 1,477. It has therefore grown in the ratio of 100:134.65

2. SECOND ILLUSTRATION

Now take the annual product of 9,000, which is altogether a com- modity capital in the hands of the class of industrial capitalists in a form in which the general average ratio of the variable to the con- stant capital is that of 1:5. This presupposes a considerable develop- ment of capitalist production and accordingly of the productivity of social labour, a considerable previous increase in the scale of produc- tion, and finally a development of all the circumstances which pro- duce a relative surplus population among the working class. The an- nual product will then be divided as follows, after rounding off the various fractions:

I. 5,000c + l,000v + l,000s = 7,000} _ II. l,430 c+ 285 v+ 285s = 2,000/ ~ y , u u u '

Now take it that capitalist class I consumes one half of its surplus value = 500, and accumulates the other half. In that case (l,000v + 500J I = 1,500 would have to be converted into 1,500 II,.. Since IIC here amounts to only 1,430, it is necessary to add 70 from the surplus value. Subtracting this sum from 285 IIS leaves 215 IIS. Then we have:

in the consumption fund of the capitalists and labourers.

[^1]: I. 5,000c + 500s (to be capitalised) + l,500(v + s)

[^2]: II. l,430c + 70s (to be capitalised) + 285v + 215s.

[^3]: As 70 IIS are directly annexed here to IIC, a variable capital of 70/5 = 14 is required to set this additional constant capital in motion. These 14 must also come out of the 215 II„ so that 201 II„ remain, and we have:

[^4]: II. (l,430c + 70c) + (285v + 14v) + 201s.

[^5]: The exchange of 1,500 I(v + ,/2s) for 1,500 IIC is a process of simple re- production, and nothing further need be said about it. However a few



peculiarities remain to be noted here, which arise from the fact that in accumulating reproduction I(v+1/2s) is not replaced solely by IIC, but by IIC plus a portion of IIS.

It goes without saying that as soon as we assume accumulation, I(v + S) is greater than IIC, not equal to IIC, as in simple reproduction. For in the first place, I incorporates a portion of its surplus product in its own productive capital and converts 5/6 of it into constant capital, therefore cannot replace these 5/6 simultaneously by articles of con- sumption II. In the second place, I has to supply out of its surplus product the material for the constant capital required for accumula- tion within II, just as II has to supply I with the material for the vari- able capital, which is to set in motion the portion of I's surplus prod- uct employed by I itself as additional constant capital. We know that the actual, and therefore also the additional, variable capital consists of labour power. It is not capitalist I who buys from II a sup- ply of necessities of life or accumulates them for the additional labour power to be employed by him, as the slaveholder had to do. It is the labourers themselves who trade with II. But this does not prevent the articles of consumption of his additional labour power from being viewed by the capitalist as only so many means of production and main- tenance of his eventual additional labour power, hence as the natural form of his variable capital. His own immediate operation, in the pres- ent case that of I, consists in merely storing up the new money capi- tal required for the purchase of additional labour power. As soon as he has incorporated this in his capital, the money becomes a means of purchase of commodities II for this labour power, which must find these articles of consumption at hand.

By the by. Mr. Capitalist, as well as his press, is often dissatisfied with the way in which the labour power spends its money and with the commodities II in which it realises this money. On such occasions he philosophises, babbles of culture, and dabbles in philanthropical talk, for instance after the manner of Mr. Drummond, the Secretary of the British Embassy in Washington. According to him, The Nation //a journal// carried last October 1879 an interesting article, which contained among other things the following passages:

[^1]: "The working people have not kept up in culture with the growth of invention, and they have had things showered on them which they do not know how to use, and thus make no market for." //Every capitalist naturally wants the labourer to buy his com- modities.// "There is no reason why the working man should not desire as many com-



forts as the minister, lawyer, and doctor, who is earning the same amount as himself." //This class of lawyers, ministers, and doctors have indeed to be satisfied with the mere desire of many comforts!// "He does not do so, however. The problem remains, how to raise him as a consumer by rational and healthful processes, not an easy one, as his ambition does not go beyond a diminution of his hours of labour, the demagogues rather inciting him to this than to raising his condition by the improvement of his men- tal and moral powers" (Reports of H. M.'s Secretaries of Embassy and Legation on the Manufactures, Commerce, etc., of the Countries in which they reside. London, 1879, p. 404).

Long hours of labour seem to be the secret of the rational and healthful processes, which are to raise the condition of the labourer by an improvement of his mental and moral powers and to make a rational consumer of him. In order to become a rational consumer of the commodities of the capitalist, he should above all begin to let his own capitalist consume his labour power irrationally and un- healthfully — but the demagogue prevents him! What the capitalist means by a rational consumption is evident wherever he is conde- scending enough to engage directly in the trade with his own labour- ers, in the TRUCKSYSTEM, which includes also the supplying of homes to the labourers, so that the capitalist is at the same time a landlord for them — a branch of business among many others.

The same Drummond, whose beautiful soul is enamoured of the capitalist attempts to uplift the working class, tells in the same report among other things of the cotton goods manufacture of the Lowell and Lawrence Mills. The boarding and lodging houses for the factory girls belong to the corporation or company owning the mills. The stew- ardesses of these houses are in the employ of the same company which prescribes them rules of conduct. No girl is permitted to stay out after 10 p.m. Then comes a gem: a special police patrol the grounds for the purpose of guarding against an infringement of those rules. After 10 p. m. no girl can leave or enter. No girl may live any- where but on the premises of the company, and every house on it brings the company about 10 dollars per week in rent. And now we see the rational consumer in his full glory:

But the main secret of making a rational consumer out of the la-

[^1]: "As the ever present piano is however to be found in many of the best appointed working girls' boarding houses, music, song, and dance come in for a considerable share of the operatives' attention at least among those who, after 10 hours' steady work at the looms, need more relief from monotony than actual rest" (p. 412).





**[p. 517]**

bourer is yet to be told. Mr. Drummond visits the cutlery works of Turner's Falls (Connecticut River), and Mr. Oakman, the treasurer of the concern, after telling him that especially American table cut- lery beat the English in quality, continues:

"The time is coming that we will beat England as to prices also, we are ahead in quality now, that is acknowledged, but we must have lower prices, and shall have it the moment we get our steel at lower prices and have our labour down" (p. 427).

A reduction of wages and long hours of labour — that is the essence of the "rational and healthful processes" which are to raise the labourer to the dignity of a rational consumer, so that "he make a market for things showered upon him" by culture and growth of invention.

Consequently, just as I has to supply the additional constant capi- tal for II out of its surplus product, so II likewise supplies the addi- tional variable capital for I. II accumulates for I and for itself, so far as the variable capital is concerned, by reproducing a greater portion of its total product, and hence especially of its surplus product, in the shape of necessary articles of consumption.

In production on the basis of increasing capital, I v + S) must be equal to IIC plus that portion of the surplus product which is re- incorporated as capital, plus the additional portion of constant capi- tal required for the expansion of the production in II; and the mini- mum of this expansion is that without which real accumulation, i. e., a real expansion of production in I itself, is unfeasible.

Reverting now to the case which we examined last, we find in it the peculiarity that IIC is smaller than I(v + 1/2s), than that portion of prod- uct I which is spent as revenue for articles of consumption, so that on exchanging the 1,500 I(v + s! a portion of surplus product II = 70 is at once realised. As for IIC = 1,430, it must, all other condi- tions remaining the same, be replaced by an equal magnitude of value out of Iiv + s), in order that simple reproduction may take place in II, and to that extent we need not pay any more attention to it here. It is different with the additional 70 IIS. What for I is merely a replacement of revenue by articles of consumption, merely commod- ity exchange meant for consumption, is for II not a mere reconver- sion of its constant capital from the form of commodity capital into its natural form, as it is in simple reproduction, but a direct process of

accumulation, a transformation of a part of its surplus product from the form of articles of consumption into that of constant capital. If with -£ 70 in money (money reserve for the conversion of surplus value) I buys the 70 IIS, and if II does not buy in exchange 70 I5, but accumulates the £ 70 as money capital, then the latter is indeed al- ways an expression of additional product (precisely of the surplus product of II, of which it is an aliquot part), although this is not a product which re-enters production; but in that case this accumula- tion of money on the part of II would at the same time express that 70 I, in means of production are unsaleable. There would be a relative overproduction in I, corresponding to the simultaneous non- expansion of reproduction on the part of II.

But apart from this: Until the 70 in money, which came from I, re- turn to it, wholly or in part, through the purchase of 70 I, by II, this 70 in money figures wholly or in part as additional virtual money cap- ital in the hands of II. This is true of every exchange between I and II, until the mutual replacement of their respective commodities has effected the return of the money to its starting-point. But in the nor- mal course of things the money figures here only transiently in this role. In the credit system, however, where all temporarily released additional money is supposed to function at once actively as an addi- tional money capital, such only temporarily released money capital may be enthralled, for instance, serve in new enterprises of I, while it should have to realise additional product held there in other enterprises. It must also be noted that the annexation of 70 I, to constant capital II requires at the same time an expansion of variable capital II by 14. This implies — about the way it did in I, in the direct incorporation of surplus product Is in capital If — that the reproduction in II is al- ready in process with a tendency toward further capitalisation; in other words, it implies expansion ofthat portion of the surplus prod- uct which consists of necessary means of subsistence.

The product of 9,000 in the second illustration must, as we have seen, be distributed in the following manner for the purpose of repro- duction, if 500 I, are to be capitalised. In doing so we merely consider the commodities and neglect the money circulation.

[^1]: I. 5,000c. + 500s (to be capitalised) + l,500!v + s, consumption fund = 7,000 in commodities.





**[p. 519]**

II. l,500c + 299v + 201s = 2,000 in commodities. Grand total, 9,000 in commodities.

Capitalisation takes place in the following manner: In I the 500s which are being capitalised divide into 5/6 = 417C + '/6 = 83v. The 83v draw an equal amount out of IIS, which buys elements of constant capital and adds them to IIC. An increase of IIC by 83 implies an increase of IIV by '/s of 83 = 17. We have, then, af- ter this exchange:

I. (5,000c + 417s)c + (l,000v + 83,)v = 5,417c + l,083v = 6,500 II. (l,500 c+ 83 s) c+ (299v + 17,)v = l,583c + 316v = 1,899

Total 8,399.

The capital in I has grown from 6,000 to 6,500, or by '/12. That of II has grown from 1,715 to 1,899, or by not quite '/9.

The reproduction on this basis in the second year brings the capital at the end of that year to:

I. (5,417c + 452s)c + (l,083v + 90s)v = 5,869c + l,173v = 7,042 II. (l,583c + 42, + 90s)c + (316v + 8, + 18,)v = l,715c + 342v = 2,057,

and at the end of the third year, we have a product of

Total capital = 9,858.

In three years of growing reproduction the total capital of I has in- creased from 6,000 to 7,629 and that"of II from 1,715 to 2,229, the aggregate social capital from 7,715 to 9,858.

[^1]: I. 5,869c4- l,173 v+ 1,173, II. l,715 c+ 342 v+ 342s.

[^2]: If I accumulates one half of its surplus value, as before, we find that I(v + 1/2sj yields 1,173v + 587(1/2s) = 1,760, i. e.,more than the entire 1,715 IIC, an excess of 45. This must again be balanced by transfer- ring an equal amount of means of production to IIC, which thus grows by 45, necessitating an addition of '/5 = 9 to IIV. Furthermore, the capitalised 587 Is divide into 5/6 and '/6, i.e., 489c and 98v. The 98 imply in II a new addition of 98 to the constant capital, and this again an increase of variable capital II by '/5 = 20. Then we have:

[^3]: II. (5,869c + 489s)c + (l,173v + 98s)v = 6,358c 4- l,271v = 7,629 II. (l,715c + 45s + 98s)c + (342v + 9S + 20.)v = l,858c + 371v = 2,229



