---
Volume: 36
Document_Title: "3. Replacement of IIC in Accumulation "
Page_Range: "528-530"
---

# 3. Replacement of IIC in Accumulation 

3. REPLACEMENT Of II, IN ACCUMULATION"

In the exchange of I,v + s! for II, we thus meet with various cases. In simple reproduction both of them must be equal and replace one another, since otherwise simple reproduction cannot proceed without disturbance, as we have seen above.

In accumulation it is above all the rate of accumulation that must be considered. In the preceding cases we assumed that the rate of accu- mulation in I = '/2s I) a n d a l s o t n a I : it remained constant from year to year. We changed only the proportion in which this accumulated capital was divided into variable and constant capital. We then had three cases:

1) Ifv+ i/2s; = Ho which is therefore smaller than I v + S1. This must always be so, otherwise I does not accumulate.

2) I v + i/2sl is greater than II(. In this case the replacement is effect- ed by adding a corresponding portion of IIS to IIr, so that this sum = I ) v +|, 2 s. Here the replacement for II is not a simple repro- duction of its constant capital, but accumulation, an augmentation of its constant capital by that portion of its surplus product which it ex- changes for means of production of I. This augmentation implies at the same time a corresponding addition to variable capital II out of its own surplus product.

3) I,v+ i/2s! ' s smaller than IIr. In this case II does not fully repro- duce its constant capital by means of exchange and must make good the deficit by purchase from I. But this does not entail any further ac- cumulation of variable capital II, since its constant capital is fully re- produced only by this operation. On the other hand that part of capi- talists I, who accumulate only additional money capital, have al- ready accomplished a portion of this accumulation by this transac- tion.

The premise of simple reproduction, that I,v + S, = II,, is not only incompatible with capitalist production, although this does not ex- clude the possibility that in an industrial cycle of 10-11 years some year may show a smaller total production than the preceding year, so that not even simple reproduction takes place compared to the pre- ceding year. Besides that, considering the natural annual increase in population, simple reproduction could take place only to the extent that a correspondingly larger number of unproductive servants would partake of the 1,500 representing the aggregate surplus value. But accumulation of capital, real capitalist production, would be im-



**[p. 521]**

possible under such circumstances. The fact of capitalist accumula- tion therefore excludes the possibility of IIC being equal to I(v + s). Nevertheless it might occur even with capitalist accumulation that, in consequence of the course taken by the processes of accumulation during a preceding series of periods of production, IIr might become not only equal but even bigger than I,v + s). This would mean an over- production in II and could not be adjusted in any other way than by a great crash, in consequence of which some capital of II would get transferred to I.

Nor does it alter the relation of I(v + s! to IIC if a portion of constant capital II reproduces itself, as happens for instance in the use of home-grown seeds in agriculture. This portion of IIC is no more to be taken into consideration in the exchange between I and II than is Ic. Nor does it change matters if a part of the products of II is capable of entering into I as means of production. It is covered by a part of the means of production supplied by I, and this part must be deducted on both sides at the outset, if we wish to examine in pure and unobscured form the exchange between the two large classes of social production, the producers of means of production and the producers of articles of consumption.

It must be noted that in this exposition of accumulation the value of the constant capital is not presented accurately so far as that capi- tal is a part of the value of the commodity capital it helped to pro- duce. The fixed portion of the newly accumulated constant capital enters into the commodity capital only gradually and periodically, according to the different natures of these fixed elements. Therefore whenever raw materials, semi-finished goods, etc., enter in huge quan- tities into the production of commodities, the commodity capital con- sists for the most part of replacements of the circulating constant com- ponents and of the variable capital. (On account of the turnover of the circulating component parts this way of presenting the mat- ter may nevertheless be adopted. It is then assumed that the circulat- ing portion together with the portion of value of the fixed capital

[^1]: Hence under capitalist production I(v + Sl cannot be equal to IIC, in other words, the two cannot balance in mutual exchange. On the other hand, if 1-^- is taken as that portion of Is which is spent by capitalists I as revenue, I(v + i) may be equal to, larger, or smaller than IIC. But I(V + -j must always be smaller than I I r + s! by as much as that portion of IIS which must be consumed under all cir- cumstances by capitalist class II.



