---
Volume: 36
Document_Title: "IV. Supplementary Remarks "
Page_Range: "530-535"
---

# IV. Supplementary Remarks 



**[p. 522]**

transferred to it is turned over so often during the year that the ag- gregate sum of the commodities supplied is equal in value to all the cap- ital entering into the annual production.) But wherever only auxili- ary materials are used for mechanical industry, and no raw material, there the labour element = v must re-appear in the commodity capi- tal as its larger constituent. While in the calculation of the rate of prof- it the surplus value is figured on the total capital, regardless of whether the fixed components periodically transfer much or little value to the product, the fixed portion of constant capital is to be in- cluded in the calculation of the value of any periodically created com- modity capital only to the extent that on an average it yields value to the product on account of wear and tear.

IV. SUPPLEMENTARY REMARKS

The original source of the money for II is v + s of the gold produc- tion I exchanged for a part of IIC. The v + s of the producer of gold does not enter into II only to the extent that he accumulates surplus value or converts it into means of production I, i. e., to the extent that he expands his production. On the other hand, since the accumula- tion of money on the part of the gold producer himself leads ultimat- ely to reproduction on an extended scale, a portion of the surplus value of gold production not spent as revenue passes as additional var- iable capital of the gold producer into II, promotes here the forma- tion of new hoards or supplies new means with which to buy from I without selling to it direct. From the money derived from this I(V + S) of the production of gold that portion of the gold must be de- ducted which certain branches of production II need as raw material, etc., in short as an element for the replacement of their constant capi- tal. An element for the preliminary formation of hoards — for the purpose of future extended reproduction — exists in the exchange be- tween I and II: for I only if part of Is is sold one-sidedly, without a bal- ancing purchase, to II and serves here as additional constant capital II; for II, when the same is the case on the part of I for additional va- riable capital; furthermore, if a part of the surplus value spent by I as revenue is not covered by IIC, hence a part of IIS is bought with it and thus converted into money. If I(v + !( is greater than IIC, then IIC need not for its simple reproduction replace in commodities from I what I consumed out of IIS. The question arises to what extent hoarding can take place within the sphere of exchange of capitalists II among



**[p. 523]**

themselves, an exchange which can consist only of a mutual exchange of IIS. We know that direct accumulation takes place within II by the direct conversion of a portion of IIS into variable capital (just as in I a portion of Is is directly converted into constant capital). In the vari- ous age categories of accumulation within the various lines of business of II, and for the individual capitalists in each line of business, the matter is explained mutatis mutandis in the same way as in I. Some are still in the stage of hoarding, and sell without buying; the others are on the point of actual expansion of reproduction, and buy without selling. The additional variable money capital is, true enough, first invested in additional labour power, but this buys means of subsist- ence from the hoarding owners of the additional articles of consump- tion entering into the consumption of the labourers. From these own- ers, pro rata to their hoard formation, the money does not return to its point of departure. They hoard it.



NOTES

AND INDEXES



