---
Volume: 42
Document_Title: "1864"
Page_Range: "42-99"
---

# 1864



**[p. 1864]**

1

MARX TO CARL KLINGS1

IN SOLINGEN

[Draft]

London, 4 October 1864

1 Modena Villas, Maitland Park, Haverstock Hilla

Dear Friend,

I was glad to receive further signs of life from the workers of the Rhine Province, as conveyed in your letter of 28 September.2

B. Becker or M. Hess? I know them both; both are old members of the movement. Both are honest. Neither of them is capable of leading a movement of any import. Becker is a weak man, in fact, and Hess a muddle-head. It is therefore difficult to decide between the two. I also think it scarcely signifies which of the two you elect, as there will be no difficulty in finding the right people at the decisive moment.

Enquiries have reached me, e.g. from Berlin, as to whether I would accept the presidency?3 I replied that it was impossible, because for the present I am still forbidden to take up residence in Prussia.b However, I would certainly think it a good gesture by the party, vis-à-vis both the Prussian government and the bourgeoisie, if the workers' congress were to elect me, to which I would make a public reply explaining why I cannot accept the election. Such a step would be important for the following reason in particular: a big public MEETING of workers took place here in London on 28 September, with English, German, French and Italian workers participating. The Parisian workers had, moreover, sent over a special delegation, headed by Tolain, a worker, who was put up as

[^1]: 11 The Marx family lived here from March 1864 to March 1875. - b At this point, the following passage is deleted from the manuscript: 'in any case, if I were to assume the leadership, the government would immediately suppress the whole thing.'





**[p. 4]**

At this MEETING, a Comité was elected — an international Comité to represent the workers' interests, which is directly linked to the workers in Paris and includes the leaders of the London workers. I was elected as representative of the German workers (and my old friend Eccarius, the tailor, along with me)." If I were thus nominated by the German congress—although I would have to decline the election now—the Comité and with it the workers in London and Paris would regard this as a gesture on the part of the German workers. Next year, the Comité will be calling an international workers' congress in Brussels.5 Unfortunately, I shall not be able to attend in person, as I am still exiled from the model state of Belgium, just as I am from France and Germany.

I shall send you some 'Manifestoes'b at the first safe opportunity. This letter will be brought to you by one of my friends' from Barmen.

I have been sick throughout the past year (being afflicted with carbuncles and furuncles). Had it not been for that, my work on political economy, 'Capital', would already have come out. I hope I may now complete it finally in a couple of months and deal the bourgeoisie a theoretical blow from which it will never recover.

Farewell; you may count on my remaining ever a loyal champion of the working class.

Yours

K. M.

[^1]: First published, in Russian, in Bolshevik, Printed according to the original No. 8, 1934

[^2]: a At this point, the following passage is deleted from the manuscript: 'to establish a liaison between the German workers' movement and the English one.' - b K. Marx and F. Engels, Manifesto of the Communist Party. - c At this point in the manuscript, the following words are deleted: 'C. Siebel from Barmen or'.





**[p. 2]**

MARX TO SOPHIE VON HATZFELDT6

IN BERLIN

[Copy]

London, 16 October 1864 Modena Villas, Maitland Park, Haverstock Hill

My dear Countess,

In recent weeks I have been so seriously ill that I was obliged to keep to my bed and hence, unfortunately, to defer until now my reply to your friendly letter of 1 October.

I assure you that I still cannot bring myself to accept Lassalle's death as a fait accomplil I see him in my mind's eye so full of life, spirit, energy and plans, so very, very young, and now suddenly his voice is silenced and his breath departed—I find it impossible to reconcile the two, to conceive of both simultaneously, and the reality oppresses me like an awful, nightmarish dream.

You are quite right to imply that no one appreciated Lassalle's greatness and significance better than I. He himself was most aware of this, as his letters to me show. As long as the correspondence between us lasted, I always expressed to him my heartfelt appreciation of his achievements, on the one hand, while always frankly advising him of my criticisms and reservations regarding those things I considered faulty, on the other.

In one of his last letters to me he wrote, in that peculiarly forceful manner he had, of the satisfaction that this gave him. But, apart from all his abilities, I felt affection for him as a person. The pity is that we have always concealed this fact from one another, as if we were going to live for ever"

[^1]: First published in: F. Lassalte. Nachgelas- Printed according to the original sene Briefe und Schriften, Bd. III, Stuttgart- Berlin, 1922

[^2]: 11 The end of the letter is missing.





**[p. 3]**

MARX TO ENGELS

IN MANCHESTER

[London,] 2 November 1864

Dear Engels,

Your long silence worries me. I presume you are back.7 Why have we not heard from you?

I have all kinds of important things to tell you, which I shall do immediately as soon as you give some sign of life.

Salut.

Your

K. M.

First published in MEGA, Abt. Ill, Printed according to the original Bd. 3, Berlin, 1930 , , Published in English for the first time

4

ENGELS TO MARX

Manchester, 2 November 1864

Dear Moor,

The crisis and its innumerable vexations must be my excuse for not writing to you earlier. Never in my whole life have I had such a glut of Jewish chicanery as now, and you can just imagine how much correspondence that entails.

Later this week, I shall go and see Borchardt to complete the business of Lupus' legacy,8 which is now about to be concluded.

My travels7 took me as far as Sonderburg3; I did not go to Copenhagen, in part because I had neither the time nor a passport, and in part because Bille, the editor of the Dagbladet,

[^1]: IN LONDON

[^2]: a Danish name: Scriderborg.





**[p. 7]**

Schleswig is a curious country—the east coast very pretty and prosperous, the west coast also prosperous, heath and moors in the middle. AH the bays extremely beautiful. The people are decidedly one of the biggest and heaviest of all the human races on Earth, especially the Frisians on the west coast. One only needs to travel across the country to be convinced that the main stock of the English comes from Schleswig. You know the Dutch Frisians, in particular those colossal Frisian women with their delicate white and fresh red complexions (which also predominate in Schleswig). They are the ancestral types of the northern English, and in particular those colossal women, who are also found here in England, all are of decidedly Frisian type. There is no doubt in my mind that the 'Jutes' (Anglo-Saxon eotena cyn), who migrated to England with the Angles and Saxons, were Frisians, and that the Danish migration to Jutland, as to Schleswig, dates only from the 7th or 8th century. The present Jutland dialect is proof enough of this.

These fellows are great fanatics and, for that reason, really took my fancy. You must have read something by that extraordinary 'Dr K. J. Clement of North Friesland'. The man is typical of the whole race. These fellows are in deadly earnest about their struggle against the Danes, which is their whole purpose in life, and the Schleswig-Holstein theory is not an end but a means for them. They regard themselves as a physically and morally superior race to the Danes, and indeed they are. Bismarck was really kidding himself when he thought he could get the measure of such people by his own methods.9 We have held out against the Danes for fifteen years and became consolidated on our territory, and are we supposed to let these Prussian bureaucrats get us down?—that's what these fellows were saying.

The situation regarding language and nationality is most bizarre. In Flensburg, where the Danes claim that the whole of the northern part is Danish, especially by the harbour, all the children, who were playing down by the harbour there in droves, spoke Low German. On the other hand, north of Flensburg the language of the people is Danish—i.e. the Low Danish dialect, of which I hardly understood a word. The peasants in the tavern at Sundewitt,3 however, spoke Danish, Low German and High

[^1]: Danish name: Sundeved.





**[p. 8]**

I have recently been doing some work on the philology and archaeology of the Frisians, Angles, Jutes and Scandinavians, and here, too, I have come to the conclusion that the Danes are no more than a nation of advocates, who will knowingly and brazenly lie, even in matters of scholarship, if it is in their interest. Mr Worsaae ON THE DANES ETC. IN ENGLAND TO WIT.3 By way of contrast, next time you come here I will show you a book, which is in the main very good, by the lunatic Clement from North Friesland about Schleswig and the migration to England in the 6th to 8th centuries.b The fellow is certainly knowledgeable, despite his eccentricity. But he does appear to be a prodigious drinker.

To my surprise, the Prussians in Schleswig created a very good impression, particularly the Westphalians, who looked like giants at the side of the Austrians, but admittedly much more ponderous. The whole army went around entirely unshaven, with their buttons undone and generally bearing themselves in a most unsoldier-like fashion, so that the natty Austrians acted almost like Prussians here. Amongst the officers of the Prussian artillery and engineers I encountered several very agreeable fellows, who told me all kinds of interesting things, but the infantry and cavalry maintained a most dignified reticence and enjoyed a thoroughly bad reputation with the population. There was a notable lack of enthusiasm for Prince Frederick Charles' conduct of the war, and no one at all, not even those who had been decorated, had a good word to say about the distribution of rewards. The non- commissioned officers behaved well towards the older soldiers, and indeed generally when in company; on the other hand, I did see one of the Brandenburg sappers drilling recruits in Sonder- burg, a real old infamous Prussian. It was, by the way, remarkable to observe the different tone that prevailed in the 3rd and 7th army corps in this respect. Your March Tribe, as Georg Jung has

[^1]: a J. J. A. Worsaae, An Account of the Danes and Norwegians in England, Scotland, and Ireland. - b K. J. Clement, Schleswig, das urheimische Land des nicht dänischen Volks der Angeln und Frisen und Englands Mutterland, wie es war und ward.





**[p. 9]**

What do you think of the commercial crisis? I think it is all over, i.e. the worst is. It is a pity these things do not come to a proper head.

Can you explain: Rüm Hart, klar Kimmang? Give my kindest regards to your wife and the girls.

Your

F. E.

First published in Der Briefwechsel zwischen Printed according to the original F. Engels und K. Marx, Bd. 3, Stuttgart, , . , , „ , . , r 1913 Published in English for the first time

5

ENGELS TO HERMANN ENGELS10

Manchester, 2 November 1864

Dear Hermann,

No joy with the Niersteiner. The wine arrived here with a distinct sourness to it, it does not taste at all as it did at your house, and I shall therefore have to forgo any more orders.

The money crisis, I think, is over. Now only 3 things can have any effect:

1. possible major insolvencies owing to bad news from India. Such are, however, not expected by those most deeply involved. India had its crisis in the spring, when discount was at 32% in Bombay.

2. large deliveries of cotton arriving in Liverpool, say 100,000 bales in one week, which would mean the sudden completion of a mass of loss-making contracts and consequent insolvencies. This danger also appears to be receding. The Liverpool men know how deeply they are all implicated and are being extremely tolerant towards each other. Those who cannot pay the difference lost in

[^1]: IN BARMEN

[^2]: a as an equal among equals

[^3]: 3-1196





**[p. 10]**

A favourable factor in both cases is that the money market is experiencing a decided lift and confidence is returning.

3. if in America Lincoln were not elected. However, his re-election is as certain as anything ever can be in America. I have no doubt that the war will be continued until the South is totally subjugated,11 irrespective of who becomes President, but if Mc Clellan should be elected, at least 6 months of uncertainty would ensue, until people learned precisely what his policy was. But after the elections in the individual states, there can be no question of that happening.

The result of all this will, in my view, be as follows: the American war will continue, certainly, until late next year, and will end with bands of Southerners resorting to brigandry, as in Naples 2 years ago,12 in the course of which much cotton will be burnt. We shall therefore remain dependent on the same sources for our cotton as in the past year. Supplies from these are only increasing slowly. However, since consumption has become more and more limited owing to high prices, stocks of finished goods, even in the hands of the individual consumers themselves, must now be exceedingly small, and as consumption after all absolutely requires a very large quantity of cotton goods, I believe that increased demand will fully accommodate the increased supply of raw cotton, and, consequently, not only will the downward trend cease to continue, but by next summer we ought, by and large, to see a general rise.

During the money crisis the price of cotton was not determined by the state of the cotton trade but by the state of the money market in general. I believe we've got over that now, and prices will once more be determined naturally by supply and demand, and then with the healthy state of business and the absolute deficiency in stocks, and with prices lower now, I am sure we can expect business to thrive with prices as a whole rising.

There may yet be sporadic shocks, perhaps from India, perhaps from Liverpool. We may, in consequence, again find ourselves momentarily somewhat depressed, but it cannot last, nor will it be of any import, and it would assuredly be an error to speculate à la baisse2 on such evidence. Conversely, I am equally

[^1]: a on prices falling





**[p. 11]**

SEWINGS were still very quiet, especially seven LEAS, for which there is not a buyer to be found.

This is my opinion. We are covered for one to two months and are expecting substantial ORDERS in a week or two.

Please pass on my regards to Emma, the little ones, Rudolf, the Blanks and the Boellings, and, if you are writing to Engelskirchen, then to motherb and everyone there, too. The chicaneries arising from the fall in prices have caused me a deal of botheration.

Your

Frederick

6

[London,] 4 November 1864

Dear FREDERICK,

I was very pleased to hear from you again. All well here. Myself included, since your departure from here'

[^1]: First published in Deutsche Revue, Jg. 46, Printed according to the original Bd. II, 1921 and the Deutsche Revue

[^2]: Published in English in full for the first time

[^3]: MARX TO ENGELS13

[^4]: IN MANCHESTER

[^5]: a The manuscript breaks off here. The end of the letter is printed according to the Deutsche Revue. - b Elisabeth Engels

[^6]: 3*





**[p. 12]**

I would translate your runic rum hart, etc.a as Dutch-Frisian for open heart, clear horizon. But I fear that there may be a quite different explanation, so I give up the riddle.

You must send all the enclosed papers back to me as soon as read. / still need them. So that I do not forget any of the things I wanted to tell you, I am going to number them.

1. Lassalle and Countess Hatzfeldt. The lengthy document is a copy of a circular that Herwegh's wife (honi soit qui mal y pense0), Emma, sent to Berlin immediately after the catastrophe,14 so that EXTRACTS from it could be put in the newspapers. You will see from it how cleverly Emma manages to put herself and her spineless Georg in the limelight at the beginning, in the middle, and at the end of the report; how the account evades two important points, firstly Rüstow's meeting with Dönniges and daughter, when the latter must have renounced

Lassalle before the scene recounted by Emma took place. Secondly: how the duel came about. Lassalle wrote the insulting letter. But then something happened which is not reported and which led directly to the duel.

The suppression of two such important and crucial points makes one sceptical of the accuracy of the account.

The Hatzfeldt letter. On her arrival in Berlin I got Liebknecht to take her a brief letter of condolence from myself.' Liebknecht wrote to me d that she was complaining 'I left Lassalle in the lurch', as if I could have done the man any greater service than by keeping my mouth shut and letting him do as he liked. (In his last speech before the Düsseldorf assizes, he played the part of Marquis Posa with handsome William as Philipp II,e whom he was trying to persuade to suspend the present constitution, proclaim universal direct suffrage and ally himself with the proletariat.15) You can see what is behind her letter and what she wants of me. I wrote a very amicable but diplomatically discouraging letter in reply.1 The latterday Redeemer! That personage and the sycophants, who surround her, are mad.

[^1]: a See this volume, p. 9. - b the shame be his who thinks ill of it (the motto of the English Order of the Garter) - c See present edition, Vol. 41, p. 563. - d on 30 September 1864 - e Marquis Posa and Philipp II are characters from Schiller's Don Carlos; William — King William I of Prussia. - f See this volume, p. 5.



^ *»*»&< «Ulu O x f c - y A S ^ U ^ . y J . < ^ x > A a ^

-»- w •~M~ "^ ^ \ V— t ,v

Kr

n "v— ^ "ri "^ ^ r »

[^1]: Third page of Marx's letter to Engels of 4 November 1864







**[p. 15]**

Apropos. A couple of NUMBERS of E. Jones' Notes to the People (1851, 1852) happened to fall into my hands again; as far as the economic articles are concerned, the main points in them had been written directly under my guidance and partly even in direct collaboration with myself.3 WELL! What do I find in them? That at that time we conducted the same polemic—only better—against the co-operative movement, since it claimed, in its present narrow-minded form, to be the last word, as Lassalle conducted against Schulze-Delitzsch in Germany 10-12 years later.

In his last will and testament Lassalle has 'installed' Bernhard Becker, the unfortunate fellow, who was Juch's editor on the Hermann for a while, as his successor in the office of President of the General Association of German Workers2—in his 'last will and testament' (like a ruling prince). The Association's congress meets in Düsseldorf this month,16 and strong opposition to this 'decree' by last will and testament is expected.

Also enclosed, letter from a worker in Solingen, Klings,2 in fact the clandestine leader of the Rhineland workers (former member of the League "). This letter is not to be returned but filed.

2 . Wo RKINGMENS INTERNATIONAL ASSOCIATION. Some time ago, London workers sent an address to workers in Paris about Poland and called upon them to act jointly in the matter.b

For their part, the Parisians sent over a deputation headed by a worker named Tolain, who was the real workers' candidate in the last elections in Paris,4 a thoroughly nice fellow. (His compagnons were quite nice lads, too.) A PUBLIC MEETING in St Martin's Hall was called, for 28 September 1864, by Odger (shoemaker, President of the local COUNCIL OF ALL LONDON TRADES' UNIONS and, in particular, also of the TRADES' UNIONS SUFFRAGE AGITATION SOCIETY,18 which is connected with Bright) and Cremer, a MASON and secretary of the MASONS' UNION. (These two had arranged the big TRADE-UNION MEETING on North America chaired by Bright in St James's Hall, ditto the Garibaldi manifestations.19) A certain Le Lubez was sent to ask me if I would participate pour les ouvriers allemands,'1 and, in particular, whether I was willing to provide a German worker to speak at the MEETING, etc. I provided them with Eccarius, who put on a splendid

[^1]: a E. Jones, 'A Letter to the Advocates of the Co-operative Principle, and to the Members of Co-operative Societies', 'Co-operation. What It Is, and What It Ought to Be' (see present edition, Vol. 11, pp. 573-89). - b 'To the Workmen of France from the Working Men of England', The Bee-Hive Newspaper, No. 112, 5 De- cember 1863. - c for the German workers





**[p. 16]**

performance, and I was also present myself in a non-speaking capacity on the PLATFORM. I knew that on this occasion 'people who really count' were appearing, both from London and from Paris, and I therefore decided to waive my usual standing rule to DECLINE

ANY SUCH INVITATIONS.

(Le Lubez is a young Frenchman, i.e. in his thirties; however, he grew u p in Jersey and London, speaks capital English and is a very good intermediary between the French and English workers.) (Music teacher and leçons" OF FRENCH.)

At the MEETING, which was chock-full (for THERE IS NOW EVIDENTLY A

REVIVAL OF THE WORKING CLASSES TAKING PLACE), M a j o r W o l f f ( T h u m - T a x i s , Garibaldi's adjutant) represented THE LONDON ITALIAN WORKINGMENS

SOCIETY.20 It was resolved to found a 'WORKINGMENS INTERNATIONAL ASSOCIATION', whose GENERAL COUNCIL is to have its seat in London and is to 'intermediate' between the workers' SOCIETIES in Germany, Italy, France, and England. Ditto that a General WORKINGMENS CONGRESS was to be convened in Belgium in 1865. A PROVISIONAL COMMITTEE was set u p at the MEETING, with Odger, Cremer and many others, some of them former Chartists, former Owenites, etc., representing England, Major Wolff, Fontana, and other Italians representing Italy, Le Lubez, etc. for France, Eccarius and myself for Germany. T h e COMMITTEE was empowered to co-opt as many people as it chose.

So FAR so GOOD. I attended the first meeting of the committee. A Sub-Committee (including myself) was set u p to draft a déclaration des principes and provisional rules.21 Indisposition prevented m e from attending the meeting of the Sub-Committee and the subsequent meeting of the full committee.

At these two meetings, which I did not attend,—that of the Sub-Committee and the subsequent one of the full committee— the following occurred:

Major Wolff had submitted the regulations (statutes) of the Italian Workers' Associations (which possess a central organisation, but, as emerged later, are essentially associated BENEFIT SOCIETIES) to be used by the new Association. I saw the stuff later. It was EVIDENTLY a concoction of Mazzini's, and that tells you in advance in what spirit and phraseology the real question, the labour question, was dealt with. As well as how the NATIONALITIES question intruded into it.22

What is more, an old Owenite, Weston—now a MANUFACTURER himself, a very amiable and worthy m a n — h a d drawn u p a

[^1]: a lessons





**[p. 17]**

The subsequent full committee meeting instructed the Sub- Committee to remodel Weston's programme, ditto Wolff's REGULA- TIONS. Wolff himself left to attend the congress of the ITALIAN WORKINGMEN'S ASSOCIATIONS in Naples and persuade them to join the central association in London.

A further meeting of the Sub-Committee, which again I did not attend, as I was informed of their rendezvous too late. At this meeting, 'une déclaration des principes' and a revised version of Wolff's rules were presented by Le Lubez and accepted by the Sub-Committee for submission to the full committee. The full committee met on 18 October. Eccarius wrote to me that it was a case of periculum in mora," so I went along and was really shocked when I heard the worthy Le Lubez read out a fearfully cliché-ridden, badly written and totally unpolished preamble

PRETENDING TO BE A DECLARATION OF PRINCIPLES, w i t h Ma ZZUli s h o w i n g through the whole thing from beneath a crust of the most insubstantial scraps of French socialism. What is more, the Italian rules had by and large been adopted, whose aim, apart from all their other faults, was really something quite impossible, a sort of central government of the European working classes (with Mazzini in the background, of course). I remonstrated mildly, and, after prolonged debate, Eccarius proposed that the Sub-Committee should subject the thing to further 'editing'. However, the 'SENTIMENTS' expressed in Lubez' DECLARATION were carried.

Two days later, on 20 October, Cremer representing England, Fontana (Italy) and Le Lubez met at my house. (Weston was unable to be present.) I had not previously had the papers (Wolff's and Le Lubez') in my hands, so could not prepare anything; but I was absolutely determined that NOT ONE SINGLE LINE of the stuff should be allowed to stand if I could help it. To gain time, I proposed that before we 'edited' the preamble, we ought to 'discuss' the RULES. This was done. It was 1 o'clock in the morning before the first of the 40 RULES was adopted. Cremer said (and that was my whole aim): we have nothing to put before the committee that is to meet on 25 October. We must postpone it until 1 November. But the Sub-Committee can meet on 27 October and attempt to reach a definite conclusion. This was agreed and the 'papers' were 'bequeathed' to me for my perusal.

[^1]: danger in delay (Livy, History of Rome, Vol. XXXVIII, Chap. 25)





**[p. 18]**

SORT OF REVIEW OF THE ADVENTURES OF THE Wo RKING CLASSES SINCE 184ô); O n t h e pretext that all the necessary facts were contained in this 'Address' and that we ought not to repeat the same things three times over, I altered the whole preamble, threw out the déclaration des principes

and finally replaced the 40 RULES by 10. Insofar as INTERNATIONAL POLITICS is mentioned in the 'Address', I refer to COUNTRIES and not to NATIONALITIES, and denounce Russia, not the minores gentium}' T h e Sub-Committee adopted all my proposals. I was, however, obliged to insert two sentences about 'DUTY' and 'RIGHT', and ditto about 'TRUTH, MORALITY AND JUSTICE' in the preamble to the rules,0 but these are so placed that they can d o no harm. 2 3

At the meeting of the General Committee my 'ADDRESS', etc., was adopted with great enthusiasm (UNANIMOUSLY). T h e debate on the form of publication, etc., is to take place next Tuesday. 0 Le Lubez has a copy of the 'Address' for translation into French and Fontana one for translation into Italian. (For a start there is a weekly CALLED Bee-Hive," edited by T r a d e Unionist Potter, a sort of Moniteur.) I am to translate the stuff into German myself.

It was very difficult to frame the thing so that our view should appear in a form that would make it ACCEPTABLE to the present outlook of the workers' movement. In a couple of weeks, the same people will be having MEETINGS on the franchise with Bright and Cobden. It will take time before the revival of the movement allows the old boldness of language to be used. We must be fortiter in re, suaviter in modo.1 You will get the stuff as soon as it is printed.

3. Bakunin sends his regards. H e left today for Italy where he is living (Florence). I saw him yesterday for the first time in 16 years. I must say I liked him very much, more so than previously. With regard to the Polish movement, he said the Russian government had needed the movement to keep Russia itself quiet, but had not counted on anything like an 18-month struggle. They had thus provoked the affair in Poland. Poland had been defeated by two things, the influence of Bonaparte and, secondly, the hesitation of

[^1]: a K. Marx, 'Inaugural Address of the Working Men's International Association'. - b smaller nations - c K. Marx, 'Provisional Rules of the Association'. - d 8 November - e The Bee-Hive Newspaper, No. 160, 5 November 1864. - f strong in deed, mild in manner





**[p. 19]**

the Polish aristocracy in openly and unambiguously proclaiming peasant socialism from the outset.24 From now on—after the collapse of the Polish affair—he (Bakunin) will only involve himself in the socialist movement.

On the whole, he is one of the few people whom after 16 years I find to have moved forwards and not backwards. I also discussed Urquhart's DENUNCIATIONS with him. (Apropos: the International Association will probably lead to a rupture between myself and these friends!2a) He inquired a great deal after yourself and Lupus. When I told him of the latter's death, he said straightaway that the movement had suffered an irreplaceable loss.

4. Crisis. By no means burnt out on the Continent yet (esp. France). Incidentally, what the crises have lost in intensity, they have now gained in frequency.

Salut.

Your

K. M.

First published in Der Briefwechsel zwischen Printed according to the original F. Engels und K. Marx, Bd. 3, Stuttgart, , , . . , . ,• , r .. r jojo Published in English in lull for the first time

7

Manchester, 7 November 1864

Dear Moor,

Your Frisian solution is quite right, but for one word. In North Frisian, Kimmang means: look, or eye; these North Frisians are of a speculative disposition and have substituted the inward horizon for the outward one, rather as Wagener is now calling for an 'inward Düppel'.27 It is an old sailors' saying.

[^1]: ENGELS TO MARX26

[^2]: IN LONDON

[^3]: The Herwegh and Hatzfeldt papers returned enclosed. What was the further provocation you refer to which Lassalle inflicted on the Walachiana and was suppressed by Emmab? Lassalle's fatal error was obviously that he did not throw the hossyc straight on

[^4]: Janko von Racowita - b Emma Herwegh - c Helene von Dönniges





**[p. 20]**

Old Hatzfeldt's idea that you should write an apotheosis of the latterday Redeemer" is really priceless.

The letter from the Solingen worker5 was not enclosed. I cannot wait to see the Address to the Workers,' it must be a real masterpiece, to judge by what you tell me of the people involved. But it is good that we are again making contact with people who do at least represent their class, which is what really matters ultimately. The effect on the Italians will be particularly good, as there is some chance that this will at last put an end to this Dio e popolod among the workers—it will come as quite a surprise to the worthy Giuseppe.6 Incidentally, I suspect that there will very soon be a split in this new association between those who are bourgeois in their thinking and those who are proletarian, the moment the issues become a little more specific.

Concerning Lupus' legacy, we had a meeting with the lawyer this morning.8 The sum still owing to you will amount to a little over £200; as soon as I have the money, I shall send most of it to you. There are still some details we do not know exactly, so we cannot finally calculate yet. The tax authorities want a list of all the books, and the exact value of the clock Lupus left. Please send me something itemising all the larger works and at the end just: so

Kind regards to your wife and the girls.

Your

F. E.

[^1]: MANY PAMPHLETS ETC., e v e r y t h i n g IN ONE CLUMP. I must close now, as I have to go to a Directors' meeting of the Schiller Institute,28 of which I am chairman, as you know, to Mr Borchardt's annoyance. Happily, beer has been introduced.

[^2]: First published abridged in Der Briefwech- sel zwischen F. Engels und K. Marx, Bd. 3, Stuttgart, 1913 and in full in MEG A Abt. Ill, Bd. 3, Berlin, 1930

[^3]: Printed according to the original

[^4]: Published in English in full for the first time

[^5]: •> Ferdinand Lassalle - b Carl Klings (see this volume, p. 15) - c K. Marx, 'Inaugural Address of the Working Men's International Association'. - d 'God and People' - e Mazzini





**[p. 8]**

ENGELS TO MARX29

IN LONDON

Manchester, 9 November 1864

Dear Moor,

In respect of the legacy,8 a further £200 enclosed in 2/2 à £100 banknotes. All being well, there will be approx. £40 to come. I'll send the other two halves as soon as you telegraph receipt.

You will have received the Dagblätter" with the celebrated article. Unfortunately, I could not find the 2nd section of the article, but there was not much in it.

The end appears to be approaching at Richmond.90 However, as long as Lee is not obliged to stay entirely on the defensive, which in particular means pulling all his troops back from the Shenandoah Valley as well, and as long as Richmond is not completely encircled, all the advances Grant makes against the defences at Richmond or Petersburg will be of little importance. It is just as it was at Sevastopol, which was not encircled either.31 I cannot imagine what Monsieur de Beauregard will do, probably no more than Hood before him, if as much. I have no confidence at all in this much-vaunted hero.

I am sending you yesterday's Guardian0; you must have a look at the RELIEF Committee's report in it, and see what a difference there is between Mr Marie's ateliers nationaux and those of your English gentlemen.32 In the case of the former, tasks of doubtful utility were performed, but most of the money that was spent passed into the hands of the workers, who had lost their jobs. Here, tasks of similarly doubtful importance (but ultimately of definite utility to the bourgeoisie) were also performed, but of the £230,000 a mere £12,100 is going to pass into the hands of the FACTORY OPERATIVES, for whom the whole sum was intended (in other words, just that which is set down as being for UNSKILLED LABOUR). The ACT FOR THE RELIEF OF THE DISTRESSED FACTORY OPERATIVES is thus turned into one FOR THE RELIEF OF THE UNDISTRESSED MIDDLE CLASSES, who thereby save on rates.

All my regards.

Your

F. E.

[^1]: a i.e. Dagbladet - b 'Central Executive Relief Committee', The Manchester Guardian, No. 5686, 8 November 1864





**[p. 22]**

First published in Der Briefwechsel zwischen Printed according to the original F. Engels und K. Marx, Bd. 3, Stuttgart, jgj3 Published in English in full for the first time

9

MARX TO ENGELS33

IN MANCHESTER

[London,] 14 November 1864

Dear Engels,

I have had to stay mainly in bed for almost a week on account of the carbuncle. The thing is now healing up. However, as the carbuncle is just below the breast, I still have trouble leaning forward in order to write. So, to keep it as brief as possible:

1. Please send the enclosed letters addressed to me back to me (both the one from Schweitzer and the one from Liebknecht) and reply by return, as the people need our reply as soon as possible.34

My view is that we should promise occasional contributions from time to time. It is important for us to have a mouthpiece in Berlin, especially for the sake of the association I was involved in founding in London/ and for the sake of the bookb I am planning to publish. It is also important that whatever we do, we do it together.

If you agree with me, you can send me a few lines for these chaps, or say in a few lines what statement / am to make in your name.

2. You will receive the 'ADDRESS' along with the 'PROVISIONAL RULES', etc., in a few days. The thing was not quite so difficult as you think, because we are dealing with 'workers' all the time. The only LITERARY MAN in the Association is the Englishman, Peter Fox, a writer and AGITATOR who is, at the same time, one of the people from The National Reformer (atheist but anti-Holyoake). I am

[^1]: a International Working Men's Association - h Capital





**[p. 23]**

3. Your stuff from the Guardianh I find most valuable. I had already pieced this abomination together from the 'FACTORY REPORTS', but only in a most laborious and fragmentary fashion.

4. 2 COPIES received from the Manchester SOLICITOR for signing, etc. In a day or two, I shall send you the signed copies, along with the list (inventory), etc., which you will then have to record. Of course, I can no longer reel off a complete list of all the stuff we left in the flat, etc., and put a value on it.8

That old HUMBUG Mc Culloch has died. I hope the British Museum buys up his ECONOMICAL LIBRARY. But no doubt Edinburgh will get in first.

Salut.

Your

K. M.

I have just come across P. Fox's letter, which I am enclosing; please send it back as soon as you have had time to peruse it.

10

ENGELS TO MARX

Manchester, 16 November 1864

Dear Moor,

Glad that the carbuncle is getting better. Let us hope it is the last. But do take arsenic.

Acknowledgement from the charming private secretary1 grate- fully received.

[^1]: First published in Der Briefwechsel zwischen Printed according to the original F. Engels und K. Marx, Bd. 3, Stuttgart, . . jnio Published in English in lull tor the first time

[^2]: IN LONDON

[^3]: a but one has to grin and bear it - b The Manchester Guardian (see this volume, p. 21) - c Laura Marx (a reference to Marx's receipt of money in respect of Wolff's legacy; see this volume, p. 20)





**[p. 24]**

And what a dreadful title: Der Socialdemokratl Why do these fellows not simply call it the Proletarier?

Enclosed papers returned with thanks. Why haven't you sent the Solingen letterc you promised?

Amid the nonsense written by Emma Herwegh,d I notice there is a further attempt to turn Lassalle into a demi-god, as follows: only his mighty spirit kept him alive for so long, anyone else would have given up the ghost 2 hours after being wounded—but you ask Allen some time about the way peritonitis develops following a wound, and he will tell you inflammation hardly sets in at all within 2 hours, and is scarcely ever fatal in less than 24 hours, and usually not until much later. These people are really given to deification.

Schaaffhausen in Bonn has given a pretty lecture on man and apes, pointing out that Asiatic anthropoids have rounded heads, like the human beings there, but in Africa both are long-headed, and commenting that, with the present state of knowledge, this is the strongest argument against the unity of the human race. Someone ought to try saying that at a gathering of naturalists in England!

It is splendid how Müller and the Rev. Cappell have made fools of that gang Kinkel, Juch & Co. even from the gallows. It is a long time since I have come across anything quite so absurd as the conduct of these fellows. How fortunate Gottfriedc is in the people whose cases he takes up! First Mac Donald, then Müller. And then

[^1]: a Sophie von Hatzfeldt - b of Lassalle - c See this volume, pp. 15, 20. - d ibid., p. 12. - e Gottfried Kinkel





**[p. 25]**

Your

F. E.

First published abridged in Der Briefwech- Printed according to the original sei zwischen F. Engels und K. Marx, Bd. 3, Stuttgart, 1913 and in full in MEGA, Published in English for the first Abt. Ill, Bd. 3, Berlin, 1930 t l m e

11

MARX TO ENGELS

IN MANCHESTER

[London,] 18 November [1864]

1. I am sending the stuff for the SOLICITOR. You will have to copy the enclosed inventory and put it into whatever shape you think fit.1

2. Ad vocemh Solingen. I had put the letter out READY when I sent you the last but one letter-package, and it hasn't been 'seen any more since then'.' I suspect it has ensconced itself in a notebook and WILL TURN UP one fine morning.

3. Ad vocem Schweitzer. Is a Dr of Law, formerly of Frankfurt am Main. Published a confused pamphlet against Vogt in 1859.d Subsequently, a social novel I have not read.e Declared his vigorous support for Lassalle. Later, during Lassalle's lifetime, he got to know sundry writings of ours at Liebknecht's house while staying in Berlin and, even at that time, sent me a message through Liebknecht saying how amazed he was at finding that everything about Lassalle that he liked had been plagiarised.

[^1]: DEAR FRED,

[^2]: a See this volume, pp. 20, 23. - b With regard to - c J. W. Goethe, 'Der Fischer'. - d J. B. Schweitzer, Widerlegung von Carl Vogt's Studien zur gegenwärtigen Lage Europa's. - e J. B. Schweitzer, Lucinde oder Capital und Arbeit.





**[p. 26]**

As far as Lassalle's apotheosis is concerned,b the Hamburg Nordstern, edited by that jackass Bruhn (who at the same time continues to print Heinzen's ELUCUBRATIONS, as though nothing had happened), is exclusively dedicated to this matter just as before, and the Social-Demokrat can scarcely compete with it in that respect.

Old Hatzfeldt seems to be most disappointed by the letter I sent in reply to her 'ploy',c although it was most delicate and considerate in tone. Since that time, she has—kept silence.

Social-Demokrat is a bad title. But there is no need to throw away the best tides immediately on things that may prove to be FAILURES.

Wilhelm Liebknecht is an unquestionably big man among the Berlin workers, as you can see from the Berlin correspondence of The Morning Star. I am only afraid he will soon be sent packing.

4. Ad voce m Peritonitis, it says in Andral: 'Clinique Médicale': 'La Péritonite aiguë en certains cas un petit nombre d'heures s'écoulent entre l'époque de l'invasion de la maladie et celle de la mort, tandis que d'autres fois la péritonite, toujours aiguë par ses symptômes, ne devient mortelle qu'au bout de 30 à 40 jours.'e

And under the rubric: 'Péritonite par violence extérieure'1 he describes the case of a Parisian worker who was kicked in the stomach by a horse, in the region of his navel. Was only taken to the Charitég le surlende- main, 'offre tous les symptômes d'une phlegmasie aiguë du péritoine"1 (later confirmed by ouverture du cadavre'). Died du 5-ème au 6-ème jour,1 and amongst the general OBSERVATIONS concerning this case, it says: 'jusqu'au dernier moment, on n'observe aucun trouble des facultés intellectuelles et sensoriales.'k

[^1]: a K. Marx, 'Inaugural Address of the Working Men's International Association'. - b See this volume, pp. 20, 24. - c ibid., p. 12. - d ibid., p. 24. - e 'Acute peritonitis in some cases just a few hours elapse between the onset of the disease and death, whereas on other occasions peritonitis, which is always acute in its symptoms, does not cause death for from 30 to 40 days.' - f 'Peritonitis due to external violence' - s hospital in Paris - h two days later, 'exhibits all the symptoms of acute phlegmasia of the peritoneum' - ' autopsy - i on the 5th or 6th day - k 'until the very last, no disturbance of the mind or senses is observed' (see G. Andral, Clinique médicale, ou choix d'observations recueillies à l'hôpital de la Charité (clinique de M. Lerminier), t. 4, Paris, 1827, pp. 511, 532, 533)





**[p. 27]**

6. Prof. Huber has held his 'labour convention' with ABOUT 100 workers' associations. He is conservative in politics but a co- operator as far as POLITICAL ECONOMY is concerned. His Leipzig Convention nearly ended in a real 'thrashing' for Huber and his comrades, with the great majority declaring themselves to be 'radical' in politics.39

7. I gather all kinds of things have been published by the COMMITTEE in Manchester about the COTTON-FAMINE40—I mean IN REGARD TO THE wo RKi NGMEN. Can you get hold of it for me?

8. My chest still hurts me when I write and lean forward. Hence this 'itemised' letter.

Regards to Gumpert. Ditto to Madame Lizzy.b

Your

K. M.

[Enclosure: List relating to W. Wolff's Legacy]

BOOKS : Schlosser, Weltgeschichte £1 10s. Schieiden, Studien 3s. Schiller's Werke 10s. Duller, Geschichte des Deutschen Volkes 5s. Duncker, Geschichte £1 Mommsen, Geschichte 10s. Schoemann, Griechische Alterthümer 5s. Lange, Römische Alterthümer 3s. Preller, Griechische Mythologie 5s. Nösselt, Weltgeschichte 4s. Völter, Geographie 5s. Mortimer-Ternaux, Histoire de la Terreur, 2 v 5s. Arago, Astronomie Populaire 10s. Müller, Physik 3s. Baer, Magnetismus ls. Figuier, Année scientifique, 3 vol 5s.

[^1]: SILVER WATCH £2

[^2]: a is the 'grand' organ of Swabian democracy - b Lizzy Burns





**[p. 28]**



[^1]: First published abridged in Der Briefwech- Printed according to the original sei zwischen F. Engeb und K. Marx, Bd. 3, Stuttgart, 1913 and in full in MEGA, Published in English for the first Abt. Ill, Bd. 3, Berlin, 1930 t l m e





**[p. 12]**

ENGELS TO MARX

IN LONDON

Manchester, 22 November 1864

Dear Moor,

I received enclosed today from Schweitzer.41 Herwegh and Hess—fine company. As things stand and as I am not very familiar with the exact circumstances, I shall have to leave it to you to answer the man on behalf of both of us, as he wants his answer by return. Mosesa of all people!

Please return the letter to me and let me know what you have written, and I can then confirm your statement to him later on.

Solicitor's stuff received.8

Kindest regards.

Your

F. E.

13

MARX TO ENGELS

[London, 24 November 1864]

Dear FREDHUCK,

Letter from the old Hatzfeldt woman enclosed, which I would like sent back by return.4Also enclosed the letter from the man in Solingenb which has turned up again, and Schweitzer's letter.

[^1]: First published in Der Briefwechsel zwischen Printed according to the original F. Engels und K. Marx, Bd. 3, Stuttgart, igj3 Published in English for the first time

[^2]: IN MANCHESTER

[^3]: a Moses Hess - b See this volume, p. 15.





**[p. 30]**

As for Schweitzer, I have written—not to him but to Liebk- necht—that we both dislike the company, but we intend FOR A NONCE to adopt bonne mine à mauvais jeu,h but to disown them immediately as soon as they do anything silly. I also ask why Bûcher and especially Rodbertus are not among them!43

Moses0 and Herwegh (who are, incidentally, of some stature, compared with B. and Ph. Becker, IN A LITERARY SENSE) are, after all, more highly regarded by people in Germany than by us. At least, one cannot publicly denigrate them, as one can fellows like Grün, etc.

In great haste. Salut.

Your

K. M.

I have just been obliged to write long letter to the old womand

to extricate myself from the Blind affair she has tried to involve me in. Student Blind has, of course, not let the opportunity slip by of puffing himself up, by issuing a 'protest' in the name of the Republic" and selecting a few passages from Lassalle's speeches which are indeed quite sickeningly royalist.44 Also to advise her against reproducing the 'wanted' portraits of her enemies.45

[^1]: First published in Der Briefwechsel zwischen Printed according to the original F. Engels und K. Marx, Bd. 3, Stuttgart, 1923 Published in English for the first time

[^2]: a K. Marx, 'Inaugural Address of the Working Men's International Association'. - b an attitude of grin and bear it - c Moses Hess - d Sophie von Hatzfeldt - e ['A Republican Protest',] Neue Frankfurter Zeitung, No. 270, 29 September 1864; 'Republikanischer Protest', Hermann, No. 2407, 8 October 1864; Die Westliche Post, October-beginning of November 1864.





**[p. 14]**

MARX TO SOPHIE VON HATZFELDT

IN BERLIN

London, 24 November 1864

1 Modena Villas, Maitland Park, Haverstock Hill

My dear Countess,

I have just informed you by telegraph46 (to avoid all delay in reply) of my view that the two photograms of von R. et Co.a

should, in no circumstances, appear together with Lassalle's in the pamphlet. It would, on the one hand, dishonour the deceased, and, on the other, give the publication a gaudy appearance which should be avoided completely. Furthermore, as you know, 'contra hostem vindicatio aeterna sit'b is my motto too, but, for revenge to be successfully executed, it is advisable not to initiate the public in one's vindictive 'intent'.45

'Ex ossibus ultor'c would seem to me the best title for Lassalle's portrait. They were also my last words spoken at the graveside of my never-to-be-forgotten friend W. Wolff47 some six months ago.

As regards ex-student Blind, that fellow who made himself known before 1848 by peddling Heinzen's nonsense and as the

homme entretenu"1 of the wife of the Jewish banker Cohene (whom he later married in London), so I would ask you to remember that in my piece Herr Vogt (see pp. 58-69 and Appendices 9 and 11 )f I do not merely describe this student Blind as a 'deliberate liar', but I prove by reference to legal documents that this wretched man fabricated 'false witness' to cast suspicion on myself and to extricate his neck from a noose that this creature had made for himself for the purpose of merely making himself look big (which is indeed this rascal's sole purpose in every public step, or rather crawl, he undertakes).48

Then Blind succeeded in deflecting the catastrophe of his

[^1]: a Janko von Racowija and Helene von Dönniges - b A paraphrase of an article from the Twelve Tables (a code of law of ancient Rome) which says: 'Adversus hostem aeterna auctoritas [esto]' (III, 7); Marx uses the word vindicatio in the sense of revenge. - c 'Let the avenger rise' (Virgil, Aeneid, IV, 625: 'ex oriare aliquis nostrius ex ossibus ultor'). - d kept man - e Friederike Ettlinger, Cohen's and later Karl Blind's wife - f See present edition, Vol. 17, pp. 116-32, 315, 317-20.





**[p. 32]**

When Lassalle was here in London,50 he sought to enlighten Louis Blanc and Mazzini about Blind on his personal visits to them, but in vain. The man is exactly what Mazzini, Ledru, etc., had hoped, but failed, to find in the other Germans of standing, a servile lackey and sycophant. Through his relations with these people he makes the English think that he represents Germany, and he impresses the Germans by his boasting here. Yet the whole of this fellow's activity consists in writing, in conjunction with 3 or 4 South Germans/ from, for and about 'Karl Blind' and, at every possible opportunity, to force on the English, Germans and Americans his 'unofficial judgment' as the self-appointed rep- resentative of 'German republicanism' (a party, which is well known to exist only on the moon, since the German bourgeois is interested in a constitutional monarchy, the feudal lord in an aristocratic monarchy, and the worker in general not in mere forms of state, but in the form of state as the expression of economic social conditions, and, at all events, has never recognised ex-student Blind as representative). He is a true master of dictating letters to one of his 6 satellites,51 in which they call on the said, etc., 'Karl Blind' to do this or that, or congratulate him on this or that, and then—by oversight or OTHERWISE—the replies from the same Karl Blind gain entry to the press.

As one of the 'YOUNG MEN' who were active in the service of F. Hecker, Blind learnt that art, which is by no means rare among the South Germans, of self-defamation and creating a spurious PUBLIC OPINION about people who are essentially nonentities. In London he thought himself far enough advanced along the road or to have served long enough in the 'Democratic cause' to

[^1]: a between ourselves - b in one way or another - c Heinrich Heine, Atta Troll. Ein Sommernachtstraum, 11. - d Marx presumably has in mind, first and foremost, Eduard Bronner and Karl Heinrich Schaible.



exploit for himself those arts he had acquired in the service of others.

Regarding his education, it is, as I told Lassalle during his sojourn here, that of a Baden publican," who has read Rotteck's

Weltgeschichte, Welker's Staatslexikon and Mr Struve's republican Almanac.b

In his manoeuvres in Germany Mr Blind enjoys the particular support of Mr Gustav Rasch of Berlin.

Bernhard Becker, as the former SUBEDITOR of the London Hermann, best knows how Blind composed with his own fair hand the paeans of praise to himself that appeared e.g. in the Hermann. He does this mostly and on average. By way of variation he will occasionally get a certain Dr Bronner in Bradford or his Schaible (see 'Herr Vogt') via London to put their names to his epistles. All the agitation of this person is nothing but a tissue of lies, self-deception and hot air. In this field, however, he has no rivals. He demonstrated the height of his dexterity when Garibaldi visited London.19 He first spread the rumour in the English papers that he was an intimate friend of Garibaldi. Imposing himself as is his custom, he issued 'addresses' to Garibaldi from London and you know that in his kind-hearted naivety Garibaldi will write a nice letter back to anyone. Then he descends on the Isle of Wight (before Garibaldi made his ceremonial entry to London), and 'appoints' with him the date on which Garibaldi would receive the German deputation (Blind, you see, had so arranged things as to get a few Germans, including Kinkel and unfortunately my friend Freiligrath as well, to elect him as the leader of a deputation) and at the same time sends mysterious hints to some London papersc that Garibaldi WAS CLOSETED' WITH 'HIS FRIEND' (Blind) and, of course, settled some very important affairs of state with him.52 But Blind's masterstroke is still to come. As serving-man to the European 'kings of democracy"1 (for so he designates Mazzini, Ledru Rollin, Louis Blanc, and indeed COMPARED WITH student Blind even they are 'great men"), our Baden trickster manages so to arrange things that he, as a member of the society and a leader, fetches Garibaldi from the Duke of Sutherland's, where he is staying, and escorts him in the Duke's State Carriage

[^1]: a An allusion to Karl Blind's father, Johann Adam Blind who was a publican in Mannheim. - b G. Struve, Die neue Zeit. Ein Volkskalender auf das Jahr 1. - c 'Interview of Karl Blind with Garibaldi', The Morning Advertiser, No. 22726, 11 April 1864. - d Marx quotes Karl Blind - e Cf. the title of Marx and Engels' pamphlet: The Great Men of the Exile (present edition, Vol. 11, pp. 227-326).





**[p. 34]**

But Garibaldi, Schleswig-Holstein, America, Lassalle, all are for the ex-student only a pretext for puffing up his own self- importance! The modest fellow wrote in his own fair hand a short while ago to the 'Glasgow Sentinel' that the whole of Europe

[^1]: a 'General Garibaldi', The Times, 19 April 1864. - b G. Rasch, Vom verlassenen Bruderstamm. Das dänische Regiment in Schleswig-Holstein, Bd. 1-3; Vom verrathenen Bruderstamm. Der Krieg in Schleswig-Holstein im Jahre 1864. Bd. 1-2. - c R. Virchow's speech in the House of Representatives on 9 December 1863. In: Stenographische Berichte über die Verhandlungen der [] beiden Häuser des Landtages, Haus der Abgeordneten, 13 Sitzung, Bd. 1.





**[p. 35]**

After his success with Garibaldi MR KARL BLIND JOINED THE SHAKESPEARE COMMITTEE,53 as was stated in the Athenaeum\c He had now clearly progressed to the status of 'literary' representative of Germany, too!

During the skirmish in Baden (1849),54 Struve, as he himself recounts in a piece about the 'Baden revolution',1* sent the 'young man', as he calls Blind, as Under-Secretary to Schütz, who had been appointed Secretary, from Mainz to Paris, to rescue ex-student Blind from conflict with Brentano. The government to which Blind was directed as Under-Secretary to Secretary Schütz,— the provisional government no longer existed when Secretary and Under-Secretary arrived in Paris. Nevertheless, in mysterious hints in English papers, he let it be understood that he held an important diplomatic post as agent of the German 'republican government' in Paris!

In the first few years after 1849 he lived in Belgium with his present wife. Since this woman has children from her marriage to the dead banker (and they inherited) and she also has children by Blind (at that time still illegitimate), a court in Baden ruled that Cohen's children should be taken away from his widow Cohen because of her 'immoral' relations with ex-student Blind. The court in Brussels gave this ruling legal force in Belgium, and this caused Blind to flee to England together with his wife and the children. He later got English papers to print (and was brazen enough to boast publicly of it on a visit to South Germany) that he had been expelled from Belgium for political reasons!e

His next deed you will see from the enclosed cutting, which he had printed in many London papers. What provoked it was the report disseminated in some papers that Garibaldi had declared his support for the slave-oumersl Blind used this to extort a short letter from Garibaldi with 'CORDIAL GREETINGS FOR MRS BLIND'. YOU can see what lies he told Garibaldi from his remark 'I THANK YOU FOR YOUR

[^1]: a 'M. Karl Blind', North British Daily Mail, 30 March 1863. - b Marx refers to the reports on Blind's meetings with Garibaldi published in The Observer, Nos. 3804, 3805 and 3806, 10, 17 and 24 April 1864. - c The Athenaeum, No. 1902, 9 April 1864. - d G. Struve, Geschichte der drei Volkserhebungen in Baden. - e 'M. Karl Blind', North British Daily Mail, 30 March 1863.



The most splendid aspect of the affair is that the London paper to which Blind is a regular contributor, the mouthpiece of the publicans (a most appropriate context to a 'Blind'), is a fanatical supporter of the Confederates!b And by the by, the paper— The Morning Advertiser—is at one and the same time the mouthpiece of spirits, the Low CHURCH (English pietism),55 the SWELL-MOB which is concerned with gambling, PRICEFIGHTS AND SO FORTH, and the most lickspittling poodle of Palmerston's. FROM A LITERARY STANDPOINT, it cannot be counted among the English daily press and is in general only read in TAPROOMS.

So much for the man. In Lassalle's lifetime he issued an address casting doubt on the former's integrity.56 But Lassalle—as far as I know—did not think it worth the trouble of a reply. I was only surprised that B. Becker, who is fully aware of Blind's doings, did not then take the opportunity to blazon abroad my revelations about Blind?

One of the reasons why I have joined the International Working Men's Association here is to expose that man. After the statements I have made against Blind, branding him as a 'deliberate liar' and a 'falsifier of evidence', I cannot of course further involve myself in polemic against the fellow. I reserve the right to treat him as a figure of comedy should the occasion arise. If I should now take his scrawl against Lassalle, which I have incidentally not seen, as grounds for an attack on him, people here, who know of my implacable hostility to Blind, will think that in fact I am only using Lassalle's name as a pretext for personal spite.

But do send me the (printed) declaration by the workers. I shall ensure that it gets into a German paper here and if student Blind then makes any further moves, perhaps he will give me the opportunity to let me fall upon him.

At all events, you may depend on it that he will be shown no favours. In the meantime, the best thing you can do is to disseminate my revelations about Blind as a 'deliberate liar' and 'falsifier' as far as possible in Germany. (If his scrawl about Lassalle had set any mice stirring here, a word or two about it at all events

[^1]: a Blind published Garibaldi's letter to him in The Morning Advertiser, 9 November 1864. - b i.e. the southern slave-owning states - c Marx means his revelations about Blind in Herr Vogt.





**[p. 37]**

Apart from anything else, it would be quite impossible for me to travel to Berlin on account of the fresh outbreak of the fearful carbuncle disease that I have been struggling against for 14 months with slight interruptions.

You may, however, be sure that I shall seize whatever opportunity I find appropriate (but you will have to leave it to me to choose whatever moment appears favourable to me) to rebuff all malicious attacks on the friend who has been prematurely taken from me.

Yours very respectfully

K. M.

First published in International Review of Printed according to the journal Social History, Vol. XXVII, Assen, 1982

Published in English for the first time

15

Manchester, 24 November 1864

Dear Weydemeyer,

I was most pleased to hear from you again at long last.58 We have been without your address for years, otherwise you would already have received a reminder from me earlier on. My address is still Ermen & Engels and will probably continue to be so for five years or so yet, unless the storm breaks in Germany. Marx' address is No. 1, Modena Villas, Maitland Park, Haverstock Hill, London, but Dr Marx, London, will also suffice if need be.

Our plump little pig Blind is showing off here in Europe, wherever he can, just as he did over there, it is the only little pleasure the poor wee creature has, and he indulges it with an assiduity worthy of a better cause and greater success. However, ever since Marx belaboured him so thoroughly in Herr Vogt, he has been keeping out of our range.

[^1]: ENGELS TO JOSEPH WEYDEMEYER57

[^2]: IN ST LOUIS



You will have heard that our poor Lupus died here on 9 May of this year. His was a loss for the party of an altogether different order from Lassalle's. We shall never again find such a steadfast fellow, who knew how to talk to the people and was always there when things were at their most difficult. For 4 long weeks he had the most terrible headaches, his German doctorb neglected him, and at length a vessel burst in his brain from the colossal pressure of the blood, he gradually lost consciousness and died 10 days later.

Nothing of much interest is happening here in Europe. The suppression of the Polish uprising was the last decisive event; for his assistance in this, the Tsarc gave Bismarck permission to take Schleswig-Holstein from the Danes. It will be a long time before Poland is capable of rising again, even with help from outside, and yet Poland is quite indispensable to us. The despicable behaviour of the liberal German philistines is to blame; if those curs in the Prussian Chamber had had more insight and courage, all might be well—Austria was ready to march in support of the Poles at any time, and it was only Prussia's attitude that prevented it, and the treachery of Mr Bonaparte, who was, of course, only prepared to keep his promises to the Poles if he could do so safely, i.e. if he was covered by Prussia and Austria.

[^1]: That war of yours over there11 is really one of the most

[^2]: a 'Ein republikanischer Protest', Die Westliche Post, October-beginning of November 1864. - b Louis Borchardt - c Alexander II



stupendous things that one can experience. Despite the numerous blunders made by the Northern armies (enough by the South, too), the tide of conquest is rolling slowly but surely onward, and, in the course of 1865, at all events the moment will undoubtedly come when the organised resistance of the South will fold up like a pocket-knife, and the warfare turn into banditry, as in the Carlist war in Spain59 and more recently in Naples.12 A people's war of this kind, on both sides, has not taken place since great states have been in existence, and it will, at all events, point the direction for the future of the whole of America for hundreds of years to come. Once slavery, the greatest shackle on the political and social development of the United States, has been broken, the country is bound to receive an impetus from which it will acquire quite a differed position in world history within the shortest possible time, and a use will then soon be found for the army and navy with which the war is providing it.

It was incidentally quite understandable that the North had some difficulty in providing itself with an army and generals. From the outset, the South's oligarchy had brought the country's few military forces under its control, it supplied the officers and furthermore raided the arsenals. The North found itself with no resources other than the militia, while the South had been training for years. From the outset, the South had a population accus- tomed to the saddle for use as light cavalry, on a scale the North could not match. The North adopted the habit, introduced from the South, of filling positions with party supporters; the South, in the midst of a revolution and with a military dictatorship, could brush that aside. Hence, all the blunders. I do not deny that Lee is a better general than any the North has, and that his latest operations around the fortified camp at Richmond30 are master- pieces from which our glorious Prince Frederick Charles of Prussia could learn much. But, ultimately, the determined attacks of Grant and Sherman made all strategy superfluous. It is clear that Grant is sacrificing a colossal number of men, but what else could he do? I have absolutely no idea of the level of discipline in your army, its cohesion under fire, its capacity and willingness to endure hardship, and in particular the nature of its MORALE, i.e. what can be demanded of it without its becoming demoralised. With such scanty reports and no proper maps, one needs to know all this before permitting oneself any judgment on this side of the water. What does seem certain to me, however, is that the army now commanded by Sherman is the best you have, as superior to Hood's as Lee's is to Grant's.



**[p. 40]**

Your field-manual and elementary tactics are, as I hear, positively French—the basic formation thus presumably being the column with intervals between platoons. What kind of field artillery do you now have? If you can enlighten me on these points, I shall be greatly obliged. What has become of the great Anneke? Since the battle at Pittsburgh-Landing was all but lost60

because he was not supplied with everything which he should have had, according to the Prussian field-manual, he has quite vanished from my view. Of the Germans who have joined in the war, Willich appears to have given the best account of himself, whereas Sigel has UNMISTAKEABLY demonstrated his mediocrity. And Schurz, the valiant Schurz, farting away amidst the shower of bullets and shells, what foes is he demolishing now?

Apropos. The Prussian cannons that smashed Düppela and Sonderburg61 from 6,500 paces were our old long bronze 24-pounders, rifled and rebuilt as breech-loaders, 54-pound shells with 4-pound-charge! I've seen them with my own eyes.

Kindest regards to your wife.b

Your

F. Engels

16

MARX TO ENGELS

[London,] 25 November [1864]

[^1]: First published abridged in Die Neue Zeit, Printed according to the original Bd. 2, Nr. 33, 1906-1907 and in full in: „ . , . , . . „ , . • • * . , , u Marx and Engels, Works, First Russian Published in English in full for the Edition, Vol. XXV, Moscow, 1934 f l r s t t i m e

[^2]: IN MANCHESTER

[^3]: DEAR FREDERICK! Weydemeyer's letter returned enclosed (how odd it should come at the same time as the one from the countessc)58 with Schweitzer's letter/ which I forgot to enclose yesterday.

[^4]: a Danish name: Dybböl. - b Louise Weydemeyer - c Sophie von Hatzfeldt - d See this volume, p. 29.





**[p. 41]**

The position is now as follows:

1. It was not until after I wrote to you that I saw that Blind has sent an answer to the Swabian Beobachter via Dr Bronner (unsigned, of course, but dated Bradford; letter, naturally, written by Blind himself, in which he firstly proves that by his influence over '7' million Germans he in fact shaped American politics; secondly, he has the impudence to say that the Vogt affair has been disposed of by statements from all sides.62 So, I have grounds here for replying and referring to the 'AFFIDAVITS',63 and, at the same time, an extract from Weydemeyer's letter would kill two birds with one stone, firstly exposing Blind's influence on America and secondly giving the old countess some kind of satisfaction as far as Lassalle is concerned.

2. These 'Republican Protests', which Blind has sent with the same date to St Louis, Frankfurt am Main and the London Hermann, are only identical in their general drift. In the shit in the Hermann and the Frankfurter Journal^" which I shall try to send you later today, this Baden publican" has simply put together the passages which were most damaging to ourselves, whilst across the ocean he is more insolent and resorts to bare-faced lies.

But the real 'POINT' is this, a 'POINT' typical of the way he manufactures his pamphlets: in the European edition he says that the protest comes from American and European republicans, whilst in the American edition he calls upon the American government to protest. Here we have caught the dog in flagranti.0

3. Since Lassalle is dead and can do no more harm, we must of course—as far as possible, i.e. without compromising ourselves— defend him against these petty-bourgeois scoundrels.

My plan is therefore this: to reply (briefly) in the Siuabian Beobachter; 1. putting the record straight about the 'statements from all sides' in the Vogt affair; 2. giving an extract from Weydemeyer's letter about Blind's influence in America; 3. exposing the fellow afresh by comparing the European and American editions of his 'Republican Protest'; finally 4. concluding that it is NOT WORTH WHILE defending Lassalle against such a comical character.

If this seems all right to you, send me a wire and I will tie the whole business up tomorrow, amongst other things in order to have some peace with the 'old girl'. I said in my letter to her, by

[^1]: il from Die Westliche Post with Blind's article 'Ein republikanischer Protest' - b Neue

[^2]: Frankfurter Zeitung - c See this volume, p. 33. - d red-handed

[^3]: 4-1196



Your

K. M.

First published in Der Briefwechsel zwischen Printed according to the original F. Engels und K. Marx, Bd. 3, Stuttgart, 1013 Published in English for the first time

17

MARX TO SOPHIE VON HATZFELDT

IN BERLIN

[London,] Saturday, 26 November 1864

My dear Countess,

These few lines in the greatest of haste (there being just time before the last post goes) to inform you that I have been fortunate enough to be vouchsafed the opportunity to get a hold on Blind immediately and deliver him a vigorous kick for his attack on our Lassalle.62

I shall send you my attack on him on Monday which will appear in the form of a short letter to the Stuttgart Beobachter}" You will then learn of the circumstances of the case, too.

Yours very respectfully

K. M.

[^1]: First published in: Marx and Engels, Printed according to the original Works, Second Russian Edition, Vol. 31, Moscow 1963 Published in English for the first time

[^2]: a See this volume, p. 30. - b K. Marx, 'To the Editor of the Stuttgart Beobachter'.





**[p. 18]**

MARX TO SOPHIE VON HATZFELDT

IN BERLIN

London, 28 November 1864

My dear Countess,

From the enclosed" you will see the circumstances that have presented me with the opportunity to renew my tussle with ex-student Blind and, at the same time, deliver him a kick in the name of Lassalle.

You must arrange for publication in the papers at your disposal, but not before two days have elapsed after you receive this, so that Mayer of Swabia—i.e. the editor of the Beobachter in Stuttgart— has no excuse for refusing it.1'4

Yours very respectfully

K. Marx

First published in: Marx and Engels, Printed according to the original Works, Second Russian Edition, Vol. 31, Moscow 1963 Published in English tor the iirst time

19

London, 29 November 1864

1 Modena Villas, Maitland Park, Haverstock Hill, N. W.

Dear Weiwi,

The whole household and myself were extraordinarily pleased to hear from you and your family again. My wife asserts that she wrote to yours*' last and is thus expecting to have the first letter back from her.

[^1]: MARX TO JOSEPH WEYDEMEYER57

[^2]: IN ST LOUIS

[^3]: K. Marx, 'To the Editor of the Stuttgart Beobachter'. - b Louise Weydemeyer

[^4]: 4*





**[p. 44]**

I am, at the same time, sending you by mail 4 copies of a printed 'Address',3 of which I am the author. The newly established INTERNATIONAL Workers' Committee, in whose name it has been put out, is not without significance. Its English members consist chiefly of the heads of the TRADE-UNIONS here, in other words, the real worker-kings of London, the same people who organised that gigantic reception for Garibaldi and who, by that monster meeting in St James's Hall (under Bright's chairmanship), prevented Palmerston declaring war on the United States, which hè was on the point of doing.19 On the French side, the members are unimpor- tant figures, but they are the direct spokesmen of the leading 'workers' in Paris. There is likewise a link with the Italian associations, which recently held their congress in Naples.22

Although I have been systematically refusing to participate in any way whatsoever in all the 'organisations', etc. for years now, I accepted this time because it concerns a matter by means of which it is possible to have a significant influence.

For the past 14 months I have been suffering almost constantly from carbuncles, which often threatened my life. More or less cured now.

Engels will have written to you of the loss of our friend Lupus.b

Curiously enough, I received a letter from Berlin last Friday, in which the old Hatzfeldt woman urged me to defend Lassalle against Blind's 'Republican Protest'.42 The next day I received your letter to Engels, containing the much amended American edition of the same garbage. By a third coincidence, I was, at the same time, sent 2 numbers of the Swabian Beobachter (from Stuttgart) which I never see otherwise. In the first number the editorc was poking fun at a letter from Mr Blind to the American nation which had been translated from the English by 'Mr Blind' and sent to him and to other South German editors; in it, 'almost at official request', as he puts it, he gives his inexpert opinion on Lincoln's election, etc.d In the same number, the editor said that one can see from my book attacking Vogte what Blind's vanity leads to, etc. Whereupon, Blind sent the enclosed reply through his man-of-straw, Dr Bronner of Bradford, 1. setting out just how powerful his influence in America was, and 2. having the impudence to say that the Vogt affair was 'a put-up-job'.62 This then enabled me (using your letter and copying the passages relating to Blind) to put out the

[^1]: a 'Inaugural Address of the Working Men's International Association'. - b Wilhelm Wolff - c Karl Mayer - d 'Bescheidenheit — ein Ehrenkleid', Der Beobachter, No. 245, 21 October 1864. - e Herr Vogt



statement3 as desired by the old Hatzfeldt woman against that clown, without identifying myself with those aspects of Lassalle's agitation b

which are not to my liking. Write soon.

Your

K. Marx

The source of Blind's boastful epistle which I am copying out for you is No. 268 of the Beobachter (Stuttgart), 17 Nov., 1864.

It is absolutely essential that you write me a few lines, suitable for publication, about Mr Blind's American influence.

First published abridged in Die Neue Zeit, Printed according to the original Bd. 2, Nr. 33, 1906-1907 and in full in: Marx and Engels, Works, First Russian Published in English in full for the Edition, Vol. XXV, Moscow, 1934 f l r s t t l m e

20

London, 29 November 1864

1 Modena Villas, Maitland Park, Haverstock Hill, N. W.

Dear Friend, Today you will receive from me by post 6 copies of the ADDRESS

The Association—or rather its Committee—is important be- cause the leaders of the London TRADE-UNIONS belong to it, the same people who organised that enormous reception for Garibaldi and thwarted Palmerston's plan for a war with the United States by means of the monster meeting in St James's Hall.19 The leaders of the Parisian workers are also in contact with it.

[^1]: MARX TO LUDWIG KUGELMANN65

[^2]: IN HANOVER

[^3]: OF THE WORKINGMEN'S INTERNATIONAL ASSOCIATION'/ o f w h i c h I a m t h e author. Please be so good as to convey a copy with my kindest regards to Madame Markheim (Fulda). Give one to Mr Miquel as well.

[^4]: a K. Marx, 'To the Editor of the Stuttgart Beobachter'. - b See this volume, pp. 40-42. - c 'Inaugural Address of the Working Men's International Association'





**[p. 46]**

In the last few years I have been much afflicted with illness (e.g., in the last 14 months by a recurrence of carbuncles). My private circumstances have improved in consequence of a legacy from the death of my mother.3

I think that my book on capital (60 sheets) will at last be ready for the press next year.66

You will doubtless understand the reasons for not allowing myself to become involved in Lassalle's movement in his lifetime, without my spelling them out in detail. However, that cannot deter me—the more so since persons close to him are urging me to do so—from taking up his defence, now that he is dead, against such despicable curs as the clamorous K. Blind.b

I am afraid that in mid-spring or early summer of next year there will be war between Italy, Austria and France. This will be very damaging for the movement in France and England, which is growing significantly.

I hope to hear from you soon.

Yours very respectfully

K. Marx

First published in Die Neue Zeit, Bd. 2, Printed according to the original Nr. 1, Stuttgart, 1901-1902

21

London, 29 November 1864

1 Modena Villas, Maitland Park, Haverstock Hill

Dear Uncle,

I hope that you are in the best of health despite the ABOMINABLE weather. All is well here. Except that, to the great alarm of the whole family, I had a most malignant carbuncle below the left breast at the beginning of this month, which kept me in great pain for 2-3 weeks. Other than that, everything has been going well.

[^1]: MARX TO LION PHILIPS67

[^2]: IN ZALT-BOMMEL

[^3]: a Henrietta Marx (died 30 November 1863) - b See this volume, pp. 40-42.



The enclosed printed 'Address"3 is written by myself. The matter hangs together like this: in September the Parisian workers sent a delegation to the London workers to demonstrate support for Poland. On that occasion, an international Workers' Commit- tee was formed. The matter is not without importance because 1. in London the same people are at the head who organised the gigantic reception for Garibaldi and, by their monster meeting with Bright in St James's Hall, prevented war with the United States.19

In a word, these are the real workers' leaders in London, with one or two exceptions all workers themselves. 2. On the Parisian side, Mr Tolain (ouvrierc himself, as well) et Co. are at the head, i.e., the same people who were prevented by a mere intrigue on the part of Garnier-Pages, Carnot, etc., from entering the Corps législatif at the last elections in Paris as representatives of the workers there,4 and 3. on the Italian side, it has been joined by the representatives of the 4-500 Italian workers' clubs which held their general congress in Naples some weeks ago,22 an event which even The Times considered important enough to merit a few dozen lines in the paper.d

Courtesy toward the French and the Italians, who always require florid language, has obliged me to include a few superfluous turns of phrase in the preamble to the 'Rules',6 though not in the 'Address'.23

A few days ago I received a letter from America from my friend Weydemeyer, Colonel in the regiment stationed at St Louis (Missouri). Amongst other things, he writes—and these are his exact words:

[^1]: a Marx to Lion Philips, 17 August 1864 (present edition, Vol. 41). - b 'Inaugural Address of the Working Men's International Association'. - c worker - d The Times, No. 25021, 4 November 1864. - e K. Marx, 'Provisional Rules of the Association'.





**[p. 48]**

When you reflect, my dear Uncle, how at the time of Lincoln's election 372 years ago it was only a matter of making no further concessions to the slave-owners, whereas now the avowed aim, which has in part already been realised, is the abolition of slavery, one has to admit that never has such a gigantic revolution occurred with such rapidity. It will have a highly beneficial influence on the whole world.

At a public MEETING this week the fellow-member of our race Benjamin Disraeli has again made a dreadful laughing-stock of himself by assuming the mantle of guardian angel of the HIGH CHURCH69 and CHURCH RATES, repudiating criticism in religious affairs.15

He furnishes the best evidence of how a great talent unaccom- panied by conviction creates rogues, albeit gold-braided and 'RIGHT HONORABLE' ones.

Those jackasses in Germany have again made a proper laughing-stock of themselves over the Müller affair,36 with ex-parson Kinkel at their head.

With kindest regards from the whole family to you and from me to Jettchen, Dr, Fritzc et Co.

Ever your faithful nephew

K. M.

[^1]: First published in International Review of Printed according to the original Social History, Vol. I, Part 1, Assen, 1956 „ , ,. , , . _ ,. , . . „ , Published in English m lull tor the first time

[^2]: a Marx quotes from J. Weydemeyer's letter to Engels written in October 1864. - b An account of Disraeli's speech at the meeting in Oxford on 25 November 1864 was published in The Times, No. 25040, 26 November 1864. - c Henriette van Anroij, Dr van Anroij and Friedrich Philips





**[p. 22]**

MARX TO ENGELS29

IN MANCHESTER

[London,] 2 December 1864

DEAR FRED,

THANKS FOR THE GUARDIAN* I did send on a few COPIES of the 'Address"3 to E. Jones afterwards, with a letter to him saying that he would probably receive one from you first. He writes today that he has neither seen nor heard anything from you. His address is 55, not 52, Cross Street. He says in his letter that, when the Assizes are over, he will form a branch association in Manchester amongst his acquaintances.

Could you by any chance dig up the address of the musician Petzler (maybe from the Manchester directory, or the Schiller Association28)? He has a lot of contacts among the Manchester workers, and without ANY INTERVENTION ON YOUR PART I could put him in touch with E. Jones from here. You would only need to send me Petzler's address.

The worst thing about agitation of this kind is that one gets very BOTHERED as soon as one becomes involved in it. E.g. Address to Lincoln now on the agenda again, and again I had to compose the thingc (which is far more difficult than writing a proper work)—so that the phraseology to which that kind of writing is limited, is at least distinguishable from vulgar-democratic phraseology.70 Fortunately, Mr Fox is doing the Polish business which is coming up in connection with 29 November, the anniversary of the Polish revolution of 1830.71

[^1]: In the Committee, since the address for Lincoln is to be handed over to Adams, some of the English wanted to have the deputation introduced BY A MEMBER OF PARLIAMENT—as is CUSTOMARY. This desire was suppressed by the majority OF the ENGLISH and the unanimity of the continentals, and it was declared instead that such OLD ENGLISH CUSTOMS OUGHT TO BE ABOLISHED. On the other hand: M. Le Lubez, as a real crapaud,d wanted the address to be directed not to Lincoln but TO THE

[^2]: a The Manchester Guardian - b K. Marx, 'Inaugural Address of the Working Men's International Association'. - c K. Marx, 'To Abraham Lincoln, President of the United States of America'. - d philistine





**[p. 50]**

AMERICAN PEOPLE. I made him look suitably foolish and made it clear to the English that FRENCH DEMOCRATIC ETIQUETTE is not worth a FARTHING more than MONARCHICAL ETIQUETTE.

Apropos. Naturally it is impossible to have a movement here without its own press-organ. The Bee-Hive (weekly, organ of the TRADES-UNIONS) was therefore declared to be the organ of the Association. By a stroke of ill-luck, to which the workers are particularly susceptible, a scoundrel called George Potter (in the BUILDING STRIKES72 he acted as MOUTHPIECE in The Times, but with articles written not by himself but by others) has installed himself as MANAGER with a clique of shareholders, who have so far formed the majority. The COMMITTEE, whose English members are mostly Bee-Hive shareholders (a share costs only 5s., and no one can have more than 5 votes, even if he holds 5,000 shares; thus 1 vote per share up to a maximum of 5), has therefore decided that we should set up a share-fund here which will enable us to create shareholders AND TO SWAMP THE OLD MAJORITY. I would appreciate it if you would let us have a contribution for this purpose as well. The whole operation must, of course, be confined to the close friends of the members of the Committee, as otherwise counter-measures would be promptly taken by the other side (i.e. before the GENERAL MEETING OF SHAREHOLDERS which is not far off now).

Besides the Hermann, there was also another little paper here, the Londoner Anzeiger, which belongs to the worthy Jewish bookseller Bender. It is trying to build itself up as a competitor to the Hermann, as the editorship has been taken over by a certain L. Otto von Breidtschwerdt, although he writes under the name of L. Otto. I shall hardly become directly involved in the thing at all, as I had my fill with the Volk, but it is good for reprinting statements in London as soon as they appear in the German newspapers, e.g. like the one against Blind.2

This Otto first got to know Eccarius, at whose suggestion he became a German member of the INTERNATIONAL COMMITTEE. He is a Swabian, Stuttgarter born and bred. Quite a young fellow, ABOUT 27 OR as. Very much like my wife's elder brother.6 Began as a cadet in the Austrian army, where he learnt all kinds of languages and was stationed all over the place. Subsequently studied in Tübingen. As a person, he is a very pleasant, witty fellow and well-mannered. His head is still stuffed full of petty Swabianisms and Germanic nonsense. For all that, very good knowledge and ability. But he

[^1]: a K. Marx, 'To the Editor of the Stuttgart Beobachter'. - b Ferdinand von Westphalen





**[p. 51]**

I wrote to Mr Klings that it was difficult, but also quite unnecessary, to decide between Moses and Bernhard.b Both were honest and both incompetent. I said that, at the present moment, it was neither here nor there who has the title of President. When the time became decisive, there would be no difficulty in finding the right people.'

I am very much afraid I can feel another carbuncle starting on my right hip. Allen knows nothing about it as I have been treating myself for some time. If I went to him now about the arsenic business, which after all you cannot start without a doctor and to which he might perhaps not even agree, he would give me the most dreadful dressing down for having been carbuncling for so long behind his back!!

YOURS

K. M.

In his reply to Mayer the Swabian (via his man-of-straw Bronner),d Blind states that Lincoln and Fremont were fighting for his vote because it would decide the ELECTION.62 And in an American newspaper, The Radical Democrat? that he was responsible for the Polish revolution.

[^1]: First published in Der Briefwechsel zwischen F. Engels und K. Marx, Bd. 3, Stuttgart, 1913

[^2]: Printed according to the original

[^3]: Published in English in full for the first time

[^4]: a Allgemeine Zeitung - b Moses Hess and Bernhard Becker - c See this volume, p. 2. - d [K. Blind,] Article marked 'Bradford, 25. Oct.', Der Beobachter, No. 268, 17 November 1864 - e Missouri Democrat





**[p. 23]**

MARX TO ENGELS

IN MANCHESTER

[London,] 8 December 1864

Dear Engels,

You will find enclosed

1. Free Press." 2. Swabian Beobachter. (With the latter, I have managed to get the fellow at least to adopt an ironical tone towards Blind again, whereas, as a result of the letter transmitted by Bronner,b he was so bowled over by Blind's boasting—I have sent the scrawl to Weydemeyer—that he absolutely drew in his horns and paid compliments to the 'excellent man'. Incidentally, the editor—hinc Mae lacrimaec—is the man whom I referred to in Herr Vogt as the 'garrulous Swabian, Karl Mayer',d and who is moreover the son of that Mayer the Swabian so incessantly derided by Heine.73)

3. Letter enclosed from Red Becker/ I had, you see, sent a copy of the statement' to the Rheinische Zeitung. Please return Becker's letter to me.74

Apropos Liebknecht. At the end of the year he is, of course, in a very tight spot. I have sent him money several times in the course of the last six months and now I want to send his wife8 something in the form of a Christmas present for the children, since I know they are in dire straits. I would appreciate it if you would make a contribution, too. But you must let me know quickly, as periculum in mora.h I would then send the whole lot to Frau Liebknecht at the same time.

Salut. Your

K. M.

[^1]: First published abridged in Der Briefwechsel Printed according to the original zwischen F. Engels und K. Marx, Bd. 3, . . . Stuttgart, 1913 and in full in MEGA, Abt. Published in English for the first III, Bd. 3, Berlin, 1930 t i m e

[^2]: a Presumably The Free Press, No. 12, 7 December 1864, with the article [CD. Collet,] 'Russia's Designs on the Pope'. - b See this volume, p.51. - c hence these tears (Terence, Andria, I, 1, 99) - d See present edition, Vol. 17, pp. 120 and 205. - e Hermann Heinrich Becker - f K. Marx, 'To the Editor of the Stuttgart Beobachter'. - s Ernestine Liebknecht - h danger in delay (Livy, History of Rome, Vol. XXXVIII, Chap. 25)





**[p. 24]**

MARX T O ENGELS 3 3

IN MANCHESTER

[London,] 10 December 1864

DEAR FRED,

MY COMPLIMENT TO MRS LIZZY.3

You had already given m e your PRIVATE ADDRESS some time ago, but not the 'FIRM' to which to write. I am very glad to have it now, as I sometimes find it desirable to drop you a few lines ON SATURDAYS.

T h e £ 5 for Wilhelm b is already on its way to Berlin today. You have not sent m e back the Becker.74 However cunningly 'the Red' fancies he has extricated himself from the matter, his letter is a DOCUMENT WHICH ONE FINE MORNING HE MAY FIND TO TURN UP for unforeseen purposes. T h e old Hatzfeldt woman will, incidentally, ensure that the statement' gets to the right person. 6 4

WHAT ABOUT SHERMAN'S EXPEDITION? 5

Apropos. Your POOR-HOUSE Purdy is said to have published an absolutely disgraceful document during the COTTON-FAMINE,40 recom- mending reducing support to a minimum, on the grounds that the HEALTH of THE COTTON-OPERATIVES was said to have improved; as a result of this, FAMINE DISEASES are said to have broken out in the EAST OF LANCASHIRE. (That was in the early days of the COTTON-FAMINE.) D O you know anything about it? And, in general, can you obtain for me the OFFICIAL PAPERS in Manchester (of the Committee, d etc.) relating to the COTTON-FAMINE?

Lothario Bücher, whom Lassalle appointed executor to his will and to whom h e left £ 1 5 0 a year pension, has, as you probably already know, gone over to Bismarck's camp. Baron Izzyc would perhaps have done the same himself as 'Minister of Labour1, Marquis Posa to Philipp II of the Uckermark/ but not IN THE SMALL WAY OF Lothario, with whom the Hatzfeldt woman has fallen out and who can now shake hands with Edgar Bauer and the Prussian consul in Milan, Mr R. Schramm. T h e Prussians were looking for a post for Mr Schramm 'where yer don't need n o exam'. 8 I also

[^1]: a Lizzy Burns - b Wilhelm Liebknecht - ' K. Marx, 'To the Editor of the Stuttgart Beobachter'. - d See this volume, p. 27. - e Lassalle - f Marquis Posa and Philipp II are characters from Schiller's Don Karlos. By 'Philipp II of the Uckermark' Marx means William I. - s Berlin dialect in the original here: 'wo ken Examen nicht netig.'





**[p. 54]**

I fancy there is a SECRET UNDERSTANDING between Prussia, Russia and France for THE WAR AGAINST AUSTRIA IN NEXT SPRING. Venetia will, of course, provide the WAR-CRY.68 The Austrians are behaving with abysmal cowardice and stupidity. This ensues from Francis Joseph himself interfering personally in Austrian politics. Buol- Schauenstein, etc., all the sensible hommes d-état,h are obliged to keep their traps shut, and the Russian agents, such notorious fellows as the present Austrian FOREIGN MINISTER,0 are giving all the orders. For all that, the Austrians' behaviour would be inexplica- ble, unless these fellows either have faith in Prussia's perfidious promises or are determined to accept the long-standing promise of compensation in Turkey.

What do you say to Collet's profound discoveries—based on Urquhart—about Nebuchadnezzar and the Russians' Assyrian ancestry, and the further discovery, which is cited as 'Urquhart's', that IN ITALY THE POPE IS THE ONLY REAL THING ?d

Today's The Miner and Workman's Advocate—the Moniteur^ of the mineworkers in England and Wales—is printing the whole of my 'Address'/ The London 'BRICKLAYERS' (over 3,000 men) have announced they are joining the International Association, and they are fellows who have never before joined a MOVEMENT.

But easy though it is to get the English workers to accept a rational approach, one has to be all the more careful the moment

[^1]: There was a SUB-COMMITTEE2' meeting last Tuesday,g at which Mr Peter Fox (his real name is P. Fox André) presented his address on Poland " to us. (This kind of thing is always dealt with beforehand in the SUBCOMMITTEE before going to the GENERAL COMMITTEE.) The piece is not badly written and Fox has en- deavoured to apply the concept of 'class', at least a semblance of it, although it is normally alien to him. His real forte is FOREIGN POLICY, and it is only as a propagandist of atheism that he has had dealings with the WORKING CLASSES AS SUCH.

[^2]: a Marx quotes almost literally Liebknecht's letter to him of 2 December 1864. - b statesmen - c Alexander Mensdorff-Pouilly - d [CD. Collet,] 'Russia's De- signs on the Pope', The Free Press, No. 12, 7 December 1864. - e mouthpiece - f K. Marx, 'Inaugural Address of the Working Men's International Association', The Miner and Workman's Advocate, No. 93, 10 December 1864. - s 6 December





**[p. 55]**

O u r Major Wolff has been locked u p by the Piedmontese for the moment in the fortress of Alexandria.

Louis Blanc has written to the General Secretary Cremer that he approves the 'Address' and regrets not having been able to attend the St Martin's Hall MEETING, etc. ALTOGETHER, the sole purpose of his letter is to get him co-opted an HONORARY MEMBER. Foreseeing that attempts of this kind would be made, I had, however, fortunately got the BYLAW accepted that no one (except workers' SOCIETIES) could be invited to join and that nobody at all could be an honorary member.'*

Salut.

Your

K. M.

[^1]: a See this volume, pp. 15-16.





**[p. 56]**

First published in Der Briefwechsel zwischen Printed according to the original F. Engels und K. Marx, Bd. 3, Stuttgart, 29 j 3 Published in English in full for the first time

25

MARX TO ENGELS

IN MANCHESTER

[London,] 22 December 1864 Dear FREDERICK,

In great haste. Please send Becker's letter back to me.a I hope you have not lost it.

Happy New Year!

Your

K. M.

First published in MEGA, Abt. Ill, Printed according to the original Bd. 3, Berlin, 1930

26

MARX TO SOPHIE VON HATZFELDT

London, 22 December 1864

1 Modena Villas, Maitland Park, Haverstock Hill

My dear Countess,

A few days ago, a friend in Hamburg sent me the Nordstern containing my statement against Blind,b duly emended with misprints.

[^1]: Published in English for the first time

[^2]: IN BERLIN

[^3]: [Draft]

[^4]: a See this volume, pp. 52,53. - b K. Marx, 'To the Editor of the Stuttgart Beobachter'.



'Westliche Post'.*4 I had not the slightest idea which papers you would send the statement to. The Nordstern was the furthest from my mind. Mr Bruhn has now seized upon this opportunity to make an 'indecent gesture' in my direction, by hinting to his readers in the commentaries that I had sought access to his emporium through the back door and had been granted it as an act of extreme graciousness only because a third party had intervened especially on my behalf.64 I have no doubt that his accomplice in America3 will make use of this. Is it Mr Bruhn's desire that I should be forced into exposing him publicly for the conceited nonentity that he is?

If Bruhn, Bernhard Becker and tutti quanti set out to oppose me and my efforts in any manner whatsoever that I consider harmful to the workers' movement itself, a storm will break about these gentlemen's heads that will take their breath away. Reasons of long-standing personal friendship and party interest, which held me back vis-à-vis Lassalle, can no longer have the slightest force in respect of these dii minorum gentium}' This I am stating once and for all, so that I cannot later be charged with ambiguity or inconsiderateness.

In no circumstances, do I wish the Eighteenth Brumaire to be published, and, if steps have already been taken to this end, they are to be checked forthwith.79

I scarcely dare express any good wishes for the New Year, knowing as I do that the old year has left you, my dear Countess, only with memories.

Yours very respectfully

K. M.

[^1]: First published in: F. Lassalte. Nach- gelassene Briefe und Schriften, Bd. III, Stutt- gart-Berlin, 1922

[^2]: Printed according to the original

[^3]: Published in English for the first time

[^4]: Karl Blind - b Literally: minor gods; here, creatures of a lesser kind.





**[p. 27]**

MARX TO CARL SIEBEL

IN ELBERFELD

London, 22 December 1864

1 Modena Villas, Maitland Park, Haverstock Hill

Dear Siebel,

A Happy New Year! You will perhaps have seen that Engels and I have agreed to become contributors to the Berlin Social-Demokrat.80 Neverthe- less—this entre nous*—either that paper will have to dissociate itself from the apotheosis of Lassalle, or we shall dissociate ourselves from it. But the poor devils have a lot to contend with.

You will have received the 'Addresses'11 sent to you and have no doubt guessed I am the author. For the sake of the movement here, it is important for us that German workers' associations should join the Central Committee here. (As has happened in many cases with the Italians and the French.) Now Liebknecht has written to me that the Berlin printers' association will be joining, but that it is very doubtful whether the 'General Association of German Workers'2 will join, on account of the intrigues of Mr Bernhard Becker, whose importance was 'invented' by Lassalle. (Entre nous this is perhaps Lassalle's only invention.)81

Today I wrote the old Hatzfeldt woman a kind of threatening letter, sub rosa,c of course.

Now it would be highly desirable for you to pay a brief visit to Solingen to explain on my behalf to the cutler, Klings, how exceedingly important it is that the Association of German Workers should decide to join the INTERNATIONAL ASSOCIATION at its congress in Düsseldorf on 27 December of this year.82 You might surreptitiously hint that, for such nonentities as B. Becker, etc., what matters is, naturally, not the cause but the 'infiniment petit'? i.e., their own persons. But such a hint must be dropped diplomatically, without implicating me.

You understand that it is necessary that the General Association of German Workers should join only for a start, on account of our

[^1]: a between ourselves - b K. Marx, 'Inaugural Address of the Working Men's International Association'. - c allusively (see previous letter) - d infinitely small





**[p. 59]**

If you do not now at last write me a few lines, I shall presume that you have become totally disloyal to me, and will proclaim you excommunicated.

Your

K. M.

First published in Deutsche Zeitung, Printed according to the original Nr. 473, 16 October 1920 " ,. , • Published in English for the first time

