---
Volume: 42
Document_Title: "7. Engel s to Marx. 7 November "
Page_Range: "58-60"
---

# 7. Engel s to Marx. 7 November 



**[p. 19]**

the Polish aristocracy in openly and unambiguously proclaiming peasant socialism from the outset.24 From now on—after the collapse of the Polish affair—he (Bakunin) will only involve himself in the socialist movement.

On the whole, he is one of the few people whom after 16 years I find to have moved forwards and not backwards. I also discussed Urquhart's DENUNCIATIONS with him. (Apropos: the International Association will probably lead to a rupture between myself and these friends!2a) He inquired a great deal after yourself and Lupus. When I told him of the latter's death, he said straightaway that the movement had suffered an irreplaceable loss.

4. Crisis. By no means burnt out on the Continent yet (esp. France). Incidentally, what the crises have lost in intensity, they have now gained in frequency.

Salut.

Your

K. M.

First published in Der Briefwechsel zwischen Printed according to the original F. Engels und K. Marx, Bd. 3, Stuttgart, , , . . , . ,• , r .. r jojo Published in English in lull for the first time

7

Manchester, 7 November 1864

Dear Moor,

Your Frisian solution is quite right, but for one word. In North Frisian, Kimmang means: look, or eye; these North Frisians are of a speculative disposition and have substituted the inward horizon for the outward one, rather as Wagener is now calling for an 'inward Düppel'.27 It is an old sailors' saying.

[^1]: ENGELS TO MARX26

[^2]: IN LONDON

[^3]: The Herwegh and Hatzfeldt papers returned enclosed. What was the further provocation you refer to which Lassalle inflicted on the Walachiana and was suppressed by Emmab? Lassalle's fatal error was obviously that he did not throw the hossyc straight on

[^4]: Janko von Racowita - b Emma Herwegh - c Helene von Dönniges





**[p. 20]**

Old Hatzfeldt's idea that you should write an apotheosis of the latterday Redeemer" is really priceless.

The letter from the Solingen worker5 was not enclosed. I cannot wait to see the Address to the Workers,' it must be a real masterpiece, to judge by what you tell me of the people involved. But it is good that we are again making contact with people who do at least represent their class, which is what really matters ultimately. The effect on the Italians will be particularly good, as there is some chance that this will at last put an end to this Dio e popolod among the workers—it will come as quite a surprise to the worthy Giuseppe.6 Incidentally, I suspect that there will very soon be a split in this new association between those who are bourgeois in their thinking and those who are proletarian, the moment the issues become a little more specific.

Concerning Lupus' legacy, we had a meeting with the lawyer this morning.8 The sum still owing to you will amount to a little over £200; as soon as I have the money, I shall send most of it to you. There are still some details we do not know exactly, so we cannot finally calculate yet. The tax authorities want a list of all the books, and the exact value of the clock Lupus left. Please send me something itemising all the larger works and at the end just: so

Kind regards to your wife and the girls.

Your

F. E.

[^1]: MANY PAMPHLETS ETC., e v e r y t h i n g IN ONE CLUMP. I must close now, as I have to go to a Directors' meeting of the Schiller Institute,28 of which I am chairman, as you know, to Mr Borchardt's annoyance. Happily, beer has been introduced.

[^2]: First published abridged in Der Briefwech- sel zwischen F. Engels und K. Marx, Bd. 3, Stuttgart, 1913 and in full in MEG A Abt. Ill, Bd. 3, Berlin, 1930

[^3]: Printed according to the original

[^4]: Published in English in full for the first time

[^5]: •> Ferdinand Lassalle - b Carl Klings (see this volume, p. 15) - c K. Marx, 'Inaugural Address of the Working Men's International Association'. - d 'God and People' - e Mazzini



