---
Volume: 42
Document_Title: "9. Mar x to Engels. 14 November "
Page_Range: "61-62"
---

# 9. Mar x to Engels. 14 November 



**[p. 22]**

First published in Der Briefwechsel zwischen Printed according to the original F. Engels und K. Marx, Bd. 3, Stuttgart, jgj3 Published in English in full for the first time

9

MARX TO ENGELS33

IN MANCHESTER

[London,] 14 November 1864

Dear Engels,

I have had to stay mainly in bed for almost a week on account of the carbuncle. The thing is now healing up. However, as the carbuncle is just below the breast, I still have trouble leaning forward in order to write. So, to keep it as brief as possible:

1. Please send the enclosed letters addressed to me back to me (both the one from Schweitzer and the one from Liebknecht) and reply by return, as the people need our reply as soon as possible.34

My view is that we should promise occasional contributions from time to time. It is important for us to have a mouthpiece in Berlin, especially for the sake of the association I was involved in founding in London/ and for the sake of the bookb I am planning to publish. It is also important that whatever we do, we do it together.

If you agree with me, you can send me a few lines for these chaps, or say in a few lines what statement / am to make in your name.

2. You will receive the 'ADDRESS' along with the 'PROVISIONAL RULES', etc., in a few days. The thing was not quite so difficult as you think, because we are dealing with 'workers' all the time. The only LITERARY MAN in the Association is the Englishman, Peter Fox, a writer and AGITATOR who is, at the same time, one of the people from The National Reformer (atheist but anti-Holyoake). I am

[^1]: a International Working Men's Association - h Capital



