---
Volume: 42
Document_Title: "10. Engel s to Marx. 16 November "
Page_Range: "62-64"
---

# 10. Engel s to Marx. 16 November 



**[p. 23]**

3. Your stuff from the Guardianh I find most valuable. I had already pieced this abomination together from the 'FACTORY REPORTS', but only in a most laborious and fragmentary fashion.

4. 2 COPIES received from the Manchester SOLICITOR for signing, etc. In a day or two, I shall send you the signed copies, along with the list (inventory), etc., which you will then have to record. Of course, I can no longer reel off a complete list of all the stuff we left in the flat, etc., and put a value on it.8

That old HUMBUG Mc Culloch has died. I hope the British Museum buys up his ECONOMICAL LIBRARY. But no doubt Edinburgh will get in first.

Salut.

Your

K. M.

I have just come across P. Fox's letter, which I am enclosing; please send it back as soon as you have had time to peruse it.

10

ENGELS TO MARX

Manchester, 16 November 1864

Dear Moor,

Glad that the carbuncle is getting better. Let us hope it is the last. But do take arsenic.

Acknowledgement from the charming private secretary1 grate- fully received.

[^1]: First published in Der Briefwechsel zwischen Printed according to the original F. Engels und K. Marx, Bd. 3, Stuttgart, . . jnio Published in English in lull tor the first time

[^2]: IN LONDON

[^3]: a but one has to grin and bear it - b The Manchester Guardian (see this volume, p. 21) - c Laura Marx (a reference to Marx's receipt of money in respect of Wolff's legacy; see this volume, p. 20)





**[p. 24]**

And what a dreadful title: Der Socialdemokratl Why do these fellows not simply call it the Proletarier?

Enclosed papers returned with thanks. Why haven't you sent the Solingen letterc you promised?

Amid the nonsense written by Emma Herwegh,d I notice there is a further attempt to turn Lassalle into a demi-god, as follows: only his mighty spirit kept him alive for so long, anyone else would have given up the ghost 2 hours after being wounded—but you ask Allen some time about the way peritonitis develops following a wound, and he will tell you inflammation hardly sets in at all within 2 hours, and is scarcely ever fatal in less than 24 hours, and usually not until much later. These people are really given to deification.

Schaaffhausen in Bonn has given a pretty lecture on man and apes, pointing out that Asiatic anthropoids have rounded heads, like the human beings there, but in Africa both are long-headed, and commenting that, with the present state of knowledge, this is the strongest argument against the unity of the human race. Someone ought to try saying that at a gathering of naturalists in England!

It is splendid how Müller and the Rev. Cappell have made fools of that gang Kinkel, Juch & Co. even from the gallows. It is a long time since I have come across anything quite so absurd as the conduct of these fellows. How fortunate Gottfriedc is in the people whose cases he takes up! First Mac Donald, then Müller. And then

[^1]: a Sophie von Hatzfeldt - b of Lassalle - c See this volume, pp. 15, 20. - d ibid., p. 12. - e Gottfried Kinkel



