---
Volume: 42
Document_Title: "11. Mar x to Engels. 18 November "
Page_Range: "64-68"
---

# 11. Mar x to Engels. 18 November 



**[p. 25]**

Your

F. E.

First published abridged in Der Briefwech- Printed according to the original sei zwischen F. Engels und K. Marx, Bd. 3, Stuttgart, 1913 and in full in MEGA, Published in English for the first Abt. Ill, Bd. 3, Berlin, 1930 t l m e

11

MARX TO ENGELS

IN MANCHESTER

[London,] 18 November [1864]

1. I am sending the stuff for the SOLICITOR. You will have to copy the enclosed inventory and put it into whatever shape you think fit.1

2. Ad vocemh Solingen. I had put the letter out READY when I sent you the last but one letter-package, and it hasn't been 'seen any more since then'.' I suspect it has ensconced itself in a notebook and WILL TURN UP one fine morning.

3. Ad vocem Schweitzer. Is a Dr of Law, formerly of Frankfurt am Main. Published a confused pamphlet against Vogt in 1859.d Subsequently, a social novel I have not read.e Declared his vigorous support for Lassalle. Later, during Lassalle's lifetime, he got to know sundry writings of ours at Liebknecht's house while staying in Berlin and, even at that time, sent me a message through Liebknecht saying how amazed he was at finding that everything about Lassalle that he liked had been plagiarised.

[^1]: DEAR FRED,

[^2]: a See this volume, pp. 20, 23. - b With regard to - c J. W. Goethe, 'Der Fischer'. - d J. B. Schweitzer, Widerlegung von Carl Vogt's Studien zur gegenwärtigen Lage Europa's. - e J. B. Schweitzer, Lucinde oder Capital und Arbeit.





**[p. 26]**

As far as Lassalle's apotheosis is concerned,b the Hamburg Nordstern, edited by that jackass Bruhn (who at the same time continues to print Heinzen's ELUCUBRATIONS, as though nothing had happened), is exclusively dedicated to this matter just as before, and the Social-Demokrat can scarcely compete with it in that respect.

Old Hatzfeldt seems to be most disappointed by the letter I sent in reply to her 'ploy',c although it was most delicate and considerate in tone. Since that time, she has—kept silence.

Social-Demokrat is a bad title. But there is no need to throw away the best tides immediately on things that may prove to be FAILURES.

Wilhelm Liebknecht is an unquestionably big man among the Berlin workers, as you can see from the Berlin correspondence of The Morning Star. I am only afraid he will soon be sent packing.

4. Ad voce m Peritonitis, it says in Andral: 'Clinique Médicale': 'La Péritonite aiguë en certains cas un petit nombre d'heures s'écoulent entre l'époque de l'invasion de la maladie et celle de la mort, tandis que d'autres fois la péritonite, toujours aiguë par ses symptômes, ne devient mortelle qu'au bout de 30 à 40 jours.'e

And under the rubric: 'Péritonite par violence extérieure'1 he describes the case of a Parisian worker who was kicked in the stomach by a horse, in the region of his navel. Was only taken to the Charitég le surlende- main, 'offre tous les symptômes d'une phlegmasie aiguë du péritoine"1 (later confirmed by ouverture du cadavre'). Died du 5-ème au 6-ème jour,1 and amongst the general OBSERVATIONS concerning this case, it says: 'jusqu'au dernier moment, on n'observe aucun trouble des facultés intellectuelles et sensoriales.'k

[^1]: a K. Marx, 'Inaugural Address of the Working Men's International Association'. - b See this volume, pp. 20, 24. - c ibid., p. 12. - d ibid., p. 24. - e 'Acute peritonitis in some cases just a few hours elapse between the onset of the disease and death, whereas on other occasions peritonitis, which is always acute in its symptoms, does not cause death for from 30 to 40 days.' - f 'Peritonitis due to external violence' - s hospital in Paris - h two days later, 'exhibits all the symptoms of acute phlegmasia of the peritoneum' - ' autopsy - i on the 5th or 6th day - k 'until the very last, no disturbance of the mind or senses is observed' (see G. Andral, Clinique médicale, ou choix d'observations recueillies à l'hôpital de la Charité (clinique de M. Lerminier), t. 4, Paris, 1827, pp. 511, 532, 533)





**[p. 27]**

6. Prof. Huber has held his 'labour convention' with ABOUT 100 workers' associations. He is conservative in politics but a co- operator as far as POLITICAL ECONOMY is concerned. His Leipzig Convention nearly ended in a real 'thrashing' for Huber and his comrades, with the great majority declaring themselves to be 'radical' in politics.39

7. I gather all kinds of things have been published by the COMMITTEE in Manchester about the COTTON-FAMINE40—I mean IN REGARD TO THE wo RKi NGMEN. Can you get hold of it for me?

8. My chest still hurts me when I write and lean forward. Hence this 'itemised' letter.

Regards to Gumpert. Ditto to Madame Lizzy.b

Your

K. M.

[Enclosure: List relating to W. Wolff's Legacy]

BOOKS : Schlosser, Weltgeschichte £1 10s. Schieiden, Studien 3s. Schiller's Werke 10s. Duller, Geschichte des Deutschen Volkes 5s. Duncker, Geschichte £1 Mommsen, Geschichte 10s. Schoemann, Griechische Alterthümer 5s. Lange, Römische Alterthümer 3s. Preller, Griechische Mythologie 5s. Nösselt, Weltgeschichte 4s. Völter, Geographie 5s. Mortimer-Ternaux, Histoire de la Terreur, 2 v 5s. Arago, Astronomie Populaire 10s. Müller, Physik 3s. Baer, Magnetismus ls. Figuier, Année scientifique, 3 vol 5s.

[^1]: SILVER WATCH £2

[^2]: a is the 'grand' organ of Swabian democracy - b Lizzy Burns





**[p. 28]**



[^1]: First published abridged in Der Briefwech- Printed according to the original sei zwischen F. Engeb und K. Marx, Bd. 3, Stuttgart, 1913 and in full in MEGA, Published in English for the first Abt. Ill, Bd. 3, Berlin, 1930 t l m e



