---
Volume: 42
Document_Title: "13. Mar x to Engels. 24 November "
Page_Range: "68-70"
---

# 13. Mar x to Engels. 24 November 



**[p. 12]**

ENGELS TO MARX

IN LONDON

Manchester, 22 November 1864

Dear Moor,

I received enclosed today from Schweitzer.41 Herwegh and Hess—fine company. As things stand and as I am not very familiar with the exact circumstances, I shall have to leave it to you to answer the man on behalf of both of us, as he wants his answer by return. Mosesa of all people!

Please return the letter to me and let me know what you have written, and I can then confirm your statement to him later on.

Solicitor's stuff received.8

Kindest regards.

Your

F. E.

13

MARX TO ENGELS

[London, 24 November 1864]

Dear FREDHUCK,

Letter from the old Hatzfeldt woman enclosed, which I would like sent back by return.4Also enclosed the letter from the man in Solingenb which has turned up again, and Schweitzer's letter.

[^1]: First published in Der Briefwechsel zwischen Printed according to the original F. Engels und K. Marx, Bd. 3, Stuttgart, igj3 Published in English for the first time

[^2]: IN MANCHESTER

[^3]: a Moses Hess - b See this volume, p. 15.





**[p. 30]**

As for Schweitzer, I have written—not to him but to Liebk- necht—that we both dislike the company, but we intend FOR A NONCE to adopt bonne mine à mauvais jeu,h but to disown them immediately as soon as they do anything silly. I also ask why Bûcher and especially Rodbertus are not among them!43

Moses0 and Herwegh (who are, incidentally, of some stature, compared with B. and Ph. Becker, IN A LITERARY SENSE) are, after all, more highly regarded by people in Germany than by us. At least, one cannot publicly denigrate them, as one can fellows like Grün, etc.

In great haste. Salut.

Your

K. M.

I have just been obliged to write long letter to the old womand

to extricate myself from the Blind affair she has tried to involve me in. Student Blind has, of course, not let the opportunity slip by of puffing himself up, by issuing a 'protest' in the name of the Republic" and selecting a few passages from Lassalle's speeches which are indeed quite sickeningly royalist.44 Also to advise her against reproducing the 'wanted' portraits of her enemies.45

[^1]: First published in Der Briefwechsel zwischen Printed according to the original F. Engels und K. Marx, Bd. 3, Stuttgart, 1923 Published in English for the first time

[^2]: a K. Marx, 'Inaugural Address of the Working Men's International Association'. - b an attitude of grin and bear it - c Moses Hess - d Sophie von Hatzfeldt - e ['A Republican Protest',] Neue Frankfurter Zeitung, No. 270, 29 September 1864; 'Republikanischer Protest', Hermann, No. 2407, 8 October 1864; Die Westliche Post, October-beginning of November 1864.



