---
Volume: 42
Document_Title: "14. Mar x to Sophie von Hatzfeldt. 24 November "
Page_Range: "70-76"
---

# 14. Mar x to Sophie von Hatzfeldt. 24 November 



**[p. 14]**

MARX TO SOPHIE VON HATZFELDT

IN BERLIN

London, 24 November 1864

1 Modena Villas, Maitland Park, Haverstock Hill

My dear Countess,

I have just informed you by telegraph46 (to avoid all delay in reply) of my view that the two photograms of von R. et Co.a

should, in no circumstances, appear together with Lassalle's in the pamphlet. It would, on the one hand, dishonour the deceased, and, on the other, give the publication a gaudy appearance which should be avoided completely. Furthermore, as you know, 'contra hostem vindicatio aeterna sit'b is my motto too, but, for revenge to be successfully executed, it is advisable not to initiate the public in one's vindictive 'intent'.45

'Ex ossibus ultor'c would seem to me the best title for Lassalle's portrait. They were also my last words spoken at the graveside of my never-to-be-forgotten friend W. Wolff47 some six months ago.

As regards ex-student Blind, that fellow who made himself known before 1848 by peddling Heinzen's nonsense and as the

homme entretenu"1 of the wife of the Jewish banker Cohene (whom he later married in London), so I would ask you to remember that in my piece Herr Vogt (see pp. 58-69 and Appendices 9 and 11 )f I do not merely describe this student Blind as a 'deliberate liar', but I prove by reference to legal documents that this wretched man fabricated 'false witness' to cast suspicion on myself and to extricate his neck from a noose that this creature had made for himself for the purpose of merely making himself look big (which is indeed this rascal's sole purpose in every public step, or rather crawl, he undertakes).48

Then Blind succeeded in deflecting the catastrophe of his

[^1]: a Janko von Racowija and Helene von Dönniges - b A paraphrase of an article from the Twelve Tables (a code of law of ancient Rome) which says: 'Adversus hostem aeterna auctoritas [esto]' (III, 7); Marx uses the word vindicatio in the sense of revenge. - c 'Let the avenger rise' (Virgil, Aeneid, IV, 625: 'ex oriare aliquis nostrius ex ossibus ultor'). - d kept man - e Friederike Ettlinger, Cohen's and later Karl Blind's wife - f See present edition, Vol. 17, pp. 116-32, 315, 317-20.





**[p. 32]**

When Lassalle was here in London,50 he sought to enlighten Louis Blanc and Mazzini about Blind on his personal visits to them, but in vain. The man is exactly what Mazzini, Ledru, etc., had hoped, but failed, to find in the other Germans of standing, a servile lackey and sycophant. Through his relations with these people he makes the English think that he represents Germany, and he impresses the Germans by his boasting here. Yet the whole of this fellow's activity consists in writing, in conjunction with 3 or 4 South Germans/ from, for and about 'Karl Blind' and, at every possible opportunity, to force on the English, Germans and Americans his 'unofficial judgment' as the self-appointed rep- resentative of 'German republicanism' (a party, which is well known to exist only on the moon, since the German bourgeois is interested in a constitutional monarchy, the feudal lord in an aristocratic monarchy, and the worker in general not in mere forms of state, but in the form of state as the expression of economic social conditions, and, at all events, has never recognised ex-student Blind as representative). He is a true master of dictating letters to one of his 6 satellites,51 in which they call on the said, etc., 'Karl Blind' to do this or that, or congratulate him on this or that, and then—by oversight or OTHERWISE—the replies from the same Karl Blind gain entry to the press.

As one of the 'YOUNG MEN' who were active in the service of F. Hecker, Blind learnt that art, which is by no means rare among the South Germans, of self-defamation and creating a spurious PUBLIC OPINION about people who are essentially nonentities. In London he thought himself far enough advanced along the road or to have served long enough in the 'Democratic cause' to

[^1]: a between ourselves - b in one way or another - c Heinrich Heine, Atta Troll. Ein Sommernachtstraum, 11. - d Marx presumably has in mind, first and foremost, Eduard Bronner and Karl Heinrich Schaible.



exploit for himself those arts he had acquired in the service of others.

Regarding his education, it is, as I told Lassalle during his sojourn here, that of a Baden publican," who has read Rotteck's

Weltgeschichte, Welker's Staatslexikon and Mr Struve's republican Almanac.b

In his manoeuvres in Germany Mr Blind enjoys the particular support of Mr Gustav Rasch of Berlin.

Bernhard Becker, as the former SUBEDITOR of the London Hermann, best knows how Blind composed with his own fair hand the paeans of praise to himself that appeared e.g. in the Hermann. He does this mostly and on average. By way of variation he will occasionally get a certain Dr Bronner in Bradford or his Schaible (see 'Herr Vogt') via London to put their names to his epistles. All the agitation of this person is nothing but a tissue of lies, self-deception and hot air. In this field, however, he has no rivals. He demonstrated the height of his dexterity when Garibaldi visited London.19 He first spread the rumour in the English papers that he was an intimate friend of Garibaldi. Imposing himself as is his custom, he issued 'addresses' to Garibaldi from London and you know that in his kind-hearted naivety Garibaldi will write a nice letter back to anyone. Then he descends on the Isle of Wight (before Garibaldi made his ceremonial entry to London), and 'appoints' with him the date on which Garibaldi would receive the German deputation (Blind, you see, had so arranged things as to get a few Germans, including Kinkel and unfortunately my friend Freiligrath as well, to elect him as the leader of a deputation) and at the same time sends mysterious hints to some London papersc that Garibaldi WAS CLOSETED' WITH 'HIS FRIEND' (Blind) and, of course, settled some very important affairs of state with him.52 But Blind's masterstroke is still to come. As serving-man to the European 'kings of democracy"1 (for so he designates Mazzini, Ledru Rollin, Louis Blanc, and indeed COMPARED WITH student Blind even they are 'great men"), our Baden trickster manages so to arrange things that he, as a member of the society and a leader, fetches Garibaldi from the Duke of Sutherland's, where he is staying, and escorts him in the Duke's State Carriage

[^1]: a An allusion to Karl Blind's father, Johann Adam Blind who was a publican in Mannheim. - b G. Struve, Die neue Zeit. Ein Volkskalender auf das Jahr 1. - c 'Interview of Karl Blind with Garibaldi', The Morning Advertiser, No. 22726, 11 April 1864. - d Marx quotes Karl Blind - e Cf. the title of Marx and Engels' pamphlet: The Great Men of the Exile (present edition, Vol. 11, pp. 227-326).





**[p. 34]**

But Garibaldi, Schleswig-Holstein, America, Lassalle, all are for the ex-student only a pretext for puffing up his own self- importance! The modest fellow wrote in his own fair hand a short while ago to the 'Glasgow Sentinel' that the whole of Europe

[^1]: a 'General Garibaldi', The Times, 19 April 1864. - b G. Rasch, Vom verlassenen Bruderstamm. Das dänische Regiment in Schleswig-Holstein, Bd. 1-3; Vom verrathenen Bruderstamm. Der Krieg in Schleswig-Holstein im Jahre 1864. Bd. 1-2. - c R. Virchow's speech in the House of Representatives on 9 December 1863. In: Stenographische Berichte über die Verhandlungen der [] beiden Häuser des Landtages, Haus der Abgeordneten, 13 Sitzung, Bd. 1.





**[p. 35]**

After his success with Garibaldi MR KARL BLIND JOINED THE SHAKESPEARE COMMITTEE,53 as was stated in the Athenaeum\c He had now clearly progressed to the status of 'literary' representative of Germany, too!

During the skirmish in Baden (1849),54 Struve, as he himself recounts in a piece about the 'Baden revolution',1* sent the 'young man', as he calls Blind, as Under-Secretary to Schütz, who had been appointed Secretary, from Mainz to Paris, to rescue ex-student Blind from conflict with Brentano. The government to which Blind was directed as Under-Secretary to Secretary Schütz,— the provisional government no longer existed when Secretary and Under-Secretary arrived in Paris. Nevertheless, in mysterious hints in English papers, he let it be understood that he held an important diplomatic post as agent of the German 'republican government' in Paris!

In the first few years after 1849 he lived in Belgium with his present wife. Since this woman has children from her marriage to the dead banker (and they inherited) and she also has children by Blind (at that time still illegitimate), a court in Baden ruled that Cohen's children should be taken away from his widow Cohen because of her 'immoral' relations with ex-student Blind. The court in Brussels gave this ruling legal force in Belgium, and this caused Blind to flee to England together with his wife and the children. He later got English papers to print (and was brazen enough to boast publicly of it on a visit to South Germany) that he had been expelled from Belgium for political reasons!e

His next deed you will see from the enclosed cutting, which he had printed in many London papers. What provoked it was the report disseminated in some papers that Garibaldi had declared his support for the slave-oumersl Blind used this to extort a short letter from Garibaldi with 'CORDIAL GREETINGS FOR MRS BLIND'. YOU can see what lies he told Garibaldi from his remark 'I THANK YOU FOR YOUR

[^1]: a 'M. Karl Blind', North British Daily Mail, 30 March 1863. - b Marx refers to the reports on Blind's meetings with Garibaldi published in The Observer, Nos. 3804, 3805 and 3806, 10, 17 and 24 April 1864. - c The Athenaeum, No. 1902, 9 April 1864. - d G. Struve, Geschichte der drei Volkserhebungen in Baden. - e 'M. Karl Blind', North British Daily Mail, 30 March 1863.



The most splendid aspect of the affair is that the London paper to which Blind is a regular contributor, the mouthpiece of the publicans (a most appropriate context to a 'Blind'), is a fanatical supporter of the Confederates!b And by the by, the paper— The Morning Advertiser—is at one and the same time the mouthpiece of spirits, the Low CHURCH (English pietism),55 the SWELL-MOB which is concerned with gambling, PRICEFIGHTS AND SO FORTH, and the most lickspittling poodle of Palmerston's. FROM A LITERARY STANDPOINT, it cannot be counted among the English daily press and is in general only read in TAPROOMS.

So much for the man. In Lassalle's lifetime he issued an address casting doubt on the former's integrity.56 But Lassalle—as far as I know—did not think it worth the trouble of a reply. I was only surprised that B. Becker, who is fully aware of Blind's doings, did not then take the opportunity to blazon abroad my revelations about Blind?

One of the reasons why I have joined the International Working Men's Association here is to expose that man. After the statements I have made against Blind, branding him as a 'deliberate liar' and a 'falsifier of evidence', I cannot of course further involve myself in polemic against the fellow. I reserve the right to treat him as a figure of comedy should the occasion arise. If I should now take his scrawl against Lassalle, which I have incidentally not seen, as grounds for an attack on him, people here, who know of my implacable hostility to Blind, will think that in fact I am only using Lassalle's name as a pretext for personal spite.

But do send me the (printed) declaration by the workers. I shall ensure that it gets into a German paper here and if student Blind then makes any further moves, perhaps he will give me the opportunity to let me fall upon him.

At all events, you may depend on it that he will be shown no favours. In the meantime, the best thing you can do is to disseminate my revelations about Blind as a 'deliberate liar' and 'falsifier' as far as possible in Germany. (If his scrawl about Lassalle had set any mice stirring here, a word or two about it at all events

[^1]: a Blind published Garibaldi's letter to him in The Morning Advertiser, 9 November 1864. - b i.e. the southern slave-owning states - c Marx means his revelations about Blind in Herr Vogt.



