---
Volume: 42
Document_Title: "16. Mar x to Engels. 25 November "
Page_Range: "79-81"
---

# 16. Mar x to Engels. 25 November 



**[p. 40]**

Your field-manual and elementary tactics are, as I hear, positively French—the basic formation thus presumably being the column with intervals between platoons. What kind of field artillery do you now have? If you can enlighten me on these points, I shall be greatly obliged. What has become of the great Anneke? Since the battle at Pittsburgh-Landing was all but lost60

because he was not supplied with everything which he should have had, according to the Prussian field-manual, he has quite vanished from my view. Of the Germans who have joined in the war, Willich appears to have given the best account of himself, whereas Sigel has UNMISTAKEABLY demonstrated his mediocrity. And Schurz, the valiant Schurz, farting away amidst the shower of bullets and shells, what foes is he demolishing now?

Apropos. The Prussian cannons that smashed Düppela and Sonderburg61 from 6,500 paces were our old long bronze 24-pounders, rifled and rebuilt as breech-loaders, 54-pound shells with 4-pound-charge! I've seen them with my own eyes.

Kindest regards to your wife.b

Your

F. Engels

16

MARX TO ENGELS

[London,] 25 November [1864]

[^1]: First published abridged in Die Neue Zeit, Printed according to the original Bd. 2, Nr. 33, 1906-1907 and in full in: „ . , . , . . „ , . • • * . , , u Marx and Engels, Works, First Russian Published in English in full for the Edition, Vol. XXV, Moscow, 1934 f l r s t t i m e

[^2]: IN MANCHESTER

[^3]: DEAR FREDERICK! Weydemeyer's letter returned enclosed (how odd it should come at the same time as the one from the countessc)58 with Schweitzer's letter/ which I forgot to enclose yesterday.

[^4]: a Danish name: Dybböl. - b Louise Weydemeyer - c Sophie von Hatzfeldt - d See this volume, p. 29.





**[p. 41]**

The position is now as follows:

1. It was not until after I wrote to you that I saw that Blind has sent an answer to the Swabian Beobachter via Dr Bronner (unsigned, of course, but dated Bradford; letter, naturally, written by Blind himself, in which he firstly proves that by his influence over '7' million Germans he in fact shaped American politics; secondly, he has the impudence to say that the Vogt affair has been disposed of by statements from all sides.62 So, I have grounds here for replying and referring to the 'AFFIDAVITS',63 and, at the same time, an extract from Weydemeyer's letter would kill two birds with one stone, firstly exposing Blind's influence on America and secondly giving the old countess some kind of satisfaction as far as Lassalle is concerned.

2. These 'Republican Protests', which Blind has sent with the same date to St Louis, Frankfurt am Main and the London Hermann, are only identical in their general drift. In the shit in the Hermann and the Frankfurter Journal^" which I shall try to send you later today, this Baden publican" has simply put together the passages which were most damaging to ourselves, whilst across the ocean he is more insolent and resorts to bare-faced lies.

But the real 'POINT' is this, a 'POINT' typical of the way he manufactures his pamphlets: in the European edition he says that the protest comes from American and European republicans, whilst in the American edition he calls upon the American government to protest. Here we have caught the dog in flagranti.0

3. Since Lassalle is dead and can do no more harm, we must of course—as far as possible, i.e. without compromising ourselves— defend him against these petty-bourgeois scoundrels.

My plan is therefore this: to reply (briefly) in the Siuabian Beobachter; 1. putting the record straight about the 'statements from all sides' in the Vogt affair; 2. giving an extract from Weydemeyer's letter about Blind's influence in America; 3. exposing the fellow afresh by comparing the European and American editions of his 'Republican Protest'; finally 4. concluding that it is NOT WORTH WHILE defending Lassalle against such a comical character.

If this seems all right to you, send me a wire and I will tie the whole business up tomorrow, amongst other things in order to have some peace with the 'old girl'. I said in my letter to her, by

[^1]: il from Die Westliche Post with Blind's article 'Ein republikanischer Protest' - b Neue

[^2]: Frankfurter Zeitung - c See this volume, p. 33. - d red-handed

[^3]: 4-1196



