---
Volume: 42
Document_Title: "19. Marx to Joseph Weydemeyer. 29 November "
Page_Range: "82-84"
---

# 19. Marx to Joseph Weydemeyer. 29 November 



**[p. 18]**

MARX TO SOPHIE VON HATZFELDT

IN BERLIN

London, 28 November 1864

My dear Countess,

From the enclosed" you will see the circumstances that have presented me with the opportunity to renew my tussle with ex-student Blind and, at the same time, deliver him a kick in the name of Lassalle.

You must arrange for publication in the papers at your disposal, but not before two days have elapsed after you receive this, so that Mayer of Swabia—i.e. the editor of the Beobachter in Stuttgart— has no excuse for refusing it.1'4

Yours very respectfully

K. Marx

First published in: Marx and Engels, Printed according to the original Works, Second Russian Edition, Vol. 31, Moscow 1963 Published in English tor the iirst time

19

London, 29 November 1864

1 Modena Villas, Maitland Park, Haverstock Hill, N. W.

Dear Weiwi,

The whole household and myself were extraordinarily pleased to hear from you and your family again. My wife asserts that she wrote to yours*' last and is thus expecting to have the first letter back from her.

[^1]: MARX TO JOSEPH WEYDEMEYER57

[^2]: IN ST LOUIS

[^3]: K. Marx, 'To the Editor of the Stuttgart Beobachter'. - b Louise Weydemeyer

[^4]: 4*





**[p. 44]**

I am, at the same time, sending you by mail 4 copies of a printed 'Address',3 of which I am the author. The newly established INTERNATIONAL Workers' Committee, in whose name it has been put out, is not without significance. Its English members consist chiefly of the heads of the TRADE-UNIONS here, in other words, the real worker-kings of London, the same people who organised that gigantic reception for Garibaldi and who, by that monster meeting in St James's Hall (under Bright's chairmanship), prevented Palmerston declaring war on the United States, which hè was on the point of doing.19 On the French side, the members are unimpor- tant figures, but they are the direct spokesmen of the leading 'workers' in Paris. There is likewise a link with the Italian associations, which recently held their congress in Naples.22

Although I have been systematically refusing to participate in any way whatsoever in all the 'organisations', etc. for years now, I accepted this time because it concerns a matter by means of which it is possible to have a significant influence.

For the past 14 months I have been suffering almost constantly from carbuncles, which often threatened my life. More or less cured now.

Engels will have written to you of the loss of our friend Lupus.b

Curiously enough, I received a letter from Berlin last Friday, in which the old Hatzfeldt woman urged me to defend Lassalle against Blind's 'Republican Protest'.42 The next day I received your letter to Engels, containing the much amended American edition of the same garbage. By a third coincidence, I was, at the same time, sent 2 numbers of the Swabian Beobachter (from Stuttgart) which I never see otherwise. In the first number the editorc was poking fun at a letter from Mr Blind to the American nation which had been translated from the English by 'Mr Blind' and sent to him and to other South German editors; in it, 'almost at official request', as he puts it, he gives his inexpert opinion on Lincoln's election, etc.d In the same number, the editor said that one can see from my book attacking Vogte what Blind's vanity leads to, etc. Whereupon, Blind sent the enclosed reply through his man-of-straw, Dr Bronner of Bradford, 1. setting out just how powerful his influence in America was, and 2. having the impudence to say that the Vogt affair was 'a put-up-job'.62 This then enabled me (using your letter and copying the passages relating to Blind) to put out the

[^1]: a 'Inaugural Address of the Working Men's International Association'. - b Wilhelm Wolff - c Karl Mayer - d 'Bescheidenheit — ein Ehrenkleid', Der Beobachter, No. 245, 21 October 1864. - e Herr Vogt



