---
Volume: 42
Document_Title: "20. Mar x to Ludwig Kugelmann. 29 November "
Page_Range: "84-85"
---

# 20. Mar x to Ludwig Kugelmann. 29 November 

statement3 as desired by the old Hatzfeldt woman against that clown, without identifying myself with those aspects of Lassalle's agitation b

which are not to my liking. Write soon.

Your

K. Marx

The source of Blind's boastful epistle which I am copying out for you is No. 268 of the Beobachter (Stuttgart), 17 Nov., 1864.

It is absolutely essential that you write me a few lines, suitable for publication, about Mr Blind's American influence.

First published abridged in Die Neue Zeit, Printed according to the original Bd. 2, Nr. 33, 1906-1907 and in full in: Marx and Engels, Works, First Russian Published in English in full for the Edition, Vol. XXV, Moscow, 1934 f l r s t t l m e

20

London, 29 November 1864

1 Modena Villas, Maitland Park, Haverstock Hill, N. W.

Dear Friend, Today you will receive from me by post 6 copies of the ADDRESS

The Association—or rather its Committee—is important be- cause the leaders of the London TRADE-UNIONS belong to it, the same people who organised that enormous reception for Garibaldi and thwarted Palmerston's plan for a war with the United States by means of the monster meeting in St James's Hall.19 The leaders of the Parisian workers are also in contact with it.

[^1]: MARX TO LUDWIG KUGELMANN65

[^2]: IN HANOVER

[^3]: OF THE WORKINGMEN'S INTERNATIONAL ASSOCIATION'/ o f w h i c h I a m t h e author. Please be so good as to convey a copy with my kindest regards to Madame Markheim (Fulda). Give one to Mr Miquel as well.

[^4]: a K. Marx, 'To the Editor of the Stuttgart Beobachter'. - b See this volume, pp. 40-42. - c 'Inaugural Address of the Working Men's International Association'



