---
Volume: 42
Document_Title: "21. Mar x to Lion Philips. 29 November "
Page_Range: "85-88"
---

# 21. Mar x to Lion Philips. 29 November 



**[p. 46]**

In the last few years I have been much afflicted with illness (e.g., in the last 14 months by a recurrence of carbuncles). My private circumstances have improved in consequence of a legacy from the death of my mother.3

I think that my book on capital (60 sheets) will at last be ready for the press next year.66

You will doubtless understand the reasons for not allowing myself to become involved in Lassalle's movement in his lifetime, without my spelling them out in detail. However, that cannot deter me—the more so since persons close to him are urging me to do so—from taking up his defence, now that he is dead, against such despicable curs as the clamorous K. Blind.b

I am afraid that in mid-spring or early summer of next year there will be war between Italy, Austria and France. This will be very damaging for the movement in France and England, which is growing significantly.

I hope to hear from you soon.

Yours very respectfully

K. Marx

First published in Die Neue Zeit, Bd. 2, Printed according to the original Nr. 1, Stuttgart, 1901-1902

21

London, 29 November 1864

1 Modena Villas, Maitland Park, Haverstock Hill

Dear Uncle,

I hope that you are in the best of health despite the ABOMINABLE weather. All is well here. Except that, to the great alarm of the whole family, I had a most malignant carbuncle below the left breast at the beginning of this month, which kept me in great pain for 2-3 weeks. Other than that, everything has been going well.

[^1]: MARX TO LION PHILIPS67

[^2]: IN ZALT-BOMMEL

[^3]: a Henrietta Marx (died 30 November 1863) - b See this volume, pp. 40-42.



The enclosed printed 'Address"3 is written by myself. The matter hangs together like this: in September the Parisian workers sent a delegation to the London workers to demonstrate support for Poland. On that occasion, an international Workers' Commit- tee was formed. The matter is not without importance because 1. in London the same people are at the head who organised the gigantic reception for Garibaldi and, by their monster meeting with Bright in St James's Hall, prevented war with the United States.19

In a word, these are the real workers' leaders in London, with one or two exceptions all workers themselves. 2. On the Parisian side, Mr Tolain (ouvrierc himself, as well) et Co. are at the head, i.e., the same people who were prevented by a mere intrigue on the part of Garnier-Pages, Carnot, etc., from entering the Corps législatif at the last elections in Paris as representatives of the workers there,4 and 3. on the Italian side, it has been joined by the representatives of the 4-500 Italian workers' clubs which held their general congress in Naples some weeks ago,22 an event which even The Times considered important enough to merit a few dozen lines in the paper.d

Courtesy toward the French and the Italians, who always require florid language, has obliged me to include a few superfluous turns of phrase in the preamble to the 'Rules',6 though not in the 'Address'.23

A few days ago I received a letter from America from my friend Weydemeyer, Colonel in the regiment stationed at St Louis (Missouri). Amongst other things, he writes—and these are his exact words:

[^1]: a Marx to Lion Philips, 17 August 1864 (present edition, Vol. 41). - b 'Inaugural Address of the Working Men's International Association'. - c worker - d The Times, No. 25021, 4 November 1864. - e K. Marx, 'Provisional Rules of the Association'.





**[p. 48]**

When you reflect, my dear Uncle, how at the time of Lincoln's election 372 years ago it was only a matter of making no further concessions to the slave-owners, whereas now the avowed aim, which has in part already been realised, is the abolition of slavery, one has to admit that never has such a gigantic revolution occurred with such rapidity. It will have a highly beneficial influence on the whole world.

At a public MEETING this week the fellow-member of our race Benjamin Disraeli has again made a dreadful laughing-stock of himself by assuming the mantle of guardian angel of the HIGH CHURCH69 and CHURCH RATES, repudiating criticism in religious affairs.15

He furnishes the best evidence of how a great talent unaccom- panied by conviction creates rogues, albeit gold-braided and 'RIGHT HONORABLE' ones.

Those jackasses in Germany have again made a proper laughing-stock of themselves over the Müller affair,36 with ex-parson Kinkel at their head.

With kindest regards from the whole family to you and from me to Jettchen, Dr, Fritzc et Co.

Ever your faithful nephew

K. M.

[^1]: First published in International Review of Printed according to the original Social History, Vol. I, Part 1, Assen, 1956 „ , ,. , , . _ ,. , . . „ , Published in English m lull tor the first time

[^2]: a Marx quotes from J. Weydemeyer's letter to Engels written in October 1864. - b An account of Disraeli's speech at the meeting in Oxford on 25 November 1864 was published in The Times, No. 25040, 26 November 1864. - c Henriette van Anroij, Dr van Anroij and Friedrich Philips



