---
Volume: 42
Document_Title: "23. Marx to Engels. 8 December "
Page_Range: "91-92"
---

# 23. Marx to Engels. 8 December 



**[p. 23]**

MARX TO ENGELS

IN MANCHESTER

[London,] 8 December 1864

Dear Engels,

You will find enclosed

1. Free Press." 2. Swabian Beobachter. (With the latter, I have managed to get the fellow at least to adopt an ironical tone towards Blind again, whereas, as a result of the letter transmitted by Bronner,b he was so bowled over by Blind's boasting—I have sent the scrawl to Weydemeyer—that he absolutely drew in his horns and paid compliments to the 'excellent man'. Incidentally, the editor—hinc Mae lacrimaec—is the man whom I referred to in Herr Vogt as the 'garrulous Swabian, Karl Mayer',d and who is moreover the son of that Mayer the Swabian so incessantly derided by Heine.73)

3. Letter enclosed from Red Becker/ I had, you see, sent a copy of the statement' to the Rheinische Zeitung. Please return Becker's letter to me.74

Apropos Liebknecht. At the end of the year he is, of course, in a very tight spot. I have sent him money several times in the course of the last six months and now I want to send his wife8 something in the form of a Christmas present for the children, since I know they are in dire straits. I would appreciate it if you would make a contribution, too. But you must let me know quickly, as periculum in mora.h I would then send the whole lot to Frau Liebknecht at the same time.

Salut. Your

K. M.

[^1]: First published abridged in Der Briefwechsel Printed according to the original zwischen F. Engels und K. Marx, Bd. 3, . . . Stuttgart, 1913 and in full in MEGA, Abt. Published in English for the first III, Bd. 3, Berlin, 1930 t i m e

[^2]: a Presumably The Free Press, No. 12, 7 December 1864, with the article [CD. Collet,] 'Russia's Designs on the Pope'. - b See this volume, p.51. - c hence these tears (Terence, Andria, I, 1, 99) - d See present edition, Vol. 17, pp. 120 and 205. - e Hermann Heinrich Becker - f K. Marx, 'To the Editor of the Stuttgart Beobachter'. - s Ernestine Liebknecht - h danger in delay (Livy, History of Rome, Vol. XXXVIII, Chap. 25)



