---
Volume: 42
Document_Title: "24. Marx to Engels. 10 December "
Page_Range: "92-95"
---

# 24. Marx to Engels. 10 December 



**[p. 24]**

MARX T O ENGELS 3 3

IN MANCHESTER

[London,] 10 December 1864

DEAR FRED,

MY COMPLIMENT TO MRS LIZZY.3

You had already given m e your PRIVATE ADDRESS some time ago, but not the 'FIRM' to which to write. I am very glad to have it now, as I sometimes find it desirable to drop you a few lines ON SATURDAYS.

T h e £ 5 for Wilhelm b is already on its way to Berlin today. You have not sent m e back the Becker.74 However cunningly 'the Red' fancies he has extricated himself from the matter, his letter is a DOCUMENT WHICH ONE FINE MORNING HE MAY FIND TO TURN UP for unforeseen purposes. T h e old Hatzfeldt woman will, incidentally, ensure that the statement' gets to the right person. 6 4

WHAT ABOUT SHERMAN'S EXPEDITION? 5

Apropos. Your POOR-HOUSE Purdy is said to have published an absolutely disgraceful document during the COTTON-FAMINE,40 recom- mending reducing support to a minimum, on the grounds that the HEALTH of THE COTTON-OPERATIVES was said to have improved; as a result of this, FAMINE DISEASES are said to have broken out in the EAST OF LANCASHIRE. (That was in the early days of the COTTON-FAMINE.) D O you know anything about it? And, in general, can you obtain for me the OFFICIAL PAPERS in Manchester (of the Committee, d etc.) relating to the COTTON-FAMINE?

Lothario Bücher, whom Lassalle appointed executor to his will and to whom h e left £ 1 5 0 a year pension, has, as you probably already know, gone over to Bismarck's camp. Baron Izzyc would perhaps have done the same himself as 'Minister of Labour1, Marquis Posa to Philipp II of the Uckermark/ but not IN THE SMALL WAY OF Lothario, with whom the Hatzfeldt woman has fallen out and who can now shake hands with Edgar Bauer and the Prussian consul in Milan, Mr R. Schramm. T h e Prussians were looking for a post for Mr Schramm 'where yer don't need n o exam'. 8 I also

[^1]: a Lizzy Burns - b Wilhelm Liebknecht - ' K. Marx, 'To the Editor of the Stuttgart Beobachter'. - d See this volume, p. 27. - e Lassalle - f Marquis Posa and Philipp II are characters from Schiller's Don Karlos. By 'Philipp II of the Uckermark' Marx means William I. - s Berlin dialect in the original here: 'wo ken Examen nicht netig.'





**[p. 54]**

I fancy there is a SECRET UNDERSTANDING between Prussia, Russia and France for THE WAR AGAINST AUSTRIA IN NEXT SPRING. Venetia will, of course, provide the WAR-CRY.68 The Austrians are behaving with abysmal cowardice and stupidity. This ensues from Francis Joseph himself interfering personally in Austrian politics. Buol- Schauenstein, etc., all the sensible hommes d-état,h are obliged to keep their traps shut, and the Russian agents, such notorious fellows as the present Austrian FOREIGN MINISTER,0 are giving all the orders. For all that, the Austrians' behaviour would be inexplica- ble, unless these fellows either have faith in Prussia's perfidious promises or are determined to accept the long-standing promise of compensation in Turkey.

What do you say to Collet's profound discoveries—based on Urquhart—about Nebuchadnezzar and the Russians' Assyrian ancestry, and the further discovery, which is cited as 'Urquhart's', that IN ITALY THE POPE IS THE ONLY REAL THING ?d

Today's The Miner and Workman's Advocate—the Moniteur^ of the mineworkers in England and Wales—is printing the whole of my 'Address'/ The London 'BRICKLAYERS' (over 3,000 men) have announced they are joining the International Association, and they are fellows who have never before joined a MOVEMENT.

But easy though it is to get the English workers to accept a rational approach, one has to be all the more careful the moment

[^1]: There was a SUB-COMMITTEE2' meeting last Tuesday,g at which Mr Peter Fox (his real name is P. Fox André) presented his address on Poland " to us. (This kind of thing is always dealt with beforehand in the SUBCOMMITTEE before going to the GENERAL COMMITTEE.) The piece is not badly written and Fox has en- deavoured to apply the concept of 'class', at least a semblance of it, although it is normally alien to him. His real forte is FOREIGN POLICY, and it is only as a propagandist of atheism that he has had dealings with the WORKING CLASSES AS SUCH.

[^2]: a Marx quotes almost literally Liebknecht's letter to him of 2 December 1864. - b statesmen - c Alexander Mensdorff-Pouilly - d [CD. Collet,] 'Russia's De- signs on the Pope', The Free Press, No. 12, 7 December 1864. - e mouthpiece - f K. Marx, 'Inaugural Address of the Working Men's International Association', The Miner and Workman's Advocate, No. 93, 10 December 1864. - s 6 December





**[p. 55]**

O u r Major Wolff has been locked u p by the Piedmontese for the moment in the fortress of Alexandria.

Louis Blanc has written to the General Secretary Cremer that he approves the 'Address' and regrets not having been able to attend the St Martin's Hall MEETING, etc. ALTOGETHER, the sole purpose of his letter is to get him co-opted an HONORARY MEMBER. Foreseeing that attempts of this kind would be made, I had, however, fortunately got the BYLAW accepted that no one (except workers' SOCIETIES) could be invited to join and that nobody at all could be an honorary member.'*

Salut.

Your

K. M.

[^1]: a See this volume, pp. 15-16.



