---
Volume: 42
Document_Title: "26. Mar x to Sophie von Hatzfeldt. 22 December "
Page_Range: "95-97"
---

# 26. Mar x to Sophie von Hatzfeldt. 22 December 



**[p. 56]**

First published in Der Briefwechsel zwischen Printed according to the original F. Engels und K. Marx, Bd. 3, Stuttgart, 29 j 3 Published in English in full for the first time

25

MARX TO ENGELS

IN MANCHESTER

[London,] 22 December 1864 Dear FREDERICK,

In great haste. Please send Becker's letter back to me.a I hope you have not lost it.

Happy New Year!

Your

K. M.

First published in MEGA, Abt. Ill, Printed according to the original Bd. 3, Berlin, 1930

26

MARX TO SOPHIE VON HATZFELDT

London, 22 December 1864

1 Modena Villas, Maitland Park, Haverstock Hill

My dear Countess,

A few days ago, a friend in Hamburg sent me the Nordstern containing my statement against Blind,b duly emended with misprints.

[^1]: Published in English for the first time

[^2]: IN BERLIN

[^3]: [Draft]

[^4]: a See this volume, pp. 52,53. - b K. Marx, 'To the Editor of the Stuttgart Beobachter'.



'Westliche Post'.*4 I had not the slightest idea which papers you would send the statement to. The Nordstern was the furthest from my mind. Mr Bruhn has now seized upon this opportunity to make an 'indecent gesture' in my direction, by hinting to his readers in the commentaries that I had sought access to his emporium through the back door and had been granted it as an act of extreme graciousness only because a third party had intervened especially on my behalf.64 I have no doubt that his accomplice in America3 will make use of this. Is it Mr Bruhn's desire that I should be forced into exposing him publicly for the conceited nonentity that he is?

If Bruhn, Bernhard Becker and tutti quanti set out to oppose me and my efforts in any manner whatsoever that I consider harmful to the workers' movement itself, a storm will break about these gentlemen's heads that will take their breath away. Reasons of long-standing personal friendship and party interest, which held me back vis-à-vis Lassalle, can no longer have the slightest force in respect of these dii minorum gentium}' This I am stating once and for all, so that I cannot later be charged with ambiguity or inconsiderateness.

In no circumstances, do I wish the Eighteenth Brumaire to be published, and, if steps have already been taken to this end, they are to be checked forthwith.79

I scarcely dare express any good wishes for the New Year, knowing as I do that the old year has left you, my dear Countess, only with memories.

Yours very respectfully

K. M.

[^1]: First published in: F. Lassalte. Nach- gelassene Briefe und Schriften, Bd. III, Stutt- gart-Berlin, 1922

[^2]: Printed according to the original

[^3]: Published in English for the first time

[^4]: Karl Blind - b Literally: minor gods; here, creatures of a lesser kind.



