---
Volume: 42
Document_Title: "28. Marx to Hermann Jung. About 8 January "
Page_Range: "99-100"
---

# 28. Marx to Hermann Jung. About 8 January 



**[p. 1865]**

28

MARX TO HERMANN JUNG83

IN LONDON

Manchester,84 [about 8 January 1865] 58 Dover Street, Oxford Street

My dear Jung,

I felt rather shocked at reading in the 'Beehive' and the 'Miner' of this week that at our last Committee-sitting

'It was unanimously agreed to invite Messrs Beesly, Grossmith, Beales and Harrison, to the soirée which is to be held on the 16th'.a

I do not mention the mere anachronism, that no such resolution was taken on last Tuesday's sitting.13

What I object to is the positive falsehood that Mr Grossmith was invited.

This Grossmith, although he seldom or never attends our sittings, figures as a member of the Committee under all our addresses.

How could our Committee invite a member of our Committee to a soirée given by our Committee? Shall this, perhaps, form a sort of premium to be gained by regular absence from our weekly séances?

Since I cannot return to London before the end of next week, you'll much oblige me

By asking at next Tuesday's sitting, who is the writer of the report in the 'Beehive' and the 'Miner?

Who empowered that writer to make our Committee the 'unconscious' instrument of exalting Mr Grossmith?

You will understand at once how important it is to nip in the bud any attempt at turning our Committee into the tool of local ambitions, or any sort of intrigues.

[^1]: a The Bee-Hive Newspaper, No. 169, 7 January 1865; The Miner and Workman's Advocate, No. 97, 7 January 1865. - b on 3 January



