---
Volume: 42
Document_Title: "29. Engel s to Rudolf Engels. 10 January "
Page_Range: "100-101"
---

# 29. Engel s to Rudolf Engels. 10 January 



**[p. 61]**

Salut et fraternité.

K. Marx

First published in: Marx and Engels, Reproduced from the original for Works, First Russian Edition, Vol. XXV, the first time Moscow, 1934

29

ENGELS TO RUDOLF ENGELS10

IN BARMEN

[Manchester,] 10 January 1865

Dear Rudolf,

My view of the American war" is this: the South is gradually becoming exhausted and cannot replace its armies. The North has not yet mobilised the half of its resources. The South is limited to defence, so much so in fact that counter-attacks such as, e.g., Longstreet undertook in the Shenandoah Valley, are now a thing of the past. Hood attempted yet another one, but, in so doing, revealed his own impotence and decided the whole campaign at one stroke.86 The North is superior to its Southern opponents at all points and, furthermore, has Sherman's 40,000 men at its disposal who can go wheresoever they please, everywhere destroy- ing the South's forces, communications, resources and supplies deep in the South's own territory.75 Charleston is certain to fall in 4-6 weeks at the latest, once Sherman has encircled it on land.87

The South has but one army left, that at Richmond.30 That will assuredly be quite decisively beaten in the present year, and with that the defence of the South by armies will be at an end. A guerrilla war, brigandry, etc., may then ensue and will probably do so into next year.

If the South arms its Negroes, that will be so much the better for the North. However, they will take good care not to. At the last moment, if at all. The Negroes are not so stupid as to allow themselves to be massacred for the whip that flays their backs.

