---
Volume: 42
Document_Title: "30. Marx to His Daughter Jenny. 11 January "
Page_Range: "101-103"
---

# 30. Marx to His Daughter Jenny. 11 January 

I do not believe we shall get cotton from America; but I do believe we shall see a temporary fall. Cotton is at present so subject to speculation that prices are affected by every vicissitude of public opinion. There are, moreover, 500,000 bales in Liverpool, and the people here do have a tendency to fly to extremes immediately and shout: the South is done for, is bound to surrender in 14 days, etc.—a rise is thereby inconceivable. We shall be at the mercy of whatever news we receive, though always with the proviso that we know the STOCK in Liverpool to be double what it was last year. I also believe we shall see the year 1865 close below present prices, as we must expect more cotton from all parts.

Your

Friedrich

First published in Deutsche Revue, Jg. 46, Printed according to the original Bd. II, 1921

Published in English in full for the first time

30

MARX TO HIS DAUGHTER JENNY

Manchester, 11 January 1865 58 Dover Street

My sweet child,

I wanted to leave Manchester tomorrow, but I'll be hardly able to do so before Sunday (15th Jan.) next.S4 Ernest Jones, whom I am anxious to speak, is busily engaged in the neighbouring towns and has invited me (and Engels) for next Friday evening when he'll be at home. I have not yet seen him, and could not see him before that day. This is one cause of delay. There are others, but at all events I shall not stay longer than until Sunday.

[^1]: IN LONDON



The German translation of the 'Address to the Working Classes'a has been reprinted in the Mainzer Zeitung, the 'Address to Lincoln'b in the Berliner Reform and the London Hermann. The latter honour is probably due to Mr Juch's anxiety lest his rival Bender might monopolize 'our protection'.

The weather here was abominable. Today 'the sun shines', as Müller has it, but its rays are reflected by the ice drops covering the dirty streets. Even the sunbeams must here always have something disagreeable to fall upon.

I have not yet seen a Borchardt, and as to the Gumperts, I had only a few minutes' conversation with the Dr yesterday evening.

On my arrival I did not find Frederick, but in his stead a letter informing me that he would be back from fox-hunting at 6 o'clock. Meanwhile he had taken all precautionary measures for making my 'entrée joyeuse"1 (with your great historical knowledge you'll not be at a loss as to the 'entrée joyeuse'). Whether his change of domicile is an improvement, seems a rather debatable question. At all events, the people are less impudent.

Apropos. There is much 'chronique scandaleuse' just now in the Freiligrath world, as far as it is connected with the General Bank of Switzerland. There has appeared a pamphlet at Genève, disclosing the scandalous mismanagement of Fazy,d Freiligrath's 'natural superior'. He has been forced to resign his post as supreme director of the bank, and 'um zu retten, was zu retten ist'* (literally this) Jew Reinach has been put into his place, assisted by a Frenchman and—Karl Vogt who has the despicable meanness of betraying, and denouncing, and publicly declaring against Fazy, his old idol, the man in fact of whom he is a mere 'creature'.

I suppose you are aware that the first 'abonnement number'* of the 'Social-Democrat' has been confiscated by the police at Berlin.88

This is a rather favourable accident. Those fellows stand in need of some small political martyrdom.

I hope all is right at home. The cat being gone, the mice ought to dance. Pay my compliments to Ma, 'Success', 'Mine Own' and the 'Prophet'.g As to yourself, my dear Aaron, I dreamt of you last

[^1]: '' K. Marx, 'Inaugural Address of the Working Men's International Association'. - b K. Marx, 'To Abraham Lincoln, President of the United States of America'. - c 'joyful entrance' (a French medieval expression used to welcome the arrival of a prince or king into one of his own towns). - d James Fazy. Sein Leben und Treiben. (Von einem Westschweizer), Neue Zürcher-Zeitung, Nos. 321-360, 16 November - 25 De- cember 1864. - e to save what can yet be saved - f regular issue for the subscribers - R Mrs Marx, Laura, and Eleanor Marx and Helene Demuth



