---
Volume: 42
Document_Title: "31. Mar x to Johann Baptist von Schweitzer. 16 January "
Page_Range: "103-104"
---

# 31. Mar x to Johann Baptist von Schweitzer. 16 January 



**[p. 64]**

night, and saw you in your bloomer costume, performing the most wonderful jumps, almost flying through the air, after you had before done the Davenport trick in the most admirable manner.89

I felt quite proud and chuckled in my sleeves over the success of my old acquaintance, and had the most lively remembrance of the rather unplastic dance you had in bygone times executed before the golden calf, in the desert.3

Show Ma the inclosed. She will remember Bochum-Dolfs, from Paris. He is now the happy father of 10 children with whom he 'vagabonds' through the world.

First published, in Russian, in Voin- Reproduced from the original stvuyushchy materialist, Book 4, 1925, and in the language of the original, English, in The Socialist Review (London), No. 44, September 1929

31

MARX TO JOHANN BAPTIST VON SCHWEITZER '

To. J. B. v. Schweitzer ('Social-Demokrat')

London, 16 January 1865

Sir,

Despite its brief existence, your Social-Demokrat has already carried two attacks on the 'International Association'. I am only awaiting the 'third' before my friends and I publicly dissociate ourselves from any connection with your paper. In the event of such a dissociation, I should be compelled to deal 'critically' with certain things which, in deference to party interests, I have hitherto not aired, and this may not be at all to the liking of certain gentlemen. The first attack on the 'International Associa-

[^1]: IN BERLIN

[^2]: [Draft]

[^3]: 3 Here a strip of paper is cut off at the bottom of the page, presumably bearing Marx's signature. The paragraph that follows is a postscript in the left-hand corner of the first page of the letter.



