---
Volume: 42
Document_Title: "34. Marx to Engels. 30 January "
Page_Range: "109-111"
---

# 34. Marx to Engels. 30 January 



**[p. 34]**

MARX TO ENGELS103

IN MANCHESTER

[London,] 30 January 1865

Dear Engels,

Tout d'accord.11 As far as your anxiety about confiscation is concerned, what you must do is to announce quite briefly, as a foreword to the first article,b that you are firstly going to throw light on the subject from the military point of view, secondly you are going to criticise the bourgeoisie and, thirdly, the reaction, etc., and the attitude of the workers' party to the question, etc., whereby the drift can already be narrowly outlined or hinted at. This will, de prime abord*" make it more difficult for the government to confiscate. If it does so in spite of that, the Social-Demokrat will thereby be hurled into a new phase (for the fellows cannot at present confiscate without releasing the confis- cated material, or taking it to court), and, at the same time, you must keep a copy of the manuscript of No. III. It is then the easiest thing in the world to publish it in the one of the 2 German papers hered and then send COPIES of it to Hamburg, etc., where one or other of the bourgeois papers is sure to print it.

It seems to me that Schily has allowed himself to be duped by M. Hess. This is quite evident from all Moses' epistles to the Social-Demokrat. (CF. K.I. No. 15 of the Social-Demokratc which has just arrived and is, on the whole, full of the most revolting 'Lassalleanism'. The gentlemen from Iserlohn speak of 'Lassalle- Lincoln'.') Moses is our adversary, has forgotten neither our 'expulsion from Brussels' nor our 'ejection from Cologne'104 and always counts it to Lassalle's credit that he had the 'tact' so necessary for a 'leader of the people' to take M. Hess seriously.

By the way, being the 'organ of the General Association of German Workers', the Social-Demokrat finds it extremely difficult to extricate itself from the apotheosis-soup.

[^1]: " In complete agreement (see previous letter) - b F. Engels, The Prussian Military Question and the German Workers' Party, Chapter 1. - < from the outset - d The reference is presumably to the Hermann and the Londoner Anzeiger.- e A reference to Hess' report 'Paris, 25. Jan. [Associationswesen. Clerus. Der oppositionelle Wahlsieg]', Der Social-Demokrat, No. 15, 29 January 1865. - f Quoted from the report 'Iserlohn, 25. Januar', Der Social-Demokrat, No. 15, 29 January 1865.





**[p. 71]**

Incidentally, since we now know that Izzy planned to trade off the workers' party to Bismarck98 (we were previously quite unaware of how) so that he might become known as the 'Richelieu of the Proletariat', I shall not now have any scruples about making it sufficiently plain in the preface to my book that he is a parrot and plagiarist.105

I wonder whether the 'poems': 'To follow Lassalle is our every wish'a and other nonsense which the workers are sending to the Social-Demokrat, do not emanate directly or indirectly from the old lady.b At all events, I have already told the editors several times in writing that this nonsense has got to stop BY and BY.106

What sort of fellows the men of Progress" are is evident yet again from their conduct regarding the combination question.107

(En passant, the Prussian Anti-Combination Law, like all continen- tal laws of this kind, has its origin in the decree of the Assemblée Constituante of 14 June 1791,10S by which the French bourgeois imposed the most severe penalties on ANYTHING OF THE SORT, in fact workers' associations of any kind,—e.g. loss of civil rights for a year—on the pretext that this constituted restoration of the guilds and is in contravention of liberté constitutionellec and the 'droits de l'homme'.6 It is so characteristic of Robespierre that, at a time when it was a crime punishable by the guillotine to be 'constitutional', as defined by the Assemblée of 1789, all of its laws directed against the workers remained in force.)

Here in London Mr Bright has again spoiled his whole rapport with the workers by his SPEECH opposing the application of the Ten Hours' Bill109 to the BIRMINGHAM TRADES.e A bourgeois of that kind really is INCORRIGIBLE. And the fellow does that at a mo- ment when he wants to make use of the workers to beat the oligarchs!

Apropos. As I have now told the Social-Demokrat twice that they must purge their paper of this infantile 'apotheosis' as far and as quickly as possible, it will doubtless do no harm if you make similar remarks to the editors when you send your article/ If we allow them to use our names, then we can, at the same time, demand that now, when people are aware of Lassalle's intended treachery, they should not help to throw dust in the eyes of the

[^1]: a Quoted from an anonymous poem published in the section 'Einsendungen von Arbeitern' in Der Social-Demokrat, No. 15, 29 January 1865. - b Sophie von Hatzfeldt - c constitutional liberty - d 'rights of man' - c J. Bright's speech in the Birmingham Chamber of Commerce on 19 January 1865. In: The Times, No. 25087, 20 January 1865. - f The Prussian Military Question and the German Workers' Party



