---
Volume: 42
Document_Title: "38. Marx to Engels. 6 February "
Page_Range: "118-120"
---

# 38. Marx to Engels. 6 February 



**[p. 79]**

I must stop now. Best wishes and do send the statement straightaway. I shall have finished the article by Wednesday or Thursday.

Your

F. E.

I have tried to sound out my brother-in-lawb about Siebel, but I could discover nothing except that he is 'always drunk', runs around with actresses, and his wife wants to divorce him.

M Y BEST COMPLIMENTS TO THE LADIES.

First published abridged in Der Briefwech- sel zwischen F. Engels und K. Marx, Bd. 3, Stuttgart, 1913 and in full in MEGA, Abt. III, Bd. 3, Berlin, 1930

38

[London,] 6 February [1865]

Dear Engels,

As good luck would have it, in the feuilleton section in the Social-Demokrat which arrived today your call for the crushing of the aristocracy comes right after my article0 condemning even a 'pseudo-compromise'.

They will inevitably provide the occasion for a further statement. But

Printed according to the original

Published in English in full for the first time

[^1]: MARX TO ENGELS 101

[^2]: IN MANCHESTER

[^3]: In the first instance, I now believe it is better to send in the few lines below,125 instead of the statement I had originally intended.d

[^4]: a if there are grounds for doing so - b Karl Emil Blank - c F. Engels, 'Herr Tidmann. Old Danish Folk Song', K. Marx, 'On Proudhon [Letter to J. B. Schweitzer]'. - d See this volume, pp. 75, 76-77.





**[p. 80]**

I enclose letter from the unfortunate Liebknecht12fi and note sent him by the old Hatzfeldt woman; there is still not enough 'Lassalle' in the paper3 for her liking.

As TO Klings, I am not going to answer at all. Let the fellows manage by themselves.b

Letter from Schily just received (can only send it to you in a few days time), from which it emerges:

1. that Moses'L insinuations were pure invention, 2. that our plan will have a 'fantastic' effect in Paris, and the workers there are not taking any notice whatsoever of L'Associa- tion, which Mr A. Horn, Lob Sonnemann and other riff-raff use to indulge their self-importance.95

If the attached statement meets with your approval, make a copy of it and sign it. Then send it back. I will then put my name to it as well and post the thing to Berlin.

Apropos. Lincoln's answer to us is in today's Times.112

Liebknecht's private address is: '13 Neuenburger Strasse, Berlin'. You can send to Mrs Liebknecht at that address whenever you want to write privately. Poor W. Liebknecht is obviously in an exceedingly embarrassing situation. He will have to be told that it is a case of either bending or breaking. In the latter case, I should think he could certainly earn an honest living as a schoolmaster in Manchester.

[^1]: [Postscript]

[^2]: First published (without Postscript) in Der Printed according to the original Briefwechsel zwischen F. Engels und K. Marx, , , ,. , , . „ . . . . r ,, r , Bd. 3, Stuttgart, 1913 Published in English m full for the first time

[^3]: Der Social-Demokrat - b See this volume, p. 82. - c Moses Hess



