---
Volume: 42
Document_Title: "42. Marx to Engels. 11 February "
Page_Range: "125-127"
---

# 42. Marx to Engels. 11 February 



**[p. 86]**

At the preparatory session for the Polish meeting,97 I also saw OLD Oborski again, who does not send his regards.

Salut.

Your

K. M.

Apropos. The fact that Lincoln answered us112 so courteously and the 'BOURGEOIS EMANCIPATION SOCIETY"13 SO brusquely and purely formallyb made the The Daily News so indignant that they did not print the answer to us. However, since they saw, to their dismay, that The Times was doing so, they had to publish it later in The Express? Levy also had to eat humble pie. The difference between Lincoln's answer to us and to the bourgeoisie has created such a sensation here that the West End 'clubs' are shaking their heads at it. You can understand how gratifying that has been for our people.

First published in Der Briefwechsel zwischen Printed according to the original F. Engels und K. Marx, Bd. 3, Stuttgart, , ,. , , . _ ,. , . . „ . 1913 Published in English in lull for the first time

42

MARX TO ENGELS118

[London,] 11 February [1865]

It being Saturday today, I am assuming you won't be sending off your thingd this very day, so there will still be time for these 'supplementary' suggestions for changes:

1. In the passage where you ask what the workers want? I would not answer as you do that the workers in Germany, France and

[^1]: IN MANCHESTER

[^2]: DEAR FRED,

[^3]: a information bureau - b See this volume, p. 73. - c 'President Lincoln and the International Working Men's Association', The Express, 6 February 1865. - d F. Engels, The Prussian Military Question and the German Workers' Party.





**[p. 87]**

It would seem that the demands put forward at the present moment by the most advanced workers in Germany amount to the following, etc. This doesn't commit you at all, which is all to the good, as later on you yourself criticise universal suffrage if not accompanied by the requisite conditions. (Morever, in England e.g., etc., the word 'direct' would indeed be meaningless, it is after all only the opposite of the 'indirect' suffrage invented by the Prussians.) The form in which the louts in Germany conceive of state intervention à la Lassalle is such that one must ANYHOW take care not to identify oneself with 'same'. It would be a lot more dignified (and safer), if you took the louts at their word and let them say for themselves what they want. (I say the louts because they are the really argumentative section who have been infected by

Lassalle.)I29

2. I would not say that the 1848-49 movement failed because the bourgeois opposed direct universal suffrage. What happened was rather that this was proclaimed by the people of Frankfurt to be an ancient German right and proclaimed by the Imperial Regentc

with all due formality.130 (In my opinion, too, as soon as the matter comes up for serious discussion in dear old Germany, this franchise must be treated as a rightfully existing law.) As that is no place for a lengthy exposition, I would make do with the following phrase: that the bourgeois at that time preferred peace and servitude to the mere prospect of struggle and freedom, or something of that sort.

Taken as a whole, it's a very good piece, and 'Oi' am particularly tickled by the passage which shows that the present louts' movement IN FACT only exists par la grâce de la police.

In great haste. Salut.

Your

K. M.

[^1]: I have crossed out the bit where you console the reactionaries, I DONT KNOW WHY, by saying that a soldier does not turn reactionary in

[^2]: a Lassalle's - b A sentence deleted by Marx follows here: 'This is not the place for you to set out your own view—or alternatively you could drop the introductory section and just say the following:'. - c Archduke John of Austria - rf by gracious permission of the police



