---
Volume: 42
Document_Title: "43. Engels to Marx. 13 February "
Page_Range: "127-128"
---

# 43. Engels to Marx. 13 February 



**[p. 88]**

First published abridged in Der Briefwech- Printed according to the original sei zwischen F. Engels und K. Marx, Bd. 3, Stuttgart, 1913 and in full in MEGA, Abt. III, Bd. 3, Berlin, 1930

43

ENGELS TO MARX'18

IN LONDON

[Manchester,] 13 February 1865

Dear Moor,

Your SUGGESTIONS came just in time yesterday and have both been used. How necessary the one about the demands of the louts in particular was,3 was further brought home to me by Nos. 20 and 21 of the Sow's-Dirtb which arrived today.

By the by, our attitude seems to be bearing fruit in spite of everything. There is a certain revolutionary note in No. 21 which was entirely absent before. By the by, I've written to Liebknecht that there's no point in raising a storm, they must just drop their flirting with reaction and make sure the aristocracy and reaction get their SHARE, too, but for the rest abuse neither them nor the bourgeoisie, which is superfluous in quiet times.131

But one can see that Izzyc has given the movement a Tory-Chartist character,132 which it will be difficult to get rid of and which has given rise to a tendency in Germany which was previously unheard of among the workers. This nauseating toadying to the reaction comes through everywhere. WE SHALL HAVE SOME TROUBLE WITH THAT. You wait and see, the louts will be saying, what's that Engels after, what has he been doing all the time, how can he speak in our name and tell us what to do, the fellow's up there in Manchester exploiting the workers, etc. To be sure, I

[^1]: a See previous letter. - b Der Social-Demokrat - c Lassalle



