---
Volume: 42
Document_Title: "44. Marx to Engels. 13 February "
Page_Range: "128-131"
---

# 44. Marx to Engels. 13 February 



**[p. 89]**

Your

F. E.

First published in Der Briefwechsel zwischen Printed according to the original F. Engels und K. Marx, Bd. 3, Stuttgart, 1913

44

MARX TO ENGELS

IN MANCHESTER

London, 13 February 1865 1 Modena Villas, Maitland Park, Haverstock Hill

Dear Engels,

This time I believe Liebknecht is right: Mr von Schweitzer is pretending to see in our statement only a personal attack on Moses; he 'overlooks' the stand against Bonapartism, etc., probably knowing full well WHAT HE IS ABOUT. It might perhaps not come amiss to Schweitzer if a public break (who knows whether he has committed himself to something which will soon force one or not?) were occasioned by this Moses business, instead of ad vocem" Bismarck} I have therefore written him letter (copy retained134) in which I d'abord A give him a summary of our relations to date and ask him where in all this we for our part have gone 'beyond the bounds'? And I analyse the Moses CASE once more. I then say that because of Moses' latest silly outburst, our statement is to A CERTAIN DECREE out-of-date, and the matter can therefore be allowed to rest.

[^1]: You'll see from the enclosed how things stand with regard to our statement3 about Moses.133 At the same time, you will have read Moses' scrawl in the last Social-Demokrat.b

[^2]: 11 K. Marx and F. Engels, 'To the Editor of the Social-Demokrat'. - b [Moses] H[ess], 'Paris, 7. Febr. [Amerika.—Der Orient.— Italien.—Die Internationale Arbeiter- Association]', Der Social-Demokrat, No. 21, 12 February 1865. - c concerning - d firstly





**[p. 90]**

clear to Mr von Schweitzer once again.

(I would in fact not be at all surprised if Bismarck were to reject outright the repeal of the Combination Laws to the extent that some of the men of Progress " have now been obliged to demand. The right of combination, and all that it entails, interferes too much with police domination, the Rules Governing Servants,136 the flog-'em and birch-'em rural aristocracy and bureaucratic tutelage in general. As soon as the bourgeoisie (or some of them) appear to turn serious, the government will certainly make a joke and do a volte-face.b The Prussian state can not tolerate COALITIONS and TRADES UNIONS. That much is certain. On the contrary, government support for a few lousy co-operative societies suited their dirty game to a tee. Officials becoming even more nosey, control of 'new' money, bribery of the most active of the workers, emasculation of the whole movement! However, since the Prussian government is so short of money just now, this plan is scarcely more to be feared than the Order of the Swan of old!137

Nota bene, Lassalle was opposed to the campaign for the right of combination. Liebknecht improvised it among the Berlin printers against Lassalle's wishes. That was the starting-point of the whole affair that beau Beckerc has now taken over.13")

For the present we should—in my opinion—exercise 'restraint' quant aud the Social-Demokrat. I.e. write nothing (Eccarius excepted). Things will soon reach such a pass that we shall either have to break openly with it, or we shall be able to collaborate with it in a proper manner. Moses will have to receive his chastisement on some later occasion.

MEANWHILE, I am delighted that you have got into the swing again. You are by nature always able to get back to working at speed. I take it my letter came in time?e

As long as these abominable Lassalleans rule the roost in Germany, that country will be infertile ground for the 'INTERNATIONAL ASSOCIATION'. For the present, we must be patient. The

[^1]: a concerning - b about-turn - c Bernhard Becker - d with regard to - e See this volume, pp. 86-88.





**[p. 91]**

Apropos. Cutting from the latest Hermann enclosed. You must make a few bad jokes about this notice from Messrs Blind- Wolffsohn, for m e to pass on to Eccarius for insertion in his London correspondence.vi9 I have been so p u t out by this lousy correspondence with Berlin (apart from the amount of time the INTERNATIONAL ASSOCIATION inevitably takes up) that I absolutely must make u p the lost ground.

Tyndall has succeeded in using a simple mechanical technique to break down sunlight into heat-rays and pure light-rays. T h e latter are cold. You can light your cigar straight from the former, and through a burning-glass they can melt platinum, etc.

* My best compliments to Mrs Burns. I am indeed very glad to hear that the o was an inorganic intrusion upon her name, and that she is a namesake of the great poet.b If Mrs Gumpert declines becoming a member of a Workingmen's Association, I hope Mrs Burns will not follow that example, but will believe with her namesake that 'a m a n is a m a n for all that'.c*

Salut

Your

K. M.

T h e latter has written to me about the electoral agitation (whereupon I wrote him that he should write me a 2nd letter117

Concerning the cards, o u r RULES are as follows: existing societies (UNIONS, etc.) who wish to affiliate in that capacity need only take out corporate membership. That doesn't cost them anything, or they can

[^1]: HAVE AN EYE UPON JONES! H E IS A FELLOW 'TOO CLEVER BY HALF'! Apropos. I think I should be in a position to send you the cards by Tuesday. I SEND ABOUT 2 DOZEN, which you don't need to dispose of all at once. But give some of them to E. Jones.

[^2]: which I could read out at the Comité. Which he duly did).140 But he didn't say anything in his letter about the INTERNATIONAL ASSOCIATION. As h e is a fox a n d I want to pin him down, you should insist that he forms A BRANCH COMMITTEE immediately (the n u m b e r of MEMBERS doesn't matter for the present) and that he and his friends take out CARDS OF MEMBERSHIP. They must realise that the 'INTERNATIONAL is the only means and method of establishing co-operation (political) between London and the provinces*.

[^3]: a Lassalleanism - b Robert Burns - c R. Burns, Is There for Honest Poverty.



