---
Volume: 42
Document_Title: "45. Marx to Victor Le Lubez. 15 February "
Page_Range: "131-132"
---

# 45. Marx to Victor Le Lubez. 15 February 

First published abridged in Der Briefwech- Printed according to the original sei zwischen F. Engels und K. Marx, Bd. 3, Stuttgart, 1913 and in full in MEGA, Published in English for the first Abt. Ill, Bd. 3, Berlin, 1930 n m e

45

MARX TO VICTOR LE LUBEZ1

IN LONDON

London, 15 February 1865

My dear Lubez,

The very success of our association warns us to be cautious. In my opinion, M. Beales joining our council would spoil the whole affair." I believe him an honest and sincere man; at the same time, he is nothing and can be nothing save a Bourgeois politician. He is weak, mediocre and ambitious. He wants to stand for Marylebone at the next Parliamentary election. By that single fact he ought to be excluded from entering our committee. We cannot become le piédestal for small parliamentary ambitions.

You may be sure that if Beales is admitted le ton cordial, sincère et francb that distinguishes now our Debates, will be gone, and make place to word-mongering. In the wake of Beales will follow Taylor, this unbearable nuisance and tufthunter.

In the eyes of the world, Beales' admission will change the whole character of our society, we will diminish into one of the numerous societies which he favours with patronage. Where he has driven in the wedge, others of his class will follow, and our

[^1]: •' See this volume, pp. 109-10. - b the cordial, sincere and frank atmosphere



