---
Volume: 42
Document_Title: "46. Marx to Engels. 16 February "
Page_Range: "132-133"
---

# 46. Marx to Engels. 16 February 



**[p. 93]**

I know beforehand that if Beales be admitted, there will arise questions mainly of a social sort, which will force him to tender his demission. We will have to issue manifestos on the land question, etc., which he cannot sign. Is it not better not to let him instead of giving him afterwards an opportunity of denying us.a

I know that after the foolish step taken by Mr Dell,b there will be certain difficulties in ensuring this candidature.

I would think that by means of quiet talks with the chief English members, the whole question could be [settled]' before it is put before the committee again.

Yours fraternally

K. Marx

Apropos. For all his enthusiasm for Poland, Mr Beales has as yet done nothing other than follow the Duke d in throwing all the demonstrations for Poland into confusion. Yesterday, he at- tempted the same trick again, under similar instigation.

46

MARX TO ENGELS

[London, 16 February 1865]

[^1]: First published abridged in the language Reproduced from the text of of the original (English) in: I. Tchernoff, Tchernoffs book, verified with Le Parti républicain au coup d'état et sous le the manuscript copy in French Second Empire, Paris, 1908 and in full in: written in an unknown hand Marx and Engels, Works, Second Russian Edition, Vol.31, Moscow, 1963

[^2]: IN MANCHESTER

[^3]: DEAR FREDERICK, Jones has written, asking me to send him ABOUT 1 DOZEN CARDS; I am sending you 1 DOZEN for him and 1 for yourself. What you can't

[^4]: 11 The rest of the letter, missing in the English original, has been translated from the extant French manuscript. - b See this volume, p. 110. - c Manuscript damaged - d An omission in the original; Marx presumably means Duke Townshend.



