---
Volume: 42
Document_Title: "53. Marx to Ludwig Kugelmann. 23 February "
Page_Range: "140-145"
---

# 53. Marx to Ludwig Kugelmann. 23 February 



**[p. 52]**

MARX TO WILHELM LIEBKNECHT149

IN HANOVER

[London, 23 February 1865]

In the few brief excerpts, which Eccarius gives from my speech at the workers' society, there are certain things that convey precisely the opposite of what I said.Ka I have written to him about it, leaving it to him whether to correct it or not in the next piece he contributes, as it is not very important in the present cir First published in Der Briefwechsel zwischen Printed according to the original F. Engels und K. Marx, Bd. 3, Stuttgart, , ,. , , . _ ,. , . iqi Q Published in English tor the tirst time

53

London, 23 February 1865

1 Modena Villas, Maitland Park, Haverstock Hill

Dear Friend,

Yesterday I received your letter, which I found most interest- ing, and will now reply to the various points.

First of all, I shall briefly describe my attitude towards Lassalle. Whilst he was pursuing his agitation, our relations were sus- pended, 1. on account of his bombastic self-adulation, which he managed to combine with the most shameless plagiarism of writings by myself and others; 2. because I condemned his political tactics; 3. because, even before he began his agitation,B0 I had fully explained and 'proved' to him here in London that direct socialist intervention by a 'Prussian state' was an absurdity. In his letters to me (from 1848 to 1863), as well as when we met personally, he had always declared himself a supporter of the party I represent.

[^1]: MARX TO LUDWIG KUGELMANN65

[^2]: IN HANOVER





**[p. 102]**

Lassalle got on the wrong path because he was, like Mr Mi- quel,151 a 'realistic politician', only on a larger scale and with grander aims! (BY THE BYE, I had long ago seen through Miquel sufficiently to explain his conduct to myselfe by the fact that the National Association152 offered a splendid excuse for a petty

[^1]: a K. Marx, 'To the Editor of the Stuttgart Beobachter'. - b See this volume, pp. 56-57. - c K. Marx, 'Inaugural Address of the Working Men's International Association'. - d K. Marx, 'On Proudhon [Letter to J. B. Schweitzer]'. - e See this volume, pp. 107 and 112.





**[p. 103]**

For a histrionically vain character like Lassalle (who was not, however, to be bribed with such paltry things as office, mayoral- ties, etc.), it was a most seductive thought that he, Ferdinand Lassalle, might perform a deed for the direct benefit of the proletariat! He was, in fact, too ignorant of the real economic conditions required for such a deed to be critically self-consistent! The German workers, on the other hand, had 'demoralised' too far in consequence of the despicable 'realistic politics' with which the German bourgeoisie had tolerated the reaction of 1849-1859 and watched the people's minds being stultified, for them not to hail such a mountebank of a saviour who was promising to help them reach the promised land with one bound!

So, to take up the thread where I left off above! Hardly had the Social-Demokrat been established when it became clear that the old Hatzfeldt woman was planning to execute Lassalle's 'testament' posthumously. She had contact with Bismarck through Wagener (of the Kreuz-Zeitungh). She placed the 'Workers' Association' (Gen. German),2 the Social-Demokrat, etc., at Bismarck's disposal. The

[^1]: a Marquis Posa and Philipp II are characters in Schiller's drama Don Carlos. Here Marx calls William I of Prussia 'the Philipp II of the Uckermark'. - b Neue Preussische Zeitung





**[p. 104]**

In the meantime, Mr Schweitzer's articles in the Social-Demokrat were becoming more and more Bismarckian. I had earlier written to him to say that, although the men of Progress can be intimidated over the 'Combination question', the Prussian govern- ment would never under any circumstances concede the complete abolition of the Combination Laws because that would entail breaching the bureaucratic system, giving freedom of thought and expression to the workers, tearing up the Rules Governing Servants,136 abolishing flogging and birching by the aristocracy in rural areas, etc., etc., which Bismarck could never allow, it being altogether incompatible with the Prussian bureaucratic state.c I added that, if the Chamber were to repudiate the Combination Laws, the government would resort to empty phrases (such as e.g. that the social question requires 'profounder' steps to be taken, etc.) in order to preserve them. All this has come to pass. And what did Mr von Schweitzer do? He wrote an article in support of Bismarck UD and is reserving all his heroism for such infiniment petitsd as Schulze, Faucher, etc.

I believe that Schweitzer, etc., mean it sincerely, but they are 'realistic politicians'. They wish to take due account of the existing state of affairs and not leave this privilege of 'realistic politics' to Messrs Miquel et Comp, alone. (The latter seem to wish to reserve the right of INTERMIX IURE with the Prussian government.) They know that the workers' papers and the workers' movement in

[^1]: a a brave face on it - b See this volume, pp. 64-65. - c ibid., p. 90, 95-96. - d nonentities





**[p. 105]**

You will see at the same time why there is nothing I can do in Prussia at the moment. The government there has flatly refused to restore my Prussian citizenship.154 I should only be permitted to agitate there in a manner agreeable to Mr von Bismarck.

I prefer my agitation here through the 'International Association' a 100 times. The effect on the English proletariat is direct and of the greatest importance. We are now STIRRING the GENERAL SUFFRAGE QUESTION here, which is, naturally, of quite different significance here than in Prussia.165

As a whole, the progress made by this 'Association' has exceeded all expectations here, in Paris, in Belgium, Switzerland, and Italy. Only in Germany, of course, I am opposed by Lassalle's successors who 1. are stupidly afraid of forfeiting their own importance; 2. are aware of my avowed opposition to what the Germans call 'realistic polities'. (It is this sort of 'reality' that puts Germany so far behind all civilised countries.)

Since any person who takes out a card at 1 SHILLING can become a MEMBER OF THE ASSOCIATION; since the French have chosen this form of INDIVIDUAL MEMBERSHIP (ditto the Belgians) because the law prohibits them from joining us as an 'association'; and since the situation is similar in Germany, I have now resolved to ask my friends here and in Germany to form small SOCIETIES, regardless of how many MEMBERS there may be in each locality, each member of which will acquire AN ENGLISH CARD OF MEMBERSHIP.156 Since the English society is public, there is no obstacle to this procedure even in France. I should appreciate it if you, too, would get in touch with London in this way in your neighbourhood.

My thanks to you for your prescription. Oddly enough this vile disease had broken out once more 3 days before it arrived. So, the prescription was most timely.

[^1]: In a few days I shall send you another 24 ADDRESSES.0 I have just been interrupted in my writing by a friend, and, as I very

[^2]: '•' by the grace of the police - b K. Marx and F. Engels, 'To the Editor of the Social-Demokrat'. - c K. Marx, 'Inaugural Address of the Working Men's Internation- al Association'.

[^3]: 6-1196



