---
Volume: 42
Document_Title: "54. Engels to Marx. 24 February "
Page_Range: "145-146"
---

# 54. Engels to Marx. 24 February 



**[p. 106]**

Yours

K. M.

First published in Sozialistische Aus- Printed according to the original landspolitik, No. 18, 1918

54

ENGELS TO MARX

IN LONDON

Manchester, 24 February 1865

Dear Moor,

I'm a bit concerned at not having heard from you today, in view of the furuncles and carbuncles you mentioned, in the most interesting places (or rather most interested). I hope you are not

LAID UP.

I was particularly disappointed as I hoped to get the explana- tion—as well as the Weydemeyer—about the unspeakable mess the Social-Demokrat fellows made of your speech at the London Workers' Society festivity. They make you speak pure S.-D. Eccarius never reported that to them.150 This piece of infamy and the reprint of the article from the Norddeutsche Allgemeine Zeitung in the following number, ostensibly about universal suffrage, about which it says not a word*57 is proof enough for me that the fellow3

has simply been bought and has the job of compromising us. I hope the statementb is on its way. We must not delay a moment longer.

But quelle bête notre amic Liebknecht, who is supposed to keep an eye on the newspaper and never reads it on principle!

Your

F. E.

[^1]: First published in Der Briefwechsel zwischen Printed according to the original F. Engels und K. Marx, Bd. 3, Stuttgart, ig 13 Published in English for the first time

[^2]: a Schweitzer - b K. Marx and F. Engels, 'To the Editor of the Social-Demokrat'. - c what a fool our friend



