---
Volume: 42
Document_Title: "55. Marx to Engels. 25 February "
Page_Range: "146-151"
---

# 55. Marx to Engels. 25 February 



**[p. 55]**

MARX TO ENGELS33

IN MANCHESTER

[London,] 25 February 1865

Dear FRED,

I quite forgot—*you must excuse me—to send back Weydemeyer's letter. I enclose it. Ditto a letter of Dr Kugelmann with enclosure of wiseacre Miquel's letter.151 Ditto a prescription* from Kugelmann. Oddly enough the prescription arrived just after the disease had broken out afresh. (Nota bene, the passage in Kugelmann's LETTER, saying I wrote that I wanted to defend Lassalle, referred to Blind's attack.62 I have now told him (Kugelmann) the plain truth.3 Return the letters from Kugelmann and Miquel.) I have had the prescription made up and have already taken the POWDER, but I would still like Gumpert's opinion of it. It's a most troublesome business. Unlike last year, however, my faculties are not affected and (to the extent that sitting down for a long time is not physically troublesome) I am perfectly able to work. Incidentally, I have the feeling in every part of my CADAVER that the stuff is about to burst out all over.

Strohn passed by here. He was still in Hamburg when your manuscriptb came in, in the nick of time to recommend to Meissner that he should accept it. Strohn was informed that a manuscript from Rüstow on the same topic was rejected. Apropos. Have you taken any steps yourself regarding your pamphlet in the newspapers, or AM I TO DO IT? On this occasion, Eccarius himself was responsible for the incomprehensible BLUNDER.150 When his article arrived, I wrote to him at once (22 February) enquiring whether the thing had been falsified by Schweitzer?111 Quod non S

When I sent our statementd to that jackass Wilhelm' (23 February), I wrote this to him:

'In the few brief excerpts, which Eccarius gives from my speech at the workers' society/ there are certain things that convey precisely the opposite of what I said. I have written to him about it, leaving it

[^1]: a See this volume, pp. 101-05. - b F. Engels, The Prussian Military Question and the German Workers' Party. - c Not so. - d K. Marx and F. Engels, 'To the Editor of the Social-Demokrat''. - c Wilhelm Liebknecht - f German Workers' Educational Society in London

[^2]: 6*





**[p. 108]**

to him whether to correct it or not in the next piece he contributes, as it is not very important in the present cir- cumstances.' a

My letters to Eccarius and Liebknecht have been written so that, if Schweitzer (who from the private letter he had just previously received from m e b VERY WELL KNEW WHAT HE WAS ABOUT, of course) should try to use Eccarius' BLUNDER to defend himself, we could if necessary cut off this retraite.0 MEANWHILE, I HAVE TOLD ECCARIUS PRIVATELY not to make any BOTHER about the whole filthy business until such time as Schweitzer's own behaviour requires it. Eccarius was very unwell, and that is probably to blame for the NONSENSE. On the other hand, I imagine that Schweitzer, who already had Wilhelm's resigna- tion 14S in his possession and was therefore prepared for a statement from us, was delighted to accept the report, 1. so as to show by means of the passage about Prussia what extravagant demands we were making of him, and 2. by means of the conclusion to the report that we did IN FACT share his views. T h e galantuomod is forgetting, by the way, that I have kept copies of my private letter to him?34

I have informed Liebknecht that, if Schweitzer should turn it down, he should put the thing in the Berliner Reform and tell Schweitzer about this at the same time, and also that I have simultaneously sent the statement to two Rhineland papers, so that Schweitzer cannot procrastinate this time. I have in fact sent 2 COPIES to Siebel, instructing him to insert the thing in the Rheinische Zeitung and the Düsseldorfer Zeitung (the latter being the workers' paper) two days after receipt of my letter, and to send us a report on any comments in the local press.158 So, this time there is nothing Schweitzer can do about it any more. I would not be surprised if the Lassalleans, especially in the H a m b u r g Nordstern, declared we had sold ourselves to the bourgeoisie. BUT NEVER MIND! T h e 'INTERNATIONAL ASSOCIATION' has managed so to constitute the majority on the committee to set u p the new REFORM LEAGUE that the whole leadership is in our hands. 1 5 5 I have put the full details in a letter to E. Jones.111

Such a conflict has broken out in Paris between our own representatives that we have sent Lubez to Paris to clarify matters and effect conciliation.95 His CREDENTIALS state that Schily has been attached to him as an adjunct, and I have given Schily private instructions.159 We could have sold 20,000 cards in Paris, but since one group was accusing the other of having Plon-Plon behind

[^1]: a See this volume, p. 101. - b ibid., pp. 95-96.- c retreat - d honourable man





**[p. 109]**

them, etc., the distribution of cards has had to be suspended for the time being. Under this military despotism, people are naturally highly suspicious of each other (my impression is that this time both sides are doing each other an injustice), and they are not capable of sorting out their differences and reaching an under- standing by MEETING or through the press. A further factor is this: the workers seem to want to take things to the point of excluding any LITERARY MAN, etc., which is absurd, as they need them in the press, but it is pardonable in view of the repeated treachery of the LITERARY MEN. Conversely, the latter are suspicious of any workers' movement, which displays hostility towards them.160

(Apropos these 'LITERARY MEN', I am reminded that the workers here (English) want to make me editor when The Bee-Hive* is transformed, which is to happen in 3 months time, and have already informed me of this. However, I shall mull over the matter in all its multifarious aspects, before making a move in one direction or another.)

So, what we have in Paris is, on the one hand, Lefort (a LITERARY MAN, well-to-do into the bargain, in other words 'bourgeois' but with an unsullied reputation, and, as far as La belle Franceb is concerned, the real founder of our Association), and, on the other, Tolain, Fribourg, Limousin, etc., who are workers. WELL, I shall let you know the outcome. At all events, Wolff, an acquaintance, who has just returned from Paris, tells me that there is growing interest in the 'INTERNATIONAL ASSOCIATION'. T h e Débats" has also intervened in the matter.

As far as the London UNIONS, etc., are concerned, every day brings about new ADHESION, so that BY AND BY we are becoming a force to be reckoned with.

[^1]: But that is where the difficulty begins as well. Already MR BEAI.ES (THE REGISTERING BARRISTER of Middlesex, one of the most popular people in London at present, President of the POLISH LEAGUE,9 co-founder of the NEW REFORM LEAGUE, IN FACT THE GO-BETWEEN between WORKING- MAN and MIDDLE CLASS, honest and well-meaning to boot) has got himself proposed as MEMBER for our COUNCIL. T h e opportunity arose because as a SUBCOMMITTEE together with him we were to prepare the Polish MEETING (Marquis Townshend in the chair) for next Wednesday. 1 6 1 This was most unfortunate for me. I could, of course, have prevented the matter by force, as all the CONTINENTALS would have voted with me. BUT I DID NOT LIKE ANY SUCH DIVISION. So, by

[^2]: a See this volume, pp. 154-55. - b beautiful France - c Journal des Débats politiques et littéraires





**[p. 110]**

means of private letters 3 to the PRINCIPAL ENGLISH MEMBERS, I have managed to persuade Beales' PROPOSER6 not to bring forward his MOTION again. T h e 'official' reason given was: 1. that Beales WILL STAND FOR MARYLEBONE at the next parliamentary elections and that our Association must by all means avoid appearing TO SERVE THE INTERESTS OF ANY PARLIAMENTARY AMBITION; 2. that Beales and we ourselves can be of greater assistance to each other, if we sail our separate ships. Thus, the danger has been temporarily averted. Incidental- ly, other parliamentarians, such as Taylor, etc. (fellows, who have close links with Mazzini), had taken it into their heads to tell us that the TIME was not OPPORTUNE for a Polish meeting. I answered t h r o u g h our COUNCIL that the WORKING CLASS has ITS OWN FOREIGN POLICY, which is most certainly not determined by what the MIDDLE CLASS considers OPPORTUNE. They always considered it OPPORTUNE TO GOAD ON

THE POLES AT THE BEGINNING OF A NEW OUTBREAK, TO BETRAY THEM DURING ITS PROGRESS BY THEIR DIPLOMACY, AND TO DESERT THEM WHEN RUSSIA HAD THROWN THEM DOWN. In fact, the chief purpose of the MEETING is to raise money to support them. Are the poor émigrés (this time mostly WORKINGMEN and PEASANTS and thus not in the least PROTECTED BY PRINCE ZAMOYSKI et Co.) to starve because it appears to the ENGLISH MIDDLE CLASS JUST NOW INOPPORTUNE TO MENTION EVEN THE NAME OF POLAND?

Cutting enclosed by Mr Blind from The Morning Star.162

Your

K. M.

Apropos. Some port wine and claret would do me a world of

[^1]: Mazzini, who did tell Fontana that Blind was a liar, was absolutely furious that his Italian Workers' Association20 here sent out the Italian version of my 'Address' c into the world without the omissions Mr Mazzini had expressly demanded, e.g. the passages attacking the MIDDLE CLASS.

[^2]: g O O d UNDER PRESENT CIRCUMSTANCES.

[^3]: First published in Der Briefwechsel zwischen Printed according to the original F. Engels und K. Marx, Bd. 3, Stuttgart, 1913 Published in English in full for the first time

[^4]: a See this volume, pp. 92-93. - b William Dell - c K. Marx, 'Inaugural Address of the Working Men's International Association'.





**[p. 56]**

ENGELS TO CARL SIEBEL

IN ELBERFELD

Manchester, 27 February 1865 Dear Siebel,

Marx has sent you our statement denouncing the Social- Demokrat in Berlin.3 In the meantime, to do something positive to prevent the people from lumping us together with Bismarckery, I have written a pamphlet,b and O. Meissner in Hamburg has accepted it. I should be grateful if you would arrange for a notice concerning it to be placed in the Düsseldorfer Zeitung and other papers to which you have access, with something like the following content:

A pamphlet by Fr. Engels entitled The Prussian Military Question and the German Workers' Party will shortly be published by Otto Meissner in Hamburg. It originated at the request of a so-called 'social-democratic' paperc to the author to express his views on the subject in that paper.d Detailed treatment of the subject, however, required more space than a newspaper could command; the pro-Bismarck direction adopted by the latest 'Social-Democracy' furthermore made it impossible for the people at the Neue Rheinische Zeitung to collaborate with the organs of this particular 'Social-Democracy'. In these circumstances, the above-mentioned work is being published independently in pamphlet-form163

You will need to act quickly as Meissner has written that the pamphlet was already going to be distributed on 24 February. It will vex the Lassallean clique most dreadfully, the men of Progress" no less so, and not least Monsieur Bismarck. There are some most impudent things in it which have previously, for the most part, been passed over with tactful timidity. As long as the press does not again totally ignore the thing164 with its fulmina- tions against all and sundry, the story will have some effect.

So, be quick now! This is all important. For the Rheinische Zeitung I shall supply the necessary material through Dr Klein in Cologne.

Best wishes to your wife. Your

F. E.

[^1]: a K. Marx and F. Engels, 'To the Editor of the Social-Demokrat'. - b F. Engels, The Prussian Military Question and the German Workers' Party. - c Der Social-Demokrat - d See this volume, pp. 67-69.



