---
Volume: 42
Document_Title: "56. Engels to Carl Siebel. 27 February Ill 57. Engels to Marx. 27 February "
Page_Range: "151-152"
---

# 56. Engels to Carl Siebel. 27 February Ill 57. Engels to Marx. 27 February 



**[p. 112]**

First published in Deutsche Zeitung, Printed according to the original No. 473, 16 October 1920 „ , ,. , , . _ ,. , r , ,. Published in English for the rirst time

57

ENGELS TO MARX

IN LONDON

Manchester, 27 February 1865

Dear Moor,

As you had positively promised to take the necessary steps regarding the newspapers3 immediately Meissner sent a positive reply, I counted on it that this had been done. Meanwhile, today I dispatched the necessary to Siebel,b Liebknecht and Klein in Cologne (for the Rheinische Zeitung),163 as there is no time to lose. If you have anyone else who can do anything, please write to them—PERHAPS Kugelmann? His letter returned enclosed, ditto Miquel whose high-faluting refashioning of the theory into a platform for mayoral dignity and bourgeois benevolence greatly amused me.151 It is more or less how Heinrich Bürgers will view the world if he should ever become mayor of Nippes or Kalscheuren.

Jones has got SESSIONS again, I have not been able to see him yet. More tomorrow, 7 o'clock has just struck and I must post this letter.

Your

F. E.

[^1]: a Engels refers to the publication of a notice about his pamphlet The Prussian Military Question and the German Workers' Party (see this volume, p. 84). - b See this volume, pp. 111-12.



