---
Volume: 42
Document_Title: "58. Engels to Marx. 3 March "
Page_Range: "152-153"
---

# 58. Engels to Marx. 3 March 



**[p. 113]**

I have no port wine in the WAREHOUSE and will have to get hold of some first, but will do so immediately.

First published in Der Briefwechsel zwischen Printed according to the original F. Engels und K. Marx, Bd. 3, Stuttgart, . igj3 Published in English lor the lirst time

58

ENGELS TO MARX

IN LONDON

Manchester, 3 March 1865

Dear Moor,

You must excuse me for neglecting my correspondence this week. Borkheim was here and took up a lot of my time; he left this evening; then there is COTTON-PANIC following Sherman's advance,7ä with endless letter-writing and vain attempts to dispose of our STOCK. I think Richmond will be abandoned within a fortnight, and, unless by some miracle Lee manages to get a fresh respite of 2-3 months, the final, decisive battle will be fought within 4 weeks.30

I must go home now and write to Meissner and Siebel, who is putting himself to a lot of trouble—he says he has sent you the statement.3 I am glad the thing is finally published; still nothing in the damned Social-Demokrat of 1 March — presumably, they tried to go back on it? 165 It's a load off my mind that we have at last made the break with that gang. So, now we have the grand concluding article on Bismarck which was supposed to patch everything up. O, jerum, jerum, jerum!c

Your

F. E.

[^1]: a K. Marx and F. Engels, 'To the Editor of the Social-Demokrat'. - b A reference to the fifth article of the series 'Das Ministerium Bismarck', Der Social-Demokrat, No. 28, 1 March 1865. - c O, jerum, jerum, jerum! O quae mutatio rerum! (Oh, dear me, dear me, dear me. A crazy world. Lord, hear me!)—part of the refrain from a student song attributed to Höfling.



