---
Volume: 42
Document_Title: "59. Marx to Engels. 4 March "
Page_Range: "153-155"
---

# 59. Marx to Engels. 4 March 



**[p. 114]**

First published in Der Briefwechsel zwischen Printed according to the original F. Engels und K. Marx, Bd. 3, Stuttgart, , , . , , . ,• . r jgj3 Published m English for the first time

59

MARX TO ENGELS

IN MANCHESTER

[London,] 4 MARCH 1865

DEAR FRED,

Our statement3 is in today's Social-Demokrat. Although claiming that the statement from these 'gentlemen' requires no further î comment, Mr Schweitzer has, nevertheless, 'anonymously' devoted one of his 'bloody pretentious' LEADERS 166 to us. Lassalle and B. Becker, 'President of Mankind', FOR EVER! At all events, I have Mr Schweitzer's exceedingly humble letter of invitation, etc. in my possession. Siebel has sent 5 newspapers (the Barmer, the Elberfelder, the Düsseldorfer, the Rheinische and the Neue Frankfur- ter) carrying the statement.158 The enclosed cutting is from the Elberfelder. I am glad, firstly, that we are 'out' and, secondly, that we were 'in'. If we had not been, we would never have penetrated the 'mystères of Lassalle'.

I have written to Kugelmann (please send his prescription back to me) about your pamphletb (it looks very good in print; if there is a 2nd impression, only a sentence here and there would need to be altered). Can you send me another 2 COPIES? I would like to use Eccarius' good offices to put two short notices in Bender's ragc

(London) and in the Hermann, but that will hardly be possible unless I let them have 2 copies.167

The 'Polish Meeting' (WEDNESDAY) went off very well, and full, although the BOURGEOIS had done everything they could to wreck it by declaring it 'i N0PP0RTUNE'.d 168

[^1]: a K. Marx and F. Engels, 'To the Editor of the Social-Demokrat'. - b F. Engels, The Prussian Military Question and the German Workers' Party. - c Londoner Anzeiger - d See this volume, pp. 109-10.





**[p. 115]**

Major Wolff has returned after serving his sentence in Alessandria.

Apropos: did I tell you that Mazzini later secretly communicated his 'displeasure' to Fontana after all (and his predilection for K. Blind, whom he had himself branded as a 'liar'd)?

Your wine came yesterday; received with THANKS. For the past week my brother-in-law6 from the Capef has been here again; he leaves next Tuesday. My niece8 from Maastricht came with him (daughter of my sister, widow Schmalhausen); I shall have to take her back IN ABOUT A WEEK LATER.

My old trouble is plaguing me in various sensitive and 'aggravating' places, so that sitting down is difficult.

Apropos: is the Lupus affair8 still not quite wound up? Ditto I never heard a word from Mr Borchardt about the outstanding money he was going to collect in. You will see from the enclosed scrawl, which is just one example, how I am being sent claims of every conceivable kind, things I had totally forgotten about. This is the most recent to have raised its head from the days of the

Neue Rheinische Zeitung. It is something I have to take into account in every possible way because otherwise the fellows will make a public scandal.'1

It seems all up with CONFEDERACY.

Salut.

Your

K. M.

[^1]: •• See this volume, p. 118-19. - b Moses Hess - c Manuscript illegible - d See this volume, p. 110. - e Johann Carl Juta - f Cape of Good Hope - e Caroline Schmalhausen - h See this volume, pp. 117-18.



