---
Volume: 42
Document_Title: "60. Engels to Marx. 6 March "
Page_Range: "155-156"
---

# 60. Engels to Marx. 6 March 



**[p. 116]**

First published abridged in Der Briefwech- Printed according to the original sei zwischen F. Engels und K. Marx, Bd. 3, . Stuttgart, 1913 and in full in MEGA, Published in English for the first Abt. III, Bd. 3, Berlin, 1930 n m e

60

ENGELS T O MARX

IN LONDON

Manchester, 6 March 1865

Dear Moor,

Yours of the day before yesterday received, as was the Social-Demokrat today containing that droll article excommunicat- ing us.166 It really makes one laugh.

I have been at home with 'flu most of today, but I shall go and see the lawyer about the Lupus affair8 as soon as possible. Everything will be straight as soon as the fellow completes; Borchardt has been paid his £ 1 0 0 (i. e. less the money he has already had), and the Schiller Institute a 8 its £100, too; further- more, I gave the lawyer approx. £ 1 5 0 to cover tax and am only waiting for his account now before remitting the rest to you directly. I shall put together a provisional balance sheet for you in a day or two so that you can see how things stand.

Things from Siebel and a certain Lange enclosed." Qu'en penses-tu?b Send the stuff back, as well as the letter from Meissner, which I must have for my correspondence with him. I am sending him the cuttings for him to see that we have also got people to push things along.

T h e Kölnische Zeitung has also printed o u r statement,1 but only u p to the words that the Social-Demokrat's tactics preclude o u r further participation in it.

[^1]: B r u h n returned enclosed. How THE HELL CAME YOU TO OWE THAT FELLOW ANY BRASS? d However much it is, I shall send it to-you at once.

[^2]: a See this volume, pp. 135-38. - b What do you think of it? - c K. Marx and F. Engels, 'To the Editor of the Social-Demokrat'. - d See this volume, pp. 117-19.



