---
Volume: 42
Document_Title: "61. Marx to Engels. 7 March "
Page_Range: "156-159"
---

# 61. Marx to Engels. 7 March 



**[p. 117]**

What kind of 'PAPERS from the Manchester press relating to the COTTON-CRISIS' are you talking about? Surely you mean from the RELIEF COMMITTEE32? I have not seen Maclure for some time; as soon as I encounter him, I shall have a word with him about it.

Gumpert does not think much of Kugelmann's phosphate of lime. At all events, it is not a specific remedy. He says you ought to take arsenic. Returned enclosed.

I must now go to the Schiller Institute to chair the Comité. By the by, one of the fellows there, a chemist,c has recently explained Tyndall's experiment with sunlightd to me. It is really capital.

Your

F. E.

First published abridged in Der Briefwech- Printed according to the original sei zwischen F. Engels und K. Marx, Bd. 3, Stuttgart, 1913 and in full in MEGA, Published in English for the first Abt. Ill, Bd. 3, Berlin, 1930 t l m e

61

MARX TO ENGELS

My brother-in-lawf is leaving today to return to the Cape. I've got to accompany him onto the ship. So, I'm very short of time—hence just the following in the utmost brevity:

1. Ad vocem* Bruhn. A worker in Paris received a letter from a worker in Hamburg saying that Bruhn is slandering us in every way he can. Firstly, he says I owe him 60 talers which I never

[^1]: IN MANCHESTER

[^2]: [London,] 7 Marche 1865

[^3]: DEAR FRED,

[^4]: a F. Engels, The Prussian Military Question and the German Workers' Party. - b Kölnische Zeitung - c probably Carl Schorlemmer - d See this volume, p. 91. - e In the original: May. - f Johann Carl Juta - S As regards





**[p. 118]**

Neue Rheinische Zeitung was banned when I got back to Cologne from Hamburg and I myself was kicked out of Prussia, it was possible that in the whirl of events at the time / had forgotten.170

It is still striking that he waited from 1849 to 1865 to remind me. But it was a simple matter. He should let me know by letter how much he thought he had on me and send me Griibel's address. I would then write to Grübel myself. If the latter confirmed what he said, his demand would be satisfied. This procedure is absolutely essential, as I am still uncertain about the matter even at this moment, and the way I have been fleeced by claims of this kind is really scandalous.

2. From the enclosed from Schily you will see what transpired in Paris whither we sent Le Lubez to settle the disputes that had broken out there. (We had given Schily ditto FILL POWER to negotiate,0 as we were aware of Le Lubez's bias towards Lefort.95

Here I should just mention in passing that Béluze, President of the

[^1]: a In the original: January 1852. - b K. Marx, 'Hirsch's Confessions'. - c See present edition, Vol. 17, pp. 219-20. - d See this volume, pp. 108-09.





**[p. 119]**

3. The things from Siebel returned. It strikes me as most unfortunate that he gives London as the origin of the notice put in the Düsseldorfer Zeitung? thus exposing me as the presumed author.

4. Letter from Liebknecht enclosed. 5. One copy of the circular from the Geneva BRANCH-ASSOCIATION0 enclosed.

6. The letter from Meissner enclosed. 7. Lange: not to be directly rebuffed.1* Write and tell him that he would do best to post the thing to you, 2 COPIES, and you would send one to me each time. As he rightly realises himself, after our recent experience we would have to hold back for the present from making contributions to any German paper. He would, of course, have the same right as any other EDITOR of a journal to reprint whatever extracts he liked from your pamphlet.'

Salut.

Your

K. M.

The first numbers (2 sheets) of Blind's Eidgenosse have come, with the only contributions by Blind, Struve and Rasch.172 Trivia. Emblem consisting of hand with dagger, to kill the 'tyrants'.

[^1]: First published abridged in Der Briefwech- Printed according to the original sei zwischen F. Engels und K. Marx, Bd. 3, Stuttgart, 1913 and in full in MEGA, Published in English for the first Abt. Ill, Bd. 3, Berlin, 1930 t l m e

[^2]: a See this volume, p. 130 - b [F. Engels,] 'Notice Concerning The Prussian Military Question and the German Workers' Party'. - c 'Aufruf an alle Arbeiter, Arbeitervereine und Arbeiterassociationen in der Schweiz zum Beitritt der "Internationalen Arbeiter-Association" '. - d See this volume, p. 116. - e F. Engels, The Prussian

[^3]: Military Question and the German Workers' Party.



