---
Volume: 42
Document_Title: "62. Marx to Engels. 10 March "
Page_Range: "159-160"
---

# 62. Marx to Engels. 10 March 



**[p. 62]**

MARX TO ENGELS

IN MANCHESTER

[London,] 10 MARCH [1865]

DEAR FRED,

I can only write these few lines today, as I have much else to do. The statement from Herwegh and Rustow3 is good. The impudence of Mr Schweitzer, who knows perfecdy well that all I need to do is publish his own letters, is fantastic. Though what else can the wretched cur do?

As you will already have guessed, the scrawl he quotes from the Neue Frankfurter Zeitung is from student 'Blind'.173 I'm sending you the first No. of this ' lackey'b of the deposed Kings of Democracy and Holloway-type 'SELFADVERTISERS' and 'PUFFERS'. YOU must arrange for a few jokes about the fellow to reach Siebel, for him to hawk around to the various papers.

By the by, if there should be a 2nd impression of your pamphlet,0 we can, in a short preface, make a brief official statement on our position with regard to the Lassalle shit and the Social-Demokra U It would be, of course, beneath our dignity to take up the cudgels directly with that gang of riff-raff in minor journals.

Salut.

Your

K. M.

[^1]: First published in Der Briefwechsel zwischen Printed according to the original F. Engels und K. Marx, Bd. 3, Stuttgart, 29J3 Published in English for the first time

[^2]: a concerning the breach with Der Social-Demokrat - b Der Deutsche Eidgenosse - c F. Engels, The Prussian Military Question and the German Workers' Party.



