---
Volume: 42
Document_Title: "64. Engels to Marx. 11 March "
Page_Range: "165-167"
---

# 64. Engels to Marx. 11 March 



**[p. 64]**

ENGELS TO MARX

IN LONDON

Manchester, 11 Marcha 1865

Dear Moor,

Schweitzer's brazenness really is ludicrous. But it does show how hard he has been hit by our withdrawalb and how well he knows that very much depends on it for his petty paper. After Herwegh and Rüstow have come out in support of our statement/ anything can happen. Schweitzer will soon become aware of the effect his big talk has had, especially on the Rhine. Siebel has done a capital job in circulating the pamphlet.d The Bonner Zeitung has twice published long extracts already and is intending to produce still more. The Rheinische" has also got a long extract as well. Our standing with the Rhineland workers being what it is, this agitation-by-clique against us won't get very far.

Siebel had already sent me the little piece from the Neue Frankfurter Zeitung.173 Student Blind as always. He is having to make a couple of phrases of Lassalle's last a whole year. I haven't received the lackey1 yet.

The legacy business is complete, the LAWYER will send the statement of account next week, he has still got approx. 10s. to collect in or pay out, he wasn't sure which. So, I can send you the money on Monday then.8 Meanwhile, my statement of account enclosed, according to which another £ g approx. are due to you.

The ideas Liebknecht has about Manchester! He has got nothing to gobble and asks me what a house 'with garden' costs here! The fellow is simply soft in the head. Schweitzer, he said, could not sell himself to Bismarck because he would have been obliged to use the good offices of the beastly old woman.11

I'm finding the new movement a terrible fag, by the way. It's the devil's own job letter-writing in the evening as well for the party and publisher, etc., until 1 or 2 o'clock, after letter-writing all day at work.

[^1]: a The original has: February. - b from the Social-Demokrat - c K. Marx and F. Eng- els, 'To the Editor of the Social-Demokrat'. - d F. Engels, The Prussian Military Question and the German Workers' Party. - e Die Rheinische Zeitung - f Der Deutsche Eidgenosse - & No figure in the original. - h Sophie von Hatzfeldt





**[p. M]**

Schily's letter also returned enclosed which I found most entertaining. Our old comrade is turning himself into a very useful diplomat.159 How did the two of you settle the dispute?

It's impossible to get anywhere with Jones. Hardly are the SESSIONS over when the Assizes begin. THE TRADE IN CRIME SEEMS HIGHLY

FLOURISHING.

Adios, and my kindest regards to the LADIES.

EXECUTION of Will W. Wolff

Debit

Your

F. E.

Payment from Steinthal & Co. incl. interest " " " Heywood BROTHERS incl. interest Debts collected by Dr Borchardt

£1,083-9-3 " 234-14-9 " 66-13-0

£1,384-17-0

[^1]: Credit

[^2]: To payment to Marx £234-14-9 " " " do " 350-0-0 " " do " 200-0-0 " " " do " 40-0-0 " do

[^3]: £824-14-9

[^4]: „ to Borchardt £ 100-0-0

[^5]: • i Schiller Institute28 " 100-0-0 " Engels " 100-0-0 " " Wood, Solicitor " 150-0-0 f Payment to LANDLORD " 13-4-9

[^6]: Paid , " funeral expenses " 57-11-0 by Borchardt

[^7]: of 2 bills 1-2-4 by Borchardt »* of PROBATE DUTY . " 30-0-0 1,376-12-10 »* of PROBATE DUTY .

[^8]: Balance 8-4-2

[^9]: a F. A. Lange, Die Arbeiterfrage in ihrer Bedeutung für Gegenwart und Zukunft



