---
Volume: 42
Document_Title: "66. Marx to Hermann Jung. 13 March "
Page_Range: "170-171"
---

# 66. Marx to Hermann Jung. 13 March 



**[p. 131]**

should form his own opinion of it, etc.a This he will do. I chose this approach because with Juch I'd always poked fun at the notices sent to the Hermann by Blind, for Blind and about Blind, and the two of us here are generally regarded as one person.

Salut.

Your

K. M.

First published abridged in Der Briefwech- Printed according to the original sei zwischen F. Engels und K. Marx, Bd. 3, Stuttgart, 1913 and in full in MEGA, Published in English in full for the Abt. Ill, Bd. 3, Berlin, 1930 f l r s t t , m e

66

MARX TO HERMANN JUNG

IN LONDON

[London,] 13 March 1865

My dear Jung,

Mr Cremer has quite misunderstood me (and I shall write him immediately upon that point). I was so far from any intention of moving new amendments on Tuesday evening6 to the old resolutions183 that, before the arrival of your letter, I had to-day posted to Schily a letter containing the very same resolutions. I wrote him at the same time to wait with their communication until Thursday next, so as to give Mr Le Lubez the time to fulfil his functions, viz. to communicate himself the resolutions.

What I said to Cremer, and to Fox ditto, was, that if Le Lubez and Mr Wolff, by their foolish behaviour, had not excited the feelings, and killed the time, the resolutions would and might have been rédigées in a way more polite on the one, and more logical, on the other hand; [so that] f.i. Resolution II (concerning Lefort's [defensive ways]) might, by a short phrase, have lost its aspect, while Resolution IV concedes too much to Lefort etc. All this might have been mended, and I expressed to Mr Cremer my regret that it had, after the vote on the contents of the resolutions, not been left to the subcommittee21 to give it the convenient stylistic form.

[^1]: •> See this volume, p. 134. - b 14 March



