---
Volume: 42
Document_Title: "67. Engels to Marx. 14 March "
Page_Range: "171-172"
---

# 67. Engels to Marx. 14 March 



**[p. 132]**

Yet, I should consider it the greatest folly to reopen the questions once settled, and which, as far as the substance of the resolutions goes, have been settled in the most fair spirit. I should consider it, particularly, quite unworthy of the Central Council to rescind one single word after the exhibitions Le Lubez and Wolff have made of themselves. Moreover, by my letter to Schily such a course has become impossible.

You will, of course, oblige me by communicating to me your résumé historique—but I beg you to understand me well. I shall like to read it, as the thing itself interests me, but not in order to control your writing.184 I am convinced beforehand that you will not embitter the spirits. I fear Mr Le Lubez has already sent to his friends private despatches in that childish spirit.

Yours fraternally

K. Marx

First published in: Marx and Engels, Reproduced from the original Works, First Russian Edition, Vol. XXV, . Moscow, 1934 Published in English tor the first time

67

ENGELS TO MARX

[Manchester,] 14 March 1865

Dear Moor,

The business of the £40 is based solely on a statement of the business I made out in November, in which this £40 figures as 'CASH' to you, but undated. I had the impression myself that I had not yet sent you this £40, but as I had no opportunity to check, I could only go by the memorandum. Today I checked my account in the ledger, but I couldn't deduce anything relevant from that either. But if you've not had the £40 and, at the same time, I too have the vague feeling that that is the position, that's good enough, and I've already given the cashier instructions to have the money ready tomorrow.

[^1]: IN LONDON



