---
Volume: 42
Document_Title: "68. Marx to Engels. 18 March "
Page_Range: "172-174"
---

# 68. Marx to Engels. 18 March 



**[p. 133]**

On the question of the statement in the Düsseldorfer Zeitung,3 I'm in complete agreement. Though on the whole it doesn't matter at all if Mr Schweitzer occasionally takes it into his head to indulge in such barefaced effrontery, I did, nevertheless, find it galling that this vulgar upstart rogue should be allowed to get away with such behaviour towards us. Furthermore, if his smarmy letters aren't published now, they won't be any use at all later. It's always nice when someone like that gets the scolding he deserves for once. So, do il straightaway, and please ask Dresemann to send 2 COPIES, so that I can have one.

In haste.

Your

F. E.

First published in Der Briefwechsel zwischen Printed according to the original F. Engels und K. Marx, Bd. 3, Stuttgart, „ , .. , , . „ ,. , . inio Published in English tor the first time

68

MARX TO ENGELS

[London] 18 March 1865

The remaining HALVES of the notes received. You can send the POST OFFICE order to my wife. I've sent off a note from Bender asking for 50 copies, etc., of your pamphlet,6 etc., to O. Meissner direct, as I had to write to him today. It is possible that Meissner's answer may arrive too late for the next Londoner Anzeiger. Since Bender does at present

[^1]: IN MANCHESTER

[^2]: DEAR FRED, There are a lot of things, some of them important, that I want to write to you about. But as there's A VERY GREAT DEAL OF BUSINESS to do in connection with my departure tomorrow,177 just the following bare facts:

[^3]: a See this volume, p. 129. - b F. Engels, The Prussian Military Question and the German Workers' Party.





**[p. 134]**

without doubt know best how to disseminate things of this kind in England, you should send him a note about the price of the pamphlet by return if you can (i.e. if you know it yourself). He will then advertise it straightaway in the next number. His address is 8 Little Newport St., Leicester Square.

I did a short, highly condensed little article for Bender, such as I thought would be suitable for his paper,3 a kind of prospectus of contents, and sent Juch conversely, contrariwise and notwithstand- ing, just your pamphlet itself, asking him to do a critique of it in his own way and according to his own point of view.b Then I received enclosed note from Juch (to be kept). There certainly wasn't the time for a critical review. So, I sent the notice originally intended for Bender (in today's Hermann) to Juchc (and the enclosed message to Bender instead d). At the same time, I wrote to Juch—diplomacy becoming increasingly important—that I couldn't meet his request because I was going away, that he should print copious extracts in a later number; I would discuss his difficulty in finding contributors with him when I returned to London. (I am thinking of placing Eccarius there, instead of with the Social-Demokrat) I sent him ditto a copy of my statement against Schweitzer, although the Hermann won't be able to print it until next Saturday's edition (copies sent at the same time to Reform in Berlin and to the Düsseldorfer Zeitung"); no amendments in the version for the Hermann except a stab at Blind inserted at the beginning.

Bender has written to me ditto:

I've passed this on to Eccarius. Also enclosed a number of the Rheinische Zeitung sent to me by Liebknecht with HIS SPEECH.185 His wife' has written to mine; they are really down on their luck. He still owed the Social-Demokrat £5, etc. I can't send him anything at the present moment. Nordstern enclosed. You must keep this document. You can see these gentlemen are now trying to make out that that wretch Schweitzer completely falsified Lassalle.186 So, my statement against Schweitzer, which also repudiates Lassalle, even though very

[^1]: 'Most obliged and grateful for notice you sent; but we now need a review as well.'

[^2]: a Londoner Anzeiger - b See this volume, pp. 130-31. - c K. Marx, 'Review of Engels' Pamphlet The Prussian Military Question and the German Workers' Party'. - d K. Marx, 'Synopsis of Engels' Pamphlet The Prussian Military Question and the German Workers' Party'. - e K. Marx, 'Statement [Regarding the Causes of the Breach with the Social-Demokrat]'. - l Ernestine Liebknecht



