---
Volume: 42
Document_Title: "78. Marx to Engels. 1 May "
Page_Range: "188-190"
---

# 78. Marx to Engels. 1 May 



**[p. 149]**

wished to invite more guests, I should have had to ask too many for the purpose of the evening. This entre nous!"

I have just written to Cremer111 that he should issue the letter of authority for P. Vinçard immediately, which Dupont must then deliver to Vinçard forthwith. It would be best if Dupont could despatch the thing to Vinçard direct without it having to go by way of Fribourg.

Vinçard had already written to Lubez that he would not accept if he did not receive the POWERS direct from London.'99 In a letter to Fribourg Lubez promised to inform the 'CENTRAL COUNCIL' of this, but did not do so. I have reason to believe that Fribourg subsequently 'forgot' the matter, not unintentionally.

I shall give you a verbal account of what further occurred in Paris (which was for the most part good); but in the meantime you should tell Dupont.

Salut et fraternité.

K. Marx

First published in: Marx and Engels, Printed according to the original Works, First Russian Edition, Vol. XXV, Moscow, 1934

78

[London,] 1 MAY 1865

You must excuse me for not writing until today and thus breaking my LAST PROMISE. It happened not because it is 'sheer delight to break one's word',b but because I really am OVERWORKED, as completing my book,c on the one hand, and the 'INTERNATIONAL ASSOCIATION', on the other, are making very heavy demands on my time.

Today is little Jenny's birthday, and this evening I shall be having Ernest Jones to my house along with Odger, Cremer, Fox

[^1]: MARX TO ENGELS29

[^2]: IN MANCHESTER

[^3]: DEAR FRED,

[^4]: 3 between ourselves - b Paraphrased quotation from F. Rückert's poem 'Die Weisheit des Brahmanen'. - c Capital





**[p. 150]**

and Jung, so it will be a political birthday party. Laura HAD 'THE QUESTION POPPED' by one Charles Manning, born in South America, English father, Spanish mother. He's rich and generally a nice fellow, BUT LAURA 'DOES NOT CARE A PIN EOR HIM'. 'SHE HAS ALREADY KNOWN HOW TO DAMP' the passionate southern temperament. However, as my girl is a friend of his sisters, and he is frightfully IN LOVE, it is A

DISAGREEABLE CASE.

I enclose a 'curiosity'. The Nordstern's correction makes it a worthy organ of the German louts.

I am also enclosing for you THE LATTER END of a letter from Schily, whose report on the Moses woman a will amuse you.

The great achievement of the 'INTERNATIONAL ASSOCIATION' is this: The REFORM LEACUE is OUR WORK. On the inner committee of 12 (6 MIDDLECLASSMEN and 6 WORKINGMEN), the wo RKi NGMF.N are ALL MEMBERS OF OUR COUNCIL (including Eccarius).'55 WE HAVE BAFFLED all attempts by the middle class TO MISLEAD THE WORKING CLASS. This time the movement in the provinces is completely dependent on that in London. Ernest Jones, e.g., had DESPAIRED TILL WE SET THE BALL AGOING. If we succeed in re-electrifying the POLITICAL MOVEMENT of the ENGLISH WORKING CLASS, our ASSOCIATION will already have done more for the European working class, WITHOUT MAKING ANY FUSS, than was possible IN ANY OTHER WAY. And there is every prospect of success.

Weber junior' has been thrown out of the workers' society here for making false reports to the Social-Demokrat and for stirring up trouble in the branch society 'Teutonia', which is run by two fanatical Prussians by the name of Klinker.200

Our joint statementd really was successful beyond all expecta- tion. Not merely have we blown apart the 'General Association of German Workers'2 as an organ of the Prussian government and in six WORDS generally cleared the heads of the German workers of their intoxication with royalty. The present split in the Party of Progress" was also the direct result of our stand.

a Sibylle Hess - b See this volume, p. 140. - c Louis Weber - d K. Marx and F. Engels, 'To the Editor of the Social-Demokrat'.

[^1]: You know that the Italian society20 has not withdrawn from the ASSOCIATION, but its DELEGATES have from the Cou Nci L.b We now have Spaniards on it instead. ONE ROMAN NATION FOR THE OTHER. If those fellows don't appoint new delegates soon, as we have asked them to, Bakunin will have to arrange FOR SOME LIFE ITALIANS.

[^2]: The CHIVALRY OF THE SOUTH has ended worthily. In addition, Lincoln's ASSASSINATION was the most stupid act they could have committed. Johnson is STERN, INFLEXIBLE, REVENGEFUL and as a former



