---
Volume: 42
Document_Title: "81. Engels to Marx. 12 May "
Page_Range: "195-196"
---

# 81. Engels to Marx. 12 May 



**[p. 81]**

ENGELS TO MARX

IN LONDON

Manchester, 12 May 1865

Dear Moor,

Schily's letter returned enclosed. That passing glimpse of the family life of Moses and the Moses womana was most entertaining. Many thanks for the Nordsterns. The reports in them provide a check on the negative evidence of the Social-Demokrat, which I am keeping on until June (and if it is not being taken anywhere in London accessible to you, I am willing to continue taking it, one never knows what may happen).

By the by, the rag in question—i.e., the Social-Demokrat—has now gone into such decline that one really feels sorry for it. Poor Schweitzer's heroic soul is at its last gasp, every shred of an idea and all the fruits of his reading have already been used up and he hasn't even a fart left in him to serve up to his readers. Nor is Mausesb producing anything any more, Mauses, the last hope of the new 'party'.207 'News of the Association' is a complete blank, too—literary section re-printed from the Augsburger Allgemeine Zeitung.208 After four months editorship during one of the most turbulent periods we have known since 1848, that milksop has been pumped dry, right down to the dregs, and those are the fellows who wanted to annex the whole German proletariat by one trick.

Ad vocemc Potter: five pounds end., you can take some, i.e., five of the SHARES in my name and five in Samuel Moore's, whom I've admittedly not yet seen, but he's sure to take some; we'll send you PROXY for the general meeting.d If Gumpert also wants 5 SHARES, you can pass some of those 20 on to him—so: 5 for me, 5 for Moore, the remaining 10 to be distributed to other people, but make sure that, if the people are not quite reliable, you reserve the right to take them back again.

As for the suggestion that I should form a BRANCH of the International Association here, it's quite out of the question. Apart

[^1]: a Moses and Sibylle Hess. See this volume, p. 150. - b Moses Hess. Engels makes a pun on the name Moses and the word Maus (mouse). - c concerning - d See this volume, pp. 154-55.



