---
Volume: 42
Document_Title: "82. Marx to Engels. 13 May "
Page_Range: "196-198"
---

# 82. Marx to Engels. 13 May 



**[p. 157]**

Apropos. Moses is still up to his tricks against the International Association in the Social-Demokrat209; if you haven't read the piece, I'll send it to you.

The number of the banknote is: B/C 48498, Manchester, 4 January 1864. The tongues of Engels, etc., are not a reference to me, as I thought myself at first, but to the statistician Privy Councillor

Engel in Berlin who sorted out the things for Roon which I criticised .b

Jones must be allowed to go his own way. He doesn't seem to me to have any real confidence in the proletarian movement any more. I can never find him here anyway, he's always away.

Your

F. E.

82

[London,] 13 MAY 1865 DEAR FRED,

The £5 received with THANKS. Will be invested as suggested. You are right about the COMMITTEE IN MANCHESTER/ Quoadd E. Jones, it is necessary to march with him for the time being. He and his people will be figuring at the next Manchester

[^1]: First published abridged in Der Briefwech- Printed according to the original sei zwischen F. Engels und K. Marx, Bd. 3, Stuttgart, 1913 and in full in MEG A Published in English for the first Abt. Ill, Bd. 3, Berlin, 1930 t l m e

[^2]: MARX TO ENGELS33

[^3]: IN MANCHESTER

[^4]: :l And what would be the use? - b See this volume, p. 154. - c ibid., pp. 155, 156. - à Regarding





**[p. 158]**

Without us this REFORM LEAGUE would never have come into existence, or else it would have fallen into the hands of the MIDDLECLASS. T h e glorious failure of BAINESS BILL (which will result in a CHANGE OF MINISTRY and the COMING IN of the Tories), originally SUPPORTED BY THE GOVERNMENT, WHICH WANTED SOME SUCH SMALL MEASURE FOR THE HUSTINGS, occurred in the Lower House itself with direct reference to the 'extravagant' demands recently put u p by the WORKING CLASS

(I.E. OUR MEN).211

As Dronke wrote me, Reinach I, who is now MANAGING DIRECTOR of the BANK OF SWITZERLAND, will be ruthlessly putting an end to the OFFICE in London, which is causing nothing but expenses. Reinach I is, of course, not bound by the same political and personal considerations as Fazy212 and Klapka were.

A ghastly carbuncle has broken out again on my left hip, NEAR the INEXPRESSIBLE PART OF THE BODY.

Regards to MRS Lizzy.3

Salut. Your

K. M.

Lassalle's will is now proven. H e has left nothing to B. Becker apart from his 'NOMINATION', accompanied by rules of conduct dictated 'with all severity and authority'.

[^1]: Apropos. Monsieur Le Lubez, who had miscalculated about how important and dangerous he is, WANTS NOW TO RETURN TO THE CENTRAL COUNCIL IN THE CAPACITY OF A REPRESENTATIVE 'FOR GREENWICH'! We replied that d'abordh we had to wait for certain letters to come, which he had written to France at the time of the CONFLICT.213

[^2]: I hardly think the Social-Demokrat will see out another quarter. Moses c believed himself safely ensconced and didn't want to give u p his prestigious position as Lassalle's really secret agent at any price.207 Le pauvre diable!d

[^3]: First published abridged in Der Briefwechsel Printed according to the original zwischen F. Engels und K. Marx, Bd. 3, Stuttgart, 1913 and in full in MEGA, Published in English in full for the Abt. Ill, Bd. 3, Berlin, 1930 f l r s t t l m e

[^4]: a Lizzy Burns - b first of all - c Moses Hess - d The poor devil!



