---
Volume: 42
Document_Title: "83. Marx to Engels. 20 May "
Page_Range: "198-199"
---

# 83. Marx to Engels. 20 May 



**[p. 83]**

MARX T O ENGELS 1 0 1

IN MANCHESTER

[London,] 20 MAY 1865

DEAR FRED,

Cutting ENCLOSED which includes my address to Johnson. 3

Edgar's b reappearance did, of course, surprise us greatly. QUITE

THE FELLOW I THOUGHT HIM, and his career quite as I expected it. IT IS A PITY that he could not always have been right-hand to Garibaldi. He would have suited him to a tee. But the poor devil is still very weak. H e will be staying here for some time, apropos of which you could be doing A GOOD WORK by contributing to the replenishment of my wine-cellar. I am working like a horse at the moment, as I must make use of the time when I am fit for work, and the carbuncles are still with me, though they only trouble m e locally and d o not disturb the brain-pan.

In between times, since one cannot always be writing, I am

doing some DIFFERENTIAL CALCULUS . I have n o patience to read dy anything else at all. Any other kind of reading always drives me back to my writing-desk.

2. that the TRADES-UNIONS for that reason, etc., are harmful If these two propositions, in which he alone in o u r SOCIETY believes, were to be accepted, we should be in a terrible mess, both in respect of the TRADES-UNIONS here and the INFECTION OF STRIKES now prevailing on the Continent.

H e will be supported in the matter by a native Englishman— since non-members are also admitted to this meeting—who has written a pamphlet to the same effects I am, of course, expected

[^1]: Special meeting of the 'INTERNATIONAL' this evening. A good old codger, an OLD OWENIST, Weston (CARPENTER), has put u p the following two propositions that he is constantly defending in The Bee-Hive:

[^2]: 1. that A GENERAL RATE IN THE RISE OF THE RATE OF WAGES would be of no benefit to the workers;

[^3]: a K. Marx, ['Address from the Working Men's International Association to President Johnson']. - b Edgar von Westphalen's - c T. J. Dunning, Trades Unions and Strikes: Their Philosophy and Intention.



