---
Volume: 42
Document_Title: "84. Marx to Wilhelm Liebknecht. About 25 May "
Page_Range: "199-200"
---

# 84. Marx to Wilhelm Liebknecht. About 25 May 



**[p. 160]**

I know in advance, of course, what the two main POINTS will be:

1. that wages determine the value of commodities; 2. that if the capitalists pay 5s. today instead of 4, tomorrow they will sell their commodities for 5s. instead of 4 (being ENABLED to do so by the increased demand).

Trite though that is, and however little it penetrates the topmost surface of things, it is, nevertheless, not easy to explain to the ignorant all the competing economic questions involved. You CANT

COMPRESS A COURSE OF POLITICAL ECONOMY INTO 1 HOUR. B u T WE SHALL DO OUR

214 BEST.

Edgar regards it as a GOOD OMEN that he met you first in England. He liked Lizzyb very much.

Salut. Y o u r

K. M.

It is a most strange irony of fate that this Edgar, who never exploited anyone other than himself and was always a WORKMAN in the strictest sense of the word, went through A WAR OF and WITH STARVATION for the slave-owners. Ditto that both brothers-in-law have for the moment been ruined by the American war.

84

MARX TO WILHELM LIEBKNECHT

[London, about 25 May 1865] Dear LIBRARY,

I should prefer it if the translation of the Addressc could appear in the Reform6 and the Rheinische Zeitung. It will, of course,

[^1]: First published in Der Briefwechsel zwischen Printed according to the original F. Engels und K. Marx, Bd. 3, Stuttgart, jgj3 Published in English in full for the first time

[^2]: IN BERLIN

[^3]: a Capital - b Lizzy Burns - c K. Marx, ['Address from the Working Men's Interna- tional Association to President Johnson']. - d Berliner Reform



