---
Volume: 42
Document_Title: "86. Marx to Wilhelm Liebknecht. 24 June "
Page_Range: "204-205"
---

# 86. Marx to Wilhelm Liebknecht. 24 June 



**[p. 86]**

MARX T O WILHELM L I E B K N E C H T

IN BERLIN

[London,] 24 June 1865

Dear Liebknecht,

You must explain to yourself my long silence by continuing indisposition and much work in intervals when I have been capable of it. Your letters, moreover, contained nothing which would have required urgent reply.

T h e Nordstern has most likely been suspended for a while owing to lack of money? At least, it has not arrived here for a couple of weeks. A fine gutter rag, to be sure! T h e declaration by various associations" that anyone who so much as lays a finger on the articles of faith as revealed by Lassalle is guilty of high treason, is priceless. Haut-goût,1' INDEED! What is Mr B. Becker doing in Berlin, and how is the Social-Demokrat 'surviving'? You have quite the wrong notion of Dr Kugelmann. I have been in correspondence with him for years past. He was a socialist back in 1848, in Düsseldorf. As TO Pieper, the VERY NAME OF Kugelmann was not known to him when he was here.218

I have not yet written to Stumpf because I have not been writing any letters over this period. As regards the letter he entrusted to Bruhn, I have not, of course, ever set eyes upon it.219

Salut.

Your

K. M.

[^1]: T h e INTERNATIONAL ASSOCIATION is making great strides despite the 'ENORMOUS SUPPORT' it is receiving from Germany. 2 2 0

[^2]: As regards the 'Louis Bonaparte', 0 I could see from your DROPPING OF THE SUBJECT that the matter has come to nothing. 7 9 I am RATHER glad of this, as I shall later be having it re-printed in the essay-collection all the same.

[^3]: What is old Hatzfeldt doing? A n d the fracas over the will?221

[^4]: 11 A reference to the various branches of the General Association of German Workers (see this volume, p. 161). - b strong meat - c K. Marx, The Eighteenth Brumaire of Louis Bonaparte.



