---
Volume: 42
Document_Title: "87. Marx to Eleanor Marx. 3 July "
Page_Range: "205-206"
---

# 87. Marx to Eleanor Marx. 3 July 



**[p. 166]**

First published in: Marx and Engels, Printed according to the original Works, First Russian Edition, Vol. XXIX, Moscow 1946 Published in English for the first time

87

MARX TO ELEANOR MARX

IN LONDON

[London,] 3 July 1865 Maiden Tower

Dear Miss Lilliput!

You must excuse the 'belated' character of my answer. I belong to that sort of people who always look twice at things before they decide one way or the other. Thus I was rather startled on receiving an invitation on the part of a female minx, quite unknown to me. However, having ascertained your respectability, and the high tone of your transactions with your tradespeople, I shall feel happy to seize this rather strange opportunity of getting at your eatables and drinkables. But, pray, don't neglect the latter, as spinsters usually have bad taste of doing. Suffering somewhat under an attack of rheumatism, I hope you keep your reception room clear of anything like draught. As to the ventilation required, I shall provide for it myself. Being somewhat deaf in the right ear, please put a dull fellow, of whom, I dare say, your company will not be in want, at my right side. For the left, I hope you will reserve your female beauty; I mean the best-looking female amongst your guests.

I am somewhat given to tobacco-chewing, so have the stuff ready. Having from former intercourse with Yankees taken to the habitude of spitting, I hope spittoons will not be missing. Being rather easy in my manners, and disgusted at this hot and close English atmosphere, you must prepare for seeing me in a dress

[^1]: a Edgar von Westphalen - b See this volume, p. 159.



