---
Volume: 42
Document_Title: "89. Engels to Marx. 25 July "
Page_Range: "208-209"
---

# 89. Engels to Marx. 25 July 



**[p. 169]**

a side line; I need to spend 4 weeks all at once on it and nothing else, when I have little to do. Many regards to the LADIES.

Your

F. E.

Moore has been asking me about the SHARES for The Bee-Hive;

h o w d o t h i n g s S t a n d ? A N D HOW DID YOU GET ON WITH P O T T E R ? 2 0 5

First published abridged in Der Briefwech- Printed according to the original sei zwischen F. Engels und K. Marx, Bd. 3, Stuttgart, 1913 and in full in MEGA, Published in English in full for the Abt. Ill, Bd. 3, Berlin, 1930 f l r s t t l m e

89

ENGELS TO MARX

IN LONDON

[Manchester,] 25 July 1865

Dear Moor,

How do you like our Prussian Mirabeaus in—the Zoological Gardens} Harkort and Co. as wild animals, Bismarck himself could not have thought that up.224

By the by, it seems certain to me that Mr Bismarck decidedly wants to have a collision. For me the most convincing evidence of this is the behaviour of Schweitzer's shit-rag,a which is being confiscated every day now. The workers are now suddenly expected to take the part of the Deputies, after being called on for 6 months not to get excited; there are to be mass meetings, etc., and every effort is to be put into agitating against the government. Further corroboration is provided by the unanimous refrain from the reactionary press, which is comparing the banquet with the February banquets in Paris,225 and finally the government's whole proceeding, the pointless provocations, etc. Meanwhile, it was to be expected that Bismarck would come a cropper. Wasn't cleverly enough organised anyway.

[^1]: a Der Social-Demokrat

[^2]: 8-1196



