---
Volume: 42
Document_Title: "92. Marx to Engels. 5 August "
Page_Range: "213-217"
---

# 92. Marx to Engels. 5 August 



**[p. 174]**

necessary documents for the CENTRAL COUNCIL as well—I can only foresee a disgrace. Despite considerable opposition from the other side, I have succeeded in turning the public congress in Brussels into A PRIVATE PRÉALABLE CONFERENCE in London (25 September) which only DELEGATES OK THE ADMINISTRATIVE COMMITTEES will attend and at which the future congress is to be prepared. Official reasons given for postponing the congress were:

1. T h e need for PRÉALABLE UNDERSTANDING between the EXECUTIVE

COMMITTEES.

2. T h e obstacles to the Association's propaganda arising from the STRIKES IN FRANCE, the elections, REFORM MOVEMENT and WORKWOMEN'S

E 2S1 NGLAND. 3. T h e ALIEN BILL REI.ENTLY PRESSED in Belgium 2 3 2 which rules out Brussels as a RENDEZVOUS for an INTERNATIONAL WORKINGMENS CONGRESS.21

I do not see the Social-Demokrat any more, as the Workers' Society3 has also stopped it.200 Nor am I taking the Nordstern any more, but I do see it occasionally at the Society. It said the Rhineland branches had on the main question deserted Bernhard. b

Edgar c is a very expensive guest for us, especially in the present circumstances, and he does not seem in the least inclined TO DECAMP.

In consequence of the hot weather and related biliousness, I have again been vomitting nearly every day for the past 3 months, as I did previously in Brussels.

K. M.

92

MARX T O ENGELS

Dear Engels, London, 5 August 1865

[^1]: Salut. Y o u r

[^2]: First published in Der Briefwechsel zwischen Printed according to the original F. Engels und K. Marx, Bd. 3, Stuttgart, . 1913 Published in English in lull tor the first time

[^3]: IN MANCHESTER

[^4]: MY BEST THANKS FOR THE £ 5 0 AND the speed with which the help came. I was greatly amused by the part of your letter1S1 which deals with the 'work of art' TO BE.d But you misunderstood me. T h e only

[^5]: a German Workers' Educational Society in London - b Bernhard Becker (see this volume, p. 152) - c Edgar von Westphalen - d Capital





**[p. 175]**

Eichhoff has written a few lines to me, but couldn't call on me owing to pressure of business. In his letter he said Dronke would visit (he was here yesterday) but in such a confused way there was no making sense of the scriptum.b That 'treatise' is sticking to POOR Eichhoff like his own skin, and no operation will detach it from him.

What do you make of Siebel's productions as a patriotic-liberal poet? The thing appears to have been written during extremely depressing hangover. It is utter nonsense and surpasses EVERYTHING our friend has previously produced.

The Social-Demokrat's attempt to commit itself in support of the bourgeoisie is a sign of complete and utter fiasco, although I share your view that the first calls in Berlin did not occur without some ministerial prompting.c However, the other Lassallean faction, which executed a volte faced against the Social-Demokrat as a result of our statement,* are also quite a pitiful rabble. These fellows are not merely at loggerheads with B. Becker and Co. as to whose faith in Lassalle is the true one, but several of their branches have published that phrase inspired by OLD Hatzfeldt and coined specifically with us in mind, that anyone who tried to overturn or

[^1]: a Otto Meissner - b what he had written - c See this volume, pp. 169-70. - d about- turn - e K. Marx and F. Engels, 'To the Editor of the Social-Demokrat'.





**[p. 176]**

It is ages since I last answered Liebknecht, despite various notes he sent me; however I am going to do so now. He is in Hanover for the time being now, but his wife3 is still in Berlin. The reason why I did not write was partly that I was very busy, and also I had enough on my hands with my own TROUBLES. On the other hand, I was furious with him for the nonsense which he had been retailing about me at the Berlin Lassalle-Association and which is there for all to read in the scrap of a pamphlet about B. Becker's expulsion from that association which the old sow got someone called Schilling to publish (Farthing would have been a more appropriate name).234 With his usual talent for being too lazy to acquaint himself with the facts, he drivels the greatest nonsense abour the Bangya-manuscript169 and my intercession for Becker quoadh

Vienna Botschafter^ etc. And, moreover, the whole way in which he plays the part of my 'PATRON' and 'apologises' for me to the louts of Berlin for them not knowing my works; and generally behaves as though so far I had done nothing in affairs of action. So, I allowed some time to elapse, so as not to say anything rude to him and to pacify myself with the thought that Liebknecht will be Liebknecht and that his intentions are 'good'. The 30,000 members of the old Berlin Journeymen's Association, and ditto the Association of Printers there organised a kind of ovation for him when he was expelled. With his usual optimism, Wilhelmchen sees 'the proletariat of Berlin at my (that is, his) and our (yours and mine) feet'.235 At the same time, he has not managed even to form a single BRANCH of 6 members for the INTERNATIONAL ASSOCIATION in Germany, although the sanguine fellow must surely realise that I cannot serve up his DELUSIONS to the English as true coin. He also kept on writing to me about my 'book'. But however often I sent him 'books' (first the whole remainder of ' Vogt,,c then the whole remainder of the 'Communist Trials'*) at his most sanguine request, from the moment he received them, I never heard a dying word more about them.

Mr Groote, Party of Progress " deputy for Düsseldorf, has written to him saying that what he did in Berlin has had more effect than the actions of 100 Party of Progress deputies.

[^1]: a Ernestine Liebknecht - b with regard to - c The original has: Beobachter. - d Capital - e K. Marx, Herr Vogt. - i K. Marx, Revelations Concerning the Communist Trial in Cologne.





**[p. 177]**

During the warm weather I have been regularly working day and night by the open window. Outcome: an attack of rheumatism in my right arm, particularly the shoulder blade, which is very painful and makes writing, especially any lifting-movement, dif- ficult. I instinctively cry out if I unintentionally raise my arm in bed at night, which tells you how nasty the thing is. Does Gumpert know of any kind of NOSTRUM for it?

You probably know that at the Gymnastic Festival in Paris, the worthy Gottfried Kinkel refused the laurel crown he was offered by a Jew who was presiding, with the words: 'I want no crown, not even a crown of laurel', but at once added in fairly unvarnished words that he had by no means yet given up his claims to the Presidency of the German Republic, the 'office' that was his due. The Nordstern ridiculed him rather effectively as much for this bit of melodrama, and for his whole SPEECH, which was disgusting? The Festival opened with a toast to Badinguet.d

Where is Stroh n? As soon as you have time and inclination, do not forget to send me something 'continental' for the Miner?

Kindest regards to you from the whole family, and from me to MRS Lizzy/

Your

K. Marx

[^1]: First published abridged in Der Briefwech- Printed according to the original sei zwischen F. Engels und K. Marx, Bd. 3, „ , , . „ ,. , r , r. o ,r.,o J • c H • «rr-y-x Published in English tor the first Stuttgart, 1913 and in full in MEGA, . 8

[^2]: Abt. Ill, Bd. 3, Berlin, 1930

[^3]: a Edgar von Westphalen - b Bardolph—a character from Shakespeare's The Merry Wives of Windsor and King Henry IV. - c Nordstern, Nos. 315 and 316, 8 and 15 July 1865. - d nickname of Napoleon III (the name of a bricklayer in whose clothes Napoleon fled from prison in 1846) - e The Miner and Workman's Advocate - f Lizzy Burns



