---
Volume: 42
Document_Title: "94. Marx to Engels. 9 August "
Page_Range: "219-220"
---

# 94. Marx to Engels. 9 August 



**[p. 94]**

MARX TO ENGELS238

IN MANCHESTER

[London,] 9 August 1865

DEAR FRED, Letter from Mr Siebold enclosed.239 You need not send it back. Secondly, I am sending you the Hatzfeldt rubbish.3 Do not send it back, but store it. Don't show it to anyone either. Fortunately, this rubbish has left no trace in the German press. The only thing relating to it which appeared publicly in the press was a statement by Metzner (ex-authorised representative of the Berlin branchb) and Vogtc (STILL its treasurer), countersigned W. Liebknecht, in which they stated:

1. that Schilling had falsified the report, suppressed some resolutions and made others their direct opposite;

2. that that old girl Hatzfeldt could have spared her comments SINCE the Association had forbidden her to interfere in any way.

That appeared in Reform0 and Volks-Zeitung P4

I have been medicating myself for a couple of days now and am feeling utterly rotten, quite incapable of working. But Allen tells me that I shall be up and about again in a few days. It's the bilious trouble and a consequence of the 'bitter' labour of thinking in the HOT WEATHER. Officially I'm now away from home on account of the

' INTERNATIONAL' . Edgare is vegetating. In his hermit-like existence he has become accustomed to the narrowest kind of egotism, pondering the needs of his stomach from morn till night. But as he is a good-natured sort, his egotism is that of a KIND-NATUREDCAT or a friendly dog. To the devil with hermit-life. He has even lost all interest in women, and his sex-urge has gone to his belly, too. At the same time, he is constantly anxious about his precious health, that same lad who was, on the other hand, used to feeling 'safe' amongst snakes, tigers, wolves, and leopards.

He now wishes he was back in Texas again. But there is no escape from the confrontation with his cher frère.'

[^1]: a C. Schilling, Die Ausstossung des Präsidenten Bernhard Becker aus dem Allgemeinen Deutschen Arbeiter-Verein und der 'Social-Demokrat'. - b of the General Association of German Workers - c August Vogt - d Berliner Reform - e Edgar von Westphalen - f dear brother (Ferdinand von Westphalen)



