---
Volume: 42
Document_Title: "95. Engels to Marx. 16 August "
Page_Range: "220-222"
---

# 95. Engels to Marx. 16 August 



**[p. 181]**

H e likes to pretend to be an OLD GENTLEMAN who has settled his accounts with life, has nothing more to do and is only living 'for his health's sake'.

Besides, he is preoccupied with his attire as well, and the 'OLD GENTLEMEN' in Rotten Row 2 4 0 make him very sad because he cannot keep u p with them. Queer cove! Laura, who HAS a small CARBUNCLE o n h e r left c h e e k JUST NOW, SAYS THAT HER MOTHERS BROTHER IS AN

EXCEEDINGLY BRIGHT FELLAH ! ' T u S S y a 'THAT SHE LIKES HIM, BECAUSE HE IS SO FUNNY' and little Jenny that Lina Schöler and he can congratulate each other 'TO HAVE SAFELY GOT RID OF EACH OTHER'. WELL, THEY ARE A BAD LOT. T h e girls have also SEVERELY CROSS-EXAMINED me AS TO THE 'MRS Burns'.

Salut.

Your

K. M.

First published abridged in Der Briefwech- Printed according to the original sei zwischen F. Engels und K. Marx, Bd. 3, „ . . . _ .. . . r „ r . o . m o J • r H • \n?r A Published in English in tu 1 for the Stuttgart, 1913 and in full in MEGA, f. 6

ENGELS T O MARX

Manchester, 16 August 1865

[^1]: Abt. III, Bd. 3, Berlin, 1930 " r s t t i m e

[^2]: 95

[^3]: IN LONDON

[^4]: Dear Moor,

[^5]: T h a t unctuous trash from the Hatzfeldt w o m a n b really is unctuous trash with all that is in it about Lassalle the only saviour, Liebknecht, etc. Dear old LIBRARY0 has really surpassed himself this time in his - customary spinelessness, lack of imagination and

[^6]: a Eleanor Marx - b C. Schilling, Die Ausstossung des Präsidenten Bernhard Becker aus dem Allgemeinen Deutschen Arbeiter-Verein und der 'Social-Demokrat'. - c Wilhelm Liebknecht





**[p. 182]**

Ditto our sparkling-wine enthusiast Siebold. With what self- assured naivety the fellow tried to 'reconcile' you to Blind! 239 And then those interesting 'old Swedes' whom nobody has ever heard of and whom we're supposed to write to, to make 'contact'. Quite à

la Harro Harring. I'm increasingly coming round to think that from the most southerly latitude of North Friesland onwards everything beyond urban bourgeois and peasant politics is pure Harro Harring." But no doubt you will be having that dolt on your back every year.

Next week (about Friday 25th inst.) Moore and I are going to Germany and Switzerland for a fortnight, and maybe we shall also 'cast a casual glance' over Italy.241 If I can so arrange it, I shall call in briefly at Modena Villas6 on my way back.

The 28th of this month, i.e. Monday week, is the date of the General Meeting of the Cologne-Minden shareholders, which will decide Prussia's politics for the next few years. I can't imagine that those fellows will be such jackasses as to pay out 13 mill, talers in cash to Bismarck without having the approval of the Chambers.237

But your liberal Rhineland burgher is capable of a good many tricks the moment he has a chance of swindling the state, and thinks that in his capacity as Deputy he can obtain indemnity for himself afterwards. But if the deal were to fall through, or if it were made conditional on authorisation by the Chambers, that would be more or less the end for Monsieur Bismarck; even that adventurer would not survive such a defeat in financialibus" and after such a desperate attempt. But the fact that he is momentarily coming to terms with Austria again, shows that intellectually and morally he is au bout de son latin.à He knows only too well that he can't start a war without being brought down immediately, so he goes on lashing out with big talk, chalking up little gains and turning Germany into the laughing stock of the world. But the philistine is almost as much impressed by him as by Boustrapa.76

The philistine now no longer requires even ephemeral victories from his idols, but only that they can brag. This is how Classen-Kappelmann became the idol of Cologne as well, because he took to his heels at the crucial moment.224

[^1]: a See K. Marx and F. Engels, The Great Men of the Exile (present edition, Vol. 11, pp. 284-90). - b the street in London, where Marx lived - c in financial transac- tions - d at the end of his strength



