---
Volume: 42
Document_Title: "97. Engel s to Marx. 21 August "
Page_Range: "225-226"
---

# 97. Engel s to Marx. 21 August 



**[p. 186]**

from Lord Overstone, who is consequently 'facile maximus argen- tariorum'b and has to be cleared, come what may. I shall have to reserve my critique of this whole unsavoury stew for a later paper.245

First published abridged in Der Briefwech- sel zwischen F. Engels und K. Marx, Bd. 3, Stuttgart, 1913 and in full in MEGA, Abt. III, Bd. 3, Berlin, 1930

Printed according to the original

Published in English in full for the first time

97

ENGELS TO MARX

IN LONDON

Manchester, 21 August 1865

Dear Moor,

End. £20, first half, B/G 56794, Manchester, 9 January 1864, second to follow as soon as you acknowledge receipt. I cannot send more until I know how the final accounts work out, and I shall not know that until my return or even later.

That business of Kirkwood's law was new to me, as it was to Moore. But is it really proven, or is it not perhaps just a hypothesis?c Surely it ought to be possible to verify a thing like that.

I hope you are all restored to health now. That trouble with Laura is probably of no more consequence than with little Jenny that time, but it really is absurd of you to allow yourself to continue in such a way. In such circumstances, you should put your foot down as master of the house. I expect you have shaken off your INFLUENZA now, with the warm weather, that kind of thing really takes it out of you, but at least it is easily cured now.

[^1]: a sweetener - b without doubt the greatest banker - c See this volume, p. 184.



