---
Volume: 42
Document_Title: "101. Engel s to Wilhelm Liebknecht. 21 September "
Page_Range: "229-230"
---

# 101. Engel s to Wilhelm Liebknecht. 21 September 



**[p. 190]**

The Swiss have chosen two delegates, Mons Dupleix, a Frenchman, and Mr Philipp Becker, a German.

Old Hatzfeldt dwells at Paris, where the old hag is intriguing with the 'horn-bearing' father of 'Socialism', Moses," her most cringing slave. It was at her instigation, that he inserted his 'warning' in the Nordstern and his slander into the Social- Demokrat.2i S She is now concocting with him the 'Apotheosis' of her own belated 'Oedipus'.b The London correspondent of the Social-Demokrat seems to be cracked Weber.c All these things have been reported to me from Paris. As to myself, I carefully abstain from taking any notice whatever of what is going on in the Berlin and Hamburg 'organs' of the movement.0 This so-called movement is so disgusting a thing that the less you hear of it the better.

We have founded here a weekly paper of our own The Workman's Advocate. You will oblige by sending correspondence (English) for it to my address.

Yours truly

101

ENGELS TO WILHELM LIEBKNECHT

Manchester, 21 September 1865

Dear Liebknecht,

It was bad luck that you chose to write to me just as I was leaving for 3 weeks on the Continent,241 so that I only found your

[^1]: A. Williamse

[^2]: First published in the language of the Reproduced from the book original, English, in Wilhelm Liebknecht. Briefwechsel mit Karl Marx und Friedrich Engels, The Hague, 1963

[^3]: IN LEIPZIG

[^4]: a Moses Hess - b Ferdinand Lassalle - c Louis Weber - d Der Social-Demokrat and

[^5]: Nordstern - e Marx's conspiratorial pseudonym



