---
Volume: 42
Document_Title: "102. Mar x to Hermann Jung. 30 September "
Page_Range: "230-231"
---

# 102. Mar x to Hermann Jung. 30 September 



**[p. 191]**

I cannot write much today, as I want to get the banknote sent off as well; but I will just say that Marx has, of course, every reason to be angry with you. The manner in which you rebutted Becker'sb absurd allegations against Marx in your Berlin defence- speech was exceedingly weak and incompetent, and in respect of both the Bangya-affair I69 and several others you twisted the facts as much as did Mr Becker, although you could easily have gained better knowledge by referring to Herr Vogt2i4 These are extremely disagreeable matters, which Madame Hatzfeldt will now purvey to the world in this distorted form, and with your seal of approvals and you demand that Moor should take all that so calmly?

Your

F. E.

First published in: Marx and Engels, Printed according to the original Works, First Russian Edition, Vol. XXIX, Moscow 1946 Published in English for the first time

102

[London,] 30 September [1865] Dear Jung,

I am expecting you tomorrow (Sunday) for DINNER <A VERY FRUGAL ONE»; I have also asked De Paepe and Becker/ Please be so kind and invite Kaub in my name. This morning I am so PRESSED BY BUSINESS

K. Marx

[^1]: MARX TO HERMANN JUNG 1

[^2]: IN LONDON

[^3]: OF ALL KIND THAT I CANNOT AFFORD TO WRITE TWO LETTERS.

[^4]: YOURS FRATERNALLY

[^5]: First published in: Marx and Engels, Printed according to the original Works, First Russian Edition, Vol. XXIX, Moscow, 1946

[^6]: a of 30 August 1865 - b Bernhard Becker - c See this volume, p. 176. - d Johann Philipp Becker



