---
Volume: 42
Document_Title: "103. Engels to Marx. 4 October "
Page_Range: "231-232"
---

# 103. Engels to Marx. 4 October 



**[p. 2923]**

ENGELS TO MARX

IN LONDON

Dear Moor [Manchester,] 4 October 1865

I always strike unlucky with my plans for coming to London. I met my mother" just 3 days before my return here, in Ostende, to be exact, and I couldn't make it an hour shorter, of course. Nor could I have met her any earlier, as neither of us knew where she would be 2-3 days before. But I was DUE here on 15 September,241

as Charlesb had to leave on that day, as he in fact did. Since then, as always when I come back from a journey, the very devil has got into the cotton market, I have had to look after Charles' work as well as my own, and that is no trifle when cotton goes up in a fortnight from 18 to 24 l/2d. per pound, yarns on the other hand by 8-9d. per pound, and telegrams of every description pour in. I hope that is all over now, and besides Charles will come back at the beginning of next week, so that I can gather my wits again at last. This horrible rush has made it positively impossible for me to write even 2 lines to you, in fact, since I've been back, I've not been able to write a line of private correspondence at all. As soon as ever I can, I will write at greater length; meanwhile do let me know how you all are and how the 'book'c is getting on. I think I should manage to come over some time for 3 X 24 hours, as soon as we have got things in order here. But our office is looking like a pigsty, Gottfried d has taken on 3 fellows for me who are absolutely hopeless, and is holding me to the contract which says I am to make something of them. So, you can see the way things are here. I shall have to sack one or two of them.

Your

F. E. Kindest regards to all. I was also 'all ready' among the Swabians; however, they are not creating any School of Poetry but are cotton-spinning, or emigrating.

[^1]: First published in Der Briefwechsel zwischen Printed according to the original F. Engels und K. Marx, Bd. 3, Stuttgart, Published in English for the first time

[^2]: a Elisabeth Engels - b Charles Roesgen - c Capital - d Gottfried Ermen



