---
Volume: 42
Document_Title: "108. Mar x to Engels. 15 November "
Page_Range: "234-235"
---

# 108. Mar x to Engels. 15 November 



**[p. 107]**

ENGELS TO MARX

IN LONDON

[Manchester,] 13 November 1865 Dear Moor,

You should receive herewith at the same time a registered letter with £15, which I made out on Friday and gave to our errand-boy to attend to. I received no answer from you on Sunday, which I found somewhat surprising, and it occurred to me that the boy did not give me the ticket for the letter on Saturday morning. When I looked into it today, it turned out that the wretch had messed up the whole business with his procrastinating and still had the letter in his pocket. That was the last straw as far as his slovenliness was concerned, and he was sacked. I am extremely annoyed about this, as you must meanwhile have been thinking I had quietly put your last letter in my pocket and left things to take their course, without writing a single word to you.

Your

F. E. Has Edgar" gone?

108

MARX TO ENGELS

[London,] 15 November 1865

You must excuse me for not most gratefully acknowledging receipt of the £15 until today and for not writing to you until tomorrow. I am so pressed that I cannot manage it today.

[^1]: First published in Der Briefwechsel zwischen Printed according to the original F. Engels und K. Marx, Bd. 3, Stuttgart, , , . , , . _ , . , ,. îoia Published in English tor the hrst time

[^2]: IN MANCHESTER

[^3]: DEAR FRED,

[^4]: a Edgar von Westphalen



