---
Volume: 42
Document_Title: "110. Engel s to Marx. 17 November "
Page_Range: "236-237"
---

# 110. Engel s to Marx. 17 November 



**[p. 110]**

ENGELS TO MARX

IN LONDON

Manchester, 17 November 1865 Dear Moor,

Your letter was only passed on to me yesterday evening, and I shall be making enquiries as to how it was left lying around for so long.

I hope little Jenny is ALL RIGHT again and at least has got over the acute stage of the illness and the danger therewith. I'm sending her a case of port, sherry and claret this evening, to restore her strength. It gave me a real fright when I read the word diphtheria; it is not something to be made light of.

The letter from the Berliners really took me aback.25' It has obviously been written by someone with a lot more to him than Wilhelmchena and his references to the latter do not appear to be without a certain irony. Now the letter has certainly not been written by a worker, the mere fact that Grimm's rules of orthography are impeccably observed shows that, and I am just a mite suspicious as to how genuine the thing is. At any rate, we ought to obtain more information about the 3 signatories, Wilhelmchen should know them at least, if the business is bona fide. It is rather the form of the document that makes me suspicious, the content most definitely implies the contrary. But as you won't in any case be going to Berlin to found a new organisation there, it will not signify if you write to these people. Letter returned encl.

What do you say to the Nicc ER-rebellion in Jamaica and the atrocities perpetrated by the English?252 The Telegraph says today:

Your

F. E.

[^1]: * 'We should be very sorry if the right was taken away from any British officer to shoot or hang all and every British subject found in arms against the British Crown? *b

[^2]: First published abridged in Der Briefwech- Printed according to the original sei zwischen F. Engels und K. Marx, Bd. 3, Stuttgart, 1913 and in full in MEGA, Published in English for the first Abt. Ill, Bd. 3, Berlin, 1930 u m e

[^3]: a Wilhelm Liebknecht - b The Daily Telegraph, No. 3249, 17 November 1865.



