---
Volume: 42
Document_Title: "113. Mar x to Wilhelm Liebknecht. 21 November "
Page_Range: "240-242"
---

# 113. Mar x to Wilhelm Liebknecht. 21 November 



**[p. 113]**

MARX TO WILHELM LIEBKNECHT

IN LEIPZIG3

[London,] 21 November 1865

My dear Miller,b

Since the conference246 held at this place I fell again very sick. Afterwards I had to leave London for family affairs.249 Hence my protracted silence. As to your report, I could not lay it before the conference, because I was too personally introduced in it.261 As to your Berlin speech, there were some very disagreeable blunders in it which could only emanate from yourself, because they alluded to facts only known to you, but half forgotten and wrongly reproduced by you.c But this is a thing of the past.

I have received the Berlin letter, and I shall answer to it.251 I have at present neither the time nor the means to go to Berlin. Even if I could, you know very well that all and every sort of agitation would be out of the question. The Prussian government has not in vain declared that the amnesty, as far as I was concerned, still excluded me from Prussia, and only gave me leave to travel as a Foreigner through the Bismarckian world.154

The Workman's Advocate I shall send you one of these days some numbers of. You can write to it on every subject you please, social or political. Till now it is a paper of good will, but very mediocre still. Of course, myself had and have not yet the time to contribute to it, although I am one of its Directors.230 (By my continual relapse into damned ill health I was forced to interrupt the finishing of my bookd and must now apply to it all my time, part of which is, with all that, absorbed by the International Associa- tion.) Engels has promised to contribute6 but not yet done so. And the same is the case with other people.

The Conference has resolved that a Public Congress is to take place at the end of May, at Geneva. A programme of questions to be there debated, has been resolved upon/ But nobody can assist who does not belong to a society connected with us, and being sent as a delegate of such society. I now call upon you very seriously (I

[^1]: a The letter bears the stamp: International Working Men's Association / Central Council / London - b Liebknecht's conspiratorial pseudonym - c See this volume, p. 176. - d Capital - e See this volume, pp. 198-99, 205. - f See previous letter.

[^2]: 9-1196





**[p. 202]**

The programme (of questions to be lead before Congress) I shall send you in my next letter. All the Paris liberal and republican papers have made great fuss about our Association. Henri Martin, the well known historian, had a most enthusiastic leader about it in the Siècle]256 I have heard nothing of Quenstedt262

A thing which will rather surprise you, is this: Shortly before the arrival of workingmen's letter from Berlin, I received from that very same place—'centre et foyer des lumières',0 of course — a letter on the part of— Lothar Bucher, inviting me to become the London money article writer of the Preussische Staatsanzeiger, and giving me to understand that everybody, der noch bei Lebzeiten im Staat wirken will, 'sich an die Regierung ralliiren' muss.d I have answered him by a few lines which he is not likely to exhibit.263 Of course, you must not publish in the papers this affair, but you can communicate it, under the seal of discretion, to your friends.

Freiligrath's London shop—viz. the London branch of the Bank of Switzerland — will be shut up, never to be opened again, before 1866.e

Give my best compliments to Madame and Alice.'

Yours truly

A. Williams«

[^1]: a August Vogt, Sigfrid Meyer, Theodor Metzner - b Johann Philipp Becker - c centre and hearth of enlightenment - d who wishes to be active in the state during his lifetime must 'rally to the government' - e See this volume, p. 208. - f Ernestine and Alice Liebknecht -8 Marx's conspiratorial pseudonym



