---
Volume: 42
Document_Title: "114. Mar x to César De Paepe. About 25 November "
Page_Range: "242-243"
---

# 114. Mar x to César De Paepe. About 25 November 

Some curious letters, written long time since, during his stay at London, by Bernhard Becker to Dr Rode have fallen into my hands.

I have opened this letter again, and by that operation somewhat torn it, in order to add that, during the past spring I had sent a letter to Dr Kugelmann, together with cards of membership for our Association.3 I have received no answer on his part.264 The letter of which you speak has never arrived at my hands. Please, write him on this affair. If he writes to me, let him do so under the address of 'A. Williams, Esq.', and not the other one.

First published in: Marx and Engels, Reproduced from the original Works, First Russian Edition, Vol. XXIX, Moscow, 1946 and in the language of the original, English, in: Wilhelm Liebknecht.

Briefwechsel mit Karl Marx und Friedrich Engels, The Hague, 1963

114

MARX TO CÉSAR DE PAEPE265

[London, about 25 November 1865]

I. Questions relating to the Association

1) Question of organisation. 2) System of friendly societies for the members of the Associa- tion. Moral and material support for the Association's orphans.

II. Social questions 1) Co-operative labour. 2) Reduction of the hours of labour. 3) Children's labour. 4) [Trades' Unions,] their past, their present, and their future. 5) [Combination] of efforts, by means of the International Association, in the struggle between capital and labour.

6) International credit, banking institution, mode of operation. 7) Direct and indirect taxation. 8) Standing armies and their effects upon production.b

[^1]: IN BRUSSELS

[^2]: a Marx is referring to his letter to Kugelmann of 23 February 1865 (see this volume, pp. 101-06). - b The French text mistakenly has here: 'Association'.

[^3]: 9*



