---
Volume: 42
Document_Title: "115. Engels to Marx. 1 December "
Page_Range: "243-244"
---

# 115. Engels to Marx. 1 December 



**[p. 204]**

IV. Question of Philosophy The religious idea and its relation to social, political and intellectual development.

First published in: Marx and Engels, Printed according to the Minutes Works, Second Russian Edition, Vol. 31, of the meeting of the Brussels Moscow, 1963 section of the International Work- ing Men's Association of 25 November 1865 Translated from the French

Published in English for the first time

115

Manchester, 1 December 1865 Dear Moor,

Enclosed on the new month's account a further two five-pound notes, please to confirm receipt to me at 86 Mornington Street or if possible telegraph tomorrow early in the morning to 7 Southgate, as I'm not registering the letter this time because of the fuss.

As far as I can tell from the German newspapers, Prof. Eckardt3

is a South German democrat, one of the Swabians and Bavarians who seceded from the National Association.152 It is not clear to me how we are supposed to collaborate with him, it's something like Kolatschek.

That the gentlemen from the Social-Demokrat would like to resume their ties with us is typical of that riff-raff. They think everyone is as much of a swine as they are. Bismarck seems to have realised how powerless they are and therefore to have thrown them out, so at last there's a trial and Schweitzer has been

[^1]: ENGELS TO MARX263

[^2]: IN LONDON

[^3]: a See this volume, p. 198.



