---
Volume: 42
Document_Title: "116. Marx to Engels. 2 December "
Page_Range: "244-245"
---

# 116. Marx to Engels. 2 December 



**[p. 205]**

Every post brings news of worse atrocities in Jamaica.252 The letters from the English officers about their heroic deeds against unarmed NIGGERS are beyond words. Here the spirit of the English army is at last expressing itself quite uninhibitedly. 'THE SOLDIERS ENJOY IT.' Even The Manchester Guardian has had to come out against the authorities in Jamaica this time.

Regarding The Workman's Advocate, I will see what can be done, meanwhile perhaps you could send the paper to me. You have no notion at all of the TROUBLE and chasing around involved here in obtaining these PENNY WEEKLY PAPERS which are not worth the bother to the NEWSAGENTS. You still do not get them even if you order and pay for them in advance. Or put MRS Burns down for a subscription with an order for the PAPER to be sent here by post.

Every good wish to MRS and MISSES.

Your

F. E. G/P 62563. London, 4 August 1865—£5 E/M 35757. Liverpool, 15 May "—" 5 How much is the bill for that you accepted, and when is it due?

116

MARX TO ENGELS

_, „ [London, 2 December 1865] Dear 1*RED,

I found your letter just as I arrived home (I was at the Museum3 where I had some things to look up). I've just TIME to

[^1]: First published in Der Briefwechsel zwischen Printed according to the original F. Engels und K. Marx, Bd. 3, Stuttgart, , , . , , . •• , • r ., r • g, o Published in English m lull for the first time

[^2]: IN MANCHESTER

[^3]: a the British Museum Library



