---
Volume: 42
Document_Title: "118. Marx to Engels. End of 1865- beginning of 1866 "
Page_Range: "247-250"
---

# 118. Marx to Engels. End of 1865- beginning of 1866 

NON-EXISTENT), etc. Bonaparte appears to me shakier than ever. The business with the students269 is symptomatic of ominous signs of conflict in the army itself, but above all the Mexico affair270 and that original sin of the LOWER EMPIRE," debts ! Nor has the fellow managed to pull off a single coup in the past year. Indeed things have reached such a pass with him that Bismarck figures as a rival to him!

Palmerston's death has obviously been a blow here. If he were still alive, Governor Eyre would have been awarded the ordre pour le mérite !

Freiligrath is also ending the year with tremendous bad luck. Jew Reinach has closed down the business here, with a great brouhaha, coming to London expressly for the purpose.b Freili- grath, who owed the bank money anyway, suffered the further misfortune that 3 days before the ARRIVAL of the mighty Reinach one of his clerks absconded with £150. But still the old boy" has got powerful protection TO FALL BACK UPON. His Plonplonist93 friends in Paris (e.g. EX-COLONEL Kiss, who married the daughter of the former French minister Thouvenel, a millionaire, and is now at the head of an enormous company) will find a new position for him soon enough.

Happy New Year! To MRS Lizzy,c too.

Your

K. M.

118

MARX TO ENGELS271

[London, end of 1865-beginning of 1866]

Appendix

While I was last staying in Manchester249 you once asked me to explain differential calculus. The thing will be quite clear to you

[^1]: First published in Der Briefwechsel zwischen Printed according to the original F. Engels und K. Marx, Bd. 3, Stuttgart, 19,13 Published in English in full for the first time

[^2]: IN MANCHESTER

[^3]: a the designation of the Byzantine Empire; used figuratively it means any state experiencing decline - b See this volume, pp. 158, 164. - c Lizzy Burns





**[p. dx]**

from the following example. The whole of differential calculus arose originally from the task of drawing tangents through any point on any curve. So, that is the example I am going to use for you.

Assume that the line n Ao is any curve whose nature (whether it's a parabola, ellipse, etc.) is unknown to us and on which a tangent is to be drawn at point m.

Ax is the axis. We drop the perpendicular m P (the ordinate) onto the abscissa Ax. Now assume that point n is the infinitely closest point on the curve beside TO. If I drop a perpendicular np onto the axis, p must be the infinitely closest point to P and np the infinitely closest parallel line to m P. Now drop an infinitely small perpendicular m R onto np. If you now take the abscissa APX and the ordinate m Py, then np = m P (or Rp), increased by an infinitely small increment [n R], or [n R] = dy (differential of y) and m R (=Pp)=dx. Since the part of the tangent mn is infinitely small, it coincides with the corresponding part of the curve itself. I can therefore regard mn R as a A(triangle), and the Amn R and m TP are similar triangles. Therefore: dy (=n R):dx(=m R) = = y(m P):PT (which is the subtangent of the tangent Tn). Thus, the

subtangent PT=y ——• We now have a general differential equation

for drawing the tangent at any points on any curves. If I am now

y^ If I put this value for y into the equation PT= , I must dy then work out dy, i.e. to find the differential of y (which represents an infinitely small increment of y). If yi=ax, I know from the differential calculus that from d(y2)=d(ax) (I have to differentiate both sides of the equation, of course), it follows that

2y dy 2ydy=adx (d always means differential). Thus dx = . If I put ydx this value of dx into the formula PT=—~, I get

2y2dy 2y2 2ax y PT= = = (since y —ax) = = 2x. Or the subtangent of ady a a ° any point m on the parabola=twice the abscissa of the same point. The differential values are cancelled in the operation.

[^1]: First published in: Marx and Engels, Printed according to the original Works, Second Russian Edition, Vol. 31, Moscow 1963 Published in English for the first time



