---
Volume: 42
Document_Title: "119. Engels to Marx. 4 January "
Page_Range: "250-251"
---

# 119. Engels to Marx. 4 January 



**[p. 211]**

1 8 6 6

119

ENGELS TO MARX

IN LONDON

Manchester, 4 January 1866a

Dear Moor,

£10 encl. in 2 Bank-of-England notes. How stands it with bill of exchange for LANDLORD? Tell me how much and date when due, so that I may make my dispositions.

That malicious compilation of Social-Demokrat garbage in the Schulze-Delitzschite pamphletb had already been sent me anonym- ously from Berlin; it is always a good thing to have such a résumé with extracts. Schulze-Delitzsch has also announced that in the next few days he is to publish a reply to Lassalle, in which he is going to demolish him. 72

Mr Held's speech has also been sent me from Berlin. He's a real Berlin scoundrel.

Monsieur Bonaparte's progress is most decidedly that of the crab. The trouble in the army over Mexico270 is very serious, and so is the student trouble in Paris.269 It is very important that the Paris students should take the side of the proletariat, confused though their ideas on the subject may be. The École polytechnique will follow soon enough. It would be so splendid if the rascal lived to see his own DOWNFALL, and it now almost appears that he might. It is getting more and more rotten for Bismarck every day, too, and, if those scoundrels in Cologne had not got him out of the soup, it would probably already have been all up with him now.237

[^1]: You will already know as well that Racowija died of consump- tion, so presumably Mamsell Dönniges is once more IN THE MARKET, IF

[^2]: EVER SHE WAS FAIRLY OUT OF IT.

[^3]: a The original has: 1865. - b [E. Richter,] Die Geschichte der social-demokratischen Partei in Deutschland seit dem Tode Ferdinand Lassalle's.



