---
Volume: 42
Document_Title: "120. Marx to Engels. 5 January "
Page_Range: "251-252"
---

# 120. Marx to Engels. 5 January 



**[p. 212]**

I am agog for the next parliament, the disintegration of the old parties must surely proceed apace now. JOHN BRIGHT IS EVIDENTLY BIDDING FOR OFFICE—it is true, I have not yet read the speech he gave yesterday.3

Have you read Tyndall's 'HEAT CONSIDERED AS A MODE OF MOTION'? If not, you should d o so. A great deal of work has been done in this field, and the matter appears to be assuming a rational shape; the atom theory is being taken to such extremes that it must soon fall apart.

Please don't forget to send me The Workman's Advocate and The Free Press.

Regards and best wishes to your family for the New Year.

Your

F. E.

First published abridged in Der Briefwech- Printed according to the original sei zwischen F. Engels und K. Marx, Bd. 3, . ,. Stuttgart, 1913 and in full in MEGA, Published in English for the first Abt. Ill, Bd. 3, Berlin, 1930 t i m e

120

In the greatest of haste. Best thanks for the £ 1 0 . T h e bill of exchange falls d u e on 18 February and is for £48. I wanted the LANDLORD to draw it only for the 2 terms that were d u e and not for the third one as well, which is not d u e until the end of January. But he insisted.

[^1]: MARX T O ENGELS 3 3

[^2]: IN MANCHESTER

[^3]: [London,] 5 JANUARY 1866

[^4]: DEAR FRED,

[^5]: A plot has been hatched against the INTERNATIONAL ASSOCIATION, in which connection I need your co-operation. Further details later. For the moment, suffice to say: Mr Le Lubez and Vésinier (the

[^6]: a Engels is referring to J. Bright's speech on the Parliamentary Reform delivered at the meeting in Rochdale on 3 January 1866, The Times, No. 25386, 4 January 1866.



