---
Volume: 42
Document_Title: "123. Mar x to Wilhelm Liebknecht. 15 January "
Page_Range: "257-259"
---

# 123. Mar x to Wilhelm Liebknecht. 15 January 

and is himself conspiring with Le Lubez.) 'Déjà ils ne se font pas faute de dire qu'ils se serviront de l'Association pour aider au rétablissement de leur nationalité, sans s'occuper de la question de l'émancipation des travailleurs.'3

T h e Poles—they had just sent a deputation to see us—burst out laughing when these PASSAGES were read out. We are commemorat- ing their revolution on 23 January. 2 8 4

You will be amused by WISEACRE Denis' concluding prayer to Proudhon?m This SENSATIONAL WRITER has done great harm with his little bit of learning and with his Lassalle-like trumpeting of scholarship, of which he had no conception, with his spurious critical superiority over the SOCIALIST SECTARIANS.

Le Lubez is of n o account. Fox righdy calls him 'Le père enfantin', b but Vesinier is just the fellow for the Russians. Of little merit as a writer, as his Vie du Nouveau César and his other pamphlets attacking Bonaparte show. But with talent, great RHETORICAL POWER, much energy and above all unscrupulous through and through.

Salut. Your

K. M.

First published abridged in Der Briefwech- sel zwischen F. Engels und K. Marx, Bd. 3, Stuttgart, 1913 and in full in MEGA, Abt. III, Bd. 3, Berlin, 1930

Printed according to the original

[London,] 15 January 1866

Happy New Year! You must excuse my silence, ditto the brevity of these lines of mine. You will not believe how BOTHERED I am for time.

[^1]: Published in English in full for the first time

[^2]: 123

[^3]: MARX T O W I L H E L M L I E B K N E C H T 1

[^4]: IN LEIPZIG0

[^5]: Dear LIBRARY,*1

[^6]: a Already they do not shrink from saying that they will make use of the Association to help to restore their nationhood, without concerning themselves with the question of the emancipation of the workers.' - b 'Le père enfantin' ('The childish father') — a pun on 'Père Enfantin' ('Father Enfantin'). An allusion to Le Lubez' efforts to imitate the chief representative of the Saint-Simonian school, Barthélémy Prosper Enfantin. - c The letter bears the stamp: International Working Men's Association / Central Council / London - d nickname for Wilhelm Liebknecht





**[p. 219]**

Indisposition, for ever recurring periodically, all manner of unfortunate mischances, demands made on me by the INTERNATIONAL ASSOCIATION, etc., have confiscated every free moment I have for writing out the fair copy of my manuscript.3 I hope to be able to take Volume I of it to the publisherb for printing myself in March. (The whole thing, the two volumes, will, however, appear simultaneously-23S This is good.)

So, this very much by way of summary. Today I am sending you by post the 2 latest issues of The Workman's Advocate, of which Eccarius is now editor.0 If, as I hope, you send any articles for it, please do so to me (political, social, as you will).

I also enclose CARDS OF MEMBERSHIP for you. I have paid for them. You can therefore give them to whomever you like, and have only to inscribe the name and after the £, put 0, but after the 0s., Id.

The conditions, GENERALLY, are these: a society as such that wishes to join has an Association collective membership Card, for which 5s. per year is to be paid. But, if all the members join individually, they have to take out cards of the kind I am sending you. This is advantageous for workers. The cards serve as a passport abroad, and their confreres'* in London, Paris, Brussels, Lyons, Geneva, etc., will get jobs for them.

The Association has made great progress. It already has 1 official English paper, The Workman's Advocate, a Brussels one, La Tribune du Peuple, a French one in Geneva, Journal de l'Association Internationale des Travailleurs, Section de la Suisse Romande, and a German one in Geneva, Der Vorbote, which will be appearing in a few days. Address: 6 rue du Môle, Genf, ]. P. Becker, in case you want to write to the old man occasionally (as I hope you will).

I am now hoping you will soon make it possible for me to announce the foundation of a Leipzig section and enable me to present correspondence. (In English. It can then be used in The Workman's Advocate as well.) The number is not important, a l t h o u g h THE MORE, THE BETTER.

If people want to join en masse, as a society, you will see that the total price of 5s., which they have to pay annually, is nothing. J. P. Becker writes to me e:

[^1]: 'Sections are going to be formed in Leipzig, Gotha, Stuttgart and Nuremberg; shall we register them here for the time being, until there is a large number and a Central Committee has been formed in Germany?'278

[^2]: 11 Capital - b Otto Meissner - c See this volume, p. 224. - d colleagues - e J. Ph. Becker to Karl Marx, 18 December 1865



