---
Volume: 42
Document_Title: "124. Mar x to Ludwig Kugelmann. 15 January "
Page_Range: "259-261"
---

# 124. Mar x to Ludwig Kugelmann. 15 January 

I have replied in the affirmative.11 However, since there can be several branches in one town, you and your people can establish links direct with us.

I have had a second letter from the Berliners.b I am at last writing to them today.282 Ditto to Dr Kugelmann.

Salut.

Your

K. M.

I will let you know next time what questions are to be dealt with at the Geneva Congress at the end of May.286

First published in: Marx and Engels, Printed according to the original Works, First Russian Edition, Vol. XXIX, Moscow, 1946

124

MARX TO LUDWIG KUGELMANN66

London, 15 January 1866

1 Modena Villas, Maitland Park, Haverstock Hill

Dear Friend,

A happy New Year and best thanks for your kind letter. You must excuse the brevity of these lines on account of my being excessively busy at present. I'll write more fully next time.

Our Association has made great progress. It already has 3 official organs, one in London, The Workman's Advocate, one in Brussels, La Tribune du Peuple, one put out by the French section in Switzerland, Journal de l'Association Internationale des Travailleurs,

Section de la Suisse Romande (Geneva), and in a few days time a journal is to be put out by the German-Swiss section, Der Vorbote,

[^1]: IN HANOVER

[^2]: I am enclosing two cards287 and will let you know in my next letter which questions are to be dealt with at the public congress in Geneva at the end of May.286

[^3]: a See this volume, p. 215. - b August Vogt, Sigfrid Meyer and Theodor Metzner





**[p. 221]**

under the editorship of /. P. Becker. (Address: 6 rue du Môle, Genf, J. P. Becker, in case you wanted to send him an occasional article, political or social).

We have succeeded in attracting into the movement the only really big workers' organisation, the English 'TRADE UNIONS, which previously concerned themselves exclusively with the wage ques- tion. With their help, the English society we founded to achieve UNIVERSAL SUFFRAGE3 (half of its Central Committee consists of members—working men—of our Central Committee) held a giant MEETING a few weeks ago, at which only working men spoke.267 You can tell what effect it had from the fact that the LEADERS of two successive issues of The Times were concerned with this MEETi Nc.b

As regards my work,c I am now busy 12 hours a day writing out the fair copy. I am thinking of taking the manuscript of the first volume to Hamburg myself in March and using the opportunity to see you.

I was much amused by the antics of Justus von Möser's successor.d How wretched a man of talent must be who seeks and finds satisfaction in trivialities of that kind!e

As regards Bürgers, he is doubtless well-meaning, but weak. It is not much over a year ago that he declared at a public MEETING in Cologne (it appeared in print in the Cologne papers) that Schulze-Delitzsch had 'solved' the social question once and for all and that only personal friendship for me had induced him (Bürgers) to stray onto the tangled paths of communism! After such public statements, could I regard him as other than a 'renegade'?

Your most sincere friend

K. Marx

[^1]: First published abridged in Die Neue Zeit, Bd. 2, Nr. 1, Stuttgart, 1901-1902 and in full in Pisma Marksa k Kugelmanu (Letters of Marx to Kugelmann), Moscow- Leningrad, 1928

[^2]: Printed according to the original

[^3]: a the Reform League - b The Times, Nos. 25367 and 25368, 13 and 14 December 1865. - c Capital - d Johannes von Miquel - e See this volume, pp. 207-08.



