---
Volume: 42
Document_Title: "127. Marx to Engels. 10 February "
Page_Range: "262-264"
---

# 127. Marx to Engels. 10 February 



**[p. 223]**

the landowner, etc., etc. I have undoubtedly seen the earlier plans of the nobility and the emperor,3 but not the definitive implemen- tation. Have you any material on itb?

Your

F. E.

N.B. I shall not refer directly to the article in the 1864 Tribune,0

cela serait lui faire trop d'honneur?

First published in Der Briefwechsel zwischen Printed according to the original F. Engels und K. Marx, Bd. 3, Stuttgart, , , . , , . „ ,. , r 1913 Published in English for the iirst time

127

MARX TO ENGELS33

IN MANCHESTER

[London,] 10 February 1866

Dear Fritz,

It was a close shave this time. My family did not know how sérieux the case was. If the matter recurs in that form three or four times more, I shall be a dead man. I am marvellously wasted away and still damned weak, not in the mind but about my loins and in my legs. The doctors are quite right to think that excessive work at night has been the chief cause of this relapse. But I cannot tell these gentlemen the reasons that force this extravagance on me—nor would it serve any purpose to do so. At this moment, I have all kinds of little progeny about my person, which is painful but no longer in the least dangerous.

What was most loathsome to me was the interruption in my work/ which had been going splendidly since JANUARY 1ST, when I got over my liver complaint. There was no question of 'sitting', of

[^1]: a Alexander II- b See this volume, pp. 212-13. - c H. Denis, 'La question polonaise et la démocratie', La Tribune du Peuple, Nos. 41-43, 45, 46; 5, 26 March, 17 April, 29 May, 30 June 1864. - d that would be doing it too great an honour - e serious the case - f on Capital





**[p. 224]**

As far as the Russians are concerned, I have no material. As soon as my condition permits, I shall go to the Museumd about it and look around for it among the Poles. There's been a great crisis with The Workman's Advocate, which will appear tomorrow as The Commonwealth, a transformation pushed through by the bourgeois element, for which my absence from the COUNCIL was to blame. From my sickbed I have, nevertheless, managed to baulk the plot by means of written threats, with the effect that Eccarius has been made editor instead of a gentleman from The Nonconform- ist, and an EDITORIAL SUPERVISION COMMITTEE has been appointed which will meet weekly. It consists of myself, Fox, Howell, Weston and Miall (the PUBLISHER-EDITOR of The Nonconformist and our PUBLISHER NOW), 4 atheists against one 'PROTESTANT'.290 POOR Eccarius now needs your article L urgently (there being a whole mass of intrigues and I unable to help; my book requires all my writing time).

Your wine is having a miraculous effect on me. While my illness was in full bloom I had to buy bad PORTWINE—it being the only wine suitable for an acute carbuncle condition.

Apropos. As I see from one of the latest 'FACTORY REPORTS', John Watts has published a pamphlet 'ON MACHINERY.'f Ask him, on my behalf, to send me a copy.

[^1]: a F.Engels, The Condition of the Working-Class in England. - b Reports of the Inspectors of Factories to Her Majesty's Principal Secretary of State for the Home Department. - c Public Health. Reports of the Medical Officer of the Privy Council. - d the British Museum Library - e F. Engels, 'What Have the Working Classes to Do with Poland?' -

[^2]: 1 J. Watts, Trade Societies and Strikes Machinery



