---
Volume: 42
Document_Title: "129. Marx to Engels. 13 February "
Page_Range: "266-268"
---

# 129. Marx to Engels. 13 February 



**[p. 129]**

MARX TO ENGELS101

IN MANCHESTER

[London,] 13 February 1866

DEAR FRED,

Tell or write to Gumpert to send me the prescription with instructions for use. As I have confidence in him, he owes it to the best of 'Political Economy'" if nothing else to ignore professional etiquette and treat me from Manchester.

I was laid up again yesterday with a vicious cur of a carbuncle erupting on left loin. If I had enough money, that is, more>—0, for my family, and if my book were ready, I would care not a fig whether I was thrown on the charnel heap today or tomorrow, alias perished. But things being as they are, that cannot be contemplated just yet.

As far as this 'damned' book is concerned, the position now is: it was ready at the end of December.227 The treatise on ground rent alone, the penultimate chapter, is in its present form almost long enough to be a book in itself.294 I have been going to the Museumb in the day-time and writing at night. I had to plough through the new agricultural chemistry in Germany, in particular Liebig and Schönbein, which is more important for this matter than all the economists put together, as well as the enormous amount of material that the French have produced since I last dealt with this point. I concluded my theoretical investigation of ground rent 2 years ago. And a great deal had been achieved, especially in the period since then, fully confirming my theory incidentally. And the opening up of Japan295 (by and large I normally never read travel-books if I am not professionally obliged to) was also important here. So here was the 'SHIFTING SYSTEM', as it was applied by those curs of English manufacturers to one and the same persons in 1848-50, being applied by me to myself.296

Although ready, the manuscript, which in its present form is gigantic, is not fit for publishing for anyone but myself, not even for you.

I began the business of copying out and polishing the style on the dot of January first, and it all went ahead swimmingly, as I

[^1]: Capital - b the British Museum Library





**[p. 228]**

Otherwise, I agree with you and shall get the first volume to Meissner as soon as it is ready.3 But in order to complete it, I must at least be able to sit.

Please do not forget to write to Watts,b as I have now reached my chapter on machinery.297

Could you not dash off an article on Prussia for The Commonwealth, under the rubric Berlin? Bear in mind how important it is for us to have a firm footing in London. The articles on Polandc can take their time. But with the German papers, which are at your disposal, it would be fun for you to write about Prussia. My influence here depends partly on people seeing at last that I do not stand entirely alone.

I am less bothered by political affairs (not quad individual but on account of the book) than by the economic situation, which is pointing more and more ominously to a crisis.

Salut.

Your

K. M.

[^1]: Greetings to your 'Irish' lady-friend.e The Irish ladies, notabene Roses O'Donovan, etc., have thanked us for the appeal in our paper and for Fox's articles.298

[^2]: First published in Der Briefwechsel zwischen F. Engels und K. Marx, Bd. 3, Stuttgart, 1913

[^3]: Printed according to the original

[^4]: Published in English in full for the first time

[^5]: a See this volume, p. 226. - b ibid., p. 224. - c F. Engels, 'What Have the Working Classes to Do with Poland?' - <• as - e Lizzy Burns



