---
Volume: 42
Document_Title: "132. Engels to Marx. 19 February "
Page_Range: "269-270"
---

# 132. Engels to Marx. 19 February 



**[p. 230]**

First published in: Marx and Engels, Printed according to the original Works, First Russian Edition, Vol. XXV, , ,. , , . ,, ,. , r , r. Moscow, 1934 Published in English for the first time

132

ENGELS TO MARX

IN LONDON

Manchester, 19 February 1866

Dear Moor,

Had encl. £10 note for you in my pocket, but could not get to speak to you on your own yesterday.301 I hope that today's expiry date for the bill of exchange passed uneventfully and that the trifling deficit from the full amount occasioned no unpleasantness.

How is the upper carbuncle, and the one down on your thigh? I have not yet been able to see Gumpert.

Your

F. E.

Sincere regards to the LADIES and especially little Tussye from her chimpanzee.

[^1]: I have forgotten everything—'Klein Zaches'b that I put on top of a row of upright books in the book-case at the foot of the sofa in your room, the 'FACTORY REPORT"7 and The Commonwealth. Please send me a copy of the latter for me to read Fox's article.d

[^2]: First published in Der Briefwechsel zwischen Printed according to the original F. Engels und K. Marx, Bd. 3, Stuttgart, , , . , • • x- •• . r jgjg Published in English lor the first time

[^3]: 11 The German Workers' Educational Society in London - b E. T. A. Hoffmann, KUin-Zaches, genannt Zinnober. - c Reports of the Inspectors of Factories to Her Majesty's Principal Secretary of State for the Home Department.-'1 P. Fox,'The Irish Question', The Commonwealth, Nos. 153 and 154, 10 and 17 February 1866. - e Eleanor Marx



