---
Volume: 42
Document_Title: "135. Marx to Engels. 2 March "
Page_Range: "273-274"
---

# 135. Marx to Engels. 2 March 



**[p. 234]**

of the whole movement if anything were to happen to you, and the way you are proceeding, that will be the inevitable outcome. I really shall not have any peace day or night until I have got you over this business, and every day that passes without my hearing anything from you, I worry and imagine you are worse again.

Nota bene. You should never again let things come to such a pass that a carbuncle which actually ought to be lanced, is not lanced. That is extremely dangerous.

Kindest regards to the LADIES.

Your

F. E.

First published in Der Briefwechsel zwischen Printed according to the original F. Engels und K. Marx, Bd. 3, Stuttgart, 1913

135

MARX TO ENGELS

[London,] 2 March 1866

DEAR FRED, The thing will soon be all over now. I think that by tomorrow or the day after at the latest I shall not merely be able to rise from my bed, but to go out, and that with this last malignant cur the series of carbuncles is finished, FOR THIS SEASON. I also feel much better again GENERALLY. This last attack was atrocious. It did not merely put paid to any work, but to any reading, too, EXCEPT Walter Scott.

I found the arsenic not at all unpleasant to begin with (when the taste of the CINNAMON predominated). Now I am beginning to find its specific flavour most repugnant. Otherwise, I believe it was helpful. I took it 3 TIMES A DAY from the outset.

[^1]: IN MANCHESTER

[^2]: How are things with your contributions for The Commonwealth?* And with John Watts 'ON MACHINERY'?13

[^3]: a F. Engels, 'What Have the Working Classes to Do with Poland?' - b See this volume, pp. 224, 228.



