---
Volume: 42
Document_Title: "136. Engels to Marx. 5 March "
Page_Range: "274-275"
---

# 136. Engels to Marx. 5 March 



**[p. 235]**

The sofa to which I have been confined for 9 days now is in my study, but right by the window, so that at certain times of day, e. g. as at this moment, T can enjoy a most refreshing breeze.

You have no further cause for anxiety now, but AS FAR AS ACTUAL OUTBREAKS ARE CONCERNED you can regard the business as terminated.

Salut.

Your

K. M.

Little Tussy a 'SENDS HER BEST COMPLIMENTS TO HER CHIMP'.

First published in Der Briefwechsel zwischen Printed according to the original F. Engels und K. Marx, Bd. 3, Stuttgart, im a Published in English for the first time

136

ENGELS TO MARX

IN LONDON

Manchester, 5 March 1866 Dear Moor,

Gumpert is décidément* of the opinion that, just as soon as your condition allows, you should go to the seaside for at least 4 weeks and in any case have a change of air. Now what do you think of that? Would you prefer to go to a seaside resort near here (Lytham, or Blackpool or New Brighton perhaps) or on the south coast? Make your MIND up about it, and if the former, then come up here. I shall raise the money for the purpose and, as I promised you, a bit more as well. These constantly recurring carbuncles have really just got to stop, or you will be unable either to work or to do anything else. So, you must reach a decision.

You yourself disrupted my contributions for The Commonwealth'1

by asking for something on Prussia as well as on the Polish business.d As a result, the one was interrupted and the other not completed in time either. I was suddenly collared to CANVASS for the money for the Schiller Institute28 which I told you about, and that kept me off it every evening last week, and I have to go out again now.e I expect to have got that behind me in a fortnight but, at all events, to dispatch an article on Poland this week.

[^1]: a Eleanor Marx - b decidedly - c F. Engels, 'What Have the Working Classes to Do with Poland?'-d See this volume, p. 228. - e See present edition, Vol. 20, pp. 402-04.

[^2]: 10*



