---
Volume: 42
Document_Title: "139. Marx to Engels. 10 March "
Page_Range: "276-277"
---

# 139. Marx to Engels. 10 March 



**[p. 138]**

ENGELS TO MARX

IN LONDON

[Manchester, about 10 March 1866]

CONFIDENTIAL ! Excerpt from a letter to Freiligrath,305 who asked me for information on some commercial philistine and, at the same time, expressed his regret at your illness and wished you well:

'Marx needs to rest from working at night and from worry, as well as sea-air and good living. That will put him back on his feet all right. Such troubles are spared to plump bourgeois like Blind. Instead, the poor man has the misfortune that for all the levers and thumbscrews he applies, nobody speaks of him other than Blind himself. Such fellows have their carbuncles on the insides of their skulls. But enough of the "DELIBERATE LIAR".

'How are you actually doing now? I hear the bank in London" has closed down. A good thing too, for you, in the long run, the liaison with Fazy and Co. could have compromised you later in some unforeseen way.212 I am sure you will soon pick up a decent position again.'

In haste.

Your

F. E.

139

Did you receive the lines I wrote last Tuesday?b I need to know in order to ascertain whether my letters are being tampered with. It was addressed to MRS Burns.

[^1]: First published in Der Briefwechsel zwischen Printed according to the original F. Engels und K. Marx, Bd. 3, Stuttgart, 1013 Published in English for the lirst

[^2]: MARX TO ENGELS33

[^3]: IN MANCHESTER

[^4]: [London,] 10 MARCH 1866 DEAR FRED,

[^5]: a a branch of the Bank of Switzerland - b See.this volume, p. 236.



