---
Volume: 42
Document_Title: "140. Marx to Engels. 15 March "
Page_Range: "277-278"
---

# 140. Marx to Engels. 15 March 



**[p. 238]**

If I am to go to the seaside at all, it will have to be now, as I do not wish to waste any time. I told you in my last letter that in that case I wanted to go to Margate, and the requisite steps must be attended to now. I also asked you in my little letter what Gumpert has in mind by the 'cure'? Continuing with the arsenic, etc., or what?

Everything is at sixes and sevens on the 'INTERNATIONAL COUNCIL' and the 'newspaper board',3 and a great desire is being manifested to rebel against the absent 'tyrant',b but at the same time to wreck the whole shop as well.c My wound (from the last carbuncle) has healed up sufficiently (and so far no new one has appeared) for me to go out into company next Monday and Tuesday; but, at the same time, I can still scarcely endure those late meetings in some corner of Fleet Street,,ofi and what is even worse, I am still in a state of such nervous irritation that I could hardly contain the storms within 'the bounds of pure reason',d but would more probably explode with excessive violence, which would be pointless.

When shall we finally see Polish article I?e

Your

K. M.

140

MARX TO ENGELS

[London,] 15 March 1866

My dear Frederic,

The bearer of these lines is citizen Orsini, the brother of the immortal martyr,g and a member of our association. He leaves

[^1]: First published abridged in Der Briefwech- Printed according to the original sei zwischen F. Engels und K. Marx, Bd. 3, Stuttgart, 1913 and in full in MEGA, Published in English in full for the Abt. Ill, Bd. 3, Berlin, 1930 f l r s t t l m e

[^2]: IN MANCHESTERf

[^3]: a The Commonwealth - b i.e. Marx - c See this volume, pp. 249-51.-d Presumably an ironical allusion to Kant's Kritik der reinen Vernunft. - e in the series of articles 'What Have the Working Classes to Do with Poland?' - f The letter bears the stamp: International Working Men's Association / Central Council / London. - g Felice Orsini



