---
Volume: 42
Document_Title: "143. Marx to Antoinette Philips. 18 March "
Page_Range: "280-283"
---

# 143. Marx to Antoinette Philips. 18 March 



**[p. 241]**

As to boarding houses, they are about empty now, and, as I understood the librarian, hardly yet prepared for the reception of guests. As to dining-rooms, there was some difficulty to get at a proper one, but by the by this obstacle will be overcome.

And now, with my best compliments to all, by-bye.

Yours

Mohr

I have already walked five hours to-day.

First published, in Russian, in Voin- Reproduced from the original stvuyushchy materialist, Book 4, 1925 and in the language of the original, English, in The Socialist Review (London), No. 44, September 1929

143

MARX TO ANTOINETTE PHILIPS

Margate, 18 March 1866 5 Lansell's Place

My dear Child,

From the address you will see that I have been banished, by my medical adviser, to this seaside place, which, at this time of the year, is quite solitary. Margate lives only upon the Londoners, who regularly inundate it at the bathing season. During the other months it vegetates only. For my own part right glad I am to have got rid of all company, even that of my books. I have taken a private lodging which fronts the sea. In an inn or Hotel one might have been exposed to the danger of falling in with a stray traveller, or being pestered by local politics, vestry interests, and neighbourly gossip. As it is, 'I care for nobody, and nobody cares for me'.a But the air is wonderfully pure and reinvigorating, and you have here at the same time sea air and mountain air. I have become myself a sort of walking stick, running up and down the

[^1]: IN SALT-BOMMEL

[^2]: from the English folk-song 'The Miller of the Dee'



Withdrawing a little from the seaside, and roaming over the adjacent agricultural districts, you are painfully reminded of 'civilisation', because from all sides you are startled by large boards, with governmental proclamations on them, headed: Cattle Disease. The ruling English oligarchs were never suspected to care one farthing for 'der Menschheit ganzes Weh',a but as to cows and oxen, they feel deeply. At the opening of Parliament, the horned cattle gentlemen of both houses, commoners and lords, made a wild rush at government. All their talk sounded like a herd of cows' lowing, translated into English. And they were not like honest king Wiswamitra, 'der kämpfte und büsste für die Kuh Sabalah'.b On the contrary. They seized the opportunity to 'battre monnaie"2 out of the cows' ailings at the expense of the people.308

By the by, the East sends us always nice things—Religion, Etiquette, and the Plague in all forms.

I am very glad to hear of Waaràtje'sd winding up adventure. Verily, verily, I tell thee, my sweet little cousin, I always felt deep sympathy for the man, and always hoped that one day or other he should fix his melting heart in the right direction, and not persevere performing the nasty part in the children's tale: 'The Beast and the Beauty'.c I'm sure he will make a good husband. Is his inamorata a 'Bommelerin' or an importation?

A few days before leaving London, I made the acquaintance of Mr Orsini, a very fine fellow, the brother of the Orsini who was sent to the grave for sending Bonaparte to Italy.309 He has now left England for the U. States, in commercial matters, but during the few days of our acquaintance, he did me good service. Although an intimate friend of Mazzini's, he is far from sharing

[^1]: a 'all misery of mankind'. Paraphrase of a passage from Schiller's poem 'Das Eleusische Fest': 'doch der Menschheit Angst und Wehen / Fühlet mein gequältes Herz' (yet the pains and woes of humans / ever fill my tortured heart) - b 'who wrangled and suffered for the cow Sabalah'—an episode from the epic poem Ramayana; used by Heine in Buch der Lieder, 'Die Heimkehr' (Marx gives a free rendering of the words from Heine's poem; see this volume, p. 245). - c 'coin money' - rf Waaràtje ('really', 'indeed')—the word always used by student Petrus from Hildebrand's novel Camera obscura. Marx presumably refers in this letter to pastor Roodhuizen who later became Antoinette's husband.- e 'La Belle et la Bête', a tale by Jeanne Marie Le Prince de Beaumont.



the antiquated antisocialist and theocratical views of Mazzini. Now, during my forced and prolonged absence from the Council of the International Association, Mazzini had been busy in stirring a sort of revolt against my leadership. 'Leadership' is never a pleasant thing, nor a thing I ambition. I have always before my mind your father's3 saying in regard to Thorbecke that 'der Eselstreiber den Eseln immer verhasst ist'.b But having once fairly embarked in an enterprise which I consider of import, I certainly, 'anxious' man as I am, do not like to give way. Mazzini, a most decided hater of freethinking and socialism, watched the progress of our society with great jealousy. His first attempt of making a tool of it and fastening upon it a programme and declaration of principles of his hatching, I had baffled.c His influence, before that time very great with the London working class, had sunk to zero. He waxed wroth, when he saw that we had founded the English Reform League100 and a weekly paper, The Commonwealth, to which the most advanced men of London contribute, and of which I shall send you a copy after my return to London. His anger increased, when the editors of the Rive gauche (the journal of la jeune

France? directed by Rogeard, author of the Propos de Labienus,310

Longuet, etc.) joined us, and when he became aware of the spread of our society on the Continent. He improved my absence, to intrigue with some English workingmen, raise their jealousies against 'German' influence, and even sent his bully, a certain Major Wolff (a German by birth) to the Council there to lodge his complaints and more or less directly to denounce me. He wanted to be acknowledged as 'the leader (I suppose par la grace de dieu*) of the continental democratical movement'. In so doing, he acted so far quite sincerely, as he utterly abhors my principles which, in his eyes, embody the most damnable 'materialism'. This whole scene was enacted behind my back, and after they had made sure that my malady would not allow me to be present. The English wavered, but, although still very weak, I rushed to the following

séance, Mr Orsini accompanying me. On my interpellation, he declared them that Mazzini had lost his influence even in Italy and was, from his antecedents and prejudices, quite disabled from understanding the new movement.311 All the Foreign secretaries declared for me, and, if you, our Dutch secretary,312 had been present, I hope you would have also cast your vote for your humble servant and admirer. As it was, I carried a complete

[^1]: •' Lion Philips - b 'the ass-driver is always hateful to the ass' - c See this volume, pp. 16-18. - d young France - e by the grace of God



