---
Volume: 42
Document_Title: "146. Marx to Engels. 24 March "
Page_Range: "288-290"
---

# 146. Marx to Engels. 24 March 



**[p. 146]**

MARX TO ENGELS33

IN MANCHESTER

Margate, 24 March 1866 5 Lansell's Place

Dear FRED,

The belated arrival of this letter will tell you how 'professionally' I am applying my time here. I am reading nothing, am writing nothing. The mere fact of having to take the arsenic three times a day obliges one to arrange one's time for meals and for strolling by the sea and over the adjacent HILLS in such a way that one finds 'no time' for anything else. And in the evening one is too tired to do anything other than sleep. The weather is, by and large, rather raw, and in particular there is often an east wind blowing here, which is SOMEWHAT CHILLING, but one soon becomes accustomed to that, too. You can tell how much I am restored from the fact that last Sunday I marched per pedes" to Canterbury (17 miles from here) in less than 4 hours. As regards company here, it does not exist, of course. I can sing with the MILLER OF THE DEE: 'I CARE FOR

The day before yesterday' I had to go to London in the evening to attend a 'soirée' of my daughters. My uncled had sent them £ 5 at Christmas, which was, however, 'borrowed' from them for GENERAL PURPOSES and which they only got back when your money arrived. Thev arranged their annual 'PARTY' with it and so bombarded me with letters that I 'made' for London, as Mr Nothjung used to say. But I returned to my hermitage here the very next morning (i. e., yesterday).

Before setting off for Margate (which I did on Wednesday, 14 March6), I had to attend the consecutive evening meetings, on 12 and 13 March, firstly of the SHAREHOLDERS of The Commonwealth290

and secondly, on the 13th, of the CENTRAL COUNCIL, although still in a thoroughly wretched condition at the time.

On the former occasion Mr Cremer had set everything up for Eccarius to be given his marching orders, which would probably

[^1]: NOBODY AND NOBODY CARES FOR ME.'

[^2]: a on foot - b from the English folk-song 'The Miller of the Dee' - c 22 March - d Lion Philips - e Presumably this is not correct, for Marx arrived at Margate on Thursday, 15 March (see this volume, p. 239).





**[p. 250]**

T h e intrigue on the CENTRAL COUNCIL was closely bound u p with the RIVALRIES and JEALOUSIES concerning the journal (Mr Howell wished to be EDITOR-IN-CHIEF and Mr Cremer ditto). Mr Le Lubez had used this to agitate against GERMAN INFLUENCE, and at the meeting of 6 March a beautifully and quietly prepared scene took place. T o wit, Major Wolff suddenly appeared and made a solemn speech in his own name and in Mazzini's and in that of the ITALIAN SOCIETY20 against the reply to Vesinier's attacks, which J u n g had sent to the Echo de Verviers in the name of the CENTRAL COUNCIL.274

H e made a very violent attack on J u n g and (impliciterc) myself. Odger, Howell, Cremer, and others gave vent to their longstand- ing Mazzinism. Le Lubez fed the flames and, AT ALL EVENTS, a resolution was passed which included what amounted to an amende honorable6 for Mazzini, Wolff, etc. It was a serious matter, as you can see. (Of the FOREIGNERS, there were only A FEW PRESENT, and none of them voted.) It would really be a neat trick of Mazzini's to let me bring the Association so far and then to appropriate it for himself. H e demanded that the English should recognise him as leader of the continental democrats, as though it was for the English gentlemen to appoint leaders for us\

On Saturday (10 March) the FOREIGN SECRETARIES of the Association gathered at my house to hold a council of war (Dupont, Jung, Longuet, Lafargue, Bobczyriski). It was resolved that, whatever happened, I was to attend the COUNCIL on Tuesday (13th) and protest against the PROCEEDINGS in the name of all the FOREIGN- SECRETARIES. T h e PROCEEDINGS were irregular, you see, as Wolff is n o longer a MEMBER OF THE COUNCIL, therefore n o resolution on a matter in which he was personally implicated ought to be passed in his presence. Furthermore, I was to explain Mazzini's position vis-à-vis both o u r Association and the CONTINENTAL WORKINGMENS PARTIES, etc. Finally, the French were to bring Cesare Orsini (who is BY THE BY a personal friend of Mazzini) along to give EVIDENCE on Mazzini, Wolff and the STATE OF SOCIALISM' in Italy.

[^1]: a blessed are they who have possession (Horace, Odes, IV, IX, 45) - b the man in possession - c by implication - d apology



