---
Volume: 42
Document_Title: "147. Engels to Marx. 27 March "
Page_Range: "290-291"
---

# 147. Engels to Marx. 27 March 



**[p. 251]**

T h e affair went off better than I had ever expected 3 1 3; though the English element was unfortunately not well represented (on account of the bloody Reform League 1 5 5). I gave that Lubez a thorough dressing down. In any case, it has been made clear to the English (in fact only a minority is meant here, too) that the whole CONTINENTAL ELEMENT stands behind me as one man and that here it is by no means, as Mr Lubez had insinuated, a case of GERMAN INFLUENCE. Lubez had sought to put it to them that as LEADER of the ENGLISH ELEMENT on the COUNCIL, I was holding DOWN the other CONTINENTAL ELEMENTS; the English gentlemen are, on the contrary, now persuaded that by means of the CONTINENTAL ELEMENT I have got them entirely under my thumb, should they kick over the traces. More about that next time.

Before coming here, I did, of course, pay off the most pressing DEBTS at home, as otherwise I should not have had a moment's peace of mind. If you can send me a little bit more at the end of this month, I would appreciate it. Meanwhile, the power of attorney from the C a p e 3 will be here at last, and thus something will at least be flowing into the coffers, even if it is not very much.

MY COMPLIMENTS TO MRS LIZZY.b

Your

K. M.

147

ENGELS T O MARX

Manchester, 27 March 1866

Dear Moor,

I had just made u p my mind to write you a letter of congratulations on what I inferred from your silence to be your

[^1]: First published in Der Briefwechsel zwischen F. Engels und K. Marx, Bd. 3, Stuttgart, 1913

[^2]: Printed according to the original

[^3]: Published in English in full for the first time

[^4]: IN MARGATE

[^5]: a from Johann Carl Juta (Marx presumably refers to the power of attorney for receiving his share of legacy at the death of his aunt, Esther Kosel; see this volume, p. 194) - b Lizzy Burns



