---
Volume: 42
Document_Title: "148. Marx to Engels. 2 April "
Page_Range: "291-294"
---

# 148. Marx to Engels. 2 April 



**[p. 252]**

Old Hill has just come and interrupted me. So I must break off for today. The £10 encl.

E/T 96963, Manchester, 20 January 1865.

Your

F. Engels

First published in Der Briefwechsel zwischen Printed according to the original F. Engels und K. Marx, Bd. 3, Stuttgart, jnjg Published m English for the first time

148

Margate, 2 April 1866 5 Lansell's Place

Dear FRED,

D'abord? the £10 received with kindest thanks. In my absence there has been a changement de décoration,11 or rather, de direction on The Commonwealth which will be realised next week.290 Odger, EDITOR; FOX, SUBEDITOR; the 'SON OF TOIL"* contracted to supply an article a week for 10s.; Cremer OUT OF PLACE; has also tendered his resignation as GENERAL SECRETARY of the 'INTERNATIONAL ASSOCIATION. Taken as a whole, I have no objection to the CHANGE. Eccarius could hardly have (or at least ought not to have) imagined that he would be allowed to retain nominal control

[^1]: MARX TO ENGELS33

[^2]: IN MANCHESTER

[^3]: d on foot - b Firstly - c change of decor - d pen-name for Johann Georg Eccarius





**[p. 253]**

from the moment the paper established itself. I warned him to no avail. It was a 'political' error on my part to have given way to his entreaties and proposed him by letter for his now defunct job. If I had not been ill, he would have knocked on the door in vain. I knew in advance that I would find the affair coming home to roost. Avoidance of any appearance of pursuing personal interests or abusing personal influence for clandestine purposes, and good understanding with the English must, of course, be more important to us than satisfying Eccarius' more or less justified ambition.

People of a dry disposition like Eccarius also have a certain dry egoism, which easily leads them astray. When the REFORM LEAGUE decided on the big MEETING in St Martin's Hall,267 the League's COUNCIL nominated him as one of the PUBLIC SPEAKERS. The fellows in Potter's clique objected to him as a FOREIGNER. I warned him expressly not to accept his 'BRIEF'. However, he thought he had got over all his troubles and flattered himself with the important part in the METROPOLITAN MOVEMENT. And he was A DEAD FAILURE. The poor fellow has, of course, lived a life of DISAPPOINTMENTS, and the honorary positions the English SPONTANEOUSLY allowed him, as Vice-President of the 'INTERNATIONAL', etc., deceived him to the point where he now believed he could suddenly make up for the whole of his past life. If he had followed me, operated slowly, maintained a modest posture, everything would be in the best of order. If I even went so far as to muddy myself for his sake, despite his lack of discipline and his wilful behaviour, I was moved to do so particularly by the consideration that he has always worked with us and never reaped the fruits of it. But one always makes BLUNDERS if one allows oneself to be influenced by suchlike considerations.

As regards the newspaper itself,3 the danger—arising from lack of funds—lies in the growing encroachments and dominance of the Nonconformist clique.b

The accursed traditional nature of all English movements is manifesting itself again in the REFORM-MOVEMENT. The same 'INSTAL- MENTS' which but a few weeks ago were rejected with the utmost indignation by the people's party—they had even refused Bright's ultimatum of HOUSEHOLD SUFFRAGE—are now treated as a prize worthy to be fought for. And why? Because the Tories are screaming blue murder.31j These fellows lack the METTLE of the old Chartists.

[^1]: a The Commonwealth - b See this volume, p. 224.





**[p. 254]**

Admittedly, there is still always the possibility that one fine day the affair will simply end with the worthy Bismarck's dismissal. But since Düppel, 2 7 'William the Conqueror' b believes his 'glorious armies' are invincible, a n d a second 01mütz<: must appear to be a risk even to him, in view of the INTERNAI, CONFLICT.317

T h e weather has been very bad here for several days, as if it had been made especially to order for the COCKNEYS who have invaded this place for the Easter holiday.

For how long must I take the arsenic? MY COMPLIMENTS TO MRS BURNS.

Your

K. M.

My friend Kaub has written to me from Paris that a certain M. Rebour has found a means to separate water into hydrogen and oxygen, using a method which would entail the expenditure of 2 sous per day FOR A FIRE TO MELT IRON WITH. He is, however, keeping the matter secret for the time being still, as on a previous occasion a discovery had been stolen from him and patented in London. Qui vivra verra? You know how often we have both dreamed of a cheap way of making fire from water.

[^1]: First published in Der Briefwechsel zwischen Printed according to the original F. Engels und K. Marx, Bd. 3, Stuttgart, , , . „ , - • J923 Published in English in full for the first time

[^2]: a willy-nilly - b William I (an ironical comparison with the Norman William who conquered England in 1066) - c Czech name: Olomouc - d Time will tell.



