---
Volume: 42
Document_Title: "150. Engels to Marx. 6 April "
Page_Range: "295-297"
---

# 150. Engels to Marx. 6 April 

If the first battle ends in a decisive defeat for the Prussians, there will be nothing to stop the Austrians advancing on Berlin. If Prussia wins, she has not the power to launch and sustain an offensive to Vienna across the Danube, let alone to Pest and beyond. Austria is quite capable of imposing a peace on Prussia SINGLE-HANDED, although Prussia cannot do so on Austria. Every Prussian success would thus be an encouragement to Bonaparte to intervene. Furthermore, both the German swine will now already be seeking to outbid each other with offers of German territory to the third, French, swine.

Your

F. E.

First published in Der Briefwechsel zwischen Printed according to the original F. Engels und K. Marx, Bd. 3, Stuttgart, jqi« Published in English for the first time

150

ENGELS TO MARX

Manchester, 6 April 1866

Dear Moor,

That the Russians are behind the Prussians at once struck me as very probable, too. The mere fact that the Austrian paper guilder is almost at par again and will thus have to be disturbed again, aroused suspicion, but the simultaneous Cuza affair318 even more so, and ce cher a Bismarck would not have put out all his efforts if he did not have the Russians behind him. It is possible that things are so far committed already that neither Bismarck nor that old

[^1]: IN MARGATE

[^2]: a that dear





**[p. 257]**

jackass William have a say in the matter any more and that it depends entirely on the whim of the St Petersburgers whether there shall be war or peace. How clumsily this Bismarck is acting, incidentally. It is too absurd how he tries to represent the poor Austrians as the attacking party. Even more splendid, however, is the fact that the fellow is seriously thinking of convening a German parliament on 1 June to reform the federal constitution. This is to be a remedy against the smaller states: he—lui Bismarck"—is appealing to the people instead of to the govern- ments. That even called forth universal derisive laughter from the German philistines.316

After the upheaval that has occurred on The Commonwealth,1' by the way, I was no longer able to get the said articlesc to the editors on time, as they would have had to take the roundabout route via Margate, so I am sending them to you for the next number. I found the relevant data on the emancipation of the Russian serfs in an article by Mazade, Revue des II Mondes.d

And how is your health now? You haven't had any further carbuncles or small furuncles? And how are you otherwise, are you building yourself up? Are you still visiting old 'Cantuar"" per pedes1? The arsenic must be taken for at least 3 months, and will not do you the slightest harm anyway.

Otherwise, there is nothing new here except for a foul east wind and clouds of dust.

How much longer are you thinking of staying in Margate? At least until the end of this month, I hope?

Your

F. E.

[^1]: Reform movement—general admission of general indolence. What a tiny INSTALMENT! 31D

[^2]: First published in Der Briefwechsel zwischen Printed according to the original F. Engeb und K. Marx, Bd. 3, Stuttgart, . . . . JOJO Published in English for the first time

[^3]: a Bismarck of all people - b See this volume, pp. 252-54. - c F. Engels, 'What Have the Working Classes to Do with Poland?' - ° 'La Russie sous l'empereur Alexan- dre II.— La société et le gouvernement russes depuis l'insurrection polonaise', Revue des deux Mondes, Vol. 62, 15 March 1866. - c the Archbishop of Canterbury - ' on foot (see this volume, p. 249).



