---
Volume: 42
Document_Title: "152. Engels to Hermann Engels. 6 April "
Page_Range: "298-300"
---

# 152. Engels to Hermann Engels. 6 April 

untold harm. What is to be done? In France, Belgium, Swit- zerland (and here and there in Germany, and even sporadical- ly in America) the Association has made great and sustained progress. In England, the reform movement, which we brought into being, has almost KILLED us. That would be of no consequence, if the Geneva Congress had not been announced for the end of May, and if the Parisians, for whom this movement is the sole possibility, had not, through their own paper Le Congrès, made it almost impossible to prorogue the congress.319 The English would soon see the rottenness of the REFORM MOVEMENT, as it now is. After my return the threat of flirtation with the Potter-clique, etc., would soon put everything back on the right lines. But THERE IS NO TIME. For the English even the FAILURE of the congress is a trifle. But for us? A fiasco of European dimensions!! I really do see scarcely a way out. The English have neglected to do anything which might give the congress any kind of respectable form. Que faire!* Do you think I should go to Paris to put to the people there how impossible the congress now is? Answer soon. The only possible way out I can see is by agreement with the Parisians. On the other hand, I know that their position itself is at stake if the congress does not take place. Que faire! Mr

Vésinier has challenged our Parisians. They are to go to Belgium to shoot it out with him. L'imbécile. As TO Orsini, I knew that there was nothing you could do. But I could not refuse him the introduction to you.b

Your

K. M.

152

ENGELS TO HERMANN ENGELS

Manchester, 6 April 1866 Dear Hermann,

Best thanks for your statement of account for 27 March, which appears to be in order by and large. The only thing is, it is hard to

[^1]: First published in Der Briefwechsel zwischen Printed according to the original

[^2]: Published first time

[^3]: F. Engels und K. Marx, Bd. 3, Stuttgart, , . . . . . r „ r îqia Published in English in lull lor the

[^4]: IN BARMEN

[^5]: a What is to be done? - b See this volume, p. 255.



It is rather awkward that you make up your accounts on 31 December, whereas we do so on 30 June. I shall therefore only send you a statement once, on 31 December, which will thus never coincide with yours, but in the end it will make no odds.

To keep our entries clear, I would be glad if you would enter all business items from E. & E. under E. & E., Barmen, and all private items under F. Engels & Co.

I passed the information on the agent Brown straight on to Fr. Boelling; Karth wrote to us about a different matter.

I do not advise you to obtain your SEWINGS through us as a rule, G. Ermen will always try to palm off his yarn from Pendlebury on you, and that would surely not always be in your interest. Besides, he would at once claim payment of 2% commission from you as the business expands. But if you can make use of his yarn (and why not, since we can use it?), you had best apply to us. I am today posting you a sample of No. 16, of which he has 120 BALES [at] 10 pounds, 7 LEAS in stock, and would take 2 [s.] 1/2 d. per No. 16, perhaps even less. You can also obtain the same yarn from the broker F. A. Schmits. Fine Nos. and COPS, on the other hand, in which G. Ermen has no interest we can always supply you with.

How much does the hock cost? That is what really matters. And how much of it is there? You should have sent 3 dozen bottles straightaway, instead of 3.

I shall ask around about the PONIES. Good, strong COBS, however, are at the moment much sought after here, and expensive, and bargains—a good pair in one lot—not easily come by.

You don't think there'll be war either? It would be a terrible business if it came to that, and there is no telling where it would end. Recently, when the affair first started, I dreamed that I had got mixed up with an enormously large army somewhere on the Mosel. They were volunteers of some description, all manner of fellows dashing about full of self-importance, and now and again someone would shout, 'We're surrounded!'—at which they all took to their heels. At length, I found my way into the headquarters and encountered Peter and Gottfried Ermen there as GENERALS en

