---
Volume: 42
Document_Title: "154. Marx to Ludwig Kugelmann. 6 April "
Page_Range: "301-303"
---

# 154. Marx to Ludwig Kugelmann. 6 April 



**[p. 262]**

Write me immediately under my London address. After my return, I shall regularly send you The Commonwealth (under which altered title The Workman's Advocate is now published).290 It is only since a few weeks that it has been registered for Transmission for abroad. Eccarius is no longer the editor, but only a contributor. It was to be foreseen, that so soon as the paper should get some sort of standing, a Foreigner would not be allowed to retain the nominal leadership/

Write me

1) about the state of 'our' movement in Germany, 2) about the state of German politics.

Yours truly

K. M. My best compliments to Madame.b

First published in: Marx and Engels, Reproduced from the origimil Works, First Russian Edition, Vol. XXIX, Moscow, 1946 and in the language of the original, English, in: Wilhelm Liebknecht.

Briefwechsel mit Karl Marx und Friedrich Engels, The Hague, 1963

154

Margate, 6 April 1866 5 Lansell's Place

Dear Friend,

I shall return to London from here the day after tomorrow. My doctor banished me to this seaside place, where I am indeed much recovered. But another two months and more—February, March and half of April have thus been entirely lost to me again, and the completion of my bookc put back once more! It is enough to drive one out of one's mind.

[^1]: MARX TO LUDWIG KUGELMANN66

[^2]: IN HANOVER

[^3]: a See this volume, pp. 252-53. - b Ernestine Liebknecht - c Capital





**[p. 263]**

I was suffering from CARBUNCLES, not furuncles. It was a dangerous business this time. You are, of course, right that 'dietetic' sins lay behind it. I am too accustomed to working at night, studying by day and writing by night. That, together with all manner of worries, private and public, and—whenever I am immersed in work—neglect of regular diet, exercise, etc., is quite enough to upset the blood.

I received Mr Menke's contribution of 10 talers for the 'International' with your letter.3 I have not got the addresses of my French friends in Paris here. However, if Mr Menke approaches my friend K. Kaub (33, Rue des trois Couronnes du Temple), the latter can introduce him to V. Schily (German) and Tolain, Fribourg, etc., the people on the Paris Committee.

The news from Germany is rather depressing.316 Prussia is being egged on by Russia (and Bonaparte), Austria by the latter (following on rather reluctantly, in self-defence). Will our philis- tines at last realise that, unless there is a revolution to remove the Habsburgs and Hohenzollerns (it being superfluous to mention the lesser dung-beetles), another Thirty Years' War320 and another partition of Germany are ultimately inevitable!

A movement on the part of the Italians might help Prussia. But just considering Austria and Prussia on their own, the latter would almost certainly be at a disadvantage, for all their bragging about Düppel.27 At all events, Benedek is a better General than Prince Frederick Charles. Austria might well impose a peace on Prussia SINGLE-HANDED, but Prussia cannot do so on Austria. Any Prussian success would be an encouragement to Bonaparte to interfere.

Bismarck may perhaps have already drawn in his horns again as I write these lines to you. But that, too, would only delay the conflict. Such a delay is probable in my opinion.

This turmoil in Germany is an extraordinary piece of luck for Bonaparte. His position is completely undermined. But war would give him a new lease of life.

Write to me soon, and in particular about the situation in Germany.

Yours

K. M.

[^1]: First published abridged in Die Neue Zeit Bd. 2, Nr. 2, Stuttgart, 1901-1902 and in full in Pisma Marksa k Kugelmanu (Letters of Marx to Kugelmann), Moscow- Leningrad, 1928

[^2]: Printed according to the original

[^3]: a of 30 March 1866



