---
Volume: 42
Document_Title: "156. Engels to Marx. 13 April "
Page_Range: "305-307"
---

# 156. Engels to Marx. 13 April 



**[p. 266]**

I shall be letting you have a bit of money as soon as I can. I shall also try and see Gumpert and ask him about terminating the sea-cure and what you should do afterwards about the arsenic.

Your

F. E.

First published in Der Briefwechsel zwischen Printed according to the original F. Engels und K. Marx, Bd. 3, Stuttgart, „ , .. , , . ,, ,• , r , r- ,n,o Published in English for the first time

156

ENGELS TO MARX101

IN MARGATE

[Manchester,] 13 April 1866 Dear Moor,

As I do not exactly know whether you are in Margate at the moment, I am today sending your wife

E/R 13430, Manchester, 21 January 1865 £10 E/P 43331, Manchester, 20 January 1865 £10-£20 and am telling her that I have informed you of it.

So, Bismarck has executed his suffrage universel coup,321 even though without his Lassalle. It would appear that, after some show of reluctance, the German bourgeois will go along with it, for Bonapartism really is the true religion of the modern bourgeoisie. It is becoming increasingly clear to me that the bourgeoisie does not possess the qualities required to rule directly itself, and that therefore, unless there is an oligarchy as here in England capable of taking over, for good pay, the management of state and society in the interest of the bourgeoisie, a Bonapartist semi-dictatorship is the normal form; it promotes the great material interests of the bourgeoisie even against the bourgeoisie, but allows it no share in the government itself. Conversely, this dictatorship itself is in turn compelled unwillingly to adopt these material interests of the bourgeoisie. So, now we have Monsieur Bismarck adopting the programme of the National Association.152 Its execution is admittedly quite another matter, but Bismarck will scarcely be



**[p. 267]**

below), the people in Karlsruhe have approved of the matter, and the Kölnische Zeitung's unbounded embarrassment over the affair is a clear indication of a forthcoming change of course.

That Bismarck has direct agreements with the Russians, however, is once more proved firstly by the fact that not only The Times but Reuter, too, is beginning to lie on Prussia's behalf, in complete contrast to their usual custom. There is a method in the mistranslations with which the telegrams are now infested more than ever. Until a short while ago, against Prussia. Now against Austria. Reuter telegraphs: Austria would only go along with the plan if all the Austrian provinces (that is, including the non-German ones) were represented.b In the German original it merely says: conditional upon the regions of Austria being represented, too.—Further: according to the Bromberger Zeitung and the Ostsee-Zeitung (the latter is a Russian organ), the Russians are continuing to gather more troops in the south-western provinces, from the Kingdom of Poland322 to the Prut, doing so very slowly and unobtrusively; the soldiers are all expecting to move with Prussia against Austria, and those on the Warta repeat that their role is to occupy Posen so that the Prussians there can march away.

The Russians can, incidentally, leave Schleswig-Holstein to the Prussians for the time being, as the Peace of Vienna and the annexation have, after all, saved the main issue for them: the Treaty of London and thereby the succession in Denmark323 If they have the Sound,c what does Kiel signify to them?

At all events, your best course is to stay in Margate until you no longer feel anything at all in the affected part, and you are in general convinced of a marked turn for the better.

Write soon.

Your

[^1]: F. E. First published in Der Briefwechsel zwischen Printed according to the original F. Eneeb und K. Marx, Bd. 3, Stuttgart, „ , ,. , , . _ . . . . r „ r , iqia Published in English in full for the first time

[^2]: a see - b 'Austria and Prussia. Berlin, April 10', The Times, No. 25469, 11 April 1866 (Reuter's telegram reporting on Austria's reaction to Bismarck's proposition for the assembly of a German parliament for the reorganisation of the German Confederation). - c Danish name: 0resund

[^3]: 11»



