---
Volume: 42
Document_Title: "158. Engels to Marx. 1 May "
Page_Range: "308-310"
---

# 158. Engels to Marx. 1 May 



**[p. 269]**

For the present, they do not seem to be coming to blows in the Fatherland after all. Prussian braggadocio is slow indeed to draw the sword! Whatever the outcome, we shall have the pleasure of a Prussian disgrace before both a domestic and foreign audience. For all that, it still seems uncertain whether war might not break out one fine morning. The Russians want war (although they have indeed already gained and are continuing to gain much merely from the bickering and bellicose threats in Germany), and for Bonaparte it would be a GODSEND. At all events, Mr Bismarck has set 'the movement' going again in Germany.

The phase of the Civil War" over, only now have the UNITED STATES really entered the revolutionary phase, and the European WISEACRES who believe in the omnipotence of Mr Johnson will soon be disappointed.

In England, the Tories and Palmerstonian Whigs really deserve thanks for frustrating Russell's quiet SETTLEMENT.326 At one of the latest sittings, Mr Gladstone himself, expressed his 'melancholy' conviction that now, quite contrary to his benevolent expectations, a 'long series of struggles' was imminent.

K. M.

158

Manchester, 1 May 1866 Dear Moor,

I hope you are happily over your rheumatism and faceache and are once more sitting diligently over the bookd How is it coming

[^1]: What do you say to the '8th' sage of the world—Mi//?a

[^2]: Best regards to MRS Lizzy.b

[^3]: Tout à vousc

[^4]: First published in Der Briefwechsel zwischen Printed according to the original F. Engels und K. Marx, Bd. 3, Stuttgart, * , ,. , , . „ ,. , . , „ r ,Q,Q Published in English m lull tor the first time

[^5]: ENGELS TO MARX26

[^6]: IN LONDON

[^7]: 11 Marx presumably refers to J. S. Mill's speech in Parliament of 17 April 1866 in which he urged the duty of paying off the national debt before Britain's coal supplies exhausted. See The Times, No. 25475, 18 April 1866. - b Lizzy Burns - c Entirely yours - d Capital





**[p. 270]**

It's good that you have no more worries about the congress and the INTERNATIONAL ASSOCIATION. Apropos, a shipload of 57 German tailors has been imported to Edinburgh TO PUT DOWN A STRIKE and 2 more loads are expected. Probably from Hamburg. Can you not discover the details in Edinburgh and put a stop to this, too?327

Bismarck wants war à tout prix? and after he failed in Bohemia, he seems likely to succeed in Italy.328 I hope that, if he pulls it off, the Berliners will hit out. If they proclaim a republic there, the whole of Europe can be overturned in 14 days. But, but, will they? How do our connections there stand?

Have you seen how little Louis Blanc, as a good démocrate impérial, is now declaring in the Temps that, if Prussia absorbs the smaller German states, France must have at least the left bank of the Rhine.*5 There's a real revolutionary for you.

In order to incite my ancient rage somewhat, in the last few days I have been reading the book by Röckel, the 49er imprisoned in Dresden, about his treatment in gaol.c These infamies perpetrated by the Saxons exceed everything that I have ever come across. There will be a harsh reckoning to be had with a large number of villains. Such brutality was quite unknown in the old days before '48, and the Prussian fortresses of that time seem like paradise in comparison.

These Adullamites really are tremendous jackasses to put up such resistance to this pauvred REFORM BILL, the most conservative thing that has ever been done here.326 However, quern deus vult perdere,c etc.

I already sent my third article on Poland' to The Commonwealth 3 weeks ago and asked for it to be returned if it should be too late

[^1]: a at any price - b L. Blanc, 'Lettres de Londres', Le Temps, No. 1815, 23 April 1866. - c A. Röckel, Sachsens Erhebung und das Zuchthaus' zu Waldheim. - d poor -

[^2]: e quem deus vult perdere, prius demental: whom God wishes to destroy, he first makes mad - f F. Engels, 'What Have the Working Classes to Do with Poland?'



