---
Volume: 42
Document_Title: "160. Engels to Marx. 9 May "
Page_Range: "311-312"
---

# 160. Engels to Marx. 9 May 



**[p. 272]**

For the same purpose you find, on the last page of this letter, an 'avis'a to the German tailors which I call upon you to have inserted in such German papers as you have access to.327 At the same time you will oblige me by sending me a copy or two of some papers in which the 'avis' will have been inserted, telling me at the same time the names of all other papers that should have reprinted it. Kugelmann might also be useful for this purpose.

My best compliments to Mrs. Liebknecht.1' I feel exceedingly thankful for her friendly interest in my welfare.

Yours fraternally

A. Williams1

First published in: Marx and Engels, Reproduced from the original Works, First Russian Edition, Vol. XXIX, Moscow, 1946 and in the language of the original, English, in: Wilhelm Liebknecht- Briefwechsel mit Karl Marx und Friedrich Engels, The Hague, 1963

160

ENGELS TO MARX

Manchester, 9 May 1866 Dear Moor,

I am becoming concerned at your silence, I almost fear your health is not what it should be. You have not got carbuncles again?

What is this strange business of Cohen the blind,d who cannot hit the tall Bismarck with five shots and gets himself arrested by

[^1]: IN LONDON

[^2]: a 'warning'. Marx means his article 'A Warning'. - b Ernestine Liebknecht - c Marx's conspiratorial pseudonym - d Engels makes a pun here: the German word blind means without sight, blind; Blind—the name of Cohen's stepfather.



