---
Volume: 42
Document_Title: "163. Marx to Engels. 17 May "
Page_Range: "316-318"
---

# 163. Marx to Engels. 17 May 



**[p. 277]**

strong force in Galicia. The deciding battle could then be fought by 180,000 Prussians against 240-280,000 Austrians and would almost infallibly be another Jena203 and lead directly to Berlin. But it is difficult to speculate about this, as the Austrians' troops are always much stronger on paper, and they tell a lot of lies, at present in particular.

Unfortunately, Monsieur Charles3 is behind with the ledger, which has my account in it, so that at the moment I cannot even properly ascertain how I stand, and as the financial year ends in 6 weeks and I then must have a certain amount of capital in the business, I shall have to make my dispositions accordingly. As soon as I can, I shall add up my worldly assets and send you some money, if it is at all possible. But, at all events, you can count on my letting you have a £50 early in July immediately after the accounts for the financial year have been made up.

The Kreuz-Zeitungb makes delightful reading, advocating as it does universal suffrage, Bonapartism, Victor Emmanuel, etc. The dirt those fellows are now being obliged to eat is abundant.

Kindest regards to your wife and the girls.

Your

F. E.

163

[London,] 17 May 1866

[^1]: First published in Der Briefwechsel zwischen Printed according to the original F. Engels und K. Marx, Bd. 3, Stuttgart, 19,13 Published in English for the first time

[^2]: MARX TO ENGELS33

[^3]: IN MANCHESTER

[^4]: DEAR FRED, How are the articles on Poland" progressing? The paper d may or may not hold out, you must give as much as you can. The Poles

[^5]: a Charles Roesgen - b Neue Preussische Zeitung - c F. Engels, 'What Have the Working Classes to Do with Poland?' - d The Commonwealth





**[p. 278]**

It is true that for all their big talk the Prussians are inclined to draw in their horns, and Bismarck is meeting strong opposition from Burp,a too. But a retreat is scarcely possible in Italy, and that may have repercussions on Prussia again. What Izzyb is missing by being so dead! Bismarck would have had him playing a part now. Bismarck is surely cursing us (and thinking us Austrian agents) for spoiling his easy game with the workers.

From the beginning of this week my workc has at last been advancing again. If you can send me some vino, please do so, as the sudden abstinence may do harm.

Mr Mazzini gave himself no rest until he had founded an 'INTERNATIONAL REPUBLICAN COMMITTEE' in opposition to us. On it are jackass Holtorp, Langiewicz, Ledru, Kinkel, Blind, I believe also—Bolleter! Our Association is gaining ground daily. Only in Germany nothing can be done, on account of jackass Liebknecht

The present crisis appears to me to be merely a premature, specifically financial crisis. It could only become important if the business in the UNITED STATES goes rotten, and there would scarcely be time for that now. What effect is it having on you COTTONLORDS? And what effect has the fall in cotton prices had?

Salut.

Your

K. M.

[^1]: (GOOD FELLOW AS HE IS!).

[^2]: First published in Der Briefwechsel zwischen Printed according to the original F. Engels und K. Marx, Bd. 3, Stuttgart, 29J3 Published in English in full for the first time

[^3]: a William I - b Ferdinand Lassalle - c on Capital



