---
Volume: 42
Document_Title: "166. Marx to Engels. 9 June "
Page_Range: "321-323"
---

# 166. Marx to Engels. 9 June 



**[p. 282]**

The official tone adopted by the 'BLOOD AND mo N'-Prussians M1

shows how very anxious they are. They are now even doing obeisance to the French Revolution of 1789! They are complaining about Austrian tetchiness!

The best thing in the lousy debate here in Parliament was the register of sins that Disraeli laid at the unfortunate Clarendon's door.342

Salut.

Your

K. M.

Italian enthusiasm will no doubt get its bucket of cold water. Even its melodrama, in keeping with the national character, by the way, would be tolerable, if right underneath it all328 they were not setting their hopes on Badinguet.3 I cannot forget my Tzzy.b If he were still alive now, what a scandal he would create!

166

Whatever the pressure from events, my workc has been progressing poorly owing to purely physical factors ever since my

[^1]: First published in Der Briefwechsel zwischen Printed according to the original F. Engels und K. Marx, Bd. 3, Stuttgart, „ , - , . , , • „ ,• , • r .. r in.a Published in English in lull lor the first time

[^2]: MARX TO ENGELS33

[^3]: IN MANCHESTER

[^4]: [London,] 9 June 1866 DEAR FRED, Many thanks for the £10.

[^5]: a nickname of Napoleon III (the name of a bricklayer in whose clothes Napoleon fled from prison in 1846) - b Ferdinand Lassalle - c on Capital





**[p. 283]**

return from Margate.307 I have been so low over the last few weeks that I have not been able even to attend the INTERNATIONAL ASSOCIATION any more. I had Gumpert's prescription (for my liver) made u p for me yesterday, as Allen's stuff was of no use at all to me. Furthermore, I have had a tooth pulled, to put an end to the toothache, and probably a second one will have to go, too.

If your wine-cellar permits (that is, if you are not thereby obliged to buy in more), I should appreciate it if you would send me some, as I am now forbidden beer altogether.

T h e verses await your 'commentary'. They are nothing in my hands.

This evening I am compelled to go to the meeting of the 'DIRECTORS AND FRIENDS' of The Commonwealth.290 T h e thing is on its last legs. Apart from the acute financial difficulties, there are internal political ones as well. Since that jackass of a Bradford MANUFACTURER, Mr Kell (who has given £ 5 0 , his brother ditto, and hints of more to come), has Miall entirely under his thumb, Dr Bridges, Professor Beesly, Harrison (the COMTEISTS) have threatened not merely to resign but also to make a public statement about their resignation.

I am tired of the business and shall propose to the people this evening that they should sell their bankrupt institution to Kell et Co. and put an end to the farce of A BRADFORD MANUFACTURER directing a London 'workers' organ'. If they do not agree, I shall, at all events, announce my withdrawal. T h e paper cannot survive for much longer on its own resources, is therefore dependent on advances of bourgeois money, and thereby loses its own character. I have shown great patience in this matter, because I always hoped that the workers themselves would make sufficient efforts to continue the undertaking on their own; and, for another thing, I did not want to be a wet blanket.

Mr Gottfried Kinkel has been appointed to a chair in Zurich. Since the sounds of war started up, the 'Saxon' workers have been flocking to join the 'INTERNATIONAL ASSOCIATION'.

Salut.

Your

K. M.

Apropos. Lafargue tells me that the whole new French school of microscopical physiologists, with Robin at their head, is pronounc-

[^1]: COMPLIMENTS TO MRS LIZZY.a

[^2]: a Lizzy Burns



