---
Volume: 42
Document_Title: "173. Marx to Engels. 21 July "
Page_Range: "334-336"
---

# 173. Marx to Engels. 21 July 



**[p. 295]**

themselves about it. One old man from Frankfurt told me: it's worth more to the Prussians than a reinforcement of 100,000 men.

You see how the stupid South Germans are letting themselves be picked off one by one without even taking the trouble to close ranks.356 It'll soon be the old, old story, we've been betrayed, we'll be led like lambs to the slaughter!a 1849 all over again. I feel sorry for the fellows, they're good soldiers. Only now does one understand how the French were able to score such successes against the 'Empire', but not how the Empire was able to hold out for so long against a concentrated monarchy like France.358

I will try and produce the stuff about the mass-murder-industry for you.b

Many regards.

Your

F. E.

First published in Der Briefwechsel zwischen Printed according to the original F. Engels und K. Marx, Bd. 3, Stuttgart, 19,13 Published in English for the first time

173

MARX TO ENGELS

DEAR FRED, The carbuncle has fortunately departed again of its own accord. But in the present heat my LIVER has been and still is scourging me sorely. For all that, my workd is progressing well and will continue to do so if my present condition lasts. It is, of course, embarrassing for me to have to pester you again already, but as you will gather from the enclosed note (which you must return to me) there is periculum in mora.* I have with difficulty obtained an

[^1]: IN MANCHESTER

[^2]: [London,] 21 Julyc 1866

[^3]: a Engels uses the South-German dialect here: 'Man will uns uf die Schlachtbank fihre!' - b See this volume, p. 291. - c The original has: January. - d on the first volume of Capital - e danger in delay (Livy, The History of Rome, Vol. XXXVIII, Chap. 25)



One must refrain from passing any judgment on the present circumstances, pending news either of a ceasefire or of a decisive battle at Vienna. At any rate, the course of events has demonstrated the extraordinary decay of the Austrian system.

For the moment, these English of ours are, as always, paying homage to success. The great Arnold Ruge, too, has made his pronunciamento for Prussia 14 days ago, as the great Kinkel did earlier still. If the Prussians continue victorious to the end, what a throng of place-seekers and fatherland-rescuers will surge towards Frankfurt!

At all events, the 'homme prestige',3 'Jupiter Scapin',b GROTESQUE PROVIDENCE or EUROPE is shaken and even overshadowed by Bismarck. That is some consolation.

T h e V T H REPORT of t h e CHILDREN'S EMPLOYMENT COMMISSION a p p e a r e d here a few days ago. It concludes the enquêtec into the manufactories, and only a supplement has yet to appear concern- ing the 'ORGANISED GANGS' of women and children, who are sporadically used in agriculture. There could have been no more dreadful blow to the optimism of the bourgeoisie since 1850 than from these 5 BLUE BOOKS. Furthermore, the Vlllth REPORT of the BOARD OF HEALTH d was brought out a few days ago, which contains in particular a very detailed enquête of the living conditions of the proletariat.359

Salut

Your

K. M.

[^1]: First published in Der Briefwechsel zwischen Printed according to the original F. Engels und K. Marx, Bd. 3, Stuttgart, 2923 Published in English for the first time

[^2]: a 'man of prestige' - b Scapin—a character from Molière 's Les fourberies de Scapin (here Napoleon III is meant) - c enquiry - d Eighth Report of the Medical Officer of the Privy Council.



