---
Volume: 42
Document_Title: "174. Engels to Marx. 25 July ;"
Page_Range: "336-338"
---

# 174. Engels to Marx. 25 July ;



**[p. 174]**

ENGELS TO MARX101

IN LONDON

Manchester, 25 July 1866

Dear Moor,

I think you will now have received the notes all right; in a moment of distraction I must have put in, in their stead, the piece of paper on which I had noted the Nos. The notes themselves I had slipped inside the cover of my writing-case, which is where I found them when I had recovered from the initial shock of your telegram.46 I hope they still arrived in time.

The business in Germany now seems fairly straightforward to me. From the moment of Bismarck's so colossal success in using the Prussian army to put the bourgeois plan for Little Germany into effect,3b0 developments in Germany have moved so decisively in that direction that we shall have to accept the fait accompli just like everybody else, WE MAY LIKE IT OR NOT. AS regards the national aspect of the question, at all events, Bismarck will set up a Little German Empire of the dimensions envisaged by the bourgeoisie, i. e., including South-West Germany, the phrases about the Main boundary and the OPTIONAL SOUTH GERMAN SEPARATE CONFEDERACY, at any rate, only being intended for the French367; meanwhile the Prussians are marching on Stuttgart. Incidentally, before very long, the German provinces of Austria will join this Empire too, since Austria is certain to go Hungarian now,293 and the Germans will become the 3rd nation in the Empire—lower even than the Slavs.

Politice" Bismarck will be forced to rely on the bourgeoisie, whom he needs against the Imperial Princes. Perhaps not at this moment, as his prestige and the army are still sufficient. But simply to ensure that parliament will grant the necessary conditions for central power, he will have to give something to the bourgeoisie, and the natural course of events will constantly compel him or his successors to appeal to the bourgeoisie again; so that, even if Bismarck perhaps gives the bourgeoisie no more than he absolutely has to now, he will, nevertheless, be driven increasingly in a bourgeois direction.

[^1]: Politically

[^2]: 12-1196





**[p. 298]**

The good aspect to the affair is that it simplifies the situation and makes revolution easier by putting an end to the brawling among the smaller capitals and, at all events, hastens develop- ments. A German parliament is after all quite a different thing from a Prussian Chamber. All the little states will be drawn into the movement, there will be an end to the worst localised tendencies, and the parties will at last become truly national instead of merely local.

The chief disadvantage—and it is a very substantial one—is the inevitable swamping of Germany by Prussianism. Also the temporary exclusion of German Austria, a consequence of which will be an immediate advance of the Slav cause in Bohemia, Moravia and Carinthia. Unfortunately, nothing can be done to prevent either.

In my view, therefore, we can do nothing whatsoever but simply accept the fact, without approving of it, and use, as far as we can, the increased opportunities which are, at all events, bound to arise now, to organise and unite the German proletariat nationally.

I did not need Stumpfs letter to tell me that BROTHER Liebknecht would launch himself into fanatical support of the Austrian cause, it was absolutely inevitable.31'1 Incidentally, there was no mistaking his furious despatches from Leipzig in the Neue Frankfurter Zeitung. This N. F. Zeitung, with its Blind-ish regicidal tendencies, went so far as to reproach the Prussians for their disgraceful treatment of 'His Highness the Elector of Hesse'" and was beside itself with enthusiasm for the poor blind Guelph.b

Nothing more of mine in the Guardian.34"

Your

F. E.

Best wishes to the LADIES.

[^1]: First published in Der Briefwechsel zwischen F. Engels und K. Marx, Bd. 3, Stuttgart, 1913

[^2]: Printed according to the original

[^3]: Published in English in full for the first time

[^4]: •' Ludwig III - h George V of Hanover



