---
Volume: 42
Document_Title: "180. Marx to Engels. 13 August "
Page_Range: "348-349"
---

# 180. Marx to Engels. 13 August 



**[p. 309]**

abolish poetry, will not wish to make poetry to the detriment of my child.

3. To preclude any misinterpretation of this letter, I would like to state that—were you in a position to enter into matrimony today—it would not come about. My daughter would refuse. I myself should object. You must have achieved something in life before thinking of marriage, and a long period of testing is required of you and of Laura.

4. I would like this letter to remain confidential between ourselves. I await your reply.

Yours very truly

Karl Marx

First published in: Marx and Engels, Printed according to the original Works, Second Russian Edition, Vol. 31, Moscow, 1963 Translated from the French Published in English in full for the first time

180

[London,] 13 août* 1866

Lenchenb reached the post-office too late on Saturday to send off my note gratefully acknowledging receipt of the £10.

You must forgive me if I do not write a letter today. I have the most pressing business on my back. I wrote a long letter in French to Laiargue today, telling him that I must have des renseignements positifs1' from his family concerning his economic circumstances before the affair can proceed or an ARRANGEMENT can be arrived at.d

A letter that he passed to me yesterday from a famous French doctor" in Paris speaks well of him.

The title of the book:: 'P. Trémaux: Origine et Transformations de l'Homme et des autres Êtres. Première Partie. Paris (Librairie de

[^1]: MARX TO ENGELS26

[^2]: IN MANCHESTER

[^3]: DEAR FRED,

[^4]: a August - b Helene Demuth - c positive information - d See this volume, pp. 307-09. - e Jules Antoine Moilin



