---
Volume: 42
Document_Title: "181. Marx to Engels. 23 August "
Page_Range: "349-350"
---

# 181. Marx to Engels. 23 August 



**[p. 310]**

L. Hachette) 1865.' Part Two has not yet appeared. No planches? The man's geological MAPS are in his other works.

Snippet from Liebknecht enclosed. I shall be sending you his newspapers,b too, but they are not worth a pinch of snuff.372

Salut.

Your

K. M.

I shall also be getting the chief work by the above-mentioned Parisian médecin" and will let you have it as soon as I have read it myself.

First published in Der Briefwechsel zwischen Printed according to the original F. Engels und K. Marx, Bd. 3, Stuttgart, 2923 Published in English in full for the first time

181

London, 23 August 1866

Just a few lines today. The Lafargue affair has been arranged inasmuch as his old mand has written to me from Bordeaux, requesting the title of promesso sposoe for his son and offering a very favourable economic settlement. Furthermore, it is accepted that Lafargue jeune1 first has to qualify as a doctor in London and then in Paris before thinking of marriage. So FAR THE THING is SETTLED. But I also informed our Creole yesterday that if he cannot calm himself DOWN to English manners, Laura will show him the door without more ado. He must be absolutely clear about this or nothing will come of the affair. He has a heart of gold but is an enfant gâtég and too much a child of nature.

[^1]: MARX TO ENGELS373

[^2]: IN MANCHESTER

[^3]: DEAR FRED,

[^4]: a plates - b Mitteldeutsche Volkszeitung - c doctor. J. A. Moilin (le docteur Tony),

[^5]: Leçons de médecine physiologique. - d François Lafargue - e fiancé - f junior - 8 spoilt child



