---
Volume: 42
Document_Title: "182. Marx to Ludwig Kugelmann. 23 August "
Page_Range: "350-351"
---

# 182. Marx to Ludwig Kugelmann. 23 August 



**[p. 311]**

Laura declares that before she will formally let herself become betrothed, she must have your CONSENT.

I am threatened with new carbuncles here and there, but they keep disappearing again; they do, however, oblige me to keep my hours of work very much WITHIN LIMITS

Kindest regards to Lizzy.1

Salut.

Your

K. M.

First published in Der Briefwechsel iwischen Printed according to the original F. Engels und K. Marx, Bd. 3, Stuttgart, 1913

182

MARX TO LUDWIG KIGELMANN15

IN HANOVER

London, 23 August 1866

My dear Friend,

You must justifiably be angered by my prolonged silence, despite your sundry friendly communications.

However, you will have to excuse me, on account of the extraordinary circumstances in which I find myself.

In consequence of my long illness, my economic situation has reached a point of crisis. I have accumulated debts, which are a crushing mental burden and make me incapable of any activity other than the work in which I am immersed. If I do not succeed in taking out a loan of at least 1,000 talers at an interest of say 5%, I can really see no way out. And despite the numerous letters of acknowledgement I receive from Germany, I do not know where to turn. I can only accept aid from personal friends, nothing public. You will understand that in such conditions letter-writing becomes difficult.

I have not yet succeeded in re-establishing my former lucrative links with America.374 They are so taken up with their own

[^1]: 11 Lizzy Burns



