---
Volume: 42
Document_Title: "183. Engels to Emil Engels. 23 August "
Page_Range: "351-352"
---

# 183. Engels to Emil Engels. 23 August 

As regards that work itself, I do not think I shall be able to deliver the manuscript of the first volume (it has now grown to 3 volumes227) to Hamburg before October. I can only work productively for a very few hours per day without immediately feeling the effects physically, and for my family's sake I suppose I must, however unwillingly, resolve to observe the hygienic limits until I am fully recovered. My work is furthermore often interrupted by the impingement of adverse external cir- cumstances.

Although I am devoting much time to the preparations for the congress in Geneva,375 I cannot go myself, nor do I wish to, because my work cannot be subjected to prolonged interruption. I consider that what I am doing through this work is far more important for the working class than anything I might be able to do personally at any congrès quelconque.0

I regard the international situation in Europe as only tempor- ary. As regards Germany in particular, we must take things as we find them,376 i.e., promote the interests of revolution in a manner appropriate to the changed conditions. As TO PRUSSIA, it is now more important than ever TO WATCH AND TO DENOUNCE her RELATIONS TO RUSSIA.

Your very sincere friend

K. Marx

183

ENGELS TO EMIL ENGELS

_, „ ., Manchester, 23 August 1866 Dear Emit,

In great haste, just to ask you to send the Funke document not to me but to

[^1]: First published in Die Neue Zeit, Bd. 2, Printed according to the original Nr. 2, Stuttgart, 1901-1902

[^2]: IN ENGELSKIRCHEN

[^3]: a unnecessary costs - b Capital - c congress whatsoever



