---
Volume: 42
Document_Title: "185. Marx to Johann Philipp Becker. 31 August "
Page_Range: "353-354"
---

# 185. Marx to Johann Philipp Becker. 31 August 

First published in the language of the Reproduced from the original original, English, in Annali, an. 1, Milano, 1958'

185

MARX T O J O H A N N PHILIPP BECKER 1

IN GENEVA:>

[London,] 31 August 1866

Dear Becker,

It is absolutely imperative that Jung be made President of the congress, 3' 5

1. because he speaks the 3 languages, English, French, and German.

2. J u n g truly represents the CENTRAL COUNCIL, Odger (who further- more only knows his mother-tongue) was not elected by the CENTRAL COUNCIL; we elected 4 delegates, with J u n g at the head; Odger was only to go if he could raise the money himself (guaranteed by us, of course). He has done nothing for the Association.

6. Mr Cremer has morally debased himself completely. All his efforts are now aimed at securing a 'paid'' post for himself, so that he need not work. In no circumstances must he therefore be elected as General Secretary by the congress. (The only paid post.) They

[^1]: 3. Cremer and Odger have hatched a very mean plot to prevent J u n g and Eccarius leaving on the very last day.

[^2]: 4. Odger wishes to be elected President of the congress as a means of impressing the English and imposing himself as President of the CENTRAL COUNCIL for next year, against the wish of the great majority of the COUNCIL. 5. Cremer and Odger have both betrayed us in the Reform League, where they came to a compromise with the bourgeoisie against our wishes.315

[^3]: a The letter bears the stamp: International Working Men's Association / Central Council / London.



