---
Volume: 42
Document_Title: "186. Marx to Eleanor Marx. 5 September "
Page_Range: "354-356"
---

# 186. Marx to Eleanor Marx. 5 September 

must elect Fox, on the pretext, which is incidentally true, that the General Secretary must know more than one language.

9.1' The President of the CENTRAL COUNCIL must not be elected by the congress but here in London, as a figure of merely local importance.

10. At the election of the President for the congress, you must say at the outset that an international congress can only be presided over by a man who can speak the various languages, simply to save time, etc.

11. Convey this to Dupleix. 12. I should be glad if you would get Eccarius to translate the instructions'1 which I wrote in the name of the CENTRAL COMMITTEE for the London delegates into German beforehand.

Regards and handshake.

Your

Karl Marx

First published in: Marx and Engels, Printed according to the original Works, First Russian Edition, Vol. XXV, Moscow, 1934

186

MARX TO ELEANOR MARX

[London,] 5 September 1866

My beloved master ±oo+.

I bow to the earth before your immensity, whatever part you may condescend to act, that of the infinitely small or the infinitely grand.

Your letters have enchanted us, and we were really bursting out with laughter on reading that fine passage in which you describe the spontaneous explosion produced by the exhibition spinster.

I am belaboured by a gorilla offspringc who can hardly spend the separation from a velvet mouse he has put his mind upon.d If he knew her, as well as I do, he would, of course, be still more

[^1]: IN HASTINGS

[^2]: a Marx omitted points 7 and 8 here. - '' K. Marx, 'Instructions for the Delegates of the Provisional General Council. The Different Questions'. - c Paul Lafargue - d Laura Marx



Calypso, qui ne pouvait se consoler du départ d'Ulysse? She may be a Calypso, but he is not an Ulysses, with all that. A spoonzy fellow rather. However, he deserves some praise at my hands. He has worked hard (from 1 o'clock p.m. to 9) in translating the instructions6 I had to draw up for the Geneva Congress delegates.3'3 He has worked not less hard as a tailor at certain gymnastic apparatus you are to use. Last, not least, he affects great attention to the scientific gabble I affect to treat him with, although he and myself are far away from the scene of the mental entertainment.

The day before yesterday the Lormiers were here and the Negrillo,0 too. Old Lormier, on the pretext of having to communicate him some gymnastic trick, told him 'secretly' and discreetly, of course, he must stop that fountain of saliva which, while smoking, he is in the habit of inundating the chimney with. When both returned from the kitchen, where the secret communi- cation was taking place, our poor Negrillo looked rather downcast, and behaved like a 'good boy'.

In fact, I liked the boy, at the same time, I think, rather jealous of his encroachments upon my old 'geheimsecretar'.d

Don't forget to write me immediately what you have to pay per week.

The damned weather! I hope it will still mend. Address of Memelitene: 'Mrs Goodbun, Rose and Crown, Dover.' Adio, my dear child. Many kisses to you and to the immortal Cacadou,

Yours

You don't want to write to Mama, as she probably leaves Dover on Friday for another watering-place.

[^1]: 00

[^2]: First published, in Russian, in Voin- Reproduced from the original stvuyushchy materialist, Book 4, 1925 and in the language of the original, English, in The Socialist Review (London), No. 44, September 1929

[^3]: a who could not be consoled after Ulysses' departure - b K. Marx, 'Instructions for the Delegates of the Provisional General Council. The Different Questions'. - c Paul Lafargue - d 'secret secretary', i.e., Laura Marx - e Marx's wife



