---
Volume: 42
Document_Title: "188. Marx to Engels. 26 September "
Page_Range: "356-358"
---

# 188. Marx to Engels. 26 September 



**[p. 187]**

MARX TO LAURA MARX

IN HASTINGS

[London, about 8 September 1866] My dearest Cacadou,1'

You must excuse if I write those few lines only. We want the inclosed Post Office Order for £3 to leave with the first Post, that is before 11 o'clock a.m. You will oblige me by writing us with what train you will leave Hastings next week, and when you will arrive here?

Poor child, your toothache would have been spared to you, if my advice had been followed and my own 'dentist' resorted to.

Your last letter has given much pleasure (the toothache news excepted) because we saw from it with what calm energy our Cacadou knows how to act.

Tell Quoquo b that mischief is brewing. The Emperorc fancies to be neglected by his subjects and feels rather sore.

Yours truly

Old One

188

[London,] 26 September 1866 DEAR FRED,

Mr Sawyer, the LANDLORD, has also written me letter that the 3 quarters (£46) are due on 2 October. I have not received a FARTHING from Holland yet and so cannot count on that.

[^1]: First published in: Marx and Engels, Reproduced from the original Works, Second Russian Edition, Vol. 31, „ , ,. , , . r ,. , , , r. „, ,r>/-o Published in English tor the hrst Moscow, 196:5 . ° time

[^2]: MARX TO ENGELS33

[^3]: IN MANCHESTER

[^4]: Receipt enclosed for Moore (I only got the receipt from Dell yesterday).379

[^5]: Laura's jocular nickname - b Eleanor Marx - c Jenny, Marx's daughter





**[p. 318]**

By way of demonstration against the French monsieurs—who wanted to exclude everyone except 'travailleurs manuels',>l in the first instance from membership of the INTERNATIONAL ASSOCIATION, or at least from eligibility for election as delegate to the congress— the English yesterday proposed me as President of the CENTRAL COUNCIL. I declared that under no circumstances could I accept such a thing, and proposed Odger in my turn, who was then in fact re-elected, although some people voted for me despite my declaration. Dupont, incidentally, has given me the key to the Tolain and Fribourg operation. They want to stand as workers' candidates for the Corps législatif4 in 1869, on the 'principle' that only workers can represent the workers. That is why it was exceedingly important for these gentlemen to get this principle proclaimed through the Congress.380

At yesterday's meeting of the CENTRAL COUNCIL there were all manner of dramatic scenes. E.g., Mr Cremer fell to earth with a bump when Fox was appointed General Secretary in his stead. He controlled his fury only with great difficulty. Another scene when Mr Le Lubez had to be officially informed of his expulsion from the CENTRAL COUNCIL par décret1' of the congress. He gave vent to the turmoil in his breast in an hour-long speech, in which he spat fire and brimstone at the Parisians, represented himself in terms of astonishing self-esteem and mumbled all manner of dubious things about intrigues whereby the nationalities who were well-disposed towards him (Belgium and Italy) were prevented from attending the congress. Finally, he demanded a vote of confidence from the Central Council'81—and this will be discussed next Tuesday.

Salut.

Your

K. M.

[^1]: First published in Der Briefwechsel zwischen F. Engels und K. Marx, Bd. 3, Stuttgart, 1913

[^2]: Printed according to the original

[^3]: Published in English in full for the first lime

[^4]: a manual workers - b by decree



