---
Volume: 42
Document_Title: "189. Marx to Engels. 1 October "
Page_Range: "358-359"
---

# 189. Marx to Engels. 1 October 



**[p. 189]**

MARX TO ENGELS

IN MANCHESTER

[London,] 1 October 1866

Dear Engels,

I do not know whether I told you last time I wrote that there is a bill of exchange (no longer in the LANDLORD'S hands) outstanding against me for the rent. Sawyer had written that the bill was due on the 2nd inst., i.e., tomorrow. I called on him yesterday, as by my reckoning the thing could not be due until 3 October, as I had drawn the bill on 1 July for 3 MONTHS, so that 3 days sight must be added. And it turned out I was right. The amount is £46 (3 QUARTERS), and I have been sans sou" for many weeks, since the SMALL SUMS, which were still obtainable via pawnbrokers, dried up.

As I am furthermore now HARD PRESSED from the daily 'supplies' which have once more accumulated in recent months and in present circumstances (Lafargue) must avoid any éclath more than ever, I would leave for the Continent at once to see what I can arrange there 'personally'. However, I must defer that until my manuscript' is completed, so that I can take it with me and am not subjected to fresh interruption.

You must forgive me for constantly Bor HERing and plaguing you with my private morass. I had put too much reliance on having the money from Holland.

Your

K. Marx

[^1]: What do you think of Moilin?d

[^2]: First published in Der Briefwechsel zwischen F. Engels und K. Marx, Bd. 3, Stuttgart, 1913

[^3]: Printed according to the original

[^4]: Published in English for the first time

[^5]: a penniless - b scandal - c of the first volume of Capital - d See this volume, p. 310.



