---
Volume: 42
Document_Title: "193. Marx to Ludwig Kugelmann. 9 October "
Page_Range: "364-366"
---

# 193. Marx to Ludwig Kugelmann. 9 October 



**[p. 325]**

represents a direct danger, in exactly the same way that by surgery one destroys tissues where there is no alternative, and 2. that one does have to stick to the medicines for as long as one has nothing better. As soon as Moilin can cure syphilis with his electricity, mercury will soon vanish, but scarcely until then. Incidentally, no one can go on telling me that only the Germans can 'construct' systems, THE FRENCH BEAT THEM HOLLOW AT THAT. Kindest regards.

Your

F. E.

First published in Der Briefwechsel zwischen Printed according to the original F. Engels und K. Marx, Bd. 3, Stuttgart, „ . ,. , . . _ ,. , . , .. .q,„ ° Published in English tor the irrst time

193

MARX TO LUDWIG KUGELMANN65

1 Modena Villas, Maitland Park, Haverstock Hill

Dear Friend,

I hope I must not conclude from your lengthy silence that my last letterb has in any way offended you. The case should be quite the reverse. Any person, who is in desperate straits, sometimes feels the need to ventilate his feelings. But he only does so to people in whom he has a special and exceptional confidence. I do assure you that my domestic troubles disquiet me far more for being an obstacle to the completion of my work' than for any personal or family reasons. I could dispose of the whole problem tomorrow if I were prepared to take up a practical trade tomorrow, instead of working for the cause. And I equally hope that you are not embarrassed by the fact that you can do nothing to alleviate my plight. That would indeed be the most unreasona- ble of reasons.

[^1]: IN HANOVER

[^2]: London, 9 October3 1866

[^3]: a The original has: November. - b See this volume, pp. 311-12. - c Capital





**[p. 326]**

I was exceedingly pleased at the American workers' congress, which took place at the same time in Baltimore. The watchword there was organisation for the struggle against capital, and, remarkably enough, most of the demands I had put up for Geneva were put up there, too, by the correct instinct of the workers.383

[^1]: •' K. Marx, 'Instructions for the Delegates of the Provisional General Council. The Different Questions'. - b brilliant youth



