---
Volume: 42
Document_Title: "194. Marx to Ludwig Kugelmann. 13 October "
Page_Range: "366-368"
---

# 194. Marx to Ludwig Kugelmann. 13 October 

The reform movement here, which was called into being by our Central Council (quorum magna pars fui''), has now assumed enormous and irresistible dimensions.155 I have always kept behind the scenes and have not further concerned myself with the matter since it has been under way.

Your

K. Marx

Apropos. The Workmanb is a philistine paper, and has nothing to do with us. The Commonwealth belongs to our people, but has for the moment transformed itself purely into a mouthpiece for Reform (partly for economic and partly for political reasons).

I have recently read Dr T. Moilin: 'Leçons de Médecine Physiologi- que', which came out in Paris in 1865. A lot of fanciful ideas in it and too much 'construing'. But a lot of criticism of traditional therapeutics, too. I would be glad if you would read the book and let me have your opinion in detail. I would also recommend to you Trémaux: 'De l'origine de tous les êtres, etc' Although written in a slovenly way, full of geological howlers and seriously deficient in literary-historical criticism, it represents—WITH AI I THAT AND AIL THAI—an advance over Darwin.1

194

London, Saturday, 13 October 1866

Dear Friend,

[^1]: First published in Die Neue Zeit, Bd. 2, Printed according to the original Nr. 2, Stuttgart, 1901-1902

[^2]: MARX TO LUDWIG KUGELMANN'5

[^3]: IN HANOVER

[^4]: Since I wish to reply to you at once and your letter has arrived just before the Post closes (and no post goes from here tomorrow, Sunday), I shall summarise the quintessence of my INTERCEPTED LETTER384 in a few words. (This confiscation of letters is certainly

[^5]: a in which I played an important part (Virgil, Aeneid, II, 6) - b The Working Man - c See this volume, pp. 304-05.





**[p. 328]**

not at all pleasant, as I have not the slightest desire to make Mr Bismarck a confidant to my private affairs. If, on the other hand, he wishes to know my views on his policies, he can approach me direct, and I am sure I shall not mince my words.)

My economic situation has deteriorated so much following my prolonged illness and the many expenses it entailed that I am faced with a financial crisis in the immediate future, something which, quite apart from its direct effects on myself and family, would also be ruinous for me politically, especially here in London, where one must keep up appearances. What I wanted to find out from you was this: do you know anyone, or a few people (under no circumstances must the affair become public), who could advance me about 1,000 talers at an interest rate of 5 or 6% for at least 2 years? I am now paying 20-50% interest for the small sums I am borrowing, but for all that I can no longer keep the creditors at bay, with the result that the old firm is about to come crashing down about my ears.

Since my penultimate letter to youa I have suffered another series of relapses and have consequently only been able to pursue my theoretical work very intermittently. (The practical work for the International Association goes on as ever, and there is a lot of it, as I am in fact having to run the whole Association myself.) I shall be sending the first sheetsb to Meissner next month, and will continue to do so until I go to Hamburg with the remainder myself. At all events, I shall take that opportunity to call on you.

My circumstances (endless interruptions, both physical and social) oblige me to publish Volume One first, not both volumes together, as I had originally intended. And there will now probably be 3 volumes.

The whole work is thus divided into the following parts:

Book I. The Process of Production of Capital. Book II. The Process of Circulation of Capital. Book III. Structure of the Process as a Whole. Book IV. On the History of the Theory. The first volume will include the first 2 books. The 3rd book will, I believe, fill the second volume, the 4th the 3rd.227

It was, in my opinion, necessary to begin again ab ovoc in the first book, i. e., to summarise the book of mine published by Dunckerd in one chapter on commodities and money.Ma I judged

[^1]: a See this volume, pp. 311-12. - b of the first volume of Capital- c from the beginning - d K. Marx, A Contribution to the Critique of Political Economy.



