---
Volume: 42
Document_Title: "197. Marx to Engels. 10 November "
Page_Range: "370-371"
---

# 197. Marx to Engels. 10 November 



**[p. 331]**

least 20 people, so that the share that fell to me at the beginning of the summer was — 80 talers! My attempts to drum up money in Germany or Holland have all come to nothing. The only thing that still makes us think of the pawnshop (and my wife has pawned so many possessions that she herself can scarcely go out) is the interest it asks for. I thus had to go round London begging small loans left and right, as in our worst refugee days—and that from a limited number of people who are themselves impecuni- ous—to make even the most essential cash purchases. On the other hand, I am being threatened by tradesmen, some of whom have withdrawn their credit and threatened to take me to court. This state of affairs was all the more critical in that Lafargue (until his departure for Bordeaux a few days ago) was constantly in the house and the REAL STATE OK THINGS had to be anxiously concealed from him. Not merely has my work" been frequently interrupted by all this, but by trying to make up at night for the time lost during the day, I have acquired a fine carbuncle near my PENIS. I know you have done everything in your power, and more. But recourse of some kind must be found. Would it not be possible to take up a LOAN or some such transaction? Saint.

Your

K. M.

197

MARX TO ENGELS

[London,] 10 November 1866

Dear Engels,

My best thanks for coming to my aid so quickly and ditto for the port wine. I know your own circumstances exactly, and that makes it doubly painful for me thus to put PRESSURE on you. You know, we

[^1]: First published abridged in Der Briefwech- Primed according to the original sei zwischen F. Engels und K. Marx, Bd. 3. Stuttgart, 1913 and in full in MEGA, Abt. III, Bd. 3, Berlin, 1930

[^2]: IN i MANCHESTER

[^3]: ;l on Capital

[^4]: 13*



