---
Volume: 42
Document_Title: "198. Engels to Marx. 11 November "
Page_Range: "371-373"
---

# 198. Engels to Marx. 11 November 

really must put an end to this business once and for all, but that will not be possible until I can go to the Continent and act there in person.

Next week the first BATCH of the manuscript" will go off to Meissner at last. This summer and autumn it was really not the theory which caused the delay, but my physical and civil condition. It is just 3 years ago now that the first carbuncle was lanced. Since then I have had only short periods of respite from it, and as Gumpert will confirm, of all types of work, theory is the most unsuitable if one has this devil's brew in one's blood.

As regards the present fellow, it will be cured in the space of ABOUT 14 days. I now know exactly how it has to be treated and I have therefore started taking the arsenic again.

In great haste.

Your

K. Marx

First published in Der Briefwechsel zwischen Printed according to the original F. Engels und K. Marx, Bd. 3, Stuttgart, . jgj3 Published in English lor the first time

198

ENGELS TO MARX

[Manchester,] 11 November 1866 86 Mornington St.

Dear Moor,

Many thanks for The Free Press. Can you send me the August and September issues? I have not received them.

Encl. the 2nd halves of the £30. I would have liked to send you more, but I really cannot. I'll see what I can do next month, and on 31 December we shall be doing our accounts again; if they turn out well, no doubt we shall be able to manage a bit more.

The news that the manuscript3 has gone off is a load off my mind. So, a commencement d'exécutionb at last, as the Code pénal has

[^1]: IN LONDON

[^2]: a of the first volume of Capital - b commencement of proceedings





**[p. 1913]**

it.387 To that end I shall drink a special glass to your particular health. The book has greatly contributed to wrecking your health; once you have got it off your back, you'll be quite a different fellow again.

I hope that Birch despatched the port yesterday, but I am none too sure of it; at all events, however, it is sure to arrive by Monday evening or Tuesday morning.

Prussians will be Prussians. As a reward for voting for the indemnity, Twesten and Frenzel are arraigned for speeches made in the Chamber.388 Such stupidity is quite incomprehensible, but it is a point of principle.The burghers3 of Frankfurt are still furious, they are now playing the part of Poles, going about in mourning and wearing cravats with the city colours of Frankfurt.362 A Prussian lieutenant entered a Sachsenhausen tavern and found all the seats taken. Someone got up in one corner and left, at which his neighbour drew the lieutenant's attention to the empty chair, but he said thank you very much, he did not like to sit on a warm chair. Oh, said the other, you have no need to worry about that, our bums are all freezing since the Prussians have been here.

I have heard the most marvellous stories here from eyewitnesses about the Imperial warfare.b Such things are unprecedented. E.g., the Nassauers were ordered to bridge the Main at Höchst. Having failed once on account of a storm (a storm on the Main!), they found upon their 2nd attempt that they had too few pontoons and could only bridge the Main half-way. They therefore wrote to Darmstadt, asking for the loan of a few pontoons, which did eventually arrive then, and thus the bridge over the horrendous stream was completed. Then the Nassauers immediately received orders to march south. They left the bridge standing, without a guard, merely leaving it to the care of an old boatman to see that it did not drift away down the Main. A few days later, the Prussians arrived, took possession of the completed bridge, fortified it and marched across!

Your

F. E.

[^1]: First published in Der Briefwechsel zwischen F. Engels und K. Marx, Bd. 3, Stuttgart,

[^2]: Printed according to the original

[^3]: Published in English for the first time

[^4]: :l Engels uses the South-German dialect here: 'Borjer'. - b Engels refers to the Austrian Empire and its allies in the Austro-Prussian war of 1866.



