---
Volume: 42
Document_Title: "199. Marx to François Lafargue. 12 November "
Page_Range: "373-374"
---

# 199. Marx to François Lafargue. 12 November 



**[p. 199]**

MARX TO FRANÇOIS LAFARGUE389

IN BORDEAUX

London, 12 November 1866

My dear Mr Lafargue,

I hope our friend il amoroso* has apologised to you on my behalf for my inexcusable silence. On the one hand, I have been plagued by constantly recurring illness, on the other, I have been so taken up by a very lengthy workb that I have neglected my correspondence with my closest friends. If I did not count you among that category, I should never have dared so to offend against propriety.

My sincere thanks for the wine. Being myself from a wine- growing region, and former owner of a vineyard,390 I know a good wine when I come across one. I even incline somewhat to old Luther's view that a man who does not love wine will never be good for anything. (There are exceptions to every rule.) But one cannot, for example, deny that the political movement in England has been spurred on by the commercial treaty with France and the import of French wines.391 That is one of the good things that Louis Bonaparte was capable of doing, whereas poor Louis Philippe was so intimidated by the manufacturers in the North that he did not dare enter into commercial treaties with England. It is only to be regretted that regimes such as the Napoleonic one, which are founded on the weariness and impotence of the two antagonistic classes of society, buy some material progress at the expense of general demoralisation. Fortunately, the mass of working men cannot be demoralised. Manual labour is the great antidote for all the ills of society.

You will have been just as delighted by the defeat of President Johnson in the latest elections as I was.392 The workers in the North have at last fully understood that white labour will never be emancipated so long as black labour is still stigmatised.

On Saturday evening Citizen Dupont brought me a letter addressed to Paul' by the secretary of the College of Surgeons. He required some papers which were neither in the possession of my daughter0 (except for his baccalauréat diploma) nor of the person

[^1]: a the lovelorn gentleman (Paul Lafargue) - b Capital - c Paul Lafargue - d Laura Marx



