---
Volume: 42
Document_Title: "200. Marx to Paul Lafargue. 7 December "
Page_Range: "374-375"
---

# 200. Marx to Paul Lafargue. 7 December 

who has charge of your son's effects. You will therefore have to send us these documents at once.

Please be so good as to tell your son that he will greatly oblige me by desisting from propaganda in Paris. This is a dangerous time. The best thing he can do in Paris is to use his time to profit by his association with Dr Moilin. It will do him no harm to spare his polemical strength. The more he holds himself in check, the better he will be as a fighter when the right moment comes.

My daughter asks me to request you to be so kind as to send with Paul some photograms of Madame Lafargue and of yourself.

All my family joins me in greetings to the Lafargue family.

Yours ever

Karl Marx

Translated from the French

First published in the language of the Printed according to the original original, French, in Annali, an. 1, Milano,

1958

200

MARX TO PAUL LAFARGUE

[London,] 7 December 1866

My dear Lafargue,

I am so taken up by a piece of work" which must be completed by Monday that I am unable to reply to you at once. Meanwhile, if I have offended you by my brusque monologue, I beg your pardon. One should not lose one's temper even when one is in the right.

Greetings.

Karl Marx

[^1]: IN LONDON

[^2]: First published in: Marx and Engels, Printed according to the original Works, Second Russian Edition, Vol. 31, Moscow, 1963 Translated from the French

[^3]: Published in English for the first time

[^4]: the first volume of Capital



