---
Volume: 42
Document_Title: "202. Engels to Marx. 14 December "
Page_Range: "375-377"
---

# 202. Engels to Marx. 14 December 



**[p. 201]**

MARX TO ENGELS

IN MANCHESTER

[London,] 8 December 1866 Dear FRED,

Meissner has not begun printing yet," as he wanted to finish off some other things first. I am expecting a letter from him next Monday. All in all, I found the delay by no means disagreeable, as I have only been rid of that vile carbuncle for a few days, and, moreover, my creditors are badgering me in a truly edifying manner. I only regret that private persons CAN not FILE THEIR BILLS FOR THE BANKRUPTCY COURT with the same propriety as men of business.

A while ago, Kladderadatsch printed a swipe at the Brimstone Gang in large type, in a bad lampoon on Collins' The Woman in White. The author of this garbage is that miserable Bettziech, and I should not be surprised if the order had emanated from Kinkel or Hatzfeldt. Nor have I any doubt that the old bag was the cause of Liebknecht's arrest.393

The Prussian swine are acting precisely as we should wish them to. There will be no progress until heads roll.

Salut.

Your

K. M.

202

ENGELS TO MARX

Manchester, 14 December 1866 Dear Moor,

You just would not believe how overrun I am at present by all manner of folk. Young men recommended by customers, seeking

[^1]: First published in Der Briefwechsel zwischen Printed according to the original F. Engels und K. Marx, Bd. 3, Stuttgart, . . 10,13 Published in English for the first

[^2]: IN LONDON

[^3]: the first volume of Capital





**[p. 337]**

The Prussian swine are certainly behaving quite splendidly. I would indeed not have imagined them to be quite so stupid, but it is really impossible to imagine them stupid enough. That is all to the good. Things are on the move again now, and the revolution will come all the sooner for it, and this time heads are bound to roll, as you yourself say.

They are locking up the office, and I must close, too. Enclosed two five-pound-notes:

I/S 38969 and I/S 62239, Manchester, 26 January 1866. That is as much as I can risk sending until I know how I stand, and I cannot check on it until the books are made up.

Kindest regards to your wife and children.

Your

F. E.

[^1]: First published in Der Briefwechsel zwischen F. Engels und K. Marx, Bd. 3, Stuttgart, 1913

[^2]: Printed according to the original

[^3]: Published in English for the first time

[^4]: •' Emil Blank - b See this volume, p. 152.



