---
Volume: 42
Document_Title: "203. Marx to Engels. 17 December "
Page_Range: "377-378"
---

# 203. Marx to Engels. 17 December 



**[p. 203]**

MARX T O ENGELS

IN MANCHESTER

[London,] 17 December 1866

DEAR FRED.

THANKS FOR THE £ 1 0 . As far as Rode is concerned, he is obsessed with political connections and his own self-importance. As you are finding this obsession a nuisance—and JUSTLY SO—you should write to him at the first opportunity saying that you have not the honour of his acquaintance and requesting him to desist from such LIBERTIES.

T h e Revue des deux Mondes and the Revue Contemporaine had two detailed articles on the 'INTERNATIONAL', which treat it and its congress as one of the most significant events of the century. a T h e like also in The Fortnightly Review, in consequence. b Meanwhile, we are in practice paralysed BY WANT OF FUNDS and even OF MEN, with all the English being totally absorbed by the REFORM MOVEMENT. T h e French government is (heureusement) beginning to treat us as enemies. 3 9 5

One of our more dubious ACQUISITIONS was the joining (AT New York) of HEAD CENTRE 3 9 6 Stephens.

Not a word from Mr Meissner yet. I presume that now, at the

[^1]: Was not the Pope's d address to the French OFFICERS capital? Only an Italian priest could thus, before the whole of Europe, deliver Bonaparte a kick in the form of a BLESSING.397

[^2]: It is highly characteristic of the status rerume that neither Bonaparte nor William the Conqueror f are quite right in the top DEPARTMENT. T h e latter believes that God Almighty has entrusted him with a special mission, and the former has been TURNED SO TOPSYTURVY by Mexico 2 ? 0 and Bismarck that he sometimes appears positively demented.

[^3]: And do you not think that there will be peace for another year yet at least (apart from ACCIDENTS, of course, such as the death of Bonaparte, etc.)? T h e fellows all need time for the CONVERSION and PRODUCTION OF ARMS, d o they not?

[^4]: a L. Reybaud, 'L'économie politique des ouvriers', Revue des deux Mondes, Vol. 66, 1 November 1866; J. E. Alaux, 'Une forme nouvelle du socialisme. Le Congrès ouvrier de Genève', Revue contemporaine, Vol. 53, 15 October 1866. - b Marx refers to an editorial published in The Fortnightly Review, No. 37, December 1866. - c fortunately - d Pius IX - e state of affairs - f An ironic reference to William I of Prussia



