---
Volume: 42
Document_Title: "204. Engels to Marx. 21 December "
Page_Range: "378-380"
---

# 204. Engels to Marx. 21 December 



**[p. 339]**

As you enjoy credit with quelconque" bookseller and I CAN not SPEND a FARTHING on books at the moment, you would be doing me a great favour if you could get as quickly as possible for me: '/. E. Th. Rogers: A History of Agriculture'. I must have a look at the book and have left a gap in one chapter for the purpose. 3 9 8

Although it has already been out for a long time, it is not yet in the library. Nor at Mudie's, so I am assured by Eccarius, for whom The Commonwealth took out a subscription there. Salut.

Your

K. M.

First published in Der Briefwechsel zwischen Printed according to the original F. Engels und K. Marx, Bd. 3, Stuttgart, 1913 Published in English for the first time

204

Manchester, 21 December 1866

Dear Moor,

I also think that the leaders in Western Europe will do their utmost to preserve the peace next year and until everyone is equipped with breech-loaders. However, whether the Russians will not consider this very time opportune for cutting Austria down to size with Bismarck's help, for annexing Galicia and dividing Turkey u p into a multitude of small Slav states, is another question. Moreover, it could happen that in France, too, war will become a necessity—for the sake of this military reorganisation, because without a war good old Boustrapa7<i will

[^1]: ENGELS T O MARX 3 9 9

[^2]: IN LONDON

[^3]: •' of the first volume of Capital (see this volume, pp. 174-75) - b some



I will get the bookf for you next week if I can. It is very pleasing about the articles in the Revue des deux Mondes and Fortnightly, although I have not yet been able to read them.8

Revue contemporaine^ does not exist here.

Wehner, who was recently in Germany, tells the following anecdote, which was told by Bennigsen (of the National Associa- tion ll2) himself: when Bennigsen had his meeting with Bismarck before the war, the latter expounded his whole National- Associationist German policy to him, whereupon Bennigsen enquired how it was that Bismarck was choosing the difficult path of war in order to carry it out, instead of simply 'relying on the support of the people', as the liberal cry has it. Bismarck stared at him for a few moments and then said: Could you jump a ditch with a rheumatic nag? He also brought back the news that the unhappy Crown Prince,1 who used to put on such liberal airs, has

[^1]: a the Austro-Prussian war - b a just man, firm of purpose (Horace, Odes, III, iii, 1) - c basically - d in respect of politics - e the tyrant's threatening countenance (Horace, Odes, III, iii, 3) - s J. E. Th. Rogers, A History of Agriculture (see previous letter) - S L. Reybaud, 'L'économie politique des ouvriers', Revue des deux Mondes, Vol. 66, 1 November 1866; the leading article in The Fortnightly Review, No. 37, December 1866. - h See this volume, p. 338. - ' Frederick William



