---
Volume: 42
Document_Title: "205. Marx to Engels. 31 December "
Page_Range: "380-382"
---

# 205. Marx to Engels. 31 December 



**[p. 341]**

I enclose another two five-pound-notes, so that you shall not be quite without money over the holidays:

M/W 34768, London, 12 October 1866, I/S 49080, Manchester, 26 January 1866, in the not entirely unfounded expectation that the accounts will indemnify me for it at the end of the year.

Many regards to the LADIES.

Your

F. E.

First published abridged in Der Briefwech- Printed according to the original sei zwischen F. Engels und K. Marx, Bd. 3, Stuttgart, 1913 and in full in MEGA, Published in English in full for the Abt. Ill, Bd. 3, Berlin, 1930 first time

205

MARX TO ENGELS33

[London,] 31 December 1866

Happy New Year! Ditto for Madame Lizzyb! May the devil take Russians, Prussians, Bonaparte and the BRITISH JURYMAN in the coming year!

Apropos. The French government had confiscated papers and documents intended for us which were being brought across the frontier by French MEMBERS after the Geneva Congress, and attached them for the police archives. We claimed the things back through Lord Stanley, FOREIGN MINISTER, as 'BRITISH PROPERTY'. And in fact POOR Bonaparte had to surrender everything to us via the FOREIGN OFFICE. IS that not priceless! He has been outwitted but himself does not know how.

I received some very sad news today — my uncle0 has died, he was an excellent man. However, he made a good death, quick,

[^1]: IN MANCHESTER

[^2]: DEAR FRED,

[^3]: a William I - b Lizzy Burns - c Lion Philips





**[p. 342]**

The whole family sends you New Year greetings.

Salut.

Your

K. M.

First published in Der Briefwechsel zwischen F. Engels und K. Marx, Bd. 3, Stuttgart, 1913

Printed according to the original

Published in English in full for the first time

