---
Volume: 42
Document_Title: "207. Engels to Marx. 29 January "
Page_Range: "383-385"
---

# 207. Engels to Marx. 29 January 



**[p. 344]**

FIX.

As for my physical condition, it has been better for some weeks, a few small carbuncles on my left loin, but not significant. Only dreadful insomnia, which makes me very RESTLESS, although the chief cause is probably mental.

THANKS for the Rogers.3 A lot of material in it. Regarding the STRIKE question, or at least the Manchester WEAVERS' DISPUTE, I should be obliged to you if you would write me an exact account of the STATE OF AFFAIRS, as I can still include it.b

Politics frozen up, too cold even for the Russian bear. I am tickled by the Prussians' black, white and red flag!403

Best wishes to MRS Lizzy.c

What does Gumpert have to say about Moilind?

Your

K. M.

First published in Der Briefwechsel zwischen Printed according to the original F. Engels und K. Marx, Bd. 3, Stuttgart, . , . , . , „ , ig 2 3 Published in English in full tor the first time

207

ENGELS TO MARX

Manchester, 29 January 1867

Dear Moor,

I have been so overrun by philistines this morning that I did not manage to despatch the second half of the note by first post, but am doing so herewith.

I expect Meissner will accept your opinion. At all events it is obvious that after the first volumee you must have a 6 week rest,

[^1]: IN LONDON

[^2]: a See this volume, pp. 339 and 340. - b in the first volume of Capital - c Lizzy Burns - d J. A. Moilin (le docteur Tony), Leçons de médecine physiologique (see this volume, pp. 324-25). - e of Capital (see this volume, p. 343).





**[p. 345]**

The position regarding WORKINGMEN AND MANUFACTURERS is as follows: India, China, Levant, etc., grossly oversupplied, in consequence of which CALICOS have been almost unsaleable for the last 6 months. In some districts feeble attempts by the MANUFACTUR- ERS to organise SHORT TIME ensued. Being only sporadic, all of these collapsed. Meanwhile, the manufacturers go and send consignments of their goods, unsaleable here, to India and China, etc., thereby aggravating the GLUT. They then discover that this does not agree with them either, and they finally propose the HANDS should take a 5% REDUCTION OF WAGES. Whereupon counterproposal from the HANDS to work just 4 days a week. Refus" of the MASTERS—AGITATION. In the last fortnight, finally, a situation has gradually been reached, and most recently become general, where SHORT TIME at 4 days a week has been introduced everywhere in the weaving mills and in the spinning mills that spin for them, in some cases with and in some cases without the 5% reduction in wages. The workers therefore were right in theory and were proved right in practice, too.404

The scoundrel Bismarck has splendidly gulled the scoundrel Bonaparte over the Peace of Prague, exactly as Bonaparte gulled the Austrians at Villafranca about the expelled Italian princes qui

rentreront dans leurs étatsb—but without recourse to foreign troops.365 Bismarck is thus saying: the South German states auront une existence internationale indépendante/ but only for so long as they themselves wish; from the moment that they wish to join with us, they shall be entirely free to do so, otherwise after all they would be not indépendants!405 POOR Bonaparte has never been a member of a student fraternity at a German university, nor has he ever practised the art of interpretation at one of their beer- conventions, and is consequently no match for the Hon. Bismarck. In Hanover they are most frightfully vexed at the Prussians,355

and not just the city itself but even more so amongst the peasantry — they are flocking to the queend and putting all their assets at her disposal.

There is much ludicrous sentimentality therein, mixed with hatred for the military and the police; the very same people, e. g., are themselves saying that the administration is much improved, etc., but the Prussians' talent for inspiring hatred for themselves

[^1]: a Rejection - b who will return to their states - c will have an independent internation- al existence - d Marie of Hanover



