---
Volume: 42
Document_Title: "208. Marx to Ludwig Kugelmann. 18 February "
Page_Range: "385-386"
---

# 208. Marx to Ludwig Kugelmann. 18 February 

If I can manage it, I'll come down and see you for a few days at the end of this week or next, i. e., from Friday to Sunday evening. Providing it does not freeze again. Kindest regards to the LADIES.

Your

F. E.

First published in Der Briefwechsel zwischen Printed according to the original F. Engels und K. Marx, Bd. 3, Stuttgart, , , . , , . r- jgjg Published in English for the first time

208

MARX TO LUDWIG KUGELMANN"5

IN HANOVER

[London,] 18 February 1867 Dear Kugelmann,

Will you see to it that the following reply3 is placed in the Zeitung für Norddeutschland, and, if they refuse it, in another Hanoverian paper? It is a matter of some importance to me as I really am intending to travel to Germany in a few weeks' time. The whole notice reeks of Stieber.406

In the next few days I shall send you the official report of the congress in Geneva, which is now appearing in instalments in English and French in a paper here.407 The Commonwealth is entirely given over to the REFORM MOVEMENT. Its editorship is in very bad hands. For the present we have reasons for letting it go as it is, although as shareholders we are entitled to intervene.

Our Association has recently had all manner of bother with Mr Bonaparte.402 More next time. Kindly inform me what Liebknecht is doing and where he is hiding.

Yours

K. M.

[^1]: First published in Die Neue Zeit, Bd. 2, Printed according to the original Nr. 3, Stuttgart, 1901-1902

[^2]: a K. Marx, 'A Correction'.



