---
Volume: 42
Document_Title: "212. Mar x to Engels. 2 April: "
Page_Range: "389-391"
---

# 212. Mar x to Engels. 2 April: 



**[p. 350]**

As an exercise in vulgar democracy, I have recently3

First published in Der Briefwechsel zwischen Printed according to the original F. Engels und K. Marx, Bd. 3, Stuttgart, , ,. , , . ,. ,. , . r „ . ,013 Published in English in lull tor the first time

212

MARX TO ENGELS33

IN MANCHESTER

[London,] 2 Aprilb 1867

Dear Engels,

I had resolved not to write to you until I could announce completion of the book,' which is now the case. Nor did I wish to bore you by explaining the further delay, viz., carbuncles on my posterior and near the PENIS, the final traces of which are now fading but which made it extremely painful for me to adopt a sitting (hence writing) posture. 1 am not taking arsenic because it dulls my mind too much and I needed to keep my wits about me at least at those times when writing was possible.

Next week I shall have to take the manuscript to Hamburg myself.412 I did not like the tone of Mr Meissner's last letter. Added to which, I received the enclosed scrawl from Borkheim yesterday. I have every reason to believe that the 'continental friend' is Mr Privy Councillor Bucher.413 Borkheim had written him a letter, you know, which he read out to me, about his arrangements for travelling to Silesia, which he wishes to visit on family business. Bücher replied directly. I therefore scent a plot behind these canards and will have to put the knife to Meissner's

[^1]: a The end of this letter is missing. - b The original has: 27 March. - c the first volume of Capital





**[p. 351]**

I must now d'abord3 reclaim my clothes and timepiece from their abode at the pawnbroker's. I can also hardly leave my family in their present situation, they being sans souh and the creditors becoming more brazen each day. Finally, before I forget, all the money that I could afford to spend on Laura's champagne- treatment has gone the way of all flesh. She now needs red wine, of better quality than I can command. Voilà la situation.1

Our 'INTERNATIONAL' has just celebrated a great victory. We were providing financial support from the LONDON TRADE-UNIONS for the Paris bronze WORKERS, who were out on STRIKE. As soon as the masters learnt of that, they gave in.414 The affair has created a deal of commotion in the French papers, and we are now an established force in France.

It appears to me there must have been collusion between Bismarck and Bonaparte over the Luxemburg affair. It is possible, though improbable, that the former either cannot or will not keep his word.415 That the Russians have been meddling in German affairs is crystal clear from:

1. the treaty between Württemberg and Prussia, which was already concluded on 13 August before all the others;

The Russians are more active than ever. They are setting the stage for trouble between France and Germany. Austria is pretty well paralysed in herself. Our English gentlemen are about to be led a fine song and dance in the UNITED STATES.

Salut.

Your

K. M.

[^1]: 2. Bismarck's demeanour in respect of the Poles.416

[^2]: First published abridged in Der Briefwech- sel zwischen F. Engels und K. Marx, Bd. 3, Stuttgart, 1913 and in full in MEGA, Abt. III, Bd. 3, Berlin, 1930

[^3]: Printed according to the original

[^4]: Published in English in full for the first time

[^5]: first of all - b penniless - c That is the situation.



