---
Volume: 42
Document_Title: "217. Mar x to Engels. 24 April "
Page_Range: "398-401"
---

# 217. Mar x to Engels. 24 April 



**[p. 359]**

I must finish now (more later) as Dr Kugelmann, who sends his best compliments, intends to acquaint me with the splendours of Hanover.

Tout à toi''

K. Marx

First published in: Marx Festnummer zum Printed according to the original 40. Todestage, Wien, 1923 r Published in English m full for the first time

217

MARX TO ENGELS 101

IN MANCHESTER

Hanover, 24 April 1867

Dear FRED,

I have been here as Dr Kugelmann's guest for a week now. I was obliged to stay in Hamburg or right near Hamburg on account of the printing.b Things stand as follows. Meissner wants to have the whole undertaking complete in 4-5 weeks, but cannot get the printing done in Hamburg, both because there are not enough printers, and because the proof-readers are insufficiently learned. He is therefore having the printing done at Otto Wigand's (or RATHER his son's,c as that puffed-up old cur only has a nominal share in the business now). He sent the manuscript to Leipzig a week ago. He now wants to have me to hand to check the first 2 proof-sheets and at the same lime to decide whether it is 'possible' to print quickly with a single proof-reading on my part. In this case, the whole undertaking would be complete in 4-5 weeks. However, Easter week is now holding it up. Wigand Jr wrote to Meissner that he cannot start until the end of this week. At Kugelmann's pressing invitation, I therefore came here (which also

[^1]: a Entirely yours - b of the first volume of Capital - c Hugo Wigand





**[p. 360]**

Regarding Hanover, then. Kugelmann is a doctor of great eminence in his special field, which is gynaecology. He is in correspondence with Virchow and the other authorities (including one Meyer in Berlin) and formerly with von Siebold in Göttingen and with Semmelweis in Vienna, before he went mad. Whenever there is a difficult case in this field over here, he is always brought in as consultant. As an instance of the professional jealousy and stupidity of the locals, he told me he had initially been blackballed, i.e., not admitted to the doctors' association here, because 'gynaecology' is a 'cesspit of immorality'. Kugelmann is very talented technically, too. He has invented a mass of new instruments in this field.

Kugelmann is secondly a fanatical supporter (and for my taste excessively Westphalian in his admiration) of our ideas and the two of us personally. He sometimes bores me with his enthusiasm, which is at odds with the detachment he displays as a doctor. But he understands, and he is a really excellent man, unaffected by qualms, capable of making sacrifices, and, most important of all, convinced. He has a charming little wife and an 8-year old daughter who is positively sweet." He has in his possession a far better collection of our works than the two of us together. I even came across The Holy Family again here, which he presented to me and of which he will be sending you a copy. I was pleasantly surprised to find that we have no need to feel ashamed of the piece, although the Feuerbach cult now makes a most comical impression upon one. The ordinary people, and in the capital, Hanover, even the bourgeoisie, are extremely hostile to the Prussians (ditto in Electoral Hesse) and miss no opportunity of expressing their sentiments. They openly proclaim their longing—

[^1]: a Gertruda and Franziska Kugelmann





**[p. 361]**

The standing the two of us enjoy in Germany, particularly among the 'educated' officials, is of an altogether different order from what we imagined. Thus, e.g., the director of the statistical bureau here, Merkel, visited me and told me, he had been studying questions of money for years to no avail, and I had immediately clarified the matter once and for all. 'Your Dioscurus Engels,' he told me, 'was recently acknowledged by my colleague Engel before the royal family in Berlin.' These are trifling things, but they are important for us. We have more influence on these officials than on the louts.

I was also invited to attend the society of 'Europeans', as they call the anti-Prussian, North-Germanic members of the National Association 152 here. What jackasses!

I also received an invitation from the head (head-in-chief, as Stieber calls it421) of the railway here. I went along, he provided some good herb wine, his wife was 'delaighted', and as I was leaving, he thanked me 'for doing him such an honour'.

I have a debt of honour—£10—to settle with Mr Wheeler, a member of our COUNCIL b and MANAGER of the EMPIRE INSURANCE CORPORATION. YOU would oblige me greatly if you would send him the money on my behalf: 'G. Wheeler, Esq., 27 Gresham Street, E.C. PRIVATE (London). I am also very much afraid that my family in London may be 'in profundis'.' This grieves me the more particularly because poor good little Jenny's birthday is May 1st. I have cast out nets with a view to making a monetary haul. With what success remains to be seen.

My health is extraordinarily improved. No trace of the old complaint. What is more, in good spirits, despite all adversity, and no liver trouble.

[^1]: a In the original the South-German dialect here: 'mür'. - b General Council of the International Working Men's Association - c in dire straits

[^2]: 14-1196



