---
Volume: 42
Document_Title: "218. Engel s to Marx. 27 April "
Page_Range: "401-405"
---

# 218. Engel s to Marx. 27 April 



**[p. I]**

Your

Moor

Freiligrath is making a fool of himself by his public beggary in Germany.422 Meissner tells me he has disappeared without trace in North Germany.

First published abridged in Der Briefwech- Printed according to the original sei zwischen F. Eneels und K. Marx, Bd. 3, . ,.

C l „ , loi Q J • c ii • <^i?/~ A Published in English in full for the Stuttgart, 1913 and in lull in MEGA, (. .^ 6

Abt. Ill, Bd. 3, Berlin, 1930

first time

218

ENGELS TO MARX101

IN HANOVER

Manchester, 27 April 1867

Dear Moor,

have received both your letters, the second yesterday afternoon, and would have replied to your first long before, if I had known where to. Firstly, BUSINESS. I am sending £10 to your wife, who wrote to me this morning, and likewise the other £10 to Wheeler at the beginning of next month. This will give you some peace of mind in that regard, and, from what you write, the future also looks rosier at last. I always had the feeling that that damn book," which you have been carrying for so long, was at the bottom of all your misfortune, and you would and could never extricate yourself until you had got it off your back. Forever resisting completion, it was driving you physically, mentally and financially into the ground, and I can very well understand that, having shaken off that nightmare, you now feel quite a new man, especially as, once you have got back into it again, the world doesn't seem so gloomy a place as it did before. Especially when you have such a capital publisher as Meissner appears to be. Incidentally, a quick printing will only be possible, I fear, if you can remain in the vicinity throughout, i.e., on the continent;

[^1]: Capital





**[p. 363]**



[^1]: a F. Engels, The Prussian Military Question and the German Workers' Party. - b friend - c compare - d F. Lassalle, Die Philosophie Herakleitos des Dunklen von

[^2]: Ephesos. - e K. Marx, The Eighteenth Brumaire of Louis Bonaparte. - f Gottfried Ermen

[^3]: 14*





**[p. 364]**

I cannot go along with Meissner's suggestion.3 À few sheets could be quickly knocked together, but something longer, 6 à 10 sheets, would require more work and be too late for the war now brewing.415 One really cannot just knock together rubbish in the manner of Vogt's Studien.h Furthermore, the stuff would be looked upon more or less as a party manifesto, and for that we would have to discuss the matter first. However, I have had an anti-Russian piece in mind for some time, and, if events provide me with an excuse, I shall start on it without more ado and write to Meissner. The only thing I am still in two minds about is whether I should make the 'nationality principle'424 or the 'Eastern Question' the chief theme.

I had expected that Bismarck would come knocking at your door, although not his haste.' It is characteristic of the fellow's mentality and outlook that he judges everybody by his own standards. The bourgeoisie may well admire the great men of today, it sees itself reflected in them. All the qualities to which Bonaparte and Bismarck owe their successes are the qualities of businessman: the pursuit of a specific purpose by a policy of wait-and-see and experimentation, until they hit the right moment, the diplomacy of always leaving the back door open, negotiating and haggling, swallowing insults if it is in one's interest, the attitude of 'ne soyons pas larrons '? in short, the businessman in all things. In his own way, Gottfried Ermen is as great a statesman as Bismarck, and, if one follows the tricks of these great men, one is constantly reminded of the Manchester Exchange. Bismarck thinks, if I only continue knocking at Marx's door, I am bound to hit upon the right moment eventually, and then we shall do a deal together after all. Gottfried Ermen to a tee.

[^1]: a See this volume, pp. 359-60. - b C. Vogt, Studien zur gegenwärtigen Lage Europas (for Marx's criticism of this work see present edition, Vol. 17). - c See this volume, p. 361. - d let us not be robbers





**[p. 365]**

I would not have expected the Prussians to be so hated there. But how do you reconcile that with the election results? Those jackasses from the National Association 152 did get half their men through, and in Electoral Hesse all but one.

Vogt has got a life-size portrait of himself in the Gartenlaube* He has become a proper porker in the last few years, and looks fine.

In the Demokratische Studien, which recently came my way, Simon of Trier has quite naively copied out whole pages from Po and Rhine,b without suspecting from what poisoned source he was drawing!c Similarly, in 'Preussen in Waffen', the lieutenant who writes the military articles in Unsere Zeit has borrowed at length from my pamphlet,d likewise without giving his sources, of course.

Rüstow will stop at nothing to become a Prussian general, as though that could be as easily done as with Garibaldi. In his abysmal and slipshod book on the war,6 he grovels in optima forma1

before William the Conqueror and the Prince.8 That's why he is moving to Berlin.

I saw Ernest Jones the other day, he has had enquiries from 4 places about standing for election under the new BILL425—from Manchester as well. Has not a good word to say for the workers here AND BACKS THE PRUSSIANS AT ANY ODDS AGAINST THE FRENCH. I hope this wretched war passes over, I cannot see that any good can come of it. A French revolution saddled in advance with the obligation to go a-conquering would be very nasty; it almost seems as though Bonaparte would be satisfied with the tiniest tit-bit, but whether the Lord of Hosts will permit handsome William to grant him even that tit-bit, time alone will show.

My kindest regards to Dr Kugelmann, although we are not acquainted, and my thanks to him for The Holy Family.h

Your

F. E.

[^1]: First published abridged in Der Briefwech- Printed according to the original sei zwischen F. Engels und K. Marx, Bd. 3, Stuttgart, 1913 and in full in MEGA, Published in English in full for the Abt. Ill, Bd. 3, Berlin, 1930 f l r s t t l m e

[^2]: a Die Gartenlaube, No. 10, 1867. - b F. Engels, Po and Rhine. - c L. Simon, 'Deutsch- land und seine beiden Grossmächte', Demokratische Studien, 1860. - d F. Engels, The Prussian Military Question and the German Workers' Party. - e W. Rüstow, Der Krieg von 1866 in Deutschland und Italien. - ' in top form - S William I of Prussia (an ironical comparison with the Norman William, who conquered England in 1066) and Frederick Charles - h by K. Marx and F. Engels; see this volume, p. 360.



