---
Volume: 42
Document_Title: "219. Mar x to Sigfrid Meyer. 30 April "
Page_Range: "405-406"
---

# 219. Mar x to Sigfrid Meyer. 30 April 



**[p. 219]**

MARX TO SIGFRID MEYER426

IN NEW YORK

Hanover, 30 April 1867

Dear Friend,

You must think very badly of me, and all the more so when I tell you that your letters did not merely give me great pleasure but were a real comfort to me since they reached me at a time of great affliction. The knowledge that a capable man, à la hauteur des principes,* has been won for our party, is some compensation to me for the worst. Your letters were furthermore full of such warm friendship for me personally, and you will appreciate that I who am engaged in a most bitter struggle with the (official) world can least afford to underestimate such things.

Why then did I not answer you? Because I was the whole time at death's door. I thus had to make use of every moment when I was capable of work to complete my book,b to which I have sacrificed my health, happiness, and family. I hope this explana- tion suffices. I laugh at the so-called 'practical' men and their wisdom. If one wanted to be an ox, one could, of course, turn one's back on the sufferings of humanity and look after one's own hide. But I should really have thought myself unpractical if I had pegged out without finally completing my book, at least in manuscript.

The first volume of the book will be published by Otto Meissner in Hamburg in a few weeks. The title of the work is: 'Capital. A Critique of Political Economy'. I travelled to Germany to bring over the manuscript, and I am spending a few days with a friend in Hanoverc on my way back to London.412

Volume I comprises the 'Process of Production of Capital'. As well as setting out the general theory, I examine in great detail the conditions of the English—agricultural and industrial — proletariat over the last 20 years, ditto the condition of Ireland, basing myself on official sources that have never previously been used. You will immediately realise that all this serves me solely as an argumentum

ad hominem?

[^1]: a of high principles - b the first volume of Capital - c Ludwig Kugelmann - d evidence against the adversary



