---
Volume: 42
Document_Title: "220. Mar x to Ludwig Büchner. 1 May "
Page_Range: "406-408"
---

# 220. Mar x to Ludwig Büchner. 1 May 



**[p. 367]**

I hope that a year from now the whole work will have appeared. Volume II contains the continuation and conclusion of the theory, Volume III the history of political economy from the middle of the 17th century*16

As to the 'International Working Men's Association', it has become a power to be reckoned with in England, France, Switzerland, and Belgium. You should form as many branches as possible in America. CONTRIBUTION PER MEMBER 1 PENNY (ABOUT 1 silver groschen) per year. However, every branch gives what it can. Congress in Lausanne this year, 3 September. Every branch can send one representative. Do write to me about this matter, about how you are faring in America and about conditions in general. If you do not write, I shall take it as showing that you have not yet absolved me.

With warmest greetings

Your

Karl Marx

First published abridged in Die Neue Zeit, Printed according to the original Bd. 2, Nr. 33, 1906-1907 and in full in: Marx and Engels, Worts, First Russian Edition, Vol. XXV, Moscow, 1934

220

MARX T O LUDWIG BÜCHNER427

Hanover, 1 May 1867 (c/o Dr Kugelmann)

Dear Sir,

Although we are entirely unacquainted, I am taking the liberty of addressing a personal letter to you, on a personal, although at the same time scientific, matter; and I hope you will excuse my so doing on account of the confidence you inspire in me as a man of science and of the party.

I have come to Germany to deliver the first volume of my work 'Capital. A Critique of Political Economy' to my publisher, Mr Otto Meissner in Hamburg. I have to stay here a few days longer to see

[^1]: IN DARMSTADT





**[p. 368]**

The reason I am writing to you personally is this: I should like to have the thing published in French as well, in Paris, after its publication in Germany. I cannot go there myself, at least not without risk, as I have been expelled from France, first under Louis Philippe and a second time under Louis Bonaparte (President),428 and finally I have been ceaselessly attacking Mr Louis during my exile in London. I cannot therefore go personally to seek out a translator. I know that your work on 'Stoff und Kraft'3 has appeared in French, and therefore suppose that you can put me in touch, directly or indirectly, with a suitable person. As I have to prepare the second volume for printing this summer and the concluding third volume418 next winter, I do not have the time to attend to the French version of the book429 myself.

I consider it to be of the greatest importance to emancipate the French from the erroneous views under which Proudhon with his idealised petty bourgeoisie has buried them. At the recent congress in Geneva,375 ditto in the links that I have with the Paris branch as a member of the General Council of the International Working Men's Association, I am constantly confronted with Proudhonism's most repugnant consequences.

As I do not know for how long I shall be staying here, I should be obliged to you for an early answer. If I, for my part, can be of any service to you in London, I shall do so with the greatest pleasure.

Yours most respectfully

Karl Marx

[^1]: First published in: Marx and Engels, Printed according to the original Works, First Russian Edition, Vol. XXV, Moscow, 1934

[^2]: a L. Büchner, Kraft und Stoff. Empirisch-naturphilosophische Studien (the French edition, Force et matière, appeared in 1863).



