---
Volume: 42
Document_Title: "221. Marx to His Daughter Jenny. 5 May "
Page_Range: "408-409"
---

# 221. Marx to His Daughter Jenny. 5 May 



**[p. 221]**

MARX TO HIS DAUGHTER JENNY

IN LONDON

Hanover, 5 May 1867

My dear Child,

Your letter gave me the greatest pleasure. It is written in the true Imperial style.3 I hope to find you plump and fresh like a May rose.

The enclosed photograph was to be sent to you for your birthday, but was not ready. It is backed by the photograph of Mme Tenge (by-the-by, the aunt of the Baer's girl, of whom Edgarb told us so much), who, however, is not so beautiful in reality as her shadow indicates. But she is a really noble nature, of a peculiar suavity, frankness and simplicity of character. Nothing of 'falsche Bildung'.' She speaks English, French and Italian (she is of Italian descent) perfectly. Although a great musician, she does not kill one with Kunstgeschwäts,d which, on the contrary, she abhors. She is an atheist and inclines to Socialism, although rather little informed on that point. What distinguishes her above all is a spontaneous kindness and the absence of all pretensions. I feel sure you would in no time become very intimate friends. Mrs Kugelmann is also a nice little woman.

To-day, on my birthday, I receive the first 'Bogen'e for revision. I fear the book will become rather a little too big. In consequence of the Easter week business, the printing did not commence before 29th April, Meissner growing very wild at this suspense. Mean- while, time has not been lost. Preliminary notices have been published almost in all German papers. Kugelmann has very many connections, which were all put into motion.

Your birthdayf was solemnly celebrated here. Except part of the bourgeoisie, lawyers and such ones, there reigns here at Hanover a fanatical hatred of the Prussians, which much amuses me.

The delay of war is exclusively due to the Derby Cabinet. As

[^1]: I was very glad to hear of your Polish surprise. If the things have no mercantile value, they have a historical one.430

[^2]: a An allusion to Jenny's jocular nickname: 'the Emperor'. - b Edgar von Westphalen -

[^3]: c sham education - d chatter about art - e sheet (of the first volume of Capital) - f 1 May



