---
Volume: 42
Document_Title: "222. Marx to Engels. 7 May "
Page_Range: "409-414"
---

# 222. Marx to Engels. 7 May 



**[p. 370]**

long as it remains at the head of England, Russia will not (sound the war signal—a phrase, by-the-by, which is conceived in the true colletian style.

I cannot exactly state the day of my return. I have still to receive letters from different sides. I shall return directly from here via Hamburg (there to have another interview with my publishera) to London.

I had, very soon after my arrival here, written to Liebknecht.111

He has answered. His wifeb cannot be saved. She is approaching the catastrophe. She sends her compliments to you all and was cheered up by your letters.

Hegel's photograph will be looked after. It is not to be had at Hanover. As to his Thilos, of Hist.', I shall try to find it at London.

I consider that Cacadouc might have written some lines long since, but excuse her with her equestrian studies.

And now, with my best wishes to all, adio, my dear 'Joe'.d

Your

Old One

I add a few lines for Tussy.e

222

Hanover, 7 May 1867

Dear FRED,

[^1]: First published, in Russian, in Voin- Reproduced from the original stvuyushchy materialist, Book 4, 1925 and in the language of the original, English, in The Socialist Review (London), No. 44, September 1929

[^2]: MARX TO ENGELS26

[^3]: IN MANCHESTER

[^4]: D'abord,1 best thanks for your intervention in the most pressing casus delicti,g as well as for your very detailed letter.

[^5]: a Otto Meissner - b Ernestine Liebknecht - c Laura's jocular nickname - d a charac- ter from Louisa May Alcott's Little Women - e Eleanor Marx (these lines have not been found) - ( First of all - s difficult case





**[p. 371]**

Meanwhile, my time here has not been wasted. Letters have been written to all and sundry, and preliminary notices have appeared in most German papers.

I hope and confidently believe that in the space of a year I shall be made, in the sense that I shall be able to fundamentally rectify my financial affairs and at last stand on my own feet again. Without you, I would never have been able to bring the work to a conclusion, and I can assure you it always weighed like a nightmare on my conscience that you were allowing your fine energies to be squandered and to rust in commerce, chiefly for my sake, and, INTO THE BARGAIN, that you had to share all my petites misèresd as well. On the other hand, I cannot conceal from myself that I still have a year OF TRIAL ahead of me. I have taken a step on which a great deal depends, viz., on which it depends whether several £100 will be made available to me from the only quarter where that is possible. There is a tolerable prospect of a positive outcome, but I shall remain uncertain for ABOUT 6 weeks. I shall not have definite confirmation until then. What I am most afraid of—apart from the uncertainty—is my return to London, which will be necessary in 6-8 days. My debts there are considerable, and

[^1]: a the first volume of Capital - b After so many perils! (Paraphrase of an expression from Virgil's Aeneid, I, 204: post tot discrimina rerum—after so many setbacks.) - c gradually - d little miseries





**[p. 372]**

Dr Kugelmann and his wife11 are being exceptionally kind to me and anticipate my every need. They are splendid people. They really leave me no time to explore 'the gloomy paths of my inner self. Apropos, the Bismarck affair must be kept absolutely secret.b

I promised to tell no one, not even Kugelmann, about it. Nor have I done so. I did, however, of course make the reservatio mentalis to except yourself.

You express surprise that the National-Liberals432 (or, as Kugelmann calls them, the Europeans) did so well in the elections,c

when the Prussians are so hated here. The matter is very simple. They did badly in all the larger towns, in smaller places they owed their victories to their organisation, which has existed ever since Gotha.433 These fellows do, on the whole, show how important party organisation is. That is the position in Hanover. In Electoral Hesse, there is no limit to the influence of Prussian intimidation, backed up by the shouting of the members of the National Association.152 The Prussians meanwhile are operating quite in the Persian manner here. It is true that they cannot transplant the population to their Eastern provinces, but they are doing so with their officials, right down to the RAILWAY conductors, and for the officers. Even those poor devils of postmen are having to move to Pomerania. In the meantime, trains full of Hessians, Hanoverians, etc., are to be seen on the railway every day en route to Bremen, emigrating to the United States. Not since dear old Germany came into existence has it sent such a motley crowd of people from all parts across the Atlantic. One is trying to avoid his taxes, another, his military service, a third the political situation, and all of them the hegemony of the sword and the gathering storm of war.

I am greatly diverted by the (pro-Prussian) bourgeoisie here. They want war, but immédiatement.'1 Business, they say, can stand the uncertainty no longer, and where the devil are the taxes to come from if business stagnates for much longer? Incidentally, you would scarcely conceive the burden that the last war and taxation have imposed upon the rural populace in Prussia. Here in the vicinity of Prussian Westphalia, e.g., truly Irish conditions prevail.

BY THE BY a few days ago the director of the joint-stock foundry

[^1]: " Gertruda Kugelmann - b See this volume, p. 361. - c to the North German Parliament (see this volume, p. 365) - d immediately





**[p. 373]**

I am sure you will recall J. Meyer (at Bielefeld), who refused to print our manuscript on Stirner, etc.,b and sent the youth Kriege to annoy us?434 A few months ago he threw himself out of the window in Warsaw, whither his business affairs had taken him, and broke his neck, if you please.

Our friend Miquel, who declared himself prepared to sacrifice freedom so readily for the sake of unity, is believed to be job-hunting. In my view, le brave homme' has miscalculated. Had he not hurled himself so fanatically and unconditionally at Bismarck's feet, he would have been able to pick up a generous gratuity. But now! What need is there for that? He has made himself so hated by his performance in the North German Parliament435 that he is chained to the Prussians like one convict to the next. And the Prussians, as you know, do not like to make 'useless' and superfluous dépenses? Recently, the Bismarckite newspaper, the Norddeutsche Allgemeine, produced by that scoun- drel Brass published a very witty articlee about the National- Associationites, pleading inability to emulate even the de mortuis nil nisi bene? It sent Bismarck's North-German-Confederationite, National-Associationite minions packing with some artistic kicks delivered con amore.s

As far as the war is concerned, I am entirely of your opinion. At the present moment, it can only do harm. If it could be delayed, even

[^1]: a Die geschichtsschreiber der deutschen Vorzeit, Vol. 1, Die Urzeit (Jacob Grimm took part in publishing this series of historical documents). - b K. Marx and F. Engels,

[^2]: The German Ideology. - c the good man - d expenditure - e 'Politischer Tagesbericht. 25. April 1867', Norddeutsche Allgemeine Zeitung, No. 97, 26 April 1867. - f motto, [speak] only good of the dead (Diogenes Laertius, De vitis philosophorum, I, 3, 70) - « with love





**[p. 374]**

In my view, we owe the postponement of war exclusively to the Derby ministry. It is anti-Russian, and Russia dares not give the signal until she is sure of Britain. Gladstone, THE PHRASEMONGER (entirely under the influence of LADY Palmerston, Shaftesbury, and LORD Cowper), and Bright, not forgetting Russell, would gladly provide her with the guarantees that Britain was disposed as recjuired. Derby had to be removed in 1859, too, in order to stage the Great Drama in Italy.c In the North German Parliament Bismarck was obliged to throw down the gauntlet to the Poles in the most brutal manner416 and thus declare his total subservience to the Tsard.

In the Prussian army there prevails deep distrust of the Russians amongst the better officers, as I learnt personally from Captain von Bölzig here (Guards Regiment, raised in the Cadet Corps, loyal to the Prussian monarchy, but a nice fellow). 'Bismarck's conduct in North Schleswig is incomprehensible to me. Only the Russians,' this he said quite unprompted, 'have any interest in maintaining tension between ourselves and Denmark.' He went on to call Frederick William IV a 'shady cavalier', who had turned Germany into Russia's lackey for '/a century. The Russian officers were 'shitty fellows', the army good for nothing, except for the Guards Regiments, Austria alone was capable of matching the Russian army, etc. I also put a good many more ideas into his head about the Muscovites.

And now adio. Kindest regards to MRS Lizzy.e

Tout à vous! Your

Moor

[^1]: First published abridged in Der Briefwech- sel zwischen F. Engels und K. Marx, Bd. 3, Stuttgart, 1913 and in full in MEGA, Abt. III, Bd. 3, Berlin, 1930

[^2]: Printed according to the original

[^3]: Published in English in full for the first time

[^4]: 3 An ironic reference to William I of Prussia. - b Johann Jacobi - c the war of France and Piedmont against Austria - d Alexander II e Lizzy Burns - f Entirely yours.



