---
Volume: 42
Document_Title: "223. Mar x to Laura Marx. 13 May "
Page_Range: "414-416"
---

# 223. Mar x to Laura Marx. 13 May 



**[p. 223]**

MARX TO LAURA MARX

IN LONDON

Hanover, 13 May 1867 My pretty little Cacadou,"

My best thanks for your letter, and that of the worthy Quoquo.b

You complain that I had given no signs of life, but on reviewing the question you will find that, on the whole, I have given weekly signals. Moreover, you know that I am not of a very 'demonstra- tive' character, of rather retiring habitudes, a slow writer, a clumsy sort of man or, as Quoquo has it, an anxious man.

I shall leave Hanover the day after to-morrow, and probably leave Hamburg by first steamer for London. Yet, you must not expect me to settle the day and the hour. I have still some business to transact with my publisher.' At all events, this is the last week of my continental stay.412

I am very glad that my photogramm has met with such good reception. The shadow is at all events less troublesome than the original.

As to Mrs Tenge, I wonder that you ask me how she looks, whether she is pretty? I have sent Jenny her photogramm, hidden behind my own. How could it have been lost? Now, to answer your questions, she is 33 years of age, mother of 5 children, rather interesting than pretty, and certainly no professional wit. But she is a superior woman. As to 'flirting', he would be rather a bold man who were to try it. As to 'admiration', I owe it, and there may, perhaps, have been on her side, some overestimation of your most humble and 'modest' master. You know, if no one is a prophet on his own dunghill (speaking symbolically), people are easily overvalued by strangers who, legen sie nicht aus, so legen sie doch unter,d and find what they were resolved upon to find in a fellah. She has left Hanover Thursday last.

Eight days since, the weather was still frosty and rainy. Now summer has at once burst into full bloom. On the whole, the weather, since my departure, was here as bad and changeable as it used to be in London. Only, and this is a great thing, the air is thinner.

[^1]: a Laura's jocular nickname - b Eleanor Marx - c Otto Meissner - d if they do not interpret something in their own way, so they attribute it (a play on the German verbs

[^2]: auslegen and unterlegen).



There arrive this morning rather 'excited' letters from Berlin. It seems that a collision between the workmen and the Pickelhauben* is apprehended. I do not expect much for the present, but there is something brewing. The working class, in the greater centres of Germany, are commencing to assume a more decided and threatening attitude. One fine morning there will be a nice dance!

And now my dear little birdseye, Cacadou, secretary, cook, equestrian, poet, auf Wiedersehn.h Viele Grüsse, anc Möhmchen, Quoquo and Queque, Helen,d and, last not least, our 'mutual friend'.e

Adio.

Your master

[^1]: Old Nickf

[^2]: Enclosed Hegel,g presented by Kugelmann to Mons. Lafargue.

[^3]: First published, in German, in Die Neue Reproduced from the original Zeit, Bd. 1, Nr. 2, 1907-1908 and in the language of the original, English, in Annali, an. 1, Milano, 1958

[^4]: a policemen - b good-bye - c Many greetings to - d Marx's wife—Jenny, his daughters Eleanor and Jenny, and Helene Demuth - e Paul Lafargue - f Marx's family nickname - s See this volume, p. 370.



