---
Volume: 42
Document_Title: "225. Mar x to Engels. 3 June "
Page_Range: "417-418"
---

# 225. Mar x to Engels. 3 June 



**[p. 225]**

MARX T O ENGELS

IN MANCHESTER

[London,] 3 JUNE 1867

DEAR FRED,

T h e reason why sheets 10 and 11 are not being sent to you, indeed why no more proofs 3 at all, you will discover from the enclosed note from Wigand. On the other hand, you will receive the first 5 pulls that have been sent to me. You can keep them ABOUT 8-10 days, but then you must let me know exactly which points in the exposition of the form of value you think should be specially popularised for the philistines in the supple- ment.438

Fenians ordered. 4 3 9 Other commissions will be executed BY AND BY. See the Hermann of last week. It is now the private herald of Mr Freiligrath, who is reporting on the PROGRESS OE THE SUBSCRIFHON here each week via Juch.422 Little Jenny says that if her father ever did such a thing, she would publicly proclaim him her non-father. Whereupon Lafargue asked her: Mais qu'est-ce que votre mère dirait là-dessus?h T h e noble poet' is incidentally sly enough to declare already that he will have to remain in London on account of his resp. part in the Shakespeare translation. Ferdinand and Ida, d Ida and Ferdinand, A WELL-ASSORTED COUPLE, THOSE TWO!

Apropos. When Gumpert asked me which hospital Lafargue was at, I said St Thomas's. I was, however, mistaken. He is at Bartholomew's Hospital and asks for the ERROR to be corrected. Please do not forget to supply a photogramm of yourself and Lupus.

Salut.

Your

K. M.

I was exceedingly pleased to read in the Paris correspondence of The Times that the Parisians chanted their support for the Poles to

[^1]: MY BEST COMPLIMENTS TO MRS Lizzy,e Moore and Chlormayer. f

[^2]: a of the first volume of Capital - b But what would your mother say to that? - c Ferdinand Freiligrath - d Ferdinand Freiligrath's wife - e Lizzy Burns - f The name given by Marx in joke to Carl Schorlemmer, a chemist by profession.



