---
Volume: 42
Document_Title: "226. Mar x to Ludwig Kugelmann. 10 June "
Page_Range: "418-420"
---

# 226. Mar x to Ludwig Kugelmann. 10 June 



**[p. 379]**

First published abridged in Der Briefwech- Printed according to the original sei zwischen F. Engels und K. Marx, Bd. 3, Stuttgart, 1913 and in full in MEGA, Published in English for the first Abt. "ill, Bd. 3, Berlin, 1930 t i m e

226

MARX TO LUDWIG KUGELMANN65

IN HANOVER

London, 10 June 1867

Dear Friend,

The delay attending this letter will expose me to the more or less 'well-founded suspicion' of being a 'bad fellow'. The sole extenuating circumstance I can plead is that I have only been 'resident' in London for the last few days. In the interval I was visiting Engels in Manchester.437 But I am sure you and your dear wifea now know me sufficiently to realise that epistolary negli- gence is the rule with me. Nevertheless, my thoughts were with you every day. I count my stay in Hanover among the most splendid and refreshing oases in life's desert.412

My stay in Hamburg was uneventful, except that, despite all precautions, I made the acquaintance of Mr Wilhelm Marr. In respect of his personal manner, he is Lassalle translated to Christianity, but there is naturally far less to him. Mr Niemann was also performing in the few days I spent there. However, I had been too spoiled by the society in Hanover to wish to attend a theatrical performance in less good company. Mr Niemann thus escaped me.

Apropos. Meissner is willing to print the medical pamphlet you are planning. You need only send him the manuscript and mention my name. Regarding the precise conditions, you will have to negotiate the rest with him yourself.

The crossing from Hamburg to London was by and large fair, if one discounts somewhat raw weather on the first day. A few hours

[^1]: Gertruda Kugelmann



for her destination. Just think what fodder that would provide for Blind or other vulgar democrats—my CONSPIRACY WITH Bismarck!

Today I despatched the 14th corrected proof-sheet.f I received the majority of them while staying with Engels, who is exceedingly pleased with them and, except for sheets 2 and 3, finds them written in a manner very easy to understand. I was reassured by his verdict, as I am always very dissatisfied with my things when I see them printed, especially at first sight.

Please convey my special thanks to your dear wife once more for her warm and friendly welcome to me; I am sending her the photogramm of my 2nd daughter Laura, as the other photo-

[^1]: a 19 May - b put a brave face on it - c the wandering lady - d the Prussian colours - e safe and sound - f of the first volume of Capital



