---
Volume: 42
Document_Title: "230. Engel s to Marx. 26 June "
Page_Range: "427-428"
---

# 230. Engel s to Marx. 26 June 



**[p. 388]**

Wurtz has only popularised and elaborated it." He is going to send you a book setting out the historical development of the subject.

Are there not old pre-Baconian, pre-Lockeian philosophical writings in English, in which we might be able to find material for the terminology? I have a feeling that something of that kind exists. And how about English attempts at reproducing Hegel?

Kindest regards to your wife and the girls.

Your

F. E.

First published in Der Briefwechsel zwischen F. Engels und K. Marx, Bd. 3, Stuttgart, 1913

Printed according to the original

Published in English in full for the first time

230

ENGELS TO MARX448

IN LONDON

Manchester, 26 June 1867

Dear Moor,

'Pursuant to mine faithfully of yesterday', two half five-pound- notes enclosed, whose 2nd halves will follow by 1st post early tomorrow morning and thus be in your possession tomorrow evening.

With regard to the production of surplus-value, another point: the manufacturer, and with him the vulgar economist, will immediately interject: if the capitalist only pays the worker the price of 6 hours for his 12 hours' labour, no surplus-value can be produced, since in that case each hour of the factory worker's labour counts only='/2 an hour's labour,=the amount which has been paid for, and only that value can be embodied in the value of the labour product. Whereupon there will follow the usual formula by way of example: so much for raw materials, so much for wear and tear, so much for wages (wages actually paid per hour's actual product), etc. Atrociously superficial though this argument may be, however much it may equate exchange-value

[^1]: a See this volume, pp. 382-83 and 385.



