---
Volume: 42
Document_Title: "231. Mar x to Engels. 27 June "
Page_Range: "428-430"
---

# 231. Mar x to Engels. 27 June 



**[p. 389]**

You must supply me with an address in London to which I can have the £100 sent next week. I am thinking of taking Lizzie3 via Grimsby to Hamburg, Schleswig, Copenhagen, etc., one week from now, and will probably be away for 4 weeks.449 I shall therefore have to get our cashier to send the money there on Thursday or Friday, for which purpose I need a neutral address, if possible commercial. You must therefore consider whom you would prefer for this purpose, and let me know at once.

When I have sent Lizzie back to Grimsby from Hamburg, I shall also go on to visit Meissner and Kugelmann, and then travel to the Rhine.

Kindest regards.

Your

F. E.

231

Dear FRED,

The 2 half £5-notes received with kindest thanks. With respect to the address, use Borkheim. He knows my situation, though with as much concealment as I consider necessary in his regard. I would even like him to know that you are lending me money. But

[^1]: First published in Der Briefwechsel zwischen F. Engels und K. Marx, Bd. 3, Stuttgart, 1913

[^2]: ;l Lizzie Burns - b The original has: July.

[^3]: Printed according to the original

[^4]: Published in English in full for the first time

[^5]: MARX TO ENGELS448

[^6]: IN MANCHESTER

[^7]: [London,] 27 June b 1867





**[p. 390]**

T h e Fenians should be delivered to you today.439

I was so very pleased by your lines of yesterday, and that requires no further elaboration from me.

Sheet 2 0 a was the latest to reach me. It will probably run to 40 or 42 sheets in all. I've not as yet received any corrected proofs after the ones already sent you. On your departure send me back those which are in your possession.

Regarding the objection that you mentioned the philistines and vulgar economists will infallibly raise (they forget, of course, that, if they reckon paid labour as wages, they are reckoning unpaid labour as profit, etc.), it amounts, in scientific terms, to the following question:

How is the value of the commodity transformed into its price of production, in which 1. the whole of the labour appears paid for in the form of wages; 2. the surplus-labour, however, or the surplus-value, assumes the form of an addition to the price, and goes by the name of interest, profit, etc., over and above the cost-price (=price of the constant part of capital+wages).

Answering this question presupposes: I. That the transformation of, for example, the value of a day's labour-power into wages or the price of a day's labour has been explained. This is done in Chapter V of this volume.450

Now if I wished to refute all such objections in advance, I should spoil the whole dialectical method of exposition. On the contrary, the good thing about this method is that it is constantly setting traps for those fellows which will provoke them into an untimely display of their idiocy.

[^1]: II. That the transformation of surplus-value into profit, and of profit into average profit, etc., has been explained. This presupposes that the process of the circulation of capital has been previously explained, since the turnover of capital, etc., plays a part here. This matter cannot therefore be treated prior to the 3rd book ( Volume II is to contain books 2 and 3).418 Here it will be shown how the philistines' and vulgar economists' manner of conceiving things arises, namely, because the only thing that is ever reflected in their minds is the immediate form of appearance of relations, and not their inner connection. Incidentally, if the latter were the case, we would surely have no need of science at all.

[^2]: a of the first volume of Capital



