---
Volume: 42
Document_Title: "233. Mar x to Ludwig Kugelmann. 13 July "
Page_Range: "434-435"
---

# 233. Mar x to Ludwig Kugelmann. 13 July 



**[p. 395]**

Vienna with regard to Poland, in respect of both Prussia and Russia, and France ditto?

First published in Der Briefwechsel zwischen Printed according to the original F. Engels und K. Marx Bd. 3, Stuttgart, IQ23 Published in English in full for the first time

233

MARX TO LUDWIG KUGELMANN65

IN HANOVER

London, 13 July 1867

Dear Friend,

THANKS FOR HEGEL AND the young madam!a

I shall now briefly answer all the points you raised. Engels is in Denmark at present and will be paying you a visit one day in the course of this month.449 Ad vocemh the same: you recall you told me that Menke (or whatever the man in your statistical office in Hanover is called) made some very appreciative remarks about the work of mine1 that was published by Duncker. For Engels' ears I have twisted this, to the effect that Menke expressed his great appreciation to me of Engels' 'Condition of the Working Class'.*1 The reason for this pia fraus'' (and I have perpetrated various fraudes1 with the same object in view): to spur Engels on to write and publish the second volume, concerning the period from 1845 to the present. I have at last succeeded in this to the extent that he has promised to get down to it. So, if by chance conversation should turn to the statistician, do not let the cat out of the bag.

Nothing is fixed for my wife's journey, nor can it be, it having been overtaken by another event, the proposed departure of my 3 daughters for Bordeaux, to visit Lafargue senior.g

I do not advise you to go to Paris. It is impossible to study anything in the midst of that Babylon of things and among that

[^1]: d for the portrait of Hegel and the photograph of Kugelmann's daughter, Franziska - b Concerning - c K. Marx, A Contribution to the Critique of Political Economy. - d F. Engels, The Condition of the Working-Class in England - e white lie - f deceits - R François Lafargue

[^2]: 15*



