---
Volume: 42
Document_Title: "234. Marx to Engels. 20 July "
Page_Range: "435-436"
---

# 234. Marx to Engels. 20 July 



**[p. 396]**

My book a comprises ABOUT 50 sheets. You see how I had miscalculated AS TO ITS EXTENT. A few days ago I sent the Appendix, entitled The Form of Value, Appendix to Chapter I, 1, to Leipzig. You know who was the author of this plan, and I herewith offer him my thanks for his SUGGESTION.438

You will excuse me if I terminate these lines here. Another proof-sheet has just come.

With my best compliments to your wife and the young madam. b

Yours

K. Marx

With my next letter I shall send membership cards" for MRS Kugelmann and MRS Tenge. One lady, MRS Law, has been promoted to membership of our Central Council.

Best thanks from Eleanor for the STAMPS. T h e photograms will follow.

First published slightly abridged in Die Printed according to the original Neue Zeit, Bd. 2, Stuttgart, Nr. 3, 1901- 1902 and in full in Pisma Marksa k Kugelmanu (Letters of Marx to Kugel- mann), Moscow-Leningrad, 1928

234

MARX T O ENGELS

[London,] 20 July 1867

Dear Engels,

[^1]: IN HANOVER449

[^2]: I am writing these lines in haste, in the hope that they may still find you in Hanover. C'est une chose brûlante."1 Old Lafargue e has invited my 3 daughters to Bordeaux (they depart tomorrow with the secrétaire1), whence they will go with him and his wife to a

[^3]: a the first volume of Capital - b Gertruda and Franziska Kugelmann - cof the International Working Men's Association - à It is a matter of urgency. - e François Lafargue - f Paul Lafargue (he was Corresponding Secretary for Spain on the General Council)



