---
Volume: 42
Document_Title: "235. Mar x to Ferdinand Freiligrath. 20 July "
Page_Range: "436-437"
---

# 235. Mar x to Ferdinand Freiligrath. 20 July 



**[p. 397]**

seaside resort. It was all the harder for me to refuse as the state of health of all 3 girls made this invitation a real blessing. But propriety required that the secrétaire de l'Espagne should not be allowed to pay the expenses of the journey. The latter (return) approximately £30, which I thus had to disburse to him. Furthermore, their watches, dresses, etc., had to be reclaimed from the pawnshop. In this way, the £45 which I had in reserve for the rent on 3 August (bill drawn on myself) melted into thin air.

I can now think of no other recourse than writing to you. If the letter catches you, please write to me at once with enclosure to

Borkheim asking him to advance me the money.

While you are in Germany you must read: 'Zwölf Streiter der Revolution von Gustav Struve und Gustav Rasch'. Under the heading of the 'fighting revolutionary' Freiligrath, you will find a fresh instance of this fine fellow's treachery towards us.3

Your

K. M.

First published abridged in Der Briefwech- Printed according to the original sei zwischen F. Engels und K. Marx, Bd. 3, . . Stuttgart, 1913 and in full in MEGA, Published in English for the frrst Abt. Ill, Bd. 3, Berlin, 1930 t l m e

235

[London,] 20 July 1867

Dear Freiligrath,

I am not a regular reader of German literary trash, but I cannot prevent friends in Germany from occasionally sending me excerpts containing personal references to me. Thus, yesterday I received all the passages referring to myself in a publication by a certain Rasch entitled 'Zwölf Streiter der Revolution'. I should be obliged to you for an explanation of the followingb:

[^1]: MARX TO FERDINAND FREILIGRATH6

[^2]: IN LONDON

[^3]: [Copy]

[^4]: a See next letter. - b G. Struve and G. Rasch, Zwölf Streiter der Revolution, p. 61.



