---
Volume: 42
Document_Title: "240. Engel s to Marx. 15 August "
Page_Range: "440-441"
---

# 240. Engel s to Marx. 15 August 



**[p. 239]**

MARX TO LONDON BOOKSELLER3

[London,] 14 August 1867 1 Modena Villas, Maitland Park, Haverstock Hill Dear Sir,

Will you send me, The 2 reports on the Orissa famine*"; 'The Hours of Labour Regulation Act',c as soon as it is printed, and ditto:

'The Artisans' and Labourers' Dwelling Bill'.

Yours truly

Karl Marx

First published in: Marx and Engels, Reproduced from the original Works, First Russian Edition, Vol. XXV, Moscow, 1934 Published in the language of the original, English, for the first time

240

ENGELS TO MARX

Manchester, 15 August 1867

Dear Moor,

End. 3 £5-notes I/V 65551] . , , « .< .• CFLII<A Manchester " " " 44954J 2 9 January 1 8 6 6

and the tax-slip returned. In these circumstances, it is essential that my return be kept a secret from Borkheim,449 so that I do not

[^1]: IN LONDON

[^2]: a This presumably refers to P. St. King. - b Marx refers to East India (Bengal and Orissa Famine). Papers and Correspondence relative to the Famine in Bengal and Orissa, including the Report of the Famine Commission and the Minutes of the Lieutenant Governor of Bengal and the Governor General of India Ordered, by the House of Commons, to be printed, 31 May 1867; East India (Madras and Orissa Famine). Return to an Address of the Honourable House of Commons, dated 4 July 1867. Ordered, by the House of Commons, to be printed, 30 July 1867. - c An Act for Regulating the Hours of Labour for Children, Young Persons, and Women employed in Workshops, 21 August 1867.



