---
Volume: 42
Document_Title: "241. Mar x to Engels. 16 August "
Page_Range: "441-444"
---

# 241. Mar x to Engels. 16 August 

need to pay him until as late as possible in September, otherwise I shall be completely stuck, since you will understand that I too have a mass of payments to make here, especially in the new half-year. Furthermore, consequent upon the fall in the price of yarns, we are having to enter the stock in the accounts at approx. £2,500 less than by the prices which applied at the time of my departure. Which is not very pleasant either!

When do you wish to have some of the sheets" returned? Schorlemmer asked me to pass them on to him a few at a time, as I finished with them, but that naturally depends on you. I have now read the thing through to the end (cursorily) and definitely think that the second volume is also indispensable, and the sooner you finish it, the better.418 I am now looking through the whole thing again, i.e., the more theoretical aspects. The fellows will be astonished to see with what consummate ease the most difficult points, such as Ricardo's theory of profit, are dealt the coup de grâce here 'in this way'.

Kindest regards to your wife.

Your

F. E.

241

[London,] 16 August 1867, 2.0.a.m.

[^1]: Lupus was born in Tarnau b on 21 June 1809, died 9 May 1864.c

[^2]: First published in Der Briefwechsel zwischen Printed according to the original F. Engels und K. Marx, Bd. 3, Stuttgart, „ , , . , , - T, ,., r 29j3 Published in English tor the first time

[^3]: MARX TO ENGELS118

[^4]: IN MANCHESTER

[^5]: DEAR FRED, Have just finished correcting the last sheet (49th) of the book." The appendix— Form of Value— in small print, takes up 1 '/4 sheets.438

[^6]: a of the first volume of Capital - b Polish name: Tarnöw - c Marx wanted to know this because he meant to dedicate the first volume of his Capital to Wilhelm Wolff (Lupus).



v^^

y&fc: >teo~»»8*»\*-H^ A k y -

: X- *t —•» 4 - M 4^-

^**f.

[^1]: Marx's letter to Engels of 16 August 1867





