---
Volume: 42
Document_Title: "247. Marx to Sigfrid Meyer. 27 August "
Page_Range: "454-455"
---

# 247. Marx to Sigfrid Meyer. 27 August 



**[p. 247]**

MARX TO SIGFRID MEYER

IN NEW YORK

London, 27 August 1867 1 Modena Villas, Maitland Park, Haverstock Hill

Dear Meyer,

Excerpt enclosed from the preface to the first volume of my book," which is being published next week. Try to place it as far as you can in German-American papers and, where feasible, in English-American papers as well. Be so kind as to send me a copy, where it appears, since this is important for my publisher.b

Ad vocem Weber.c His fatherd is a fool, exilé from Baden, clockmaker. The boy with whose presence you are blessed there is a scoundrel. The Hatzfeldt woman picked him for the assassina- tion of Lassalle's KILLER.6 He took the money and followed his intended victim as far as Augsburg or thereabouts. Then he funked it. He then absconded with the Hatzfeldt money from Germany to America (trying to squeeze yet more from the old woman by threats).

His worthy father and his brother/ living here, said in the (German) Communist Society R here that I denounced the good lad to the German police. That was how they explained his exit and cheating of Countess Hatzfeldt. I went along to the Society, denounced the scoundrels, and Weber jun. was chucked out in disgrace.

Now you know the facts of the matter.

Salut.

Your

K. Marx

[^1]: First published in: Marx and Engels, Printed according to the original Works, First Russian Edition, Vol. XXV, „ , ,. , • . ^ •• • r , r- , , ina^ Published in English tor the tirst Moscow, 1934 . &

[^2]: time

[^3]: •' Capital - b Otto Meissner - ' Regarding (Wilhelm) Weber - d Joseph Valentin Weber - c Janko von Racowija - f Louis Weber - « the German Workers' Educa- tional Society in London



