---
Volume: 42
Document_Title: "254. Marx to Engels. 11 September "
Page_Range: "462-464"
---

# 254. Marx to Engels. 11 September 



**[p. 423]**

I must congratulate you on your appendix on the form of value.438 In this form, it is BROUGHT HOME TO THE MOST REBELLIOUS UNDERSTANDING. Likewise with regard to the preface. But who did the appalling, ungrammatical translation in The Bee-Hive?456 Why was it not sent to me, saying what you wanted? I am afraid it will harm your reputation with Beesly, etc., who will think you did it yourself.

Apropos, what shores does the ' Jramatlantic Ocean' wash, exactly?

More tomorrow.

Your

F. E.

First published in Der Briefwechsel zwischen Printed according to the original F. Engels und K. Marx, Bd. 3, Stuttgart, n i . i - i . j - T- I- • r i r- iqio ° Published in English tor the first time

254

[London,] 11 September 1867

Regarding the 'transatlantic Ocean', it is a matter for the final corrector to put right such lapsus pennae? I see that the Zukunft has reprinted this splendid 'flow' along with the greater part of the preface.b

The translation in The Bee-Hivec is by Eccarius. I believe that most of the errors stem not from him, but, because of his bad hand-writing, from The Bee-Hive's CORRECTORS. I would naturally have preferred you to do the translation. However, as Eccarius offered his services de prime abord,,d and is now on the staff of The Bee-Hive, that was not feasible.

I shall personally deliver the coup de grâce to those Proudhonist jackasses at the next congress in Brussels. I have DIPLOMATICALLY

[^1]: MARX TO ENGELS101

[^2]: IN MANCHESTER

[^3]: DEAR FRED,

[^4]: a slips of the pen - b to the first volume of Capital (Die Zukunft, No. 206, 4 September 1867) - c of a part of the preface to the first volume of Capital (The Bee-Hive Newspaper, No. 308, 7 September 1867) - d initially





**[p. 424]**

MANAGED the whole affair and did not want to COME OUT personally before my book appears and our Association is firmly rooted. By the by, I shall give them a caning in the OFFICIAL REPORT of the GENERAL COUNCIL (despite all their efforts, the Parisian wind-bags were unable to prevent our re-election475).

MEANWHILE our Association has made great progress. The wretched Star, which wanted to ignore us entirely, announced in its leading article yesterday that we are more important than the PEACE CONGRESS.461 Schulze-Delitzsch could not prevent his ' Workers' Association' in Berlin from joining us.476 Those wretches from among the English TRADE UNIONISTS, who think we are too 'extreme', are coming flocking. Besides the Courrier français, there have been reports on our congress in Girardin's Liberté, Siècle, Mode, Gazette de France, etc. Les choses marchent3 And when the next revolution comes, and that will perhaps be sooner than might appear, we (i.e., you and I) will have this mighty ENGINE at our disposal. COMPARE WITH THIS THE RESULTS OF MAZZINFS, ETC, OPERATIONS SINCE 30 YEARS! And with no money to boot! And with the intrigues of the Proudhonists in Paris, Mazzini in Italy and the jealous Odger, Cremer, Potter in London, with the Schulze-Delitzsch and the Lassalleans in Germany! We can be well satisfied!

My children arrived back safe and in good spirits with Lafargue yesterday.b He has brought an enormous crystal goblet (holds IV2 POTS) back with him for you. He appears to be impressed with your 'transatlantic Ocean'.

In these days, Lafargue would like to visit you for 3 days at this time before his lectures begin again. The most awkward thing about it is that he is demanding (of course, not being IN THE SECRET OF MY MONEY-AFFAIRS) that I should accompany him, and I have not yet found a satisfactory excuse for turning down this tour, which I just cannot manage.

I am exceedingly vexed with Meissner. He has wasted weeks in bringing out the book. Why?

Salut.

Your

K. M.

Apropos. Our plump poet'sc begging-campaign, which, vided the latest Hermann? is not proceeding quite as desired, has had one

[^1]: 2nd letter from Lessner enclosed.477

[^2]: a Things are going ahead. - b See this volume, pp. 396-97. - c Ferdinand Freilig- rath - d see - e Hermann, 7 September 1867.



