---
Volume: 42
Document_Title: "255. Engels to Marx. 11 September "
Page_Range: "464-466"
---

# 255. Engels to Marx. 11 September 



**[p. 425]**

good result.422 Kätchen of the sturdy calves3 is to get married. Notice of betrothal to A CERTAIN Kröker (a most poetic name) in the Zvkunft\b

First published abridged in Der Briefwech- Printed according to the original sei zwischen F. Engels und K. Marx, Bd. 3, „ , , • • • • ^ ,• , • r „ r Stuttgart, 1913 and in full in MEGA, Published in English in full for the Abt. Ill, Bd. 3, Berlin, 1930 t i r s t t l r a e

255

ENGELS TO MARX419

IN LONDON

Manchester, 11 September 1867

Dear Moor,

The congress really does appear to have been swept away in the French tide this time, the number of Proudhonist resolutions is really far too large.462 It is good that it will be coming to Belgium next time, by then it will perhaps be possible to do something in North Germany as well, and then, with the help of the English, to dam up the flood. Meanwhile, whatever they resolve there is more or less just wasted breath as long as the CENTRAL COUNCIL remains in London. Once again notre cherc Philipp Becker appears to have committed some of his unpremeditated blunders, for which one must forgive the old agitator when he has no one to guide him.478

That Eccarius wrote the reports in The Times must be kept secret.473 In view of the manner in which the editors have trimmed his story, it could do him enormous harm. The next time that he reports to the paper, he will have to consider more carefully to what extent his humour can be exploited by the bourgeois editors to cast RIDICULE on the whole business and not just on the few

crapauds?

Since you are in contact with Vermorel, can you not moderate the fellow's asininities with regard to Germany? It is really too much if the jackass is demanding that Bonaparte should become

[^1]: a Käthe Freiligrath - b Die Zukunft, No. 208 (supplement), 6 September 1867. - c our dear - d toads; philistines (here Engels refers to the French Proudhonists, delegates to the Lausanne Congress)





**[p. 426]**

liberal, bourgeois liberal, and then start a war to liberate Germany from the tyranny of Bismarck!" These crapauds, who will have to handle Germany with great delicacy even if they do make a revolution, believe that but a slight turn toward liberalism would enable them to revert to their old roles. I regard it as most important, particularly in the event of a revolution, that these gentlemen should become accustomed to treating us d'égal à égalb

According to them, Bismarckism in Germany is an inherent characteristic of Germany, which they must destroy by intervening, but their own Bonapartism is a mere accident and could be terminated just by a change of ministers and transformed into its opposite.

The great Schweitzer has been happily elected with the assistance of the pietists55 of Elberfeld and Barmen, and will now have the opportunity to bowdlerise various points from your bookc in the 'Reichstag'. You may wager your life that he will do so. However, it can only do good and will afford us much entertainment; once the book is out, only good can come of such things.

Apropos of Barmen, I am reminded of Siebel. The poor devil is dreadfully sick again and is once more having to leave Barmen, though I do not know whereto; it is possible he will not live out the winter. He must be very bad, so I cannot count on him raising any cry for your book in the newspapers. He has written me a very DESPONDING letter.

The TRADES OUTRAGE COMMISSION'S442 conclusions here are entirely farcical and are no different from those reached 7 years ago. If they do not produce anything better, they might as well pack their bags. Just imagine seeing BRICKMAKING AND BRICKLAYING treated as the chief industries of Manchester!

The defects which have become apparent in the tests carried out on the Chassepot rifle here are the very ones which had already been discovered in Berlin and which Bölzig told me of in Hanover. At that time, I thought that they had deliberately allowed faulty specimens to fall into the hands of the Prussians, but now it rather looks as though there is something in it, in which case the rifle is not half as good as the Prussians' needle-gun.

Meissner's people in Leipzig appear to be taking an inordinately long time to send the book out. Still no notices anywhere. Do you think I should attack the thing from the bourgeois point of view,

[^1]: a A. Vermorel, 'La prochaine campagne de la Prusse', Le Courrier français, No. 84, 9 September 1867. - b as equals - c the first volume of Capital



