---
Volume: 42
Document_Title: "256. Marx to Engels. 12 September "
Page_Range: "466-468"
---

# 256. Marx to Engels. 12 September 



**[p. 427]**

to get things under way? Meissner or Siebel would surely get that accepted by a paper.479 As for it being prohibited,3 I don't believe it myself, but one can never swear that the zeal of some government official will not get the better of him, and once a case has been brought, you could rely on your friend Lippe.

Kindest regards to your wife and the girls, who I presume are back now.b

The Diplomatic Reviews received with thanks.

Your

F. E.

First published abridged in Der Briefwech- Printed according to the original sei zwischen F. Engels und K. Marx, Bd. 3, . ,. . . . ,. . , c. „ . mi a j • r ii ' »*!•/- A Published in English in lull tor the Stuttgart, 1913 and in lull in MEGA, 6

Abt. Ill, Bd. 3, Berlin, 1930 h r s t t l m e

256

MARX TO ENGELS33

[London,] 12 September 1867

Dear FRED,

Meissner's procrastination bodes most ill. He could have disposed of many COPIES' at the congress in Lausanne.462 And the book would have been discussed there as a real event. Such stupidity is beyond my comprehension. Next Saturday it will be 4 weeks since I sent the last corrections to Leipzig.0

Your plan to attack the book from the bourgeois point of view is the best tactic. However—once the thing is out—I consider it better to have this done through Siebel or Rittershaus, rather than Meissner. There is no need to let even the best publishers see through one's game. On the other hand, you must write a few instructions to Kugelmann, who is back, concerning the positive aspects he should emphasise. Otherwise, he will do something foolish, enthusiasm alone being insufficient in this case. Naturally, you will feel less inhibited about doing this than I.

[^1]: IN MANCHESTER

[^2]: a See this volume, pp. 417 and 420-21. - b Ibid, pp. 396-97 and 424. - c of the first volume of Capital - d See this volume, pp. 402, 405.

[^3]: 16*





**[p. 428]**

It was the wretched French Swiss, who, being very strongly represented, gave the French wind-bags from Paris so much scope. Old Becker was responsible for the most serious BLUNDER.478 H e first disrupted the agenda we had planned, so as to spring his freedom resolution. This then provided the Parisians with the opportunity to let themselves go.

But none of that signifies. T h e main thing is that the congress was held, not what happened there. On se moquera biend of the Paris WISEACRES in o u r GENERAL REPORT. T O the latter's great dismay, a resolution was adopted that those who do not pay (and the Parisians have not paid a farthing) cannot send delegates in future. T h e aim must be to send 20 English and 30 Germans to Brussels next time.475 As TO THE BELGIANS THEMSELVES, they can only send 1 MAN per 500, so there will not be very many of them. They are furthermore RATHER REBELLIOUS towards the Parisians. Nota bene: the worst thing is, we have not a single man in Paris who could make contact with the workers' sections which are hostile to the Proudhonists (and they form the majority!). If Dupont were to spend a few weeks in Paris, everything would be in order, but the police have him u n d e r close surveyance.

Laura and Lafargue are just now translating part of the preface for the Courrier français.4^ Salut. , , Your

K. M.

[^1]: In d u e course I shall write privately to Vermorel and knock those absurd notions about German politics out of him. e I shall have to proceed gradatim* and therefore deliberately began with the UNITED STATES, RUSSIA and TURKEY, because this is 'neutral' ground between Germans and French. 8

[^2]: First published in Der Briefwechsel zwischen Printed according to the original F. Engels und K. Marx, Bd. 3, Stuttgart, _ , , . _ .. , . , „ r , iqio Published in English in lull tor the first time

[^3]: a concerning - b See this volume, p. 425. - c Neue Rheinische Zeitung. Politisch- ökonomische Revue - d We shall make fun - e See this volume, pp. 425-26. - f gradually - g See this volume, pp. 413-14.



