---
Volume: 42
Document_Title: "258. Engels to Marx. 12 September "
Page_Range: "468-470"
---

# 258. Engels to Marx. 12 September 



**[p. 257]**

MARX TO ENGELS

IN MANCHESTER

[London,] 12 September 1867

DEAR FRED,

I am sending this 2nd letter, because Eccarius' LETTER has just arrived.480

Apropos. What Eccarius could not have known: L. Blanc has absented himself from the Geneva Congress,3 because 'my' people would be playing tricks there; Jules Favre, because the 'class question'b (as a SUPPORTER of Cavaignac in the June days,481 his CONSCIENCE is, of course, not CLEAN) has been adopted by the Courrier français, along London lines.

Your

K. M.

First published in Der Briefwechsel zwischen Printed according to the original F. Engels und K. Marx, Bd. 3, Stuttgart, n i_i- L j • T- r u r •_ r- iqio Published in English for the tirst time

258

ENGELS TO MARX

Manchester, 12 September 1867

Dear Moor,

You have not enclosed letter No. 2 from Lessner.477 If Lafargue does come, I would much appreciate it if you came too,c as I do not rightly know how to entertain our comrade during my business hours. If possible, you should come straight away tomorrow, or at least on the morning of the day after, so that we can be together on Saturday and Sunday, and I can also more

[^1]: IN LONDON

[^2]: a of the League of Peace and Freedom - b See this volume, p. 420. - c ibid., p. 424.





**[p. 430]**

£5 enclosed to help with money-matters; apart from the cost of travelling here, you can leave it at home for your wife.

Here, too, the press is treating the International much more decently than before. All the newspapers here have carried some part of the proceedings,3 the Examiner & Timesb had a philistinish- ly benevolent LEADER.

Would it not be appropriate also to report on the meetings of the CENTRAL COUNCIL in the German newspapers? e.g., the Zukunft; Wilhelmchenc might perhaps find somewhere else, too. Where actually is the noble fellow now?

The Lassalleans are beset by a fresh shindig again. Dr Reincke in Hagen and Schweitzer are AT DAGGERS DRAWN. Reincke went along with the party-of-Progress clique"—Bürgers and E. Richter — to ensure his election in Hagen, Düsseldorf and Solingen, but failed in the two latter.

We really must try to establish a direct link with the workers in Germany again, that is what we most lack, otherwise everything is buoyant enough.

I read of the betrothal of Käthe,d as she calls herself, in the Kölnische Zeitung.

You will have to give me a verbal account of the congress telegrams from Germany.

The Courriers^ returned herewith. Apropos of the vote in Schleswig, it is splendid how those jackasses declared: avons une

carte devant nous,( which shows Holstein within Schleswig (or vice versa)! Likewise, they first have the Federal troops and then the Dutch (instead of the Luxemburgers themselves) marching into Luxemburg. And it is they who want to abolish IGNORANCE!

Your

F. E.

[^1]: First published in Der Briefwechsel zwischen F. Engels und K. Marx, Bd. 3, Stuttgart, 1913

[^2]: Printed according to the original

[^3]: Published in English for the first time

[^4]: a of the Lausanne Congress - b The Manchester Daily Examiner & Times - c Wilhelm Liebknecht - d Freiligrath's daughter (see this volume, p. 425) - c Le Courrier français, Nos. 85 and 86, 10 and 11 September 1867. - f we have a map before us



