---
Volume: 42
Document_Title: "260. Engels to Laura Marx. 23 September "
Page_Range: "470-471"
---

# 260. Engels to Laura Marx. 23 September 



**[p. 259]**

MARX TO ENGELS482

IN MANCHESTER

[Telegram]

London, 13 September 1867

From Karl Marx, 1 Modena Villas, Maitland Park. To Fred Engels, Southgate, St. Mary's.

Will start from Euston station 4.15 p.m.

First published in the language of the Reproduced from the photocopy original, English, in MEGA, Abt. Ill, of the telegram Bd. 3, Berlin, 1930

260

ENGELS TO LAURA MARX

Manchester, 23 September 1867

Dear Löhrchen,

I have received your delightful letter, and as soon as the books arrived I despatched the various copies3 to their resp. recipients— those to Imandt and Strohn sent securely packed by BOOK POST, but the one intended for me, for which my best thanks to Moor, straight to the binders.

You will be interested to learn that a week ago last Saturday I already showed Lafargue482 the battlefield where the great Fenian liberation battle was enacted the previous Wednesday.483 We were actually within ten paces of the railway arch; however, he will scarcely recollect it.

So that you may see what man, and cotton-man in particular, is capable of, I am sending you enclosed the latest abomination of this kind in the form of a cotton sheen-wig. These GUYS are now being made and sold in colossal quantities.

Your friend Libraryb has been successfully elected at Schneeberg in Saxony to the great North German Reichstag

[^1]: IN LONDON

[^2]: a of the first volume of Capital - b Wilhelm Liebknecht



