---
Volume: 42
Document_Title: "262. Engels to Marx. 8 October "
Page_Range: "475-476"
---

# 262. Engels to Marx. 8 October 



**[p. 436]**

I was, OF COURSE, OBLIGED to tell him that Lafargue would have to see him, as he could not proceed to make the 'deletions' (to begin with, Lafargue wants to delete the whole of THE FIRST HALF) and 'amendments' in his absence. He is therefore coming to see me this evening. Lafargue additionally showed me French commis voyageur* SLANG in almost every sentence. E.g., 'parlons rondement!'*

PRIVATE AFFAIRS: I have talked to Borkheim about the possibility of finding me a LOAN of at least £100 in London. He says yes, he is willing to be 1 guarantor if you will be the other. But he would, after all, need to hear from yourself about the matter first. The situation is simply that I can neither complete Volume II,418 nor find the time for the intrigues required for the English edition,229

nor even remain in England, if I do not manage to pacify the Manichaeans431 for SOME WEEKS AT LEAST. If the English transaction succeeds, and if they proceed in such a manner in Germany— which does not seem difficult to me—that a 2nd impression454

soon becomes necessary, the crisis will have been overcome.

This damned year has been made even worse by Lafargue staying with me until now, Laura is to marry in the spring, etc.

Salut.

Your

K. M.

262

Manchester, 8 October 1867 7 Southgate

Dear Moor,

Detailed letter tomorrow. Just the letters returned enclosed and the one question: will Borkheim be writing to me about the LOAN or

[^1]: First published abridged in Der Briefwech- Printed according to the original sei zwischen F. Engels und K. Marx, Bd. 3, _ , , . ,, .. , . f ,, r , m i o J • r H • \,T-^. Published in English in full for the Stuttgart, 1913 and in full m MEGA, ,. . s

[^2]: Abt. III, Bd. 3, Berlin, 1930 t l r s t t l m e

[^3]: ENGELS TO MARXC

[^4]: IN LONDON

[^5]: 3 commercial traveller - b let us not beat about the bush - c The letter is writ- ten on the blank of the Ermen & Engels firm in Manchester.



