---
Volume: 42
Document_Title: "263. Marx to Engels. 9 October "
Page_Range: "476-477"
---

# 263. Marx to Engels. 9 October 



**[p. 437]**

Meissner will no doubt have sent the copiesb to Weiss and Liebknecht through a bookshop, where they would not arrive until about 1 October in Berlin, about the time when the other copies arrived there and came into the shops. The Kölnische and Augsburger Zeitung only carried the notice a few days ago.c

Your

F. E.

First published in Der Briefwechsel zwischen Printed according to the original F. Engels und K. Marx, Bd. 3, Stuttgart, jû[Q Published in English for the first time

263

MARX TO ENGELS33

IN MANCHESTER

[London,] 9 October 1867

Poor Lafargue is in the final throes today, putting Borkheim's preface into decent French (insofar as that is possible!). The latter has baptised his opus: 'Ma perle devant le Congrès de Genève'.469

Curious how the itch for literary fame can make a FOOL of an otherwise quite intelligent garçonc!

So, yesterday, Fox was to decapitate Eccarius.f The former took more than 1 hour to speak his indictment. He had most maliciously assembled the worst passages and displayed all the arts of an Old Bailey8 barrister, also continually attacking me. In my riposte I dealt him such telling blows that in his final REPLY he quite lost his composure and self-control. Everyone joined in the

[^1]: DEAR FRED,

[^2]: Borkheim is expecting a letter from you first that you are willing to be co-guarantor.d

[^3]: a See previous letter. - b of the first volume of Capital - c Allgemeine Zeitung, No. 273, 30 September 1867. - d See previous letter. - e fellow - ' A reference to the meeting of the General Council of the International on 8 October 1867 (see this volume, pp. 434-35). - 8 Old Bailey—Central Criminal Court in London



