---
Volume: 42
Document_Title: "264. Marx to Engels. 10 October "
Page_Range: "477-478"
---

# 264. Marx to Engels. 10 October 



**[p. 438]**

You must read the piece 'Le troisième larron' I have marked in the Courrier3 that you will get at the same time (splendid that the French are already sans gêneh calling their Bonaparte one of the /arromc).492 As soon as I have the numbers back from Lormier, I shall send the interesting COMMUNICATIONS about the MEXICAN affair.270

Salut

Your

K. M. Apropos. Strohn spent the day here yesterday. He fancies you meant to slight him on his last visit to Manchester, with your remark, 'Yes, in Bradford the commis voyageur6 still counts for something.' I tried to drive this nonsense out of his mind.— He says Dronke had procured the British associé for the copper company himself. He had probably demanded to be indemnified for it, and no doubt he had based himself on spurious but legally defensible claims when appropriating or laying his hands on a portion of the copper passing through his hands. He did not believe that Dronke had unwarrantedly frisée the code pénal directly. Tant mieux1

264

[^1]: First published abridged in Der Briefwech- Printed according to the original sei zwischen F. Engels und K. Marx, Bd. 3, Stuttgart, 1913 and in full in MEGA, Published in English m full for the Abt. Ill, Bd. 3, Berlin, 1930 f l r s t t l m e

[^2]: MARX TO ENGELS302

[^3]: IN MANCHESTER

[^4]: [London,] 10 October 1867 DEAR FRED, You will see from the enclosed letter from Kugelmann that the time for ACTION has now come.493 You are better placed to write to

[^5]: a Le Courrier français - b without inhibition - c thiefs - d commercial traveller - e infringed - f So much the better.



