---
Volume: 42
Document_Title: "266. Marx to Ludwig Kugelmann. 11 October "
Page_Range: "479-482"
---

# 266. Marx to Ludwig Kugelmann. 11 October 



**[p. 440]**

There was much else about which I wished to write to you, but then along comes that damned old Jew Leibel Choras, whom you know, and detains me for over an hour. Then another fellow immediately following. For a week now I have been overrun with clients, 2 more this morning. Yet another expected tomorrow morning. On top of that, endless bother with Gottfried, it is enough to drive one mad.

So till tomorrow.

Your

F. E.

First published in Der Briefwechsel zwischen Printed according to the original F. Engels und K. Marx, Bd. 3, Stuttgart, . jgj3 Published in English tor the first time

266

[London,] 11 October 1867

Dear Kugelmann,

D'abora\b best thanks for your two letters.0 You would give me great pleasure if you were to write as often as your time allows. But you must not expect an exactly equal response, as my time is in any case scarcely sufficient now for the multifarious correspondence which I am obliged to conduct with a variety of parties.

First, before turning to the subject of my book, a preliminary word or a wordy preliminary. I fear that Borkheim is, malgré luic

on the point of doing me a very bad turn. He is publishing his

[^1]: MARX TO LUDWIG KUGELMANN65

[^2]: IN HANOVER

[^3]: a the first volume of Capital - b Firstly - c of 29 September and 8 October 1867 (see this volume, pp. 433 and 438) - d the first volume of Capital - e despite himself





**[p. 441]**

However, if, as I scarcely dare to hope, since Borkheim is meticulously despatching his progeny to all the newspapers, the press says nothing about it, you must do absolutely nothing to break this solemn silence.

If Borkheim were not a personal friend, I should publicly disown him. You will understand my fausse position* and at the

[^1]: a S. Borkheim, Ma perle devant le congrès de Genève. - b a man of some wit - c The original has: verkladderadatscht—from Kladderadatsch, a German satirical weekly. - d in his note on the congress of the League of Peace and Freedom in Geneva, see Neue Zürcher-Zeitung, No. 254, 13 September 1867. - e false position





**[p. 442]**

Your manoeuvres against Vogt in Geneva have greatly satisfait3

me.487 I am glad you like my book.

Concerning your questions: Ernest Jones had to speak as a party man to Irish men in Ireland, in other words, since the big landownership there is identical with English proprietorship of Ireland, he had to speak against the big landownership. You must never look for any matters of principle in HUSTINGS SPEECHES by English politicians, but only for what is immediately expedient.

Peonage is the advancing of money against future labour. The consequences of these advances are the same as with ordinary usury. The worker does not merely remain in debt throughout his life, thus performing forced labour for his creditor, but the relationship is inherited by the family and the next generation, who thus actually belong to the creditor.495

The completion of my second volume418 depends chiefly on the success of the first. This I require in order to find a publisher in England, and, without the latter, my material circumstances will remain so difficult and disruptive that I shall be able to find neither time nor peace for speedy completion. Naturally, these are things which I do not wish Mr Meissner to know. It thus now depends on how skilful and active my party friends in Germany are, whether the second volume takes a long or a short time to appear. Considered criticism—whether from friend or foe—can only be expected to appear gradually, as one needs time to read and digest such a compendious and, in parts, difficult work. But its immediate success will not be decided by considered criticism, but, to put it bluntly, by making a noise and beating the drum, which compels even the adversaries to speak. To begin with, it is less important what is said than that something should be said. Above all, no time must be lost'.

I have sent your last letter to Engels for him to send you the

[^1]: a gratified



