---
Volume: 42
Document_Title: "267. Engel s to Ludwig Kugelmann. 12 October "
Page_Range: "482-484"
---

# 267. Engel s to Ludwig Kugelmann. 12 October 



**[p. 443]**

necessary suggestions. He can write about my book better than I can myself.

My kindest compliments to your dear wife.a One of these days I shall send her a recipe for reading the book.b

Yours

K. M.

Please keep me au faitc with all developments in Germany respecting Volume I.

Paul Stumpf (Mainz) has written me a letterd in which he calls Borkheim's speech 'my' speech, and as at present I have no time to write to Stumpf, you would oblige me by writing to him yourself to tell him the true situation and to advise silence when Borkheim's pamphlet appears. Entre nous* Stumpf tends to put his foot in it himself whenever he takes up the pen.

First published in Die Neue Zeit, Bd. 2, Printed according to the original Nr. 3, Stuttgart, 1901-1902

267

ENGELS TO LUDWIG KUGELMANN

Manchester, 12 October 1867

Dear Kugelmann,

than he could himself. To save trouble, I have just set out what are, in my opinion, the most suitable ideas for the populusg in two complete articles which will probably be appropriate for almost any bourgeois paper496; they may, however, be of use to you until you have worked your way through the 50 sheets' yourself, for writing both long and short articles for other publications. The

[^1]: IN HANOVER

[^2]: Marx sent me your letter of the 8th,493 believing I would be better able to give you the right ideas for a review of his bookf

[^3]: a Gertruda Kugelmann - b See this volume, p. 490. - c informed - d of 29 Sep- tember 1867 (see this volume, p. 434) - e Between ourselves - ' the first volume of Capital - g public



Liebknecht is giving a pretty good account of himself in the Berlin cattle-shed." He is consistently voting against everything and also made a good maiden speech—immediately interrupted by Zeus Cronion Simson. And what's more, his motion486 was the only sensible one.

I hope all has been well with you since my departure.449 I have been back here for 2 months now, sitting at my office desk and frittering good time away with this lousy COMMERCE. You will have heard about our little Fenian coup de mainb here. The affair was splendidly organised and executed; but the ringleaders were caught unfortunately.497

With best greetings.

Yours

F. Engels

Marx expressly asks that all the articles should be placed there immediately and that you should only send them to him after publication.0

[^1]: First published in: Marx and Engels, Printed according to the original Works, First Russian Edition, Vol. XXV, , ,. , , . _ ,. , , Moscow, 1934 Published in English for the first time

[^2]: a A reference to the North German Reichstag. - b surprise attack - c This sentence was written by Engels in the margin.



