---
Volume: 42
Document_Title: "269. Marx to Engels. 14 October "
Page_Range: "486-487"
---

# 269. Marx to Engels. 14 October 



**[p. 269]**

MARX TO ENGELS

IN MANCHESTER

[London,] 14 October 1867

Dear FRED,

You will see from the enclosed letter No. II from Juch that, although Achilles3 is dead, Beta is still alive. Juch's letter was probably provoked by the fact that Beta speaks well of Kinkel but not Freiligrath, and that Beta's article also contains some malicious remarks directed at Juch. When Freiligrath and Juch form an alliance, they are incapable of producing even a bad joke. For which reason I am to be incited to action, being 'thoroughly venomous', as Beta calls me in that vile scrawl of an article he wrote: 'Die Deutschen in London', which begins with the Norman Conquest and ends with that oily Jew Bender as the sole epitome of mankind in England.

This is about the 6th time now that Mr Juch has offered me his stale columns b for the purpose of 'self-glorification', for him a well proven tactic which he has used, successfully of course, with Blind, Kinkel, Freiligrath, and Heintzmann. I wrote him a few lines only.111 And not to Mr. Freiligrath's liking either. I told him privatim of what happened at Beta's How do you do? editorial office when I went there in the company of Ziegenhainer, Freiligrath, and our W. Wolff.501 So as to give him one bad joke for his trouble, I told him that I would not allow Kinkel the credit for being more than the a and o> to this Beta.

Typical of Juch: he sends me Payne's people's calendar502 which contains the corpus delicti (like all such abominations in Germany,

Gartenlaube, etc., this calendar has 250,000 subscribers), along with the inevitable invoice for lid., which I immediately enclosed with my reply. Though admittedly he was once more on the threshold of the BANKRUPTCY COURT and has with great difficulty SETTLED with his creditors for monthly payments of 2s. 6d. in the £.

Has Borkheim sent you the Courrier français with the translation of my preface0? I am asking because POOR Lafargue is on tenterhooks for 'your verdict'—every day. The Belgian Liberté

[^1]: How shall I answer the enclosed from Nahmer?503

[^2]: a Ferdinand Lassalle - b in the Hermann - c to the first volume of Capital



