---
Volume: 42
Document_Title: "270. Engels to Marx. 15 October "
Page_Range: "487-488"
---

# 270. Engels to Marx. 15 October 



**[p. 1913]**

EXPULSION.

I had already replied to Liebknecht,"1 but had to write to him again today because I only today received the 2 ACTS relating to the TRADE UNIONS COMMISSION.504 Your tips

Salut COMPLIMENTS TO MRS BURNS.

First published slightly abridged in Der Briefwechsel zwischen F. Engels und K. Marx, Bd. 3, Stuttgart, 1913 and in full in MEGA Abt. Ill, Bd. 3, Berlin, 1930

270

ENGELS TO MARX

IN LONDON

Manchester, 15 October 1867

Dear Moor,

In the greatest of haste, just this: Borkheim wants me to allow a bill to be drawn on myself, which more than anything else I am not permitted to do. I have written to him131 that I will give him a guarantee for the £150 (having at the same time increased the amount) and am prepared to give him privatim any SECURITY that it will be paid ANY TIME after 1 August 1868, and asked him whether in these circumstances he can raise the money.b He has said nothing further about the LOAN. Perhaps it would be best if you saw him, as he is going away at the end of the week and will not be back for a fortnight.

Your

F. E.

attached to my letter.

Your

Moro

Printed according to the original

Published in English for the first time

[^1]: First published in Der Briefwechsel zwischen Printed according to the original F. Engels und K. Marx, Bd. 3, Stuttgart, Published in English for the first

[^2]: time

[^3]: a See this volume, p. 445. - b Ibid., pp. 436, 437 and 439.



