---
Volume: 42
Document_Title: "271. Marx to Ludwig Kugelmann. 15 October "
Page_Range: "488-489"
---

# 271. Marx to Ludwig Kugelmann. 15 October 



**[p. 271]**

MARX TO LUDWIG KUGELMANN65

IN HANOVER

[London,] 15 October 1867

Dear Kugelmann,

You must not write to Borkheim. It would be poindess in any case as the worka has already been announced in the Buchhändler- börsenblatt*' and is being already published by Schabelitz. Moreover, Borkheim himself is now in Bordeaux: such a letter from you could have no effect whatsoever except to make an enemy of Borkheim for me.505

Ce qui est fait, est faitc NEVER MIND! It was just that, my mind being in a turmoil from working all night, I AT FIRST exaggerated the gravity of the événement? And indeed, je suis puni par où j'ai péché!e

You see I was amused au premier abord1 by the thought of the scandal that our friend would create amongst the respectable philistines of Geneva. Of course, I did not foresee the fruits it would bear in the book trade. I should, moreover, have reflected that, in working out his plan, Borkheim would naturally overstep the bounds of prudence which I suggested to him in my letter.469 The only policy we can pursue now is silence, for as long as our opponents do not speak; as soon as they speak and attempt to hold me responsible, we must make bad jokes about their being obliged to burden me with Borkheim's pranks in order not to have to reply to my book.8 Borkheim ought furthermore to be treated indulgently in that event, for AFTER ALL, except for his literary vanity, he is a capable and well-meaning man, and good as an homme d'action^ as long as his sense of devilry does not get the better of him.

By the 'success of the book', I only meant that it should sell quickly, on account of the effect this will have back in England.

The Courrier français (at present the Paris daily which creates the biggest stir) and the Liberté in Brussels have published a

[^1]: You will probably already have received Engels' recipes.496 I am in correspondence with Liebknecht and Becker.1

[^2]: a S. Borkheim, Ma perle devant le congrès de Genève. - b Börsenblatt für den Deutschen Buchhandel, No. 230, 3 October 1867. - c What is done, is done. - d event - e I am punished for my sins! - ' initially - e the first volume of Capital - h man of action - ' Johann Philipp Becker



