---
Volume: 42
Document_Title: "272. Engels to Marx. 18 October "
Page_Range: "489-490"
---

# 272. Engels to Marx. 18 October 

French translation of my preface alone with COMPLIMENTARY PREAMBLES.«6

One Nahmer in New York has offered his services as English translator over there.503 Quod non.a

I am very pleased with Liebknecht's performance in Berlin.486 I sent him over some instructions from here.

Poor Becker has reached such a pass that he is on the verge of abandoning politics and writing altogether.506 How one regrets not being able to help in such circumstances!

My compliments to your dear wife and my litde friend,b for whose portrait I have not yet thanked you.

Yours

K. M.

First published in Die Neue Zeit, Bd. 2, Printed according to the original Nr. 3, Stuttgart, 1901-1902

272

ENGELS TO MARX26

Manchester, 18 October 1867 Dear Moor,

I have written to Borkheim that I cannot accept in any circumstances and that now that I have guaranteed him the amount, it all depends on his sources of credit, as mine are tied up.<

The letters returned enclosed. Liebknecht appears to have been SICK, or else he could surely have said something about the combination law. PERHAPS IT IS BETTER SO. Schweitzer has shown himself to be a vain jackass and phrasemonger. He's finished now.507

The Courtier français" has arrived, but I have no time whatsoever to form an opinion of it today.

[^1]: IN LONDON

[^2]: I was much amused by the Beta correspondence.d

[^3]: a Impossible. - b Gertruda and Franziska Kugelmann - c See this volume, p. 448. -<f Ibid., p. 447. - e No. 308 of 6 October 1867 containing a French translation of part of Marx's preface to the first volume of Capital.



