---
Volume: 42
Document_Title: "276. Engel s to Marx. 1 November "
Page_Range: "496-497"
---

# 276. Engel s to Marx. 1 November 



**[p. 457]**

associations at most. So, the scoundrel still thinks he can dupe the workers.

Victor Emmanuel appears to be playing a most risky game. For all that, the Roman fracas is not yet over.5'3 The air is becoming more electric every day, and I should not be at all surprised if the storm were to break right next spring.

Best regards to your wife, the girls and Doctor Eisenbart.3

Your

F. E.

I'm glad the Borkheim business is straight now. Under no circumstances can I give Gottfried Ermen a pretext just now to terminate his contract with me on the grounds of direct breach of contract. I hope the money drives away your carbuncles; don't forget to take plenty of exercise in the open air.

I shall be glad to do the thing for The Fortnightly Review?09 But you must let me know about how much space I am allowed for it. I presume you will prefer me to summarise, so as briefly to give the main points of the bookb—origin of capital—surplus-value— working day—revision of Ricardo's laws, etc., etc., after all I really cannot criticise the thing. I should also like to know approximately when the thing must be complete. It is too late for the 1 November number, so for the 1 December number it will have to be.

276

ENGELS TO MARX

_. Manchester, 1 November 1867 Dear Moor,

What is the matter? Why have I not heard from you at all? Ever since your last letter I have been in constant fear that you have the

[^1]: First published abridged in Der Briefwech- Printed according to the original sei zwischen F. Engels und K. Marx, Bd. 3, . Stuttgart, 1913 and in full in MEGA, Published in Enghsh for the first Abt. Ill, Bd. 3, Berlin, 1930 t I m e

[^2]: IN LONDON

[^3]: a Paul Lafargue (Engels jocularly calls Lafargue by the name of a wandering German physician, which became synonymous with a quack) - b the first volume of Capital

[^4]: 17-1196



