---
Volume: 42
Document_Title: "277. Mar x to Engels. 2 November "
Page_Range: "497-500"
---

# 277. Mar x to Engels. 2 November 



**[p. 458]**

carbuncles again. Have you heard any more from across the water? From Kugelmann or Meissner concerning articles on your book3? I am getting no news of any kind and, in the circumstances, there is damn little I can do.

Just how far Dizzyb has contrived not merely to DISH the Whigs but to disorganise the Tories, too, was demonstrated to me the day before yesterday in a conversation with two of that ilk. They were agreed:

1. that the Irish Church and thus the Established Church in England, too, should fall forthwith,

2. that the LAWS OF PRIMOGENITURE AND ENTAIL514 are no longer tenable, 3. that when the Queenc dies, a revolution will probably soon follow here.

Your

F. E.

First published in Der Briefwechsel zwischen Printed according to the original F. Engels und K. Marx, Bd. 3, Stuttgart, jgjg Published in English for the first time

277

[London,] 2 November 1867

DEAR FRED, Although none of my recent CARBUNCLES has fully developed, fresh ones are forever appearing; they always disappear again, BUT FRET ME. And then my old insomnia. But it has been better for ABOUT the last 3 DAYS. The silence about my booka makes me FIDGETY. I have had no news of any kind. What good fellows the Germans are! Their achievements in the service of the English, French and even the Italians in this field would indeed entitle them to ignore me and my affairs. Our people over there do not have the knack

[^1]: MARX TO ENGELS101

[^2]: IN MANCHESTER

[^3]: a the first volume of Capital - b Benjamin Disraeli - c Victoria





**[p. 459]**

of agitation. Meanwhile, we must do as the Russians do—wait. Patience is the core of Russian diplomacy and of their successes. But the likes of us, who only live once, may well never live to see the day.

Letter enclosed from the German communist association.515 Well meant. But strangely loutish in style.

Enclosed letter from Maughan, man of private means, old Owenite, very decent fellow. These people are obviously intending to emancipate the FREETHINK movement from the PROFESSIONAL AGITATORS Bradlaugh, etc. I very politely declined.516 On the one hand, it is true that I would thereby have had the chance, which I am wanting so much, of becoming acquainted with all manner of people who are to a greater or lesser extent, directly or indirectly, connected with the English press. On the other hand, I have not the time, nor do I think it right that I should figure on the LEADING COMMITTEE of any English sect.

A certain Auberon Herbert,3 brother of the EARL OF CARNARVON and COUSIN to Stepney (who is member of our CENTRAL COUNCIL) and much dabbling in socialism (I.E.. CO-OPERATIVE DODGES, etc.), has asked Stepney to arrange a rendezvous with me. As I first want to have sight of the man and smell him over, I have made an appointment to see him next Tuesday at the Cleveland Hall, where we hold our meetings. This 'channel' (Vogt)517 may perhaps prove useful for reaching publishers.

Apropos. SUBSCRIPTIONS for the INTERNATIONAL: now have to be renewed. As soon as Moore is back send your SUBSCRIPTIONS to me per POST OFFICE ORDER (Charing Cross), but drawn on our TREASURER: Robert Shaw, 62 Hall Place, Hall Park, London W. It would be desirable for Schorlemmer to send his at the same time as you, even if only A FEW SHILLINGS. IS he back yet? When shall I be getting his Chemistry b?

I don't know whether you are familiar with the course of the Italian affair,513 fragments of which have accidentellement found their way into the English and German press in the form of extracts from Russian and other papers. It is easy to lose track of such threads.

At the time of the Luxemburg affair415 Mr Bonaparte came to an agreement (informal) with Victor Emmanuel, by which the latter was given the right to annex the remaining Papal States

[^1]: a The original has: Egerton Herbert. - b H. E. Roscoe, Kurzes Lehrbuch der Chemie nach den neuesten Ansichten der Wissenschaft. Deutsche Ausgabe, unter Mitwirkung des Verfassers bearbeitet von Carl Schorlemmer. - c by chance

[^2]: 17*





**[p. 460]**

If retreat, then with present corn-prices, business in crisis and disaffection in France revolution is possible ONE FINE MORNING.

One good thing about our Bismarck—although he is the chief instrument of Russian intrigues—is that he is pushing things towards crisis in France. However, in respect of our German philistines, their entire past has shown that unity can only be imposed on them by the grace of God and the sabre.

Salut.

Your

K. M.

I once believed the separation of Ireland from England to be impossible. I now regard it as inevitable, although FEDERATION may follow upon separation. The way the English are proceeding is

[^1]: The Fenian trial in Manchester exactly as was to be expected.497

[^2]: You will have seen what a scandal 'our people' have caused in the REFORM LEAGUE. I sought by every means at my disposal to incite the English workers to demonstrate in favour of FENIANISM.521

[^3]: a Karl Georg von Usedom - b Pius IX - c confusion



