---
Volume: 42
Document_Title: "278. Engel s to Marx. 5 November "
Page_Range: "500-502"
---

# 278. Engel s to Marx. 5 November 



**[p. 461]**

shown by the AGRICULTURAL. STATISTICS for this year, which appeared a few days ago. Over and above that the manner of the EVICTION. The Irish VICEROY, Lord Abicorn a (the name is something like that), has 'CLEARED' his ESTATE in the last few weeks by forcibly driving thousands from their homes. Among them, well-to-do tenant- farmers, their IMPROVEMENTS and capital investments being thus confiscated! In no other European country has foreign rule assumed this form of direct expropriation of the natives. The Russians confiscate only for political reasons; the Prussians in West Prussia buy out.

First published in Der Briefwechsel zwischen Printed according to the original F. Engels und K. Marx, Bd. 3, Stuttgart, 1013 Published in English in full for the first time

278

ENGELS TO MARX522

Manchester, 5 November 1867

Dear Moor,

Enclosed placed in the Elberfelder Zeitung by Siebel.b It is such a pity that the poor devil, who will probably be arriving here tomorrow, will have to leave straight away, he would probably have arranged a few more things. However, I will see what else he can do, perhaps something will be possible nonetheless.

Notre amic Kugelmann appears to have miscalculated in respect of the Hanoverian newspapers, too—at least, to my utter astonishment I discovered one of the articles'1 sent him, and the tamest of them at that, shortened and mutilated to boot, in the Zukunft\e We hardly needed amicum1 for that, and at all events I would have written differently for that paper. But I was writing for the national-liberal papers he had boasted about.

[^1]: IN LONDON

[^2]: a James Hamilton Abercorn - b F. Engels, 'Review of Volume One of Capital for the Elberfelder Zeitung'. - c Our friend - d on the first volume of Capital - e F. Engels, 'Review of Volume One of Capital for the Zukunft. - f this friend





**[p. 462]**

You must write to Meissner and ask whether he can place any if they are sent to him, and where. In addition, I shall write to Klein in Cologne about the Rheinische Zeitung, and offer an article if need be. It is a dreadful handicap not being on the spot oneself. If we were in Germany, we should already have created a stir in all the papers, and have managed to get the book denounced, which is always the best thing.

Louisb in Paris does not know which way to turn. What a mess he has got himself into! Either another retreat or war on behalf of the Pope.c I can hardly believe that he has really served the Italians an ultimatum to evacuate Roman territory, no more than I can believe that he can let things rest with Moustier's churlish note.524 In either case, he is foutu.d The present mood in Paris was shown at the cimetière Montmartre.525 Things may begin to happen any day now, and I hardly believe that the great man will celebrate another 2 December," or at least it will probably be for the last time. He is in such a bad way that even the philistines here only treat him as a common adventurer now.

If the storm does break, however, the revolution will everywhere be faced with a quite different situation from 1848. After last year, the disorganisation of that time will be out of the question in Germany, and even if an immediate violent uprising in Berlin has little chance, the impact of events would provoke clashes there, too, which would inevitably end in the downfall of the present regime. Monsieur Bismarck would very soon lose command of the situation. And then this time England would be dragged in straightaway and ABOVE ALL the social question would at once become the burning issue throughout Europe.

Yesterday Blackburn showed the depths to which the English judges have sunk when he asked the witness Beck (who had first sworn to William Martin, but said afterwards that it was John M.):

[^1]: a See this volume, pp. 467-69. - b Napoleon III - c Pius IX - d done for - e the anniversary of the Bonapartist coup d'état of 2 December 1851



