---
Volume: 42
Document_Title: "279. Mar x to Engels. 7 November "
Page_Range: "502-504"
---

# 279. Mar x to Engels. 7 November 



**[p. 463]**

THEN YOU SWORE TO WILLIAM, AND YOU MEANT TO SWEAR TO JOHN? The whole prosecution will, I believe, crumble increasingly with each new BATCH of accused, the amount of perjury to get the £200 reward is quite incredible.497

Can you tell me where I can find more details about Lord Abercorn's EVICTIONS?"

Louis in Paris would once more have to mind bombs and bullets. The Italians are not to be trifled with.

I shall return the Courriers*" to you tomorrow if I can. Kindest regards to your wife, the girls and the lovelorn cobbler.c

Your

F. E.

First published in Der Briefwechsel zwischen Printed according to the original F. Engels und K. Marx, Bd. 3, Stuttgart, 1913 Published in English in full for the first time

279

[London,] 7 November 1867

Liebknecht's old address: '11, Braustrasse, Leipzig.' By the way, perhaps safer to forward it through Kugelmann, who is in contact with a friend of Liebknecht's in Leipzig.

I forgot to tell you in my letter of Saturdayf 1 sheet maximum for the Fortnightly?509 If longer than half a sheet, it should be set out as FIRST NOTICE, SECOND NOTICE. As regards Meissner, it appears to me to be undiplomatic to let him see into our cards too much. What he can do from his own resources, he does anyway. It would be important—and for the present more important than the English article—to send a more

[^1]: MARX TO ENGELS522

[^2]: IN MANCHESTER

[^3]: DEAR FRED, My remercimentsd for the Elberfelder.e

[^4]: 3 See this volume, pp. 461. - b Le Courrier français - c Paul Lafargue - d thanks - e F. Engels, 'Review of Volume One of Capital for the Elberfelder Zeitung'. - f 2 November (see this volume, pp. 458-61) - « The Fortnightly Review





**[p. 464]**

detailed report (perhaps broken down into several articles) to the Austrian Internationale Revue (Arnold Hilberg's publishing house, 4, Kolowrat-Ring, Vienna). As Arnold Hilberg lists you and me as his contributors (and through me has asked us both for contribu- tions), there are no obstacles here. It is in fact the sole German 'Review' which is open to us.

T h e only weekly paper here in London which has a certain impartiality and is much concerned with things German, such as German philology, natural science, Hegel, etc., is a—Catholic paper, The Chronicle. It is obviously their tendency to show that they are more learned than their Protestant rivals. I sent them ONE COPY3 at the end of last week with A SHORT LETTER TO THE PURPOSE, saying that my book does not share their opinions, but that the 'scholarly' nature of their paper suggests THAT SOME NOTICE WILL BE TAKEN or rms FIRST ATTEMPT AT APPLYING THE DIALECTIC METHOD TO POLITICAL ECONOMY'.1

Nous verrons!b T h e r e is a great desire prevailing at present in the more refined circles (I am referring, of course, to the INTELLECTUAL portion of the latter) to become acquainted with the dialectical method. And perhaps that is after all the easiest way to get at the English.

T h e most interesting thing in the enclosed Diplomatic Review is the excerpts from the new book by Prokesch.c

How very characteristic of the diplomatic farce being enacted in Europe at present, that at the same time as Bonaparte is intervening in Italy, France, Italy and Prussia are jointly, and most

[^1]: Detailed description of Abercorn's EVICTIONS appeared ABOUT a fortnight ago in the (Dublin) Irishman."1 I may manage to get again the copy which was only lent me for 24 hours.

[^2]: At the MEETING e presided over by Colonel Dickson and at which Bradlaugh delivered a lecture on Ireland, our OLD Weston, SECONDED BY Fox and Cremer, put forward a RESOLUTION in support of the FENIANS, which was passed unanimously. Last Tuesday ditto, during Acland's lecture on the REFORM BILL, Cleveland Hall (right above us, we were meeting downstairs in the COFFEE ROOM, which is in the basement), tempestuous demonstration in favour of the FENIANS. T h e business is boiling u p in the intelligent section of the WORKING CLASS here.

[^3]: a of the first volume of Capital - b We shall see! - c 'Conference held on August the 27th, 1822, at Constantinople. From the Work of Baron Prokesch', The Diplomatic Review, 2 October 1867 (excerpts from the book by A. Prokesch-Osten, Geschichte des Abfalls der Griechen vom Türkischen Reiche im Jahre 1821). - d See this volume, pp. 461 and 463. - e In this paragraph Marx refers to the meetings of the Reform League branches.



