---
Volume: 42
Document_Title: "280. Engel s to Marx. 8 November "
Page_Range: "504-506"
---

# 280. Engel s to Marx. 8 November 



**[p. 465]**

obediently at Russia's behest, delivering a threatening note to the Porte.526

Salut.

Your

K. M.

Old Urquhart with his Catholicism, etc., GROWS MORE AND MORE

DISGUSTING.

On lit dans un registre d'une inquisition d'Italie cet aveu d'une religieuse; elle disait innocentent à la Madonne: 'Degrâce, sainte Vierge, donne moi quelqu'un avec qui je puisse pécher.'* However, the Russians are plus fortsb in this, too. A case is reported of a fellow in the best of health who emerged dead after only 24 hours in a Russian nunnery. T h e nuns had ridden him to death. Of course, in their case le directeur des consciences n'entre pas tous les joursc\

First published abridged in Der Briefwech- Printed according to the original sei zwischen F. Engels und K. Marx, Bd. 3, Stuttgart, 1913 and in full in MEGA, Published in English m full for the Abt. Ill, Bd. 3, Berlin, 1930 h r s t t l m e

280

ENGELS T O MARX

Manchester, 8 November 1867

Dear Moor,

In great haste: Siebel will be here tomorrow or in Liverpool, where I shall see him. He can place another 3 articles,0 which I have prepared at once and which we shall then despatch with all speed. If I had known that it would be so long before he came, he should have received them in Barmen long ago.

[^1]: IN LONDON

[^2]: a The following confession from a nun is to be found in an inquisition record in Italy, who innocently prayed to the madonna: 'I beg of you, Holy Virgin, send me someone with whom I may sin.' - b stronger - c the Father Confessor does not come in every day - d on the first volume of Capital





**[p. 466]**

The Dow NBREAK of the police in the trial here has been more rapid and more complete than I had expected. But there is probably even better to come. OLD Blackburn also appears to be changing his tune, today he complimented Ernest Jones most fulsomely on his speech.497

Have you read Bismarck's instructions to Usedom (in the Augsburger Abendzeitung* denied, of course518)? The fellow is making no bones about exposing the Italians' intrigues with Bonaparte; one has to grant him that he is capable of the most undiplomatic manners if it suits him. (Kölnische Zeitung of Wednesday has reprinted it.) This stance of Bismarck's also explains the Italians' retreat and their present grovelling.

Concerning the true nature of the inspections, checks and interferences of the Prussian bureaucracy: my brother writes that the manufacturers want to set up an association on the Rhine and in the Ruhr, like the ones here, to have their boilers periodically examined by competent engineers, and he goes on to say of the government control:

There are the Prussians for you! Portrayed by themselves.

[^1]: 'Here at our place, a District Architect inspects 7 boilers in half an hour (!!) and goes home quite satisfied, in another factory a similar official took 2 hours for 35 boilers U If anyone is so foolish as to imagine he can sleep soundly after such an inspection, he is, of course, deceived. It would be a real blessing if this nonsense were done away with and replaced by some sensible practical arrangement. At one inspection, I first explained the boiler with all its fittings to the District Architect, then I carried out his instructions as well and finally wrote the report for the government for him.'

[^2]: First published in Der Briefwechsel zwischen Printed according to the original F. Engels und K. Marx, Bd. 3, Stuttgart, 1913 Published in English for the first time

[^3]: a to force the hand of these miserable economists - b Augsburger Abendzeitung, No. 303, 4 November 1867.



