---
Volume: 42
Document_Title: "283. Engel s to Marx. 10 November "
Page_Range: "509-511"
---

# 283. Engel s to Marx. 10 November 

2 8 2

M A R X T O E N G E L S 5 2 7

IN MANCHESTER

[London,] 9 November 1867

DEAR FRED,

Enclosed from Kugelmann. Salut.

Your

Moor

[Postscript from Laura Marx in English]

Dear Engels,

As Mohr's Secretary I am really rather ashamed to send off a letter of this kind.

Yours sincerely

Kakadou a

283

ENGELS TO MARX

Manchester, 10 November 1867

Dear Moor,

What touching gaucheness in dear old Kugelmann's letter! And what discernment of character in respect of that Warnebold! The fellow extracts all his secrets from him, and all the while he is a Prussian spy! You must tell Kugelmann the truth about that cur—at least sufficiently to stop the Prussians learning every detail

[^1]: First published in MEGA, Abt. Ill, Printed according to the original Bd. 3, Berlin, 1930

[^2]: Published in English for the first time

[^3]: IN LONDON

[^4]: 11 Laura's jocular nickname





**[p. 471]**

I saw Siebel yesterday in Liverpool. I fear the poor devil's days are numbered. Since I last saw him, his desease has advanced considerably, his health broke down in Barmen, he has had 3 successive attacks of pleurisy and is coughing very violently (he calls them coughing-spasms, and they recur periodically), however he has lately regained some of his health and strength at Honnef on the Rhine. Unfortunately, I could only speak to him alone for a short while, there were always several relatives there apart from his wife. Despite that, we settled the most important things.

D'abord3: Siebel has up to the present moment neither received a copyh nor even seen one, although he wrote to Meissner asking to be sent one by post immediately on publication. Mr Rittershaus, however, who has not lifted a finger, has received one, and Siebel thought you had not sent him one at all, but had done so to Rittershaus, which may have piqued him. I naturally explained the true position to him, but a few lines from you to him, which you can enclose in a letter to me, really are called for. But you must now take Meissner to task forthwith for this negligence. This affair has cost us 20 short notices which Siebel would immediately have had in all the papers, but could not because he did not have the book. Furthermore, I must have a copy here by 22 November at the latest to send to Siebel in Madeira, where he will make up for lost time as far as he can. But really what can one say to such a slapdash approach? And these are the Germans who are demanding self-government and CANNOT LOOK AFTER THEIR OWN BUSINESS!

Of the 3 articles I took with me, we sent off 2 to the Frankfurter Börsenzeitung0 and to the Düsseldorfer Zeitung529 forthwith—the latter will do Mr Heinrich Bürgers good, with his circumspect scruples: my articled—a very simple report, which makes no judgments and was composed for a national-liberal newspaper—is too dubious for that brute!523 Siebel took the 3rd with him, it will probably go to the Barmer Zeitung.550 Notices will also appear in all kinds of illustrated and other papers, as soon as Siebel himself has the book. Furthermore, the Weser-Zeitung will receive an article a tempo" from him for its literary section, and one on the book, and will be faced only with the choice of taking both or neither. (Siebel is using the literary section articles as a bait for editors, they are desperate for them, and he often lets them pocket the fee

[^1]: a Firstly - b of the first volume of Capital - c Frankfurter Zeitung und Handelsblatt - d F. Engels, 'Review of Volume One of Capital for the Rheinische Zeitung'. - e in time



