---
Volume: 42
Document_Title: "284. Mar x to Carl Siebel. 10 November "
Page_Range: "511-512"
---

# 284. Mar x to Carl Siebel. 10 November 



**[p. 472]**

Ad vocem3 Freiligrath: that worthy's debts amounted to approx. £6,000, £4,000 with the Swiss Bank advanced for shares in the Mansfield Co. which are now worthless, and the rest debts of honour. The Comité422 has settled these debts at 5% dividend, a few of them at 10%. Freiligrath has thus gone bankrupt in optima forma.b The collection will amount to approx. 30,000 talers.

Freiligrath is said to have lied to the Comité through and through, concealed his debts and pretended his wife knew nothing of it and must not be allowed to know anything of it either, so that eventually they were very rude to him; even on the day when he knew that a letter was to arrive from London to say that the debts of honour totalled £2,000, he was still saying they were only £1,500, etc. In short, his conduct has been disgraceful and cowardly. I said I was quite convinced that dear old Idac knew all about it, to which he replied: how was it then possible for her to give fêtes6 last summer in Barmen? Just imagine, Ida goes a-begging and at the same time holds fêtes for the people she is begging from with the money that has not yet been given!

I am surprised Tussye has not yet sent me a receipt for my contribution to the Freiligrath funeral-fund. THAT IS NOT BUSINESSLIKE.

Your

F. E.

284

London, 10 November 1867 Dear Siebel,

For the time being I am sending you this personal copy of mine.f At the same time I wrote to Meissner, the deuce take him! I

[^1]: First published abridged in Der Briefwech- Printed according to the original sei zwischen F. Engels and K. Marx, Bd. 3, , , - • • • T- .• . r • r- Stuttgart, 1913 and in full in MEGA, Published in Enghsh for the first Abt. Ill, Bd. 3, Berlin, 1930 t i m e

[^2]: MARX TO CARL SIEBEL531

[^3]: IN MADEIRA

[^4]: a Regarding - b in the best of form - c Ida Freiligrath - d parties - c Eleanor Marx - f the first volume of Capital



