---
Volume: 42
Document_Title: "285. Mar x to Engels. 14 November : "
Page_Range: "512-513"
---

# 285. Mar x to Engels. 14 November : 



**[p. 473]**

Karl Marx

First published in: Marx and Engels, Printed according to the text of Works, First Russian Edition, Vol. XXV, Volume XXV of the First Russian Moscow, 1934 Edition

Translated from the Russian

Published in English for the first time

285

MARX TO ENGELS

IN MANCHESTER

[London,] 14 November 1867

DEAR FRED, A letter from Russia enclosed and one from Solingen.532 I believe the Russo-Germana must be the same man that Meyerb

told us about.

Kugelmann has sent me a copy of the Deutsche Volkszeitung (Hanover) containing a short notice of my book' written by himself. In it, Kugelmann has imitated one of your articles,d and by no means happily. As this paper is democratic, he could have gone into the content more. Among other things, he has me arrive 'at the' admittedly 'astonishing conclusion that all capital is derived from unpaid labour power1. Among the 'German authorities on political economy' whose 'verdict' he seeks, Mr 'Faucher' (fortu- nately printed as 'Taucher') appears at the head of the list and Roscher at the end.

Your 'revelations' in respect of Freiligrath have created a great sensation here at home.

At this moment, Bonaparte has need of a riot or a secret society in Paris if he is to extricate himself from his predicament. For the time being, he is treating the Ligue de la Paixe46i as such. However,

[^1]: a Joseph Dietzgen - b Sigfrid Meyer - c the first volume of Capital (Deutsche Volkszeitung, 10 November 1867) - d F. Engels, 'Review of Volume One of Capital for the Zukunft'. - e League of Peace



