---
Volume: 42
Document_Title: "286. Engels to Marx. 24 November "
Page_Range: "513-514"
---

# 286. Engels to Marx. 24 November 



**[p. 474]**

I am being plagued by a carbunculum on the right side of my back.

Salut.

Your

K. M.

First published in Der Briefwechsel zwischen Printed according to the original F. Engels und K. Marx, Bd. 3, Stuttgart, „ • , - , . • T- .• ._ r u r- 1913 Published in English for the first time

286

ENGELS TO MARX522

IN LONDON

Manchester, 24 November 1867

Dear Moor,

The letters returned enclosed. So, yesterday morning, and by Mr Colcraft's hand, the Tories have really performed the ultimate act of separation between England and Ireland. The only thing the Fenians still lacked were martyrs. Derby and G. Hardy have now provided them with these. It was the execution of those 3 a which will transform the liberation of Kelly and Deasy into an act of heroism, such as will now be sung at the cradle of every Irish child in Ireland, England and America. The Irish women will see to that as surely as did the Polish womenfolk.

The only time that anyone has, to my knowledge, been executed for anything similar in a civilised state was the case of John Brown at Harpers ferry.533 The Fenians could not wish for a better precedent. And yet even the SOUTHERNERS had the decency to treat J. Brown as a rebel, whereas here no effort is spared to convert an act of political violence into a common crime.

Everybody knows that while he was leading his band of ruffians at Boulogne, Louis Napoleon shot the duty-officer dead.534 He

[^1]: 11 the Fenians Michael Larkin, William Allen and Michael O'Brien



