---
Volume: 42
Document_Title: "287. Engel s to Marx. 26 November "
Page_Range: "514-515"
---

# 287. Engel s to Marx. 26 November 



**[p. 475]**

thus did what Allen is supposed to have done but did not do. For which the English government hangs Allen, while the English queena kisses Louis Napoleon's cheek and the English aristocracy and bourgeoisie his backside.

The latter point should be made in the press.

Your

F. E.

First published in Der Briefwechsel zwischen Printed according to the original F. Engels und K. Marx, Bd. 3, Stuttgart, jojg Published in English in full for the first time

287

ENGELS TO MARX

IN LONDON

Manchester, 26 November 1867

Dear Moor,

Meissner's proposal to send out new notices with excerpts from the reviews was what I had in mind to suggest to you as soon as Siebel's articles (i.e. the ones I gave himc) appear. The excerpt from the Zukunft is quite good,535 but a few more would be even better; he should send you the whole caboodle, and you can then prepare a notice from it. Or if you do not wish to, then he can send it to me and I will do it. I was most struck by the fact that the first notice took up precisely the same space as the one for my little pamphlet,d and it had not a word of commentary with it.536

If the matter does not turn out differently soon, then / shall have to write—with your consent OF COURSE—to Meissner and offer him articles written by myself for newspapers to be specified by him. I am sure that could not compromise you.

before the post office closed. They are admittedly persuasive,

[^1]: I have not received the promised letter in quo tua res agebatur.b

[^2]: I have just managed to convey Meissner's excuses to Siebel1S1

[^3]: a Victoria - b in which your business was dealt with (see next letter) - c F. Engels,

[^4]: 'Review of Volume One of Capital for the Elberfelder Zeitung and 'Review of Volume One of Capital for the Düsseldorfer Zeitung. - d F. Engels, The Prussian Military Question and the German Workers' Party.



