---
Volume: 42
Document_Title: "288. Mar x to Engels. 27 November "
Page_Range: "515-517"
---

# 288. Mar x to Engels. 27 November 



**[p. 476]**

You will have received my letter of Sunday with the returned letters." The tannerb returned enclosed, autodidactum integrum,'' which does not, however, mean that other nations are incapable of bringing forth such a tanner. Philosophy, which in Jakob Böhme's day was just a shoemaker, is making progress when it assumes the shape of a tanner.

How is the carbuncle? I do not like its location, I hope Lafargue has lanced it for you. A stop really must be put to this business.

Has Borkheim paid you the money? He has not written a word to me, although I am guarantor.d

Your

F. E.

First published in Der Briefwechsel zwischen Printed according to the original F. Engels und K. Marx, Bd. 3, Stuttgart, . JC)J3 Published in English tor the first time

288

MARX TO ENGELS

[London,] 27 November 1867

Dear Engels,

With regard to my private business (I intended writing to you on Saturdaye but was prevented on that and on the following days by people consulting me from every side about the FENIAN AFFAIRS,497 etc., in short, they were confiscating my time), Mr Borkheim— despite the best of intentions, I am sure—has throughout this month kept me suspended between frying pan and fire. You will see from his latest letter, of yesterday, that we are again faced with a new, indefinite delay. The worst part of it all is that he had positively promised me he would pay out the whole sum on the

[^1]: IN MANCHESTER

[^2]: ;t See this volume, p. 474. - b Joseph Dietzgen - e entirely self-educated - d See this volume, pp. 436, 437, etc. - e 23 November





**[p. 477]**

10th of this month (at the latest), and I had made my dispositions with the creditors accordingly. The amount he has actually paid since he returned is £5. So, you will realise what TROUBLE I find myself in. The state of my health has greatly worsened, and there has been virtually no question of working. I am furthermore expecting summonses any day, and we no longer know which way to turn from one day to the next.

With regard to Meissner, my view is that we should let him have a free hand with his notice, as everything else would mean further delay. Thimm told Borkheim that Meissner had requested all the booksellers to send any still unsold copies3 back to him (or to his agent in Leipzig). I have also heard from York, the Workers' Society"1 bookseller, that it is at the moment very difficult to obtain copies from Meissner. To me this indicates no more than 1. that the STOCK in Meissner's hands is very small, 2. that he wants to know how much of the STOCK not in his hands is really sold, 3. he wants to force his business 'friends' to hold as much as possible at their own expense. I shall write to Meissner that should he need notices or reviews for certain newspapers or journals (and he must tell me which), he can obtain them from friends such as yourself, etc. Must keep me informed.

Dr Contzen, private lecturer in political economy at Leipzig, PARTISAN and pupil of Roscher and friend of Liebknecht, has asked me through the latter for a copy with the promise of a detailed review. You will see that this has already been attended to through Meissner. Contzen is a good opening.

The extract from Liebknecht's SPEECH at the Berlin Workers' Society4"' on the deferment of the 'social question' which he has published as an appendix admittedly gives some grounds for Kugelmann's censure.537 As Liebknecht is asking you, among other things, to contribute to the little paper he is planning,538 you can give him a few hints privatim about how to combine political opposition with social agitation.

Letters from Liebknecht and Kugelmann enclosed.

Salut.

Your

K. M.

[^1]: Liebknecht has sent me 50 of his PAMPHLETS0 (of which I am sending you one today) for sale here, 3d. each. Lessner is seeing what can be done in the Workers' Society.

[^2]: a of the first volume of Capital - b German Workers' Educational Society in London - c W. Liebknecht, Was ich im Berliner 'Reichstag' sagte.



