---
Volume: 42
Document_Title: "289. Mar x to Engels. 28 November "
Page_Range: "517-518"
---

# 289. Mar x to Engels. 28 November 



**[p. 478]**

What is the position regarding Mr Schorlemmer's Chemistry" which I was to receive?

First published in Der Briefwechsel zwischen Printed according to the original F. Engels und K. Marx, Bd. 3, Stuttgart, „ , .. , , • ^ i- L <• u r- iqia Published in English tor the tirst time

289

MARX TO ENGELS

IN MANCHESTER

London, 28 November 1867

DEAR FRED,

I see that I did not enclose the 2 letters from Borkheim for you. But it is not really necessary. Yesterday we had the 'discussion' he desired. He has reverted to the idea (which I suggested to him 2 months ago) of a loan from the 'Atlas' Life Assurance Company, whose secretary is a friend of his. I completed the papers yesterday at his house. You only figure as a REFERENCE on them. £150 (of which Borkheim would receive £45), repayable on 1 September.

I no longer have any faith in the success of Borkheim's operations. I have no doubt about his good will.

Have you received his 'Peart? (French and German so farb). Important letter from Schily enclosed. Please send it back by return; give your opinion at the same time. Whatever happens I shall not permit Mosesc to derive 'profit' from my workd without profiting to some extent from it myself.539

I am having to be diplomatic about Fenianism. I cannot keep entirely silent, but under no circumstances do I want the fellows, when criticising my book, to confine themselves to the statement that I am a demagogue.

I am sending you Borkheim's Gentz (important for the article on

[^1]: a H. E. Roscoe, Kurzes Lehrbuch der Chemie Deutsche Ausgabe, unter Mitwirkung des Verfassers bearbeitet von Carl Schorlemmer. - b S. Borkheim, Ma perle devant le congrès de Genève (German edition: Meine Perle vor dem Genfer Congress). - c Moses Hess - à the first volume of Capital



