---
Volume: 42
Document_Title: "290. Engel s to Marx. 28 November "
Page_Range: "518-519"
---

# 290. Engel s to Marx. 28 November 



**[p. 479]**

Russia)" without his knowledge. Please return it to me as soon as you have finished.

I now have a rash of furuncles more or less all over, and am glad of it. It puts paid to the carbuncle malady.

Salut.

Your

Moro

*My compliments to Mrs Burns. Jenny goes in black since the Manchester execution,497 and wears her Polish cross on a green ribbon.*430

First published in Der Briefwechsel zwischen Printed according to the original F. Engels und K. Marx, Bd. 3, Stuttgart, 1913 Published in English for the first time

290

ENGELS TO MARX

Manchester, 28 November 1867

Dear Moor,

Enclosed for your immediate relief £30 in 3 notes à 10, O/U 56068 to 70, Manchester, 9 January 1867. The letter from Borkheim was not enclosed. I have also received a letter from Kugelmannb which I enclose and wish to have returned, I have to answer him.

Liebknecht would have done better to leave his pamphlet unprinted.c His speeches appear better in the Kölnische Zeitung than in this form, and the stuff at the end indeed shows just how pig-headedly he is stuck in his errors.537 It is true I have already told him a thing or two by letter, but now that he is starting up another little paper, he must be told some more home truths538;

[^1]: IN LONDON

[^2]: a F. von Gentz, Vertrauliche Bemerkungen über den Stand und die nächste Zukunft der russisch-türkischen Angelegenheiten. - b of 25 November 1867 - c W. Liebknecht, Was ich im Berliner 'Reichstag' sagte.'



