---
Volume: 42
Document_Title: "294. Engel s to Marx. 29 November "
Page_Range: "522-523"
---

# 294. Engel s to Marx. 29 November 



**[p. 294]**

ENGELS TO MARX522

IN LONDON

Manchester, 29 November 1867 7 Southgate

Dear Moor,

Schily returned enclosed.539 Oh, Lord, have mercy upon us, here comes olle Moses3 pissing up to us again! And he is congratulating himself that you certified he was right when he asserted that capital is accumulated labour!

I would be just the tiniest bit reticent in respect of that worthy. He will then take the bait all the more surely, and you know how little we can trust him if we have not made quite sure of him. In my view, for the present you could permit him to publish a few extracts from itb in the Courrier français, so that we may see how he proposes to handle the thing. He will naturally put his signature to these, and we shall thereby again have him to some degree qualified as a repentant sinner. Then you could talk about the translation of the whole book which he is envisaging; your right of revision always reserved; and discuss conditions as soon as a publisher has been found. What Schily says of Reclus seems important to me, as the man knows German.

You are perfectly right about the Fenians.c The vile deeds of the English must not allow us to forget that most of the leaders of this sect are jackasses and some of them exploiters, and that we can, under no circumstances, make ourselves responsible for the idiocies that are perpetrated in any conspiracy. That there will be some, is certain.

to have looked pale and confused. The Catholic priests who were there declare that is a lie. Larkin, they say, stumbled over an irregularity in the ground and all three showed great courage.

[^1]: I need hardly tell you that black and greend are the prevailing colours in my house, too. The English press has again conducted itself abominably.497 Larkin is said to have fainted, and the otherse

[^2]: a Moses Hess (olle—Low German for 'old') - b the first volume of Capital - c See this volume, pp. 478-79. - d i.e., colours symbolising mourning and the struggle for the emancipation of Ireland - e William Allen and Michael O'Brien



