---
Volume: 42
Document_Title: "295. Mar x to Engels. 30 November "
Page_Range: "523-526"
---

# 295. Mar x to Engels. 30 November 



**[p. 484]**

MURDERED.

You will have received my letter of yesterday with the £30.a As regards the life assurance,0 I am willing to guarantee the sum concerned, provided that Borkheim retains the original in his own keeping and merely gives the secretary a copy, in the hope that this will facilitate matters.

I agree that the furuncles appear to mark the crisis of the previous illness.

Best regards to your wife, the girls and Lafargue. Now that Liebknecht has got a little paper,538 for which we shall be held responsible, it is very important that he does nothing stupid in respect of his German policy. I am most impatient for a letter from him.

Apropos. From 1 January the Internationale Revue will appear as joint successor to a journal produced by Prutzc which is to merge with it. Could put paid to our plans.d How do you think we should broach the matter with Hilberg? We shall have to be cunning about it.

Your

F. E.

295

London, 30 November 1867 DEAR FRED,

Regarding Moses,' I shall follow your prescription exactly. At all events, we must make use of the man and, at the same time,

[^1]: First published in Der Briefwechsel zwischen Printed according to the original F. Engels und K. Marx, Bd. 3, Stuttgart, jgj3 Published in English in full for the first time

[^2]: MARX TO ENGELS54'

[^3]: IN MANCHESTER

[^4]: a See this volume, pp. 479, 481-82. - b Ibid., p. 478. - c Deutsches Museum - d See this volume, pp. 463-64. - e Moses Hess (see this volume, p. 484).





**[p. 485]**

prevent him from misusing us. Regarding Hilberg, it would indeed be a good thing if we could keep a hold on this Revue,3

being the only one still open to us, but how? is not yet clear to me. This morning I received a COPY of Schorlemmer b AND SEND HIM MY

THANKS FOR IT.

If you have read the papers, you will have seen that 1. the INTERNATIONAL COUNCIL sent MEMORIAL for the FENIANS542 to Hardy, 2. the debate on FENIANISM (a week ago last Tuesday c) was public and The Times carried a REPORT on it.d T h e r e were also REPORTERS there from the Dublin Irishman and Nation. I did not arrive until very late (I have been suffering from a fever for about 2 weeks, and have only got over it in the last 2 days) and had not in fact intended to speak, first on account of my uncomfortable physical condition, and second because of the delicacy of the situation. However, the CHAIRMAN Weston wanted to force me to, so I moved ADJOURNMENT, which obliged me to speak last Tuesday. 6 What I had in fact prepared for TUESDAY LAST was not a SPEECH but rather the POINTS for A SPEECH.' However, the IRISH REPORTERS did not come, and by the time we had finished waiting for them it was 9 o'clock, whereas the premises were only available to us until IOV2- At my suggestion, Fox had prepared a long SPEECH (because of a QUARREL on the COUNCIL he had made no appearance for 2 weeks, and furthermore sent in his RESIGNATION as MEMBER OF THE COUNCIL containing furious outbursts against Jung 5 4 3). When the séance* opened I therefore declared that, on account of the BELATED HOUR, I would yield the floor to Fox. In fact—because the executions in Manchester had intervened—our subject 'FENIANISM' was bound u p with the passions and heated emotions of the moment, which would have compelled me (though not the abstract Fox) to unleash a revolutionary thunderbolt, instead of the intended objective analysis of the situation and the movement. T h e Irish REPORTERS thus did me a great service by staying away and so delaying the opening of the meeting. I do not enjoy getting embroiled with people like Roberts, Stephens, and the like.

Fox's SPEECH was good, first because it was delivered by an Englishman, and second insofar as it dealt only with political and international ASPECTS. However, for that very reason he only skated over the surface of things. T h e resolution he brought forward was

[^1]: a Internationale Revue - b H. E. Roscoe, Kurzes Lehrbuch der Chemie Deutsche Ausgabe, unter Mitwirkung des Verfassers bearbeitet von Carl Schorlemmer. - c 19 Novem- ber - d 'London Meetings', The Times, No. 25974, 21 November 1867. - e 26 November - f K. Marx, 'Notes for an Undelivered Speech on Ireland'. - 8 meeting





**[p. 486]**

What the English d o not yet realise, is that since 1846 the economic content and hence the political purpose of English rule in Ireland as well has entered an entirely new phase, and that for that very reason FENIANISM is characterised by socialist (in the negative sense, as directed against the APPROPRIATION of the SOIL) leanings and as a LOWER ORDERS MOVEMENT. What could be more absurd than to lump together the barbarities of Elizabeth o r Cromwell, who wanted to drive out the Irish by means of English colonists (in the Roman sense), and the present system, which wants to drive out the Irish by means of sheep, pigs and oxen! T h e system of 1801-1846 (EVICTIONS in that period were exceptional, particular- ly in Leinster, where the soil is especially suited to cattle-raising) with its RACKRENTS and MIDDLEMEN, collapsed in 1846. T h e ANTI-CORN- LAW-REPEAL, in part a consequence of or, at all events, hastened by the IRISH FAMINE,545 took from Ireland its monopoly of supplying England with corn in normal times. Wool and meat became the watchword, hence CONVERSION OF TILLAGE INTO PASTURE. SO from then on, SYSTEMATIC CONSOLIDATION OF FARMS. T h e ENCUMBERED ESTATES ACT which made LANDLORDS of a mass of former MIDDLEMEN who had grown rich, hastened the process.546 CLEARING OF THE ESTATES OF IRELAND! is now the sole meaning of English rule in Ireland. T h e stupid English government in London naturally knows even nothing of this IMMENSE CHANGE since 1846. But the Irish do. From Meagher's Proclamation (1848)547 down to Hennessy's election address (Tory a n d Urquhartite) (1866) the Irish have been expressing their awareness of it in the clearest and MOST FORCIBLE MANNER.

T h e question now is, what advice should we give the English workers? In my view, they must make REPEAL of the UNION (in short, the farce of 1783, only democratised and adapted to meet present circumstances) an article of their pronunziamento."548 This is the only legal a n d hence the only possible form of Irish emancipation which can be adopted by an English party in its programme. Experience must later show, whether mere personal union between the 2 countries can continue to exist. I half believe it could if it comes about in due time.

What the Irish need is:

1. Self-government and independence from England. 2. Agrarian revolution. With the best will in the world the

[^1]: a manifesto



