---
Volume: 42
Document_Title: "296. Mar x to Victor Schily. 30 November "
Page_Range: "526-528"
---

# 296. Mar x to Victor Schily. 30 November 



**[p. 487]**

English cannot do this for them, but they can give them the legal means to do it for themselves.

3. Protective tariffs against England. From 1783-1801 every branch of industry in Ireland flourished. By suppressing the protective tariffs which the Irish parliament had established, the Union destroyed all industrial life in Ireland. The little bit of linen industry is in no way a substitute. The Union of 1801 affected Irish industry exactly as did the measures for the suppression of the Irish wool industry, etc., on the part of the English parliament under Anne, George II, and others. As soon as the Irish became independent, necessity would turn them, like Canada, Australia, etc., into protectionists. Before I put forward my views at the CENTRAL COUNCIL (next Tuesday, this time fortunately without REPORTERS being present),549 I would appreciate it if you would let me know your opinion in a few lines.

Salut.

Your

K. M.

Since Moses3 is a cousin of Hirsch? I am not surprised that he himself has a set of antlers. HE BEARS IT PROUDLY/

296

London, 30 November 1867

Dear Schily,

[^1]: First published abridged in Der Briefwech- Printed according to the original sei zwischen F. Engels und K. Marx, Bd. 3, Stuttgart, 1913 and in full in MEGA, Abt. III, Bd. 3, Berlin, 1930

[^2]: MARX T O VICTOR SCHILY419

[^3]: IN PARIS

[^4]: I wrote to Meissner as soon as I received your letter and asked him to send you a COPY of the bookd for Reclus.111 I believe Reclus

[^5]: a Moses Hess - b A pun on the name Hirsch which also means stag.- c Marx wrote this postscript at the top of the first page. - d the first volume of Capital





**[p. 488]**

to be just the man to undertake the French translation, with German co-operation. In a translation, I would indicate certain changes to be made in several parts and, at the same time, reserve the right to carry out the final revision myself.539

What should be done, in the first instance, and as quickly as possible, is to bring out passages from the book in the Courrier français. I do not see why Hess should need to involve any third person for this. He would best do it by himself. I also think that the topic he had in mind on English factory legislation is the most suitable as an introduction. However, even that cannot be treated without a few introductory words about the theory of value, as Proudhon has sown total confusion in people's minds on that subject. They believe that a commodity is sold for its value if it is sold for its prix de revient"1 = price of the means of production which have been consumed in it, + wages (or price of the labour added to the means of production). They do not see that the unpaid labour which is contained in the commodity constitutes just as fundamental an element of value as the labour which has been paid for, and that this element of value now takes the form of profit, etc. They have no idea what wages are. Without an understanding of the nature of value, arguments about the working day, etc., in short, the factory laws, have no basis. A few words of introduction on this subject are thus called for.

My publisherb is satisfied with sales in Germany. The liberal and vulgar-economist gang is, of course, seeking to harm it as much as they can by their tried and tested method of conspiration de silence. But this time they will not succeed.

I am here enclosing 1 COPY of Liebknecht1 for you. You will see from the back page that he is bringing out a little weekly paper of his own d in the coming weeks. I am to request contributions from you from Paris. (His address: 11 Braustrasse, Mr Miller!1) I have given him a dressing-down for the phrase about the 'social question' (in the supplement)537 and ditto drew his attention to the fact that he should avoid uncritical stand of the South Germans in his polemic against Bismarck. What should already have perplexed him is the fact that Jakobus Venedey has become his admirer.

[^1]: a prime cost - b Otto Meissner - c W. Liebknecht, Was ich im Berliner 'Reichstag' sagte. - d Democratisches Wochenblatt - e Liebknecht's conspiratorial pseudonym



