---
Volume: 42
Document_Title: "299. Engels to Marx. 6 December "
Page_Range: "530-532"
---

# 299. Engels to Marx. 6 December 



**[p. 298]**

ENGELS TO MARX

IN LONDON

Manchester, 4 December 1867

Dear Moor,

I have given the LOAN COMPANY the REFERENCE, I said, FROM

CONFIDENTIAL INFORMATION I AM CONVINCED THAT M R M A R X WILL BE IN A POSITION

TO REPAY THE LOAN WHEN DUE.

The letters from Borkheim returned enclosed. I hope the business goes well.

I shall be sending you letters from Kugelmann and Liebknecht tomorrow or the day after. Both have some prospect of getting various things3 placed in newspapers, though admittedly small ones, I shall be attending to it this and tomorrow evening.

As to Meissner's notice,b haste is not very advisable. The stuff must not appear in the papers until after New Year, otherwise it will get lost in the flood of notices for Christmas books.

Your

F. E.

299

ENGELS TO MARX

Manchester, 6 December 1867

Dear Moor,

Enclosed letters from Kugelmann (with enclosure), Liebknecht and Siebel, as well as three acknowledgments from Rau, Hilde-

[^1]: First published in Der Briefwechsel zwischen Printed according to the original F. Engels und K. Marx, Bd. 3, Stuttgart, , ,. , , . _ ,. , r .q,o Published in English tor the hrst time

[^2]: IN LONDON

[^3]: a concerning the first volume of Capital - b See this volume, pp. 475 and 476.

[^4]: 18*





**[p. 492]**

brand and Schulze-Delitzsch.551 Please send back by return the ones from Kugelmann, with the enclosure, and Siebel, the post for Siebel is going off on Monday evening, and I also have to write to Kugelmann. What do you think of the little Swabian paper3? Kugelmann certainly does seem to be resorting to desperate means though.

I have written at length to Liebknecht and demanded that he should attack not only the Prussians but their opponents, too, the Austrians, Federalists, Guelphs420 and other advocates of the smaller states. As I suspected, the fellow has become narrow- minded in exclusively South German fashion. He and Bebel have signed an address to the Viennese City Council,b in which Austria is hailed as the newly-arising state of freedom in the South, in contrast to the North's condition of servitude! ITS ALL VERY WELL for him to make a few vague speeches in the Reichstag, but a little newspaperc is a different matter altogether, we shall be held responsible for it, and we really cannot allow ourselves to be confused with Austrians, Federalists and Guelphs.552 I have also written to him about his stupidity in suspending social agitation.ss7

This evening I shall be sending Jenny the trial of Adelaide Macdonald, who fired a pistol at the policeman.553 Her relation- ship with Allen is not clear. Allen was betrothed to another girl and was to marry on the Monday after the 'OUTRAGE'.

In haste.

Your

F. E. LOAN ALL RIGHT, I presume? Enquiries today about life assurance.

[^1]: First published abridged in Der Briefwech- sel zwischen F. Engels und K. Marx, Bd. 3, Stuttgart, 1913 and in full in MEGA, Abt. III, Bd. 3, Berlin, 1930

[^2]: Printed according to the original

[^3]: Published in English for the first time

[^4]: a Der Beobachter - b 'Adresse an den Wiener Gemeinderat', Neue Preußische Zeitung,

[^5]: 1 December 1867. - c Demokratisches Wochenblatt



