---
Volume: 42
Document_Title: "303. Engels to Marx. 12 December "
Page_Range: "536-538"
---

# 303. Engels to Marx. 12 December 



**[p. 497]**

I enclose a letter (which you will be so kind as to return to me) from a German-Russian worker3 (tanner).532 Engels rightly ob- serves that the autodidactic philosophy—pursued by workers themselves—has made great progress in this tanner, when compared with the cobbler Jakob Böhme, ditto that none but the 'German' worker is capable of such cerebral production.15

Borkheim asked me yesterday who wrote the article in the Zukunft? (he subscribes to the paper). He said it must originate from our side as you had sent him a copy. I said I did not know. N.B.! One must not let others see through one's game!

Heartiest thanks to your good wifed for the trouble she has taken in copying the letters. You should not exploit her so for 'surplus labour'.

As I told you, if I am not mistaken, Bücher has actually asked me himself to become economic correspondent for the 'Königlich Preußische Staats-Zeitung.* So you see, if I wished to avail myself of such sources, I could do so without the mediation of any third party.559

I am suffering from the same illness as before. Nothing dangerous to it, but a nuisance.

With best compliments to your good wife and Fränzchen.'

Yours

K. Marx

303

ENGELS TO MARX

Manchester, 12 December 1867 Dear Moor,

Since Sunday I've been having a grand gala performance, with toothache, influenza, SORE THROAT, fever, and all manner of

[^1]: First published abridged in Die Neue Zeit, Printed according to the original Bd. 2, Nr. 4, Stuttgart, 1901-1902 and in full in Pisma Marksa k Kugelmanu (Letters of Marx to Kugelmann), Moscow- Leningrad, 1928

[^2]: IN LONDON

[^3]: a Joseph Dietzgen - b See this volume, p. 476. - c F. Engels, 'Review of Volume One of Capital for the Zukunft'. - d Gertruda Kugelmann - e Königlich Preußischer Staats-Anzeiger (see this volume, p. 202) - f Franziska Kugelmann





**[p. 498]**

Bürgers has been put ad acta.554 By one of the ironies of fate, the introduction to the article b sent him by Kugelmann necessarily cut him to the quick as the unsuccessful Reichstag candidate for Düsseldorf. I quite innocently mentioned in it the fact that the social-democratic party could no longer simply be ignored now that it is represented in the Reichstag, and that these gentlemen would make this book their Bible. With his customary tact,

Kugelmann sends this to Heinrich. Hinc Mae lacrimae F I had quite forgotten the matter, and I was only reminded of it by Heinrich's anxious letter, which takes all this most seriously.

The Zukunft affair is very good.d Write and tell me when it appears,6 as I cannot spare the time to consult Zukunft every day at the Schiller Institute.28

Kugelmann becomes more simple-minded every day. If Bücher—why not go straight to Bismarck?559 I do not understand, or else I've forgotten, what he says in the letter of 3 December to you about a letter from Meissner enclosed for me.

Enclosed 1. 2 letters from Kugelmann to you, returned, 2. 1 ditto " " " me and 1 from Stumpf to Kugelmann. 3. The letter from Siebel. Last post now. Kindest regards to the ladies and Lafargue.

Your

F. E.

[^1]: First published abridged in Der Briefwech- sel zwischen F. Engels und K. Marx, Bd. 3, Stuttgart, 1913 and in full in MEGA, Abt. III, Bd. 3, Berlin, 1930

[^2]: Printed according to the original

[^3]: Published in English for the first time

[^4]: a See this volume, pp. 493-95. - b F. Engels, 'Review of Volume One of Capital for the Rheinische Zeitung. - c Hence these tears! (Terence, Andria, Act I, Scene 1, 99). d See this volume, p. 495. - e K. Marx, 'Plagiarism'.



