---
Volume: 42
Document_Title: "304. Engel s to Ludwig Kugelmann. 12 December "
Page_Range: "538-539"
---

# 304. Engel s to Ludwig Kugelmann. 12 December 



**[p. 304]**

ENGELS TO LUDWIG KUGELMANN

IN HANOVER

Manchester, 12 December 1867

Dear Kugelmann,

Your zeal truly deserves my gratitude, but it appears greatly to overestimate my free time. I received your letter of 30 November on 2 December, held counsel with Marx, as there were several things in it to be considered, and would already have sent you various articles, if on Sunday I had not been visited by a toothache-influenza-sore throat with inevitable fever, which pros- trated me on the sofa. Fortunately, that kind of thing takes an acute course with me, and so I am fit for work again today and will be setting my nose to the grindstone at once. But you must not imagine that one can just toss off a dozen reviews of one and the same book3 and not merely say something different in each one but also so compose them that one cannot tell they are all by one author. One often has to pause for thought.560

I would advise against writing directly to Miquel. There are some things which can be achieved verbally with such people and which are scarcely to be risked in writing. He will surely be coming over to Hanover sometime.

The United States of Europe* was stillborn. And with Vogt's brother1 and minion as editor—pshaw!

The Englishman who called on Brandes was our friend Moore from here, who spent 7 weeks in Eisenach for German-learning purposes; I had no idea he would be passing by, or I should have written him a few lines to give to you. He might perhaps have called on you anyway, except that he had curiously got it fixed in his head that you lived in Hamburg. He will probably undertake the English translation of Marx' book.229

Concerning Liebknecht's South German outburst, I have written to him that nothing is achieved by it.552 He would have done better not to publish his speeches,d in extenso* their effect is lost, the nonsense in them obtrudes too much. I also wrote to him about his curious theory on the postponement of the social question.537 You

[^1]: a the first volume of Capital - b Les Etats-Unis d'Europe - c Gustav Vogt - d W. Liebknecht, Was ich im Berliner 'Reichstag' sagte. - c literally: at full length; figuratively: in print.



