---
Volume: 42
Document_Title: "305. Engel s to Ludwig Kugelmann. 13 December "
Page_Range: "539-540"
---

# 305. Engel s to Ludwig Kugelmann. 13 December 

will recall, incidentally, that I was already telling you last autumn that he had become too much of an Austrian owing to his hatred of the Prussians.

This brief epistle just to keep you informed. The articles will follow in a few days time, and you can then at all events tell the Lieutenant-Colonel" that there will be a few more, and there will then be something for him to do.

In friendship

Yours

F. E.

I have just been ejected from the office, as it was closing time.

First published in: Marx and Engels, Printed according to the original Works, First Russian Edition, Vol. XXV, , Moscow, 1934 Published in English for the first time

305

ENGELS TO LUDWIG KUGELMANN

Manchester, 13 December 1867

Dear Kugelmann,

'Pursuant to mine humbly of yesterday'—so that you do not forget all the elements of commercial style—you will find enclosed 2 articles, one examining the content of the book, for the

Beobachter? and the other merely discussing points of fact, for the Gewerbeblatt or the Staats-Anzeiger.c

You will appreciate the difficulties which had to be overcome with the first of these when you consider that the editor of the

Beobachter is the tedious talker from Swabia, Karl Mayer, from Herr Vogt, who will certainly never knowingly do us any favours. You realise that these articles must only be submitted in copy, but I

[^1]: IN HANOVER

[^2]: a Adolf Friedrich Seubert - b F. Engels, 'Review of Volume One of Capital for the Beobachter1. - c F. Engels, 'Review of Volume One of Capital for the Staats-Anzeiger fur

[^3]: Württemberg'.



