---
Volume: 42
Document_Title: "306. Marx to Engels. 14 December "
Page_Range: "540-542"
---

# 306. Marx to Engels. 14 December 



**[p. 501]**

would ask you to keep all the originals, as one never knows what they may be needed for.

I shall also be sending something for the Merkur,' but I cannot yet do so much work in the evening now as I get too excited by it and last night again e.g. I could scarce sleep for thinking of the articles. The weather, business and the vestiges of the tic douloureux* from last Sunday are keeping me from riding, and so I cannot get back to normal.

I have not read about the Siebenmark affair561 in the Zukunft, I but rarely set eyes on the paper.

Farewell for today. It is 6 o'clock in the evening, closing time, and I am tired and hungry.

Yours

F. E.

First published in: Marx and Engels, Printed according to the original Works, First Russian Edition, Vol. XXV, Moscow, 1934 Published m English for the first time

306

[London,] 14 December 1867

This latest FENIAN EXPLOIT in Clerkenwell663 is a great folly. The London masses, who have shown much sympathy for Ireland, will be enraged by it and driven into the arms of the government party. One cannot expect the London proletarians to let them- selves be blown up for the benefit of FENIAN EMISSARIES. Secret, melodramatic conspiracies of this kind are, in general, more or less doomed to failure.

I received the money on Monday and paid Borkheim his £45 back together with £1 Is for INQUIRY FEES.

Would you do me a favour and inquire of Ernest Jones the most appropriate way of marrying civiliter0 in London, in DOCTORS'

[^1]: MARX TO ENGELS562

[^2]: IN MANCHESTER

[^3]: DEAR FRED,

[^4]: a Schwäbischer Merkur - b pain in the nerve - c by civil ceremony





**[p. 495]**

What is the position regarding witnesses in England? Nothing from the Zukunft yet.a It is a pity these papers are so small in format, especially at a time when their columns are so full of parliamentary filibustering.

Our friend Stumpf is obviously a great muddle-head. Siebel returned enclosed. He is mistaken about Lange. The latter must 'buy' the bookb and will surely already have bought it long ago.364

Salut.

Your

K. Moor

[^1]: The quid pro quoc with Heinrichd is indeed most amusing.e

[^2]: First published abridged in Der Briefwech- sel zwischen F. Engels und K. Marx, Bd. 3, Stuttgart, 1913 and in full in MEGA, Abt. III, Bd. 3, Berlin, 1930

[^3]: Printed according to the original

[^4]: Published in English in full for the first time

[^5]: a See this volume, pp. and 498. - b the first volume of Capital - c misunderstanding - d Bürgers - e See this volume, p. 498.



