---
Volume: 42
Document_Title: "307. Engels to Marx. 16 December "
Page_Range: "542-543"
---

# 307. Engels to Marx. 16 December 



**[p. 307]**

ENGELS TO MARX

IN LONDON

[Manchester,] 16 December 1867

Dear Moor,

Enclosed a letter from Liebknecht, who is another great muddle-head. Especially over the Austrian business. Because Austria stands on the eve of its 1789, Liebknecht therefore praises it as the state of freedom!552 I have not answered him yet, but will do so as soon as you send the letter back.

Have sent articles to Kugelmann 1. for the Swabian Mayer,a 2. for the Gewerbeblatt}' Ditto to Siebel for Mannheim.c Further Swabian articles to follow.

The pieced has appeared in the Zukunft. I now buy the paper SECOND HAND from the Schiller Institute28 so that I can see it regularly.

In haste.

Your

F. E.

Gumpert was married in this way. Your wife can tell her philistine neighbours that this way was chosen because Laura is protestant and Paul catholic.

[^1]: The marriage business is perfectly straightforward. THE MARRIAGE IS

[^2]: PERFORMED BEFORE THE REGISTRAR FOR THE Dl STRICT, w h o a l s o p U t S U p t h e BANNS at his OFFICE 14 days previously. Two or more witnesses are necessary. You can find out all the details at that office. For England nothing else is required, but as regards validity in France, Jones cannot tell you either, so Laf argue senior will have to ask his lawyer in Bordeaux. I shall, incidentally, check the code civil.

[^3]: First published in Der Briefwechsel zwischen Printed according to the original F. Engels und K. Marx, Bd. 3, Stuttgart, 1013 Published in English for the first time

[^4]: a F. Engels, 'Review of Volume One of Capital for the Beobachter'. - b F. Engels, 'Review of Volume One of Capital for the Staats-Anzeiger für Württemberg'. -

[^5]: c F. Engels, 'Review of Volume One of Capital for the Neue Badische Landeszeitung '. - d K. Marx, 'Plagiarism'.



