---
Volume: 42
Document_Title: "308. Marx to Engels. 17 December "
Page_Range: "543-544"
---

# 308. Marx to Engels. 17 December 



**[p. 308]**

MARX TO ENGELS662

IN MANCHESTER

London, 17 December 1867 Dear FRED,

Wilhelma returned enclosed. You must be careful in your reply. The position is difficult. To pursue an entirely correct course would require a much more critical spirit and dialectical skill than our Wilhelm possesses.552 We can only restrain him from committing really grave blunders. In general, hostility to Prussia is the pathos to which alone he owes his VERVE AND SINGLENESS OF PURPOSE. He has rightly sensed that the true bourgeoisie forms the core of the 'National Liberals',482 which gives him the opportunity to bestow on his political antipathy the more elevated sanction of economics. Ira facit poetamh and also gives our Wilhelmchen cunning up TO A CERTAIN POINT.

The correspondent of The Irishman here is willing to print, if you write it in English, a critique of the bookc about one column in length (Ireland must take the proper role in it, however) in that Dublin paper as a contribution under his own name. I shall send you a few copies of the paper and you will see what needs to be done.

The Zukunft has a talent for misprints'1 which is all the odder as Dr Guido Weiss does after all have the original.

I have a small but infinitely irritating carbuncle on my left buttock.

Yesterday I gave a 1 V2 hour lecture on Ireland565 at our German Workers' Society (though a further 3 German workers' societies were represented, ABOUT 100 people in all), as 'standing' is the easiest posture for me just now.

Salut. ,, Your

[^1]: And if the noble fellow has no bum. On what does he propose to sit?e

[^2]: K. M. First published in Der Briefwechsel zwischen Printed according to the original F. Engels und K. Marx, Bd. 3, Stuttgart, 1 gi3 Published in English in full for the first time

[^3]: a Liebknecht - b Anger makes the poet (Juvenal, Satires, I, 79). - c the first volume of Capital - d when it published Marx's article 'Plagiarism' - e J. W. Goethe, 'Totalität'.



