---
Volume: 42
Document_Title: "1868"
Page_Range: "546-604"
---

# 1868



**[p. 507]**

1868

310

MARX TO ENGELS419

IN MANCHESTER

[London,] 3 January 1868

DEAR FRED,

Happy New Year! I have only been 'sitting up' again for 3 days after lying all bent for so long. It was a nasty attack. You can judge this by the fact that for 3 weeks—no smoking! My head is still shaky. In a few days I hope to be back in action.

I am absolutely opposed to arsenic. Enclosed the Beobachter* (Lessner filched it for me from the Workers' Society150).

I have had no more letters from Siebel except the enclosed one to me.

Meissner can always have a try with the Barmer.b It can do no harm. When you send the cuttings to Meissner, you must refer to them only as something which has come to hand, without explaining to him 'our' activity.568 Also draw his attention to the latest things in the Zukunft^

I would like to know from Schorlemmer what is the latest and best book (German) on agricultural chemistry. Furthermore, what is the present state of the argument between the mineral-fertiliser people and the nitrogen-fertiliser people? (Since I last looked into the subject, all sorts of new things have appeared in Germany.) Does he know anything about the most recent Germans who have written against Liebig's soil-exhaustion theory? Does he know about the alluvion theory of the Munich agronomist Fraas ( Prof essor at Munich University) ?d For the chapter on ground

[^1]: a F. Engels, 'Review of Volume One of Capital for the Beobachter'. - b Banner Zeitung - c K. Marx, 'Plagiarism'. - d K. Fraas, Die Natur der Landwirthschaft.



THE COMPLIMENTS OF THE SEASON TO MRS Burns, Moore, AND Schor- lemmer.

Your

Moor

[From Eleanor Marx, in English]

You bad boy, why haven't you answered my letters?—I suppose you and the hedgehog have been on the spree again.

Alberich,b

the grim dwarf

Happy New Year.

First published abridged in Der Briefwech- Printed according to the original sei zwischen F. Engels und K. Marx, Bd. 4, Stuttgart, 1913 and in full in MEGA, Published in English in full for the Abt. Ill, Bd. 4, Berlin, 1931 f l r s t t l m e

311

ENGELS TO JENNY MARX

Manchester, 3 January 1868

Dear Mrs Marx,

I must apologise for leaving your letter570 unanswered for so long. But the Christmas period is the only time in the whole year when, apart from business, I am made to feel that I stand with one foot in the bourgeoisie, and here in Manchester this entails a lot of eating and drinking and upset stomach, and the obligatory ill humour and waste of time. This is now fairly well over, and I am beginning to breathe freely again.

I am really sorry that I was unable to lay my hands on a larger crate for the moment, but I had to take just what was available in the WAREHOUSE—I shall make up for this soon.

[^1]: IN LONDON

[^2]: a probably two numbers of The Diplomatic Review - b Eleanor's jocular nickname. The words "the grim dwarf" are in German.



Enclosed the latest from Siebel. Do please return the letter, together with an earlier one sent to Moor, as soon as possible, I have to write to him on the 8th, the post goes only twice a month, and it is a great pleasure for the poor devil when-'he sees that people think of him. He does what he can honestly, despite his illness. The thing from the Barmer Zeitung is by him.671 Moor might let me know what he thinks about the business with the Kölnische Zeitung; if he thinks it better that / should write about this to Meissner, I can do so, and, at the same time, send him the cutting from Barmer.

The pater peccavi3 from Hoffstetten is very amusing.572 He naturally suspects Liebknecht everywhere and nobody else.b In any case, we have now put paid to the attempt of these gentry to stifle, and at the same time to exploit, the book.c

I shall be writing to Wilhelmchen in the next few days. I have heard nothing more from Kugelmann as to how things have gone with the Swabian articles.d

Meissner could already put together quite a nice advertisement from the articles that have appeared up to now,568 which would be quite in place now that the Christmas season is over. In particular, he might include those passages in which the economists are challenged to present their defence.

I hope that Moor has been freed from his carbuncle. But this is all no good, he must do something to get rid of the business once and for all. The 2nd volume418 can only gain, also with regard to the time needed for completion, if the fight against the carbuncles is waged with full force for a period. How would it be if he were to take arsenic again?

Best greetings to Moor and the whole family, and a hearty Happy New Year from

Yours

F. E.

[^1]: First published in Der Briefwechsel zwischen Printed according to the original F. Engels und K. Marx, Bd. 3, Stuttgart, . j Qja Published in English for the first time

[^2]: a 'Father, I have sinned' (Luke 15:21) - b See this volume, p. 529. - c the first volume of Capital - d See this volume, p. 499.





**[p. 312]**

ENGELS TO MARX

IN LONDON

Manchester, 6 January 1868

Dear Moor,

If you do not want to take arsenic, then for goodness sake do something else, for things cannot go on like this. Have you consulted Allen or another doctor recently? Gumpert was not at home when I called the other day, but I shall take the first opportunity to speak to him.

You did not send the Beobachter or the 2 Urquharts either." However, today Kugelmann sent me the Beobachter and the Württemberg Staats-Anzeiger" (I am sending you the latter and when I get it back will send it to Meissner, if you do not send it to him direct). It's fine that these two PAPERS have risen to the bait. I shall now also prepare Kugelmann something for the Schwäbischer Merkur.560

Schorlemmer will put together the information for you from the latest annual reports. He was not acquainted with the book by Fraas.c

A natural scientist has appeared in Paris who calls him- self Chmoulevitch (Schmulsohn!). This even beats Ephraim Art- ful."

The first instalment of the Austrian official general staff report on the war of 66 first proves that Austria's military organisation was not fit for a simultaneous war with Prussia and Italy, this is followed by the naive passage: Under these circumstances it should really have been the task of state foreign policy to safeguard the state against such a war.e

The Prussian 2nd instalment' shows quite clearly that on the 28th, and even more on the evening of the 29th,g Benedek was in a position to attack the scattered columns of the Crown Princeh

with superior force and with almost absolute certainty to throw him

[^1]: a See this volume, p. 508. - b F. Engels' reviews of Volume One of Capital for the Beobachter and for the Staats-Anzeiger für Württemberg. - c K. Fraas, Die Natur der Landwirthschaft. - d Ferdinand Lassalle - e Österreichs Kämpfe im Jahre 1866, Bd. I, S. 60-61. - f Der Feldzug von 1866 in Deutschland (appeared in instalments) - s of June - h Frederick William





**[p. 511]**

back into the mountains and take his guns. The jackass did not do it, and lost the campaign.

Salut.

Your

F. E.

First published abridged in Der Briefwech- Printed according to the original sei zwischen F. Engels und K. Marx, Bd. 4, Stuttgart, 1913 and in full in MEGA, Published in English for the first Abt. Ill, Bd. 4, Berlin, 1931 t l m e

313

ENGELS TO MARX419

IN LONDON

Manchester, 7 January 1868

Dear Moor,

Herewith returned the Dühring* and the Beobachter}* The former is highly amusing. The whole article is embarrassment and FUNK. You can see that the worthy vulgar economist is frappé au vif and can find nothing to say except that it will only be possible to judge the first volume when the 3rd has come out,418 that determination of value by labour time is not undisputed, and that there are people who have some modest doubts about the determination of the value of labour on the basis of its costs of production. You see that for this genusd you are by no means learned enough, for you have not confuted the great Macleode on the decisive point. At the same time, there is the fear in every line that he may be exposed to a treatment à la Roscher.' The fellow was happy when he had finished the thing, but I am sure he carried it to the post with a heavy heart.

Kugelmann and Wilhelmcheng I shall return tomorrow. If there is anything in the copied letter from Lieutenant-Colonel Seubert

[^1]: a E. Dühring, 'Marx, Das Kapital, Kritik der politischen Oekonomie, 1. Band, Hamburg 1867', Ergänzungsblätter zur Kenntniß der Gegenwart, Bd. 3, Hildburg- hausen, 1867, S. 182-86. - b F. Engels, 'Review of Volume One of Capital for the Beobachter'. - c cut to the quick - d sort - e H. D. Macleod, The Theory and Practice of Banking - ' Engels has in mind the critique of Roscher's views in Vol. One of Capital. - 8 Wilhelm Liebknecht



I could do something for Vienna too. Richter could perhaps be asked about the Internationale Revue, he is supposed to know the situation there.

Wilhelmchen's PAPER3 is just too lovely—everything ready except the security bond, and so it cannot be published. Incidentally, if Wilhelm should go to Vienna then the fuss about the Austrian agent would really get going.573

How are things with Beesly, Lewes & Co. and the Fortnightly Review?509

Best greetings to the LADIES and the Doctor amorosus.h

Your

F. E.

First published in Der Briefwechsel zwischen Printed according to the original F. Engels und K. Marx, Bd. 4, Stuttgart, 2913 Published in English in full for the first time

314

MARX TO ENGELS

[London,] 8 January 1868

I have ditto received the Staats-Anzeiger and the Beobachter* from Kugelmann. I am returning you your Staats-Anzeiger today. Also the COPY Kugelmann sent me of the letter from the coloneld

who arranged the whole thing.560 Württemberg is now sufficiently provided. In my opinion,—with special regard to sales—Austria is now the most important. Notabene, if you have the patience to write more prescriptions.6 Little Jenny, an expert in this respect, claims that you are developing great dramatic talent, or comic talent, in pursuing this action from 'different' viewpoints and in different disguises.

[^1]: IN MANCHESTER

[^2]: DEAR FRED,

[^3]: a Demokratisches Wochenblatt - b Paul Lafargue - c F. Engels' reviews of Volume One of Capital for the Staats-Anzeiger für Württemberg and for the Beobachter. - d Adolf Friedrich Seubert - e reviews of the first volume of Capital





**[p. 513]**

In the next few days—I am still a trifle limp, and do not feel much like writing—but as soon as I am quite on my feet I shall give Wilhelmchena a good hiding. This is because of his identification of my views with the specific views of Wilhelm.

Dühring's articleb (he is lecturer at Berlin University) is very decent, particularly since I handled his master 'Carey' so roughly. Dühring obviously misunderstood various things. But the oddest thing is that he ranks me with Stein, because I pursue the dialectic, and Stein assembles thoughtlessly the greatest trivialities in clumsy hair-splitting, with a few Hegelian category conversions^

Have you already received Borkheim's Perled? It appears that professional poesy is simply a mask for the driest sort of prosiness. Take, for example, the Freiligrath family. Kate travels (on her honeymoon) to Paris with Kröker, the young corn usurer. However, since this noble man has 'business' to do at the same time, he leaves her alone in one of the big Paris hotels for 2-3 days. Kate and the whole FAMILY find this quite in order. Kate even writes delightedly that in the hotel they call her 'mademoisel- le' (after she had spent the night together with Kröker there), and that all the waiters and even the porter give her friendly 'nods'. But even more: Kröker (after this business trip to the provinces) returns from Paris immediately to London with Kate, and the whole family is delighted that the 'HONEYMOON' is to be postponed for 6 months, since business 'comes first'. After all, for a poet the HONEYMOON is only a flower of speech, and can be 'celebrated' before or after the accouchement, early or late (the facts were related by the Freiligrath boyse in my house). Kate even seems to have read Clauren, for she described herself—from Paris—as a 'grass widow'.

The Yankees will show John Bull what's what. What do you think of the latest rodomontades of the Russians?

[^1]: Dwarf Alberichf was very delighted by your letter.131 He is just off to the gymnastics school, where he is doing great things.

[^2]: Salut. Y o u r

[^3]: K. M. First published abridged in Der Briefwech- Printed according to the original sei zwischen F. Engels und K. Marx, Bd. 4, Stuttgart, 1913 and in full in MEGA, Published in English for the first Abt. Ill, Bd. 4, Berlin, 1931 t i m e

[^4]: a Liebknecht - b E. Dühring, 'Marx, Das Kapital, Kritik der politischen Oekonomie, 1. Band, Hamburg 1867'. - c A reference to L. Stein's System der Staatswissenschaft and Die Verwaltungslehre. - d S. Borkheim, Ma perle devant le congrès de Genève. -

[^5]: e Wolfgang and Otto - f Eleanor Marx





**[p. 315]**

MARX TO ENGELS574

IN MANCHESTER

[London,] 8 January 1868

DEAR FRED,

Ad vocem* Dühring.b It is a great deal from this man that he gives almost positive acceptance to the section on 'primitive accumulation'.575 He is still young. As a follower of Carey he is in direct opposition to the FREETRADERS. Furthermore, he is a university lecturer, and therefore not displeased that Professor Roscher, who blocks the way for them all, is receiving some kicks.c One thing in his description struck me very strongly. That is, as long as the determination of value by labour time is itself left 'undetermined', as it is with Ricardo, it does not make people SHAKY. But as soon as it is brought exactly into connection with the working day and its variations, a very unpleasant new light dawns upon them. I believe one reason that Dühring reviewed the book at all is malice against Roscher. Indeed it is easy to scent his anxiety that he might also be 'Roscher'ed. Curiously, the fellow has not detected the three fundamentally new elements of the book:

1. that in contrast to all previous political economy, which from the outset treated the particular fragments of surplus value with their fixed forms of rent, profit and interest as already given, I begin by dealing with the general form of surplus value, in which all these elements are still undifferentiated, in solution as it were;

2. that the economists, without exception, have missed the simple fact that, if the commodity has the double character of use value and exchange value, then the labour represented in the commodity must also have a double character; thus the bare analysis of labour sans phrase,d as in Smith, Ricardo, etc., is bound to come up against the inexplicable everywhere. This is, in fact, the whole secret of the critical conception;

3. that for the first time wages are shown as the irrational outward form of a hidden relationship, and this is demonstrated exactly in both forms of wages: time wages and piece wages. (It was a help to me that similar formulae are often found in higher mathematics.)

[^1]: a With regard to - b E. Dühring, 'Marx, Das Kapital, Kritik der politischen Oekonomie, 1. Band, Hamburg 1867'. - c See this volume, p. 511. - d without more ado





**[p. 515]**

As for Mr Dühring's modest objection to the determination of value, he will be astonished when he sees in Volume II418 how little the determination of value counts for 'directly' in bourgeois society. Actually, no form of society can prevent the labour time at the disposal of society from regulating production in ONE WAY OR ANOTHER. But so long as this regulation is not effected through the direct and conscious control of society over its labour time—which is only possible under common ownership—but through the movement of commodity prices, then things will remain as you so aptly described them already in the Deutsch- Französische Jahrbücher*

Ad vocem Vienna. I am sending you various Vienna papers (of which you must return to me the Neues Wiener Tagblatt which belongs to Borkheim, and keep the rest), from which you will see two things: firstly how important Vienna is at this moment as a market place, since there is new life there576; and secondly the way the matter should be handled there. I cannot find the address of Prof. Richter. Perhaps you have Liebknecht's letter which gives it. If not, ask him to send it to you, and then dispatch the article direct to Richter, but not via Liebknecht.

It seems to me that Wilhelmchen is by no means ALTOGETHER bona fide. He (for whom I have had to find so much time to make good his asininity in the Allgemeine Augsburger, etc.,577) has so far found no time even to mention publicly the title of my bookb or my name. He overlooks the affair in the Zukunft so as not to be put in the embarrassing position of sacrificing his own independent great- ness. And there was also no time available to say a solitary word in the workers' paper (Deutsche Arbeiterhalle, Mannheim), which appears under the direct control of his friend Bebel. In short, it is certainly no fault of Wilhelmchen that my book has not been totally ignored. First, he has not read it (although to little Jenny he made fun of Richter, who thinks that he needs to understand a book before he can publicise it), and secondly, after he had read it or claimed to have read it, he has had no time, although he has time, since I got him Borkheim's SUBVENTION, to write letters twice weekly to Borkheim; although, instead of sending the shares'1 to Strohn for the money, which was transmitted to him through me and obtained by my good offices, he asks for Strohn's address, in order to play his tricks with him directly, behind my back,

[^1]: a F. Engels, 'Outlines of a Critique of Political Economy'. - b the first volume of Capital in the Allgemeine Zeitung - c K. Marx, 'Plagiarism' (see this volume, p. 495). - d of the Demokratisches Wochenblatt





**[p. 516]**

and swamp him with epistles as he does Borkheim. In short, Wilhelmchen wants to make himself important, and in particular the public should not be distracted from its interest in Wilhelmchen. We must now act half as if we did not notice this, but still treat him with caution. As for his call to Austria, you cannot believe him until it has happened.3 And secondly if it should come to this, we shall not dissuade him, but IF NECESSARY, simply explain to him what I explained to him when he joined Brass's Norddeutsche,*'5''8 that, if he should compromise himself again, he will be, if necessary, publicly disavowed. I told him this, in the presence of witnesses, when he moved off to Berlin at that time.

I think you can send articles direct to the enclosed Neue Freie Presse (Vienna). The present joint owner, Dr Max Friedländer (Lassalle's cousin and deadly enemy), was the person for whom I acted as a correspondent for a longish period for the old Vienna

Presse and for the Oder-Zeitung.c

Finally, with regard to the Internationale Revue, Fox (who was sent to Vienna by an English paper to pay a visit and establish connections) asked me, from Vienna a few days ago, for a letter of introduction to Arnold Hilberg. I sent it to him, and at the same time told the said Hilberg in this letter that circumstances had prevented us writing, that we would do something this year, etc.111

Fortnightly Review. Professor Beesly, one of the triumviri who secretly direct this paper, has told his special friend Lafargue (whom he constantly invites to dine at his house) that he is morally certain (it completely depends upon him!) that a review509 would be accepted. Lafargue would hand it in to him himself.

Ad vocem Pyat. In today's Times you will see the ADDRESS of the FRENCH DEMOCRATS about FENIANISM 257 (which appeared 4 weeks ago) and was sent in by Pyat.d What has happened is this. The French government has launched an investigation (particularly visites domiciliaires" at the homes of our correspondents in Paris) against the International Association as a société illicite.1 Ditto probably sent to the British government letters about FENIANISM written by our

Dupont.579 Mr Pyat, who always ran down our 'Association' as non-revolutionary, Bonapartist, etc., is afraid of this TURN of things, and is swiftly seeking to give the appearance that he has something to do with the matter and is 'MOVING'.

[^1]: a See this volume, p. 512. - b Norddeutsche Allgemeine Zeitung - c Neue Oder-Zeitung - d F. Pyat, 'Adresse des Démocrates Français à leur Frères d'Irlande et d'Angleterre. Paris, 2 décembre 1867', The Times, No. 26015, 8 January 1868 (The French Democrats and the Fenians). - e searches - f illegal society





**[p. 517]**

Ad vocem Benedek*: can I have the journal for A FEW DAYS? YOU have now proven yourself twice a prophet, firstly a tactical prophet (in the Sevastopol affair), and secondly a strategic prophet (in the Prussian-Austrian affair).580 But the sense of sensible men cannot predict the stupidities of which man is capable.

Ad vocem carbuncles. Consulted doctors. Nothing new. Everything which the gentlemen have to say indicates that one has to have private means to live in accordance with their prescriptions, instead of being a poor devil like me, poverty-stricken as a church-mouse. When you see Gumpert, you can tell him that I feel (up to THIS MOMENT that I write) a stinging prickle in my body, that is my blood. It seems to me that for this year I shall not be quite over the affair.

M Y COMPLIMENTS TO M R S B u r n s . Salut.

Your

Moor

First published abridged in Der Briefwech- Printed according to the original sei zwischen F. Engels und K. Marx, Bd. 4, Stuttgart, 1913 and in full in MEGA, Published in English in full for the Abt. Ill, Bd. 4, Berlin, 1931 f l r s t t l m e

316

ENGELS TO MARX

[Manchester,] 10 January 1868 Dear Moor,

I wanted to write to you at length today, but the intervention of a Serb and a Wallachian, who held me up for hours, has frustrated my plans. Moreover, yesterday I had a visit from the ex-dictator Amand Goegg, who is travelling for the ridiculous Peace League461 and who ruined my evening. Luckily, Schorlem- mer also happened by, and got the surprise of his life with this fossil of Federal Republic; he had not believed such a thing possible. The stupid oaf has become ten times more stupid through the unthinking repetition of the same phrases, and has lost all points of contact with the world of common sense (not to

[^1]: IN LONDON

[^2]: " Österreichs Kämpfe im Jahre 1866, Bd. 1 (see this volume, pp. 510-11).





**[p. 518]**

mention actual thinking). Apart from Switzerland and the Canton of Baden, there is still nothing else in the world for people of this sort. For all that, he soon convinced himself of the truth of your first reply to his application for support: that the further apart we lived and the less we had to do with one another, the better we would get on. He admitted that in the Vogt affair63 Blind had behaved like a coward, but said he was after all a worthy fellow, and even threatened to reconcile you and Blind! Vogt—no politician, but a worthy fellow, honest to the backbone, who simply scribbled away in the daytime without considering the content—if we 2 spent an hour together then we would be like brothers; he admitted him to be a Bonapartist, but not a paid one. To which I replied that all Bonapartists were paid, there were no unpaid ones, and if he could show me an unpaid one, then I would accept the possibility that Vogt was not paid; otherwise I would not. This astonished him, but finally he discovered one—Ludwig Bamberger] Incidentally, he said that Vogt had continually had a very hard time, his wife was a peasant girl from the Bernese Oberland, whom he had married out of virtue after he had made her a baby. Vogt, the artful dodger, appears to have pulled the wool well over this jackass's eyes. But when Schorlemmer and I explained to him that Vogt had not produced anything as a natural scientist either, you should have seen his rage: Had he not popularised? Was not that worth while?

I shall write something for Vienna as soon as it is in any way possible. Additionally for the Fortnightly,509 but I would need to know first whether it could be made into a longer article, or should only be a short notice like those at the back of the Fortnightly. Beesly should be sounded out about this3; a short notice would be almost useless and Beesly himself would learn nothing about the bookb from it.

I shall call Wilhelmchenc to account in a few days time about fulfilling the promises he made me: we shall make this little fellow get a move on. I have Richter's address.

F. E.

[^1]: Herewith returned Liebknecht, Kugelmann and Siebel. Best greetings. v

[^2]: First published abridged in Der Briefwech- sel zwischen F. Engels und K. Marx, Bd. 4, Stuttgart, 1913 and in full in MEGA, Abt. III, Bd. 4, Berlin, 1931

[^3]: Printed according to the original

[^4]: Published in English for the first time

[^5]: a See this volume, p. 516. - b the first volume of Capital - c Wilhelm Liebknecht





**[p. 317]**

MARX TO ENGELS101

IN MANCHESTER

[London,] 11 January 1868

DEAR FRED,

The Top' 3 was bustling around for a long time in London. He also visited Borkheim, where he produced just the same phrases as he did to you, only with better success, for he knew how to tickle the vanity of our Borkheim. But after he had squeezed out of the latter money for 10 shares, ditto assimilated various of his wines, he was not seen there again. For the understanding of his further activity in London, the following preliminary report. Cremer, as you know, was removed a long time since from his post as SECRETARY of the INTERNATIONAL COUNCIL, and in his anger at this he long ago resigned as MEMBER OF THE COUNCIL, and was not re-elected as such by the last congress either.b Mr Odger was re-elected. On my proposal, however, the post of president (the annual one) was abolished, and replaced by a CHAIRMAN, to be elected at each sitting.489 Odger, annoyed by this, stays away from us on principle. WELL! Mr 'Fop' insinuates himself via Le Lubez to Odger (who introduced him to the LONDON TRADES COUNCIL 18) and to Cremer. They appointed a London committee,0 Beales as PRESIDENT, etc. In short, an affair against the INTERNATIONAL WORKING MENS ASSOCIATION. (At the founding MEETING Fop also introduced the noble Blind.) The fellows had the impudence to invite me to their 2nd MEETING LAST WEEK. Eccarius (in a very badly written article in the Bee-Hive last Saturday) denounced Fop and his consorts.d

I am writing to you naked and with alcohol compresses. I went out again for the first time the day before yesterday, to the British Museum, of course, because I cannot write yet. Then yesterday there was a new outbreak under my left breast. The alcohol treatment, which Nélaton used in Paris for even the largest carbuncles, is, from my personal experience, by far the speediest and pleasantest for the patient (apart from cutting or lancing, depending on the case). The misfortune is only the constant

[^1]: a Amand Goegg. In German 'Geek' means a 'dandy' or 'fop'. - b Lausanne Congress of the International - c presumably the committee of the London branch of the League of Peace and Freedom - d J. G. Eccarius, 'The Geneva Peace Congress', The Bee-Hive Newspaper, No. 325, 4 January 1868.





**[p. 520]**

activity, necessitated by the rapid evaporation of the alcohol.

At the museum, where I did nothing but leaf through catalogues, I also noted that Dühring is a great philosopher. For he has written a Natürliche Dialektik against Hegel's 'un-natural' one. Hinc Mae lacrimae." The gentlemen in Germany (with the exception of theological reactionaries) believe Hegel's dialectic to be a 'dead dog'.581 Feuerbach has much on his conscience in this respect.

The French government has started a prosecution against the Paris Committee of the INTERNATIONAL WORKINGMENS ASSOCIATION (as société illiciteb). This is very agreeable for me, since it means that the jackasses have been hindered and interrupted in their discussion of the programme they had already drawn up for the congress of 1868.582 Dupont has apparently written something incautious about the Fenians579 to his Paris correspondents that Bonaparte, who is now creeping dolefully up the arse of the British government, forwarded to Downing Street.'

It is characteristic that the disclosures of Prokesch-Osten, Gentz and Count Münster0 are being printed one after the other—with the direct or indirect collaboration of the Austrian government. Urquhart, with his ignorance now becoming permanent, knows only the first one. It is also very indicative of his 'totality', that he does not know Moltke's Turkish War of 1828, etc.,e which would have provided him with excellent material. Incidentally, at the time when I was in Berlin (at Lassalle's)583 Moltke was regarded as a declared Russophobe, inside the Royal Prussian frontiers, naturally.

If you should be writing to Borkheim some time, request him to let you have a look at the two small Russian pamphlets about which I had told you. I would particularly like you to look at the one about the emancipation of the serfs, so that you can let me know the quintessence.

From the enclosed Courrier français you will see that the French government is entering into a direct polemic with General Cluseret.

If you could send little Tussy cotton-yarn ball on the 16th of

[^1]: a Hence these tears! (Terence, Andria, Act I, Scene 1). - b illegal society (see this volume, p. 517) - c seat of the British Cabinet - d A. Prokesch-Osten, Geschichte des Abfalls der Griechen vom Türkischen Reiche im Jahre 1821 und der Gründung des Hellenischen Königreiches; Fr. von Gentz, Aus dem Nachlasse Friedrichs von Gentz; G. H. Münster, Politische Skizzen über die Lage Europas vom Wiener Congress bis zur Gegenwart (1815-1867). - e H. K. B. Moltke, Der russisch-türkische Feldzug in der europäischen Türkei 1828 und 1829.





**[p. 521]**

this month I should be very pleased. It is her birthday and THAT LITTLE HUMBUG loves all Chinese formalities.

It gives me much pleasure that the English government is persecuting The Irishman. This paper is IN REALITY not Fenian, but simply wants REPEAL.584 What blockheads these John Bulls are!

MY COMPLIMENTS TO MRS Lizzy.

Salut. Your

Moor

Enclosed a portion of 'new philology' from the Hermann.

First published abridged in Der Briefwech- Printed according to the original sei zwischen F. Engels und K. Marx, Bd. 4, Stuttgart, 1913 and in full in MEGA, Published in English in full for the Abt. Ill, Bd. 4, Berlin, 1931 f l r s t t l m e

318

MARX T O LUDWIG KUGELMANN 6 5

IN HANOVER

London, 11 January 1868

Dear Kugelmann,

With all respect for your medical authority, you have too low an opinion of the English, German and French doctors whom I have in turn consulted and continue to consult here, if you think they cannot distinguish anthrax (carbuncles) from FURUNCLES, particularly here in England, the land of carbuncles, which is essentially a

[^1]: D'abord3 my best HAPPY NEW YEARS to your good wife, Fränzchen, b

[^2]: and you yourself. And then MY BEST THANKS for the Jupiter, 5 8 5 and for the activity and interest you display in making propaganda and leading the German press by the nose.c As our friend Weerth, who unfortunately died too early, used to sing:

[^3]: The finest thing in all the world Is making your enemies bellow, And cracking really awful jokes About each pompous fellow.d

[^4]: a First of all - b Gertruda and Franziska Kugelmann - c A reference to Kugel- mann's assistance in having Engels' reviews of Volume One of Capital published in the bourgeois press. - d G. Weerth, 'Es gibt nichts Schönres auf der Welt'.

[^5]: 19-1196



proletarian illness! And if the doctors made no distinctions, the patient like myself who knows both forms of monster could do so, for the subjective impression they make is very different, though as far as I know no doctor has yet managed to distinguish exactly between the two things theoretically. I have only been persecuted by this business for a few years. Earlier quite unknown to me. At the moment of writing to you, I am not yet quite restored, and not yet fit for work again. Once again many weeks lost, and not even pour

le roi de Prusse.11

The criticism of Mr Dühringb shows mainly—fear! I would be grateful if you could get Duhring's book Gegen die Verkleinerer

Carey's for me, ditto von Thünen's Der isolirte Staat mit Bezug auf die Landwirtschaft (or something like that) (together with a note of the prices). Orders like this take too long from here.

Finally, I must ask you to send me ABOUT 12 COPIES of my photogram (only that FULLFACED). ABOUT one dozen friends are pestering me for them.

Enclosed for Mrs Kugelmann the photograms of my eldest daughter Jenny and of Eleanor, who sends her best greetings to Fränzchen.

Ad vocemc Liebknecht: let him play le petit grand hommed just A LITTLE WHILE. Tout s'arrangera pour le mieux dans le meilleur des mondes possibles.""

I still have all sorts of personal anecdota to relate. But I shall save them for next time when the writing position no longer bothers me.

Salut. Yours

K. Marx

One of my friends here,' who busies himself a lot with phrenology, stated yesterday about the photogram of your wife: very witty! So you see that phrenology is not the baseless art that Hegel thought it.g

[^1]: First published abridged in Die Neue Zeit, Printed according to the original Bd. 2, No. 4, Stuttgart, 1901-1902 and in full in Pisma Marksa k Kugelmanu (Letters of Marx to Kugelmann), Moscow- Leningrad, 1928

[^2]: a literally: for the King of Prussia; figuratively: all for nothing. - b E. Dühring, 'Marx, Das Kapital, Kritik der politischen Oekonomie, 1. Band, Hamburg 1867'. - c With regard to - d would-be great man - e Everything will be for the best in the best of all possible worlds (F. M. A. Voltaire, Candide). - f presumably Karl Schapper - s G. W. F. Hegel, Werke, Bd. II, Phänomenologie des Geistes, 2. Aufl., Bd. 2, Berlin, 1841, S. 251-71.





**[p. 319]**

ENGELS T O MARX

IN LONDON

Manchester, 16 January 1868

Dear Moor,

I have just discovered that I have left all your letters at home in another coat-pocket (including the last letter from your chief HONOURABLE SECRETARY a for which I express special thanks) and so I shall have to reply from memory.

You received the Courriers français and also the Wiener Tagbtatt yesterday.

I am sending you the Prussian report, b with special explanations. Or rather it is only necessary to look at the sketch contained therein on the positions on the evening of June 28th in order to see that Benedek had brought together 6 corps (not counting cavalry) in an area of 2 square miles, faced by the Crown Prince c

with only the 5th Corps and 1 brigade of the 6th Corps. If, on the 29th, Benedek had attacked Steinmetz (5th Corps), the latter would have been thrown back across the mountains on to the 6th Corps, and on the 30th Benedek would have been able to attack the Guards and the 1st Corps at his leisure with at least 4 corps and throw them back, après quoid the cautious Frederick Charles would have taken great care not to act unrestrainedly. Frederick Charles had 5 corps and would have been faced by at least 6; the order for them to retreat was, however, certain as soon as the 3 individual columns of the Crown Prince had been beaten, and thereby the campaign would have acquired a completely different character. That the Austrians would finally have been beaten, if the Prussians had shown some care, is clear from a comparison of the figures. But the Prussian rabble would have been forced to cast aside their lousy system, and it would not have been the reorganisation and Bismarck who triumphed, but the people.

[^1]: Cluseret (who, of course, played the Fenian 2 5 7 in London as well) is even wilder than the Germans with his militia plan. T h e American war 1 1—with militia on both sides—proves nothing except that the militia system demands enormous sacrifices of

[^2]: a Laura Marx (see this volume, p. 583) - b Der Feldzug von 1866 in Deutschland - c Frederick William - d after which

[^3]: 19»



With regard to the Viennese papers, I am in some embarrass- ment3; I do, of course, see the Neue Freie Presse from time to time, but the whole area is rather too alien for me. What are your ideas on the subject, also with regard to the Fortnightly509? The business is worth the trouble of thorough consideration.

I hope you are sitting again, and have had no further volcanic outbreaks. Gumpert laughs at your antipathy to arsenic, says that it is just the thing to make you sprightly and is convinced there is no better remedy for you. But if you are flatly opposed to it, then you should take acids, and that constantly, so once again he encloses a prescription for the aqua regia prescribed before, and this you really will take.

Best wishes to your wife and the girls, ditto Lafargue.

Your

F. E.

[^1]: a See this volume, pp. 512, 515.





**[p. 525]**

Alberich, the strong dwarf,a I hereby greet most humbly on his birthday and empty a glass of beer to his health at this instant. They forgot about the COTTON at the factory so I shall only be able to send it tomorrow.

First published in Der Briefwechsel zwischen Printed according to the original F. Engels und K. Marx, Bd. 4, Stuttgart, ima Published in English for the first time

320

ENGELS TO MARX

IN LONDON

Manchester, 23 January 1868

Dear Moor,

From the enclosed scrawl you can see what Wilhelmchen has not done.086 I shall give him a fitting wigging in the next few days. A JOLLY IDEA, we should 'utilise' the position he has created for himself locally in Saxony, in fact stand up for him BODILY. His ragb arrived for me today, I have not yet been able to look at it.

I hope you are finally finished with that obstinate carbuncle. But you will at last realise, won't you, that simply letting this matter slide can no longer be tolerated, and that at the very least you must have daily vigorous exercise in the fresh air, and regular 'renunciation' of night work (as soon as the first is possible), in order that you should become at all capable of work again. Like this, the second volume will never eventuate.41"

Enclosed are the shares for Strohn/ I really don't know what to do about the Vienna articles. Apart from the Neue Freie Presse and Wiener Tagblatt, I do not know by name any paper in which Richter has a hand; owing to almost complete ignorance of the audience I have no idea where to begin, and this is the most important point. Laura writes that to instruct people is ALL VERY WELL, but to pick out the right point is the real

[^1]: a Eleanor Marx (see this volume, pp. 520-21) - b Demokratisches Wochenblatt - c See this volume, pp. 515-16.





**[p. 526]**

difficulty. I am just going through the whole book" once again to make this clear to myself, and your opinion would be welcome.

It is also a good presumption on the part of Wilhelmchen to suggest that I should explain to him and his readers once and for all, on one page of his rag, and from this book, what the difference really is between Marx and Lassalle. This presumption has suggested to me that it might be a good idea to write a popular little pamphlet Marx and Lassalle of about 6 sheets for the workers; in this space it could be managed and the positive things required for the workers could be developed. It would have to be sold dirt cheap, and the Lassalleans would immediately be forced to take up a position. But for this, time is needed.587

You really cannot ask me to drudge my way through Borkheim's Russian pamphletsb—at least not at the moment. I have a lot to do in the office and come home late, so that I cannot get down to anything before 8 o'clock and, moreover, I have to live a life of great regularity, since for some time now I have been sleeping badly and as a result am often a wreck in the morning, something which has never happened in my life before. Besides, there are sometimes unavoidable hindrances, and the absolute necessity of having physical exercise so as to get my sleep back to normal. Each Russian pamphlet would consume 8-14 days in view of my necessity of working myself in again, and the poor quality of the dictionaries. Ne vaut pas la paine.c

About the Fortnightly509 next time. I am still ruminating about this point. Monetary matters—important as they may be for England—I shall probably only be able to touch upon fleetingly in the first article; otherwise this subject would take up the whole article. If a second could be placed, then it would still be suitable. What do you think?

Best wishes to your wife and the girls as well as Lafargue.

Your

F. E.

[^1]: First published abridged in Der Briefwech- sel zwischen F. Engels und K. Marx, Bd. 4, Stuttgart, 1913 and in full in MEGA, Abt. III, Bd. 4, Berlin, 1931

[^2]: Printed according to the original

[^3]: Published in English for the first time

[^4]: a the first volume of Capital - b See this volume, p. 520. - c It is not worth the trouble.





**[p. 321]**

MARX TO ENGELS26

IN MANCHESTER

[London,] 25 January 1868

DEAR FRED,

I went out again yesterday for the first time, and the scar will be healed in 1-2 days. Naturally I am still weak after this bad attack.

I hope that your indisposition is only the momentary outcome of the week on the spree. In any case, you must not neglect your health for my sake or for ANY BODY OR THING ELSE.

In last week's Saturday Review there is a note about my book.'1 I have not seen it yet, and also do not know who wrote it. Borkheim has communicated the FACT to me.

As regards Liebknecht, one should no longer butter him up. This young man very much likes to play the 'protector', as he already showed once earlier when he was in London. This is also shown by his latest letter to you.586 He feels very important, and au cas de besoin nous ferons notre petit bonhomme de chemin sans lui et malgré lui.b What magnanimity that he has reprinted the preface, which nearly all the papers printed months ago!456 And in addition he has actually had 2 COPIES of my book sent to Contzen and the editor of the Volks-Zeitungl To SHOW HIM THE COLD SHOULDER is best. Apart from this, I do not believe that he has yet read 15 pages of the book. He had not read Herr Vogt a whole year after it had appeared, and that was not very heavy reading. His motto is: teach but not learn.

As far as the 'Lassalleans' are concerned, I only deal with the TRADE UNIONS, COOPERATIVE SOCIETIES, etc. in Volume II.C I think therefore that I shall at present only take the initiative with regard to 'Lassalle' if a direct occasion should offer itself.

Regarding the way to deal with the Viennese, I shall write to you shortly, when my head is ALL RIGHT again.

Please return the enclosed letters from Kugelmann and Kert- bény. I have not yet replied. Coppel the Great hasn't turned up

[^1]: a A review of Volume One of Capital in The Saturday Review of Politics, Literature, Science and Art, 18 January 1868. - b if needs be we shall do our business without him and despite him - c of Capital



It would be beneficial in my present state if you could let me have a shipment of your more FULLFLAVOURED claret (also SOME HOCK or Moselle).

Card, the Pole, has written from Geneva and offered himself as French translator, he seems to have a book-seller in Geneva. Through my wife I have had this letter sent to Schily, so that he can use it in Paris to further the affair.589 Card is absolutely unsuitable, except to give Mosesa a fright.

For 2-3 weeks I shall do absolutely no work (i.e. writing), at the most read; and as soon as the wound is completely healed (in the meantime, I THINK ONLY FOR ONE OR TWO DAYS, the bad part rubs and itches when I walk) then I shall do a lot of walking. It would be dreadful if a 3rd monster were to erupt.

And now, salut, MY DEAR BOY.

Your

K. Marx

First published abridged in Der Briefwech- Printed according to the original sei zwischen F. Engels und K. Marx, Bd. 4, Stuttgart, 1913 and in full in MEGA, Published in English in full for the Abt. HI, Bd. 4, Berlin, 1931 f l r s t t , m e

322

London, 30 January 1868

Dear Kugelmann,

Cut, lanced, etc., in short treated in every respect secundum legem artis.b Despite this, the business continues to break out again, so that I have been lying quite fallow for 8 weeks, with the exception of two or three days. Last Saturday I went out again for the first time; Monday a relapse. I hope that it will come to an end this week, but who can give me a guarantee against new eruptions? It is extremely vexatious. In addition, my head is very affected by the business. My friend Dr Gumpert in Manchester is urging the use of arsenic. What do you think about this?

[^1]: MARX TO LUDWIG KUGELMANN R5

[^2]: IN HANOVER

[^3]: a Moses Hess - b according to all the rules of the art





**[p. 529]**

Your Coppel hasn't turned up yet.388

Kertbény is a German-Hungarian, whose real name, entre nous* is Benkert. The German-Hungarians love to Magyarise their names. I don't know him personally. As he had a row with Vogt ABOUT I860, I approached him for some information but received nothing of any use. (My Hungarian material comes partly from Szemere, partly from my personal experiences in London.) Later- he turned to me in connection with a row he was having with Kossuth. Much as I have enquired around, I have learned nothing politically suspicious about him. He appears to be a scribbling BUSYBODY. His heresies quant ah Bonaparte may be found amongst many otherwise honest eastern barbarians. In any case, WATCH HIM. And I would consider it more diplomatic not to display any mistrust of him (for which reason I am enclosing, through you, the biographical note which he requested). 'Meanwhile,' as soon as the writing position no longer troubles me, I shall 'order' information about him elsewhere.

You guessed rightly about 'Plagiarism'. I intentionally wrote rudely and clumsily in order to make Hofstetten suspect Lieb- knecht, and to conceal the source."72 This entre nous.

You probably know that Engels and Siebel have also had newspaper articles published about my book in the Barmer Zeitung,c Elberfelder Zeitung? Frankfurter Börsenzeitung529 and—to the distress of Heinrich Bürgers—in the Düsseldorfer Zeitung." Siebel was the man in Barmen to whom I wished to introduce you. He is, however, now in Madeira for his health.

A week ago on Saturday The Saturday Review1—the 'BLOOD AND CULTURE' PAPER—included a note about my book in a review of recent German books. I came out of it relatively well, as you will see from the following passage:

' Ouff!

My best greetings to your dear wife and Fränzchen.8 You will be receiving other photograms from here, for we have now discov-

[^1]: * 'The author's views may be as pernicious as we conceive them to be, but there can be no question as to the plausibility of his logic, the vigour of his rhetoric, and the charm with which he invests the driest problems of political economy.'*589

[^2]: a between ourselves - b regarding - c [C. Siebel,] 'Carl Marx: Das Kapital. Kritik der politischen Oekonomie', Barmer Zeitung, No. 291, 6 December 1867. - d F. Engels, 'Review of Volume One of Capital for the Elberfelder Zeitung'. - e F. Engels, 'Review of Volume One of Capital for the Düsseldorfer Zeitung'. - f The Saturday Review of Politics, Literature, Science and Art, 18 January 1868. - s Gertruda and Franziska Kugelmann



ered that the WATERCOLOURS applied which look good on the first day, run into PATCHES immediately afterwards.

Write to me as often as time permits. During my indisposition, and many occasions for vexation, letters from friends are welcome.

Salut

Yours

K. M.

[Autobiographical Notes]590

Karl Marx, Ph. D., born Trier, 5 May 1818.

1842-43, first contributor, then rédacteur en chef of the Rheinische Zeitung (Cologne). During his editorship the govern- ment subjected the paper to double censorship; after censorship by the proper censor, the superior censor of the Regierungspräsi- dent*' Finally suppressed on cabinet orders. Marx leaves Germany, moves to Paris.

1844 publishes in Paris, with A. Ruge, the Deutsch-Französische Jahrbücher, banned in Germany.

Further Die heilige Familie, Kritik der kritischen Kritik, gegen Bruno Bauer und Konsorten. (Frankfurt a/M. Literarische Anstalt.)

January 1845,c expelled from France by Guizot at the instigation of the Prussian Government, Marx proceeds to Brussels, forms the German Workers' Society in Brussels in 1847,d gives lectures on political economy there,591 contributor to the French Réforme (Paris), etc.

1847: Misère de la Philosophie. Réponse à la Philosophie de la Misère de M. Proudhon.

Ditto: Discours sur le libre échange and other pamphlets.

1848, with F. Engels: Manifest der Kommunistischen Partei. Ar- rested and expelled from Belgium, invited back to France on the written invitation of the provisional government. Leaves France April 1848, founds in Cologne:

Neue Rheinische Zeitung (June 1848-May 1849). Marx expelled from Prussia, after the government had vainly prosecuted him through legal channels. Twice acquitted at assizes (once press trial, the other time for incitement to rebellion). Marx's defence speeches published in Zwei politische Prozesse, Cologne.

1849. Final, red issue of the Neue Rheinische Zeitung.

[^1]: a editor-in-chief - b District President - c Inaccuracy in the original: December 1844. - d Ditto: 1846





**[p. 531]**

1850 published: Neue Rheinische Zeitung. Politisch-ökonomische Revue (Hamburg).

1851-52: contributor to the London Chartist paper: The People's Paper, Ernest Jones': Notes to the People, etc.

1852: Der 18. Brumaire des Louis Bonaparte, New York. Enthüllungen über den Kommunistenprozess zu Köln, Basel Since this edition was confiscated on the German frontier, new edition in Boston, 1853.

1853-54: Flysheets against Lord Palmerston.592

1859: Zur Kritik der Politischen Oekonomie, Berlin. 1860: Herr Vogt. 1851-1862b: regular contributor to the English-language Tribune (New York).c Contributions to Putnam's Review (New York)593 and the new Cyclopaedia Americana (New York).

1861: after the amnesty visited Berlin; Prussian Government refused his renaturalisation.583

1864à: published by order of the Central Council of the International Working Men's Association Address to the Working Class of Europe."

1867: Das Kapital. Kritik der politischen Ökonomie. Vol. I, Hamburg.

323

MARX TO ENGELS

[London,] 1 February 1868 Dear FRED,

I hope that you are not also indisposed, since you have not written to me this week, and not returned the letters of Kugelmann and Kertbény (I need them to reply).588 Last Tuesday I went out to the Museum' and for a stroll. On Wednesday a new

[^1]: First published in Pisma Marksa k Kugel- Printed according to the original manu (Letters of Marx to Kugelmann), Moscow-Leningrad, 1928

[^2]: IN MANCHESTER

[^3]: a Ditto: September - b Ditto: 1851-1860. - c New-York Daily Tribune - d Inaccuracy in the original: 1865. - e K. Marx, 'Inaugural Address of the Working Men's International Association'. - f the British Museum Library





**[p. 532]**

Enclosed a letter from Schily. According to him, things look rotten in Paris, as does everything connected with Moses.3 Reclus does not seem to me to be the right man either.539 There can naturally be no question of the Poleb in Geneva. As soon as your article for the Fortnightly309 is AT HAND, Lafargue will do it into French for the Courrier français.

From the enclosed Viennese cuttings, which Fox sent me from Vienna, you can see how Lassalle and Delitzschc are rampant there. At the same time as the rascal Bernhard Becker turned up there as a great man. He is now a 'Great-German'd in the Bismarck style.

If you still have a copy of your article in the Frankfurter Borsenzeitung,e send it to me.529

Salut. T,

Your

K. M.

The Freiligrath begging campaign422 is going ahead; it has already raised over 32,000 talers.

324

ENGELS TO MARX

Manchester, 2 February 1868 Dear Moor,

The reason for my silence was that I wanted to inform you, together with the letter, of the dispatch of the wine. However, the

[^1]: First published in Der Briefwechsel zwischen Printed according to the original F. Engels und K. Marx, Bd. 4, Stuttgart, 1913 Published in English for the first time

[^2]: IN LONDON

[^3]: a Moses Hess - b Joseph Card - c Hermann Schulze-Delitzsch - d i. e., champion of Austria's annexation to united Germany - e Frankfurter Zeitung und Handelsblatt





**[p. 533]**

fellow who packs wine for me had an accident, and will be lying sick for at least 14 days, and so I have not been able to manage it yet; possibly I shall pack it myself tomorrow. You will receive very good 1863 claret and 1857 Rhine wine; I only have a few bottles of Moselle left, and they are in Mornington Street, where I cannot have them packed.

Then I was also chasing after The Saturday Review and have with great trouble got hold of the notice. If you have not seen it, I can send you a copy—not much in it, but nevertheless a good sign."

At the moment, in addition to the tremendous amount of work connected with the annual accounts and that resulting from the revival in business, I must also rush around like mad as chairman of the Schiller Institute,28 since the affair of the building fund must be decided within 14 days, and until then all the work falls on me myself. However, I shall start with the piece for the Fortnightly.509 Important and interesting as the question of money is for England as well, I still think it appropriate to allow it to retreat into the background this time; it would distract attention from the main theme and demand a long explanation so that the English might understand that the subject is simply money as such, which he is accustomed to think of only in its entanglement with credit money, etc. What do you think?

Kertbény's idea of having your portrait in the Leipzig Illustrirte is quite splendid.588 This sort of advertisement penetrates right into the depths of the philistine's heart. Give him everything he needs for this. The fellow can be used for other things too, is very willing, and has the need to intervene busily everywhere and in everything. Vain, but not stupid for a Hungarian. His assessment of the German-Austrians at that time was very correct.

Card, the Pole, has sent me an insoluble puzzle with his signature. Cwichiewicz, neither my knowledge of handwriting nor my philology suffices for the solution of it. OF COURSE, HE WOULD NEVER DO AS A TRANSLATOR, and what Schily writesb is very fishy. If Reclus alone wants 3,000-4,000 francs, and Mosesc who wants to do the main work, also his share, and you should be paid the droits

d'auteur,d where should the publisher come from?*39 And these people should be left to do the job of 'condensing' and Trenching' it? Moses, who would rather be capable of watering down into 20 volumes the chapter about absolute surplus value594 than condens-

[^1]: a A reference to the notice on the first volume of Capital published in The Saturday Review of Politics, Literature, Science and Art, 18 January 1868.- b See this volume, p. 52. - c Moses Hess - d author's rights





**[p. 534]**

ing a page of it by one line? It is really your fault; if you write strictly dialectically for German science, then afterwards, when it comes to the translations, particularly the French, you fall into evil hands.

The Frankfurter Börsenzeitung* like all the rest I have sent to Meissner, from whom I have heard nothing since.529 I wrote to him that he should make up an advertisement from the various articles.131

Liebknecht's rag b displeases me to the highest degree. Nothing but concealed South German federalism. The article on Swiss and Prussian military history has been worked up on the basis of Grün (K.) in Les Etats-Unis d'Europe,595 almost every word is wrong. Furthermore there is nothing in the rag, and though he is as thick as thieves with Hanoverian particularists and South German louts, he attacks the Berlin Zukunft people who, the devil take it, are at least as good as that rabble. Incidentally I have only received 3 numbers.

What little trust the Prussians have in the internal peace in the new provinces596 is shown by the new stationing and organisation of the army. For instance, 3 Hanoverian infantry and 2 cavalry regiments are stationed in Westphalia or rather Wesel, while in Hanover there are only 2 Hanoverian infantry and 3 cavalry regiments but, besides, in Westphalia 4 infantry and 2 cavalry regiments. It is true that in Schleswig-Holstein home regiments are stationed with one exception, but 2 infantry and 2 cavalry regiments from the old provinces as well. In Hesse there are indeed nominally 3 Hessian regiments of infantry, but of these the 82nd (2nd Hessian) consists of Westphalians! And the Nassauers have been sent to Hesse, the Hessians to Nassau, and parts of both with old Prussian regiments sent to Mainz. Finally Frankfurt is kept in order by Pomeranian infantry and Rhineland cavalry.

The great Borchardt seems to be approaching the target of his career. You know that for years he has transferred his priestly leanings from the beautiful Mrs Steinthal to the even more beautiful Mrs Schwabe, and that every year he has taken her to Germany to a spa because of her weakened health, and brought her back again, while her husband has to stay at home out of respect for his wife's health. So, Borchardt even took her, as Schwabe told Knowles and me one day, 'to Königsberg for the coronation'—whereupon I naturally asked: 'Whose coronation?'

[^1]: a Frankfurter Zeitung und Handelsblatt - b Demokratisches Wochenblatt





**[p. 535]**

Although I made fun of the cuckolded jackass for a whole half hour over the coronation, and fat Knowles was laughing aloud, the oaf noticed nothing. But now, after the priestly doctor had kept the husband apart from his sick wife for years, it suddenly emerges that the sick wife is pregnant and expects her accouche- ment about April. Remarkably, the high priest must have been guilty of some carelessness or foolishness sufficiently for the cuckolded jackass to suddenly see the light; he leaves his house here and moves to Berlin, sells his HUNTERS although he will still be here for the whole hunting season, resigns his club membership, and is so hostile to the high priest that when the latter manages to launch a collection for the East Prussians here and sends £700 to the Zukunft, the cuckolded jackass throws himself into the arms of the Prussian consul and together with him collects abour £350 for the official committee. Now there is a lot of talk about this amongst the philistines, and although the story above is only whispered about in the dark, the position of the high priest has been badly shattered, and many people dare to speak of him with disrespect. He no longer looks so jovial and elegant. I wonder how things will proceed. (Nota bene. The names in this story are be- tween you and me.) Best greetings to the ladies and Lafargue.

Your

F. E.

325

MARX TO ENGELS

[London,] 4 February 1868

Many thanks for the 'medicine BOTTLES'. I still have two not quite withered buds under my left arm and on my left thigh. However, they do not bother me when walking. I feel GENERALLY better as well.

[^1]: First published abridged in Der Briefwech- Printed according to the original sei zwischen F. Engels und K. i Stuttgart, 1913 and in full Abt. III, Bd. 4, Berlin, 1931

[^2]: sei zwischen F. Engels und K. Marx, Bd. 4, _ , , . „ ,. , r , r.

[^3]: e . . , „ , , ° j • c H • »ri;-* Published in English tor the first Stuttgart, 1913 and in full in MEGA, 8 time

[^4]: IN MANCHESTER

[^5]: DEAR FRED,





**[p. 536]**

Enclosures from Vienna from Fox (please send them back to me). You see what effect your essay in the Börsenzeitungb is having.529 It is perhaps best to leave Vienna to its own devices. It is enough that attention has been drawn there to my book.c The whole business is very immature. When you consider how agriculture still predominates in the Empire en gros, then it is comical to watch these somersaults. What prevails in Vienna is finance, and not large industry. However, as a ferment the hubbub cannot hurt.

Kugelmann has sent me Dühring's Verkleinerer Carey's. I was right that he only noticed me in order to annoy the others.d What is very conspicuous is the very coarse way in which this affected Berliner handles Mill, Roscher, etc., while he treats me with timid care. According to him, apart from Carey, List is the greatest genius of the 19th century. In another pamphlet Kapital und

Arbeit which I saw today at the Museum,* he 'abuses' Lassalle. I shall send you his book to look at one of these days.

Perhaps there will be no war this year. The fellows are all anxious about domestic conditions. However, the Russians will not neglect to provide causes of friction. They will lie fallow if they do not manage to bring Germany and France to blows.

Coppel was here on Sunday and will come again on Wednes- day. He is here to put the financial affairs of the King of Hanoverf in order. He is a merry fellow. Kugelmann has forced this cousin of the Rothschilds to study my book.

Moro

I can only send the newspaper cuttings tomorrow because the BOXES for BOOK-POST were closed.

[^1]: There is little new for me in Schorlemmer's letterg. But still MY

[^2]: THANKS.

[^3]: Salut. Y o u r

[^4]: First published in Der Briefwechsel zwischen Printed according to the original F. Engels und K. Marx, Bd. 4, Stuttgart, JQJ3 Published in English for the first time

[^5]: a See this volume, pp. 526 and 533. - b Frankfurter Zeitung und Handelsblatt - c the first volume of Capital - d E. Dühring, 'Marx, Das Kapital, Kritik der politischen Oekonomie, 1. Band, Hamburg 1867' (see this volume, p. 514). - e the British Museum Library - f George V - s See this volume, pp. 507-08 and 510.





**[p. 1913]**

ENGELS TO MARX

IN LONDON

Manchester, 11 February 1868 7 Southgate

Memorandum from Engels to Mr Moor597

I have received your letter and that from your HONOURABLE SECRETARY3 and return enclosed the Viennese cuttings and Meyer's letter. What a frightful tragedy at the Weydemeyers.598 I am of the opinion that an article should be contributed to the Debatte (via Richter), and that one should strike while the iron is hot.599 It will be sent this week. The 'specialist criticism' in the Frankfurter

Börsenzeitun^ is extremely amusing.529 It is significant that these Viennese literary gents, all Jews as cunning as foxes, who well know all the tricks, should regard the German press outside Austria as bona fide.

Dühring amuses me very much. The thrusts at Roscher, Mill, etc., were a godsend for him—but what a difference there is between the embarrassed tone of the criticism0 and the saucy nature of the pamphlet.0

has made it impossible for Bonaparte to start a war against Germany without great alliances. And since at the best he could only get Austria (England, as always, or more than ever, would not count militarily), and would have Prussia and Russia against him, the whole business is fishy. Italy is no good either, and furthermore he mucked things up for himself there. HE IS FLOORED. Even the great Karl Schurz, ex-student General Fart,e has confided this to Bismarck secretly.fi0°

It is nearly 7 o'clock, and I have not had dinner yet. I must go home first, so enough for today.

Your

[^1]: I do not believe either there will be war, if only because the Peace League461 describes it as unavoidable; in any case, Sadowa348

[^2]: F. E. First published in Der Briefwechsel zwischen Printed according to the original F. Engels und K. Marx, Bd. 4, Stuttgart, Published in English for the first time

[^3]: a Laura Marx - b Frankfurter Zeitung und Handelsblatt - c E. Dühring, 'Marx, Dos

[^4]: Kapital, Kritik der politischen Oekonomie, 1. Band, Hamburg 1867'. - d E. Dühring, Die Verkleinerer Carey's und die Krisis der Nationalökonomie. - e Furz in German, rhyming with Schurz.





**[p. 327]**

MARX TO ENGELS26

IN MANCHESTER

[London,] 15 February 1868

DEAR FRED,

Forced since yesterday to stay at home again, since the monster under my left shoulder-blade is developing viciously. It appears that this shit will never end.

From Bordeaux I have received all the papers for the marriage.601 I am very worried about this. It should take place on 1 April, and nothing has been prepared for Laura. She cannot be sent out into the world like a beggar. I have written to Holland,3 m

b u t NO ANSWER. I am writing only these few lines since the writing position is uncomfortable for me today.

Have you received further PAPERS from the important Wilhelmchenb? I have heard and seen nothing of it since THE 2

FIRST NUMBERS.

Salut

Your

K. M.

328

MARX TO ENGELS

[London,] 20 February 1868

At the same time as this I am sending you an interesting cutting from a Viennese paper,0 received via Fox.

[^1]: First published in MEGA Abt. Ill, Bd. 4, Printed according to the original Berlin, 1931

[^2]: Published in English in full for the first time

[^3]: IN MANCHESTER

[^4]: DEAR FRED,

[^5]: a to the Philipses - b Demokratisches Wochenblatt edited by Liebknecht - c Neues

[^6]: Wiener Tagblatt





**[p. 539]**

Borkheim gave me a letter to him from Liebknecht, which I had to send back to him by return. From this the following excerpt:

'Tell Marx that Dr Contzen is working on a long review, and in a lecture has already mentioned the work" in the most laudatory terms from the purely scientific standpoint. And tell Marx, too, that he should get Engels to supply an article about Capital for our paperb which now circulates 1,300 copies equally-spread through- out Germany. I myself have no time at present for such a job.'

If you think it worth the trouble to supply something for the paper, it would be good to make the article longer this time (with extracts), even if it had to run through several numbers.602

Borkheim will probably be sending you a reprint—if you do not have the paper—of the 'Russian refugees' which he wrote for it.c

Dr Contzen, BY THE BY, himself publishes (or published) an economic periodical patroned Roscher.

Regarding health, CHANGE from day to day.

Salut

Your

K. M.

First published in Der Briefwechsel zwischen Printed according to the original F. Engels und K. Marx, Bd. 4, Stuttgart, 1913 Published in English for the first time

329

Manchester, 20 February 1868 7 Southgate

Dear Moor,

This week you will have to regard me as completely out of action. I have such a frightful lot of work at the firm as a result of the sudden rise in cotton that I do not get out of the office from

[^1]: ENGELS TO MARX302

[^2]: IN LONDON

[^3]: a the first volume of Capital - b Demokratisches Wochenblatt - c S. B[orkheim], 'Russische politische Flüchdinge in West-Europa', Demokratisches Wochenblatt, Nos. 5 and 6, 1 and 8 February 1868 (the end of the article was published in Nos. 17 and 20, 25 April and 16 May 1868). - d under the patronage of





**[p. 540]**

the morning on until 7 o'clock in the evening, and do not get my dinner until 8 o'clock in the evening. You will understand what one is capable of after that. I hope that the damned carbuncle has got settled. Hearty greetings to your wife, the girls and Lafargue.

Your

F. E.

First published in Der Briefwechsel zwischen Printed according to the original F. Engels und K. Marx, Bd. 4, Stuttgart, 1913

330

ENGELS TO MARX

IN LONDON

[Manchester,] 1 March 1868

Dear Moor,

The whole of last week I worked like a slave from morning till night in commerce so that I was good for nothing at all. This has now passed, I think, and this week I should get back on to the rails.

Enclosure from Meissner. His draft is naturally absolutely unusable: I shall see whether I cannot knock together something better for him. Now I am sorry that I sent him the articles, I should already have prepared something for him from them."

How is your carbuncle faring? Let us hope that this is finally the last.

[^1]: I shall write something for Wilhelmchenb; verbatim extracts would be difficult, but I can spin out some main points to some extent for his public.602 I, too, have seen only 3 numbers of the rag,c and these could have been edited by Gustav Struve. Since Wilhelmchen was left to his own devices his South German basic federative republicanism (how earnestd the man is) has broken out again in full glory. The fellow even re-prints Karl Grün.D95

[^2]: •x See this volume, p. 534. - b Wilhelm Liebknecht - c Demokratisches Wochenblatt - d Ernscht in the original; Engels is punning on the Saxon pronunciation of ernst.





**[p. 1913]**

Mr Goegg obstinately sends me the Les États-Unis d'Europe (the fellow wants me to get an agency for him, thus the devotion). Since the paper appears simultaneously and with the same contents in German and French, it would not be bad at all to announce your booka there and Goegg has promised to insert articles by you or me. What do you think of that?

Best greetings to your wife, the girls and Lafargue.

Your

F. E.

First published abridged in Der Briefwech- sel zwischen F. Engels und K. Marx, Bd. 4, Stuttgart, 1913 and in full in MEGA, Abt. III, Bd. 4, Berlin, 1931

Printed according to the original

Published in English for the first time

331

MARX TO ENGELS

IN MANCHESTER

[London,] 4 March 1868

Dear FRED,

From the enclosed scrawl you will see that, if I do not pay £1.5.0 by the day after tomorrow, MY CHATTELS' SHALL BE DISTRAINED.

The carbuncle business is now reduced to a residuum under my left arm, which should soon fade.

That I write you only these few lines today is due to a HORRIBLE headache.

Enclosed scrawl from S. Meyer, which you should please return. Salut.

Your

K. M.

[^1]: Make sure that Meissner does not write any nonsense on his own. If the jackass had only sent back the newspaper cuttings.b

[^2]: First published in Der Briefwechsel zwischen F. Engels und K. Marx, Bd. 4, Stuttgart,

[^3]: Printed according to the original

[^4]: Published in English for the first time

[^5]: ;* the first volume of Capital - b See this volume, pp. 534, 540.





**[p. 332]**

MARX TO ENGELS238

IN MANCHESTER

[London,] 6 March 1868 DEAR FRED,

BEST THANKS FOR THE .£10. The copies of Social-Demokrat promised by Meissner have not arrived. This shows that he is not at all precise. Thus for instance the copies for Paris have not been dispatched either. There the worthy Moses" has prevaricated for so long603 that the Courrier français has now finally announced that as the result of the many

amendes,*" etc., it will soon completely quit the stage.

I have not seen Eichhoff's lucubrations and anyway not the Zukunft for a very long time.604 Since Eichhoff's brother' is a bookseller and specialises in political economy (he is the publisher of several opera of Dr Dühring), this is reason enough for Eichhoff to deliver lectures on the same subject.

My head is in a sorry state. But that should 'disappear' BY AND BY, as soon as the last traces of carbuncledom have gone.

I wrote to Holland111 again yesterday since the matter is becoming brûlante.d Old Lafarguee has dealt with the necessary marriage BANNS, etc., in Bordeaux, and has sent all the papers here. He now expects that the wedding will take place here at the beginning of next month, and that the pair will go to Paris, to which he will later move. We, however, have not yet risked taking the necessary steps here for the BANNS, since my wife has not yet been able to acquire even the most essential things for Laura. For worthy Freiligrath all this went very smoothly, but then he is 'noble'.

As soon as this affair is SETTLED, it will be a great relief for the entire household, since Lafargue is as good as living with us, which perceptibly increases EXPENSES.

As far as the 'reviews' are concerned, I think that after you have supplied Liebknecht602 you should abandon the German ones and only pursue the English. First, the echo of an English review in Germany is more powerful than vice versa, and secondly this is, after all, the only country where finally money can be made from the business.

[^1]: a Moses Hess - b fines - c Albert Eichhoff - d urgent - e François Lafargue





**[p. 543]**

Mr Macleod has nevertheless achieved a 2nd edition of his lousy and pedantic-scholastic book on BANKS.11 He is a very stilted jackass who expresses every banal tautology 1. in algebraic form, and 2. constructs it geometrically. I have already given him a passing kick in the pamphlet published by Duncker.b His 'great' discovery is: credit is capital.

Salut

Your

K. M. First published abridged in Der Briefwech- Printed according to the original sei zwischen F. Engels und K. Marx, Bd. 4, Stuttgart, 1913 and in full in MEGA, Published in English in full for the Abt. Ill, Bd. 4, Berlin, 1931 f l r s t t l m e

333

MARX TO LUDWIG KUGELMANN65

IN HANOVER

London, 6 March 1868

Dear Friend,

As soon as Coppel vanished, my condition got worse again. Scarcely, I think, because of his departure. Post not propter." (After all he is, in his way, quite a nice man. But that particular way is, in my present state, too healthy for me to harmonise with it very well.) This is therefore the reason for my silence, so that I did not even inform you of the receipt of Thünen." There is something touching about the latter. A Mecklenburg squire (moreover, one with German distinction of thought), who treats his estate of Tellow as the land and Mecklenburg-Schwerin as the town, and who, proceeding from these premises, constructs for himself the Ricardian theory of ground rent, with the help of observation, differential calculus, practical accountancy, etc. This is estimable and at the same time ridiculous.

The curiously embarrassed tone used by Mr Dühring in his review6 is now clear to me. Usually, you see, he is a very

[^1]: a H. D. Macleod, The Theory and Practice of Banking. - b K. Marx, A Contribution to the Critique of Political Economy. - c After, not because. - d J. H. Thünen, Der isolirte Staat in Beziehung auf Landwirtschaft und Nationalökonomie. - e E. Dühring, 'Marx, Das Kapital, Kritik der politischen Oekonomie, 1. Band, Hamburg 1867'.





**[p. 544]**

bumptious, insolent lad, who sets himself up as a revolutionary in political economy. He has done two things. Firstly (basing himself upon Carey) he published a Kritische Grundlegung der Nationalökonomie (ABOUT 500 PAGES), and a new Natürliche Dialektik (against Hegelian dialectic). My book has buried him in both respects. He reviewed it out of hatred for Roscher, etc. Incidentally he practises deception, half intentionally and half from lack of insight. He knows full well that my method of exposition is not Hegelian, since I am a materialist, and Hegel an idealist. Hegel's dialectic is the basic form of all dialectic, but only after being stripped of its mystical form, and it is precisely this which distinguishes my method. Quant oa Ricardo, Mr Diihring has been vexed precisely because in my treatment the weak points do not exist which Carey, and 100 others before him, held up as proof against Ricardo. Consequently, he attempts, with mauvaise foi,b to burden me with Ricardo's narrow-mindedness. BUT NEVER MIND. I must be grateful to the man, since he is the first expert who has said anything at all.

In volume II418 (which will probably never appear if my condition does not change) property in land will be one of the subjects analysed, competition only in so far as called for in the treatment of other themes.

During my indisposition (which I hope will soon cease al- together) I have not been able to write, but have gobbled up enormous masses of 'material', statistical and otherwise; this alone would have made SICK those whose stomachs are not accustomed to this type of fodder and the rapid digestion of the same.

My circumstances are very harassing, since I was unable to do any additional work which would bring in money, but must always maintain a certain appearance for the children's sake. If I didn't have to produce these 2 damned volumes (and look for an English publisher besides), which can be done only in London, I would move to Geneva where I could live very well with the means at my disposal. My daughter No. IIe is getting married at the end of this month.601

Greetings to Fränzchen.

Yours

K. M.

[^1]: First published in Die Neue Zeit, Bd. 2, Printed according to the original Nr. 6, Stuttgart, 1901-1902

[^2]: a As for - b bad faith - c Laura Marx





**[p. 334]**

ENGELS TO MARX

IN LONDON

Manchester, 10 March 1868

Dear Moor,

Do not forget to return to me the things from Meissner,11

otherwise I cannot reply to him.

If the Dutchb do not write to you soon, I shall see what I can do. I suppose something can still be managed.

The storm in commerce is beginning to die down, so I can work again in the evening. What you say about the Fortnightly is quite right; what is published there can be used again afterwards in Germany. The matter should be undertaken as quickly as possible.509 But you will understand it is not possible to do much in the evening when you only get your midday meal at 7.30 or 8 in the evening.

Eichhöffchen enclosed.—You will see that besides his brother17

As long as they have no railways, I really cannot believe that they seriously intend any serious action. Moreover, they have an awful famine in the interior.

The costs of the Bismarckian gloire, etc., are beginning to tell. 1864—population of Prussia 19,250,000. 1867—19,668,000 for the old Provinces. According to the rate hitherto—250,000 per year, it should have been 20 million. The rate has thus been reduced to one half. In the administrative districts of Münster, Minden, and Koblenz (inter alia) the population has actually declined. Biggest increase in Berlin and Düsseldorf administrative district.

Your

F. E.

[^1]: he also has other 'grounds' to lecture on political economy.604

[^2]: So, the Russians have again postponed the business in Turkey.605

[^3]: First published abridged in Der Briefwech- sel zwischen F. Engels und K. Marx. Bd. 4, Stuttgart, 1913 and in full in MEGA, Abt. III, Bd. 4, Berlin, 1931

[^4]: Printed according to the original

[^5]: Published in English for the first time

[^6]: a See this volume, pp. 534, 540. - b the Philipses - c Albert Eichhoff





**[p. 335]**

ENGELS TO MARX

IN LONDON

Manchester, 13 March 1868

Dear Moor,

For Meissner I still lack the letter from von Eynern. I wanted to prepare an advertisement" today but was disturbed.

Enclosed from Vienna.606 Have written to Wilhelmchenb for information. I think I shall accept in general, but say that the matter must remain secret 'in order not to disturb my other connections in the Viennese press'.

I also sent Wilhelm two articles about your book, completely popular for workers (so that even Wilhelm will understand them).1

At the same time, I have coached him in his role in order to work over in the Reichstag the new code for crafts and manufactures (which also includes factory legislation).607 This opportunity is very good in order to ADVERTISE the book, and I am convinced that this will also have a considerable effect, since even the official economists have to draw on it.

Since yesterday I have been fit for work again—on the one hand, I get back earlier in the evening, and, on the other, I have discovered that for 14 days I had been drinking beer poisoned probably with cocculus indicus,d which totally narcotised me in the evening. I CHANGED THE TAP YESTERDAY—by chance—noted the differ- ence, and discovered the cause, which I had ascribed to digestive troubles.

Your

F. E.

[^1]: H o w ABOUT CARBUNCLES?

[^2]: First published abridged in Der Briefwech- sel zwischen F. Engels und K. Marx, Bd. 4, Stuttgart, 1913 and in full in MEGA, Abt. III, Bd. 4, Berlin, 1931

[^3]: Printed according to the original

[^4]: Published in English for the first time

[^5]: a See this volume, pp. 534, 540. - b Wilhelm Liebknecht - c F. Engels, 'Review of Volume One of Capital for the Demokratisches Wochenblatt'. - d Indian berries





**[p. 336]**

MARX TO ENGELS608

IN MANCHESTER

[London,] 14 March3 1868

DEAR FRED,

Since the beginning of the week I have had carbuncles on my right thigh (not yet QUITE EXTINCT). Despite this—and the conse- quent difficult gait—I went to the Museum,b since this continuous being cooped up and lying down at home (the business has now lasted, with some intervals OF COURSE, over 4 months) would drive me mad. For all that, I am convinced that the present blossoms are only the last aftereffects. At the Museum—BY THE BY—I studied, amongst other things, the latest writings about the Constitution of the German Mark, Villages, etc., by OLD Maurerc (the old Bavarian Privy Councillor, who already played a role as one of the regents of Greece, and was among the first to denounce the Russians, long before Urquhart). He demonstrates at length that private property in land only arose later, etc. The idiotic Westphalian squirearchical opinion (Möser,d etc.) that the Germans settled each by himself, and only afterwards established villages, districts, etc., is completely refuted. It is interesting just now that the Russian manner of re-distributing land at certain intervals (in Germany originally annually) should have persisted in some parts of Germany up to the 18th century and even the 19th. The view I put forward that the Asiatic or Indian property forms everywhere mark the beginning in Europe receives new proof here609

(although Maurer knows nothing of it). But for the Russians there disappears the last trace OF ORIGINALITY, even in THIS LINE. What remains to them is that they still maintain forms long abandoned by their neighbours. OLD Maurer's books (from 1854 and 1856, etc.) are written with real German erudition, but, at the same time, in the more homely and readable manner which sets the southern Germans apart from the northern Germans (Maurer is from Heidelberg, but this applies even more to the Bavarians and

[^1]: a 14 November in the original - b the British Museum Library - c Presumably a reference to G. L. Maurer's Einleitung zur Geschichte der Mark-, Hof-, Dorf- und Stadt-Verfassung und der öffentlichen Gewalt; Geschichte der Markenverfassung in Deutschland; Geschichte der Fronhöfe, der Bauernhöfe und der Hofverfassung in Deutschland; Geschichte der Dorfverfassung in Deutschland. - d J. Moser, Osnabrückische Geschichte.





**[p. 548]**

Tyroleans, such as Fallmerayer, Fraas, etc.). Here and there a hat is doffed deeply—re, non verbis*—to OLD Grimm (Rechtsalterthiimer,h

etc.). Besides, I looked at the things by Fraas, etc., on agriculture.c

BY THE BY, you must send me back the Duhring,d and, at the same time, the page proofs of my book.e You will have seen from Dühring what Carey's great discovery is, namely, that in agricul- ture humanity proceeds from poorer to increasingly better soil. Partly because cultivation descends from the dry hills, etc., to the damp lowlands. But in particular because Mr Carey considers the most fertile soil marshes and so on, which first have to be converted into soil. And finally because the English colonisation in America began with that lousy New England which is Carey's model country: Massachusetts in particular.

THANKS for your efforts with the damned book. I cannot find Eynern's letter but suffit' to write to Meissner that you sent it to me.8 I have received the same letter from Vienna, with a few modifications.fi0fi I enclose the cuttings about Lassalle sent me by Fox. Apart from the arch-blackguard B. Becker, Reusche is in Vienna; this vagabond is there for Hatzfeldt money (as our J. Ph. Becker writes to Borkheim)—the enclosed Viennese Lassal- le-creature article is by him—in order to glorify Izzy as the Son of God, and the beastly old girl as the Mother of God.

From Holland11 I have still not heard anything, and the wedding should be on April 8th (with difficulty despite Lafargue I have postponed the business that far).601 In addition, I have on the 17th (next Tuesday) to pay ABOUT £5 for water and gas (also last SUMMONS). As for the DUTCH, it appears to me that I shall not squeeze anything out of them until I once again pounce upon them personally, without previous notice. But JUST NOW there can be no question of this.

Have you read about the scandal (Borkheim informed me of it) between Dühring and 'Privy Councillor' Wagener, with the former accusing the latter of pinching his manuscript610 or something or other about workers' cooperation.

Salut.

Your

K. M.

[^1]: a in fact, not words - b J. Grimm, Deutsche Rechtsalterthümer. - c Presumably a reference to K. Fraas' Klima und Pflanzenwelt in der Zeit; Historisch-encyklopädischer Grundriß der Landwirthschaftslehre; Geschichte der Landwirthschafl; Die Natur der Landwirthschafl ; Die Ackerbaukrisen und ihre Heilmittel. - d E. Dühring, Die Verkleinerer

[^2]: Carey's und die Krisis der Nationalökonomie. - e the first volume of Capital - f it suffices - 8 See previous letter. - h i.e. the Philipses





**[p. 549]**

From Maurer I have noted that the change in opinions about the history and development of 'Germanic' property, etc., pro- ceeds from the Danes who are apparently tremendously active in all kinds of archaeology in every corner. But, although they thus give the impulse, something is always missing with them SOMEWHERE OR ELSE. They lack the proper critical instinct, and in particular the sense of proportion. I was extremely struck by the fact that Maurer, though often referring, for instance, to Africa, Mexico, etc., knows absolutely nothing about the Celts, and therefore ascribes the development of common ownership in France solely to the Germanic conquerors. 'As though,' Mr Brunoa would say, 'as though' we did not possess a Celtic (Welsh) book of laws from the 11th centuryb which is entirely communist, and 'as though' the French in recent years had not just excavated original settlements in Celtic form here and there. As though! But the matter is quite simple. Besides German and ancient Roman relations, OLD Maurer has only studied oriental (Greek-Turkish!) ones.

First published in Der Briefwechsel zwischen Printed according to the original F. Engels und K. Marx, Bd. 4, Stuttgart, , , - , , . ,• , • r ,, r jq.o Published in English in lull lor the first time

337

[London,] 16 March 1

Enclosed a letter to Kugelmann from a young Bielefeld manufacturer.c I am particularly amused by his idea that I myself must have formerly been a sewing-machine EMPLOYING MANUFACTURER. If people only knew how little I know of all that stuff.

The question is also unavoidable: what now? The fellows all want recipes for miracle cures, and do not see the fairly graspable cure by fire and iron already plainly indicated.

[^1]: MARX TO ENGELS522

[^2]: IN MANCHESTER

[^3]: DEAR FRED,

[^4]: a Bruno Bauer - b Ancient Laws and Institutes of Wales. - c Gustav Meyer (see this volume, p. 552)





**[p. 550]**

It is strange how Dollfus (Alsace) has won such false renommé. This HUMBUC, who ranks far beneath such Englishmen as Briggs, etc., has drafted his contracts with his workers, contracts that could only be entered into by a degenerate rabble, in such a way that they do in fact become his colony of serfs, and in fact he treats them well 'as serfs', and exploits them as neatly as anybody else. And on this account the brute recently introduced in the Corps législatif the nasty paragraph of the Press Law about the 'vie

privée qui doit être murée'."611 For here and there light had been thrown on his philanthropic juggling.

The way in which the English in Ireland are now treating political prisoners, or just suspects, or those only sentenced to ordinary prison terms (like Pigott of The Irishman and Sullivan of the News) in fact exceeds anything seen on the Continent612— except Russia. They are curs!

Salut

Your

K. M.

First published in Der Briefwechsel zwischen Printed according to the original F. Engels und K. Marx, Bd. 4, Stuttgart, . igj3 Published in English in full tor the first time

338

ENGELS TO MARX

Manchester, 17 March 1868

Dear Moor,

Yesterday evening the cashier rushed off before I had asked him for the £5 for your gas, etc., and I could not even borrow a note anywhere; it is now enclosed, and I hope this delay has not caused you any serious unpleasantness. Further money will follow in the next few days, as soon as I can view my own affairs more clearly. Has Lafargue furnished a house, etc., for he cannot take his wife into his LODGINGS?

[^1]: IN LONDON

[^2]: a private life which should be surrounded by walls - b Weekly News





**[p. 551]**

The proofs3 and the Dühringb I shall send to you; I forgot to take the stuff with me this morning. In haste.

Your

F. E.

First published abridged in Der Briefwech- Printed according to the original sei zwischen F. Engels und K. Marx, Bd. 4, , . - , , . „ , . , r . Stuttgart, 1913 and in full in MEGA, Published in English for the first Abt. Ill, Bd. 4, Berlin, 1931 t i m e

339

MARX TO LUDWIG KUGELMANN65

IN HANOVER

London, 17 MARCH 1868

Dear Friend,

Your letter' affected me both unpleasandy and pleasandy (you see I always move in a dialectical contradiction).

Unpleasantly, since I know your circumstances, and it would be wretched of me to accept such presents at your family's expense. I therefore regard these £15 as an advance, which I shall repay when I am able.

You can imagine that I have often discussed moving from London to Geneva, not only with myself and my family, but also with Engels. Here I have to spend £400-500 annually. In Geneva I could live on £200. But CONSIDERED ALL IN ALL this is impossible for the time being. I can only complete my worke in London. And only here can I hope finally to derive a decent or at least adequate

[^1]: Pleasantly, not simply as a mark of your great friendship (and in the bustle of the world, friendship is the only personal thing that matters), but also because you have helped me over a great embarrassment in regard to the coming wedding.601 In the past 4 months—quite apart from medicine and doctors—I have spent so much money on BLUE BOOKS,359 Enquêtes and YANKEE REPORTS, etc., ON BANKS that I really had nothing left for my daughter.d

[^2]: a of the first volume of Capital - b E. Dühring, Die Verkleinerer Carey's und die

[^3]: Krisis der Nationalökonomie. - c of 13 March 1868 - d Laura Marx - e Capital





**[p. 552]**

monetary profit from this work. This is why it is necessary that I stay here for the time being. Apart from the fact that, were I to move away from here at this critical period, the whole working- class movement, which I influence behind the scenes, would fall into very bad hands and leave the right track.

For the time being, therefore, fate binds me to London ALL DRAWBACKS NOTWITHSTANDING. Quant àa Coppel, you do him an injustice. Had I not been indisposed he would have amused me and such a diversion never hurts the family.

Engels and I have hitherto written nothing for Liebknecht's paper.b (Engels has now sent him 2 articles about my book.') Eccarius is the regular London correspondent. Borkheim has written an article against Herzen et Co.d

Meyer'se letter gave me great pleasure. However, he has partly misunderstood my exposition. Otherwise he would have seen that I depict large-scale industry not only as the mother of the antagonism, but also as the producer of material and intellectual conditions for resolving these antagonisms, though this cannot proceed along pleasant lines.

With regard to the factory act—as a first condition, whereby the working class obtains ELBOW-ROOM for development and move- ment— I demand it from the state, as a forcible law, directed not only against the manufacturers, but also against the workers them- selves. (Page 542, note 52, I indicate the resistance of women workers to a limitation of hours.) By the way, should Mr Meyer develop the same energy as Owen, he can break this resistance. That the individual manufacturer (apart from the extent to which he endeavours to influence legislation) can do little in the matter, I state ditto p. 243: 'But looking at things as a whole, all this does not, indeed, depend on the good or ill will of the individual capitalist, etc' and ib. note 114.613 Despite all this, the individual working person can do something, and this has been abundantly shown by such manufacturers as Fielden, Owen, etc. Their main effectiveness must naturally be of a public nature. As for the Dollfuses in Alsace, they are HUMBUGS who have managed, through their conditions of contract, to establish a comfortable and at the same time for them very profitable serfdom-relationship with their workers. They have been duly exposed in the Paris press, and for

[^1]: 3 As for - b Demokratisches Wochenblatt - c F. Engels, 'Review of Volume One of Capital for the Demokratisches Wochenblatt'. - à S. Bforkheim], 'Russische politische Flüchtlinge in West-Europa', Demokratisches Wochenblatt, Nos. 5 and 6, 1 and 8 February 1868 (the end of the article was published in Nos. 17 and 20, 25 April and 16 May 1868). - e Gustav Meyer (see this volume, p. 549)





**[p. 553]**

this very reason one of these Dollfuses, in the Corps législatif, recently introduced and CARRIED one of the most infamous paragraphs of the Press Law, namely that 'vie privée doit être murée'.3

With heartiest greetings to your dear wifeb

Yours

K. M.

Apropos: Did you see that my personal enemy Schweitzer has heaped eulogies on my head in 6 numbers of the Social-Demokrat on account of my book? c Very harrowing for that old harlot Hatzfeldt.

First published abridged in Die Neue Zeit, Printed according to the original Bd. 2, No. 6, Stuttgart, 1901-1902 and in full in Pisma Marksa k Kugelmanu (Letters of Marx to Kugelmann), Moscow- Leningrad, 1928

340

[^1]: MARX T O ENGELS 6

[^2]: IN MANCHESTER

[^3]: [London,] 18 MARCH 1868

[^4]: DEAR FRED,

[^5]: T h e £5 received with many thanks. Laura and Lafargue will first go to Paris (after the marriage), then rent an APARTMENT here (somewhere on the Heath, d if findable) and after Lafargue's final exam (he took the others at Barth- olomew's Hospital H14) will go back to France for a time, and then move off to America, where OLD Lafargue e has house and home.

[^6]: Whence comes the word b 1 5 higid, hid, hiwisc (hida autem Anglice vocatur terra unius aratri culturae sufficiens1)? And also the German

[^7]: a private life should be surrounded by walls - b Gertruda Kugelmann - r [J. B. Schweitzer,] 'Das Werk von Carl Marx', Der Social-Demokrat, Nos. 10-12, 14, 15 and 24; 22, 24, 26 and 31 January, 2 and 23 February 1868. - <* Hampstead Heath - e François Lafargue - f hida is also the name in English for the land that can be cultivated sufficiently with one plough (see also this volume, pp. 560-61).

[^8]: 20-1196





**[p. 554]**

word: wiffa (Qui signum, quod propter defensionem terrae3 that is to say, to declare the land INCLOSED, a sign instead of a real fence ponitur, quod signum wiffam vocamush).

Salut.

Your

K. M.

First published in Der Briefwechsel Printed according to the original zwischen F. Engels und K. Marx, Bd. 4, Stuttgart, 1913

341

ENGELS TO MARX

IN LONDON

Manchester, 19 March 1868

Dear Moor,

Enclosed £40 in two twenties, which, it is to be hoped, will suffice at least for the most urgent purposes. I had not expected that Löhrchenc would be making a honeymoon trip to America. So the wedding is on 8 April, a Wednesday; had it been Friday, Saturday or Monday I could have got away easily.

The things from OLD Maurer are very niced; it is really remarkable how much material already exists on these subjects, and how little the professors have been able to make of it.

Ï shall try to discover the Anglo-Saxon word,6 but, since no Anglo-Saxon dictionary is available to me here, I shall have to make do with other sources, which are very dubious, in view of the large and peculiar stock of words in Anglo-Saxon. First of all, the correct spelling must be determined. With regard to Wiffa, a question: where is it found, so we might know whether it has Low German or High German sound shifts. If it is High German you should compare Graff's Althochdeutscher Sprachschatz, the Bayerisches Wörterbuch by Schindler or the Swiss dictionary by Stalder. Does it not occur in Grimm's Rechtsalterthümer*?

[^1]: a Here a sign to declare the land defended - b is erected, this sign we call Wiffa - c Laura Marx - d See this volume, pp. 547-49. - e Ibid., pp. 553-54. - f J. Grimm, Deutsche Rechtsallerthiimer.





**[p. 555]**

The accursed business with the ill-fated Schiller Institute here,28

which Gumpert once pushed me into and then did nothing further, is finally reaching a crisis, and the matter will be decided by Wednesday. During these days I must— étant engagé"—make a great EFFORT; I shall therefore scarcely be left with time in this period to write the English article.509 From the middle of next week onwards I shall have peace, and will press ahead without pause. Regarding this business here, there is every prospect that I—and everything depends upon me—shall bring everything to a happy conclusion despite Borchardt and various other German cliques. Since I have been involved in the business for 4 years, and victory or defeat fall <on my head, I simply must.

Since you say nothing about carbuncles, I assume that every- thing is fading without further issue.

The most conscientious reader of your bookb here is Sam Moore; he has really worked his way thoroughly through over 600 pages and is grinding indefatigably on.

Best greetings.

Your

F. E.

So, Plon-Plon, according to The Times,'2 should inaugurate the Russian-Prussian-French alliance. This Bonaparte seems to get into a worse position every day. The stupid Prussians are continually making arrests and searching houses in the annexed lands.596 The proofs0 and the Dühring" will be dispatched today or tomorrow.

[^1]: First published abridged in Der Briefwech- Printed according to the original sei zwischen F. Engels und K. Marx, Bd. 4, „ , , . , , . ,• • r r- Stuttgart, 1913 and in full in MEGA, Published in Enghsh for the first Abt. Ill, Bd. 4, Berlin, 1931 time

[^2]: a since I have promised - b the first volume of Capital - c The Times, No. 26074, 17 March 1868,'Prussia (From our own Correspondent). Berlin, March 14'. - d of the first volume of Capital - e E. Dühring, Die Verkleinerer Carey's und die Krisis der Nationalökonomie.

[^3]: 20*





**[p. 342]**

MARX T O ENGELS

IN MANCHESTER

[London,] Museum, 3 23 MARCH 1868

IN HASTE

DEAR FRED,

I thought Laura would notify you about the £40. She claims, however, that I did not ask her to. Thus malentendu^ During the whole of last week I had many bleeding shingles; particularly obstinate and hard to obliterate the mess under my left armpit. But GENERALLY I feel much better, IN FACT like a RFco NVAi.Esc ENT and I am sure that the business is coming to an end.

At the same time, I am sending you the Schweitzer, which please return to me after use. A few lines from Meissner, in which he notifies me of his stupidity in informing Schweitzer that he should not continue with his EXTRACTS C until / have stated my views. Quelle bêtise!'1 I immediately attempted to redress things. Whatever secondary motives Schweitzer may have (e.g. to annoy old Hatzfeldt, etc.), one thing must be admitted. Although he makes a MISTAKE here and there, he has studied the stuff really hard, and knows where the centres of gravity lie. Such a 'base consciousness' is still preferable to the 'honest consciousness' of a Heinzen or the 'noble consciousness' of a Wilhelmchen. e Hegel forgot to list idleness as an essential element of 'noble-minded consciousness'.'

Your

K. M.

[^1]: More de diversiss in the next letter. Salut.

[^2]: First published abridged in Der Briefwech- Printed according to the original set zwischen F. Engels und K. Marx, Bd. 4, Stuttgart, 1913 and in full in MEGA, Published in English for the first Abt. Ill, Bd. 4, Berlin, 1931 t l m e

[^3]: 11 the British Museum Library - b a misunderstanding - c [J. B. Schweitzer,] 'Das Werk von Carl Marx', Der Social-Demokrat, Nos. 10-12, 14, 15 and 24; 22, 24, 26 and 31 January, 2 and 23 February 1868. - d What stupidity! - e Wilhelm Liebknecht - f See G. W. F. Hegel, Phänomenologie des Geistes, Abt. 'Die Bildung und ihr Reich der Wirklichkeit'. - % on various topics





**[p. 343]**

MARX T O ENGELS lnl

IN MANCHESTER

[London,] 25 March 1868

DEAR FRED,

I wanted to write to you yesterday from the Museum,'1 but I suddenly became so very unwell that I had to close the very interesting book I was reading. T h e r e was something like a black veil before my eyes. In addition, a frightful headache and chest constriction. So I crept home. T h e air and the light did me good, and at home I slept FOR SOME TIME. My state is such that I really should give u p working and thinking entirely for SOME TIME; but that would be hard for me, even if I had the means to loaf.

Ad vocemh Maurer: his books are extremely significant.' Not only the primitive age but also the entire later development of the free imperial cities, of the estate owners possessing immunity, of public authority, and of the struggle between the free peasantry and serfdom, get an entirely new character.

And we are all very much in the clutches of this JUDICIAL BLINDNESS: right in my own neighbourhood, on the Hunsriick? the old Germanic system survived until the last few years. I now rem- ember my father" talking about it to me from a lawyer's point of view. Another proof: just as the geologists, even the best like

[^1]: T h e history of mankind is like palaeontology. Owing to A CERTAIN JUDICIAL BLINDNESS, even the best minds fail to see, on principle, what lies in front of their noses. Later, when the time has come, we are surprised that there are traces everywhere of what we failed to see. T h e first reaction to the French Revolution and the Enlightenment bound u p with it was naturally to regard every- thing as mediaeval, romantic, and even people like Grimm are not free from this. T h e second reaction to it is to look beyond the Middle Ages into the primitive age of every people—and this corresponds to the socialist tendency, though these learned men have n o idea that they are connected with it. And they are then surprised to find what is newest in what is oldest, and even EGALITARIANS TO A DECREE which would have made Proudhon shudder.

[^2]: a the British Museum Library - b Regarding - c See this volume, pp. 547-49, and 554-55. - d mountains in the Rhine Province, Prussia - e Heinrich Marx





**[p. 558]**

Cuvier, have expounded certain faits" in a completely distorted way, so philologists of the forceh of a Grimm, mistranslated the simplest Latin sentences because they were under the influence of Moser, etc. (who, I remember, was enchanted that 'freedom' never existed among the Germans, but that 'Luft macht eigen"1). E.g. the famous passage in Tacitus: 'arva per annos mutant, et superest ager\d which means: they exchange the fields (arva) (by lot, hence also sortes' in all later Leges Barbarorum6™), and there remains over communal land (ager in distinction to arva as ager publicus1), Grimm and others translate: they till every year new fields, and there is still (untilled) land left over!g

In the same way the passage: 'colunt discreti ac diversi'h is taken to prove that the Germans from the earliest times cultivated on individual farms like Westphalian squires. But the very same passage continues: 'Vicos locant non in nostrum morem, connex- is et cohaerentibus aedificiis; suum quisque locum spatio circumdat',' and such Germanic primitive villages, in the form described, still exist here and there in Denmark. Obviously Scandinavia must become as important for German jurisprudence and economics as for German mythology. Only by starting from there will we be able once again to decipher our past. Incidentally, even Grimm, etc., found in Caesar's writings that the Germans always settled as kinship groups, and not as individuals: 'gentibus cognationibusque, qui uno coierunf'

But what would OLD Hegel say, were he to learn in the hereafter that the general [das Allgemeine] in German and Nordic means only the communal land, and that the particular, the special [das Sundre, Besondere] means only private property divided off from the communal land? Here are the logical categories coming damn well out of 'our intercourse' after all.

Very interesting is the book by Fraas (1847): Klima und Pflanzenwelt in der Zeit, eine Geschichte beider, namely as proving that climate and flora change in historical times. He is a Darwinist before Darwin, and admits even the species developing in historical

[^1]: a facts - b importance - c J. Moser, Patriotische Phantasien, Th. 3, S. 329. 'Luft macht eigen'—part of a medieval German saying, 'Stadtluft macht frei, Landluft macht eigen', literally: 'town air brings freedom, country air brings serfdom'. In medieval times a serf who moved to a town became free. - d Tacitus, Germania, 26. - e lot -

[^2]: f communal land - s Die Geschichtschreiber der deutschen Vorzeit, Bd. 1. S. 661. - h they till separately and scattered - ' ' They do not lay out villages in our fashion, with adjacent buildings one next to the other; each surrounds his dwelling with a free space'. - J 'according to gentes and kinships, which settled together' (Gaius Julius Caesar, Commentarii de bello Gallico, Lib. VI, 22).





**[p. 559]**

times. But he is at the same time agronomist. He claims that with cultivation—depending on its degree—the 'moisture' so beloved by the peasants gets lost (hence also the plants migrate from south to north), and finally steppe formation occurs. The first effect of cultivation is useful, but finally devastating through deforestation, etc. This man is both a thoroughly learned philologist (he has written books in Greek) and a chemist, agronomist, etc. The conclusion is that cultivation—when it proceeds in natural growth and is not consciously controlled (as a bourgeois he naturally does not reach this point)—leaves deserts behind it, Persia, Mesopotamia, etc., Greece. So once again an unconscious socialist tendency!

This Fraas is also interesting as a German case-study. First Dr. med., then inspector and teacher of chemistry and technology. At present head of Bavarian veterinary services, university professor, head of state agricultural experiments, etc. In his latest writings you see his advanced age, but he is still a dashing fellow. He has been around a lot in Greece, Asia Minor, Egypt! His history of agriculture is also important. He calls Fourier this 'pious and humanist socialist'.3 On the Albanians, etc. 'every sort of shameless lechery and rape'.b

We must keep a close watch on the recent and very latest in agriculture. The physical school is pitted against the chemical.

Nothing pleases me better than to see you here.

Your

K. M.

[^1]: Do not forget to send me back the letter of Kugelmann's manufacturer.0

[^2]: Apropos. Edgar'sd planter's hat has been found again, and this time you can take it to MRS Lizzy.e

[^3]: First published in Der Briefwechsel zwischen Printed according to the original F. Engels und K. Marx, Bd. 4, Stuttgart, JOIQ Published in English in full for the first time

[^4]: a C. Fraas, Geschichte der Landwirthschaft, S. 12. - b K. Fraas, Klima und Pflanzenwelt in der Zeit, S. XVI. - c Gustav Meyer (see this volume, p. 549) - d Edgar von Westphalen - e Lizzy Burns





**[p. 344]**

ENGELS TO MARX

IN LONDON

Manchester, 29 March 1868

Dear Moor,

I am afraid I shall not finish the article for the Fortnightly509 by Tuesday. The damned Schiller Institute business28 kept me breathless all the week, until I finally got things cleared up yesterday. If I had failed—and several stupidities on the part of my main adjutant put everything doubtful again—I would have been terribly discredited, made ludicrous for the whole of Manchester; TO BE DONE' IN BUSINESS, TO GET YOURSELF SOLD' is naturally here the worst thing that can happen to you. Now it is a great triumph and gives me the opportunity I wanted to withdraw with honour from official participation in the affair; anyway now enough people will be pushing themselves forward for it. I am doubly annoyed because this business has made it impossible for me to complete the article; but for this I would have had to rush it, and in this case the quality is very important.

Schorlemmer has made a very fine discovery: the law of the boiling points of the hydrocarbons of the series Cn H2n+2' i.e. for three of the four isomeric series; of the 4th, too few have yet been described."

I shall be arriving at your place on Wednesday evening at 9, possibly earlier.61 '

Where on earth can the enclosed article come from? And a letter of Bismarck's to cheer you up.

Best greetings.

Your

F. E.

I can find nothing about Wiffa. But in higid, hiwisc, hida you are confusing 2 if not 3 different words.b

Anglo-Saxon hiwisce, Old Saxon and Old High German hiwiski, Old Frisian hiskthe, Old Nordic hyski, New North Frisian hiske = familia.

[^1]: a C. Schorlemmer, 'Researches on the Hydrocarbons of the Series C n H2 n + 2', Proceedings of the Royal Society, No. 94, 1867 and No. 102, 1868. - b See this volume, pp. 553-54.





**[p. 561]**

Higid can be the participle of the Anglo-Saxon hegjan, this verb means TO FENCE IN.

Whether hide, which is still encountered locally today as a measure of land, is drawn from this, or is connected with hide cutis, Anglo-Saxon hyde, I cannot determine without an Anglo- Saxon dictionary.

First published abridged in Der Briefwech- sel zwischen F. Engels und K. Marx, Bd. 4, Stuttgart, 1913 and in full in MEGA, Abt. III, Bd. 4, Berlin, 1931

Printed according to the original

Published in English for the first time



APPENDICES



