---
Volume: 42
Document_Title: "310. Marx to Engels. 3 January "
Page_Range: "546-547"
---

# 310. Marx to Engels. 3 January 



**[p. 507]**

1868

310

MARX TO ENGELS419

IN MANCHESTER

[London,] 3 January 1868

DEAR FRED,

Happy New Year! I have only been 'sitting up' again for 3 days after lying all bent for so long. It was a nasty attack. You can judge this by the fact that for 3 weeks—no smoking! My head is still shaky. In a few days I hope to be back in action.

I am absolutely opposed to arsenic. Enclosed the Beobachter* (Lessner filched it for me from the Workers' Society150).

I have had no more letters from Siebel except the enclosed one to me.

Meissner can always have a try with the Barmer.b It can do no harm. When you send the cuttings to Meissner, you must refer to them only as something which has come to hand, without explaining to him 'our' activity.568 Also draw his attention to the latest things in the Zukunft^

I would like to know from Schorlemmer what is the latest and best book (German) on agricultural chemistry. Furthermore, what is the present state of the argument between the mineral-fertiliser people and the nitrogen-fertiliser people? (Since I last looked into the subject, all sorts of new things have appeared in Germany.) Does he know anything about the most recent Germans who have written against Liebig's soil-exhaustion theory? Does he know about the alluvion theory of the Munich agronomist Fraas ( Prof essor at Munich University) ?d For the chapter on ground

[^1]: a F. Engels, 'Review of Volume One of Capital for the Beobachter'. - b Banner Zeitung - c K. Marx, 'Plagiarism'. - d K. Fraas, Die Natur der Landwirthschaft.



