---
Volume: 42
Document_Title: "311. Engels to Jenny Marx. 3 January "
Page_Range: "547-549"
---

# 311. Engels to Jenny Marx. 3 January 

THE COMPLIMENTS OF THE SEASON TO MRS Burns, Moore, AND Schor- lemmer.

Your

Moor

[From Eleanor Marx, in English]

You bad boy, why haven't you answered my letters?—I suppose you and the hedgehog have been on the spree again.

Alberich,b

the grim dwarf

Happy New Year.

First published abridged in Der Briefwech- Printed according to the original sei zwischen F. Engels und K. Marx, Bd. 4, Stuttgart, 1913 and in full in MEGA, Published in English in full for the Abt. Ill, Bd. 4, Berlin, 1931 f l r s t t l m e

311

ENGELS TO JENNY MARX

Manchester, 3 January 1868

Dear Mrs Marx,

I must apologise for leaving your letter570 unanswered for so long. But the Christmas period is the only time in the whole year when, apart from business, I am made to feel that I stand with one foot in the bourgeoisie, and here in Manchester this entails a lot of eating and drinking and upset stomach, and the obligatory ill humour and waste of time. This is now fairly well over, and I am beginning to breathe freely again.

I am really sorry that I was unable to lay my hands on a larger crate for the moment, but I had to take just what was available in the WAREHOUSE—I shall make up for this soon.

[^1]: IN LONDON

[^2]: a probably two numbers of The Diplomatic Review - b Eleanor's jocular nickname. The words "the grim dwarf" are in German.



Enclosed the latest from Siebel. Do please return the letter, together with an earlier one sent to Moor, as soon as possible, I have to write to him on the 8th, the post goes only twice a month, and it is a great pleasure for the poor devil when-'he sees that people think of him. He does what he can honestly, despite his illness. The thing from the Barmer Zeitung is by him.671 Moor might let me know what he thinks about the business with the Kölnische Zeitung; if he thinks it better that / should write about this to Meissner, I can do so, and, at the same time, send him the cutting from Barmer.

The pater peccavi3 from Hoffstetten is very amusing.572 He naturally suspects Liebknecht everywhere and nobody else.b In any case, we have now put paid to the attempt of these gentry to stifle, and at the same time to exploit, the book.c

I shall be writing to Wilhelmchen in the next few days. I have heard nothing more from Kugelmann as to how things have gone with the Swabian articles.d

Meissner could already put together quite a nice advertisement from the articles that have appeared up to now,568 which would be quite in place now that the Christmas season is over. In particular, he might include those passages in which the economists are challenged to present their defence.

I hope that Moor has been freed from his carbuncle. But this is all no good, he must do something to get rid of the business once and for all. The 2nd volume418 can only gain, also with regard to the time needed for completion, if the fight against the carbuncles is waged with full force for a period. How would it be if he were to take arsenic again?

Best greetings to Moor and the whole family, and a hearty Happy New Year from

Yours

F. E.

[^1]: First published in Der Briefwechsel zwischen Printed according to the original F. Engels und K. Marx, Bd. 3, Stuttgart, . j Qja Published in English for the first time

[^2]: a 'Father, I have sinned' (Luke 15:21) - b See this volume, p. 529. - c the first volume of Capital - d See this volume, p. 499.



