---
Volume: 42
Document_Title: "312. Engels to Marx. 6 January "
Page_Range: "549-550"
---

# 312. Engels to Marx. 6 January 



**[p. 312]**

ENGELS TO MARX

IN LONDON

Manchester, 6 January 1868

Dear Moor,

If you do not want to take arsenic, then for goodness sake do something else, for things cannot go on like this. Have you consulted Allen or another doctor recently? Gumpert was not at home when I called the other day, but I shall take the first opportunity to speak to him.

You did not send the Beobachter or the 2 Urquharts either." However, today Kugelmann sent me the Beobachter and the Württemberg Staats-Anzeiger" (I am sending you the latter and when I get it back will send it to Meissner, if you do not send it to him direct). It's fine that these two PAPERS have risen to the bait. I shall now also prepare Kugelmann something for the Schwäbischer Merkur.560

Schorlemmer will put together the information for you from the latest annual reports. He was not acquainted with the book by Fraas.c

A natural scientist has appeared in Paris who calls him- self Chmoulevitch (Schmulsohn!). This even beats Ephraim Art- ful."

The first instalment of the Austrian official general staff report on the war of 66 first proves that Austria's military organisation was not fit for a simultaneous war with Prussia and Italy, this is followed by the naive passage: Under these circumstances it should really have been the task of state foreign policy to safeguard the state against such a war.e

The Prussian 2nd instalment' shows quite clearly that on the 28th, and even more on the evening of the 29th,g Benedek was in a position to attack the scattered columns of the Crown Princeh

with superior force and with almost absolute certainty to throw him

[^1]: a See this volume, p. 508. - b F. Engels' reviews of Volume One of Capital for the Beobachter and for the Staats-Anzeiger für Württemberg. - c K. Fraas, Die Natur der Landwirthschaft. - d Ferdinand Lassalle - e Österreichs Kämpfe im Jahre 1866, Bd. I, S. 60-61. - f Der Feldzug von 1866 in Deutschland (appeared in instalments) - s of June - h Frederick William



