---
Volume: 42
Document_Title: "313. Engels to Marx. 7 January "
Page_Range: "550-551"
---

# 313. Engels to Marx. 7 January 



**[p. 511]**

back into the mountains and take his guns. The jackass did not do it, and lost the campaign.

Salut.

Your

F. E.

First published abridged in Der Briefwech- Printed according to the original sei zwischen F. Engels und K. Marx, Bd. 4, Stuttgart, 1913 and in full in MEGA, Published in English for the first Abt. Ill, Bd. 4, Berlin, 1931 t l m e

313

ENGELS TO MARX419

IN LONDON

Manchester, 7 January 1868

Dear Moor,

Herewith returned the Dühring* and the Beobachter}* The former is highly amusing. The whole article is embarrassment and FUNK. You can see that the worthy vulgar economist is frappé au vif and can find nothing to say except that it will only be possible to judge the first volume when the 3rd has come out,418 that determination of value by labour time is not undisputed, and that there are people who have some modest doubts about the determination of the value of labour on the basis of its costs of production. You see that for this genusd you are by no means learned enough, for you have not confuted the great Macleode on the decisive point. At the same time, there is the fear in every line that he may be exposed to a treatment à la Roscher.' The fellow was happy when he had finished the thing, but I am sure he carried it to the post with a heavy heart.

Kugelmann and Wilhelmcheng I shall return tomorrow. If there is anything in the copied letter from Lieutenant-Colonel Seubert

[^1]: a E. Dühring, 'Marx, Das Kapital, Kritik der politischen Oekonomie, 1. Band, Hamburg 1867', Ergänzungsblätter zur Kenntniß der Gegenwart, Bd. 3, Hildburg- hausen, 1867, S. 182-86. - b F. Engels, 'Review of Volume One of Capital for the Beobachter'. - c cut to the quick - d sort - e H. D. Macleod, The Theory and Practice of Banking - ' Engels has in mind the critique of Roscher's views in Vol. One of Capital. - 8 Wilhelm Liebknecht



