---
Volume: 42
Document_Title: "314. Marx to Engels. 8 January"
Page_Range: "551-553"
---

# 314. Marx to Engels. 8 January

I could do something for Vienna too. Richter could perhaps be asked about the Internationale Revue, he is supposed to know the situation there.

Wilhelmchen's PAPER3 is just too lovely—everything ready except the security bond, and so it cannot be published. Incidentally, if Wilhelm should go to Vienna then the fuss about the Austrian agent would really get going.573

How are things with Beesly, Lewes & Co. and the Fortnightly Review?509

Best greetings to the LADIES and the Doctor amorosus.h

Your

F. E.

First published in Der Briefwechsel zwischen Printed according to the original F. Engels und K. Marx, Bd. 4, Stuttgart, 2913 Published in English in full for the first time

314

MARX TO ENGELS

[London,] 8 January 1868

I have ditto received the Staats-Anzeiger and the Beobachter* from Kugelmann. I am returning you your Staats-Anzeiger today. Also the COPY Kugelmann sent me of the letter from the coloneld

who arranged the whole thing.560 Württemberg is now sufficiently provided. In my opinion,—with special regard to sales—Austria is now the most important. Notabene, if you have the patience to write more prescriptions.6 Little Jenny, an expert in this respect, claims that you are developing great dramatic talent, or comic talent, in pursuing this action from 'different' viewpoints and in different disguises.

[^1]: IN MANCHESTER

[^2]: DEAR FRED,

[^3]: a Demokratisches Wochenblatt - b Paul Lafargue - c F. Engels' reviews of Volume One of Capital for the Staats-Anzeiger für Württemberg and for the Beobachter. - d Adolf Friedrich Seubert - e reviews of the first volume of Capital





**[p. 513]**

In the next few days—I am still a trifle limp, and do not feel much like writing—but as soon as I am quite on my feet I shall give Wilhelmchena a good hiding. This is because of his identification of my views with the specific views of Wilhelm.

Dühring's articleb (he is lecturer at Berlin University) is very decent, particularly since I handled his master 'Carey' so roughly. Dühring obviously misunderstood various things. But the oddest thing is that he ranks me with Stein, because I pursue the dialectic, and Stein assembles thoughtlessly the greatest trivialities in clumsy hair-splitting, with a few Hegelian category conversions^

Have you already received Borkheim's Perled? It appears that professional poesy is simply a mask for the driest sort of prosiness. Take, for example, the Freiligrath family. Kate travels (on her honeymoon) to Paris with Kröker, the young corn usurer. However, since this noble man has 'business' to do at the same time, he leaves her alone in one of the big Paris hotels for 2-3 days. Kate and the whole FAMILY find this quite in order. Kate even writes delightedly that in the hotel they call her 'mademoisel- le' (after she had spent the night together with Kröker there), and that all the waiters and even the porter give her friendly 'nods'. But even more: Kröker (after this business trip to the provinces) returns from Paris immediately to London with Kate, and the whole family is delighted that the 'HONEYMOON' is to be postponed for 6 months, since business 'comes first'. After all, for a poet the HONEYMOON is only a flower of speech, and can be 'celebrated' before or after the accouchement, early or late (the facts were related by the Freiligrath boyse in my house). Kate even seems to have read Clauren, for she described herself—from Paris—as a 'grass widow'.

The Yankees will show John Bull what's what. What do you think of the latest rodomontades of the Russians?

[^1]: Dwarf Alberichf was very delighted by your letter.131 He is just off to the gymnastics school, where he is doing great things.

[^2]: Salut. Y o u r

[^3]: K. M. First published abridged in Der Briefwech- Printed according to the original sei zwischen F. Engels und K. Marx, Bd. 4, Stuttgart, 1913 and in full in MEGA, Published in English for the first Abt. Ill, Bd. 4, Berlin, 1931 t i m e

[^4]: a Liebknecht - b E. Dühring, 'Marx, Das Kapital, Kritik der politischen Oekonomie, 1. Band, Hamburg 1867'. - c A reference to L. Stein's System der Staatswissenschaft and Die Verwaltungslehre. - d S. Borkheim, Ma perle devant le congrès de Genève. -

[^5]: e Wolfgang and Otto - f Eleanor Marx



