---
Volume: 42
Document_Title: "316. Engels to Marx. 10 January "
Page_Range: "556-558"
---

# 316. Engels to Marx. 10 January 



**[p. 517]**

Ad vocem Benedek*: can I have the journal for A FEW DAYS? YOU have now proven yourself twice a prophet, firstly a tactical prophet (in the Sevastopol affair), and secondly a strategic prophet (in the Prussian-Austrian affair).580 But the sense of sensible men cannot predict the stupidities of which man is capable.

Ad vocem carbuncles. Consulted doctors. Nothing new. Everything which the gentlemen have to say indicates that one has to have private means to live in accordance with their prescriptions, instead of being a poor devil like me, poverty-stricken as a church-mouse. When you see Gumpert, you can tell him that I feel (up to THIS MOMENT that I write) a stinging prickle in my body, that is my blood. It seems to me that for this year I shall not be quite over the affair.

M Y COMPLIMENTS TO M R S B u r n s . Salut.

Your

Moor

First published abridged in Der Briefwech- Printed according to the original sei zwischen F. Engels und K. Marx, Bd. 4, Stuttgart, 1913 and in full in MEGA, Published in English in full for the Abt. Ill, Bd. 4, Berlin, 1931 f l r s t t l m e

316

ENGELS TO MARX

[Manchester,] 10 January 1868 Dear Moor,

I wanted to write to you at length today, but the intervention of a Serb and a Wallachian, who held me up for hours, has frustrated my plans. Moreover, yesterday I had a visit from the ex-dictator Amand Goegg, who is travelling for the ridiculous Peace League461 and who ruined my evening. Luckily, Schorlem- mer also happened by, and got the surprise of his life with this fossil of Federal Republic; he had not believed such a thing possible. The stupid oaf has become ten times more stupid through the unthinking repetition of the same phrases, and has lost all points of contact with the world of common sense (not to

[^1]: IN LONDON

[^2]: " Österreichs Kämpfe im Jahre 1866, Bd. 1 (see this volume, pp. 510-11).





**[p. 518]**

mention actual thinking). Apart from Switzerland and the Canton of Baden, there is still nothing else in the world for people of this sort. For all that, he soon convinced himself of the truth of your first reply to his application for support: that the further apart we lived and the less we had to do with one another, the better we would get on. He admitted that in the Vogt affair63 Blind had behaved like a coward, but said he was after all a worthy fellow, and even threatened to reconcile you and Blind! Vogt—no politician, but a worthy fellow, honest to the backbone, who simply scribbled away in the daytime without considering the content—if we 2 spent an hour together then we would be like brothers; he admitted him to be a Bonapartist, but not a paid one. To which I replied that all Bonapartists were paid, there were no unpaid ones, and if he could show me an unpaid one, then I would accept the possibility that Vogt was not paid; otherwise I would not. This astonished him, but finally he discovered one—Ludwig Bamberger] Incidentally, he said that Vogt had continually had a very hard time, his wife was a peasant girl from the Bernese Oberland, whom he had married out of virtue after he had made her a baby. Vogt, the artful dodger, appears to have pulled the wool well over this jackass's eyes. But when Schorlemmer and I explained to him that Vogt had not produced anything as a natural scientist either, you should have seen his rage: Had he not popularised? Was not that worth while?

I shall write something for Vienna as soon as it is in any way possible. Additionally for the Fortnightly,509 but I would need to know first whether it could be made into a longer article, or should only be a short notice like those at the back of the Fortnightly. Beesly should be sounded out about this3; a short notice would be almost useless and Beesly himself would learn nothing about the bookb from it.

I shall call Wilhelmchenc to account in a few days time about fulfilling the promises he made me: we shall make this little fellow get a move on. I have Richter's address.

F. E.

[^1]: Herewith returned Liebknecht, Kugelmann and Siebel. Best greetings. v

[^2]: First published abridged in Der Briefwech- sel zwischen F. Engels und K. Marx, Bd. 4, Stuttgart, 1913 and in full in MEGA, Abt. III, Bd. 4, Berlin, 1931

[^3]: Printed according to the original

[^4]: Published in English for the first time

[^5]: a See this volume, p. 516. - b the first volume of Capital - c Wilhelm Liebknecht



