---
Volume: 42
Document_Title: "317. Marx to Engels. 11 January "
Page_Range: "558-560"
---

# 317. Marx to Engels. 11 January 



**[p. 317]**

MARX TO ENGELS101

IN MANCHESTER

[London,] 11 January 1868

DEAR FRED,

The Top' 3 was bustling around for a long time in London. He also visited Borkheim, where he produced just the same phrases as he did to you, only with better success, for he knew how to tickle the vanity of our Borkheim. But after he had squeezed out of the latter money for 10 shares, ditto assimilated various of his wines, he was not seen there again. For the understanding of his further activity in London, the following preliminary report. Cremer, as you know, was removed a long time since from his post as SECRETARY of the INTERNATIONAL COUNCIL, and in his anger at this he long ago resigned as MEMBER OF THE COUNCIL, and was not re-elected as such by the last congress either.b Mr Odger was re-elected. On my proposal, however, the post of president (the annual one) was abolished, and replaced by a CHAIRMAN, to be elected at each sitting.489 Odger, annoyed by this, stays away from us on principle. WELL! Mr 'Fop' insinuates himself via Le Lubez to Odger (who introduced him to the LONDON TRADES COUNCIL 18) and to Cremer. They appointed a London committee,0 Beales as PRESIDENT, etc. In short, an affair against the INTERNATIONAL WORKING MENS ASSOCIATION. (At the founding MEETING Fop also introduced the noble Blind.) The fellows had the impudence to invite me to their 2nd MEETING LAST WEEK. Eccarius (in a very badly written article in the Bee-Hive last Saturday) denounced Fop and his consorts.d

I am writing to you naked and with alcohol compresses. I went out again for the first time the day before yesterday, to the British Museum, of course, because I cannot write yet. Then yesterday there was a new outbreak under my left breast. The alcohol treatment, which Nélaton used in Paris for even the largest carbuncles, is, from my personal experience, by far the speediest and pleasantest for the patient (apart from cutting or lancing, depending on the case). The misfortune is only the constant

[^1]: a Amand Goegg. In German 'Geek' means a 'dandy' or 'fop'. - b Lausanne Congress of the International - c presumably the committee of the London branch of the League of Peace and Freedom - d J. G. Eccarius, 'The Geneva Peace Congress', The Bee-Hive Newspaper, No. 325, 4 January 1868.





**[p. 520]**

activity, necessitated by the rapid evaporation of the alcohol.

At the museum, where I did nothing but leaf through catalogues, I also noted that Dühring is a great philosopher. For he has written a Natürliche Dialektik against Hegel's 'un-natural' one. Hinc Mae lacrimae." The gentlemen in Germany (with the exception of theological reactionaries) believe Hegel's dialectic to be a 'dead dog'.581 Feuerbach has much on his conscience in this respect.

The French government has started a prosecution against the Paris Committee of the INTERNATIONAL WORKINGMENS ASSOCIATION (as société illiciteb). This is very agreeable for me, since it means that the jackasses have been hindered and interrupted in their discussion of the programme they had already drawn up for the congress of 1868.582 Dupont has apparently written something incautious about the Fenians579 to his Paris correspondents that Bonaparte, who is now creeping dolefully up the arse of the British government, forwarded to Downing Street.'

It is characteristic that the disclosures of Prokesch-Osten, Gentz and Count Münster0 are being printed one after the other—with the direct or indirect collaboration of the Austrian government. Urquhart, with his ignorance now becoming permanent, knows only the first one. It is also very indicative of his 'totality', that he does not know Moltke's Turkish War of 1828, etc.,e which would have provided him with excellent material. Incidentally, at the time when I was in Berlin (at Lassalle's)583 Moltke was regarded as a declared Russophobe, inside the Royal Prussian frontiers, naturally.

If you should be writing to Borkheim some time, request him to let you have a look at the two small Russian pamphlets about which I had told you. I would particularly like you to look at the one about the emancipation of the serfs, so that you can let me know the quintessence.

From the enclosed Courrier français you will see that the French government is entering into a direct polemic with General Cluseret.

If you could send little Tussy cotton-yarn ball on the 16th of

[^1]: a Hence these tears! (Terence, Andria, Act I, Scene 1). - b illegal society (see this volume, p. 517) - c seat of the British Cabinet - d A. Prokesch-Osten, Geschichte des Abfalls der Griechen vom Türkischen Reiche im Jahre 1821 und der Gründung des Hellenischen Königreiches; Fr. von Gentz, Aus dem Nachlasse Friedrichs von Gentz; G. H. Münster, Politische Skizzen über die Lage Europas vom Wiener Congress bis zur Gegenwart (1815-1867). - e H. K. B. Moltke, Der russisch-türkische Feldzug in der europäischen Türkei 1828 und 1829.



