---
Volume: 42
Document_Title: "318. Marx to Ludwig Kugelmann. 11 January "
Page_Range: "560-562"
---

# 318. Marx to Ludwig Kugelmann. 11 January 



**[p. 521]**

this month I should be very pleased. It is her birthday and THAT LITTLE HUMBUG loves all Chinese formalities.

It gives me much pleasure that the English government is persecuting The Irishman. This paper is IN REALITY not Fenian, but simply wants REPEAL.584 What blockheads these John Bulls are!

MY COMPLIMENTS TO MRS Lizzy.

Salut. Your

Moor

Enclosed a portion of 'new philology' from the Hermann.

First published abridged in Der Briefwech- Printed according to the original sei zwischen F. Engels und K. Marx, Bd. 4, Stuttgart, 1913 and in full in MEGA, Published in English in full for the Abt. Ill, Bd. 4, Berlin, 1931 f l r s t t l m e

318

MARX T O LUDWIG KUGELMANN 6 5

IN HANOVER

London, 11 January 1868

Dear Kugelmann,

With all respect for your medical authority, you have too low an opinion of the English, German and French doctors whom I have in turn consulted and continue to consult here, if you think they cannot distinguish anthrax (carbuncles) from FURUNCLES, particularly here in England, the land of carbuncles, which is essentially a

[^1]: D'abord3 my best HAPPY NEW YEARS to your good wife, Fränzchen, b

[^2]: and you yourself. And then MY BEST THANKS for the Jupiter, 5 8 5 and for the activity and interest you display in making propaganda and leading the German press by the nose.c As our friend Weerth, who unfortunately died too early, used to sing:

[^3]: The finest thing in all the world Is making your enemies bellow, And cracking really awful jokes About each pompous fellow.d

[^4]: a First of all - b Gertruda and Franziska Kugelmann - c A reference to Kugel- mann's assistance in having Engels' reviews of Volume One of Capital published in the bourgeois press. - d G. Weerth, 'Es gibt nichts Schönres auf der Welt'.

[^5]: 19-1196



proletarian illness! And if the doctors made no distinctions, the patient like myself who knows both forms of monster could do so, for the subjective impression they make is very different, though as far as I know no doctor has yet managed to distinguish exactly between the two things theoretically. I have only been persecuted by this business for a few years. Earlier quite unknown to me. At the moment of writing to you, I am not yet quite restored, and not yet fit for work again. Once again many weeks lost, and not even pour

le roi de Prusse.11

The criticism of Mr Dühringb shows mainly—fear! I would be grateful if you could get Duhring's book Gegen die Verkleinerer

Carey's for me, ditto von Thünen's Der isolirte Staat mit Bezug auf die Landwirtschaft (or something like that) (together with a note of the prices). Orders like this take too long from here.

Finally, I must ask you to send me ABOUT 12 COPIES of my photogram (only that FULLFACED). ABOUT one dozen friends are pestering me for them.

Enclosed for Mrs Kugelmann the photograms of my eldest daughter Jenny and of Eleanor, who sends her best greetings to Fränzchen.

Ad vocemc Liebknecht: let him play le petit grand hommed just A LITTLE WHILE. Tout s'arrangera pour le mieux dans le meilleur des mondes possibles.""

I still have all sorts of personal anecdota to relate. But I shall save them for next time when the writing position no longer bothers me.

Salut. Yours

K. Marx

One of my friends here,' who busies himself a lot with phrenology, stated yesterday about the photogram of your wife: very witty! So you see that phrenology is not the baseless art that Hegel thought it.g

[^1]: First published abridged in Die Neue Zeit, Printed according to the original Bd. 2, No. 4, Stuttgart, 1901-1902 and in full in Pisma Marksa k Kugelmanu (Letters of Marx to Kugelmann), Moscow- Leningrad, 1928

[^2]: a literally: for the King of Prussia; figuratively: all for nothing. - b E. Dühring, 'Marx, Das Kapital, Kritik der politischen Oekonomie, 1. Band, Hamburg 1867'. - c With regard to - d would-be great man - e Everything will be for the best in the best of all possible worlds (F. M. A. Voltaire, Candide). - f presumably Karl Schapper - s G. W. F. Hegel, Werke, Bd. II, Phänomenologie des Geistes, 2. Aufl., Bd. 2, Berlin, 1841, S. 251-71.



