---
Volume: 42
Document_Title: "319. Engels to Marx. 16 January "
Page_Range: "562-564"
---

# 319. Engels to Marx. 16 January 



**[p. 319]**

ENGELS T O MARX

IN LONDON

Manchester, 16 January 1868

Dear Moor,

I have just discovered that I have left all your letters at home in another coat-pocket (including the last letter from your chief HONOURABLE SECRETARY a for which I express special thanks) and so I shall have to reply from memory.

You received the Courriers français and also the Wiener Tagbtatt yesterday.

I am sending you the Prussian report, b with special explanations. Or rather it is only necessary to look at the sketch contained therein on the positions on the evening of June 28th in order to see that Benedek had brought together 6 corps (not counting cavalry) in an area of 2 square miles, faced by the Crown Prince c

with only the 5th Corps and 1 brigade of the 6th Corps. If, on the 29th, Benedek had attacked Steinmetz (5th Corps), the latter would have been thrown back across the mountains on to the 6th Corps, and on the 30th Benedek would have been able to attack the Guards and the 1st Corps at his leisure with at least 4 corps and throw them back, après quoid the cautious Frederick Charles would have taken great care not to act unrestrainedly. Frederick Charles had 5 corps and would have been faced by at least 6; the order for them to retreat was, however, certain as soon as the 3 individual columns of the Crown Prince had been beaten, and thereby the campaign would have acquired a completely different character. That the Austrians would finally have been beaten, if the Prussians had shown some care, is clear from a comparison of the figures. But the Prussian rabble would have been forced to cast aside their lousy system, and it would not have been the reorganisation and Bismarck who triumphed, but the people.

[^1]: Cluseret (who, of course, played the Fenian 2 5 7 in London as well) is even wilder than the Germans with his militia plan. T h e American war 1 1—with militia on both sides—proves nothing except that the militia system demands enormous sacrifices of

[^2]: a Laura Marx (see this volume, p. 583) - b Der Feldzug von 1866 in Deutschland - c Frederick William - d after which

[^3]: 19»



With regard to the Viennese papers, I am in some embarrass- ment3; I do, of course, see the Neue Freie Presse from time to time, but the whole area is rather too alien for me. What are your ideas on the subject, also with regard to the Fortnightly509? The business is worth the trouble of thorough consideration.

I hope you are sitting again, and have had no further volcanic outbreaks. Gumpert laughs at your antipathy to arsenic, says that it is just the thing to make you sprightly and is convinced there is no better remedy for you. But if you are flatly opposed to it, then you should take acids, and that constantly, so once again he encloses a prescription for the aqua regia prescribed before, and this you really will take.

Best wishes to your wife and the girls, ditto Lafargue.

Your

F. E.

[^1]: a See this volume, pp. 512, 515.



