---
Volume: 42
Document_Title: "320. Engels to Marx. 23 January "
Page_Range: "564-566"
---

# 320. Engels to Marx. 23 January 



**[p. 525]**

Alberich, the strong dwarf,a I hereby greet most humbly on his birthday and empty a glass of beer to his health at this instant. They forgot about the COTTON at the factory so I shall only be able to send it tomorrow.

First published in Der Briefwechsel zwischen Printed according to the original F. Engels und K. Marx, Bd. 4, Stuttgart, ima Published in English for the first time

320

ENGELS TO MARX

IN LONDON

Manchester, 23 January 1868

Dear Moor,

From the enclosed scrawl you can see what Wilhelmchen has not done.086 I shall give him a fitting wigging in the next few days. A JOLLY IDEA, we should 'utilise' the position he has created for himself locally in Saxony, in fact stand up for him BODILY. His ragb arrived for me today, I have not yet been able to look at it.

I hope you are finally finished with that obstinate carbuncle. But you will at last realise, won't you, that simply letting this matter slide can no longer be tolerated, and that at the very least you must have daily vigorous exercise in the fresh air, and regular 'renunciation' of night work (as soon as the first is possible), in order that you should become at all capable of work again. Like this, the second volume will never eventuate.41"

Enclosed are the shares for Strohn/ I really don't know what to do about the Vienna articles. Apart from the Neue Freie Presse and Wiener Tagblatt, I do not know by name any paper in which Richter has a hand; owing to almost complete ignorance of the audience I have no idea where to begin, and this is the most important point. Laura writes that to instruct people is ALL VERY WELL, but to pick out the right point is the real

[^1]: a Eleanor Marx (see this volume, pp. 520-21) - b Demokratisches Wochenblatt - c See this volume, pp. 515-16.





**[p. 526]**

difficulty. I am just going through the whole book" once again to make this clear to myself, and your opinion would be welcome.

It is also a good presumption on the part of Wilhelmchen to suggest that I should explain to him and his readers once and for all, on one page of his rag, and from this book, what the difference really is between Marx and Lassalle. This presumption has suggested to me that it might be a good idea to write a popular little pamphlet Marx and Lassalle of about 6 sheets for the workers; in this space it could be managed and the positive things required for the workers could be developed. It would have to be sold dirt cheap, and the Lassalleans would immediately be forced to take up a position. But for this, time is needed.587

You really cannot ask me to drudge my way through Borkheim's Russian pamphletsb—at least not at the moment. I have a lot to do in the office and come home late, so that I cannot get down to anything before 8 o'clock and, moreover, I have to live a life of great regularity, since for some time now I have been sleeping badly and as a result am often a wreck in the morning, something which has never happened in my life before. Besides, there are sometimes unavoidable hindrances, and the absolute necessity of having physical exercise so as to get my sleep back to normal. Each Russian pamphlet would consume 8-14 days in view of my necessity of working myself in again, and the poor quality of the dictionaries. Ne vaut pas la paine.c

About the Fortnightly509 next time. I am still ruminating about this point. Monetary matters—important as they may be for England—I shall probably only be able to touch upon fleetingly in the first article; otherwise this subject would take up the whole article. If a second could be placed, then it would still be suitable. What do you think?

Best wishes to your wife and the girls as well as Lafargue.

Your

F. E.

[^1]: First published abridged in Der Briefwech- sel zwischen F. Engels und K. Marx, Bd. 4, Stuttgart, 1913 and in full in MEGA, Abt. III, Bd. 4, Berlin, 1931

[^2]: Printed according to the original

[^3]: Published in English for the first time

[^4]: a the first volume of Capital - b See this volume, p. 520. - c It is not worth the trouble.



