---
Volume: 42
Document_Title: "321. Marx to Engels. 25 January "
Page_Range: "566-567"
---

# 321. Marx to Engels. 25 January 



**[p. 321]**

MARX TO ENGELS26

IN MANCHESTER

[London,] 25 January 1868

DEAR FRED,

I went out again yesterday for the first time, and the scar will be healed in 1-2 days. Naturally I am still weak after this bad attack.

I hope that your indisposition is only the momentary outcome of the week on the spree. In any case, you must not neglect your health for my sake or for ANY BODY OR THING ELSE.

In last week's Saturday Review there is a note about my book.'1 I have not seen it yet, and also do not know who wrote it. Borkheim has communicated the FACT to me.

As regards Liebknecht, one should no longer butter him up. This young man very much likes to play the 'protector', as he already showed once earlier when he was in London. This is also shown by his latest letter to you.586 He feels very important, and au cas de besoin nous ferons notre petit bonhomme de chemin sans lui et malgré lui.b What magnanimity that he has reprinted the preface, which nearly all the papers printed months ago!456 And in addition he has actually had 2 COPIES of my book sent to Contzen and the editor of the Volks-Zeitungl To SHOW HIM THE COLD SHOULDER is best. Apart from this, I do not believe that he has yet read 15 pages of the book. He had not read Herr Vogt a whole year after it had appeared, and that was not very heavy reading. His motto is: teach but not learn.

As far as the 'Lassalleans' are concerned, I only deal with the TRADE UNIONS, COOPERATIVE SOCIETIES, etc. in Volume II.C I think therefore that I shall at present only take the initiative with regard to 'Lassalle' if a direct occasion should offer itself.

Regarding the way to deal with the Viennese, I shall write to you shortly, when my head is ALL RIGHT again.

Please return the enclosed letters from Kugelmann and Kert- bény. I have not yet replied. Coppel the Great hasn't turned up

[^1]: a A review of Volume One of Capital in The Saturday Review of Politics, Literature, Science and Art, 18 January 1868. - b if needs be we shall do our business without him and despite him - c of Capital



