---
Volume: 42
Document_Title: "322. Marx to Ludwig Kugelmann. 30 January "
Page_Range: "567-570"
---

# 322. Marx to Ludwig Kugelmann. 30 January 

It would be beneficial in my present state if you could let me have a shipment of your more FULLFLAVOURED claret (also SOME HOCK or Moselle).

Card, the Pole, has written from Geneva and offered himself as French translator, he seems to have a book-seller in Geneva. Through my wife I have had this letter sent to Schily, so that he can use it in Paris to further the affair.589 Card is absolutely unsuitable, except to give Mosesa a fright.

For 2-3 weeks I shall do absolutely no work (i.e. writing), at the most read; and as soon as the wound is completely healed (in the meantime, I THINK ONLY FOR ONE OR TWO DAYS, the bad part rubs and itches when I walk) then I shall do a lot of walking. It would be dreadful if a 3rd monster were to erupt.

And now, salut, MY DEAR BOY.

Your

K. Marx

First published abridged in Der Briefwech- Printed according to the original sei zwischen F. Engels und K. Marx, Bd. 4, Stuttgart, 1913 and in full in MEGA, Published in English in full for the Abt. HI, Bd. 4, Berlin, 1931 f l r s t t , m e

322

London, 30 January 1868

Dear Kugelmann,

Cut, lanced, etc., in short treated in every respect secundum legem artis.b Despite this, the business continues to break out again, so that I have been lying quite fallow for 8 weeks, with the exception of two or three days. Last Saturday I went out again for the first time; Monday a relapse. I hope that it will come to an end this week, but who can give me a guarantee against new eruptions? It is extremely vexatious. In addition, my head is very affected by the business. My friend Dr Gumpert in Manchester is urging the use of arsenic. What do you think about this?

[^1]: MARX TO LUDWIG KUGELMANN R5

[^2]: IN HANOVER

[^3]: a Moses Hess - b according to all the rules of the art





**[p. 529]**

Your Coppel hasn't turned up yet.388

Kertbény is a German-Hungarian, whose real name, entre nous* is Benkert. The German-Hungarians love to Magyarise their names. I don't know him personally. As he had a row with Vogt ABOUT I860, I approached him for some information but received nothing of any use. (My Hungarian material comes partly from Szemere, partly from my personal experiences in London.) Later- he turned to me in connection with a row he was having with Kossuth. Much as I have enquired around, I have learned nothing politically suspicious about him. He appears to be a scribbling BUSYBODY. His heresies quant ah Bonaparte may be found amongst many otherwise honest eastern barbarians. In any case, WATCH HIM. And I would consider it more diplomatic not to display any mistrust of him (for which reason I am enclosing, through you, the biographical note which he requested). 'Meanwhile,' as soon as the writing position no longer troubles me, I shall 'order' information about him elsewhere.

You guessed rightly about 'Plagiarism'. I intentionally wrote rudely and clumsily in order to make Hofstetten suspect Lieb- knecht, and to conceal the source."72 This entre nous.

You probably know that Engels and Siebel have also had newspaper articles published about my book in the Barmer Zeitung,c Elberfelder Zeitung? Frankfurter Börsenzeitung529 and—to the distress of Heinrich Bürgers—in the Düsseldorfer Zeitung." Siebel was the man in Barmen to whom I wished to introduce you. He is, however, now in Madeira for his health.

A week ago on Saturday The Saturday Review1—the 'BLOOD AND CULTURE' PAPER—included a note about my book in a review of recent German books. I came out of it relatively well, as you will see from the following passage:

' Ouff!

My best greetings to your dear wife and Fränzchen.8 You will be receiving other photograms from here, for we have now discov-

[^1]: * 'The author's views may be as pernicious as we conceive them to be, but there can be no question as to the plausibility of his logic, the vigour of his rhetoric, and the charm with which he invests the driest problems of political economy.'*589

[^2]: a between ourselves - b regarding - c [C. Siebel,] 'Carl Marx: Das Kapital. Kritik der politischen Oekonomie', Barmer Zeitung, No. 291, 6 December 1867. - d F. Engels, 'Review of Volume One of Capital for the Elberfelder Zeitung'. - e F. Engels, 'Review of Volume One of Capital for the Düsseldorfer Zeitung'. - f The Saturday Review of Politics, Literature, Science and Art, 18 January 1868. - s Gertruda and Franziska Kugelmann



ered that the WATERCOLOURS applied which look good on the first day, run into PATCHES immediately afterwards.

Write to me as often as time permits. During my indisposition, and many occasions for vexation, letters from friends are welcome.

Salut

Yours

K. M.

[Autobiographical Notes]590

Karl Marx, Ph. D., born Trier, 5 May 1818.

1842-43, first contributor, then rédacteur en chef of the Rheinische Zeitung (Cologne). During his editorship the govern- ment subjected the paper to double censorship; after censorship by the proper censor, the superior censor of the Regierungspräsi- dent*' Finally suppressed on cabinet orders. Marx leaves Germany, moves to Paris.

1844 publishes in Paris, with A. Ruge, the Deutsch-Französische Jahrbücher, banned in Germany.

Further Die heilige Familie, Kritik der kritischen Kritik, gegen Bruno Bauer und Konsorten. (Frankfurt a/M. Literarische Anstalt.)

January 1845,c expelled from France by Guizot at the instigation of the Prussian Government, Marx proceeds to Brussels, forms the German Workers' Society in Brussels in 1847,d gives lectures on political economy there,591 contributor to the French Réforme (Paris), etc.

1847: Misère de la Philosophie. Réponse à la Philosophie de la Misère de M. Proudhon.

Ditto: Discours sur le libre échange and other pamphlets.

1848, with F. Engels: Manifest der Kommunistischen Partei. Ar- rested and expelled from Belgium, invited back to France on the written invitation of the provisional government. Leaves France April 1848, founds in Cologne:

Neue Rheinische Zeitung (June 1848-May 1849). Marx expelled from Prussia, after the government had vainly prosecuted him through legal channels. Twice acquitted at assizes (once press trial, the other time for incitement to rebellion). Marx's defence speeches published in Zwei politische Prozesse, Cologne.

1849. Final, red issue of the Neue Rheinische Zeitung.

[^1]: a editor-in-chief - b District President - c Inaccuracy in the original: December 1844. - d Ditto: 1846



