---
Volume: 42
Document_Title: "323. Marx to Engels. 1 February "
Page_Range: "570-571"
---

# 323. Marx to Engels. 1 February 



**[p. 531]**

1850 published: Neue Rheinische Zeitung. Politisch-ökonomische Revue (Hamburg).

1851-52: contributor to the London Chartist paper: The People's Paper, Ernest Jones': Notes to the People, etc.

1852: Der 18. Brumaire des Louis Bonaparte, New York. Enthüllungen über den Kommunistenprozess zu Köln, Basel Since this edition was confiscated on the German frontier, new edition in Boston, 1853.

1853-54: Flysheets against Lord Palmerston.592

1859: Zur Kritik der Politischen Oekonomie, Berlin. 1860: Herr Vogt. 1851-1862b: regular contributor to the English-language Tribune (New York).c Contributions to Putnam's Review (New York)593 and the new Cyclopaedia Americana (New York).

1861: after the amnesty visited Berlin; Prussian Government refused his renaturalisation.583

1864à: published by order of the Central Council of the International Working Men's Association Address to the Working Class of Europe."

1867: Das Kapital. Kritik der politischen Ökonomie. Vol. I, Hamburg.

323

MARX TO ENGELS

[London,] 1 February 1868 Dear FRED,

I hope that you are not also indisposed, since you have not written to me this week, and not returned the letters of Kugelmann and Kertbény (I need them to reply).588 Last Tuesday I went out to the Museum' and for a stroll. On Wednesday a new

[^1]: First published in Pisma Marksa k Kugel- Printed according to the original manu (Letters of Marx to Kugelmann), Moscow-Leningrad, 1928

[^2]: IN MANCHESTER

[^3]: a Ditto: September - b Ditto: 1851-1860. - c New-York Daily Tribune - d Inaccuracy in the original: 1865. - e K. Marx, 'Inaugural Address of the Working Men's International Association'. - f the British Museum Library



