---
Volume: 42
Document_Title: "325. Marx to Engels. 4 February "
Page_Range: "574-576"
---

# 325. Marx to Engels. 4 February 



**[p. 535]**

Although I made fun of the cuckolded jackass for a whole half hour over the coronation, and fat Knowles was laughing aloud, the oaf noticed nothing. But now, after the priestly doctor had kept the husband apart from his sick wife for years, it suddenly emerges that the sick wife is pregnant and expects her accouche- ment about April. Remarkably, the high priest must have been guilty of some carelessness or foolishness sufficiently for the cuckolded jackass to suddenly see the light; he leaves his house here and moves to Berlin, sells his HUNTERS although he will still be here for the whole hunting season, resigns his club membership, and is so hostile to the high priest that when the latter manages to launch a collection for the East Prussians here and sends £700 to the Zukunft, the cuckolded jackass throws himself into the arms of the Prussian consul and together with him collects abour £350 for the official committee. Now there is a lot of talk about this amongst the philistines, and although the story above is only whispered about in the dark, the position of the high priest has been badly shattered, and many people dare to speak of him with disrespect. He no longer looks so jovial and elegant. I wonder how things will proceed. (Nota bene. The names in this story are be- tween you and me.) Best greetings to the ladies and Lafargue.

Your

F. E.

325

MARX TO ENGELS

[London,] 4 February 1868

Many thanks for the 'medicine BOTTLES'. I still have two not quite withered buds under my left arm and on my left thigh. However, they do not bother me when walking. I feel GENERALLY better as well.

[^1]: First published abridged in Der Briefwech- Printed according to the original sei zwischen F. Engels und K. i Stuttgart, 1913 and in full Abt. III, Bd. 4, Berlin, 1931

[^2]: sei zwischen F. Engels und K. Marx, Bd. 4, _ , , . „ ,. , r , r.

[^3]: e . . , „ , , ° j • c H • »ri;-* Published in English tor the first Stuttgart, 1913 and in full in MEGA, 8 time

[^4]: IN MANCHESTER

[^5]: DEAR FRED,





**[p. 536]**

Enclosures from Vienna from Fox (please send them back to me). You see what effect your essay in the Börsenzeitungb is having.529 It is perhaps best to leave Vienna to its own devices. It is enough that attention has been drawn there to my book.c The whole business is very immature. When you consider how agriculture still predominates in the Empire en gros, then it is comical to watch these somersaults. What prevails in Vienna is finance, and not large industry. However, as a ferment the hubbub cannot hurt.

Kugelmann has sent me Dühring's Verkleinerer Carey's. I was right that he only noticed me in order to annoy the others.d What is very conspicuous is the very coarse way in which this affected Berliner handles Mill, Roscher, etc., while he treats me with timid care. According to him, apart from Carey, List is the greatest genius of the 19th century. In another pamphlet Kapital und

Arbeit which I saw today at the Museum,* he 'abuses' Lassalle. I shall send you his book to look at one of these days.

Perhaps there will be no war this year. The fellows are all anxious about domestic conditions. However, the Russians will not neglect to provide causes of friction. They will lie fallow if they do not manage to bring Germany and France to blows.

Coppel was here on Sunday and will come again on Wednes- day. He is here to put the financial affairs of the King of Hanoverf in order. He is a merry fellow. Kugelmann has forced this cousin of the Rothschilds to study my book.

Moro

I can only send the newspaper cuttings tomorrow because the BOXES for BOOK-POST were closed.

[^1]: There is little new for me in Schorlemmer's letterg. But still MY

[^2]: THANKS.

[^3]: Salut. Y o u r

[^4]: First published in Der Briefwechsel zwischen Printed according to the original F. Engels und K. Marx, Bd. 4, Stuttgart, JQJ3 Published in English for the first time

[^5]: a See this volume, pp. 526 and 533. - b Frankfurter Zeitung und Handelsblatt - c the first volume of Capital - d E. Dühring, 'Marx, Das Kapital, Kritik der politischen Oekonomie, 1. Band, Hamburg 1867' (see this volume, p. 514). - e the British Museum Library - f George V - s See this volume, pp. 507-08 and 510.



