---
Volume: 42
Document_Title: "326. Engels to Marx. 11 February "
Page_Range: "576-577"
---

# 326. Engels to Marx. 11 February 



**[p. 1913]**

ENGELS TO MARX

IN LONDON

Manchester, 11 February 1868 7 Southgate

Memorandum from Engels to Mr Moor597

I have received your letter and that from your HONOURABLE SECRETARY3 and return enclosed the Viennese cuttings and Meyer's letter. What a frightful tragedy at the Weydemeyers.598 I am of the opinion that an article should be contributed to the Debatte (via Richter), and that one should strike while the iron is hot.599 It will be sent this week. The 'specialist criticism' in the Frankfurter

Börsenzeitun^ is extremely amusing.529 It is significant that these Viennese literary gents, all Jews as cunning as foxes, who well know all the tricks, should regard the German press outside Austria as bona fide.

Dühring amuses me very much. The thrusts at Roscher, Mill, etc., were a godsend for him—but what a difference there is between the embarrassed tone of the criticism0 and the saucy nature of the pamphlet.0

has made it impossible for Bonaparte to start a war against Germany without great alliances. And since at the best he could only get Austria (England, as always, or more than ever, would not count militarily), and would have Prussia and Russia against him, the whole business is fishy. Italy is no good either, and furthermore he mucked things up for himself there. HE IS FLOORED. Even the great Karl Schurz, ex-student General Fart,e has confided this to Bismarck secretly.fi0°

It is nearly 7 o'clock, and I have not had dinner yet. I must go home first, so enough for today.

Your

[^1]: I do not believe either there will be war, if only because the Peace League461 describes it as unavoidable; in any case, Sadowa348

[^2]: F. E. First published in Der Briefwechsel zwischen Printed according to the original F. Engels und K. Marx, Bd. 4, Stuttgart, Published in English for the first time

[^3]: a Laura Marx - b Frankfurter Zeitung und Handelsblatt - c E. Dühring, 'Marx, Dos

[^4]: Kapital, Kritik der politischen Oekonomie, 1. Band, Hamburg 1867'. - d E. Dühring, Die Verkleinerer Carey's und die Krisis der Nationalökonomie. - e Furz in German, rhyming with Schurz.



