---
Volume: 42
Document_Title: "329. Engels to Marx. 20 February "
Page_Range: "578-579"
---

# 329. Engels to Marx. 20 February 



**[p. 539]**

Borkheim gave me a letter to him from Liebknecht, which I had to send back to him by return. From this the following excerpt:

'Tell Marx that Dr Contzen is working on a long review, and in a lecture has already mentioned the work" in the most laudatory terms from the purely scientific standpoint. And tell Marx, too, that he should get Engels to supply an article about Capital for our paperb which now circulates 1,300 copies equally-spread through- out Germany. I myself have no time at present for such a job.'

If you think it worth the trouble to supply something for the paper, it would be good to make the article longer this time (with extracts), even if it had to run through several numbers.602

Borkheim will probably be sending you a reprint—if you do not have the paper—of the 'Russian refugees' which he wrote for it.c

Dr Contzen, BY THE BY, himself publishes (or published) an economic periodical patroned Roscher.

Regarding health, CHANGE from day to day.

Salut

Your

K. M.

First published in Der Briefwechsel zwischen Printed according to the original F. Engels und K. Marx, Bd. 4, Stuttgart, 1913 Published in English for the first time

329

Manchester, 20 February 1868 7 Southgate

Dear Moor,

This week you will have to regard me as completely out of action. I have such a frightful lot of work at the firm as a result of the sudden rise in cotton that I do not get out of the office from

[^1]: ENGELS TO MARX302

[^2]: IN LONDON

[^3]: a the first volume of Capital - b Demokratisches Wochenblatt - c S. B[orkheim], 'Russische politische Flüchdinge in West-Europa', Demokratisches Wochenblatt, Nos. 5 and 6, 1 and 8 February 1868 (the end of the article was published in Nos. 17 and 20, 25 April and 16 May 1868). - d under the patronage of



