---
Volume: 42
Document_Title: "330. Engels to Marx. 1 March "
Page_Range: "579-580"
---

# 330. Engels to Marx. 1 March 



**[p. 540]**

the morning on until 7 o'clock in the evening, and do not get my dinner until 8 o'clock in the evening. You will understand what one is capable of after that. I hope that the damned carbuncle has got settled. Hearty greetings to your wife, the girls and Lafargue.

Your

F. E.

First published in Der Briefwechsel zwischen Printed according to the original F. Engels und K. Marx, Bd. 4, Stuttgart, 1913

330

ENGELS TO MARX

IN LONDON

[Manchester,] 1 March 1868

Dear Moor,

The whole of last week I worked like a slave from morning till night in commerce so that I was good for nothing at all. This has now passed, I think, and this week I should get back on to the rails.

Enclosure from Meissner. His draft is naturally absolutely unusable: I shall see whether I cannot knock together something better for him. Now I am sorry that I sent him the articles, I should already have prepared something for him from them."

How is your carbuncle faring? Let us hope that this is finally the last.

[^1]: I shall write something for Wilhelmchenb; verbatim extracts would be difficult, but I can spin out some main points to some extent for his public.602 I, too, have seen only 3 numbers of the rag,c and these could have been edited by Gustav Struve. Since Wilhelmchen was left to his own devices his South German basic federative republicanism (how earnestd the man is) has broken out again in full glory. The fellow even re-prints Karl Grün.D95

[^2]: •x See this volume, p. 534. - b Wilhelm Liebknecht - c Demokratisches Wochenblatt - d Ernscht in the original; Engels is punning on the Saxon pronunciation of ernst.



