---
Volume: 42
Document_Title: "331. Marx to Engels. 4 March "
Page_Range: "580-581"
---

# 331. Marx to Engels. 4 March 



**[p. 1913]**

Mr Goegg obstinately sends me the Les États-Unis d'Europe (the fellow wants me to get an agency for him, thus the devotion). Since the paper appears simultaneously and with the same contents in German and French, it would not be bad at all to announce your booka there and Goegg has promised to insert articles by you or me. What do you think of that?

Best greetings to your wife, the girls and Lafargue.

Your

F. E.

First published abridged in Der Briefwech- sel zwischen F. Engels und K. Marx, Bd. 4, Stuttgart, 1913 and in full in MEGA, Abt. III, Bd. 4, Berlin, 1931

Printed according to the original

Published in English for the first time

331

MARX TO ENGELS

IN MANCHESTER

[London,] 4 March 1868

Dear FRED,

From the enclosed scrawl you will see that, if I do not pay £1.5.0 by the day after tomorrow, MY CHATTELS' SHALL BE DISTRAINED.

The carbuncle business is now reduced to a residuum under my left arm, which should soon fade.

That I write you only these few lines today is due to a HORRIBLE headache.

Enclosed scrawl from S. Meyer, which you should please return. Salut.

Your

K. M.

[^1]: Make sure that Meissner does not write any nonsense on his own. If the jackass had only sent back the newspaper cuttings.b

[^2]: First published in Der Briefwechsel zwischen F. Engels und K. Marx, Bd. 4, Stuttgart,

[^3]: Printed according to the original

[^4]: Published in English for the first time

[^5]: ;* the first volume of Capital - b See this volume, pp. 534, 540.



