---
Volume: 42
Document_Title: "332. Marx to Engels. 6 March "
Page_Range: "581-582"
---

# 332. Marx to Engels. 6 March 



**[p. 332]**

MARX TO ENGELS238

IN MANCHESTER

[London,] 6 March 1868 DEAR FRED,

BEST THANKS FOR THE .£10. The copies of Social-Demokrat promised by Meissner have not arrived. This shows that he is not at all precise. Thus for instance the copies for Paris have not been dispatched either. There the worthy Moses" has prevaricated for so long603 that the Courrier français has now finally announced that as the result of the many

amendes,*" etc., it will soon completely quit the stage.

I have not seen Eichhoff's lucubrations and anyway not the Zukunft for a very long time.604 Since Eichhoff's brother' is a bookseller and specialises in political economy (he is the publisher of several opera of Dr Dühring), this is reason enough for Eichhoff to deliver lectures on the same subject.

My head is in a sorry state. But that should 'disappear' BY AND BY, as soon as the last traces of carbuncledom have gone.

I wrote to Holland111 again yesterday since the matter is becoming brûlante.d Old Lafarguee has dealt with the necessary marriage BANNS, etc., in Bordeaux, and has sent all the papers here. He now expects that the wedding will take place here at the beginning of next month, and that the pair will go to Paris, to which he will later move. We, however, have not yet risked taking the necessary steps here for the BANNS, since my wife has not yet been able to acquire even the most essential things for Laura. For worthy Freiligrath all this went very smoothly, but then he is 'noble'.

As soon as this affair is SETTLED, it will be a great relief for the entire household, since Lafargue is as good as living with us, which perceptibly increases EXPENSES.

As far as the 'reviews' are concerned, I think that after you have supplied Liebknecht602 you should abandon the German ones and only pursue the English. First, the echo of an English review in Germany is more powerful than vice versa, and secondly this is, after all, the only country where finally money can be made from the business.

[^1]: a Moses Hess - b fines - c Albert Eichhoff - d urgent - e François Lafargue



