---
Volume: 42
Document_Title: "334. Engels to Marx. 10 March "
Page_Range: "584-585"
---

# 334. Engels to Marx. 10 March 



**[p. 334]**

ENGELS TO MARX

IN LONDON

Manchester, 10 March 1868

Dear Moor,

Do not forget to return to me the things from Meissner,11

otherwise I cannot reply to him.

If the Dutchb do not write to you soon, I shall see what I can do. I suppose something can still be managed.

The storm in commerce is beginning to die down, so I can work again in the evening. What you say about the Fortnightly is quite right; what is published there can be used again afterwards in Germany. The matter should be undertaken as quickly as possible.509 But you will understand it is not possible to do much in the evening when you only get your midday meal at 7.30 or 8 in the evening.

Eichhöffchen enclosed.—You will see that besides his brother17

As long as they have no railways, I really cannot believe that they seriously intend any serious action. Moreover, they have an awful famine in the interior.

The costs of the Bismarckian gloire, etc., are beginning to tell. 1864—population of Prussia 19,250,000. 1867—19,668,000 for the old Provinces. According to the rate hitherto—250,000 per year, it should have been 20 million. The rate has thus been reduced to one half. In the administrative districts of Münster, Minden, and Koblenz (inter alia) the population has actually declined. Biggest increase in Berlin and Düsseldorf administrative district.

Your

F. E.

[^1]: he also has other 'grounds' to lecture on political economy.604

[^2]: So, the Russians have again postponed the business in Turkey.605

[^3]: First published abridged in Der Briefwech- sel zwischen F. Engels und K. Marx. Bd. 4, Stuttgart, 1913 and in full in MEGA, Abt. III, Bd. 4, Berlin, 1931

[^4]: Printed according to the original

[^5]: Published in English for the first time

[^6]: a See this volume, pp. 534, 540. - b the Philipses - c Albert Eichhoff



