---
Volume: 42
Document_Title: "335. Engels to Marx. 13 March "
Page_Range: "585-586"
---

# 335. Engels to Marx. 13 March 



**[p. 335]**

ENGELS TO MARX

IN LONDON

Manchester, 13 March 1868

Dear Moor,

For Meissner I still lack the letter from von Eynern. I wanted to prepare an advertisement" today but was disturbed.

Enclosed from Vienna.606 Have written to Wilhelmchenb for information. I think I shall accept in general, but say that the matter must remain secret 'in order not to disturb my other connections in the Viennese press'.

I also sent Wilhelm two articles about your book, completely popular for workers (so that even Wilhelm will understand them).1

At the same time, I have coached him in his role in order to work over in the Reichstag the new code for crafts and manufactures (which also includes factory legislation).607 This opportunity is very good in order to ADVERTISE the book, and I am convinced that this will also have a considerable effect, since even the official economists have to draw on it.

Since yesterday I have been fit for work again—on the one hand, I get back earlier in the evening, and, on the other, I have discovered that for 14 days I had been drinking beer poisoned probably with cocculus indicus,d which totally narcotised me in the evening. I CHANGED THE TAP YESTERDAY—by chance—noted the differ- ence, and discovered the cause, which I had ascribed to digestive troubles.

Your

F. E.

[^1]: H o w ABOUT CARBUNCLES?

[^2]: First published abridged in Der Briefwech- sel zwischen F. Engels und K. Marx, Bd. 4, Stuttgart, 1913 and in full in MEGA, Abt. III, Bd. 4, Berlin, 1931

[^3]: Printed according to the original

[^4]: Published in English for the first time

[^5]: a See this volume, pp. 534, 540. - b Wilhelm Liebknecht - c F. Engels, 'Review of Volume One of Capital for the Demokratisches Wochenblatt'. - d Indian berries



