---
Volume: 42
Document_Title: "337. Marx to Engels. 16 March "
Page_Range: "588-589"
---

# 337. Marx to Engels. 16 March 



**[p. 549]**

From Maurer I have noted that the change in opinions about the history and development of 'Germanic' property, etc., pro- ceeds from the Danes who are apparently tremendously active in all kinds of archaeology in every corner. But, although they thus give the impulse, something is always missing with them SOMEWHERE OR ELSE. They lack the proper critical instinct, and in particular the sense of proportion. I was extremely struck by the fact that Maurer, though often referring, for instance, to Africa, Mexico, etc., knows absolutely nothing about the Celts, and therefore ascribes the development of common ownership in France solely to the Germanic conquerors. 'As though,' Mr Brunoa would say, 'as though' we did not possess a Celtic (Welsh) book of laws from the 11th centuryb which is entirely communist, and 'as though' the French in recent years had not just excavated original settlements in Celtic form here and there. As though! But the matter is quite simple. Besides German and ancient Roman relations, OLD Maurer has only studied oriental (Greek-Turkish!) ones.

First published in Der Briefwechsel zwischen Printed according to the original F. Engels und K. Marx, Bd. 4, Stuttgart, , , - , , . ,• , • r ,, r jq.o Published in English in lull lor the first time

337

[London,] 16 March 1

Enclosed a letter to Kugelmann from a young Bielefeld manufacturer.c I am particularly amused by his idea that I myself must have formerly been a sewing-machine EMPLOYING MANUFACTURER. If people only knew how little I know of all that stuff.

The question is also unavoidable: what now? The fellows all want recipes for miracle cures, and do not see the fairly graspable cure by fire and iron already plainly indicated.

[^1]: MARX TO ENGELS522

[^2]: IN MANCHESTER

[^3]: DEAR FRED,

[^4]: a Bruno Bauer - b Ancient Laws and Institutes of Wales. - c Gustav Meyer (see this volume, p. 552)



