---
Volume: 42
Document_Title: "338. Engels to Marx. 17 March "
Page_Range: "589-590"
---

# 338. Engels to Marx. 17 March 



**[p. 550]**

It is strange how Dollfus (Alsace) has won such false renommé. This HUMBUC, who ranks far beneath such Englishmen as Briggs, etc., has drafted his contracts with his workers, contracts that could only be entered into by a degenerate rabble, in such a way that they do in fact become his colony of serfs, and in fact he treats them well 'as serfs', and exploits them as neatly as anybody else. And on this account the brute recently introduced in the Corps législatif the nasty paragraph of the Press Law about the 'vie

privée qui doit être murée'."611 For here and there light had been thrown on his philanthropic juggling.

The way in which the English in Ireland are now treating political prisoners, or just suspects, or those only sentenced to ordinary prison terms (like Pigott of The Irishman and Sullivan of the News) in fact exceeds anything seen on the Continent612— except Russia. They are curs!

Salut

Your

K. M.

First published in Der Briefwechsel zwischen Printed according to the original F. Engels und K. Marx, Bd. 4, Stuttgart, . igj3 Published in English in full tor the first time

338

ENGELS TO MARX

Manchester, 17 March 1868

Dear Moor,

Yesterday evening the cashier rushed off before I had asked him for the £5 for your gas, etc., and I could not even borrow a note anywhere; it is now enclosed, and I hope this delay has not caused you any serious unpleasantness. Further money will follow in the next few days, as soon as I can view my own affairs more clearly. Has Lafargue furnished a house, etc., for he cannot take his wife into his LODGINGS?

[^1]: IN LONDON

[^2]: a private life which should be surrounded by walls - b Weekly News



