---
Volume: 42
Document_Title: "339. Mar x to Ludwig Kugelmann. 17 March "
Page_Range: "590-592"
---

# 339. Mar x to Ludwig Kugelmann. 17 March 



**[p. 551]**

The proofs3 and the Dühringb I shall send to you; I forgot to take the stuff with me this morning. In haste.

Your

F. E.

First published abridged in Der Briefwech- Printed according to the original sei zwischen F. Engels und K. Marx, Bd. 4, , . - , , . „ , . , r . Stuttgart, 1913 and in full in MEGA, Published in English for the first Abt. Ill, Bd. 4, Berlin, 1931 t i m e

339

MARX TO LUDWIG KUGELMANN65

IN HANOVER

London, 17 MARCH 1868

Dear Friend,

Your letter' affected me both unpleasandy and pleasandy (you see I always move in a dialectical contradiction).

Unpleasantly, since I know your circumstances, and it would be wretched of me to accept such presents at your family's expense. I therefore regard these £15 as an advance, which I shall repay when I am able.

You can imagine that I have often discussed moving from London to Geneva, not only with myself and my family, but also with Engels. Here I have to spend £400-500 annually. In Geneva I could live on £200. But CONSIDERED ALL IN ALL this is impossible for the time being. I can only complete my worke in London. And only here can I hope finally to derive a decent or at least adequate

[^1]: Pleasantly, not simply as a mark of your great friendship (and in the bustle of the world, friendship is the only personal thing that matters), but also because you have helped me over a great embarrassment in regard to the coming wedding.601 In the past 4 months—quite apart from medicine and doctors—I have spent so much money on BLUE BOOKS,359 Enquêtes and YANKEE REPORTS, etc., ON BANKS that I really had nothing left for my daughter.d

[^2]: a of the first volume of Capital - b E. Dühring, Die Verkleinerer Carey's und die

[^3]: Krisis der Nationalökonomie. - c of 13 March 1868 - d Laura Marx - e Capital





**[p. 552]**

monetary profit from this work. This is why it is necessary that I stay here for the time being. Apart from the fact that, were I to move away from here at this critical period, the whole working- class movement, which I influence behind the scenes, would fall into very bad hands and leave the right track.

For the time being, therefore, fate binds me to London ALL DRAWBACKS NOTWITHSTANDING. Quant àa Coppel, you do him an injustice. Had I not been indisposed he would have amused me and such a diversion never hurts the family.

Engels and I have hitherto written nothing for Liebknecht's paper.b (Engels has now sent him 2 articles about my book.') Eccarius is the regular London correspondent. Borkheim has written an article against Herzen et Co.d

Meyer'se letter gave me great pleasure. However, he has partly misunderstood my exposition. Otherwise he would have seen that I depict large-scale industry not only as the mother of the antagonism, but also as the producer of material and intellectual conditions for resolving these antagonisms, though this cannot proceed along pleasant lines.

With regard to the factory act—as a first condition, whereby the working class obtains ELBOW-ROOM for development and move- ment— I demand it from the state, as a forcible law, directed not only against the manufacturers, but also against the workers them- selves. (Page 542, note 52, I indicate the resistance of women workers to a limitation of hours.) By the way, should Mr Meyer develop the same energy as Owen, he can break this resistance. That the individual manufacturer (apart from the extent to which he endeavours to influence legislation) can do little in the matter, I state ditto p. 243: 'But looking at things as a whole, all this does not, indeed, depend on the good or ill will of the individual capitalist, etc' and ib. note 114.613 Despite all this, the individual working person can do something, and this has been abundantly shown by such manufacturers as Fielden, Owen, etc. Their main effectiveness must naturally be of a public nature. As for the Dollfuses in Alsace, they are HUMBUGS who have managed, through their conditions of contract, to establish a comfortable and at the same time for them very profitable serfdom-relationship with their workers. They have been duly exposed in the Paris press, and for

[^1]: 3 As for - b Demokratisches Wochenblatt - c F. Engels, 'Review of Volume One of Capital for the Demokratisches Wochenblatt'. - à S. Bforkheim], 'Russische politische Flüchtlinge in West-Europa', Demokratisches Wochenblatt, Nos. 5 and 6, 1 and 8 February 1868 (the end of the article was published in Nos. 17 and 20, 25 April and 16 May 1868). - e Gustav Meyer (see this volume, p. 549)



