---
Volume: 42
Document_Title: "340. Marx to Engels. 18 March "
Page_Range: "592-593"
---

# 340. Marx to Engels. 18 March 



**[p. 553]**

this very reason one of these Dollfuses, in the Corps législatif, recently introduced and CARRIED one of the most infamous paragraphs of the Press Law, namely that 'vie privée doit être murée'.3

With heartiest greetings to your dear wifeb

Yours

K. M.

Apropos: Did you see that my personal enemy Schweitzer has heaped eulogies on my head in 6 numbers of the Social-Demokrat on account of my book? c Very harrowing for that old harlot Hatzfeldt.

First published abridged in Die Neue Zeit, Printed according to the original Bd. 2, No. 6, Stuttgart, 1901-1902 and in full in Pisma Marksa k Kugelmanu (Letters of Marx to Kugelmann), Moscow- Leningrad, 1928

340

[^1]: MARX T O ENGELS 6

[^2]: IN MANCHESTER

[^3]: [London,] 18 MARCH 1868

[^4]: DEAR FRED,

[^5]: T h e £5 received with many thanks. Laura and Lafargue will first go to Paris (after the marriage), then rent an APARTMENT here (somewhere on the Heath, d if findable) and after Lafargue's final exam (he took the others at Barth- olomew's Hospital H14) will go back to France for a time, and then move off to America, where OLD Lafargue e has house and home.

[^6]: Whence comes the word b 1 5 higid, hid, hiwisc (hida autem Anglice vocatur terra unius aratri culturae sufficiens1)? And also the German

[^7]: a private life should be surrounded by walls - b Gertruda Kugelmann - r [J. B. Schweitzer,] 'Das Werk von Carl Marx', Der Social-Demokrat, Nos. 10-12, 14, 15 and 24; 22, 24, 26 and 31 January, 2 and 23 February 1868. - <* Hampstead Heath - e François Lafargue - f hida is also the name in English for the land that can be cultivated sufficiently with one plough (see also this volume, pp. 560-61).

[^8]: 20-1196



