---
Volume: 42
Document_Title: "341. Engels to Marx. 19 March "
Page_Range: "593-595"
---

# 341. Engels to Marx. 19 March 



**[p. 554]**

word: wiffa (Qui signum, quod propter defensionem terrae3 that is to say, to declare the land INCLOSED, a sign instead of a real fence ponitur, quod signum wiffam vocamush).

Salut.

Your

K. M.

First published in Der Briefwechsel Printed according to the original zwischen F. Engels und K. Marx, Bd. 4, Stuttgart, 1913

341

ENGELS TO MARX

IN LONDON

Manchester, 19 March 1868

Dear Moor,

Enclosed £40 in two twenties, which, it is to be hoped, will suffice at least for the most urgent purposes. I had not expected that Löhrchenc would be making a honeymoon trip to America. So the wedding is on 8 April, a Wednesday; had it been Friday, Saturday or Monday I could have got away easily.

The things from OLD Maurer are very niced; it is really remarkable how much material already exists on these subjects, and how little the professors have been able to make of it.

Ï shall try to discover the Anglo-Saxon word,6 but, since no Anglo-Saxon dictionary is available to me here, I shall have to make do with other sources, which are very dubious, in view of the large and peculiar stock of words in Anglo-Saxon. First of all, the correct spelling must be determined. With regard to Wiffa, a question: where is it found, so we might know whether it has Low German or High German sound shifts. If it is High German you should compare Graff's Althochdeutscher Sprachschatz, the Bayerisches Wörterbuch by Schindler or the Swiss dictionary by Stalder. Does it not occur in Grimm's Rechtsalterthümer*?

[^1]: a Here a sign to declare the land defended - b is erected, this sign we call Wiffa - c Laura Marx - d See this volume, pp. 547-49. - e Ibid., pp. 553-54. - f J. Grimm, Deutsche Rechtsallerthiimer.





**[p. 555]**

The accursed business with the ill-fated Schiller Institute here,28

which Gumpert once pushed me into and then did nothing further, is finally reaching a crisis, and the matter will be decided by Wednesday. During these days I must— étant engagé"—make a great EFFORT; I shall therefore scarcely be left with time in this period to write the English article.509 From the middle of next week onwards I shall have peace, and will press ahead without pause. Regarding this business here, there is every prospect that I—and everything depends upon me—shall bring everything to a happy conclusion despite Borchardt and various other German cliques. Since I have been involved in the business for 4 years, and victory or defeat fall <on my head, I simply must.

Since you say nothing about carbuncles, I assume that every- thing is fading without further issue.

The most conscientious reader of your bookb here is Sam Moore; he has really worked his way thoroughly through over 600 pages and is grinding indefatigably on.

Best greetings.

Your

F. E.

So, Plon-Plon, according to The Times,'2 should inaugurate the Russian-Prussian-French alliance. This Bonaparte seems to get into a worse position every day. The stupid Prussians are continually making arrests and searching houses in the annexed lands.596 The proofs0 and the Dühring" will be dispatched today or tomorrow.

[^1]: First published abridged in Der Briefwech- Printed according to the original sei zwischen F. Engels und K. Marx, Bd. 4, „ , , . , , . ,• • r r- Stuttgart, 1913 and in full in MEGA, Published in Enghsh for the first Abt. Ill, Bd. 4, Berlin, 1931 time

[^2]: a since I have promised - b the first volume of Capital - c The Times, No. 26074, 17 March 1868,'Prussia (From our own Correspondent). Berlin, March 14'. - d of the first volume of Capital - e E. Dühring, Die Verkleinerer Carey's und die Krisis der Nationalökonomie.

[^3]: 20*



