---
Volume: 42
Document_Title: "343. Marx to Engels. 25 March "
Page_Range: "596-599"
---

# 343. Marx to Engels. 25 March 



**[p. 343]**

MARX T O ENGELS lnl

IN MANCHESTER

[London,] 25 March 1868

DEAR FRED,

I wanted to write to you yesterday from the Museum,'1 but I suddenly became so very unwell that I had to close the very interesting book I was reading. T h e r e was something like a black veil before my eyes. In addition, a frightful headache and chest constriction. So I crept home. T h e air and the light did me good, and at home I slept FOR SOME TIME. My state is such that I really should give u p working and thinking entirely for SOME TIME; but that would be hard for me, even if I had the means to loaf.

Ad vocemh Maurer: his books are extremely significant.' Not only the primitive age but also the entire later development of the free imperial cities, of the estate owners possessing immunity, of public authority, and of the struggle between the free peasantry and serfdom, get an entirely new character.

And we are all very much in the clutches of this JUDICIAL BLINDNESS: right in my own neighbourhood, on the Hunsriick? the old Germanic system survived until the last few years. I now rem- ember my father" talking about it to me from a lawyer's point of view. Another proof: just as the geologists, even the best like

[^1]: T h e history of mankind is like palaeontology. Owing to A CERTAIN JUDICIAL BLINDNESS, even the best minds fail to see, on principle, what lies in front of their noses. Later, when the time has come, we are surprised that there are traces everywhere of what we failed to see. T h e first reaction to the French Revolution and the Enlightenment bound u p with it was naturally to regard every- thing as mediaeval, romantic, and even people like Grimm are not free from this. T h e second reaction to it is to look beyond the Middle Ages into the primitive age of every people—and this corresponds to the socialist tendency, though these learned men have n o idea that they are connected with it. And they are then surprised to find what is newest in what is oldest, and even EGALITARIANS TO A DECREE which would have made Proudhon shudder.

[^2]: a the British Museum Library - b Regarding - c See this volume, pp. 547-49, and 554-55. - d mountains in the Rhine Province, Prussia - e Heinrich Marx





**[p. 558]**

Cuvier, have expounded certain faits" in a completely distorted way, so philologists of the forceh of a Grimm, mistranslated the simplest Latin sentences because they were under the influence of Moser, etc. (who, I remember, was enchanted that 'freedom' never existed among the Germans, but that 'Luft macht eigen"1). E.g. the famous passage in Tacitus: 'arva per annos mutant, et superest ager\d which means: they exchange the fields (arva) (by lot, hence also sortes' in all later Leges Barbarorum6™), and there remains over communal land (ager in distinction to arva as ager publicus1), Grimm and others translate: they till every year new fields, and there is still (untilled) land left over!g

In the same way the passage: 'colunt discreti ac diversi'h is taken to prove that the Germans from the earliest times cultivated on individual farms like Westphalian squires. But the very same passage continues: 'Vicos locant non in nostrum morem, connex- is et cohaerentibus aedificiis; suum quisque locum spatio circumdat',' and such Germanic primitive villages, in the form described, still exist here and there in Denmark. Obviously Scandinavia must become as important for German jurisprudence and economics as for German mythology. Only by starting from there will we be able once again to decipher our past. Incidentally, even Grimm, etc., found in Caesar's writings that the Germans always settled as kinship groups, and not as individuals: 'gentibus cognationibusque, qui uno coierunf'

But what would OLD Hegel say, were he to learn in the hereafter that the general [das Allgemeine] in German and Nordic means only the communal land, and that the particular, the special [das Sundre, Besondere] means only private property divided off from the communal land? Here are the logical categories coming damn well out of 'our intercourse' after all.

Very interesting is the book by Fraas (1847): Klima und Pflanzenwelt in der Zeit, eine Geschichte beider, namely as proving that climate and flora change in historical times. He is a Darwinist before Darwin, and admits even the species developing in historical

[^1]: a facts - b importance - c J. Moser, Patriotische Phantasien, Th. 3, S. 329. 'Luft macht eigen'—part of a medieval German saying, 'Stadtluft macht frei, Landluft macht eigen', literally: 'town air brings freedom, country air brings serfdom'. In medieval times a serf who moved to a town became free. - d Tacitus, Germania, 26. - e lot -

[^2]: f communal land - s Die Geschichtschreiber der deutschen Vorzeit, Bd. 1. S. 661. - h they till separately and scattered - ' ' They do not lay out villages in our fashion, with adjacent buildings one next to the other; each surrounds his dwelling with a free space'. - J 'according to gentes and kinships, which settled together' (Gaius Julius Caesar, Commentarii de bello Gallico, Lib. VI, 22).





**[p. 559]**

times. But he is at the same time agronomist. He claims that with cultivation—depending on its degree—the 'moisture' so beloved by the peasants gets lost (hence also the plants migrate from south to north), and finally steppe formation occurs. The first effect of cultivation is useful, but finally devastating through deforestation, etc. This man is both a thoroughly learned philologist (he has written books in Greek) and a chemist, agronomist, etc. The conclusion is that cultivation—when it proceeds in natural growth and is not consciously controlled (as a bourgeois he naturally does not reach this point)—leaves deserts behind it, Persia, Mesopotamia, etc., Greece. So once again an unconscious socialist tendency!

This Fraas is also interesting as a German case-study. First Dr. med., then inspector and teacher of chemistry and technology. At present head of Bavarian veterinary services, university professor, head of state agricultural experiments, etc. In his latest writings you see his advanced age, but he is still a dashing fellow. He has been around a lot in Greece, Asia Minor, Egypt! His history of agriculture is also important. He calls Fourier this 'pious and humanist socialist'.3 On the Albanians, etc. 'every sort of shameless lechery and rape'.b

We must keep a close watch on the recent and very latest in agriculture. The physical school is pitted against the chemical.

Nothing pleases me better than to see you here.

Your

K. M.

[^1]: Do not forget to send me back the letter of Kugelmann's manufacturer.0

[^2]: Apropos. Edgar'sd planter's hat has been found again, and this time you can take it to MRS Lizzy.e

[^3]: First published in Der Briefwechsel zwischen Printed according to the original F. Engels und K. Marx, Bd. 4, Stuttgart, JOIQ Published in English in full for the first time

[^4]: a C. Fraas, Geschichte der Landwirthschaft, S. 12. - b K. Fraas, Klima und Pflanzenwelt in der Zeit, S. XVI. - c Gustav Meyer (see this volume, p. 549) - d Edgar von Westphalen - e Lizzy Burns



