---
Volume: 42
Document_Title: "344. Engels to Marx. 29 March "
Page_Range: "599-604"
---

# 344. Engels to Marx. 29 March 



**[p. 344]**

ENGELS TO MARX

IN LONDON

Manchester, 29 March 1868

Dear Moor,

I am afraid I shall not finish the article for the Fortnightly509 by Tuesday. The damned Schiller Institute business28 kept me breathless all the week, until I finally got things cleared up yesterday. If I had failed—and several stupidities on the part of my main adjutant put everything doubtful again—I would have been terribly discredited, made ludicrous for the whole of Manchester; TO BE DONE' IN BUSINESS, TO GET YOURSELF SOLD' is naturally here the worst thing that can happen to you. Now it is a great triumph and gives me the opportunity I wanted to withdraw with honour from official participation in the affair; anyway now enough people will be pushing themselves forward for it. I am doubly annoyed because this business has made it impossible for me to complete the article; but for this I would have had to rush it, and in this case the quality is very important.

Schorlemmer has made a very fine discovery: the law of the boiling points of the hydrocarbons of the series Cn H2n+2' i.e. for three of the four isomeric series; of the 4th, too few have yet been described."

I shall be arriving at your place on Wednesday evening at 9, possibly earlier.61 '

Where on earth can the enclosed article come from? And a letter of Bismarck's to cheer you up.

Best greetings.

Your

F. E.

I can find nothing about Wiffa. But in higid, hiwisc, hida you are confusing 2 if not 3 different words.b

Anglo-Saxon hiwisce, Old Saxon and Old High German hiwiski, Old Frisian hiskthe, Old Nordic hyski, New North Frisian hiske = familia.

[^1]: a C. Schorlemmer, 'Researches on the Hydrocarbons of the Series C n H2 n + 2', Proceedings of the Royal Society, No. 94, 1867 and No. 102, 1868. - b See this volume, pp. 553-54.





**[p. 561]**

Higid can be the participle of the Anglo-Saxon hegjan, this verb means TO FENCE IN.

Whether hide, which is still encountered locally today as a measure of land, is drawn from this, or is connected with hide cutis, Anglo-Saxon hyde, I cannot determine without an Anglo- Saxon dictionary.

First published abridged in Der Briefwech- sel zwischen F. Engels und K. Marx, Bd. 4, Stuttgart, 1913 and in full in MEGA, Abt. III, Bd. 4, Berlin, 1931

Printed according to the original

Published in English for the first time



APPENDICES



