---
Volume: 42
Document_Title: "2. Jenny Marx to Engels. 30 March 1865 "
Page_Range: "605-606"
---

# 2. Jenny Marx to Engels. 30 March 1865 



**[p. 566]**

First published in: Marx and Engels, Printed according to the original Works, Second Russian Edition, Vol. 31, . Moscow 1963 Published in English tor the first time

JENNY MARX TO ENGELS

IN MANCHESTER

[London, 30 March 1865]

Dear Mr Engels,

Thank you so much for your letter131 and the newspaper cutting, which I now return. The worst thing about this dreadful business in which 'Wilhelmchen'3 has once more involved yourself and Moor is that I have no idea where Moor is at present.177 I have heard nothing from him and don't know whether he is in Germany or Holland. I have taken pot luck in sending all the filth from the newspapers after him. It is almost impossible to take up the cudgels in the newspapers with a creature like Becker,b I92 but FACTS must be corrected, on account of the credulous Straubin- gers.618 The most ridiculous and most vexing part of the affair is to have people like Mr Reusche testifying that 'Lassalle also spoke of Marx with respect'. Lassalle, who copied everything from my husband, even his MISTAKES, who had been his friend and disciple for 15 years—he is cited as also having spoken of him with respect. And this gracious testimonial is being purveyed by people who only became friends of Lassalle in the last 2 years, at a time when he was already fully committed to that wrong path, which was taking him into Bismarck's camp,98 into the ministry, like friend Bücher, or to the ultimate retraite, to Italy. And, of course, Lassalle should be rescued for these 'freedom-fighters' who have received their reward in his will! Yet these social riff-raff are after

[^1]: a Wilhelm Liebknecht - b Bernhard Becker



