---
Volume: 42
Document_Title: "3. Karl Marx. Confession. 1 April 1865 "
Page_Range: "606-607"
---

# 3. Karl Marx. Confession. 1 April 1865 



**[p. 567]**

all only following their great agitator. Like his lord and master, incidentally, Mr Reusche is constantly misappropriating things of my husband's, forever reproducing every witticism from Herr Vogt, just as in that last opus he himself borrowed from Karl the 'grotesque CI.OWN, who has nothing behind him but his own shadow' (a phrase aimed at Karl Blind)." The condescending manner in which this triumvirate deigns to allow Moor its protection, is the most vexing thing of all. Incidentally, Lassalle's respect for the aging Ph. Becker was also of recent date. As far back as August 1862 he believed him to be a paid agent, though in whose hire I do not know, and refused to have anything to do with him.619 He likewise declared to me in one of his outbursts of shouting, when his voice always went OUT OF TUNE, that Mosesb in Paris was a completely useless muddlehead with whom he desired no truck. I defended that Plonplonist93 as an honest Con- fusionarius. I live from day to day in the hope that I shall have news of Carel; this uncertainty causes me more bother than all the other troubles.

We are all well here and send you our cordial greetings.

Yours

Jenny Marx

3

KARL MARX

Zalt-Bommel, 1 April 1865

Simplicity Strength Weakness Singleness of purpose Glancing at Netchenc

The Quality you like best..

In man In woman Your chief characteristic .. Your favourite occupation

[^1]: First published in MEGA, Abt. Ill, Bd. 3, Printed according to the original Berlin, 1930 , , . , , . . , r Published in English for the first time

[^2]: CONFESSION620

[^3]: a See present edition, Vol. 20, p. 25. - b Moses Hess - c Nannette Philips. In Jenny Marx's album: 'Bookworming'.



