---
Volume: 42
Document_Title: "4. Jenny Marx to Johann Philipp Becker. 29 January 1866 "
Page_Range: "607-611"
---

# 4. Jenny Marx to Johann Philipp Becker. 29 January 1866 

The vice you hate most Servility The vice you excuse most Gullibility Your idea of happiness To fight Your idea of misery To submit3

Your aversion Martin Tupper b

Your hero Spartacus, Keppler Your heroine Gretchen The poet you like best Aeschylus, Shakespeare, Goethec

The prose writer you like best Diderotd

Your favourite flower Daphne" Your favourite dish Fishf

Your maxim: Nihil humani a me alienum putos

Your motto: De omnibus dubitandumh

Karl Marx

First published, in the language of the Reproduced from the original ver- original, English, in International Review of ified with the handwritten text in Social History, Vol. I, Part I, Assen, 1956 Jenny Marx's album

[London, 29 January 1866]

My dear Mr Becker,

For the past week my husband has again been laid low with his former dangerous and exceedingly painful complaint. The afflic- tion is all the more distressing for him this time since it further interrupts him in the copying out of his bookj that he has just

[^1]: JENNY MARX TO JOHANN PHILIPP BECKER621

[^2]: IN GENEVA1

[^3]: a In the album this query and the one above remained unanswered. - b In the album: 'Martin Tupper, Violet powder'. - c In the album: 'Dante, Aeschylus, Shakespeare, Goethe'. - d In the album: 'Diderot, Lessing, Hegel, Balsac'. - e In the album there are three more queries and replies here; 'Favourite colour Red; Colour of eyes & heir Black; Names Jenny, Laura.' - f In the album the query 'The character in history you most dislike' is left unanswered. - K Nothing human is alien to me (Terence, Heautontimorumenos, I, 1, 25) - h Doubt everything - ' written on a sheet of paper bearing the stamp: 'International Working Men's Association / Central Council / London' - J the first volume of Capital



,*£**-

www ^ T I L I

.* -»Hii<-w ,/& «^ | - ******" v^«^V

i & t - ss«*^*»*^* w *

[^1]: A page from the album of Jenny, Marx's daughter, containing Marx's 'Confession'





begun. I think that this new eruption is simply and solely due to overwork and long hours without sleep at night. He is very sorry not to be able to attend the meetings of the 'International', since the very existence of The Workman's Advocate is at stake right now; until now it has had the greatest difficulties to contend with and fonds are now being offered by philistines and parsons.230 The attempt must now be made to get a hold on the money without making any concessions in point of principle to the 'MONEY-LENDERS'.3 The Reform question, which is of such immediate practical concern to the English, is also making great demands on the resources, the time and the interest of the workers and is greatly distracting them from other matters.15 Karl and I were most taken by your Vorbote. Both its language and its serious approach are manly indeed! I am enclosing Lessner's letter about it. The agent to whom I entrusted the Manifestos' has written to say that he has managed to prevent them from falling into the hands of the French police and that he can now send them off to Geneva.622

However, they cannot be stamped, so I must ask you to write and say what outlay they committed you to. The money can then be sent you together with that for the subscriptions for the Vorbote.

With respect to religion, a great movement is currently developing in stuffy old England. The top men in science, Huxley (Darwin's disciple) at the head, with Tyndall, Sir Charles Lyell, Bowring, Carpenter, etc., give very enlightened, truly free- thinking and bold lectures for the people in St. Martin's Hall (of glorious waltzing memory623), and, what is more, on Sunday evenings, exactly at the time when the lambs are usually grazing on the Lord's pastures; the hall has been full to bursting and the people's enthusiasm so great that, on the first evening, when I went there with the girls, 2,000 could not get into the room, which was crammed full. The clerics let this dreadful thing happen three times.—Yesterday evening the assembly was informed that no more lectures could be held until the court case brought by the clerics against the 'SUNDAY EVENINGS FOR THE PEOPLE' had been decided. The gathering emphatically expressed its indignation and more than £100 were immediately collected for fighting the case. How stupid of the clerics to interfere in such a matter. To the annoyance of this band, the evenings even closed with music. Choruses from Händel, Mozart, Beethoven, Mendelsohn and Gounod were sung and received enthusiastically by the English,

[^1]: a See this volume, p. 224. - b ibid., p. 150. - c K. Marx and F. Engels, Manifesto of the Communist Party.



