---
Volume: 42
Document_Title: "5. Jenny Marx to Sigfrid Meyer. Beginning of February 1866 "
Page_Range: "611-612"
---

# 5. Jenny Marx to Sigfrid Meyer. Beginning of February 1866 

Karl, who is in great pain today, and my girls send you their warmest greetings, the little one* in particular, asking me to convey very best wishes to 'dear Becker'. And I extend my hand to you from afar.

Yours

Jenny Marx

First published abridged in Der Vorbote, Printed according to the original Jg. 1, No. 2, 1866 and in full in: Marx and Engels, Works, Second Russian Edi- Published m English m full for the tion, Vol. 31, Moscow, 1963 f l r s t u m e

JENNY MARX TO SIGFRID MEYER

IN BERLIN

[London, beginning of February 1866] 1 Modena Villas, Maitland Park

Dear Sir,

For the past week my husband has again been laid low with his former dangerous and painful complaint; this fresh affliction is all the more distressing for him since it further interrupts him in the copying out of his bookb that he has just begun. He is very sorry that you did not receive his lengthy letter,c as he is at the present moment incapable of writing. He also fears that the letter has been seized, as it should have been returned long ago otherwise. The address was, by the way, perfectly correct, and I took the letter to the post myself along with many others and the newspapers, all of which arrived. With regard to the Manifesto^ being a historical document, he wishes it to be printed exactly as it originally appeared; the misprints are so obvious that anyone can correct them. He will be sending the 'International Address"" to you as soon as he can.

[^1]: •' Eleanor Marx - b the first volume of Capital - c See this volume, p. 216. - d K. Marx and F. Engels, Manifesto of the Communist Party. - c K. Marx, 'Inaugural Address of the Working Men's International Association'.



