---
Volume: 42
Document_Title: "6. Jenny Marx to Ludwig Kugelmann. 26 February 1866 "
Page_Range: "612-613"
---

# 6. Jenny Marx to Ludwig Kugelmann. 26 February 1866 

At the same time, he asks you to let him know your new address for further correspondence, when you have left Berlin. And could not Mr Vogt,a in turn, give us another address, as we do not think his present one is quite safe. When you write back, kindly address to A. Williams,13 Esq., etc.

My husband sends you his warmest greetings.

Yours

Jenny Marx

First published in: Marx and Engels, Printed according to the original Works, First Russian Edition, Vol. XXV, Moscow, 1934 Published in English for the first time

6

JENNY MARX TO LUDWIG KUGELMANN

IN HANOVER

1 Modena Villas, Maitland Park

Dear Sir,

For 4 weeks now my poor husband has been laid low again with his old, very painful and dangerous complaint, and no doubt I need scarcely tell you under what great and fearful anxieties we have all been suffering during that time. Right at the beginning of January he had begun to prepare his whole bookd for printing, and he was making wonderfully rapid progress with copying, so that the manuscript piled up most impressively. Karl felt in the best of 'SPIRITS' and was happy to be so far on at last, when a carbuncle suddenly erupted, soon to be followed by 2 others. The last one was especially bad and obstinate and furthermore was so awkwardly placed that it prevented him from walking or moving at all. This morning it has been bleeding more strongly, which has brought him some relief. Two days ago we began the arsenic cure, of which Karl expects a good effect. It is really dreadful for him

[^1]: [London,] 26 February 1866c

[^2]: a August Vogt - b Marx's conspiratorial pseudonym - ' The date is written in by Kugelmann. - d the first volume of Capital



