---
Volume: 42
Document_Title: "7. Jenny Marx to Ludwig Kugelmann. 1 April 1866 "
Page_Range: "613-615"
---

# 7. Jenny Marx to Ludwig Kugelmann. 1 April 1866 

to be interrupted again in the completion of his book, and in his delirium at night he is forever talking of the various chapters which are going round and round in his mind. This morning I brought him your letter3 in bed. He was very pleased that you had been kind enough to write, and he asked me to thank you at once for it on his behalf. A further concern is that his presence is sorely needed at this moment, both in the debates about the forthcoming congress of the International Association 28h and in the discussions about the policy and editing of the new workers' paper which is appearing weekly here now under the title of Commonwealth and represents both the newly formed workers' party,b with all the Co-operative Societies, and the International Association.290 His anxiety about all this has naturally done much to worsen the general state of his health. I hope that by the spring he will be sufficiently restored to be able to visit his friends in Germany. He had been very much looking forward to doing so.

Karl sends you his warmest greetings, to which, despite our not being acquainted, I add my respects.

Yours truly

Jenny Marx

7

JENNY MARX TO LUDWIG KUGELMANN

[London,] 1 April 1866

1 Modena Villas, Maitland Park

Dear Sir,

I presume that the registered letter that I received from Hanover late yesterday evening is from you.c I cannot send it on to my husband in Margate until tomorrow,307 unfortunately, as in

[^1]: First published in: Marx and Engels, Printed according to the original Works, First Russian Edition, Vol. XXV, Moscow, 1934 Published in English for the first time

[^2]: IN HANOVER

[^3]: a of 23 February 1866 - b the Reform League (see Note 155) - c Probably Kugelmann's letter to Marx of 30 March 1866.



pious England all communications halt on Sundays. Since the reply may be held up by this delay, I hasten to let you know immediately today that the letter has arrived safely; but, at the same time, I would like to take this opportunity to apologise to you for my total silence. Just how indebted I am to you for the great sympathy and touching friendship you have shown my husband was really brought home to me when the young man from the CITY called to enquire on your behalf as to my husband's condition. Immediately after my last letter to you, Karl really became gravely ill; a fresh CARBUNCLE (not a furuncle) erupted, and was indeed so obstinate and so inflammatory that for almost 3 weeks my poor husband could scarcely move and was entirely confined to the sofa. Since we are all only too well aware how dangerous this complaint is, if it keeps recurring over a period of years, you can well imagine how melancholy the days and nights have been for us.

On the advice of Doctor Gumpert in Manchester, he decided to begin the arsenic cure, as well as to spend a few weeks at the seaside after the abscess had healed. He has now been in Margate, a coastal resort quite near here, for nearly 2 weeks, and it seems to us that his health has been greatly restored there. He will return next week to pick up with renewed energy the completion of that work of his3 which has so often been interrupted.

Yesterday he sent me his photogram, and since you would perhaps appreciate a sunny picture of the man to whom you have shown so much friendship, although you do not know him personally, I am enclosing 1 COPY with this note.

With all my respects, despite our not being acquainted

Yours truly

Jenny Marx

[^1]: First published in: Marx and Engels, Printed according to the original Works, Second Russian Edition, Vol. 31, , . , , . _ , . , r Moscow, 1963 Published in English for the first

[^2]: a the first volume of Capital



