---
Volume: 24
Document_Title: "I. A Polish Proclamation "
Page_Range: "36-43"
---

# I. A Polish Proclamation 



**[p. 5]**

I

A POLISH PROCLAMATIONS

When the Tsar of Russia arrived in London, the entire police force there was already astir. It was claimed that the Poles wanted to shoot him, the new Berezowski had already been found and was better armed than before, in Paris.3 The houses of well-known Poles were surrounded by plain-clothes policemen, and the police inspector with special responsibility for surveillance of Poles under the Empire was even summoned from Paris. The police precau- tions along the Tsar's route from his residence into the City were organised according to positively strategic principles—and all this trouble for nothing! No Berezowski showed up, no pistol shots were fired, and the Tsar, who was trembling quite as much as his daughter, got off with a fright. All this trouble was not, however, entirely in vain, for the Tsar awarded a tip of £5 to every police superintendent and £2 to every police inspector (33 and 14 talers3

respectively) who had been on duty for his sake.

Meanwhile, the Poles had other things on their minds than murdering the noble Alexander. The society called "The Polish People" 4 issued an "Address of the Polish Refugees to the English People", signed: General W. Wrôblewski, President, J. Krynski, Secretary. This address was distributed in large numbers in London during the Tsar's visit. With the exception of Reynolds's Newspaper^ the London press unanimously refused to publish it: "England's guest" should not be insulted!

The address starts by pointing out to the English that it was no honour, but an insult, for the Tsar to visit them at the very

[^1]: a In the 1894 edition: "100 and 40 marks".— Ed. b Reynolds's Newspaper, No. 1240, May 17, 1874.— Ed.





**[p. 6]**

"By her geographical situation and by her readiness at any moment to fight in the cause of humanity, Poland always was, and in future always will continue to be, the foremost champion of justice, civilisation and social development in all North Eastern Europe. Poland has incontestably proved this by her centuries of resistance to the invasions of Eastern Barbarians 6 on the one hand, and to the inquisition, then oppressing nearly the entire West, on the other. How was it that the Nations of Western Europe were enabled peaceably to occupy themselves with the development of their social vitality precisely in the most decisive epoch of modern times? Merely because on the Eastern frontier of Europe the Polish soldier stood sentry, always watchful, always ready to charge, always prepared to sacrifice his health, his property, his life. It was owing to the shelter of Polish arms, that on Europe's awakening to a new life in die sixteenth century, the arts and sciences could flourish afresh, that commerce, industry and wealth could attain their present wonderful extension. What, for instance, would have become of the legacy of civilisation left to the West by the labour of two centuries, had not Poland, herself threatened by Mongolian hordes at her back, come to the rescue of Central Europe threatened by the Turks, and broken the Ottoman power by the brilliant victory under the walls of Vienna 7?" 3

The address goes on to argue that even today it is essentially Poland's resistance that prevents Russia from turning her forces on the West and that has even managed to disarm the most dangerous allies of Russia, her pan-Slavist agents. The most renowned Russian historian, Pogodin, says, in a work printed by the order and at the expense of the Russian government,b that Poland, hitherto the most painful sore on Russia's body, must become her right hand by restoring her as a small, weak kingdom under the sway of some Russian Prince—that would be the strongest bait for the Turkish and Austrian Slavonians:

[^1]: a Address of the Polish Refugees to the English People, London, 1874, p. 2.— Ed b M. n . Iloro4HHT>, FIo Att CKoù eonpoct. Coôpanie pcucyo Kdeniu, aanuco Kh u 30Mb- Hauiü. 1831-1867.—Ed





**[p. 7]**

Unfortunately, this beautiful plan lacked only the main thing: the consent of Poland. But

"to all those allurements—the world knows it—Poland replied: I will live and must live, if I am to live at all, not as the tool of a foreign Tsar's plans for world conquest, but as a free nation among the free nations of Europe".3

The address then explains in further detail how Poland has confirmed this unshakeable decision of hers. At the critical moment of her existence, at the outbreak of the French Revolution, Poland was already crippled by the first partition and divided between four states.9 Yet she had the courage to raise the banner of the French Revolution on the Vistula—by the Constitution of the 3rd of May, 179110—a deed that earned her a place high above all her neighbours. The old Polish economy was thus destroyed; given a few decades of peaceful development, undisturbed from outside, and Poland would have become the most advanced and most powerful country east of the Rhine. It would not, however, suit the partition powers for Poland to rise once again, and even less for her to rise through the naturalisation of revolution in north-eastern Europe. Her fate was sealed: the Russians imposed on Poland what Prussians, Austrians and Imperial troops attempted in France in vain.11

At the same time, she has also developed the principles on which this future, the new Polish republic, will be organised: they are laid down in the manifestoes of 1836, 1845 and 1863.12

[^1]: "Kosciuszko fought simultaneously for Polish independence and the principle of equality. [] And it is notorious that from the moment of the loss of her national independence and in spite of it, Poland, in virtue of her innate patriotism and of her solidarity with all nations struggling for the rights of humanity, became the most active champion of justice outraged, no matter in what country, fighting on whatever battlefield tyranny was resisted. Unbroken by her own disasters, unshaken by the blindness and ill will of European governments, Poland has not for one moment been unmindful of the duties imposed upon her by herself, by history and by regard for the future."b

[^2]: a Address, pp. 3-4.— Ed. b Ibid., p. 4.— Ed





**[p. 8]**

"And yet neither the cruel yoke of the Tsar, though it has now weighed on her for a full century, nor the indifference of Europe, have been able to kill Poland.

"We have lived and we shall live by virtue of our own will, our own strength and our own social and political development, which renders us superior to our oppressors; for their existence is based, from beginning to end, upon brute force, prisons and the gallows, and their chief means of action abroad are clandestine machinations, treacherous surprises and, finally, conquest by force. " b

Let us, however, leave the address, which has been adequately characterised by the above extracts, in order to append to it some observations on the importance of the Polish question for the German workers.

No matter how much Russia had developed since Peter the Great, no matter how much her influence had grown in Europe (to which Frederick II of Prussia contributed more than a little, even though he knew full well what he was doing), she nevertheless remained essentially just as non-European a power as, for example, Turkey, until the moment she seized Poland. The first partition of Poland was in 1772; in 1779 in the Peace of Teschenc Russia was already demanding0 the attested right to

[^1]: a Italicised by Engels.— Ed. b Address, pp. 4-5.— Ed c Traité de paix entre Sa Majesté l'Impératrice de Hongrie et de Bohème, et Sa Majesté le Roi de Prusse, conclu et signé à Teschen le treize mai 1779, avec un article séparé et les conventions, garanties et actes annexés.— Ed

[^2]: d In the 1894 edition added: "and received".— Ed.





**[p. 9]**



[^1]: a Frederick William IV.— Ed. b Francis Joseph I.— Ed,





**[p. 10]**

Yet it is the German workers who are first exposed to the onslaught of this large reserve army of oppression, both in the so-called German Empire and in Austria. As long as the Russians stand behind the Austrian and German bourgeoisie and govern- ments, the sting is taken out of the entire German labour movement. So we, more than any others, have an interest in ridding ourselves of Russian reaction and the Russian army.

Moreover, in doing this we have only one reliable ally, which will remain reliable in all circumstances: the Polish people.

Through her historical development and her present position, Poland is faced, far more than France is, with the choice of either being revolutionary or perishing. And this scotches all the silly talk concerning the essentially aristocratic nature of the Polish move- ment. There are plenty of Polish refugees who have aristocratic cravings; but once Poland herself enters the movement it becomes revolutionary through and through, as we have seen in 184625 and 1863. These movements were not simply national; they were also aimed directly at liberating the peasants and transferring landed property to them. In 1871 the great mass of Polish refugees in France entered the service of the Commune26; was this an act of aristocrats? Did that not prove that these Poles were at the very apex of the modern movement? Since Bismarck introduced the Kulturkampf27 in Posen3 and, on the pretext of striking a blow against the Pope,b searches out Polish textbooks, suppresses the Polish language and does his utmost to drive the Poles into the arms of Russia, what happens? The Polish aristocracy is increas- ingly siding with Russia to at least reunify Poland under Russian rule; the revolutionary masses reply by offering to ally themselves with the German workers' party and fighting in the ranks of the International.

In 1863, Poland showed that she could not be done to death, and continues to show this every day. Her claim to an

[^1]: * This is already stated in the "Second Address of the General Council of the International Working Men's Association on the Franco-German War" (dated September 9, 1870).

[^2]: a The 1894 edition has: "Poland".— Ed b Pius IX.— Ed.





**[p. 11]**



