---
Volume: 24
Document_Title: "IV "
Page_Range: "60-70"
---

# IV 



**[p. 29]**

IV 44

The readers of the Volksstaat have suffered a misfortune. Some of them may still remember that, in my last article on "refugee literature" (Nos. 117 and 118),a I dealt with some passages from the Russian periodical Forward and a pamphlet by its editor.b

Quite by chance I happened to mention a Mr. Peter Tkachov, who has published a little pamphlet attacking the aforementioned editor,0 and with whom I had only concerned myself as little as was absolutely necessary. I described him, to judge by the form and content of his immortal work, "as a green grammar-school boy of singular immaturity, the Karlchen Missnick, as it were, of Russian revolutionary youth"d and pitied the editor of the Forward for deeming it necessary to bandy words with such an adversary. I was soon to learn, however, that the boy Karl is beginning to get cross with me e and entangling me, too, in polemics with him. He publishes a pamphlet: Offener Brief an

Herrn Friedrich Engels by Peter Tkachov, Zurich, typography by

Tagwacht, 1874. The fact that, in it, I have all sorts of things foisted on to me that Mr. Tkachov must know I have never maintained would be a matter of indifference to me; but the fact that he gives the German workers quite a false picture of the situation in Russia, in order to justify the activities of the Bakuninists in relation to Russia, makes a reply necessary.

In his open letter, Mr. Tkachov consistently sets himself up as a representative of Russian revolutionary youth. He maintains that I "dispensed advice to the Russian revolutionaries urging them to

[^1]: a See this volume, pp. 19-28.— Ed. h Ibid., p. 25.— Ed. c Ibid., p. 24.— Ed d Ibid.— Ed e Ibid., p. 18.— Ed





**[p. 30]**

Now, nobody knows better than Peter Nikitich Tkachov that there is not a single grain of truth in all this. First, in the article in question, I held no one responsible for Mr. Tkachov's utterances other than Mr. Tkachov himself. It never occurred to me to see him as a representative of the Russian revolutionaries. If he appoints himself as such, thereby transferring the green grammar- school boy and other pleasantries from his shoulders on to theirs, then I must definitely protest. Among Russian revolutionary youth there are, of course, as everywhere, people of widely differing moral and intellectual calibre. Yet its general level, even after taking full account of the time difference and the essentially different milieu, is undoubtedly still far higher than our German student youth has ever attained, even during its best period in the early 1830s. Nobody but Mr. Tkachov himself gives him the right to speak on behalf of these young people in their entirety. Indeed, even though he reveals himself as a true Bakuninist on this occasion, I nevertheless doubt at the moment whether he has the right to conduct himself as the representative of the small number of Russian Bakuninists whom I described as "a few immature little students, who inflate themselves with big words like frogs, and finally gobble one another up".c But even if this were the case, it would only be a new version of the old story of the three tailors of Tooley Street in London, who issued a proclamation that started, "We, the people of England, declare" 45 etc.* Thus, the main point that needs to be made is that the "Russian revolutionaries" do not

[^1]: * What's the betting that Mr. Tkachov will say that, with the above anecdote, I have betrayed the proletariat by depicting tailors as such in a "ridiculous light" d?

[^2]: a P. Tkatschoff, Offener Brief an Herrn Friedrich Engels, Zurich, 1874, p. 3.— Ed.

[^3]: b Ibid., pp. 3, 7, 10 and 11.— Ed.

[^4]: c See this volume, p. 23.— Ed. d P. Tkatschoff, Offener Brief, p. 10.— Ed





**[p. 31]**

I am supposed to have given him "advice". I haven't the faintest idea what he is talking about. I may have let fly a few blows, Peter Nikitich, but advice*? Be so kind as to furnish proof.

At the end of my last article, I am supposed to have urged him or his ilk to enter into an alliance with me. I will pay Mr. Tkachov ten marks in Bismarck's coin of the realm46 if he can demonstrate that.

I am supposed to have maintained that he is "stupid", and he puts the word in quotation marks. Although I would not deny that he has hidden his talents—if that is the appropriate word here—under a bushel of considerable size in both these works, it is open to anyone to ascertain that the word '.'stupid" does not occur once anywhere in my article. But if all else fails, the Bakuninists resort to bogus quotations.

Further, I am supposed to have "mocked" him and portrayed him in a "ridiculous light". Granted, Mr. Tkachov will never be able to force me to take his pamphlet seriously. We Germans are widely reputed to be boring, and must have richly deserved this reputation on many an occasion. That does not, however, oblige us in all circumstances to be as boring and pompous as the Bakuninists. The German labour movement has acquired a singularly humorous character from its skirmishes with police, state prosecutors and prison-warders; why should I deny it? Mr. Tkachov has full permission to mock me and depict me in a ridiculous light, if he can manage it without imputing any lies to me.

Now the incomparable accusation: by portraying Mr. Tkachov in a light befitting him and his works, I have "done our common enemy, the Russian state, a valuable service"! Similarly, he says at another point: by describing him as I have, I am breaching "the basic principles of the programme of the International Working Men's Association"! Here we see the true Bakuninist. These gentlemen, as true revolutionaries, shun no means against us, particularly in the dark; but if one fails to treat them with the greatest respect, if one drags their antics into the light, criticises them and their ringing phrases, then one is serving the Tsar of Russia and breaching the basic principles of the International. Precisely the opposite is the case, in fact. The one who has done

[^1]: a In the original a play on the words Schläge (blows) and Ratschläge (advice).— Ed.





**[p. I]**

But, says Mr. Tkachov, I have subjected him to "every conceivable kind of abuse". Now a certain kind of abuse, the so-called invective, is one of the most effective forms of rhetoric, employed by all great orators when necessary; the most powerful English political writer, William Cobbett, possessed a supreme command of it that is still admired to this day and serves as an unsurpassed model. Mr. Tkachov himself also indulges in a good deal of "abuse" in his pamphlet. So, if I had indulged in abuse, that would not in itself have been wrong of me at all. But as I did not become rhetorical with regard to Mr. Tkachov, as I did not take him seriously at all, I cannot have used abuse to attack him. Let us examine what I said about him.

I called him "a green grammar-school boy of singular immaturi- ty". Immaturity may refer to character, mind or knowledge. As far as immaturity of character is concerned, I made the following addition to Mr. Tkachov's own account:

"A Russian scholar, who has a considerable reputation in his own country, becomes a refugee and acquires the means to found a political journal abroad. Scarcely has he managed to do this, when some more or less enthusiastic youth comes along, unasked, and offers to take part, on the more or less childish condition that he should have an equal voice with the founder of the journal in all literary and financial matters. In Germany he would have been laughed at."a

hardly think I need adduce any further evidence of immaturity of character. Immaturity of mind is sufficiently demonstrated by the further quotations from Mr. Tkachov's pamphlet that follow below. As far as knowledge is concerned, the dispute between the Forward and Mr. Tkachov largely concerns this: the editor of the Forward demands that the Russian revolutionary youth should learn something, should enrich them- selves with serious and thorough information, should acquire critical faculties in accordance with accepted methods, should work

[^1]: a See this volume, p. 24.— Ed.



"Again and again I must express the feeling of profound indignation that it has always aroused in me Learn! Educate yourselves! Oh God, how can a living human being say such a thing to another living human being! Wait! Study and finish your education! But have we the right to wait" (with revolution to wit)? "Have we the right to waste time on education?" (p. 14). "Knowledge is probably a necessary precondition for peaceful progress, but it is not necessary at all for the revolution" (p. I7).a

So, if Mr. Tkachov evinces profound indignation at the very injunction to study, if he declares all knowledge superfluous for a revolutionary, if, in addition, he does not betray even the slightest trace of knowledge in his entire pamphlet, he himself writes out the testimony to his own immaturity, and I have but ascertained the fact. Yet anyone who makes out this testimony himself can, in our opinion, aspire at most to the educational level of a grammar-school boy. Thus, by attributing the highest possible level to him, rather than abusing him, I was perhaps doing him even too much credit.

Furthermore, I said that Mr. Tkachov's observations were childish (for examples of this, see the quotations in this article), tedious (surely even the writer himself would not deny this), contradictory (as the editor of the Forward has demonstrated) and revolving in an eternal circle (which is also true). I then go on to speak of his great pretensions (which I have simply related in his own terms) and his utterly insignificant achievements (which the present article demonstrates more than adequately). Where, then, is all the abuse? Surely, it cannot be abuse to compare him with Karlchen Missnick, Germany's favourite grammar-school boy and one of the most popular German writers. But stay! Did I not say of him that he had retired like Achilles to his tent and from there fired off his pamphlet against the Forward?b That must be the crux of the matter. In the case of a man whose hackles rise at the mere mention of studying, who can boldly take Heine's words:

as his motto, I dare say one may assume that it is the first time he has come across the name Achilles. And as I link Achilles with "tent" and "firing", perhaps Mr. Tkachov imagines that this Achilles is a Russian N.C.O. or a Turkish bashibazouk47 and it

[^1]: And all his ignorance He acquired himself,0

[^2]: a II. TKa MëBT>, 3adav,u peeo Moiiiou Hou nponaeandt* «& Pocciu.— Ed. b See this volume, p. 24.— Ed. c H. Heine, Kobes I.—Ed

[^3]: 5-1317





**[p. 34]**

Mr. Tkachov goes on to say:

"Despite all this I ventured, however, to express the conviction that the social revolution can be easily called into life. 'If it is so easy to call it into life,' you remark, 'why do you not do so, instead of talking about it?'—It seems to you to be ridiculous, childish behaviour I and those who think as I do are convinced that the practicability of the social revolution in Russia presents no problems, that it is possible at any moment to induce the Russian people to make a general revolutionary protest (!). True, this conviction commits us to a certain amount of practical activity, but it does not militate in the least against the usefulness and necessity of literary propaganda. It is not enough that we are convinced; we want others, too, to share our conviction. The more like-minded comrades we have, the stronger we shall feel, the easier it will be for us to achieve a practical solution to the task."3

That really does take the cake. It sounds so nice, so sensible, so cultivated, so reasonable. It quite sounds as though Mr. Tkachov had only written his pamphlet0 to demonstrate the usefulness of literary propaganda, and I, the impatient greenhorn, had ans- wered him: "The devil take literary propaganda, let's get cracking!" Now, what is the true state of affairs?

Mr. Tkachov commences his pamphlet by straightaway giving newspaper propaganda (and that is surely the most effective form of literary propaganda) a vote of no confidence, saying that one should not "expend too much revolutionary energy on it", for "it does far more harm through inappropriate use, than it does the good through appropriate use".c So enthusiastic is our Tka- chov about literary propaganda in general. In particular, though, if one wishes to engage in such propaganda and recruit like-minded comrades, mere rhetoric is no good; one must examine causes, and treat the matter theoretically, i.e., in the final analysis, scientifically. On this point, Mr. Tkachov tells the editor of the Forward:

[^1]: "Your philosophical struggle, that purely theoretical, scientific propaganda to which your journal is devoted, is, from the point of view of the interests of the revolutionary party, not merely useless; it is even harmful."d

[^2]: a P. Tkatschoff, Offener Brief, pp. 9-10.— Ed b 3adanu peeojiwuiow Hoü nponazanàbi ea Pocciu.— Ed c n . TKanèBi», 3adauu peao Mouionnoü nponazandu er> Pocciu, p. II.— Ed d Ibid., p. 37.— Ed



"Do you not realise that the revolutionary always assumes and must assume the right to summon the people to revolt; that he differs from philistine philosophers in that, without waiting until the course of historical events announces the moment, he himself chooses this moment, in that he knows that the people are always ready for revolution (p. 10) Whoever does not believe in the possibility of the revolution in the present does not believe in the people, does not believe in the people's readiness for revolution (p. 11) That is why we cannot wait, why we maintain that revolution is an urgent necessity in Russia, and particularly necessary at the present time; we permit no hesitation, no delay. Now or very late, perhaps never (p. 16)! Every people exposed to despotism, enslaved by exploiters any such people (and all peoples are in this position) is by virtue of the very conditions of its social order—revolutionary; it is always capable, it is always willing to make revolution; it is always ready for revolution (p. 17) But we cannot and will not wait (p. 34) Now is no time for long, protracted arrangements and eternal preparations—let everyone pack his possessions and hasten on his way. The question of what is to be done 4 8 must no longer concern us. It has long since been settled. It is to make revolution.— How? To the best of one's ability" (p. 39[-40]).

This seems clear enough to me. So I asked Karlchen Missnick: If nothing else will do, if the people are ready for revolution, and you are too; if you are simply unwilling and unable to wait any longer, and have no right to wait; if you claim the right to choose the moment to strike, and if it is, at last, "now or never!"—well, dear Karlchen, do what you cannot refrain from doing, make revolution today and smash the Russian state into a thousand pieces, otherwise you will end up by bringing about an even greater misfortune!

And what does Karlchen Missnick do? Does he strike? Does he destroy the Russian state? Does he liberate the Russian people, "this unfortunate people, streaming in blood, with the crown of thorns, nailed to the cross of slavery",3 whose suffering prevents him from waiting any longer?

Not a bit of it. Karlchen Missnick, with tears of injured innocence in his eyes, appears before the German workers saying: See what lies that depraved Engels is imputing to me! He claims I spoke of striking immediately; yet it is not a question of that, but of making literary propaganda, and this Engels, who does nothing more himself than make literary propaganda, has the effrontery to pretend that he does not understand "the usefulness of literary propaganda".b

[^1]: a Ibid., p. 34.— Ed. b P. Tkatschoff, Offener Brief, p. 10.— Ed.

[^2]: 5*





**[p. 36]**

Was I wrong when I described these impetuous rodomontades, now so basely denied, as "childish"? They are so childish that one would think the writer had gone as far as was humanly possible in this respect. And yet he has since surpassed himself. The editor of the Forward quotes a passage from a proclamation to the Russian peasants, penned by Mr. Tkachov. In it Mr. Tkachov describes the state of affairs after a completed social revolution as follows:

"And then the peasant would embark on a merry life with song and music his pockets would be full, not of coppers but of gold ducats. He would have all kinds of beasts and poultry in the farmyard, as many as he desired. On the table he would have every kind of meat, and festive cakes, and sweet wines, and the table would be laid from morn to night. And he would eat and drink as much as his belly would hold, but he would work no more than he had a mind to. And there would be no one who dared to force him: go, eat!—go, lie down on the stove! " b

And the person capable of perpetrating this proclamation complains when I confine myself to calling him a green grammar-school boy of rare immaturity!

Mr. Tkachov continues:

First, it is untrue that the Russian revolutionaries have no other means at their disposal than pure conspiracy. Mr. Tkachov himself has just stressed the importance of literary propaganda, from abroad into Russia! Even within Russia oral propaganda among the people themselves, particularly in the cities, can never be quite excluded as a method, whatever Mr. Tkachov may find it in his interest to say about it. The best proof of this is that, in the latest

[^1]: "Why do you reproach us with conspiracies? If we were to renounce conspiratorial, secret, underground activities, we would have to renounce all revolutionary activity. But you also castigate us for not wanting to depart from our conspiratorial ways here in the European West and thus disturbing the great international labour movement."0

[^2]: a IT. TKane Bt, 3adauu peeo Jiwi^io HHoü nponazandu ea Pocciu.— Ed b II. Aa Bpo B-b, Pycc Koü c&uicuib HO-peeajiwiiio HHoü MOJiode JKu, [London,] 1874, p. 47.— Ed.

[^3]: c P. Tkatschoff, Offener Brief, p. 7.—Ed.





**[p. 37]**

Second, I undertake to fly to the moon, even before Tkachov liberates Russia, as soon as he proves that I have ever, anywhere, at any time in my political career, declared that conspiracies were to be universally condemned in all circumstances. I undertake to bring him back a souvenir from the moon as soon as he proves that any other plots are mentioned in my article but the one against the International by the Alliance. Indeed, if only the Russian Bakuninists really were to conspire seriously against the Russian Government! If only, instead of fraudulent conspiracies based on lies and deceit against their co-conspirators, like that of Nechayev,50 this "typical representative of our present-day youth" according to Tkachov,3 instead of plots against the European labour movement like the Alliance, fortunately exposed and thus destroyed—if only they, the "doers" (dejateli), as they boastfully call themselves, would at last, for once, perform a deed proving that they really possess an organisation and that they are concerned with something else apart from the attempt to form a dozen! Instead, they cry out loud to all and sundry: We conspire, we conspire!—just like operatic conspirators roaring in four parts: "Silence, silence! Make not a sound!"*5 And all the tales about far-reaching conspiracies only serve as a cloak to hide nothing more than revolutionary inactivity vis-à-vis governments and ambitious cliquishness within the revolutionary party.

It is precisely our ruthless exposure of this entire fraud in the Komplott gegen die Internationale that causes these gentlemen to wax so indignant. It was "tactless". In exposing Mr. Bakunin we were seeking "to besmirch one of the greatest and most selfless representatives of the revolutionary epoch in which we live", and with "dirt", at that. The dirt that came to light on this occasion was, to the very last particle, of Mr. Bakunin's own making, and not his worst by any means. The pamphlet in question made him out to be far cleaner than he really was. We simply quoted § 18 of the "Revolutionary Catechism", the article stipulating how to behave vis-à-vis the Russian aristocracy and bourgeoisie, how "to seize hold of their dirty secrets and thereby make them our slaves, so that their wealth, etc., becomes an inexhaustible treasure and a valuable support in all kinds of undertaking".51 We have not yet

[^1]: a n . TKa MëBT>, 3adanu peeo Aioiiio HHoü nponazauàbi ej> Pocciu, [London,] 1874, p. 19.— Ed.

[^2]: b G. Verdi, Rigoletto, Scene II. Libretto by Piave with changes according to Victor Hugo's Le roi s'amuse.— Ed.





**[p. 38]**

It thus turns out that all the accusations Mr. Tkachov has made against me, with that virtuous mien of injured innocence that becomes all Bakuninists so well, are all based on claims he not only knew to be false, but were also a pack of lies that he himself had concocted. Whereupon we take our leave of the personal part of his "Open Letter".

