---
Volume: 24
Document_Title: "II "
Page_Range: "122-124"
---

# II 



**[p. il]**

"Starting from these basic principles, the German workers' party strives by all legal means for the free state—and—socialist society; the abolition of the wage system together with the iron law of wages—and—exploitation in every form; the elimination of all social and political inequality."

I shall return to the "free" state later. So, in future, the German workers' party has got to believe in Lassalle's "iron law of wages" 114! That this may not be lost, the nonsense is perpetrated of speaking of the "abolition of the wage system" (it should read: system of wage labour) "together with the iron law of wages". If I abolish wage labour, then naturally I abolish its laws too, whether they are of "iron" or sponge. But Lassalle's attack on wage labour turns almost solely on this so-called law. In order, therefore, to prove that the Lassallean sect has won, the "wage system" must be abolished " together with the iron law of wages" and not without it.

It is well known that nothing of the "iron law of wages" is Lassal- le's except the word "iron" borrowed from Goethe's "eternal, iron, great laws".3 The word iron is a label by which the true believers recognise one another. But if I take the law with Lassalle's stamp on it and, consequently, in his sense, then I must also take it with his substantiation. And what is that? As Lange already showed, shortly after Lassalle's death, it is the Malthusian theory of population (preached by Lange himself).b But if this theory is correct, then again I cannot abolish the law even if I abolish wage labour a hundred times over, because the law then governs not only the system of wage labour but every social system. Basing themselves directly on this, the economists have been proving for fifty years and more that socialism cannot abolish destitution, which has its basis in nature, but can only make it general, distribute it simultaneously over the whole surface of society!

But all this is not the main thing. Quite apart from the false Lassallean formulation of the law, the truly outrageous retrogres- sion consists in the following:

[^1]: a Quoted from Goethe's poem Das Göttliche, sixth stanza.— Ed. b F. A. Lange, Die Arbeiterfrage in ihrer Bedeutung für Gegenwart und Zukunft, Duisburg, 1865, pp. 108-12.— Ed.





**[p. 92]**

It is as if, among slaves who have at last got behind the secret of slavery and broken out in rebellion, a slave still in thrall to obsolete notions were to inscribe on the programme of the rebellion: Slavery must be abolished because the feeding of slaves in the system of slavery cannot exceed a certain low maximum!

Does not the mere fact that the representatives of our Party were capable of perpetrating such a monstrous attack on the understanding that has spread among the mass of our Party prove by itself with what criminal levity and with what lack of con- science they set to work in drawing up this compromise pro- gramme!

Instead of the indefinite concluding phrase of the paragraph, "the elimination of all social and political inequality", it ought to have been said that with the abolition of class distinctions all social and political inequality arising from them would disappear of itself.

