---
Volume: 24
Document_Title: "8. F. Engels. Letter to the General Council of the International Working Men's Association in New York "
Page_Range: "136-138"
---

# 8. F. Engels. Letter to the General Council of the International Working Men's Association in New York 



**[p. 105]**

Frederick Engels

[LETTER T O THE GENERAL COUNCIL OF THE INTERNATIONAL WORKING MEN'S

ASSOCIATION IN NEW YORK]

London, August 13, 1875 122 Regent's Park Road, NW

TO THE GENERAL COUNCIL OF THE INTERNATIONAL WORKING MEN'S ASSOCIATION

Citizens!

The circulars122 sent to me with the letter from Secretary Speyer (June 4, received 21st) have been put into circulation according to the instructions, and I have been able to do the following in the interests of the cause:

1. On account of its amalgamation with the Lasselleans and its over-generous policy in accepting new members—roughly 120— the Working Men's Society (German section) here123 would not be suitable for confidential communications, unless one wished them to be published immediately. I therefore gave circulars to Lessner and Frankel, who agreed with me that the content was not suitable for official release to the Society, and that we should have to confine ourselves to communicating it to suitable persons, and work behind the scenes in other ways to promote the matter in question. Since it is fairly certain that no German workers will be sent to Philadelphia from here, it will not affect the practical consequences in any way.

2. Our friend Mesa from Madrid, who now lives in Paris, happened to be here when the circular arrived. He showed a keen interest in the matter; I translated the circular for him, and as he knows members of the committee that administers the subscrip- tions in Paris to the workers' donations to Philadelphia, I dare say that, with his well-known energy, he will be able to get something done. He is also sending it to Spain.

3. I could not send it to Belgium, as the whole Belgian International supports the Alliancists,124 and it is not in our interests to communicate the plan to them. I have no addresses for



**[p. 106]**

4. As Germany, Austria and Switzerland are not mentioned in the instructions, and the General Council has plenty of direct contacts with these countries,125 I have taken no steps there, so as not to frustrate any action that may have been taken directly on the spot.

5. The circular has been very well received by all who have seen it, and the just proposal for a conference is universally regarded as the sole practical one. It appears impossible to us here, however, to hold a ballot on the issue. The Society here has already been mentioned. Other sections in England have all fizzled out; the best people have mostly left. In Denmark, France and Spain, where the International is officially prohibited, there can be no question of a ballot. In Germany there has never been a vote on anything like this and, after uniting with the Lassalleans, they have totally renounced the already loose connection with the International. In these circumstances, the American votes should be enough to cover the General Council if it tables the motion for a decision, especially since we know from a reliable source that the Alliancists are not holding a congress this year either (and probably never will again).

6. Would it not be a good thing if a brief announcement were placed in the European party newspapers around the time the exhibition opens, to the effect that: "Socialist workers visiting the exhibition in Philadelphia are asked to go to (address), where they will be put in touch with the Philadelphia party comrades", or if we founded a "committee for the accommodation of socialist workers, or to protect them against trickery" and published its address? The latter, in particular, would look very innocent, but a few private letters would suffice to make the true state of affairs known.

Fraternal greetings,

F. Engels

[^1]: First published in Briefe und Auszüge aus Printed according to the manu- Briefen von Joh. Phil. Becker, Jos. Dietzgen, script Friedrich Engels, Karl Marx u. A. an « , , . , , . „ , . , , F. A. Sorge und Andere, Stuttgart, 1906 Published in English for the first

[^2]: a See this volume, pp. 174-78.— Ed



