---
Volume: 24
Document_Title: "9. F. Engels. Speech at the Meeting Held to Commemorate the Anniversary of the Polish Uprising of 1863 "
Page_Range: "138-140"
---

# 9. F. Engels. Speech at the Meeting Held to Commemorate the Anniversary of the Polish Uprising of 1863 



**[p. 107]**

Frederick Engels

[SPEECH AT THE MEETING HELD T O COMMEMORATE

THE ANNIVERSARY OF THE POLISH UPRISING

OF 1863]126

Citizens! The role of Poland in the history of Europe's revolutions is a role that stands apart. Any revolution in the West which does not succeed in involving Poland and ensuring its independence and liberty is doomed to defeat. Let us take the revolution of 1848 as an example. It covered an area more extensive than any previous revolution; it swept along in its current Austria, Hungary, Prussia. But it came to a halt at the borders of Poland occupied by the armies of Russia. When Tsar Nicholas received the news of the February Revolution, he said to his entourage: Gentlemen, we shall mount our horses.127 At this he promptly mobilised his troops and concentrated them in Poland, in order to let them overrun rebellious Europe at the opportune moment. For their part, the revolutionaries knew perfectly well that the ground where the decisive battle would be fought was Poland. On May 15 the people of Paris, to cries of "Long Live Poland!", invaded the National Assembly to force it to go to war for Polish independence. At the same time, in the Neue Rheinische Zeitung, Marx and I demanded that Prussia should immediately declare war on Russia in order to set Poland free, and we were supported by all advanced democrats in Germany.128 Thus in France and Germany they knew perfectly well where the decisive point was: with Poland, revolution was assured; without Poland, it was bound to fail. But in France M. Lamartine, in Prussia Frederick William IV, the Tsar's3 brother-in-law, and his bourgeois minister Mr. Camphausen, had no intention whatever of themselves breaking the power of Russia, in which they saw quite

[^1]: a Nicholas I.— Ed.





**[p. 108]**

Speech delivered on January 22, 1876 Printed according to the manu- script, verified with the newspaper First published in the newspaper Bne- pedh! (London), No. 27, February 15, Translated from the French 1876

Published in English for the first time

