---
Volume: 24
Document_Title: "III "
Page_Range: "171-175"
---

# III 



**[p. 140]**

III

The state of siege in Cologne was short-lived. It ended on October 4. On the 12th the Neue Rheinische Zeitung resumed publication.171 Wolff had gone to Dürkheim in the Palatinate where he was left in peace. There was a warrant out for his arrest as for several others of the editorial staff, for conspiracy, etc.; but our Wolff did not bide long in the Palatinate, and when the grape harvest was over he suddenly turned up in the editorial office again, 17 Unter Hutmacher. He managed to find rooms next door, from where he was able to cross the yard into the office without setting foot in the street. However, he soon tired of captivity; disguised in a long overcoat and a cap with a long peak, he sallied out into the darkness nearly every evening on the pretext of buying tobacco. He believed that no one recognised him, although his curiously gnarled figure and determined gait were absolutely unconcealable; anyway he was not betrayed. Thus he lived for several months while the warrants out for the rest of us were gradually lifted. Finally on March 1, 1849 we were informed that there was no longer any danger, and Wolff now went before the examining magistrate, who also declared that, being based on exaggerated police reports, the whole case had been dropped.172

Meanwhile the Berlin Assembly had been sent packing and Manteuffel's period of reaction had set in.173 One of the first measures of the new government was to reassure the feudal lords of the Eastern Provinces regarding their disputed right to unpaid peasant labour. After the March days the peasants of the Eastern Provinces had ceased to perform statute labour, and in places even forced the worthy lords to give them a written disclaimer



**[p. 141]**



[^1]: a [Declaration of the Prussian ministry regarding "Entwurf eines Gesetzes betreffend die unentgeltliche Aufhebung verschiedener Lasten und Abgaben vom

[^2]: 10. Juli 1848,] Preußischer Staats-Anzeiger, No. 223, December 13, 1848 (in the section Nichtamtlicher Theil, Deutschland. Preußen).— Ed.

[^3]: b In place of the following text, up to "Few of the many inflammatory articles in the Neue Rheinische Zeitung" (see this volume, p. 146), Engels wrote in 1886:

[^4]: "Thus Wolff opened the campaign against the feudal lords, which culminated in the Silesian Milliard and to which I refer below. It was a campaign which by right ought to have been waged by the bourgeoisie. It was, after all, precisely the struggle against feudalism that was the mission of this class in world history. But as we have seen, it failed to wage it, or only pretended to do so. Thanks to the social and political backwardness of Germany, the German bourgeoisie everywhere left its own political interests in the lurch, because the proletariat was already looming up behind it. The vague hopes and desires of the Parisian workers in February, but even more their four-day battle of desperation in June 1848, terrified not only the bourgeoisie of France but of all Europe. And in Germany even simple democratic demands, such as they had themselves long since carried out legally in Switzerland, seemed to the quaking bourgeois to be attacks on their property, their security, their lives, etc. As cowardly as ever, the German bourgeois sacrificed their common, i.e., political interests so that each might save his private interest, his capital. Rather a return to the old bureaucratic-feudal absolutism than a victory of the bourgeoisie as a class, than a modern bourgeois state attained in a revolutionary way and strengthening the revolutionary class, the proletariat! That was the German bourgeoisie's cry of anguish, in the midst of which reaction triumphed all along the line.





**[p. 142]**

This decree, says Wolff,

"is an invitation to our lords the princes, counts, barons, etc., to make haste 'in the interim' to rob and plunder the rural population under the semblance of law to an extent that will enable them, after this fat year, to survive the lean ones all the more easily. Before March Silesia was the promised land of the worthy landowners. By the redemption laws since 1821 the feudal Junkers had made themselves as comfortable as they conceivably could. As a result of the redemptions, which were always and everywhere passed and put into effect for the benefit of the privileged and the ruination of the rural people, the Silesian Junkers had obtained the tidy sum of about 80 millions in hard cash, arable land, and interest from the hands of the rural population. And the redemptions were still far from being completed. Hence their rage at the godless revolution of 1848. The country people refused to go on doing statute labour for the worthy lords like docile cattle, and to go on paying the terrible impositions, interest and dues of all kinds. The amounts of money flowing into the coffers of the landowners underwent a serious decline."

The Berlin Assembly took the settlement of these relations in hand.

"There was danger in delay. This was understood by the camarilla of Potsdam, which is equally adept at filling its money-bags from the sweat and blood of the country folk. So, away with the Assembly! Let us make the laws ourselves as they seem most lucrative to us!—And so it happened. The decree for Silesia published in the Staats-Anzeiger is nothing but an entangled snare with all the trimmings, in which the rural population, should it once venture in, will be irrevocably lost."

Wolff then demonstrates that the decree essentially marks the restoration of the pre-March conditions, concluding:

[^1]: "Only what's the use? The worthy lords need money. Winter is here with its balls, masquerades, enticing gambling-tables, etc. The peasants who have furnished the funds for amusement hitherto, must go on supplying them. The Junkers wish to enjoy at least one more merry carnival and exploit the November achievements

[^2]: "Thus the party of the proletariat had to take up the struggle at the point where the bourgeoisie had absconded from the batdefield. And Wolff took up the struggle against feudalism in the Neue Rheinische Zeitung. But not in such a way as to afford the bourgeois any joy; no, in truly revolutionary fashion, in such a manner that the bourgeoisie was just as appalled at these articles exhaling the spirit of the great French Revolution as the feudal lords and the government themselves."— Ed.

[^3]: a See Wolffs article on Manteuffel's statement against the abolition of feudal duties, Neue Rheinische Zeitung, No. 171, December 17, 1848 (in the section

[^4]: Deutschland. Köln).— Ed.

[^5]: b Here and below Engels quotes Wolffs article ["Decree on the Abolition of Feudal Duties without Compensation in Silesia",] Neue Rheinische Zeitung, No. 181, December 29, 1848 (in the section Deutschland. Köln).— Ed





**[p. 143]**

There followed on January 20 a new article by Wolffa which dealt with this field. The party of reaction had got a village mayor, Krengel from Nessin near Kolberg, and a number of day labourers to address an inquiry to the Kingb whether it was true that His Majesty really intended to split up landed property and turn it over to the propertyless.

"One can imagine", says Wolff, "the mortal terror and sleepless nights of the day labourers of Nessin when they heard of such intentions. What? The King wants to split up landed property? We day labourers who have up till now tilled the field of our worthy lords so joyously for 5 silver groschen a day—are we supposed to cease being day labourers and work on our own fields? Our worthy lord, who owns 80 to 90 domains and a mere few hundred thousand morgenc—is he to be forced to give up so and so many morgen to us?—No, at the mere thought of such a frightful disaster our day labourers were atremble in every limb. They had never a peaceful moment until they were reassured that they were not to be pitched into this bottomless misery, that the menacing morgen of land were to be warded off and the worthy lords left in peace just as before."

[^1]: a "(Das königl. Patent an die Bauern)", Neue Rheinische Zeitung, No. 200, January 20, 1849 (in the section Deutschland. Köln).— Ed.

[^2]: b See [An Inquiry from the Electors of Nessin to Frederick William IV, "Berlin. 12. Januar"], Preußischer Staats-Anzeiger, No. 14, January 14, 1849.— Ed.

[^3]: c Morgen = 0.6 or 0.9 of an acre depending on local variations.— Ed.



