---
Volume: 24
Document_Title: "14. F. Engels. British Agricultural Labourers Want to Participate in the Political Life of Their Country "
Page_Range: "210-212"
---

# 14. F. Engels. British Agricultural Labourers Want to Participate in the Political Life of Their Country 



**[p. 179]**

Frederick Engels

[BRITISH AGRICULTURAL LABOURERS WANT

TO PARTICIPATE IN THE POLITICAL LIFE

OF THEIR COUNTRY]207

London, June 5

At a meeting of delegates of the agricultural associations which took place a few days ago at Exeter Hall, Joseph Arch spoke out forcefully against the war208 and received rapturous applause. The leader of the farm labourers' party revealed himself to be an uninhibited advocate of peace, especially because the sacrifices which war entails weigh increasingly heavily on the workers more than on the other social classes. The agricultural labourers in Britain do not yet participate officially in the political life of their country, but these impressive demonstrations of opposition to war cannot help having a certain influence also on those classes upon which the politics of the nation depends. The agricultural labourers are beginning to feel the need of playing a direct part in this political life themselves, and therefore at their meeting at Exeter Hall they also dealt in particular with the extension of franchise.209 They still constitute a caste of poor pariahs, not only in economic terms but politically too. They therefore hammer at the door of Parliament and ask to go in: they no longer want to be what they have been up till now. One can easily imagine that their claims are not viewed favourably by all those—and they are many, particularly among the clergy—who consider the subjection of the agricultural labourers to be the basis of the whole British politico-economic system. On the other hand, the members of the bourgeois parliamentary opposition are coming forward to take control of this farm labourers' movement themselves and use it to destroy their political opponents currently in government. At the head of this bourgeois opposition stands Mr. Bright, who also spoke at the Exeter Hall meeting and, deftly leaving out the big economic-social issue, made a resounding political accusation

[^1]: 14*





**[p. 180]**

The social movement in Britain—as you can see—is slow, it is evolutionist, not revolutionary, but it is nonetheless a movement forwards.

[^1]: Written on June 5, 1877 Printed according to the news- paper First published in La Plebe, No. 18, June 8, 1877 Translated from the Italian

[^2]: Published in English for the first time



