---
Volume: 24
Document_Title: "16. F. Engels. Karl Marx "
Page_Range: "214-227"
---

# 16. F. Engels. Karl Marx 



**[p. 183]**

Frederick Engels

KARL MARX214

Karl Marx, the man who was the first to give socialism, and thereby the whole workers' movement of our day, a scientific foundation, was born in Trier in 1818. He studied in Bonn and Berlin, at first taking up jurisprudence, but he soon devoted himself exclusively to the study of history and philosophy, and in 1842 was on the point of qualifying as a dozent in philosophy when the political movement which had arisen since the death of Frederick William III directed his life into a different career. With his collaboration, the leaders of the Rhenish liberal bourgeoisie, Messrs. Camphausen, Hansemann, and others had founded in Cologne the Rheinische Zeitung, and in the autumn of 1842, Marx, whose criticism of the proceedings of the Rhine Province Assembly3 had attracted very great attention, was put at the head of the paper. The Rheinische Zeitung naturally appeared under censorship, but the censors could not cope with it.* The Rheinische Zeitung almost always got through the articles which mattered; the censor was first supplied with insignificant fodder for him to strike out, until he either gave way of himself or was compelled to give way by the threat that then the paper would not appear the next day. Ten newspapers with the same courage as the Rheinische Zeitung and whose publishers allowed a few hundred talers extra to be expended on typesetting—and censorship would have been made impossible

[^1]: * The first censor of the Rheinische Zeitung was Police Councillor Dolleschall, the same man who once struck out an advertisement in the Kölnische Zeitung of the translation of Dante's Divine Comedy by Philalethes (later King John of Saxony) with the remark: One must not make a comedy of divine affairs.

[^2]: a K. Marx, "Proceedings of the Sixth Rhine Province Assembly".— Ed.





**[p. 184]**

Marx, who in the meanwhile had married the sister of von Westphalen, later a reactionary minister, moved to Paris, and there, in conjunction with A. Ruge, published the Deutsch- Französische Jahrbücher, in which he opened the series of his socialist writings with a Critique of Hegel's Philosophy of Law.h

Further, together with F. Engels, The Holy Family. Against Bruno Bauer and Co.,c a satirical criticism of one of the latest forms assumed by the German philosophical idealism of the time.

The study of political economy and of the history of the Great French Revolution215 still allowed Marx time enough for occasion- al attacks on the Prussian government216; the latter revenged itself in the spring of 1845 by securing from Guizot's ministry—Mr. Alexander von Humboldt is said to have acted as inter- mediary217—his expulsion from France. Marx shifted his domicile to Brussels and published there in French in 1848 "Discours sur le libre échange" (Speech on the Question of Free Trade)218 and in 1847 Misère de la philosophie,6 a criticism of Proudhon's Philosophie de la misèree (Philosophy of Poverty). At the same time he made use of the opportunity to found a German workers' association in Brussels219 and so commenced practical agitation. The latter became still more important for him when he and his political friends in 1847 entered the secret Communist League, which had already been in existence for a number of years. Its whole structure was now radically changed; this association, which previously had been more or less conspiratorial, was transformed into a simple organisation of communist propaganda, which was

[^1]: a Carl Johann Heinrich Eduard von Gerlach.— Ed. b K. Marx, "Contribution to the Critique of Hegel's Philosophy of Law. Introduction".— Ed.

[^2]: c K. Marx and F. Engels, The Holy Family, or Critique of Critical Criticism. Against Bruno Bauer and Company.—Ed.

[^3]: d K. Marx, The Poverty of Philosophy. Answer to the "Philosophy of Poverty" by M. Proudhon.—Ed.

[^4]: e P. J. Proudhon, Système des contradictions économiques, ou la Philosophie de la misère.—Ed.



IP

Braunschweig. Druck und Verlag vou W. Bracke jr.

'*--*_,-

[^1]: The title-page of Volks-Kalender, Brunswick, 1878







**[p. 187]**

The transformation of the League took place at two congresses held in 1847,220 the second of which resolved on the elaboration and publication of the fundamental principles of the Party in a manifesto to be drawn up by Marx and Engels. Thus appeared Manifesto of the Communist Party, which first saw the light of day in 1848, shortly before the February Revolution, and has since been translated into almost all European languages.

The Deutsche-Brüsseler-Zeitung, in which Marx participated and which mercilessly exposed the blessings of the police regime of the fatherland, caused the Prussian government to try to effect Marx's expulsion once more, but in vain. When, however, the February Revolution resulted in popular movements also in Brussels, and a radical change appeared to be imminent in Belgium, the Belgian government arrested Marx without ceremony and deported him. In the meantime, the French Provisional Government had sent him through Flocon an invitation to return to Paris, and he accepted this call.

In Paris he came out especially against the swindle, widespread among the Germans there, of wanting to form the German workers in France into armed legions in order to carry the revolution and the republic into Germany. On the one hand, Germany had to make her revolution herself, and, on the other hand, every revolutionary foreign legion formed in France was betrayed in advance by the Lamartines of the Provisional Government to the government which was to be overthrown, as occurred in Belgium and Baden.

After the March Revolution, Marx went to Cologne where he founded the Neue Rheinische Zeitung, which was in existence from June 1, 1848 to May 19, 1849—the only paper which represented the standpoint of the proletariat within the democratic movement of the time, as shown e.g. in its unreserved support for the Paris



**[p. 188]**

the government believed itself strong enough to suppress the Neue Rheinische Zeitung by force. The last number—printed in red— appeared on May 19.

Marx again went to Paris, but only a few weeks after the demonstration of June 13, 1849, he was faced by the French government with the choice of either moving his residence to Brittany or leaving France. He preferred the latter and moved to London, where he has lived uninterruptedly ever since.

An attempt to continue to issue the Neue Rheinische Zeitung in the form of a review (in Hamburg in 1850)e had to be given up after a while in view of the ever-increasing onslaughts of the reaction. Immediately after the coup d'état in France in December 1851, Marx published The Eighteenth Brumaire of Louis Bonaparte

[^1]: a Neue Preußische Zeitung.— Ed. b A peak in the Andes.— Ed. c Frederick William IV and Archduke John of Austria.— Ed. d "Arrests", Neue Rheinische Zeitung, No. 35, July 5, 1848.— Ed. e Neue Rheinische Zeitung. Politisch-ökonomische Revue.— Ed.





**[p. 189]**

(New York, 1852; second edition, Hamburg, 1869, shortly before the war). In 1853 he wrote Revelations Concerning the Communist Trial in Cologne (first printed in Basle, later in Boston and again recently in Leipzig).

After the condemnation of the members of the Communist League in Cologne, Marx withdrew from political agitation and for ten years devoted himself, on the one hand, to the study of the rich treasures offered by the library of the British Museum in the sphere of political economy, and, on the other hand, to writing for the New-York Tribune, which up to the outbreak of the American Civil War published not only contributions signed by him but also numerous leading articles on conditions in Europe and Asia from his pen. His attacks on Lord Palmerston, based on an exhaustive study of British official documents, were reprinted in London in pamphlet form.3

As the first fruit of his many years studying economics, there appeared in 1859 A Contribution to the Critique of Political Economy, Part One (Berlin, Duncker). This work contains the first coherent exposition of the Marxian theory of value, including the doctrine of money. During the Italian War224 Marx, in the German newspaper Das Volk, appearing in London, attacked Bonapartism, which at that time posed as liberal and played the part of liberator of the oppressed nationalities, and also the Prussian policy of the day, which under the cover of neutrality was seeking to fish in troubled waters. In this connection it was necessary to attack also Herr Karl Vogt, who at that time, on the commission of Prince Napoleon (Plon-Plon) and in the pay of Louis Napoleon, was carrying on agitation for the neutrality, and indeed the sympathy, of Germany. When Vogt heaped upon him the most abominable and deliberately false calumnies, Marx answered with Herr Vogt (London, I860), in which Vogt and the other gentlemen of the imperial sham-democratic gang were exposed, and Vogt himself on the basis of both external and internal evidence was convicted of receiving bribes from the December Empire .b The confirmation came just ten years later: in the list of the Bonaparte hirelings, found in the Tuileries in 1870 and published by the September government, there was the following entry under the letter V: "Vogt—in August 1859 there were remitted to him—Frs. 40,000."225

[^1]: a See present edition, Vol. 12, pp. 341-406.— Ed. b The empire of Napoleon III.— Ed.





**[p. 190]**

Meanwhile the workers' movement in various countries of Europe had regained strength to the extent that Marx could entertain the idea of realising a long-cherished wish: the founda- tion of a Workers' Association embracing the most advanced countries of Europe and America, which would demonstrate bodily, so to speak, the international character of the socialist movement both to the workers themselves and to the bourgeois and the governments—for the encouragement and strengthening of the proletariat, for striking fear into the hearts of its enemies. A public meeting in favour of Poland, which had just then again been crushed by Russia, held on September 28, 1864, in St. Martin's Hall, London, provided the occasion for bringing forward the matter, which was enthusiastically taken up. The International Working Men's Association was founded; a Provisional General Council, with its seat in London, was elected at the meeting, and Marx was the soul of this as of all subsequent General Councils up to the Hague Congress. He drafted almost every one of the documents issued by the General Council of the Internation- al, from the Inaugural Address, 1864, to the Address on the Civil War in France, 1871. To describe Marx's activity in the International is to write the history of this Association it- self, which in any case lives on in the memory of European workers.

The fall of the Paris Commune put the International in an impossible position. It was thrust into the forefront of European history at a moment when it had everywhere been deprived of all possibility of successful practical action. The events which raised it to the position of the seventh Great Power simultaneously forbade it to mobilise its fighting forces and employ them in action, on pain of inevitable defeat and the setting back of the workers' movement for decades. In addition, from various sides elements were pushing themselves forward that sought to exploit the suddenly enhanced fame of the Association for the purpose of gratifying personal vanity or personal ambition, without under- standing the real position of the International or without regard for it. A heroic decision had to be taken, and it was again Marx



**[p. 191]**

who took it and who carried it through at the Hague Congress. In a solemn resolution, the International disclaimed all responsibility for the doings of the Bakuninists, who formed the centre of those unreasonable and unsavoury elements. Then, in view of the impossibility of also meeting, in the face of the general reaction, the increased demands which were being imposed upon it, and of maintaining its complete efficacy other than by a series of sacrifices which would have drained the workers' movement of its life-blood—in view of this situation, the International withdrew from the stage for the time being by transferring the General Council to America.3 The results proved the correctness of this decision—which was at the time, and has been since, so often censured. On the one hand, it put a stop then and since to all attempts to make useless putsches in the name of the International, while, on the other hand, the continuing close intercourse between the socialist workers' parties of the various countries proved that the consciousness of the identity of interests and of the solidarity of the proletariat of all countries evoked by the International is able to assert itself even without the bond of a formal international association, which for the moment has become a fetter.

After the Hague Congress, Marx at last found peace and leisure again for resuming his theoretical work, and it is to be hoped he will be able before long to have the second volume of Capital ready for the press.

Of the many important discoveries through which Marx has inscribed his name in the annals of science, we can here dwell on only two.

The first is the revolution brought about by him in the whole conception of world history. The entire view of history hitherto was based on the conception that the ultimate causes of all historical changes are to be sought in the changing ideas of human beings, and that of all historical changes political changes are the most important and dominate the whole of history. But the question was not asked as to whence the ideas come into men's minds and what the driving causes of the political changes are. Only upon the newer school of French, and partly also of English, historians had the conviction forced itself that, since the Middle Ages at least, the driving force in European history had been the struggle of the developing bourgeoisie with the feudal aristocracy for social and political domination. Now Marx has proved that the whole of history hitherto is a history of class

[^1]: a See present edition, Vol. 23, pp. 250-52.— Ed.





**[p. 192]**





**[p. 193]**

This new conception of history, however, was of supreme significance for the socialist outlook. It showed that all history hitherto revolved around class antagonisms and class struggles, that there have always existed ruling and ruled, exploiting and exploited classes, and that the great majority of mankind has always been condemned to arduous labour and little enjoyment. Why is this? Simply because in all earlier stages of development of mankind production was so little developed that historical development could proceed only in this antagonistic form, that historical progress on the whole was assigned to the activity of a small privileged minority, while the great mass remained con- demned to producing by their labour their own meagre means of subsistence and also the increasingly rich means of the privileged. But the same investigation of history, which in this way provides a natural and reasonable explanation of class rule hitherto, other- wise only explicable from the wickedness of man, also leads to the realisation that, in consequence of the so tremendously increased productive forces of the present time, even the last pretext has vanished, at least in the most advanced countries, for a division of mankind into rulers and ruled, exploiters and exploited; that the ruling big bourgeoisie has fulfilled its historic mission, that it is no longer capable of the leadership of society and has even become a hindrance to the development of production, as the trade crises, and especially the last great crash, 26 and the depressed condition of industry in all countries have proved; that historical leadership has passed to the proletariat, a class which, owing to its whole position in society, can only free itself by abolishing altogether all class rule, all servitude and all exploitation; and that the productive forces of society, which have outgrown the control of the bourgeoisie, are only waiting for the associated proletariat to take possession of them in order to bring about a state of things in which every member of society will be enabled to participate not only in production but also in the distribution and administration of social wealth, and which so increases the productive forces of society and their yield by planned operation of the whole of production that the satisfaction of all reasonable needs will be assured to everyone in an ever-increasing measure.

[^1]: 15-1317





**[p. 194]**





**[p. 195]**

Modern, scientific socialism is based on these two important facts. In the second volume of Capital, these and other hardly less important scientific discoveries concerning the capitalist system of society will be further developed, and thereby those aspects of political economy not touched upon in the first volume will also undergo révolutionisation. May it be vouchsafed to Marx to be able soon to have it ready for the press.

[^1]: Written in mid-June 1877 Printed according to the text of the first publication First published in the Volks-Kalender, Brunswick, 1878

[^2]: 15*



