---
Volume: 24
Document_Title: "17. K. Marx. Letter to Otechestvenniye Zapiski "
Page_Range: "227-233"
---

# 17. K. Marx. Letter to Otechestvenniye Zapiski 



**[p. 196]**

Karl Marx

[LETTER TO OTECHESTVENNIYE ZAPISKI]

Dear Sir,a

The authorb of the article "Karl Marx Before the Tribunal of Mr. Zhukovsky" is obviously an intelligent man and, had he found a single passage in my account of "primitive accumulation" to support his conclusions, he would have quoted it. For want of such a passage he considers it necessary to seize hold of an annexe, a polemical sortie against a Russian "belletrist"c printed in the appendix to the first German edition of Capital What do I there reproach this writer for? The fact that he discovered "Russian" communism not in Russia but in the book by Haxthausen,d the adviser to the Prussian Government, and that in his hands the Russian community serves only as an argument to prove that the old, rotten Europe must be regenerated by the victory of Pan-Slavism. My appreciation of this writer may be correct, it may be wrong, but in neither case could it provide the key to my views on the efforts "pycc KHxt Aio^eft HaÜTH AAJI CBoero OTe^ec TBa ny Tb

In the Afterword to the second German edition of Capital— which the author of the article about Mr. Zhukovsky knows,

[^1]: pa3BHTi H, OTAHHHbl H OTT» TOr O, KOTOpbl MT» IIIAa H H^CTb 3 a n a 4 H a » Eßpona etc."e

[^2]: a M. Ye. Saltykov-Shchedrin.— Ed. b N. K. Mikhailovsky.— Ed c A. I. Herzen.— Ed d A. Haxthausen, Studien über die innern Zustände, das Volksleben und insbesondere die ländlichen Einrichtungen Rußlands.— Ed

[^3]: e "of Russians to find a path of development for their country which will be different from that which Western Europe pursued and still pursues etc."—Ed.





**[p. 1]**

f * "^ "^ ~* • » , i • - nj T I»—f** - — **-*- -*a T3SC ^ * ^ ^ J I ^ K ^ - V ^ - * . v-*.•*•»

*-** *»» *****

[^1]: * ^ * «.^v-*«"-,—» ^ " 5 V " ,, . V A S » , •

[^2]: *w M «MJV^J-A v •'. fc<* ^ - i « ^ î 3 * - ^ < V-*J

[^3]: The first page of Marx's "Letter to Otechestvenniye Zapiski"







**[p. 199]**

Be that as it may, as I do not like to leave anything to "guesswork", I shall speak straight out. In order to reach an informed judgment of the economic development of contempor- ary Russia, I learned Russian and then spent several long years studying official publications and others with a bearing on this subject. I have arrived at this result: if Russia continues along the path it has followed since 1861, it will miss the finest chance that history has ever offered to a nation, only to undergo all the fatal vicissitudes of the capitalist system.0

il

The chapter on primitive accumulation does not pretend to do more than trace the road by which in Western Europe the capitalist economic order emerged from the entrails of the feudal economic order. It thus describes the historical movement which by divorcing the producers from their means of production transforms them into wage-workers (proletarians in the modern sense of the word) and the owners of the means of production into capitalists. In this history, "every revolution which acts as a lever for the advancement of the capitalist class in its process of formation marks an epoch; above all that which, by stripping great masses of men of their traditional means of production and subsistence, suddenly hurls them on the labour market. But the basis of this whole development. is the expropriation of the agricultural

[^1]: a N. G. Chernyshevsky.— Ed. b H. Hep Hbime BCKift, TIucb Ma 6e3t> adpeca, LJiop HX-b, 1874.— Ed. c This paragraph is crossed out in Marx's manuscript.— Ed.





**[p. 200]**

I do not give any proof at this point for the very good reason that this assertion itself is nothing but a summary recapitulation of long developments previously set out in the chapters on capitalist production.

Now, in what way was my critic3 able to apply this historical sketch to Russia? Only this: if Russia is tending to become a capitalist nation, on the model of the countries of Western Europe,—and in recent years it has gone to great pains to move in this direction—it will not succeed without having first transformed a large proportion of its peasants into proletarians; and after that, once it has been placed in the bosom of the capitalist system, it will be subjected to its pitiless laws, like other profane peoples. That is all! But this is too little for my critic. It is absolutely necessary for him to metamorphose my historical sketch of the genesis of capitalism in Western Europe into a historico-philosophical theory of general development, imposed by fate on all peoples, whatever the historical circumstances in which they are placed, in order to eventually attain this economic formation which, with a tremen- dous leap of the productive forces of social labour, assures the most integral development of every individual producer. But I beg his pardon. This does me too much honour, and yet puts me to shame at the same time. Let us take an example. In various places in Capital I allude to the destiny of the plebeians of Ancient Rome. They were originally free peasants cultivating their own plots of land on their own account. In the course of Roman history they were expropriated. T h e same movement which cut them off from their means of production and subsistence involved not only the formation of large landed property but also the formation of large money capital. Thus, one fine morning, there

[^1]: a N. K. Mikhailovsky.— Ed



Written presumably in November 1877 Printed according to the manu- script First published in Vestnik Narodnoi Voli, No. 5, Geneva, 1886

Translated from the French

