---
Volume: 24
Document_Title: "21. K. MarxandF. Engels. Herr Bucher "
Page_Range: "261-263"
---

# 21. K. MarxandF. Engels. Herr Bucher 



**[p. c]**

Karl Marx and Frederick Engels

HERR BUCHER265

TO THE EDITOR 3 OF THE DAILY NEWS

Sir,

According to a telegram of Reuter's,b

"Herr Bucher, Councillor of Legation, is designated for the post of secretary and keeper of the records of the Congress."266

Should this "Herr Bucher" be the same Lothar Bucher who, during his long London exile, shone as a staunch partisan of the late Mr. David Urquhart, whose anti-Russian doctrines he held forth week by week in the Berlin National Gazettec; the same Lothar Bucher who, on his return to Berlin, turned so ardent a votary of Ferdinand Lassalle that the latter named him his testamentary executor, bequeathed him an annual revenue, and transferred the copyright of his works to Lothar Bucher267? Soon after Lassalle's death Lothar Bucher entered the Prussian Foreign Office, was made a "Councillor of Legation", and became Bismarck's confi- dential man-of-all-work.

He had the naivete to address a letter to myself, inviting me, of course with the sanction of his master, to undertake the money article of the Prussian official Staats-Anzeiger.

The pecuniary terms were left to my discretion, while I was expressly told I should enjoy full liberty of treating the operations and the operators of the money market from my own "scientific"

[^1]: a W. K. Hales.— Ed b "We have received the following telegrams through Reuter's Agency: Eastern Affairs, Berlin, June 11." In the section Latest Intelligence, The Times, No. 29279, June 12, 1878.— Ed.

[^2]: National-Zeitung.—Ed.





**[p. 231]**

Karl Marx

London, June 12

[^1]: First published in The Daily News, Reproduced from the newspaper No. 10030, June 13, 1878

[^2]: a "Empfangsbescheinigungen der für die Zentralkasse von Außen eingegange- nen Beträge", Der Vorbote, No. 9, September 1867; No. 10, October 1871.— Ed.



