---
Volume: 24
Document_Title: "I. The Negotiations with Carl Hirsch "
Page_Range: "284-290"
---

# I. The Negotiations with Carl Hirsch 



**[p. 253]**

Karl Marx and Frederick Engels

CIRCULAR LETTER

T O AUGUST BEBEL, WILHELM LIEBKNECHT, WILHELM BRACKE AND OTHERS 3 1 0

Dear Bebel,

The delay in replying to your letter of August 20 a has been due, on the one hand, to Marx's prolonged absence311 and, on the other, to a number of incidents: first, the arrival of the "Richter" Jahrbuch, secondly that of Höchberg himself.312

I can only conclude that Liebknecht did not show you the last letter I wrote him, although I specifically instructed him to do so. Otherwise you would certainly not have adduced the same reasons as had been put forward by Liebknecht, and to which I had already replied in the aforesaid letter.313

Let us now run through the individual points with which we are concerned here.

Liebknecht asked Hirsch whether he would undertake to edit the party organ that was about to be founded in Zurich. Hirsch sought information as to the financing of the paper: what funds were available and who was providing them? Firstly, so as to know whether the paper might not peter out within a few months. Secondly, to ascertain who held the purse-strings, thus having the final say as to the paper's stance. Liebknecht's reply, telling Hirsch that "everything is in order; you will be getting further information from Zurich" (Liebknecht to Hirsch, July 28), didn't arrive.314 But what did reach Hirsch from Zurich was a letter from

[^1]: I. THE NEGOTIATIONS WITH CARL HIRSCH

[^2]: a The original erroneously has: "August 29".— Ed.





**[p. 254]**

"that your position might be rendered somewhat difficult by the differences of opinion which you, as a Laterne man, have had with individual comrades, though J myself do not consider this objection carries much weight".

Not a word about the financing. Hirsch answered by return on July 26, enquiring about the paper's material circumstances. Which comrades had undertaken to cover the deficit? Up to what amount and for how long?—The question of the editor's salary didn't enter into this at all; Hirsch merely wanted to know whether "means have been secured to ensure the paper's continued existence for at least a year".

On July 31, Bernstein replied, saying that any deficit there might be would be covered by voluntary contributions of which some (!) had already been subscribed. Hirsch's remarks about the stance he thought the paper should adopt, of which more below, elicited deprecating remarks and injunctions:

"It is all the more necessary for the supervisory committee315 to insist on it in that it, in turn, is subject to control, i.e. is responsible. On these points, therefore, you must come to an understanding with the supervisory committee."

They asked him to reply by return, preferably by telegraph. Hence, instead of getting a reply to his justified questions, Hirsch was informed that he was to be editor under a supervisory committee based in Zurich, with views differing very materially from his own and members of whose names he wasn't even informed!

Hirsch, quite justifiably outraged by this treatment, chose rather to come to an understanding with the Leipzigers. His letter of August 2 to Liebknecht must be known to you, since Hirsch

expressly demanded that it be shown to you and Viereck. Hirsch is even willing to submit to a supervisory committee in Zurich, inasmuch as the latter is to put its comments to the editor in writing and these may be referred for decision to the controlling committee in Leipzig.316

In the meantime Liebknecht had written to Hirsch on July 28:

Nor does Liebknecht's next letter contain anything about the financing—only an assurance that the Zurich committee is not an

[^1]: "Of course finance is available for the undertaking, seeing that it is backed by the entire party+(INCLUSIVE) Höchberg. But I'm not concerned with the details."

[^2]: a Eduard Bernstein, Karl Höchberg and Karl August Schramm.— Ed.



?S* V

•?£E

^-._ /L-Ac ^-ti

* • * * * * • - - • •

/ - « > • • > - - > •'••- - * • * •

. ^ - - — ••• - < : *

+**ls *&4JL ft, • j» ^ -^—;*- » * ^ • ^ y " ' j&: ~y~~~jr~

• • / • " * * £., x i . —"• ^ * */*?£?

%

Jt

[^1]: v >•;

[^2]: A page of the "Circular Letter to August Bebel, Wilhelm Liebknecht, Wilhelm Bracke and Others" by Karl Marx and Frederick Engels





"He" (Höchberg) "has no more say in the editing of the paper than any other well-known member of the party."

Finally, Hirsch received a letter from Viereck, dated August 11, containing the admission that

"the 3 men domiciled in Zurich are to, qua editorial committee, apply themselves to founding the paper and, subject to the agreement of the three Leipzigers, select an editor so far as I recall, the resolutions that were sent them also asserted that the (Zurich) founding committee mentioned under 2., was to assume both political and financial responsibility towards the party From this state of affairs it follows, or so it seems to me, that there can be no question of anyone assuming the editorship without the concurrence of the 3 men domiciled in Zurich and entrusted with the founding by the party".

Here at last was something definite, at least, for Hirsch to go on, if only in regard to the position of the editor vis-à-vis the Zürichers. They were an editorial committee; they were also politically responsible; without their concurrence no one could assume the editorship. In short, Hirsch was simply instructed to come to an understanding with three men in Zurich whose names had still not been disclosed to him.

But to make the confusion worse, Liebknecht added a postscript to Viereck's letter:

The Zurich trio and one member of the Leipzig committee—the only onea present at the discussions—insist that Hirsch is to be subject to official direction by Zurich, while another Leipzig memberb contests this outright. And yet Hirsch is to make up his mind before these gentlemen are agreed amongst themselves! The fact that Hirsch was entitled to acquaint himself with the resolutions they had adopted and which embodied the conditions with which he was expected to comply, was entirely overlooked,

[^1]: "Singer from Berlin was here just now and informed us that the supervisory committee in Zurich is not, as Viereck imagines, an editorial committee, but essentially an administrative committee which is financially responsible to the party, i.e. to ourselves, for the paper; of course, its members also have the right and the duty to discuss the editing with you (a right and a duty of which, by the way, every member is possessed); they are not empowered to place you under their guardianship."

[^2]: a Louis Viereck.— Ed. b Wilhelm Liebknecht.— Ed.

[^3]: 19-1317





**[p. 258]**

If the Leipzigers were unable to agree upon the powers vested in the Zurich people, the latter harboured no doubts on this score.

Schramm to Hirsch, August 14:

"Had you not written at one time that in a similar case" (as that of Kayser),a

"you would do just as you had done before, thus holding out the prospect of a similar modus operandi?1"1 we would not be wasting words on the subject. As it is, however, and in view of that statement of yours, we must reserve the right to have the casting vote as to what articles the new paper should take."

The letter to Bernstein in which Hirsch was alleged to have said this was dated July 26, long after the conference in Zurich at which the Zurich trio's powers were laid down. But so much were those in Zurich already revelling in the sense of their own bureaucratic authority that, in reply to this subsequent letter of Hirsch's, they were already laying claim to new powers, namely the decision as to what articles should be included. The editorial committee was already a censorship committee.

Not until Höchberg arrived in Paris did Hirsch learn from him the names of the members of the two committees.318

If, then, discussions with Hirsch broke down, what was the cause?

1. The obstinate refusal, on the part of both Leipzig and Zurich, to give him any hard and fast information about the paper's financial basis and hence the likelihood of keeping it afloat, if only for a year. Not until he was over here did he learn from me (following your communication to meb) how much had been subscribed. Hence, the only conclusion it was really possible to draw from previous communications (the party + Höchberg) was either that the paper was already being largely financed by Höchberg or that it would soon be entirely dependent on his subsidies. And this latter eventuality is still far from being excluded. The sum of—if I read it right—800 marks is precisely the same (40 pounds sterling) as had to be contributed by the local association, Freiheit?19 during the first half year.

2. Liebknecht's repeated assurances, which have since proved totally erroneous, that Zurich was to have no official control whatever over the editorship, and the resulting comedy of errors;

3. The certainty finally established that not only were the Zurich

[^1]: a See this volume, pp. 260-61.— Ed. b This refers to August Bebel's letter to Engels of August 20, 1879.— Ed.



