---
Volume: 24
Document_Title: "III. The Manifesto of the Zurich Trio "
Page_Range: "293-301"
---

# III. The Manifesto of the Zurich Trio 



**[p. 262]**

But why go abroad at all, unless one intends to crowd on sail? Abroad, there's nothing to prevent this being done. In Switzerland there are no German press, combination and penal laws. Hence, not only can one say things there, which could not, even before the Anti-Socialist Law, be said at home because of the ordinary German laws, but one is actually duty-bound to do so. For here one is under the eyes, not of Germany alone, but of Europe and it is one's duty, insofar as the Swiss laws allow, openly to proclaim for Europe's benefit the methods and aims of the German party. Anyone in Switzerland seeking to abide by the German laws would only prove that he is deserving of those German laws and that he has, in effect, nothing to say save what he was allowed to say in Germany before the Exceptional Law. Nor should any account be taken of the possibility that the editors might be temporarily deprived of the chance to return to Germany. Anyone who is not prepared to run that risk is not fit to occupy so exposed and honourable a post.

More. If the German party was ostracised by the Exceptional Law, this was precisely because it was the only serious opposition party in Germany. If, in an organ published abroad, it renders thanks to Bismarck by abandoning its role as the only serious opposition party, by behaving in a nice, docile manner and adopting a dispassionate stance when kicked, it only proves that it deserved to be kicked. Of all the German émigré papers that have appeared abroad since 1830, the Laterne is undoubtedly one of the most moderate. If, however, even the Laterne was too insolent— then the new organ could not but compromise the party in the eyes of sympathisers in non-German countries.

In the meantime we have received Höchberg's Jahrbuch, containing an article, "Rückblicke auf die sozialistische Bewegung in Deutschland,"3 which, as Höchberg himself informed me, was actually written by the three members of the Zurich committee.5

[^1]: III. THE MANIFESTO OF THE ZURICH TRIO

[^2]: a See this volume, p. 253. Jahrbuch für Socialwissenschaft und Socialpolitik, Jg. 1, 1. Hälfte, Zurich-Oberstrass, 1879, pp. 75-96. The parentheses, abridgements and italics in the following quotations are by Engels.— Ed

[^3]: b Höchberg, Bernstein and Schramm.— Ed





**[p. 263]**

"The movement, regarded by Lassalle as an eminently political one, to which he sought to rally not only the workers but all honest democrats, and in the van of which were to march the independent representatives of science and all men imbued with a true love of mankind, was trivialised under the chairmanship of J. B. von Schweitzer into a one-sided struggle of the industrial workers to promote their own interests." a

I shall not inquire whether and to what extent this is historically true. The specific charge against Schweitzer is that Schweitzer trivialised Lassalleanism, here regarded as a bourgeois democratic- philanthropic movement, into a one-sided struggle of the industri- al workers to promote their own interests—trivialised it by emphasising its character as a class struggle of industrial workers against the bourgeoisie.15 He is further charged with having "repudiated bourgeois democracy".0 But has bourgeois democracy any business to be in the Social-Democratic Party at all? If it consists of "honest men", it surely cannot wish to join, and if it nevertheless wishes to join, this can only be for the purpose of stirring up trouble.

The Lassallean party "chose to present itself in a most one-sided manner as a workers' party".d The gentlemen who wrote those

[^1]: a Jahrbuch für Socialwissenschaft und Socialpolitik, p. 84.— Ed. b These two sentences were substituted by the authors for the following passage deleted in the manuscript: "Schweitzer was a great blackguard, but very talented intellectually. His particular merit consisted in his having broken free of the original, narrow Lassalleanism with its limited panacea of state aid Whatever wrong he may have done out of corrupt motives and however much, too, he may have clung to the Lassallean panacea of state aid in order to preserve his domination, he nevertheless had the merit of having broken free of the original, narrow Lassalleanism, of having broadened the party's economic horizons and thus paved the way for its subsequent merger with the German party as a whole. The class struggle between proletariat and bourgeoisie, that pivot of all revolutionary socialism, had already been advocated by Lassalle. If Schweitzer stressed this point even more strongly it was, at any rate, a step forward so far as the cause was concerned, however much of a pretext he may thus have afforded dangerous individuals for calling his dictatorship in question. It may rightly be said that he turned Lassalleanism into a one-sided struggle of the industrial workers to promote their own interests. But one-sided only in the sense that, for reasons that were politically corrupt, he wished to have nothing to do with the farm workers' struggle to promote their own interests vis-à-vis the big landowners. It is not that with which he is reproached here; rather the 'trivialisation' consists in his emphasising its character as a class struggle of industrial workers against the bourgeoisie."— Ed.

[^2]: c Jahrbuch für Socialwissenschaft und Socialpolitik, p. 84.— Ed. <» Ibid., p. 85.— Ed.





**[p. 264]**

Thus, in the view of these gentlemen, the Social-Democratic Party ought not to be a one-sided workers' party but a many-sided party of "all men imbued with a true love of mankind". This it is to prove, above all, by divesting itself of crude proletarian passions and applying itself, under the direction of educated philanthropic bourgeois, "to the formation of good taste" and "the acquisition of good manners" (p. 85). After which the "seedy appearance" of some of the leaders would give way to a respectable "bourgeois appearance".3 (As though the outwardly seedy appearance of those referred to here were not the least that could be held against them!) After which, too,

"there will be an influx of supporters from the ranks of the educated and propertied classes. These, however, must first be won over if the agitation engaged in is to have perceptible results". German socialism has laid "too much stress on winning over the masses, thus omitting to prosecute vigorous" (!) "propaganda amongst the so-called upper strata of society". For "the party still lacks men who are fit to represent it in the Reichstag". It is, however, "desirable and necessary to entrust the mandates to men who have had the time and the opportunity to become thoroughly conversant with the relevant material. Only rarely and in exceptional cases does the simple working man and small master craftsman have sufficient leisure for the purpose".b

Therefore elect bourgeois! In short, the working class is incapable of emancipating itself by its own efforts. In order to do so it must place itself under the direction of "educated and propertied" bourgeois who alone have "the time and the opportunity" to become conversant with what is good for the workers. And, secondly, the bourgeois are not to be combatted—not on your life—but won over by vigorous prop- aganda.

If, however, you wish to win over the upper strata of society, or at least their well-intentioned elements, you mustn't frighten them—not on your life. And here the Zurich trio believe they have made a reassuring discovery:

[^1]: a Jahrbuch für Socialwissenschaft und Socialpolitik, p. 86.— Ed. b Ibid., pp. 87-89.— Ed.



"Now, at the very time it is oppressed by the Anti-Socialist Law, the party is showing that it does not wish to pursue the path of forcible, bloody revolution, but rather is determined to tread the path of legality, i.e. of reform."*

If, therefore, the 5-600,000 Social-Democratic voters, Vio to Vs of the total electorate—and dispersed, what is more, over the length and breadth of the country—have sense enough not to beat their heads against a wall and attempt a "bloody revolution" with the odds at one to ten, this is supposed to prove that they will, for all time, continue to deny themselves all chance of exploiting some violent upheaval abroad, a sudden wave of revolutionary fervour engendered thereby, or even a people's victory won in a clash arising therefrom! Should Berlin ever be so uneducated as to stage another March 18,323 it would behove the Social-Democrats not to take part in the fighting as "louts besotted with barricades" (p. 88) but rather to "tread the path of legality", to placate, to clear away the barricades and, if necessary, march with the glorious army against the one-sided, crude, uneducated masses. Or if the gentlemen insist that that's not what they meant, then what did they mean?

But there's better in store.

"Hence, the more calm, sober and considered it (the Party) shows itself to be in its criticism of existing circumstances and its proposals to change the same, the less likelihood is there of a repetition of the present successful move" (introduction of the Anti-Socialist Law) "by means of which conscious reaction has scared the bourgeoisie out of their wits by holding up the red spectre" (p. 88).

In order to relieve the bourgeoisie of the last trace of anxiety, it is to be shown clearly and convincingly that the red spectre really is just a spectre and doesn't exist. But what is the secret of the red spectre, if not the bourgeoisie's fear of the inevitable life-and- death struggle between itself and the proletariat, fear of the unavoidable outcome of the modern class struggle? Just abolish the class struggle, and the bourgeoisie and "all independent persons" will "not hesitate to go hand in hand with the proletarians" ! b In which case the ones to be hoodwinked would be those self-same proletarians.

Let the party, therefore, prove, by its humble and subdued demeanour, that it has renounced once and for all the "improp- rieties and excesses"0 which gave rise to the Anti-Socialist Law. If it voluntarily undertakes to remain wholly within the bounds of the Anti-Socialist Law, Bismarck and the bourgeoisie will, no

[^1]: a Jahrbuch für Socialwissenschaft und Socialpolitik, pp. 87-88.— Ed. b Ibid., p. 88.— Ed. c Ibid., p. 87.— Ed.





**[p. 266]**

"Let no one misunderstand us"; we don't want "to relinquish our party and our programme,3 but in our opinion we shall have enough to do for years to come if we concentrate our whole strength, our entire energies, on the attainment of certain immediate objectives which must in any case be won before there can be any thought of realising more ambitious aspirations."13

Then, too, the bourgeois, petty-bourgeois and workers, who "are now scared off by ambitious demands",0 will join us en masse.

The programme is not to be relinquished, but merely postponed— for some unspecified period. They accept it—not for themselves in their own lifetime but posthumously, as an heirloom for their children and their children's children. Meanwhile they devote their "whole strength and energies" to all sorts of trifles, tinkering away at the capitalist social order so that at least something should appear to be done without at the same time alarming the bourgeoisie. Here I can only commend that communist, Miquel, who gives proof of his unshakable belief in the inevitable downfall of capitalist society within the next few hundred years by swindling it for all he's worth, contributing manfully to the crash of 1873, and thus really doing something towards the collapse of the existing order.324

Another offence against good manners was the "exaggerated attacks on the Gründer" ?A who, after all, were "only children of their time"; hence "the vilification of Strousberg and suchlike men would have been better omitted".0 Sadly we are all "children of our time", and if this be sufficient grounds for excuse, it is no longer permissible to attack anyone, and we for our part would have to desist from all polemic, all struggle; we would calmly submit whenever kicked by our opponents, because we would know in our wisdom that they are "only children of their time" and cannot act otherwise than they do. Instead of repaying them their kicks with interest, we should rather, it seems, feel sorry for the poor fellows.

Similarly, our support for the Commune had one drawback, at any rate, namely

[^1]: "that it put off people otherwise well-disposed towards us, and generally increased the hatred felt for us by the bourgeoisie". Moreover, the party "cannot be wholly exonerated from having brought about the October Law,325 for it had needlessly exacerbated the hatred of the bourgeoisie" .e

[^2]: a "Programm der sozialistischen Arbeiterpartei Deutschlands".— Ed. b Jahrbuch für Socialwissenschaft und Socialpolitik, p. 88.— Ed. c Ibid.— Ed. d Ibid., p. 95.— Ed.

[^3]: e Ibid., pp. 95, 96.— Ed.







**[p. 268]**

As for their socialist import, this has already been adequately criticised in the Manifesto, Chapter: "German, or 'True' Socialism". Wherever the class struggle is thrust aside as a distasteful, "crude" manifestation, the only basis still left to socialism will be a "true love of mankind" and empty phrases about "justice".

It is an inevitable manifestation, and one rooted in the process of development, that people from what have hitherto been the ruling class also join the militant proletariat and supply it with educative elements. We have already said so clearly in the Manifesto. But in this context there are two observations to be made:

Firstly, if these people are to be of use to the proletarian movement, they must introduce genuinely educative elements. However, in the case of the vast majority of German bourgeois converts, this is not the case. Neither the Zukunft nor the Neue Gesellschaft has contributed anything that might have advanced the movement by a single step. Here we find a complete lack of genuinely educative matter, either factual or theoretical. In place of it, attempts to reconcile superficially assimilated socialist ideas with the most diverse theoretical viewpoints which these gentlemen have introduced from the university or elsewhere, and of which each is more muddled than the last thanks to the process of decay taking place in what remains of German philosophy today. Instead of first making a thorough study of the new science, each man chose to adapt it to the viewpoint he had brought with him, not hesitating to produce his own brand of science and straightaway assert his right to teach it. Hence there are, amongst these gentlemen, almost as many viewpoints as there are heads; instead of elucidating anything, they have only made confusion worse—by good fortune, almost exclusively amongst themselves. The party can well dispense with educative elements such as these for whom it is axiomatic to teach what they have not learnt.

Secondly, when people of this kind, from different classes, join the proletarian movement, the first requirement is that they should not bring with them the least remnant of bourgeois, petty-bourgeois, etc., prejudices, but should unreservedly adopt the proletarian outlook. These gentlemen, however, as already shown, are chock-full of bourgeois and petty-bourgeois ideas. In a country as petty-bourgeois as Germany, there is certainly some justification for such ideas. But only outside the Social-Democratic Workers' Party. If the gentlemen constitute themselves a Social- Democratic petty-bourgeois party, they are fully within their

As for ourselves, there is, considering all our antecedents, only one course open to us. For almost 40 years we have emphasised that the class struggle is the immediate motive force of history and, in particular, that the class struggle between bourgeoisie and proletariat is the great lever of modern social revolution; hence we cannot possibly co-operate with men who seek to eliminate that class struggle from the movement. At the founding of the International we expressly formulated the battle cry: The emanci- pation of the working class must be achieved by the working class itself.3 Hence we cannot co-operate with men who say openly that the workers are too uneducated to emancipate themselves, and must first be emancipated from above by philanthropic members of the upper and lower middle classes. If the new party organ is to adopt a policy that corresponds to the opinions of these gentlemen, if it is bourgeois and not proletarian, then all we could do—much though we might regret it—would be publicly to declare ourselves opposed to it and abandon the solidarity with which we have hitherto represented the German Party abroad. But we hope it won't come to that.

It is intended that this letter should be communicated to all five members of the committee in Germany,326 and also to Bracke

Nor have we any objection to its being communicated to the people in Zurich.

[^1]: Written on September 17-18, 1879 Published according to Engels' manuscript First published in Die Kommunistische Internationale, XII. Jahrg., Heft 23, Published in English in full June 15, 1931 for the first time

[^2]: a See present edition, Vol. 20, p. 14.— Ed.



