---
Volume: 24
Document_Title: "30. K. Marx. Note on The Poverty of Philosophy "
Page_Range: "357-359"
---

# 30. K. Marx. Note on The Poverty of Philosophy 



**[p. 326]**

Karl Marx

[NOTE ON THE POVERTY OF PHILOSOPHY]

The Poverty of Philosophy by Karl Marx appeared in 1847a

shortly after the Economic Contradictions by Proudhon,b which bore the sub-title Philosophy of Poverty. What prompted us to reprint this book, the first edition of which is out of print, was the fact that it contains the seeds of the theory developed after twenty years' work in Capital Reading the Poverty of Philosophy and the Manifesto of the Communist Party, published by Marx and Engels in 1848, might thus serve as an introduction to the study of Capital and the works of other modern socialists who, like Lassalle, have derived their ideas from them. By authorising this republication in our journal, Marx wished to give us a token of his sympathy.

We must say a few more words about the drastic tone of this polemic against Proudhon. On the one hand, Proudhon, while attacking the official economists such as Dunoyer, Blanqui the Academician and the whole clique around the Journal des Économistes,0 knew how to appeal to their vanity at the same time as he heaped coarse insults on the Utopian socialists and communists whom Marx honoured as the forebearsd of modern socialism. On the other hand, to prepare the way for the critical and materialist socialism which alone can render the real, historical

[^1]: a K. Marx, Misère de la philosophie. Réponse à la philosophie de la misère de M. Proudhon, Paris, Brussels, 1847.— Ed.

[^2]: b P. J. Proudhon, Système des contradictions économiques, ou philosophie de la misère, Vols. 1-2, Paris, 1846.— Ed.

[^3]: c Léon Faucher, Charles Duchâtel, Louis François Benoiston de Châteauneuf, Maurice Rubichon, and Edelestand Duméril.— Ed

[^4]: d L'Egalité has here: "initiators".— Ed



development of social production intelligible, it was necessary to break abruptly with the ideological economics of which Proudhon was unwittingly the last incarnation.

Besides, in an article published in the Berlin Social-Demokrata on the death of Proudhon, Marx did justice to this fighter's great qualities, to his manly attitude after the days of June 1848,37 and to his talent as a political writer.

Written in late March or early April 1880 Printed according to the manu- script, checked with the newspaper First published in L'Egalité, No. 12, April 7, 1880 Translated from the French

[^1]: a K. Marx, "On Proudhon", Der Social-Demokrat, Nos. 16-18, February 1, 3 and 5, 1865 (see present edition, Vol. 20, pp. 26-33).— Ed.



