---
Volume: 24
Document_Title: "32. K. Marx. Introduction to the French Edition of Engels' Socialism: Utopian and Scientific "
Page_Range: "366-371"
---

# 32. K. Marx. Introduction to the French Edition of Engels' Socialism: Utopian and Scientific 



**[p. 335]**

Karl Marx

[INTRODUCTION TO THE FRENCH EDITION OF ENGELS' SOCIALISM: UTOPIAN AND SCIENTIFIC]

The pages which form the subject of the present pamphlet, first published as three articles in the Revue socialiste* have been translated from the latest book by Engels Revolution in Science^

Frederick Engels, one of the foremost representatives of contemporary socialism, distinguished himself in 1844 with his Outlines of a Critique of Political Economy, which first appeared in the Deutsch-Französische Jahrbücher, published in Paris by Marx and Ruge. The Outlines already formulates certain general principles of scientific socialism. Engels was then living in Manchester, where he wrote (in German) The Condition of the Working-Class in England (1845), an important work to which Marx did full justice in Capital0 During his first stay in England he also contributed— as he later did from Brussels—to The Northern Star, the official journal of the socialistd movement, and to the New Moral World of Robert Owen.

During his stay in Brussels he and Marx founded the German workers' communist club,377 linked with Flemish and Walloon

[^1]: a F. Engels, "Le socialisme utopique et le socialisme scientifique, I-III", La Revue socialiste, Nos. 3-5, March 20, April 20 and May 5, 1880 (see this volume, pp. 281-325).— Ed.

[^2]: b F. Engels, Anti-Dühring. Herr Eugen Dilhring's Revolution in Science. In the Introduction to the French edition of Engels' Socialism: Utopian and Scientific the following sentence was added: "They were revised by the author who introduced diverse additions in the third chapter in order to make the dialectical movement of the economic forces of capitalist production more comprehensible to the French reader."— Ed.

[^3]: c K. Marx, Capital, Vol. I, Part III, Chapter X; Part IV, Chapter XV; Part VII, Chapters XXIV, XXV (present edition, Vol. 35).—Ed.

[^4]: d The 1880 edition has "Chartist" instead of "socialist".— Ed





**[p. 336]**

published immediately before the February Revolution and translated3 into almost all the European languages.b

In the same year they were involved in founding the Democratic Association of Brussels,381 an international and public association, where the delegates of the radical bourgeois and those of the proletarian0 workers met.

After the February Revolution, Engels became one of the editors of the Neue Rheinische Zeitung (Nouvelle Gazette Rhénane), founded in 1848 by Marx in Cologne and suppressed in June

1849d by a Prussian coup d'état. After taking part in the rising at Elberfeld Engels fought in the Baden campaign6 against the Prussians (June and July 1849) as the aide-de-camp of Willich, who was then colonel of a battalion of francs-tireurs.382

In 1850, in London, he contributed to the Review of the Neue Rheinische Zeitung1 edited by Marx and printed in Hamburg. There Engels for the first time published The Peasant War in Germany, which 19 years later appeared again in Leipzig as a pamphlet and ran into three editions.

After the resumption of the socialist movement in Germany, Engels contributed to the Volksstaat and Vorwärts his most

[^1]: a The 1880 edition further has: "at once into almost".— Ed b The following passage was added in the French edition which appeared in 1880: "The Communist Manifesto is one of the most valuable documents of modern socialism; even today it remains one of the most vigorous and clearest expositions of the development of bourgeois society and the formation of the proletariat which must put an end to capitalist society; as in The Poverty of Philosophy by Marx, published a year earlier, here, for the first time, the theory of class struggle is clearly formulated."— Ed

[^2]: c The 1880 edition has here: "socialist".— Ed d The last issue of the Neue Rheinische Zeitung came out on May 19, 1849.— Ed e The 1880 edition has: "the Baden and Palatinate campaign".— Ed f Neue Rheinische Zeitung. Politisch-ökonomische Revue.—Ed



v^^v,^sg53 Ali?

- <** ^ ^ 4 W J * * ^ Ä cî^« -*>

[^1]: The first page of Marx's "Introduction to the French Edition of Engels' Socialism:

[^2]: Utopian and Scientific







**[p. 339]**

In 1870, after leaving Manchester for London, Engels joined the General Council of the International, where he was entrusted with the correspondence with Spain, Portugal and Italy.

The series of final articles which he contributed to the Vorwärts under the ironic title of Herr Dühring's Revolution in Scienceh (in response to the allegedly new theories of Mr. E. Dühring on science in general and socialism in particular) were assembled in one volume and were a great success among German socialists. In the present pamphlet we reproduce the most topical excerpt from the theoretical section of the book, which constitutes what might be termed an introduction to scientific socialism.

Written on about May 4-5, 1880 Printed according to the manu- script, checked with the 1880 First published in a pamphlet: F. Engels, edition Socialisme utopique et socialisme scientifique, Paris, 1880 Translated from the French

Published in English for the first time

[^1]: a A reference to The Bakuninists at Work—Ed b In the 1880 edition the title is given in French and, in brackets, in German — Herrn Dühring's Umwälzung der Wissenschaft— Ed

[^2]: 24*



