---
Volume: 24
Document_Title: "34. K. Marx and F. Engels. To the Meeting in Geneva Held to Commemorate the 50th Anniversary of the Polish Revolution of 1830 "
Page_Range: "374-377"
---

# 34. K. Marx and F. Engels. To the Meeting in Geneva Held to Commemorate the 50th Anniversary of the Polish Revolution of 1830 



**[p. 343]**

Karl Marx and Frederick Engels

T O THE MEETING IN GENEVA HELD T O COMMEMORATE THE 50TH ANNIVERSARY

OF THE POLISH REVOLUTION OF 1830385

Citizens!

After the first partition of their country, Poles who had left their fatherland crossed the Atlantic in order to defend the great American republic, which had just come into being.386 Kosciuszko fought side by side with Washington. In 1794, when the French Revolution was resisting the coalition forces with difficulty, the glorious Polish revolt deflected danger away from it.387 Poland lost its independence, but the Revolution survived. The defeated Poles joined the army of the sans-culottes and helped to smash feudal Europe.388 Finally, in 1830, when Tsar Nicholas and the Prussian King3 sought to carry out their plans to restore the Legitimist monarchy with a new attack on France, the Polish Revolution,389

whose memory you are celebrating today, blocked their path: "Order was restored in Warsaw."

The cry "Long live Poland!" which then resounded throughout Western Europe was not merely an expression of sympathy and admiration for the patriotic fighters who were crushed with brutal force—with this cry men hailed the people whose revolts all ended so unhappily for itself but always halted the advance of the counter-revolution, the people whose best sons never ceased to fight the struggle of resistance by everywhere going into battle under the banner of the popular revolutions. On the other hand, the partition of Poland consolidated the Holy Alliance, which served as a disguise for the Tsar's hegemony over all the governments of Europe. Thus the cry "Long live Poland!" has

[^1]: a Frederick William III.— Ed.





**[p. 344]**

Since 1830, when the bourgeoisie in France and England more or less took power in their hands, the proletarian movement began to grow. Since 1840 the propertied classes of England were already obliged to resort to force of arms to resist the Chartist Party, this first militant organisation of the working class. Then in 1846 in the last corner of independent Poland, Cracow, the first political revolution to proclaim socialist demands broke out.390

From that time on, Poland forfeited all the ostensible sympathies of the whole of Europe.3

In 1847 the first international congress of the proletariat391 met secretly in London. One outcome of this congress was the writing of the Communist Manifesto, which ended with the new revolution- ary watchword: "Working Men of All Countries, Unite!" Poland had its representatives at this congress, and at a public meeting in Brussels3 the famous Lelewel and his supporters declared their adhesion to the resolutions of the congress.— In 1848 and 1849 numerous Poles served in the revolutionary German, Italian, Hungarian and Romanian armies, distinguishing themselves as soldiers and commanders.393 Although the socialist aspirations of this age were drowned in the bloodbath of the June days,394 the revolution of 1848 nevertheless—and this should not be forgot- ten— turned Europe for a moment into one community by seizing it almost entirely with its flame, and in this way prepared the ground for the International Working Men's Association. The Polish insurrection of 1863,395 by giving rise to a joint protest of English and French workers at the international machinations of their governments, formed the starting point for the International, which was founded with the participation of Polish exiles. Finally, the Paris Commune396 found its true champions among the Polish refugees and after its fall, it was sufficient to be a Pole to be shot by the war tribunals in Versailles.

Thus outside the borders of their country the Poles have played a major part in the struggle for the emancipation of the proletariat; in this struggle they were predominantly its interna- tional combat force.

May this struggle develop among the Polish people itself, may our propaganda and the refugee press support it, and may it unite with

[^1]: a The Polish pamphlet has here: "property-owning Europe".— Ed. h The Polish pamphlet has: "revolutionary press".— Ed



(Signed) Karl Marx, Frederick Engels,

Paul Lafargue, F. Lessnerh

First published in Le Précurseur, No. 49, Printed according to the news- December 4, 1880 paper, checked with the text of the Polish pamphlet Sprawozdanie z

miçdzynarodowego zebrania zwolanego w 50-letniç rocznicç listopadowego powstania, Geneva, 1881

Translated from the French

[^1]: a This word is omitted in the Polish pamphlet.— Ed. b The Polish pamphlet further has: "Former members of the General Council of the International Working Men's Association".— Ed.



