---
Volume: 24
Document_Title: "53. K. Marx and F. Engels. Preface to the Second Russian Edition of the Manifesto of the Communist Party "
Page_Range: "456-458"
---

# 53. K. Marx and F. Engels. Preface to the Second Russian Edition of the Manifesto of the Communist Party 



**[p. 425]**

Karl Marx and Frederick Engels

PREFACE TO THE SECOND RUSSIAN EDITION OF THE MANIFESTO OF THE COMMUNIST PARTY4'

The first Russian edition of the Manifesto of the Communist Party, translated by Bakunin, was published early in the sixties by the printing office of the Koloko L 81 At that time the West could see in it (the Russian edition of the Manifesto) only a literary curiosity. Such a view would be impossible today.

What a limited field the proletarian movement still occupied at that time (December 1847) is most clearly shown by the last section of the Manifesto: the position of the Communists in relation to the different opposition parties in the various countries.3 Russia and the United States of all places are missing here. It was the time when Russia constituted the last great reserve of all European reaction, when the United States absorbed the surplus proletarian forces of Europe through emigration. Both countries supplied Europe with raw materials and were at the same time markets for its industrial products. At that time both were, therefore, in one way or another, pillars of the existing European order.

How very different today! It was precisely European immigra- tion that enabled North America to attain gigantic agricultural production, competition from which is shaking the very founda- tions of European landed property—large and small. Moreover, it enabled the United States to exploit its tremendous industrial resources with an energy and on a scale that must shortly break the prevailing industrial monopoly of Western Europe, and especially of England. Both circumstances react in revolutionary manner upon America itself. Step by step the smaller and middle landownership of the farmers, the basis of the whole political

[^1]: a See present edition, Vol. 6, pp. 518-19.— Ed.





**[p. 426]**

And now Russia! During the Revolution of 1848-49, not only the European princes, but the European bourgeois as well, found their only salvation from the proletariat, which was just beginning to awaken, in Russian intervention. The Tsara was proclaimed the chief of European reaction. Today he b is a prisoner of war of the revolution, in Gatchina,482 and Russia forms the vanguard of revolutionary action in Europe.

The Communist Manifesto had as its object the proclamation of the inevitably impending dissolution of modern bourgeois proper- ty. But in Russia we find, face to face with the rapidly developing capitalist swindle and bourgeois landed property, which is just beginning to develop, more than half the land owned in common by the peasants. Now the question is: can the Russian obshchinaf a form of primeval common ownership of land, even if greatly undermined, pass directly to the higher form of communist common ownership? Or must it, conversely, first pass through the same process of dissolution as constitutes the historical development of the West?

The only answer possible today is this: If the Russian Revolution becomes the signal for a proletarian revolution in the West, so that the two complement each other, the present Russian common ownership of land may serve as the starting point for communist development.

Karl Marx, Frederick Engels London, January 21, 1882

[^1]: Published, in Russian, in: K. Marx and Printed according to the manu- F. Engels, Manifesto of the Communist Party, script Geneva, 1882

[^2]: a Nicholas I.— Ed. b Alexander III.— Ed. c Obshchina: village community.— Ed.



