---
Volume: 24
Document_Title: "55. F. Engels. The Vicar of Bray "
Page_Range: "467-470"
---

# 55. F. Engels. The Vicar of Bray 

Frederick Engels

THE VICAR OF BRAY

In good King Charles's golden days

When loyalty no harm meant, A zealous high-church man I was,

And so I got preferment: To teach my flock I never miss'd,

Kings are by God appointed, And damn'd are those that do resist.

Or touch The Lord's Anointed, And this is law I will maintain,

Until my dying day, Sir, That whatsoever king shall reign,

I'll be the vicar of Bray, Sir.

When royal James obtain'd the crown,

And popery came in fashion, The penal laws I hooted down,

And read the Declaration: The church of Rome I found would fit

Full well my constitution; And had become a Jesuit,

But for the Revolution. And this is law, &c.

When William was our King declar'd,

To ease the nation's grievance; With this new wind about I steer'd,

And swore to him allegiance: Old principles I did revoke,

Set conscience at a distance; Passive obedience was a joke,

A jest was non-resistance. And this is law, &c.



**[p. 437]**

The Church of England's glory, Another face of things was seen,

And I became a Tory: Occasional conformists base,

I damn'd their moderation; And thought the church in danger was,

By such prevarication. And this is law, &c.

When George in pudding-time came o'er,

And moderate men look'd big, Sir, I turn'd a cat-in-pan once more,

And so became a Whig, Sir; And thus preferment I procur'd

From our new faith's-defender; And almost ev'ry day abjur'd

The Pope and the Pretender. And this is law, &c.

Th'illustrious house of Hanover,

And Protestant succession; To these I do allegiance swear—

While they can keep possession: For in my faith and loyalty,

I never more will falter, And George my lawful king shall be—

Until the times do alter. And this is law I will maintain,

Until my dying day, Sir, That whatsoever king shall reign,

The above song is probably the only political folk song to have remained in favour in England for more than 160 years. This is largely attributable to its fine tune, which is still sung everywhere today. Moreover, the song is far from outdated, even with regard to present-day conditions in Germany. Though, in the meantime, as is only fit and proper, we have made some progress. The good vicar of the original had only to turn his coat at every

[^1]: I'll be the vicar of Bray, Sir!3

[^2]: a The English poem is cited from Joseph Ritson, A Select Collection of English Songs, in three volumes, 2nd ed., Vol. II, London, 1813, pp. 141-43. For Engels' German translation of this poem see Note 491.— Ed.



Fr. Engelsb

Written at the end of August and the beginning of September 1882

First published in Der Sozialdemokrat, No. 37, September 7, 1882

Printed according to the manu- script of the second rough outline, checked with the newspaper

Published in English in full for the first time

[^1]: a A reference to Bismarck.— Ed.

[^2]: b There is no signature in the manuscript.— Ed



