---
Volume: 24
Document_Title: "57. F. Engels. Preface to the First German Edition of Socialism: Utopian and Scientific "
Page_Range: "488-491"
---

# 57. F. Engels. Preface to the First German Edition of Socialism: Utopian and Scientific 



**[p. 457]**

Frederick Engels

PREFACE TO THE FIRST GERMAN EDITION OF SOCIALISM: UTOPIAN AND SCIENTIFIC511

The following work is derived from three chapters of my book: Herrn E. Dührings Umwälzung der Wissenschaft, Leipzig, 1878. I put them together for my friend Paul Lafargue for translation into French and added a few extra remarks. The French translation revised by me appeared first in the Revue socialiste* and then independently under the title: Socialisme utopique et socialisme scientifique, Paris, 1880. A rendering into Polish made from the French translation has just appeared in Geneva and bears the title: Socyjalizm utopijny a naukowy, Imprimerie de l'Aurore, Genève, 1882.

The surprising success of the Lafargue translation in the French-speaking countries and especially in France itself forced me to consider the question whether a separate German edition of these three chapters would not likewise be of value. Then the editors of the Zurich Sozialdemokrat informed me that a demand was generally being raised within the German Social-Democratic Party for the publication of new propaganda pamphlets, and they asked me whether I would not apply those three chapters to this purpose.512 I was naturally in agreement with that and put my work at their disposal.

It was, however, not originally written for immediate popular propaganda. How could what was in the first place a purely scientific work be suitable for that? What changes in form and content were required?

So far as form is concerned, only the numerous foreign words could arouse doubts. But even Lassalle in his speeches and

[^1]: a F. Engels, "Le socialisme utopique et le socialisme scientifique", I-III, La Revue socialiste, Nos. 3, 4 and 5, March 20, April 20 and May 5, 1880.— Ed.





**[p. 458]**

The content on the other hand, I think I can assert, will cause German workers few difficulties. In general, only the third section is difficult, but far less so for workers, whose general conditions of life it concerns, than for the "educated" bourgeois. In the many explanatory additions that I have made here, I have had in mind not so much the workers as "educated" readers; persons of the type of the Deputy von Eynern, the Privy Councillor Heinrich von Sybel and other Treitschkes, who are governed by the irresistible impulse to demonstrate again and again in black and white their frightful ignorance and, following from this, their colossal misconception of socialism. If Don Quixote tilts his lance at windmills, that is in accordance with his office and his role; but it would be impossible for us to permit Sancho Panza anything of the sort.

Such readers will also be surprised that in a sketch of the history of the development of socialism they should encounter the Kant-Laplace cosmogony, modern natural science and Darwin, classical German philosophy and Hegel. But scientific socialism is after all an essentially German product and could arise only in that nation whose classical philosophy had kept alive the tradition of conscious dialectics: in Germany.* The materialist conception of history and its specific application to the modern class struggle

[^1]: * "In Germany" is a slip of the pen. It should read "among Germans". For as indispensable, on the one hand, as German dialectics were for the genesis of scientific socialism, as equally indispensable for it were the developed economic and political conditions of England and France. The economic and political stage of development of Germany, which at the beginning of the forties was still more backward than today, could produce at the most caricatures of socialism (cf. Communist Manifesto, III, 1. c, "German, or 'True', Socialism"3). Only by the subjection of the economic and political conditions produced in England and France

[^2]: a See present edition, Vol. 6, pp. 510-13.— Ed.



Frederick Engels

London, September 21, 1882

First published in the book: F. Engels, Printed according to the book Die Entwicklung des Sozialismus von der Utopie zur Wissenschaft, Hottingen-Zurich, 1882

[^1]: to German dialectical criticism could a real result be achieved. From this angle, therefore, scientific socialism is not an exclusively German, but just as> much as international product. [This footnote was added by Engels to the third German edition of 1883.]



