---
Volume: 24
Document_Title: "2. Speeches by Karl Marx and Frederick Engels at the Meeting Held to Celebrate the 36th Anniversary of the German Workers' Educational Society in London, February 7, 1876 "
Page_Range: "596-598"
---

# 2. Speeches by Karl Marx and Frederick Engels at the Meeting Held to Celebrate the 36th Anniversary of the German Workers' Educational Society in London, February 7, 1876 



**[p. 565]**

[SPEECHES BY KARL MARX AND FREDERICK ENGELS

AT THE MEETING HELD TO CELEBRATE THE 36TH ANNIVERSARY OF THE GERMAN WORKERS'

EDUCATIONAL SOCIETY IN LONDON,

FEBRUARY 7, 1876]6n

Comrade Carl Marx then spoke about the work of the Society since its inception. The Society had been founded in 1840 by Carl Schapper in collaboration with 6 other like-minded persons. There existed an organisation within the Society, "The League of the Just",612 which had its seat in various countries and opposed the oppression of the people. Four or five nationalities had been involved in the foundation of this Society. In 1845613 a congress had been convened in London at which the Communist Manifesto had been worked out and whose motto was: "Proletarians of All Countries, Unite!" Marx then gave a most interesting account of the associations in those days, stating that the number of members had reached a level of 400-500. In March 1848 the Society was closed down by the British government,614 which was otherwise not so swift to resort to police measures. The Chartist movement, which had received a great deal of support from the Society, may have been the cause of the closure. The organisation called "The League of the Just" was dissolved in 1849,615 whereupon many members moved to America. In the fifties the Society worked more by itself, though it had always remained a refuge for the persecuted and oppressed. Marx then went on to discuss the present movement, stressing that the Society had contributed to its rise and he hoped that it would continue to do so.

Comrade Frederick Engels then recalled a faithful champion of truth and justice, Wilhelm Weitling. He was in fact the first person to try to spread the Communist idea in Germany. He was extradited by Switzerland to the Prussian government, which kept him in prison for a considerable time without any grounds. Weitling had died in America. His book Garantien der Harmonie



**[p. 566]**

Comrade Wroblewski, speaking in French, said: As long as there are Poles alive, the great movement of workers will have defenders in them; they will show by word and deed that their place is wherever the cause of the proletariat is being fought for. Speaker pays tribute to the workers' movement in all countries.

Comrade Engels translates Wroblewski's speech into German and then provides information on his activities. Wroblewski was a general and in 1863, during the Polish revolution,616 managed to keep 2 Russian armies in check with a small band; he was sentenced to death by the Russian government and succeeded at some risk in escaping to France, where he earned his daily bread as a worker. When the Paris Commune rose up, he took part in its battles and defended the southern part of Paris617; also con- demned to death by the Versailles people, he was fortunate enough to escape; he was still suffering greatly from the wounds he had incurred. []

[^1]: First published in Der Volksstaat, No. 24, Printed according to the news- February 27, 1876 paper

[^2]: Published in English for the first time



