---
Volume: 24
Document_Title: "6. Account of an Interview of Karl Marx with John Swinton, Correspondent of The Sun "
Page_Range: "614-617"
---

# 6. Account of an Interview of Karl Marx with John Swinton, Correspondent of The Sun 



**[p. 583]**

[ACCOUNT OF AN INTERVIEW OF KARL MARX WITH JOHN SWINTON,

CORRESPONDENT OF THE SLW]636

KARL MARX

One of the most remarkable men of the day, who has played an inscrutable but puissant part in the revolutionary politics of the past forty years, is Karl Marx. A man without desire for show or fame, caring nothing for the fanfaronade of life or the pretence of power, without haste and without rest, a man of strong, broad, elevated mind, full of far-reaching projects, logical methods, and practical aims, he has stood and yet stands behind more of the earthquakes which have convulsed nations and destroyed thrones, and do now menace and appal crowned heads and established frauds, than any other man in Europe, not excepting Joseph Mazzini himself. The student of Berlin, the critic of Hegelianism, the editor of papers, and the old-time correspondent of the New York Tribune, he showed his qualities and his spirit; the founder and master spirit of the once dreaded International and the author of "Capital", he has been expelled from half the countries of Europe, proscribed in nearly all of them, and for thirty years past has found refuge in London. He was at Ramsgate,63 the great seashore resort of the Londoners, while I was in London, and there I found him in his cottage, with his family of two generations. The saintly-faced, sweet-voiced, graceful woman of suavity who welcomed me at the door was evidently the mistress of the house and the wife of Karl Marx. And is this massive-headed, generous-featured, courtly, kindly man of 60, with the bushy masses of long revelling gray hair, Karl Marx? His dialogue reminded me of that of Socrates—so free, so sweeping, so creative, so incisive, so genuine—with its sardonic touches, its gleams of humor, and its sportive merriment. He spoke of the political forces and popular movements of the various countries of



**[p. 584]**

from the original German, he seemed unable to tell, but said that a proposition for an English translation had come to him from New York.638 He said that that book was but a fragment, a single part of a work in three parts, two of the parts being yet unpublished, the full trilogy being "Land", "Capital", "Credit",639

the last part, he said, being largely illustrated from the United States, where credit has had such an amazing development. Mr. Marx is an observer of American action, and his remarks upon some of the formative and substantive forces of American life were full of suggestiveness. By the way, in referring to his "Capital", he said that any one who might desire to read it would find the French translation much superior in many ways to the German original.640 Mr. Marx referred to Henri Rochefort the Frenchman, and in his talk of some of his dead disciples, the stormy Bakunin, the brilliant Lassalle, and others, I could see how his genius had taken hold of men who, under other circumstances, might have directed the course of history.

[^1]: a Kanumaiih. Kpumuxa nojiumimec Koü a KOHOMiu. Co HHHeme Kap Aa Mapicca. nepe B04T> CT> HÏ>Meq Karo. TOMT. nep Bbift. Kmira I. "npoqeccb npo H3B04CTBa Kan HTa Aa", C.-rie Tep6ypn>, 1872; Le Capital Par Karl Marx. Traduction de M. J. Roy, entièrement revisée par l'auteur, [Vol. I,] Paris.— Ed.





**[p. 585]**

At first it seemed as though I had heard the echo of despair; but, peradventure, it was the law of life.

[^1]: First published in The Sun, No. 6, Reproduced from the newspaper September 6, 1880

[^2]: a Jenny and Charles Longuet with their children—Jean, Henri and Edgar— and Laura and Paul Lafargue.— Ed.

[^3]: b Paul Lafargue.— Ed. c Charles Longuet.— Ed.



