---
Volume: 24
Document_Title: "7. Statement on the Closure of L'Egalité "
Page_Range: "617-620"
---

# 7. Statement on the Closure of L'Egalité 



**[p. 586]**

[STATEMENT ON THE CLOSURE OF L'ÉGALITÉ]641

The editorial board of L'Egalité* had concluded an agreement with a printer6 for two years, under which the latter bore the expenses and shared the profits equally with the editorial board. A sale of 6,000 copies would cover the expenses. The first issue sold 3,800 copies straightaway. But by the third issue the printer already declared that he no longer wished to pay out money in order to disseminate ideas which he did not share; henceforth he would pay only for the setting and the paper, the editorial board would have to provide the rest. Reference to the contract did not help. Accept or the paper closes (c'est à prendre ou à laisser). In return, he finally allowed the editorial board to receive the income from advertisements and sales outside Paris. Four days later the printer declared that this also had to stop; the editorial board would have to take over the newspaper on its own account. Since the board lacked the resources to do this, the newspaper was thus doomed. The editorial board will sue the man for breach of contract, but the newspaper remains dead and buried. The whole secret is that the man is being given a large Orleanist paper to print and has evidently been told that he must first show the damned socialists the door; after all, they had committed the crime of advocating the confiscation of the Orleans fortune.

[^1]: Sent by Engels to Zurich on March 1, Printed according to the news- 1883 paper

[^2]: First published in Der Sozialdemokrat, Published in English for the first No. 11, March 8, 1883 time

[^3]: a Gabriel Deville, Jules Guesde, Paul Lafargue, Emile Massard.— Ed.

[^4]: b A. Le Tailleur.— Ed.



NOTES

AND INDEXES



