---
Volume: 3
Document_Title: "1. To Ludwig Feuerbach, October 3, 1843 "
Page_Range: "372-374"
---

# 1. To Ludwig Feuerbach, October 3, 1843 



**[p. 1843]**

1 TO LUDWIG FEUERBACH

IN BRUCK.BERG 106

Kreuznach, October 3, 1843 Dear Sir,

A few months ago while passing through [Bruckberg], Dr. Ruge informed you of our plan to publish Franco-German Jahrbücher and asked at the same time for your collaboration. It has now been already settled that Paris is to be the place for printing and publication and that the first monthly number is to appear by the end of November.

Before I leave for Paris in a few days time I feel obliged to make a brief epistolary approach to you since I have not had the privilege of making your personal acquaintance.

You were one of the first writers who expressed the need for a Franco-German scientific alliance. You will, therefore, assuredly be one of the first to support an enterprise aimed at bringing such an alliance into being. For German and French articles are to be published promiscue* in the Jahrbücher. The best Paris writers have agreed to co-operate. Any contribution from you will be most welcome and there is probably something at your disposal that you have already written.

From your preface to the 2nd edition of Das Wesen des Christentums, I am almost led to conclude that you are engaged on a fuller work on Schelling or that you have something about this windbag in mind.107 Now that would be a marvellous beginning.

Schelling, as you know, is the 38th member of the [German] Confederation.108 The entire German police is at his disposal as I myself once experienced when I was editor of the Rheinische Zeitung. That is, a censorship order can prevent anything against

[^1]: Mixed, alternately.— Ed.





**[p. v]**

the holy Schelling []* from getting through. Hence it is almost impossible in Germany to attack Schelling except in books of over 21 sheets, and books of over 21 sheets are not books read by the people.109 Kapp's bookb is very commendable but it is too circum- stantial and rather inaptly separates judgment from facts. Moreover, our governments have found a means of making such works ineffective. They must not be mentioned. They are ignored or the few official reviews dismiss them with a few contemptuous words. The great Schelling himself pretends he knows nothing about these attacks and he succeeded in diverting attention from Kapp's book by making a tremendous fiscal to-do about old Paulus' soup.cll° That was a diplomatic master stroke!

But just imagine Schelling exposed in Paris, before the French literary world! His vanity will not be able to restrain itself, this will wound the Prussian Government to the quick, it will be an attack on Schelling's sovereignty abroad, and a vain monarch sets much greater store by his sovereignty abroad than at home.

How cunningly Herr von Schelling enticed the French, first of all the weak, eclectic Cousin, then even the gifted Leroux. For Pierre Leroux and his like still regard Schelling as the man who replaced transcendental idealism by rational realism, abstract thought by thought with flesh and blood, specialised philosophy by world philosophy! To the French romantics and mystics he cries: "I, the union of philosophy and theology", to the French materialists: "I, the union of flesh and idea", to the French sceptics: "I, the destro/er of dogmatism", in a word, "I Schelling!"

Schelling has not only been able to unite philosophy and theology, but philosophy and diplomacy too. He has turned philosophy into a general diplomatic science, into a diplomacy for all occasions. Thus an attack on Schelling is indirectly an attack on our entire policy, and especially on Prussian policy. Schelling's philosophy is Prussian policy sub specie philosophiae.

You would therefore be doing a great service to our enterprise, but even more to truth, if you were to contribute a characterisa- tion of Schelling to the very first issue. You are just the man for this because you are Schelling in reverse. The sincere thought—we may believe the best of our opponent^of the young Schelling for the realisation of which however he did not possess the necessary

[^1]: a A word here is indecipherable.— Ed.

[^2]: [Ch. Kapp,] Friedrich Wilhelm Joseph von Schelling—Ed. c H. E. G. Paulus, Die endlich offenbar gewordene positive Philosophie der Offen- barung.— Ed.



