---
Volume: 3
Document_Title: "2. To Julius Fröbel, November 21, 1843 "
Page_Range: "374-377"
---

# 2. To Julius Fröbel, November 21, 1843 



**[p. 351]**

qualities except imagination, he had no energy but vanity, no driving force but opium, no organ but the irritability of a feminine perceptivity, this sincere thought of his youth, which in his case remained a fantastic youthful dream, has become truth, reality, manly seriousness in your case. Schelling is therefore an anticipated caricature of you, and as soon as reality confronts the caricature the latter must dissolve into thin air. I therefore regard you as the necessary, natural — that is, nominated by Their Majesties Nature and History — opponent of Schelling. Your struggle with him is the struggle of the imagination of philosophy with philosophy itself.

I confidently expect a contribution from you in the form you may find most convenient.111 My address is: "Herr Maurer. Rue Vanneau No. 23, Paris, for the attention of Dr. Marx." Although she does not know you, my wife sends greetings. You would not believe how many followers you have among the fair sex.

Yours very truly,

Dr. Marx

First published in part in: K. Grün, Printed according to the original Ludwig Feuerbach in seinem Briefwechsel T-, r u . . • ur u J • r und Nachlass, sowie in seiner Philosophischen ^he full text is published ,n Eng- Charakterentwicklung, Bd. I, Leipzig und l i s h f o r t h e f l r s t t l m e

Paris, November 21, 1843 rue Vanneau, No. 31, Faub. St. Germain Dear Friend,

Your letter has just arrived, but with some very strange symptoms.

1) Everything which you say you enclosed is missing with the exception of Engels' article.3 This, however, is all in pieces and is therefore useless. It begins with No. 5.

[^1]: Heidelberg, 1874; in full in: Karl Marx and Frederick Engels, Collected Works, second Russ. ed., Vol. 27, 1962

[^2]: 2 TO JULIUS FRÖBEL112

[^3]: IN ZURICH

[^4]: a Frederick Engels, "Outlines of a Critique of Political Economy" (see this volume, pp. 418-43).— Ed.





**[p. 352]**

3)Mäurer's letter, which, like mine, I found open in the enclosed envelope, is also superscribed in a strange hand. I enclose the page with the writing.

Hence there are only two possibilities. Either the French Government opened and seized your letters and your packet. In which case return the enclosed addresses. We will then not only initiate proceedings against the French Post-Office but, at the same time, publicise this fact in all the opposition papers. In any event it would be better if you addressed all packets to a French bookshop. However, we do not believe that the French Government has perpetrated the kind of infamy which so far only the Austrian Government has permitted itself.

There thus remains the second possibility, that your Bluntschli and associates have played this police-spy trick. If this is so, then (1) You must bring proceedings against the Swiss and (2) Maurer as a French citizen will protest to the Ministry.

As far as the business itself is concerned, it is now necessary: a) To ask Schüller not to issue the aforesaid document for the time being, as this must be the principal ornament of our first number.2

ß) Send the whole of the contents to Louis Blanc's address: No. 2 or 3, rue Taitbout.

t) Ruge is not yet here. I cannot very well begin with the printing until he has arrived. I have had to reject the articles so far sent to me by the local people (Hess, Weill, etc.) after many protracted discussions. But Ruge is probably coming at the end of this month, and if at that time we also have the document you promised, we can begin with the printing. I have written to Feuerbach,b Kapp and Hagen. Feuerbach has already replied.113

Ô) Holland seems to me to be the most suitable place providing that your police spies have not already been in direct touch with the government.

If your Swiss people have perpetrated the infamy I will not only attack them in the Réforme, the National, the Démocratie pacifique, the Siècle, Courrier, La Presse, Charivari, Commerce and the Revue indépendante, but in the Times as well, and, if you wish, in a pamphlet written in French.

[^1]: a Of the Deutsch-Französische Jahrbücher.—Ed.

[^2]: See previous letter.— Ed.





**[p. 353]**

These pseudo-Republicans will have to learn that they are not dealing with young cowhands, or tailors' apprentices.

As to the office I will try to acquire one along with the new lodging into which I intend moving. This will be convenient from the business and financial viewpoint.

Please excuse this scraggy letter. I can't write for indignation.

Yours, Marx

In any case, whether the Paris doctrinaires or the Swiss peasant lads were responsible for the trick, we will get Arago and Lamartine to make an intervention in the Chamber. If these gentlemen want to make a scandal, ut scandalum fiat.3 Reply quickly for the matter is pressing. Since Maurer is a French citizen, the plot on the part of the Zürichers would be a violation of international law, with which the cowhands shall not get away.

First published in German and Russian Printed according to the original in the journal Voprosy istorii KPSS No. 4, Published in English for the first 1958 time

[^1]: Scandal they shall have.— Ed.



