---
Volume: 1
Document_Title: "I. The Subject of the Treatise "
Page_Range: "68-70"
---

# I. The Subject of the Treatise 

Part One

DIFFERENCE BETWEEN THE DEMOCRITEAN

AND EPICUREAN PHILOSOPHY OF NATURE

IN GENERAL

I. THE SUBJECT OF THE TREATISE

Greek philosophy seems to have met with something with which a good tragedy is not supposed to meet, namely, a dull ending.3

The objective history of philosophy in Greece seems to come to an end withb Aristotle, Greek philosophy's Alexander of Macedon, and even the manly-strong Stoics did not succeed0 in what the Spartans did accomplish in their temples, the chaining of Athenad

to Heracles so that she could not flee.

Epicurean philosophy is taken as a syncretic combination of Democritean physics and Cyrenaic morality; Stoicism as a com- pound of Heraclitean speculation on nature and the Cynical- ethical view of the world, together with some Aristotelean logic; and finally Scepticism as the necessary evil confronting these dogmatisms. These philosophies are thus unconsciously linked to the Alexandrian philosophy by being made into a one-sided and tendentious eclecticism. The Alexandrian philosophy is finally regarded entirely as exaltation and derangement — a confusion in which at most the universality of the intention can be recognised.

[^1]: Epicureans, Stoics and Sceptics are regarded as an almost improper addition bearing no relation to its powerful premises.6

[^2]: a After "ending", Marx erased "an incoherent finale".— Ed.

[^3]: Corrected by Marx from "after".— Ed. c The sentence "The objective history succeed" was originally: "With Aristotle, Greek philosophy's Alexander of Macedon, the owl of Minerva seems to lower its wings, and even the manly-strong Stoics seem not to have suc- ceeded"— Ed.

[^4]: Corrected by Marx from "Minerva".— Ed. e Prämissen (premises) corrected by Marx from Antezedentien (predeces- sors).— Ed.





**[p. 35]**

And then: birth, flowering and decline are very general, very vague notions under which, to be sure, everything can be arranged, but through which nothing can be understood. Decay itself is prefigured in the living; its shape should therefore be just as much grasped in its specific characteristic as the shape of life.

Finally, when we glance at history, are Epicureanism, Stoicism and Scepticism particular phenomena? Are they not the pro- totypes of the Roman mind, the shape in which Greece wandered to Rome? Is not their essence so full of character, so intense and eternal that the modern world itself has to admit them to full spiritual citizenship?

I lay stress on this only in order to call to mind the historical importance of these systems. Here, however, we are not at all con- cerned with their significance for culture in general, but with their connection with the older Greek philosophy.

Should not this relationship urge us at least to an inquiry, to see Greek philosophy ending up with two different groups of eclectic systems, one of them the cycle of Epicurean, Stoic and Sceptic philosophy, the other being classified under the collective name of Alexandrian speculation? Furthermore, is it not remarkable that after the Platonic and Aristotelean philosophies, which are univer- sal in range, there appear new systems which do not lean on these rich intellectual forms, but look farther back and have recourse to the simplest schools — to the philosophers of nature in regard to physics, to the Socratic school in regard to ethics? Moreover, what is the reason why the systems that follow after Aristotle find their foundations as it were ready made in the past, why Democritus is linked to the Cyrenaics and Heraclitus to the Cynics? Is it an accident that with the Epicureans, Stoics and Sceptics all moments of self-consciousness are represented completely, but every mo- ment as a particular existence? Is it an accident that these systems in their totalityb form the complete structure of self-consciousness? And finally, the character with which Greek philosophy mythically

[^1]: a Corrected by Marx from "not to be denied".— Ed. b Marx erased after "totality" the word gleichsam, "so to say", or "as it were".— Ed.



