---
Volume: 1
Document_Title: "III. Difficulties Concerning the Identity of the Democritean and Epicurean Philosophy of Nature "
Page_Range: "72-80"
---

# III. Difficulties Concerning the Identity of the Democritean and Epicurean Philosophy of Nature 



**[p. 38]**

Thus while Cicero says that Epicurus worsened the Democritean doctrine, at the same time crediting him at least with the will to improve it and with having an eye for its defects, while Plutarch ascribes to him inconsistencyn) and a predisposition toward the inferior, hence also casts suspicion on his intentions, Leibniz denies him even the ability to make excerpts from Democritus skilfully.

But all agree that Epicurus borrowed his physics from De- mocritus.

III. DIFFICULTIES CONCERNING THE IDENTITY OF THE DEMOCRITEAN AND EPICUREAN PHILOSOPHY OF NATURE

Apart from historical testimony, there is much other evidence for the identity of Democritean and Epicurean physics. The principles — atoms and the void — are indisputably the same. Only in isolated cases does there seem to be arbitrary, hence unessential, difference.

However, a curious and insoluble riddle remains. Two philosophers teach exacdy the same science, in exacdy the same way, but—how inconsistent!—they stand diametrically opposed in all that concerns truth, certainty, application of this science, and all that refers to the relationship between thought and reality in general. I say that they stand diametrically opposed, and I shall now try to prove it.

A. The opinion of Democritus concerning the truth and certainty of human knowledge seems hard to ascertain. Contradictory passages are to be found, or rather it is not the passages, but Democritus' views that contradict each other. For Trendelenburg's assertion in his commentary to Aristotelean psychology, that only later authors, but not Aristotle, knew of such contradictions, is factually incor- rect. Indeed, in Aristotle's Psychology* it is stated: "Democritus posits soul and mind [Verstand] as one and the same, since the phenomenon is the true thing." !) But in his Metaphysics he writes: "Democritus asserts that nothing is true or it is concealed from us."2) Are not these passages of Aristotle contradictory? If the phenomenon is the true thing, how can the true thing be con- cealed? The concealment begins only when phenomenon and truth separate.13 But Diogenes Laertius reports that Democritus was

[^1]: Corrected by Marx from "Physiology".— Ed. This sentence and the one before were inserted by Marx.— Ed.



counted among the Sceptics. His saying is quoted: "In reality we know nothing, for truth lies at the deep bottom of the well."3) Similar statements are found in Sextos Empiricus.v

This sceptical, uncertain and internally self-contradictory view held by Democritus is only further developed in the way in which the relationship between the atom and the world which is apparent to the senses is determined.

Sensuous appearance, on the one hand, does not belong to the atoms themselves. It is not objective appearance, but subjective sem- blance [Schein]. "The true principles are the atoms and the void, everything else is opinion, semblance."5) "Cold exists only according to opinion, heat exists only according to opinion, but in reality there are only the atoms and the void."6) Unity therefore does not truly result from the many atoms, but rather "through the combination of atoms each thing appears to become a unity".7) The principles can therefore be perceived only through reason, since they are inaccessible to the sensuous eye if only because of their small- ness. For this reason they are even called ideas.8) The sensuous appearance is, on the other hand, the only true object, and the aisthesis (a Io^7)ai C) is the phronesis (cpp6v7jat<;)a; this true thing however is the changing, the unstable, the phenomenon. But to say that the phenomenon is the true thing is contradictory.9) Thus now the one, now the other side is made the subjective and the objective. The contradiction therefore seems to be held apart, being divided between two worlds. Consequently, Democri- tus makes sensuous reality into subjective semblance; but the antinomy, banned from the world of objects, now exists in his own self-consciousness, where the concept of the atom and sen- suous perception face each other as enemies.

Thus Democritus does not escape the antinomy. This is not yet the place to explain it. It is enough that we cannot deny its existence.

Now let us listen to Epicurus. The wise man, he says, takes a dogmatic, not 2L sceptical position.10)

"Nor is there anything which can refute sensations, neither like can refute like, because of their equal validity, nor can unlike refute unlike, because they do not pass judgment on the same thing, nor the concept, because the concept depends on the sensuous

[^1]: Yes, exactly this makes him superior to all the others, that he knows with conviction.n) "All senses are heralds of the true." 12)

[^2]: a Aisthesis—sensuous perception, phronesis—reason, that which is rational.— Ed.





**[p. 40]**

perceptions," 13) as it says in the Canon. But while Democritus turns the sensuous world into subjective semblance, Epicurus turns it into objective appearance. And here he differs quite consciously, since he claims that he shares the same principles but that he does not reduce the sensuous qualities to things of mere opinion.14)

Since therefore sensation was in fact Epicurus' standard, since objective appearance corresponds to it: then we can only regard as a correct conclusion that at which Cicero shrugs his shoulder:

"The sun seems large to Democritus, because he is a man of science well versed in geometry; to Epicurus it seems to be about two feet large, for he pronounces it to be as large as it seems." '

B. This difference in the theoretical judgments of Democritus and Epicurus concerning the certainty of science and the truth of its objects manifests itself in the disparate scientific energy and practice of these men.

Democritus, for whom the principle does not enter into the appearance, remains without reality and existence, is faced on the other hand with the world of sensation as the real world, full of content. True, this world is subjective semblance, but just because of this it is torn away from the principle, left in its own independent reality. At the same time it is the unique real object and as such has value and significance. Democritus is therefore driven into empirical observation. Dissatisfied with philosophy, he throws himself into the arms of positive knowledge. We have already seen that Cicero calls him a vir eruditus.* He is versed in physics, ethics, mathematics, in the encyclopedic disciplines, in every art.16)

The catalogue alone of his books given by Diogenes Laertius bears witness to his erudition.17) But since it is the characteristic trait of erudition to expand in breadth and to collect and to search on the outside, we see Democritus wandering through half the world in order to acquire experiences, knowledge and observations.

Demetrius in the Homonymois (o}Movüjioi<;)b and Antisthenes in the Diadochais{^\.o Zoi<x\ç)c report that he travelled to Egypt to the priests in order to learn geometry, and to the Chaldeans in Persia, and

[^1]: "I have among.my contemporaries," he prides himself, "wandered through the largest part of the earth, investigating the remotest things. I have seen most climates and lands, and I have heard most learned men, and in linear composition with demonstration no one surpassed me, not even the so-called Arsipedonapts of the Egyptians." 18)

[^2]: Man of science.— Ed.

[^3]: Men of the Same Name.—Ed. Successions of Philosophers.—Ed.





**[p. 41]**

that he reached the Red Sea. Some maintain that he also met the gymnosophists20 in India and set foot in Ethiopia.19) On the one hand it is the lust for knowledge that leaves him no rest; but it is at the same time dissatisfaction with true, i. e., philosophical, knowledge that drives him far abroad. The knowledge which he considers true is without content, the knowledge that gives him content is without truth. It could be a fable, but a true fable, that anecdote of the ancients, since it gives a picture of the contradictory elements in his being. Democritus is supposed to have blinded himself so that the sensuous light of the eye would not darken the sharpness of intellect.2Q) This is the same man who, according to Cicero, wandered through half the world.3 But he did not find what he was looking for.

An opposite figure appears to us in Epicurus. Epicurus is satisfied and blissful in philosophy.

"You must," he says, "serve philosophy so that true freedom will be your lot. He who has subordinated and surrendered himself to it does not need to wait, he is emancipated at once. For to serve philosophy is freedom itself." ' Consequendy he teaches: "Let no one when young delay to study philosophy, nor when he is old grow weary of his study. For no one can come too early or too late to secure the health of his soul. And the man who says that the age for philosophy has either not yet come or has gone by is like the man who says that the age for happiness is not yet come to him, or has passed away."

While Democritus, dissatisfied with philosophy, throws himself into the arms of empirical knowledge, Epicurus has nothing but contempt for the positive sciences, since in his opinion they contribute nothing to true perfection.2^ He is called an enemy of science, a scorner of grammar.24) He is even accused of ignorance. "But," says an Epicurean in Cicero, "it was not Epicurus who was without erudition, but those are ignorant who believe that what is shameful for a boy not to know ought still to be recited by the old , ^ „ „ " 25) man. ;

But while Democritus seeks to learn from Egyptian priests, Persian Chaldeans and Indian gymnosophists, Epicurus prides himself on not having had a teacher, on being self-taught. 6) There are some people, he says according to Seneca, who struggle for truth without any assistance. Among these people he has himself traced out his path. And it is they, the self-taught, whom he praises most. The others, according to him, are second-rate minds.27) While Democritus is driven into all parts of the world, Epicurus leaves his garden in Athens scarcely two Or three times and travels to

[^1]: "Half the world" corrected from "the whole of infinity".— Ed.





**[p. 42]**

Ionia, not to engage in studies, but to visit friends.28) Finally, while Democritus,a despairing of acquiring knowledge, blinds himself, Epicurus, feeling the hour of death approaching, takes a warm bath, calls for pure wine and recommends to his friends that they be faithful to philosophy.29)

C. The differences that we have just set forth should not be attributed to the accidental individuality of the two philosophers; they embody two opposite tendencies. We see as a difference of practical energy that which is expressed in the passages above as a difference of theoretical consciousness.

We consider finally the form of reflection which expresses the relation of thought to being, their mutual relationship. In the general relationship which the philosopher sees between the world and thought, he merely makes objective for himself the relation of his own particular consciousness to the real world.

Now Democritus uses necessity as a form of reflection of reality.30) Aristotle says of him that he traces everything back to necessity.31) Diogenes Laertius reports that the vortex of atoms, the origin of all, is the Democritean necessity.32) More satisfactory explanations are given by the author of De placitis philosophorum:

A similar passage is to be found in the Physical Selections of Stobaeus*4) and in the sixth book of the Praeparatio evangelica of Eusebius.35) In the Ethical Selections of Stobaeus the following aphorism of Democritus is preserved36)—it is almost exactly repeated in the 14th book of Eusebius37): human beings like to create for themselves the illusion of chance — a manifestation of their own perplexity, since chance [Zufall] is incompatible with sound thinking. Simplicius similarly attributes to Democritus a passage in which Aristotle speaks of the ancient doctrine that does away with chance.38)

Contrast this with Epicurus:

[^1]: Necessity is, according to Democritus, fate and law, providence and the creator of the world. But the substance of this necessity is the antitype and the movement and impulse of matter.

[^2]: "Necessity, introducedb by some as the absolute ruler, does not exist, but some things are accidental, others depend on our arbitrary will. Necessity cannot be per- suaded, but chance is unstable. It would be better to follow the myth about the gods

[^3]: a Before "Democritus" Marx erased "the widely travelled".— Ed.

[^4]: "Introduced" (eingeführt) corrected by Marx from "played up" (auf- geführt).— Ed.



than to be a slave to the heimarmene (eluocppvr))* of the physicists. For the former leaves hope for mercy if we do honour to the gods, while the latter is inexorable necessity. But it is chance, which must be accepted, not God, as the multitude believe." "It is a misfortune to live in necessity, but to live in necessity is not a necessity. On all sides many short and easy paths to freedom are open. Let us therefore thank God that no man can be kept in life. It is permitted to subdue necessity itself." '

The Epicurean Velleius in Cicero says something similar about Stoic philosophy:

"What are we to think of a philosophy in which, as to ignorant old women, everydiinc seems to occur through fate? by Epicurus we have been redeemed, set free."

Thus Epicurus even denies disjunctive judgment so as not to have to acknowledge any concept of necessity.4^

True, it is claimed that Democritus also used the concept of chance, but of the two passages on this matter which can be found in Simplicius 43) the one renders the other suspect, because it shows clearly that it was not Democritus who used the category of chance, but Simplicius who ascribed it to him as a consequence. For he says: Democritus assigns, generally speaking, no cause for the creation of the world, he seems therefore to make chance the cause. Here, however, we are concerned not with the determination of the content, but with the form used consciously by Democritus. The situation is similar in regard to the report by Eusebius that Democritus made chance the ruler of the universal and divine and claimed that here it is through chance that everything happens, whereas he excluded chance from human life and empirical nature and called its supporters foolish.4^

In part, we see in these statements only a desire of the Christian bishop Dionysius for conclusion-forcing. In part, where the univer- sal and divine begin, the Democritean concept of necessity ceases to differ from chance.

Hence, this much is historically certain: Democritus makes use of necessity, Epicurus of chance. And each of them rejects the opposite view with polemical irritation.

The principal consequence of this difference appears in the way individual physical phenomena are explained.

Necessity appears in finite nature as relative necessity, as determin- ism. Relative necessity can only be deduced from real possibility, i.e., it is a network of conditions, reasons, causes, etc., by means of which this necessity reveals itself. Real possibility is b the explica-

[^1]: a What has been decreed, destiny.— Ed.

[^2]: b After "is" Marx erased gleichsam, "as it were".— Ed.





**[p. 44]**

tion of relative necessity. And we find it used by Democritus. We cite some passages from Simplicius.

If somebody is thirsty and drinks and feels better, Democritus will not assign chance as the cause, but thirst. For, even though he seems to use chance in regard to the creation of the world, yet he maintains that chance is not the cause of any particular event, but on the contrary leads back to other causes. Thus, for example, digging is the cause of a treasure being found, or growing the cause of the olive tree.45)

The enthusiasm and the seriousness with which Democritus introduces this manner of explanation into the observation of nature, the importance he attaches to the striving to ascertain causes, are naively3 expressed in his avowal:

"I would rather discover a new aetiology than acquire the Persian crown."46)

Once again Epicurus stands direcdy opposed to Democritus. Chance, for him, is a reality which has only the value of possibility. Abstract possibility, however, is the direct antipode of real possibility. The latter is restricted within sharp boundaries, as is the intellect; the former is unbounded, as is the imagination. Real possibility seeks to explain the necessity and reality of its object; abstract possibility is not interested in the object which is explained, but in the subject which does the explaining. The object need only be possible, conceivable. That which is abstracdy possible, which can be conceived, constitutes no obstacle to the thinking subject, no limit, no stumbling-block. Whether this possibility is also real is irrelevant, since here the interest does not extend to the object as object.

Epicurus therefore proceeds with a boundless nonchalance in the explanation of separate physical phenomena.

More light will be thrown upon this fact by the letter to Pythocles, later to be considered. Suffice it here to draw attention to Epicurus' attitude to the opinions of earlier physicists. Where the author of De placitis philosophorum and Stobaeus quote the different views of the philosophers concerning the substance of the stars, the size and shape of the sun and similar matters, it is always said of Epicurus: He rejects none of these opinions, all could be right, he adheres to the possible.47) Yes, Epicurus polemi- cises even against the rationally determining, and for precisely this reason one-sided, method of explanation by real possibility.

Thus Seneca says in his Quaestiones naturales: Epicurus maintains

[^1]: a After "naively" Marx erased "also".— Ed.





**[p. 45]**

One can see that there is no interest in investigating the real causes of objects. All that matters is the tranquillity of the explaining subject. Since everything possible is admitted as possi- ble, which corresponds to the character of abstract possibility, the chance of being is clearly transferred only into the chance of thought. The only rule which Epicurus prescribes, namely, that "the explanation should not contradict sensation", is self-evident; for to be abstractly possible consists precisely in being free from con- tradiction, which therefore must be avoided.49) And Epicurus con- fesses finally that his method of explaining aims only at the ata- raxf1 of self-consciousness, not at knowledge of nature in and for itself.m

It requires no further clarification to show how in this matter, too, Epicurus differs from Democritus.

We thus see that the two men are opposed to each other at every single step. The one is a sceptic, the other a dogmatist; the one considers the sensuous world as subjective semblance, the other as objective appearance. He who considers the sensuous world as subjective semblance applies himself to empirical natural science and to positive knowledge, and represents the unrest of observation, experimenting, learning everywhere, ranging over the wide, wide world. The other, who considers the phenomenal world to be real, scorns empiricism; embodied in him are the serenity of thought satisfied in itself, the self-sufficiency that draws its knowledge ex principio interno.a But the contradiction goes still farther. The sceptic and empiricist, who holds sensuous nature to be subjective semblance, considers it from the point of view of necessity and endeavours to explain and to understand the real existence of things. The philosopher and dogmatist, on the other hand, who considers appearance to be real, sees everywhere only chance, and his method of explanation tends rather to negate all objective reality of nature. There seems to be a certain absurdity in these contradictions.

It hardly seems still possible to presume that these men, who contradict each other on all points, will adhere to one and the same doctrine. And yet they seem to be chained to each other.

The task of the next section is to comprehend their relation- ship in general.22

[^1]: a From an inner principle.— Ed.



