---
Volume: 1
Document_Title: "3. To Arnold Ruge. February 10, 1842 "
Page_Range: "415-416"
---

# 3. To Arnold Ruge. February 10, 1842 

1 8 4 2

3

TO ARNOLD RÜGE

IN DRESDEN149

Trier, February 10 [1842]

Dear Friend,

I take the liberty of sending you a small contribution for the Deutsche Jahrbücher in the form of the enclosed criticism of the censorship instruction.3

If the article is suitable for your journal, I ask you for the time being not to mention my name to anyone except Wigand, and also to send me by post immediately the issues of the Deutsche Jahrbücher containing my article; because for the time being here in Trier I am completely excluded from the literary world.

It is obvious that it is in the interest of the cause that the printing should be expedited, if the censorship does not censor my censure.

If you do not know of a critic for Vatke's super-clever book on sin b— were it not so devilishly clever, one would be tempted to call it stupid — my critical zeal is at your disposal.

It would perhaps be equally worth while to deal again with Bayer's work on the moral spirits Feuerbach's criticism was a friendly service.150 Honourable as is Bayer's moral frame of mind, his work itself is just as weak and even immoral.

I should be very glad if you would let Wigand know that my manuscript will reach you in a few days' time. Bauer'sd letter in

[^1]: a See this volume, pp. 109-31.— Ed. W. Vatke, Die menschliche Freiheit in ihrem Verhältnis zur Sünde und zur göttlichen Gnade.—Ed.

[^2]: c K. Bayer, Betrachtungen über den Begriff des sittlichen Geistes und über das Wesen der Tugend.—Ed.

[^3]: d Bruno Bauer.— Ed.



