---
Volume: 1
Document_Title: "4. To Arnold Ruge. March 5, 1842 "
Page_Range: "416-417"
---

# 4. To Arnold Ruge. March 5, 1842 



**[p. 382]**

As I have now come to the end of some voluminous works, it goes without saying that all my forces are at the disposal of the Deutsche Jahrbücher.

With sincere respect,

Marx

My address is: Dr. Marx, Trier, to be delivered to Geheimer Regierungsrat von Westphalen.

First published in the journal Printed according to the original Documente des Socialismus, Bd. I, 1902 _ ,,. , , . _ ,. , , Published in English for the first time

4

TO ARNOLD RUGE

Trier, March 5 [1842]

Dear Friend,

I fully agree with the plan for the Anekdota philosophica151 and also think it would be better to include my name among the others. A demonstration of this kind, by its very nature, precludes all anonymity. Those gentlemen must see that one's conscience is clear.

With the sudden revival of the Saxon censorship it is obvious from the outset that it will be quite impossible to print my "Treatise on Christian Art', which should have appeared as the second part of the Posaune.152 But what about including it in a modified version in the Anekdota? The mass of material obnoxious to the censorship which now fills people's minds perhaps makes it possible also to publish the Anekdota, as material accumulates, in a number of separate instalments! Another article which I also intended for the Deutsche Jahrbücher is a criticism of Hegelian natural law, insofar as it concerns the internal political system. The central point is the struggle against constitutional monarchy as a hybrid which from beginning to end contradicts and abolishes

[^1]: IN DRESDEN



