---
Volume: 1
Document_Title: "5. To Arnold Ruge. March 20, 1842 "
Page_Range: "417-421"
---

# 5. To Arnold Ruge. March 20, 1842 



**[p. 383]**

Regarding the other things, next time. With sincerest respect,

Devotedly yours,

Marx

Apropos. Through an oversight, the manuscript on the censor- ship contains the phrase: "the censorship of tendency and the tendency censorship". It should be: "the censorship of tendency and the tendency of censorship".3

Be so kind as to send me the reply directly by post to Trier. Bauer has been suspended from his post, as he writes in a letter just received, par lit de justice}'154

5

TO ARNOLD RUGE

Trier, March 20 [1842]

Dear Friend,

Bauer once had the same sort of scene with Eichhorn in Berlin as you had with the Minister of the Interior.0 As orators, these gentlemen are as alike as two peas. On the other hand, what is exceptional is that philosophy speaks intelligibly with the state

[^1]: First published in the journal Documente Printed according to the original des Socialismus, Bd. I, 1902 _, , ,. , . . _ . . . . Published in English for the first time

[^2]: IN DRESDEN

[^3]: Novices are the most pious people, as Saxony proves ad oculos.c

[^4]: a See this volume, p. 123.— Ed. Here—by a royal order.— Ed. c By ocular demonstration.— Ed. d Von Rochow.— Ed.

[^5]: 14-194





**[p. 384]**

When I was still young and good, I already knew at least that the eggs laid in Berlin were not the eggs of the swan Leda, but goose eggs. A little later I realised that they were crocodile eggs, like, for example, the very latest egg by which, allegedly, on the proposal of the Rhine Province Assembly, the illegal restrictions of French legislation concerning high treason, etc., and crimes of officials, have been abolished.155 But this time, because it is a question of objective legal provisions, the hocus-pocus is so stupid that even the stupidest Rhenish lawyers have immediately seen through it. At the same time, Prussia has declared with complete naivety that publicity of court proceedings would jeopardise the prestige and credit of Prussian officials. That is an extremely frank admission. All our Rhenish scribblings about publicity and publicising suffer from a basic defect. Honest folk continually point out that these are by no means political, but merely legal, institutions, that they are a right, and not a wrong. As though that were the question! As though all the evil of these institutions did not consist precisely in the fact that they are a right! I should very much like to prove the opposite, namely, that Prussia cannot introduce publicity and publicising, for free courts and an unfree state are incompatible. Similarly, Prussia should be highly praised for its piety, for a transcendental state and a positive religion go together, just as a pocket icon does with a Russian swindler.

[^1]: Bülow-Cummerow, as you will have seen from the Chinese newspapers,156 makes his pen flirt with his plough.8 Oh, this rustic

[^2]: Bülow-Cummerow, Preussen, seine Verfassung, seine Verwaltung, sein Verhältnis zu Deutschland, Th. I.— Ed.





**[p. 385]**

coquette, who adorns herself with artificial flowers! I think that writers with this earthly position — for, after all, a position on ploughland is surely earthly—would be desirable, and even more so if in the future the plough were to think and write instead of the pen, while the pen, on the other hand, were to perform serf labour in return. Perhaps, in view of the present uniformity of the German governments, this will come to pass, but the more uniform the governments, the more multiform nowadays are the philosophers, and it is to be hoped that the multiform army will conquer the uniform one.

Ad rem* since among us, loyal, moral Germans, politica is included in formalia, whence Voltaire deduced that we have the profoundest textbooks on public law.

Therefore, as regards the matter, I found that the article "On Christian Art", which has now been transformed into "On Religion and Art, with Special Reference to Christian Art", must be entirely redone, because the tone of the Posaune, which I conscientiously followed:

"Thy word is a lamp unto my feet, And light unto my path." "Thy command- ments make me wiser than mine enemies, For they are ever with me," and "The Lord shall roar from Zion"

—this tone of the Posaune and the irksome constraint of the Hegelian exposition should now be replaced by a freer, and therefore more thorough exposition. In a few days, I have to go to Cologne, where I set up my new residence,157 for I find the proximity of the Bonn professors intolerable. Who would want to have to talk always with intellectual skunks, with people who study only for the purpose of finding new dead ends in every corner of the world!

Owing to these circumstances, therefore, I was not able, of course, to send herewith the criticism of the Hegelian philosophy of law for the next Anekdota (as it was also written for the Posaune); I promise to send the article on religious art by mid-April, if you are prepared to wait so long. This would be the more preferable for me, since I am examining the subject from a new point de vue and am giving also an epilogue de romanticis0 as a supplement. Meanwhile I shall most actively, to use Goethe's language, con- tinue to work on the subject and await your decision. Be so kind

[^1]: a To come to the matter.— Ed. b Psalm 119: 105, 98; Amos 1:2 (paraphrased).— Ed. c On the romantics.— Ed.

[^2]: 14*





**[p. 386]**

In the article itself I necessarily had to speak about the general essence of religion; in doing so I come into conflict with Feuer- bach to a certain extent, a conflict concerning not the principle, but the conception of it. In any case religion does not gain from it.

I have heard nothing about Koppen for a long time. Have you not yet approached Christiansen in Kiel? I know him only from his history of Roman law,3 which, however, contains also some- thing about religion and philosophy in general. He seems to have an excellent mind, although when he comes to actual philosophis- ing, his writing is horribly incomprehensible and formal. Perhaps, he has now begun to write plain German. Otherwise he seems to be à la hauteur des principes^

I shall be very pleased to see you here on the Rhine.

Yours,

Marx

I have just had a letter from Bauer in which he writes that he wants to travel northwards again, owing to the silly idea that there he will be better able to conduct his proceedings against the Prussian Government. Berlin is too close to Spandau.158 At all events, it is good that Bauer is not allowing the matter to take its own course. As I have learned here from my future brother-in-law,0

aristocrat comme il faut, people in Berlin are particularly vexed at Bauer's bonne foi.d

[^1]: First published in the journal Documente Printed according to the original des Socialismus, Bd. I, 1902 _, , .. , , . _ .. , . . .. Published in English tor the tirst time

[^2]: J. Christiansen, Die Wissenschaft der römischen Rechtsgeschichte im Grundrisse, Bd. 1.— Ed.

[^3]: b Highly principled.— Ed. c Ferdinand von Westphalen.— Ed. d Good faith.— Ed.



