---
Volume: 7
Document_Title: "1. Karl Marx and Frederick Engels. Demands of the Communist Party in Germany "
Page_Range: "34-39"
---

# 1. Karl Marx and Frederick Engels. Demands of the Communist Party in Germany 



**[p. 3]**

Karl Marx and Frederick Engels

DEMANDS OF THE COMMUNIST PARTY IN GERMANY '

"Workers of all countries, unite!"

1. The whole of Germany shall be declared a single and indivisible republic.

2. Every German, having reached the age of 21, shall have the right to vote and to be elected, provided he has not been convicted of a criminal offence.

3. Representatives of the people shall receive payment so that workers, too, shall be able to become members of the German parliament.

4. Universal arming of the people. In future the armies shall be simultaneously labour armies, so that the troops shall not, as formerly, merely consume, but shall produce more than is necessary for their upkeep.

This will moreover be conducive to the organisation of labour. 5. Legal services shall be free of charge. 6. All feudal obligations, dues, corvées, tithes etc., which have hitherto weighed upon the rural population, shall be abolished without compensation.

7. Princely and other feudal estates, together with mines, pits, and so forth, shall become the property of the state. The estates shall be cultivated on a large scale and with the most up-to-date scientific devices in the interests of the whole of society.

8. Mortgages on peasant lands shall be declared the property of the state. Interest on such mortgages shall be paid by the peasants to the state.

9. In localities where the tenant system is developed, the land rent or the quit-rent shall be paid to the state as a tax.



**[p. 4]**

The landowner in the strict sense, who is neither a peasant nor a tenant farmer, has no share in production. Consumption on his part is, therefore, nothing .but abuse.

10. A state bank, whose paper issues are legal tender, shall replace all private banks.

This measure will make it possible to regulate the credit system in the interest of the people as a whole, and will thus undermine the dominion of the big financial magnates. Further, by gradually substituting paper money for gold and silver coin, the universal means of exchange (that indispensable prerequisite of bourgeois trade and commerce) will be cheapened, and gold and silver will be set free for use in foreign trade. Finally, this measure is necessary in order to bind the interests of the conservative bourgeoisie to the Government.3

11. All the means of transport, railways, canals, steamships, roads, the posts etc. shall be taken over by the state. They shall become the property of the state and shall be placed free at the disposal of the impecunious classes.

12. All civil servants shall receive the same salary, the only exception being that civil servants who have a family to support and who therefore have greater requirements, shall receive a higher salary.

13. Complete separation of Church and State. The clergy of every denomination shall be paid only by the voluntary contributions of their congregations.

14. The right of inheritance to be curtailed. 15. The introduction of steeply graduated taxes, and the abolition of taxes on articles of consumption.

16. Inauguration of national workshops. The state guarantees a livelihood to all workers and provides for those who are incapacitated for work.

17. Universal and free education of the people. It is to the interest of the German proletariat, the petty bourgeoisie and the small peasants to support these demands with all possible energy. Only by the realisation of these demands will the millions in

[^1]: a The leaflet published in Cologne has "cause of the revolution" instead of "Government".— Ed.



in

„Proletarier aller ïànber Bereinigt (Sua)!"

1. ©an; Dcutfôïanb »irb ju einer einigen, unheilbaren Stepublit erflàrt.

2. 3eber Deutfaje, ber 21 3 « $ « «It, tft SBä&ter unb »ä$lbar, »or- ausgefegt baf) er feine Rriminalftrafe erlitten $at.

3. Die SBol Wrertreter »erben befotbei, bamit auä) bei ärieiter im Parlament be« beutfct)en SBolfe« fîÇen fönne.

4. allgemeine SBolt«be»affmmg. Die Armeen ftnb in 3«t«nft 8"' gleich, ärbeiter-Slmteen, fo bafj ba« Jpeer ntr^t Mo«, »iefrütier, Berjebrt, fonbern nocb me&r probujirt, al« feine linterbattungsfoften betragen.

Diefj ift aufjerbem ein Mittet jur Drganifation ber arbeit. 5. Die ©erecbtigiei Wpflege ift unentgeltlid).

6. ïltte geuballaften, alle abgaben, grofcnben, 3«$nten,ic., biebisber auf bem Sanboolte tafteten, »erben ol)ne irgenb eine Sntfcf/àbigung ab« gefcbafft.

7. Die fürftlicben unb anbern feubaten Sanbgüter, alle SBergwerfe, ©ruben, u. f. »., »erben in Staatseigentum umgewandelt. Sluf biefen Sanogiitcrn »irb ber acferbau im ©rofien unb mit ben mobernften §ilf«mitteln ber SBiffenfctjaft jum Cortheit ber ©efammtbeit betrieben.

8. Die £9BOtt)efen auf ben Bauerngütern »erben für ©taat«eigen= tyum er Kart. Die 3ntereffen für jene Jpçpott)eren »erben »on ben Bauern an ben Staat gejabjt.

9. 3n ben ©egenben, »o ba« $act)t»efen entwictett ift, »irb bie ©runbrente ober ber ^adjtfayiling al« ©teuer an ben Staat gejault.

SStle biefe unter 6, 7, 8 unb 9 angegebenen 27raa§regetn »erben ge= fafjt, um öffentliche unb anbere îaften ber Bauern unb Keinen ^Säcbter ju »erminbern, obne bie jur SBeftreitung ber Staat Sfoften nötigen 3J?ittet ju formalem unb o I>ne bie frobuftion felbft ju geführten.

Diefe 3)?a|jregcl maebt e« möglich, da« Ärebtttoefen im 3ntereffe be» ganjen SSolre« ju regeln unb untergrabt bamit bie Jperrfciaft ber gro- ßen ©elbmanner. 3«bem fie naa) unb nacb. Papiergeld an bie Stelle »on ©olb unb Silber fetjt, »er»oc>lfeilert fie ba« rnientbebrlïà)e 3nftru- ment be« bürgerlichen Serfebj:«, ba« allgemeine Xaufd)tnittei, unb er< laubt, ba« ©olb unb Silber nad) aufen bin »irfen ju taffen. Diefe SWaafjregel ift fd)lief lid) notwendig, um bie 3ntereffen ber fonfersati» »en Bourgeois an bie 9?c»olution ju fnüpfen.

11. äße Transportmittel: (Sifcnbabnen, Kanäle, Datnpffd)iffe, 2Bege, Soften, ic, nimmt ber ©taat in feine §anb. ©te »erben in ©taat«eigentb.um umgewanbclt unb ber unbemittelten Waffe jur unent- geltlicben SBerfügung geftellt.

12. 3n ber Befolbung fämmtlid)er Staatsbeamten finbet lein anbe- rer Unterfd)ieb ftatt, al« ber, pajj biejenigen mit Jamilie, alfo mit mehr Sebürfniffen, audi ein böbereä ®et)alt bejieben al« bie Uebrigen.

13. SBoflige îrenming ber Rircbe »ont Staate. Die ©eiftlicben aller Äonfeffionen »erben lebiglia) Bon ibjrcr freiwilligen ©emtinbe befolget.

14. Befchrànfung be« 8rbrcn)t«.

15. Einführung Mit ftarten ^rogreffroftettera unb abfebaffung ber flonfumtion«fteuern.

16. (ïrricbtung von ')iational»erfftätten. Der ©taat garantirt allen Arbeitern ihre Sriftenj unb »erforgt bie jur arbeit Unfähigen.

17. allgemeine, unentgeltliche Solfäcrjicbung.

g« liegt im 3»tereffe be« bcutfd)en proletariat«, be« Keinen Sürger- unb Sauernftanbc«, mit alltr Energie an ber Dure^feÇung obiger 2Haafj- regeln jn arbeiten. Demi nur buret) Serwir Hic Jung berfelben lönnen ci« ïltittionen, bie bisher in Deutfd)lanb »on einer Keinen 3<>bl au«ge= beutet mürben unb bie man weiter inberllnterbrücfung ju erbalten fuiben roirb, ju ibrem Siecryt unb ju berjenigen Waa)t gelangen, bie t^nen, al« ben Jperoorbringern alle« 3îeta)t|um«, gebührt.

Pas «Lomite:

[^1]: Der eigcntlidje ©runbeigentljûmer, ber »eber Sauer nocb Siebter ifl.

[^2]: Sarl TOan. Äarl ©cbapper. ip. Bauer, g. Sngel«. 3. SWofl. 3». 333o Iff.

[^3]: Demands of the Communist Party in Germany, leaflet published in Cologne in 1848







**[p. 7]**

Germany, who have hitherto been exploited by a handful of persons and whom the exploiters would like to keep in further subjection, win the rights and attain to that power to which they are entitled as the producers of all wealth.

The Committee: Karl Marx, Karl Schapper, H. Bauer, F. Engels,

J. Moll, W. Wolff

Written between March 21 and 24, 1848

First published as a leaflet in Paris on March 24 or 25, 1848, in the supplement to the Berliner Zeitungs-Halle No. 82, on April 5, 1848, and in a number of other German newspapers; it was repeatedly reprinted during the revolution and after its defeat, in particular as a leaflet in Co- logne issued not later than September 10, 1848

Printed according to the text of the Berliner Zeitungs-Halle collated with the leaflet issued in Cologne

