---
Volume: 7
Document_Title: "11. Defeat of the German Troops at Sundewitt "
Page_Range: "65-67"
---

# 11. Defeat of the German Troops at Sundewitt 



**[p. 34]**

DEFEAT OF THE GERMAN TROOPS AT SUNDEWITT

Schleswig. So the German troops have once again been beaten, once again the German-Prussian policy has suffered a brilliant defeat! This is the outcome of all those solemn promises of a strong, united Germany! — The time that could have been used to press home the initial victory they let slip by in useless negotiations which the enemy only entered into under duress in order to gain time for renewed resistance. And when Russia declared that she would intervene if Jutland were not evacuated, they still failed to recognise what lay behind the offer of an armistice, they lacked the courage to accept the impending conflict, the long-awaited and unavoidable conflict with Russia. Indeed, the proponents of a policy of force were at a loss, they gave in like cowards and during the retreat the "brave" guards were defeated by the "little" Danes! If this is not a case of open treason, then it is a manifestation of such immense incompe- tence that in any case the management of the whole affair must be placed in other hands. Will the National Assembly in Frankfurt at last feel compelled to do what it should have done long since, that is take over foreign policy itself? Or will it here too—"in the trust that governments perform what are the duties of their office"—proceed to the order of the day?

There follows the report of the Danish attack at Sundewitt,3 taken from the Schleswig-Holsteiner Zeitung.

[^1]: Rendsburg, May 29. Yesterday (Sunday, the 28th) was assigned to the relief of confederate troops on outpost duty outside Alsen. This information must have

[^2]: The Danish name is Sundeved.— Ed. The Danish name is Als.—Ed.





**[p. 35]**

Written by Engels on June 2, 1848 Printed according to the newspapei

First published in the Neue Rheinische Published in English for the first Zeitung No. 3, June 3, 1848 time

[^1]: a The Danish name is Fyn.—Ed. b The Danish name is Dybbjzfl.—Ed.



