---
Volume: 7
Document_Title: "36. The First Deed of the German National Assembly in Frankfurt "
Page_Range: "140-144"
---

# 36. The First Deed of the German National Assembly in Frankfurt 



**[p. 109]**

THE FIRST DEED OF THE GERMAN NATIONAL ASSEMBLY IN FRANKFURT

Cologne. The German National Assembly has at last risen to its task! It has at last made a decision of immediate practical value, it has intervened in the Austro-Italian war.82

And how has it intervened? Has it proclaimed Italy's indepen- dence? Has it sent a courier to Vienna with the order that Radetzky and Weiden must at once withdraw behind the River Isonzo? Has it issued a congratulatory message to the Provisional Government of Milan?83

Not at all! It has declared that it would regard any attack upon Trieste as a casus belli.

This means: The German National Assembly, in cordial agree- ment with the Federal Diet, allows the Austrians to commit the greatest brutalities in Italy, to plunder, to murder, to pour incendiary rockets into every village and town (see under Italy) and then to retreat safely to neutral territory of the German Confedera- tion! It allows the Austrians at any time to inundate Lombardy from German soil with Croats and Pandours84 but it wants to prohibit the Italians from pursuing the beaten Austrians into their hiding-places! It permits the Austrians to use Trieste to blockade Venice and the mouths of the Piave, the Brenta, the Tagliamento; but it prohibits any hostile action of the Italians against Trieste!

The German National Assembly could not have acted with greater cowardice than it did by adopting this decision. It does not have the courage openly to sanction the Italian war. It has even less courage to prohibit the Austrian Government from conducting the war. Caught in this embarrassing situation, it passes the decision on Trieste (to top it all by acclamation, so as to still its secret fear by loud cries) which



**[p. 110]**

This decision is an indirect declaration of war on Italy, and because it is an indirect declaration, doubly disgraceful for a nation of 40 million people like the German.

The decision of the Frankfurt Assembly will evoke a storm of protest in all Italy. If the Italians still have some pride and energy, they will answer by a bombardment of Trieste and a march on the Brenner.

But while the Frankfurt Assembly proposes, the French people disposes. Venice has appealed for French aid. After this, the French will probably soon cross the Alps and then it will not be long before we have them on the Rhine.

One deputy3 has accused the Frankfurt Assembly of being idle. On the contrary! It has already worked so hard that we have one war in the northb and another one in the south and that wars in the west and east have become inevitable. We shall be in the fortunate position of having to fight simultaneously the Tsar and the French Republic, reaction and revolution. The Assembly has made sure that Russian and French, Danish and Italian soldiers will meet at St. Paul's Church in Frankfurt.0 And it is said the Assembly has been idle!

[^1]: Written by Engels on June 22, 1848

[^2]: First published in the Neue Rheinische Zeitung No. 23, June 23, 1848

[^3]: Printed according to the newspaper

[^4]: Published in English for the first time

[^5]: Kohlparzer.— Ed. The war with Denmark over Schleswig-Holstein.—Ed. c The meeting place of the German National Assembly.— Ed.



THE HANSEMANN GOVERNMENT'

Cologne, June 23. A new turn in the government crisis in Berlin! Our Hansemann has been entrusted with the formation of a Cabinet and he will drop pathetically into the arms of the Left Centre together with Patow, Bornemann, Schleinitz and Schreckenstein, the debris of the old Cabinet. Herr Rodbertus is supposed to participate in the new combination. He is the mediator who obtains favour and forgiveness from the Left Centre for the contrite wreckage of the Camphausen Government.

By the grace of Herr Rodbertus, our Prussian Duchâtel sees his wildest dreams coming true—he becomes Prime Minister. Camp- hausen's laurels did not let him rest. Now he will at last have the opportunity to prove what he is capable of when he is in a position to spread his wings unhindered. Now we will be able to admire in all their glory his gigantic financial plans and his limitless projects for the elimination of all want and misery—those plans which he used to present in such a magnificent light to his deputies. Only now is he in a position to devote to the state the entire range of his talents which he earlier displayed so brilliantly and successfully as railwayman and in other posts. And now it will begin to rain votes of confidence.

Herr Hansemann has surpassed his model. Thanks to Rodbertus' devotion he will be Prime Minister, a position never held by Duchâtel. But we warn him. Duchâtel had his reasons for always remaining ostensibly in the background. Duchâtel knew that the more or less cultured circles of the country both within and without the Chamber need a well-spoken knight of the "great debate", a Guizot or Camphausen, who on every occasion could soothe the consciences and capture the hearts of all audiences with the required arguments, philosophical deductions, statesman-like theories and

[^1]: 6-3447





**[p. 112]**

We are struck with a painful feeling when we contemplate how soon Herr Hansemann must plunge from his dizzy height. For before the Hansemann Government has been formed, before it has had a single moment to enjoy its existence, it is already doomed.

"The hangman stands at the door,"

reaction and the Russians are knocking and before the cock will have crowed thrice,b the Hansemann Government will have fallen despite Rodbertus and despite the Left Centre. Then good-bye to the Prime Minister's office, good-bye financial plans and gigantic projects for the elimination of want; the abyss will swallow them all and best wishes to Herr Hansemann when he quietly returns to his humble civil hearth and can contemplate the fact that life is but a dream.c

Written on June 23, 1848 Printed according to the newspaper

[^1]: First published in the Neue Rheinische Published in English for the first Zeitung No. 24, June 24, 1848 time

[^2]: a Heinrich Heine, "Ritter Olaf", Caput II.—Ed. b Cf. Mark 14:30.—Ed. c An allusion to the title of Calderön de la Barca's play La vida es sueno (Life Is a Dream).—Ed.



