---
Volume: 7
Document_Title: "40. Patow's Redemption Memorandum "
Page_Range: "148-150"
---

# 40. Patow's Redemption Memorandum 



**[p. 117]**

PATOW'S REDEMPTION MEMORANDUM1

Cologne, June 24. During the agreement session of the 20th of this [month], that fateful session during which Camphausen's sun went down and the ministerial chaos began, Herr Patow submitted a memorandum3 which contains the chief principles according to which he intends to regulate the abolition of feudalism in the countryside.

Reading this memorandum, one cannot understand why there had not been a peasant war long ago in the old-Prussian provinces. What a mess of services, fees and dues, what a jumble of medieval names, one more fantastic than the other! Seigniory, death dues, heriot,b tithes on livestock, protection money, Walpurgis rent, bee dues, wax rent, commonage, tithe, liege money,88 additional rent — all that has been in existence until today in the "best-administered state of the world" and would have continued into all eternity if the French had not made their February revolution.

Yes, most of these obligations, particularly the most burdensome among them, would continue into all eternity if Herr Patow were to get his way. It was exactly for this reason that Herr Patow was put in charge of this department so that he should spare the squires from the backwoods of Brandenburg, Pomerania and Silesia as much as possible and cheat the peasants as much as possible of the fruits of the revolution!

[^1]: Patow, Promemoria, betreffend die Massregeln der Gesetzgebung, durch welche die zeitgemässe Reform der guts- und grundherrlichen Verhältnisse und die Beseitigung der noch vorhandenen Hemmungen der Landeskultur bezweckt wird.— Ed.

[^2]: In the original Besthaupt and Kurmede are used, which are regional variants of the German expression for heriot.— Ed.





**[p. 118]**

But its castles must go up in flames before the aristocracy decides upon a fourth of August.8 The Government, itself represented in this case by an aristocrat, declares for the aristocracy; it submits to the Assembly a memorandum in which the agreers are requested now also to betray to the aristocracy the peasant revolution which broke out in all Germany in March. The Government is responsible for the consequences which the application of Patow's principles will have in the countryside.

For Herr Patow wants the peasants to pay indemnities for the abrogation of all feudal obligations, even the liege money. The only obligations which are to be abolished without compensation are those which are derived from serfdom, from the old tax system and from patrimonial jurisdiction90 or those which are worthless to the feudal lords (how gracious!), i.e. on the whole those obligations which constitute the smallest part of the entire feudal burden.

On the other hand, all feudal redemption payments which have previously been fixed by contract or judgment are to be definitive. This means: the peasants, who have paid off their obligations under the reactionary, pro-aristocratic laws issued since 1816 and particu- larly those issued since 1840, and who have been cheated out of their property in favour of the feudal lords, first by the law and then by bribed officials, will receive no compensation.

Instead mortgage banks91 are to be created so as to throw dust into the peasants' eyes.

If all were to go according to the wishes of Herr Patow, the feudal obligations would be just as little removed under his laws as under the old laws of 1807*

The correct title of Herr Patow's essay should be: "Memorandum concerning the Preservation of Feudal Obligations for All Time by Way of Redemption."

The Government is provoking a peasant war. Perhaps Prussia will also "not shrink from the temporary loss" of Silesia.

[^1]: Written on June 24, 1848 Printed according to the newspaper

[^2]: First published in the Neue Rheinische Zeitung No. 25, June 25, 1848



