---
Volume: 7
Document_Title: "51. The June Revolution "
Page_Range: "175-181"
---

# 51. The June Revolution 



**[p. 144]**

THE JUNE REVOLUTION114

The workers of Paris were overwhelmed by superior strength, but they were not subdued. They have been defeated but their enemies are vanquished. The momentary triumph of brute force has been purchased with the destruction of all the delusions and illusions of the February revolution, the dissolution of the entire moderate republican party and the division of the French nation into two nations, the nation of owners and the nation of workers. The tricolour republic now displays only one colour, the colour of the defeated, the colour of blood. It has become a red republic.

None of the big republican figures, whether of the National or the Réforme,1*5 sided with the people. In the absence of leaders and means other than rebellion itself, the people stood up to the united forces of the bourgeoisie and army longer than any French dynasty with the entire military apparatus at its disposal was ever able to stand up to any group of the bourgeoisie allied with the people. To have the people lose its last illusions and break completely with the past, it was necessary that the customary poetic trimmings of French uprisings—the enthusiastic bourgeois youth, the students of the école polytechnique, the tricornes—should be on the side of the suppressors. The medical students had to deny the wounded plebeians the succour of their science. Science does not exist for the plebeian who has committed the heinous, unutterable crime of fighting this time for his own existence instead of for Louis Philippe or Monsieur Marrast.

The Executive Committee,116 that last official vestige of the February revolution, vanished like a ghost in the face of these grave events. Lamartine's fireworks have turned into the incendiary rockets of Cavaignac.

Fraternité, the brotherhood of antagonistic classes, one of which exploits the other, this fraternité which in February was proclaimed

JW 29. ftöla, lorarrßag 29. 3uni t848.

3nn( «M tâ$\ié>. IBejkt Uunfitn fâr fca* n«u We fiuartel, 3«H Stic „Nene Wjetaf W* Sefttrag" erfefcrint »on bi# a Zeptcnbcr, too Ut man fal Mgft wd<^en.

Wie ^offämrrr £<utfd>fan M tubmen -Btftt Diingen an.

5iir Çr«irfrti* Obcrntfrmeit abonnement« iptrt 9 . 0 . tttcronbrt, gfr. 28, *3r M»$afft in

mir Dié fônigliifec O6m$oft*ttmt in 9aa>en. Cur (fn^Un D tit £ £ . g , <$. g t o t r £ Comp,

raniglidren One M-Memier une taé $oftbäreau ju £üiticb.

Sbont KMCittéyrci« m ftélit »imtljäbrlid) 1 Jtbfr. 15 Cgr., tn at Un übrigen Ort« ^mißen« 2 îblr. 3 *>&. Ô $f. «M«erba(b «Prni&rn«

tim9*i»rt#4. 3 * f ( t « t t : ©ce Mtrfj Mttip 9ctä|etfc ton twrtn Sfoim t ©gr. (i $f. «njf^en «ffer »rt erlangen tard) öie großen Snb M&ungen t*r 3titima, bit mitejh Sntrettung.

arbitra,, un© 2 3 , ru« Notre Dame de Nazareth in D« SRcmgote @ftt« tu Sonoon. Sûr Belgien une Jpoflart B tit

t 3»t*laa •*•" fremi Mn 3ei<

3« 91t. 28 brr „SWeuen ftbfimftrn 3citunfl" iff am 38- 3uni CDtoratnt* tine auptrorotntlidtt ©tilagt audge* tjtben un» wrfan M woroen.

9f<M|éflf<6e Äepablif. ** I>ie ««rifrr Arbeitet fhb t maty, fît fait i!fi aîd>t erleg<_. t>te l&egaer fiab befielt Der Mgrabïtit1i«>c>'tn«PÏ » taira Orwalt tft erfawft r'' ' " *' * "" r j L- Ctabtlbaaara kn $tbrt«'3tr»0l«i»B, Bit "7taa.f*ea Carter, -'• ' - ^~- l»et Statiaaea,

Sermd)t MKg aler li Ufdjaagra a:

alt-repablitaaifà)ea f «

Kaflbfuft ber aanirt 3erf Iift HM ber fraij Mf^«

"l *- -*) bit SMUM i eu«, eu iitjot »tbfi Xcpablir geworben.

ftetae repub[ifa Bifd)e Sepatatio B, fet ti »ont Motional, fri rt DOB T »rforme oaf (Seite be« Sol H ! Oba« autre g**«*- »bar ai. i s Hi Jril a« bu (Swpbra Bg felbft, wibrrftwb e" " i ©elbate«ta larger, al« „ . _ „ . . . t fraa}bfi|d)i aafrir, mit allem militiinfdjen apparat errfrbn, ràrr mit bta

»igln gtaffion bn^ »»»rgwifi« »ibrr^a Bb. Iloitit "

UBttrbridrr fieb B. D« 3ôfl''nl9* 6rr "*6'l'n'|j**1 Satxlttt rniitt R bfn vrrwaibftni yi(*«|fra {«aft rrfagtn BBfaat

ifftnfa)aft rnftnt nid>t foi bfrt Çlfbfjn igbatf, b«* BBféglto)« ¥(Tbrt4« ' ** t 6a>a Bjf ju fö)[agoi t fit Son f biûppf pbft fur fterra SRarraft.

X>tr Itftt pftijif Bf ÄH* ïft g(br«a T'Sew>Itti(nt, bit trefutice kommiffîo B ifi »ot btt B «TB^ brr Œrei OBtfft mt tia »tbflbil B |rr- flofffn. ïaniartiiiï'l ïfii(W«9«ùi babe Bfi* «noanbefl in ' ~ ra Frtrn Œanaigtiac"

»eif bit Oete Bftte, ibr flcgea Ut ttfiign)a« eftatirtfa, nitttwirftlt, ràtriét M Rebet etao Bber fd)li MBtrrt B, »ril ber feeiale t«*pf, bei fbt« ^w. terarub bilbett, M I tiat Inftige fciftcmj «awavea batte. Me lïnrt«! *" f Vafe, be« ffim« Dit ^aii Tetolativa iî kie Mflio V Sfpel Bttw, bie abftsfeabt Neoolahm, awil«B bit 6te Se brr «brafe bit ©aa> grrrrttn tjl, »ni tit Stepablif bai boivt bes Uaartmträ ftfbß nttblftflc, t«brn fie ibm bie fa)irnnbe «ab eerfiedenbe t n » tbfû)I«flt«.

!•' Writ

I bi Biait «ibo ber frauoufibta -Katip Babei> fd)rtit Savaigna .««joui r rrp Rblifd Bifrbfft {N>Brgeeifie. DBBf Ttta ftine ftaiatrffbta, a

fra R)bftfq)*R »»irjrtifw - ng, bf RB fie lie) bie

ng anaeta^et. ffitbt «brr bt B 3»at! ufortfd Kn Ste^ieran^ »at rt «nftaab a Bb ir Äetbwtjioiiitfitj b"« flro Sia Btbigea Rrtei- u ta tanft Rb »m ofnjieflrn f lafattu abbrarft«

Per ju prtbtgtn, bit gfbmartccolut 3nitrrfft gema«>t une ti bantie fi

nrrtt j Bflltid), ibnri » tbrtm riae Ren • Ktbniarre Dolnrioa r. <Stit brr «r- Hprofaïf*. (ttfban-

« Vffaftrt »»a Vari4 ta » U t e . , . . . . 1 i Vt 3 0 i b M im f Ktotrtov jrrnaa«, Die «abera, ami fie «d>t bfjreifoi, wie bo4 8»lf ! awftra ïoaa, fftae al(e»eiÄeaflea ^tmfn frlbftßüt.g j •crtretea. SRff.fdjt« 0 e ( b , t Rflli T*»* 0 e l b , brr boa! »aitifd>ellblri r bie Silir, Saialette aller Hrt »âffra bu fvaberbarc tinanif tytm Serfia Bbe Mtaritttl R. Veibe I b n ] ber SRfaamlaaa aber fà|lc B, baf eiae i Remrïlid V ftlifl fie vu bm »#lre treaat. fteiae »agi, fid) fâr bat So U » erbebe a. éabalb brr 6tnp»r wrâber if), brùbt bie atafrrri aa< ai

8rÂb(rfia Xett m 3Raab JB fibrea. C« |BB

t «bfo Mffaa« biefer ^brafe beahgrr ®â>«o« »rrbùrat. SI« îaroà)

30B(WI

fio> j« rtm B - -W ibr »m- brr îr$itirirerrlid>r ©a>»dr«ri atgea Pie 3«fa»ri* rifrrte, «it m RMB Vie ricutï t Br* bra * t ( i ( 9 t t i ' aatraft, arrdn) bit TOajtttrdt ber Serfaatnl Hag ia Stirttanjt, ail min fw »m ber îaraattf «rjembra. Sit fo)rrit ffitb ! aber bte Srbettrr, an u Brrbrroea, baft 9tiraia Bb aabn« ber „Defitatr" ïft, al« fit fr(bftl Enr»tbrrfirfli Bfjr|t BBte T«be B sber bie Xrpablit. Uab barast béait fie fra>rpfbaft : 4< lebr bie Stepabld 1

tm tirfe Hbori Rb, brr fid) ear aa« trifftti bat, barf er bie Dtwefratf B trrrn, batf R BB« «àbaea laffrt, bie Kämpfe am bie Staatffvra frira iabaltta«, illaferifd), »njl¥

«ar fd>»ad)t frigr ®emàrber fbaarn bit graar «afnerfra. Uit ftoflifi PHrn, »tl*c ml bea »tbiag Bigtn brr b Brar Tlid>ea 0efr D- fdjaft felbft ber»r«rbr B, fie mâffrn bard Xdmpft, fir ftaara aia)t »rapboatafirl ambra, tit brfte ®taat«form ift bit, wpruibif oc fellfd>aftrid)t B ®eoe Bfd|e aitbt vrr»ifo}t, «.4t gr Watrfam, alf» aar (ànftlitp, alfo aar fdmnbar arfrffrlt »trbe B. J)it beftr Staat«'

[^1]: î « grattïRité, r »ribrrli Orti't

[^2]: t a Bbm txpÏp Uivt,

[^3]: it ötant-

[^4]: tgt«,«*,tfr|te8 Slajfrn,

[^5]: S(f<tritben, auf i*bt* l - ibt wabrtr,

[^6]: r eourgrnftf i Onatini Ttr, BNlbrrnb bad ^oti* be* Proletariat« rbranstf, Mv H«trtf, v«ni Q>)tr. Dir »r«bnlio>(fit B»à|rte arabe f» taug,

[^7]: r pn>trtarifâ)c ïb»t m Sajlaf «lallt »rrbf B mu(itf, Me Mblitaiiet, »((ö)i bit flan «»rfia V Drbnu B« «lit »JBfl br< flrfrontw Ihtpfr« tçnaflifdjf DBDofihone B*. bcaen ,ber 3Bfa H

[^8]: I gr Froattn Itopfr« ocrla Bgttn _ ,-_, .r Stellt ti Brt îfoifirr»f(fcff« bf B gt Brjtinn Cpaa^ir wtrtfjob, îtgitiatifttii, Hwld>r bit ïi Mét Biibt flb»erfe B, fonbtrn ibren ©aj Bitt «raabmt

[^9]: fffiiung btr'Sational Pf Tfaramlung

[^10]: [agtt, jnrû(f(ufubren.

[^11]: trfr Krin tfbf

[^12]: r ürbtitrr fyatten fitfe i"i ^rbraar gtfdjïagr B,

[^13]: Ht ttm> jjtroorfrn ju ®ef4aft brr Xatioaalt brnar «B0tfd>cbt R fa nacbra, in bit altrn Srrbaltatfft ^aràdjiiwirffn aid)!, »tit ti fo to*«ig m brr (£)r»ali tiirt Ring« frbt, riaer inbuftrietl«* Si rafter jejaraftn : h, i e brutal« ïifrt ta t Rbra n ergriff ftlbft bit Stefreacta aid)t, bie aaf Um »obea t Srr MIt Biffe m MIi^ * - ~ " " ' ' 3abr prefr f« far att<»ârtigra permet, . ,._ .. bit »Bot îaofpa# fltbcrign ®e|btr tarifer» «erÏAeft fie 1 " " »rga Rifirtra SBtrffidtt« SWMptrfoai Bil BBB îbril Bfpaini, »- T _ J,.._lf. _ fit aflfböm Steplbfthaer )• fria. ttidjt bit fratrnrntkir X>etonr aad) brin Sebraar rtitbte aa6, ma>t bit btitatt 8tgn Jlattr iaa) béai 15. TOfli. Sattifa), prarrifâ) Rufte e Rtfcbiebea »erb<hi. Çabt it>r Sa' aai Urn ,bte gebi Borretiei Btic B fâr QBO) semad)t, Pbrr far U K ?

[^14]: ,Riab Iea: bra mraqfenf R pro Biforifà) " tin \J»Rabeab*»b t« au'Iitârif* ©tbiagung, bafj fit

[^15]: r Vtbtaaa M, ba^

[^16]: fiflea, fur @arbr, bit îtnitï

[^17]: t Optt, r Satb

[^18]: (eiaea ©rnher, l\> tri So Urt rrpabli(anif(br

[^19]: pflrgra, Zttutt on- ïtn fie trrbenlid)», feierliche ^eid)»|ôar »rrbra ibre 9tefte ter Ifrbe beftattra, bit cffitit Oe greffe »irb Tir unfirr Mid) rrflarr R, bie tarapdifibe btraftio B »irfc ibntn bulbiar R oom Often bid in m »ßfften.

[^20]: «ber bir yiebtier, t-om ÔRRgrr jm.fft R, r « btr trrf Te «t- fd)aubt, »OR bra Strjtra »rrlaffrn, von ten famtttn Siebe ge- " '• ~ - *' ~ ta, ibre Seibtr HBb Iriabtr IR

[^21]: mafrat.ftbe R greffe.

[^22]: mein (k fefbft im Jldinpi, 9Iaebtn<ad»f H une tte, je Biber fit iljmn mbli Arn ßleae r Bttir. tr N.Irtt Bit Vrbeiitr Riebt far «nfi Kmlidje

[^23]: t&t&pbalfn-

[^24]: Her 3 . M (»»II i«< '<1 B«««ä( 1« 9tt- M M Cto AMn ZMtistttt i* bit Çàiibe. Sir fil» bra fimlli Qrn 3if«a fir birfr artiflfrit fe^r vrrbnbt«.

[^25]: (Em Î U M M «Of i Brfrobafra, BOB ©eilf B brt Dr. Phil. 38. BOB »r BS)»Biff Br {ir BIru BI, Btni Bil bie rt TCBnrrtbr Sriladr aanl ,. « k W g . H « * • • * «r«""« «•" •<*'',** »"''i.*ï!' r Bf »«wr (B gebra ; »ir V«e B M «brr fit u«fre M w Mi Ot, »niglln« "Bn Z M birirt Cbhatalrt «B bit (»•*< » l i * l " briur.. „SB(»b»BHB ! b. t. t»B«B»fr BBfr, Br«i B(*»»lj<r, »». b>r, Olb«Bb«r|jrr BBb fr<B|»B ! » I * B * ail - • » u» ri Bc;B(lt« » . r i ru»l" (B brji BBi bn Dr. Pkil. B . » « 8r»Wa»l(B, y<r Btnta M. — „ 3 * bflb* BBfrnfrrfam a Dr Vmétr bfr 3ntrr«g. niïïr b Brrblt Bbirt ; iè) b'r U ba« @IMX : a Bf Brrfa)ùbm» SBrgr B, tir IIb 1BBI îbnl »rrfo>BJ"«BB IBBJ,'BBB brt rafff*« KBiffr» »BBt Bii (B rrtall™. - »c Stf«!™ ! E n J « « . l l i » r B (l«»i- f4>B «Bllrr (Ü. » 1 " M 1 '• f<»8). bu (<u la Bg.r Inl «BB b« 9CB(>B .Bf|»»«*<ll fcb, »*rbe« a«A la bitfr« 3a>ri BM BBfr, Siti Bbr ia îx Btdtlaab rtf*.i B<B. - Sribil bit »3»<aia!ra Bflb nibaarfra, bit SM««rb aarrftaat B, a Bb attt aabtni 8B(M- «àaii Bt bt. i Bt BKt(*t B làrfci «jrbta lall i- »BBb, (tia - - I» »irb f.» .Btfa Vibra, ab bat Srafraltaai, b. ». W î . j t la « ( B û t , «irait BBb 8 a * , I , ( BBO) bti aa« Viai(a), abtr ab bt T Ctatfa>t »Pitbtr (ni t Btrbta »iib, »it aattr bta laialia)i(a)ta yailtra. -

[^26]: St Marra ! 3»r »t»»«l («gl™» tia(t»fa, baf is «Nttt J t i « . ai t bit f..a»r(a>l.4lt B »trbta gt Wagta t „ r t H ; «rbt" air! < »rat bar* » a l a»tb gtr Mt» »trbta. Cit »Bbllart B

[^27]: (bara Btrr bit rarfi(a)t B €täiaai O »rrbta (tafti M t

[^28]: ltafr<a,i>|>B aab S ) i l , i i r »trbtl 3 t r »Offralli* bit 5CB(. (ta âbrrniflbta. Tu @Bb»fllbtatfdit B a. (. ». »trbta nil bt B ëv Mtot B fertig.

[^29]: Stjr Btalt B ! (Sort Hafgabt ift ti Bt bitl (d)»trrrt, brin bit gtafft B »trbta gtfa^rb »BB (ürarrälra b t a l ( 4 t r Xblasfl. „Xbtr »trbta baaa bit Slaffra bié la aa< ffitltbbalta BBrbriagta fbaat B V (brt ia) CBO> fragra. Hatrbi Bg«~ ! X^talt barda . baf B»4IBI 15. 3a»r»BBbtrl bit v«((ilta, ». t. bit rigrallutca » t b a i t a , bit «labl S a t « btlagtil.a, atrulta baro) tiata »trrllbt Ti(a)IB XtiàXfit Dta. - Xailaa M «MUe fiab làagf) brfa BBl ; gafli Dratfibl Bab »arbt baio) (ti Bt @»ioat btwao>l: t» Sattt aattr br B 3tit UBJ«Brrrt»BBbtalta »»trail (ti Bt 'Konon Stailaab »Bltt Magfl Ct Bt(a)la Bb trobtra ; tiat» naigta Dtar(a)l BBbt Bal tiat» Kaiftr aa btr ®»iet ijt ta aio>l gtwaajfta. — SBt Malfa! »miltl «fld> ja ti Btm tr Bftta Äampfi

[^30]: L . # ^ 3br erjag«B.r.fe

[^31]: (frotte* in (ÉRala Hb'ieib e«, »rldje ©e^rrgabea *abea; faft ,a lebet« üarer Chfer \M 3br 3rma Rbe R, brr „Stuarfi Mtr R" fiebt, brr foaafer, èrtaftea, Vtubea^itgr, Jefljàge «•* b*rgleia>« laaac »orber araaa fe fielt, mit birfe fpattr fommea »er< bea. ffieflpbale Bl 3D» («Bt ade ©ojlai»tfe Ibrr, <if trae B IB biefem j a * t e bie „i»tl)e Crbr" mit ©dt »irb getriaftwer- bra; 3br »iff! «aaa Ç»eaa 3br « B * beffre graoa erii Krt, »a« «arr „Sp Hrifirn'' gefebra Bat »or »arjem, » r 20 3«b*™ »»» me Orùbt BBO) fribrr erjâblt babwj »a« ia jebem Dorfr paf- firei mrb ; m brr Sa« be« «irng Biffe« blieb aabtfaaat.

[^32]: «afin «a<b barabrr frib 3br ciaigrrmaftea telebrt »orben : S

[^33]: " ' ' " b»berfl ïbtile be« fat

[^34]: 3 * »cube mid> ba|er an tf aa) *0e tov we Rpbalifdjea Ptatnme ! i« ift aid)t a Bein ti* Aampf am nnfere greifreif anb @eiîltnag; e* ift tip Itampf, bnra> bt B far ri Bt'gr 3e>tta bie grogt ratfdftr- befl »irb : Ob (jnropa ber Barbarei oerfallt R *nb bie Hage mil a Qen ibrea ©tàaeln bie Dbetbanb beba Utn fotl, ober ob ba«, »a« is an« Efttfa)« lebt, aab »orjag«»eife in Seftp|alra btwif« ifl: ffiabrbrit tn ©taat, Kird>e aab Jantilir, asd) ia flfiei fio>

[^35]: Ditfrr «Bfeaf tft . Dt HBfftr •^•r,

[^36]: ltfd)t SRertflr brafrlbra aio>t babe abbrarfen mo Dra. weil bolt bt« SUfrafe« |R aufregenb fn, al« baft »a* bir Srraarvert- lid)ftit be« tlbbruttr« abrraebmra fbnae.

[^37]: « „<ep&f«fifrr«" ja geboren, febea »ir nul

[^38]: i anfern Sraillrto R aafjabevabre

[^39]: e ^trlt »rftpbâlifa)rr 8iti

[^40]: - t>.e »rflpbal.ftbe ftfl bat aabtr gaita t*,Bff. SRb f<£<- Perairfrln aao) bit brrabiflf Kbr 9ta<brid)t mitgrbraa>t, baf bit *< «olari M ia arm fomifo>ea girftenfba» ffialberf bit beftta Ära*" la tvaara btfliaat. Salbct T ift »big, St. Zlariblaaa X ftebt m"> tâglio) aaa) bna tffra mit brr «errfi Hampftife im TOaabr »or brm @a)loftpertalt aaf BBb abnaabrl R grà|rnb itbea g Blen »arger.

[^41]: First page of the Neue Rheinische Zeitung containing Marx's article "The June Revolution"







**[p. 147]**

and inscribed in large letters on the façades of Paris, on every prison and every barracks—this fraternité found its true, unadulterated and prosaic expression in civil war, civil war in its most terrible aspect, the war of labour against capital. This brotherhood blazed in front of all the windows of Paris on the evening of June 25, when the Paris of the bourgeoisie held illuminations while the Paris of the proletariat was burning, bleeding, groaning in the throes of death.

This brotherhood lasted only as long as there was a fraternity of interests between the bourgeoisie and the proletariat. Pedants sticking to the old revolutionary tradition of 1793; socialist doctrinaires who begged alms for the people from the bourgeoisie and who were allowed to deliver lengthy sermons and compromise themselves so long as the proletarian lion had to be lulled to sleep; republicans who wanted to keep the old bourgeois order in toto, but without the crowned head; members of the dynastic opposition117

on whom chance imposed the task of bringing about the downfall of a dynasty instead of a change of government; legitimists,118 who did not want to cast off their livery but merely to change its style—these were the allies with whom the people had fought their February revolution. What the people instinctively hated in Louis Philippe was not Louis Philippe himself, but the crowned rule of a class, capital on the throne. But magnanimous as always, the people thought they had destroyed their enemy when they had overthrown the enemy of their enemies, their common enemy.

The February revolution was the nice revolution, the revolution of universal sympathies, because the contradictions which erupted in it against the monarchy were still undeveloped and peacefully dormant, because the social struggle which formed their background had only achieved a nebulous existence, an existence in phrases, in words. The June revolution is the ugly revolution, the nastv revolution, because the phrases have given place to the real thing, because the republic has bared the head of the monster by knocking off the crown which shielded and concealed it.

Order! was Guizot's war-cry. Order! shouted Sébastiani, the Guizotist, when Warsaw became Russian. Order! shouts Cavaignac, the brutal echo of the French National Assembly and of the republican bourgeoisie.

Order! thundered his grape-shot as it tore into the body of the proletariat.

None of the numerous revolutions of the French bourgeoisie since 1789 assailed the existing order, for they retained the class rule, the slavery of the workers, the bourgeois order, even though the political



**[p. 148]**

form of this rule and this slavery changed frequently. The June uprising did assail this order. Woe to the June uprising!

Under the Provisional Government it was considered good form and, moreover, a necessity to preach to the magnanimous work- ers—who, as a thousand official posters proclaimed, "placed three months of hardship at the disposal of the republic"—it was both politic and a sign of enthusiasm to preach to the workers that the February revolution had been carried out in their own interests and that the principal issue of the February revolution was the interests of the workers. With the opening of the National Assembly the speeches became more prosaic. Now it was only a matter of leading labour back to its old conditions, as Minister Trélat said. Thus the workers fought in February in order to be engulfed in an industrial crisis.

It is the business of the National Assembly to undo the work of February, at least as far as the workers are concerned, and to fling them back to their old conditions. But even this was not done, because it is not within the power of any assembly any more than of a king to tell a universal industrial crisis—advance up to this point and no further. In its crude eagerness to end the embarrassment of the February phraseology, the National Assembly did not even take the measures that were possible on the basis of the old conditions. Parisian workers aged 17 to 25 were either pressed into the army or thrown onto the street; those from other parts were ordered out of Paris to Sologne without even receiving the money normally due to them under such an order; adult Parisians could for the time being secure a pittance in workshops organised on military lines on condition that they did not attend any public meetings, in other words on condition that they ceased to be republicans. Neither the sentimental rhetoric which followed the February events nor the brutal legislation after May 15119 achieved their purpose. A real, practical decision had to be taken. For whom did you make the February revolution, you rascals—for yourselves or for us? The bourgeoisie put this question in such a way that it had to be answered in June with grape-shot and barricades.

The entire National Assembly is nevertheless struck with paralysis, as one representative of the people2 put it on June 25. Its members are stunned when question and answer make the streets of Paris flow with blood; some are stunned because their illusions are lost in the smoke of gunpowder, others because they cannot understand how the people dare stand up on their own for their own vital interests. Russian money, British money, the Bonapartist eagle, the lily, amulets of

[^1]: Ducoux.— Ed.





**[p. 149]**

all kinds—this is where they sought an explanation of this strange event. Both parts of the Assembly feel however that a vast gulf sepa- rates them from the people. None of them dares stand up for the people.

As soon as the stupor has passed frenzy breaks out. The majority quite rightly greets with catcalls those pitiful Utopians and hypocrites guilty of the anachronism of still using the term fraternité, brotherhood. The question at issue was precisely that of doing away with this term and with the illusions arising from its ambiguity. When the legitimist Larochejaquelein, the chivalrous dreamer, protested against the infamy of those who cried "Vae victis! Woe to the vanquished!" the majority of the deputies broke into a St. Vitus's dance as if stung by a tarantula. They shouted woe! to the workers in order to hide the fact that it is precisely they themselves who are the "vanquished". Either the Assembly must perish now, or the republic. And that is why it frantically yells—long live the republic!

Is the deep chasm which has opened at our feet to be allowed to mislead the democrats, to make us believe that the struggle over the form of the state is meaningless, illusory and futile?

Only weak, cowardly minds can pose such a question. Collisions proceeding from the very conditions of bourgeois society must be fought out to the end, they cannot be conjured out of existence. The best form of state is that in which the social contradictions are not blurred, not arbitrarily—that is merely artificially, and therefore only seemingly—kept down. The best form of state is that in which these contradictions reach a stage of open struggle in the course of which they are resolved.

We may be asked, do we not find a tear, a sigh, a word for the victims of the people's wrath, for the national guard, the mobile guard, the republican guard and the troops of the line?

The state will care for their widows and orphans, decrees extolling them will be issued, their remains will be carried to the grave in solemn procession, the official press will declare them immortal, European reaction in the East and the West will pay homage to them.

But the plebeians are tormented by hunger, abused by the press, forsaken by the doctors, called thieves, incendiaries and galley-slaves by the respectabilities; their wives and children are plunged into still greater misery and the best of those who have survived are sent overseas. It is the right and the privilege of the democratic press to place laurels on their clouded threatening brow.

[^1]: Written by Marx on June 28, 1848 Printed according to the newspaper

[^2]: First published in the Neue Rheinische Zeitung No. 29, June 29, 1848



