---
Volume: 7
Document_Title: "89. Bakunin "
Page_Range: "346-348"
---

# 89. Bakunin 



**[p. 315]**

BAKUNIN2

In number 36, of this paper, we communicated a rumour circulating in Paris, according to which George Sand was stated to be possessed of papers which placed the Russian refugee, Bakunin, in the position of an agent of the Emperor Nicholas.3 We gave publicity to this statement, because it was communicated to us simultaneously by two correspondents wholly unconnected with each other. By so doing, we only accomplished the duty of the public press, which has severely to watch public characters. And, at the same time we gave to Mr. Bakunin an opportunity of silencing suspicions thrown upon him in certain Paris circles. We reprinted also from the Allgemeine Oder Zeitung Mr. Bakunin's declaration, and his letter addressed to George Sand, without waiting for his request.6 We publish now a literal translation of a letter addressed to the Editor of the New Rhenish Gazette, by George Sand, which perfectly settles this affair.c

[^1]: To the editor Sir,

[^2]: Under the date line Paris, July 3, you have published the following article (there follows a translation of the relevant item) in your newspaper. The facts conveyed by your correspondent are entirely false and do not have even the slightest semblance of truth. I have never had the smallest scrap of evidence in support of the imputations you seek to make against Mr. Bakunin, who was banished from France by the dethroned King. I have therefore never had any warrant for the slightest doubt about the sincerity of Mr. Bakunin's character and the honesty of his views.

[^3]: Yours etc. George Sand

[^4]: a "Bakunin", Neue Rheinische Zeitung No. 36, July 6, 1848.—Ed.

[^5]: "Bakunin. Erklärung", Neue Rheinische Zeitung No. 46 (supplement), July 16, 1848.—Ed.

[^6]: c This passage is given in Marx's own translation as printed in The Morning Advertiser, September 2, 1853.—Ed. Louis Philippe.—Ed.



La Châtre (Dept. Indre), July 20, 1848

Written by Marx on August 2, 1848 Printed according to the newspaper

First published in the Neue Rheinische Published in English for the first Zeitung No. 64, August 3, 1848 time

