---
Volume: 7
Document_Title: "93. Dr. Gottschalk "
Page_Range: "356-358"
---

# 93. Dr. Gottschalk 



**[p. 325]**

DR. GOTTSCHALK

Cologne, August 4. Dr. Gottschalk had his three first interrogations published in the Zeitung des Arbeiter-Vereines zu Köln. As a punish- ment, the warders he has had up to now have been removed and a new gaoler appointed in the person of warder Schröder.3

"The latter was not willing to take over his duties without an exact inventory," writes the local workers' paper, "and so Dr. Gottschalk and his cell were searched again, customs-style. Although nothing suspicious was found, a much closer watch than before is being kept on him."

Public proceedings in the Rhine Province are a sheer illusion as long as they are supplemented by "Spanish Inquisition proceedings" ,213

In order to appreciate Gottschalk's arrest, one should read the Gervinus Zeitung? The forceful intervention of the Public Prosecutor, it says, has restored confidence once more. On the other hand, the approaching festivities0 are diverting the attention of the frivolous citizens of Cologne from all thought of politics. And these same citizens of Cologne, to whom the Government has handed over Gottschalk and the Cathedral festivities, these same ungrateful citizens, the Gervinus Zeitung exclaims, forget all these good deeds of the Prussian Government as soon as it stammers the first word about a compulsory loan!

[^1]: "Die Beiden Verhöre des Herren Dr. Gottschalk" and "Der dritte Verhör des Dr. Gottschalk" (Zeitung des Arbeiter-Vereines zu Köln Nos. 16 and 18, July 20 and 27, 1848).—Ed.

[^2]: b "Köln", ibid., No. 20, August 3, 1848.— Ed.

[^3]: Deutsche Zeitung.— Ed.

[^4]: Celebration of the 600th anniversary of the Cologne Cathedral in August 1848.— Ed.





**[p. 326]**

We advise the Prussian Government in its financial difficulties to take refuge in a measure tried and tested under Louis XIV and Louis XV. Let it sell Lettres de cachet! Lettres de cachet! Lettres de cachet!214 as a means of restoring confidence and filling up the Prussian treasury!

Written on August 4, 1848 Printed according to the newspaper

First published in the Neue Rheinische Published in English for the first Zeitung No. 66, August 5, 1848 time

