---
Volume: 7
Document_Title: "102. Geiger and Schapper "
Page_Range: "424-426"
---

# 102. Geiger and Schapper 



**[p. 393]**

GEIGER AND SCHAPPER

Cologne, August 22. At the request of Police Superintendent Geiger (from Koblenz), Herr Schapper has been ordered to leave Cologne, since he is not a Prussian subject but a citizen of Nassau. The Workers' Association, of which Herr Schapper is an active mem- ber, feels compelled to make this cause its own and to protest against the arbitrary expulsion of Herr Schapper. Last Friday the protest was handed over to Herr Dolleschall in the absence of Herr Geiger. Since Herr Dolleschall declared that he knew nothing of the affair, the deputation appointed to deliver the protest was postponed to the following Tuesday, August 22, so as to be able to speak to Herr Geiger himself. Today Herr Geiger received the deputation with the declaration that the matter was no longer in his hands but that following an article in the Neue Rheinische Zeitung* the Ministry had asked him, Geiger, for a detailed report on the affair. The report had been sent off today; it was therefore no longer within his powers either to carry out or to countermand the expulsion of Schapper. One member of the deputation believed he understood Herr Geiger to say that Herr Schapper's expulsion order emanated from the Ministry, whereupon Herr Geiger vehemently assured the deputa- tion on his most sacred word of honour that it was he who had taken the initiative in this measure. He referred first of all to his special knowledge of the law, since he had earlier been an examining magistrate; but that was not the only reason.

[^1]: "I believe that I have acted not only as Police Superintendent, but also in accordance with the dictates of reason: J have acted as I myself."

[^2]: a See this volume, pp. 383-84.— Ed.





**[p. 394]**

Written on August 22, 1848 Printed according to the newspaper

[^1]: First published in the Neue Rheinische Published in English for the first Zeitung No. 84, August 24, 1848 time



