---
Volume: 7
Document_Title: "119. The Faedrelandon the Armistice "
Page_Range: "477-479"
---

# 119. The Faedrelandon the Armistice 



**[p. 446]**

THE FAEDRELAND ON THE ARMISTICE

Cologne, September 21. It is common knowledge that the so-called National Assembly in Frankfurt approved of the armistice on Prussia's assurance that the Danish Government has officially given notice of its readiness to agree to modifications.

It is well known, however, what intrigues went on during the voting on the preliminary question. The intrigues over the main question took place outside the Assembly.

Listen to what the Faedreland of September 16 says: After explaining the disadvantages of the armistice that was actually signed as compared with the first draft, the newspaper comes to the advantages for Denmark. England and Russia would intervene if the war broke out again; German unity, held together with difficulty by the Danish war, would immediately disintegrate; the population of Jutland could be trained as an army reserve and the army doubled in size:

[^1]: "and 60,000 troops on the narrow peninsula, backed up by the fleet, are a Dannevirke which big, united Germany would think twice about storming".

[^2]: "But whatever the terms of the armistice, it is plain that once it is signed, ratified and guaranteed, it would be irresponsible if we neglected to fulfil its terms, or tolerated their infringement by our enemies. There is no question of our Government doing such a thing, there can and must be no doubts about this, and for this reason it would be wrong to get alarmed at all the rumours hawked around in Schleswig- Holstein publications about changes in the terms once they have been accepted. We are fully aware that Prussian generals and officials and the Germans in general, with a few honourable exceptions, do not take their commitments and their vows, their bona fides so very seriously; we are quite ready to believe that General Wrangel had the effrontery to put proposals to the Danish Commissioner, Mr. Reedtz, suggesting a breach of the terms in order to make them more acceptable to his friends in Schleswig-Holstein; we are quite ready to believe that both the Frankfurt Assembly and the Prussian Ministry consider it quite in order to urge us to agree to arbitrary





**[p. 447]**

"We are pleased to say that as we lay down our pen we can give the positive assurance that as far as Danish Government is concerned any modification of the armistice convention which has been concluded is out of the question.

Thus the semi-official organ of the Danish Cabinet. And now? Who is the deceiver now, who the deceived, who the deceived deceiver3?

[^1]: Written by Engels on September 21, 1848

[^2]: First published in the Neue Rheinische Zeitung No. 109, September 22, 1848

[^3]: Printed according to the newspaper

[^4]: Published in English for the first time

[^5]: a G. E. Lessing, Nathan der Weise, Act III, Scene 7.— Ed.



