---
Volume: 7
Document_Title: "127. Revolution in Vienna "
Page_Range: "488-490"
---

# 127. Revolution in Vienna 



**[p. 457]**

REVOLUTION IN VIENNA;

Cologne, October 11. In its first issue (for June 1) the Neue Rheinische Zeitung wrote of a revolution (on May 25) in Vienna. Today, when we resume publication for the first time after the break caused by the declaration of a state of siege in Cologne, we bring news of the much more important Viennese revolution of October 6 and 7. Detailed reports on the events in Vienna compel us today to omit all analytical articles. Only a few words of comment, therefore, on the revolution in Vienna. Our readers will see from the reports of our Vienna correspondent3 that the bourgeoisie's distrust of the working class threatens, if not to wreck the revolution, at least to hamper its development. However that may be, the repercussions of this revolution in Hungary, Italy and Germany foiled the entire plan of campaign devised by the counter-revolution. The flight from Vienna of the Emperor and of the Czech deputies298 compels the Viennese bourgeoisie to continue the fight unless it is prepared to surrender unconditionally. The Frankfurt Assembly, which is just now engaged in presenting us Germans with

has been rudely awakened from its day-dreaming by the events in Vienna, and the Government at Berlin is beginning to doubt the efficacy of the state of siege as a panacea. The state of siege, like the revolution, is making a round-the-world tour. A large-scale experi- ment has just been made to impose a state of siege on a whole

[^1]: a national gaol and a common whip,b

[^2]: a Müller-Tellering.— Ed. b Heinrich Heine, "Der Tannhäuser", Caput 3.—Ed.





**[p. 458]**

Following the latest news from Vienna, we publish several reports sent on October 5, because they reflect the hopes and fears current in Vienna about the fate of Hungary.

Written by Marx on October 11, 1848 Printed according to the newspaper

First published in the Neue Rheinische Zeitung No. 114, October 12, 1848

