---
Volume: 7
Document_Title: "128. The Latest News from the ' Model State' "
Page_Range: "490-493"
---

# 128. The Latest News from the " Model State" 



**[p. 459]**

THE LATEST NEWS FROM THE ««MODEL STATE

Brussels, October 8. La Nation yesterday led off with the following article about two members of the editorial staff of the Neue Rheinische Zeitung, Herr Frederick Engels and Herr Ernst Dronke:

"The expulsions are succeeding one another and are unfortunately all too similar. While we are still awaiting a few words of explanation about the expulsion of Herr Adam, a similar measure is taken against two German citizens who were foolish enough to rely on the protection which the Belgian Constitution grants every foreigner. Yes, this protection exists in the wording of the Constitution; until a few days ago it even beamed down from one of the façades of that charming little constitutional monument with which the courtyard of the Palais de Nation was graced; but as soon as the intoxication of the national holidays is over, the liberals who rule over us hurriedly stuff away the slogans with which they so gallandy regaled the inquisitive citizens of the city and the provinces. Brussels has returned to normal and the police is fulfilling exactly as before its lofty mission of compensating by its brutal manners for the generosity of our ill-advised constitutional theories.

[^1]: "Herr Engels and Herr Dronke had been staying in our city for a few days. Both members of the editorial staff of a democratic journal, the Neue Rheinische Zeitung, they left Cologne to avoid the consequences of warrants issued for their arrest because of a few speeches made at public meetings. They made their way to Belgium not in order to abuse that Belgian hospitality which on account of its rarity can be so valuable, but only to wait for the money they needed to continue their journey to Paris. The unhappy events that occurred in Cologne after their departure strengthened them in their intention. The Prussian Government has been blessed with good fortune since it followed the Belgian example and set out on the broad constitutional path—after finding a general3 who decreed a state of siege and the suspension of the press à la Cavaignac, it also managed to find a public prosecutor-general who agreed to employ the concept of moral complicity à la Hébert and à la de Bavay. But Herr Engels and Herr Dronke had forgotten that though the traveller proposes the police disposes.

[^2]: Kaiser.— Ed. Zweiffel.— Ed.





**[p. 460]**

"If this is obstinacy, at least it is not blind obstinacy. "Judging from the way in which the arrests are at present taking place, we believe that this article will probably have its sequels in future issues, unless the friends of liberty of all countries become convinced that it is better 'to refrain under all circumstances from dropping in on us during their travels through this world'."

It is clear from this that the Belgian Government is increasingly learning to recognise its position. The Belgians gradually become policemen for all their neighbours, and are overjoyed when they are complimented on their quiet and submissive behaviour. Neverthe- less, there is something ridiculous about the good Belgian policeman. Even the earnest Times only jestingly acknowledged the Belgian desire to please. Recently it advised the Belgian nation, after it had got rid of all the clubs, to turn itself into one big club with the motto: "Ne risquez rien!"3

It goes without saying that the official Belgian press, in its cretinism, also reprinted this piece of flattery and welcomed it jubilantly. The fact that in its very first issue the Neue Rheinische Zeitung quite properly ridiculed any illusions about the Belgian "model" state makes it easier to understand, moreover, why the Belgian Government meted out such brutal treatment to two members of the Neue Rheinische Zeitung's editorial staff.b

The Belgian press itself reveals to us how the Belgian Government seeks to perpetuate these illusions. The following report is printed word for word in the Messager de Gand:

[^1]: "We now know of what this Germany consists that cherishes such great admiration for us. This Germany consists of Herr Wolfers from Lou vain, whom M. Rogier pays to produce enthusiastic articles about Belgium in German for the Kölnische Zeitung. In view of the search for all possible ways to economise, it seems to us that we could easily abolish the fund of admiration which we are paying to all the journalists in Europe. In Brussels, in the provinces, in Paris, in London and even as far as Bucharest we are buying their compliments at a very high price. Savings in this field could add up to a

[^2]: a "London, Monday, October 2, 1848", The Times No. 19383, October 2, 1848.— Ed.

[^3]: b "Brüssel, 30. Mai", Neue Rheinische Zeitung No. 1, June 1, 1848.— Ed.





**[p. 461]**

Are these revelations not delightful? But I have not finished yet. La Nation carries the following small item in its issue of October 10.

"We have often noticed that the 'private correspondent's' column in the In- dépendance, dated Frankfurt and Berlin, is as like the articles in the Kölnische Zeitung (to which Wolfers contributes) as two drops of dirty water. This newspaper does not appear on Sundays; and the Indépendance, too, has no private correspondent's column on Mondays."

We need not add much. To show its gratitude to the Indépendance for copying its German news from the Kölnische Zeitung, the Kölnische Zeitung in turn obtains its views on Belgium and France from the Indépendance.

But as everyone knows, the Indépendance is the organ of the same M. Rogier who buys admiration for Belgium, who had the Belgian patriots of 1830, and the eighty-year-old General Mellinet, con- demned to deathb and who has political refugees conveyed across the frontier in sealed carriages.

[^1]: Written between October 8 and 11, 1848 Printed according to the newspaper

[^2]: First published in the supplement to the Published in English for the first Neue Rheinische Zeitung No. 114, October time 12, 1848

[^3]: a The Neue Rheinische Zeitung has "New England".— Ed. b See this volume, pp. 405-06.— Ed.



