---
Volume: 7
Document_Title: "129. The ' Revolution of Cologne' "
Page_Range: "493-497"
---

# 129. The " Revolution of Cologne" 



**[p. 462]**

THE "REVOLUTION OF COLOGNE"300

Cologne, October 12. The Kölnische Zeitung tells us that the "revolution of Cologne" of September 25 was a Shrovetide farce and the Kölnische Zeitung is right.3 The "Garrison Headquarters of Cologne" plays Cavaignac on September 26. And the Kölnische Zeitung admires the wisdom and moderation of the "Garrison Headquarters of Cologne". Who, however, is more comical—the workers who practised barricade building on September 25, or the Cavaignac who most solemnly proclaimed a state of siege on September 26, suspended the newspapers, disarmed the civic militia and prohibited the associations?

Thé poor Kölnische Zeitungl The Cavaignac of the "revolution of Cologne" cannot be an inch taller than the "revolution of Cologne" itself. The poor Kölnische Zeitungl It must regard the "revolution" as a joke and has to take seriously the "Cavaignac" of this merry revolution. What a vexatious, ungrateful and contradictory topic!

We will not waste a word on the competence of the Garrison Headquarters. D'Ester has exhausted that subject.301 We regard, moreover, the Garrison Headquarters as a subordinate tool. The real authors of this peculiar tragedy were the "loyal citizens", the Dumonts and their associates. Thus it was no wonder that Herr Dumont had the address against d'Ester, Borchardt and Kyll disseminated by his newspapers.302 What these "loyal ones" had to defend was not the action of the Garrison Headquarters but their own action.

[^1]: a "Köln, 29. September. Die Barrikaden in Köln", Kölnische Zeitung No. 268, September 30, 1848.— Ed.





**[p. 463]**

Moll, one of the most popular leaders of the Workers' Associa- tion,303 was to have been arrested. Schapper and Becker had already been arrested. A Monday had been selected for the execution of this measure, a day on which, as is well known, the majority of workers are not working. Thus it must have been known beforehand that the arrests might arouse a great deal of ferment among the workers and that they might even give rise to violent resistance. It was a strange accident that these arrests were planned to take place on a Monday! It was the more easy to foresee the excitement since on the occasion of Stein's Army Order, after Wrangel's proclamation304 and Pfuel's appointment as Prime Minister, a decisive counter-revolutionary blow and thus a revolution emanating from Berlin was expected at any moment. The workers, therefore, had to regard the arrests not as legal but as political measures. They viewed the Public Prosecutor's office only as a counter-revolutionary authority. They believed that it was the intention to rob them of their leaders on the eve of important events. They decided to prevent Moll's arrest at all costs and they left the scene of action only after they had accomplished their purpose. The barricades were not built until the workers, who had assembled on the Altenmarkt, learned that the army was advancing to attack from all sides. They were not attacked; hence they did not have to defend themselves either. They had learned, moreover, that no important news at all had arrived from Berlin. Hence they withdrew after they had spent the greater part of the night waiting in vain for the enemy.

Nothing is more ridiculous, therefore, than the reproach of cowardice which has been levelled against the workers of Cologne.

One has reproached them on yet other scores in order to justify the state of siege and to fashion the events in Cologne into a small June revolution. Their actual plan is supposed to have been the looting of the good city of Cologne. This accusation is based upon the alleged looting of one drapery shop. As if not every city has its contingent of thieves who naturally take advantage of days of public excitement. Or does one mean by looting the plundering of gun- smith's shops? If this is the case, the Cologne Public Prosecutor's office should be sent to Berlin to prepare the case against the March revolution. Without the looted gunsmith's shops, we would perhaps never have had the satisfaction of witnessing the transformation of Herr Hansemann into a bank President and of Herr Müller into a Secretary of State.

[^1]: 17-344"





**[p. 464]**

The heroic Brüggemanns, Bassermanns etc. demanded blood and the tender-hearted democrats have out of cowardice not allowed the blood to flow.

The facts are simply these: the democrats declared to the workers in the Kranz (on the Altenmarkt), in the Eiser Hall305 and upon the barricades that they did not want a "putsch" under any cir- cumstances. At this moment, however, when no large issue would drive the entire people into combat, and any rising would be bound to fail, such a rising would be the more senseless since tremendous events might occur within the next few days and one would thus render oneself unfit to fight before the day of decision. Once the Government in Berlin dares a counter-revolution, the day will have arrived for the people to dare a revolution. The judicial investigation will confirm our statement. Instead of standing in "nocturnal darkness" in front of the barricades with "folded arms and ominous glances" and "contemplating the future of their people",3 the gentlemen of the Kölnische Zeitung would have done better to stand on the barricades haranguing the deluded crowd with their words of wisdom. What good is wisdom post festumh7

On the occasion of the events in Cologne, the respectable press reserved its worst treatment for the civic militia. Let us distinguish. That the civic militia refused to degrade itself by becoming the docile servant of the police, was its duty. That it turned over its weapons voluntarily can only be excused by one fact: the liberal section of it knew that the illiberal section would jubilantly take the opportunity to rid itself of the weapons. Partial resistance, however, would have been useless.

The "revolution of Cologne" has had one result. It has revealed the existence of a phalanx of more than 2,000 saints' whose "satiated virtue and solvent morale"0 leads a "free life"d only in a state of siege. Perhaps one day the occasion will arise to write an "acta sanctorum", the biographies of these saints. Our readers will then find out how

[^1]: "Köln, 29. September. Die Barrikaden in Köln", Kölnische Zeitung No. 268, September 30, 1848.— Ed.

[^2]: After the event.— Ed. c Heinrich Heine, "Anno 1829" (modified).— Ed. d Schiller, Die Räuber, Act IV, Scene 5.— Ed.





**[p. 465]**

Written by Marx on October 12, 1848 Printed according to the newspaper

First published in the Neue Rheinische Zeitung No. 115, October 13, 1848

[^1]: a Matthew 6:20.— Ed.



