---
Volume: 7
Document_Title: "134. Reply of Frederick William IV to the Delegation of the Civic Militia "
Page_Range: "507-509"
---

# 134. Reply of Frederick William IV to the Delegation of the Civic Militia 



**[p. 476]**

REPLY OF FREDERICK WILLIAM IV TO THE DELEGATION OF THE CIVIC MILITIA

Cologne, October 18. Frederick William IV replied to Rimpler, the commander of the civic militia of Berlin, in response to the latter's congratulations on the occasion of October 15a:

"I know that a heroic and brave people is also a loyal one. But do not forget that you obtained the weapons from me and that I demand that you stand up dutifully for the preservation of order, law and freedom."

Constitutional kings are not responsible, on the understanding that they are not answerable, in the constitutional sense, of course. Their actions, their words, their countenances do not belong to them, they belong to the responsible Ministers.

Hansemann, for example, on the occasion of his exit, had the King say that he considered the execution of Stein's Army Order312

incompatible with constitutional monarchy. Pfuel carried it out, that is in the parliamentary sense. Hansemann was compromised, in the constitutional sense. The King had not contradicted himself, because he had not spoken, always in the constitutional sense.

Thus the above declaration of the King is nothing but a ministerial declaration and as such is subject to criticism.

If Pfuel claims that the King has created the civic militia on his own accord, then he claims that the King is the originator of the March revolution which is nonsense, even in the constitutional sense.

Apart from this. After God had created the world and the kings by the grace of God, he relinquished the smaller industry to human beings. Even "weapons" and lieutenants' uniforms are manufactured by profane

[^1]: Birthday of Frederick William IV.— Ed.



Section 1. Productive workers: kings, officers, lords, country clergymen etc.

Section 2. Unproductive workers: sailors, peasants, weavers, spinners etc.

According to this chart section 1 produces and section 2 receives. It is in this sense that Herr Pfuel says the king gives.

The most recent incidents in Berlin remind one of the conflicts in Vienna on August 23 between the civic militia and the people, conflicts which were also provoked by the camarilla. That August 23 was followed by October 5.3 3

[^1]: Pfuel's declaration shows what one expects in Berlin from the hero of "Croatian order and freedom".15

[^2]: Written by Marx on October 18, 1848 Printed according to the newspaper

[^3]: First published in the Neue Rheinische Published in English for the first Zeitung No. 121, October 20, 1848 time

[^4]: a [Ch. Davenant,] An Essay upon the Probable Methods of making a People Gainers in the Ballance of Trade, pp. 23, 50.—Ed.

[^5]: b Jellachich.— Ed.



