---
Volume: 7
Document_Title: "139. ' Appeal of the Democratic Congress to the German People' "
Page_Range: "521-524"
---

# 139. " Appeal of the Democratic Congress to the German People" 



**[p. 490]**

"APPEAL OF THE DEMOCRATIC CONGRESS TO THE GERMAN PEOPLE"322

Cologne, November 2. We give below the appeal of the "Democra- tic Congress"323:

TO THE GERMAN PEOPLE!

[^1]: During long humiliating years, the German people groaned under the yoke of despotism. The bloody deeds of Vienna and Berlin justified the hope that its freedom and unity would be realised at one blow. The diabolical cunning of an execrable reaction balked this development, thus cheating the heroic people of the fruits of its grandiose insurrection. Vienna, a main bulwark of German freedom, finds itself at the moment in the greatest danger. Sacrificed by the intrigues of a still powerful camarilla, it was to be delivered again to the fetters of despotism. But its noble population rose as one man and opposes the armed hordes of its oppressors resolute unto death. The cause of Vienna is the cause of Germany and the cause of freedom. With the fall of Vienna, the old tyranny will raise its banner higher than ever, Vienna's victory would mean its destruction. It is up to us, German brothers, not to allow Vienna's freedom to perish and not to sacrifice it to the fortune of war of barbaric hordes. It is the most sacred duty of the German governments to rush to the aid of their hard pressed sister city with all their influence. It is, however, at the same time also the most sacred duty of the German people—in the interest of its freedom and in the interest of its self-preservation—to make every sacrifice for the salvation of Vienna. The German people must never draw upon itself the humiliation of blunt indifference when the most precious things, when everything is at stake. Therefore we ask you, brothers, to contribute, each according to his strength, to save Vienna from perdition. What we are doing for Vienna, we are doing for Germany. It is up to you to help! The men whom you have sent to Frankfurt in order to establish freedom have rejected the request to help Vienna with derision. It is up to you now to act! With your powerful and unshakeable energy, demand from your governments that they submit to your majority and save the German cause and the cause of freedom in Vienna. Hurry! You are the power, your will is law! Arise, ye men of freedom, arise in all German lands and wherever else the thought of freedom and humanity inflames noble hearts! Arise,



before it is too late! Save the freedom of Vienna. Save the freedom of Germany. The present generation will admire you, posterity will reward you with immortal glory!

October 29, 1848

The Democratic Congress in Berlin

In this appeal lack of revolutionary energy is replaced by sermonising, wailing and ranting324 behind which hides the most decided lack of thought and passion.

Just a few samples!

The appeal expected of the Vienna and Berlin March revolutions "the realisation of the unity and freedom" of the German people "at one blow". In other words: the appeal dreamed of "one blow" which would render the "development" of the German people towards "unity and freedom" superfluous.

Immediately thereafter, however, the fantastic "one blow" which replaces the development is transformed into a "development"which was balkedhy the reaction. A phrase which reduces itself to nothing!

We are disregarding the monotonous repetition of the basic theme: Vienna is in danger and with Vienna Germany's freedom. Help Vienna and you will help yourselves! This thought has not been given flesh and blood. This one phrase is wrapped around itself so many times until it has been extended into a piece of oratory. We merely observe that artificial, insincere ranting always lapses into this clumsy rhetoric.

And how are we to do this? First of all, by an appeal to the sense of duty of the "German governments". C'est incroyable!3

Is the Prussian Government supposed to send Wrangel or Colomb or the Prince of Prussia against Auersperg, Jellachich and Win- dischgrätz? Did the "Democratic" Congress have the right to assume for one moment this childish and conservative attitude to the German governments? Did it have the right to separate for one moment the cause and the "most sacred interests" of the German governments from the cause and the interests of "Croatian order and freedom"? The governments will smile in self-satisfaction at this virginal enthusiasm.

[^1]: "It is up to us, German brothers, not to allow Vienna's freedom to perish and not to sacrifice it to the fortune of war of barbaric hordes."

[^2]: "It is the most sacred duty of the German governments to rush to the aid of their hard pressed sister city with all their influence."

[^3]: That is incredible!—Ed.





**[p. 492]**

And the people? The people are exhorted in general "to make every sacrifice for the salvation of Vienna". Fine! The "people", however, expect particular demands of the Democratic Congress. Whoever demands everything, demands nothing and obtains nothing. Thus the particular demand, the whole point is:

"With your powerful and unshakeable energy, demand from your governments that they submit to your majority and save the German cause and the cause of freedom in Vienna. Hurry! You are the power, your will is law! Arise!"

Let us assume that great popular demonstrations succeed in compelling the governments to take steps in a semi-official way for the salvation of Vienna; we would be blessed with a second edition of "Stein's Army Order". The very idea of using the present "German governments" as "saviours of freedom"—as if in carrying out imperial punitive measures they were not fulfilling their true calling and their "most sacred duties" as the Gabriels of "constitutional freedom". The "Democratic Congress" had to be silent about the German governments or it had to reveal unsparingly their conspiracy with Olmütz3 and Petersburg.

Even though the appeal recommends "speed" and there is indeed no time to lose, the humanistic phraseology carries it beyond the borders of Germany and beyond every geographical boundary into the cosmopolitan, misty land of "noble hearts" in general.

We do not doubt that there are such "hearts" even in Lapland.

In Germany and wherever elsel By evaporating into this pure and indefinite phrase the "appeal" has gained its true expression.

It remains unforgivable that the "Democratic Congress" counter- signed such a document. Neither will "the present generation admire it for this" nor will "posterity reward it with immortal glory".

Let us hope that the people, in spite of the "appeal of the Democratic Congress", will awaken from its lethargy and that it will aid the Viennese in the only way it is still able to do at this moment, by defeating the counter-revolution at home.

[^1]: "Hurry! Arise, ye men of freedom, arise in all German lands and wherever else the thought of freedom and humanity inflames noble hearts!"

[^2]: Written by Marx on November 2, 1848 Printed according to the newspaper

[^3]: First published in the Neue Rheinische

[^4]: Zeitung No. 133, November 3, 1848

[^5]: The Austrian Emperor and his Ministers fled to Olmütz (Olomouc) during the uprising in Vienna.— Ed.



