---
Volume: 7
Document_Title: "140. The Paris Réforme on the Situation in France "
Page_Range: "524-527"
---

# 140. The Paris Réforme on the Situation in France 



**[p. 493]**

THE PARIS RÉFORME ON THE SITUATION IN FRANCE325

Cologne, November 2. Even before the June uprising we repeatedly exposed the illusions of the republicans who cling to the traditions of 1793, the republicans of the Réforme (of "Paris"). The June revo- lution and the movement to which it gave rise are compelling the Utopian republicans gradually to open their eyes.

A leading article in the Réforme for October 29 reveals the struggle going on within the party between its old delusions and the new facts.

The Réforme says:

The Réforme adds with a sigh:

That is to say: up to now the Réforme in its republican optimism saw only "citoyens", but it has been so hard pressed by history that the splitting up of the "citoyens"into "bourgeois" and "prolétaires"can no longer be dismissed by any effort of imagination.

The Réforme continues:

[^1]: "In our country the fights waged to seize the reins of government have long been class wars, struggles of the bourgeoisie and the people against the nobility when the First Republic came into being; the sacrifices of the armed people without, and rule of the bourgeoisie within during the Empire; the attempts to restore feudalism under the older branch of the Bourbons; finally, in 1830, the triumph and rule of the bour- geoisie—that is our history."

[^2]: "We certainly regret that we have to speak of classes, of ungodly and hateful divergences, but these divergences exist and we cannot overlook this fact."

[^3]: "The despotism of the bourgeoisie was broken in February. What did the people demand? Justice for all and equality. That was its primary slogan, its primary desire. The wishes of the bourgeoisie, whose eyes had been opened by the flash of lightning, were at first the same as those of the people."





**[p. 494]**

Since the illusions, some of them hypocritical, some honestly held, which became widespread immediately after the defeat of Louis Philippe, are mistakenly accepted by the Réforme as facts, the developments following those days in February appear to it as a series of errors, awkward accidents, that a great man adequate to the needs of the moment could have avoided. As though Lamartine, that delusive light, had not been the true man of the moment!

The Réforme bemoans the fact that the true man, the great man, has not yet appeared, and the situation gets worse every day.

Now what is the attitude of the Réforme towards these sharply antagonistic classes? Does it realise even vaguely that class contradic- tions and class struggle will disappear only with the disappearance of classes?

No. Just now it admitted that class contradictions exist. But class contradictions are based on economic foundations, on the existing

[^1]: "On the one hand the industrial and commercial crisis grows; on the other hand hatred grows and all strive towards contradictory goals. Those who were oppressed before February 24 seek their ideal of happiness and freedom in the conception of an entirely new society. The only concern of those who governed under the monarchy is to regain their realm in order to exploit it with redoubled harshness."



mode of material production and the conditions of commerce resulting from it. The Réforme knows no better way of changing and abolishing these contradictions than to disregard their real basis, that is these very material conditions, and to withdraw into the hazy blue heaven of republican ideology, in other words, into the poetic February period, from which it was violently ejected by the June events. It writes:

"The saddest aspect of these internal dissensions is the obliteration, the loss of patriotic, national sentiments,"

i.e. of just that patriotic and national enthusiasm which enabled both classes to veil their distinct interests, their conditions of life. When they did that in 1789, their real contradictions were not yet developed. What at that time was an adequate expression of the real position, is today merely an escape from the existing situation. What had substance then, is today just a relic.

"France," concludes the Réforme, "evidendy suffers from a deep-seated malady, but it is curable. It is caused by a confusion of ideas and morals, by a neglect of justice and equality in social relations, and by depravity resulting from egoistical teaching. The means for reorganisation must be sought in this sphere. Instead people have recourse to material means."

The Réforme presents the whole case as a matter of "conscience", and moral twaddle is then used as a means to solve everything. The antithesis of bourgeoisie and proletariat accordingly derives from the ideas of these two classes. And where do these ideas derive from? From the social relations. And where do these relations derive from? From the material, economic conditions of life of the hostile classes. According to the Réforme, if the two classes are no longer conscious of their real position and their real contradictions, and become intoxicated with the opium of the "patriotic" sentiments and phrases of 1793, then their difficulties will be solved. What an admission of helplessness!

[^1]: Written by Marx on November 2, 1848 Printed according to the newspaper

[^2]: First published in the Neue Rheinische Zeitung No. 133, November 3, 1848

[^3]: 18-3447



