---
Volume: 7
Document_Title: "142. The Latest News from Vienna, Berlin and Paris "
Page_Range: "529-531"
---

# 142. The Latest News from Vienna, Berlin and Paris 



**[p. 498]**

THE LATEST NEWS FROM VIENNA, BERLIN AND PARIS328

Cologne, November 4. The outlook brightens. There is no direct news yet from Vienna. But even according to the official Prussian newspapers, it is clear that Vienna has not surren- dered and that Windischgrätz deliberately or as a result of a misunder- standing issued to the world a false telegram. The "good" press, like an orthodox, multilingual echo, willingly repeated the message al- though it tried hard to mask its malicious glee behind hypocritical mournful phrases. Stripped of all their fantastic and self- contradictory trash, the reports from Silesia and Berlin bring out the following facts. By October 29 the imperial bandits had obtained control only of a few suburbs. The reports received up till now do not show that they have gained a foothold in Vienna itself. The whole story of Vienna's surrender boils down to a few treasonable procla- mations of the Vienna Town Council The advanced guard of the Hun- garian army attacked Windischgrätz on October 30, and was said to have been driven back. On October 31 Windischgrätz resumed the bombardment of Vienna—without result. His army is now between the Viennese and the over 80,000-strong Hungarian army. Win- dischgrätz's infamous manifestos evoked uprisings or at least very threatening movements in all provinces. Even the Czech fanatics in Prague, the neophytes of the Slovanskâ Lîpa,329 have awakened from their wild dreams and declared for Vienna against the imperial Schinderhannes.3 Never before has the counter-revolution dared to proclaim its plans with such foolish brazenness. Even at Olmiitz,h that

[^1]: Jack the Skinner, a name given to Johann Bückler, a German robber chief.— Ed. The Czech name is Olomouc.— Ed.



Austrian Koblenz,330 the crowned idiota can feel the ground shaking beneath his feet. The fact that the troops are led by the world-famed Sipehsalarb Jellachich—whose name is so great that " at the flash of his sabre the frightened moon hides behind the clouds" and "the roar of cannon" always "points the way" in which he must hurriedly decamp—leaves no doubt that the people of Hungary and Vienna

Horsewhip that scum into the Danube River, Go castigate that overweening rabble, Those starveling beggars, all so tired of living, That horde of miscreants, rogues and vagabonds, Croatian riff-raff, abject peasant hirelings, That vomit, spewed up by a glutted homeland For desperate ventures and for certain doom.

Later reports will give appalling details of the crimes perpetrated by Croats and other knights of "law and order and constitutional freedom". The European bourgeoisie ensconced in stock exchanges and other convenient observation posts loudly acclaims the gory spectacle; the same wretched bourgeoisie that broke into screams of moral indignation because of a few harsh acts of popular justice and with a thousand voices unanimously anathemised the "murderers" of honest Latour and noble Lichnowski.

The Poles, avenging the Galician murders,331 are once more advancing at the head of the liberators of Vienna, just as they march at the head of the Italian people and everywhere act as high-minded generals of the revolution. Three cheers for the Polesl

The Berlin camarilla, intoxicated with the blood of Vienna, blinded by the pillars of smoke rising from the burning suburbs, stunned by the Croats' and haiduks' shouts of victory, has dropped its cloak. "Peace has been restored in Berlin." Nous verrons.c

Finally, from Paris come the first subterranean rumbles announc- ing the earthquake that will bury the respectable republic under its own ruins.

The outlook brightens.

[^1]: Written by Marx on November 4, 1848 Printed according to the newspaper

[^2]: First published in the Neue Rheinische Zeitung No. 135, November 5, 1848

[^3]: a Ferdinand I.—Ed.

[^4]: Commander-in-chief.—Ed. c We shall see.—Ed



