---
Volume: 7
Document_Title: "143. Our Bourgeoisie and Dr. Nuckel "
Page_Range: "531-532"
---

# 143. Our Bourgeoisie and Dr. Nuckel 



**[p. 500]**

OUR BOURGEOISIE AND DR. NÜCKEL

Cologne, November 4. The news of the victory of the Croats and Wends in Vienna so enraptured our Cologne bourgeoisie that they celebrated with bottles of champagne and through Dr. Niickel proposed the following fundamental motion at the evening session of the Town Council on November 3:

"That the Town Council is not obliged to give the workers work. That this is nothing but relief and that the daily wages of workers employed by the city should consequently be fixed at a lower rate than the daily wages of workers employed by private masters."

An additional reason given by Dr. Nuckel was that it was necessary by means of this differential to stem the rush of workers to municipal employment.

Herr Böker managed with difficulty to get this question adjourned. Dr. Nuckel has proclaimed the dogma of the local bourgeoisie. For this, the workers owe Dr. Nuckel their heartfelt thanks.

It was quite consistent that our men of property, who so joyfully welcomed the declaration of a state of siege in Cologne, celebrated the bombardment of Vienna and the restoration of Croatian freedom as a victory, just as they had celebrated the refined cruelty of the June victors.

[^1]: Written by Marx on November 4, 1848 Printed according to the newspaper

[^2]: First published in the Neue Rheinische Published in English for the first Zeitung No. 135, November 5, 1848 time



