---
Volume: 7
Document_Title: "144. News from Vienna "
Page_Range: "532-534"
---

# 144. News from Vienna 



**[p. 501]**

NEWS FROM VIENNA

Cologne, November 5. Letters and newspapers from Vienna failed to arrive. The newspapers from Breslau* which we have received, the Allgemeine Oderzeitung, the Schlesische Zeitung and the Breslauer Zeitung, contain, properly speaking, nothing.

Several Berlin morning papers of November 3 carry the following news item, one newspaper having received it from Hietzing, the others from Vienna:

"The city of Vienna is entirely occupied by imperial troops." The Kölnische Zeitung prints this report, which it received from Breslau and which "is described as reliable", and it confirms this report by a "telegram" from Berlin, which "in itself" is of course reliable.

Let us leave aside the anonymous note from Breslaub and proceed to the telegram printed in big letters in the Kölnische Zeitung.0

The telegram was dispatched from Vienna at noon on Novem- ber 1.

The letter to Dumont, if he received the news in writing, was sent at 8 a.m. on November 3, with the Berlin mail.

On the evening of November 3, this news was circulating merely as a rumour throughout Berlin, and the newspapers of November 4 published on the evening of November 3 deny it.

[^1]: a Wroclaw.—Ed.

[^2]: "Breslau, 2. Nov." and "Berlin, 3. Nov.", Kölnische Zeitung No. 299 (second edition), November 5, 1848.— Ed.

[^3]: c Kölnische Zeitung No. 299 (second edition), November 5, 1848, p. 1.— Ed.





**[p. 502]**

Written by Marx on November 5, 1848 Printed according to the newspaper

First published in the second edition of the Published in English for the first Neue Rheinische Zeitung No. 135, time November 5, 1848

