---
Volume: 7
Document_Title: "2. To All Workers of Germany "
Page_Range: "566-568"
---

# 2. To All Workers of Germany 



**[p. 535]**

TO ALL WORKERS OF GERMANY340

BROTHERS AND WORKERS!

If we do not want once again to be the most deceived of all, and do not want for a long series of years to be exploited, despised and downtrodden by a handful of men, then we must not lose a moment, we must not remain inactive for a single minute.

Isolated, as we have been hitherto, we are weak although we number millions. United and organised, on the other hand, we shall constitute an irresistible force. Therefore, brothers, everywhere in towns and villages form workers' associations in which our conditions are discussed, measures proposed to change our present situation, representatives from the working class to the German Parliament nominated and elected, and all other steps taken that are necessary for safeguarding our interests. Furthermore, all workers' associa- tions in Germany must as quickly as possible enter into and keep in contact with one another.

We propose that for the time being you choose Mainz as the centre for all the workers' associations and that you enter into correspon- dence with the undersigned Executive Committee so that we can agree on a common plan and as soon as possible definitively decide the seat of the Central Committee etc. at a meeting of delegates of all the associations.

We expect letters without postage pre-paid, just as for our part we shall write to the associations without pre-payment.

Mainz, April 5, 1848

The Workers' Educational Association in Mainz

On behalf of the Executive Committee

Speaker Wallau

Writer Cluss



**[p. 536]**

First published in the Deutsche Volkszeit- ung No. 8, April 8, 1848, the Mannheimer Abend-Zeitung No. 100, April 10, 1848, and in the supplement to the Seeblätter No. 89, April 13, 1848

Printed according to the Deutsche

Volkszeitung

Published in English for the first time

