---
Volume: 7
Document_Title: "5. Prospectus for the Founding of the Neue Rheinische Zeitung "
Page_Range: "570-573"
---

# 5. Prospectus for the Founding of the Neue Rheinische Zeitung 



**[p. 539]**

PROSPECTUS FOR THE FOUNDING OF THE NEUE RHEINISCHE ZEITUNG'

A new spirit has broken through in Germany. It has overthrown the old regime, it has doomed the old world to destruction. It demands a new society, a new life.

It is the spirit of the people. The people has taken sovereign power, the people that does not want any division, any class rule, which regards its component parts as co-operating members of one great body. It is its will that is to guide its life, regulate its work, create its well-being.

The first task for this will is to create the forms in which it can deploy its strength safe from oppression or falsification. These are the forms of democracy. Already the people is preparing to elect a double representation3 from which it expects the establishment of its rights, the division of the state powers and the guarantee of order, in short, a new Constitution.

This is great, difficult work, even though only preparatory. The overthrown power will resist it, personal interest will not voluntarily submit to the demands of the whole. Democracy must stand its ground in the struggle against both these enemies of an order which serves the will of the whole, and whose purpose is the good of the whole: it will have on its side the experience of the past and the needs of the present.

The immediate aim of the Neue Rheinische Zeitung is to co-operate vigorously in this immediate public work. For the time being its chief task will be a thorough examination of the questions which relate to the constitution of Germany and Prussia in conjunction with the same or similar questions which occupy people abroad. It will not close its columns to any tendencies except those stemming from

[^1]: A reference to the election of the Prussian and the German National Assemblies.— Ed.





**[p. 540]**

But if the political formation of the fatherland is the most immediate of the great tasks which the German nation is determined to solve, it is by no means the greatest and by far not the most difficult task. Political democracy is merely the means to achieve thoroughgoing changes in civil society. All wishes, all demands are directed to this end. The worst sufferings of unemployment, of deprivation, of misery weigh on the great majority of the nation, in particular the working class. The general demand, the general longing is to abolish a condition in which the existence of the whole is dependent on the carelessness of the governing, on the accidental insight or short-sighted egoism of private individuals, a condition which indeed still lacks guiding principles and general institutions, without which there can be no free activity, no security of earning a living, no true enjoyment of life. Everywhere, in agriculture, in industry, in commerce, in education etc., there is a recognised need for the most important reforms. The nation demands a free, happy life in free, happy work.

Between the will and the deed, between decision and execution, there is, however, a great distance, a hard road. Difficulties of every kind stand in the way. Not only malevolence, but incompe- tence, even more, will have to be ' overcome. Here every ounce of energy is required to overcome ignorance, narrow-minded particularism, and monopolistic aspirations; it is necessary to subordinate the conflicting interests, due to occupation and lo- cality, to a common order which establishes and maintains the well-being of the whole, to organise work, intercourse and consump- tion according to the conditions of life of a great nation which strives to promote the well-being of the whole and of every individual not by war and exploitation but by peaceful exchange and united co- operation.

It is in this field, however, that the least thorough preparations have been made; here, where the need became general before the insight did, it is above all the press which is qualified to bring the existing circumstances to public notice, to examine the conditions for change, to discuss the means of reform, to help educate public opi- nion, to give a salutary direction to the will of the whole. This, then, is also the task of the Neue Rheinische Zeitung, on which it will con- centrate its efforts more and more, in the measure in which political discussions retreat into the background.



**[p. 1848]**

While, therefore, the prospects for the success of the Neue Rheinische Zeitung can in every respect be said to be most favourable, there arises the question of the financial resources which must be raised to cover the costs in the initial period, so long as the number of subscribers and advertisements have not yet made the enterprise secure. For this purpose a capital of 30,000 talers is required, half of which is to be regarded as a reserve fund. This capital is to be raised through a limited joint-stock company.

It will be divided into 600 shares of fifty talers each, and the payment will be in such instalments as to enable the less affluent also to promote the enterprise by their participation.

Lists for the subscription of shares are open at: Herr W. Clouth, at St. Agatha No. 12

Wolff & Kapferer, Hochstrasse No. 55 Max Kemmerich, St. Katharinen 2 B Esch & Henn, Kleine Sandkaul No. 1. Please send applications from outside Cologne to: Dr. Daniels, Mittelstrasse No. 2, Cologne, April 1848. By "provisional agreement" of the first shareholders, the follow- ing conditions have been added to those announced above:

1) As soon as 200 shares are subscribed, a general meeting of shareholders will be called to agree upon the Rules of the company. The latter thereupon comes into operation.

2) The management of the editorial office and the engagement of contributors and correspondents will be the responsibility of Herr Heinrich Bürgers.

[^1]: Written by Heinrich Bürgers in April Printed according to the journal

[^2]: First published in the Westphälisches Dampf- Published in English for the first boot No. 12, May 17, 1848 time



