---
Volume: 7
Document_Title: "8. Legal Investigation against the Neue Rheinische Zeitung "
Page_Range: "585-586"
---

# 8. Legal Investigation against the Neue Rheinische Zeitung 



**[p. 554]**

LEGAL INVESTIGATION AGAINST THE NEUE RHEINISCHE ZEITUNG

Cologne, July 7. The responsible publisher3 of the Neue Rheinische Zeitung, Korff, and its editor-in-chief, Karl Marx, were interrogated yesterday at the office of the examining magistrate, both of them being accused of insulting or libelling the Chief Public Prosecutor,

Herr Zweiffei, and the policemen who arrested Anneke. The interrogation began at 4 o'clock. After its conclusion, at about 6 o'clock, the examining magistrate and Public Prosecutor Hecker accompanied the accused to the office of the editorial board, where with the aid of a police inspector a search of the premises took place in order to discover the manuscript and thus the author of the inculpated article.13 There was found a note in an unknown handwriting but it was not a copy of the inculpated article. This note was added to the dossier of the indictment against Marx and consorts. In view of this last expression, it seems that it is intended to institute proceedings against the editorial board en masse although the responsible publisher, Korff, who alone appends his signature to the newspaper, undertakes, of course, also the legal responsibility for it.

[^1]: First published in the Neue Rheinische Zeitung No. 38, July 8, 1848

[^2]: Printed according to the newspaper

[^3]: Published in English for the first time

[^4]: a Gérant. See footnote on p. 544.—Ed, b See this volume, pp. 177-79.—Ed



