---
Volume: 7
Document_Title: "15. Protest of the Democratic Society in Cologne against the Incorporation of Posen in the German Confederation "
Page_Range: "585-597"
---

# 15. Protest of the Democratic Society in Cologne against the Incorporation of Posen in the German Confederation 



**[p. 554]**

LEGAL INVESTIGATION AGAINST THE NEUE RHEINISCHE ZEITUNG

Cologne, July 7. The responsible publisher3 of the Neue Rheinische Zeitung, Korff, and its editor-in-chief, Karl Marx, were interrogated yesterday at the office of the examining magistrate, both of them being accused of insulting or libelling the Chief Public Prosecutor,

Herr Zweiffei, and the policemen who arrested Anneke. The interrogation began at 4 o'clock. After its conclusion, at about 6 o'clock, the examining magistrate and Public Prosecutor Hecker accompanied the accused to the office of the editorial board, where with the aid of a police inspector a search of the premises took place in order to discover the manuscript and thus the author of the inculpated article.13 There was found a note in an unknown handwriting but it was not a copy of the inculpated article. This note was added to the dossier of the indictment against Marx and consorts. In view of this last expression, it seems that it is intended to institute proceedings against the editorial board en masse although the responsible publisher, Korff, who alone appends his signature to the newspaper, undertakes, of course, also the legal responsibility for it.

[^1]: First published in the Neue Rheinische Zeitung No. 38, July 8, 1848

[^2]: Printed according to the newspaper

[^3]: Published in English for the first time

[^4]: a Gérant. See footnote on p. 544.—Ed, b See this volume, pp. 177-79.—Ed





**[p. 555]**

LEGAL PROCEEDINGS AGAINST THE NEUE RHEINISCHE ZEITUNG

Cologne, July 22. This morning the editor-in-chief of the Neue Rheinische Zeitung, Karl Marx, was again summoned before the examining magistrate to be interrogated on account of the incriminated article on the arrest of Herr Anneke. This time the summons did not include the responsible publisher of the newspa- per, Herr Korff.

[^1]: First published in the Neue Rheinische Printed according to the newspaper Zeitung No. 53, July 23, 1848

[^2]: Published in English for the first

[^3]: time





**[p. 556]**

REPORT OF THE SPEECHES MADE BY MARX AND ENGELS

AT THE GENERAL MEETING OF THE DEMOCRATIC SOCIETY IN COLOGNE

ON AUGUST 4, 1848346

[] Hereupon Dr. Marx, editor-in-chief of the Neue Rheinische Zeitung, examines the principles of Herr Weitling, pronounced at the meeting of the Democratic Society held a fortnight ago,a and in a pithy and fairly long speech seeks to prove, on the grounds of the historical development of the revolutions that have taken place during the last few centuries, that, the separation of political and social interests assumed by Weitling is as unthinkable as their direct opposition, that, rather, the political and social interests must interpenetrate. The claim that social development retards political development was also incorrect; unfortunately, in respect of social development we Germans had only now arrived at the point which the French had already reached in the year 1789; the present contradictions could only be resolved by sharply defining them and emphasising the interests of the individual classes; only in this way, that is by using intellectual weapons, can an amicable settlement be achieved. The disregard of the position of the various strata of the population to one another, the refusal to make reciprocal conces- sions and wrong notions about class relations have led to the bloody outcome in Paris. The dictatorship which Weitling proposed as the most desirable constitutional form is, for similar reasons, regarded by Marx as impractical and quite unfeasible, since power cannot be attained by a single class; the intention to carry on a dictatorship in accordance with a system devised by a single brain, deserves to be called nonsensical. On the contrary, the governing power, just as the Provisional Government in Paris, must consist of the most heteroge-

[^1]: a On July 21, 1848.— Ed.





**[p. 557]**

Herr Engels reports on the Government's rejection of the application for citizenship of Dr. Marx.3 As the latter was a Rhineland Prussian by birth, and as since the March revolution all political refugees have had their citizenship restored to them, this interpretation of citizenship involved injustice and breach of faith; he would thereby be regarded as a foreigner who could be expelled at any time.

First published in the newspaper Der Printed according to the newspaper Wächter am Rhein, 2. Dutzend, No. 1, Aueust 23 1848 Published in English for the first time

[^1]: a See this volume, pp. 407-10.—Ed.





**[p. 558]**

ANNOUNCEMENT OF THE CONVOCATION

OF THE RHENISH DISTRICT CONGRESS

OF DEMOCRATIC ASSOCIATIONS347

Cologne, August 4. In accordance with the decision of the Democratic Congress in Frankfurt, which resolved that Cologne should be the seat of the Executive for the Prussian Rhine Prov- ince and authorised the democratic associations there to con- vene a district congress for organising the democratic party in the province, the Central Committee of the associations here348 invites all democratically-minded associations in the Rhine Province to appoint delegates to this congress, which will take place here on Sunday, August 13. The delegates must report their arrival in the upstairs hall of the Stollwerk premises.

The Central Committee of the three democratic associations in Cologne

Schneider II, Marx (For the Democratic Society)

Moll, Schapper Becker, Schützendorf (For the Workers' Association) (For the Association for Workers

and Employers

At a moment when reaction, operating under the name of itinerant "constitutional" congresses, is reviewing and concentrating its forces throughout the state, democrats do not need any more exhaustive exposition of the necessity for an energetic counter-



**[p. 559]**

First published in the Neue Rheinische Printed according to the newspaper Zeitung No. 66, August 5, 1848

Published in English for the first

[^1]: Words from the decree of Frederick William III issued on March 17, 181; announcing the setting up of the army reserve.— Ed.





**[p. 560]**

THE LEGAL PROCEEDINGS AGAINST THE NEUE RHEINISCHE ZEITUNG

Cologne, August 4. Our entanglement with the office of the Public Prosecutor continues to take its course. Last Monday the responsible publisher Korff was again summoned before the examining magis- trate and yesterday two of our editors, Dronke and Engels, were cited as witnesses. Dronke is away at present; Engels appeared but was not interrogated on oath, since it is supposed that the note recently confiscated in our office3 is in his handwriting and it is possible, therefore, that he, too, will be involved in the indictment.

It is clear that the prosecution is not satisfied with the manager functioning as the responsible publisher. The editor-in-chief has to be implicated, the author of the article in question has to be discovered, the editors — any one of whom could be the author of the article in question — have to be made to give evidence against one another, indeed, if possible, against themselves.

[^1]: First published in the Neue Rheinische Zeitung No. 66, August 5, 1848

[^2]: Printed according to the newspaper

[^3]: Published in English for the first time

[^4]: See this volume, p. 554.—Ed.





**[p. 561]**

KARL MARX TO POLICE SUPERINTENDENT GEIGER349

To Police Superintendent Geiger

Here.

Sir, I inform you that I have immediately appealed3 to the Ministry of the Interior against the paper drawn up by youb and that I continue to regard myself as before as a citizen of the German Empire.

Cologne, August 5, 1848

Editor-in-Chief of the Neue Rheinische Zeitung Dr. Karl Marx

[^1]: First published in the Zeitschrift für Printed according to the manu- Geschichtswissenschaft No. 3, 1968 script

[^2]: Published in English for the first time

[^3]: a See this volume, pp. 407-10.— Ed. b Ibid., p. 408.— Ed.





**[p. 562]**

FROM THE MINUTES OF THE GENERAL MEETING

OF THE DEMOCRATIC SOCIETY IN COLOGNE HELD ON AUGUST 11, 1848

After the minutes of the preceding general meeting had been read and approved at the request of acting President Marx, Herr

Wolff read out the protest to the German National Assembly against the partition of Poland,3 which was joyfully greeted and adopted with acclamation.

Herr Rittinghausen gave many reasons vindicating Herr Marx's right to citizenship recendy contested by the Prussian Government.0

He considered that the best thing would be, by means of a deputation tomorrow, to make the Government reverse this illegal and altogether ridiculous action, and if the Government is unwilling to do that, to send a protest at such behaviour directly to the Minister. The protest was read and adopted, and in the event of the refusal of citizenship for Marx not being withdrawn people will be invited to sign the protest this evening.

Herr Marx dwelt in more detail on the grounds proving the injustice of the measures adopted against him, and the applause of the whole meeting testified to the force of his arguments. The circumstance on account of which the Government refused him the right of citizenship really lies in the fact that previously attempts had been made in vain to win him over to the side of the Government.

Herr Engels reported a new vexatious police measure against Schapper by which the latter is threatened with deportation.0 He described the intervention of the police and especially stressed that in any case Schapper as a citizen of Nassau has the right to be

[^1]: a See this volume, pp. 564-65.—Ed. b Ibid., pp. 407-10.— Ed. c Ibid., pp. 383-84.— Ed.





**[p. 563]**

Rittinghausen, Schneider and Bürgers were elected as delegates to put the case of Marx and Schapper before the Regierungspräsident and the Police Superintendent and try to effect a reversal of the decisions in question.

Deputy Gladbach, whose appearance was greeted with stormy applause, explained at length that salvation should not be expected to come either from the Berlin Assembly or from the Frankfurt Assembly.

Herr Engels stressed that it was Gladbach who had always distinguished himself by his liberal outlook and audacity and especially by his vigorous protest against the way the Schleswig- Holsteiners were dealt with in Spandau.3 Thereupon three cheers were given for Herr Gladbach.

First published in the newspaper Der Printed according to the newspaper Wächter am Rhein, 2. Dutzend, No. 2, August 25, 1848 Published in English for the first time

[^1]: a See this volume, pp. 180-81 and 192-93.—Ed.



PROTEST OF THE DEMOCRATIC SOCIETY IN COLOGNE AGAINST THE INCORPORATION OF POSEN IN THE GERMAN CONFEDERATION31

Cologne, August 12. The Democratic Society of Cologne has submitted the following protest to the National Assembly:

To the High National Assembly!

The Democratic Society of Cologne, considering 1. that Germany, which is engaged in a struggle for freedom, does not desire to oppress other nationalities but to promote their efforts for freedom and independence; 2. that the liberation of Poland is a vital question for Germany; 3. that Poland has in fact been repeatedly robbed of its freedom and national independence by three despots; 4. that since 1792 all attacks upon Poland and all partitions of Poland have always been aimed by reaction against the freedom of the whole of Europe, and, on the other hand, whenever a liberation of the peoples took place there was insistence also on the restoration of Poland; 5. that even the Committee of Fifty,351 in the name of the German people, indignantly rejected any share in the outrage commit- ted against Poland and clearly proclaimed the duty of the German people to co-operate in the restoration of an indepen- dent Poland; 6. that after the March revolution even the King of Prussia, compelled by the force of public opinion, solemnly assented to the reorganisation of Posen; 7. that despite that the National Assembly in Frankfurt, which, it is true, arose from indirect elections, in its sitting of July 27, 1848, voted for the incorporation of three-quarters of the Grand Duchy of Posen in the as yet non-existent German Empire and thereby incurred the guilt of a new partition of



**[p. 565]**

to make a formal protest against the decision adopted by the German National Assembly on July 27, 1848, in regard to the Grand Duchy of Posen and herewith to lay before Germany, Poland and the whole of Europe its vigorous objections to this incorporation which is solely of advantage to the reactionary party in Prussia, Russia and Austria.

On behalf of the Democratic Society, The Committee

First published in the Neue Rheinische Printed according to the newspaper Zeitung No. 74, August 13, 1848

Published in English for the first time

