---
Volume: 7
Document_Title: "27. Minutes of the Committee Meeting of the Cologne Workers' Association Held on September 11, 1848 "
Page_Range: "610-612"
---

# 27. Minutes of the Committee Meeting of the Cologne Workers' Association Held on September 11, 1848 



**[p. 579]**

MINUTES OF THE COMMITTEE MEETING OF THE COLOGNE WORKERS' ASSOCIATION

HELD ON SEPTEMBER 11, 1848

After reading the minutes of the previous meeting, the secretary, Citizen Kalker, declared that because of his departure from here, which would take place tomorrow, it would no longer be possible for him to give his services as secretary of the Association and that he herewith handed over his functions to the Association.

Thereupon Citizen Blum jun. was proposed as secretary and accepted.

The latter then took the floor and related the detailed circum- stances of the arrest of himself and Citizen Salget last Sunday evening in Wesseling by the Burgomaster of that place.3 For, on their way back to Cologne, after visiting a Workers' Association founded earlier in Cassel, they visited the Workers' Association in Wesseling; they had spoken there about social reform for barely a quarter of an hour, when Geier, the local Burgomaster, suddenly appeared accompanied by a policeman, arrested them, and placed them in custody in the latter's house, but next morning, with the most friendly civility, he let them go home peacefully.

President Moll thereupon asked Citizen Blum whether he had perhaps promised the Burgomaster of Wesseling not to take any steps against him, and when the question was answered in the negative, he moved that, to safeguard their rights and prevent similar illegal and arbitrary arrests, the meeting should decide to take the necessary steps, namely through the courts, which was agreed unanimously.

Citizen Röser requested the managing committee of the Society to invite the Workers' Association in Frechen to the public meeting to

[^1]: a See this volume, p. 426.—Ed.





**[p. 580]**

Citizen Dronke: We have now reached a point which could be more important and fraught with more consequences than many might perhaps think. The Government of Action has fallen, along with its world-enchanting financial plans. But let us not assume that we are now at the goal of our desires, or that anything will be done for us; let us not even count on getting a Government of the Left. On the contrary, we now have the prospect of a Government which does not even belong to the Chamber and will consist of people from the past, von Vincke etc. Behind such a Government stands absolutism in all its grandeur, all its insolence and arrogance. It will probably wish to disperse the Chamber with the aid of Pomeranian bayonets, and then the struggle between monarchy and nation will be inevitable. Perhaps while we are sitting here they are already fighting on the barricades in Berlin.

Thereupon the meeting turned to the social question, and President Moll remarked that we had come to a halt on the question whether an organisation of work was possible or not.358 People often threw at us the failure of the national workshops in France359 in order to prove that an organisation of work was impossible.

Citizen Engels made a lengthy speech on this subject. His speech was received with great applause.

After a written reply from the local Town Council had been read, concerning the request that the expenses of our delegates to the workers' congress in Frankfurt360 be defrayed, in which the Town Council asks for further details, the meeting was closed.

Voluntary contributions amounted to 11 silver groschen and 7 pfennigs.

[^1]: First published in the Zeitung des Arbeiter- Printed according to the newspaper Vereines zu Köln No. 33, September 21, ig4g Published in English for the first time



