---
Volume: 7
Document_Title: "34. Invitation to Subscribe to the Neue Rheinische Zeitung "
Page_Range: "623-624"
---

# 34. Invitation to Subscribe to the Neue Rheinische Zeitung 



**[p. 592]**

INVITATION TO SUBSCRIBE TO THE NEUE RHEINISCHE ZEITUNG

The Neue Rheinische Zeitung was quite unjustifiably suppressed for some days by the armed reaction during the state of siege imposed on the city of Cologne. After today's lifting of the state of siege, the

Neue Rheinische Zeitung will once more defend the democratic interests of the whole people with energy and circumspection. This is just now the more essential since we have all seen with what brazen ruthlessness the armed reaction has come out in the most recent period in opposition to the freedom justly won by the people. Making this announcement to supporters of democracy, we ask them at the same time for really numerous subscriptions for the fourth quarter now commencing, since the democratic newspapers, which moreover encounter hostility from many sides, especially need the active co-operation of their supporters.

H. Kor ff

Responsible Publisher of the Neue Rheinische Zeitung

[^1]: For Cologne, the subscription per quarter costs 1 taler 15 silver groschen. In Prussia outside Cologne it is 1 taler 24 silver groschen 6 pfennigs. Outside Prussia the printed matter mail charges in the foreign country concerned have to be added.

[^2]: Advertisements: per 8-point line of column width (4 columns per page) or the equivalent space, cost 1 silver groschen 6 pfennigs. Cologne, October 3, 1848.

[^3]: Published as a leaflet Printed according to the leaflet

[^4]: Published in English for the first time



