---
Volume: 7
Document_Title: "37. From the Minutes of the Committee Meeting of the Cologne Workers' Association on October 16, 1848. Entry of Marx's Speech in Connection with His Assumption of the Presidency "
Page_Range: "626-628"
---

# 37. From the Minutes of the Committee Meeting of the Cologne Workers' Association on October 16, 1848. Entry of Marx's Speech in Connection with His Assumption of the Presidency 



**[p. 595]**

FROM THE MINUTES OF THE COMMITTEE MEETING OF THE COLOGNE WORKERS' ASSOCIATION

ON OCTOBER 16, 1848. ENTRY OF MARX'S SPEECH IN CONNECTION WITH HIS ASSUMPTION

OF THE PRESIDENCY

The acting President, Citizen Röser, stated that Dr. Marx had acceded to the request of the deputation sent to him from the Association that he should put himself at the head of our Association, and he therefore asked him to take his seat.

Dr. Marx: His position in Cologne was precarious. The reply he had received from ex-Minister Kühlwetter to his request for renaturalisation3 was tantamount to a concealed order for his expulsion. He would, of course, lodge a protest against it in the National Assembly. On the other hand, he was to be tried at the Assize Court for an alleged press offence. Moreover, owing to the temporary dispersion of the editorial board of the Neue Rheinische Zeitung he was overburdened with work. Nevertheless, he was ready, provisionally until Dr. Gottschalk was set free, to accede to the desire of the workers. The Government and the bourgeoisie ought to realise that, despite their acts of persecution, there were always persons to be found who would be ready to put themselves at the disposal of the workers.

Dr. Marx then spoke in some detail about the revolutionary activities of the German workers abroad, and in conclusion stressed their outstanding role in the recent Vienna revolution. He therefore proposed an address to the Vienna Workers' Association. (Adopted with acclamation.)

The President's proposal (concerning the rules of procedure) was that the first hour should be devoted to the interests of the Association (i.e. to its internal and external affairs), that during the

[^1]: See this volume, p. 581.—Ed.





**[p. 596]**

First published in the Zeitung des Arbeiter- Printed according to the newspaper Vereines zu Köln No. 40, October 22, 1848

Published in English for the first time

