---
Volume: 46
Document_Title: "1880"
Page_Range: "32-81"
---

# 1880



**[p. 3]**

1880

l

ENGELS TO WILHELM LIEBKNECHT

IN LEIPZIG

London, 10 January 1880

Dear Liebknecht,

Your letter arrived slap in the middle of the festive hurly-burly which, in view of the multiplication of the Marx family ' and also because two of our friends3 from Manchester were staying with us, as- sumed pretty formidable proportions. In order to forward your letter I had to consult the latest POST OFFICE DIRECTORY which was not to be had except at some distance from this house. Enfiri' I laid my hands on it at the beginning of this week and sent your letter to Alexander Macdonald Esq. M.P. Well Hill (according to the DIRECTORY, Well hi.) by Hamilton, North Britain (N.B.) Macdonald is the bigger scoundrel of the two 2 but more deeply in- volved officially with the coal miners. Maybe you will get his reply before mine. As soon as Parliament opens, you can address your let- ters simply: Alexander Macdonald, House of Commons.

Since you say you have asked Macdonald for the documents men- tioned in the main body of your letter, I shall of course do nothing further on this score until I hear from you again.

The silver and/or bimetallism 3 affair is the chimera of a few cotton speculators in Liverpool. Since it is virtually only silver that circulates among the Indian and Chinese traders, and silver has fallen from '/i5.5 to ' /17.5-1 /is of the value of gold over the past 10 years, this circum- stance has, of course, further accentuated the crisis in the said article brought about by the over-export of cotton goods to the Far East. In

[^1]: a Probably Carl Schorlemmer and Samuel Moore - b Finally





**[p. 4]**

I, too, wish you and all the others success in the New Year, as I do the Russian revolution which will surely get under way in the course of it and at once impose a quite different character upon Europe. For this too we are largely indebted to our friend Bismarck. With his os- tentatious trip to Austria and the alliance he concluded there 4 he presented the Russian government at precisely the right moment (for us!) with the alternative: war or revolution. Quel génie!"

Your

F.E.

[^1]: First published, in Russian, in Marx- Printed according to the original Engels Archives, Vol. I (VI), Moscow, 1932

[^2]: Published in English for the first time

[^3]: What a genius!





**[p. 5]**

MARX TO CHARLES WALSTONE (WALDSTEIN) 5

IN LONDON

[London,] 26 January 1880 Dear Waldhorn,3

If I don't find you in, I shall leave this note for you. I am prepared to come at 7 o'clock on Wednesday evening, WIND AND WEATHER PERMIT- TING. THAT IS TO SAY, IF IT BE NOT TOO COLD FOR THE PRESENT CONDITIONS OF MY corpus delicti} For in this world all promises are relative.

Meanwhile, salut

Your

Moor

First published in: Marx and Engels, Printed according to the original Works, Second Russian Edition, Vol. 50, , ,. . , Moscow 1981 Published in English for the first ' time

ENGELS TO CARL HIRSCH

[London,] 17 February 1880

Dear Hirsch,

Many thanks for the banker's letter which I return herewith. But I have not the faintest idea what can be meant by 'negotiated à 340e'. I can discover no rational connection whatever between this figure and German or Austrian currency. If the man would tell us how many marks he thinks he will be able to get for 200 Austrian gulden,

[^1]: IN LONDON

[^2]: a Waldhorn (French horn) is a jocular name given to Walstone by Marx. - b A pun on corpus (body) and corpus delicti (substance of the offence).





**[p. 6]**

Your

F.E.

First published in Marx/Engels, Werke, Bd. 39, Berlin, 1968

Printed according to the original

Published in English for the first time

MARX TO BERNHARD KRAUS 6

IN LONDON

[Copy]

[London,] 26 March 1880

Dear Dr Kraus [Kranz?],

I had quite forgotten that today was Good Friday; hence found the Café Royal shut on arriving there with my daughter Eleanor at 12 o'clock, waited until 1 o'clock and, not seeing you arrive, [proceeded?] to your hotel. Would you be so kind as to write to me today — so that I have your reply tomorrow — and let me know whether you might honour us with your company at dinner this Sunday at 5 o'clock (not 2).

With best wishes from Miss Eleanor.

Yours,

Karl Marx

[^1]: First published in: Marx and Engels,

[^2]: Works, First Russian Edition, Vol. XXVII, Moscow, 1935

[^3]: Printed according to a copy in an unknown hand

[^4]: Published in English for the first time





**[p. 5]**

ENGELS TO JOHANN PHILIPP BECKER 7

IN GENEVA

London, 1 April 1880

Dear Old Man,

This is to notify you that I have taken out a money order for you at the post office for four pounds sterling — should amount to 100 frs 80 cts — and hope it will reach you safely. I trust that your health and that of your wife has improved now that the bitter winter is happily behind us. Here things are so-so. Mrs Marx is still not quite up to the mark and Marx, too, could be better. When winter's over, he always has his worst time; his coughing fits prevent him from sleeping.

For the rest, things have reverted to what they were in 1850. The Workers' Society has split up into a multitude of parties8— Most here, Rackow there — and it is as much as we can do not to get drawn into this maelstrom.1 So many storms in a teacup, which may have an altogether salutary effect on some of the participants in that they con- tribute to their development but, so far as the march of events is con- cerned, whether 100 German working men here declare themselves for this side or for that is pretty immaterial. If they could exert any influ- ence on the English — but there's no question ofthat. In his thirst for action Most cannot keep still but nor, for that matter, can he get any- thing done; people in Germany just won't see that, because Most has been statutorily slung out of the country, the moment of revolution is at hand. The Freiheit is to become, by hook or by crook, the most rev- olutionary paper in the world, but this cannot be achieved simply by repeating the word 'revolution' in every line. Luckily it matters very little what's in the paper and what isn't. The same thing applies to the Zurich organ,11 which advocates revolution one day, only to de- clare on the next that a violent upheaval is the greatest of misfor- tunes, which is afraid on the one hand of being outdone by Most's rhetoric and fears on the other that the workers may take its own rheto- ric to heart. Well, take your pick between the empty rantings of the Freiheit and the narrow philistinism of the Sozialdemokrat.

[^1]: a See this volume, p. 9. - b Der Sozialdemokrat





**[p. 8]**

I fear that our friends in Germany are deluding themselves as to the kind of organisation that ought to be maintained under present circumstances. That elected members of parliament should wish to place themselves in the van because there would otherwise be no lead- ership— to that I have no objection. But they can neither demand nor impose the implicit obedience that could be demanded by the former party leadership, specifically elected for the purpose. Least of all under present circumstances, without a press, without mass meet- ings. The more loose-knit the organisation now seems to be, the more tightly-knit it is in reality. Instead of this, the old system is to be re- tained, the party leadership is to have the final say (although there is no congress to discipline or, if necessary, dismiss it), and anyone who attacks one of its members is branded a heretic. At the same time, the best of them are themselves aware that they have in their midst all sorts of incapable and otherwise not very savoury persons, and they must be obtuse indeed if they fail to see that it is not they who are in control of their organ, but Höchberg, thanks to his money-bags, and with him his fellow philistines Schramm and Bernstein. In my view, the old party, together with its former organisation, is finished. When, as may be expected, the European movement shortly gets going again, then it will be joined by the vast mass of the German prole- tariat, of which the 500,000 men of 1878 9 will form the trained and educated nucleus, and then, too, the old 'rigorous organisation' de- riving from the Lassallean tradition will become a brake which, though it might hold back a waggon, no one could hope to apply to an avalanche.

At the same time, these men are doing a number of things which may wholly disrupt the party. First, the party is to go on maintaining its former agitators and editors by saddling itself with a mass of pa- pers which contain nothing more than may be found in any middle- class local rag. And the workers are supposed to tag along with that indefinitely! Secondly, their bearing in the Reichstag and in the Sax- on Diet is for the most part so meek as to discredit both them and the party in the eyes of the whole world; they make 'positive' suggestions to the existing government as to how it might do better in minor questions of detail, etc. And the workers, who have been declared outside the law and delivered up, bound hand and foot, to the tender mercies of the police, are expected to regard this as adequate repre- sentation! Thirdly, there is their tolerance of the philistine petty bour- geoiserie of the Sozialdemokrat. In every letter we are told that we must



**[p. 9]**

on no account believe any reports of splits or differences of opinion within the party, but everyone who comes here from Germany assures us that our people are completely bewildered by this conduct on the part of their leaders and that they by no means agree with it. Nor could it be otherwise, given the character of our workers which has so splen- didly stood the test. It is a peculiarity of the German movement that all the mistakes committed by the leadership are invariably put right by the masses, and no doubt such will again be the case this time. ' ° Well, keep your pecker up and drop us a line occasionally. Bork- heim is still in pretty well the same helpless condition as before.3

Your

F.E.

First published in: F. Engels, Vergessene Briefe (Briefe Friedrich Engels' an Johann Philipp Becker), Berlin, 1920

Printed according to the original

Published in English in full for the first time

ENGELS TO H. MEYER

[London,] 3 April 1880 122 Regent's Park Road, N.W.

Mr H. Meyer,

Your favour of 25 March ' ' did not come into my hands until late at night on Saturday, 27 March, and hence, if only for that reason, I could not accept your invitation.

In view of the rifts and differences of opinion that have recently oc- curred among German Social-Democrats here and elsewhere, I am unable for the time being to declare myself in favour either of one party or of the other, especially as I cannot but reprobate, not only the policy of the Zurich Sozialdemokrat, but also and no less that of the London Freiheit*

[^1]: IN LONDON

[^2]: See present edition, Vol. 45, p. 349.-b See this volume, p. 7.





**[p. 10]**

I would request you to be good enough to convey this to the execu- tive, and meanwhile remain

Yours very truly,

F. Engels

First published in: Marx and Engels, Printed according to the original Works, First Russian Edition, Vol. XXIX, , , , , - , , - r- ,• , r , r- , , , „ . c Published m English tor the lirst Moscow. 1946 . &

time

7

ENGELS TO AUGUST BEBEL

IN LEIPZIG

[London, after 27 April 1880] 12

[]a so as to make the whole thing impossible without actually prohibiting it.

Mr Hasselmann will soon become harmless if you people bring to light really compromising facts about him and take the wind out of his sails in the Reichstag, i. e. proceed in a frankly revolutionary way, which can be done by using quite temperate language, as you your- self did in exemplary fashion in your speech on the persecutions.13 If, however, a person is constantly afraid of being thought by the philis- tine, as often happens, to be a bit more extreme than he really is, and if in fact the enclosed cutting from the Kölnische Leitung is correct in re- porting that the Social-Democrats have brought a motion intended to restore the guild privilege of trading in home-made goods, then the Hasselmanns and Mosts will have an easy task.

None of this, however, is really of much consequence. What is now keeping the party alive is unobtrusive, spontaneous activity on the part of individuals; like its organisation, it is kept going by their irre- pressible journeyings. In Germany we have fortunately reached the stage when every action of our adversaries is advantageous to us; when all historical forces are playing into our hands, when nothing,

[^1]: The beginning of the letter is missing.





**[p. 11]**

absolutely nothing, can happen without our deriving advantage from it. For that reason we can quietly allow our adversaries to work for us. Bismarck is working for us like a real Trojan. He has now won Ham- burg for us 14 and will shortly also make us a present, first of Altona, and then of Bremen. The National Liberals ' 5 are working for us, even though all they do is submit to kicks and vote taxes. The Catho- lics are working for us, even though they voted first against, and then for, the Anti-Socialist Law, ' 6 in return for which they, too, have sim- ply been delivered by Bismarck over to the tender mercies of the gov- ernment, i. e. also placed outside the law. Anything we can do is a mere drop in the ocean compared with what events are doing for us at this moment. Bismarck's feverish activity, which is throwing every- thing into disorder and putting everything out of joint without achiev- ing anything of a remotely positive nature; which is stretching the philistine's tax-paying potential to the utmost limit, and this for noth- ing and worse than nothing; which wants one thing one day and the opposite the next and is forcibly driving into the arms of the revolu- tion the philistine who would so gladly grovel at his feet — this is our strongest ally, and I'm delighted at your being able to confirm from actual observation that there has in fact been a shift to the left, as was inevitable in the circumstances.

In France, too, things are progressing well. Our communist view- point is breaking new ground everywhere and the best of those advo- cating it are all of them former anarchists who have come over to us without our raising a finger/ Unanimity has thus been established among European socialists; any who are still shilly-shallying aren't worth mentioning now that the last remaining sect, the anarchists, has melted away. There, too, we find increasingly a general shift to the left among the bourgeois and peasants, as you have already re- marked; but there's one snag here: this shift to the left is primarily tending towards a war of retribution and that must be avoided.

The victory of the Liberals here has at least one good aspect in that it puts a spoke in the wheel of Bismarck's foreign policy.17 Since he might just as well dismiss the Russian war from his mind now, he will, as usual, doubtless sell his ally — Austria — to the first comer. After all, the bitter experiences of 1864-66 have already shown the Aus- trians that Bismarck seeks allies only to betray them ' 8 — but they're too stupid and will again fall into the trap.

[^1]: a Engels probably means, above all, Paul Brousse and Benoît Malon.





**[p. 12]**

In Russia, too, everything is proceeding splendidly, despite judicial murder, banishments and an appearance of calm. You can't banish sheer lack of money. Not one banker will make a loan without a guar- antee from the Imperial Assembly. Hence the present desperate recourse to an internal loan. On paper it will be a success, in reality a total failure. And then they will have to convene some assembly or other if only to obtain cash — always supposing something else doesn't happen in the meantime.

Kindest regards to you and Liebknecht from Marx and

Yours

F. E.

First published, in Russian, in Marx- Printed according to the original Engels Archives, Vol. I (VI), Moscow, 1932 „ , , . , , . „ ,. , r , <• s ; Published in English for the first time

London, 4 May 1880

My dear Lafargue,

Grateful as I am for his good intentions, what is needed here are facts, and where would he get them from? The history of German socialism from 1843 to 1863 is not yet in print, and Malon's German friends in Zurich know hardly anything about that period, which preceded their entry into political life. So it is natural enough that Malon's introduc- tion should omit the most important facts while going into details which can hardly interest the French reader and should, besides, be riddled with mistakes of a fairly serious kind. To mention only one — Lassalle was never editor of the Neue Rheinische Leitung. He never so much as contributed to it, if one excepts a feuilleton in a single is- sue— a feuilleton which was, moreover, completely rewritten by the editorial staff. At that time Lassalle was almost wholly taken up with the adulteries and divorce proceedings of Countess Hatzfeldt and her

[^1]: ENGELS TO PAUL LAFARGUE 19

[^2]: IN LONDON

[^3]: What are we to do about the introduction Malon has submitted? 20



Bibliothèque a« la REVUE SOCIALISTE

X.

SOCIALISME UT0PI0ÜE

SOCIALISME SGKITIFIQÜE

ta FRÉDÉRIC ENGELS

7ra4«ttlo B frnf «i M ytr

PAUL LAFARGUE

P r i x t BO c e n t i m e s

<©^HW

[^1]: PARIS

[^2]: DXXYXAUX I.IBRAIRB-ÉDITSUR.

[^3]: 3», Ri» d Angaultme, 32

[^4]: 188»







**[p. 15]**

husband 2 ' ; and had he offered to join the editorial department, we should have refused outright to associate ourselves with a man up to his eyes in the filth necessarily arising from the conduct of such a scan- dalous case. Neither Marx nor I have ever collaborated with Lassalle.

In about 1860 he suggested we should join him in founding a big daily newspaper in Berlin, but the conditions we laid down were such that he was bound to find them unacceptable.22

Come to that, if someone is needed to introduce me to the French public, as is very possible, it seems to me that it could only be you, who have taken the trouble to translate my articles* and who alone are in a position to get hold of the necessary information which I have asked Marx to let you have. To my mind, I owe it to you as much as to myself to take on no one else.

Yours ever,

F. Engels

First published in F. Engels, P. et Printed according to the original L. Lafargue, Correspondance, t. I, Paris, 1956 _ , r , _ , Translated from the French

9

[London, circa 4-5 May 1880]

Dear Lafargue,

Here is the fruit of my consultation (of yesterday evening) with En- gels. Polish the phrases, leaving the gist intact.

Yours ever,

Karl Marx

[^1]: MARX T O PAUL LAFARGUE 2 3

[^2]: IN LONDON

[^3]: Printed according to the original

[^4]: Translated from the French

[^5]: Published in English for the first time

[^6]: a F. Engels, 'Le Socialisme utopique et le socialisme scientifique', La Revue socialiste, Nos. 3, 4 and 5, 20 March, 20 April and 5 May 1880.

[^7]: First published as a facsimile in: Marx and Engels, Works, Second Russian Edition, Vol. 19, Moscow, 1961





**[p. 10]**

MARX TO FERDINAND DOMELA NIEUWENHUIS 24

IN THE HAGUE

London, 27 June 1880 41 Maitland Park Road, N. W.

Dear Sir,

At the urgent insistence of my doctor I must refrain from work of any kind for some time to come; [indeed]a I should already have left London on a recuperative trip to the seaside or mountains had I not been prevented from doing so by the very serious illness of my wife. Letters sent to the above address, however, will always find me, as they will be forwarded.

But my present state of health apart, I could not have complied with your request,25 if only because I don't know enough Dutch to be able to judge whether this or that expression is appropriate.

Nevertheless, to go by the essays of yours I have read in the Jahr- buch der Sozialwissenschaft (Volume I, Second Half),26 I have not the slightest doubt that you are the right man to provide the Dutch with a résumé of Capital—I would also mention en passant that Mr Schramm (C. A. S., p. 81)b misconstrues my theory of value. From a note in Capital to the effect that A. Smith and Ricardo are mistaken in lumping together value and price of production2 7 (let alone market prices, therefore) — he could already have gathered that the connec- tion between 'value' and 'price of production', hence also between 'value' and the market prices that oscillate about the 'price of pro- duction', has no place whatever in the theory of value as such, still less can it be anticipated by cliché-ridden, scholastic generalisations.

Under present circumstances the 2nd part of Capital26 cannot appear in Germany, which I am quite glad of inasmuch as certain economic phenomena are, at this precise moment, entering upon a new phase of development and hence call for fresh appraisal.

With kindest regards,

Yours sincerely,

[Karl Marx]

[^1]: First published, in Russian, in the Printed according to the original magazine htorik-marksist, Vol. 6 (40), „ , ,. , , . „ ,. , • r „ r Moscow, 1934 Published m English m full for the '__ first time

[^2]: a Manuscript damaged.-1, [C. A. Schramm,] 'Zur Werttheorie', signed 'C.A.S.',

[^3]: Jahrbuch für Sozialwissenschaft und Sozialpolitik, 1880.





**[p. 11]**

ENGELS TO MINNA GORBUNOVA

IN BIARRITZ

London, 22 July 1880

122 Regent's Park Road, N. W.

Dear Madam,

After a number of vagaries, your letter from Biarritz 2 9 has safely reached me here, where I have been living for the past 10 years, and I hasten to let you have such information as it is within my power to give.

I have talked over the matter with my friend Marx, and we both take the view that no better sources on the English industrial school system are to be had over here than the official reportsa you already possess. The content of other non-official literature on the subject amounts to little more than window-dressing, where it is not expressly designed to provide an advertisement for some humbug or other. I shall have a look round and see if I can find anything that might interest you among the reports of the SCHOOL BOARDS and the Educa- tion Department in recent years, and shall send you further details if you would be so kind as to let me know to what address I should write or send packages, either within the next fortnight or so, or else in the autumn (since I shall be away from London for some time 3 0). The industrial education of young people is in an even worse state here than in most countries on the Continent and what is being done, is done mostly for appearances' sake. You will have seen from the ac- tual reports that the 'INDUSTRIAL SCHOOLS' are by no means on a par with continental industrial schools, but are a kind of penal institute where neglected children are committed for a given number of years by order of court.

On the other hand, the efforts made in America might perhaps be of greater interest to you. The United States has sent a wealth of ma- terial connected with this to the Paris Exhibition,31 material which must be lodged in the big library in the rue Richelieu 32 and of which

[^1]: " Reports of the Commissioners Appointed to Inquire into the State of Popular Education in Eng- land and Reports of Reformatory and Industrial School.





**[p. 18]**

you will find details in the catalogue of the exhibition at the said library.

I am further endeavouring to find out for you the address of a Mr Da Costaa in Paris; his sonb played a part in the Commune in 1871, and the father is himself employed in education, is passionately interested in his profession and would be more than willing to be of assistance to you.

Again, the schools for the further education of adult working men over here are not as a rule up to very much. Where anything worth while is done, it is usually thanks to special circumstances and individ- ual personalities, i. e. local and temporary. In all such matters, the only element that systematically recurs here is humbug. The best of establishments relapse after a short while into a stultifying routine and the avowed purpose increasingly becomes a pretext for the em- ployees to earn their keep as comfortably as possible. So much is this the rule that even establishments for the education of the children of the middle classes — bourgeoisie — form no exception. Indeed I have latterly come across a number of notable instances of this very kind.

I am sorry that at this stage I should not myself be able to place any fresh material at your disposal; for a number of years it has unfor- tunately been impossible for me to follow the course of public educa- tion in any detail. Otherwise I should have been only too delighted to be able to offer you more. Everything that furthers public education and hence the movement, however indirectly, in a country such as Russia, which stands on the threshold of a world historical crisis, and has produced a dynamic party of exceptional devotion and vigour—everything of this nature commands our most ardent sym- pathy.

I am, Madam,

Yours truly,

F. Engels

[^1]: First published in Russian and in the Ian- Printed according to the original guage of the original (German) in the book „ . .. , , . „ • • , r L c Mizdanniye pisma F. Engelsa (F. Engels' ^ l s h e d m E " S Sh f ° r * ' fim

[^2]: Unpublished Letters), Leningrad, 1924 time

[^3]: Eugene François Da Costa - b Charles Nicolas Da Costa





**[p. 12]**

MARX TO PHILIP STEPHEN KING 3 3

IN LONDON

[London,] 27 July 1880 41 Maitland Park Road, N. W.

Dear Sir,

Please send me: Part IV of Reports from Her M's Consuls.

Yours truly,

Karl Marx

First published in the language of the Reproduced from the original original (English) in Marx-Engels Jahrbuch, Nr. 8, Berlin, 1985

13

ENGELS T O MINNA GORBUNOVA

London, 2 August 1880

122 Regent's Park Road, N. W.

Dear Madam,

In all haste — for several days my house has been full of friends, come on a visit from the provinces — herewith the address:

M. Da Costa, 40 rue Gay-Lussac, Paris. Since I have only seen the old gentleman once and very briefly, he will certainly not remember me. But all you need say by way of introduction is that Marx ob- tained the address expressly for you through his son-in-law Longuet — who is a friend of young Da Costa's. a

[^1]: IN BIARRITZ

[^2]: a Charles Nicolas Da Costa





**[p. 20]**

In the course of this week I shall have time to write to you at great- er length, and shall address my letter to Paris, poste restante.

Meanwhile I remain,

Yours faithfully,

F. Engels

First published in Russian and in the Ian- Printed according to the original guage of the original (German) in the bo Neiz,danniye pisma F. Engelsa (F. Eng« Unpublished Letters), Leningrad, 1924

guage of the original (German) m the book _ , ,. . , . „ .. , . , . ,, • , .. „ _ , ' „ , , Published in English lor the first JVeizdanmye pisma t. tngelsa (t. Engels ° time

14

ENGELS TO MINNA GORBUNOVA 3 4

IN PARIS

London, 5 August 1880

122a Regent's Park Road, N. W.

Dear Madam,

Further to my brief note sent to Biarritz,b all I can tell you is that I don't in fact know of any documents or reports I could recommend to you other than those first enumerated by yourself in your previous esteemed letter.35 However, after the school holidays, when the vari- ous people I'm acquainted with return, I shall make further inquiries, and if I find anything new, shall send it to you in Moscow 36 or report to you further. In order that such correspondence should appear per- fectly innocuous, I shall write in English and sign myself E. Burns. When communicating with me from there, you could address your letters: Miss E. Burns, 122 Regent's Park Road, N. W., London. An inner envelope is unnecessary; she is my niece.

[^1]: I was most interested to hear about your activities in Moscow and about the prospect of your setting up an industrial school with the help of the president of the 3CMCTBOC37; we, too, have the statistical reports of all the Russian 3e MCTBa over here, as in general quite excel-

[^2]: a 112 in the manuscript. - b See previous letter. -c Zemstvo





**[p. 21]**

lent material on economic conditions in Russia, but unfortunately I cannot look it out at this moment as it is at Marx's house and he and all his family are away at the seaside.38 However it wouldn't be much help to me in answering your inquiry,3Q since this calls for a knowl- edge of the relevant branches of the cottage industry, its operation, products and competitiveness, and that can only be acquired on the spot. All in all it seems to me that most, at any rate, of the branches of industry you mentioned would probably be capable of competing with large-scale industry for some time yet. Industrial revolutions such as these progress extremely slowly; even the handloom has not yet been entirely superseded in some branches in Germany, whereas in England those same branches did away with it 20 or 30 years ago. In Russia that process might well be even slower. After all, the long winter provides the peasant with a great deal of spare time, and even if he only earns something during the day, that is still so much gain. Admittedly these primitive forms of production cannot escape their ultimate demise, and in a highly developed industrial country, as here, for example, one might claim that it would be more humane to accelerate this process of dissolution rather than prolong it. In Russia the situation may well be different, especially as there is some pros- pect there of violent changes in the political situation as a whole. The minor palliatives which have proved virtually useless in Germany, as you yourself have of course discovered, and also elsewhere, might in Russia help the people on occasion to surmount the political crisis and keep their industry going until such time as they also have a say. The schools, however, might perhaps enable them to get at least some idea of what they ought to say. And all genuine educative elements that are dispersed among the people will, to a greater or lesser extent, contribute to that end. Technical instruction might perhaps best achieve its aim if it sought, on the one hand, to organise the operations at any rate of the more viable branches of traditional industry in a more rational way and, on the other, to provide the children with sufficient training in general technology to facilitate their transition to other industries. Aside from such generalisations there is, at this distance, little to be said. Except that this much seems pretty clear to me: The Moscow gouvernement is unlikely to become a seat of large-scale indus- try in the near future, since it is remote from the coal-mining areas, and wood fuel is already in short supply. Cottage industry in some, if not always the same, form might persist there for a bit longer even if protective tariffs were to make feasible the introduction of this or that



**[p. 22]**

large enterprise, such as the cotton industry of Shuya and Ivanovo in the Vladimir gouvernement. And, after all, the only way one can really help the peasants is to see that they get more land and cultivate it in associations.

Your report about the incipient decay of the oöuni Ha340 and the artel4 ' confirms news that has also come to us from another quarter. Nevertheless this process of disintegration may go on for a very long time. And since the general current in Western Europe is flowing in precisely the opposite direction and, with the next convulsion, must acquire a strength of a quite different order, it may be expected that in Russia, too, which has certainly produced a great many critical minds over the past 30 years, this current will still be strong enough to make a timely appeal to the people's innate, millennial urge to as- sociate before that urge is completely extinguished. For this reason, productive associations and other means of promoting the associate system among the people in Russia should also be looked at from an aspect other than the Western one. Admittedly they still remain no more than minor palliatives. I remain,

Yours most respectfully,

F. Engels

15

MARX TO JOHN SWINTON

Ramsgate, 15 August 1880 10 Cumberland Road

Dear Sir,

[^1]: First published in Russian and in the Ian- Printed according to the original guage of the original (German) in the book Neizdanniye pisma F. Engelsa (F. Engels' Unpublished Letters), Leningrad, 1924

[^2]: IN LONDON

[^3]: [Postcard]

[^4]: I got only today your letter.42 I am staying here with my family,

[^5]: a obshchina





**[p. 23]**

and, if your time allows, shall be very glad to see you in Ramsgate.43

Yours truly

Karl Marx

[On the side reserved for the address]

John Swinton, Esq. 12 Norfolk Street, Strand, London

First published in the language of the origi- Reproduced from the original nal (English) and in Japanese in: Suzuki Koichiro, Sihonron hekireki, Tokyo, 1971

16

ENGELS TO JOHANN PHILIPP BECKER 4 4

IN GENEVA

Ramsgate, 17 August 1880

Dear Old Man,

Your postcard was not forwarded to me here 3 ° until today and I immediately took out a money order for you for two pounds ster- ling, i. e. 50 frs and a few centimes (on which I wrote my London address). It goes without saying, of course, that we wouldn't let you be thrown out of your house while we were restoring our health at the seaside here. There's no need for you to make such a to-do about a few pence; that sort of thing is a matter of course between old com- rades-in-arms who have been fighting under the same flag for forty years and who hearken to the same trumpet-calls.

We are all here — Marx, his wife and his daughters, together with husbands and children,3 and the visit is proving especially beneficial to Marx, who, I hope, will be completely refreshed. His wife has unfor- tunately been ailing for some time, but is as cheerful as could be ex- pected. I shall be returning to London next week but Marx ought to stay here as long as he possibly can.

[^1]: a Laura and Paul Lafargue; Jenny and Charles, Jean, Henri and Edgar Longuet





**[p. 24]**

Apropos, I should perhaps add that there's been a great muddle over the letters. Marx has never had letters of yours for safe-keeping, whereas Borkheim was supposed to have had some of yours and, when Mrs Marx was still in Geneva with you, you got her to ask Marx to get Borkheim to give them to him.a But now Borkheim de- nies ever having got any from you; so what the actual facts of the case are, we over here are unable to fathom.

Well, I hope that, for the time being at least, you have extricated yourself from the worst of your predicament and will get a bit of peace. Kindest regards from us all, and in particular from,

Your

F. Engels

First published in: F. Engels, Vergessene Printed according to the original Briefe (Briefe Friedrich Engels' an Johann _ , ,. , , . _ . . . . „ „ „ , Philipp Beeker), Berlin, 1920 Published in English ,n full for the rr ' first time

MARX TO FRIEDRICH ADOLPH SORGE

[Ramsgate,] 30 August 1880

Dear Sorge,

I am writing from Ramsgate, where I now am with my wife38; be- fore that I took her up to Manchester for a consultation with my friend Dr Gumpert. She is suffering from a dangerous liver complaint.

In consequence of our wanderings I only got your letter very be- latedly. I am entirely of your opinion. If you can't get hold of any money — i.e. S 200 — in YANKEELAND, the matter will have to be dropped.45 What the position is here will be evident to you if only from the fact that the Egalité went under for want of 3,000 francs.46

I will, for form's sake, let Liebknecht know about the affair.

The article from The Sun received with many thanks.47 Though he

[^1]: 17

[^2]: IN HOBOKEN

[^3]: a See present edition, Vol. 45, p. 443.





**[p. 25]**

may have the best of intentions, the man nevertheless shows that he doesn't understand the first rudiments of the matter about which he writes.

De minimis non curat lex,' and among those minima I number, inter alia, the priestly Douai.48

With warmest regards,

Your

Karl Marx

First published in Briefe und Auszüge aus Briefen von Joh. Phil. Becker, Jos. Dietzgen, Friedrich Engels, Karl Marx u. A. an F.A. Sorge und Andere, Stuttgart, 1906

Printed according to the original

Published in English for the first time

18

ENGELS TO LAURA LAFARGUE 4 9

[Bridlington Quay,] 3 September 1880

My dear Laura,

I have only a few minutes to reply to your amiable letter—we have been inspecting a geological amateur's collection this evening and to- morrow we are off to an excursion to Flamboro' Head. The weather here continues grand: regular Rhenish October weather, that is the acme of fine weather as far as I know, not a cloud on the sky, hot sun, cool bracing air at the same time. Why cannot you and Lafargue come for a week, the place is getting empty, plenty of apartments and accommodation of every sort.

I have not heard from Pumps since the letter I had at Ramsgate dated, I believe, 15th August. I wrote her at once, and since then, on arrival in London, last Fridayb this day week, a postcard, but no re- ply. Now I am almost certain that she has written to Sarah or her mother Mrs Nicholls who stays in our house during my absence.

[^1]: IN LONDON

[^2]: a The law does not concern itself with trifles. - b 27 August





**[p. 26]**

It is now half past nine at night, all windows wide open and yet the fine cool air outside will not come in rapidly enough to enable me to keep my coat on. The beer — oh the beer, it would be worth your while to come here only in order to drink one glass of beer at the Pier refreshment rooms, a nice little café — such splendid beer!

Moore and Beust are off to the 'Parade' (such a thing you know is de rigueur* at every seaside place) to hear the music and hunt backfishes, of which there are excellent specimens here; you know the backfishh

lives on dry land. At all events before leaving they wished to be kindly remembered to both of you.c

Yours affectionately

F. Engels

First published in the language of the origi- Reproduced from the original nal (English) in: F. Engels, P. et L. La- fargue, Correspondance, t. I, Paris, 1956

19

Bridlington Quay, Yorkshire, 3 September 1880 7 Burlington Place

My dear Lafargue,

Why Geneva? 5 ' The seat of the Swiss Federal Government is Berne and, besides, any other Swiss town would do as well as Geneva. Unless you have specific objections, of which I may be unaware, the

[^1]: ENGELS T O PAUL LAFARGUE 5 0

[^2]: IN LONDON

[^3]: a the form -b See this volume, p. 29. Engels puns on the German Backfisch (Anglicised here) which means both 'adolescent girl' and 'fried fish'. - c Laura and Paul Lafargue





**[p. 27]**

May the soil rest lightly On the egalitarian Egalité.46

Yours ever,

F. Engels

First published in F. Engels, P. et Printed according to the original L. Lafargue, Correspondance, t. I, Paris, 1956

Translated from the French

20

ENGELS TO PAUL LAFARGUE' 9

Bridlington Quay, 9 September 1880

My dear Lafargue,

I had to write to you in haste the day before yesterday 5 2 because we were due to leave at 9.30 for an excursion to Flamboro' Head where our two naturalists3 botanised in the sea. In case I didn't express myself clearly enough, let me summarise.

The more serious aspect of Grant's scheme is that he alone has the right to raise or lower the value of your shares, if not make them vir- tually worthless. To begin with, he is deducting 12% per annum for the first 4 guides. If the gross profit amounts to 15%, that leaves a net profit, the shareholders' dividend, of only 3%; if 20% it leaves 8%, etc. But with the generous salaries Grant proposes to pay the local di- rectors, can one count on such profits? That seems to me exceedingly doubtful.

Let us suppose, however, that the gross profit amounts to 20% or even 25%. What will Grant do then? He will propose to borrow yet

[^1]: IN LONDON

[^2]: a Samuel Moore and Adolph Beust





**[p. 28]**

There is nothing to prevent Grant providing you with funds, as soon as there is a further need of them, at still higher interest, the rate of which will depend upon him alone. Since it is he who pockets the interest, at least the greater part thereof, it is in his interest to ap- proach as closely as possible the rate of gross profit generated by the firm. He shares the interest only with the man who advances this money — the net profit he shares with all the other shareholders.

So in fact the value of your PAID UP shares goes down and down and Grant alone has the right to reduce it to nothing. In other words he pays the two of you for your literary property 1. £400; 2. £300 each the moment it suits him to get rid of you; 3. in virtually worthless shares carrying no dividend; total £ 500 each, always provided Grant does not find a way of avoiding payment of the £300 — which wouldn't be too difficult — by accusing you of breach of contract, in which case there would be a fine old lawsuit costing you much more than £ 300, even if you won.

Grant cannot invoke your letter. Even if it contains what he alleges, that letter ceases to be valid after the month during which you were bound by it.

Jervis' interest is not identical with yours. If he has neglected his af- fairs and is prepared to sacrifice the lot of them for £ 300 a year, that goes to show that they weren't worth the trouble of discussing. Jervis is staying in London. Once launched by Grant on this enterprise, it is in his interest to be launched by him on other enterprises, to act as his UNDERSTRAPPER until such time as he has enough money and enough fi- nancial contacts to do without him. You have an entirely different interest. You are going to Paris, you hope to find an assured existence in this enterprise. Ask yourself if such is to be found under the terms proposed by Grant.

It is likewise in the interests of your SOLICITOR, evidently another underling, to pay court to Grant. And this applies to everyone save yourself. All the more reason not to conclude anything in haste.



**[p. 29]**

You would do well to sound Bradshaw. The latter has a twofold interest in coming to an arrangement with you in respect both of this country and of the Continent. If only as a means of putting pressure on Grant. It would be better still to have a choice between the two. And Bradshaw cannot allow himself to go in for the sharp practices that are the other man's stock-in-trade. Unfortunately you can no longer have full confidence in Jervis, once he claims to have tired of the matter and advises you to accept forthwith.

That is, of course, the gloomier aspect of the affair. Grant may possibly have more generous intentions, but once the contract has been signed you will be at his mercy, of that you may be certain.

With a man like Grant I see no means of safeguarding oneself. You could insert a condition that all net profits must be used to pay off the £ 3,000 and that no dividends are distributed so long as the company is paying interest of more than 6% — they would either not accept it or find a way of deleting if at the first shareholders' meeting. And that would merely safeguard the first £ 3,000; as regards subsequent bor- rowings it would do nothing of the kind; it would be nonsensical to re- pay with one hand and borrow with the other.

My advice is try to manage without Grant and, if you can't, at least try to make him fear that you can do without him, so that he robs you a little less UNMERCIFULLY than he intended. He will rob you anyhow.

The weather here continues magnificent, sunshine all the time, bracing air, north-east breeze, sea-bathing already somewhat brac- ing, but this evening I fear I shall have to wear an overcoat as at Ramsgate. The visitors are quite different from those at Ramsgate. Here we have the SHOPKEEPER, the small manufacturer, the TRADESMAN from Leeds, Sheffield, Hull, etc., an atmosphere decidedly more pro- vincial yet at the same time more solid than at Ramsgate; no 'ARRYS. What strikes you most is the fact that all the young girls are backfisha

between 14 and 17 years — what you call the ugly age, although there are some very pretty ones here. Of young girls fashioned to per- fection there are none or virtually none. No sooner have they ceased to be backfish than they're put into long skirts and, so it would seem,

[^1]: a Properly Backfische—adolescent girls





**[p. 30]**

My best wishes to Laura. The two herbalists3 send their compli- ments. The thing has been sent to Beust's fatherb in Zurich. The news- papers will be returned to you. I don't know Marx's whereabouts, for I have not had word from him.

Yours ever,

F. Engels

First published in F. Engels, P. et Printed according to the original L. Lafargue, Correspondance, t. I, Paris, 1956

Translated from the French

21

Ramsgate, 12 September 1880

My dear Sir,

I need not tell you that I should feel only too happy to do anything you consider useful,55 but a short statement of the circumstances in which I find myself at this moment will convince you that I am at pre- sent unfit for theoretical labour. Having been sent here by the medi- cal men in order to 'do nothing' and to restore my nervous system by the far niente\c an illness of my wife, under which she suffered long time since, has suddenly been aggravated to a degree which menaces to tend to a. fatal termination. Whatever little time I may snatch for work, is necessarily limited to things which I must get rid of.

However, the most important part for the public in general is that

[^1]: MARX TO NIKOLAI DANIELSON 5 3

[^2]: IN ST PETERSBURG 5 4

[^3]: a Moore and Beust - b Friedrich Beust -c Abbreviated from dolce far niente (sweet doing nothing), which originates from a similar Latin expression used by Pliny the Younger in Epistle VIII.





**[p. 31]**

which you have already performed — the drawing up of the statistical tables and the interpretation of the facts which they imply. It would be a pity if you delayed the publication which I expect myself with the greatest impatience.56

Whatever you may have found useful in my letters for that pur- pose, you may freely dispose of. Only I fear it is not much, since I sent you only a few fragmentary scraps.

The present crisis was the greatest England has passed through with regard to duration, extent and intensiveness,57 but despite the failures of some Scotch and English provincial banks — the crowning of the past English great periodical crises, I mean the financial crash in London, shone by its absence. This most extraordinary incident — the absence of the monetary panic properly so called, was due to a con- catenation of circumstances the analysis of which would lead me too far at present. One of the most decisive circumstances was, however, this: The heavy bullion drain of 1879 was to a great extent met by the cooperation of the Banque de France and the Imperial Bank of Germany. On the other hand, the sudden revival in the United States — since the spring of 1879 — reacted on England like a deus ex machina.*

As to the agricultural crisis, it will gather strength, develop itself, and, by the bye, come to a head, carrying with it quite a revolution in the relations of landed property,— quite independent of the cycles of the commercial-industrial crises. Even such optimists as Mr Caird have commenced 'to smell a rat'. Most characteristic of English blockheadedness is this: since two years there have been published letters of farmers — in The Times as well as in agricultural papers — giving the items of their expenses in cultivating their farms, compar- ing them with their returns at present prices, and winding up with a positive deficit. Would you believe that not one of the specialists — expatiating upon these accounts — has thought of considering how these accounts would stand if the item of rent was struck out in many cases or reduced 'most feelingly' in many other cases? But this is a delicate point which must not be touched. The farmers themselves, though become unbelievers in the nostrums proposed by their landlords or the 'plumitifs'b of the latter, dare not yet assume attitudes of bold vi-

[^1]: a deus ex machina — a god from the machine (by which in ancient theatre gods were shown in the air); a power or an event that comes in the nick of time to solve a difficulty - b hired scribblers





**[p. 32]**

I hope there will be no general war in Europe. Though, ultimately, it could not check, but would rather intensify, the social, I mean thereby the economical, development, it would certainly produce a useless exhaustion of forces for some longer or shorter interval.

Please to send your letters as before to my London address, from where I shall always receive them even in case of momentary absence.

Yours most sincerely

A. Williams»

First published, in Russian, in the maga- Reproduced from the original zine Minuvshiye gody, No. 1, St Petersburg, « • • • < • JQQO Published in English for the first time

22

ENGELS TO PAUL LAFARGUE 5 8

Bridlington Quay, 12th September 1880

My dear Lafargue,

How can I advise you on business if you give me all the informa- tion afterwards? If you had sent me the draft articles5 9 before, I should have known better what to say. Do not say that you had not got it; it was your business to have had it as soon as printed. Mais on dirait que vous brûlez de vous faire voler}

You say the articles forbid to borrow at more than 10%. Whoever told you that, reckoned upon your credulity. Article 74 says distinctly that the directors can raise money upon such terms and conditions in all respects as they think fit. Now I do not know and cannot be expected to know whether the acts of parliament forbid limited companies to raise money at more than 10%. I doubt it. But if it be the fact, you have before your eyes the proof that that is no use whatever. Have

[^1]: IN LONDON

[^2]: a Marx's pseudonym-b But anyone would think you were begging to be robbed.





**[p. 33]**

you not written to me that Grant wanted to raise £3,000 — at 10% and a bonus of 20% at the end of five years? 20% divided by 5 is 4, and 10 + 4 are 14; thus, you pay really 14% for your money. Why do you not speak of that when people want to make you believe that Grant cannot get more than 10% out of your company in interest?

Then you say, Jervis and Mason had pris des garanties contre Grant, en ce que rien de nouveau pouvait être décidé sans qu'on ait au moins le vote des 4/s des actionnaires, et que Grant n'avait que 55% et que par conséquent il ne pouvait rien faire sans votre consen- tement.

Décidément on se moque de vous." In the whole agreement not a word about 4/5 of the shareholders. All resolutions by simple majori- ties. It may be in the acts of parliament that 4/5 are required to alter the original deed of association. But that is not the question. I have shown you the way how Grant by his system of loans at 10% and any bonus he likes, can suck all the profits out of the company. And Article 74 gives him the right to do so, without even consulting anybody but his directors who, whatever they may be, are sure to be his puppets.

Secondly. All the capital being subscribed you have

1) 5,000 votes for original capital—£5,000.- 2) 3,000 votes for preference shares 3,000 at £ 5 each (Art. 49). 8,000 votes in all. Out of these you, Jervis and Mason have together 2,250 votes, that is to say not 45% against 55%, but 28% against 72%. Still more than '/s, but not very far off. Let a few shares be sold by one of you, and the power to stop even alterations of deed of asso- ciation is lost by you. You will be told that it is not intended to issue all the preference shares. But how long that remains so, will depend upon Grant.

There is another article which may affect you and alter the case. Art. 21 says that for calls not yet made, but paid up by the share- holder voluntarily, interest up to 10% shall be paid. I should pre- sume that this applies to your paid up shares, only, if it was so, Jervis and Mason would have pointed it out to you; at least I should think so. If that be the case and you can secure 10% on the greater part of your shares that would be so much in your favour. See whether it is so or not.

[^1]: * safeguarded themselves against Grant in that no new decision could be taken with- out the consent of at least 4/5 of the shareholders and that Grant had only 55% and hence could do nothing without your consent.— They're having you on, no doubt about that.





**[p. 34]**

I cannot write to you about Jervis as you say you read my letters to him and Mason. Else I should have something to say to that. Any- how, the honesty of a financier is different from that of some people, be it ever so honest in its own way.

I must conclude; dinner is going to be laid. Si vous ne voyez pas d'autre voie, naturellement vous vous êtes trop avancé pour reculer tout seul. Mais réfléchissez bien, et rassurez-vous sur les points indi- qués ci-dessus.

Je n'ai que l'argent absolument nécessaire pour mon voyage et même peut-être pas cela. Mon CHEQUE-BOOK est à Londres où je serai de retour samedi soir30; jusque là, je ne pourrai rien faire.

Si vous pouvez retarder l'affaire G. jusqu'à mon arrivée, on pour- rait peut-être avoir plus de renseignements.

Bien des choses à Laura de la part de nous tous.

Bien à vous

F. E.

Je rapporterai les articles d'association à moins que vous n'en avez un besoin immédiat."

[^1]: First published, in the languages of the ori- Reproduced from the original ginal (English and French), in F. Engels, P. et L. Lafargue, Correspondance, t. I, Paris, 1956

[^2]: " Unless you can see some other way out you have, of course, gone too far to withdraw all on your own. But think it over carefully and make sure about the points outlined above.

[^3]: I only have such money as is absolutely essential for my journey, and maybe not even that. My cheque-book is in London, whither I shall return on Saturday eve- ning 3 0; until then I shall be unable to do anything.





**[p. 23]**

ENGELS TO MARX

IN LONDON

Bridlington Quay, 13 September 1880 7 Burlington Place

Dear Moor,

Have received the enclosed from Liebknecht. I am writing to tell him that, provided he hears nothing to the contrary within the next few days, we shall be back in London again from next Sunday, 19 September,30 and shall be expecting them (him and Bebel).60 So if you should be prevented in any way, kindly let me know.

I haven't had an answer to a postcard sent from here to your ad- dress in Ramsgate 38 on 29 August; no doubt it didn't arrive. Yester- day I heard from Lafargue, who said you would be returning to Lon- don today.

We shall be returning at the end of this week; wet weather since the day before yesterday, before which the weather was splendid.

I hope your wife is better. Warmest regards to all, likewise from Moore and Beust.

Your

F. E.

[^1]: First published in MEGA, Abt. Ill, Bd. 4, Printed according to the original Berlin, 1931 , , . Published in English for the first time

[^2]: If you can postpone the Grant business until my arrival, it might be possible to ob- tain more information.

[^3]: Best wishes to Laura from us all.

[^4]: Yours ever,

[^5]: F.E. I shall bring the articles of association with me unless you need them at once.





**[p. 24]**

MARX TO FERDINAND FLECKLES

IN KARLSBAD

[London,] 29 September 1880

My Dear Friend,

My best thanks for your letter.6 ' Ladies have their own ideas about things. Which is why my wifea didn't want to reply on this side of the form, nor indeed, in accordance with any formula, but after her own fashion. Not having read her letter, I don't know whether her answer is appropriate; however, women will have their way.b

Eleanor sends her kind regards.

Tout à vous,c

Karl Marx

First published in Beiträge zur Geschichte der Printed according to the original deutschen Arbeiterbewegung, Nr. 1, Berlin, „ , ,. , , . „ ,. , „ . _ ,qfifi Published in English for the first time

25

ENGELS TO EUGEN OSWALD AND AN UNKNOWN CORRESPONDENT62

[London,] 5 October 1880 122 Regent's Park Road

Dear Oswald,

Many thanks for the recommendations for Beust,d which have all been attended to. As regards Kaulitz, I got an identical letter —

[^1]: IN LONDON

[^2]: a Jenny Marx- b Marx paraphrases the German proverb 'Des Menschen Wille ist sein Himmelreich' corresponding to the English 'The will of man is the arbiter of his fortune'.-0 All yours-d Adolf von Beust





**[p. 37]**

Ever yours

F. Engels

[On the reverse of the letter]

* (Copy) Confid.

Sir,

Mr Kaulitz was introduced to me on his arrival in England last spring, by a letter from an old friend in Germany. The letter stated that Mr Kaulitz was of a very good family, his father being one of the first notaries in Brunswick (a position of much importance and great trust in Germany), and recommended him warmly to me. From what I have seen of him since, he appears to be a man of very great business abilities and to have succeeded very well, so far, in the scholastic line; but on this point no doubt the professional gentleman to whom Mr K. may have referred you, will be able to give you more satisfactory information.

I am etc.

F. E.*

[^1]: First published in: Marx and Engels, The letter to Oswald is printed ac- Works, Second Russian Edition, Vol. 34, cording to a typewritten copy and Moscow, 1964 that to the unknown correspondent reproduced from a photocopy of the original

[^2]: Published in English for the first time

[^3]: a Presumably Bennet Burleigh (cf. this volume, p. 38).





**[p. 26]**

ENGELS TO JOHANN PHILIPP BECKER

IN GENEVA

London, 12 October 1880

Dear Old Man,

I've heard from Liebknecht that you're still short of cash but that they can't help you just now. By a lucky chance I was on the point of putting a five pound note on one side for you and have lost no time in changing it into a money order for 126 frs. I trust it reaches you safely and soon and will tide you over your initial difficulties until such time as the Leipzigers can do something for you. And so they damned well ought. You're certainly as much a victim of the Exceptional Law ' 6 as the agitators in Germany who have been deprived of their livelihood.

Liebknecht was here 60 and promised that the Zurich papera would adopt a different attitude in keeping with the party's former attitude. If that is done, it's all we ask.

Adieu and keep your pecker up.

Your old friend

F. Engels

ENGELS TO HARRY KAULITZ

[London,] 28 October 1880 Mr H. Kaulitz

I return herewith Mr Burleigh's letter. As to the matter of Mr Lafargue, you concede the chief point,

[^1]: First published in: F. Engels, Vergessene Printed according to the original Briefe (Briefe Friedrich Eneeh' an Johann T ^ I I - , I • n i-i r i <- „,.;.„ D i \ -D T mon rubhshed in English tor the hrst Philipp Becker), Berlin, 1920 . 6

[^2]: rr time 27

[^3]: IN LONDON

[^4]: [Draft]

[^5]: Der Sozialdemokrat





**[p. 39]**

With regard to Beust,a I do not propose to go into the question of when you offered to give the said lessons elsewhere. This much is cer- tain: that after our return from Bridlington Quay 30 you again offered to give lessons to Beust, that you promised, in the presence of myself and Schorlemmer, to set about the thing in the manner stipulated, that you did the opposite of what you had promised, and that Beust, far from attacking his 'very dear friend Kaulitz' behind his back, told him in Trafalgar Square exactly what he thought of him, adding quite rightly that all three of us had been convinced from the outset that you wouldn't do a single thing you had promised. I should have written you off there and then had it not been for the fact that I avoid making private matters a cause for breaking with people with whom I have been in any way connected politically.

Concerning the tittle-tattle in the Central News, I will not labour the point as to whether it was you or Most who disseminated it, since I am not permitted to divulge my sources, and since, on the other hand, I lay no store at all by the agent's letter.

If one is compelled to make a decision such as mine in regard to yourself, one bases it not on this or that particular indiscretion, but rather on the other's whole mode of behaviour, observed over a con- siderable period. And in any case your almost daily intercourse with Most and Co., which you freely admit, is quite enough to supply, in place of the fact you contest, another that is no less convincing.

Yours very truly

[^1]: First published in: Marx and Engels, Printed according to the original Works, First Russian Edition, Vol. XXVII, _ , ,. , , . „ .. , „ . r -ç. ,qoc Published in English tor the hrst ' time

[^2]: " Adolf von Beust





**[p. 28]**

MARX TO JOHN SWINTON

IN NEW YORK

London, 4 November 1880 41 Maitland Park Road, N.W.

My dear Sir,

I have sent you today a copy of the French edition of the Capi- tal. 6 3 I have at the same time to thank you for your friendly article in The Sun. 4 3

Apart Mr Gladstone's 'sensational' failures abroad 6 4 — political interest centres here at present on the Irish 'Land Question'. And why? Mainly because it is the harbinger of the English 'Land Ques- tion1.

Not only that the great landlords of England are also the largest landholders of Ireland, but having once broken down in what is iro- nically called the 'Sister'-island, the English landed system will no longer be tenable at home. There are arrayed against it the British farmers, wincing under high rents, and — thanks to the American competition — low prices; the British agricultural labourers, at last impatient of their traditional position of ill-used beasts of burden, and — that British party which styles itself 'Radical'. The latter con- sists of two sets of men; first the ideologues of the party, eager to over- throw the political power of the aristocracy by mining its material basis, the semi-feudal landed property. But behind these principle- spouters, and hunting them on, lurks another set of men — sharp, close-fisted, calculating capitalists, fully aware that the abolition of the old land laws, in the way proposed by the ideologues, cannot but convert land into a commercial article that must ultimately concen- trate in the hands of capital.

On the other side, considered as a national entity, John Bull has ugly misgivings lest the aristocratic English landed garrison in Ireland once gone — England's political sway over Ireland will go too!

Liebknecht has to enter prison for 6 months.— The Anti-Socialists' Law ' 6 having failed to overthrow or even to weaken the German So- cial-Democratic organisation, Bismarck clings the more desperately to his panacea, and fancies that it must work, if only applied on a larg-



**[p. 41]**

er scale. Hence he has extended the state of siege65 to Hamburg, Al- tana, and 3 other Northern towns. Under these circumstances the German friends have written me a letter of which one passage runs thus:

'The Socialist Law, though it could not break and never will break our organisa- tion, does impose pecuniary sacrifices almost impossible to bear. To support the fami- lies ruined by the police, to keep alive the few papers left to us, to keep up the necessary communications by secret messengers, to fight the battle on the whole line — all this re- quires money. We are nearly exhausted and forced to appeal to our friends and sym- pathisers in other countries.'

So far this extract. Now, we, here at London, Paris, etc., will do our best. At the same time, I believe that a man of your influence might organise a sub- scription in the United States. Even if the monetary result were not important, denunciations of Bismarck's new coup d'état in public meet- ings held by you, reported in the American press, reproduced on the other side of the Atlantic — would sorely hit the Pomeranian hobereaua

and be welcomed by all the socialists of Europe. More information you might get from Mr Sorge (Hoboken). Any money forthcoming to be sent over to Mr Otto Freytag, Landtagsabgeordneter,h Amtmannshof, Leipzig- His address ought of course not to be made public; otherwise the German police would simply confiscate.

À propos. My youngest daughter" — who was not with us at Rams- gate—just tells me that she has cut my portrait from the copy of the Capital I sent you, on the pretext that it was a mere caricature. Well, I shall make up for it by a photogram to be taken on the first fine day.

Mrs Marx and the whole family send you their best wishes.

Yours most sincerely,

Karl Marx

[^1]: First published in Science and Society, Vol. II, Reproduced from the original No. 2, New York, 1938

[^2]: Junker- b deputy to the Provincial Diet-C Eleanor Marx





**[p. 29]**

MARX TO FRIEDRICH ADOLPH SORGE 6 3

IN HOBOKEN

[London,] 5 November 1880 41 Maitland Park Road, N.W.

Dear Sorge,

You must excuse my long silence on the grounds 1. of excessive pressure of work, 2. of my wife's exceedingly grave illness which has now lasted for something over a year.

You have yourself seen what JOHN Most has blossomed out into and, on the other hand, how wretchedly the so-called party organ, the Zurich Sozialdemokrat (not to mention the Jahrbuch* of that place) —duceh Dr Höchberg, has been run. As a result Engels and I have been constantly engaged in acrimonious exchanges with the Leipzigers in the course of which many a hard word has been said.0

But we have eschewed any kind of public intervention. It does not befit those who are peacefully — comparativement parlantd — ensconced abroad to contribute to the gratification of government and bour- geosie by doing anything to aggravate the position of those who are operating in the homeland under the most difficult circumstances and at considerable personal sacrifice. Liebknecht was here a few weeks ago 6 0 and promised 'improvement' in every respect. The party organisation has been revived, something that could only be done by secret means, i. e. in so far as 'secret' denotes secret from the police.

It was, believe it or not, in a Russian socialist paperc that I first dis- covered what a blackguard Most is. He has never dared print in Ger- man what is to be read here in the Russian VERNACULAR. This isn't just an attack on individual persons but a dragging-through-the-mire of the entire German workers' movement. At the same time his utter incomprehension of the doctrine in which he used to traffic is grotesquely in evidence. It's idle chatter, so silly, so illogical, so abysmal that it finally dissolves into the inane, namely into Johannes Most's unbounded personal vani-

[^1]: * Jahrbuch für Sozialwissenschaft und Sozialpolitik - b chief-0 See present edition, Vol. 45, pp. 366-68, 379-80, 394-408, 416-21, 423-26, 429-31.-d comparatively speaking - e Vep Huü nepeàbm (Cherny Peredel)





**[p. 43]**

ty.a Having failed, for all his caterwauling, to achieve anything in Germany — save, perhaps, among certain hoodlums in Berlin — he has allied himself with the Parisian successors of the Bakuninists, the group which publishes the Révolution Sociale (its circulation = 210 EXACTLY, but possesses allies in the shape of Pyat's Commune. Pyat, that cowardly, melodramatic farceur — in whose Commune I figure as Bis- marck's right-hand man — has a grudge against me for having always treated him with the utmost contempt and frustrated all his attempts to use the International for his sensation-mongering). At all events there's one good thing Most has done, namely to bring together in one group all the brawlers — Andreas Scheu, Hasselmann, etc., etc.

In view of Bismarck's new emergency decrees 65 and the persecution of our party members, it is absolutely essential that there should be a whip-round for the party. Yesterday I wrote and said as much to John Swintonh (for a well-disposed bourgeois is best suited to this job), at the same time telling him that he should refer to you for further infor- mation about conditions in Germany.

Apart from the inanities mentioned on the previous page — and during our long years of exile how many of the same have we not seen explode like squibs and then fizzle out again! — things in general are going splendidly (I mean the course of events in Europe as a whole), as they are within the confines of the genuinely revolutionary party on the Continent.

You will probably have noticed that the Egalité, in particular, (thanks en première instancer to Guesde's having come over to us and to the efforts of my son-in-law, Lafargue) has become the first 'French' work- ers' paper in the true sense of the term. Even Malon — albeit with the inconsistencies inseparable from his eclectic nature — has felt bound, in his Revue socialiste, (we used to be enemies, he being one of the original co-founders of the Alliance 6 7 ) to espouse le socialisme moderne scientifique,A i. e. the German variety. I drew up a 'questionneur'[sic]c for him which was first published in the Revue socialiste and then reprinted in quantity for distribution throughout France. Shortly afterwards Guesde came to London to collaborate with us (MYSELF, Engels and Lafargue) in drafting an electoral programme68 for the use of the workers in the forthcoming general elections. With the exception of

[^1]: a [J. Most] [I. Mocrb,] H*Mei{Kan cotfiajib-de MOKpamin in Wepiibiü nepedbnh, No. 2, September 1880, pp. 11-13. - ^ See previous letter.-' in the first place-d B. Malon, 'Les Débuts du Parti ouvrier', La Revue socialiste, No. 11, 5 August 1880.-'' K. Marx, 'Workers' Questionnaire'





**[p. 44]**

some foolishnesses such as minimum wages fixed by law, etc., which de- spite our protests Guesde thought fit to dole out to the French work- ers (I told him that if the French proletariat was so puerile as to re- quire these sops so is IT NOT WORTH WHILE DRAWING UP ANY PROGRAMME WHAT- EVER), the economic section of this very short document consists (apart from some introductory words which define the communist aim in a few lines) solely of demands that have, in fact, arisen spontaneously out of the workers' movement itself. To bring the French workers down to earth out of their verbal cloud-cuckoo land was a tre- mendous step forward, and therefore aroused much resentment among all those French intellectual frauds who make a living as 'cloud-assemblers'. The programme was first adopted, after most vigorous opposition on the part of the anarchists, in the Région cen- trale— i. e. Paris and all its purlieus, and later in many other working- class areas. The simultaneous formation of opposing workers' groups — which (sauf les anarchistes,a not made up of genuine workers, but of déclassé people with a few misguided workers for their rank- and-file) nevertheless adopted most of the 'practical' demands in the programme — as also the ventilation of the most diverse points of view in relation to other matters, is to my mind proof that this is the first real workers' movement in France. Hitherto there have been noth- ing but sects there which, of course, received their mot d'ordreb from their founders, while the bulk of the proletariat followed the radical or pseudo-radical bourgeois and fought for them when the day came, only to be slaughtered, deported, etc., on the morrow by the very lad- dies they had placed at the helm.

The Emancipation, which first came out a few days ago at Lyons, will be the organ of the 'parti ouvrier'c— a party that has arisen on the basis of German socialism.

Meanwhile we have also had — and still have — our pioneers in the very camp of the enemy — i.e. in the radical camp. Theisz has taken on the workers' question in the Intransigeant, Rochefort's organ; after the defeat of the 'Commune' he, like all 'thinking' French so- cialists, came to London as a Proudhonist and, while there, changed completely as a result of personal intercourse with myself and of a conscientious study of Capital. My son-in-law,d for his part, gave up his teaching post at King's College,69 went back to Paris (his

[^1]: save for the anarchists - b word of command -c workers' party -d Charles Longuet





**[p. 45]**

family, I'm glad to say, is remaining here for the time being), where he became one of the most influential editors of Justice, owned by Cle- menceau, the leader of the extreme left. He has laboured to such good purpose that Clemenceau who, only last April, publicly entered the arena as the opponent of socialism and the advocate of the American- democratic-republican viewpoint, recently made an anti-Gambetta speecha at Marseilles, in which, to judge by its general tenor no less than its references to the most essential points in the minimum pro- gramme, he came over to our side. Whether he sticks to what he prom- ised doesn't really matter. At all events, he has introduced an element of ours into the radical party whose organs, comically enough, now admire as SOMETHING WONDERFUL, on Clemenceau's lips, what had been ignored or sneered at by them when merely a catchword emanating from the 'parti ouvrier'.

I need hardly tell you — for you know what French chauvinism is like — that the secret strings whereby the LEADERS — from Guesde- Malon to Clemenceau — have been set in motion, must remain entre nous. Il n'en faut pas parler. Quand on veut agir pour Messieurs les Français, il faut le faire anonymement, pour ne pas choquer le sen- timent 'national'.b * As it is, the Anarchists denounce our co- operators already as Prussian agents, under the dictatorship of the 'notorious' Prussian agent * — Karl Marx.

In Russia — where Capital is more widely read and acclaimed than anywhere else — our success is even greater. On the one hand, we have the critics (mostly young university professors, some of them personal friends of mine,c SOME also littérateurs), on the other, the ter- rorist Central Committee,7 ° whose recent programme, clandestinely print- ed and published in St Petersburg, ' ' aroused considerable ire among the anarchist Russians in Switzerland, who bring out The Black Redistribution6 (to translate literally from the Russian) in Ge- neva. Unlike the terrorists, who risk life and limb, these men — most of whom (but not all) left Russia of their own accord—constitute the so- called Propaganda Party. (In order to disseminate propaganda in Rus- sia— they remove to Geneva}. What a quid pro quoi) These gentry are all of them opposed to politico-revolutionary action. Russia is to leap

[^1]: a 'Discours de M.Clemenceau', La Justice, No. 291, 1 November 1880. - b between our- selves. You mustn't talk about it. If one wants to act on behalf of Messieurs les Français, this must be done anonymously so as not to offend 'national' sentiment.-0 N. I. Sieber, M. M. Kovalevsky-d lep Huü nepedtjib





**[p. 46]**

head-over-heels into the anarchist-communist-atheist millennium! Meanwhile they pave the way for that leap by tedious doctrinari- anism of which the self-styled principes courent la rue depuis le feu Bakou- nine. a

Well, that's enough for now. Let us [hear] from you soon. Warm- est regards from my wife.

Totus tuus,h

Karl Marx

I should be most grateful if you could unearth for me some sound stuff (meaty) on economic conditions in California, OF COURSE AT MY EX- PENSE. California is of great moment to me because in no other place has revolution by capitalist centralisation been effected with such ef- frontery at such great speed.

First published in Briefe und Auszüge aus Printed according to the original Briefen von Joh. Phil. Becker, Jos. Dietzgen, Friedrich Engels, Karl Marx u. A. an F. A. Sorge und Andere, Stuttgart, 1906

30

MARX TO FRIEDRICH ADOLPH SORGE

[London,] 5 November 1880

Dear Sorge,

I had just sent off a longish letter to youc when, after the event — postfestum but not before the post office closed — another point occurred to me in connection with that poor devil Borkheim. Last summer, when I went from Ramsgate 38 to see him in Hastings, where I found him ill in bed, he requested me to ask you to dun a certain Francis Murhard (215 Washington Street, Hoboken). This man owes our

[^1]: IN HOBOKEN

[^2]: IM HASTE

[^3]: a principles have been current since the late Bakunin's time. - b Ever yours -c See pre- vious letter.





**[p. 47]**

friend Borkheim some money — £10 if I remember aright — which he lent Murhard for the journey to America and in respect of which he possesses a promissory note.

Salut.

Your

K.M.

First published in Briefe und Auszüge aus Printed according to the original Briefen von Joh. Phil. Becker, Jos. Dietzgen, Friedrich Engels, Karl Marx u. A. an F. A. Published in English for the first Sorge und Andere, Stuttgart, 1906 t i m e

31

MARX T O FERDINAND FLECKLES

IN CARLSBAD

[London,] 12 November 1880

Dear Friend,

Herewith a card of introduction to my son-in-law Longuet who is to introduce you to Rochefort.

No doubt you will by now have received the letter my wife even- tually sent off; like all female invalids, she always despairs of the doc- tors who happen to be attending her.

With kindest regards,

Yours very sincerely,

Karl Marx

Dr. F. Fleckles, Carlsbad (Austria)

[^1]: I.N HASTE

[^2]: [Address on the envelope in Marx's hand]

[^3]: First published in full in: Marx and Engels,

[^4]: Works, Second Russian Edition, Vol. 50, Moscow, 1981

[^5]: Printed according to the original

[^6]: Published in English for the first time





**[p. 32]**

MARX T O ACHILLE LORIA 7 2

IN MANTUA

London, 13 November 1880 41 Maitland Park Road, N. W.

Dear Mr Loria,

Domestic upsets resulting from my wife's very dangerous illness have delayed my reply to your letter of 14 September.73 I regret that my lack of personal means does not allow me to provide for your stay in London, the more so since I have the highest opinion of your talent, your learning and your scientific future. 74

Being of a somewhat solitary disposition and eschewing as I do all contact with the English press, I have very little influence and few connections to place at your disposal. I know from experience that Italian competition, as regards both contributions to the press and private lessons, is OVERDONE in London, as in every other sphere of the struggle for existence.

Nevertheless, on the re-opening of Parliament — until which time everyone, i. e. THE UPPER TEN THOUSANDS, deserts the metropolis — I shall consult SOME WELL-MEANING AND INFLUENTIAL MEN. In the meantime, perhaps you would be so kind as to let me know whether you speak French and a modicum of English.

Yours very faithfully,

Karl Marx

[^1]: First published abridged in A. Loria, Ri- Printed according to the original cordi di uno studente settuagenario, Bologna,

[^2]: 1927 and in full in: Marx and Engels, Translated from the French Works, Second Russian Edition, Vol. 34, Moscow, 1964





**[p. 33]**

MARX TO HENRY MAYERS HYNDMAN 75

IN LONDON

[London,] 8 December 1880

My dear Sir,

Mrs Marx, like most sickly people whose illness has assumed a chronic character, becomes sometimes suddenly unable to leave her bedroom and then fit again for social intercourse. Believing she could within a few days pay a visit to Mrs Hyndman, she did not write to her at once, but as we are this week inundated with visitors from the Con- tinent, she begs me to write you that she will give herself the pleasure to call upon Mrs Hyndman next week.

I welcome the prospect of the journal you speak of. If you say that you do not share the views of my party for England I can only reply that that party considers an English revolution not necessary, but — according to historic precedents—possible. If the unavoidable evolu- tion turn into a revolution, it would not only be the fault of the ruling classes, but also of the working class. Every pacific concession of the former has been wrung from them by 'pressure from without1. Their action kept pace with that pressure and if the latter has more and more weakened, it is only because the English working class know not how to wield their power and use their liberties, both of which they possess legally.

In Germany the working class were fully aware from the beginning of their movement that you cannot get rid of a military despotism but by a Revolution. At the same time they understood that such a Revo- lution, even if at first successful, would finally turn against them with- out previous organisation, acquirement of knowledge, propaganda, and [word illegible]. Hence they moved within strictly legal bounds. The illegality was all on the side of government, which de- clared them en dehors la loi.a Their crimes were not deeds, but opinions unpleasant to their rulers. Fortunately, the same government — the working class having been pushed to the background with the help of the bourgeoisie — becomes now more and more unbearable to the

[^1]: a beyond the law





**[p. 50]**

Please to present my compliments to Mrs Hyndman.

Yours very truly,

Karl Marx

First published in: H. M. Hyndman, The Reproduced from the book Record of an Adventurous Life, London, 1911

34

ENGELS TO JOHANN PHILIPP BECKER

IN GENEVA

London, 24 December 1880

Dear Old Man,

This is to advise you in all haste that I have taken out a money order for you for five pounds sterling = 126 frs, which I trust you will receive.

When Liebknecht was here 6 ° I hauled him over the coals for hav- ing failed so much as to consider you when distributing the relief fund. I told him you were just as much, if not more, a victim of the Anti-Socialist Law ' 6 as many of the Berliners, amongst whom there are some notorious blackguards. Now he has written to say: Becker will be cared for. So make sure this is done and, if not and supposing it embarrasses you to dun them, drop me a line and I'll see to it for you.

Better luck in the New Year.

Your old friend,

F. Engels

[^1]: First published in: F. Engels, Vergessene Briefe (Briefe Friedrich Engels' an Johann Philipp Becker), Berlin, 1920

[^2]: Printed according to the original

[^3]: Published in English for the first time





**[p. 35]**

MARX TO CARL HIRSCH

IN LONDON

[London,] 29 December 1880

Dear Hirsch,

You would oblige me by coming here next Friday evening (7 o'clock) to dine with us and to celebrate the New Year.

Salut.

K.M.

First published in: Marx and Engels, Printed according to the original Works, Second Russian Edition, Vol. 39, Moscow 1966 Published in English for the first time

