---
Volume: 46
Document_Title: "1. Engels to Wilhelm Liebknecht. 10 January "
Page_Range: "32-34"
---

# 1. Engels to Wilhelm Liebknecht. 10 January 



**[p. 3]**

1880

l

ENGELS TO WILHELM LIEBKNECHT

IN LEIPZIG

London, 10 January 1880

Dear Liebknecht,

Your letter arrived slap in the middle of the festive hurly-burly which, in view of the multiplication of the Marx family ' and also because two of our friends3 from Manchester were staying with us, as- sumed pretty formidable proportions. In order to forward your letter I had to consult the latest POST OFFICE DIRECTORY which was not to be had except at some distance from this house. Enfiri' I laid my hands on it at the beginning of this week and sent your letter to Alexander Macdonald Esq. M.P. Well Hill (according to the DIRECTORY, Well hi.) by Hamilton, North Britain (N.B.) Macdonald is the bigger scoundrel of the two 2 but more deeply in- volved officially with the coal miners. Maybe you will get his reply before mine. As soon as Parliament opens, you can address your let- ters simply: Alexander Macdonald, House of Commons.

Since you say you have asked Macdonald for the documents men- tioned in the main body of your letter, I shall of course do nothing further on this score until I hear from you again.

The silver and/or bimetallism 3 affair is the chimera of a few cotton speculators in Liverpool. Since it is virtually only silver that circulates among the Indian and Chinese traders, and silver has fallen from '/i5.5 to ' /17.5-1 /is of the value of gold over the past 10 years, this circum- stance has, of course, further accentuated the crisis in the said article brought about by the over-export of cotton goods to the Far East. In

[^1]: a Probably Carl Schorlemmer and Samuel Moore - b Finally





**[p. 4]**

I, too, wish you and all the others success in the New Year, as I do the Russian revolution which will surely get under way in the course of it and at once impose a quite different character upon Europe. For this too we are largely indebted to our friend Bismarck. With his os- tentatious trip to Austria and the alliance he concluded there 4 he presented the Russian government at precisely the right moment (for us!) with the alternative: war or revolution. Quel génie!"

Your

F.E.

[^1]: First published, in Russian, in Marx- Printed according to the original Engels Archives, Vol. I (VI), Moscow, 1932

[^2]: Published in English for the first time

[^3]: What a genius!



