---
Volume: 46
Document_Title: "5. Engels to Johann Philipp Becker. / April "
Page_Range: "36-38"
---

# 5. Engels to Johann Philipp Becker. / April 



**[p. 5]**

ENGELS TO JOHANN PHILIPP BECKER 7

IN GENEVA

London, 1 April 1880

Dear Old Man,

This is to notify you that I have taken out a money order for you at the post office for four pounds sterling — should amount to 100 frs 80 cts — and hope it will reach you safely. I trust that your health and that of your wife has improved now that the bitter winter is happily behind us. Here things are so-so. Mrs Marx is still not quite up to the mark and Marx, too, could be better. When winter's over, he always has his worst time; his coughing fits prevent him from sleeping.

For the rest, things have reverted to what they were in 1850. The Workers' Society has split up into a multitude of parties8— Most here, Rackow there — and it is as much as we can do not to get drawn into this maelstrom.1 So many storms in a teacup, which may have an altogether salutary effect on some of the participants in that they con- tribute to their development but, so far as the march of events is con- cerned, whether 100 German working men here declare themselves for this side or for that is pretty immaterial. If they could exert any influ- ence on the English — but there's no question ofthat. In his thirst for action Most cannot keep still but nor, for that matter, can he get any- thing done; people in Germany just won't see that, because Most has been statutorily slung out of the country, the moment of revolution is at hand. The Freiheit is to become, by hook or by crook, the most rev- olutionary paper in the world, but this cannot be achieved simply by repeating the word 'revolution' in every line. Luckily it matters very little what's in the paper and what isn't. The same thing applies to the Zurich organ,11 which advocates revolution one day, only to de- clare on the next that a violent upheaval is the greatest of misfor- tunes, which is afraid on the one hand of being outdone by Most's rhetoric and fears on the other that the workers may take its own rheto- ric to heart. Well, take your pick between the empty rantings of the Freiheit and the narrow philistinism of the Sozialdemokrat.

[^1]: a See this volume, p. 9. - b Der Sozialdemokrat





**[p. 8]**

I fear that our friends in Germany are deluding themselves as to the kind of organisation that ought to be maintained under present circumstances. That elected members of parliament should wish to place themselves in the van because there would otherwise be no lead- ership— to that I have no objection. But they can neither demand nor impose the implicit obedience that could be demanded by the former party leadership, specifically elected for the purpose. Least of all under present circumstances, without a press, without mass meet- ings. The more loose-knit the organisation now seems to be, the more tightly-knit it is in reality. Instead of this, the old system is to be re- tained, the party leadership is to have the final say (although there is no congress to discipline or, if necessary, dismiss it), and anyone who attacks one of its members is branded a heretic. At the same time, the best of them are themselves aware that they have in their midst all sorts of incapable and otherwise not very savoury persons, and they must be obtuse indeed if they fail to see that it is not they who are in control of their organ, but Höchberg, thanks to his money-bags, and with him his fellow philistines Schramm and Bernstein. In my view, the old party, together with its former organisation, is finished. When, as may be expected, the European movement shortly gets going again, then it will be joined by the vast mass of the German prole- tariat, of which the 500,000 men of 1878 9 will form the trained and educated nucleus, and then, too, the old 'rigorous organisation' de- riving from the Lassallean tradition will become a brake which, though it might hold back a waggon, no one could hope to apply to an avalanche.

At the same time, these men are doing a number of things which may wholly disrupt the party. First, the party is to go on maintaining its former agitators and editors by saddling itself with a mass of pa- pers which contain nothing more than may be found in any middle- class local rag. And the workers are supposed to tag along with that indefinitely! Secondly, their bearing in the Reichstag and in the Sax- on Diet is for the most part so meek as to discredit both them and the party in the eyes of the whole world; they make 'positive' suggestions to the existing government as to how it might do better in minor questions of detail, etc. And the workers, who have been declared outside the law and delivered up, bound hand and foot, to the tender mercies of the police, are expected to regard this as adequate repre- sentation! Thirdly, there is their tolerance of the philistine petty bour- geoiserie of the Sozialdemokrat. In every letter we are told that we must

