---
Volume: 46
Document_Title: "8. Engels to Paul Lafargue. 4 May "
Page_Range: "41-44"
---

# 8. Engels to Paul Lafargue. 4 May 



**[p. 12]**

In Russia, too, everything is proceeding splendidly, despite judicial murder, banishments and an appearance of calm. You can't banish sheer lack of money. Not one banker will make a loan without a guar- antee from the Imperial Assembly. Hence the present desperate recourse to an internal loan. On paper it will be a success, in reality a total failure. And then they will have to convene some assembly or other if only to obtain cash — always supposing something else doesn't happen in the meantime.

Kindest regards to you and Liebknecht from Marx and

Yours

F. E.

First published, in Russian, in Marx- Printed according to the original Engels Archives, Vol. I (VI), Moscow, 1932 „ , , . , , . „ ,. , r , <• s ; Published in English for the first time

London, 4 May 1880

My dear Lafargue,

Grateful as I am for his good intentions, what is needed here are facts, and where would he get them from? The history of German socialism from 1843 to 1863 is not yet in print, and Malon's German friends in Zurich know hardly anything about that period, which preceded their entry into political life. So it is natural enough that Malon's introduc- tion should omit the most important facts while going into details which can hardly interest the French reader and should, besides, be riddled with mistakes of a fairly serious kind. To mention only one — Lassalle was never editor of the Neue Rheinische Leitung. He never so much as contributed to it, if one excepts a feuilleton in a single is- sue— a feuilleton which was, moreover, completely rewritten by the editorial staff. At that time Lassalle was almost wholly taken up with the adulteries and divorce proceedings of Countess Hatzfeldt and her

[^1]: ENGELS TO PAUL LAFARGUE 19

[^2]: IN LONDON

[^3]: What are we to do about the introduction Malon has submitted? 20



Bibliothèque a« la REVUE SOCIALISTE

X.

SOCIALISME UT0PI0ÜE

SOCIALISME SGKITIFIQÜE

ta FRÉDÉRIC ENGELS

7ra4«ttlo B frnf «i M ytr

PAUL LAFARGUE

P r i x t BO c e n t i m e s

<©^HW

[^1]: PARIS

[^2]: DXXYXAUX I.IBRAIRB-ÉDITSUR.

[^3]: 3», Ri» d Angaultme, 32

[^4]: 188»





