---
Volume: 46
Document_Title: "9. Marx to Paul Lafargue. About 4- 5 May "
Page_Range: "44-45"
---

# 9. Marx to Paul Lafargue. About 4- 5 May 



**[p. 15]**

husband 2 ' ; and had he offered to join the editorial department, we should have refused outright to associate ourselves with a man up to his eyes in the filth necessarily arising from the conduct of such a scan- dalous case. Neither Marx nor I have ever collaborated with Lassalle.

In about 1860 he suggested we should join him in founding a big daily newspaper in Berlin, but the conditions we laid down were such that he was bound to find them unacceptable.22

Come to that, if someone is needed to introduce me to the French public, as is very possible, it seems to me that it could only be you, who have taken the trouble to translate my articles* and who alone are in a position to get hold of the necessary information which I have asked Marx to let you have. To my mind, I owe it to you as much as to myself to take on no one else.

Yours ever,

F. Engels

First published in F. Engels, P. et Printed according to the original L. Lafargue, Correspondance, t. I, Paris, 1956 _ , r , _ , Translated from the French

9

[London, circa 4-5 May 1880]

Dear Lafargue,

Here is the fruit of my consultation (of yesterday evening) with En- gels. Polish the phrases, leaving the gist intact.

Yours ever,

Karl Marx

[^1]: MARX T O PAUL LAFARGUE 2 3

[^2]: IN LONDON

[^3]: Printed according to the original

[^4]: Translated from the French

[^5]: Published in English for the first time

[^6]: a F. Engels, 'Le Socialisme utopique et le socialisme scientifique', La Revue socialiste, Nos. 3, 4 and 5, 20 March, 20 April and 5 May 1880.

[^7]: First published as a facsimile in: Marx and Engels, Works, Second Russian Edition, Vol. 19, Moscow, 1961



