---
Volume: 46
Document_Title: "15. Marx to John Swinton. 15 August "
Page_Range: "51-52"
---

# 15. Marx to John Swinton. 15 August 



**[p. 22]**

large enterprise, such as the cotton industry of Shuya and Ivanovo in the Vladimir gouvernement. And, after all, the only way one can really help the peasants is to see that they get more land and cultivate it in associations.

Your report about the incipient decay of the oöuni Ha340 and the artel4 ' confirms news that has also come to us from another quarter. Nevertheless this process of disintegration may go on for a very long time. And since the general current in Western Europe is flowing in precisely the opposite direction and, with the next convulsion, must acquire a strength of a quite different order, it may be expected that in Russia, too, which has certainly produced a great many critical minds over the past 30 years, this current will still be strong enough to make a timely appeal to the people's innate, millennial urge to as- sociate before that urge is completely extinguished. For this reason, productive associations and other means of promoting the associate system among the people in Russia should also be looked at from an aspect other than the Western one. Admittedly they still remain no more than minor palliatives. I remain,

Yours most respectfully,

F. Engels

15

MARX TO JOHN SWINTON

Ramsgate, 15 August 1880 10 Cumberland Road

Dear Sir,

[^1]: First published in Russian and in the Ian- Printed according to the original guage of the original (German) in the book Neizdanniye pisma F. Engelsa (F. Engels' Unpublished Letters), Leningrad, 1924

[^2]: IN LONDON

[^3]: [Postcard]

[^4]: I got only today your letter.42 I am staying here with my family,

[^5]: a obshchina



