---
Volume: 46
Document_Title: "16. Engels to Johann Philipp Becker. 17 August "
Page_Range: "52-53"
---

# 16. Engels to Johann Philipp Becker. 17 August 



**[p. 23]**

and, if your time allows, shall be very glad to see you in Ramsgate.43

Yours truly

Karl Marx

[On the side reserved for the address]

John Swinton, Esq. 12 Norfolk Street, Strand, London

First published in the language of the origi- Reproduced from the original nal (English) and in Japanese in: Suzuki Koichiro, Sihonron hekireki, Tokyo, 1971

16

ENGELS TO JOHANN PHILIPP BECKER 4 4

IN GENEVA

Ramsgate, 17 August 1880

Dear Old Man,

Your postcard was not forwarded to me here 3 ° until today and I immediately took out a money order for you for two pounds ster- ling, i. e. 50 frs and a few centimes (on which I wrote my London address). It goes without saying, of course, that we wouldn't let you be thrown out of your house while we were restoring our health at the seaside here. There's no need for you to make such a to-do about a few pence; that sort of thing is a matter of course between old com- rades-in-arms who have been fighting under the same flag for forty years and who hearken to the same trumpet-calls.

We are all here — Marx, his wife and his daughters, together with husbands and children,3 and the visit is proving especially beneficial to Marx, who, I hope, will be completely refreshed. His wife has unfor- tunately been ailing for some time, but is as cheerful as could be ex- pected. I shall be returning to London next week but Marx ought to stay here as long as he possibly can.

[^1]: a Laura and Paul Lafargue; Jenny and Charles, Jean, Henri and Edgar Longuet



