---
Volume: 46
Document_Title: "17. Marx to Friedrich Adolph Sorge. 30 August "
Page_Range: "53-54"
---

# 17. Marx to Friedrich Adolph Sorge. 30 August 



**[p. 24]**

Apropos, I should perhaps add that there's been a great muddle over the letters. Marx has never had letters of yours for safe-keeping, whereas Borkheim was supposed to have had some of yours and, when Mrs Marx was still in Geneva with you, you got her to ask Marx to get Borkheim to give them to him.a But now Borkheim de- nies ever having got any from you; so what the actual facts of the case are, we over here are unable to fathom.

Well, I hope that, for the time being at least, you have extricated yourself from the worst of your predicament and will get a bit of peace. Kindest regards from us all, and in particular from,

Your

F. Engels

First published in: F. Engels, Vergessene Printed according to the original Briefe (Briefe Friedrich Engels' an Johann _ , ,. , , . _ . . . . „ „ „ , Philipp Beeker), Berlin, 1920 Published in English ,n full for the rr ' first time

MARX TO FRIEDRICH ADOLPH SORGE

[Ramsgate,] 30 August 1880

Dear Sorge,

I am writing from Ramsgate, where I now am with my wife38; be- fore that I took her up to Manchester for a consultation with my friend Dr Gumpert. She is suffering from a dangerous liver complaint.

In consequence of our wanderings I only got your letter very be- latedly. I am entirely of your opinion. If you can't get hold of any money — i.e. S 200 — in YANKEELAND, the matter will have to be dropped.45 What the position is here will be evident to you if only from the fact that the Egalité went under for want of 3,000 francs.46

I will, for form's sake, let Liebknecht know about the affair.

The article from The Sun received with many thanks.47 Though he

[^1]: 17

[^2]: IN HOBOKEN

[^3]: a See present edition, Vol. 45, p. 443.



