---
Volume: 46
Document_Title: "18. Engels to Laura Lafargue. 3 September "
Page_Range: "54-55"
---

# 18. Engels to Laura Lafargue. 3 September 



**[p. 25]**

may have the best of intentions, the man nevertheless shows that he doesn't understand the first rudiments of the matter about which he writes.

De minimis non curat lex,' and among those minima I number, inter alia, the priestly Douai.48

With warmest regards,

Your

Karl Marx

First published in Briefe und Auszüge aus Briefen von Joh. Phil. Becker, Jos. Dietzgen, Friedrich Engels, Karl Marx u. A. an F.A. Sorge und Andere, Stuttgart, 1906

Printed according to the original

Published in English for the first time

18

ENGELS TO LAURA LAFARGUE 4 9

[Bridlington Quay,] 3 September 1880

My dear Laura,

I have only a few minutes to reply to your amiable letter—we have been inspecting a geological amateur's collection this evening and to- morrow we are off to an excursion to Flamboro' Head. The weather here continues grand: regular Rhenish October weather, that is the acme of fine weather as far as I know, not a cloud on the sky, hot sun, cool bracing air at the same time. Why cannot you and Lafargue come for a week, the place is getting empty, plenty of apartments and accommodation of every sort.

I have not heard from Pumps since the letter I had at Ramsgate dated, I believe, 15th August. I wrote her at once, and since then, on arrival in London, last Fridayb this day week, a postcard, but no re- ply. Now I am almost certain that she has written to Sarah or her mother Mrs Nicholls who stays in our house during my absence.

[^1]: IN LONDON

[^2]: a The law does not concern itself with trifles. - b 27 August



