---
Volume: 46
Document_Title: "19. Engels to Paul Lafargue. 3 September "
Page_Range: "55-56"
---

# 19. Engels to Paul Lafargue. 3 September 



**[p. 26]**

It is now half past nine at night, all windows wide open and yet the fine cool air outside will not come in rapidly enough to enable me to keep my coat on. The beer — oh the beer, it would be worth your while to come here only in order to drink one glass of beer at the Pier refreshment rooms, a nice little café — such splendid beer!

Moore and Beust are off to the 'Parade' (such a thing you know is de rigueur* at every seaside place) to hear the music and hunt backfishes, of which there are excellent specimens here; you know the backfishh

lives on dry land. At all events before leaving they wished to be kindly remembered to both of you.c

Yours affectionately

F. Engels

First published in the language of the origi- Reproduced from the original nal (English) in: F. Engels, P. et L. La- fargue, Correspondance, t. I, Paris, 1956

19

Bridlington Quay, Yorkshire, 3 September 1880 7 Burlington Place

My dear Lafargue,

Why Geneva? 5 ' The seat of the Swiss Federal Government is Berne and, besides, any other Swiss town would do as well as Geneva. Unless you have specific objections, of which I may be unaware, the

[^1]: ENGELS T O PAUL LAFARGUE 5 0

[^2]: IN LONDON

[^3]: a the form -b See this volume, p. 29. Engels puns on the German Backfisch (Anglicised here) which means both 'adolescent girl' and 'fried fish'. - c Laura and Paul Lafargue



