---
Volume: 46
Document_Title: "25. Engels to Eugen Oswald and an Unknown Correspondent. 5 October "
Page_Range: "65-67"
---

# 25. Engels to Eugen Oswald and an Unknown Correspondent. 5 October 



**[p. 24]**

MARX TO FERDINAND FLECKLES

IN KARLSBAD

[London,] 29 September 1880

My Dear Friend,

My best thanks for your letter.6 ' Ladies have their own ideas about things. Which is why my wifea didn't want to reply on this side of the form, nor indeed, in accordance with any formula, but after her own fashion. Not having read her letter, I don't know whether her answer is appropriate; however, women will have their way.b

Eleanor sends her kind regards.

Tout à vous,c

Karl Marx

First published in Beiträge zur Geschichte der Printed according to the original deutschen Arbeiterbewegung, Nr. 1, Berlin, „ , ,. , , . „ ,. , „ . _ ,qfifi Published in English for the first time

25

ENGELS TO EUGEN OSWALD AND AN UNKNOWN CORRESPONDENT62

[London,] 5 October 1880 122 Regent's Park Road

Dear Oswald,

Many thanks for the recommendations for Beust,d which have all been attended to. As regards Kaulitz, I got an identical letter —

[^1]: IN LONDON

[^2]: a Jenny Marx- b Marx paraphrases the German proverb 'Des Menschen Wille ist sein Himmelreich' corresponding to the English 'The will of man is the arbiter of his fortune'.-0 All yours-d Adolf von Beust





**[p. 37]**

Ever yours

F. Engels

[On the reverse of the letter]

* (Copy) Confid.

Sir,

Mr Kaulitz was introduced to me on his arrival in England last spring, by a letter from an old friend in Germany. The letter stated that Mr Kaulitz was of a very good family, his father being one of the first notaries in Brunswick (a position of much importance and great trust in Germany), and recommended him warmly to me. From what I have seen of him since, he appears to be a man of very great business abilities and to have succeeded very well, so far, in the scholastic line; but on this point no doubt the professional gentleman to whom Mr K. may have referred you, will be able to give you more satisfactory information.

I am etc.

F. E.*

[^1]: First published in: Marx and Engels, The letter to Oswald is printed ac- Works, Second Russian Edition, Vol. 34, cording to a typewritten copy and Moscow, 1964 that to the unknown correspondent reproduced from a photocopy of the original

[^2]: Published in English for the first time

[^3]: a Presumably Bennet Burleigh (cf. this volume, p. 38).



