---
Volume: 46
Document_Title: "27. Engels to Harry Kaulitz. 28 October "
Page_Range: "67-69"
---

# 27. Engels to Harry Kaulitz. 28 October 



**[p. 26]**

ENGELS TO JOHANN PHILIPP BECKER

IN GENEVA

London, 12 October 1880

Dear Old Man,

I've heard from Liebknecht that you're still short of cash but that they can't help you just now. By a lucky chance I was on the point of putting a five pound note on one side for you and have lost no time in changing it into a money order for 126 frs. I trust it reaches you safely and soon and will tide you over your initial difficulties until such time as the Leipzigers can do something for you. And so they damned well ought. You're certainly as much a victim of the Exceptional Law ' 6 as the agitators in Germany who have been deprived of their livelihood.

Liebknecht was here 60 and promised that the Zurich papera would adopt a different attitude in keeping with the party's former attitude. If that is done, it's all we ask.

Adieu and keep your pecker up.

Your old friend

F. Engels

ENGELS TO HARRY KAULITZ

[London,] 28 October 1880 Mr H. Kaulitz

I return herewith Mr Burleigh's letter. As to the matter of Mr Lafargue, you concede the chief point,

[^1]: First published in: F. Engels, Vergessene Printed according to the original Briefe (Briefe Friedrich Eneeh' an Johann T ^ I I - , I • n i-i r i <- „,.;.„ D i \ -D T mon rubhshed in English tor the hrst Philipp Becker), Berlin, 1920 . 6

[^2]: rr time 27

[^3]: IN LONDON

[^4]: [Draft]

[^5]: Der Sozialdemokrat





**[p. 39]**

With regard to Beust,a I do not propose to go into the question of when you offered to give the said lessons elsewhere. This much is cer- tain: that after our return from Bridlington Quay 30 you again offered to give lessons to Beust, that you promised, in the presence of myself and Schorlemmer, to set about the thing in the manner stipulated, that you did the opposite of what you had promised, and that Beust, far from attacking his 'very dear friend Kaulitz' behind his back, told him in Trafalgar Square exactly what he thought of him, adding quite rightly that all three of us had been convinced from the outset that you wouldn't do a single thing you had promised. I should have written you off there and then had it not been for the fact that I avoid making private matters a cause for breaking with people with whom I have been in any way connected politically.

Concerning the tittle-tattle in the Central News, I will not labour the point as to whether it was you or Most who disseminated it, since I am not permitted to divulge my sources, and since, on the other hand, I lay no store at all by the agent's letter.

If one is compelled to make a decision such as mine in regard to yourself, one bases it not on this or that particular indiscretion, but rather on the other's whole mode of behaviour, observed over a con- siderable period. And in any case your almost daily intercourse with Most and Co., which you freely admit, is quite enough to supply, in place of the fact you contest, another that is no less convincing.

Yours very truly

[^1]: First published in: Marx and Engels, Printed according to the original Works, First Russian Edition, Vol. XXVII, _ , ,. , , . „ .. , „ . r -ç. ,qoc Published in English tor the hrst ' time

[^2]: " Adolf von Beust



