---
Volume: 46
Document_Title: "29. Marx to Friedrich Adolph Sorge. 5 November "
Page_Range: "71-75"
---

# 29. Marx to Friedrich Adolph Sorge. 5 November 



**[p. 29]**

MARX TO FRIEDRICH ADOLPH SORGE 6 3

IN HOBOKEN

[London,] 5 November 1880 41 Maitland Park Road, N.W.

Dear Sorge,

You must excuse my long silence on the grounds 1. of excessive pressure of work, 2. of my wife's exceedingly grave illness which has now lasted for something over a year.

You have yourself seen what JOHN Most has blossomed out into and, on the other hand, how wretchedly the so-called party organ, the Zurich Sozialdemokrat (not to mention the Jahrbuch* of that place) —duceh Dr Höchberg, has been run. As a result Engels and I have been constantly engaged in acrimonious exchanges with the Leipzigers in the course of which many a hard word has been said.0

But we have eschewed any kind of public intervention. It does not befit those who are peacefully — comparativement parlantd — ensconced abroad to contribute to the gratification of government and bour- geosie by doing anything to aggravate the position of those who are operating in the homeland under the most difficult circumstances and at considerable personal sacrifice. Liebknecht was here a few weeks ago 6 0 and promised 'improvement' in every respect. The party organisation has been revived, something that could only be done by secret means, i. e. in so far as 'secret' denotes secret from the police.

It was, believe it or not, in a Russian socialist paperc that I first dis- covered what a blackguard Most is. He has never dared print in Ger- man what is to be read here in the Russian VERNACULAR. This isn't just an attack on individual persons but a dragging-through-the-mire of the entire German workers' movement. At the same time his utter incomprehension of the doctrine in which he used to traffic is grotesquely in evidence. It's idle chatter, so silly, so illogical, so abysmal that it finally dissolves into the inane, namely into Johannes Most's unbounded personal vani-

[^1]: * Jahrbuch für Sozialwissenschaft und Sozialpolitik - b chief-0 See present edition, Vol. 45, pp. 366-68, 379-80, 394-408, 416-21, 423-26, 429-31.-d comparatively speaking - e Vep Huü nepeàbm (Cherny Peredel)





**[p. 43]**

ty.a Having failed, for all his caterwauling, to achieve anything in Germany — save, perhaps, among certain hoodlums in Berlin — he has allied himself with the Parisian successors of the Bakuninists, the group which publishes the Révolution Sociale (its circulation = 210 EXACTLY, but possesses allies in the shape of Pyat's Commune. Pyat, that cowardly, melodramatic farceur — in whose Commune I figure as Bis- marck's right-hand man — has a grudge against me for having always treated him with the utmost contempt and frustrated all his attempts to use the International for his sensation-mongering). At all events there's one good thing Most has done, namely to bring together in one group all the brawlers — Andreas Scheu, Hasselmann, etc., etc.

In view of Bismarck's new emergency decrees 65 and the persecution of our party members, it is absolutely essential that there should be a whip-round for the party. Yesterday I wrote and said as much to John Swintonh (for a well-disposed bourgeois is best suited to this job), at the same time telling him that he should refer to you for further infor- mation about conditions in Germany.

Apart from the inanities mentioned on the previous page — and during our long years of exile how many of the same have we not seen explode like squibs and then fizzle out again! — things in general are going splendidly (I mean the course of events in Europe as a whole), as they are within the confines of the genuinely revolutionary party on the Continent.

You will probably have noticed that the Egalité, in particular, (thanks en première instancer to Guesde's having come over to us and to the efforts of my son-in-law, Lafargue) has become the first 'French' work- ers' paper in the true sense of the term. Even Malon — albeit with the inconsistencies inseparable from his eclectic nature — has felt bound, in his Revue socialiste, (we used to be enemies, he being one of the original co-founders of the Alliance 6 7 ) to espouse le socialisme moderne scientifique,A i. e. the German variety. I drew up a 'questionneur'[sic]c for him which was first published in the Revue socialiste and then reprinted in quantity for distribution throughout France. Shortly afterwards Guesde came to London to collaborate with us (MYSELF, Engels and Lafargue) in drafting an electoral programme68 for the use of the workers in the forthcoming general elections. With the exception of

[^1]: a [J. Most] [I. Mocrb,] H*Mei{Kan cotfiajib-de MOKpamin in Wepiibiü nepedbnh, No. 2, September 1880, pp. 11-13. - ^ See previous letter.-' in the first place-d B. Malon, 'Les Débuts du Parti ouvrier', La Revue socialiste, No. 11, 5 August 1880.-'' K. Marx, 'Workers' Questionnaire'





**[p. 44]**

some foolishnesses such as minimum wages fixed by law, etc., which de- spite our protests Guesde thought fit to dole out to the French work- ers (I told him that if the French proletariat was so puerile as to re- quire these sops so is IT NOT WORTH WHILE DRAWING UP ANY PROGRAMME WHAT- EVER), the economic section of this very short document consists (apart from some introductory words which define the communist aim in a few lines) solely of demands that have, in fact, arisen spontaneously out of the workers' movement itself. To bring the French workers down to earth out of their verbal cloud-cuckoo land was a tre- mendous step forward, and therefore aroused much resentment among all those French intellectual frauds who make a living as 'cloud-assemblers'. The programme was first adopted, after most vigorous opposition on the part of the anarchists, in the Région cen- trale— i. e. Paris and all its purlieus, and later in many other working- class areas. The simultaneous formation of opposing workers' groups — which (sauf les anarchistes,a not made up of genuine workers, but of déclassé people with a few misguided workers for their rank- and-file) nevertheless adopted most of the 'practical' demands in the programme — as also the ventilation of the most diverse points of view in relation to other matters, is to my mind proof that this is the first real workers' movement in France. Hitherto there have been noth- ing but sects there which, of course, received their mot d'ordreb from their founders, while the bulk of the proletariat followed the radical or pseudo-radical bourgeois and fought for them when the day came, only to be slaughtered, deported, etc., on the morrow by the very lad- dies they had placed at the helm.

The Emancipation, which first came out a few days ago at Lyons, will be the organ of the 'parti ouvrier'c— a party that has arisen on the basis of German socialism.

Meanwhile we have also had — and still have — our pioneers in the very camp of the enemy — i.e. in the radical camp. Theisz has taken on the workers' question in the Intransigeant, Rochefort's organ; after the defeat of the 'Commune' he, like all 'thinking' French so- cialists, came to London as a Proudhonist and, while there, changed completely as a result of personal intercourse with myself and of a conscientious study of Capital. My son-in-law,d for his part, gave up his teaching post at King's College,69 went back to Paris (his

[^1]: save for the anarchists - b word of command -c workers' party -d Charles Longuet





**[p. 45]**

family, I'm glad to say, is remaining here for the time being), where he became one of the most influential editors of Justice, owned by Cle- menceau, the leader of the extreme left. He has laboured to such good purpose that Clemenceau who, only last April, publicly entered the arena as the opponent of socialism and the advocate of the American- democratic-republican viewpoint, recently made an anti-Gambetta speecha at Marseilles, in which, to judge by its general tenor no less than its references to the most essential points in the minimum pro- gramme, he came over to our side. Whether he sticks to what he prom- ised doesn't really matter. At all events, he has introduced an element of ours into the radical party whose organs, comically enough, now admire as SOMETHING WONDERFUL, on Clemenceau's lips, what had been ignored or sneered at by them when merely a catchword emanating from the 'parti ouvrier'.

I need hardly tell you — for you know what French chauvinism is like — that the secret strings whereby the LEADERS — from Guesde- Malon to Clemenceau — have been set in motion, must remain entre nous. Il n'en faut pas parler. Quand on veut agir pour Messieurs les Français, il faut le faire anonymement, pour ne pas choquer le sen- timent 'national'.b * As it is, the Anarchists denounce our co- operators already as Prussian agents, under the dictatorship of the 'notorious' Prussian agent * — Karl Marx.

In Russia — where Capital is more widely read and acclaimed than anywhere else — our success is even greater. On the one hand, we have the critics (mostly young university professors, some of them personal friends of mine,c SOME also littérateurs), on the other, the ter- rorist Central Committee,7 ° whose recent programme, clandestinely print- ed and published in St Petersburg, ' ' aroused considerable ire among the anarchist Russians in Switzerland, who bring out The Black Redistribution6 (to translate literally from the Russian) in Ge- neva. Unlike the terrorists, who risk life and limb, these men — most of whom (but not all) left Russia of their own accord—constitute the so- called Propaganda Party. (In order to disseminate propaganda in Rus- sia— they remove to Geneva}. What a quid pro quoi) These gentry are all of them opposed to politico-revolutionary action. Russia is to leap

[^1]: a 'Discours de M.Clemenceau', La Justice, No. 291, 1 November 1880. - b between our- selves. You mustn't talk about it. If one wants to act on behalf of Messieurs les Français, this must be done anonymously so as not to offend 'national' sentiment.-0 N. I. Sieber, M. M. Kovalevsky-d lep Huü nepedtjib



