---
Volume: 46
Document_Title: "30. Marx to Friedrich Adolph Sorge. 5 November "
Page_Range: "75-76"
---

# 30. Marx to Friedrich Adolph Sorge. 5 November 



**[p. 46]**

head-over-heels into the anarchist-communist-atheist millennium! Meanwhile they pave the way for that leap by tedious doctrinari- anism of which the self-styled principes courent la rue depuis le feu Bakou- nine. a

Well, that's enough for now. Let us [hear] from you soon. Warm- est regards from my wife.

Totus tuus,h

Karl Marx

I should be most grateful if you could unearth for me some sound stuff (meaty) on economic conditions in California, OF COURSE AT MY EX- PENSE. California is of great moment to me because in no other place has revolution by capitalist centralisation been effected with such ef- frontery at such great speed.

First published in Briefe und Auszüge aus Printed according to the original Briefen von Joh. Phil. Becker, Jos. Dietzgen, Friedrich Engels, Karl Marx u. A. an F. A. Sorge und Andere, Stuttgart, 1906

30

MARX TO FRIEDRICH ADOLPH SORGE

[London,] 5 November 1880

Dear Sorge,

I had just sent off a longish letter to youc when, after the event — postfestum but not before the post office closed — another point occurred to me in connection with that poor devil Borkheim. Last summer, when I went from Ramsgate 38 to see him in Hastings, where I found him ill in bed, he requested me to ask you to dun a certain Francis Murhard (215 Washington Street, Hoboken). This man owes our

[^1]: IN HOBOKEN

[^2]: IM HASTE

[^3]: a principles have been current since the late Bakunin's time. - b Ever yours -c See pre- vious letter.



