---
Volume: 46
Document_Title: "32. Marx to Achill e Loria. 13 November "
Page_Range: "77-78"
---

# 32. Marx to Achill e Loria. 13 November 



**[p. 32]**

MARX T O ACHILLE LORIA 7 2

IN MANTUA

London, 13 November 1880 41 Maitland Park Road, N. W.

Dear Mr Loria,

Domestic upsets resulting from my wife's very dangerous illness have delayed my reply to your letter of 14 September.73 I regret that my lack of personal means does not allow me to provide for your stay in London, the more so since I have the highest opinion of your talent, your learning and your scientific future. 74

Being of a somewhat solitary disposition and eschewing as I do all contact with the English press, I have very little influence and few connections to place at your disposal. I know from experience that Italian competition, as regards both contributions to the press and private lessons, is OVERDONE in London, as in every other sphere of the struggle for existence.

Nevertheless, on the re-opening of Parliament — until which time everyone, i. e. THE UPPER TEN THOUSANDS, deserts the metropolis — I shall consult SOME WELL-MEANING AND INFLUENTIAL MEN. In the meantime, perhaps you would be so kind as to let me know whether you speak French and a modicum of English.

Yours very faithfully,

Karl Marx

[^1]: First published abridged in A. Loria, Ri- Printed according to the original cordi di uno studente settuagenario, Bologna,

[^2]: 1927 and in full in: Marx and Engels, Translated from the French Works, Second Russian Edition, Vol. 34, Moscow, 1964



