---
Volume: 46
Document_Title: "37. Marx to an Unknown Correspondent. 31 January "
Page_Range: "84-85"
---

# 37. Marx to an Unknown Correspondent. 31 January 



**[p. 55]**

Can you give me some information on a person named E. Fortin who has written me several letters addressing me as: 'Mon cher maître.' His demand is very 'modest'. While he studies the Capital he pro- poses to make monthly résumés which he is kind enough to be wil- ling to send over to me monthly, whereupon I shall correct them monthly, elucidating the points he might have misunderstood. In this quiet way, when he had done with the last monthly résumé, and I sent it back corrected — he would have a manuscript ready for publication and — as he says — inundate France with torrents de lumière. "

Now I shall — even for mere want of time — not answer to his call, but at all events I must reply to his letter. He may be a well- intentioned man. Before writing him I should like to have some infor- mation. He resides at present at Beauvais, 22, rue de la Porte de Paris.

First published, in Russian, in the maga- Reproduced from the original zine Voinstvuyushchiy materialist, Book IV, Moscow 1925 Published in English for the first time

37

[London,] 31 January 1881 41 Maitland Park Road, N. W.

Dear Sir,

Please to forward me the papers etc. enumerated in the enclosed list. At the same time you would greatly oblige me by the information whether there exists a short compendium of the Factory and Work- shops' Acts?

I possess myself the several Acts, but a member of the French Chamber of Deputies has asked me to procure him such a compen- dium where he might find the whole matter together. Has not been

[^1]: MARX TO AN UNKNOWN CORRESPONDENT 7 8

[^2]: IN LONDON

[^3]: a of light



