---
Volume: 46
Document_Title: "38. Engels to Karl Kautsky. 1 February "
Page_Range: "85-87"
---

# 38. Engels to Karl Kautsky. 1 February 



**[p. 56]**

something of the sort been published by Mr Redpath, Factory In- spector? a

Yours truly,

Karl Marx

First published in: Marx and Engels, Reproduced from the original Works, Second Russian Edition, Vol. 35, Moscow, 1964 Published in English for the first time

38

ENGELS TO KARL KAUTSKY 7 9

IN VIENNA

London, 1 February 1881

122 Regent's Park Road, N. W.

Dear Mr Kautsky,

Now, in view of the fact that you intend to come here shortly, it would be a somewhat unnecessary labour to let you have a detailed critique in writing of the book you have been good enough to send me; since I shall, in all probability, have the pleasure of discussing it with you in person, I shall confine myself to just a few points.

1. What you say on p. 66 etc. is invalidated by the fact that other, real differences exist between surplus value and profit on capital be- sides the percentage estimate based on the variable or total capital. The main passages from Capital relating to this are summarised in Anti-Dühring, p. 182.81

2. Even if the armchair socialists82 persist in demanding that we proletarian socialists should help them solve the problem of how to avoid what looks like imminent over-population and the threat of col- lapse this poses to the new social order, that is very far from being a reason why I should do them such a favour. To resolve all the

[^1]: Having been long prevented, I am at last able to reply to your let- ter.80

[^2]: a Presumably A. Redgrave, The Factory and Workshop Act, 1878, London, 1879.





**[p. 57]**

doubts and scruples of these chaps which they owe to the excess of their own muddle-headed wisdom, or even to refute, for example, all the monstrous twaddle which Schäffle alone has assembled in his many fat tomes,83 is, in my opinion, a sheer waste of time. It would fill a fair-sized book were one merely to attempt to put right all the misquotations from Capital inserted by these gentlemen between invert- ed commas.They should first learn to read and copy before demand- ing to have their questions answered.

Moreover, I do not regard the question as in any way a burning one at a moment when American mass production, as yet only in its infancy, and really large-scale agriculture are threatening to all but suffocate us by the sheer volume of the means of subsistence pro- duced; on the eve of an upheaval of which one of the first conse- quences must be to populate the globe — what you say on the subject on pp. 169-70, skates too lightly over this point — and which, more- over, will of necessity call for considerable demographic growth in Europe.

Euler's calculation 84 has about as much merit as the one concern- ing the kreutzer which, invested at compound interest in the year dot, doubles every 13 years and therefore now amounts to some

1 x 2 144 ——— gulden, a silver nugget larger than the earth. When you 60 say on p. 169 that social conditions in America are not very different from those in Europe, this holds good only so long as you consider nothing but the large coastal cities, or even the outward legal forms those conditions assume. There can be no doubt that the vast mass of the American people live in conditions that are exceedingly favour- able to demographic growth. The stream of immigrants is proof of this. And yet it has taken more than 30 years to double itself. Alarm- ism doesn't come into it.

The abstract possibility that mankind will increase numerically to such an extent that its propagation will have to be kept within bounds does, of course, exist. But should communist society ever find itself compelled to regulate the production of humans in the same way as it has already regulated the production of things, then it, and it alone, will be able to effect this without difficulty. In such a society it would not, or so it seems to me, be particularly difficult to obtain deliberately a result which has already come about naturally and haphazardly in France and Lower Austria. At all events, it's for those chaps to decide whether, when and how it's to be done and what

