---
Volume: 46
Document_Title: "39. Engels to Eduard Bernstein. 2 February "
Page_Range: "87-89"
---

# 39. Engels to Eduard Bernstein. 2 February 



**[p. 58]**

Incidentally, as early as 1844 I wrote {Deutsch-Französische Jahr- bücher, p. 109): 'For even if Malthus were completely right, this' (so- cialist) 'transformation would have to be undertaken straight away; for only this transformation, only the education of the masses which it provides, makes possible that moral restraint of the propagative in- stinct which Malthus himself presents as the most effective and easiest remedy for over-population.'a

That must suffice until I am able to discuss the other points with you in person. You are quite right to come over here. You are one of the few among the younger generation who really tries to learn some- thing, and hence it will do you a lot of good to get out of the atmo- sphere of non-criticism in which all the historical and economic lite- rature currently being produced in Germany is going to wrack and ruin.

With sincere regards,

Yours,

F. Engels

39

ENGELS TO EDUARD BERNSTEIN

London, 2 February 1881

Dear Mr Bernstein,

Enclosed a letter to Kautsky,b which kindly forward; I don't know whether the Vienna address I was given is still the right one.

[^1]: First published, in Russian, in Marx- Printed according to the original Engels Archives, Vol. I (VI), Moscow, 1932

[^2]: Published in English in full for the first time

[^3]: IN ZURICH

[^4]: a F. Engels, Outlines of a Critique of Political Economy (present edition, Vol. 3, p. 439).- b See previous letter.





**[p. 59]**

As it seems that you are short of material for your feuilleton, you might, sometime, reprint the poem from No. 44 of 1848: 'This morn- ing I went to Düsseldorf; possibly with the title 'A Socialist-Eater of 1848' (feuilleton to the Neue Rheinische Z^eitung of 14 July 1848) and, under it, the author: Georg Weerth (died Havana, 1856).86 So just keep it up!

Yours,

F. E.

[^1]: 'Thou shalt not steal' and the apology for the execution of Louis X V I 8 7 are very good.

[^2]: First published, in Russian, in Marx- Engels Archives, Book I, Moscow, 1924

[^3]: Printed according to the original

[^4]: Published in English for the first time



