---
Volume: 46
Document_Title: "41. Marx to Nikolai Danielson. 19 February "
Page_Range: "89-94"
---

# 41. Marx to Nikolai Danielson. 19 February 



**[p. 40]**

MARX TO CARL PEARSON 88

IN LONDON

[London,] 15 February 1881 41 Maitland Park, N.W.

My dear Sir,

I should have answered before but for great pressure of work dur- ing the last days.

Will you give me the pleasure to call on me on Thursday next," 8 o'clock p. m.?

Yours truly,

Karl Marx

First published in Neues Deutschland, Reproduced from the original 15./16. Dezember 1984 as a facsimile and in German translation

41

London, 19 February 1881

My dear Sir,

In all haste these few lines in answer to your friendly letter. Since my return from Ramsgate38 my health was generally im- proving, but the detestable weather, lasting for months, we are pass- ing through, has blessed me with a perpetual cold and coughing, in- terfering with sleep, etc. But the worst is that Mrs Marx's state be- comes daily more dangerous notwithstanding my resort to the most celebrated medical men of London, and I have besides a host of

[^1]: MARX TO NIKOLAI DANIELSON 7

[^2]: IN ST PETERSBURG

[^3]: a 17 February





**[p. 61]**

Now first as to the enclosed manuscript.90 Its author, Mr Lafargue, is the husband of my second daughter,d and one of my direct dis- ciples. He has requested me to try whether through your interference he could become a contributor to a Petersburg Review, the Omeuecm- ee HHbi H 3anuc Ku or the Cjioeo. (I think they are the only ones where he might have a chance.) If so, you would be empowered to change or suppress anything not suitable to the St Petersburg Meridian. As to his 'name', the initials would do. At all events it will interest you to read the manuscript.

I have read with the greatest interest your article 5 6 which is in the best sense of the word 'original'. Hence the Boycotting. If you break through the webs of routine thought, you are always sure to be 'boy- cotted' in the first instance; it is the only arm of defence which in their first perplexity the routiniers know how to wield. I have been 'boycot- ted' in Germany for many many years, and am still so in England, with that little variation that from time to time something so absurd and asinine is launched against me that I would blush to take any public notice of it. But try on: The next thing to do — in my opin- ion— is to take up the wonderfully increasing indebtedness of the landlords, the upper class representatives of agriculture, and show them how they are 'crystallised' in the retort under the control of the 'new pillars of society'.

[^1]: a Jean, Henri and Edgar- b Charles Longuet-0 'Discours de M. Clemenceau', La Justice, No. 291, 1 November 1880. -d Laura





**[p. 62]**

So we have 1870 an excellent harvest in your country, but that year is a climax year, and as such immediately followed by a very bad one; the year 1871, the very bad harvest, must be considered as the starting point for a new little cycle, till we come to the new climax year 1874, which is immediately followed by the famine year 1875; then the up- wards movement begins again, ending in the still worse famine year 1880. The summing up of the years during the whole period proves that the average annual production remained the same and that the mere natural factors have alone produced the changes comparing the single years and the smaller cycles of years.

I wrote you some time ago,b that if the great industrial and com- mercial crisis England has passed through went over without the cul- minating financial crash at London, this exceptional phenomenon was only due to — French money. This is now seen and acknowl- edged even by English routiniers. Thus The Statist (January 29, 1881) says:

[^1]: 'The money market has only be[en] so easy as it has been during the past year through an accident. The Bank of France in the early autumn permitted its stock of gold

[^2]: a [N. F. Danielson,] Ouep KU Haweeo nopecßop MCHHaio oömecmemuazo xomücmea. Signed: Hutcojiaü —0Hb.-h See this volume, p. 30.





**[p. 63]**

bullion to fall from £ 3 0 Millions to £ 2 2 Millions Last autumn undoubtedly there was a very narrow escape.' (!)

The English railway system rolls on the same inclined plane as the European Public Debt system. The ruling magnates amongst the differ- ent railway-nets directors contract not only — progressively — new loans in order to enlarge their networks, i. e. the 'territory', where they rule as absolute monarchs, but they enlarge their respective networks in order to have new pretexts for engaging in new loans which enable them to pay the interest due to the holders of obligations, preferential shares, etc., and also from time to time to throw a sop to the much ill- used common shareholders in the shape of somewhat increased divi- dends. This pleasant method must one day or another terminate in an ugly catastrophe.

In the United States the railway kings have become the butt of at- tacks, not only, as before this, on the part of the farmers and other in- dustrial 'entrepreneurs' of the West, but also on the part of the grand representative of commerce — the New York Chamber of Commerce. The octopodus railway king and financial swindler Gould has, on his side, told the New York commercial magnates:

M. Gould 'a le flair bon '.* In India serious complications, if not a general outbreak, is in store for the British government. What the English take from them an- nually in the form of rent, dividends for railways useless to the Hin- doos, pensions for military and civil servicemen, for Afghanistan and other wars, etc. etc.— what they take from them without any equivalent and quite apart from what they appropriate to themselves annually within India, speaking only of the value of the commodities the Indians have gratuitously and annually to send over to England, it amounts to more than the total sum of income of the 60 millions of agricultural and industrial labourers of India). This is a bleeding process, with a ven- geance! The famine years are pressing each other and in dimensions till

[^1]: You now attack the railways, because you think them most vulnerable considering their present unpopularity; but take heed: after the railways every sort of corporation (means in the Yankee dialect joint stock company) will have its turn; then, later on, all forms of associated capital; finally, all forms of capital; you are thus paving the way to — Communism whose tendencies are already more and more spreading among the people.

[^2]: a has a good nose





**[p. 64]**

Can you tell me whether Prof. Lankester's 'Chapter on Deteriora- tion' 92 (I have seen it quoted in your article) is translated into Rus- sian? He is a friend of mine.

Last month we had here Russian visitors, amongst others Prof. Sie- ber (now settled at Zurich) and Mr Kablukof T(Moscow). They were all day long studying at the British Museum.

No news of our 'mutual' friendb? Apropos. Janson's last statistical workc — comparing Russia with Europe — has made much sensation. I should be glad to see it. 9 3

With best compliments

Yours very truly,

Karl Marx

Should Lafargue's article find no 'home' in Petersburg, be so kind as to return it to me. 9 4

[^1]: First published, in Russian, in Minuvshiye Reproduced from the original gody, No. 1, St Petersburg, 1908 ,. , . Published in English in full for the first time

[^2]: * All the better! - b Hermann Lopa tin -' (Janson] K3. 9. .HHCOHT,, Cpaenumenman cma- muemwea Pocciu u sanaduo-eeponeüc Kuxb zocydapcmeb, T. 1-2, C.-rie Tep6ypn>, 1878-1880.



