---
Volume: 46
Document_Title: "42. Marx to Ferdinand Domela Nieuwenhuis. 22 February "
Page_Range: "94-96"
---

# 42. Marx to Ferdinand Domela Nieuwenhuis. 22 February 



**[p. 42]**

MARX TO FERDINAND DOMELA NIEUWENHUIS 9 5

IN THE HAGUE

London, 22 February 1881 41 Maitland Park Road, N.W.

Dear Comrade,

My prolonged silence is due to the fact that I wished to enclose in my reply to your letter of 6 January a conspectus of the amendments that you might care to make in the event of a 2nd edition of Kapitaal en Arbeid.96 As a result of domestic disturbances, unforeseen labours and other disruptions, I have not yet got this done and shall therefore be sending off this letter without the enclosure for the present, lest my continued silence be misconstrued by you. The amendments I con- sider necessary relate to details; the main thing, the spirit of the thing, is there already.

I have to thank you for the kind dedication,9 7 since you, person- ally, have thereby thrown down the gauntlet before our bourgeois antagonists.

The authora of Mannen van beteekenis, 9 8 an inspector of schools OR SOMETHING OF THAT SORT, wrote to me requesting material for a biograph- ical memoir and, in addition, got his publisher to approach my brother-in-law, Juta, with a view to his persuading me to accede to a request of the kind I habitually turn down. The gentleman — the author of Mannen — wrote to me saying he did not share my views but recognised their importance, protested his esteem, etc. The selfsame individual subsequently had the effrontery to embody in his pam- phlet a libellous fabrication by that notorious Prussian spy, Stieber, and likewise, — on the inspiration, no doubt, of one of the armchair socialists82 in Bonn, — to accuse me of deliberate misquotation, nor, in so doing, did the estimable fellow even go to the trouble of reading up my polemic against the worthy Brentano in the Volksstaat,9 9

where he would have seen that Brentano, who had originally de- nounced me in the Concordia (manufacturers' sheet) for 'formal and substantive falsification', later extricated himself with the lie that he

[^1]: a Arnold Kerdijk





**[p. 66]**

OF FORCE.

The forthcoming Zurich Congress's 'question' which you mention would seem to me a mistake. 10° What is to be done, and done imme- diately at any given, particular moment in the future, depends, of course, wholly and entirely on the actual historical circumstances in which action is to be taken. But the said question, being posed out of the blue, in fact poses a fallacious problem to which the only answer can be a critique of the question as such. We cannot solve an equation that does not comprise within its terms the elements of its solution. Come to that, there is nothing specifically 'socialist' about the predi- caments of a government that has suddenly come into being as a re- sult of a popular victory. On the contrary. Victorious bourgeois poli- ticians immediately feel constrained by their 'victory', whereas a so- cialist is at least able to intervene without constraint. Of one thing you may be sure — a socialist government will not come to the helm in a country unless things have reached a stage at which it can, before all else, take such measures as will so intimidate the mass of the bour- geoisie as to achieve the first desideratum — time for effective action.

You may, perhaps, refer me to the Paris Commune but, aside from the fact that this was merely an uprising of one city in exceptional cir- cumstances, the majority of the Commune was in no sense socialist, nor could it have been. With a modicum of COMMON SENSE, it could, however, have obtained the utmost that was then obtainable — a compromise with Versailles beneficial to the people as a whole. The appropriation of the Banque de France alone would have rapidly put an end to the vainglory of Versailles, etc., etc.

The general demands of the French bourgeoisie before 1789 were, mutatis mutandis,a just as well-defined as are today, with a fair degree of uniformity, the primary, immediate demands of the proletariat in all countries where there is capitalist production. But could any 18th-

[^1]: a the necessary changes being made



