---
Volume: 46
Document_Title: "43. Engels to Jenny Longuet. 24 February "
Page_Range: "96-100"
---

# 43. Engels to Jenny Longuet. 24 February 



**[p. 67]**

Yours most cordially,

Karl Marx

43

[London,] 24 February 1881

My dear Jenny,

Well may the illustrious Regnard recommend his factum to your 'charity'.102 This Jacobin defending English respectable Protestant-

[^1]: First published, in Russian, in Pravda, Printed according to the original No. 62, 14 March 1928

[^2]: ENGELS TO JENNY LONGUET 101

[^3]: IN PARIS

[^4]: a mode of operation





**[p. 68]**

1) The 30,000 protestants' massacre of 1641. The Irish Catholics are here in the same position as the Commune de Paris. The Ver- saillais massacred 30,000 Communards and called that the horrors of the Commune. The English protestants under Cromwell massacred at least 30,000 Irish and, to cover their brutality, invented the tale that this was to avenge 30,000 protestants murdered by the Irish Catho- lics.

The facts are these. Ulster having been taken from its Irish owners who at that time 1600-1610 held the land in common, and handed over to Scotch prot- estant military colonists, these colonists did not feel safe in their pos- sessions in the troublous times after 1640. The puritan English Gov- ernment officials in Dublin spread the rumour that a Scotch Army of Covenanters103 was to land in Ulster and exterminate all Irish and Catholics. Sir W. Parsons, one of the two Chief Justices of Ireland, said that in a 12-month there would not be a Catholic left in Ireland. It was under these menaces, repeated in the English Parliament, that the Irish of Ulster rose on 23rd October 1641. But no massacre took place. All contemporaneous sources ascribe to the Irish merely the in- tention of a general massacre, and even the two protestant Chief Jus- tices (proclam. 8th February 1642) declare that 'the chief part of their plot, and amongst them a general massacre, had been disappoint- ed.' The English and Scotch however, 4th May 1642, threw Irish women naked into the river (Newry) and massacred Irishmen. (Pren- dergast, Cromwellian Settlement of Ireland, 1865.)

2) L'Irlande la Vendée de l'Angleterre. 104 Ireland was Catholic, Protestant England Republican, therefore Ireland — English Ven- dée. There is however this little difference that the French Revolution intended to give the land to the people, the English Commonwealth intended, in Ireland, to take the land from the people.

The whole Protestant reformation, as is well known to most stu- dents of history save Regnard, apart from its dogmatical squabbles and quibbles, was a vast plan for a confiscation of land. First the land was taken from the Church. Then the Catholics, in countries where Protestantism was in power, were declared rebels and their land con- fiscated.

Now in Ireland the case was peculiar.



**[p. 69]**

The whole agrarian history of Ireland is a series of confiscations of Irish land to be handed over to English settlers. These settlers, in a very few generations, under the charm of Celtic society, turned more Irish than the aborigines. Then a new confiscation and new col- onization took place, and so in infinitum.

In the 17th century, the whole of Ireland except the newly Scotchi- fied North, was ripe for a fresh confiscation. So much so, that when the British (puritan) Parliament accorded to Charles I an army for the reduction of Ireland, it resolved that the money for this arma- ment should be raised upon the security of2,500,000 acres to be confiscated in Ireland. And the 'adventurers' 105 who advanced the money should also appoint the officers of that army. The land was to be divided amongst those adventurers so that 1,000 acres should be given them, if in Ulster for £ 200.- advanced, in Connaught for £ 300, in Mun- ster for £ 450, in Leinster for £ 600. And if the people rose against this beneficent plan they are Vendéens! If Regnard should ever sit in a National Convention, he may take a leaf out of the proceedings of the Long Parliament, 106 and combat a possible Vendée with these means.

The Abolition of the Penal Laws 1 0 7! Why the greater part of them were repealed, not in 1793 but in 1778, when England was threat- ened by the rise of the American Republic, and the second repeal, 1793, was when the French Republic arose threatening and England required all the soldiers she could get to fight it!

The Grant to Maynooth by Pitt. 108 This pittance was soon re- pealed by the Tories and only renewed by Sir R. Peel in 1845. But not a word about the other cadeau que faisait à l'Irlande ce grand homme {c'est la première fois qu'il trouve grâce devant les yeux d'un Jacobin),* that other 'dotation' not only 'considérable' but actually lavish — the 3 Million £ b y which the Union of Ireland with England 109 was bought. The parliamentary documents will show that the one item of the purchase money of rotten and nomination boroughs alone cost no less a sum than £1,245,000 (O'Connell, Memoir on Ireland addressed to the Queen).

[^1]: * present this great man gave to Ireland (it is the first time that grace has been bes- towed upon him in the eyes of the Jacobins)





**[p. 70]**

was 'leading to evil rather than good', 'that such education the people are actually ob- taining for themselves, and though we consider it practicable to correct it, to check its pro- gress appears impossible: it may be improved but it cannot be impeded'.

So then, these truly national schools did not suit English purposes. To suppress them, the sham national schools were established. They are so little secular that the reading-book consists of extracts both from the Catholic and Protestant Bibles, agreed upon by the Catho- lic and Protestant Archbishops of Dublin. Compare with these Irish peasants the English who howl at compulsory school attendance to this day!

[^1]: First published, in Russian, in the col- Reproduced from the original lection Sredniye veka (Middle Ages), _, , ,. , , . _ . . . . „ „ . Book XIX, Moscow, 1961 Published in English in full for the first time



