---
Volume: 46
Document_Title: "46. Engels to Eduard Bernstein. 12 March "
Page_Range: "102-105"
---

# 46. Engels to Eduard Bernstein. 12 March 



**[p. 73]**

Trusting that you will find elsewhere the means of obtaining the funds you need,

I remain,

Yours very truly

First published in: Marx and Engels, Printed according to the original Works, First Russian Edition, Vol. XXVI1, „ , , . , , . „ , . , , . , ,- Moscow, 1935 Published in English for the first time

46

ENGELS TO EDUARD BERNSTEIN ' 1 3

IN ZURICH

London, 12 March 1881

Dear Mr Bernstein,

Herewith some material on the anti-adultery commandment. ' ' 4

Whether you'll be able to use it, I confess I don't know. It's a ticklish subject and you must know whether more harm than good will be done by touching on it. At all events I wanted to show you one way of dealing with this commandment without relapsing into moral philis- tinism, and it may be useful to you anyway to have the historical ma- terial on the case, in so far as it was available to me.

For the rest, the papera is doing very well on the whole and some of the nos. are very good; rather less doctrinaire articles, like the one on state socialism,b would do no harm. How can one lump together Tur- got, one of the leading economists of the 18th century, with Necker, that highly practical man of haute finance,c precursor of your Laffittes and Péreires and, worse still, the wretched Calonne, the man of hand-to-mouth expedients, who was a genuine après moi le déluge0 ' ' 5

aristocrat? How can one place these — Turgot in particular and even Necker — cheek by jowl with Bismarck who, at the most, wants money regardless, à la Calonne, and the said Bismarck in his turn quite summarily cheek by jowl with Stoecker on the one hand and Schäffle and Co. on the other, every one of whom in his turn pursues quite different lines? If the bourgeois lump them all together,

[^1]: a Der Sozialdemokrat-h [K. Kautsky,] 'Der Staatssozialismus und die Sozialdemo- kratie', signed: Symmachos, Der Sozialdemokrat, No. 10, 6 March 1881.-° high finance-11 after me the deluge





**[p. 74]**

that is no reason why we should proceed as uncritically. Here, pre- cisely, are the roots of doctrinairism, in that one believes the self- interested and narrow assertions of one's opponent and proceeds to construct on those assertions a system which naturally stands or falls with them. With Bismarck it is a case of money, money and again money, and the pretexts he gives change in accordance with purely external considerations. Give him a differently composed majority in the Reichstag and he'll jettison all his present plans and prepare conflicting ones. That's why one can never ever infer a declaration of modern society's bankruptcy from anything that is done by an ani- mal as irrational in theory and inconsistent in practice as Bismarck. Still less from the intellectual St Vitus dance of a fool like Stoecker. Nor yet from the twaddle of'thinking men' à la Schäme. Their 'think- ing' (and this is pretty well all they do 'think') is not directed towards declaring modern society bankrupt. On the contrary, they are, of course, simply living in the hope of patching it up again. But what kind of a thinking man is e.g. Schäffle? In his Quintessenz" the silly Swabian admits that he pondered one of the (simplest) points in Capital for ten years before getting to the bottom of it; in fact the bot- tom he got to was pure nonsense. ' ' 6

It is nothing but self-interested misrepresentation on the part of the Manchester bourgeois to describe as 'socialism' all interference by the state with free competition: protective tariffs, guilds, tobacco monop- oly, nationalisation of branches of industry, the Overseas Trading Company, ' ' ' royal porcelain factory. That is something we should criticise, but not believe. If we do the latter and base a theoretical ar- gument thereon, this will collapse together with its premisses,— simply upon it's being proved, that is, that this alleged socialism is nothing but feudal reaction on the one hand and, on the other, a pre- text for extortion, its secondary object being to turn as many proleta- rians as possible into officials and pensioners dependent on the state, and to organise, alongside the disciplined army of officials and mili- tary, a similar army of workers. Compulsory suffrage imposed by se- nior functionaries instead of by factory overseers — fine socialism that! This is where you get if you believe what the bourgeois himself doesn't believe but only pretends to, namely that the state = so- cialism.

Otherwise I find that your views on the attitude to be adopted by

[^1]: a [A. Schäffle,] Die Quintessenz des Socialismus, Gotha, 1875.





**[p. 75]**

the paper coincide entirely with my own, and I'm also glad that of late there has no longer been such liberal use of the word revolution as there was at the outset. That was quite all right earlier on, after the sorry opiate-mongering of 1880, ' ' 8 but it would be preferable, and this, too, with an eye to Most, to be wary of high-flown rhetoric. One may express revolutionary thoughts without forever harping on the word revolution. The pitiful Most is, by the way, quite beside himself; he's at a loss where to pull in and now, on top ofthat, the success of Fritzsche and Viereck in America ' 1 9 has taken the last bit of wind out of his sails.

The paper can now really serve to encourage and cheer up our people in Germany, something a number of them, or at least their so- called leaders, are much in need of. I've received a few more jere- miads and answered them in accordance with their deserts. Viereck was very down in the mouth at the start, but a few days in the fresh air of London were enough to restore his resilience. The paper must import that fresh air into Germany and by far the best way of doing so is to mock our adversaries, treat them with contempt. Once the people learn to laugh at Bismarck & Co. again, much will have been gained. But it mustn't be forgotten that this is the first time such a thing has happened to the people, at any rate the vast majority, or, more especially, that a large number of agitators and editors will have the discomfort of being jolted out of their very comfortable berths. Such being the case, it is just as necessary to cheer people up as it is constantly to remind them that Bismarck & Co. are still the same jackasses, the same scoundrels and the same poor wretches, im- potent in face of the historical movement, as they were before the at- tempted assassinations. ' 2 0 So any joke at the expense of this rabble is of value.

will either be thrown out by the Upper House, or else it will be castrat- ed, and then the fun will begin, in other words, the covert disintegra- tion of the parties will become overt. Since Gladstone's nomination,

[^1]: As regards Ireland, only this much: The people are far too canny not to know that an uprising would spell their ruin; it would stand no chance save in the case of war between England and America. ' 2 ' Meanwhile the Irish have forced Gladstone to introduce continental standing orders in Parliament, ' 2 2 thus undermining the whole of the English parliamentary system. They have further forced Gladstone to forswear all his cant and to become more Tory than even the worst of TORIES. The Coercion Bills 123 have gone through, the Land Bill 124



