---
Volume: 46
Document_Title: "47. Engels to Johann Philipp Becker. 28 March "
Page_Range: "105-106"
---

# 47. Engels to Johann Philipp Becker. 28 March 



**[p. 76]**

the WHIGS and moderate TORIES, i. e. the big landowners generally, have been secretly combining to form a big landed property party. As soon as this comes to fruition, and family and personal interests have been adjusted, or as soon as the new party is driven out into the open in consequence of, say, the Land Bill, the administration and the present majority will disintegrate. Then the new bourgeois-radical party will come out in opposition to the new conservative party, but with noth- ing to fall back on save the workers and the Irish peasants. And so that there may be no recurrence of bilking and trickery here, a prole- tarian-radical party is in process of formation under the leadership of Joseph Cowen (M. P. for Newcastle), an old Chartist who is half, if not wholly, communist and a very worthy chap. Ireland is responsible for all this, Ireland is the driving force in the realm. This for your private information. More on the subject anon. Regards,

Yours

F.E.

Since Kautsky — will you give him my regards? — will be coming over here soon, there's no point in answering him at length. My re- gards to Beust should you see him.

47

London, 28 March 1881

122 Regent's Park Road, N. W.

Dear Old Man,

I shall send you some money the instant you put me in a position to do so by letting me hacveyour new address. For I have to produce this,

[^1]: First published, in Russian, in Marx-Engels Printed according to the original Archives, Book I, Moscow, 1924

[^2]: Published in English in full for the first time

[^3]: ENGELS TO JOHANN PHILIPP BECKER 12ä

[^4]: IN GENEVA



