---
Volume: 46
Document_Title: "48. Engels to August Bebel. 30 March "
Page_Range: "106-108"
---

# 48. Engels to August Bebel. 30 March 



**[p. 77]**

and such addresses as I find in the Précurseur do not seem to me really fit to be produced if they are not to create difficulties. The moment I have had a reply you will at once get 100 frs and a lengthy reply from

Your

F. Engels

First published in; F. Engels, Vergessene Printed according to the original Briefe (Briefe Friedrich Engels' an Johann Phi- T , • ,• i , • ,, , - i r , r- tipp Becker), Berlin, 1920 Published in English for the first rr time

48

ENGELS TO AUGUST BEBEL

IN LEIPZIG

London, 30 March 1881

Dear Bebel,

Viereck (a postcard from whom I enclose) wants me to give you an account of the Boston meeting; but here too, as commonly in com- bined operations, there has been hitch after hitch; 1. Harney wrote a week later; 2. he forgot to enclose the newspaper report which I did not get till yesterday. Today I gave this to Kautsky, who is over here, for him to work on for the Sozialdemokrat. 126

The meeting in Boston was first-rate; ill-advertised but nevertheless attended by 1,500 people, '/s German. The first speaker was Swin- ton, an American communist who came to visit us here last sum- mer 4 3 and is the proprietor of a big New York paper.8 Then Fritz- sche. Finally, Wendell Phillips, the great anti-slavery man who, with the exception of John Brown, did more than anyone else for the aboli- tion of slavery and the prosecution of the war, and is the foremost speaker in America — maybe in the world. He returned thanks to the Germans and gave them credit for the fact that in 1861, in every large city, it was the German gymnasts who shielded him with their own bodies from the American mob, and who kept St Louis in the Union. 127 To give you just one example of how he spoke:

[^1]: a The Sun





**[p. 78]**

'Being as far as I am away from the field of battle, I would not presume to criticise the method of combat. I look at Russia, 4,000 miles away, and see what a nightmare weighs on the shoulders of the people there. I only hope that someone will be found to relieve them of it. And if the dagger alone can do it, I say: Welcome to the dagger! Is there any American here who would disapprove? If he would, then he should look (pointing to a picture on the wall) at Joe Warren who died at Bunkers Hill.'"

That was on the 7th of March. On the 13th a bomb did what the dagger had been unable to do. 128

According to today's Standard, Most is to be prosecuted by the Brit- ish government because of the article on the assassination at- tempt! 129 If the Russian Embassy and Gladstone are absolutely in- tent on making a great man out of the silly nincompoop, no one can stop them. At the same time, it's far from certain that Most will be found guilty. The moral indignation about the bomb in the big news- papers was largely a matter of observing the proprieties, something your bourgeois here never omits to do, if only for appearances' sake. The humorous papers, which reflect public opinion far more faith- fully, have taken an altogether different view of the case and, by the time the trial draws to a close, much may have changed in this re- spect, so that it's far from certain whether the 12 jurymen will reach the unanimous verdict that is called for.

To return to our American friends, Wendell Phillips' champion- ship (induced by a young American journalist, Willard Brown, who was over here last year, when he consorted much with Marx and gen- erally did his utmost for them with the American press and gave them the boosting they needed) is of the first importance. Their success has altogether exceeded my expectations and shows that Bismarckery has fallen greatly in the esteem of the Germans, even middle-class Germans, in America. However \_^ 'sh hopes of a second trip with Liebknecht would hardly seem practicable; it is inadvisable to turn up twice in rapid succession. Moreover, such a trip — anyhow inadmissible before next year — ought to have been rendered unnec- essary by the great event in Petersburg and its inevitable conse- quences. Alexander III, whether he wants to or not, will have to take some decisive step to get things moving, but before that there might be a short period of intensive persecution, and Switzerland will no doubt soon embark on mass expulsions. Meanwhile old William,c if not actually on his last legs, becomes dottier and dottier, Bismarck

[^1]: a Retranslated from the German. -h Viereck in German means quadrangle.-0 Wil- liam I



