---
Volume: 46
Document_Title: "49. Engels to Gottlieb Lemcke. 2 April "
Page_Range: "108-109"
---

# 49. Engels to Gottlieb Lemcke. 2 April 



**[p. M]**

grows daily more rabid and seems absolutely intent on playing the part of a rampaging Prussian Roland, the bourgeois parties go fur- ther off the rails every day, while the government's taxation mania sees to the rest. Even if we all sat with our hands in our laps, events would forcibly propel us to the fore and pave the way for victory. It is a real pleasure to see a revolutionary world situation we have long predicted mature into a general crisis, blinkered opponents do our work for us, and the inexorability of a development that is heading for universal collapse prevail in, and as a result of, the general confusion.

Regards from Marx and from your

F.E.

First published, in Russian, in Marx-Engels Printed according to the original Archives, Vol. I (VI), Moscow, 1932 „ , ,. , , . „ ,. , . , . Published in English ior the first time

49

ENGELS TO GOTTLIEB LEMCKE

[London,] 2 April 1881 122 Regent's Park Road, N. W.

Dear Mr Lemcke,

I have just heard that one of my brothers3 will be passing through London with his family this evening, and this will mean my spending with them the few hours they will be pausing here. I therefore greatly regret that I shall be unable to take advantage of your kind invitation to the opening ceremony of the new club-house. 130 Hoping that the club will prosper and flourish, I remain

Yours very truly,

F. Engels

[^1]: IN LONDON

[^2]: First published in the journal Internationale Printed according to the original wissenschaftliche Korrespondenz zur Geschichte T . , , - , , • ^ i- • r r j , , , A L •. L in -D i- Published in English tor the first der deutschen Arbeiterbewegung, Nr. 1U, Berlin . ° (West), 1970 t i m e

[^3]: * Apparently Hermann Engels



