---
Volume: 46
Document_Title: "51. Marx to Jenny Longuet. 11 April "
Page_Range: "110-114"
---

# 51. Marx to Jenny Longuet. 11 April 



**[p. 51]**

MARX TO JENNY LONGUET 133

IN ARGENTFX'IL

[London,] 11 April 1881

My dear Jennychen,

It's been boring ever since you left — without you and Johnny and Harra! and MR 'TEA!' a Sometimes I hurry across to the window when I hear children's voices which sound like those of our children, mo- mentarily oblivious of the fact that the little chaps are on the other side of the Channel!

One comfort is that you have found a nice place to live and that it suits the children; otherwise everything seems to be RATHER WORSE than in London, with the exception, however, of the climate, whose benefi- cial effect — beneficial also to asthma — you will discover BY AND BY.

I have found yet another doctor for Mama, one recommended to me by Prof. Lankester, namely Dr Donkin; HE SEEMS A BRIGHT AND INTELLI- GENT MAN; but for Mama's complaint it does indeed strike me that ONE MAN [is] AS GOOD, AND PERHAPS BETTER, THAN ANOTHER MAN. However, the CHANGE OF MEDICAL ADVISERS serves to distract her and, during the initial period — which doesn't usually last long — she is full of praise for the new Aesculapius. Longuet's eyeglass turned up immediately after his departure; it was, in fact, tucked away in your bedroom. Hirsch has been selected to bring it to you, but that gossip-hunter seems hardly able to tear himself away from London at a moment when there is so much to be smelt out. The 'great' Most affair 129 alone is an inex- haustible source of fresh water (if by no means a 'cooling stream') for the said hart.b Now he threatens to postpone his departure till 18 Ap- ril. Then, too, he has found a kindred spirit in Kautsky — on whom he had frowned so grimly; even Engels takes a much more tolerant view of this jokerc since the latter gave proof of his considerable drinking ability. When the charmer— the little joker,c I mean — first came to see me, the first question that rose to my lips was — are you

[^1]: a Marx' grandsons: Jean, Henri and Edgar Longuet - b A pun on the name Hirsch — hart. ('As pants the hart for cooling streams/When heated in the chase'.)-0 Kauti (diminutive Käutzchen), an untranslatable pun on the name Kautsky.





**[p. 82]**

like your mothera? Not in the least, he exclaimed, and silently I con- gratulated his mother. He's a mediocrity, narrow in outlook, over- wise (only 26 years old), a know-all, hard-working after a fashion, much concerned with statistics out of which, however, he makes little sense, by nature a member of the philistine tribe, for the rest, a decent fellow in his own way; I unload him onto amigoh Engels as much as I can.

The day before yesterday the Dogberry CLUB ' 3 * was here; yester- day, besides the 2 Maitland girlsc — and, briefly, Lankester and Dr Donkin — we were invaded by Hyndman and his wife,d both of whom have too much staying-power. I quite like the wife on account of her brusque, unconventional and determined manner of thinking and speaking, but it's amusing to see how admiringly she hangs on the lips of her complacent chatterbox of a husband! Mama grew so weary (it was close on half past ten at night) that she withdrew. But there was some BYPLAY which tickled her. For Tussy has discovered a new infant prodigy amongst the Dogberries — one Radford; this youth is already a BARRISTER-AT-LAW, yet looks down upon the jus ' and works in the same LINE as Waldhorn. HE LOOKS WELL, CROSS between Irving and the late Lassalle (but has nothing in common with the latter's cynical, smarmily importunate mannerisms à la marquis-cum-Jew), AN INTELLIGENT AND SOMEWHAT PROMISING BOY. WELL, that's him in a nutshell. So shockingly did Dolly Maitland pay court to him that during sup- per Mama and Tussy were constantly exchanging signals. Finally, Mr Maitland also turned up, pretty well sober, and began a verbal duel with his instructive neighbour, Hyndman, on the subject of Gladstone in whom Maitland, a spiritualist, believes. *I — rather an- noyed by a bad throat — felt glad when the whole lot vanished. It is a strange thing that one cannot well live altogether without com- pany, and that when you get it, you try hard to rid yourself of it.*

Hartmann is working hard in Woolwich as a COMMON WORKMAN; it is becoming increasingly difficult to converse with him in any language. The Russian REFUGEES in Geneva insist that he should disavow Roche- fort and do so publicly. This he neither will nor can, even had this not been made impossible by the immoderate letter sent to Rochefort by the Petersburg Committee and published by him in the Intransi- geant. 135 The Genevans have, indeed, long been trying to convince

[^1]: a Minna Kautsky-b friend-c Dolly and Clara Maitland-d Mathilda Hyndman - c law





**[p. 83]**

Europe that it was, in fact, they who were directing the movement in Russia; now that the lie they themselves had disseminated has been taken up by Bismarck et cie and constitutes a threat to them, they as- sert the opposite and vainly endeavour to convince the world of their innocence. In fact, they are mere doctrinaires, muddle-headed anar- cho-socialists, and their influence on the Russian 'theatre of war' is

ZERO.

Have you been following the course of the legal proceedings against the assassins in St Petersburg?136 They are sterling chaps through and through, sans pose mélodramatique,a simple, matter-of-fact, heroic. Shouting and doing are irreconcilable opposites. The Petersburg Executive Committee,70 which took such vigorous ac- tion, issues manifestoes of exquisite 'moderation'. It is remote indeed from the bungling way in which Most and other puerile ranters advo- cate TYRANNICIDE as a 'theory' and 'PANACEA' (the same thing was done by ENGLISHMEN as innocent as Disraeli, Savage Landor, Macaulay and Mazzini's friend, Stansfeld); they, on the other hand, are at pains to teach Europe that their modus operandi* is a specifically Russian and historically inevitable mode of action which no more lends itself to moralising — for or against — than does the earthquake in Chios.137

In this connection there was a fine old scandal in the House of Commons (as you know, so as to oblige Bismarck and Gorchakov these miserable Gladstonites are making an onslaught, in the person of the pitiful Most, 129 on the freedom of the press in England, in which they are unlikely to succeed). Lord Churchill, a bumptious Tory youth, and member of the Marlborough FAMILY, questioned Sir Charles Dilke and Brassey, both UNDERSTRAPPERS in the CABINET, about the financial support afforded to the Freiheit. This was flatly denied and Churchill was compelled to name his authority. He named the ubiquitous Mr Maltman Barry! I enclose a cutting about this affair from the Weekly Dispatch (the Dilkes' paper, edited by the -PHILOSOPHI- CAL RADICAL, Ashton Dilke, brother of the great 'Dilke'), and a state- ment by Maltman Barry in The Daily News. Clearly Dilke is lying. How pitiful that this braggart, the self-appointed future 'President of the English republic' should, for fear of losing his post, allow Bis- marck to dictate upon what journals he ought or ought not to bestow -£ 1! Only suppose it became known that, immediately after Hart-

[^1]: without melodramatic posturing - b way of going about things





**[p. 84]**

mann's arrival in London, Ashton Dilke invited him to a LUNCHEON! But H a r t m a n n turned this down, not wanting to 'exhibit' him- self.

Apropos the Comtist renegade Maxse. This laddie is done far too great an honour in La Justice which handles him with kid gloves. In the eyes of this peculiar clique — ENGLISH LIBERALS and their even worse subspecies, the so CALLED RADICALS — it is indeed a crime on the part of La Justice that, flouting all tradition and contrary to agreement, it fails to treat these SHAMS AND HUMBUGS in the accepted manner, to perpe- tuate the legend that is current about them in the liberal press on the Continent! If one considers the enormous effrontery with which the London press attacks socialist parties in all European countries, and how difficult it is for anyone who thinks it worth the trouble to say a word in return or even to get a brief answer into that press — it is really a bit too much to have to recognise the principle that, should a Paris newspaper venture to criticise that arch-hypocrite and CASUIST of the old-fashioned school, the 'great' Gladstone, it is duty-bound to put entire columns at the disposal of M r Maxse and his prose, in order that he might repay Gladstone IN KIND for the avancement* pro- vided by the latter!

and ARMS ACT ' 3 8 ) vis-à-vis Ireland to be as right as it is in fact wrong, would this constitute any reason to talk of that man's 'générosité and 'magnanimité'? As though there was any question of any such things be- tween England and Ireland! Maxse really ought to be told that, while such Pecksniffian expressions may have free currency in London, they do not have it in Paris!

Get Longuet to read Parnell's speech in Cork in today's Times.b

H e will find in it the substance of what ought to be said about Gladstone's new LAND ACT12*; in this connection it should not be forgotten that Gladstone, by his disgraceful preliminary measures (incl. abolishing the freedom of speech of members of the Lower House), 1 2 2 has brought about the conditions under which mass EVICTIONS are now taking place in Ireland, while the ACT is pure humbug, seeing that the LORDS who can get anything they want from Gladstone, and no longer have to tremble before the Land League I 3 9 — w i l l DOUBTLESS throw it out or else so castrate it that the Irish themselves will end u p by voting against it.

[^1]: Assuming the policy adopted by Gladstone (man of the COERCION ' 2 3

[^2]: advancement-15 'Cork, 10 April', The Times, No. 30165, 11 April 1881.



