---
Volume: 46
Document_Title: "52. Engels to Eduar d Bernstein. 14 April "
Page_Range: "114-116"
---

# 52. Engels to Eduar d Bernstein. 14 April 



**[p. 85]**

Give the children a hundred kisses from me; regards to Longuet. Write and tell me, DEAR CHILD, about the state of your health. Adio.

Your

OLD NICK*

DEAR JOHNNY, HOW DO YOU LIKE FRANCE?11

First published abridged, in Russian, in the Printed according to the original magazine Nachalo, No. 5, St Petersburg, 1899 and in full in Bolshevik, No. 5, Moscow, 1931

52

ENGELS TO EDUARD BERNSTEIN 1 4 0

IN ZURICH

London, 14 April 1881

Dear Mr Bernstein,

Very many thanks for the excerpt — for numerous reasons, how- ever, it is desirable that we should read the full text of the relevant speeches. Kautsky will already have asked you to let us have the shorthand report ' 4 ' for a day or two. So much has been said in the Reichstag and Landtags that would have been better left unsaid that we cannot express an opinion on such matters unless we are fully acquainted with the case.

came as a most unpleasant surprise. We can see absolutely no reason for it and it would give us great pleasure if you were to reconsider your decision. You have edited the paper ably from the outset, have given it the right tone, at the same time developing the humorous side it needed. Erudition in a newspaper editor is far less important than the ability speedily to interpret things from the aspect that matters, and

[^1]: Your announcement that you wished to resign from the paper0

[^2]: a Marx's jocular nickname.-b Written in large block letters at the beginning of the let- ter-0 Der Sozialdemokrat





**[p. 86]**

this you have nearly always done. Kautsky, for example, would never be able to do that; he always has too many secondary viewpoints, which is perfectly all right for longish articles in a revue, but in the case of a paper, where rapid decisions are called for, frequently makes it impossible to see the wood for the trees, and that mustn't happen in a party organ. Alongside you, Kautsky would be quite all right, but on his own he would, I'm afraid, be all too often prevented by qualms of conscience over theory from following up a crucial advantage as unswervingly as is required by the Sozialdemokrat. I don't see who could take your place at this juncture, so long as Liebknecht remains in jail 1 4 2 and doesn't go to Zurich, which would be senseless except in an emergency, since there's much more need of him in the Reichstag. So you'll have to stay on after all whether you like it or not.

If we have not yet come forward directly and by name in the So- zialdemokrat, the fault, I do assure you, does not lie with your editor- ship of this paper up till now. On the contrary. It lies with the very statements made in Germany I alluded to at the beginning. Admit- tedly, we have been promised that this won't recur and that the revo- lutionary nature of the party is to be plainly spelled out and adhered to. But we should like to see evidence of it first, nor do we have any great confidence (rather the reverse) in the revolutionary bent of cer- tain of these gentlemen, and that is precisely why it is most desirable that we should have the stenographic reports of the speeches made by all our deputies. After you have used them you can easily send them over here for a day or two; I guarantee their prompt return. That will help to clear away the last obstacles that still exist — through no fault of our own — between ourselves and the party in Germany. This in confidence.

It would seem that Gladstone has paved the way for the triumph of Most. It's hardly likely that 12 jurors will be found who will unani- mously find Most guilty, and, if only one finds him innocent, the case will fall to the ground. Admittedly, he can be brought before another jury, but this hardly ever happens. On top ofthat, however, the 1861 Act, 143 under which Most is being charged, has never been applied before and by and large it is the opinion of jurists that the wording is inapplicable to the case.

Argyll's resignation from the Ministry because the Irish LAND BILL ' 2 4 confers on tenants a measure of co-ownership of the land is an ill omen for the fate of the BILL in the Upper House. Meanwhile Parnell has made a successful start in Manchester to his English agitational

