---
Volume: 46
Document_Title: "56. Marx to John Swinton. 2 June "
Page_Range: "122-123"
---

# 56. Marx to John Swinton. 2 June 



**[p. 56]**

MARX TO JOHN SWINTON

IN NEW YORK

London, 2 June 1881 41 Maitland Park Road, N. W.

Dear Mr Swinton,

I need hardly recommend you the bearer of these lines, my excel- lent friend, Mr Hartmann. I send you through him a photogram of mine; it is rather bad, but the only one left to me.

As to the book of Mr Henry George,a I consider it as a last at- tempt— to save the capitalistic regime. Of course, this is not the meaning of the author, but the older disciples of Ricardo — the radi- cal ones — fancied already that by the public appropriation of the rent of land everything would be righted. I have referred to this doctrine in the Misere de la Philosophie (published in 1847 against Proudhon).b

Mrs Marx sends you her best compliments. Unfortunately her ill- ness assumes more and more a fatal character.

Believe me, dear Sir,

Yours most sincerely,

Karl Marx

The 'Viereck' was so stultified at his arrival in the US that he con- founded my friend Engels with myself and transformed my compli- ments to you in those of Engels; he did the same with regard to another American friend of minec by whose letter I was informed of the quid pro quo.

[^1]: First published in A Souvenir from Jimmie Reproduced from the original Higgins Book Shop, New York, 1923

[^2]: a H. George, Progress and Poverty: an inquiry into the cause of industrial depressions and of in- crease of want with increase of wealth. The Remedy, New York, 1880.- b See present edition, Vol. 6, p. 203.-c G.J. Harney



