---
Volume: 46
Document_Title: "61. Marx to Friedrich Adolph Sorge. 20 June "
Page_Range: "127-131"
---

# 61. Marx to Friedrich Adolph Sorge. 20 June 



**[p. 98]**

Sam Moore has passed his final examination as Barrister success- fully last week.

I hear from Tussy that you have got a fresh servant and that she seems to suit you, so your household troubles bid fair to diminish too.

I close this letter so as to send it by early mail in the morning, hop- ing thus it may reach you to-morrow night. Miss Parnell's letter I shall return in a few days. Kind regards to Longuet and Johnny from yours affectionately

F. Engels

First published in: Marx and Engels, Reproduced from the original Works, Second Russian Edition, Vol. 35, Moscow 1964 Published in English for the first time

61

[London,] 20 June 1881

Dear Sorge,

Today I had broken off some other work I was doing, meaning to embark at long last on a lengthy letter to you and now, as ill luck would have it, I've had one visitor after another and thus hardly have time enough left to drop you a few lines before the post goes. Hence a brief survey.

Your sona pleases everyone he meets here. Since I have been suffer- ing continuously for 6 months and more from a cough, cold, sore throat and rheumatism, which only seldom permit me to go out and keep me out of society, he and I have an hour or so of private conver-

[^1]: MARX TO FRIEDRICH ADOLPH SORGE 154

[^2]: IN HOBOKEN

[^3]: a Adolph Sorge





**[p. 99]**

My last visitors, only just gone, were Viereck and his newly mar- ried wife, also née Viereck.b I had not seen the gentleman since he came back from America. ' ' 9 A few days ago he sent Kautsky to see me with sundry scraps of paper for me to sign (one written by Lieb- knecht and also signed by him in his own and Bebel's names). All of them related to certain agreements respecting the Lingenau legacy45

negotiated by Viereck with the 'New Torker Volkszeitung' et cie. I refused to sign since, in this matter, I am obliged, as I explained, to deal only with our chief executor, Sorge. At the same time I gave Viereck to understand that, in my view, the first thing to be done was to pay you the 120 dollars for the lawyer in St Louis out of what still remai- ned of the American fund in New York. Viereck now tells me today that — upon my accepting responsibility vis-à-vis the Leipzigers — he at once sent off instructions to that effect to New York. He arrived INTHE NICK OF TIME, for otherwise a formal protest would have gone off from me to Leipzig tomorrow, a protest against the modus operandi' of the Leipzig party leaders who had hitherto conducted themselves in this matter as if the decision rested solely with them.

Now, postfestum,d Viereck has mentioned your claim in respect of an advance of 80 dollars. I told him that, after the court decision, should this be unfavourable, we, the executors, would indemnify you, as we damned well ought.

Before getting your copy of Henry George, ' I had already had 2 others, one from Swinton and one from Willard Brown. I therefore gave one to Engels and one to Lafargue. Today I shall have to con- fine myself to a very brief assessment of the book. Theoretically, the man is totally arrière. ' He has understood nothing of the nature of sur- plus value and hence, after the English pattern, but lagging far be- hind the English, he loses himself in speculations about those portions of surplus value that have become independent — about the relations between profit, rent, interest, etc. His basic tenet is that everything would be in order were rent to be paid to the State. (You will also find payment of this kind among the transitional measures in the Commu-

[^1]: a basically-b Laura Viereck-c way of going about things-'1 after the event-0 See this volume, p. 93.-' stick-in-the-mud





**[p. 100]**

As already mentioned, we ourselves adopted the appropriation of rent by the State amongst many other transitional measures which, as is likewise indicated in the Manifesto, are and cannot but be contra- dictory in themselves.

But making a socialist PANACEA of this desideratum of the English radical bourgeois economists, declaring this procedure to be a solu- tion of the antagonisms inherent in today's mode of production — this was the prerogative oï Colins, a native of Belgium and on old, retired officer of Napoleon's Hussars who, in the latter days of Guizot and the early ones of Napoleon le petit, I 5 5 sent out into the world from Paris bulky volumes on the subject of this, his 'discovery',' likewise making the further discovery that, while there is indeed no God, there is an 'immortal' human soul, and that animals have 'no sensitivity'. For had they any sensitivity, i. e. soul, we would be cannibals and a kingdom of righteousness could never be set up on this earth. His 'anti-landed property theory', along with his soul, etc., theory, has for years been advocated month after month in the Paris journal Philo- sophie de l'Avenir by his few remaining disciples, mostly Belgians. They call themselves 'collectivistes rationnels' and have applauded Henry George.

In the same vein as them, and at much the same time, one Samter, amongst others, a shallow-pated Prussian banker and lottery collec-

[^1]: a See present edition, Vol. 6, p. 505.-b 'We understand such economists as Mill, Cher- buliez, Hilditch and others demanding that rent should be handed over to the State to serve in place of taxes. That is the frank expression of the hatred the industrial capitalist bears towards the landed proprietor, who seems to him a useless thing, an excrescence upon the general body of bourgeois production.' See K. Marx, The Poverty of Philosophy, present edition, Vol. 6, p. 203. -c J. G. Colins, L'économie politique. Source des révolutions et des utopies prétendues socialistes, vols I-III, Paris, 1856-57.





**[p. 101]**

All these 'socialists' since Colins have this in common — they allow wage labour and hence also capitalist production to subsist, while en- deavouring to delude themselves and the world into believing that the transformation of rent into taxation paid to the State must bring about the automatic disappearance of all the abuses of capitalist pro- duction. So the whole thing is merely an attempt, tricked out with so- cialism, to save the capitalist régime and, indeed, to re-establish it on an even broader basis than at present.

Again, this cloven hoof, which is at the same time an ass's hoof, is unmistakably in evidence in the declamations of Henry George. It is all the more inexcusable in his case in that he ought, on the contrary, to have asked himself the question: How comes it that in the UNITED STATES, where the land was relatively — i. e. by comparison with civil- ised Europe — accessible to the great mass of the people and TO A CER- TAIN DEGREE (again relative) still is, the capitalist economy and the cor- responding enslavement of the working class have developed more ra- pidly and brazenly than in any other country?

On the other hand, George's book, like the sensation it created in your midst, is significant in being a first, if unsuccessful, attempt at emancipation from orthodox political economy.

H. George, by the by, seems to know nothing of the history of the earlier American ANTI-REXTERS ' 5 6 who were men of practice rather than theory. In other respects he is a talented writer (talented, too, in the matter of boosting the YANKEES), as is shown by, e. g., his article on California in the Atlantic. 157 He also has the revolting presump- tiousness and arrogance that is the unmistakable hallmark of all such PANACEA-mongers.

Between ourselves, my wife's illness is, alas, incurable. In a few days' time I shall be taking her to the SEASIDE at Eastbourne.

Your

K. Marx

[^1]: Salut fraternel.b

[^2]: First published abridged in Die Neue <W£, Bd. 2, Nr. 33, 1891-92 and in full in the book Briefe und Auszüge aus Briefen von Joh. Phil. Becker, Jos. Dietzgen, Friedrich Engels, Karl Marx u. A. an F. A. Sorge und Andere, Stuttgart, 1906

[^3]: Printed according to the original

[^4]: Published in English in full for the first time

[^5]: a A. Samter, Social-Lehre. Ueber die Befriedigung der Bedürfnisse in der menschlichen Gesellschaft, Leipzig, 1875. - b Fraternal greetings.



