---
Volume: 46
Document_Title: "64. Engels to Norris A. Clowes. 22 July "
Page_Range: "134-135"
---

# 64. Engels to Norris A. Clowes. 22 July 



**[p. 64]**

ENGELS TO NORRIS A. CLOWES

IN NEW YORK

[Draft] London, 22 July 1881

122 Regent's Park Road, N. W.

Norris A. Clowes Esq.

Dear Sir,

I am sorry my time will not allow me to write to you the statement you desire." However, if you wish to make yourself acquainted with the present state of the Labour Movement in Great Britain, you will find the necessary information in the weekly Labour Standard pub- lished at 2 Whitefriars St. of which twelve numbers have up to now been issued. Most of the non-signed leaders are written by me. 163

If you wish to enter into communication with Mr Most, you had better write to the Editor of the Freiheit,h 252 Tottenham Court Road, W., London, who will be able to tell you whether such com- munication will be possible under present circumstances.

I shall be glad to see you in case you should come to London.

I remain

Yours very truly,

F. E.

[^1]: First published in: Marx and Engels, Reproduced from the original Works, First Russian Edition, Vol. XXVII, Moscow 1935 Published in English for the first time

[^2]: a In the manuscript the following passage is crossed out here: 'as it would require en- tering into the history of the British working class and its action since at least 1824, if not since the industrial revolution caused by steam, and to that my time will not al- low'.-1' Karl Schneidt



