---
Volume: 46
Document_Title: "66. Marx to Engels. 27 July "
Page_Range: "136-137"
---

# 66. Marx to Engels. 27 July 



**[p. 66]**

MARX TO ENGELS 7 2

IN LONDON

Argenteuil164, 27 July 1881 11 Boulevard Thiers

Dear Engels,

I can't write at any greater length today as I have a mass of letters to get off and on this, our first day, the little onesa have rightly laid claim to me.

The journey from London to Dover went off as well as could be ex- pected, i. e. my wife, who was most unwell when we set out from Maitland Park, did not notice any change for the worse as a result of the journey. On the boat she at once went to the ladies' cabin where she found an excellent sofa to lie on. The sea was quite calm and the weather couldn't have been finer. She landed in Calais in better shape than when she had left London and decided to carry on. The only stations where our TICKETS allowed us to break the journey to Paris were Calais and Amiens. She thought the latter place (ABOUT 2 HOURS'journey from Paris) too close to stop at. Between Amiens and Creil she felt diarrhoea coming on, and the griping pains also grew more violent. At Creil the train stopped for only 3 minutes, but she had just enough time to do what was necessary. In Paris, where we arrived at 7.30 in the evening, we were met at the station by Longuet. However the direct train from this station to Argenteuil left too late for us to wait for it. So, after the douaniers* had examined our trunks, by CAB to St Lazare station and from there, after waiting some while, by RAILWAY to our destination which we did not reach, however, until ABOUT 10 O'CLOCK. She was in very poor shape, but this morning (at any rate now, ABOUT 10 O'CLOCK) feels better than she used to do in London at a similar hour. At all events, the return journey will be made in much easier stages.

Longuet is introducing me to his doctor1 today, so that we can act immediately in the event of the diarrhoea recurring.

[^1]: a Marx's grandsons: Jean, Henri, Edgar and Marcel Longuet-11 customs officers - c Dourlen



