---
Volume: 46
Document_Title: "67. Engels to Marx. 29 July "
Page_Range: "137-139"
---

# 67. Engels to Marx. 29 July 



**[p. 108]**

We found everyone well here, except that Johnny and Harry had slight colds as a result of the change of temperature (all the children, especially Johnny, had been affected by the days of extreme heat). As a summer residence the house is first-class, must obviously have once served as such for a richard.a

WITH BEST COMPLIMENTS TO Pumps.

Your

Moor

It would seem that Tussy has written to her correspondent over thereb telling him of my arrival and hence, or so Longuet tells me, this is already an open secret. The 'anarchists', he says, will impute to me the malicious intention of swinging the vote. 165 Clemenceau told him that I had absolutely nothing to fear from the police.

First published abridged in Der Briefwechsel Printed according to the original zwischen F. Engels und K. Marx, Bd. 4, Stutt- gart, 1913 and in full in M EGA, Abt. III, Bd. 4, Berlin, 1931

67

ENGELS TO MARX

Bridlington Quay, Yorkshire 29 July 1881 1 Sea View

Dear Moor,

[^1]: IN ARGENTEUIL

[^2]: I got your letterc yesterday morning before we left ' 6 ' and was very glad to hear that you did, after all, have a reasonably good jour- ney. But you are right in proposing to break the return journey; it's far too risky, letting such an invalid remain on the go for 12 hours.

[^3]: very rich m a n - ' Carl Hirsch-c See previous letter.





**[p. 109]**

I only hope that the change of air and scene doesn't fail to produce the desired effect.

We left at 10.30 and arrived here at 5.5, minus my trunk, which had gone astray, but turned up before evening. After perhaps a quar- ter of an hour's search we found lodgings that were first-rate and not too dear (2 doors away from last year's, but a great improvement in every way). We had some rain yesterday, but today it seems to be slowly clearing up. The day before yesterday, by way of insuring my- self against rainy weather such as we have again become familiar with lately in London, I went to fetch the Skaldin and the first two volumes of Maurer's Fronhöfe" from Tussy.

Our present plan is to remain here for 3 weeks or, perhaps, 4, de- pending on the weather and other circumstances. I have got some CHEQUES with me, so if you need anything, don't hesitate to let me know roughly how much you want. Your wife must not and shall not want for anything; if there's something she would like to have or something you know would give her pleasure, then have it she must.

Tussy dropped in to see us the day before yesterday, so I accompa- nied her home to fetch the books and drink the inevitable glass of Pil- sener with her. Here one can pretty well do without German beer, for the BITTER ALE in the little café on the pier is excellent, and has a head on it like German beer.

Write again soon and tell me how things are. Warm regards from all of us to your wife and Jenny. Pumps sends her special love to Johnny, as do I. Our regards, too, to Longuet.

Your

F. E.

[^1]: First published abridged in Der Briefwechsel zwischen F. Engels und K. Marx, Bd. 4, Stutt- gart, 1913 and in full in MEGA, Abt. III, Bd. 4, Berlin, 1931

[^2]: Printed according to the original

[^3]: Published in English for the first time

[^4]: a [Skaldin] CKa A^nm,, Bh laxonycmbu u eh cmomujb, Ca HKT-IIe Tepôyprb, 1870 and G. L. Maurer, Geschichte der Fronhöfe, der Bauernhöfe und der Hofverfassung in Deutschland, vols I-II, Erlangen, 1862.



