---
Volume: 46
Document_Title: "68. Marx to Engels. 3 August "
Page_Range: "139-142"
---

# 68. Marx to Engels. 3 August 



**[p. 68]**

MARX TO ENGELS 1 6 6

AT BRIDLINGTON QUAY

Argenteuil, 3 August 1881 11 Boulevard Thiers

DEAR FRED,

Drawing so heavily on your EXCHEQUER is a great embarrassment to me, but the anarchy which has wrought havoc with the housekeeping over the past 2 years and given rise to all sorts of arrears has been op- pressing me for some considerable time. On the 15th of this month I have £30 to pay in London, and this has been a weight on my mind since the day we left.

When we shall return is far from clear. Every day we experience the same ups and downs here as we did in Eastbourne, 16° only with the difference — as for instance yesterday — that there are sudden and frightful bouts of pain. Our Dr Dourlen, who is an excellent doc- tor and fortunately lives quite close by, immediately intervened and used one of the powerful opiates which Donkin had been deliberately keeping up his sleeve. After that shea had a good night and today feels so well that she got up for once as early as 11 o'clock and is finding dis- traction in the company of Jenny and the children.b (The diarrhoea was STOPPED on the 2nd day after our arrival. From the start Dourlen had said that if it was merely an ACCIDENT, it didn't matter; but it might also be a symptom of an actual intestinal infection. Fortunately this was not the case, therefore.)

The temporary 'improvements' do not, of course, inhibit the natural course of the disease, but they delude my wife and fortify Jenny — despite my objurgations — in the belief that our stay in Argenteuil should last as long as possible. I know better how things stand, and my anxiety is all the greater for that. Last night, IN FACT, was the first occasion on which I had anything like a decent sleep. My thoughts, they are so dull and dead as turned a mill-wheel in my head.c And this is why I have so far remained exclusively in Argenteuil, neither

[^1]: a Mrs Marx- b Jenny Longuet and her sons Jean, Henri, Edgar and Marcel-0 A pa- raphrase from Goethe's Faust (Der Tragödie Erster Teil, 'Studierzimmer').





**[p. 111]**

visiting Paris nor writing so much as a line to anybody there encou- raging them to come and visit me. Longuet has already heard Hirsch,a in the office of La Justice, express legitimate surprise at this 'abstention'.

And, INTO THE BARGAIN, a Kotzebue-like drama has been played out here during the past 5 days.

Jenny had, for cook, A VERY LIVELY YOUNG GIRL FROM THE COUNTRY with whom she was satisfied in every respect, since she also behaved most amiably towards the children. Her only testimonial from her last MIS- TRESS, wife of Dr Reynaud (another Argenteuil doctor), was a 'nega- tive' one to the effect that she had quitted her service voluntarily. Old MOTHER Longuet who, so far as she is able, exercises a dictatorship over Jenny, was by no means satisfied with this, nor could she think of anything better to do than to go and write, off her own bat, to Ma- dame Reynaud.

Madame Reynaud is a pretty coquette and her husband a dissolute jackass; hence things happen in this couple's house that are much gos- siped about in Argenteuil. They didn't know that their former maid had again taken service in the same locality, and with none other than Mr Longuet, an intimate friend of Dr Dourlen's whose wife was an intimate enemy of Madame Reynaud's! THIS WAS TO BE LOOKED

So one fine morning along comes Madame Reynaud — not, hith- erto, personally acquainted with Jennychen —, tells the latter that the girl had had improper affairs with men (et Madame?) and, what is worse, is a thief having, dans l'espèce,b stolen a gold ring of hers; she assures Jenny that she means to settle the matter en famille,' without appealing to the 'autorités' etc. Well and good, Jennychen SUMMONS THE GIRL, Madame Reynaud chats with and AT THE SAME TIME threatens her, the girl confesses, returns the ring — whereat Dr Rey- naud denounces the unfortunate creature to the juge de paix.d UPSHOT: yesterday she was brought before the juge d'instruction' at Versailles. As you know, the Code, ' 6 7 being a relic of Roman Law whereby/amt- lia = servi,' refers to Assizes petty crimes which would ordinarily come before a police court.

In the meantime Jenny had made every imaginable representation to the juge de paix, an excellent man, but the matter had ceased to rest

[^1]: AFTER.

[^2]: ' Carl Hirsch-"5 Here: in this particular case.-0 Here: in private.-d police court magi- strate -c examining magistrate - r slaves





**[p. 112]**

with him the moment he had been officially notified of it. Neverthe- less, Jenny's statements, which he wrote down, and la Reynaud's extra-judicial procedure, which she also placed on record, will be of some benefit to the girl.

Jenny's defence of the girl surprised the juge de paix, but he took it all in a very light vein. Mais vous ne voulez pas défendre le vol? he asked her.— Mais non, Monsieur, commencez par arrêter tous les grands voleurs d'Argenteuil, et de Paris par dessus le marché!a

The immediate upshot is that she has no cook. The stupid GIRL from London — sister of our one-time Carry — is GOOD FOR NOTHING IN THAT LINE and in any case has her hands full with the 4 children.

Apropos. Nordau — who is taking Hirsch's place on the Vossische Zeitung — was awarded a French order! Whereupon Hirsch de- nounced him to La Justicel The latter attacked the government for decorating such a traducer of France (he is a German-Hungarian Jew who attacked Tissot on Bismarck's behalf in his le vrai pays des milliards168), likewise Bleichröder who wished to encumber la belle France with indemnities of 10 rather than 5 milliards. 169

That jackass Nordau, presently in Paris, replied to La Justice, in a letter in which he made himself out to be the CHAMPION of France. Whereupon he was unmasked in La Justice and, the day after, in La République française.

Salut.

Your

Moor

[^1]: First published abridged in Der Briefwechsel Printed according to the original zwischen F. Engels und K. Marx, Bd. 4, Stutt- gart, 1913 and in full in MEGA, Published in English in full for the Abt. Ill, Bd. 4, Berlin, 1931 f l r s t t l m e

[^2]: a You're not proposing to stand up for theft? — No, monsieur, but start of Fby arresting all the big thieves of Argenteuil, not to mention those of Paris.



