---
Volume: 46
Document_Title: "71. Marx to Engels. 9 August "
Page_Range: "144-147"
---

# 71. Marx to Engels. 9 August 



**[p. 70]**

MARX TO CARL HIRSCH

IN PARIS

Argenteuil, 6 August3 1881 11 Boulevard Thiers

Dear Hirsch,

I have been here for nearly a fortnight ' 6 4; haven't visited Paris or any of my acquaintances. My wife's condition has permitted neither the one nor the other.

Because of her growing weakness, it is possible that I shall have to leave much earlier than I originally planned and I therefore intend

(if NO ACCIDENT INTERFERES) t O C O m e t O P a r i s TOMORROW MORNING w i t h Lenchen and Johnny. I shall take a cab to your house and, if your time permits, count on your accompanying us. ' 7 ' Regards to Kaub.

Your

K. Marx

71

MARX TO ENGELS

[Argenteuil,] 9 August 1881

Have just received your letter. I am registering this one; Longuet says that, while there can be no question of Stieberian tampering

[^1]: First published in: Marx and Engels, Printed according to the original Works, Second Russian Edition, Vol. 50, Moscow 1981 Published in English for the first time

[^2]: AT BRIDLINGTON QUAY

[^3]: DEAR FRED,

[^4]: a July in the ms.





**[p. 116]**

with letters, registered ones, especially at little places like Argenteuil, are handled with greater despatch.

On Satudaya we took my wife to Paris; she watched it go by from an open carriage, which pleased her much (on myself it made the im- pression ofa foire perpétuelleb). A few pauses, of course, and SITTING DOWN BEFORE cafés. On the way back she felt momentarily sick, but wants to go there again.

Her condition is, as usual, sometimes too much to bear, sometimes better for hours on end. She grows steadily thinner and at the same time weaker. Yesterday there was slight cutaneous bleeding which the doctorc considers a symptom of debility. I told him we must seriously consider going home; he said we could wait a day or two be- fore finally deciding. She herself, after I had spoken to her about leav- ing at the end of this week, played a trick on me by sending out a mass of washing which will not be returned until the beginning of next week. At all events I shall let you know by telegraph when we are leaving (should there not be time SIMPLY to notify you beforehand by letter). Oddly enough, though I get damned little rest at night and my days are racked with worry, everyone tells me how well I look — as is, indeed, the case.

Jennychen's asthma is bad, the house being a very draughty one. The child is heroic, as always.

On Sunday I was to show Helend round Paris. I wrote and advised Hirsche of it beforehand — and IN THE NICK OF TIME. He was just on the point of leaving for Germany (to the intense annoyance of Kaub and the chagrin of his wife). He wants to show the party leaders in Germany that there's nothing out of the way about expos- ing oneself to apprehension by the police. He made off yester- day.

here yesterday. Today we expect, for the same PERFORMANCE, Lissaga- ray and our doctor's wife (along with her sister).

From Jaclard we learned that he had attended an election meeting at Batignolles where the following put themselves up as candidates: Henry Maret, our Dr Regnard and — Pyat, who turned up — SELF-UNDERSTOOD with the permission of the police — suddenly and unex- pectedly. Pyat was frightfully jeered at. When he mentioned the

[^1]: A pleasant couple, Jaclard and his Russian wife/ came to déjeunerg

[^2]: a 6 August-b perpetual fair-c Dourlen-d Helene Demuth- e Carl Hirsch (see pre- vious letter).-' Anna Korvin-Krukovskaya-g luncheon





**[p. 117]**

Commune there was a general cry of ' Vous l'avez lâchée Pa Regnard fared no better. In order to appear paradoxical and profound, the idiot opened with the declaration: 'Je suis contre la UbertéPb GENERAL HOWLING! His subsequent declaration that it was 'liberté des congrega- tions'1 c he had meant availed him nothing. T h e champion of anti- clericalism ' 7 2 was a flop, likewise Henry Maret.

It may be that the extreme left will slightly increase its numbers, but the chief upshot of this will PROBABLY be victory for Gambetta. Things being what they are in France, the shortness of the election period will decide the issue in favour of faiseursd with numerous 'strongholds' in their possession, prospective bestowers of places in the machinery of government, and the men who control the 'exchequer', etc. T h e 'Grévystes' e could have licked Gambetta if, after the latter's recent FAILURES, they had had the energy to throw his appendages, Ca- zot, Constans and Farre, out of the cabinet. Since they didn't, the place-hunters, speculators on the Bourse, etc., etc., are saying to themselves, 'GAMBETTA IS THE MANP THEY HAVE NOT DARED TO ATTACK HIM IN

HIS STRONGHOLDS, YOU CANNOT RELY UPON THEM.The general onslaughts daily made upon him in the radical and reactionary press CONTRIBUTE

At the same time as this letter, another will go off to Tussychen, tel- ling her what to do. I shall need a little more money, since this time the journey is going to cost a lot (the doctor thinks, moreover, that a few days in Boulogne might do the patient good because of the sea air), we shall have to meet a large doctor's bill and also make some compensation to Jennychen for all the expenses we have put her to.

So Gumpert is founding a 3rd (or is it 2nd?) family? Good luck to him. It seems a sensible thing for a doctor to do. M y wife has heard a number of people extolling the Böcker woman of Man- chester.

Salut.

Your

Moor

[^1]: TO ENHANCE HIM DESPITE ALL HIS TOMFOOLERIES. O n top of which the peasants regard Gambetta as the nee plus ultra1 in possible repub- licanism.

[^2]: " You deserted it.-b I am against liberty.-0 liberty of the congregation - d humbugs-' Jules Grévy's followers-' the last word



