---
Volume: 46
Document_Title: "72. Marx to Laura Lafargue. 9 August "
Page_Range: "147-148"
---

# 72. Marx to Laura Lafargue. 9 August 



**[p. 118]**

Beesly is making ever more of an ass of himself. Weiler ought to put a stop to the glorification of Max Hirsch in The Labour Stan- dard.'1*

First published abridged in Der Briefwechsel Printed according to the original zwischen F. Eneels und K. Marx, Bd. 4, Stutt- „ , ,. , , • ^ i-, ,- , r .. ima j • r n • i^r/^x *u^ TTT Published in English lor the hrst gart, 1913 and m full in MEGA, Abt. Ill, . &

Bd. 4, Berlin, 1931 t l m e

72

MARX TO LAURA LAFARGUE 7 2

IN LONDON

[Argenteuil,] 9 August 1881 Dear Laurachen,

I can only write you a line or two as the post is about to go. Mama is in a serious condition as a result of her growing weakness. It was therefore my intention (as we shall only be able to travel by ea- sy stages this time) to set off at all costs at the end of the week, and I informed the patient accordingly. Yesterday, however, she thwarted my plan by sending out our washing. So there can be no question of our leaving before the beginning of next week.

We may — depending on the state she is in — stop in Boulogne for a few days. The doctor* thinks that (given favourable conditions) the sea air might momentarily have an invigorating effect.

Next time (but for this purpose you must write at once giving me your latest address) I shall send you a fuller report. Best wishes to Paul.b

Your

[^1]: OLD NICK

[^2]: First published in: Marx and Engels, Printed according to the original Works, Second Russian Edition, Vol. 35, Moscow, 1964

[^3]: Probably Dourlen - b Lafargue



