---
Volume: 46
Document_Title: "75. Engels to George Shipton. 15 August "
Page_Range: "151-153"
---

# 75. Engels to George Shipton. 15 August 



**[p. 122]**

Best wishes to everyone.

Your

F. E.

First published in Der Briefwechsel zwischen Printed according to the original F. Engels und K. Marx, Bd. 4, Stuttgart, „ , , . , , • ^ i- i c < c- , G , Q ' & Published in English for the first

time

75

ENGELS TO GEORGE SHIPTON

IN LONDON

[Draft]

Bridlington Quay,

15 August 1881

Dear Mr Shipton,

I cannot make it out, how you could so strangely misunderstand Mr Kautsky's article.174 To the first passage you objected because State interference went against the grain of'many prominent men in the Unions'. Of course it does, because they are at heart Manchester School ' 7 6 men and so long as their opinions of such are taken into ac- count, no working-class paper is possible. But my addition to the passage in question must have convinced you, that the State interfer- ence here alluded to, was such, and such only, as has been in England the law of the Land for years: factories and workshops' acts,177 and nothing further: things not objected to by even your 'prominent men'.

As to the second passage, Mr Kautsky says: an international regu- lation of the war of competition is as necessary as that of open warfare; we demand a Geneva Convention 178 for the workpeople of the world. The 'Geneva Convention' is an agreement entered into by the various Gov- ernments for the protection of wounded and ambulances in battle. What therefore Mr Kautsky demands, is a similar agreement be- tween the various Governments for the protection of the workpeople not of one state only, but of all, against overwork especially of women and

[^1]: a Carl Hirsch





**[p. 123]**

children. How out ofthat you can make an appeal to the workpeople of the world to meet in a Convention of delegates at Geneva, I am utterly at a loss to understand.3

You will own that the occurrence of such misunderstanding on your part cannot at all encourage me to alter my resolution.b

As to the Hirsch article, ' " I do know Mr Eccarius and only too well for a traitor to the cause and it will be utterly impossible for me to write for a paper which opens its columns to him.

Moreover, I do not see any progress. The Labour Standard remains the same vehicle of the most various and mutually contradictory views on all political and social questions which it was, perhaps una- voidably, on the first day of its existence, but which it ought no longer to be by this time, if there was an undercurrent among the British working class tending towards emancipation from the liberal Capital- ists. Such undercurrent not being shown itself up to now, I must con- clude it does not exist. If there were unmistakable signs of its exis- tence, I might make an extra effort to assist it. But I do not think that one column a week drowned as I might say amongst the remaining multifarious opinions represented in The Labour Standard could do anything towards producing it.

And as I told you, I had resolved to stop writing after the Trade Unions Congress, ' 7 5 because of want of time; so whether I write a few articles more till then, would make no difference.

So waiting and hoping for better times, I remain

Faithfully yours,

F. E.

[^1]: First published in: Marx and Engels, Reproduced from the original Works. First Russian Edition, Vol. XXVII, „ , , . , , . „ , . , , . y. l Q^s Published in English for the hrst ' time

[^2]: a In the manuscript the following passage is crossed out here: 'If you had understood the drift of the article, you must have at once seen that here was a measure of an im- mediately practical nature, so easy of execution that one of the existing governments of Europe (the Swiss Government) had been induced to take it in hand; that the proposal to equalize the hours of labour in all manufacturing countries by making factory and workshop's legislation a matter of international state agreement, was one of the greatest immediate interest to the working people. Especially to those of England who, besides the Swiss, are the best protected of all against overworking and therefore are exposed to an unfair competition on the part of Belgian, French and German work- people whose hours of work are much longer.'-b See this volume, p. 119.



