---
Volume: 46
Document_Title: "80. Engels to Marx. 18 August "
Page_Range: "159-161"
---

# 80. Engels to Marx. 18 August 



**[p. 0]**

ENGELS TO MARX

IN LONDON

Bridlington Quay, 18 August 1881 1 Sea View

Dear Moor,

Not until last night did I get your Argenteuil letter explaining your sudden arrival. I trust Tussy's indisposition is of no real signifi- cance— she wrote me a cheery letter only the day before yesterday; at all events, I shall presumably hear further details tonight or tomor- row morning, and also whether your wife accompanied you as far as Boulogne or Calais or whether she stopped off before that.

Yesterday, then, I at last plucked up the courage to make a thor- ough study of your mathematical mss. 192 without any reference to manuals and was glad to find I had no need of them. I offer you my congratulations. The thing is so crystal clear that one can only marvel at the obstinacy with which mathematicians insist on shrouding it in mystery. But that is what comes of those gentry's one-sided mentality.

To write firmly and categorically —- = - could never enter their

dy heads. And yet it is obvious that — can only be the pure expres- sion of a process undergone by x and y when the last trace of the terms x and y has disappeared and all that remains is the expression, free from all quantity, of the process of variation they are undergoing. There is no need to fear that some mathematician may have antici- pated you in this. The above method of differentiating is, after all, much simpler than any other — so much so that I myself have just used it to deduce a formula that had momentarily slipped my mind, afterwards verifying it in the usual way. The process would undoubt- edly create a great stir, especially since it clearly demonstrates that the usual method, ignoring dx dy, etc., is positively wrong. And the particular beauty of it is that only when — = - is the operation absolutely correct mathematically.



**[p. 131]**

So old Hegel was quite right in supposing that the basic premiss for differentiation was that both variables must be of varying powers and at least one of them must be to the power of at least 2 or '/2-a Now we also know why.

When we say that in y = f(x), x and y are variables, this is an asser- tion which, so long as we continue to maintain it, has no implications whatsoever and x and y still remain, pro tempore? factual constants. Only when they really change, i. e. within the function, do they become variables in fact, nor does the relationship implicit in the original equation — not of the two quantities as such, but of their variabi Ay lity — come to light till then. The first derivate -— shows this rela- ; 5 Ax tion as it occurs in the course of true variation, i. e. in any given variady tion; the final derivate = — shows it purely and simply in its generally . A y ity and hence, from — we can arrive at any — we choose, while dx Ax this itself never covers more than the particular case. But in order to proceed from the particular case to the general relation, the particu- lar case as such has to be eliminated. Hence, after the function has gone through the process from x to x' with all this implies, one can simply let x' revert to x; it is no longer the old x, a variable only in name; it has undergone real variation, and the result of that variation remains, even if we again eliminate that variation itself.

Here at last we are able to see clearly what has long been main- tained by many mathematicians who were unable to produce rational grounds for it, namely that the differential quotient is the prototype, while the differentials dx and dy are derived: the derivation of the for- mula itself requires that the two so-called irrational factors should originally constitute one side of the equation and only when one has dy reduced the equation to this, its original form, — = f(x), can one do

dx anything with it, is one rid of the irrational factors, replacing them with their rational expression.

The thing has got such a hold over me that it not only keeps going round in my head all day, but last night I actually had a dream in

[^1]: a G. W. F. Hegel, Wissenschaft der Logik, Book I, Section II, Chapter 2. Note: Der Zweck des Differentialkalkuls aus seiner Anwendung abgeleitet.-b temporarily



