---
Volume: 46
Document_Title: "82. Marx to Jenny Longuet. 18 August "
Page_Range: "163-165"
---

# 82. Marx to Jenny Longuet. 18 August 



**[p. 134]**

As regards the latest splits among the leaders of the parti ouvrier, it would be best if I told you about this in person later on.

With best wishes to Pumps and Mrs Rendstone.

Your

Moor

First published in Der Briefwechsel zwischen Printed according to the original F. Engels und K. Marx, Bd. 4, Stuttgart, r> , ,• , , • ^ •• i r i r- ,„|o Published in hnghsh lor the hrst time

82

M A R X T O J E N N Y L O N G U E T

[London,] 18 August 1881

My dear sweet child,

I came to London, i. e.c in Maitland Park about 7 o'clock. Tussychen is looking pale and thin, since weeks she eats almost nothing (literally); her nervous system is in a state of utter dejection; hence continuous sleeplessness, trembling of the hands, neuralgic con- vulsions of the face, etc.

I telegraphed at once to Dr Donkin; he put in his presence at 11 o'clock (yesterday morning), had a long consultation with and ex- amination of Tussy. He says that there is no organic disease, heart

[^1]: IN ARGENTEUIL

[^2]: d workers' party - b in embryo -c more or less a fiction-d collectivist workers' party- c The beginning of the letter is in German.





**[p. 135]**

sound, lungs sound, etc., but only action of stomach quite deranged by her foolish way of living, and nervous system fearfully over- wrought.

He has succeeded to frighten her into obedience to his prescrip- tions, and you know, if she once gives way and promises, she will keep her promise. With all that, her recovery cannot but be slow, and I arrived in the very nick of time. There was the greatest danger in case of any further delay.

Donkin was about — as he had informed me before our depar- ture— to leave this day London for the Hebrides. Because of Tussy, and hoping still to hear something of Maman, he will now stay till the end of the week.

Tell me about the state of Maman, whether she has left you, etc. How is Longuet and Harraa? and yourself and the other dear chil- dren b?

How do you go on with your new servant? Apropos. Sarah0 (Engels' Sarah), now for some hours daily the helpmate of Tussy, a girl of the best character and fitness for every thing, told Tussy that she had nothing liked better than to go with you, but Pumps did never tell her about Lizzy's having left you and about your want of a remplaçantd for her. She has also told Tussy and again myself, that she is still ready to come over to you. Only she dares not travel alone to France, but this matters little. I myself can bring her over later on.

And now adio, dear child. The pleasure to be with you and the dear children has given me a more substantial satisfaction than I could have found anywhere else.

My compliments to that excellent Dr Dourlen. With 1000 kisses for the children

Yours,

Old Nick

Tussy sends her best wishes to Wolfc and the whole family.

[^1]: First published, in Russian, in the maga- zine Machalo, No. 5, St Petersburg, 1899

[^2]: Reproduced from the original

[^3]: Published in English for the first time

[^4]: " Henri Longuet-b Jean, Edgar and Marcel -c Parker-d locum-1' Edgar Longuet



