---
Volume: 46
Document_Title: "85. Engels to August Bebel. 25 August "
Page_Range: "166-169"
---

# 85. Engels to August Bebel. 25 August 



**[p. 85]**

ENGELS TO AUGUST BEBEL

IN LEIPZIG

London, 25 August 1881

Dear Bebel,

I would have replied sooner to your letter of 13.5.197 But, after the Leipzig 'local', 198 I waited to see whether you might perhaps send me another forwarding address; as you haven't I am using the old one, and also enclosing a letter from Tussy Marx to Mrs Liebknecht, for whom we haven't got an address either.

Bernstein still writes to say he wants to leave the Sozialdemokrat, and now proposes that Kegel be taught the ropes and, once he knows them, appointed in his place. My view is that any change would be for the worse. Bernstein has made good, so greatly exceeding our ex- pectations (for instance, his articles on 'intellects'184 were, trifles apart, quite excellent and written along exactly the right lines) that it would be hard to find anyone better. Kegel hasn't proved himself, at any rate in this sphere, and, as things stand now, all experimentation should be avoided. I have urgently requested Bernstein to stay,3 and believe you could do no better than give him similar advice. In his hands the paper is getting better and better, and so, too, is he. He has genuine tact and is quick on the uptake—just the reverse of Kautsky, who is an exceptionally good chap, but a born pedant and hair- splitter in whose hands complex questions are not made simple, but simple ones complex. Like all the rest of us, I am very fond of him as a person and, in longer articles of the review type, he might occasion- ally do something pretty good, but even with the best will in the world he can't go against the grain, c'est plus fort que lui.h On a news- paper, a doctrinaire of this kind is a real disaster; even Edec was forced to append a critical note to one of his articles in the last Sozialde- mokrat. On the other hand, he has written a fly-sheet for the consump-

[^1]: » See this volume, pp. 85-86 and 128.-b it's too much for him- c Eduard Bern- stein





**[p. 138]**

tion of peasants in Austria" in which he gives proof of something of his mother's15 gift for short story writing; aside from one or two erudite expressions, it's really good and should be effective.

I wrote to Liebknecht about the speeches in the Landtag, and in reply 199 was told that these had been a matter of'tactics' (but I had pointed out that it was precisely those tactics that prevented us from siding openly with him) and that speeches of a different kind would shortly be made in the Reichstag. True, this has now been done by you 2 0 0—but what is one to think of Liebknecht's unfortunate and wholly unnecessary remark about the 'Reich Chancellor's hones- ty' 2 0 1? It may have been meant ironically, but that's not evident from the report, and what capital the bourgeois press made out of it! I have sent no further reply — it does no good, after all. But Kautsky, too, has told us not only that Liebknecht is writing letters all over the place — e.g. to Austria — saying Marx and I are in complete agree- ment with him and had sanctioned his 'tactics', but also that people believe him. This really can't go on indefinitely! Again, the Freiheit has got a lot of fun of Hartmann V speech on the Accident Bill202

which, if the passage they quote is genuine, was certainly a pretty wretched affair.

In France, working-class candidates obtained 20,000 votes in Paris and 40,000 in the provinces 203 and, if their leaders hadn't perpetrat- ed one stupidity after another since setting up the collectivist work- ers' party, things would have gone even better. But there, too, the masses are better than most of their leaders. For instance, several Par- isian candidates lost thousands of votes through using empty revolu- tionary verbiage (as much part of the business in Paris as patter is of trade) in the provinces as well where it was taken seriously and peo- ple asked: 'How can you make a revolution without weapons and or- ganisation?' For the rest, developments in France are taking their regular, normal and very necessary course along peaceful lines, and that is a very good thing just now, for otherwise the provinces could not be swept earnestly into the movement.

I understand very well that your fingers should itch, when every- thing's going so nicely for us in Germany and you, having your hands tied, cannot reap the fruits of victories that are all but falling into your laps. But this does no harm. Many people in Germany have set

[^1]: a [K. Kautsky,] Der Vetter aus Amerika, eine Erzählung für Landleute, erbaulich zu lesen. - b Minna Kautsky-0 Georg Wilhelm Hartmann





**[p. 139]**

Your

F.E.

Viereck is in Copenhagen. Address poste restante, Copenhagen.

[^1]: First published, in Russian, in Marx-Engels Printed according to the original Archives, Vol. I (VI), Moscow, 1932

[^2]: Published in English for the first time



