---
Volume: 46
Document_Title: "88. Marx to Minna Kautsky. 1 October "
Page_Range: "172-173"
---

# 88. Marx to Minna Kautsky. 1 October 



**[p. 143]**

fatal illness, which day by day is drawing closer to its consummation, prevented this. I am her garde malade."

I get the Arbeiterstimme regularly; it edifies but does not surprise me, for I've known my Swiss for decades.

With regard to Mr Mc Guire, it would appear from your letter that he is in London. How comes it that none of our New York friends gave him letters of recommendation? I have, prima facie,h always been somewhat suspicious of YANKEE socialists and know in particular that the kind that Shipton keeps in touch with are *very crotchety and sectarian. With all that, Mr Mc Guire may be an excellent party man.*

Yours very sincerely,

Karl Marx

their compliments.

Printed according to the original

Published in English for the first time

88

MARX TO MINNA KAUTSKY

London, 1 October 1881 41 Maitland Park Road, N. W.

Dear Madam,

I would have taken the liberty of inviting you to stay at my house in London — and your son will have told you how greatly everyone in the family admires your works— had not my wife's shocking and,

My wife and daughter' send you

First published, in Russian, in Marx-Engels Archives, Vol. I (VI), Moscow, 1932

[^1]: IN PARIS

[^2]: I enclose herewith a note for my daughter.210 Argenteuil is quite close to Paris, about 20 minutes from the Gared St Lazare.

[^3]: a nurse - b Here: from the outset.-c Eleanor Marx -d Station



