---
Volume: 46
Document_Title: "89. Engels to Eduard Bernstein. 25 October "
Page_Range: "173-180"
---

# 89. Engels to Eduard Bernstein. 25 October 



**[p. 144]**

I fear, fatal illness put a stop, as it were, to our intercourse with the outside world.

With sincerest wishes for your future prosperity,

Yours very truly,

Karl Marx

First published in the yearly, Das Jahr, Printed according to the original Wien 1929

' Published in English for the first time

89

ENGELS TO EDUARD BERNSTEIN 2 1 1

IN ZURICH

London, 25 October 1881

Dear Mr Bernstein,

I am most grateful to you for having written to me about the Egalité business.212 Aside from the point at issue, this provides me with an opportunity of letting you know what is Marx's attitude, and hence also my own, towards the French movement. And from this one instance you will be able to gauge our attitude towards other non-German movements, in so far as these are in sympathy with us and we with them.

I am glad that you are not at present in a position to give financial support to the Egalité. Lafargue's letter was another of those coups de tête' which the French, in particular those south of the line Bordeaux- Lyons, now and again find themselves unable to resist. So certain was he of perpetrating a stroke of genius and a blunder rolled into one, that he didn't even tell his wifeb (who has prevented many such things) about it until after the event. With the exception of Lafargue, who is always in favour of'something being done', n'importe quoi,c we over here were unanimously against Egalité No. 3.d I confidently

[^1]: a impulsive actions-b Laura Lafargue-0 no matter what- d Engels means the third series of L'Egalité.





**[p. 145]**

predicted that, with their 5,000 frs (if as much), they would last out for 32 numbers. If Guesde and Lafargue are intent on acquiring the reputation in Paris of tueurs dejourneaux,a we can't stop them, but nor shall we do anything else. If, contrary to all expectation, the paper improves again, and if it gets really good, we shall always be able to see what can be done if it finds itself in a predicament. But it's abso- lutely essential that these gentlemen should learn at last how to stand on their own feet.

The fact of the matter is that, during the past 12 or 15 months, our French friends, who are trying to set up the parti ouvrier,b have made one blunder after another, and this applies to all of them without ex- ception. The first was committed by Guesde when, for absurdly pur- ist reasons, he prevented Malon from accepting the editorship of the labour department on the Intransigeant at a salary of 12,000 frs. That was when the whole squabble began. This was followed by the unpar- donable folly over the Emancipation, when Malon allowed himself to be misled by the false promises of the Lyonnais (the worst working men in France), while Guesde showed himself no less feverishly an- xious to have a daily paper à tout prix.c Next came the hair-splitting over the matter of candidature,208 in which connection it is more than probable that Guesde was guilty of the solecism you reprobate, though it is obvious to me that Malon was seeking to pick a quarrel. Finally, the ingress into, followed by the egress from, the Citoyen français, of Mr Bourbeau, alias Secondigné, an adventurer of the worst repute — his egress being due simply to non-payment of salary, not to any political motive. Next, Guesde, in very mixed company, joined the most recent Citoyen, and Malon and Brousse the miserable Pro- létaire which they — or Malon at any rate — had always secretly opposed as a vulgar loutish rag.

The Prolétaire was the organ of the very narrowest clique of the most inveterate scribblers among the Parisian workers. It was axio- matic that access could be had and contributions made only by ge- nuine manual workers. The most bigoted Weitlingian 'scholar'- baiting was the order of the day. The sheet was in consequence quite without substance, while preening itself on being la plus pure expres- sion0 of the Parisian proletariat. Hence, for all its apparent cordiality, it always secretly looked upon other papers, including the 2 Egalités, as mortal enemies and intrigued against them.

[^1]: a killers of newspapers - b workers' party -c at all c^sts -d the purest expression





**[p. 146]**

But the link that binds Malon and Brousse to this potty little sheet is their common jealousy of Marx. To the majority of French social- ists it is an anathema that the nation which confers upon the world the boon of idées françaises * and has a monopoly of ideas—that Paris, centre des lumièresh — must now all of a sudden import its socialist ideas ready-made from a German, Marx. But there's no denying the fact and, what is more, Marx's genius, his almost excessive scientific scru- pulousness and his incredible erudition place him so far above all the rest of us that anyone who ventures to criticise his discoveries is more likely to burn his fingers than anything else. That is something which must be left to a more advanced epoch. If, then, French social- ists (i. e. the majority) are obliged, whether they like it or not, to bow to the inevitable, it will not happen without a certain amount of grumbling. It is the Prolétaire people who say, of both Guesde and Lafargue, that they are Marx's mouthpieces or, translated into more familiar idiom, that ils veulent vendre les ouvriers français aux Prussiens et à Bismarcks And in everything M. Malon writes, this grumbling is most plainly audible and, what's more, in most ignoble form: Malon is at pains to find or impute other progenitors (Lassalle, Schäffle and actually De Paepe!) on whom to father Marx's discoveries. Now it is, of course, perfectly in order to disagree with party members, no mat- ter whom, as to their mode of procedure in this or that case, or to dis- pute or differ on a point of theory. But thus to contest the right of a man like Marx to his own achievements is to betray a pettiness such as is found, one might almost say, only in a compositor,— a race of whose self-conceit you will surely have had ample experience. I sim-

[^1]: a French ideas-b centre of enlightenment-0 they want to sell the French workers to the Prussians and Bismarck





**[p. 147]**

ply cannot understand how anyone can be envious of genius; it's something so very special that we, who have not got it, know it to be unattainable right from the start; but to be envious of anything like that one must have to be frightfully small-minded. The furtive way Malon goes about it, doesn't improve matters. The fact that it is he who eventually comes out worst, betraying his lack of knowledge and discernment at every turn, is something of which he might at some time be made unpleasantly aware, should it at any time become ne- cessary to scrutinise Malon's goodly Histoire du Socialisme 'depuis les temps les plus reculés'* (!!) and other productions with an eye to their substance.

Brousse is, I think, the most hopelessly muddle-headed man I have ever known. He has dropped the anarchy — i. e. opposition to political activity and voting — out of anarchism, while at the same time retaining all its other catchwords and, more notably, its tactics. Thus, in tedious articles in the Prolétaire directed against Guesde

(but not naming him), he is currently brooding on the insoluble ques- tion of how to set up an organisation in such a way as to preclude a dictatorship (Guesde's!!). If this consummate literary and theoreti- cal ignoramus, whose forte, however, is cliquism, is again able to play a part, the blame must be shared by Lafargue, Guesde and Malon.

Lastly Guesde. In matters of theory this man is by far the most lucid thinker amongst the Parisians, and one of the few who takes no excep- tion at all to the German origins of present-day socialism. Hinc Mae lacrimae} Which is why the gentlemen of the Prolétaire are letting it be known that he is merely Marx's mouthpiece, a rumour which, with lugubrious mien, Malon and Brousse carry further afield. Out- side that clique no one dreams of such a thing. What there is to it, we shall see anon. That he is domineering may well be true. Every one of us is domineering in the sense that he would like to see his views pre- dominate. If Guesde seeks to do this by direct and Malon by tortuous means, it says much for Guesde's character and for the superiority of Malon's worldly wisdom — especially in dealing with people like the Parisians who obstinately dig their heels in if you try to dictate to them but are only too delighted to let you lead them by the nose. Come to that, whenever I have heard anyone who is worth his salt described as domineering, I have only been able to conclude that

[^1]: a from the earliest times. See B. Malon, Histoire du socialisme depuis les temps les plus reculés jusqu'à nos jours. - b Hence those tears (Terence, Andria, I, 1, 99).





**[p. 148]**

If, in addition, you take the inability of the French, especially the Parisians, to conceive of differences that are other than personal, and it is obvious enough how it was that these gentry, as soon as they had scored a few small successes, saw themselves already at the goal, sought to divide as yet inexistent spoils, and fell out with each other in the process.

Guesde's pamphlets and articles, by the way, are the best to have appeared in the French language, and he is, moreover, one of the best speakers in Paris. Also, we have always found him forthcoming and reliable.

Now for ourselves. We, i. e. Marx and I, do not even correspond with Guesde. We have only written to him for specific reasons of busi- ness. We have no more than a general idea of what Lafargue says in his letters to Guesde, nor have we by any means read everything Guesde writes to Lafargue. Heaven only knows what plans the two of them have exchanged of which we have no inkling. Every now and again Marx, like myself, has transmitted advice to Guesde via La- fargue, but it has hardly ever been taken.

It is true, however, that Guesde came over here when the question arose of drafting a programme for the French workers' party.68

The considérants to this was dictated to him by Marx," here in my own room, in the presence of Lafargue and myself: the worker is free only when he is the owner of his instruments of labour — this may assume either individual or collective form — the individual form of owner- ship is being daily and increasingly superseded by economic develop- ments, hence, all that remains is that of communal ownership, etc.— a masterpiece of cogent reasoning, calculated to explain things to the masses in a few words; I have seldom seen its like and, even in this concise version, found it astonishing. The remaining contents of the programme were then discussed; we added this and took out that, but

[^1]: See K. Marx, 'Preamble to the Programme of the French Workers' Party'.





**[p. 149]**

as for Guesde being Marx's mouthpiece, how little this holds water is evident from the fact that he insisted on including his nonsense about the minimum du salaire* and since not we but the French were respon- sible for the thing, we eventually gave him his head, although he ad- mitted that, theoretically, it was absurd.

Brousse was in London at the time and would have liked to join us. But Guesde was short of time and anticipated, not incorrectly, that Brousse would engage in tedious arguments about ill-digested anar- chist terms; he therefore insisted that Brousse should not attend this meeting. C'était son affaire} But Brousse has never forgiven him for it and it's to that time that his intrigues against Guesde go back.

This programme was subsequently discussed by the French and ac- cepted with a few alterations, including Malon's which were by no means improvements.

Then, too, I wrote 2 articles for the Egalité No. II on Le socialisme de M. Bismarck' and that, so far as I'm aware, is the sum total of our active participation in the French movement.

But what mainly annoys the small-minded carpers who count for nothing, yet like to think themselves all-important, is the fact that Marx, thanks to his theoretical and practical achievements, has at- tained a position in which he enjoys the complete trust of the best people in all the labour movements in the various countries. At critical junc- tures it is to him they turn for advice, when they generally find that his advice is the best. He occupies that position in Germany, in France, and in Russia, not to speak of the smaller countries. Hence it is not Marx who imposes his opinion, let alone his will, on these people; rather it is these people who come to him of their own accord. And it is precisely on this that Marx's peculiar influence rests, an influence of the utmost importance to the movement. Malon also wished to come here, but to procure a special invitation from Marx through La- fargue, which naturally he didn't get. We were as prepared to deal with him as we are with anybody else de bonne volonté,6 but invite him! Why? Who has ever had an invitation of that kind from us?

Marx's attitude, and hence also my own, towards the French is the same as towards the other national movements. We are constantly in touch with them in so far as it is worth our while and opportunities

[^1]: a minimum wage- b It was his business.-0 F. Engels, 'The Socialism of Mr Bismarck, M I ' , L'Égalité, Nos. 7 and 10, 3 and 24 March 1880 (see present edition, Vol. 24).- d willingly





**[p. 150]**

1. It was Guesde, and with him Lafargue, who, in the Egalité, brought quite undeserved fame to Malon, turned him, as it were, into a legend, and this simply because Guesde thought, in typically French fashion, that as a writer one had to have a working man beside one.

2. And here is something the recipient of the letter has authorised me to tell you: Lissagaray, who was the chairman of the meeting at which Malon arraigned that blackguard Lullier, writes to say that, just as the meeting was supposed to begin, Lullier sent word to Malon requesting a short discussion. Malon departed, didn't return, and fi- nally his Comité went in search of him (Lissagaray was the chairman of the Comité and the meeting) only to find him toping most jovially and on the brink of a peaceable understanding with Lullier, the man he had (rightly) described as the dirtiest of blackguards. Had not Malon had to leave at 9 o'clock for the congress at Zurich,213 there would have been the risk of a full reconciliation. And he describes himself as a man of politics!

Mesa's address is: J. Mesa, 36 Rue du Bac, Paris. Marx knows nothing about this letter. He has been in bed for the past 12 days with bronchitis and all kinds of complications, but since Sundayb — due precautions having been taken — there has no longer been any danger. I've been anxious enough, I can tell you. Now things are looking up and tomorrow, 27 October, we shall, I trust, show the world that we are still there as large as life.2 ' 4 Kindest regards to Kautsky.

Your

F. E.

As regards the Egalité, I think it would be best if our people were not to found a new paper for the time being, at any rate until the state of affairs within the party has become a little less obscure. If they do want to start one, however, neither we nor anyone else can stop them, though I don't see how it's going to be managed this time without

[^1]: a in revolutionary matters - b 23 October



