---
Volume: 46
Document_Title: "90. Engels to Johann Philipp Becker. 4 November "
Page_Range: "180-181"
---

# 90. Engels to Johann Philipp Becker. 4 November 



**[p. 151]**

a row between the Egalité and the Prolétaire. This wouldn't be a major disaster, but it would still be a perhaps unnecessary case of teething trouble.

What kind of operation is Kautsky having? — I trust he won't let himself be cut up into a complete Malthusian!

First published, in Russian, in Marx-Engels Printed according to the original Archives, Book I, 1924 . Published in English in lull lor the first time

90

ENGELS TO JOHANN PHILIPP BECKER

IN GENEVA

[London,] 4 November 1881 122 Regent's Park Road, N.W.

Dear Old Man,

Your postcard re the congress2 ' 5 arrived too late for me to write to you about it. Since then we have also had sundry calamities over here. Mrs Marx has been in bed for months, critically ill, and then Marx went down with bronchitis accompanied by all sorts of com- plications which, at his time of life and considering the general state of his health, was certainly no laughing matter. Fortunately the worst is over and, so far as Marx is concerned, all danger has been com- pletely eliminated for the time being, though he has to spend the greater part of the day in bed and is greatly weakened.

Herewith money order for 4 pounds sterling = 100 frs 80 c. which is what I have to send you this time. I trust it will come in handy for, delighted though I am to hear that you have been able to make a start at earning a living, it is after all only a start and I'm only sorry that of late I myself have been somewhat short and therefore unable to step into the breach any sooner.

I'm always glad when a so-called international congress passes off, as it did on this occasion, without anyone making an ass of himself in public. You always get such a hotchpotch of people attending these affairs, some of whom have no other object than to look important in

