---
Volume: 46
Document_Title: "91. Engels to Eduard Bernstein. 30 November "
Page_Range: "181-185"
---

# 91. Engels to Eduard Bernstein. 30 November 



**[p. 152]**

Our people in Germany have given a splendid account of them- selves at the elections.216 In 23 or 27 constituencies (I can't find out the exact number) they were in the second ballot, despite the fact that on this occasion all the other parties turned out to the very last man. And this under the stress of the exceptional law 16 and state of siege,65

without a press, without meetings, without any means of public agita- tion and in the certain knowledge that by way of return the livelihood of some thousands within the party would again be sacrificed. It is al- together splendid and the impression it has made throughout Europe, and particularly here in England, has been quite tremendous. How many seats we get is neither here nor there. Enough anyway to say what is necessary in the Reichstag. But the fact that we have gained ground in the larger towns instead of losing it — that is first rate and here's three cheers for our lads in Germany!

Your old friend,

F.E.

First published in: F. Engels, Vergessene Printed according to the original Briefe (Briefe Friedrich Engels' an Johann Phi- „ , , . , , . ^ ,- lipp Becker), Berlin, 1920 Published m English for the first time

91

London, 30 November 1881

Dear Mr Bernstein,

[^1]: ENGELS TO EDUARD BERNSTEIN 2 1 7

[^2]: IN ZURICH

[^3]: If any one outside event has contributed to putting Marx more or less to rights again, then it is the elections.2 ' 6 Never has a proletariat conducted itself so magnificently. In England, after the great defeat of 1848,218 there was a relapse into apathy and, in the end, resigna- tion to bourgeois exploitation, with the proviso that the TRADES UNIONS





**[p. 153]**

fought individual battles for higher wages. In France the proletariat disappeared from the stage after the 2nd December.219 In Germany, after 3 years of unprecedented persecution and unrelenting pressure, during which any form of public organisation and even communica- tion was a sheer impossibility, our lads have returned, not only in all their former strength, but actually stronger than before.16 And strong- er in one crucial respect, in that the movement's centre of gravity has shifted from the semi-rural districts of Saxony to the large indus- trial towns.

The bulk of our people in Saxony consist of hand-loom weavers, who are doomed to obsolescence by the power-loom and are only just enabled to keep going by starvation wages and secondary occupa- tions (gardening, toy carving, etc.). These people find themselves in an economically reactionary situation and represent an obsolescent stage of production. So they are not born representatives of revolu- tionary socialism — not, at any rate, to the same degree as are the workers in large-scale industry. Hence they are not reactionary by nature (as, for instance, the remaining hand-loom weavers eventually became over here — the hard core of the 'CONSERVATIVE WORKING MEN') but cannot be relied upon in the long run. This is also very largely due to their appallingly miserable condition, which means that they have far less power of resistance than townsmen, and also to their disper- sion, which makes them easier to enslave politically than the inhab- itants of large towns. The facts reported in the Sozialdemokrat" fill one with admiration for the heroism with which so many of those poor devils continued to stand firm.

But they are not the right kind of nucleus for a great national mov- ement. In certain circumstances — as in 1865-70 — their poverty ren- ders them more readily receptive to socialist views than the inhabi- tants of large towns. But this same poverty also makes them unreli- able. A drowning man clutches at any straw, nor can he wait for a boat to push off from the bank and come to his rescue. The boat is socialist revolution, the straw, protective tariffs and state socialism. It is significant that there, in our old constituencies, it was almost only conservatives who stood any chance against us. And if, on a previous occasion, Kayser could talk such rubbish about protective tariffs 22° without anyone's venturing any real objection, whose was the

[^1]: a 'Warum sind wir in Glauchau (Sachsen) unterlegen?', Sozialdemokrat, No. 47, 17 No- vember 1881.





**[p. 154]**

Now everything's different. Berlin, Hamburg, Breslau, Leipzig, Dresden, Mainz, Offenbach, Barmen, Elberfeld, Solingen, Nurem- berg, Frankfurt am Main, Hanau, as well as Chemnitz and the Erz- gebirge districts — that's backing of quite a different order. A class that is revolutionary by reason of its economic situation has come to be the nucleus of the movement. Aside from that, the movement is evenly distributed over the entire industrial area of Germany and, from being restricted to a few local centres, has only now come to be a national movement. And that is what frightens the bourgeois most of all.

As regards those who have been elected, we shall have to hope for the best, although I find it very difficult to do so where some of them are concerned. But it would be a disaster if, this time, Bebel were not to be returned.222 For there will be many new elements—each armed, no doubt, with his own little schemes — whom Bebel alone, with his unerring tact, would be able to keep in order and prevent from making asses of themselves.

As regards the French, it would now be best simply to let Messrs Malon and Brousse have their head, and show what they can do. But it's unlikely to come to that. One of these days the Egalité will ap- pear; Brousse will, as before, be guardedly libellous, launching at- tacks in the Prolétaire without naming names, while the others, fall- ing headlong into the snare, will, in their attacks, name names from the outset, whereupon they will be hailed as disturbers of the peace, sectarians, spreaders of dissension and budding dictators. Nothing can be done to stop this. The fellows are completely incapable of waiting until their opponents have got into a mess of their own con- triving, but must perforce take issue with them and thus give them a longer lease of life. Left to their own devices Malon and, more espe- cially, Brousse would scupper themselves (and probably each other) within 6 months. But as things are, it may take longer.

Like almost all such congresses, the Congress of Rheims 223 served to impress the outside world but, seen in the cold light of day, was a swindle. Of the 'federations' represented there, only the Centre, Nord and Est really exist; the others exist only on paper. The Al- gerian federation had elected the bourgeois Henry Maret {radical depu- ty) as its delegate!!, which just shows what kind of allies Malon has got. Guesde had wanted only properly organised federations to be re-



**[p. 155]**

presented on the Comité national—but his proposal was turned down. This was misrepresented, i. e. suppressed, in the official account in the Pro- létaire.' Thus, half the delegates to the congress and on the Comité na- tional represent nothing at all, or at best only castles in Spain. The haste to declare the Prolétaire, already completely taken over by Malon and Brousse, an official gazette was due solely to the desire to steal a march on the forthcoming Égalité. As usual, none of the reso- lutions on organisation were determined by expediency but by the opportunist considerations of the parties concerned.

Here is something that will give you an idea of Malon's Marxo- phobia: last spring he asked Lafargue, when the latter was in Paris, to obtain from Marx a foreword to the new edition of Malon's Histoire du Socialisme; needless to say, Lafargue laughed in his face and told him he must have a very poor idea of Marx if he thought him capable of lending himself to such humbug.

G. Howell, luckily not returned as 'labour candidate' for Stafford, is undoubtedly the biggest blackguard of all the politicantib ex- working men here. He was until recently secretary of the TRADES UNIONS PARLIAMENTARY COMMITTEE (needless to say, a salaried post) and took occasion to cook the books, this being only hushed up with some difficulty; however, he was given the sack.

Marx is still very run down, isn't allowed to leave his room or engage in any serious occupation, but he is visibly gaining weight. His wife is growing ever weaker.

With best regards,

Yours,

F.E.

[^1]: Within the next few days I shall write to K. K. of Käsburg0 about the Polish affair.224 In the meantime, give him my best regards.

[^2]: First published, in Russian, in Marx-Engels Archives, Book I, Moscow, 1924

[^3]: Printed according to the original

[^4]: Published in English in full for the first time

[^5]: a 'Cinquième congrès national ouvrier socialiste de Reims. Compte rendu analytique', Le Prolétaire, Nos. 162 and 163, 5 and 12 November 1881.-b politicising-' Karl Kaut- sky's jocular nickname {Käse — cheese).



