---
Volume: 46
Document_Title: "92. Marx to Jenny Longuet. 7 December "
Page_Range: "185-188"
---

# 92. Marx to Jenny Longuet. 7 December 



**[p. 92]**

MARX TO JENNY LONGUET »40

IN ARGENTEUIL

London, 7 Décembre 1881

My dear, sweet Jennychen,

You will, assuredly, find it quite natural that I should not feel in the mood for 'writing' at the moment and hence only now be sending you this brief note. Since I haven't yet even left the sick room, there was no gainsaying the doctor's interdict on my attending the funeral. Moreover I resigned myself, for only the day before her death our dear departeda had told her NURSE, apropos some neglected formality: 'WE ARE NO SUCH EXTERNAL PEOPLE!'

Schorlemmer came up from Manchester of his own accord. I still have to paint my chest, neck, etc., with iodine and, when reg- ularly repeated, this produces a somewhat tiresome and painful in- flammation of the skin. The said operation, which is only being per- formed to prevent a relapse during convalescence (now complete apart from a slight cough), is therefore doing me sterling service just at this moment. There is only one effective antidote for mental suffering, and that is physical pain. Set the end of the world on the one hand against a man with acute toothache on the other.

It now gives me extraordinary happiness to recall that, despite nu- merous misgivings, I ventured on the trip to Paris. Not only because of the time itself that she, of undying memory, spent with you and the little onesb — 'barely' marred by the image OF A CERTAIN DOMESTIC BULLY et Mirabeau de la cuisine,' but also the reliving ofthat time during the fi- nal phase of her illness. There can be no doubt that during that phase the presence of you and the children could not have distracted her to such good purpose as her mental preoccupation with you all!

It is a comfort to me that her strength gave out before it was too late. Because of the highly unusual location of the growth — which meant that it was moveable, not static—the really typical and un- bearable pain did not set in until the very last days (and even then

[^1]: Her resting-place is fairly close to that of dear 'Charles'.d

[^2]: a Jenny Marx - b Jean, Henri, Edgar and Marcel Longuet -c and kitchen Mira- beau -A son of Charles and Jenny Longuet





**[p. 157]**

Apropos. Engels — as always the truest of friends — has sent you at my request a copy of the Irish World in which an Irish bishop de- clares himself against landownership (private). This was one of the last items of NEWS I passed on to your mamma, and she thought you might get it into A FRENCH PAPER so as to horrify the French clericals. At all events it shows that such gentlemen are able to pipe any tune they like.

(In La Justice of 2 December 1881 a certain laddie by the name of B. Gendre" seeks, under the title l Le catholicisme socialiste en Allemagne', to assuage his chauvinism by taking au sérieux,b like Laveleye before him, the fanciful statistics of our friend R. Meyer (in his book Emancipa- tionskampf des 4. Standes). The fact is that, since the German Empire came into being, the so-called Catholic socialists have only once elected a deputy to the Reichstag and that, from the moment of his election, he 'figured' only as a 'member of the Centre'.225 As to the numerical strength of the Catholic labour unions, on the other hand, our R. Meyer accords France a number disproportionately greater even than that he accords Germany.)

Have just received La Justice of 7 Décembre and see that, under the rubric Gazette du jour, there is an obituary, which says inter alia:

Toute cette histoired is A SIMPLE «TEA-TOW, THERE WAS ,VO préjugés à vaincre' * I suppose, I am not mistaken in crediting Mr Ch. Longuet's inventive genius with this literary* 'enjolivement'/ * The same writer when speaking of the limitation of the working day and the factory acts,

[^1]: ' On devine que sori (il s'agit de votre mère) 'mariage avec Karl Marx, fils d'un avocat de Trêves, ne se fit pas sans peine. Il y avait à vaincre bien des préjugés, le plus fort de tous était en- core le préjugé de race. On sait que l'illustre socialiste est d'origine Israélite.''

[^2]: a real name Varvara Nikitina - b seriously-' 'One may suppose that her'(this refers to your mother) 'marriage to Karl Marx, son of a Trier barrister [Heinrich Marx], did not take place without difficulties. A great many prejudices had to be overcome, the strongest oj all being racial prejudice..The illustrious socialist is known to be of Jewish origin.' -d The whole thing -c prejudices to be overcome - r embellishment





**[p. 158]**

The allusion to your Maman's occasional anonymous correspon- dence (in fact in behalf of Irving) 226 I find indiscreet. At the time she wrote to the Gazette de Francfort (she never wrote to the Journal de Francfort — as the Justice calls it—, a simply reactionary, and philis- tine paper) the latter (the Gazette) was still on more or less friendly terms with the socialist party.

As to the 'von Westphalenfs J', they were not of Rhenish, but of* Brunswickian origin. *The father of your mother's fathera was the factotum of the* notorious * Duke of Brunswick* (during the 'seven years' war'). As such he was also overwhelmed with favours on the part of the British government and married a near relative of the Ar- gyll's.0 His papers relative to the war and politics have been published by the Minister v. Westphalen.d On the other hand,* 'par sa mère,'e

* your mother descends from a small Prussian functionaryr and was actually born at Salzwedel in the Mark. All these things need not be known, but knowing nothing of them, one ought not to pretend cor- recting* d'autress 'BIOGRAPHIES'.

* And now, my dear child, send me a long description of the doings of Johnny et Co. I still regret that Henry was not left to us at the time he went on so well. He is a child who wants a whole family's atten- dance being singly, exclusively concentrated upon him. As it is, with so many other little ones requesting your care, he is rather an impedi- ment.

Your devoted father,

K. M.

I was rather disagreeably affected by Meissner's communication, that a new third edition of the Capital Vol. I has become necessary. I wanted indeed to apply all my time — as soon as I should feel myself able again — exclusively to the finishing of the 2nd volume.227

[^1]: With many kisses to you and your 'little men'h

[^2]: a Christian Heinrich Philipp von Westphalen - b Ferdinand -c Jeanie Wishart of Pittarow -d Ch. H. Ph. von Westphalen, Geschichte der Feldzüge des Herzogs Ferdinand von Braunschweig-Lüneburg.-' through her mother-r Julius Christoph Heubel-8 other- h Jenny Longuet's four sons



