---
Volume: 46
Document_Title: "93. Marx to Johann Philipp Becker. 10 December "
Page_Range: "188-189"
---

# 93. Marx to Johann Philipp Becker. 10 December 



**[p. 159]**

First published, in Russian, in the maga- Printed according to the original zine Nachalo, No. 5, St Petersburg, 1899

Published in English in full for the first time

93

MARX TO JOHANN PHILIPP BECKER 7 2

IN GENEVA

[Postcard]

London, 10 December 1881

Dear Friend,

You may have already learned from the papers of my wife's death (she breathed her last on 2 December). You will find it natural enough that, during the first days following upon this irreplaceable loss, I should have been in no state to write letters; in fact, apart from her brother, Edgar von Westphalen, in Berlin you are the only one whom I have so far informed in person; other friends and acquain- tances have been notified by my youngest daughter.b

To the last my wife remained your loyal friend and was rightly in- censed by the party's failure to help you — a man who has, for so many years, been a staunch and heroic standard bearer — and your loyal spousec in your struggle for existence.

I myself am still an invalid, but on the road to recovery; so serious a grip had pleurisy combined with bronchitis gained over me that for a time, i. e. several days, the doctors doubted whether I would pull through.

Farewell, dear friend. Regards to your wife.

K. M.

[^1]: a The last two paragraphs were added by Marx at the beginning of the letter. - b Elea- nor Marx- C Elisabeth Becker



