---
Volume: 46
Document_Title: "94. Marx to Nikolai Danielson. 13 December "
Page_Range: "189-190"
---

# 94. Marx to Nikolai Danielson. 13 December 



**[p. 160]**

M.J. Ph. Becker, Chemin des Vollandes, Eaux Vives. Geneve {Switzerland)

First published in: Marx and Engels, Printed according to the original Works, First Russian Edition, Vol. XXVII, Moscow, 1935

94

MARX TO NIKOLAI DANIELSON

IN ST PETERSBURG

London, 13 December 1881

My Dear Friend,

On the second of this month, after a long and painful malady, I lost my wife. I had been with her during the autumn months — as her garde-malade," first to the English seaside (Eastbourne), afterwards to Argenteuil (about 20 minutes from Paris) where she and myself enjoyed together the great pleasure to be with our eldest daughter (Madame Longuet) and her 4 little boysb (the eldest about 5 years), all exceedingly attached to their grandparents.

It was a very risky affair, on my part, to undertake this voyage to Paris, considering the enfeebled state of my dear wife. But trusting to my excellent friend, Dr Donkin, I dared it in order to procure her this last satisfaction!

Unfortunately, my own health having been more or less shaky during all this time, I suddenly underwent — after our return to London — an attack of bronchitis complicated by a pleurisy, so that during 3 out of the last 6 weeks of her life, I could not see my wife, although we were in two rooms contiguous to each other.

Till now I was not yet able to leave my house. I was very near 'leaving this bad world'. The doctors want to send me to the south of France or even to Algeria.

[^1]: a nurse - b Jean, Henri, Edgar and Marcel



