---
Volume: 46
Document_Title: "95. Marx to Friedrich Adolph Sorge. 15 December "
Page_Range: "190-193"
---

# 95. Marx to Friedrich Adolph Sorge. 15 December 



**[p. 161]**

My German editora informs me that a third edition of the Capital has become necessary. This comes at a moment anything but oppor- tune. In the first instance I must first be restored to health, and in the second I want to finish off the 2nd vol.227 (even if to be published abroad) as soon as possible. I have now the additional interest to have it ready in order to inscribe in it a dedication to my wife.

However that may be, I will arrange with my editor that I shall make for the 3d edition only the fewest possible alterations and addi- tions, but, on the other hand, that he must this time only draw off 1,000 copies, instead of 3,000, as was his want. When these 1,000 co- pies forming the 3d edition are sold, then I may change the book in the way I should have done at present under different circumstances. Believe me always

Your true friend

A. Williamsb

95

[London,] 15 December 1881

Dear Sorge,

Having heard our news from over here by word of mouth from your son,c you must surely have been prepared to learn of the death of my wife, my unforgettable and beloved partner (on 2 December).

[^1]: First published, in Russian, in Minuvshiye Reproduced from the original gody, No. 1, St Petersburg, 1908

[^2]: Published in English for the first

[^3]: MARX TO FRIEDRICH ADOLPH SORGE 2 2 8

[^4]: IN HOBOKEN

[^5]: Otto Meissner-b Marx's pseudonym-0 Adolph Sorge





**[p. 162]**

I am emerging from this last illness doubly handicapped, emo- tionally by the loss of my wife, physically in that I am left with a thickening of the pleura and increased sensitivity of the bronchial tubes.

I shall, alas, have to fritter away a certain amount of time on schemes for restoring my health.

Another edition of the German text of Capital2 2 7 has now become necessary. Most inopportune so far as I'm concerned.

Your Henry George is increasingly revealing himself to be a humbug.

I trust Sorge jun. arrived in good shape; give him my regards.

Your

K. Marx

The English have latterly begun to take rather more notice of Capi- tal, etc. For instance, in last October's (or November's, *I am not quite sure *) issue of the Contemporary, there was an article by John Rae on GERMAN SOCIALISM. a (Very inadequate, full of mistakes, but -FAIR', as one of my ENGLISH FRIENDS remarked to me day before yesterday.) And why FAIR? * Because John Rae does not suppose that for the forty years I am spreading my pernicious theories I was being instigated by 'baa" motives.* 'I must praise his magnanimity!' *The fairness of making yourself at least sufficiently acquainted with the subject of your criti- cism seems a thing quite unknown to the penmen of British philis- tinism.

Before this, in the beginning of June, there was published by a cer- tain Hyndman (who had before intruded himself into my house) a little book: England for All. It pretends to be written as an exposé of the programme of the 'Democratic Federation ' 5 8— a recently formed asso- ciation of different English and Scotch radical societies, half bour- geois, half prolétaires} The chapters on Labour and Capital are only literal extracts from, or circumlocutions of, the Capital, but the fel- low does neither quote the book, nor its author, but to shield himself from exposure remarks at the end of his preface:

[^1]: a J. Rae, 'The Socialism of Karl Marx and the Young Hegelians', The Contemporary Review, Vol. XL, October 1881.-b See this volume, pp. 102-03.





**[p. 163]**

'For the ideas and much of the matter contained in chapters II and III, I am indebted to the work of a great thinker and original writer, etc., etc'

Vis-à-vis myself, the fellow wrote stupid letters of excuse, for in- stance, that 'the English don't like to be taught by foreigners', that 'my name was so much detested, etc' With all that his little book — so far as it pilfers the Capital — makes good propaganda, although the man is a 'weak' vessel, and very far from having even the pati- ence— the first condition of learning anything — of studying a matter thoroughly. All these amiable middle-class writers — if not special- ists— have an itching to make money or name or political capital immediately out of any new thoughts they may have got at by any favourable windfall. Many evenings this fellow has pilfered from me, in order to take me out and to learn in the easiest way.

Lastly, there was published on the 1st December last (I shall send you a copy of it) in the monthly review Modern Thought an article: 'Leaders of Modern Thought: No. XXIII — Karl Marx. By Ernest Belfort Bax.'

Now this is the first English publication ofthat kind which is pervad- ed by a real enthusiasm for the new ideas themselves and boldly stands up against British philistinism.This does not prevent that the biographical notices the author gives of me are mostly wrong, etc. In the exposition of my economic principles and in his translations (i. e. quotations of the Capital) much is wrong and confused, but with all that the appearance of this article, announced in large letters by pla- cards on the walls of West End London, has produced a great sensa- tion. What was most important for me, I received the said number of Modern Thought already on the 30th of November, so that my dear wife had the last days of her life still cheered up. You know the pas- sionate interest she took in all such affairs.*

[^1]: First published in Briefe und Auszüge aus Printed according to the original Briefen von J oh. Phil. Becker, Jos. Dietzgen, Friedrick Engels, Karl Marx u. A. an F. A. Sorge und Andere, Stuttgart, 1906



