---
Volume: 46
Document_Title: "96. Marx to Jenny Longuet. 17 December "
Page_Range: "193-194"
---

# 96. Marx to Jenny Longuet. 17 December 



**[p. 96]**

MARX TO JENNY LONGUET 72

IN ARGENTEUIL

London, 17 December 1881

41 Maitland Park Road, N. W.

My Dear Child,

Tussy, SUPPORTED BY Engels, is this moment taking the Christmas hamper for our little ones by CAB to the PARCEL COMPANY. Helena wants me to point out specially that 1 little jacket for Harry, 1 for Eddy,b

and a woollen bonnet for Pa ' are from her; again for the selfsame Pa, a 'little blue frock' from Laura; from myself a SAILOR s SUIT for MY DEAR Johnny. On one of the last days of her life, Möhmchend laughed so merrily when telling Laura how you and I took Johnny to Paris, and chose a suit for him there in which he looked like a little bourgeois gentilhomme.'

The letters of condolence I get from near and far, and from people of such various nationalities, professions, etc., etc., are, in their appre- ciation of Möhmchen, all of them animated by a spirit of truth and a depth of feeling rarely found in what are as a rule merely conven- tional tributes. I ascribe this to the fact that everything about her was natural and genuine, unforced and without affectation. Hence the impression she made on others was one of vivaciousness and lucidity; even Mrs Hess writes:

Liebknecht writes to say that, without her, he would have suc- cumbed to the wretchedness of exile,230 etc., etc.

How exceptionally healthy she was by nature, for all her delicate constitution, is evident from the fact that, despite being bed-ridden for so long, she did not have a sore spot on her body, much to the as- tonishment of the doctors; during my recent illness I already had a number of sore places after only two weeks of being confined to bed.

[^1]: 'In her, Nature has destroyed its own masterpiece, for never in my life have I met so witty and loving a woman.' 2 2 9

[^2]: a Demuth- b Edgar Longuet-c Marcel Longuet-'1 Pet name for Jenny Marx. - e a bourgeois with pretensions to gentility (from the title of a play by Molière)



