---
Volume: 46
Document_Title: "97. Engels to Karl Kautsky. 18 December "
Page_Range: "194-195"
---

# 97. Engels to Karl Kautsky. 18 December 



**[p. 165]**

The weather has been very bad since I got over my illness, so I have been under house arrest up till now, but next week, on doctors' orders, I am to go to Ventnor (Isle of Wight) and from there, later on, somewhere further south. Tussy will accompany me.

You will be getting (posted at the same time as this) an article about me in the monthly review Modern Thought.1 It's the first time an English critic has gone into the matter with such enthusiasm. It ar- rived in time to cheer Möhmchen up. Where the QUOTATIONS from the German 'text' are too bad (I MEAN too badly DONE INTO ENGLISH), I have got Tussy to write in corrections on such few copies as we are reserv- ing for friends. The mistakes that occur under the heading 'LIFE' are indifferent.

And now, my dear child, the best service you can do me is to keep your chin up! I hope that I shall spend many more happy days with you and worthily fulfil my functions as a GRANDPA.

With a thousand kisses to you and the little ones,

Your loving

OLD NICK

I could have written much more about Vivanti, etc., but believe that Tussy has bagged this for herself.

97

ENGELS TO KARL KAUTSKY

London, 18 December 1881

Dear Mr Kautsky,

I got the telegram from you and Bernstein at 3.50 this afternoon and am glad to be able to inform you that Marx has now recovered to

[^1]: First published, in Russian, in the maga- Printed according to the original zine Nachalo, No. 5, St Petersburg, 1899

[^2]: IN ZURICH

[^3]: a See this volume, p. 163.



