---
Volume: 46
Document_Title: "98. Engels to Ferdinand Domela Nieuwenhuis. 29 December "
Page_Range: "195-196"
---

# 98. Engels to Ferdinand Domela Nieuwenhuis. 29 December 



**[p. 166]**

the extent that he can be sent — initially—to the south coast of En- gland. He will be going there in the course of this week; as soon as he has grown a little more accustomed to the open air and there is no further fear of a relapse, he will then probably move on to the south of Europe and spend some time there.

I couldn't reply to you by telegram, as it would have meant going to the CENTRAL OFFICE and, as usual, I had Pumps, her husband3 and Sam Moore (all of whom send you their best wishes) here for a meal and later on, as you can imagine, more people dropped in. There would hardly be any point in telegraphing tomorrow as this letter will doubtless arrive just as soon ( + ).b

About the Poles, something presently224; things here have been rather at sixes and sevens of late.

So the Egalité is appearing again. Almost all the articles in No. 1 begin quite splendidly and end up most disappointingly.231 I haven't seen No. 2 yet.

Best wishes to Bernstein.

Yours

F. Engels

98

ENGELS TO FERDINAND DOMELA NIEUWENHUIS

London, 29 December 1881 122 Regent's Park Road, N. W.

Dear Comrade,

I am glad to be able to inform you that the news according to which Karl Marx is mortally sick is wholly false and fictitious. He has

[^1]: First published, in Russian, in Marx-Engels Printed according to the original Archives, Vol. I (VI), Moscow, 1932

[^2]: Published in English for the first time

[^3]: IN THE HAGUE

[^4]: a Percy Rosher-b more or less



