---
Volume: 46
Document_Title: "102. Marx to Engels. 5 January "
Page_Range: "200-201"
---

# 102. Marx to Engels. 5 January 



**[p. 102]**

MARX TO ENGELS 1 4 0

IN LONDON

Ventnor, 5 January 1882 1 St Boniface Gardens

Dear FRED,

Cold and wet during the day, raging winds at night; that, by and large, is the kind of weather and climate we've been experiencing here up till today.234 — The exception was yesterday, when it was dry with brilliant sunshine.— According to letters received by Tussy, it has been the same everywhere on the south coast of England; disap- pointment everywhere on the part of the not inconsiderable number of convalescing, etc., rabble. Qui vivra verra.* Perhaps there will be a change for the better.

I now wear—{au cas de besoinb)—a muzzle, alias RESPIRATOR; this makes one less dependent on the caprices of the weather when taking one's obligatory walk.

I still have a tiresome and persistent cough and bronchial catarrh; but it's an undoubted step forward that I should get a few hours sleep at night without recourse to artificial remedies, and this despite the roar of the wind across the sea close by; on the contrary, the noise helps to send me to sleep.

My companion, Tussy, is sorely plagued with nervous tics and in- somnia, etc. However I hope that her frequent excursions in the fresh air — for she goes into 'town' every day to attend to this and that — will have a beneficial effect on her.

What has tickled me greatly was the announcement by the LIBERAL ASSOCIATION — I no longer recall where, Birmingham perhaps236 — that, in celebration of some ANNIVERSARY or other, not only will OLD Bright and THE ILLUSTRIOUS VESTRYMAN AND CAUCUSMAN Chamberlain be speaking, *but that also old Obadiah's 'son', Mr Jacob Bright jun.237

and several 'Miss' Cobden, are to put in their appearance. It is not said whether one of the 'Miss' Cobden or all of them will be given away to the young Obadiah, so as to perpetuate in the most appropriate and safest way the Bright-Cobden stock.*

[^1]: a Who survives will see.-b in case of need



