---
Volume: 46
Document_Title: "103. Engels to Eduard Bernstein. 6 January "
Page_Range: "201-203"
---

# 103. Engels to Eduard Bernstein. 6 January 



**[p. 172]**

A different picture is presented by the 3,000 LANDLORDS'MEETING AT Dublin,238 duce* Abercorn, the sole aim of which is *'to maintain contracts and the freedom between man and man in this realm'.* The lad- dies' rage at the ASSISTANT COMMISSIONERS is comical.Their attacks on Gladstone are, by the by, fully justified, but it is only the latter's COER- CITIVE [sic] MEASURES and his 50,000 men,123 not counting the po- lice, that permit these gentlemen to confront him in so critical and threatening a manner. All this uproar is, of course, merely aimed at getting John Bull ready to pay 'compensation costs'. SERVES HIM RIGHT.

You will see from the enclosed letter from Dietzgen that the un- happy fellow has 'progressed' backwards and safely 'arrived' at the Phänomenologie.239 I regard the case as an incurable one.

I have also had a very kind letter of condolence from Reinhardt in Paris who asks me to give you, amongst others, his kindest regards. He always had a soft spot for my beloved partner.

I wish I were fit for action again; not yet reached that stage, alas. With best wishes from Tussy.

Your

Moor

103

ENGELS TO EDUARD BERNSTEIN

London, 6 January 1882

Dear Mr Bernstein,

I am writing to you in haste today in order to shed some light on the peculiar expressions that occur in the last number of the Égalité

[^1]: First published in Der Briefwechsel zwischen Printed according to the original F. Engels und K. Marx, Bd. 4, Stuttgart, . jqio Published in English in lull for the first time

[^2]: IN ZURICH

[^3]: under the leadership of





**[p. 173]**

on the subject of the Sozialdemokrat. The point is that, out of the goodness of his heart, Guesde engaged for the German section of the paper a person known to be the mortal enemy of everything apper- taining to 'Zurich',3 and the said person was unable to refrain from thus expressing his displeasure that the Sozialdemokrat should survive and not the Laterne. You would oblige us and serve the cause by tak- ing no notice of this. If it happens again, we shall at once put a stop to it. By contrast, we were delighted that the Sozialdemokrat should not have hesitated to accuse the deputies of downright cowardice, thus bringing matters to a head, something which many of them, had Be- bel not been there, would doubtless have sooner avoided.240

The Egalité people, by the way, have been luckier than, aufond,b

they deserved. Malon and Brousse made horrible fools of themselves in connection with Joffrin's candidature by putting forward a watered-down programme — in defiance of the congressional resolution passed at Rheims,223 and quite simply suppressed one of the points discussed there, just because it happened not to suit their book (Egalité, No. 4, p. 7, Paris).0 In this way they put the Egalité in the right which, in the circumstances and on tactical grounds, was absolutely imperative — not Guesde and Co., but Malon and Co., were the real 'autoritaires',d the strivers after dictatorship.1 And, now that the struggle has come out into the open, I need hardly say that our sympathies lie wholly with Guesde and his friends. More- over, the Egalité is, and always has been, infinitely superior to the Prolétaire as far as content is concerned. Malon and Brousse are again behaving like true Bakuninists: they accuse others of hankering for dictatorship and, under pretence of maintaining their 'auto- nomy', want to rule the roost themselves without regard for party resolutions.

Marx is at Veninor in the Isle of Wight, but writes to say that the weather is atrocious/ worse than here. Well, it will soon change, no doubt; at all events, there would now seem to be no real danger of a relapse. The haste the bourgeois press was in to disseminate the news of his confidently anticipated demise did him no end of good: 'Now I must live to a ripe old age, if only to spite the damned rascals.'

[^1]: a Carl Hirsch-b really-' 'Allemagne', L'Egalité, 3rd series, No. 4, 1 January 1882.- d authoritarians-"Paris', L'Égalité, 3rd series, No. 4, 1 January 1882.-r See this volume, p. 171.



