---
Volume: 46
Document_Title: "104. Engels to Marx. 8 January "
Page_Range: "203-205"
---

# 104. Engels to Marx. 8 January 



**[p. 174]**

Kautsky will have to be patient for a few more days. Schorlemmer is still here, which means that the most that I can do is dabble in natural science; on top of that, there's all the coming and going which won't be over until next week. Then, when time's no object, as Schorlemmer says Darmstadt-fashion, I'll write to him about the Poles.3

Kindest regards to him and you,

from yours

F. Engels

First published, in Russian, in Marx-Engels Printed according to the original Archives, Book I, Moscow, 1924 „ , , . , , . ^ ,•• r • r- Furnished in English for the hrst time

104

ENGELS TO MARX

London, 8 January 1882

Dear Moor,

We were glad to hear that there was no reason for yours and Tus- sy's silence and, even though you couldn't be expected to make very much progress in view of the adverse weather, you have at least bene- fited to the extent that the danger of a relapse has now been pretty well eliminated, which was, after all, the main reason why you were sent to Ventnor.

The festive season here ends tomorrow. Schorlemmer will be re- turning to Manchester, and then it's back to the grindstone. I am looking forward to it; things were really getting too much. Tuesday with Lenchen, Friday with Pumps, yesterday with the Lafargues, to- day here at my house — and every morning the eternal Pilsener; it couldn't go on indefinitely. Lenchen was always one of the party, of course, and still is, so she hasn't felt too lonely.

[^1]: IN VENTNOR

[^2]: a See this volume, pp. 191-95.





**[p. 175]**

By the time you get this note you will have been edified by old Wil- liam's3 magnificent proclamation in which he avows his solidarity with Bismarck and declares all this to be the free expression of his own opinion.241 I also liked the bit about the inviolability of the person of the monarch having persisted in Prussia since time immemorial. Par- ticularly when one considers the shots fired by Nobiling. 12° How comforting for Alexander II and III that their persons should be in- violable! One might, by the way, imagine that one was living under a travesty of Charles X when one reads that sort of drivel.

There has been yet another nice item in The Standard, a letter from a Russian general about the situation and the Nihilists,242 just like what used to be said and written by the Prussian generals of 1845 about demagogues,243 liberals, Jews, the bad principles of the French, and the universal and undying loyalty to the king felt by the sound core of the nation. Which didn't, of course, set the revolution back one day. You will have seen that the zemstvos37 have rebelled against Ignatiev, partly via the medium of petitions, partly by an out- right refusal to convene.244 That is a most important step, the first to be taken by official bodies under Alexander III.

Like you, we hope for better weather. Yesterday was very fine with a north-wester from which you will have been sheltered. Schor- lemmer and I were on the go the whole day and it was not until half past midnight that we accompanied Lenchen home from Laura's, covering the whole distance on foot. Today it's been beastly and wet, though during a brighter spell we got out and about for an hour or so with Sam Moore who turned up again the day before yesterday. It's blowing good and hard again outside. How is Tussy actually? Regards to her and to you from us all.

Your

F. E.

[^1]: First published in Der Briefwechsel zwischen F. Engels und K. Marx, Bd. 4, Stuttgart,

[^2]: 1913

[^3]: Printed according to the original

[^4]: Published in English for the first time

[^5]: » William I



