---
Volume: 46
Document_Title: "105. Marx to Engels. 12 January "
Page_Range: "205-207"
---

# 105. Marx to Engels. 12 January 



**[p. 105]**

M A R X T O E N G E L S 1 6 6

IN LONDON

Ventnor, 12 J a n u a r y 1882 1 St Boniface Gardens

Dear Engels,

I am going to try spending one more week here (the 3rd as from today); so far there's been no improvement in the weather — if any- thing the reverse. O n Monday, Tussy is going up to London for a theatrical performance she is taking part in, after which she will come back here.

By the time I left London, I had to pay out SOMEWHAT LESS THAN -£ 20 of the £ 4 0 you gave me on unavoidable expenses. Here my lodgings cost me 2 GUINEAS a week and with coal and gas but excluding other EXTRAS, ABOUT £2 15s.; remaining weekly expenditure ABOUT 4 GUINEAS. Considering the climatic performance this hole has put up, it's a tidy sum. Including travelling expenses, I have spent ABOUT -£ 17 and have still got £5. This will not suffice for the last week (incl. Tussy's INCI- DENTAL London TRIP and our probable return together next week). So I'd be grateful if you could let me have SOME£ by Monday NEXT, if it can be done.

As for future plans, the first consideration must be to relieve Tussy of her role as my companion (when I again set forth I shall be able to dispense with an escort altogether). T h e girl is under such MENTAL PRESSURE that it is undermining her health. Neither travelling, nor

CHANGE OF CLIMATE, nor PHYSICIANS CAN DO ANYTHING IN THIS CASE. All one can do for her is to do as she wishes, and let her take a course of theatrical LESSONS with M a d a m e J u n g . She has an ardent desire to open u p a ca- reer for herself, or so she imagines, as an independent, active artist and, once this has been conceded, she is undoubtedly right in saying that, at her age, there's no more time to be lost. Not for anything in the world would I have the girl think she is to be sacrificed as an old man's 'nurse' on the altar of family. In fact, I am convinced that pro nunc' M a d a m e J u n g is the only doctor for her. She is not open

[^1]: for the time being





**[p. 177]**

with me; what I say is based on observation, not on her own state- ments. Nor is the above assertion in any way incompatible with the fact that the most disquieting symptoms, which notably occur at night, are of an alarmingly hysterical nature, or so Miss Maitlanda

told me (she spent 2 days here). But for this, too, no remedy is avail- able just now save an absorbing and congenial pursuit. I have cer- tain conjectures about her affairs of the 'heart', but that is too deli- cate a subject to admit of discussion in black and white.

I have had a letter from the Sorge family,245 written by the old man, countersigned by Mrs Sorge and Sorge jun.,b in which they invite me TO TURN OVER A NEW LEAF, i. e. go and settle with them in New York. Well meant, at any rate!

In the Arbeiterstimme in which C. Schramm, invoking myself, at- tacked Karl Bürkli,0 Bürkli now attacks Schramm,A for whose bene- fit he demonstrates that everything he [Schramm] has adduced is quite beside the point since I nowhere consider the kind of money he, Bürkli, proposes, namely 'interest-bearing mortgage bank certificates'. Bürkli does, however, express surprise that I should make no mention of the Pole, August Cieszkowski [Du crédit et de la circulation, Paris,

1839), although in his Système des contradictions économiques that 'rough diamond Proudhon' frequently, if respectfully, takes issue with Ciesz- kowski (the 'prior inventor' of Bürkli's bank certificates). The said Cieszkowski — a count, as Bürkli, NATIVE of Switzerland, remarks, and a ['doctor of philosophy' and 'Hegelian']e INTO THE BARGAIN, if not ac- tually a 'fellow-countryman of Marx', i.e. as 'deputy for Posen' in the 'Prussian' National Assembly — the said count, etc., did in fact once call on me in Paris (at the time of the Deutsch-Französische Jahrbücher), and such was the impression he made on me that I neither wanted nor would have been able to read anything whatever of his contriv- ing. Nevertheless, it's a notable fact that the inventors of 'real' credit money, which was meant to serve as a means of circulation at the same time, as opposed to what they call 'personal' credit money (e. g. present-day bank-notes), should have chanced their hand — albeit in vain — as far back as the founding of the Bank of England, and this in the interests and at the behest of the landed aristocracy/ At

[^1]: " Dolly Maitland - b Friedrich Adolph, Katharina and Adolph Sorge -c C. Schramm, 'Karl Bürkli und Karl Marx', Arbeiterstimme, Nos. 52 and 53, 24 and 31 December 1881.-d K. Bürkli, 'Abschüttelungs halber', Arbeiterstimme, 7 and 14 January 1882.- e manuscript damaged-' See K. Marx, Capital, Vol. III, Part V, Ch.XXXVI (pre- sent edition, Vol. 37).



