---
Volume: 46
Document_Title: "106. Engels to Emil Engels. 12 January "
Page_Range: "207-209"
---

# 106. Engels to Emil Engels. 12 January 



**[p. 178]**

all events, Bürkli is under a delusion as to the 'historical' date of birth of the Cieszkowskian 'idea', independently rediscovered by himself.

What has struck me from the first about the Bismarck-William manifesto241 is the confusion as between Prussian king and German emperor! In the latter capacity, the laddie has, after all, no historical antecedents whatsoever, nor yet Hohenzollern traditions (on which a start has now been made with the 'Prince of Prussia's' ostentatious trip to England — to study the Constitution!246). After the nauseous protestations, expiring in submissive love, of your Mommsens, Rich- ters, Hänels 2 4 7 et tutti quanti," it was charming of Bismarck to play this card — however silly his manner of doing it. With any luck we shall yet see something happen.

Your

K. M.

First published in Der Briefwechsel zwischen Printed according to the original F. Engels und K. Marx, Bd. 4, Stuttgart,

in jo Published in English in full for the first time

106

ENGELS TO EMIL ENGELS

London, 12 January 1882

Dear Emil,

After sundry disturbances and unforeseen events, among which the eating and drinking that goes with the festive season, I have com- posed myself sufficiently to send you, Lottchen, Elisabeth and her fiancéb my heartiest congratulations on their engagement. I would never have thought, when travelling to Manchester with August Erbslöh in the late autumn of 1842 248 (I've only seen him once or

[^1]: IN ENGELSKIRCHEN

[^2]: a and all the rest-b Charlotte and Elisabeth Engels, Carl Alexander Erbslöh





**[p. 179]**

twice since then in Barmen), that his son would marry a niece of mine. Admittedly, neither of the two young people had been so much as thought of at that time. It is a subject that lends itself to all kinds of suitable and unsuitable remarks — which, however, I shall refrain from making since anyone can easily do that for himself and the young couple will in any case be much too preoccupied with present and future to have time for utterly useless comments on a past that is antecedent to their births.

Apart from that, I shall soon be moved to hope that engagements in our family, along with their more immediate and more remote consequences, will come at rather less frequent intervals, though ad- mittedly in a family as numerous and prolific as ours these cases mul- tiply proportionately to the square of the distance in time from a start- ing-point that lies over 60 years behind us, and there's no going against a natural law such as that.

I'm keeping quite well on the whole, except that I'm rather deaf in my left ear and regularly catch cold during the winter, but I got used to that years ago. At all events, the mild winter will help you shake off the effects of pneumonia, or at any rate alleviate them. Today it turned so warm again that I had to take my greatcoat off, despite a bit of SCOTCH MIST.

Love to you all, especially to Lottchen and the happy couple.

Your

Friedrich

[^1]: I shall be glad to see Emila here.

[^2]: First published in: Marx and Engels,

[^3]: Works, First Russian Edition, Vol. XXVII, Moscow, 1935

[^4]: Printed according to the original

[^5]: Published in English for the first time

[^6]: a Emil Engels jun.



