---
Volume: 46
Document_Title: "108. Engels to Marx. 13 January "
Page_Range: "209-212"
---

# 108. Engels to Marx. 13 January 



**[p. 107]**

MARX TO AMALIE DANIELS

IN COLOGNE

[Ventnor,] Isle of Wight, 12 January 1882 1 St Boniface Gardens

My dear Mrs Daniels,

On the same day as I wrote to you,233 my daughter8 found an even earlier photograph of mine among the papers she had brought with her from London. I at once sent it to Cologneb in the enclosed envelope, the same in which it was returned to me by the 'Imperial Post Office'.

Perhaps you would be so good as to send me your exact address. I shall then despatch the corpus delicti' anew.249

Best regards.

Yours very sincerely,

K. Marx

108

ENGELS TO MARX

London, 13 January 1882

Dear Moor,

First, I enclose £ 2 0 in 4 bank-notes à 5 GK 53969, 70, 71, 72. London, 7 October 1881. I have in addition given Lenchen £ 10 so

[^1]: First published in: Marx and Engels, Printed according to the original Works, First Russian Edition, Vol. XXVII, « • • • • • • ^ ,• i r • Moscow, 1935 Published in English for the first time

[^2]: IN VENTNOR

[^3]: a Eleanor Marx- b See this volume, p. 167.-c exhibit





**[p. 181]**

that she can pay the RATES and still have something in hand. Next week, larger amounts will become available and then, after your re- turn, we shall be able to make further plans.

I'm very glad that you should feel strong enough to be able to travel alone in future.

I skimmed through part of the Schramm-Bürkliadea and was greatly tickled by it. Even before 1842, Cieszkowski had already writ- ten a book on natural philosophy (botany)b and, if I am not mis- taken, also contributed to the Deutsche, if not actually the Hallische Jahrbücher."

Our Parisian friends have reaped what they had sown. What we had both of us told them would happen has actually come to pass. They have, by their impatience, ruined what was a first-rate position which, if they were to have made the most of it, called precisely for discretion and the ability to wait and see. For Malon and Brousse had set a trap for them in true old Alliance style6 ' — calumny in the form of mere hints, no open naming of names, and supplemented on the sly by word of mouth; they went straight into it like so many schoolboys (Lafargue in the van), inasmuch as they counterattacked by name, and were then dubbed disturbers of the peace. Moreover, their argument is so utterly puerile; as soon as one reads their opponents' retort, this leaps to the eye. Thus Guesde suppresses important qualificative pas- sages of Joffrin's because they don't suit his book, and fails to mention the fact that, despite his opposition, the Comité national 25° declared Joffrin's programme to be more radical than the programme minimum,251

thus giving Joffrin the party's blessing. A fact which he, of course, triumphantly parades before Guesde.d Then Lafargue words his ar- ticles in such a way as to enable Malon to say in reply: 'But have we ever maintained that the struggles of the medieval communiers' against the feudal aristocracy were anything but class struggles — and do you, Mr Lafargue, contest this?' — And now we get jeremiad after jeremiad from Paris, saying that they have been hopelessly de- feated and, at the next meeting of the Comité national, would even be set upon physically, and Guesde is as despairing as he was uppish 4 weeks ago, and can see no salvation in anything short of secession by

[^1]: a See this volume, p. 177.- b A. von Cieszkowski, Prolegomena zur Historiosophie, Berlin, 1838.-c Deutsche Jahrbücher für Wissenschaft und Kunst and Hallische Jahrbücher für deutsche Wissenschaft und Kunst-d J. Jofl Frin, 'A M. Jules Guesde, rédacteur de l'Egalitf, Le Prolétaire, No. 171, 7 January 1882.-c commoners





**[p. 182]**

I am sending you an old Kölnische Leitung which, however, contains a very interesting article on Russia.252

Incidentally, the factum (anti-Guesde) in the Prolétaire, written by Malon and Brousse and signed by Joffrin, is a splendid example of Bakuninist polemics and very much in the style of the 'Sonvillier cir- cular',253 but ruder.

So the ukase has been issued re the reduction of vykup* pay- ments. 254 Having regard to the colossal nedoimki,b the paltry per cent or two will, no doubt, make a great deal of difference! But every million it doesn't get makes a difference to the Russian Treasury.

Bismarck, by the way, has had better luck than might have been expected: the Reichstag has endorsed his pilgrimage to Canossa by a 2/3 majority.255 But that would seem to be about the only thing upon which this Reichstag is able to agree. A fine majority: feudalists, ultramontanes, particularists, Poles, Danes, Alsatians, a few men of Progress,256 demoscratchers and socialists!

Ad vocemc pilgrimages, this morning I met Furnivall wearing a blue ulster, belted at the waist, and a broad-brimmed hat — he looked exactly like a pilgrim going to the Holy Land on a quest for St Antho- ny's beard.

Kindest regards to Tussy.

Your

F. E.

[^1]: First published abridged in Der Briefwechsel zwischen F. Engels und K. Marx, Bd. 4, Stuttgart, 1913 and in full in MEGA, Abt. III, Bd. 4, Berlin, 1931

[^2]: Printed according to the original

[^3]: Published in English for the first time

[^4]: a redemption-b deficit-0 As to



