---
Volume: 46
Document_Title: "110. Marx to Pyotr Lavrov. 23 January "
Page_Range: "213-215"
---

# 110. Marx to Pyotr Lavrov. 23 January 



**[p. 110]**

MARX TO PYOTR LAVROV 7 2

IN PARIS

London, 23 January 1882 41 Maitland Park Road, N. W.

Dear Friend,

I enclose a few lines for the Russian edition of the Communist Manifesto"; as these are to be translated into Russian they have not been polished to the degree that would be necessary if they were to be published IN THE GERMAN VERNACULAR.

I have only been back in London for a few days. For as a result of pleurisy and bronchitis, from which I had recovered, I was left with chronic bronchial catarrh which my doctorb hoped to clear up by sending me to Ventnor (Isle of Wight), a place that is usually warm, even in winter. On this occasion, however,—during the 3 weeks of my stay there — Ventnor was invaded by cold, wet, dull, misty weather while at the same time in London the weather turned almost summery, only to change again, however, on my return.

The intention now is to send me somewhere in the south, possibly Algiers. It is a difficult choice, because Italy is barred to me (a man was arrested in Milan for having a name like mine); I can't even go from here to Gibraltar by STEAMER, as I have no passport and even the English demand a passport there.

Despite all the urging on the part of doctors and those closest to me, I would never have agreed to such a time-wasting operation were it not for the fact that this accursed 'English' disease impairs one's in- tellect. Moreover a relapse, even if I pulled through, would take up still more time. All the same I intend to carry out some further experi- ments here first.

*I send you a number of Modern Thought with an article on myself0; I need not tell you that the biographical notice of the author is alto- gether wrong. My daughter — your correspondent Eleanor, who sends you her love — has in the copy forwarded to you taken upon herself to correct the English misquotations from the Capital. But

[^1]: 1 See present edition,Vol. 24.- b Donkin-c See this volume, p. 163.





**[p. 185]**

There appears a 'weekly', called The Radical, full of good aspira- tions, bold in language (the boldness is in the sans gêne,h not in the vi- gour), trying to break through the trammels of the British press, but, with all that, of feeble performance. What the paper lacks, are intelli- gent editors. Many months ago these people wrote to me, I was then at Eastbourne 160 with my dear wife, then at Paris,164 etc., so that they had not yet any interview with me. I consider it in fact useless.

[^1]: a Ibid., p. 162. - b nonchalance



