---
Volume: 46
Document_Title: "111. Engels to Eduard Bernstein. 25 and 31 January "
Page_Range: "215-220"
---

# 111. Engels to Eduard Bernstein. 25 and 31 January 



**[p. 186]**

My daughtera reminds me that it is high time to finish this letter, the last minutes for letter delivery being near.*

Salut,

Karl Marx

First published, in Russian, in the maga- Printed according to the original zine Letopisi marksizma, Book V, Moscow- Leningrad, 1928

111

ENGELS TO EDUARD BERNSTEIN 2 6 0

IN ZURICH

London, 25 January 1882

Dear Mr Bernstein,

Not until today have I been able to get round to answering your letter of the 12th. Marx is home from the Isle of Wight with his youngest daughter,a both considerably better, and Marx strong enough to go walking with me yesterday for 2 hours without a break. Since he isn't working yet and the Lafargues as often as not also drop in before dinner (i. e. 5 o'clock) when a bottle of good Pilsener is served up, my hours of daylight are usually frittered away and I have never liked writing by lamplight after the warning (chronic conjucti- vitis) that was given to my left eye 3 years ago.

Just now I happen to be at Marx's, so would you be so good as to thank Höchberg very much on Marx's behalf for his kind offer which, however, he is unlikely to be able to make use of; all that he knows for certain about his journey south is that he is not going to the Riviera or to any part of Italy, if only on account of the police. The first proviso where convalescents are concerned is that there should be no harass-

[^1]: " Eleanor





**[p. 187]**

We were greatly interested by what you told us of the goings-on among the 'leaders' in Germany. I have never made a secret of my opinion that the masses in Germany have been far better than their leaders, particularly since the press and agitation combined to turn the party into the latter's milch cow and butter purveyor, only to see the said cow abruptly slaughtered by Bismarck and the bourgeoi- sie. 261 For the thousands instantly ruined thereby, it is a personal disaster not to have been placed in an immediately revolutionary si- tuation, i. e. exile. Otherwise not a few who are now bemoaning their fate would have gone over to Most's camp or at any rate found the Sozialdemokrat far too moderate. The majority of our people re- mained in Germany, as they needs must, for the most part going to fairly reactionary places, where they remained social outcasts dependent for their living on philistines and became, to a great extent, them- selves tainted with philistinism. For them, everything soon began to turn on the hope that the Anti-Socialist Law would be repealed. Small wonder that, under pressure from the philistine establishment, some of them became obsessed with the idea — in reality an absurd one — that this could be attained by the exercise of moderation. Ger- many is a truly infamous country for people without much will- power. The narrowness and pettiness of prevailing conditions, both civil and political, the provincial character of even the cities, the petty but cumulative harassment in the running battle with police and bureaucracy — all this enervates instead of stimulating resist- ance, and in this way many of those in the 'great nursery'a grow child- ish themselves. Petty conditions engender a petty outlook, so that a great deal of intelligence and vigour is called for if anyone living in Germany is to look beyond the immediate future, to keep his eyes fixed on the wider context of world events and not succumb to that complacent 'objectivity' that cannot see beyond its own nose and is therefore the most blinkered subjectivity, even though it be shared by a thousand other such fellow-subjects.

True, the emergence of such a tendency, cloaking its lack of insight and resolution under the mantle of 'objective' wisdom, is natural enough; nevertheless it must be ruthlessly combated. And for this the working masses themselves provide the best purchase. They alone in

[^1]: a A paraphrase from Heine's 'Zur Beruhigung'.





**[p. 188]**

This time it was inevitable that all manner of peculiar people should get into the Reichstag. All the more unfortunate, then, that Bebel should not have been elected.222 He alone is lucid, politically far-sighted and energetic enough to prevent blunders being commit- ted.

Could you not, after you have done with them, let us have for a week or two the 'stenographic reports' of debates" in which our deputies have played a serious part? I will vouch for their return. Newspaper reports, as we have often seen, simply cannot be relied on and none of the deputies, not even Liebknecht, could be induced to send us speeches that do them no honour.

31 January

More interruptions. Amongst others, little Hepner has been here, on his way to seek refuge in America, his purse and heart alike empty of content. A poor little chap in every respect, author of a well- intentioned pamphlet on distraint, the law governing bills of ex- change, the Jewish question and postal reform, dull as dull can be, all the old Jewish stuff he turned out 10 years ago, 2 6 2 completely gone to rack and ruin; I almost felt like advising him to get baptised. Yet he provided me with the opportunity of finding out about the new im- perial judicial code. 2 6 3 It really is unutterably infamous! All the dirty tricks of Prussian law combined with all the infamies of the Code Napoléon,264 and without any of the latter's better side. The

[^1]: ' .Stenographische Berichte über die Verhandlungen des Reichstages. V. Legislaturperiode.

[^2]: I. Session 1881/82 [Bd. I], Berlin, 1882.





**[p. 189]**

judge has freedom of decision in all spheres, being bound by nothing save — the Disciplinary Law which, in political cases, will undoubt- edly, and indeed does, grant him power of 'discretion'. Thus — within the general German context — the judge inevitably becomes the executive official and tool of the police. Incidentally, here is a joke (originating no doubt from Windthorst) about Leonhardt, who is al- leged to have said on his death-bed: 'Now I have avenged myself on Prussia; I've given it a legal system that's bound to bring it to its knees.'

Bürkli's interest-bearing mortgage certificates, also supposed to re- present money, go back much further than that thoroughly addle- pated, old Hegelian Pole, Cieszkowski.a Similar schemes for the gene- ral good of mankind had already been adumbrated as far back as the founding of the Bank of England. Since there is no mention whatever of credit in the first volume of Capital (apart from the conditions gov- erning simple debt), credit money admits of consideration here only, if at all, in its very simplest form (token of value, etc.) and in relation to its lowliest monetary functions, while interest-bearing credit money does not admit of consideration at all. Hence Bürkli is right in telling Schramm that none of these passages in Capital apply to my particular monetary paper; and Schramm is right when he proves to Bürkli from Capital that he, Bürkli, hasn't the faintest idea of the nature and function of money.b This is not to say, however, that Bürkli's own particular monetary proposal is actually reduced to its own absur- dity; that would require, besides general proof that this 'money' is in- capable of fulfilling the most essential monetary functions, particular proof as to the functions which such paper might really be able to fulfil. Moreover, when Bürkli says, 'What concern have I with Marx? I stick to Cieszkowski' — the whole argument adduced by Schramm against Bürkli falls to the ground.— How fortunate that the Sozialdemokrat shouldn't have got mixed up in all this business! No doubt the whole hullabaloo will eventually die down of its own accord.

That crises are one of the most powerful levers of political upheaval has already been pointed out in the Communist Manifesto and was ex- pounded in the Neue Rheinische Leitung Review up to and including 1848, not without the rider, however, that a recurrence of prosperity will in turn hamstring the revolutions and pave the way for the

[^1]: a See this volume, pp. 177 - 78. - b Ibid.





**[p. 190]**

In France, there have been gross blunders on both sides. However, in the end Malon and Brousse, in their impatience to bring matters to a head and engineer the suspension of the Egalité (which is quite outside the competence of the Union Federative 2 6 5), have put them- selves so clearly in the wrong that they are likely to suffer for it. Such bungling would be incomprehensible in cabalists as wily as Malon and Brousse, unless they felt that time was against them. For the Pro- létaire is said to be on its last legs and, if it expires, they will have no paper at all while the others will have two.c Hence the issue had to be decided while they still had a paper in which the resolutions -were published. The scurrilities and pure fabrications they are now dissem- inating against Guesde, Lafargue, etc., and in particular Joffrin's concoctiond — not concocted by him, however, but by Brousse and Malon — are altogether in the style of the old Bakuninist Alliance,67

and have awakened old memories in us. The Sozialdemokrat is abso- lutely right not to get involved until things have cleared up a bit, which they will, I think, before very long.

I had also meant to write to Kautsky about the Poles,224 but will have to drop that for today. Kindest regards,

Yours,

F.E.

[^1]: First published, in Russian, in Marx-Engels Archives, Book I, Moscow, 1924

[^2]: Printed according to the original

[^3]: Published in English in full for the first time

[^4]: '- See present edition, Vol. 6, pp. 489-90 and Vol. 10, pp. 493-510.-1' Ibid., Vol. 4, p. 382.-c L'Egalité and Le Citoyen -tl See this volume, p. 182.



