---
Volume: 46
Document_Title: "112. Engels to Karl Kautsky. 7 February "
Page_Range: "220-225"
---

# 112. Engels to Karl Kautsky. 7 February 



**[p. 112]**

ENGELS TO KARL KAUTSKY 140

IN ZURICH

London, 7 February J 882

Dear Mr Kautsky,

I have at last got round to answering your letter of 8 Novem- ber. 2 2 4

One of the real tasks of the revolution of'48 (and the real as distinct from illusory tasks of a revolution are always carried out on the strength of that revolution) was the restoration of the oppressed and disunited nationalities of Central Europe in so far as these were at all viable and, in particular, ripe for independence. In the case of Italy, Hungary and Germany, this task was carried out by the executors of the revolution, Bonaparte, Cavour and Bismarck, in accordance with the circumstances obtaining at the time. There remained Ireland and Poland. Ireland need not be considered here; it is only very indirectly concerned with conditions on the Continent. But Poland lies in the middle of the Continent and keeping it partitioned is precisely the bond that continually re-cements the Holy Alliance 2 6 6 and hence Poland is of great interest to us.

Now it is historically impossible for a great people to discuss this or that internal question in any way seriously so long as national in- dependence is lacking. Prior to 1859 there was no question of social- ism in Italy; even the republicans were few in number, although they constituted the most vigorous element. Not until 1861 did the repub- licans begin to expand,267 subsequently yielding their best elements to the socialists. Similarly in Germany. Lassalle was on the point of giving up the cause for lost when he was lucky enough to be shot. It was not until 1866, the year that actually decided Little Germany's Greater Prussian unity,268 that both the Lassallean and the so-called Eisenach parties2 6 9 acquired any significance, and it was not until 1870, when the Bonapartist urge to interfere had been eliminated for good, that the cause gathered momentum. If we still had the old Fe- deral Diet 2 7°, where would our party be now? Similarly in Hungary. It wasn't until 1860 that it was drawn into the modern movement — sharp practice above, socialism below.271

Generally speaking an international movement of the proletariat is



**[p. 192]**



[^1]: first among equals





**[p. 193]**

Herzegovina affair should take a serious turn are the Russian Pan- Slav Party and the Tsar; no one can really concern himself with the rapacious Bosnian riff-raff any more than with the idiotic Austrian ministers and officials who are presently pursuing their activities there. So even without an uprising, as a result, rather, of purely Euro- pean conflicts, the establishment of an independent Little Poland would be by no means impossible, just as the Prussian Little Ger- many invented by the bourgeois owed its establishment not to the re- volutionary or parliamentary methods they had dreamed of, but to war.

Hence I am of the opinion that two nations in Europe are not only entitled but duty-bound to be national before they are inter- national— Ireland and Poland. For the best way they can be inter- national is by being well and truly national. That's what the Poles have understood in every crisis and proved on every revolutionary battleground. Deprive them of the prospect of restoring Poland, or persuade them that before long a new Poland will automatically fall into their laps, and their interest in the European revolution will be at an end.

We, in particular, have absolutely no reason to impede the Poles in their necessary efforts to attain independence. In the first place they invented and put into practice in 1863 the methods of struggle which the Russians are now so successfully imitating (cf. Berlin und [St] Petersburg, Appendix 2) 274 and, in the second, they were the only reliable and capable military leaders in the Paris Commune. 2 7 5

Come to that, who are the people who oppose the Poles' national aspirations? First, the European bourgeoisie in whose eyes the Poles have been utterly discredited since the 1846 insurrection with its so- cialist tendencies 276 and, secondly, the Russian pan-Slavs and those they have influenced, such as Proudhon, who saw this through Her- zen's spectacles. But up till today few Russians, even the best of them, are free of pan-Slav tendencies and recollections; they take Russia's pan-Slav vocation for granted, just as the French do France's natural revolutionary initiative. In reality, however, pan-Slavism is an im- posture, a bid for world hegemony under the cloak of a non-existent Slav nationality, and it is our and the Russians' worst enemy. That imposture will in due course disintegrate into the void, but in the meantime it could make things very awkward for us. A pan-Slav war, as the last sheet-anchor for Russian Tsardom and Russian reaction, is presently in preparation; whether it will actually materialise is a moot



**[p. 194]**

That is precisely why the pan-Slavs have a mortal hatred of the Poles. Being the only anft'-pan-Slav Slavs, they are consequently traitors to the sacred cause of Slavdom and must be forcibly incorpo- rated into the Great Slav Tsardom of which the future capital is Tsarigrad, i. e. Constantinople.

Now you may perhaps ask me whether I have no feeling of sympa- thy for the small Slav peoples and fragments thereof which have been split apart by those three wedges — the German, the Magyar and the Turkish — driven into the Slav domain? To tell the truth, damned little. The Czecho-Slovak cry of distress:

Bote! Ach nikdo neni na zemi Kdoby Slavûm (sic) spravedlivost cinil.?i

has been answered by Petersburg, and the entire Czech national movement cherishes the aspiration that the Tsar should spravedlivost finitib them. The same applies to the others — Serbs, Bulgarians, Slo- venes, Galician Ruthenians (at least some of them). But these are aims of a kind we cannot support. Only when the collapse of Tsardom frees the national aspirations of these diminutive peoples from their entangle- ment in pan-Slav hegemonic tendencies, only then can we let them do as they please and, in the case of most of the Austro-Hungarian

[^1]: a 'O God there's no one on earth who would see that justice be done to the Slavs'. From Jan Kollâr's Slâwy dcera, Part III, 'Dunag', p.287.-b see that justice was done





**[p. 195]**

Slavs, I am sure that six months of independence will suffice to bring them begging for re-admittance. But in no circumstances will these little nationalities be granted the right they are presently arrogating to themselves in Serbia, Bulgaria and East Rumelia — of preventing, that is, the extension of the European railway network to Constanti- nople.

Now as for the differences that have arisen between the Poles in Switzerland, these are émigré squabbles224 such as are seldom of any consequence, least of all in the case of an emigration which will be cel- ebrating its centenary in 3 years' time and which, owing to the urge felt by all émigrés to do, or at any rate plan, something, has given birth to plan after plan, one new so-called theory after another. But, as you will see from the foregoing, we are not of the same opinion as the RôwnoÈc people and, indeed, we told them as much in a message sent on the occasion of the 50th anniversary of 29 November 1830, which was read out at the meeting in Geneva.a You will find a Polish version of it in the report (Sprawozdanie, etc.— Biblijoteka Rôwnosci: No. 1, Geneva, 1881), pp. 30 ff. The Rôwnoiï people have apparently allowed themselves to be impressed by the radical-sounding slogans of the Genevan Russians and are now anxious to prove that they are not open to the reproach of national chauvinism. This aberration, of which the causes are purely local and transitory, will blow over with- out having any appreciable effect on Poland as such, and refuting it in detail would be more trouble than it was worth.

How the Poles, by the way, will sort things out with the White and Little Russians and Lithuanians of the old Poland, or with the Ger- mans as regards the frontier is, for the time being, no concern of ours.

Proof, by the way, of how little the workers, even in allegedly 'op- pressed' countries, are tainted by the pan-Slav yearnings of the aca- demics and bourgeois is provided by the splendid accord between German and Czech workers in Bohemia.

But enough for now. Kindest regards from

Yours,

F.E.

[^1]: First published, in Russian, in Marx-Engels Archives, Vol. I (VI), Moscow, 1932

[^2]: See present edition, Vol. 24, pp. 343-45.

[^3]: Printed according to the original

[^4]: Published in English in full for the first time



