---
Volume: 46
Document_Title: "113. Engels to Johann Philipp Becker. 10 February "
Page_Range: "225-227"
---

# 113. Engels to Johann Philipp Becker. 10 February 



**[p. 113]**

ENGELS TO JOHANN PHILIPP BECKER ' I 3

IN GENEVA

London, 10 February 1882

Dear Old Man,

We had absolutely no idea that you were so seriously ill; all we knew was that you had been suffering from erysipelas and that's something that can be cleared up pretty easily. Had I had an inkling of how matters stood, I should have raised some money for you straight away, even though I myself was very short at the time and calls were being made on me from all sides. However, it's still not too late and I've therefore taken out a money order for you for four pounds = 100 frs 80 cts. of which you will doubtless have already been advised; because of an irregularity that cropped up here I wasn't able to write until today.

Between ourselves, one might almost count it a blessing that Marx should have been so preoccupied with his own illness during his wife's last days as to prevent him being unduly preoccupied with his loss, both when it was impending and when it actually happened. Even though we had known for 6 months or more how matters stood, the event itself still came as a terribly hard blow. Marx left yesterday for the South of France 2 7 8; where he will go from there won't be defi- nitely decided until he gets to Paris. Under no circumstances will he make for Italy first; at the start of his convalescence even the possibil- ity of harassment by the police must be avoided.

We have thought about your proposal2 7 9 and take the view that the time has not yet come, though it soon will, to put it into effect. Firstly, a new, formally reorganised International in Germany, Au- stria, Hungary, Italy and Spain would only give rise to fresh persecu- tion and ultimately leave one with the choice either of giving the thing up, or of carrying on in secret. The latter option would be a ca- lamity on account of the inevitable passion for coups and conspiracies and the no less inevitable admittance of mouchards.* Even in France the renewed application of the law banning the International,280

[^1]: a informers





**[p. 197]**

a law which has not been repealed — far from it — is by no means im- possible.— Secondly, in view of the current wrangles between the Egalité and the Prolétaire, there's absolutely no counting on the French; we would have to declare ourselves for one party or the other and that, too, has its disadvantages. As individuals we are on the side of the Egalité, but shall take good care not to support them publicly just now after the succession of tactical blunders they have made, de- spite our express warnings.— Thirdly, the English are proving more intractable than ever at present. For 5 whole months I tried, through The Labour Standard, for which I wrote leading articles, ' 6 3 to pick up the threads of the old Chartist movement and disseminate our ideas so as to see whether this might evoke some response. Absolutely noth- ing, and since the editor,2 a well-meaning but feeble milksop, ended up by taking fright even at the Continental heresies I introduced into the paper, I called it a day.b

Thus, we should have been left with an International confined, apart from Belgium, exclusively to refugees, for with the possible ex- ception of Geneva and its environs we couldn't even count on the Swiss — vide the Arbeiter stimme and Bürkli.c It would, however, hardly be worth the trouble to set up a mere refugee association. For the Dutch, Portuguese and Danes wouldn't really improve matters either and the less one has to do with Serbs and Romanians the better.

On the other hand the International does indeed still exist. In so far as it can be effective, there is liaison between the revolutionary work- ers of all countries. Every socialist journal is an international centre; from Geneva, Zurich, London, Paris, Brussels and Milan the threads run criss-cross in all directions and I honestly don't see how at this juncture the grouping of these small centres round a large main cen- tre could give added strength to the movement — it would probably only lead to greater friction. But once the moment comes for us to concentrate our forces, it will, for that very reason, be the work of a moment, nor will any lengthy preparation be called for. The names of the pioneers in one country are known in all the others and a mani- festo signed and supported by them all would make a tremendous im- pact— something altogether different from the largely unknown names of the old General Council. But that is precisely why such a man- ifesto should be saved up for the moment when it can really strike home, i. e. when events in Europe provoke it. Otherwise you will de-

[^1]: a George Shipton-b See this volume, pp. 119-20.-c Ibid., pp. 177-78.



