---
Volume: 46
Document_Title: "114. Marx to Engels. 17 February "
Page_Range: "227-230"
---

# 114. Marx to Engels. 17 February 



**[p. 198]**

tract from its future effect and will simply have put yourselves out for nothing. But such events are already taking shape in Russia where the avant-garde of the revolution will be going into battle. You should — or so we think — wait for this and its inevitable repercus- sions on Germany, and then the moment will also have come for a big manifesto and the establishment of an official, formal International, which can, however, no longer be a propaganda association but sim- ply an association for action. For that reason we are firmly of the opin- ion that so splendid a weapon ought not to be dulled and blunted du- ring the comparatively peaceful days on the very eve of the revolu- tion.

I believe that if you think the matter over again you will come round to our view. Meanwhile we both wish you a good and speedy recovery and hope to hear before long that you are quite all right again.

Ever your old friend,

F. E.

First published in: F. Engels, Vergessene Printed according to the original Briefe (Briefe Friedrich Engels' an Johann Phi- lipp Becker), Berlin, 1920 Published in English in full for the first time

114

Marseilles, 17 February 1882 Hôtel au petit Louvre, Rue de Cannebière

I presume that Tussy dropped you a line yesterday. I had not origi- nally intended to leave Paris until next Monday0; since my *state of health was rather not improving, I took at once the resolution of re-

[^1]: MARX TO ENGELS 7 2

[^2]: IN LONDON

[^3]: DEAR FRED,

[^4]: a 20 February





**[p. 199]**

moving to Marseilles, and thence at once, on Saturday, to sail for Al- giers*. 2 7 8

In Paris, accompanied by my Johnny," I called upon but one mor- tal, namely Mesa. (In fact he, Mesa, sollicitierteb me to chatter too much, in addition to which I returned to Argenteuil somewhat too late, ABOUT 7 O'CLOCK IN THE EVENING. I didn't sleep a wink all night.) I tried to persuade Mesa to ask his friends, notably Guesde, if they would be kind enough to postpone a meeting with me until my return *from Algiers. But all that in vain. In fact, Guesde is so much on all parts assailed just now, that it was important for him to have an 'offi- cial' meeting on my side*. After all, one was bound to concede that much to the party. Hence I arranged a meeting at the Hôtel de Lyon et de Mulhouse, 8 boulevard Beaumarchais, to which Guesde and Deville came with Mesa at ABOUT 5 in the afternoon. I first received them downstairs in the restaurant, having been accompanied there from Argenteuil (on Wednesday 0 afternoon) by Tussy and Jen- nychen. Guesde was rather embarrassed on Jennychen's account BE- CAUSE HE HAD JUST [brought out] an acrimonious article against Lon- guet, ALTHOUGH SHE (Jennychen) DID NOT TAKE NO REGARD WHATEVER TO THAT INCIDENT. As soon as the young ladies had left, I d'abord A went up to ma chambre' with them, chatted there for ABOUT 1 HOUR, then DOWN — it be- ing now time for Mesa to be off—to the restaurant where they still had leisure ENOUGH to empty a BOTTLE of Beauve with me. By 7 o'clock they'd 'all' gone. WITH ALL THAT, although I was in bed by 9 o'clock, a fiendish din of traffic without intermission until 1 o'clock, at which time (ABOUT 1 O'CLOCK) I had a vomissement? having again got too much engrossed in conversation.

A fine day for the journey to Marseilles, and ALL RIGHT until just beyond the STATION at Lyons. First, l'/s hours d'arrêfi AT Cassis on ac- count of the locomotive's DISTEMPER; then again the same mishap with the engine AT Valence, although this time the arrêt wasn't so long. Meanwhile it had turned bitter cold with a nasty BITING WIND. Instead of arriving some time before midnight, we did not reach [Marseilles] until after 2 o'clock in the morning; to some extent I was MORE OR LESS FREEZING, despite all my wrappings, the only antidote I found being 'alcohol' and I AGAIN AND AGAIN RESORTED TO IT. During the last quarter of an hour (if not more) in the exposed, cold and windswept gare de Mar-

[^1]: a Marx's grandson Jean Longuet- b incited-' 8 February-d first-0 my room-f bout of vomiting-8 stop





**[p. 200]**

seule,'1 there was one last épreuve* in the shape of prolonged formali- ties before obtaining possession of one's LUGGAGE.

Today it's sunny in Marseilles, but the wind itself not yet warm. Dr Dourlen advised me to stay at the above-named hotel, whence I shall leave for Algiers tomorrow (Saturday) at 5 in the afternoon. T h e office of the Paquebots à vapeur des Postes françaises' is located here, in the very hotel at which I am staying, so that I was able to take a ticket (at 80 frs FIRST CLASS) for the paquebot? Said straight away; one's BAGGAGE is likewise ENREGISTERED here, so that everything is as convenient as can be.

Apropos. I [got] hold of a Prolétaire {L'Egalité is also SOLD here). Lafargue seems to me to be constantly fomenting further USELESS INCIDENTS — though maybe the DETAILS are *far from exact. As to his characterising Fourier a 'Communist', he is now that theye make fun of him obliged to explain in what sense he might have called Fourier as a 'Communist'.* Such 'audacities' may be ignored, 'interpreted' or 'differently interpreted'; what is worse is that SUCH small FACTS

BE SAVED at all. T o my mind, he is far too long-winded.

*My best compliments to Laura; I shall write her from Algiers. There is one single m a n sufficient as patron; it is a long letter written by Longuet to his friend* Fermé, who has successfully made his way from being an erstwhile deportee to Algeria (under Napoleon III) to the post of juge d'appel' of Algiers. No question of passports and such like. Nothing is entered on the passengers' tickets save Christian and surnames.

[^1]: M y compliments also to Lenchen g AND THE OTHER FRIENDS. Addio.

[^2]: OLD Moor

[^3]: First published abridged in Der Briefwechsel Printed according to the original zwischen F. Engels und K. Marx, Bd. 4, Stuttgart, 1913 and in full in MEGA, Abt. III, Bd. 4, Berlin, 1931

[^4]: a Marseilles station-15 trial-c Steam Ferries of the French Post Office-d steam ferry - " the editors of the Prolétaire -f appelate judge - g Demuth



