---
Volume: 46
Document_Title: "116. Marx to Engels. 21 February "
Page_Range: "231-232"
---

# 116. Marx to Engels. 21 February 



**[p. 116]**

MARX TO ENGELS 7 2

IN LONDON

[Postcard, unsigned]

Alger,» 21 February 1882 Hôtel d'Orient

Dear Fred,

I left Marseilles on Saturday 18 February at 5 in the afternoon aboard the Said, EXCELLENT STEAMER; the PASSAGE was a fast one, so that we had already reached Algiers by half past three in the morning on Monday (20 February).278 However, it was a chilly crossing and, though the ship was equipped with every comfort, the 2 nights were sleepless ones for me owing to the diabolical noise of the engines, wind, etc., which were disturbing in the cabin.

Here again, I found in store for me the same quid pro quo, mutatis mu- tandis"0 as in the Isle of Wight.234 This particular SEASON happens to be, for Algiers, exceptionally cold and wet, while Nice and Menton are presently luring away most of its visitors! I had in any case had some misgivings and more than once hinted at the possibility of starting off d'abord" with the Riviera. However it would seem to be a.fatalité* The good juge' gave me a most friendly welcome yesterday; Longuet's let- ter had forewarned him the day before I arrived; he is calling on me today to consider future moves. Then I shall write at greater length. Kindest regards to all. Letters aren't dispatched every day to France and England.

Write to me under my name, Aux soins de Monsieur Fermé, juge au tribunal civil,1 No. 37, Route Mustapha Supérieur, Alger.

Fr. Engels, Esq.

122 Regent's Park Road, Londres, N. W. Angleterre

[^1]: [On the side reserved for the address]

[^2]: First published in Der Briefwechsel zwischen Printed according to the original F. Engels und K. Marx, Bd. 4, Stuttgart, 1913

[^3]: a Algiers-13 topsyturvydom, allowing for different circumstances-' first -* fatality- ' judge (Fermé) - ' Care of Monsieur Fermé, Judge in the Civil Courts.



