---
Volume: 46
Document_Title: "118. Engels to Pyotr Lavrov. 23 February "
Page_Range: "240-241"
---

# 118. Engels to Pyotr Lavrov. 23 February 



**[p. 211]**

ownership among the Arabs and has offered to enlighten him on the subject.

Kindest regards both to yourself and Kautsky.

Yours,

F. E.

First published in full, in Russian, in Marx- Printed according to the original Ensels Archives, Book I, Moscow, 1924 , . Published in bnghsh in mil lor the first time

118

ENGELS TO PYOTR LAVROV

IN LONDON

[London,] 23 February 1882 122 Regent's Park Road, N. W.

My Dear Friend,

The Financial Reform Almanack 1882 gives the following addresses: Dilke, W. Ashton, 1 Hyde Park Gate, S. W. Ditto Sir Charles, 76 Sloane St, S. W. When I got home from your place I found a letter from Dr Donkin (the one who treated Hartmann some time ago, and also the Marx family) in which he says:

Would you be so kind as to pass on the preceding lines to Hartmann? Since Donkin's letter failed to arrive, I fear there may be some mistake as to the number, of which I am not sure, since I know of it only from Donkin. Hence it is impossible for me to communicate with Hartmann direct or with any certainty, and that is why I am asking you to act as intermediary, the more so since you say it is quite close to your place.

[^1]: * 'I had a letter from Hartmann a few days ago (dating from 14 Huntley St, Bedford Sq.) asking me if he might come and see me. I answered his letter directly — giving him the choice of two days — but have heard nothing of him.

[^2]: 'In case my letters have miscarried will you tell me if you know anything about him. If you see him perhaps you will tell him that I will see him any morning here (60 Upper Berkeley St., W.) between 11 and 12 o'clock.'*



