---
Volume: 46
Document_Title: "121. Marx to Engels. 3 March "
Page_Range: "245-246"
---

# 121. Marx to Engels. 3 March 



**[p. 121]**

M A R X T O E N G E L S 7 2

IN LONDON

[Postcard]

[Algiers,] 3 March 1882

Dear FRED,

Your letter dated 25 February 2 8 4 arrived yesterday together with the Daily News CUTS (O. N. a tragicomical secret of politics and passion in England). I trust Tussy will at last stop playing fast and loose with her health; that Cacadou, alias Laurachen, continues to flourish, for she is subjected to a great deal of physical exertion. As yet no reply from Paris.

T h e tempête—c'est ici l'expression sacramentaleh — has been going on since 26 February though always with VARIABLE ASPECTS.

On 2 March confined to the house FOR THE WHOLE DAY in common with all my fellow-lodgers; pouring rain from EARLY MORNING from a SKY of a colour reminiscent of London, grey as grey; this time however the squalls were accompanied by thunder and lightning; at 4 o'clock in the afternoon an azure sky AGAIN; later on a really lovely moonlit eve- ning. O n e short spell alternating with another throughout the day, now a rise in temperature, now a drop. Meanwhile I resumed inter alia the painting of my skin; that very night A REMARKABLE IMPROVEMENT SETTING IN.— This morning, 3 March, painting first task of the day; de- spite wind not intimidated, from 9 o'clock to ABOUT quarter TO 11 out for a stroll in the balmy sea air which I found MOST DELIGHTFUL; got back just before the wind worked itself into a fury again. I shall be

Your

Moor

[^1]: SUMMONED TO dejeunerc IN A FEW MINUTES and a m making use of this vital moment to send these FEW LINES TO YOU.

[^2]: Olga Novikova-b Tempest — that's the ritual expression here- c luncheon



