---
Volume: 46
Document_Title: "122. Marx to Jenny Longuet. 16 March "
Page_Range: "246-249"
---

# 122. Marx to Jenny Longuet. 16 March 



**[p. 217]**

[On the side reserved for the address]

Fr. Engels

122 Regent's Park Road, London, N. W., Angleterre

First published abridged in Der Briefwechsel Printed according to the original Zwischen F. Engels und K. Marx, Bd. 4, Stuttgart, 1913 and in full in MEGA, Abt. III, Bd. 4, Berlin, 1931

122

MARX TO JENNY LONGUET 166

IN ARGENTEUIL

[Algiers,] 16 March 1882 Hôtel Victoria

(Go on writing to me here, aux soins dea Fermé)

My Dear Child,

After receiving your letter through Fermé, I sent a messenger to the Hôtel d'Orient to make inquiries there as well; he was handed a letter for me from you dated 24 February.

I shall now give you a short account of the state of my health. Since my cough had become more persistent, with severe expecto- ration, insomnia, etc., I sent for Dr Stephann (who also looks after some of my other fellow-lodgers) and have thus been under his care since 26 February when he first examined me. He is a very shrewd and determined man. He found that, as a result of the unfortunate conca- tenation of events from the time I left Paris until now, my left side, which had been weakened by pleurisy, was functioning abnormally. The chief antidote consists in vésicatoiresh (the drawing off of fluid by painting the left side of my back and the lefthand side of my chest with cantharidic collodion) which works well in my case, and also a 'soothing' cough mixture; lastly, an arsenical preparation (as taste- less as water) to be taken after every meal. In so far as the weather permit- ted, I was to continue taking a gentle stroll each morning.

Unfortunately (had the weather been more favourable, my violent

[^1]: a Care of-h vesicatories





**[p. 218]**

coughing would [undoubtedly]a have gone of its own accord) I be- gan to spit blood on 6 March but, after 8 and 9 March, had a really serious [haemorrhage] with some residual pain until the 12th, and on the 13th all trace of haemorrhage had gone. So this disagreeable episode lasted a week; Dr Stephann intervened energetically, forbidding all movement (walks, needless to say) ; likewise ALMOST all TALK; hot foot- baths, etc., along with drastic medicaments. During this time the treatment with vésicatoires, cough TONICS, etc., continued and did, in fact, reduce the coughing quite amazingly. Also, the weather has gra- dually begun to change although not yet ALTOGETHER comme il faut.h

From my hill-top villa (Hôtel Victoria) I have before me the prospect of the bay and, to one side, villas rising in an amphitheatre —, [finest air],a even without a stroll, [wafting] past the little balcony in front of my own and the adjoining chambres,' or again in the verandah, the latter giving access to the first floor. The doctor will not permit me to resume my strolls until he has again examined the corpus delictis Be it noted that latterly not only have I regained my appetite, but have at last managed to snatch some sleep. (From the 16th of February, IN FACT SINCE THE NIGHT IN THE hôtel in Paris, I had suffered from insomnia unre- mittingly until the moment referred to above.)

* Take now all in all, the upshot is, as I too reported to London/ that in this foolish, ill-calculated expedition, I am now just arrived again at that standard of health when I possessed it on leaving Mait- land Park.1 I must, however, say that many visitors here too passed, and are passing still through the same trial. Since 10 years Alger had not such a failure of the winter season. Myself had had some doubts; there was the experience of the Isle of Wight 2 3 4 and other corners, but Engels and Donkin fired each other mutually into African furor, neither one nor the other getting any special information, considering that in regard to temperature this year was extraordinary. I had now and again by innuendo given to understand to begin at least by Men- tone (or Nizza) as Lavrov had received from Russian friends very fa- vourable news, but all this was ruled down by my sanguine good old Fredg who, I repeat it, I say it amongst you and myself, may easily kill some one out of love.

I must tell you that in this Villa-Hôtel, the two ladies, its mana- gers, did everything in my service, no care nor attention neglecting.

[^1]: a Difficult to decipher in the ms,-b as it should be- c rooms-1* offending body- c See this volume, pp. 213-15. - r Marx's London address-8 Engels



And as to the operations relating to the vésicatoires, a young pharmacien, Mr Casthelaz (with his mother he is here as a patient ever since De- cember) is so kind as to tattoo me, then open the* blisters filled with fluid, *then put linen on the somewhat rough skin, etc. He does all such things in the most genteel way, and offers these voluntary servi- ces in the most delicate manner.*

Nothing could be more magical than the city of Algiers,unless it be the campagne* outside that city in summertime [and] before; it would be like the Arabian Nights, particularly — given good health — with all my dear ones (in particular not forgetting my GRANDSONS b) about me. I have been delighted each time you have sent me news of the staunch little fellows; Tussy, too, has written saying that she can't stop thinking about the children, and longs to have them with her again. [It is] hardly likely that I shall be able to leave this place be- fore the month is out, for I must firstly complete the full course of treatment prescribed by Dr Stephann, and not till then (always sup- posing that ALL THEN AS TO WEATHER ALTOGETHER SETTLED) shall I actually be able to commence the actual fresh air treatment.

I have seen nothing of the Justice (polemic with Citoyen), nor indeed any of the Paris papers save for the Egalité. I was very pleased to learn from your letter that Tussy had found a tactful solution to the cata- strophe.285 If and when Lissagaray launches his Bataille, you will, I presume, send me the early numbers; *I do not believe in a great result*; mais qui vivra verrai

During my very first days here (while I was still at the Hôtel d'Orient), the GOOD Fermé 'over-walked' me — I mean, set me traips- ing up hill and down dale, and likewise OVERTALKED me. *A11 this I put at once an end to this, making him understood that I was an invalid.* But he meant very well, and now he knows rest, SOLITUDE and silence to be duties that are incumbent on me as a citizen.

Kisses to all the children. Regards to Longuet. And many kisses to yourself, dear child,

From your

[^1]: OLD NICK

[^2]: First published, in Russian, in the Printed according to the original magazine Nachalo, No. 5, St Petersburg, „ . ,. . , ,ana Published in English in lull for the first time

[^3]: a countryside - b Jean, Henri, Edgar and Marcel Longuet-c Here: We shall see.



