---
Volume: 46
Document_Title: "125. Marx to Jenny Longuet. 27 March "
Page_Range: "252-254"
---

# 125. Marx to Jenny Longuet. 27 March 

particularly struck by the rôle the TRULY AFRICAN SIROCCO played in the said storm.— Dr Stephann here yesterday; EXAMINATION satisfactory; prog- ress; still peccansa [are] a place at the very bottom of one side of my chest and a corresponding place on my back. Next week (i. e. ABOUT Wednesday or Thursday of next week), my HELP is to refrain from embrocating those spots; so Stephann is specially reserving this for himself.

Regards to all.

Your

Moor

[On the side reserved for the address]

Fr. Engels

122 Regent's Park Road, London, N. W., Angleterre

First published in Der Briefwechsel zwischen Printed according to the original F. Eneels und K. Marx, Bd. 4, Stuttgart, „ , , . , , . r, ,• . ,. , ,- ,q.„ Published in English for the first time

125

MARX TO JENNY LONGUET

[Algiers,] Monday, 27 March 1882

My Dear Child,

I received your letter to-day (27 March); you know how delighted I am always to hear of you. My reports to you did not conceal the worst from you; so you may also feel quite sure that I simply tell the truth in announcing you that since the date of my last letter to youb

my state of health is progressively improving. There is no longer in- somny (the worst of all), nor want of appetite, nor any violent charac- ter of cough, the latter indeed much subdued. Of course the vésicatoi-

[^1]: IN ARGENTEUIL

[^2]: at fault-b See this volume, pp. 217-19.





**[p. 224]**

res'' can, because of their intense action, only once a week be renewed; so the process of the healing of the membranes (the essential tissue of the organ has not at all suffered) on the left side wants some time. Of course the most unsteady weather, with sudden changes, storms, heats, colds, rain, in fact only a few good intervals,— the steady seas- onable air warm and 'sec'b is still the great desideratum. When we just, like yesterday, had caught the decisive turning point — it was a beautiful day, and I had a promenade,— but to-day sky grey (with a nuance noirâtre'), rain pouring down, wind howling. People here get it quite tired, for, it must not again and again be repeated: this such weather since December (inclus.) quite anormous in Algier. The thing was to inform oneself before starting on such a chasse aux oies sau- vages.A

Entre nousc: Though in the Isle of Wight 234 the weather was un- favourable, but still my health improved so greatly that people won- dered when myself returning to London. But, then, I had tranquillity at Ventnor; at London, on the contrary, Engels' excitement (La- fargue, too, a quack, thought 'walking', free air etc. were all I did want) in fact has upset me: I felt, I could not longer stand it; hence my impatience to get from London away on any condition whatever! People may kill some one out of real most sincere love; with all that nothing more dangerous in such cases for a reconvalescent!

As I told you/ dear child, I have had the good chance of having met with well-meaning, kind and unpretending people (French-Swiss and unmixed French, no German nor English in my Villa-Hôtel). Mr Maurice Casthelaz functions as volunteer under the orders of Dr Stephann; no Nym E more careful or attentive. Hence, my child, do not worry yourself as to my fancied helpless situation. Enough of male and female helps; and, on the other hand, it is the privilege of a 'patient' to be silent, to withdraw, etc., whenever I prefer the solitude or take no notice of the company.

Generally I have altogether neglected the French, English etc. daily press; I read only the telegraphic news. What I had desired, f. i., was Longuet's articles on the grève* (Lafargue wrote me greatly praising those articles). As to Massard's sottise,' I know to that mo- ment nothing save what you have written me.

[^1]: a vesicatories - b dry -c blackish tinge -d wild goose chase -e Between us - r See this volume, p. 219.- 8 Helene Demuth- h strike-' stupidity



