---
Volume: 46
Document_Title: "128. Marx to Engels. 4 April "
Page_Range: "257-259"
---

# 128. Marx to Engels. 4 April 



**[p. 127]**

ENGELS TO HENRY MAYERS HYNDMAN

IN LONDON

[London, circa 31 March 1882]

Dear Sir,

I thank you for the pamphlet3 you have sent me. I am very glad that glorious old Tom Spence has been brought out again.

I shall be very happy to make your personal acquaintance as soon as you shall have set yourself right with my friend Marx whom I see you can now afford to quote.

Yours truly,

F.E.

First published in: Marx and Engels,

Works, First Russian Edition, Vol. XXVII, Moscow, 1931

Reproduced from the original

Published in English for the first time

128

MARX TO ENGELS

[Algiers,] Tuesday, 4 April 1882

Have received your postcard284; Laurachen's letter dated 29 March has also arrived.

I'm progressing well on the whole but the weather is making an April fool of me.

[^1]: [Postcard]

[^2]: IN LONDON

[^3]: DEAR FRED,

[^4]: My congratulations to Pumps.288

[^5]: " [Th. Spence,] The Nationalisation of the Land in 1775 and 1882, London, Manchester, 1882.





**[p. 229]**

On 31 March, Friday afternoon — a few hours before I DISPATCHED my letter to you a—Fermé called; he told me inter alia of a secret vouchsafed to him by an Algerian meteorologist, namely that next week the weather would d'abord*0 be very wild for 3 days on account of the sirocco, after which there would be 3-4 wet days but finally a normal spring would step into the breach, booted and spurred. And anyone who doesn't believe it is mistaken.

Meanwhile Saturday (1 April), as well as Monday (3 April), was warm (a bit 'too' CLOSE) but the wind (no sirocco yet) confined me to my balcony on account of the swirls of dust; by contrast, the morning of 2 April (Sunday) was so fine and inviting that I went for a 2 hours' stroll.

Last night a piping wind; rain at ABOUT 5 o'clock this morning; dry since 8 o'clock, sky overcast, continual squalls. Yesterday evening wonderful moonlight on the bay. I can never stop feasting my eyes on the sea in front of my balcony.

Give my best regards to Jollymeyer,c ditto the others.

Your

Moor

Fr. Engels

122 Regent's Park Road, London, N. W. (Angleterre)

[^1]: [On the side reserved for the address]

[^2]: First published in Der Briefwechsel zwischen F. Engels und K. Marx, Bd. 4, Stuttgart,

[^3]: 1913

[^4]: Printed according to the original

[^5]: Published in English for the first time

[^6]: a See this volume, pp. 225-27.-b at first-c Schorlemmer's jocular nickname from the English 'jolly' and the German 'Meier' (farmer).



