---
Volume: 46
Document_Title: "129. Marx to Jenny Longuet. 6 and 7 April "
Page_Range: "259-262"
---

# 129. Marx to Jenny Longuet. 6 and 7 April 



**[p. 129]**

MARX TO JENNY LONGUET

IN ARGENTEUIL

[Algiers,] 6 April 1882

My Sweet Child,

Just now judge Fermé brought me your letter d. d. March 31; I am always delighted at your letters, but whenever, my dear child, did you find the time for writing them? I think often anxiously at your little household, limited to the services of this queer fish of Emily, and the four little boysa alone would absorb the whole working time of a superior servant.

Fermé handed me also a few days ago the promised numbers of the Justice (ci-inclush Hirsch's elucubrations reproduced from Madame Adam's Revue287). Longuet's articles on the 'grèves'c are very good. En passant. He says somewhere that Lassalle did only invent the words (not the law itself developed by Ricardo, Turgot, etc.289). In fact, however, he, Lassalle, borrowed, to German 'cultured' people well known, expression of Goethe who himself had modified Sophocles' ''ewige unwandelbare Gesetze'à into 'ewige eherne Gesetze'.'

Fermé had to sit opposite to me in my 'chambre',' silent, reading, until I had finished a letter to Tussy (from her I had the same day re- ceived a letter, ditto one from Engels) to be ready for the messenger to Algiers.

I expect Dr Stephann to-day. If he comes, I should be able to report on his examination, before despatching these lines you tomorrow morning. Meanwhile the progress of my health goes on satisfactory, though slowly for somebody eager to be again active and to drop that invalid's, stupid métier. All this delay is due to this violent Algerian dis- temper, altogether quite anormous, never heard of since Fermé's 12 years long sojourn here. The weather remains fidgety, fitful, capri- cious; April weather, from sunny changing suddenly into rainy, from hot to cold, chilly, from a sky diaphaneg to scowling, almost black; from the dry atmosphere to being heavy with aqueous vapours; in

[^1]: a Jean, Henri, Edgar and Marcel Longuet-b including-1 'strikes'-d 'eternal immutable laws' (from Sophocles' Antigone)-" 'eternal iron laws' -f room- 8 clear, transparent





**[p. 231]**

one word, the weather far from being 'settled' or having subsided to what here may be considered the average 'normal' Algerian 'spring' character. However, if the wind blows not violently, if there be no rain, the April's early hours were pleasant, so that I could indulge my morning promenades to-day, yesterday, and the day last before yes- terday; thus I enjoyed three consecutive morning promenades one or two hours long.

I am just interrupted by a noise rising from the little, in terraces mounting little garden (ein rotblühender Gartena) that forms the avenue to our Verandah (behind it the first étageb of our Villa), while my cham- bre on the second étage (and 5 other ones) opens upon the little gallery over the Verandah, both of them looking at the sea before and from all sides to a charming panorama. Well, the noise called me upon the gallery, and how he would laugh, at my side, so heartfully, so delightfully, that little Johnny, below him in the garden a real pitch dark negro, dancing, playing a small fiddle, beating his long iron castagnettes, writhing his body into plastic grimaces and folding his face into broad humorous grins. These Algerian Negroes were formerly in general slaves of Turks, Arabs, etc., but were emancipat- ed under the French régime.

Well, there looks down behind him, the negro, another figure, in a dignified manner and rather condescendingly smiling at the bla- ckie's exhibition. This is a Maure (anglice Moor, germ. Mohr); en pass- ant the Maures are called the Arabs in Algeria, a small minority of them, withdrawn from the desert and their communities, dwelling in the towns at the side of the Europeans. They are taller than the aver- age French measure, oval faces, noses aquiline, eyes large and brilli- ant; hairs and beards black, their skin's colour running over an échel- le' from almost white to darkly bronze. Their costumes — even if in tatters — elegant and graceful, a culotte6 (or a mantle), a rather toga of thin white wool, or a capot à capuchon'; for their cover of the head (for which the capuchon serves also in unfavourable (too hot etc.) weather) a turban or a piece of white mousseline, wound round their culottes; generally they leave their legs naked, the feet also, but more rarely they wear pantoufles1 of yellow or red maroquin.

Even the poorest Maure surpasses the greatest European comedian as to the 'art de se draper' dans son capot f and to show natural, graceful,

[^1]: a a garden in red blossom - b floor - c range - d breeches - e cape with a hood - ' shoes - « art of draping in his cape





**[p. 232]**

and dignified attitudes, whether walking or standing (if they ride on their mules, or asses, or exceptionally on horses,— always throwing their both legs on some side down, instead of a European taking his horse between his both legs — then they offer the image of indolence).

Well, the said Maure—behind the negro in our garden — cries out for sale of'oranges' and 'cocks' (incl. hens), a strange combination of these articles vendible. Between the Maure, majestical even then, and the dancing grinning nigger there struts an animal — a most vain paon* (belonging to one of our co-pensionnairesb) with its wonderfully blue throat and most adorned long tail. At this trio, how my Johnny's laughter I should like to hear ring!

It is now 4 o'clock p. m. (during part of the afternoon, I had of course some conversation with Fermé, having brought me your letter, then later on he removed himself to Algiers). The rain pours down: the sudden lowering of the temperature most disgusting. My best compliments to Dr Dourlen!

7 April 1882

Raining through the whole night; this morning is sky covered, but no rain; pleasant air, but too saturated with watery vapours. I had an hour's promenade (9-10 a.m.), doubtful whether not surprised by rain — but none yet. As Dr Stephann came not yesterday nor the day before, I wrote him to-day morning, but at all events these lines, in order to be despatched still to-day, cannot await the Doctor's exami- nation. He will not appear before 5 o'clock afternoon. You see, it is a good sign, that the Dr neglects me a little; in other words, he is no longer anxious to strictly repeat his visits in court intervals.

How I shall feel happy when returning to my grandsons and their excellent Maman! I am not at all inclined here to prolong my sojourn longer than the Dr considers it absolutely necessary. Many kisses from your

Old Nick

I hope Longuet tries to understand it.

[^1]: The inclosed cut from a German-American paper Engels sent me; it is an amusing criticism of the newest 'Teutsche Bedientenpoesie'.c

[^2]: " peacock - b lodgers -c German servile poetry



