---
Volume: 46
Document_Title: "130. Marx to Engels. 8 April "
Page_Range: "262-264"
---

# 130. Marx to Engels. 8 April 



**[p. 233]**

Dear child, I had already sealed this letter, but was forced to re- open it. Dr Stephann came a bit earlier than expected. The fresh exam- ination led him to conclude — and I am very pleased to be able to tell you this — that my left side has in the meantime healed almost as well as the right one.290

First published, in Russian, in the Reproduced from the original magazine Nachalo, No. 5, St Petersburg. T> , ,. , , . ^ ,. , . ,oqq Published in English lor the first time

130

MARX T O ENGELS 7 2

IN LONDON

[Algiers,] 8 April * (Saturday) 1882

At 4 o'clock yesterday afternoon I was examined by Dr Stephann. Despite the changeable weather, which had again brought on a per- sistent cold, he was very satisfied; found that the épanchementb low down (to the left of my chest) had almost completely disappeared; the one on my back (low down on the left) being rather more stubborn. Yesterday he gave this a special lambasting by painting it with col- lodion cantharidal.c The result was most acute pain and, thanks to the 'painting', a sleepless night (from 7 to 8 April), but this morning there has also been a MOST EFFECTIVE PUMPING OF WATER from the blisters that have formed. So I have no doubt that this offending spot will also cap- itulate in the very near future. My ASSISTANT-DOCTOR, Mr Casthelaz, had to work away for half an hour in my flourishing watermelon plantation, after which I was made to lie in bed until déjeuner6 at half past eleven; for after bandaging the drawing off, drop by drop, of any residual fluid works best in that position.

On the other hand Stephann found my cough somewhat worse (only relatively, however, for the cough had reached a nadir), a con-

[^1]: DEAR FRED,

[^2]: March in the ms.-b effusion-c cantharidic collodion-0 luncheon





**[p. 234]**

sequence of the absurd weather; for 4 days this week the mornings were fine enough for walks; since yesterday afternoon it has never stopped raining; in the night and today THE RAIN ASSUMED THE 'caractère torrentier; today there has been a feeble attempt at lighting the fire in the dining-room, but these fireplaces don't in fact seem to exist for that purpose, BUT ONLY FOR SHOWS SAKE.

After déjeuner I retired for a nap AT 2 O'CLOCK to make up in part for last night, but by some infernal chance the courts are on vacation this week and next. So my plan was thwarted by the otherwise most ami- able JUDGE Fermé who didn't release me until ABOUT 5 p. m. when din- ner time was approaching. Fermé told me amongst other things that during his carrière on the bench a form of torture has been used (and this happens 'regularly') to extract confessions from Arabs; naturally it is done (like the English in India) by the 'police'; the judge is SUP- POSED TO KNOW NOTHING ABOUT ALL OF IT. On the other hand, he says that when, for example, a murder is committed by an Arab gang, usually with robbery in view, and the actual miscreants are in the course of time duly apprehended, tried and executed, this is not regarded as sufficient atonement by the injured colonist family. They demand INTO THE BARGAIN the 'pulling in' of at least half a dozen innocent Arabs. But this is resisted by the French judges and particularly the cours d'appel," though now and again the life of an individual, isolated judge may be threatened by the colonists if he does not provisionally consent (his competence extends no further) to having a dozen in- nocent Arabs locked up for suspected murder, burglary, etc., and involving them in the investigation. However we are aware that when a European colonist dwells among the 'lesser breeds', either as a set- tler or simply on business, he generally regards himself as even more inviolable than handsome William I. Still, when it comes to bare- faced arrogance and presumptuousness vis-à-vis the 'lesser breeds', to a grisly, Moloch-like obsession with atonement, the British and Dutch outdo the French.

Pumps' FAMILY MISSION shows great promise,288 as opposed to Hynd- man's political mission which might be regarded as problematical. It serves the laddie right that your noteb should have annoyed him, especially since he took these liberties with me only because he was counting on my own inability, for 'considerations of propaganda', to compromise him in public.291 He knew that well enough.

[^1]: courts of appeal- b See this volume, p. 228.



