---
Volume: 46
Document_Title: "131. Engels to Pyotr Lavrov. 10 April "
Page_Range: "264-265"
---

# 131. Engels to Pyotr Lavrov. 10 April 



**[p. 235]**

Scandalmonger Bodenstedt and Friedrich Vischer-Sewer-Aesthete are the Horace and Virgil of William I.292

Apropos. The Kölnische J^eitung's article on Skobelev you sent me is most interesting.

This note won't leave today (Saturday), for there are no 'paquebots' * at all to Marseilles on Mondays, Wednesdays or Saturdays; but by way of exception a. paquebot leaves Algiers on a Sunday at 1 p. m. and letters for it must be delivered to the post office by 11 o'clock in the morning (Sunday); the Hôtel Victoria, Algiers, despatches a MESSENGER with the letters early on Sunday mornings. On the other days, when there is a. paquebot from Algiers to Marseilles, departure is at 5.30 in the after- noon.

But I wanted to get these lines off by tomorrow, since Dr Steph- ann's last examination was so especially favourable.

Best wishes to everyone.

Your

Moor

First published abridged in Der Briefwechsel Printed according to the original zwischen F. Engels und K. Marx, Bd. 4, Stuttgart, 1913 and in full in MEGA, Abt. III, Bd. 4, Berlin, 1931

131

ENGELS TO PYOTR LAVROV

[London,] 10 April 1882 122 Regent's Park Road

My dear Lavrov,

I am returning the proofs,293 for which I thank you. I should have done so earlier had I not hoped to see you last night and to say Xpwc Would you be so kind as to lend me the German manuscript of the

[^1]: IN LONDON

[^2]: TOC"b, BOCKpe CB AH OHT>? h

[^3]: a ferry-boats - b Engels is using a Russian Easter greeting in an ironical form



