---
Volume: 46
Document_Title: "132. Engels to Berthold Sparr. 12 April "
Page_Range: "265-266"
---

# 132. Engels to Berthold Sparr. 12 April 



**[p. 236]**

preface for a day or two? The Sozialdemokrat has asked us to send it to them and, since the thing has appeared in the Hapoduan eonn* (to which we are proud to find ourselves contributors), there can no long- er be any objection.

Yours sincerely,

F. Engels

Our ideas seem to me to have been very well rendered.

Printed according to the original

Translated from the French

Published in English for the first time

132

ENGELS TO BERTHOLD SPARR 2 9 4

[London,] 12 April 1882

Dear Sir,

I am not acquainted either with you or with the Mr K. Schmidt you refer to. If you mean Mr K. Schneidt, the anarchist, he will be able to get you into the club in Rose Street295 and obtain assistance for you. In view of the way in which the people on the Freiheit have laid into the Social-Democratic Party in Germany,296 I hardly feel called upon to give the adherents of that tendency a helping hand. However I do not know which tendency you belong to. The German Club, which sides with the great party in Germany, is, as anyone will tell you, at 49 Tottenham Street297 and I find it inconceivable that both these clubs should let a fugitive party member starve to death.— In view of the great distress brought about among the members of the great Social-Democratic Party by police persecution in Germany, my resources will scarcely permit me to support, in addition, ad First published, in Russian, in the magazine Letopisi marksizma, Book V, Moscow-Leningrad, 1928

[^1]: IN LONDON

[^2]: [Draft]

[^3]: * Narodnaya Volya



