---
Volume: 46
Document_Title: "135. Engels to Eduard Bernstein. 17 April "
Page_Range: "273-274"
---

# 135. Engels to Eduard Bernstein. 17 April 



**[p. 135]**

ENGELS T O EDUARD BERNSTEIN

IN ZURICH

London, 17 April 1882

Dear Mr Bernstein,

As soon as I heard from Lavrov that the preface " had appeared in the JVarodnaya Volya 302 I asked for a copy of the original,0 but he had left it in his desk in Paris; however, he said he would write. Then I went to Marx's and searched in vain for the brouillon.'' Finally I got Lavrov to let me have a copy of the Russian translation so that, if the worst came to the worst, I could retranslate it myself; I feared, as indeed happened, that some Russian or other would see to this. Lavrov has just sent me the enclosed copy of the original. However, I have only myself to blame for this. For I had meant to send you a postcard, but have got Schorlemmer and Adolf Beust staying with me, and there's quite a lot of gadding about with Mrs Lafargue (whose husbandd is in Paris) and Tussy Marx, so that the postcard got overlooked. But in order that you may see that good intentions were not wanting, I am belatedly sending you the thing.

Confidential: Marx has been in Algiers since 21 February. On ar- rival he had a fresh attack of pleurisy as a result of catching cold on the journey; he found wretched weather conditions, but is now pretty well all right again. How long he'll stay there is not yet certain. Has had distinctly bad luck with the weather.

Kindest regards from

Yours,

F. Engels

[^1]: Congratulations on your attack upon Geiser's spineless conduct.303

[^2]: First published, in Russian, in Marx-Engels Printed according to the original Archives, Book I, Moscow, 1924 „ , , . , , . „ ,., ,. , ,- Published in English for the first time

[^3]: " K. Marx and F. Engels, 'Preface to the Second Russian Edition of the Manifesto of the Communist Party (see present edition, Vol. 24, pp.425-26).-b See this volume, pp. 235-36 - c draft - d Paul Lafargue



