---
Volume: 46
Document_Title: "136. Marx to Engels. 18 April "
Page_Range: "274-276"
---

# 136. Marx to Engels. 18 April 



**[p. 136]**

MARX T O ENGELS 7 2

IN LONDON

[Algiers,] Tuesday, 18 April 1882

DEAR FRED,

Got your letter yesterday,284 likewise Tussy's, together with the 'imperial' remittance.3

In my last letter to Laurachenb I announced the arrival of our '2 finest days'; but even before I had finished the letter, the sirocco (the official weather bulletins, like other French printed matter, spell it sometimes with one c, sometimes with 2) began to blow and the din served me as an overture to the 'mouvements atmosphériques in- tenses' c which had been predicted. I admitted to Laura that I was tired of such things — if not, indeed, tired of Africa, and was determined to turn my back on Algiers the moment Dr Stephann DID NO LONGER

'WANT ME'.

From the 14th April (afternoon) to the 17th April, gusts of wind, storms, heavy downpours, burning sunshine, continual ups and downs, now hot now cold (almost from one hour to the next). First thing this morning gloriously fine, but now, at 10 A.M., the wind is al- ready piping its maddening tune.— In its report — or rather fore- cast— yesterday, the meteorological office announced an 'intense mouve- ment atmosphérique' for 3-4 May, but more especially for 7-8 May (not having pro nuncà probed any further into the future); in addition, for the first week of this self-same May, it has promised us so CALLED 'seis- miques mouvements'' (apparently the periodicity of these 'seismiques' coincides with latent earth tremors).

Dr Stephann called on the 16th (Sunday), percussed, and declared that there was no longer any trace of 'pleurésie'r (AS FAR AS TO'rechute'S); on the other hand he was, he said, less satisfied with the bronchial condition (also on the left) than when he last examined me. However, he painted away with great vigour (a vigour I damned well had time to appreciate in the course of Sunday afternoon—16 April — and

[^1]: a Engels had arranged the remittance through the bankers Kayser & Co. Kaiser = Emperor.-'1 See this volume, pp. 238-43.-' intense atmospheric disturbances - d for the time being-0 seismic disturbances-1 pleurisy-8 relapse





**[p. 246]**

night, and right into the small hours of Monday—17 April!).— Incidentally, Dr Stephann shares my view that bronchial trouble is inseparable from this weather and, such being the case, any prolon- gation of my stay here could only have unfavourable consequences. He thinks he will be able to let me leave, with a written diagnosis, at the end of April unless something unforeseen should happen — e. g. the weather here take a distinct turn for the better or, which seems unlikely, my health take a turn for the worse. All things being equal, then, I should leave on 2 May, being delivered back to Marseilles by the selfsame Said under the same Captain Mace (very nice chap) who brought me to Algiers, and from there should go and try my luck at Cannes, Nice or Menton. So don't send me either letters or anything in the way of documents or newspapers from London, unless it be JUST AFTER THE RECEIPT OF THESE ums. But should I change my mind in the meantime, I shall at once notify you from here.

I am afraid that '/«o V may arrive in Algiers after not only I, but also the Casthelaz FAMILY, have evacuated Africa; all the world's pre- paring to take flight. You must excuse the meagreness of this MISSIVE. The night of the 16th to 17th April was sleepless because of the vigour of the painting; no pain from the 17th to the 18th April because the ASSISTANT DOCTOR a had already attended to me by 7 o'clock yesterday morning; but the itching due to the formation of new skin banished sleep for the 2nd night running. Since, in addition, I went for a stroll (2 whole hours) very early this morning, iiw begrijph (I can no longer recall how the Dutch spell it, but I still hear the ü begreipl — what it's got to do with 'concept', God alone knows — as enunciated in the old days at Zalt-Bommel304 by Pastor Rothhaus V wife, since divorced and replaced by my cousind), IN ONE WORD, as you can conceive, I have got to lay my head on my pillow and make up for some sleep. Mean- while:— sleep, what would'st thou more? Only first let me tell you about the rotten trick played by the French authorities on a poor, thieving Arab, a poor, multiple assassin by profession. Only at the last minute — ON THE MOMENT, as the infamous COCKNEYS say, 'TO LAUNCH' the poor sinner 'INTO ETERNITY' did he discover that he wasn't going to be shot but guillotined! This, in defiance of prior arrangements! In defi- ance of promises! He was guillotined despite what had been agreed. But that wasn't all. The French having always permitted this hith-

[^1]: a Maurice Casthelaz-b You [can] conceive-0 A. Roodhuizen-d Antoinette Philips



