---
Volume: 46
Document_Title: "137. Engels to Eduard Bernstein. 21 April "
Page_Range: "276-277"
---

# 137. Engels to Eduard Bernstein. 21 April 



**[p. 247]**

erto, his relatives had expected the head and body to be handed over to them so that they could sew the former to the latter and then bury the 'whole'. Quod non!* Howls, imprecations and gnashing of teeth; the French authorities dug their heels in, the first time they had done so! Now, when the body arrives in paradise, Mohammed will ask, 'Where have you left your head? Or, how did the head come to be parted from its body? You're not fit to enter paradise. Go and join those dogs of Christians in hell!' And that's why his relations were so upset.

Your

OLD Moor

On closer inquiry—I hadn't asked him before — Stephann told me that, although he doesn't speak German, he is the son of a Ger- man. His father emigrated to Algiers from the Palatinate (Landau).

First published in Der Briefwechsel zwischen Printed according to the original F. Engels und K. Marx, Bd. 4, Stuttgart,

1913

137

ENGELS TO EDUARD BERNSTEIN

London, 21 April 1882

Dear Mr Bernstein,

I am sending you a piece from the Kölner Leitung on 'Baron Hirsch'.305 It is significant that bourgeois papers should find it neces- sary to denounce such a trickster. The whole article is worth reprint- ing if space is available. It would make a splendid feuilleton, particu- larly as emanating from the Kölnische Reifung. If you can't reprint it in its entirety, perhaps you would return it to me when you have done with it. You might also return me the ms. of the 'Preface'b sometime.

Let me elucidate: Mahmud Nedim Pasha is, like Mahmud Damat

[^1]: IN ZURICH

[^2]: a But no.-b K. Marx and F. Engels, 'Preface to the Second Russian Edition of the Manifesto of the Communist Party (see present edition, Vol. 24, pp. 425-26).



