---
Volume: 46
Document_Title: "138. Marx to Engels. 28 April "
Page_Range: "277-279"
---

# 138. Marx to Engels. 28 April 



**[p. 248]**

Pasha (the Sultan'sa brother-in-law), Russia's chief paid agent in Constantinople. When the Russian, Poliakov, who was also after the Turkish railway concessions, had failed to get them (for the Russians could not start a war against Turkey and simultaneously con the Turks), it was naturally of the utmost concern to the Russians to see to it that the terms imposed upon the Austrian, Hirsch, who was the sole competitor and, what's more, Austria's protégé, were of such a kind as to make Hirsch, and with him Austria, hated in Turkey and to prevent Turkey from getting a coherent railway network after all. Besides, anything that weakened Turkey financially was advanta- geous to Russia — relatively speaking. So Nedim does his deal. Hirsch pays him for selling Turkey to him and Russia pays him again just for selling Turkey. The fact is that Russian diplomacy does business in the grand manner, with none of your small shopkeeper's niggardly, envious eye to his competitors and hence, if there's no other way of doing it, it can even permit an adversary like Austria an apparent or momentary advantage and nevertheless turn this to its own account. Kindest regards to you and Kautsky.

Yours,

F. E.

138

[Algiers,] Friday, 28 April 1882

Dear FRED,

RECEIVED YOUR LETTER AND THE Kölnische ^eitungs. This note is simply to inform you that I shall be leaving Algiers on

[^1]: First published, in Russian, in Marx-Engels Printed according to the original Archives, Book I Moscow, 1924 „ , , . , , . „ , . l r , ,- Published in English lor the iirst time

[^2]: MARX TO ENGELS 7 2

[^3]: IN LONDON

[^4]: a Abdul Hamid II





**[p. 249]**

2 May (Tuesday) on the same Said and with the same commandant' MR Mace, 'lieutenant de vaisseau\h as brought me to Algiers. Last Wednesday I paid a visit to a French squadron of 6 ironclads; natu- rally I inspected the flagship, Le Colbert, where a petty officer, a handsome, intelligent lad, showed me around and demonstrated everything in detail. As I took my leave he told me in typically French fashion that he was sick of his boring duties and hoped to get his discharge bientôt." I and my companions .(3 co-locatairesä from the Hôtel Victoria) were not allowed on board until after 'duties'. So we watched the manoeuvres of the flagship and the 5 other ironclads from our boat, alias skiff, as we rowed to and fro. There is to be a 'ball' on the Colbert tomorrow afternoon. I could have got hold of an invitation card for this, too, through Fermé, but there wasn't time. For on Tuesday (25 Avril) I was given my final examination by Stephann; no more tatouement' with collodion; quo-adf a recurrence of pleurisy ALTOGETHER ABSOLVED; however I'm to see him tomorrow (Sa- turday) at 3 o'clock to get his written diagnosis and take my leave of him. The weather is now very hot on occasion, but IN FACT a hurri- cane— with sirocco storms coming and going — has persisted (un- interruptedly at night, in repeated gusts during the day) throughout the week (including TO-DAY) . That is the reason why my cough has not responded hitherto; HENCE high time to flee Algiers. Best wishes to all.

Your

OLD Moor

Apropos; because of the sun, I have done away with my prophet's beard and my crowning glory but (in deference to my daughters) had myself photographed before offering up my hair on the altar of an Al- gerian barber. I shall receive the photographs next Sunday (30 Ap- ril). Specimina will be sent to you from Marseilles. On inspection you will observe that, CONSIDERING the 8 whole weeks (during which I did not in fact have one day of complete repose) of painting with collo- dion (after the manner of Ludwig of Bavaria30fi), j'ai fait encore bonne mine à mauvais jeu.g

[^1]: First published in Der Briefwechsel zwischen Printed according to the original F.Engels und K. Marx, Bd. 4, Stuttgart, 1913

[^2]: a captain- b Lieutenant Commander-' soon-d fellow lodgers-' painting-f as to- g I am still putting a good face on things.



