---
Volume: 46
Document_Title: "140. Engels to Eduard Bernstein. 3 May "
Page_Range: "279-281"
---

# 140. Engels to Eduard Bernstein. 3 May 



**[p. 139]**

MARX TO JENNY LONGUET

IN ARGENTEUIL

[Algiers,] 28 April 1882

Dearest Child,

Only 2 lines: I think only seaside living can help poor Harry. You ought — if possibly — lose no time to get him and his brothersa to Nor- mandy. It is childish to fancy that in any case I should return to En- gland without a previous visit to you and my grandsons, whether we meet in Normandy, at Paris, or elsewhere.

As to my health, it proceeds favourably; otherwise Dr Stephann would not allow me to leave 'Africa'. I think, 2 weeks or so, will suf- fice for the 'transitory' stadium at the Riviera.

My best wishes, dearest child,

Old Nick

140

London, 3 May 1882 Dear Mr Bernstein,

Could you not send me some additional offprints of the article on early Christianityb or further copies of the relevant issue? I should like to have them very much and they would come in useful for prop-

[^1]: First published, in Russian, in the Reproduced from the original magazine Nachalo, No. 5, St Petersburg, _ , .. , , . _ ,. , . ,OQQ Published in English for the first time

[^2]: ENGELS TO EDUARD BERNSTEIN ' 1 3

[^3]: IN ZURICH

[^4]: a Jean, Edgar and Marcel- b F. Engels, 'Bruno Bauer and Early Christianity'.





**[p. 251]**

aganda purposes. I should send them to people who don't otherwise see the Sozialdemokrat; 3 or 4 would suffice.

Encl. a note which is of interest in that it gives evidence of the co- lossal speed with which the concentration of capitals is taking place in America. UNITED STATES BONDS are Staatsschuldscheine der Vereinigten Staa- ten. N.Y.C. and H.R. STOCK are the shares of the NEW YORK CENTRAL and HUDSON RIVER Railroad; REAL ESTATE = Grundbesitz.

A dollar is slightly more than 4 marks = roughly 4 marks = 5 frs. Delighted to see that people everywhere are supporting the Sozial- demokrat against the whines of the milksops.

Darwin's letter was of course addressed to Marx and was an ex- tremely kind one.307 But beware of the article by Lafargue in the Citoyen of 28 April on 'La sélection darwinienne et les classes régnantes' which he concludes with the discovery of a new Amphioxus; it's too funny for words. Lafargue is in Paris and I have just written to him 2 8 4 pouring frightful scorn on his Amphioxus Lafargii.

Best wishes.

Yours,

F. E.

Gladstone has made a dreadful ass of himself— his Irish policy has failed utterly; is having to drop Forster and the LORD LIEUTENANT of Ireland, Cowper Temple (whose father was a Palmerston on his moth- er's side)," and say pater peccavib; the Irish Members of Parliament have been released, the Coercion Bill has not been extended, part of the farmers' rent arrears are to be cancelled, another part to be taken over by the state against fair amortisation.308 On the other hand, the TORIES have now got to the stage of wanting to salvage whatever there is to be salvaged; thus, before the farmers take possession of the land,

[^1]: Don't let the Society here 8 mislead you about the DEMOCRATIC FED- ERATION.158 So far, the latter has been of no importance at all. Its leader is an ambitious parliamentary candidate by the name of Hyndman, a former Conservative; only with the help of the Irish and with specifically Irish aims in view can he succeed in staging a big meeting, and when he does he plays third fiddle; otherwise the Irish would tell him where to get off.

[^2]: a Engels confuses Francis Thomas Cowper with William Cowper-Temple, who was the son of the 5th Earl Cowper. After the latter's death his widow married, as her sec- ond husband, Lord Palmerston.-b Father, I have sinned (Luke 15:18).



