---
Volume: 46
Document_Title: "143. Marx to Jenny Longuet. 8 May "
Page_Range: "284-285"
---

# 143. Marx to Jenny Longuet. 8 May 



**[p. 143]**

MARX T O JENNY LONGUET 7 2

IN ARGENTEUIL

Monte Carlo, 8 May 1882 Hôtel de Russie, Monte Carlo

Dear Jennychen,

The said Monte Carlo, whence I send you these lines, is one of the 3 places (adjoining one another) whose trinity constitutes the state of 'Monaco' (i.e. Monaco, Condamine and Monte Carlo). A really beautiful situation. Climate preferable to that of Nice or even Men- ton.

I need hardly say that with comical consistency I imported into the region the first 2 rainy days (since January) ; it would seem that they were only awaiting my arrival from Algiers for this to happen. Apart from that I struck magnificent weather.

As you will have learnt from my last letter," I am quit of my pleu- risy; the bronchial catarrh can only clear up very gradually. More- over the atmosphere will soon be warm and dry everywhere (which, however, raises fears of a water shortage); the intensity of the sun's ac- tion will be all the greater for its being strewn with large spots. So everywhere there will soon be the kind of weather I need.

As I am not sure how long I shall be staying here, I should like you to let me know at once from Paris where I can find you; it would be best if you telegraphed me here, for a telegram will give me sufficient in- formation in 3 or 4 words.

Lots of kisses for the children.

Your

OLD Moor

[^1]: First published, in Russian, in the Printed according to the original magazine Nachalo, No. 5, St Petersburg,

[^2]: 1899

[^3]: * See this volume, p. 250.



