---
Volume: 46
Document_Title: "147. Marx to Eleanor Marx. 21 May "
Page_Range: "293-294"
---

# 147. Marx to Eleanor Marx. 21 May 



**[p. 264]**

is the truth, but not the whole truth. What's the point of alarming them?

Your

Moor

Dr Kunemann's error about my being a 'medical' colleague was clea- red up when, at the end of my first visit, he refused payment; was all the more honeyed when I informed him that, as a layman, I should have to 'shell out'.

First published in Der Briefwechsel zwischen Printed according to the original F. Engels und K. Marx, Bd. 4, Stuttgart,

1913

147

MARX TO ELEANOR MARX

Monte Carlo (Monaco), 21 May 1882 Hôtel de Russie

Dearest Child,

Your being my oldest creditor, I had in fact intended writing to- day (Sunday) a long letter, but l'homme propose, mais le thermomètre dispose. Il y a aujourd'hui un jour parfaitement beau, mais exceptionnel: donc je veux l'exploiter en air libre, au lieu 'd'écrire', et de ne pas écrire le soir. C'est convenu avec mes conseillers de santé.1

Before leaving amib Fermé, I told him: On landing at the Southern coast of France, the weather at once will come out a turn-coat. And indeed — so 'fatal' a man I pride myself upon this my quality — the prophecy has been partially fulfilled. From the beginning of January the Riviera enjoyed a summer weather never so brilliant, some grumblers

[^1]: IN LONDON

[^2]: [Postcard]

[^3]: a man proposes but the thermometer disposes. Today is a wonderfully fine day, but it's exceptional. Accordingly I intend to take advantage of it in the open air instead of 'writing', and to desist from writing in the evening. That has been agreed with my medical advisers. - b friend



