---
Volume: 46
Document_Title: "148. Marx to Jenny Longuet. 26 May "
Page_Range: "294-295"
---

# 148. Marx to Jenny Longuet. 26 May 



**[p. 265]**

only complaining of an absolute lack of rain almost. The moment I arrived on the 4th May at Marseille, there set in rain, lasting some- times a whole, more generally a half day, and mostly during the nights; a general lowering of temperature; then and there cold winds; altogether changeable, variable weather; atmosphere, even if not of- ten, too saturated with aqueous vapours. With all that, here a rela- tively good warm weather, only not so dry and more constant than I want just now for my lungs. But nowhere in Italy or elsewhere you will find it a better one now: Cannes, Monte Carlo and Mentone are the three most healthsome places, of the most equable and on an average — warmer temperature than Nizza, Rome and Naples.

Yours,

Old Nick

[On the side reserved for the address]

Miss Marx 41 Maitland Park Road Maitland Park London (N.W.) (Angleterre)

148

MARX T O JENNY LONGUET

Monte Carlo, 26 May 1882 Hôtel de Russie

Dearest Child,

I am always happy to receive a letter from you, though regretting that your Old Nick steals some time of your night's rest.

My health is improving with the weather; possibly I shall perhaps at the beginning of June go to Cannes, and remain there for a week or

[^1]: First published, in Russian, in the maga- Reproduced from the original zine Voinstvuyushchiy materialist, Book IV, „ , ,. , , • T, ,• , <- i r- *, . „ „ . Published in English lor the first ' time

[^2]: IN ARGENTEUIL

[^3]: [Postcard!



