---
Volume: 46
Document_Title: "151. Marx to Jenny Longuet. 4 June "
Page_Range: "300-301"
---

# 151. Marx to Jenny Longuet. 4 June 



**[p. 271]**

YANKEE-English. However one thing was clear, and that was what Dr Stephann had told me on the first day: Your thorax is what it is, so if spurious tissue takes up some of the space that one lung should occupy, that lung must make do with less space. The said tissue disap- pears in proportion as the lung re-expands. I have only just left Dr Kunemann, i. e. it's now nearly 6 o'clock in the evening which (6 o'clock) is the latest posting time FOR TO-DAY. Tomorrow — because of the final vésicatoire to be applied tonight — writing will be OUT OF THE QUESTION; day after tomorrow I shall have to recuperate and so it's 'unlikely' that you'll get any further news before the 2nd or 3rd of June (as I shall also have to pack). With best wishes.

OLD Moor

First published in Der Briefwechsel zwischen Printed according to the original F. Engels und K. Marx, Bd. 4, Stuttgart,

1913

151

Cannes, 4 Juin" 1882

Dearest Child,

I'll come at some of the first days of the week beginning on the 6th June. I cannot specify; it will depend on circumstance not to be exactly foreseen. Hence you oblige me greatly by not bothering about the exact day or hour of arrival. Till now, I have always found that nothing has done me more harm than people, at the station, waiting for me. Do not tell anybody else (ci-inclus le Gascon, le Russe et le Hirsch)b that I am expected that week. I'll want some absolute quietness alone with your family, No. 11, Boulevard Thiers.

Yours,

Old Nick

[^1]: MARX T O JENNY LONGUET ' 2

[^2]: IN ARGENTEUIL

[^3]: [Postcard]

[^4]: a June- b (this includes the Gascon [Lafargue], the Russian [Lavrov] and Hirsch)



