---
Volume: 46
Document_Title: "153. Marx to Engels. 9 June "
Page_Range: "304-305"
---

# 153. Marx to Engels. 9 June 



**[p. 153]**

MARX TO ENGELS

IN LONDON

[Postcardl

Argenteuil, 9 June 1882

11 Boulevard Thiers

DEAR FRED,

As you know, everywhere I go I must, like TICKETS OF LEAVE, report to the doctor nearest to the place where I first take up my abode.327

Yesterday, therefore, EXAMINATION by Dr Dourlen. *State of health exactly the same I left in which it was at Monte Carlo. As to the bron- chite, I shall for a few weeks try the sulphurous waters of Enghien, about 15 minutes distance from Argenteuil; if this will not work, he wants to send me to the Pyrenees (Cauterets). (The same things had me already told by Dr Kunemann, who, in the last time, commenced to feed me with pastilles de sulphured A specialistb at Enghien is a special friend of Dr Dourlen to whom he will give me a letter. Gene- rally Dr Dourlen found the tone and strength of my body much other than when I left; he was even astonished that I was in so good a con- dition after two* rechutes et apres 14 vésicatoires.'

* Compliments to all. Old* Moor

*Longuet brings me every evening the Standard, so useless to him. I have not yet written to the Gascon11328; my cough warns me to be careful before seeing friends.*

Frederick Engels, Esq. 122 Regent's Park Road, London, N. W., Angleterre

[^1]: [On the side reserved for the address]

[^2]: First published abridged in Der Briefwechsel Printed according to the original zwischen F. Engels und K. Marx, Bd. 4, Stuttgart, 1913 and in full in MEGA, Published m English for the first Abt. Ill, Bd. 4, Berlin, 1931 t i m e

[^3]: " sulphur pills - b Dr Feugier-1 relapses and after 14 vesicatories -d Paul Lafargue



