---
Volume: 46
Document_Title: "154. Marx to Engels. 15 June "
Page_Range: "305-306"
---

# 154. Marx to Engels. 15 June 



**[p. 1913]**

MARX T O ENGELS

IN LONDON

[Postcard] [Argenteuil,] 15 June 1882

DEAR FRED,

I thought I should be able to report progress over the past week or so. But the temperature fell as soon as I arrived, in fact one day after my arrival. The weather, therefore, according to what I've'been told by Dr Dourlen, as also by his MEDICAL FRIEND3 in Enghien, won't allow me to begin my sulphur treatment yet. In my former condition, during the happy time when I could smoke, I should have found the weather DELIGHTFUL. True, the sky is overcast more often than not, a bit of rain now and again, gusts of wind, not so much summer as late autumn, but nice weather for all that, if you're in good health!

Yesterday — as a result of a note to St Paul the Gascon6 — he came to visit me.328 I WAS GLAD TO SEE HIM. In compliance with my avis' he will keep silent — until further orders — about my presence here.

I go early to bed, get up late, spend a large part of the day with the children and Jennychen and take advantage of every favourable moment to go for a short stroll. All things considered I feel better than AT ANY TIME in Algiers, Monte Carlo or Cannes. It seems likely that the weather too will change for the better here. I shall write you a letter as soon as I've made my first trip to Enghien.

Best wishes to everyone.

Your

Moor

Fr. Engels

122 Regent's Park Road, London, N. W., Angleterre

[^1]: Tussychen has sent Jennychen an interesting eye-witness account of the Hyde Park meeting.329

[^2]: [On the side reserved for the address]

[^3]: First published in Der Briefwechsel zwischen Printed according to the original F. Engels und K. Marx, Bd. 4, Stuttgart,

[^4]: Published in English for the first time

[^5]: a Dr Feugier-b Paul Lafargue-0 admonition



