---
Volume: 46
Document_Title: "156. Engels to Friedrich Adolph Sorge. 20 June "
Page_Range: "307-309"
---

# 156. Engels to Friedrich Adolph Sorge. 20 June 



**[p. 156]**

ENGELS TO FRIEDRICH ADOLPH SORGE 3 3 0

IN HOBOKEN

London, 20 June 1882

Dear Sorge,

I shall attend to your business affairs within the next few days.331

I am sending the money for the Egalité to Lafargue, who is in Paris, and shall extract a receipt from him, however irregular the form it may take. As regards The Labour Standard you'll lose nothing if I only arrange for the subscription to run from 1 July; the paper gets more pitiful all the time.

Marx was in Algiers for approx. 2 months where, as I think I told you,a he had a relapse of PLEURISY; having been cured of it, he went to Monte Carlo in Monaco and had another but milder one. He left there for Paris approx. 3 weeks ago and is now staying with his daughter, Madame Longuet, in Argenteuil near Paris whence he travels daily to Enghien to avail himself of the local sulphur springs for his chronic bronchial catarrh and cough. His general state of health is very good; as to his further MOVEMENTS, that depends entirely upon the doctors.

The English translation of the Manifesto we have been sent is quite unpublishable without total revision. But you will realise that anything of the kind is inconceivable under present circum- stances.

I have not seen or heard anything of Leob for months. He's a pecu- liar cove who must be allowed to go his own way. I have not even got his address. Apropos, for some time I have been receiving communi- cations for Leo from Dr Lilienthal in New York, which I can only deal with via Paris. Who is this Lilienthal?

The Lassalleans' thrustfulness after their arrival in America was in- evitable. People who carried the one true gospel in their pack could hardly have behaved with less pretentiousness towards those Ameri- cans still languishing in spiritual darkness. Moreover it was for them to find new ground in America to replace that which was being in-

[^1]: a See this volume, p. 237.- b Lev Hartmann





**[p. 279]**

I trust your eyes will improve through being spared. I too had something of the sort once and know what a vile business it is.

In Germany things are going splendidly on the whole. It is true that the literary gentlemen in the party have tried to bring about a change of front, at once reactionary, bourgeois, tame and cultured, but it has proved a resounding failure. The infamies to which socialist workers everywhere have been subjected have everywhere made them much more revolutionary than they were even 3 years ago. You will have seen the details in the Sozialdemokrat. Of the leaders, Bebel is the man who behaved best over the affair. Liebknecht shilly- shallied somewhat, for not only did he himself welcome every 'eddi- cated' semi-social democrat with open arms while failing to run a careful eye over him, but his son-in-law, that obese sluggard Bruno Geiser, is one of the biggest wallers.332 Because it makes short work of their literary earnings, these people would like to get rid of the Anti-Socialist Law ' 6 at any cost and to do so ignominiously by means of moderation and meekness, tameness and toadyism. As soon as the law is repealed (not even the bourgeois believe that it will be renewed either by the present or some other eventual Reichstag, since it has proved totally ineffective), the split will prob- ably be brought out into the open, whereupon your Vierecks, Höchbergs, Geisers, Bloses & Co. will form a separate right wing, in which case we shall be able to negotiate with them as occasion arises, until they eventually come to grief for good and all. We said as much* immediately after the promulgation of the Anti- Socialist Law when Höchberg and Schramm published in the Jahrbuch333 what was, under the circumstances, a quite infamous assessment of the party's activities up till that date, and demanded that the party conduct itself in a more 'eddicated', decorous and presentable manner.b

[^1]: a K. Marx and F. Engels, 'Circular Letter to August Bebel, Wilhelm Liebknecht, Wilhelm Bracke and Others'.-15 [K. Höchberg, E. Bernstein and C A . Schramm,] 'Rückblicke auf die sozialistische Bewegung in Deutschland. Kritische Aphorismen von***', Jahrbuch für Sozialwissenschaft und Sozialpolitik, 1. Jg., 1. Hälfte, Zurich- Oberstrass, 1879.



