---
Volume: 46
Document_Title: "159. Marx to Engels. 24 June "
Page_Range: "313-314"
---

# 159. Marx to Engels. 24 June 



**[p. 284]**

Let the chaps in New York go ahead with their own 'reprint', though they must take care that there are no unauthorised addi- tions.338

We shall, then, expect Helenb on Sunday. It is still too early — for I must fight shy of all lengthy conversations just now — to advise Lavrov of my presence. He's just the man to make me prattle on for hours.

Love to Jennychen.0

Your

K. M.

First published abridged in Der Briefwech- sel zwischen F. Engels und K. Marx, Bd. 4, Stuttgart, 1913 and in full in MEGA, Abt. III, Bd. 4, Berlin, 1931

159

MARX TO ENGELS

[Argenteuil,] 24 June 1882

I got the REGISTERED LETTER yesterday; today I realised it in Paris. As a result of the present changeable weather I had an attack of muscu- lar rheumatism in the region of my hips; as a result of this and other things a sleepless night from the 22nd to the 23rd on account of severe pain. No food the next day (though absolved my sulphur inhalation at Enghien yesterday); Dourlen called in the evening and helped by embrocating me with laudanum; ALL RIGHT now as regards this IN- CIDENT, except that slight twinges of muscular rheumatism still persist.

As regards Enghien the first question to be answered — for this depends upon the individual — is whether the local sulphur spring is

Printed according to the original

Published in English for the first time

[^1]: IN LONDON

[^2]: [Postcard]

[^3]: DEAR FRED,

[^4]: a residue-b Demuth-" A slip of the pen in the ms.: Marx probably means his daughter Eleanor.



