---
Volume: 46
Document_Title: "160. Engels to Eduard Bernstein. 26 June "
Page_Range: "314-319"
---

# 160. Engels to Eduard Bernstein. 26 June 



**[p. 285]**

Salut.

Your

Moor

[On the side reserved for the address]

F. Engels. Esq.

122 Regent's Park Road, London, N. W.

First published abridged in Der Briefwech- Printed according to the original sei zwischen F. Engels und K. Marx, Bd. 4, , , - , , • Tn ,• • r , c .. » înio J • r ri • i^rv- A Published in English tor the first Stuttgart, 1913 and in full in MEGA, . 6

160

[London, 26 June 1882]

In Ireland there are two tendencies within the movement, the first and earliest being the agrarian. Out of organised brigandage, backed by the farmers, on the part of the clan chiefs whom the English had dispossessed, and the big Catholic landowners (in the 17th century these brigands were called Tories, a name that has descended by direct line to the Tories of today), there gradually evolved an indi- genous resistance, organised according to locality and province, on the part of the farmers against the interloping English landlords. The names — RIBBONMEN, WHITEBOYS, CAPTAIN ROCK, CAPTAIN MOONLIGHT,340

[^1]: Abt. Ill, Bd. 4, Berlin, 1931 t l m e

[^2]: ENGELS TO EDUARD BERNSTEIN 3 3 9

[^3]: IN ZURICH

[^4]: a Demuth- b Station where





**[p. 286]**

The period immediately after the Union (1800) 109 saw the begin- nings of the liberal-national opposition of the urban bourgeoisie who, as in every agrarian country with small towns in process of decay (e.g. Denmark), found their natural leaders in the lawyers. The lat- ter also need the farmers; hence they have to invent slogans to attract the farmers. Thus O'Connell lit, first, upon Catholic emancipation,3*1

and then upon the Repeal of the Union. Latterly supporters of this trend have been forced by the infamies of the landowners to adopt a different course. Whereas, in the social sphere, the Land League 139

pursues more revolutionary (and in this instance attainable) aims, namely the total elimination of the interloping LANDLORDS, its politi- cal posture is, if anything, rather tame since its only demand is HOME- RULE, i. e. a local Irish parliament alongside and subject to the parlia- ment of the Empire. This, too, is undoubtedly attainable by constitu- tional means. The frightened landlords are already clamouring for (and the Tories themselves proposing) the speediest possible redemp- tion of farmland in order to save what can still be saved, while Gladstone, for his part, is declaring a greater measure of self-govern- ment for Ireland to be altogether admissible.

After the American Civil War these two tendencies were infiltrated by a third — Fenianism.3 ' 2 The hundreds of thousands of Irish soldiers and officers who fought in that war did so with the ulterior motive of building up an army for the liberation of Ireland. The dissension be- tween England and America after the war became the Fenians' prin- cipal lever. Should war supervene, Ireland would, within a few months, be either a member of the United States or a republic under the latter's protection. The sum which England so willingly under- took to pay and did pay during the Alabama negotiations with the Geneva arbitrators342 was the price at which American intervention in Ireland was bought off.



**[p. 287]**

As from that moment, the principal danger was eliminated. The police were enough to keep the Fenians in order. In this they were helped by the betrayals inseparable from any conspiracy, and yet it was only the leaders who betrayed, going on to become downright spies and falsifiers of evidence. The leaders who got away to America indulged in émigré revolutionary politics there and, for the most part, went to seed like O'Donovan Rossa. All of this — if, of course, on an exaggerated American scale — will seem very familiar to anyone who witnessed the European emigration over here between 1849 and 1852.

There can be no doubt that many Fenians have now come home again and have revived the former armed organisation. They provide an important impulse within the movement and compel the liberals to adopt a more resolute posture. But otherwise they achieve nothing unless it be to frighten John Bull. True, the latter is growing percepti- bly weaker on the periphery of his empire, but as close to home as this he is still in a position to suppress with ease any kind of Irish rebellion. For a start there is, in Ireland, a permanent 'CONSTABULARY' 14,000 strong, equipped with rifles and bayonets and having had a military training. Then some 30,000 line troops who could easily be reinforced by an equal number of line and English militia. In addition, the navy. And in suppressing rebellion, John Bull's brutality is without equal. In the absence of a foreign war or the threat thereof, an Irish uprising has not the remotest prospect of success; and here only two powers might constitute a threat — France and, to a far greater degree, the United States. France is out of the question. In America the parties are co- quetting with the Irish vote; they make many promises but abide by none. Nor have they any intention of involving themselves in a war on Ireland's behalf. It even serves their interests that conditions in Ireland should be such as to encourage massive Irish emigration to America. And it is understandable that a country which, in 20 years' time, will be the most populous, wealthy and powerful in the world, should feel small inclination to rush headlong into adventures which could and would upset its gigantic internal development. In 20 years' time it will have completely changed its tune.

But should the danger of a war with America arise, England would give the Irish anything they asked, and with both hands — saving only complete independence which, in view of that country's geo- graphical position, is not at all desirable.

Accordingly the only recourse remaining to the Irish is the consti-



**[p. 288]**

One more thing that should be noted about Ireland: never praise an Irishman — politician — unconditionally or give him your un- qualified support, until he's dead. Celtic blood and the habitual ex- ploitation of the farmers (after all, in Ireland this constitutes the sole livelihood of all the 'educated' classes, and of the lawyers in particu- lar) make professional Irish politicians exceedingly prone to corrup- tion. In return for his agitation, O'Connell got the farmers to pay him £30,000 a year no less. When England effected the Union at a cost of £1,000,000 in bribes, one of those who had been bribed was re- proached with having sold his country. Says he: 'Aye, and damned glad I was to have a country I could sell.'

The infamies perpetrated against our people by the German gov- ernments, police and judges are gradually assuming a character that

[^1]: a Up to here the letter is printed according to the ms. - b propaganda by deeds





**[p. 289]**

makes even the strongest language employed in condemning them look insipid. But since language is not necessarily given added em- phasis by forceful expressions, and the repeated use of the same ex- pressions such as scoundrel, etc., detracts from the effect, so that one has to have recourse to ever more 'forceful' expressions and thus lapse into the style of Most-Schneidt,343 it would be desirable to adopt a method whereby forcefulness of expression would be assured even in the absence of intemperate language. And that method exists; it con- sists primarily in the use of irony, derision, sarcasm, which have a more deadly effect on an opponent than the crudest expressions of indignation. I think the Sozialdemokrat would be well advised to adopt the old, predominantly derisive style whenever this is feasible, as indeed was done in the last number. An occasional application of the cudgel would then be all the more effective. Bebel is also in complete agreement with me here. And, besides, your present correspondents already attend pretty adequately to lurid descriptions of events.

In response to the Egalité's translation of the passage in the Sozialdemokrat about the expulsion of their people from the Congrès du Centre, the Prolétaire published a pharisaical article about an échange de lettres courtoises entre le Comité extérieur du parti ouvrier social- iste allemand et le Comité national français.'344 Can you tell me anything about this? I was quite unaware of the existence of a Comité extérieur, might it perhaps be the much-celebrated Communications Office3*5?

The Bataille is on its last legs — c'est une défaite, et méritée}' Lissagaray has proved totally unfit to be a journalist and he, like his collabo- rators, Malon and Brousse, appeals to the Parisians' chauvinistic Ger- manophobia vis-à-vis Guesde, etc., Marxistes, nébulosités allemandes," etc. None of which has deterred Lissagaray from informing the Citqyen's proprietor11 of his desire to join the editorial department! Needless to say the editorial department instantly turned him down (this priva- tim) .

Marx is in Argenteuil with his daughter,' hiding away from Paris and availing himself of the sulphur springs in Enghien for his chronic bronchitis and cough; otherwise he is well and cheerful, but must still take great care of himself.

[^1]: " exchange of polite letters between the External Committee of the German Socialist Workers' Party and the French National Committee-b it's a defeat and a deserved one- c German nebulosities-d Blommestein-0 Jenny Longuet



