---
Volume: 46
Document_Title: "161. Marx to Engels. 4 July "
Page_Range: "319-320"
---

# 161. Marx to Engels. 4 July 



**[p. 290]**

Did Adolf Beust give you Mirabeau's Secret History of the Court of Berlin which I gave him to pass on to you? T h e book will be very use- ful to the Sozialdemokrat.

Yours,

F . E .

Printed according to the newspaper and the extant part of the original

Published in English in full for the first time

161

M A R X T O E N G E L S 7 2

IN LONDON

[Postcard, unsigned]

Summer did not actually begin until the 1ST of JULY (or RATHER THE SECONDONLY). U p till now I've had 2 sulphur baths with douches, the 3rd will be tomorrow; never before have I encountered anything as mag- nificent as the shower-bath (alias douche); one climbs out of the bath on to a slightly raised board, and this en 'nature'a; the bath attendant then manipulates the spray (about the size of a fire extinguisher) like a virtuoso his instrument, dictates the movements of the corpus and bombards all PARTS o f t h a t corpus in turn [SAVE THE HEAD, (the cranium)) for 180 seconds (alias 3 MINUTES) now with greater, now with lesser force, even unto the legs and feet incl. in an ever mounting CRESCENDO.

As you will see, there is little inducement here for a man to write. I have to be at the RAILWAY by half past eight in the morning (i. e. THIS

First published abridged in Der Sozial- demokrat, Nr. 29, 13 July 1882 and in full, in Russian, in Marx-Engels Archives, Book I, Moscow, 1924

[^1]: [Argenteuil,] 4 JULY 1882

[^2]: DEAR FRED,

[^3]: THE TIME OF LEAVING EXACTLY FOR Enghien), back to Argenteuil ABOUT 12 OCLOCK, déjeunerb shortly afterwards; aprèsc a great need for rest, as this sulphur is tiring in whatever form; then out and about, etc. T h e air in the inhalation room is murky with sulphurous vapours; 30-40 MINUTES'

[^4]: * in a state of nature - b luncheon-0 afterwards



