---
Volume: 46
Document_Title: "163. Engels to Adolf Hepner. 25 July "
Page_Range: "322-324"
---

# 163. Engels to Adolf Hepner. 25 July 



**[p. 293]**

I know absolutely nothing of value about Chartism.159 If I could persuade our old friend Harney in Boston (ex-editor of The Northern Star) to write a history of Chartism, he would be the man.

Kindest regards.

Yours,

F. Engels

I myself have been so much out of touch with Hirsch that I have no occasion whatever to give him my views on this business. If occasion arose, I should of course do so.

First published, in Russian, in Marx-Engels Printed according to the original Archives, Book I, Moscow, 1924 , ,. , . Published in English tor the first time

163

ENGELS TO ADOLF HEPNER 3 4 9

London, 25 July 1882

Dear Mr Hepner,

My delay in replying has been due to Marx's illness and frequent changes of abode. It was not until recently that I was able to corre- spond with him about business matters. Our viewsa on your projected undertaking350 are as follows:

As you are fully entitled in law to reprint anything that appears in Europe, you would, in our opinion, do best to go ahead and exercise that right without asking anybody. If you wish to reprint the Com- munist Manifesto we can have no objection whatever, nor would it occur to us to protest against it, provided there were no changes or omissions — in any case inadmissible in an historical document — or unless compelled to do so by unwarranted notes. We cannot write a preface, not only because we are not together, but also, and still

[^1]: IN NEW YORK

[^2]: [Draft]

[^3]: " Ibid., p. 284.





**[p. 294]**

more, because we should thereby be identifying ourselves to some extent with an undertaking which we are not in a position either to supervise or to control, nor, indeed, might we wish to do so. As it is, you will be entirely at liberty to reprint anything else you wish, with- out our ever having cause to complain of the company in which our works appear.

The same applies to my Condition of the Working Class. If you reprint it as it stands I can have no objection. Were I, however, to give you my special consent, I should be obliged to provide the addenda and notes needed to bring the book up to date, and that would be 6 months' work. Moreover I should require prior guarantees that the undertaking, once begun, would be brought to a conclusion.

I trust I have convinced you that it would be in your best interests to go ahead on your own. We shall certainly not place any obstacle in the way of the undertaking unless compelled to do so; rather the reverse.

As regards a new abridgement of Capital, Marx has had so many unpleasant experiences with this kind of thing that no further ap- proaches should be made to him about the matter, especially not at the moment. However {this in confidence) Marx has purged the second edition of Most's abridgement35 ' of its grosser errors and made a few addenda, so that this edition is not without its merits and could be reprinted.

Otherwise there is little that I can recommend for reprinting. The literature produced by Leipzig consists largely in the socialism of the future and doctoral dissertations by parliamentary candidates. Jules Guesde's French stuff is good on the whole, but too closely geared to French conditions. Bracke's Nieder mit den Sozialdemokraten! is perhaps not suitable for America. Bebel's parliamentary speeches are by far the best thing that Germany has produced in our line, but they are, of course, made for the occasion. Lassalle teems with economic howlers and his whole viewpoint was superseded long ago. Bracke's Lassal- le'scher Vorschlag is a pretty good piece of criticism, though not exhaustive.

Well, it's for you to choose. Wishing your undertaking the best of luck,

Yours,

F. E.

[^1]: First published, in Russian, in Marx- Printed according to the original Engels Archives, Vol. I (VI), Moscow, 1932



