---
Volume: 46
Document_Title: "166. Engels to Johann Philipp Becker. 9 August "
Page_Range: "328-329"
---

# 166. Engels to Johann Philipp Becker. 9 August 



**[p. 299]**

After I had read through these 2 pamphlets,* however, and a couple of days after Tussy's arrival here, I gave her my very categorical and final verdict — in words — I give you three guesses! — in the exactly same terms which the said Tussychen was amazed to find again, word for word, in your letter of 31 July which I showed her! Thus we, you and I, not only came to exactly the same conclusion, but formulated the same in exactly the same way\ Such being the case, we can, in future, only adopt an attitude of ironical aloofness towards him, without in any way becoming further involved in the business! He is far worse than the Kauzkitten,b who at least has the best of intentions.

Apropos Hirsch. If he really has collaborated with Mehring,346 the party will never forgive him. Should I see him, I shall ask him point- blank. Come to that, as regards the controversy over my status, it would have been better had nothing been said. What are the workers to believe, unless it be that I was, so to speak, shamming sick, and had squandered all that time and money without good reason?

Next week the Lafargues are moving into their proper quarters which are said to be very pleasant, and cheap as local logements' go.

Au revoir, OLD BOY. My love also to Lenchen.

Your

Moor

166

ENGELS TO JOHANN PHILIPP BECKER

London, 9 August 1882

Dear Old Man,

I had no opportunity yesterday of taking out a money order for you. But I did so first thing today and you will be paid £5 sterling

[^1]: First published abridged in Der Briefwech- Printed according to the original sei zwischen F. Engels und K. Marx, Bd. 4, „ , , . , , . r, •• , r , r- Stuttgart, 1913 and in full in MEGA, Published in Enghsh for the first Abt. Ill, Bd. 4, Berlin, 1931 time

[^2]: IN GENEVA

[^3]: a A. Loria, La legge di popolazione ed il sistema sociale, Siena, 1882 and La teoria del valore negli économisa italiani, Bologna, 1882. - b Karl Kau tsky-c lodgings



