---
Volume: 46
Document_Title: "168. Marx to Engels. 10 August "
Page_Range: "332-333"
---

# 168. Marx to Engels. 10 August 



**[p. 168]**

MARX TO ENGELS 7 2

IN LONDON

[Argenteuil,] jeudi," 10 August 1882

DEAR FRED,

Next Tuesday Dr Feugier will be letting me know whether I am to quit Enghien for good or carry on as I have been doing for another day or so.

Unfortunately I must first — supposing I (and Laura) go from here to Switzerland (Vevey or some such place is recommended) — have an additional MONETARY SUBSIDY. For I discovered by chance that Jenny is under severe pressure from her LANDLORD (and it's no laughing matter here) for the rent, and today I had the utmost difficulty in get- ting her to accept enough money to settle the business.

Furthermore, I am hoping that Johnny will go to London with Tussy (the only opposition comes from Longuet, who doesn't care a damn whether it's a respite for Jennychen or good for Johnny), in which case I shall have to give Tussy some extra money to take the lad for a couple of weeks to the seaside in England. Monsieur Longuet's main objection to letting us have Johnny for six months is that, for reasons of health, Johnny ought to go to the seaside in Normandy whither he would accordingly be accompanied by Longuet to stay with OLD Madame Longuetb at Caen.

In fact, Johnny is running wild here and has, in France, forgotten such rudiments of reading, writing, etc., as he had. He has grown naughty out of boredom (i. e. [for want of] occupation) and gives Jennychen more trouble than the 3 younger ones.' Monsieur Longuet

does 'nothing' for the child, but his 'love' consists in not letting him out of his sight during the brief intervals when he himself is visible, for in Argenteuil he usually spends the morning in bed and leaves for Paris again at 5 in the afternoon.

[^1]: In view of what lies ahead of Jennychen,365 it will be absolutely impossible for him to restrain young Johnny. Tussy is AN EXCELLENT DIS- CIPLINARIAN and will bring him to heel again. So at least we can put

[^2]: Thursday - b Félicitas Longuet -c Henri, Edgar and Marcel Longuet



