---
Volume: 46
Document_Title: "169. Engels to Friedrich Adolph Sorge. 10 August "
Page_Range: "333-334"
---

# 169. Engels to Friedrich Adolph Sorge. 10 August 



**[p. 304]**

Aside from the aforementioned expenses, I shall not, after paying the doctor0 and buying various necessities, have very much left for the trip from here to Switzerland. I hate squeezing you like this, but am forced to do so if I am not to come straight back to London.

Salut.

Moor

The announcement in the French, i. e. Parisian, newspapers, start- ing with the Temps, that Liebknecht was on his way to Paris, 'to es- tablish contact with the German workers and visit the socialist, Karl Marx, who is now living at Argenteuil after his return from Algiers'," this note, I say, and the way it was couched, smacked of the 'police' and was too indiscreet even for Liebknecht. If he should still find me here, I shall tell him exactly what I think of his 'indiscretion' (it's all due to his wanting to make himself look important).

First published abridged in Der Briefwech- Printed according to the original sei zwischen F. Engels und K. Marx, Bd. 4, Stuttgart, 1913 and in full in MEGA, Abt. III, Bd. 4, Berlin, 1931

169

ENGELS TO FRIEDRICH ADOLPH SORGE

London, 10 August 1882

Dear Sorge,

Herewith receipt from the Egalité; I haven't been able to obtain a better one for you from that remarkably businesslike office. Since Laura Lafargue moved to Paris, we over here no longer see or hear anything of that paper. The amount paid was 14/-.

[^1]: IN HOBOKEN

[^2]: Dr Feugier-b 'Allemagne', Le Temps, No. 7773, 6 August 1882.



