---
Volume: 46
Document_Title: "170. Engels to Marx. 20 August "
Page_Range: "334-335"
---

# 170. Engels to Marx. 20 August 



**[p. 305]**

The Labour Standard, 1 July-5 August, goes off today in 2 parcels. It would be madness for you to take out a separate subscription to the thing. I shall simply send you my copy instead of throwing it into the waste-paper basket.

Marx still at Argenteuil,327 undergoing a sulphur cure in Enghien for chronic bronchitis. He still has to take considerable precautions against a recurrence of pleurisy. As for the rest, only the doctors know, or again they may not.

In great haste.

First published abridged in Briefe und Auszüge aus Briefen von Joh. Phil. Becker, Jos. Dietzgen, Friedrich Engels, Karl Marx u.A. an F.A. Sorge und Andere, Stuttgart,

1906 and in full in: Marx and Engels, Works, First Russian Edition, Vol. XXVII, Moscow, 1935

170

ENGELS TO MARX

Great Yarmouth,366 20 August 1882 10 Columbia Terrace

Dear Moor,

The money has been paid in so I went straight to the bank today and requested a draft for 1,200 frs. I hope to have it on Tuesday.

How did last Tuesday's* great medical examination gob? Not a word about it so far.

If there is any difficulty about the CHEQUE, just send it back and I shall then send you a draft on Paris instead. It was simply a make- shift arrangement.

Your

F. E.

Printed according to the original

Published in English for the first time

[^1]: IN ARGENTEUIL

[^2]: a 15 August-b See this volume, pp. 303, 308.



