---
Volume: 46
Document_Title: "172. Marx to Engels. 21 August "
Page_Range: "337-339"
---

# 172. Marx to Engels. 21 August 



**[p. 172]**

MARX TO ENGELS

IN GREAT YARMOUTH

Argenteuil, Monday, 21 August 1882 11 Boulevard Thiers

DEAR FRED,

The 'conversion into silver'a took place the day before yester- day.

The week beginning last Mondayb distinguished itself by abomi- nable weather: rain (at times cold), storms, sultriness; above all wet, while a 'water shortage' was 'officially' announced in Paris. Not even the Flood would have deterred the bureaucrats here from contriving an 'official drought' in respect of water for drinking, washing, domes- tic and industrial purposes, etc.

Yesterday, my last perambulation in the salle d'inhalationc and the pleasure of a bath and douche at Enghien, where I was also given my valedictory examination by Dr Feugier; result:

1. The bronchial râle much reduced; would have gone completely but for my ill-luck with the weather.

2. The pleuritic frottementd noise remains in status quo; an altogether predictable circumstance. At best, and this is by no means frequent, the after-effects of pleurésie may last for years. They are sending me to Lake Geneva, whence the weather reports have so far been favour- able, since both doctores " are of the opinion that the last traces of my bronchial catarrh might well depart of their own accord there. Qui vivra verra.' The season, they say, is too far advanced for respiratory gymnastics in the mountains, and I must, above all, avoid the cold.

On this occasion I have been ordered to travel to Switzerland only by day and shall therefore have to stay overnight in Dijon and not be- take myself to my destination until the morrow. They are absolutely determined, of course, to obviate any pretext for a 'rechute'.B

Tussychen left last Wednesday with Johnny; we have had a letter

[^1]: " A jocular hint at the receipt of money from Engels.-b 14 August-0 inhalation room -d rubbing - ' Dourlen and Feugier -f We shall see. - 8 relapse





**[p. 309]**

from her; all went well. She intended to go to Eastbourne with Johnny on 19 August (Saturday). Because her pedagogic purposes demand above all that to begin with THE YOUNG MAN should be solely under her supervision, Tussy has chosen a seaside resort where he won't find any 'friends'.

Jennychen is, alas, poorly. What is more, present 'circum- stances' 3 6 5 make rest and recuperation completely impossible for her.

Laura is ALL RIGHT, leaves with me tomorrow. Lissagaray's row with the Brousse gang 368-has had one good result in that the latter no longer has a daily paper at its disposal. That dip- lomat Malon is keeping neutral vis-à-vis Brousse in this affair, since he (Malon) could not permit himself, vis-à-vis Rochefort, his editor- en-chef, to express sympathy for Brousse et cie in the Intransigeant (nor does he 'wish' he 'could').

Guesde and his party are gaining the upper hand. Best wishes to Jollymeyer" and Pumps. Salut.

'Moor'

Mr Longuet, with his usual tact, is fetching Roy to meet me at déjeu- ner^, in the course of 3 months the only day he could hit on for the purpose was today, when I have to pack, etc., etc.; in addition, I must pay a farewell visit to Dr Dourlen and, finally, would like to be on my own with Jennychen.

[^1]: First published abridged in Der Briefwech- sel zwischen F. Engels und K. Marx, Bd. 4, Stuttgart, 1913 and in full in MEGA, Abt. III, Bd. 4, Berlin, 1931

[^2]: Printed according to the original

[^3]: Published in English for the first time

[^4]: a See this volume, p. 229. - b luncheon



