---
Volume: 46
Document_Title: "176. Engels to Jenny Longuet. 27 August "
Page_Range: "344-346"
---

# 176. Engels to Jenny Longuet. 27 August 

Warmest regards from everyone here to you and Laura, who will be the recipient of my next letter.2 8 4

Your

F. E.

First published abridged in Der Briefwechsel Printed according to the original zwischen F. Engels und K. Marx, Bd. 4, . Stuttgart, 1913 and in full in MEGA, Polished in Enghsh for the first Abt. Ill, Bd. 4, Berlin, 1931 time

176

ENGELS TO JENNY LONGUET

IN ARGENTEUIL

Great Yarmouth, 27 August 1882 10 Columbia Terrace

My dear Jenny,

Many thanks for your letter. I should have been satisfied with a postcard. I am glad you opened my letter to Mohr and so took care of the contents."

I had a letter from Lausanneb and a telegram from Vevey3 7 4 with their0 new address, Hôtel du Léman, where they seem to be inclined to settle down. As to Mohr's health I was really glad to have a cool and impartial report from you, Laura who saw him only a few hours, reported rather over favorably and Tussy on the other hand, on see- ing him again at Argenteuil, was rather disappointed that no more progress had been made. I am quite of your opinion that we have every reason to be content with what progress he has made under the very unfavorable weather that has persecuted him so tenaciously, and after three pleurisies, two of which were so severe. I never expected that he would be able to pass next winter in England, and said so be- fore he went to Algiers to Helend and other discreet people. So that is no surprise to me; I am only disappointed that he will scarcely be able to come over before for a few weeks. Anyhow I am glad that the doc-

[^1]: a See this volume, p. 311.- b Ibid., pp. 310-11. -c Marx and Laura Lafargue- d Demuth





**[p. 316]**

tors are so unanimous upon this point, that will make him submit all the easier. A little more Enghien or Cauterets for his remnant of bron- chitis and then a climatic cure on high ground in the Alps or Pyrenees will then set him completely up again ready for work. But as you say, all this would be upset by a relapse, which, however, is now unlikely especially with the experience he has gained.

My dear Jenny, I know all the fearful troubles you have had to go through and are going through even now. My thoughts have been often with you and I was sorry I could not find any way in which to make myself useful to you. You and Mohr were almost the constant subjects of our almost daily conversation when I called in the morn- ing at Nim'sa for my Pilsener beer. But I know my brave Jenny will not lose heart and when you are over the next trial,b I hope and ex- pect you will be able to arrange your household in a way that will give you some rest and peace.

You have no idea what a change has come over Pumps since she is here. She occupies herself with nothing but her baby,c dress, amuse- ments, pleasure trips, everything seems to have gone out of her head. And she treats the little one well, with excellent temper and patience, but then it is really a very good child, and even now while cutting two teeth, almost always laughing. Let us hope mother and child will con- tinue in the same way.

Schorlemmer who sends his kindest regards leaves tomorrow for Germany, and I shall go to London with him for a day or two to look after business. We shall stay here for another fortnight unless driven away by the weather which has been exceedingly changeable since last Tuesday.d Poor Percy" who came last Wednesday seems to be destined to have a wet holiday, a bad lookout for a rheumatic subject. As for myself the sea air and bathing is bracing me up famously and I expect this winter I shall do some real work. .

Kind regards from all to Longuet and yourself and childrenr and best love from your affectionately

F. Engels

[^1]: First published in: Marx and Engels, Works, Second Russian Edition, Vol. 35, Moscow, 1964

[^2]: Reproduced from the original

[^3]: Published in English for the first time

[^4]: a Helene Demuth- b birth of a child-c Lilian-d 22 August-' Rosher-'Jean, Henri, Edgar and Marcel Longuet



