---
Volume: 46
Document_Title: "177. Marx to Engels. 4 September "
Page_Range: "346-347"
---

# 177. Marx to Engels. 4 September 



**[p. 177]**

MARX TO ENGELS ' 2

IN LONDON

[Postcard, unsigned]

Vevey, 4 September 1882 Hôtel du Léman

DEAR FRED,

Laura will be writing to you at length about events, or rather the uneventfulness here, since we are living in the Land of Cockaigne.374

Like others, we have been for TRIPS on the LAKE.

On 3 1ST August I got Jennychen's letter enclosing your letter284

and the CHEQJJE which last I handed in at the local bank of Genton et Co. for encaissement* in Paris.

On 31 August, 1ST, 2ND and 3RD SEPTEMBER marvellous weather (too hot yesterday). Today wet and stormy; hope it won't degenerate into general rain. Odd that I should still be coughing; I think I'm the only person in Vevey who coughs; at all events I haven't met anyone else who does. My GENERAL STATE, however, is most satisfactory; with Laura I climbed not only to the top of the local vineyard, but also to the top of the much higher vineyard at Montreux, without feeling the slight- est discomfort.

I was called on at our hotel by a M R Songeon, président du conseil mu- nicipal de Parisb; is one of the réfugiésc whom I knew in London in 1849-1850. He presented me with the official report made to the conseil municipal of Paris by the deputation (amongst whom Mr Songeon) it had sent to Rome for Garibaldi's apotheosis375; the thing is mainly concerned with 'Songeon's' own apotheosis, since he always acted as spokesman for the other French delegates. Also showed me a copy of Capital which is to accompany him to the sylvan retreat not far removed from here, whither he was wending his way.

Mr Virchow, or so I see from the supplément to yesterday's Journal de Genève, has again demonstrated that he is far and away above

[^1]: So far the English haven't made such rapid progress in Egypt3 5 5 as Wolseley 'prognosticated'.

[^2]: a collection-b Chairman of the Municipal Council of Paris-c refugees



