---
Volume: 46
Document_Title: "183. Engels to Laura Lafargue. 20 September "
Page_Range: "358-360"
---

# 183. Engels to Laura Lafargue. 20 September 



**[p. 329]**

just been received that Jenny had had a baby girl 3 6 5 and that every- thing was going as well as could be expected.

When you go away from Vevey, leave an address (poste restante or something of the sort) for letters. Will write at greater length tomor- row or the day after.

Your

F. E.

Love to Laura.

First published in Der Briefwechsel zwischen Printed according to the original F. Engels und K. Marx, Bd. 4, Stuttgart,

iqi Q Published in English for the first time

183

ENGELS T O LAURA LAFARGUE

London, 20 September 1882

My dear Laura,

I hope Mohr got my short note of the 18th.a Today, though under difficulties, I must fulfil my word to you. Have worked all day till six, then dined, now it's just nine, and so I am still a little under the influ- ence of digestion, and besides Percyb is sitting in the room but for- tunately has got hold of Joseph Andrews.c

Do I know Vevey? Why I was quartered there in September 1849 3 7 3 for about a fortnight and know all the Swiss shore of the lake from Villeneuve to Geneva, the Dent du Midi and the Mont Blanc and all the rest. If I am not much mistaken we officers were quartered in your Hotel on the Quay. On the square under the trees, facing the lake, Willich used to exercise his two horses.

I am only sorry you cannot even partially follow the route I made

[^1]: IN VEVEY

[^2]: " See previous letter. - b Rosher-c H. Fielding, The History of the Adventures of Joseph Andrews and His Friend Mr. Abraham Adams.



As to the star-foaming wine, that quality is the exclusive property of Cortaillod— the other Neuchâtel wines do not possess it as far as I know, nor are they so good.

I wonder who got up that foolish story about Bebel.c The Co- logne Gazetted up to Friday last week0 (date of the Paris papers that reported it) knows or at least tells nothing about it. The thing looks as if it was a canard concocted by Mehring and worked at Paris by Hirsch. I may be on the wrong scent, but I should not be at all as- tonished if it was so. Who else should have so quickly put in the Bataille and in the Citoyen a necrology, in which (in the Bataille at least) an old speech of Bebel's was quoted that he was for lawful means exclusively? The fright we got was something awful. On Fri- day night two members of the Working Men's Society Tottenham St. 297 came and asked me, was it true? That was the first I heard. Tussy had the Bataille with the article mentioned above same night; the silence of the Justice might be explained by Longuet's ab- sence. Hunting up German papers in the cafés was useless; the nos that could contain anything would no longer lie on the tables on Saturday. At last, Tussy (not I) got her Sozialdemokrat on Saturday night, and that was not only silent, but stated that Bebel was fit to go out again. To lose Bebel would have been irreparable. Where to find such another head not only in Germany but anywhere else? Where such theoretical clearness, such practical tact, such quiet determina- tion among the younger generation? Well, it's not true and the relief I felt when all doubt had disappeared, I cannot describe.

I am also extremely glad that Jenny has got over her crisis and that

[^1]: ' See this volume, pp. 318-19.-'' Ibid., pp. 326-27.-r A reference to the false news of Bebe Ps death. -d Kölnische Leitung-c 15 September



