---
Volume: 46
Document_Title: "185. Engels to August Bebel. 23 September "
Page_Range: "363-366"
---

# 185. Engels to August Bebel. 23 September 

here — as it did to Marx in Vevey, where he spent 3 weeks,374 and we had no means of verifying it until we got the Justice on Monday evening, containing a telegram with Liebknecht's démenti; for the information, or lack of it, in the Sozialdemokrat could not reas- sure us completely because of its having been published on the Thursday.— By now Marx will probably be on his way back to Argenteuil, though he might spend a few days in Geneva. He is bet- ter but the poor summer has undone most of the good work effected by the cure.

I would ask you to briefly acknowledge receipt of the ms., and also to send me the ms. with the proofs,— in a wrapper, of course. How long can I keep the remainder" here without causing inconvenience?

Kindest regards,

Yours,

F. E.

First published, in Russian, in Marx-Engels Printed according to the original Archives, Book I, Moscow. 1924

Published in English for the first time

185

ENGELS TO AUGUST BEBEL

London, 23 September 1882

Dear Bebel,

We have had a fine old fright on your account. A week ago yester- day, on Friday the 15 th " inst., 2 people from the Society8 came to see me at 10 o'clock at night in order to ascertain the truth of the report, which had already appeared (with obituary) in 2 issues of the Citoyen, that you were dead. I told them that it was highly unlikely but could

[^1]: IN LEIPZIG

[^2]: a A reference to Chapter III of the German translation of Engels' Socialism: Utopian and Scientific and the article 'The Mark' appended to it (see this volume, pp. 331-32). - h 16th in the ms.





**[p. 335]**

say nothing definite. As I had a boring visitor sitting with me, who wouldn't go although I had ceased to utter a word, it was not until af- ter 11 that I was able to hurry round to Tussy Marx and found her still up. She had the Bataille, likewise with an obituary, but with no details as to the source of the news which was, however, considered to be beyond doubt. Hence general consternation. The greatest mis- fortune that could befall the German party was at least a strong probability. That there should have been no mention of it in the English papers, exulting as they were over Egypt, 3 5 5 was only too understandable. Well, on Satu.day evening my Sozialdemokrat failed to arrive, which sometimes happens, but on Sunday morning I was lucky enough to discover that Tussy had got hers and, to judge by its contents, the news seemed highly improbable. To have consulted German newspapers in cafés would have been hopeless from the start, since they replace them each day. And so we remained in a state of the most excruciating uncertainty until finally, on Monday evening, the Justice arrived with an official denial.

Marx had just the same experience. He was at Vevey on Lake Geneva3 7 4 and read the story in the reactionary Journal de Genève which naturally retailed it as being beyond doubt. He wrote to me the same day absolutely aghast.a His letter arrived that same Mon- day evening and so I was able to co /ey to him by the early post the happy news that the whole thing was an invention.b

No, old fellow, you won't be allowed to peg out on us at such a ten- der age. You're 20 years younger than I am, we have many a jolly battle ahead of us and, when we have fought them side by side, it will be your duty to stay in the firing line, even though I may have cut my last caoer. And, since people alleged to be dead are supposed to live longer, you, like Marx, 3 8 9 have now doubtless been condemned to a good long life.

But who in heaven's name brought this nonsense up — is that liar Mehring at the back of it again390?

Did you get my last letter — written some 2-3 months ago? The one in which I replied about the tamer elements in the party?c

Meanwhile you will have seen that your wish that I should contrib- ute openly to the Sozialdemokrat has been met on several occasions. Moreover I yesterday sent off to Bernstein the first two of the three

[^1]: See this volume, p. 326.-b Ibid., p. 328.-c Ibid., pp. 280-83.





**[p. 336]**

Dühring chapters which are to come out in German after the French edition360 and which I have extensively revised and popularised. The rest is finished but I shall keep it here, provided it does not upset the printing arrangements, so that this, the most difficult section, can be thoroughly gone over again. An appendix will follow in the shape of a lengthy note on early German common ownership of land. When you go to quod I would advise you to procure from one library or another:

G. L. v. Maurer, Einleitung in die Geschichte der Marken-, Hof-, Dorf und Städteverfassung in Deutschland,

also his Geschichte der Markenverfassung in Deutschland. It is very necessary that someone in Germany should familiarise himself to some extent with the subject — a person capable of reading these things with an open mind and without ready-made 'cultivated' preconceptions. These are the chief works and a knowledge of them would mean that you would have extremely solid foundations to go on in any debate about landownership or agrarian ques- tions.

Judging by the few articles he has written in the Sozialdemokrat (on the possible repeal of the Anti-Socialist Law), 3 8 3 Vollmar would appear to have turned out very well. I should be glad if this also proved to be the case elsewhere; we could damned well do with some efficient chaps.

Marx is slowly recovering from his three attacks of pleurisy. For his long-standing, highly troublesome, sleep-inhibiting bronchial cough he had recourse while in Argenteuil to the nearby sulphur springs at Enghien, but in view of the bad weather did not, out of consideration for his general condition, effect the complete recovery that would oth- erwise have been virtually certain. After that he went to Vevey for three weeks with Madame Lafargue, intending to leave there the day before yesterday, first for Geneva, then Paris and then, given passable weather, to come over here for a few weeks in October. Under no cir- cumstances ought he to spend the winter in London, but whether in the south of England or elsewhere is for the doctors to decide. How- ever I can tell from his letters that there has been a steady improve- ment, albeit hampered by the bad summer.

Where exactly are you chaps at this moment? It seems as though you have all been turned by the 'Lesser' 198 into a lot of Flying Dutchmen, just as Marx has been by his illness.

Give Liebknecht my kindest regards when you see him.

