---
Volume: 46
Document_Title: "187. Marx to Engels. 30 September "
Page_Range: "367-368"
---

# 187. Marx to Engels. 30 September 



**[p. 187]**

MARX TO ENGELS 7 2

IN LONDON

Paris, 30 September 1882

Dear FRED,

Just as I was on the point of leaving Argenteuil for here (i. e. la Gare" St Lazare), to wait for Laura, dine with her in Paris and return with her to Argenteuil, I was caught by the facteur-h with your let- ter 2 8 4 and enclosure. Laura will be arriving in ABOUT A quarter of an hour, PROBABLY with your letter to her.

Today I was examined by Dr Dourlen in Jennychen's PRESENCE. The r element muqueux' has disappeared; SOME whistling remains but I am well on the way to ridding myself of this persistent catarrh, the char- acter of which has already changed considerably. My GENERAL habitusd

has, it appears, improved enormously in addition to which I have grown 'fatter'.

Under no circumstances does he wish me to spend more than a fortnight — 3 weeks if the weather is really fine — in London. He is less afraid of moderate cold than of a moist atmosphere. Nor, under any circumstances, am I to travel via Calais by the special night train, but go to Calais by day and not leave there till the day after, by the morning STEAMER.

For the rest, la campagne de l'hiver,c as he called it, should start ear- ly, in the Isle of Wight, Jersey, Morlaix (Brittany) or Pau. Otherwise he would sooner I didn't stay anywhere too far south except I.K CASE oh WEED, which is also why he had considered Vevey a better place for me than Montreux which is warmer. He assumes that normal temperatures, etc., will not suddenly rebel again in consequence of my arrival. Finally, he will not give me definite 'permission' to leave for London until his mind has been set at rest by the meteorological bulletins for the next few days. (French doctors are strongly prejudiced against the London climate.) He is now certain the cure will be complete, provided no mistakes are made. Hence I shall not get away before Tuesdayr at the earliest.

[^1]: " the station-11 postman-c mucous rale-A condition -r winter campaign-' 3 October



