---
Volume: 46
Document_Title: "188. Marx to Laura Lafargue. 9 October "
Page_Range: "368-370"
---

# 188. Marx to Laura Lafargue. 9 October 



**[p. 339]**

If the French government — AS REPRESENTED BY THE SWINDLING FINANCIER Duclerc — knew of my presence here (particularly in view of the ab- sence of the Chamber), it might, even without Dr Dourlen's permis- sion, send me packing, the 'Marxistes' and 'Anti-Marxistes' having, at their respective socialist congresses at Roanne and St-Etienne, 394 both done their damnedest to ruin my stay in France. Nevertheless, I regard it as some compensation that the selfsame Alliance gang—the Malons, Brousses, etc.— should have seen their hopes so sadly dashed in as much as (to use our Bruno'sa favourite turn of speech) the 'unspoken' innuendo, 'Marx is a "German", alias "Prussian", hence French "Marxistes1" too are traitors', could no longer cut any ice with anyone, nor yet dare make itself 'heard', even for a moment. C'est un progrès.b

Clemenceau has been seriously ill and has not quite recovered yet. He, too, took Capital with him from Paris to read while he was ill. It would now seem to be the fashion for FRENCH REAL OR WOULD BE'ADVANCED'

LEADERS —IF 'THE DEVIL BE SICK'. 3 9 5

Love to all, not forgetting Jollymeyer.

Moor

I shall write or telegraph before I leave France.

188

[London,] 9 October 1882 41 Maitland Park Road, N. W.

Dear Cacadou,

The weather over here isn't bad, i. e. there are a few reasonably fine hours when the sun is shining brightly; for the rest a cloudy sky

[^1]: First published abridged in Der Briefwech- Printed according to the original sei zwischen F. Engels und K. Marx, Bd. 4, Stuttgart, 1913 and in full in MEGA, Abt. III, Bd. 4, Berlin, 1931

[^2]: MARX TO LAURA LAFARGUE 72

[^3]: IN PARIS

[^4]: Bauer-b It's a step forward.





**[p. 340]**

and occasional showers of rain; not cold generally speaking and the old, familiar fog only in the mornings and evenings.

Schorlemmer came up to London on Saturday,a just for a friendly reunion; he has got to return to Manchester this evening, since he has to 'perpetrate' a lecture there tomorrow. He sends you his kindest re- gards.

Engels is most annoyed at not having been sent the Egalité for many months past, nor is my copy of that paper now being des- patched to London. How much is the subscription to the Citoyen, incl. postage to London? I forgot about it when I left Paris and shall send a MONEY ORDER immediately on hearing from you.

Yesterday we dined with Engels; Pumps was there too, OF COURSE, with her BABYb and Percy.c The BABY is very cheerful and her conversa- tion livelier than that of her maman — at all events.

Yesterday evening Donkin came to see me, but won't be giving me a medical examination until later this week; he thought I was looking better. He considers the ISLE OF Wight to be the best place for me to stay during the approaching FOG TIME OF England.

Johnny is cheerful and, on the whole, 'HAPPY', although it's touching how often he speaks of his mamand and Harry. Under Tussy's guid- ance he has once again acquired the habit of washing himself from head to foot in 'cold water' every morning. His 'well-being' leaves nothing to be desired; going to bed regularly at an early hour (8 p. m.) also suits him. His learning has progressed as far as 'capital letters', likewise to deciphering the large Roman numerals on clocks.

The great agitator, St Paul,'will, OF COURSE, again be enthroned on the heights of the Boulevard de Port-Royal.8 Write and tell me about his ADVENTURES, but above all about yourself—how you are and how things are going.

My cough is still tiresome, but more as a MEMENTO that I have got to throw it off completely if I am to become ALTOGETHER fit for action again.

Lenchen and Johnny send their love.

[^1]: I am most anxious that you should send me news of Jenny's STATE, personal and domestic. Is the Longuet FAMILY c back yet?

[^2]: a 7 October-b Lilian Rosher-c Percy Rosher-d Jenny Longuet-0 Charles Longuet and his sons Henri, Edgar and Marcel - r Paul Lafargue - g Paris address of the Lafar- gues



