---
Volume: 46
Document_Title: "189. Engels to Eduard Bernstein. 20 October "
Page_Range: "370-373"
---

# 189. Engels to Eduard Bernstein. 20 October 



**[p. 341]**

Farewell, Cacadou, my trusty and beloved travelling com- panion,

OLD NICK

First published, in the language of the Printed according to the original original (German), in Annali, an. I, Milano,

1958

189

ENGELS T O EDUARD BERNSTEIN ' ' 3

IN ZURICH

London, 20 October 1882

Dear Mr Bernstein,

I have long been intending to write to you i about French affairs, but have only just got round to it. Just as well, since it means that I can kill two birds with one stone.

1. St-Etienne.— Despite the well-meant advice of the Belgians, the inevitable has happened; the incompatible elements have taken themselves off.394 And that is a good thing. In the beginning, when the parti ouvrier* was formed, it was necessary to admit all elements who accepted the programme; if they did so with mental reservations this would be bound to emerge later on. We over here have never been under any illusion about Malon and Brousse. Both were edu- cated in the Bakuninist school of intrigue; Malon was actually one of those responsible for the foundation of Bakunin's secret 'Alliance' 67

(one of the 17 founders). But enfin,b they had to be given a chance to show whether, along with Bakunin's theory, they had also sloughed off his practice. Developments have shown that, if they accepted the programme (and adulterated it, Malon having introduced sundry changes for the worse), it was with the mental reservation that they would subvert it. What was begun at Rheims 3 2 3 and Paris337 has been completed at St-Etienne. The programme's proletarian class

[^1]: a workers' party- b after all





**[p. 342]**

have now been replaced with the Rules of the International of 1866b

which had to be couched in such elastic terms precisely because the French Proudhonists had lagged so far behind, yet could not be left out. The positive demands of the programme have been neutralised in that every locality may, whenever it wishes, formulate an indi- vidual programme for each individual occasion. Not only is the so- called party of St-Etienne not a workers' party — it isn't a party at all because it hasn't in fact got a programme: at most it is a Malon- Brousse party. The worst these two can reproach the old programme with is that it repelled more people than it attracted. That has now been put right: neither Proudhonists nor Radicals396 can now have any grounds for remaining aloof and, if Malon and Co. were to have their way, the 'revolutionary pap' of which Vollmar complains397

would be the official expression of the French proletariat.

In all Latin countries (and elsewhere too, perhaps), the practice as regards congressional mandates has always been exceedingly lax. Many of these could not stand close scrutiny. So long as it wasn't taken too far, and so long as only matters of little consequence were involved, small harm was done. But the Bakuninists were the first to introduce this (initially in the Jura) as a regular thing, going in for expert mandate-rigging and attempting by this means to make their way to the top. Similarly now at St-Étienne. The preliminaries to the congress have been generally dominated by all the old Bakuninist tactics which stop at nothing — lies, slander, covert cliquism. That's the only thing Brousse is master of. These chaps forget that subter- fuges and the like, which may succeed in the case of small sections and in a small territory such as the Jura, will necessarily bring about the downfall of those who try them on in the case of a genuine workers' party in a large country. The apparent victory scored at St-Etienne will not be a lasting one and Malon-Brousse will soon be done for once and for all.

It would seem that any workers' party in a large country can de- velop only through internal struggle, as indeed has been generally established in the dialectical laws of development. The German party has come to be what it is through the struggle between the Eisenach- ers and Lassalleans,269 in which, after all, the actual scuffles played

[^1]: " preambles (see present edition, Vol. 24, p. 340) - b Association Internationale des Tra- vailleurs. Statuts et règlements, London, 1866.





**[p. 343]**

Come to that, the Roanne people stand in great need of constant and searching criticism. Revolutionary hot air and futile impetuosity are things they are all too often prepared to tolerate.

2. Citoyen-Bataille. As long ago as last summer, at a time when things were going badly for the Bataille, when its funds had been frittered away on advertising, etc., the capitalists had pulled out and Lissagaray had broken with Malon-Brousse, Lissagaray proposed to Guesde that the two papers be amalgamated, that they should both be editors-in-chief and each have the right to sling out three of the other paper's editors. Thus did Lissagaray think to rid himself of the hated Lafargue. This was unanimously rejected by the editors of the Citoyen. The Bataille continued to founder. Thereupon Lissagaray approached the proprietor (a Dutch FINANCIER") of the Citoyen, and ne- gotiated the amalgamation behind its editors' backs in the hope that this coup de main would place them at his mercy. The reverse happened. The editors of the Citoyen continued to publish the paper without a day's interruption, and sued the proprietor for breach of contract. Lissagaray's coup was thereby foiled and he himself utterly put to shame, as he has himself admitted by having recourse to the extreme measure of challenging the 'lâcheb Lafargue', as he describes him in the Bataille, to a duel which, it is to be hoped, the latter will not ac- cept under any circumstances.— That Lissagaray has ruined himself for good and all by this Bonapartist coup can be pretty well assumed. To go and risk the very existence of a paper at a moment when it is more necessary than ever to the party in their struggle against the St- Étienne faction and to do so in order to save one's own paper from

[^1]: a Blommestein - b cowardly



