---
Volume: 46
Document_Title: "190. Engels to Laura Lafargue. 21 October "
Page_Range: "373-375"
---

# 190. Engels to Laura Lafargue. 21 October 



**[p. 344]**

Should the enclosed be unduly strong, you must tone it down. 3 9 8

What's the position as regards printing the pamphlet?378 Marx is here (but secretly!) and will, I hope, be able to spend the winter on the English coast.

Yours,

F. E.

Since this letter is being sent off at 5 p. m. on 20 October, it should be in your hands by tomorrow evening or Sunday8 morning.

First published, in Russian, in Marx- Printed according to the original Engels Archives, Book I, Moscow, 1924

Published in English in full for the first time

190

ENGELS TO LAURA LAFARGUE

London, 21 October 1882

My dear Laura,

The day before yesterday we received from Paulb the two first nos of the transplanted Citoyen.c From the Justice we had already seen what a Coup de Jarnac 3 9 9 the noble-hearted Prospèred had tried to give the Parti ouvrier0; from the above two Citoyens we saw that le coup avait manqué et' from the stupid shot in the Citoyen et Bataille against He lâcheg Paul Lafargue' we saw that Prospère le sa-

[^1]: IN PARIS

[^2]: * Saturday in the ras.-b Lafargue-c See this volume, pp. 346-47 and 370. -d Lis- sagaray-0 Workers' Party- r the coup had failed and- g the cowardly





**[p. 345]**

Now for two days there have not arrived either Citoyen, or Citoyen et Bataille, and today even La Justice is not to hand. We are therefore quite at sea. Has the Citoyen been stopped for want of funds after two nos, or has it merely been owing to the génie éminemment organisateur des françaisc that we have not received it? You know, in a crisis like this we ought to be regularly supplied with that information which we cannot obtain here. I have written a long letter to Bernstein yesterdayd about both Malon-Brousse and this last affair; but every day something may happen in Paris about which it would be impor- tant to communicate at once to Bernstein the correct version. How- can I do so without materials? Is it really impossible for the Parisian friends to do those things which are the most important to their own interests?

I heard from Mohr today that you have written to him and that Jenny is better. Mohr is very well on the whole, Donkin who exam- ined him was almost surprised at the great improvement he found (barring the unavoidable remnants of the two later pleurisies); he thinks he can pass the winter on the English South Coast. He will have to go soon, we have a perfectly beastly wet day to-day — but warm — and when other people have fine weather we begin to have fogs.

I wish you could first pop in some Sunday evening and see the change. Mohr of course cannot go out at nights, so there is nobody but the Pumpses and now and then Helen.c The 'crimm' has entirely disappeared. The other day the great Loria called again. That eve- ning Jollymeier happened to be here, and as we were all a little bit on, poor Loria had to undergo some chaffing, he asked Helen had she also studied political economy and told us he had tasted Moselle wine in Berlin but it tasted like sugar and water. Well, you can imagine the explosions. I appreciate, the poor pedant has enough of our 'sarcastic' company. Imagine he would not believe that you and Tussy were sis- ters and stared when he heard who your father was.

Today Signor Alessandro Oldrini called at Mohr's while I was there, but with a consistency of which I was very glad, he was not

[^1]: a was perfectly informed-11 get into this trap- 0 Frenchmen's exceptional gift for organising -d See previous letter.-' Demuth



