---
Volume: 46
Document_Title: "191. Engels to Eduard Bernstein. 27 October "
Page_Range: "375-378"
---

# 191. Engels to Eduard Bernstein. 27 October 



**[p. 346]**

The Pumpses are getting on very well, they have been a fortnight or so in their new house, but it is not yet quite furnished — for want of cash. The babya has had an abscess on the chest but is getting better. Charleyb and Miss Bevan have been married three weeks, I have not yet seen them since the happy despatch.

Now it is getting on fast for post-time and as I want you to have this letter tomorrow morning I must conclude. Kind regards to Paul and if you see them, Guesde and Mesa.

Yours affectionately,

F. E.

First published in: Marx and Engels, Reproduced from the original Works, Second Russian Edition. Vol. 35, Moscow 1964 Published in English for the first time

191

London, 27 October 1882

Dear Mr Bernstein,

In great haste the finale of the Paris affair,0 for I can hardly suppose the Parisians send you these things — even we over here have to extract them from the chaps by force.

Well, the Citoyen continued to appear under its old editors, while Lissagaray edited Le Citoyen et la Bataille with the aid of two anar- chists, Mais and Crié. On Friday evening Citoyen et Bataille made an attempt to have the Citoyen confiscated (by the police) on ac- count of a Wanda Kryloff feuilleton, whereupon the proprietor of the old Citoyen, Blommestein, a Dutch financier and now Lissagaray's associé/ asserted his proprietorial rights. Having been warned in

[^1]: ENGELS TO EDUARD BERNSTEIN 4 0 1

[^2]: IN ZURICH

[^3]: a Lilian Rosher-b Presumably Roesgen-c See this volume, pp. 343-44, 344-45.- d partner





**[p. 347]**

In the meantime, since the editors of the Citoyen would have gone in daily fear of its being confiscated unless they changed its name, the paper has, for the past 4 days, been calling itself L'Egalité, alongside which the weekly Egalité is to continue appearing. Where they are getting the money from I don't know; it's 3 weeks since we had any news of the chaps. Nor did we get an Egalité today. But since your Frenchman's génie éminemment organisateur* manifests itself, especially in our friends' case, in organising the most tremendous disorder, one cannot draw any conclusions from that.

The attempt to kill the Citoyen with the help of the judiciary and police has stripped Lissagaray of the last remnants of his disguise. He has combined stupidity and baseness in rare measure.

Marx asks whether you could procure for him a copy of the Swiss Factory Act. 4 0 3 We should be greatly obliged if you could let us know in which year the Factory Act now in force in Germany was passed and whether it is a separate Act or part of the Imperial Trade Regulations. We should then be able to get hold of it. Marx needs it for the 3rd edition of Volume Ib and promises in return to send you something every now and again for the Sozialdemokrat. In a few days he will be leaving for the Isle of Wight where, provided nothing unto- ward happens, he will spend the whole winter (5 or 6 hours' journey from here).

Your MISTER Garcia is one of the many little democrats who scurry about London, and have a finger in every association. Their new cen- tral boss — or, as Stieber puts it, ringleader,404 is a BARRISTER called

[^1]: a exceptional gift for organising - b of Capital





**[p. 348]**

I anxiously await the material on Bismarck.a If Marx goes away now, I shall set to work in earnest and, should I become engrossed in a lengthier piece of workb which ought to have been finished long ago, I shall not be able to extricate myself at all quickly, and I should warn you in advance that in that case you will have to wait. If I had got the stuff.here, I could start in on it straight away and polish off this business first of all. Bebel promised but didn't send anything and now is actually bound for prison where Liebknecht already is, 4 0 5

and there's absolutely no hope of getting anything from the others.

Encl. for Kautsky. Kindest regards,

Yours,

F.E.

[^1]: First published, in Russian, in Marx- Engels Archives, Book I, Moscow, 1924

[^2]: Printed according to the original

[^3]: Published in English in full for the first time

[^4]: See this volume, p. 324. - b A reference to Dialectics of Mature.



