---
Volume: 46
Document_Title: "192. Engels to August Bebel. 28 October "
Page_Range: "378-380"
---

# 192. Engels to August Bebel. 28 October 



**[p. 192]**

ENGELS TO AUGUST BEBEL 7

IN LEIPZIG

London, 28 October 1882

Dear Bebel,

I have at last got round to writing — Marx has been back here for about 3 weeks and leaves the day after tomorrow for the Isle of Wight, so I have had no respite in which to do anything.

As regards Vollmar's articles,383 I was particularly taken with the first one on account of its rightful dismissal of the wails emitted by those 'right wing' gentlemen who are clamouring for the repeal of the Anti-Socialist Law, ' 6 even upon conditions that would be worse for the party than the Anti-Socialist Law itself, provided this would en- able them to go back to founding newspapers à la Gerichts-Leitung and hence to the old literary fleshpots of Egypt. 406 In my view it would be perfectly in order to point out to these people — and it was exclu- sively against them that the article was levelled — that a voluntary repeal of the Anti-Socialist Law might very easily be accompanied by conditions that aggravated the position of the party; to emphasise that the last way we shall rid ourselves of the Anti-Socialist Law is by begging and cringing.

Otherwise the question is an academic one so far as I am con- cerned. I believe that the Law will receive its quietus from the events which will usher in the revolution and which cannot be long in coming.

I read the second article pretty cursorily as there were 2 or 3 people with me who kept chatting all the time. Otherwise I should have detected, from the way he visualises revolution, the French influence and hence also, no doubt, my Vollmar. Your handling of this aspect has been absolutely right. 407 It is the longed-for, ultimate realisation of the phrase 'single reactionary mass'. 408 Here all the official parties combined in a lump, there we socialists in column; a great decisive battle, victory at one stroke all along the line. Things aren't that easy in reality. In reality, as you indeed point out, a revolution begins the other way round, in that the great majority of the people, as also of the official parties, band together against the government thus isolated



**[p. 350]**

I paid little attention at the time to the final passage on the new tactics — there's certainly a great deal of indictable stuff there if looked at in conjunction with the Penal Code. However no great harm can be done if someone occasionally goes a bit too far in this direction; as it is, they err all too often in the other. So if I have made too light of this passage you, or so it seems to me, have taken it too seriously; you will have seen from Viereck's jubilations in the Süddeutsche Post how the right wing is seeking to make capital out of your reply.409 I don't believe our people in Germany would have accepted Vollmar's way of talking simply on the strength of his arti- cles, though the proclamation he has called for, 'We are organising in secret', certainly deserves to be rejected.

I am eagerly awaiting the material on Bismarck,a but as you're both in jug, 4 0 5 no doubt I shall now have to wait some time. But if by then I have got my teeth into a different, longer work, which has also long been pending,b I shan't be able to break off, and Bismarck will have to wait.

In France the long-expected split has occurred.394 The original as- sociation of Guesde and Lafargue with Malon and Brousse was prob- ably inevitable when the party was founded, but Marx and I were never under any illusion that it could last. The point at issue is purely one of principle: ought the struggle of the proletariat against the bourgeoisie to be waged as a class struggle, or ought it to be conceded that, in good opportunist (or Possibilist, as the socialist translation has it) fashion, the programme and the movement's class character be dropped wherever this would enable more votes or more 'support- ers' to be won? Malon and Brousse have come out in favour of the latter, thereby sacrificing the proletarian class character of the move- ment and making a division inevitable. Well and good. The develop- ment of the proletariat takes place everywhere to the accompaniment of internal struggles, and France, which is presently forming a work-

[^1]: a See this volume, p. 324. - b Engels means Dialectics of Mature (see present edition, Vol. 25).



