---
Volume: 46
Document_Title: "196. Engels to Marx. 3 November "
Page_Range: "387-388"
---

# 196. Engels to Marx. 3 November 



**[p. 358]**

a money order for 12/- = 15.10 frs in payment of Marx's and my sub- scription. Kindly remind me when this again falls due. Congratulations on entering your seventh thousand.2

Yours,

F. E.

In view of your amendment in the preface,b there is no longer any call for an allusion to the Wyden Conference,4 ' 8 and I shall therefore delete it. Kindly send me.? fair proofs.378 Proof will go off today or to- morrow.

First published in full, in Russian, in Marx- Engels Archives, Book I, Moscow, 1924

Printed according to the original

Published in English in full for the first time

196

ENGELS TO MARX

[London,] 3 November [1882]

Dear Moor,

Herewith the Egalité and the latest DOINGS of two 'locals' in whom you have always taken an interest.

Your

F. E.

[^1]: IN VENTNOR

[^2]: Postcard received284 — we were somewhat anxious, not having heard how you felt on the day after your journey.— ALL RIGHT! Encl. letter from Lafargue — so Brissac, Picard and Bouis did after all waver for a moment! 4 ' 9

[^3]: You will have seen that Andrea Costa has been elected in Ravenna and that there was a republican majority in Norway.420

[^4]: First published in MEGA, Abt. Ill, Bd. 4, Berlin, 1931

[^5]: Printed according to the original

[^6]: Published in English for the first time

[^7]: a of Der Sozialdemokrat-h F. Engels, 'Preface to the First German Edition of Socialism: Utopian and Scientific' (see present edition, Vol. 24, pp. 457-59).



