---
Volume: 46
Document_Title: "198. Engels to Marx. 6 November "
Page_Range: "392-393"
---

# 198. Engels to Marx. 6 November 



**[p. 363]**

never happened at all. Might you and Vollmar be suffering from the urge to be up and doing? If so beware — of yourselves. With kindest regards.

Yours,

F. E.

Marx is in Ventnor, ISLE OF Wight4 ' ' ; getting on well.

First published, in Russian, in Marx- Printed according to the original Engels Archives, Book I, Moscow, 1924 _ , ,. , , . ^ ,. . _ Published in English for the first time

198

ENGELS T O MARX

IN VENTNOR

London, 6 November 1882

Dear Moor,

Today I got a note from Laura in which she tells me that the fate of the Egalité will not be decided until tomorrow423; prospects, how- ever, are most favourable.

Have you seen today's Standard? Telegram from Frankfurta to the effect that, since Ignatiev's arrival in Paris, there have been renewed attempts — initially, it would seem, of a fairly lukewarm kind — at a Russo-French compromise: if France were to do something more about the extradition of dynamiters,424 Russia for its part would vigorously back up France in Tunis, Egypt, etc. So that explains the police campaign in France! We shall see if anything of a relevant nature is submitted to the Chambers.

Lafargue has sent me the Prolétaire containing the indictment of himself, Guesde, etc., which was read out at St-Etienne.425 A truly Bakuninist concoction, but otherwise weak: its strongest props are mutually contradictory letters, written on the spur of the moment by Lafargue to Malon, and calmly reproduced by the latter without, it would seem, any fear of the same being done to his letters by

[^1]: a 'Russia and France. Frankfort, Sunday Night', The Standard, No. 18191,6 November 1882.



