---
Volume: 46
Document_Title: "200. Marx to Philipp Stephen King. 9 November "
Page_Range: "396-397"
---

# 200. Marx to Philipp Stephen King. 9 November 



**[p. 367]**

to it of late. Official and unofficial replies to this 'LIBEL' have now appeared in the local press. But the funniest thing of all is that the Ventnor municipal panjandrum wants to start a LIBEL-CASE against the writer of the letter!

Salut.

Moor

First published abridged in Der Briefwech- Printed according to the original sei zwischen F. Engels und K. Marx, Bd. 4, Stuttgart, 1913 and in full in MEGA, Abt. III, Bd. 4, Berlin, 1931

200

MARX T O PHILIP STEPHEN KING 3 3

IN LONDON

Ventnor (Isle of Wight) 9 November 1882

1 St Boniface Gardens

Dear Sir,

I enclose Post Office Order for £4,10,10 (cf. your Fol. L. 83), your note having been sent over to me after my return from the con- tinent. Please forward me the Reports etc. (see the other page) to my present residence at Ventnor. Please also send to the same address your monthly parliam. lists until my return to London. I do not know the title, nor the time of the publication, of a recent Report on the Lon- don Bakehouses the which, at all events, has been published in the spring or the summer of this year. You would oblige me by getting it for me.

Yours truly,

Karl Marx

P. S. King, Esq.

1) Reports of the Inspectors of Factories for the years 1877-1882. 2) Agricultural Returns of Great Britain etc. for 1881 and 1882. 3) Agricultural Statistics, Ireland, General abstracts for the year 1880- 1881 and the year 1881-1882.

