---
Volume: 46
Document_Title: "201. Engels to Friedrich Adolph Sorge. 9 November "
Page_Range: "397-400"
---

# 201. Engels to Friedrich Adolph Sorge. 9 November 



**[p. 368]**

4) Statistical Abstract for the United Kingdom. The numbers: 28 and 29. 5) Reports of the Commissioners of Her M's Inland Revenue for the years 1874-1882. 6) The last edition of:

Alexander Redgrave: Factory and Workshop Act, 1878, with Introduction etc. (published by Shaw and Sons). 43°

First published, in the language of the orig- Reproduced from the magazine inal (English), in Marx-Engeh-Jahrbuch, Nr. 8, Berlin, 1985

201

ENGELS TO FRIEDRICH ADOLPH SORGE

IN HOBOKEN

London, 9 November 1882

Dear Sorge,

I have paid for The Labour Standard up till 3 December, 4/5d., and advised Shipton to send all future accounts to me.431 Should you wish to cancel the subscription, perhaps you would let me have prompt notification.

Marx was here for 3 weeks, very much better; all he needs now is decent air and careful treatment. His minor ailments have been van- quished to the extent that he will certainly be rid of them next sum- mer. The main thing is to get him through the winter without a re- currence of PLEURISY, and for that reason he has gone to Ventnor in the ISLE OF Wight4 ' ' whence I have just received a line or two from him.a

So far as circumstances permit, the 3rd editionb will now be taken vig- orously in hand there and won't, I trust, occupy too much time. For the rest he was very cheerful and sprightly and, if all goes well until next autumn, he will be stronger than he has been for years.

My thanks with regard to Lilienthal. I now know the man as well as if we had been at school together.

[^1]: I'm glad to hear that your Adolph0 is getting on well; I trust he will

[^2]: a See this volume, pp. 364-67.-b 3rd German edition of Vol. I of Capital-' Adolph Sorge jun.





**[p. 369]**

soon find a LINE that will give him the opportunity he wants of getting on quickly. His letters have arrived but, like many others, unfortu- nately still remain unanswered.

Hepner is a proper Schlemihl 432; moreover his campaigns, like the one he is waging against Schewitsch, are too much concerned with hair-splitting. Who, after all, is going to wax so enthusiastic about 'German culture'! He really ought to familiarise himself with Ameri- can culture first. But that is typically German. Here we have someone arriving from a small town in the depths of Germany who cannot wait to enlighten America. However America will BREAK him IN all right and, since he has talent, and at one time also possessed a great deal of gumption, he may yet prove very useful.

16 November

That shows you what things are like here. Having had to break off a week ago I have only today got round to continuing this and, I trust, finishing it off.

Lafargue has been in Paris ever since the spring; his wifell followed later, during the summer; she spent a month with Marx in Vevey.374

For Marx had first been in Algiers,278 then in Monte Carlo (Mona- co) 31° and in both places had suffered a recurrence of PLEURISY. After that he stayed with the Longuets in Argenteuil327 where he availed himself of the sulphur springs at nearby Enghien for his chronic bron- chitis. Then to Vevey and finally back here.

You might like to know that Lafargue (with a great deal of assis- tance from me, since he had absolutely no intention of learning Ger- man from his wife) has published in French 3 chapters from my Anti- Dilhring (introduction and the two first chapters of Part III 'Social- ism') under the title Socialisme utopique et socialisme scientifique.20 It made a tremendous impression in France. Most people are too lazy to read stout tomes such as Capital and hence a slim little pamphlet like this has a much more rapid effect. I shall now publish the thing in German — with insertions calculated to give it a strong popular ap- peal; the ms. is already in Zurich and the first sheet has been print- ed.378 I shall send it to you as soon as it is ready. Meanwhile you have, of course, in Dr Stiebeling a purveyor of popular knowledge to

[^1]: * Laura Lafargue





**[p. 370]**

America in utraque lingua.* He is a well-meaning man but no theorist and accordingly he is somewhat muddle-headed.

The Egalité is now appearing daily and weekly. Whether the daily edition (in place of the Citoyen which our people were chucked out of thanks to a financial coupb) can keep going depends upon negotiations with a man of means. The Sozialdemokrat is being much too weak- kneed in regard to the split between our people and Malon, but the smooth, cunning, rascally Malon (one of the 17 founders of Bakunin's secret 'Alliance'67) has so ingratiated himself with the Germans in Paris and our people have made a number of such colossal blunders that the Paris people are doing their utmost to bring pressure to bear on Zurich. What's more, Liebknecht also intrigued with Malon when passing through Paris on his way home from here. If, however, Lafargue and Guesde commit some altogether too extravagant follies, I shall talk the Sozialdemokrat round, never fear.

Your

F. E.

Regards to Adolph.

[^1]: First published abridged in Briefe und Auszüge aus Briefen von Joh. Phil. Becker, Jos. Dietzgen, Friedrich Engels, Karl Marx u. A. an F. A. Sorge und Andere, Stuttgart,

[^2]: 1906 and in full in: Marx and Engels, Works, First Russian Edition, Vol. XXVII, Moscow, 1935

[^3]: Printed according to the original

[^4]: Published in English for the first time

[^5]: a Here: in two tongues (German and English).-b See this volume, pp. 343-44 and 346-47.



