---
Volume: 46
Document_Title: "202. Marx to Eleanor Marx. 10 November "
Page_Range: "400-401"
---

# 202. Marx to Eleanor Marx. 10 November 



**[p. 202]**

MARX T O ELEANOR MARX 7 2

IN LONDON

[Ventnor,] 10 Novembera 1882 1 St Boniface Gardens

* My dear Tussychen,

On the whole, I cannot at all complain of Ventnor. The weather was unsettled, tempestuous, alternately rainy, dry, sunny, chilly, etc., but with all that very seldom foggy, a good deal of pure air and, except [for] a few days, generally always a few hours fit for longer promenades. Yesterday and today the air rather cold, but from 11 to 2 o'clock on the sea shore (where children are playing, and reminding me of poor Harryb) and on our Undercliff walk,234 and up to the rail- way station, and even to the down, no want of sunshine! *

You should not forget, dear child, that I was by no means quite ALL RIGHT when I arrived here. On the contrary: a spasmodic cough pretty well all the time, a great deal of sputum, increasingly unsatisfactory nights during the previous 2 weeks, no sense of well-being whatever. That couldn't change all in one day; rather a progressive change for the better.

Au fond* I was in fact glad to have had recourse to Dr Williamson for my muscular rheumatism before Donkin's PRESCRIPTION arrived from London (today). The rheumatism is really very close to the former seat of my ITERATED PLEURISY, but Dr Williamson was able to convince me by percussion and auscultation that ALL WAS STILL RIGHT — and had been since Donkin's last examination. The cough has abat- ed, but when he called today (his second visit) Williamson persuad- ed me to take yet another medicine; it would, he said, shorten the transitional period leading to the stage at which all I shall need to complete my recovery will be fresh air and plenty of outdoor exercise.

Under the circumstances I have not yet got down to any real work, though I have been occupying myself with one thing and another by way of preparation.

Do you have William Langland's Complaint of Piers the Ploughman?

[^1]: * February in the ms. - b Henri Longuet - • At bottom



