---
Volume: 46
Document_Title: "203. Engels to Marx. 11 November "
Page_Range: "401-403"
---

# 203. Engels to Marx. 11 November 



**[p. 372]**

If not, you may be able to borrow it from Furnivall for me, or alter- natively, as it isn't dear, I could also buy it in the EARLY etc. series.433

Also would you see if you could find among the (old-style) Egalités (I mean the old weekly Égalité) on the table by my bed an article, or rather a report, on the encomiums of official economists in Paris with regard to cheap Chinese labour in Europe? I don't know whether this same matter of the Chinese was discussed in the copy of Malon's former Revue43* (the copy is behind the sofa on one of the shelves of my book-case). If so you might send it to me if you cannot lay your hands on the Egalité.

How is my Johnny faring? Cough gone? My love to him and Lenchen. And how is your health?

Finally, I must write to poor Jennychen. It distresses me; I fear that this burden is more than she can bear.365

Salut.

OLD NICK

First published, in the languages of the orig- Printed according to the original inal (German and English), in Annali, an. I, Milano, 1958

203

ENGELS TO MARX

London, 11 November 1882

Dear Moor,

I was able to show Tussy your letter1 on the evening it arrived, for in the morning Lenchen and Johnny had gone to Percy's11 OFFICE to watch the LORD MAYORS SHOW and in the evening we all foregathered at Pumps's for DINNER. Johnny was very charming and Pumps's gos- ling very well-behaved.

I am very glad you should have found a pleasant doctor0; it is al- ways better if a convalescent has someone like that at hand, and what

[^1]: IN VENTNOR

[^2]: a Sec this volume, pp. 364-67. -b Rosher-1' James M.Williamson





**[p. 373]**

good can it do if every trifle must first be referred back here? I trust the rheumatism and cough are now on the mend.

Today I am sending you 2 Egalités and one weekly ditto. The manifesto of the (Lyons) Conseil national4 3 5 will convince you that the Lyonnais are still the typical louts they have always been. No further news about the progress of the negotiations with the Parisian capitalist,423 so nothing would appear to have been settled yet.

The rudeness with which Dilke replies to awkward questions4 3 6 is indeed striking, but seems very much to the taste of the bunch of lib- eral parvenus who sit behind him. Well, they'll feel the cloture"*37

soon enough. The business in Gibraltar4 ' 2 stinks more every day; the extradition was ordered, not only by the police, but also by a mag- istrate, i. e. a. judge, and the Governor reads about it in the paper and doesn't lift a finger! Meanwhile the Russians are encroaching more and more on Persia and Afghanistan and building roads to Meshed in Persia and from Samarkand via Bukhara to Balkh (the Bactria of the Ancients) in Afghanistan, while their intrigues in Turkey are such that not even Aleko Pasha, their protégé in East Rumelia, can swallow them. But neither big Gladstone nor little Dilke have any eyes for this. The Russians certainly have something in mind for next spring. But the kind of credit they enjoy will be evident to you from the announcement of the Poti-Baku Railway's Preference Loan. They have to use a company as a cloak and, moreover, on what terms!

Vollmar has opened his pro-Malon campaign in the Sozialdemo- krat— Malon's promptings being instantly recognisable in the sac- charine tone of the apologia with which the article concludes.438

But what do you think of Wilhelm'sb panegyric of Bennigsen in the Justice? It's really laid on a bit thick, even for the worthy Wilhelm.

Now, with the closure of the debate, the House of Commons has sunk wholly to the level of a continental Chamber which, in view of its present composition, is the position best suited to it.

[^1]: The Swiss Factory Act 4 0 3 also goes off in today's parcel. I shall ask Bernstein for Oldenburg's articlec at the earliest opportunity. Bern- stein will probably think twice before writing to me; I made such good use of his own arguments to refute his conclusions concerning the French business that he is unlikely to find very much more to say.d

[^2]: a closure-b Presumably Wilhelm Liebknecht.-c See this volume, p. 365.- d Ibid., pp. 354-57, 360-62.



