---
Volume: 46
Document_Title: "204. Marx to Engels. 11 November "
Page_Range: "403-405"
---

# 204. Marx to Engels. 11 November 



**[p. 374]**

But now I must pack up the papers. All well here.

Your

F.E.

First published abridged in Der Briefwech- Printed according to the original sei zwischen F. Engels und K. Marx, Bd. 4, „ , ,. , , . „ ,. , _ , .

C i „ , ,„,„ , • r H • »./EVI A rubnshed in hnsrhsn lor the hrst Stuttgart, 1913 and in full in MEGA, . 5

Abt. III, Bd. 4, Berlin, 1931 t l m e

204

[Ventnor,] 11 November 1882

I return the Prolétaire.' Difficult to say who is the greater — Lafargue, who pours out his oracular inspiration upon the bosoms of Malon and Brousse, or these two heroes, heavenly twins who not only tell deliberate lies, but deceive themselves into thinking that the out- side world has nothing better to do than to 'intrigue' against them and, indeed, that everyone has the same cranial structure as the magnanimous twain.

Lafargue has the blemish customarily found in the negro tribe — no sense of shame, by which I mean shame about making a fool of oneself.

[^1]: MARX T O ENGELS 1 6 6

[^2]: IN LONDON

[^3]: DEAR FRED,

[^4]: But it is time, if the journalb is not to be wilfully ruined and if they

[^5]: a See this volume, pp. 363-64. - b L'Égalité





**[p. 375]**

Longuet as the last Proudhonist and Lafargue as the last Bakunin- ist! Que le diable les emporte!^

It's a fine day today, and I must go out of doors (it's only half past ten in the morning).

In my last letter, I told you I intended to get rid of my cough with- out the help of MEDICAL MEN. But Dr Williamson gave me to understand d'une manière autoritaire' that I must for all that be so good as to swal- low my medicine. In fact, the brew has done me good; its main ingre- dient is quinine disulphuricum; the others — morphia, chloroform, etc., have invariably formed part of the brews I have previously had to swallow.

[^1]: a K. Marx and F. Engels, The Alliance of Socialist Democracy and the International Working Men's Association (written in collaboration with Paul Lafargue). - b May the devil take them!-c in authoritative manner



