---
Volume: 46
Document_Title: "205. Engels to Karl Kautsky. 15November "
Page_Range: "405-406"
---

# 205. Engels to Karl Kautsky. 15November 



**[p. 376]**

Moor

You'll have seen from the PARLIAMENTARY DEBATES in yesterday's Standardh that the 'worthy' Rivers Wilson has obliged to the extent of sorrowfully offering up on the altar of country his project, the TRUSTEE- SHIP he assumed in company with the magnanimous Lowe alias Sherbrooke.428 A bitter pill for Rivers Wilson.

First published abridged in Der Briefwech- Printed according to the original sei zwischen F. Engels und K. Marx, Bd. 4, „ . . . . . . „ ,• , • r u r • c. „ * lmo j • m • iti?r'A Published m English in full lor the Stuttgart, 1913 and in full in MEGA, . &

Abt. Ill, Bd. 4, Berlin, 1931 r s t t l m e

205

ENGELS TO KARL KAUTSKY

London, 15 November 1882

Dear Mr Kautsky,

I got your telegram at 3 p. m. today and at once replied by tele- graph: 'Impossible'. Not having your home address to hand and nec- essarily assuming from the 'Reply paid' that the office of origin would know where to send the reply, I addressed the telegram simply 'Kautsky, Vienna'. Well, I have this moment, 9.30 p. m., received the enclosed slip. There is no possibility of tracing the letter with your home address, so all I can do is write to you at once in order not to miss the morning post.

If I am not to dissipate every bit of my energy again, and I have been doing this for years, I shall have to draw a very strict line so far as my journalistic activity is concerned — confining myself to the Sozialdemokrat and even then writing only when practical need arises

[^1]: IN VIENNA

[^2]: * See this volume, p. 320.-b 'Imperial Parliament. House of Commons. The Obliga- tions of Civil Servants', The Standard, No. 18195, 10 November 1882.



