---
Volume: 46
Document_Title: "206. Marx to Engels. 20 November "
Page_Range: "406-407"
---

# 206. Marx to Engels. 20 November 



**[p. 377]**

or when, as in the recent case of Mehring's inanities,346 it has to be shown that there is no hostility between the Sozialdemokrat and us over here. As a result of Marx's absence and illness, party correspond- ence with diverse countries has devolved exclusively upon myself, and that is a heavy enough burden anyway. So if I am to devote my ad- vancing years to the completion of my more weighty works,439 it will be utterly impossible for me to contribute to your periodical," though I wish it every success.

The Darwin article in particular is an impossibility just now. I wrote to Bernstein saying he should have it as soon as I lit upon this subject in the course of my studies, and that might be months ahead; not that he is entirely blameless for he has encouraged me to work in a quite different field — one that I, too, consider to be more neces- sary. b So until I have slogged my way through that, returned to natural science and then progressed to zoology, there can be no question of it. To dash off a few commonplaces on Darwin would serve neither you nor me. For the rest I must confine myself, in view of the late hour, to thanking you for the various interesting reports on the situation over there and in conclusion sending you my heartiest congratulations on your engagement.c

Yours very sincerely,

F.E.

206

MARX TO ENGELS

[Ventnor,] 20 November 1882

By the end of this week (i. e. next Monday, 27 November) I shall be on my uppers. As I am supposed to advise you a week beforehand,

[^1]: First published, in Russian, in Marx- Printed according to the original Kneels Archives, Vol. I (VI), Moscow, 1932 * , , , . , , • r ,• , r , r- 5 y ' Published in English for the first

[^2]: time

[^3]: IN LONDON

[^4]: DEAR FRED,

[^5]: a Die Neue £eit-h See this volume, pp. 324-25.-c to Louise Strasser



