---
Volume: 46
Document_Title: "207. Engels to Marx. 21 November "
Page_Range: "407-409"
---

# 207. Engels to Marx. 21 November 



**[p. 378]**

PARLIAMENTARY BOOKSELLER St. King and ABOUT £2 to Kolkmann (book- seller), but also spent £ 3 on sundry items.

Tussy and Johnny left me at ABOUT 3 O'CLOCK today in passable weather.

I am perturbed over the news from Paris; it's unpardonable that Lafargue, Guesde, etc., should permit themselves to be caught up in legal proceedings 4 4 0; it could have been foreseen; the whole thing was simply occasioned by 'anxiety' over competition from the 'anarchists'! Puerile!

Salut.

Your

K . M .

First published in Der Briefwechsel zwischen F. Engels und K. Marx, Bd. 4, Stuttgart,

1913

Printed according to the original

Published in English for the first time

207

E N G E L S T O M A R X

London, 21 November 1882

Dear Moor,

I was on the point of asking you how your reserves stood when your letter * arrived today. Encl. CHEQUE for £ 3 0 which you will be able to cash in the usual way. That being so, you will get the money on Mon- day, possibly even on Saturday or, if you're prepared to lay out 1/- on a telegram, as early as Friday.

[^1]: IN VENTNOR

[^2]: Encl. 1. a mathematical experiment by Moore. 4 4 1 His conclusion, namely that THE ALGEBRAIC METHOD IS ONLY THE DIFFERENTIAL METHOD DISGUIS- ED, relates, of course, solely to his own method of geometrical con- struction and to that extent is fairly correct. I have written to tell

[^3]: a See previous letter.





**[p. 379]**

Further, 2., a letter from Bernstein which has just arrived and which I should like to have back.442

(I was interrupted by Pumps and the baby" so shall have to get a move on with this letter as I have persuaded myself that it must go off at 5.30.)

I don't know whether I ought not to fire a broadside or two at Vollmar for his doctoring of history à la Malon.438 His suppression of the Marseilles Congress443 is carrying the falsification of history a bit too far. If Bernstein fails to raise this in the notes on the final article, it will have to be put right.

I shall send you the Egalité as soon as I have read it. As usual, a letter Lafargue promised to write has not yet arrived. His public re- ply to the examining magistrate, in which he came the professor, was a childish affair.444 These people are acting as though they were absolutely intent on being arrested. Fortunately the government is pretty rocky, so it's possible that they will still get away with it.

Tussy and Johnny arrived ALL RIGHT yesterday.

Your

[^1]: F.E. First published abridged in Der Briefwech- Printed according to the original sei zwischen F. Engels und K. Marx, Bd. 4, _ . , . , , . „ ,. , ,. , „ c. ^ . inio J • r ii • ttt?r^ A Published in knehsh tor the hrst Stuttgart, 1913 and in full in MEGA, . &

[^2]: Abt. III, Bd. 4, Berlin, 1931

[^3]: time

[^4]: a Lilian Rosher



