---
Volume: 46
Document_Title: "209. Engels to Marx. 22 November "
Page_Range: "410-412"
---

# 209. Engels to Marx. 22 November 



**[p. 381]**

That jackass Amos — the mouthpiece of English officialdom in Egypt — has enormously impaired his clients' case by affording Keay, author of the pamphlet Spoiling the Egyptians, the opportunity for 'A REJOINDER' in The Contemporary Review.*46 Prominent among those whom Keay has ground ever more deeply into the MUD are Rivers Wilson, Rowsell and Goschen, and with them the British Ministry.

Salut.

Moor

First published in Der Briefwechsel zwischen F. Engels und K. Marx, Bd. 4, Stuttgart,

1913

Printed according to the original

Published in English for the first time

209

ENGELS TO MARX447

London, 22 November 1882

Dear Moor,

You will have received my letter of yesterday's date, with CHEQUE for £30.

Hartmann a was here on Sunday evening in a state of intense inven- tor's euphoria. His cell has been in action since Friday, operating a galvanometer with high resistance which at first registered more than 50° and is now steady at 46°. It would, he said, continue to run smooth- ly without further attention not just for three, but actually for six months or even a year. However, he had no intention of showing it to buyers because of as yet unpatented improvements. So my intervention was again required. I firmly refused and arranged for the matter — a perfectly simple one that presents no real difficulty— to be settled by Percyb (which it has), advising him [Hartmann] in future to supply his

[^1]: IN VENTNOR

[^2]: Lev Hartmann - b Rosher





**[p. 382]**

I have recently obtained SECONDHAND what I have long been looking for — a complete bound edition of Geschichtschreiber der deutschen Vorzeit, and guess from the sale of whose library it had come? — Dr Strousberg's! I found therein a passage in Plutarch's Marius which, seen in conjunction with Caesar and Tacitus," explains the entire agrarian structure.

The Cimbri 'had migrated, but not, as it were, all at one go, or in a regular stream; rather, they had always pushed on, year after year, during the good season and in this way had, over a long period, fought and battled their way across the Continent'.b

This passage, seen in conjunction with the Suebi's annual move to new lands, as described 70 years later by Caesar, reveals the manner in which the Germanic migrations took place. Where they spent the winter, there they would sow in the spring and, having reaped, would move on until winter brought them to a halt again. That they regular- ly tilled the land in summer (if they did not engage in rapine insteed) can be assumed with some certainty in the case of peoples who had brought agriculture with them from Asia. In the case of the Cim- bri, the process of migration is still in evidence; in Caesar it comes to an end, the Rhine forming an impassable frontier. Together, these two manifestations explain why, in Caesar, 'privati ac separati agri apud eos nihil estu': migration means that collective cultivation was only possible by kinship community, and to pace out individual fields

[^1]: * Caesar, Commenlarii de hello Gallico and Tacitus, Germania, both in the above- mentioned edition.-1' Quated from Plutarch's Life of Marius according to Die Geschicht- schreiber der deutschen Vorzeit, Vol. 1,'Die Urzeit', p. 6 1 . - c amongst them there are no private or separate fields



