---
Volume: 46
Document_Title: "210. Engels to Marx. 23 November "
Page_Range: "412-414"
---

# 210. Engels to Marx. 23 November 



**[p. 383]**

would have been absurd. In Tacitus, the step forward — or, perhaps, back—to individual cultivation within the framework of common ownership has been made.

Tussy has sent me by hand various newspapers for onward transmission to you; with them, I enclose an Egalité. The Egalité's impertinence would really seem to have made an impression on the Parquet"; the addresses are still written in Lafargue's hand.

Kindest regards.

Your

F.E.

First published abridged in Der Briefwech- Printed according to the original sei zwischen F. Engels und K. Marx, Bd. 4, , . . o. „ . , „ . , , . r n • i,f Ev^,< Published in English in mil tor the Stuttgart, 1913 and m full in MEGA, . &

Abt. Ill, Bd. 4, Berlin, 1931 l l r s t t i m e

210

ENGELS TO MARX

London, 23 November 1882

Dear Moor,

Encl. letter from Lafargue which you might let me have back as I only got it this morning. So he will doubtless have to wend his way to the cachoth within the next few days. What incurable fools they are. If Guesde and Lafargue are locked up in Montluçon, the paperc will be pretty well done for. The government dare not bring them before a court in Paris, but may well take the liberty of quietly neutralising one after the other in the provinces. Until the paper had been firmly established, they ought not to have provided any pretexts for inter- vention; instead of that we have these Bakuninist antics.

I had asked Lafargue for information about the relative strength of the two parties and also about the Maret-Godard affair.416 You see

[^1]: IN VENTNOR

[^2]: a Public Prosecutor's Department-1" prison-0 L'Egalité





**[p. 384]**

Electricity has enabled me to score a minor triumph. You may per- haps remember my discussing the Cartesian-Leibnizian point of dis- pute in regard to mv and mv2 as measures of motion.449 What it boils down to is that mv is the measure of mechanical motion when trans- mitted by mechanical motion as such, whereas is the meas- ure of motion when it changes its form, i. e. the measure in conformity with which it turns into heat, electricity, etc. Now, so long as the chaps in the physical laboratories had the sole say in electrical matters, the measure of electromotive force, the force regarded as representative of electrical energy, was the volt (E), the product of the intensity of the current (ampère, C) and resistance (ohm, R).

E = C x R.

And that is correct so long as electrical energy does not change on transmission into another form of motion. Now, however, in his presi- dential address at the last meeting of the British Association,372 we have Siemens proposing an additional unit, the watt (hereafter W) which is intended to express the true energy of an electric current (i.e. as distinct from other forms of motion, vulgo energy) and whose value is volt x ampère, W = E x C.

B u t W = E x C = C x R x C = C2R. Resistance in electricity represents the same as mass in mechanical motion. Hence it would appear that in electrical as in mechanical motion the quantitatively measurable manifestation of this motion — on the one hand velocity, on the other intensity of current — functions, in the case of simple transmission without change of form, as a simple factor of the first power, while in the case of transmission with change of form, as a factor squared. Thus what I have formulated for the first time is a universal natural law of motion. Now, however, I must really go ahead and finish my dialectics of nature.

[^1]: a Syndicalist Chambers (more on these trade union organisations see on pp. 388-89)



