---
Volume: 46
Document_Title: "211. Marx to Engels. 27 November "
Page_Range: "414-415"
---

# 211. Marx to Engels. 27 November 



**[p. 385]**

All is well at your house, but the beer everywhere is rotten; only the German stuff in the West End is any good.

Your

F.E.

First published abridged in Der Briefwech- Printed according to the original sei zwischen F. Engels und K. Marx, Bd. 4, . o. .. . ini Q J • r H ' t Avr'Ä Published in hnglish tor the lirst Stuttgart, 1913 and in full m MEGA, ,; &

Abt. Ill, Bd. 4, Berlin, 1931

211

MARX T O ENGELS

IN LONDON

[Ventnor,] 27 November 1882

DEAR FRED,

Enclosed Lafargue's letter. In my note to youa I had already given vent in advance to my vexation over Lafargue's and Guesde's foolish- ness, and thus discounted it. Inconceivable that anyone at the head of a movement could place everything at risk in so frivolous, to put it bluntly, in so inane a way—pour le roi de Prusseh\ Lafargue's article on the spellbound Ministry of Finance was very well done.450

As regards the Paris 'syndicates', I know from impartial reports I received from Paris (while staying at Argenteuil4 5 ' ) that the said syndicates are a great deal worse, if such a thing be possible, than the London TRADES UNIONS.

Your verification of the role of the second power when energy is transmitted with change of form is very pretty and I congratulate you on it.c

Salut.

Moor

[^1]: First published in Der Briefwechsel zwischen Printed according to the original F. Engels und K. Marx, Bd. 4, Stuttgart, „ , , . , , . ^ .-, r . <• . . . . Published in Lnghsh tor the nrst time

[^2]: a See this volume, pp. 374-76.-b for the King of Prussia, i.e. for nothing-1 See this volume, p. 384.



