---
Volume: 46
Document_Title: "213. Engels to Marx. 30 November "
Page_Range: "419-421"
---

# 213. Engels to Marx. 30 November 



**[p. 390]**

all organisations subject to their own directives'. It is a constantly re- curring catchword in Bakuninist tactics, and in other contexts in France it may always be resorted to in lieu of other arguments.

Treatment of other countries in the Egalitê\ If only you knew what disorder reigns and what the standard of German is like in that office! Should Lafargue remain at large, you would do best always to ad- dress yourself to him; he does at least forward the things. Otherwise I have no advice to offer.

If you want to use the resume of the pamphlet,378 I am quite agreeable. The concluding note will follow shortly. The affaire Schmidt458 is very nice. Pollaky has been running a private detec- tive's office in London for some time. In the directory, under the head- ing INQUIRY OFFICER (of whom 18 are listed), there is an entry: 'Pollaky, Ignatius Paul, 13 Paddington Green, W. (not at all far from where I live), Correspondent to the Foreign Police Gazette."

I trust my congratulations on your attaining your 7th thousand3

will again prove outdated. I, for my part, am 62 years old today.

Kindest regards.

Yours,

F.E.

213

ENGELS TO MARX

London, 30 November 1882

Dear Moor,

[^1]: First published, in Russian, in Marx- Printed according to the original Engels Archives, Book I, Moscow, 1924 „ , , . , , . „ ,• , r , r- Published in English for the first time

[^2]: IN VENTNOR

[^3]: Encl. a letter from Bebel459 received today. The 'mystery' which he is unable to understand all of a sudden and which may release them from the Anti-Socialist Law, ' 6 is, of course, the outbreak of the crisis in Russia.b Curious that none of these people can get used to the

[^4]: of Der Sozialdemokrat-b See this volume, pp. 414-15.





**[p. 391]**

idea that the impulse might come from that quarter. And it is not as though I haven't explained this to him more than once. I regard his hopes for a new major crisis as premature — there could be an interim crisis as in 1842, and Germany, the most backward country indus- trially, which must content itself with the crumbs that fall to it from the demand of the world market, would certainly suffer worse than any other.

Guesde was released in Montluçon immediately after the first hear- ing, and neither Bazin nor Lafargue was arrested; on the contrary, Bazin published in the Egalité a letter to the chief of police of his ar- rondissement, objecting to the mouchards* that sniffed round his house and advising him of the times at which he could be arrested at home.b Those chaps have more luck than sense. I shan't be able to read the Egalité until after the 5.30 post has gone; so it will reach you tomorrow by the 2nd post (2 nos).

I have obtained, second-hand, Vom Entstehen und Untergange der polnischen Konstitution vom 3. Mai 1791, 1793, place of publication not given. This is the book you have mentioned so often460 in which the infamies perpetrated upon Poland by Frederick William II are described at length. Cost one whole mark!

Hartmann's battery for lighting 6 Swan incandescent lamps is ex- pected to be ready tomorrow. If the thing proves a success, i. e. pro- vides a steady light over an extended period, hence actual proof of the constant intensity of the current, it will at once.be exhibited in public and a company 'founded' to exploit it. Hartmann will also be show- ing sundry items at the Crystal Palace*61 where a new electrical ex- hibition is shortly to be held. He and his backer, whom Percyc found for him, are highly enthusiastic about the invention.

All well here.

Your

F.E.

[^1]: First published abridged in Der Briefwech- sel zwischen F. Engels und K. Marx, Bd. 4, Stuttgart, 1913 and in full in MEGA, Abt. III, Bd. 4, Berlin, 1931

[^2]: Printed according to the original

[^3]: Published in English for the first time

[^4]: a informers-15 G. Bazin, 'À Monsieur le commissaire de police', L'Egalité, 4th series, No. 38, 30 November 1882. -c Rosher



