---
Volume: 46
Document_Title: "216. Engels to Marx. 8 December "
Page_Range: "423-425"
---

# 216. Engels to Marx. 8 December 



**[p. 394]**

[On the side reserved for the address]

F. Engels, Esq.

122 Regent's Park Road, London, N. W.

First published in Der Briefwechsel zwischen Printed according to the original F. Engels und K. Marx, Bd. 4, Stuttgart, „ , , . , • • ^ .• i r . <• .„.„ Published in English lor the first time

216

ENGELS TO MARX 7

IN VENTNOR

London, 8 December 1882

Dear Moor,

What happened about the Prolétaire was this: when I recently sent you a parcel oi Egalités and Kölnische ^eitungs, I also meant to send you the TRADES UNION Prolétaire463 and supposed I had included it. Somebody was in the room while I was packing up the parcel and I did this rather hurriedly. Finding next day that the TRADES UNION Prolétaire was still here, but not the other containing the Saint- Etienne skulduggery,425 I thought I must have sent it you twice over. Now, looking around by the light of day, I have found it — still in the original wrapper in which you returned it, this being undoubt- edly the reason why I couldn't find the same.

From your postcard to Tussy,284 I see that you are still confined to the house — which is all to the good considering the snow we're get- ting and the wet slush on the ground; but no doubt we shall soon have better weather (not the very best, but better than at present). During your first winter in the north since your attack of pleurisy you will have to resign yourself to tracheal affections of a milder kind; only next summer's cure will be able to scotch those.

In order to get the parallel between Tacitus' Germans" and the American Redskins sorted out at last, I have gently been making ex- cerpts from the first volume of your Bancroft.1' The similarity is,

[^1]: a Tacitus, Germania.-h H.H. Bancroft, The Native Races of the Pacific States of North America, Vol. I, New York, 1875.





**[p. 395]**

I must say, all the more surprising in that the modes of production are so utterly different — on the one hand fishermen and hunters and no stock-breeding or crop farming, on the other migratory stock- breeding overlapping with crop farming. It just goes to show how, at this stage, the method of production is less crucial than is the degree to which old blood ties and the ancient mutual community of the sexes within the tribe are being dissolved. Otherwise the Tlingits in what was once Russian America could not be the exact counterpart of the Germans — probably even to a greater extent than your Iro- quois.464 Another puzzle which is solved here is how placing the main burden of work on women is perfectly compatible with great re- spect for those women. In addition, I have found confirmation of my assumption that the jus primae noctis," originally found in Europe among the Celts and Slavs, is a survival of the ancient sexual commu- nity: in two tribes, widely separated and not of the same race, it is still exercised by the shamans as representatives of the tribe. I have learned a great deal from the book — enough for the present as regards the Germans. I shall have to save up Mexico and Peru until later. For I have returned the Bancroft and, in exchange, taken the remaining things by Maurer,465 all of which are therefore now at my house. I had to look through them because of my concluding note on the Mark,378 which is growing rather long and is still not to my liking although I have rewritten it 2 or 3 times. But to sum up in 8 to 10 pages what happened after rise, flowering and decline is no joke. If I have the time, I shall send it you so that you can give me your opinion. As for myself, I should be glad to be quit of the stuff and to have another go at the natural sciences.449

It's odd, the way one can see how the concept of holiness arose among the so-called aboriginal peoples. What was holy, originally, is what we took over from the animal kingdom — the bestial; as com- pared with that, 'human institutions' were as much of an abomina- tion as they are in the gospels by comparison with divine law.

Hartmann's installation of his battery for lighting 6 Swan lamps (incandescent bulbs à 6 candle-power) was supposed to have been ready yesterday, but I don't know whether it succeeded or not.b

[^1]: I shall draw Bernstein's attention to Saarbrücken, as I have al- ready done before. But the Anti-Socialist Law ' 6 will make material

[^2]: a the right of the first night.-b See this volume, pp. 381-82, 391.



