---
Volume: 46
Document_Title: "219. Marx to Laura Lafargue. 14 December "
Page_Range: "427-428"
---

# 219. Marx to Laura Lafargue. 14 December 



**[p. 219]**

MARX TO LAURA LAFARGUE 7 2

IN PARIS

Ventnor, Isle of Wight, 14 December 1882 1 St Boniface Gardens

Darling Cacadou,

All your letters have arrived on time and yet, miserable sinner that I am, it is only now that I write to you, having learned from the General's letter2 just received that Paulb has been arrested. The General enclosed Paul's letter and yours, so that I am au fait. No doubt Paul will be released within a few days.

Why haven't I written before? Because I had nothing particularly cheerful to report, for you will anyhow have learned from your cor- respondence with the General that I myself am not at all in bad shape and have only been confined to the house for the past fortnight because of a TRACHEAL CATARRH, nor have I again succumbed either to pleurisy or to bronchitis. This, then, is most encouraging, CONSIDERING

Paul has latterly been writing his best stuff' with humour, impu- dence, and solidity combined with verve, whereas before that I had been troubled by certain ultra-revolutionary turns of phrase, having always regarded these as 'hot air' — a speciality our people would be well-advised to leave to the so-called anarchists who are, in fact, props of the existing order, not creators of disorder, and are, by their nature, poor, childish creatures — ce n'est pas leur faute, le chaos.6 Just now they have, as 'péril social'/ come to the aid of the 'affaires vé- reuses cabinet'.46'' The worst of it is that, even if there were in existence a purely impartial 'examining magistrate', he would be compelled publicly to pronounce them wholly and utterly 'innocuous'! One could forgive these anarchists anything if only they weren't too 'inno-

[^1]: THAT MOST OF MY CONTEMPORARIES, I MEAN FELLOWS OF THE SAME AGE, JUST NOW KICK THE BUCKET in gratifying numbers. There are too many young donkeys for the old ones to be kept alive.

[^2]: a 'General' was the Marx family's nickname for Engels. See this volume, p. 396. - b Lafargue-0 See this volume, pp. 385, 402.-d it is not their fault if there's chaos- " 'social menace'



