---
Volume: 46
Document_Title: "220. Engels to Marx. 15 December "
Page_Range: "428-430"
---

# 220. Engels to Marx. 15 December 



**[p. 399]**

cent' for words! Not that that means they are 'saints'. A good joke was made by a Popea upon his being asked by Henry VII (Richard Ill's victorious antagonist) to translate Henry VI to the community of saints; the Pope replied that an 'innocens'b (alias 'IDIOT') was not, as such, eligible to be nominated a 'sanctus'.0*63

Here, my child, you would at any rate find better weather than in most other districts including, I need hardly say, France and Italy. I live the life of a hermit here, consorting with no one, SAVE when Dr Williamson's visits, costing SUCH PER MINUTE,11 bring me in contact with the latter.

Well, child, as soon as your devoirs' permit (for Paul's GALLANT FIGHT

WITH THE POWERS THAT BE MAKE THE MAN SYMPATHIC [SIC], TO USE THIS, A FRENCH

PENNY-A-LINER'S PHRASE) come over here and stay with me\

* Some recent Russian publications, printed in Holy Russia, not abroad, show the great run of my theories in that country.469 Nowhere my success is to me more delightful; it gives me the satisfaction that I damage a power, which, besides England, is the true bulwark of the old society.

Yours,

Nick*

220

London, 15 December 1882

Dear Moor,

Herewith the appendix on the Mark/ Be so kind as to return it on Sunday so that I can revise it on Monday — I didn't get the final revi- sion done today.

[^1]: First published, in the languages of the Printed according to the original original (German and English), in Annali, an. I, Milano, 1958

[^2]: ENGELS T O MARX 4 7 0

[^3]: IN VENTNOR

[^4]: "Julius I I - b an innocent-0 a saint-d Should read 'so much per minute'.- e duties-r F. Engels, 'The Mark'.





**[p. 400]**

I consider that the view here put forward concerning rural condi- tions in the Middle Ages and the second phase of serfdom from the middle of the 15th century onwards is, on the whole, incontrovertible. I have read all the passages in Maurer 4 6 5 that relate to this, finding therein almost all my propositions — and, what's more, substantiated; also, precisely the opposite, but either unsubstantiated or drawn from a period which happens not to be the one under discussion. This applies in particular to Fronhöfe, Vol. 4, conclusion. These contradic- tions are due in Maurer's case 1. to the habit of adducing, indiscrimi- nately and side by side, documentary proof and examples from any and every period, 2. to a residue of legalistic prejudice which invari- ably trips him up when it comes to understanding a process of develop- ment, 3. to his gross underestimation of'force and the role it plays, 4. to the enlightened presupposition that, since the dark Middle Ages, things must have changed steadily for the better; this prevents him from perceiving, not only the antagonistic nature of true progress, but likewise individual setbacks.

As you will see, the thing isn't all of one piece, but is a proper paste-and-scissors job. The first draft was all of one piece, but unfor- tunately it was wrong. Only by slow degrees have I mastered the material, which is why there's so much patchwork.

Incidentally, the general reintroduction of serfdom is one of the rea- sons why no kind of industry could develop in Germany in the 17th and 18th centuries. First, there was the division of labour in the guilds which was the reverse of that in manufacturing; instead of being divided within the workshop, labour is divided among the guilds. Here in England, there was migration to those parts of the country where there were no guilds. This was prevented in Germany by the transformation of country folk and the inhabitants of agricultural market towns into serfs. But it was also this which even- tually proved the undoing of the guilds the moment they encountered competition from foreign manufactures. I shall not mention here the other reasons that contributed to the suppression of German manu- factures.

Today has again been all fog and gaslight. Hartmann's battery probably a FAILURE where lighting is concerned, being useful at most for telegraphy, etc." More about this as soon as anything definite has been established.

[^1]: a See this volume, pp. 381-82, 391.



