---
Volume: 46
Document_Title: "221. Engels to Laura Lafargue. 15 December "
Page_Range: "430-432"
---

# 221. Engels to Laura Lafargue. 15 December 



**[p. 401]**

Look after yourself, and let's hope the weather will soon be such that you will be allowed out.

Your

F.E.

First published in Der Briefwechsel zwischen Printed according to the original F. Engels und K. Marx, Bd. 4, Stuttgart,

1913

221

ENGELS TO LAURA LAFARGUE

IN PARIS

London, 15 December 1882

My dear Laura,

Only after 7 last night Percya came with the needful so there was nothing to be done before today, so now I enclose a five-pound Bank of England note the number of which I have kept here, and will run the risk to send it whole for once.

No doubt you will by this time be quite assured about Paul'sb fate, at least for the present.440 I have no doubt he is free again now, if not already back in Paris. But I am afraid the Bonapartist and other con- servative judges of Montluçon will give themc a couple of months each of retired life. The government evidently wishes to create a few precedents in the provinces before it dares to try repression in Paris. And thus the parquet6 at Montluçon engaged the business, which, once engaged, must be carried out by the judges to the desired end, were it only to save the credit of the magistrature. And as the case will no doubt come before the police correctionnelle,' there can be not even that shadow of a doubt which a jury might still have rendered possible.

The change to a short prison life would not in itself have anything very dreadful, indeed I think it would do Paul more good than harm.

[^1]: a Rosher-b Lafargue-0 Lafargue and Guesde-d prosecutor's office-c disciplinary court





**[p. 402]**

But very likely their time will come at a moment when they, Paul and Guesde, are both most wanted for the Egalité. And the paper had so much improved lately. Whether it is the cumulative effect of Parisian life and journalistic activity, Paul's articles lately have been very much better, since he dropped the dogmatism of the scientific oracle and took up the ligne spirituelle. ' That on the candidature [of] Bontoux was charming,47 ' but I think I discover a little female hand in that here and there. So was that on the behexte ministerium1'*50

(I forgot the French title) which also pleased Mohr specially.c Now if Paul and Guesde are locked up, the soul of the paper is gone. Deville is witty and amusing only at intervals, generally he is clear but dull and doctrinaire, Massard is the reverse of a good Christian, for that with him the flesh is willing but the spirit (esprit) is weak. And I must conclude, from what information I possess, that Paul and Guesde are also the two who will be most wanted in a financially critical moment. Thus it will be a great pity that just at this time dynamitic brag and competition with the rrrrevolutionarism of the anarchists should have brought them in this predicament.

Anyhow I hope you look down upon these petites misères du haut de votre troisièmed with the same calmness as the quarante sièclesc of Gen- eral Bonaparte du kaut de leurs pyramides' on the French army and Bonaparte himself.

Very affectionately yours,

F. E.

[^1]: How is Jenny 8 getting on? is she better? I do not hear much about her at Maitland Park,1' indeed they' do not know much themselves.

[^2]: First published in: Marx and Engels, Reproduced from the original Works, Second Russian Edition, Vol. 35, Moscow 1964 Published in English for the first time

[^3]: " line of wit- b spellbound ministry-0 See this volume, p. 385. -d petty miseries from the height of your third floor-' forty centuries-1 from the height of their pyra- mids-5 Longuet-h the Marx family's address in London-' Eleanor Marx and Helene Demuth



