---
Volume: 46
Document_Title: "222. Engels to Marx. 16 December "
Page_Range: "432-434"
---

# 222. Engels to Marx. 16 December 



**[p. 222]**

ENGELS TO MARX 7

IN VENTNOR

London, 16 December 1882

Dear Moor,

Having been interrupted yesterday," I shall continue today. You will have noticed how hurriedly my letter was dashed off— I was be- ing perpetually disturbed by Pumps and BABY, b first while revising the ms.,c then while writing the letter. The point by which I set most store — because of the dissentient view you once expressed — is the almost total recession — de jure or de facto — of serfdom in the 13th and 14th centuries. So far as the country east of the Elbe is concerned, the freedom of German peasants is an established fact by reason of coloni- sation; as regards Schleswig-Holstein, Maurer admitsd that at the time (somewhat later, perhaps, than the 14th century) 'all' peasants had regained their freedom. Again, as regards the South of Germany, he admits that it was in this particular period that the bondsmen were treated best. The same thing applies to a greater or lesser extent in Lower Saxony (e. g. the new 'tenant farmers', virtually copyholders). He does not, however, share Kindlinger's viewc that serfdom did not come into being until the 16th century. That it subsequently reap- peared, however, in a 2nd refurbished edition, seems to me indubitable. Meitzen ' specifies the years in which allusions to serfs first recur in East Prussia, Brandenburg and Silesia: mid-16th century, ditto Hans- sen in respect of Schleswig-Holstein.s When Maurer calls this a miti- gated form of serfdom he is right, if one compares it with the period be- tween the 9th and 11th centuries which, in fact, saw the continuation of ancient Germanic slavery; right, too, if one compares it with the legal rights still exercised, as the statute books of the 13th century

[^1]: a See this volume, p. 400.- b Lilian Rosher-' F. Engels, 'The Mark'.- d G. L. von Maurer, Geschichte der Fronhöfe, der Bauernhöfe und der Hofverfassung in Deutschland. - c N. Kindlinger, Geschichte der Deutschen Hörigkeit insbesondere der sogenannten Leibeigen- schaft. - r A. Meitzen, Der Boden und die landwirtschaftlichen Verhältnisse des Preussischen Staates - g G. Hanssen, Die Aufhebung der Leibeigenschaft und die Umgestaltung der gutsherr- lich-bäuerlichen Verhältnisse überhaupt in den Herzogtümern Schleswig und Holstein.





**[p. 404]**

confirm, both then and later, by the lord over his serfs. But as com- pared with the de facto position of the peasants in the 13th and 14th — and in North Germany also the 15th— centuries, the new serfdom was ANYTHING BUT a mitigation. Let alone after the Thirty Years' War 4 7 2! It is also significant that, whereas in the Middle Ages there were innumerable degrees of bondage and serfdom, so that the Sachsenspiegel41'1' gives up the attempt to 'make a tally', this becomes remarkably easy after the Thirty Years' War. Enfin,a I look forward to hearing your opinion.

It was also Pumps' fault if, at the place where I mention Russian common ownership, I failed to paste on a note saying that this infor- mation came from you.

The enclosed is from old Becker474; luckily I was able to respond to his gentle nudging straight away and send him £ 5 , as I had just sold some SHARES and the money had been paid on the same day.

Herewith 2 Egalités — hope they'll be delivered tomorrow — from which you will see that Lafargue was immediately releasedb and was expected back in Paris yesterday evening. 440

Hartmann's battery ': so long as he only plugged in the galvanome- ter, in which the resistance is represented by a very long wire so that there is only a gradual consumption of electro-mechanical power, all went well. But as soon as he plugged in the lamp in which the resist- ance is concentrated at one point, namely the thin, short, incandes- cent wire, that was that; the hydrogen immediately polarised the silver electrode, and the weak current produced only a faint red glow in the wire. Now his head is again full of all manner of innovations, each of which proves that he is looking for the difficulty in the wrong place. But whether the gents who are advancing the money will agree to any further experiments is a moot point.

Do you think you might be able to book a couple of beds down there for Schorlemmer and myself in the first week of January? We would not be at all averse to nipping down for a day or two, if noth- ing intervenes. But that something will intervene is all too probable in view of Schorlemmer's rheumatism, etc. However, if we knew that you could arrange for us to stay either with you or close by, and

[^1]: ' Well- b See 'L'Arrestation de Lafargue' and 'L'Affaire de Montluçon', L'Egalité, 4th series, Nos. 53 and 54, 15 and 16 December 1882. -' See this volume, pp. 381-82, 391.



