---
Volume: 46
Document_Title: "223. Engels to Johann Philipp Becker. 16 December "
Page_Range: "434-436"
---

# 223. Engels to Johann Philipp Becker. 16 December 



**[p. 405]**

exactly how much notice we should have to give you, we could make our arrangements accordingly.

Your

F. E.

First published in Der Briefwechsel zwischen Printed according to the original F. Engels und K. Marx, Bd. 4, Stuttgart,

1913 Published in English in full for the first time

223

ENGELS TO JOHANN PHILIPP BECKER

IN GENEVA

London, 16 December 1882

Dear Old Man,

I have been waiting for some time for some money to come in so that I could send you another fiver. It eventually came in yesterday, followed that very evening by your postcard.a I therefore im- mediately took out a money order for the said fiver = 126 frs, and hope the money will reach you without delay.

I was very glad to hear that you have extricated yourself from the cantonal and communal mire; it's a sheer waste of time and produc- tive of nothing but tittle-tattle and pointless vexation. Incidentally, that jackass Solari is still sending me 2 copies of the Précurseur. It must be a fine despatch department!

Every year the anarchists commit suicide and every year rise anew from their ashes, and so it will go on until such time as anarchism is subjected to serious persecution. It is the only socialist sect that really can be destroyed by means of persecution. For its perpetual rebirth depends on a steady supply of would-be bigwigs who wish to play a role on the cheap. Anarchism is as if tailor-made for that. But run a risk? Not on your life! Hence the present harassment of anarchists in

[^1]: * See this volume, p. 404.





**[p. 406]**

Marx has been given permission by the doctors to spend the winter on the south coast of England and has been in the Isle of Wight for 6 weeks or so.4 ' ' Hitherto, all has been well as regards the two main counts: no sign of any recurrence of pleurisy or bronchitis. The rotten weather we have been having here (for a week the fog has scarcely lift- ed at all) means that convalescents are inevitably subject to colds of all sorts and, for one in Marx's condition, these are lingering and troublesome. But if it remains at that, no matter. However, he might well be sent out to Switzerland again next summer, in which case you will certainly see one another.

Madame Lafargue's address is 66 Boulevard de Port-Royal, Paris. Not long ago her husband was arrested, but has already been set free. The point at issue was certain speeches he had made in the provinces and, upon their being summoned by the examining magistrate of Montluçon, he and Guesde, instead of obeying, poured vile scorn upon him in the Egalité. Whereupon he naturally issued a warrant for their arrest but, although Lafargue went daily to the newspaper office and was at so little pains to conceal his whereabouts that he ac- tually announced he was going to speak, and did speak, at meetings, it took the clever Parisian police three weeks to seek him out. Like Guesde before him, he was immediately released after the first hearing at Montluçon. They might still get a couple of months apiece. 44°

As you know, the workers' party in France has split.394 Malon and Brousse can hardly wait for the day when they become deputies, which means that a herd of voters has to be quickly rounded up. In other words a party created without a programme (literally — for a long series of 'considérants*a is followed by the conclusion that every localpreambles

