---
Volume: 46
Document_Title: "224. Engels to Eduard Bernstein. 16 December "
Page_Range: "436-438"
---

# 224. Engels to Eduard Bernstein. 16 December 



**[p. 407]**

ity must draw up its own programme), in which every Tom, Dick and Harry is welcome and, to carry this through, people are being admitted into the party before the congress who accept the old pro- gramme with the reservation that, come the congress, they will subvert it. Guesde, Lafargue, etc., were outvoted and those who stood by the programme went to Roanne. Our people are no tacticians and have committed hopeless blunders, but nevertheless they will win through and the 'Possibilists' won't have it all their own way for long. Our chaps have a very considerable lever in the shape of the daily Egalité and, moreover, are all of them devoted to the cause, something which cannot be said of those intriguers, Malon and Brousse.

Well, good-bye, old man, and keep your pecker up. You're unlikely to decline as fast as all that and, as you know, we're all heading the same way!

Your

F. E.

First published in: F. Engels, Vergessene Printed according to the original Briefe (Briefe Friedrich Engels' an Johann Philipp Becker), Berlin, 1920 Published in English for the first time

224

ENGELS TO EDUARD BERNSTEIN

London, 16 December 1882

Dear Mr Bernstein,

Schorlemmer complains that he has not received the Sozialdemo- krat for some little while; his subscription expired and he sent me the encl. CHEQUE (which I forgot about) no less than a month ago with the request that his annual subscription be renewed and 'the balance be used for party purposes'.

The ms. of the Mark has had to be completely rewritten 3 times; on top ofthat I again had to go through about 5 or 6 of Maurer's 10 fat

[^1]: IN ZURICH



volumes,465 besides which there were other sources to compare. I have now sent it to Marx who has slogged away at the subject much more thoroughly and for much longer than I have 4 7 5; I expect it back on Monday.

Malon se moque de' Vollmar. Otherwise he would certainly have corrected the latter's howler to the effect that the 'Alliancists' at- tacked by the Egalité were understood in the sense of the Bakuninist Alliance.67 Far from it. The Possibilists were thus described because they are now wholly indistinguishable from the people in the Alliance socialiste 4 7 6 which was founded some 4 years ago by Jourde, the ex- Communard for finance, with the help of past and present Proudhon- ists (e.g. Longuet) and which constitutes La Justice's socialist re- serve. You must certainly have seen this Alliance mentioned in con- nection with elections; it put up candidates for the recent general election to the Chamber and obtained nearly as many votes — in some arrondissements at any rate — as the Parti ouvrier.b If Vollmar knew nothing of this, despite his year and a half in Paris, it was because Malon deliberately kept it from him like much else. That's what happens when you give a gang your uncritical sup- port.

Who, I ask, is guilty of indiscipline — he who carries the old flag high or he who recruits people with the express aim of deserting the colours and exchanging the old flag for a new one? Where, I ask, would Malon have got his majority at St-Etienne from394 if he hadn't first recruited people whose intention from the start, and this was precisely why they had been recruited, was to subvert the old programme?

That was a choice row between Malon and his Clovis Hugues over Louis Blanc. And they call themselves a party!

Some of Lafargue's articles in the more recent issues of the Egalité have been truly delightful, e.g. on Bontoux's candidature.471

Witticisms are better suited to them than doctrinaire pontifica- tions.

[^1]: I have to chuckle when Vollmar praises Malon as the party disci- plinarian and accuses the others of a breach of discipline.438

[^2]: You will have seen that the Fédération du Nord 4 5 4 has declared outright for Roanne.

[^3]: " is making fun of- b Workers' Party



