---
Volume: 46
Document_Title: "226. Engels to Marx. 19 December "
Page_Range: "439-441"
---

# 226. Engels to Marx. 19 December 



**[p. 226]**

ENGELS TO MARX 7

IN VENTNOR

London, 19 December 1882

Dear Moor,

Your letter arrived at 5 o'clock yesterday afternoon and this morn- ing I got back the ms.a Your opinion is most flattering though it is one I cannot share, at any rate so far as form is concerned. As it was fine and warm at midday you will doubtless be released at last for an hour or two from your confinement indoors. Here, though, the fog has grown worse again since 1 o'clock and at times it is like night.

This is how I see the Podolinski business.477 His real discovery is that human labour is capable of retaining solar energy on the earth's surface and harnessing it for a longer period than would otherwise have been the case. All the economic conclusions he draws from this are wrong. I have not got the thing to hand but read it in Italian not long ago in the Plebe. The point in question, namely how the amount of energy contained in a specific amount of foodstuffs can, through labour, yield a greater amount of energy than itself, I resolve as follows: Let us assume that the amount of food a person needs each day represents an amount of energy expressed as 10,000 cal (units of heat). These 10,000 cal will, ad infinitum, = 10,000 cal and are known in practice to lose on conversion into other forms of energy as a result of friction, etc., a portion that cannot be put to use. Significantly so in the case of the human body. Hence the physical labour performed in economic labour can never = 10,000 cal; it is invariably less.

But this is by no means to imply that physical labour is economic la- bour. The economic labour performed by 10,000 cal in no way con- sists in the reproduction, complete or partial, of these same 10,000 cal in any form whatever. On the contrary, they are for the most part lost in the increased heat given off by the body, etc., and such useful residue as remains lies in the fertilising property of excretions. The economic labour performed by an individual through the expenditure of these 10,000 cal consists rather in the stabilisation over a longer or shorter

" F. Engels, 'The Mark'.



**[p. 411]**

period of the fresh cal he absorbs from the radiation of the sun, and this is the only connection the latter have, so far as labour is con- cerned, with the first 10,000 cal. Now whether the fresh cal stabilised by the expenditure of 10,000 cal of daily nourishment amount to 5,000, 10,000, 20,000 or a million is dependent solely upon the level of development of the means of production.

To demonstrate this in the form of calculations is possible only in the case of the most primitive branches of production: hunting, fish- ing, stock farming, agriculture. In hunting and fishing fresh solar energy is not even stabilised; rather, use is simply made of what has been stabilised already. At the same time it is clear that, assuming the individual concerned takes normal nourishment, the amount of pro- tein and fat he obtains by hunting or fishing is independent of the amount of these substances he consumes.

In stock farming energy is stabilised in as much as the vegetation, that would otherwise rapidly wither, die and decompose, is systemati- cally converted into animal protein, fat, skin, bone, etc., hence stabilised over a longer period. Here calculations already become complicated.

Even more so in agriculture where the energy value of auxiliary materials, fertilisers, etc., must also be taken into consideration.

In industry all calculations come to a fujl stop; for the most part the labour added to a product simply does not permit of being expressed in terms of cal. This might be done at a pinch in the case of a pound of yarn by laboriously reproducing its durability and tensile strength in yet another mechanical formula, but even then it would smack of quite useless pedantry and, in the case of a piece of grey cloth, let alone one that has been bleached, dyed or printed, would actually become absurd. The energy value conforming to the production costs of a hammer, a screw, a sewing needle, is an impossible quantity.

To express economic conditions in terms of physical measures is, in my view, a sheer impossibility.

What Podolinski has completely forgotten is that the working indi- vidual is not only a stabiliser oi present but also, and to a far greater extent, a squanderer of past, solar heat. As to what we have done in the way of squandering our reserves of energy, our coal, ore, forests, etc., you are better informed than I am. From this point of view, hunting and fishing may also be seen not as stabilisers of fresh solar heat but as exhausters and even incipient squanderers of the solar energy that has accumulated from the past.

