---
Volume: 46
Document_Title: "227. Engels to Marx. 22 December "
Page_Range: "441-443"
---

# 227. Engels to Marx. 22 December 



**[p. 412]**

Podolinski went astray after his very valuable discovery, because he sought to find in the field of natural science fresh evidence of the rightness of socialism and hence has confused the physical with the economic.

Encl. CHEQUE for £ 4 0 so that you can cash it when you want and will have something to fall back on.

As regards Tussy's coming, I shall speak to her this evening. So far as we ourselves are concerned Jollymeier at once agreed, of course; the details can only be arranged if he does come.1 More tomorrow.

Your

F. E.

227

London, 22 December 1882

Dear Moor,

To come back to Podolinski again,b I stand corrected: storage of energy by means of labour takes place strictly speaking only in arable

[^1]: First published in Der Briefwechsel zwischen Printed according to the original F. Engels und K. Marx, Bd. 4, Stuttgart, _ . .. , , . „ . . . . . „ . ,q,Q Published m English in full for the first time

[^2]: ENGELS TO MARX 7

[^3]: IN VENTNOR

[^4]: a See this volume, pp. 404-05. - b See previous letter.





**[p. 413]**

Herewith letter from Laura 4 7 8; Jenny's case would not, in fact, appear to be too bad, always providing she obtains proper and regu- lar treatment — this being necessary not because of any immediate danger, but because of the extremely unpleasant consequences that might result from neglect.

Hartmann has thrown up the sponge here and tomorrow is cross- ing the ocean again. It's just as well. His contracts over here have involved him in such a mass of legal obligations (some of them unful- filled) that he himself no longer knows where he stands. I shall tell you all about it when I see you and am glad he is going away. It has now transpired that, all the while he was touching me for loans, he was pocketing anything from five to six pounds a week.

You are right when you say that Bernstein doesn't always allow himself adequate time for reflection. But he's not alone in that. Take a look at Lafargue's recent discoveries in 'Prêtres et commerçants' (Egalité, 20 December) and, ibid., Deville's latest reconstructiona

I am glad that 'we concur', as they say in business, on the subject of serfdom.b Certainly, serfdom and bondage are not a form peculiar to the Middle Ages and feudalism; we find them everywhere, or almost everywhere where conquerors have the land tilled for them by the original inhabitants — e. g. at a very early date in Thessaly. Indeed, this fact has clouded my view, like that of many others, of medieval servitude; we were all too eager to see it as being simply based upon

[^1]: of Weitlingianism 4 7 9—by no means an improvement.

[^2]: a G. Deville, 'Le travail', L'Egalité, 4th series, Nos. 57 and 58, 19 and 20 December 1882.-b See this volume, pp. 400, 403-04.



