---
Volume: 46
Document_Title: "229. Marx to Eleanor Marx. 23 December "
Page_Range: "446-448"
---

# 229. Marx to Eleanor Marx. 23 December 



**[p. 417]**

I should be glad if your wifea would kindly accept the enclosed Christmas card and the compliments of the season.

Your

F. E.

First published abridged in: A. Bebel, Aus Printed according to the original meinem Leben, Teil III, Stuttgart, 1914 and . , , • r n • t> • • i^ zr » ,i i.- Published m Lnghsh lor the tirst in lull, in Russian, in Marx-Engels Archives, . s

Vol. I (VI), Moscow, 1932 t l m e

229

MARX T O ELEANOR M A R X 7 2

IN LONDON

[Postcard, unsigned]

[Ventnor, 23 December 1882]

Dear Child,

From Laura's letter (which Engels sent me for information todayb) I see that Jennychen is again afflicted by that beastly inflamma- tion.478 Should it be neglected, I can only fear the worst. We must really consider (and you should talk this over with Lenchen before coming to join me here) whether we ought not to relieve Jennychen at any rate of Harry, even if it should necessitate his coming here. How can Jennychen find time for the treatment of her illness WITH ALL THESE BABIES TOGETHER? And again, how neglected (as regards health) our Johnny will be should one of the others not be displaced in his stead?

Harry makes a difficult position doubly difficult for poor Jennychen.

All I want you to bring is Physiologie by Rank (or Ranke—I'm not sure). Also Freeman's rotten little book (History of Europe), since it

[^1]: a Julie Bebel - b See this volume, p. 413.



serves me in lieu of a chronological table; it is in my bedroom on the shelves where the newspapers, etc., are.

[On the side reserved for the address]

Miss Marx 41 Maitland Park Road, Maitland Park, London, N. W.

First published in: Marx and Engels, Printed according to the original Works, Second Russian Edition, Vol. 35, Moscow, 1964

