---
Volume: 46
Document_Title: "232. Engels to Marx. 9 January "
Page_Range: "450-451"
---

# 232. Engels to Marx. 9 January 



**[p. 421]**

that the journey WOULD [not] HAVE PUNISHED ME WITH A RELAPSE such as I have so far fortunately escaped. All the same, it's hard not being able to go and see her.

Love from

O L D N I C K

First published, in the languages of the orig- Printed according to the original inal (German and English), in Annali, an. I, Milano, 1958

232

ENGELS TO MARX

IN VENTNOR

London, 9 January 1883

Dear Moor,

In great haste I am sending you the following enclosures: 1. Lafargue, 2. Bebel, 3. Hepner,484 of which I should like to have 2. and 3. back.

So at last there has been a report on Jenny's condition from which one can tell how matters really stand. In my opinion the case isn't as bad as it looks; the poor child has allowed herself to grow unduly weak as a result of over-exertion and her distaste for medical treat- ment, but she will soon pick up again under Laura's management. I at once sent Laura -£ 15, the last five being intended to give Laura a somewhat freer hand when she visits Jenny and buys things for her. Until Jenny is able to run her house again, Johnny ought certainly to remain over here.

Bebel's information on German industry is interesting, though it strikes me that one ought to take it cum grano salis.' What are ex- panding are for the most part the luxury industries and possibly mechanical weaving—though in the latter case export opportunities are restricted by the tariffs on yarn. Since the annexation of Alsace

[^1]: * with a grain of salt



