---
Volume: 46
Document_Title: "233. Marx to Eleanor Marx. 9 January "
Page_Range: "451-453"
---

# 233. Marx to Eleanor Marx. 9 January 



**[p. 422]**

they have had more spindles than they need as also, since 1870, iron- works, so how can big industry as such expand to any great extent? Moreover the fact that beet sugar has made such an impression on him suggests a narrow view. The circumstance that the state pays for the profits of the sugar-manufacturing Junkers has already been debated in the Landtag.

Hepner. What do you make of the little Jew's proposal (obviously at the insistence of his associé* Jonas) to hold a pistol to our heads as regards a preface to the Manifesto? In my view, either one completely ignores insolent letters like these or at most refers him to the preface of the Leipzig editionb; if that isn't good enough for him he ought to leave the Manifesto unprinted.

If you write to Sorge about Hartmannc (.supposing that you have not already done so) you might slip in a line or two about little Hepner.

Time for the post— I had to go into town to see to the money and then get it off, have therefore been delayed.

Your

F. E.

233

[Ventnor,] 9 January 1883

My Dear Good Child,

[^1]: First published abridged in Der Briefwech- Printed according to the original sei zwischen F, Engels und K. Marx, Bd. 4, _ , ,. , , . ,. , . , _ c* „ t im« J • r ii ' i / r ^ i Published in English for the first Stuttgart, 1913 and in full m MEGA, . s

[^2]: Abt. Ill, Bd. 4, Berlin, 1931 t l m e

[^3]: MARX TO ELEANOR MARX 166

[^4]: IN LONDON

[^5]: How kind of you to write to me so often and at such length; how- ever I do not wish TO ENCROACH ON THE VERY LITTLE TREE' TIME YOU HAVE TO

[^6]: a partner-15 K. Marx and F. Engels, 'Preface to the 1872 German Edition of the Manifesto of the Communist Party'.-' Lev Hartmann





**[p. 423]**

DISPOSE OF. I got your letter after I had sent off mine," after my return from an excursion by the sea. I have had no further news from Paris.

Today I was on the point of 'setting forth on foot' again — DESPITE THE NOISE OF THE WIND — when my doctor11 arrived; he told me I was to stay at home as it was very cold outdoors. He examined me again. All as before, in as much as the catarrh is chronic (hence, too, the persist- ent hoarseness), though from a 'higher' viewpoint my condition has improved in as much as the critical spots have not been affected in any way. This semi-permanent cough would be tiresome enough, but with the daily vomissementsc it becomes loathsome. This frequently makes work impossible, though the doctor believes — he still believes AND THAT is SOMETHING! — he can rid me of this torment (with the help of a little remedy he has just prescribed). Qui vivra, verra.d

Apropos. SOMEWHERE in my bedroom or my desk there must still be COPIES of my photograph from Algiers in a writing case or some LITTLE BOX or other. * If you could find them, you might send me two photo- gramms. One of them I have promised to forward to Madame Williamson.*485

Yesterday Mr Meissner sent me his account for 1881; it shows a very slight drop, so there is bound to be a corresponding increase for 1882 as he also wrote saying that he is rapidly running out of copies of Capital.*86 Naturally he is getting impatient about the revised sheets.c It is an unconscionable time since he heard from me on the subject. Now he will get some definite news.

in the service of their historic mission, while vainly protesting against it — and can even Cowen himself help smirking over the entrancing little prospect of all those fortified offensive positions between the At- lantic and the Indian Ocean and, INTO THE BARGAIN, an 'African-British Empire' from the Delta to the Cape? Very naice! In fact there could be no more blatant example of Christian hypocrisy than the 'con- quest' of Egypt—conquest in the midst of peace! Even Cowen, and he is certainly the best of the English parlementaires,h secretly admires

[^1]: Cowen's SPEECH quoad1 'EGYPT' 487 is on the same lines as Hyndman's political music of the future, English style. These groaning bourgeois (and even Cowen is a bourgeois in this respect), these poor British bourgeois, who groan as they assume more and more 'RESPONSABILITIES' S

[^2]: a See this volume, pp. 420-21. - b James M. Williamson-0 vomiting-d We shall see. - c of the first volume of Capital, 3rd German edition - ' as to - 8 sic - h parliamentarians



