---
Volume: 46
Document_Title: "235. Marx to Eleanor Marx. 10 January "
Page_Range: "455-458"
---

# 235. Marx to Eleanor Marx. 10 January 



**[p. 235]**

MARX TO ELEANOR MARX 7 2

IN LONDON

[Ventnor,] 10 January 1883

Dear Child,

The enclosed letter from Lafargue (be so kind as to send it back sometime) reassured me greatly on Jennychen's account, although Lafargue may have painted too rosy a picture out of consideration for me; but it does seem as though the immediate danger is over.

Charming, the accounts of Wolf and Paa (who is now an IDOLATER OF Wolfs), etc.

As things are at present (and Engels agrees with me over this) it would be a most unfavourable moment to send Johnny off to Argen- teuil. He cannot go back until Jenny is again in a condition to look after her household. All one must concentrate on is the main issue, not less- er considerations, and it was those that were very nearly the death of Jenny. What difference would a few months here or there make, quite apart from the fact that the poor boy would, from the start, be pre- cipitated into chaos.

I hope, Tussychen, that you will at once write to Jennychen telling her what I have said. I shall today drop Longuet a line on this sub- ject, addressed to the Justice.

You must let Johnnychen have news of his brothers and sister; you will, OF COURSE, also give Lenchen the main gist of Lafargue's letter.

Yesterday the weather was horrible; today, too, it looks damp and far from 'glorious'. But I shall, I think, [take] my 'CONSTITUTIONAL' to- day []"

[^1]: First published, in the language of the original (German), in Annali, an. I, Milano, 1958

[^2]: Printed according to the original

[^3]: ' Edgar and Marcel Longuet - b The end of the letter is missing.



^ <*? ^

Ù

[^1]: » ^ It

[^2]: Marx's congratulation to Mrs James M. Williamson on the reverse of his photograph of 1875





