---
Volume: 46
Document_Title: "238. Engels to Eduard Bernstein. 18 January "
Page_Range: "459-461"
---

# 238. Engels to Eduard Bernstein. 18 January 



**[p. 238]**

ENGELS TO EDUARD BERNSTEIN ' ' 3

IN ZURICH

London, 18 January 1883

Dear Mr Bernstein,

Days of festivity, followed by days of mourning,4 9 ° constant ob- structions. At present I have scarcely a moment to call my own, as you will understand when I tell you that Marx is back here from Ventnor,4 ' ' confined to the house with bronchitis — so far, luckily, only a mild attack — and forbidden to talk much, while all the family business devolves on me. (But not a word of all this in the paper"; Marx would be furious if he were to see the worthy Viereck's indis- creet and, what's more, not altogether veracious comments in today's Süddeutsche Post.)

Enfin,b I still have an hour or so to spare for you. As for Gumbel, returned herewith, he resembles Heine's Gumpelinoc in as much as he too is interested in stocks and shares. For that matter, he's an out- standing example of the German socialist abroad, having obviously been in Paris. Because we have provided these chaps with a theory of which they are entirely innocent, seldom bothering, moreover, to ac- quire a rudimentary — if indeed any — understanding of it, every provincial nincompoop among them considers himself superior to all other foreigners. Arriving from Heilbronn, or whatever the potty lit- tle place may be called, in London or Paris, he is appalled when he finds that his particular brand of provincialism does not hold good there. Instead of broadening his horizons and learning something, he deliberately makes himself more blinkered than before, for this serves to render all the more glaring the contrast between himself and the bad, stupid foreigners — i. e. his supposed superiority over them. Yet this is the kind of person who predominates in German associations abroad, and if you are now under pressure from them, just ask your- self who it was, after the promulgation of the Anti-Socialist Law, ' 6

that sought to give undeserved prominence to these associations by means of centralisation, etc. If you had known the chaps then as well

[^1]: Der Sozialdemokrat - b Well -c See Heine's Reisebilder, 2nd part.





**[p. 431]**

as you do now, you would have been unlikely to go to so much trouble.

'The party with clean hands' — meaning what? The hands, per- haps, of Hasselmann or Fritzsche and of so many others, about whom everyone arriving here as an exile or something of the kind had a tale to tell?

Gumpelino is at his best when he comes to his stocks and shares. When some such provincial champion of moral virtue tilts thus phari- saically at practices, unpleasant enough in themselves, but from which the party none the less derives a real advantage that far out- weighs any possible damage, there must be a catch somewhere. The workers do not have stocks and shares, nor do they give a damn for the financial page. Hence—the little bourgeois, who also wants to dabble in stocks and shares, proceeds to demand that his party paper carry a benevolent, honest, moral, financial page. In the first place, it is not the business of a socialist paper to indicate how best the workers can be exploited — income from stocks and shares is, however, also the product of unpaid labour. If, then, in the second place Gumpe- lino nevertheless demands that the socialist press should do this, it says little for his socialism and even less for his flair as a business- man. I, too, have stocks and shares, buying and selling from time to time. But I am not so simple as to look to the socialist press for advice on these operations. Anyone who does so will burn his fingers, and serve him right! Get yourself baptised, Abraham Gum- pelino!

We were delighted by the way Grillenberger and the Sozialdemo- krat replied to Puttkamer's piece of hypocrisy.491 That's the way to do it. Not to twist and turn beneath the opponent's blows, or whine and whimper and stammer out excuses about no harm's being meant, as is still done by so many. Hit back—that's what one should do — for every blow dealt by the enemy, pay him back two or three. These have always been our tactics and up till now we have, I believe, al- ways pretty well got the better of our opponents. 'Moreover, the genius of our soldiers lies in attacking, as is perfectly right,' says old Fritz in his orders to his generals492 and that, indeed, is what our workers do in Germany. But when, in the debate on exceptional laws generally, — given that \_j 'sa abstract is right — Kayser, for instance, retracts whining that we are revolutionaries only in the Pickwick-

[^1]: Louis Viereck (square in German = Viereck).



