---
Volume: 46
Document_Title: "239. Engels to Eduard Bernstein. 8 February "
Page_Range: "461-464"
---

# 239. Engels to Eduard Bernstein. 8 February 



**[p. 432]**

ian sense,3 what then? What he should have said was that neither the entire Reichstag nor the Federal Council would be sitting had it not been for a revolution; that old William, when he gobbled up three crowns and a free city,493 was likewise a revolutionary; that legiti- macy itself, and the very foundations of the so-called constitution, are no more than the product of innumerable revolutions effected against the will of the people and directed against the people. Oh, this damned German slackness of thought and will, introduced at such pains into the party with the 'eddicated' men,— if only we could rid ourselves of it again!

Time for the post. I shall reply as soon as possible to whatever points in your letter I may have overlooked. Thanks for the photo- graph. Proofsb when?

Regards, yours,

F. E.

First published, in Russian, in Marx-Engels Printed according to the original Archives, Book I, Moscow, 1924

Published in English in full for the first time

239

London, 8 February 1883

Dear Mr Bernstein,

1. I trust you have received the final ms. ( The Mark) which was sent off from here registered on 20 December. But the printing delays are now getting really too outrageous. If it goes on like this you had better reset the title and put 1884 on it. When, exactly, will there be another sheet?

[^1]: ENGELS TO EDUARD BERNSTEIN 2 4

[^2]: IN ZURICH

[^3]: a A reference to Max Kayser's speech in the Reichstag on 11 January 1883. - b of En- gels' Socialism: Utopian and Scientific, German edition





**[p. 433]**

2. I have received — neither the first Accident Bill, nor Bebel's speech on the subject. Meanwhile it has struck me that a specific attack on Bismarckian socialism has become outdated.a Viereck's little paperb has lost all inclination for it. Singer, who had been suffering badly from nationalisation mania on the last occasion but one, was, on the last occasion, completely free of it and genuinely revo- lutionary, 494 while as for those weaklings in the Reichstag, Bios, Geiser & Co., their courage, if not their enthusiasm, would appear to have evaporated. So why crack a nut with a sledgeham- mer? I think we should let Bismarckian socialism dig its own grave. After which all that remains is a criticism of the rotten Las- sallean remnants. But if the pamphlet378 is printed so slowly, this attack, too, may have ceased to be topical by the time the thing comes out.

3. You are mistaken about Malon. The man is. not as stupid, or rather as naive, as he makes himself out to be. C'est un faux bonhomme'1

who has learnt from the Bakuninists how to manipulate people on the sly while making out that it is he himself who is being manipulated. One of these days you will see that I am right.

4. Stock exchange tax. Has long existed here in England in the form of a simple, everyday stamp on the transfer document — '/2% °f the amount paid and 5/- transfer fee (securities au porteur A are rare over here; they are free). The only consequence is that the real specu- lation on the stock exchange is in margin dealings where no actual transfer takes place. Hence only affects the so-called 'solid capital in- vestment'. Nor has anything ever been devised that the stock market speculators cannot circumvent.

I am against it, 1. because we, after all, demand only direct taxa- tion, rejecting any that is indirect, so that the people may know and sense what they are paying, and also so that capital can be got at in this way, 2. because we certainly cannot vote one penny to this gov- ernment.

You are right in describing the outcry against the stock exchange as petty-bourgeois. The stock exchange simply adjusts the distribution of the surplus value already stolen from the workers, and how that is do- ne may at first be a matter of indifference to the workers as such. However the stock exchange adjusts this distribution in the direction

[^1]: a See this volume, pp. 324-25.-b Süddeutsche Post-c Shifty customer-d to bearer





**[p. 434]**

of centralisation, vastly accelerates the concentration of capitals and is therefore as revolutionary as the steam engine.

Equally petty-bourgeois, though perhaps just excusable, are taxes with a moral purpose — beer, spirits. In this context they are quite ludicrous and altogether reactionary. Had the stock exchange in America not created colossal fortunes, how would large-scale industry and a social movement have been possible in that land of farmers?

It would be quite a good idea if you were to lash out here. But with circumspection. There must be no gap in one's defences where your Stoeckers are concerned.

5. 3rd edition of Capital.227 Will doubtless take some time yet as Marx is still ailing. His stay in Ventnor, where it rained continuously, did him no good. On top ofthat there has been the loss of his daugh- ter. 4 9 ° He has been back here for the past 3 weeks and is so hoarse that he can barely speak, so not much could be discussed (only don't mention this in the paper,a of course).

6. We should be grateful for the Rodbertus-Meyer book.b

At one time the man was almost on the point of discovering surplus value, but his estate in Pomerania prevented him from doing so.

Very many thanks for the photograph. Kautsky has sent me his pamphlet on American grain. Choice irony: 3 years ago the population was to be reduced because it would otherwise have nothing to eat; now the population does not even suf- fice to eat what America produces!495 That's what happens when you study so-called 'questions' one by one without linking them together. In so doing you naturally fall victim to that dialectic which 'is objectively present', Diihring notwithstanding, 'in things them- selves'. 4 9 6

I am delighted to hear that the Hohenzollern family again boasts a professing pederast. It would not bè complete without one. Admit- tedly Prince Karl, like Frederick William II, also 'operated' in that line, but he also included women. That reminds me, did Adolf Beust give you Mirabeau's Secret History of the Court of Berlin" which I gave him to pass on to you? If not, get hold of it. The book is inimitable on

[^1]: a Der Sozialdemokrat-b [J. K.] Rodbertus-Jagetzow, Briefe und Socialpolitische Aufsätze, Berlin [1882], edited and with a preface by R. Meyer. - c H. G. Mirabeau, Histoire se- crete de la cour de Berlin



