---
Volume: 46
Document_Title: "240. Engels to Eduard Bernstein. 10 February "
Page_Range: "464-465"
---

# 240. Engels to Eduard Bernstein. 10 February 



**[p. 435]**

the subject of Frederick William II; the best bits have been dog's- eared.

Kindest regards.

Yours,

F. E.

First published, in Russian, in Marx-Engels Printed according to the original Archives, Book I, Moscow, 1924

Published in English in full for the first time

240

ENGELS TO EDUARD BERNSTEIN 24

IN ZURICH

London, 10 February 1883

Dear Mr Bernstein,

I respectfully confirm mine of yesterday's date" and herewith enclose a letter for Kautskyb whose old address may no longer be any good.

To come back to the stock exchange tax, there is absolutely no need for us to deny the 'immorality' and rascality of that exchange; we can even paint a really lurid picture of it as the spearhead of capi- talist gain where ownership becomes directly synonymous with theft, but then go on to conclude that it is by no means in the interests of the proletariat to destroy this immaculate spearhead of the present econ- omy; rather it should be allowed to deploy perfectly freely, so that even the most stupid can see where the present economy is taking them. We shall leave moral indignation to those who are avaricious enough to have recourse to the stock exchange without themselves being stock exchange men and who, as is only right, are cleaned out. And then if the stock exchange and 'solid business' come to blows and if the country Junkers, who also seek to dabble in securities and are inevitably fleeced, make a third in the three-sided battle between the

[^1]: a See previous letter.-b See next letter.



