---
Volume: 46
Document_Title: "241. Engels to Karl Kautsky. 10 February "
Page_Range: "465-468"
---

# 241. Engels to Karl Kautsky. 10 February 



**[p. 436]**

The request for an exact address with number and street applies to you as well. Otherwise I cannot send any money, which I must certainly do, inter alia, for 6 copies of the Schmidt pamphlet458

which Schorlemmer and I wish to send to Germany and which I ask for.

But now I must close.

Yours,

F. E.

First published, in Russian, in Marx- Printed according to the original Engels Archives, Book I, Moscow, 1924

Published in English in full for the first time

241

ENGELS TO KARL KAUTSKY

London, 10 February 1883

Dear Mr Kautsky,

At long last I can get round to answering you and thanking you for the various things you have sent. You have no idea of the way im- pediments of all kinds have prevented me, not only from working, but also from attending to the most urgent correspondence. Since Marx has been ill the burden has fallen upon myself alone and, on top of that, the number of inquiries, etc., has doubled. Moreover, I cannot very well write in the evenings because it tires my eyes and interferes with my sleep. Thus all written work is dependent on the few — in wintertime here, all too short — hours of daylight and, in view of the distances one has to cover here, a single trip into town will, as often as not, disrupt one's entire working day. And some fine to-ing and fro- ing I have had to do of late!

[^1]: IN VIENNA





**[p. 437]**

Your treatise on American food production is most timely. The fact that you make such use of the information supplied by Mr Meyer must have made him very proud. 49? Is he still in Vienna, and do you still see him from time to time?

But what irony of history! 3 or 4 years ago you, a neonato* Malthu- sian, were advocating the necessity of restricting the population by artificial means, because otherwise the time would soon come when we should none of us have enough to eat. And now you prove that the population is not even large enough to consume America's surplus food production as well as what Europe herself produces. Solve, I pray, Count Oerindur, this conundrum posed by nature!b Presuma- bly, then, it won't be rations that are withheld, but rather that much- vaunted little sponge! Which is not to say, of course, that this same or some other method might not be of great practical use in middle-class families to keep the number of children proportionate to income, and prevent the wife's health being ruined by too frequent confinements, etc. But I still maintain that this is a private matter be- tween husband and wife, or at most the family doctor (in one such case I myself recommended what you call the 'Raciborski method'), and that our proletarians will continue as before to live up to their name by producing numerous proles.c

It will not surprise you to learn that my standpoint in regard to your article on hetaerism498 still remains the same, namely that com- munity of wives (and of men for women) was the basis for sexual rela- tions within the tribe. The psychological argument against this, de- riving from jealousy, interpolates more recent views, and is disproved by countless facts (some of which below). Darwin is no more of an au- thority in this field than in that of political economy, whence he im- ported his Malthusianism. We know practically nothing about apes in this respect, since observations in a menagerie prove nothing and are difficult to make in the case of a troop of wild apes, while such as are alleged to have been made cannot claim to be accurate, conclu- sive or even universally valid. Gorillas and orang-outangs must in any case be excluded, since they do not live in troops. Those primitive tribes you adduce, with a loose form of monogamy, are, in my view,

[^1]: a new born- b A. Müllner, Die Schuld, Act 2, Scene 5.-c progeny





**[p. 438]**

Here comes Pumps with her husband and childb and that means no more writing. This is always happening.

With kindest regards,

Yours,

F. E.

[^1]: First published, in Russian, in Marx-Engels Printed according to the original Archives, Vol. I (VI), Moscow, 1932

[^2]: Published in English for the first time

[^3]: a H.H. Bancroft, The Native Races of the Pacific States of North America, Vol. I, New York, 1875.-b Percy and Lilian Rosher



