---
Volume: 46
Document_Title: "243. Engels to Eduard Bernstein. 27 February "
Page_Range: "471-474"
---

# 243. Engels to Eduard Bernstein. 27 February 



**[p. 243]**

ENGELS TO EDUARD BERNSTEIN 5 0 1

IN ZURICH

London, 27 February 1883

Dear Mr Bernstein,

I recently had a little dispute with Viereck which has forced me to break with him. As he might possibly come to Zurich for the con- gress 502 and make use of the occasion to mention the matter in private conversation, I am concerned lest in that event his version be the only one to go the rounds. I therefore authorise you to read this letter to anyone Viereck may discuss the matter with, but at all events to Bebel and Liebknecht.

Some little while before Christmas Viereck, or rather his wife,a sent me the visiting card of one Deinhardt, a Munich engineer, with three questions of a chemico-physico-industrial nature and asked me to get hold of the information if possible. I sent the card to Schorlemmer in Manchester who rightly suspected from the questions a pushful and importunate inventor and for good measure appended a 'motto' to his extremely terse reply. Here is the card as returned to Viereck:

In this form the card went back. So if Viereck did not wish to show Deinhardt the motto, all he had to do was copy questions and answers onto a sheet of paper or a postcard, and that would have been that.

Next I received No. 7 (17 January) of the Süddeutsche Post (which Viereck sent me in exchange for The Labour Standard) and, in the 'Letter Box', saw the following:

[^1]: '1. Has ozone come into use alongside chlorine and chloride of lime for bleaching rags in English paper mills? — No.

[^2]: '2. Compared with other bleaching agents, does ozone offer a manufacturing concern any noteworthy advantages in a technical or financial sense? — No.

[^3]: '3. Is the production and use of ozone in an industrial concern attended by considerable difficulties? — Tes.

[^4]: 'C. Deinhardt, Engineer (printed on card). 'Motto: Apage inventor/'b

[^5]: 'To Mr Deinhardt, engineer of this city. The author of the 'electrotechnical revo- lution' writes to tell us that, despite information to the contrary supplied by Prof. Schorlemmer,

[^6]: * Laura Viereck-b Be off with you, inventor!





**[p. 443]**

of Manchester, he must stand by his contention that the production of ozone would be effected by means of a dynamo, etc'

What was the meaning of this? How was it that this purely private piece of information found its way into the paper rather than into a proper letter box? And how could Viereck have had the impudence to make public use in his paper of private information supplied by Schorlemmer for Deinhardt — on Viereck's own evidence an ex- tremely importunate man — purely to oblige Viereck? Either Viereck didn't know what he was doing or he did it out of revenge for the 'motto'.

But there is nothing whatever in the 3 questions and answers that turns on whether the production of ozone is effected by means of a dynamo; a dynamo is not mentioned at all. Thus, by indirectly attributing to Schorlemmer a statement actually denying that the production of ozone is effected with a dynamo, Viereck is guilty of outright falsification; he is attributing to Schorlemmer things he has never said. But obviously it cannot be a matter of indifference to a chemist whose reputation extends beyond Europe if someone attributes to him things about chemico-physical questions he has never said, and does so publicly in the university city of Munich where, after all, there are also chemists and physicists who might possibly read it.

So I sent the paper, as was only my duty, to Schorlemmer who sent me the following letter for Viereck:

Accordingly Schorlemmer called for the publication of the card as it stood, with questions, answers and motto, in order that the matter might be clarified.

Whereupon a long letter arrived from Viereck addressed to me. Deinhardt, he said, had bombarded him with three letters on the sub- ject of ozone (so the Apage inventor was wholly appropriate^.). By sending him [Viereck] the above-mentioned letter I was now holding a pistol to his head {which is untrue, let him show it to you; all I did was demand in polite terms full satisfaction for Schorlemmer), while Schorlemmer's letter and the demands made therein were even more intemperate. He could not, he added, publish the motto (needless to say this request was not intended seriously) and the remainder only if Schorlemmer withdrew the insulting expressions contained in his let- ter; for the time being he could not admit having made a mistake, but

[^1]: 'If anyone' (I am quoting from memory) 'publishes a private communication without permission, then it is improper. But if in addition he goes on to distort the said communication, then it is barely ethical.'





**[p. 444]**

'/ did not even know,'' his letter goes on, 'that Prof. Schorlemmer read the Süddeutsche Post and surely cannot in any circumstances assume that you had sent him this issue ad hoc'. For I regard it as out of the question that you could inform against me and I should have been only too pleased had you suggested what steps ought to have been taken to pacify the much agitated professor.' "/12 of his readers consisted of party members nothing ought to be imputed to him that was 'inconsistent with the con- duct of a man of honour', etc.

So they make improper use of Schorlemmer's name and, on their own admission, distort what he says because they hope he won't find out. And when I, the sole cause of his involvement in the affair, tell him about it, then I am 'informing' against Viereck. Not Schorlemmer but Viereck is the injured party, because Schorlemmer characterises Viereck's conduct, and with great restraint at that. Not a word about the falsification of which Schorlemmer was the victim.

Well, Viereck may read our reply to anyone he chooses. We sent him a statement, addressed not to him but to the editorial board, i. e. a statement intended for publication, together with a request that at the same time they print questions and answers. What does Viereck do? First, a polite apology in the 'Letter Box', to wit:

And then? In No. 17, 9 February:

The clarification of this 'misunderstanding' is tantamount to the total obfuscation of the affair, as is satisfaction for Schorlemmer to attempted mockery and to further misuse of his name. Thereafter I returned the Süddeutsche Post unopened. Yet another postcard from Viereck, asking what he had done to deserve being rebuffed in this insulting (everything is insulting!) way, etc. What I said in my reply — also per postcard — he can read to you himself if he likes. 'One must

[^1]: 'We profoundly regret this tiresome misunderstanding' and promise to put the matter right.

[^2]: 'In regard to the electrotechnical revolution. On being consulted, Prof. Schorlemmer of Manchester supplied the following information which we herewith print in order to clear up a (!) misunderstanding (!)': (the questions and answers follow).

[^3]: a for this purpose



