---
Volume: 46
Document_Title: "244. Engels to Eduard Bernstein. 27 February- 1 March "
Page_Range: "474-480"
---

# 244. Engels to Eduard Bernstein. 27 February- 1 March 

Yours,

F. Engels

First published in Die Briefe von Friedrich Printed according to the original Engels an Eduard Bernstein, Berlin, 1925

Published in English for the first time

244

ENGELS TO EDUARD BERNSTEIN 7

IN ZURICH

London, 27 February 1883

Dear Mr Bernstein,

Your letter received yesterday evening.503 The Egalité has gone phut again and I would ask you to publish the following facts (see en- closed slip of paper) in the Sozialdemokrat.504 Let us hope that the chaps will finally learn some sense and not go founding daily papers on the strength of contracts of this kind. Taking legal action is a mug's game and costs money, and any French court of law would revel in non-suiting socialists and losing them their case, while the paper would still remain defunct.

At any rate, it's a good thing that they can no longer publicly de- clare their solidarity with the anarchists, the latter being now behind bars — mere children who play with fire and, when given a hiding, try and make out they're the most innocent fellows in the world. And now some fool in Brussels sets off a bomb in his own trousers pocket! In due course dynamite will come to seem plain ridiculous.

Now for a different tableau. Because of a dirty trick Viereck played on Schorlemmer in the Süddeutsche Post, I have broken with him. Further details are contained in a letter I have sent to Schorlemmer1

[^1]: Guesde and Lafargue, amongst others, were arraigned440 under Article 91 of the Code pénal ' 6 7 — conspiracy and incitement to civil war — death penalty. What a farce!

[^2]: " See previous letter.





**[p. 446]**

(both of whom were then secretly engaged), etc., etc. At the same time I told him pretty plainly what I thought of his proclivity for vulgar democracy. In short, I became involved with him, but now it is all over.

The veriest boot-black could not have tolerated the treatment meted out to Schorlemmer by Viereck. Yet Schorlemmer is, after Marx, undoubtedly the most eminent man in the European socialist party. When I got to know him 20 years ago he was already a communist. At that time an impoverished private assistant to English professors, he is now a member of the ROYAL SOCIETY (the equivalent over here of the Akademie der Wissenschaften), and the world's leading authority in his own speciality, the chemistry of the simpler hydrocarbons (paraf- fin and its derivatives). His great Treatise on Chemistry, brought out jointly with Roscoe,d but written almost entirely by Schorlemmer (as all chemists know), is now without a rival in England and Germany. And this position he has carved out for himself abroad, in competi- tion with men who exploited him for as long as they could, and he has done so entirely on the strength of genuinely scientific work, without ever making any concession to humbug. Moreover, he never hesitates to proclaim himself a socialist as, for instance, when he reads jokes aloud from the Sozialdemokrat for the benefit of the other lecturers with whom he is lunching; but he also demands, and justly so, that he should not have unwanted publicity, in whatever guise, thrust upon him, as was done by Viereck. But now, good-bye until tomorrow. It is almost midnight and I have broken my rule of not writing at night.

[^1]: 28 February. There is, however, one favour I would ask of you, and that is not to keep chucking the word 'comrade' at me in the paper.e

[^2]: a Words in brackets were added by Engels at the bottom of the page.-b Laura Viereck-0 Mary Ellen Rosher-d H. E. Roscoe, C. Schorlemmer, Ausführliches Lehrbuch der Chemie, vols I-III, Brunswick, 1877-82.-° Der Sozialdemokrat





**[p. 447]**

To begin with, I detest anything that smacks of title-mongering and since, in all the German literature that counts for anything, people are called simply by their names and are not given titles unless under attack, we too should conform to this unless the designation 'com- rade' is really intended to inform the reader that the person con- cerned belongs to the party. What is in place and normal on the platform and in verbal debate can look pretty awful in print. And then again, we here are not in fact 'comrades' in the narrower sense of the term. We can hardly be said to belong to the German party any more than to the French, American or Russian, nor can we regard ourselves as any more bound by the German programme 506 than by the minimum programme.6B We set no little store by this, our special position as representatives of international socialism. But it also pre- cludes us from belonging to one particular national party — so long, that is, as we are unable to return to Germany and participate imme- diately in the struggle there. Just now it would be pointless.

What you say about Liebknecht's complicity in importing philistine elements has long been our view. For all his excellent qualities, Lieb- knecht has one fault, namely the desire to attract 'educated' elements to the party by hook or by crook, and to him, a former teacher, the worst thing that can happen is for a working man in the Reichstag to say 'me' for T . A man like Viereck ought never to have been put up as a candidate. He would have exposed us in the Reichstag to far more deadly ridicule than would a hundred wrong 'mes' of which, after all, the Hohenzollerns and field marshals are likewise guilty. Unless the newcomers — the educated ones and those from bourgeois circles gen- erally— adopt the proletarian standpoint unreservedly, they can do nothing but harm. But if they have genuinely adopted that stand- point, then they are exceedingly useful and welcome. Another of Liebknecht's characteristics is that, for the sake of a momentary success, he will unhesitatingly sacrifice subsequent, more important successes. Thus Viereck and Fritzsche's highly dubious mission to America. 119 It went off reasonably well, but is there any knowing to what ridicule Fritzsche may not expose us later on in America? And then people will say: 'And there you have the representative of German Social Democracy in America, sent over officially!' And the caution one has to observe vis-à-vis this type of person when it comes to candidatures is evident from the Oppenheimer case.507

Yet another interruption!

But for goodness sake don't go raking up that wretched Jahrbuch article.a It was an apologia for the stock exchange men. But one can perfectly well be at one and the same time a stock exchange man and a socialist and therefore detest and despise the class of stock exchange men. Would it ever occur to me to apologise for the fact that I myself was once a partner in a firm of manufacturers? There's a fine recep- tion waiting for anyone who tries to throw that in my teeth! And if I could be certain of making a million on the stock exchange tomorrow, and thus put an ample supply of funds at the disposal

[^1]: " [K. Höchberg, E. Bernstein, C. A. Schramm,] 'Rückblicke auf die sozialistische Bewegung in Deutschland. Kritische Aphorismen', Jahrbuch für Sozialwissenschafi und Sozialpolitik, 1. Jg., 1. Hälfte, Zürich-Oberstrass, 1879.



of the party in Europe and America, to the stock exchange I should promptly go.

What you say about courting the enemy's praise is perfectly right. We have often been infuriated by the glee with which the slightest sign, be it only a fart, of recognition from the armchair socialists82

was recorded in the Volksstaat and the Vorwärts. It was the phrase, 'We must exact recognition from the bourgeoisie in every sphere', that marked the beginning of Miquel's betrayal.456 And however much Rudolf Meyer may butter us up, 4 8 2 all the recognition he is likely to get in return is for his really meritorious Politische Gründer. * We never, of course, discussed serious topics with him, but confined ourselves almost entirely to Bismarck and the like. But Meyer is at least a decent fellow and one who is also quite capable of defying the aristos, nor is he ambitious like all the rest of the armchair socialists, who are now also flourishing in Italy; one specimen, Achille Loria, was over here recently but two calls on me were enough for him.

In the case of Viereck, who knows absolutely nothing about the matter, the to-do over the electrotechnical revolution is merely an ad- vertisement for the pamphlet he has published.15 In fact, however, it's a tremendously revolutionary affair. The steam engine taught us to transform heat into mechanical motion, but the exploitation of elec- tricity has opened up the way to transforming all forms of energy — heat, mechanical motion, electricity, magnetism, light — one into the other and back again, and to their industrial exploitation. The circle is complete. And Deprez's latest discovery, namely that electric currents of very high voltage can, with a comparatively small loss of energy, be conveyed by simple telegraph wire over hitherto undreamed- of distances and be harnessed at the place of destination426 — the thing is still in embryo — this discovery frees industry for good from virtually all local limitations, makes possible the harnessing of even the most remote hydraulic power and, though it may benefit the towns at the outset, will in the end inevitably prove the most powerful of levers in eliminating the antithesis between town and country. Again, it is obvious that the productive forces will thereby acquire a range such that they will, with increasing rapidity, outstrip the con- trol of the bourgeoisie. All Viereck sees in it, short-sighted as he is, is

[^1]: " R. Meyer, Politische Gründer und die Corruption in Deutschland, Leipzig, 1877. -h See pre- vious letter.



a fresh argument in favour of his beloved nationalisation. What the bourgeoisie cannot do must be done by Bismarck.

I'm sorry about the Schumacher business. Let's hope it's just a passing phase; he used to be such a lively, resolute chap. But, as you say, it's that damned German imperial atmosphere!508

There are a great many reasons why I should not consider coming to the congress.502 Things being what they are just now on the Con- tinent, I would sooner remain here.

Kautsky has sent me his second piece on marriage498 in which he again tries to sneak in community of wives as a secondary manifesta- tion. But that won't do. Indeed, I shall write to him about ita and en- close the letter in one to you. It is Kautsky's misfortune that, in his hands, complex questions do not resolve themselves into simple ones — rather, simple questions become complex. And then, it's impossible to achieve anything if one is so prolific. He ought to write popular stuff for the sake of the fee, and take his time over scientific matters, thus dealing with them in a considered and exhaustive way, which alone can be rewarding.

The pederast, who made us laugh a great deal, has already been posted on to Manchester where he will be widely disseminated.

Marx is still incapable of work, keeps to his room (he returned here immediately after his daughter's death 4 9°), and reads French novels. His case seems to be a very complicated one. My hopes are high, now that a better season is on its way.

Yours,

F. Engels

Whatever you do, don't put anything about Marx's state of health into the paperb; Viereck shamefully exploited in the Süddeutsche Post the information I sent his wifec from time to time (he hardly ever wrote to me himself!), but naturally I was able to keep this from Marx, otherwise he would have hauled me over the coals. Here again Viereck had failed to ask my permission.

[^1]: First published, in Russian, in Marx- Printed according to the original Engels Archives, Book I, Moscow, 1924 _ , ,. . , . _ . . . . „ ,. „ , Published in hnghsh in lull lor the first time

[^2]: a See next letter.-b Der Sozialdemokrat-0 Laura Viereck



