---
Volume: 46
Document_Title: "245. Engels to Karl Kautsky. 2 March "
Page_Range: "480-482"
---

# 245. Engels to Karl Kautsky. 2 March 



**[p. 245]**

ENGELS TO KARL'KAUTSKY

IN VIENNA

London, 2 March 1883

Dear Mr Kautsky,

I have received your second article on marriage498 and, since this contains your answer to my criticism of the first one,a I shall continue where I left off; I happen to have an hour to spare which will not be the case tomorrow.

To begin with I consider it absolutely inadmissible that, having contested community of wives as a primary manifestation, you should seek to reintroduce it as a secondary one. Wherever common owner- ship exists, be it of land, women or anything else, it will necessarily be primitive, a legacy of the animal kingdom. The subsequent process of development consists entirely in the gradual dissolution of this prime- val common ownership; in no case do we find an instance of second- ary common ownership evolving out of primitive private ownership. So irrefutable and universally valid do I consider this proposition to be that, even were you to produce what appeared to be exceptions — and however striking these might be at first sight — I would not regard them as an argument to the contrary, but only as a question yet to be solved.

Moreover, having made jealousy the one decisive factor in the first article, you ought not to discard it entirely in the second. Article I presupposes a loose form of monogamy, and this very largely on the strength of jealousy for, as I have said, your other reasons carry very little weight with me. But if jealousy is able to overcome natural community of sexes — and you do after all indirectly concede the existence of the latter when you say: 'Within the tribe complete sexual licence prevailed' —if jealousy can relegate that natural licence to the confines of temporary monogamy, how much more easily must it be able to overcome lesser obstacles. The tribe's common ownership of captives is, however, an obstacle of much less magnitude. A woman remains a woman, whether she is free or a slave; true, in the case of

[^1]: See this volume, pp. 437-38.





**[p. 452]**

female slaves, a man's jealousy is able to impose sole possession much more easily than in the case of free women who have a right to adul- tery! But the moment there is any question of marriage with captives, the jealousy of the husbands suddenly evaporates; the community of sexes which so appalled them in the primitive state, becomes accept- able and pleasing and, even after monogamy or polygamy has already been introduced, even in the case of Semitic peoples where harems are the rule, husbands do not object to their wives coupling with every Tom, Dick and Harry, either in the temple or at special seasons. No, my dear fellow, you can't dismiss the thing as easily as all that. For you are duty-bound to stick to the point even when it be- comes awkward for you to do so. If primary community of sexes was inhibited by jealousy, then community of sexes is excluded once and for all, right down to and including capitalist society. Either your second article refutes the first or vice versa.

Incidentally, I would contest your statement that the freedom of women, at your first stage, contributed to monogamy because there could be no question of repression. The argument that community of sexes is dependent on repression is itself false and a modern distortion arising out of the idea that common ownership in the sexual sphere was only of women by men and at the latter's pleasure. This is totally fo- reign to the primitive state. Common ownership in this sphere was available to both sexes. To refute the false assumption, however, is not the same thing as refuting the correct facts on which the distortion is based.

Again, by reducing all community of sexes and traces thereof to marriage by rapine with foreign women, you attribute to that form of marriage, qua predominant form, a really vast range. Yet you adduce not the slightest proof of this.

that is undoubtedly correct [in regard to specific times and] a places. But you generalise at the speed of an express train, whereas questions of this kind do not lend themselves to such rapid despatch. And while the Celtic clan, the Roman gens and the German Geschlecht are, it is true, all sub-divisions of the tribe, they all have very marked differ- ences and also, surely, different origins. As do the various kinds of clan amongst non-Celtic peoples.

I am convinced that, should you pursue these studies or resume

[^1]: What follows is lost in a welter of hypotheses [among them much]a

[^2]: a Ms. damaged.



