---
Volume: 46
Document_Title: "247. Engels to Laura Lafargue. 10 March "
Page_Range: "485-486"
---

# 247. Engels to Laura Lafargue. 10 March 



**[p. 247]**

ENGELS TO LAURA LAFARGUE

IN PARIS

London, 10 March 1883

My dear Laura,

Not having received a letter from Paula this morning, I conclude that in this frosty and snowy weather with east wind, you will not be in too great a hurry to come to London. Anyhow, if you should make up your mind to come, everything is prepared for you.

Donkin saw Mohr yesterday evening and I am glad to say gave a far more favorable account of his health than a fortnight ago. He said Mohr was decidedly not worse, but better, if anything, than then; and if we could keep him up for the next two months, there would be a good chance of bringing him round again. Of course he is still getting weaker, on account of the difficulty of swallowing, but we must force him to eat and drink. This is what Tussy wrote me on a post- card last night and what Nimb told me today; I shall see Tussy to- night and if any more details are to be had shall write again at once. The abscess in the lungs he considers to be going on very favorably at present. The nocturnal sweats have now ceased the last 4 nights (or 5) but instead of that there is a certain feverishness in the day-time which of course is also weakening.

He gave me the Prolétaire and the reply of Guesde's Committee, as well as the lv W c number of the Citoyen and Bataille which I am to keep for him. The copy sent by Paul can therefore with the rest be used for Zurich.d So this time the business part of the affair can be at- tended to, fortunately, but with Mohr's present state of health, that cannot always be reckoned upon if he be in exclusive possession of the materials.

These ex-Bakounists Malon and Brousse are a beastly dirty lot. Such barefaced forgery would be enough, anywhere out of Paris, to kill them for ever. But with the immense hold of la phrase upon the Parisians, who knows how many thousand votes the 'ouvrier manuel'c

will not concentrate upon himself? Enfin espérons le mieux.r

[^1]: a Lafargue - b Helene Demuth -c base -d Der Sozialdemokrat - ' manual labourer - ' Finally, let's hope for the best.



