---
Volume: 46
Document_Title: "253. Engels to Friedrich Adolph Sorge. 15 March "
Page_Range: "489-492"
---

# 253. Engels to Friedrich Adolph Sorge. 15 March 



**[p. 252]**

ENGELS TO JOHANN PHILIPP BECKER 5 •2

IN GENEVA

London, 15 March 1883

Dear Old Man,

Rejoice that you saw Marx once more last autumn, 5 ' 4 you will never see him again. Yesterday afternoon, at 2.45, when he had been left on his own for barely two minutes, we found him peacefully asleep in his chair. The most powerful intellect our party possessed had ceased to think, the stoutest heart I have ever known was beating no more. An internal haemorrhage would seem to be indicated.

We two are now pretty well all that is left of the old guard of the days before '48. Well, we shall continue to man the breach. Though bullets may whistle and friends fall, it won't be the first time we two have seen that happen. And if one of us is hit by a bullet — well and good, provided only it is properly lodged so that one isn't left writh- ing for too long.

Your old comrade in arms,

F. Engels

253

London, 15 March 1883 11.45 p.m.

Dear Sorge,

Your telegram arrived this evening. Many thanks. To keep you regularly informed about Marx's state of health was

[^1]: First published in: F. Engels, Vergessene Printed according to the original Briefe (Briefe Friedrich Engels' an Johann Philipp Becker), Berlin, 1920

[^2]: ENGELS TO FRIEDRICH ADOLPH SORGE 5 1 2

[^3]: IN HOBOKEN





**[p. 461]**

impossible because of his perpetual ups and downs. But here, briefly, are the main facts.

In October '81, shortly before the death of his wife,513 he went down with PLEURISY. Having recovered from that, he was sent to Algiers in February '82 and, the weather during the journey being wet and cold, arrived there suffering from another bout of PLEURISY. The exe- crable weather persisted; he had only just recovered when, because of the approach of hot summer weather, he was sent to Monte Carlo (Monaco). Arrived there suffering from another, though milder, bout of PLEURISY. Further execrable weather. Cured again at last, he went to Argenteuil near Paris, to stay with his daughter, Madame Longuet. There he availed himself of the nearby sulphur springs at Enghien for the treatment of his long-standing bronchitis. And there, too, the weather continued to be really appalling, but the cure did some good. Next, 6 weeks in Vevey, whence he came back here in September, ap- parently almost restored to health. He had been authorised to spend the winter on the south coast of England. And he himself was so sick of a wandering and idle life that renewed exile in southern Europe would probably have damaged his morale as much as it would have benefited his physique. With the onset of London's foggy season he was sent to the Isle of Wight where it rained continuously and he again caught cold. Schorlemmer and I had intended to visit him ear- ly in the New Year, but then reports reached us which necessitated Tussy's going there at once. Immediately afterwards came the news of Jenny's death490—whereupon he came back here, again suffering from bronchitis. After all that had happened and at his age this spelt danger. On top ofthat there was a host of complications, in particu- lar an abcess of the lung and a tremendously rapid loss of strength. Nevertheless, the illness as a whole was taking a favourable course, and only last Friday the doctor en chef" in whose hands he was — one of the leading younger doctors in London who had been specially re- commended to him by Ray Lankester — held out the rosiest hopes. But anyone who has ever examined lung tissue under a microscope knows how great is the danger, when a lung is festering, of the wall of a blood vessel becoming perforated. And that is why, every morning for the past 6 weeks, as I turned the corner, I was mortally afraid that the blinds might have been lowered. Yesterday, at half past two in the afternoon, his best time for receiving visitors, I arrived to find

Donkin



**[p. 462]**

the household in tears; it seemed as if he was nearing his end. I asked for news, tried to get to the bottom of the matter and to offer consola- tion. There had been a slight haemorrhage, followed, however, by a sudden collapse. Our good, old Lenchen,a who has looked after him better than a mother would after her child, went upstairs, came down again: he was half asleep, she said, and invited me to come up with her. When we went in, he lay there sleeping, never to wake again. His pulse and breathing had stopped. In the space of two minutes he had passed away painlessly and peacefully.

All events, however terrible they may be, that come about with nat- ural inevitability, bear within them their own consolation. So it was here. The art of medicine might, perhaps, have been able to secure for him a few years of vegetable-like existence, the life of a helpless creature, not dying suddenly but inch by inch, a triumphant testi- mony to the skill of the doctors. But that is something our Marx could never have stood. To live with so many uncompleted works before him, with the tantalising desire to complete them and the impossibil- ity of doing so — that would have been a thousand times more bitter for him than the gentle death that overtook him. 'Death is not a mis- fortune for the one that dies but for the one that survives',b as he used to say with Epicurus. And to see this powerful man of genius continue to vegetate, a total wreck, for the greater glory of medicine and as a laughing-stock for the philistines whom, at the height of his powers, he had so often felled to the ground — no! A thousand times better that it should be as it is, a thousand times better that we should bear him the day after tomorrow to the grave in which his wife lies sleep- ing.

And after all that had gone before, with which not even the doctors are as familiar as I am, there could, in my view, have been only one choice.

Be that as it may. Mankind is the poorer for the loss of this intel- lect— the most important intellect, indeed, which it could boast to- day. The movement of the proletariat will continue on its course but it has lost its focal point, the point to which Frenchmen, Russians, Americans and Germans would automatically turn at moments of crisis, on every occasion receiving clear, indisputable advice such as only genius and consummate expertise can give. Local bigwigs and lesser luminaries, if not imposters, will be given a free hand. Ultimate

[^1]: Helene Demuth - b Epicurus to Menoeceus



