---
Volume: 46
Document_Title: "256. Engels to Laura Lafargue. 25 March "
Page_Range: "494-495"
---

# 256. Engels to Laura Lafargue. 25 March 



**[p. 256]**

ENGELS TO LAURA LAFARGUE

IN PARIS

London, 25 March 1883

My dear Laura,

Enclosed a letter from Meyer which was directed to Maitland Parka — Tussy opened it without looking at the address, but when she saw from whom it was, she gave it at once to Nimb who handed it to me.

To-day Nim found among Mohr's manuscripts a large parcel con- taining the best part if not the whole of the second volume of the Capi- tal221 — above 500 pages in folio. As we do not yet know in what state of preparation for the press it is, nor either what else we may find, it will be better to keep this piece of good news out of the press for the present.

Pumps is expecting No. 2 daily and nightly if indeed it has not ar- rived to-day — since Friday no news from her. No. Ie is a year old to-day. Jollymeier sends his love to you. Kind regards from both of us to Paul.d Tell him that the last No. of the Sozialdemokrat contains but the report of the funeral' — the same essentially which was in the Justice.f

The English and German press have been inexact and badly in- formed but upon the whole decent. Even Malon was not so bad.

Latest news. In walks Pumps and Percy8! So there the full 12 months is happily passed.

Most affectionately yours,

F. Engels

[^1]: First published, in the language of the Reproduced from the original original (English), in F. Engels, P. et L. Lafargue, Correspondance, t. I, Paris, 1956

[^2]: a London address of the Marx family-b Helene Demuth-C Lilian Rosher- d Lafargue-c F. Engels, 'Karl Marx's Funeral'.-r 'Discours de Frédéric Engels', La Justice, No. 27, 20 March 1883.-s Mary Ellen and Percy Rosher



