---
Volume: 46
Document_Title: "2. From Jenny Longuet's Letter to Charles Longuet. 27 October 1880 . "
Page_Range: "500-501"
---

# 2. From Jenny Longuet's Letter to Charles Longuet. 27 October 1880 . 



**[p. 2]**

From JENNY LONGUET'S LETTER TO CHARLES LONGUET

IN PARIS

[London,] 27 October 1880

 I was very glad to see that the notes on Eastern affairs are bear- ing such good fruit. Pelletan of late has written the most childish trash on the subject, every line giving evidence of the darkest ignorance. Your article is written in the simple, clear, elegant style for which French prose is famous, and which makes the stuff of treaties go down quite pleasantly. But how is it you are so stingy? Why not send me four copies of your own articles always — or at least three. Now again, I have no number to send my correspondent Collet, who would send more matter, if he saw that some use was made of the information giv- en. From Papa it is impossible to get a paper returned, besides if re- turned, I could not send it to anyone, as it would be marked all over with blue pencil marks. That is the reason why I could not at once send your last article to Parnell. If he were to take an interest in the Justice — a great end would be gained. Notes direct from him would be invaluable at this crisis.5 ' 9 Your article on the Treaty of Ber- lin, 376 Papa has not seen yet, therefore I cannot give you his opinion. He told me last Sunday, shocked at the ignorance displayed by Pelle- tan on Eastern affairs, that he would order the 'blue books'89 and write to you himself on the subject. Good-bye.

Your loving

Jenny

[^1]: First published in: Marx and Engels, Works, Second Russian Edition, Vol. 34, Moscow, 1964

[^2]: Reproduced from the original

[^3]: Published in English for the first time



