---
Volume: 46
Document_Title: "4. Jenny Longuet to Charles Longuet. 23 November 1880 "
Page_Range: "502-504"
---

# 4. Jenny Longuet to Charles Longuet. 23 November 1880 

be superior to anything that has hitherto been published on Littré.

Love and kisses from all.

Your

Jenny

First published in: Marx and Engels, Reproduced from the original Works, Second Russian Edition, Vol. 34, _ , ,. , , . „ ,. , . Moscow 1964 Published in English for the first ' time

JENNY LONGUET T O CHARLES LONGUET

IN PARIS

[London,] 23 November 1880

My dear Charles,

I was just going to write to Papa to ask him to send you a copy of the Capital, when I heard from Mama that a volume had already been sent you.a To-day, being Sunday, Johnny and I paid our usual visit at Maitland Parkb (I have only time to go there once a week) and so I had at length an opportunity of asking Papa's opinion of your latest productions. He seemed very pleased at the publication of Bright's opinion on the Irish question, considering it most opportune and wondering how you had got hold of that interesting document. Liebknecht's letter he thinks will do really good service. You have made Liebknecht's style sound quite elegant, which is not its general characteristic. As to your own article in answer to Massard, Papa also much approved of it, though I must add that his praise is rather more qualified than was mine.— First, he does not agree with you as to the greatness of the fact of the 4 août,520 declaring that a careful study of the history of that event diminishes it wonderfully in importance and shows that only minor points were conceded. As to the revolutionary side of the struggle for the limitation of the working day, he thinks

[^1]: French edition of the first volume of Capital -b London address of the Marx family



you have passed it over without notice in your answer to those revolu- tionists of the fire and sword.— From the Capital you will see that the fight of the English working class assumed more than once the char- acter of a revolution, and that the governing classes only granted what they dared not refuse. If Massard and Co. thirst for fight, they will derive much satisfaction by a perusal of the history in England of the limitation of the working day! Apropos, as to the question of the fixation of a minimum salary, it may perhaps interest you to know that Papa did all he could to persuade Guesde to omit it from their programme,68 explaining to him that such a measure, if adopted, would, according to economical laws, produce the result of making of this fixed minimum a maximum. But Guesde stuck to it, on the plea that it would give them a hold on the working classes if it did nothing else. Guesde, you see, is opportunist like the rest of them."

Papa is much surprised to see the want of judgment the French radical press is evincing in its treatment of General Farre who, he con- siders, acts like a man who knows that judged by his compères* Cissey would be saved, qu'ils s'entendraient comme larronsen foire.c If the Press by its foolish noise gets Farre revoked, Papa thinks they will have lost the best man in the Gambettist camp.

I have not yet received the promised series of your articles. As I suppose I shall have to wait for some time before you carry out that good intention of yours, will you in the meantime, nay by return of post, send me your last article containing Bright's letter, d

[^1]: First published in: Marx and Engels, Reproduced from the original Works, Second Russian Edition, Vol. 34, „ , ,. , , . „ ,. , . , . ]v| |Qfi4 rubhshed in English lor the first time

[^2]: a See this volume, pp. 43-44. -b accomplices-0 that birds of a feather flock together- d The end of the letter is missing.



