---
Volume: 46
Document_Title: "5. Jenny Marx to Jenny Longuet. 20 August 1881 "
Page_Range: "504-508"
---

# 5. Jenny Marx to Jenny Longuet. 20 August 1881 



**[p. 5]**

JENNY MARX TO JENNY LONGUET

IN ARGENTEUIL

London, 20 August 1881 41 Maitland Park Road, N. W.

My darling little Jenny,

Our trip went off wonderfully well, thanks to Helen's" energy and circumspection. I still don't know how she managed to drag all the BAGS AND BAGGAGES about or to cart this old bundle of bones from place to place. At Folkestone she actually contrived to get hold of a SLEEPING COUPÉ in which we lay and slept like in our own beds. At Boulogne I sent you and Moor a telegram. Moor never got his. What is more, the ship only sailed at 6 o'clock so we didn't arrive here until 11. I came upon Moor and Tussy COSY in the PARLOUR. Tussy propped up with cushions on the sofa. Her crazy mode of life has left her in such a weak and feverish state that she can walk no better than I do. Radford has proved a faithful friend. He brought her JELLIES and DAINTIES every day, took her out in CABS, rushed in despair to Mrs Anderson who, in her stead, sent another lady WHO DID HER NOT MUCH GOOD. I trust the modern young Aesculapus [sic] will make an impression on her. Although I never ceased grieving for one moment at Argenteuil and left you IN TEARS AND SORROWS, the memory of you and your love and kindness remains nevertheless as the richest treasure of my heart, on which and I shall feed like a MISER. NO more, *as I am poor even in thanks.

Poor Longuet! He frightened me quite. He looked so ill and stared at me with such big eyes.

The darling Harry and my poor Johnny. He will not much regret old granny.* I was so unjust to the dear child when he rushed about screeching — a peculiarity of childhood and part of its hap- piness.

[^1]: Adio.

[^2]: a Demuth



Apropos: I only gave you 110 frs and the TICKETS are marked 70 per

TICKET, so you had to make up the amount. THANKS AND KISSES TO ALL OF

YOU FROM OLD GRANNY.

First published in: Marx and Engels, Printed according to the original Works, Second Russian Edition, Vol. 50, „ , ,. , i . „ ,. • ,. i r- Moscow 1981 Published in English for the first ' time

NOTES

AND INDEXES



