---
Volume: 29
Document_Title: "1. Measure of Value "
Page_Range: "326-337"
---

# 1. Measure of Value 



**[p. 303]**

Chapter Two

MONEY OR SIMPLE CIRCULATION

Gladstone, speaking in a parliamentary debate on Sir Robert Peel's Bank Act of 1844 and 1845,67 observed that even love has not turned more men into fools than has meditation upon the nature of money. He spoke of Britons to Britons. The Dutch, on the other hand, who in spite of Petty's doubtsa possessed a "divine sense" for money speculation from time immemorial, have never lost their senses in speculation about money.

The principal difficulty in the analysis of money is surmounted as soon as it is understood that the commodity is the origin of money. After that it is only a question of clearly comprehending the specific form peculiar to it. This is not so easy because all bourgeois relations appear to be gilded, i.e. they appear to be money relations, and the money form, therefore, seems to possess an infinitely varied content, which is quite alien to this form.

During the following analysis it is important to keep in mind that we are only concerned with those forms of money which arise directly from the exchange of commodities, but not with forms of money, such as credit money, which belong to a higher stage of production. For the sake of simplicity gold is assumed throughout to be the money commodity.

The first phase of circulation is, as it were, a theoretical phase preparatory to real circulation. Commodities, which exist as use

[^1]: 1. MEASURE OF VALUE

[^2]: a W. Petty, "Political Arithmetick" in Several Essays in Political Arithmetick, London, 1699, p. 176.— Ed.



1 ton of iron = 2 ounces of gold, 1 quarter of wheat = 1 ounce of gold, 1 hundredweight of Mocha

coffee = 'A ounce of gold, 1 hundredweight of potash = V2 ounce of gold, 1 ton of Brazil-timber = 1 V2 ounces of gold, Y commodities = X ounces of gold. In this series of equations iron, wheat, coffee, potash, etc., appear to one another as materialisation of uniform labour, that is labour materialised in gold, in which all distinctive features of the concrete labour represented in the different use values are entirely obliterated. They are as values identical, i.e. materialisations of the same labour or the same materialisation of labour—gold. Since they are uniform materialisations of the same labour, they differ only in one way, quantitatively: in other words they represent different magnitudes of value, because their use values contain unequal amounts of labour time. These individual commodities can be compared with one another as embodiments of universal labour time, since they have been compared with universal labour time in the shape of the excluded commodity, i.e. gold. The same dynamic relation, as a result of which commodities become exchange values for one another, causes the labour time contained in gold to represent universal labour time, a given amount of which is expressed in different quantities of iron, wheat, coffee, etc., in short in the use values of all commodities, or it may be displayed direcdy in the infinite series of commodity equivalents. Since the exchange value of all commodities is expressed in gold, the exchange value of gold is directly expressed in all com- modities. Because the commodities themselves assume the form of exchange value for one another, they turn gold into the universal equivalent or into money.

Gold becomes the measure of value because the exchange value of all commodities is measured in gold, is expressed in the relation of a definite quantity of gold and a definite quantity of



**[p. 305]**

Thus as a result of the same process through which the values of commodities are expressed in gold prices, gold is transformed into the measure of value and thence into money. If the values of all commodities were measured in silver or wheat or copper, and accordingly expressed in terms of silver, wheat or copper prices, then silver, wheat or copper would become the measure of value and consequendy universal equivalents. Commodities as exchange values must be antecedent to circulation in order to appear as prices in circulation. Gold becomes the measure of value only because the exchange value of all commodities is estimated in terms of gold. The universality of this dynamic relation, from which alone springs the capacity of gold to act as a measure, presupposes however that every single commodity is measured in terms of gold in accordance with the labour time contained in both, so that the real measure of commodity and gold is labour itself, that is commodity and gold are as exchange values equated by direct exchange. How this equating is carried through in practice cannot be discussed in the context of simple circulation. It is evident, however, that in countries where gold and silver are produced a definite amount of labour time is directly incorporated in a definite quantity of gold and silver, whereas countries which produce no gold and silver arrive at the same result in a roundabout way, by direct or indirect exchange of their home products, i.e. of a definite portion of their average national labour,



[^1]: * Aristotle does indeed realise that the exchange value of commodities is antecedent to the prices of commodities: "That exchange took place thus before there was money is plain; for it makes no difference whether it is five beds that exchange for a house, or the money value of five beds." On the other hand, since it is only in price that commodities possess the form of exchange value in relation to one another, he makes them commensurable by means of money. "This is why



The concrete form in which commodities enter the process of exchange is as use values. The commodities will only become universal equivalents as a result of their alienation. The establish- ment of their price is merely their ideal conversion into the universal equivalent, an equation with gold which still has to be put into practice. But because prices convert commodities only ideally into gold or only into imaginary gold—i.e. the existence of commodities as money is indeed not yet separated from their real existence—gold has been merely transformed into imaginary money, only into the measure of value, and definite quantities of gold serve in fact simply as names for definite quantities of labour time. The distinct form in which gold crystallises into money depends in each case on the way in which the exchange values of commodities are represented with regard to one another.

Commodities now confront one another in a dual form, really as use values and ideally as exchange values. They represent now for one another the dual form of labour contained in them, since the particular concrete labour actually exists as their use value, while universal abstract labour time assumes an imaginary existence in their price, in which they are all alike embodiments of the same substance of value, differing only quantitatively.

The difference between exchange value and price is, on the one hand, merely nominal; as Adam Smith says, labour is the real price of commodities and money their nominal price. Instead of saying that one quarter of wheat is worth thirty days' labour, one now says it is worth one ounce of gold, when one ounce of gold is produced in thirty working days. The difference is on the other

[^1]: all goods must have a price set on them; for then there will always be exchange, and if so, association of man with man. Money, then, acting as a measure, makes goods commensurate and equates them; for neither would there have been association if there were not exchange, nor exchange if there were not equality, nor equality if there were not commensurability." Aristotle is aware of the fact that the different things measured by money are entirely incommensurable magnitudes. What he seeks is the oneness of commodities as exchange values, and since he lived in ancient Greece it was impossible for him to find it. He extricates himself from this predicament by making essentially incommensurable things commensurable— so far as this is necessary for practical needs—by means of money. "Now in truth it is impossible that things differing so much should become commensurate, but with reference to demand they may become so sufficiently" (Aristotles, Ethica Nicomachea, 1. V, c. 8, edit. Bekkeri, Oxonii, 1837). [The English text is from Aristotle—Ethica Nicomachea, Book V, Chapter 8, translation by W. D. Ross, Oxford, 1925, 1133b.] [Marx quotes in Greek.]



Given the process by which gold has been turned into the measure of value and exchange value into price, all commodities when expressed in their prices are merely imagined quantities of gold of various magnitudes. Since they are thus various quantities of the same thing, namely gold, they are similar, comparable and



[^1]: * The strange fact that the ounce of gold as the standard of money in England is not divided into fractional parts is accounted for as follows: "Our coinage was originally adapted to the employment of silver only—hence an ounce of silver can always be divided into a certain adequate number of pieces of coin; but, as gold was introduced at a later period into a coinage adapted only to silver, an ounce of gold cannot be coined into an adequate number of pieces" (Maclaren, History of the Currency, London, 1858, p. 16). [Marx quotes in English.]



As a result of an historical process, which, as we shall explain later, was determined by the nature of metallic currency, the names of particular weights were retained for constantly changing and diminishing weights of precious metals functioning as the standard of price. Thus the English pound sterling denotes less than one-third of its original weight, the pound Scots before the Union48 only lli6, the French livre V74, the Spanish maravedi less than Vi.ooo a n d the Portuguese rei an even smaller proportion. Historical development thus led to a separation of the money names of certain weights of metals from the common names of these weights.** Because the designation of the unit of measure, its aliquot parts and their names is, on the one hand, purely conventional, and on the other hand must be accepted as universal and indispensable within the sphere of circulation, it had to be established by legal means. The purely formal enactment thus devolved upon the government.*** Which particular metal served

[^1]: * "Money may continually vary in value, and yet be as good a measure of value as if it remained perfectly stationary. Suppose, for instance, it is reduced in value Before the reduction, a guinea would purchase three bushels of wheat or 6 days' labour; subsequently, it would purchase only 2 bushels of wheat, or 4 days' labour. In both cases, the relations of wheat and labour to money being given, their mutual relations can be inferred; in other words, we can ascertain that a bushel of wheat is worth 2 days' labour. This, which is all that measuring value implies, is as readily done after the reduction as before. The excellence of thing as a measure of value is altogether independent of its own variableness in value" (Bailey, Money and Its Vicissitudes, London, 1837, pp. 9, 10). [Marx quotes in English.]

[^2]: ** "The coins which today are ideal are the oldest coins of every nation, and all of them were once real" (so generally stated the latter assertion is incorrect) "and precisely because they were real they were used for calculation" (Galiani, Delia Moneta, I.e., p. 153). [Marx quotes in Italian.]

[^3]: *** The romantic A. Müller says: "According to our views every independent sovereign has the right to introduce metallic currency and ascribe to it a social nominal value, order, position and title" (A. H. Müller, Die Elemente der Staatskunst, Berlin, 1809. Part II, p. 288). The aulic councillor is right as regards the title, but he forgets the content. How confused his "views" are becomes evident, for instance,



The price of a commodity, or the quantity of gold into which it is nominally converted, is now expressed therefore in the monetary names of the standard of gold. Thus, instead of saying a quarter of wheat is worth an ounce of gold, one would say in England it is worth £3 17s. l O'/gd. All prices are thus expressed in the same denomination. The specific form which the exchange value of commodities assumes is converted into denominations of money, by which their value is expressed. Money3 in turn becomes money of account*

[^1]: in the following passage: "Everybody realises how important it is to determine the price of coins correctly, especially in a country like England, where the government with splendid generosity coins money gratuitously" (Mr. Müller apparently assumes that the members of the British government defray the costs of minting out of their own pocket), "where it does not levy seigniorage, etc., and consequently if it were to fix the mint price of gold considerably above the market price, if instead of paying £3 17 s. IOV2 d. for an ounce of gold as at present, it should decide to fix the price of an ounce of gold at £3 19s., all money would flow into the mint and the silver obtained there would be exchanged for the cheaper gold on the market, and then it would again be taken to the mint, thus throwing the monetary system into disorder" (I.e., pp. 280, 281). Müller throws his ideas into "disorder", so as to preserve order at the mint in England. Whereas shillings and pence are merely names, that is names of definite fractions of an ounce of gold represented by silver and copper tokens, he imagines that an ounce of gold is estimated in terms of gold, silver and copper and thus confers upon the English a triple STANDARD OF VALUE. Silver as the standard of money along with gold was formally abolished only in 1816 by 56 George III, C. 68, although it was in fact legally abolished by 14 George II, C. 42 in 1734, and in practice even earlier. Two circumstances in particular enabled A. Müller to arrive at a so-called higher conception of political economy: first his extensive ignorance of economic facts and second his purely amateurish infatuation with philosophy.

[^2]: * "When Anacharsis was asked what the Hellenes used money for, he replied—for calculation" (Athenaeus, Deipnosophistaé, 1. IV, 49, v. II, [p. 120], ed. Schweighäuser, 1802). [Marx quotes in Greek.]

[^3]: a The original has "gold"; changed by Marx in his own copy.— Ed.



Because as standard of price gold is expressed by the same names of account as the prices of commodities—for example £3 17s. l O'^d. may denote an ounce of gold just as well as a ton of iron—these names of account are called the mint price of gold. Thus the queer notion arose that gold is estimated in its own

[^1]: * G. Gamier, one of the first to translate Adam Smith into French, had the odd idea of establishing the proportion between the use of money of account and that of real money. [According to him] this proportion is 10 to 1 (G. Gamier, Histoire de la monnaie depuis les temps de la plus haute antiquité etc., t. I, p. 78).

[^2]: ** The Act of Maryland of 1732, which made tobacco legal currency but converted its value into English gold money, by declaring a pound of tobacco equal to a penny, recalls the leges barbarorum, which on the contrary equated definite sums of money with oxen, cows, etc. In this case the real material of the money of account was neither gold nor silver, but the ox and the cow. [See J. Wirth, Die Geschichte der Deutschen, Vol. I, Stuttgart, 1846, pp. 97-99.]





**[p. 313]**



[^1]: * Thus we read, for example, in the Familiar Words of Mr. David Urquhart—"The value of gold is to be measured by itself; how can any substance be the measure of its own worth in other things? The worth of gold is to be established by its own weight, under a false denomination of that weight—and an ounce is to be worth so many pounds and fractions of pounds. This is falsifying a measure, not establishing a standard." [Marx quotes in English.]

[^2]: a "Foreign Correspondence", The Economist, No. 775, July 3, 1858.— Ed.

[^3]: 12-785



