---
Volume: 29
Document_Title: "B. Theories of the Standard of Money "
Page_Range: "337-346"
---

# B. Theories of the Standard of Money 

B. THEORIES OF THE STANDARD OF MONEY

The fact that commodities are only nominally converted in the form of prices into gold and hence gold is only nominally transformed into money led to the doctrine of the ideal standard of money. Because only imaginary gold or silver, i.e. gold and silver merely as money of account, is used in the determination of prices, it was asserted that the terms pound, shilling, pence, thaler, franc, etc. denote ideal particles of value but not weights of gold or silver or any form of objectified labour. If, for example, the value of an ounce of silver were to rise, it would contain more of these particles and would therefore have to be divided or coined into a greater number of shillings. This doctrine, which arose at the close of the seventeenth century, was again advanced during the last commercial crisis in England25 and was even advocated by Members of Parliament in two special reports appended to the 1858 Report of the Select Committee on the Bank Acts. In England at the time of the accession of William III, the mint price of an ounce of silver was 5s. 2d., that is l/62 of an ounce of silver was called a penny and 12 of these pence were called a shilling. A bar of silver weighing say six ounces would, according to this standard, be coined into 31 coins which would be called shillings. But whereas the mint price of an ounce of silver was 5s. 2d., its market price rose to 6s. 3d., that is to say in order to buy an ounce of uncoined silver 6s. 3d. had to be handed over. How was it possible for the market price of an ounce of silver to rise above its mint price, if the mint price was merely a name of account for fractions of an ounce of silver? The solution of this riddle was quite simple. Four million of the £5,600,000 of silver money in

[^1]: * "Money as the measure of commerce ought to be kept (as all other measures) as steady and invariable as may be. But this cannot be, if your money be made of two metals, whose proportion constantly varies" (John Locke, Some Considerations on the Lowering of Interest etc., 1691; in his Works, 7th Edition, London, 1768, Vol. II, p. 65).





**[p. 315]**



[^1]: * Locke says inter alia: "Call that a Crown now, which before was a half Crown. Its Value is determined, as before, by the quantity of metal. If you can reduce the quantity of silver of any coin by V20 without lessening its value, you can just as well reduce it by 19/2o- According to this theory, a farthing, being called a Crown, should buy as much spice, or silk, or any other commodity, as a crown-piece, which

[^2]: 12*



Steuart believed that in the course of further development of commerce the nation would become wiser. But he was wrong. Some 120 years later the same quid pro quo was repeated.

Very fittingly it was Bishop Berkeley, the advocate of mystical idealism in English philosophy, who gave the doctrine of the nominal standard of money a theoretical twist, which the practical SECRETARY TO THE TREASURY had omitted to do. Berkeley says:

"Whether the terms livre, pound sterling, crown, etc., are not to be considered as mere denominations of proportions?" (i.e. proportions of abstract value as such). "And whether gold, silver, and paper are not tickets or counters for reckoning, recording and transferring thereof?" (of the proportion of value). "Whether power to command the industry of others" (social labour) "be not real wealth? And whether money be not in truth, tickets or tokens for conveying and recording such power, and whether it be of great consequence what materials the tickets are made of?" **

contains 60 times as much silver. All you can do is to give a less quantity of silver the stamp and denomination of a greater, but 'tis silver and not names that pay debts and purchase commodities. The raising being but giving of names at pleasure to aliquot parts of a silver piece, e.g. calling the eighth part of an ounce a penny, you may, in fact, set money as high as you please." [Some Considerations of the Consequences of the Lowering of Interest.., London, 1768, pp. 54, 58.] In reply to Lowndes, Locke declared that the rise of the market price above the mint price was not brought about by "an increase in the value of silver, but by a decrease in the weight of the silver coins." Seventy-seven clipped shillings did not weigh more than 62 shillings of standard weight. Finally Locke is quite correct in emphasising that, irrespective of the loss of silver suffered by the coins in circulation, a certain rise in the market price of silver bullion over the mint price might occur in England, because the export of silver bullion was permitted whereas that of silver coin was prohibited (see I.e., pp. 54-116 passim). Locke takes good care to avoid the vital issue of the national debt, just as he equally prudently refrains from discussing another ticklish economic problem, i.e. that according to the evidence of both the exchange rate and the ratio of silver bullion to silver coin, the depreciation of the money in circulation was by no means proportional to the amount of silver it had actually lost. We shall return to this question in its general form in the section dealing with the medium of circulation. In A Discourse Concerning Coining the New Money Lighter, in answer to Mr. Locke's considerations etc., London, 1696, Nicholas Barbon vainly sought to entice Locke on to difficult ground. * Steuart, I.e., Vol. II, p. 156. ** The Querist, I.e. Incidentally, the section "Queries on Money" is rather witty. Among other things it contains the true observation that the development of the North American colonies "makes it plain as daylight, that gold and silver are not so necessary for the wealth of a nation, as the vulgar of all ranks imagine." [The text in quotes is in English in the original.]



**[p. 317]**

The theory of the nominal standard of money was so fully elaborated by Sir James Steuart, that his followers—they are not aware of being followers since they do not know him—can find neither a new expression nor even a new example. He writes:

"Money of account is no more than an arbitrary scale of equal parts, invented for measuring the respective value of things vendible. Money of account is quite a different thing from MONEY-COIN,3 which is price,* and it might exist, although there was no such substance in the world as could be a proportional equivalent for every commodity. Money of account performs the same office with regard to the value of things, that degrees, minutes, seconds, etc., do with regard to angles, or as scales do to geographical maps, etc. In all these inventions, the same denomination is always taken for the unit. The usefulness of all these inventions being solely confined to the marking of proportion. Just so the unit in money can have no invariable determinate proportion to any part of value, that is to say it cannot be fixed to any particular quantity of gold, silver, or any other commodity whatsoever. The unit once fixed, we can, by multiplying it, ascend to the greatest value. As the value of commodities depends upon a general combination of circumstances relative to themselves and to the fancies of men, it ought to be considered as changing only with respect to one another; anything which disturbs or confuses the ascertaining those changes of proportion by the means of a general, determinate and invariable scale, must be hurtful to trade. Money is an ideal scale of equal parts. If it be demanded what ought to be the standard value of one part? I answer by putting another question: What is the standard length of a degree, a minute, a second? It has none, but so soon as one part becomes determined, by the nature of a scale, all the rest must follow in proportion. Examples of this ideal money are the money of the bank of Amsterdam and that of Angola, on the African coast." **

Steuart simply considers money as it appears in the sphere of circulation, i.e. as standard of price and as money of account. If different commodities are quoted at 15s., 20s. and 36s. respective- ly in a price list, then in a comparison of their value both the silver content of the shilling and its name are indeed quite irrelevant. Everything is now expressed in the numerical relations of 15, 20 and 36, and the numeral one has become the sole unit of measure. The purely abstract expression of a proportion is after all only the abstract numerical proportion. In order to be consistent, Steuart therefore had to abandon not only gold and silver but also their

[^1]: * Here, as in the works of seventeenth-century English economists, price is used in the sense of a concrete equivalent. ** Steuart, I.e., Vol. II, pp. 102-07.

[^2]: a Marx gives this English term in brackets after its German equivalent.— Ed.



The period when the Bank of England suspended cash

[^1]: * In connection with the last commercial crisis a certain faction in England ardently praised the ideal African money after moving its location on this occasion from the coast into the interior of Barbary. It was declared that because their BARS constituted an ideal measure, the Berbers had no commercial and industrial crises. Would it not have been simpler to say that commerce and industry are the conditio sine qua non for commercial and industrial crises?



"A SENSE OF VALUE IN REFERENCE TO CURRENCY AS COMPARED WITH COMMODITIES".3

A few years after the Treaty of Paris70 when the situation permitted the resumption of cash payments, the problem which Lowndes had broached during the reign of William III arose again in practically the same form. A huge national debt and a mass of private debts, fixed obligations, etc., which had accumu- lated in the course of over 20 years, were incurred in depreciated bank notes. Should they be repaid in bank-notes £4,672 10s. of which represented, not in name but in fact, 100 lbs. of 22-carat gold? Thomas Attwood, a Birmingham banker, acted like a Lowndes redivivus}1 He advocated that as many shillings should be returned to the creditors as they had nominally lent, but whereas according to the old monetary standard, say /78 of an ounce of gold was known as a shilling, now perhaps '/go of an ounce should be called a shilling. Attwood's supporters are known as the Birmingham school of "little shillingmen".36 The quarrel about the ideal standard of money, which began in 1819, was still carried on in 1845 by Sir Robert Peel and Attwood, whose wisdom in so far as it concerns the function of money as a measure is fully summarised in the following quotation:

[^1]: In his polemic with the Birmingham Chamber of Commerce, Sir Robert Peel asked, What will your pound note represent? What is a pound? What, conversely, is to be understood by the present standard of value? Is £3 17s. l O'^d. an ounce of gold, or is it its value? If it be an ounce of gold, why not call things by their proper names, and, instead of saying pounds, shillings and pence, say ounces, pen- nyweights and grains? Then we revert to direct system of barter Or is it the value} If an ounce = £3 17s. 10 1/2à., why was it worth at different times now £5 4s. now £3 17s. 9d? The expression pound (£) has reference to value, but not to the value fixed in an unchangeable weight unit of gold. The term pound is the ideal unit Labour is the substance to which the production costs can be reduced and it gives the relative value to gold or iron. Therefore, whatever the particular names of account used to express the daily or weekly labour of a man, such names express the value of the commodity produced.*

[^2]: * The Currency Question, the Gemini Letters,36 London, 1844, pp. 268-72 passim.

[^3]: a Hansard's Parliamentary Debates, Vol. 74, London, 1844, p. 725.— Ed. b Resurrected.— Ed.



John Gray was the first to set forth the theory that labour time is the direct measure of money in a systematic way.* He proposes that a national central bank should ascertain through its branches the labour time expended in the production of various com- modities. In exchange for the commodity, the producer would

[^1]: * John Gray, The Social System. A Treatise on the Principle of Exchange, Edinburgh, 1831. Cf. the same author's Lectures on the Nature and Use of Money, Edinburgh, 1848. After the February [1848] Revolution, Gray sent a memorandum to the French Provisional Government in which he explains that France did not need an "ORGANISATION OF LABOUR" b u t a n "ORGANISATION OF EXCHANGE", t h e p l a n f o r w h i c h was fully worked out in the monetary system he had invented. The worthy John had no inkling that sixteen years after the publication of The Social System, the ingenious Proudhon would be taking out a patent for the same invention.

[^2]: a The original has "gold".— Ed.





**[p. 321]**

"to sell for money may be rendered, at all times, precisely as easy as it now is to buy with money; production would become the uniform and never-failing cause of demand".***

The precious metals would lose their "privileged" position in comparison with other commodities and

"take their proper place in the market beside butter and eggs, and cloth and calico, and then the value of the precious metals will concern us just as little as the value of the diamond".****

"Shall we retain our fictitious standard of value, gold, and thus keep the productive resources of the country in bondage? or, shall we resort to the natural standard of value, labour, and thereby set our productive resources free?"*****

Since labour time is the intrinsic measure of value, why use another extraneous standard as well? Why is exchange value transformed into price? Why is the value of all commodities computed in terms of an exclusive commodity, which thus becomes the adequate expression of exchange value, i.e. money? This was the problem which Gray had to solve. But instead of solving it, he assumed that commodities could be directly compared with one another as products of social labour. But they are only comparable as the things they are. Commodities are the direct products of isolated independent individual kinds of labour, and through their alienation in the course of individual exchange

[^1]: * Gray, The Social System etc., p. 63. "Money should be merely a receipt, an evidence that the holder of it has either contributed a certain value to the national stock of wealth, or that he has acquired a right to the said value from some one who has contributed to it." [Marx quotes in English.]

[^2]: ** "An estimated value being previously put upon produce, let it be lodged in a bank, and drawn out again whenever it is required; merely stipulating, by common consent, that he who lodges any kind of property in the proposed National Bank, may take out of it an equal value of whatever it may contain, instead of being obliged to draw out the self-same thing that he put in." L.c:., pp. 67-68. [Marx quotes in English.] *** L.c., p. 16. **** Gray, Lectures on Money etc., p. 182. ***** L.c., p. 169.



Every commodity is immediately money; this is Gray's thesis which he derives from his incomplete and hence incorrect analysis of commodities. The "organic" project of "labour money" and "national bank" and "warehouses" is merely a fantasy in which a dogma is made to appear as a law of universal validity. The dogma that a commodity is immediately money or that the particular labour of a private individual contained in it is immediately social labour, does not of course become true because

[^1]: * "The business of every country ought to be conducted on a national capital" (John Gray, The Social System etc., p. 171). [Marx quotes in English.]

[^2]: ** "The land to be transformed into national property" (I.e., p. 298). [Marx quotes in English.]



