---
Volume: 29
Document_Title: "[ 2. Money as Means of Payment] "
Page_Range: "453-458"
---

# [ 2. Money as Means of Payment] 



**[p. 430]**

THE ORIGINAL TEXT OF THE SECOND AND THE BEGINNING OF THE THIRD CHAPTER

OF A CONTRIBUTION TO THE CRITIQUE OF POLITICAL ECONOMY95

[CHAPTER TWO, MONEY]

[2) MONEY AS MEANS OF PAYMENT]

[] [B'-l] obtains. Every peculiarity of the relation between the two [parties to the exchange] has been obliterated (exchange value as such, the general product of the social circulation, is here alone involved), and similarly all the political, patriarchal and other relationships stemming from the particularity of the relation. Both relate to each other as abstract social persons, merely representing exchange value as such before each other. Money has now become the sole nexus rerum96 between them, money sans phrase. The peasant no longer confronts the landowner as a peasant with his rural product and his rural labour, but as the money owner, for through the sale the immediate use value has been alienated and has assumed an indifferent form through the medium of the social process. On the other hand, the landowner no longer regards him as an uncouth individual producing means of subsistence in peculiar living conditions, but as one whose product—exchange value become independent, the universal equivalent, money—is no different from anyone else's product. Thus, the idyllic aura that covered up the transaction in its previous form is dispelled.

The absolute monarchy, itself already a product of the development of bourgeois wealth to a level incompatible with the old feudal relationships, is—in accordance with the uniform general power which it must be able to exercise at every point of the periphery—in need of a material instrument of that power: the universal equivalent, wealth in its constant battle-ready form in which it is completely independent of particular local, natural, individual relations. It needs wealth in the form of money. A system of services and deliveries in kind tends to impart, in accordance with their specific character, a particular character to their use as well. Money is alone capable of being immediately

Money is "impersonal" property. I can carry it around with me in my pocket as the universal social power and the universal social nexus, the social substance. Money puts social power as a thing into the hands of the private person, who as such uses this power.

[^1]: "In feudal time cash payment had not grown to be the sole nexus of man to man. Not as buyer and seller alone, but in many senses still as soldier and captain, as loyal subject and guiding king, etc. was the low related to the high. With the supreme triumph of cash, a changed time has entered" (Th. Carlyle, On Chartism, London, 1840, p. 58).

[^2]: a W. Petty, Several Essays in Political Arithmetick, pp. 178-79 and 196.— Ed. b P. Boisguillebert, Dissertation sur la nature des richesses, de l'argent et des tributs. In: Economistes financiers du XVIIIe siècle, Paris, 1843, pp. 395, 399, 413 and 422.— Ed.



[B'-2] Without any further anticipation, this much is clear: With the development of the credit system there is an extraordinary spread of buying on time. To the extent that the credit system is developed, and hence production based on exchange value, the role of money as means of payment will increase, as compared with its role as means of circulation, as agent of purchase and sale. In countries with a developed modern mode of production, and therefore a developed credit system, money as specie effectively figures almost exclusively in retail trade and in petty trade between producers and consumers, while in the sphere of large-scale trading transactions it appears almost exclusively in the form of the universal means of payment. In so far as the payments are in balance, money appears as a transient form, a merely notional, imaginary measure of the exchange magnitudes of value. Its bodily involvement is confined to the setdement of relatively insignificant balances.*

* "To prove how little," says Mr. Slater (of the firm of Morrison, Dillon et Co, whose transactions are amongst the largest of the metropolis) "of real money enters into the operations of trade", he gives an "analysis of a continuous course of commercial transactions, extending over several millions yearly, and which may be considered as a fair example of the general trade of the country. The proportions of receipts and payments are reduced to the scale of £1,000,000 only, during the year 1856, and are as under, viz.:

[^1]: Receipts £

[^2]: In bankers' drafts and mercan- tile bills of exchange, pay- able after date " 533,596 In cheques of bankers etc. pay- able on demand 357,715 In country banknotes 9,627 Bank of England notes 68,554 Gold 28,089 Silver and copper 1,486 Post-office orders 933

[^3]: Payments

[^4]: Bills of exchange pay- able after date 302,674 Cheques on London bankers 663,672

[^5]: Bank of notes Gold Silver and copper

[^6]: England

[^7]: 22,743 9,427 1,484

[^8]: £1,000,000 £1,000,000.'

[^9]: p. LXXI (Report from the Select Committee on the Bank Acts etc. 1 July 1858.) [Marx quotes in English.]





**[p. 433]**

The further elaboration of this point is here irrelevant. What is relevant, however, is that moments of monetary crises proper bring out a contradiction that is immanent to the development of money as the universal means of payment. It is not as a measure that money is demanded in such crises, since as such its corporeal presence is a matter of indifference; nor is it as coin, for it does not figure as such in payments; but it is demanded as exchange value become independent, as a materially present universal equivalent, as the embodiment of abstract wealth; in the form, that is, in which it is the object of hoarding in the strict sense of the term, as money. Its development as the universal means of payment shrouds the contradiction that exchange value has assumed forms independent of its mode of existence as money; and on the other hand, its mode of existence as money is posited precisely as the definitive and solely adequate one.

In consequence of the balancing out of payments and their cancellation of each other as positive and negative amounts, money, as means of payment, can appear as a merely notional form of commodity, as in the case with its being the measure [of value], and in its functioning in the formation of prices. The collision occurs from the fact that—contrary to the arrangement, contrary to the general assumption of modern trade, and whenever the mechanism of these mutual cancellations and the credit system on which it partly rests are disrupted—it must instantly be present and to hand in its real form.

[B'-3] We have seen that the change in the value of gold and silver does not affect their function as measure of value, as money of account. By contrast, this value change becomes crucially important for money in its function as means of payment. What is to be paid is a determined quantity of gold or silver in which a determined value, i.e. a determined labour time, was objectified by the time the contract was concluded. But, like all other com- modities, gold and silver change the magnitude of their value with the change in the labour time required for their production, falling or rising in value as it falls or rises. Therefore, in the event that the realisation of the sale on the part of the buyer occurs later in time than the alienation of the sold commodity, the same quantity of gold or silver may contain a different, a greater or lesser, value than at the conclusion of the contract. Gold and silver retain their specific quality of money, that of always being the realised and realisable universal equivalent, of always being exchangeable for all the commodities to the extent of their own value, regardless of any change in the magnitude of their own value. However, the latter is, potentialiter, subject to the same fluctuations as is the value of any other commodity. Consequently, whether payment is effected in a real equivalent, i.e. in the initially anticipated value magnitude, depends on whether or not the labour time required for the production of the given quantity of gold or silver has remained the same. The nature of money, as incarnated in a specific commodity, here comes into collision with its function of exchange value become independent. The great revolutions in all economic relationships which, in the 16th and 17th centuries, for instance, were caused by the fall in the value of the precious metals, or a similar but smaller-scale revolution in the ancient Roman Republic in the period between [the first silver denarius in 485 ab urbe condito] b and the start of the Second Punic War39 caused by the rise in the value of copper, in which the plebeians' debts were contracted, are well known. A demonstration

[^1]: a In the manuscript, "Gesamtpreis" (aggregate price) is written over the word "Gesamtsumme" (sum-total).— Ed.

[^2]: b A hiatus in the manuscript. The text in square brackets is based on analogous passages in the 1857-58 manuscript (see present edition, Vol. 28, p. 119, and this volume, p. 212).— Ed.



