---
Volume: 29
Document_Title: "3. Money as International Means of Payment and Purchase, as World Coin "
Page_Range: "458-475"
---

# 3. Money as International Means of Payment and Purchase, as World Coin 



**[p. 435]**

What is self-evident is that the fall in the value of the precious metals, i. e. of money, always goes to benefit the payer at the expense of the payee, and a rise in their value, the other way round.

The complete reification [Versachlichung], externalisation of the social exchange of matter on the basis of exchange values is strikingly manifested in the dependence of all social relationships on the production costs of metallic objects of natural origin which have no significance at all as instruments of production, as factors in the creation of wealth.

3) MONEY AS INTERNATIONAL MEANS OF PAYMENT AND PURCHASE, AS WORLD COIN

Money is the universal commodity, if only because it is the universal form which every particular commodity notionally or actually assumes.

As treasure and universal means of payment, money becomes the universal means of exchange on the world market, the universal commodity not only in concept, but also in mode of existence. The particular national form which it acquires in its function as coin is stripped from it in its existence as money. As such it is cosmopolitan.* Since a social exchange of matter can occur through the involvement of gold and silver—which are use values for the needs of enrichment, abstract wealth independent of any particular requirements—even if only one nation [B'-4] is immediately in need of the use values of another, gold and silver tend to become exceptionally effective agents in the creation of the world market, and in the extension of the social exchange of matter across any local, religious, political and racial distinctions. Even among the ancients, the hoarding by the State is significant as a reserve fund mainly for international means of payment, as a battle-ready equivalent in the event of crop-failures, and as a source of subsidies in time of war (Xenophona). The great role of

[^1]: * The ancients were quick to note this cosmopolitan character of money: "What is his homeland, what is his tribe? He is a rich man."97

[^2]: a Xenophon, De vectigalibus, IV, 9.— Ed.





**[p. 436]**

In so far as gold and silver merely serve as means of exchange in this international commerce, they in fact perform the function of coin, but a coin stripped of its stamp, and one which, whether it exists in the form of coin or bar, is estimated only according to its metallic weight, and not only represents value, but is simultaneous- ly such. That gold and silver in this determination of world coin do not, however, necessarily perform a circular movement, as they do in their capacity as coin proper, but may one-sidedly continue to act in such a way that one of the parties to the exchange always remains the buyer and the other always the seller, is also one of those observations which immediately suggested themselves in the infancy of the bourgeois society. Hence, the exceptionally impor- tant role the discovery of new gold- and silver-producing lands has to play in the history of the development of the world market, both in breadth and in depth, since the use value they produce, instandy the universal commodity, on die other hand, also immediately imparts to them together with the possibility, in virtue of the abstract nature of their product, the necessity of commerce based on exchange value.

Just as with the development of productive relations in general, money develops as means of payment within a given national circle of the bourgeois society, so it also develops in its determination as international means of payment. But as in that narrower, so in this wider circle, its importance stands out strikingly only when the mechanism of the mutual setdement of payments is disturbed. The development of money in this determination has increased to such an extent since 1825—an increase which has, naturally, kept in step with the expansion and intensity of international com- merce—that even die most outstanding economists of the preceding epoch, Ricardo, for example, still had no inkling at all of the volume in which ready money could be required as international means of payment for a nation such, for instance, as

[^1]: a [E. Misselden,] Free Trade. Or, the Meanes to Make Trade Florish, pp. 12, 13 and 19-24. See present edition, Vol. 28, pp. 161 and 164-65.— Ed.



Here we have to consider money only in its abstract determina- tions of form. The laws regulating the distribution of precious metals on the world market imply economic relationships in their most concrete form, something that still lies ahead of us. The same applies to all the circulation of money which it performs as capital, and not as universal commodity or universal equivalent.

On the world market, money is always realised value. What makes it a magnitude of value lies in its immediate materiality, in the weight of the precious metal. When it appears as coin, its use value coincides with its use merely as means of circulation, and so can be replaced by a mere symbol. As world coin, it is effectively demonetised. The externality and the establishment of the independence of the social nexus in money with respect to individuals in their individual relations clearly stand out in gold and silver [B'-5] as world coin (still national as coin). (Here money appears in effect as their [the individuals'] community existing as a physical object outside them.) Indeed, what the early forerunners of

[^1]: a An apparent reference to Goethe's "Das Göttliche", which opens with the line: "Let man be noble." — Ed.



"So soon as the PRECIOUS METALS become OBJECTS OF COMMERCE, AN UNIVERSAL EQUIVALENT FOR EVERYTHING, they become also the MEASURE OF POWER BETWEEN NATIONS." Hence the mercantile system (Steuart [An Inquiry into the Principles of Political Oeconomy, Vol. I, Dublin, 1770, p. 327]).

The determination of money—that of serving as international means of exchange and means of payment—is in effect not some kind of new determination in addition to its determination of being money in general, a universal equivalent and so both treasure and means of payment. The determination of universal equivalent contains the determination of money as universal commodity, in which capacity, it is true, money is realised only as world coin. In general, it is as international means of payment and means of exchange that gold and silver (as has been mentioned) first appear as money, and it is precisely from this appearance of theirs that the concept of them as a universal commodity is abstracted. The national, political limitation formally set on money generally as a measure (through the establishment of a measuring unit and its division into parts) which in coin may extend even to its content whenever the value tokens issued by the State are substituted for the real metal, all of this historically put in a later appearance than that form in which money appears as universal

[^1]: a A reference, among others, to Geminiano Montanari, Antonio Genovesi and Ferdinando Galiani. See this volume, p. 165.— Ed.





**[p. 439]**

To be measure and to be means of circulation are functions of money in the performance of which it assumes special forms of being only through these functions later becoming independent. Take, first, coin: initially it is nothing but a determinate weight-part of gold; the stamp is added as guarantee, as denominator of weight, so that it does not change anything yet; the stamp, the façon, i.e. the indicator of value, becomes an independent sign, a symbol of value and, through the mechanism of circulation itself, becomes substance instead of form; at this point, the State has to intervene because such a token must be guaranteed by society's power become independent, by the State. But in actual fact, money operates in circulation precisely as money, as gold and silver; being coin is merely its function. In this function it is particularised and can be sublimated into a pure token of value which, as such, requires legally established and legally enforced recognition.

Second, take measure. Initially, the measuring units of money and their subdivisions are in fact mere weight-parts of money as metal; as money, it has the same measuring unit that it has as weight. The only difference is that as soon as the nominal value of these minted pieces of metal corresponding to the weight subdivisions begins to separate from the real value, the measure-serving subdivisions of gold and silver as gold and silver are separated from their measure-serving subdivisions as money; with the result that determinate weight-parts of the metal, to the extent that they function as measures of value, obtain their own names in this function.

So, in world trade, gold and silver are estimated only according to their weight, without regard to their stamp; in other words, there is an abstraction from them as coins. In international trade, they appear entirely in the form or formlessness in which they initially appeared, and wherever they serve as means of exchange, they also simultaneously serve as equivalent value, as realised price, as real equivalent, as they had initially served in internal circulation. Wherever they serve as coin, as mere means of exchange, therefore, they simultaneously also serve as full-fledged representative of value. Meanwhile, their other functions remain the same in which they serve as money in general, as the form of treasure (be it as materially assured stock of means of subsistence for the future or as wealth in general) or as universal means of payment independent of the immediate wants of the exchangers

Hence, the form of money as international means of exchange and payment is, in fact, not some particular form of it, but only one of its uses as money; the functions in which it most strikingly functions in its simple and simultaneously concrete form as money, as a unity of measure and means of circulation, and simultaneously as neither. This is its most primitive form. It appears as a particular form only alongside the particularisation which money can assume in the so-called internal circulation as measure and coin.

In this character, gold and silver have an important role to play in creating the world market. Thus, the circulation of American silver from West to East; the metallic bond between America and Europe, on the one hand, and between America and Asia, Europe and Asia, on the other, since the beginning of the modern epoch As world coin, money is essentially indifferent to its form of means of circulation, while its material is all-important. It does not appear for exchanging the surplus, but for balancing out the surplus in the overall process of international exchange. Here, the form directly coincides with its function of being commodity, as commodity that has currency in all places, as universal commodity.

It is a matter of indifference whether money here circulates in minted or unminted form. MEXICAN DOLLARS and IMPERIALS OF RUSSIA are merely a form of the product of South American and Russian mines. The English sovereign serves in the same way, since it pays no seignorage (Tooke [A History of Prices, and of the State of the Circulation, from 1839 to 1847 inclusive, London, 1848, p. 226]).

What is the relation between gold and silver and their direct producers in the countries where they are an immediate product, the objectification of a particular type of labour? In their hands, gold and silver are produced directly as commodity, i.e. as a use value which has no use value for its producer, but becomes such for him only through its alienation, through its being thrown into circulation. In his hands, it can only be treasure, because it is not the product of circulation, it has not been extracted from it, but



**[p. 441]**

The delusion that money as universal wealth satisfying all wants can be pulled up by the ears directly from earth or river-bed is illustrated, for instance, in a naive form in the following anecdote:

" I N THE YEAR 760 THE POOR PEOPLE TURNED OUT IN NUMBERS TO WASH GOLD FROM THE RIVER SANDS SOUTH OF PRAGUE, AND 3 MEN WERE ABLE IN THE DAY TO EXTRACT A MARK (HALF A POUND) OF GOLD; AND SO GREAT WAS THE CONSEQUENT RUSH TO 'THE DIGGINGS', THAT IN THE NEXT YEAR THE COUNTRY WAS VISITED BY FAMINE" (Abhandlung von dem Alterthume des böhmischen Bergwerks, by M. G. Körner. Schneeberg, 1758).

Money transmitted as gold [or silver], in the form of [gold or] silver, can always be reconverted into means of circulation.

In the 16th century, in the infancy of the bourgeois society, gold and silver attracted the keen interest of States and the emergent political economy mainly as international money. The specific role which gold and silver play in international commerce was once again made perfectly clear and once again recognised by economists after the great gold outflows and crises of 1825, 1839, 1847 and 1857. Here gold is the absolute and exclusive international means of payment, value-for-itself, the universal equivalent. Value must be transmitted IN SPECIE, it cannot be transmitted in any other form of MERCHANDISE.

[^1]: "MONEY HAS THE QUALITY OF BEING ALWAYS EXCHANGEABLE FOR WHAT IT MEAS- URES" (Bosanquet [Metallic, Paper, and Credit Currency, London, 1842, p. 100]).

[^2]: "MONEY 3 CAN ALWAYS BUY OTHER COMMODITIES, WHEREAS OTHER COMMODITIES CANNOT ALWAYS BUY GOLD." "THERE MUST BE A VERY CONSIDERABLE AMOUNT OF THE PRECIOUS METALS APPLICABLE AND APPLIED AS THE MOST CONVENIENT MODE OF ADJUSTMENT OF INTERNATIONAL BALANCES" (Tooke [An Inquiry into the Currency Principle, 2nd ed., London, 1844, pp. 10, 13]).

[^3]: a Tooke has "Gold".— Ed.

[^4]: 16-785



(Hence Fullarton is aware that value is transmitted in gold and silver as money, and not as commodities, that [B '-7] it is their specific function as money, and therefore he is wrong in saying that they are transmitted as capital, and so already introducing irrelevant relations. Capital can also be transmitted in the form of rice, TWIST, etc.)

" I T IS NOT IN TEA, COFFEE, SUGAR, OR INDIGO THAT DEBTS, WHETHER FOREIGN OR DOMESTIC, ARE USUALLY CONTRACTED T O BE PAID, BUT IN COIN; AND A REMITTANCE, THEREFORE, EITHER IN THE IDENTICAL COIN DESIGNATED, OR IN BULLION WHICH CAN BE PROMPTLY TURNED INTO THAT COIN THROUGH THE M I N T OR MARKET OF THE COUNTRY

TO WHICH IT IS SENT, MUST ALWAYS AFFORD T O THE REMITTER THE MOST CERTAIN, IMMEDIATE, AND ACCURATE MEANS OF EFFECTING HIS OBJECT, WITHOUT RISK OF DISAPPOINTMENT FROM THE FAILURE OF DEMAND OR FLUCTUATION OF PRICE" ( F u l l a r t o n , I.e., pp. 132-33).

"ANY OTHER ARTICLE" (which is of interest as a particular use value that is not money) "MIGHT IN QUANTITY OR KIND BE BEYOND THE USUAL DEMAND IN THE COUNTRY TO WHICH IT is SENT" (Th. Tooke, An Inquiry into the Currency Principle etc., 2nd ed., London, 1844 [p. 10]).

The economists' reluctance to recognise money in this determi- nation is a survival of the old polemic against the monetary system.

Money as universal international means of purchase and payment is not a new determination at all. Indeed, it is merely the same money in a universality of appearance which corresponds to the universality of its concept; it is, in fact, its most adequate mode of existence in which it manifests itself as universal commodity.

Depending on the various functions fulfilled by money, one and the same piece of money can change its place. Today, it can be coin, and tomorrow, money, i.e. inert equivalent, without changing its outward form of being. As the concrete existence of money, gold and silver thereby differ essentially from the token of value by which they can be substituted in the internal circulation: gold and silver coins can be melted down into bars, and thus preserve their indifferent form with respect to their local character as coin, or serve only as metallic weight, if they are transformed into money in the form of coin. They can, therefore, become raw material for articles of luxury, or be hoarded, or wander abroad as international means of payment, where they can again be



**[p. 443]**

That does not happen to a token of value. It is a token only where it is regarded as such, and it is regarded as such only where it is backed by the State power. That is why it is tied down to circulation and cannot revert to the indifferent form in which it is always value itself, with the possibility of assuming any national stamp or, indifferent to the latter, of serving in its immediate form of being as means of exchange and material for hoarding, or even of being converted into a commodity. It is not tied to any of these forms but assumes any one, depending on the want or the trend in circulation. To the extent that, as a particular commodity, it is not fashioned into articles of luxury, it exists above all in relation to circulation, and not only to internal, but also to world circulation, while always existing in an independent form and resisting absorption by it. Coin, isolated as such, i.e. as mere value token, exists only through and in circulation. Even when hoarded, it [value token] can be accumulated only as coin, because its power ceases at the country's borders. Apart from the forms of hoarding which arise from the process of circulation itself, and are, strictly speaking, merely the latter's points of rest, namely, apart from the formation of a stock of coin designated for circulation or a reserve for payments made in the same national coin, there can here be no question at all of any hoarding, i.e. of hoarding in the true sense of the word, because coin as a token of value lacks the essential element of hoarding, which is being not merely a symbolic value, but, apart from its social function, the immediate being of value itself, wealth, irrespective of any definite social nexus. That is why the laws which stipulate the token of value as such do not stipulate metallic money, because it is not tied to the function of coin.

It is clear, furthermore, that hoarding, i.e. the withdrawal of money from circulation and its collection at definite points, is multiform: a temporary piling up stemming from the simple fact of the separation of purchase and sale, i.e. from the immediate mechanism of the simple circulation itself; its piling up stemming from the function of money as means of payment; and finally, hoarding proper seeking to hold on to money and preserve it as abstract wealth or, at any rate, as an excess of the available wealth over the immediate want of it and as a guarantee for the future or as something that can hamper the unwitting blockage of circula- tion. The latter forms, under which [B '-8] the achievement of independence, the adequate being of exchange value is already

[^1]: 16*



However, the simple metallic circulation shows that as a result of the various determinations in which money functions, or as a result of the process of circulation, the social exchange of matter, the available gold and silver precipitate in various forms as inert hoard, but in such a way that, while a part of the money existing as such hoard keeps changing its elements, with a constant change on the surface of the society in the portions of money which perform this or that function, passing from the hoard to circulation (national or international), being absorbed from circula- tion by reservoirs of hoard or fashioned into articles of luxury, the functioning of money as means of circulation is, nevertheless, never limited in consequence of these precipitations. The export or import of money alternately depletes or replenishes these various reservoirs, something that also results from the rise or fall in the aggregate price in the internal circulation, without the mass of money required for circulation itself rising above its mass or falling below it, because of the excess of gold and silver. That which is not required as means of circulation is withdrawn as hoard, just as hoard is absorbed by circulation as soon as it is required. That is why, among peoples with a purely metallic circulation, hoarding will be found in various forms, from individual to State, with the latter keeping watch over its State treasury. In the bourgeois society, this process is reduced to meeting the demands of the overall process of production and assumes other forms. It appears as a special business which was engendered by the division of labour in the overall process of production, and which is carried on, at the more naive stages of development, partly as the business of all private persons, and partly as the business of the State. Still, the basis remains the same; there is a constant functioning of money in various developed functions and even in the purely illusory one.

This consideration of the purely metallic circulation is all the more important, since all the speculations of the economists over the higher, more mediated forms of circulation depend on the view of the simple metallic circulation. It goes without saying 1) that when we speak of an increase or decrease of gold and

So, the mass of gold and silver present in a country must be and always will be, on the basis of the simple metallic circulation, and general trade resting on ready money, greater than the mass of gold and silver circulating as coin, although the relationship between the portion of money functioning as money and that functioning as coin will change in quantity, and the same money can alternately fulfil either function precisely as there is a change in the quantity and a substitution of each other in quality by the portions of money serving for national and international circula- tion. However, the mass of gold and silver is a constant reservoir for both streams of circulation, an outlet and inlet for them, serving as an inlet precisely because it serves as an outlet.

As exchange value, every commodity, however indivisible its use value, such as the use value of a house may be, can be divided into any number of parts. In its price, it exists as such a divisible exchange value, i.e. as value assessed in money. So it can be alienated in any way, piece by piece, for money. However immovable and indivisible, the commodity can, therefore, be thrown into circulation piece by piece, through the title to property [B '-9] in its several parts. Thus, money has an eroding effect on immovable, indivisible property.

Without money there would be a mass of inexchangeable, inalienable objects, because money alone gives these objects an existence that is independent of the nature of their use value and its relations.

[^1]: "Money is a means by which property can be split up into innumerable fragments and devoured piecemeal through exchange" (Bray [Labour's Wrongs and Labour's Remedy, Leeds, 1839, pp. 140-41]).



" T H E INTRODUCTION OF MONEY WHICH BUYS ALL THINGS BRINGS IN THE NECESSITY OF LEGAL ALIENATION" (i.e. OF FEUDAL ESTATES) (John Dalrymple, An Essay towards a General History of Feudal Property in Great Britain, 4th ed. London, 1759, p. 124).

Indeed, all the determinations in which money appears— standard of value, means of circulation, and money as such— merely express the different relationships in which individuals take part in overall production or relate to their own production as social production. But these relations of individuals to each other appear as social relations of things.

"In 1593 the Cortes sent the following petition to Philip II: 'The Cortes of Valladolid requested Your Majesty in 1586 not to permit the further importation into this kingdom of candles, glassware, jewellery, knives and similar articles coming from abroad, which, though they are of no use to human life, have to be exchanged for gold, as though the Spaniards were Indians'" (Sempéré [Considérations sur les causes de la grandeur et de la décadence de la monarchie espagnole, Vol. I, pp. 275-76]).a

"AU hide and secretly bury their money deep in the ground, especially gentiles" (non-Moslems) "who are almost the sole masters of trade and money, being held in thrall to the belief that the gold and silver they hide during their lifetime will serve them after their death" (François Bernier, Voyages contenant la description des états du Grand Mogol etc., Vol. I, Paris, 1830, p. 314). (At the Court of Aurangzeb.)

(Their imperishable character consists, therefore, not only in the imperishableness of their material, but in that they always remain wealth, i.e. always abide in a definite form of exchange value.)

[^1]: "These have one mind, and shall give their power and strength unto the beast And that no man might buy or sell, save he that had the mark, or the name of the beast, or the number of his name" (Apocalypse P Vulgate).

[^2]: "The great and ultimate effect of trade is not wealth at large, but preferably abundance of silver and gold which are not perishable, nor so mutable as other commodities, but are wealth at all times and in all places."

[^3]: "Abundance of wine, corn, fowls, flesh, etc., are riches but hic et nuncc" (depending upon their particular use value), "so as the raising of such commodities, and the following of such trade, which does store the country with gold and silver, is profitable before others" (Petty, Political Arithmetick, London, 1699, pp. 178-79).

[^4]: "Gold and silver alone are not perishable" (never cease to be exchange value) "but are esteemed for wealth at all times, and everywhere" //the utility of particular use values is temporally and spatially determined, like the very wants which they

[^5]: a Marx quotes from Sempéré and, further, from Bernier in French.— Ed. b Revelation 17:13 and 13:17.— Ed. c At a particular place and a particular time.— Ed.



UNIVERSAL WEALTH" ([ibid.,] p . 242).

Just as gold and silver are in themselves universal wealth, so the possession of them appears as the product of world circulation, and not of circulation confined to immediate natural-ethnica

connections.

It may appear odd that Petty, who says that labour is the father, as lands are the mother of wealth,b who teaches the division of labour and who, generally, in a boldly brilliant manner everywhere concentrates on the process of production instead of the individual product, nevertheless here appears to be entirely captive to the language and notions of the monetary system. [B'-IO] One should not forget, however, that, in accordance with his premiss, as with the bourgeois premiss in general, gold and silver are only the adequate form of equivalent which always has to be appropriated only through the alienation of commodities and, so, through labour. Production for the sake of production, i.e. development of the productive forces of wealth without regard to the limits of immediate want or consumption is expressed by Petty as follows: to produce and to exchange not for the sake of transient acts of consumption in which all commodities are dissolved, but for the sake of gold and silver. It is the English nation's energetic, heedless and universal drive for enrichment in the 17th century that Petty here expresses and simultaneously incites.

Firstly, the perversion of money: it turns from means into end, and degrades the other commodities:

Thus, Misselden, a London merchant, in his work Free Trade. Or, the Meanes to Make Trade Florish, London, 1622, p. 7. He compares the switch of ranks between money and commodity with the lot of the two [grandjsons of the old Jacob, who laid his right hand on the younger, and his left hand on the elder (I.e.).75

[^1]: "The natural matter of commerce is MERCHANDISE The artificial matter of commerce is money. Money, though it be in nature and time after merchandise, yet forasmuch as it is now in use" (in its present application) "has become the CHIEF."

[^2]: a The manuscript has "ethische" (ethic).— Ed. b [W. Petty,] A Treatise of Taxes and Contributions, London, 1667, p. 47.— Ed.



"The general remote cause of our want of money is the great excess of this Kingdom, in consuming the commodities of foreign countries, which prove to us DISCOMMODITIES, rather than COMMODITIES, in hindering us of so much TREASURE, which otherwise would be brought in, in lieu of these TOYS. We consume amongst us a great abundance of the wines of Spain, of France, of the Rhine, of the Levant; the raisins of Spain, the corinths of the Levant, the lawns" (a sort of fine linen) "and cambrics" (another sort of fine linen) "of Hannault3 and the Netherlands, the silks of Italy, the sugars and tobacco of the West Indies, the spices of the East Indies; all which are of no necessity unto us, and yet are bought with ready money Even the old Cato said: Patrem familias vendacem, non emacem esse oportetb" (I.e., pp. 11-13).

"The more the stock is increased in wares, the more it decreases IN TREASURE" ([ibid.,] p. 23).

Concerning the non-refluent circulation on the world market, especially in trade with Asia:

"The other foreign remote causes of the want of money, are the trades maintained out of Christendom to Turkey, Persia and the East Indies, which trades are maintained for the most part with ready money, yet in a different manner from the trades of Christendom within itself. For although the trades within Christendom are driven with ready monies, yet those monies are still contained and continued within the bounds of Christendom. There is indeed a fluxus and refluxus, a flood and ebb of the monies of Christendom traded within itself: for sometimes there is more in one part of Christendom, sometimes there is less in another, as one country wants and another abounds: It comes and goes, and whirls about the circle of Christendom, but is still contained within the compass thereof. But the money that is traded out of Christendom into the parts aforesaid is continually ISSUED out and never returns again" (I.e., pp. 19, 20).

Dr. Martin Luther, the dean of German political economists, complains in a way similar to Misselden's:

[^1]: "It cannot be denied that buying and selling are necessary practices, which cannot be dispensed with and may surely be used in a Christian manner, especially as regards things that serve necessity and honour; for thus the patriarchs also sold and bought cattle, wool, corn, butter, milk and other goods. These are gifts of God, which He produces from the soil and shares among men. But foreign trade, which brings merchandise from Calicut [B'-ll] and India and other places— merchandise such as exquisite silks and jewellery and spices, which are only for ostentation and serve no need—and drains money from the country and the people, should not be permitted if we had a government with a prince. But I do not want to write of this now, for I think that, eventually, when we have no more

[^2]: a A province of the former Spanish Netherlands (i.e. present Belgium).— Ed. b The head of the family should be eager to sell, not eager to buy (Cato, De re rustica, II, 7).— Ed.





**[p. 449]**

"God has brought it about that we Germans must thrust our gold and silver into foreign countries making all the world rich while we ourselves remain beggars. England would surely have less gold if Germany refused to tnke her cloth, and the King of Portugal, too, would have less, if we refused to take his spices. If you calculate how much money is extracted, without need or cause, from the German territories during one fair at Frankfurt, you will wonder how it comes about that even a single farthing is still left in Germany. Frankfurt is the silver and gold drain through which everything that arises and grows, that is minted or struck here flows out of the German land; if the hole were plugged, one would not hear the present complaint that there is everywhere sheer debt and no money, that the entire country and all the towns are despoilt by usury. But never mind things will nevertheless continue in this way: we Germans have to remain Germans, we do not desist unless we have to" (Bücher vom Kaufhandel und Wucher, 1524)."

Boisguillebert, who has as significant a place in French political economy as Petty in English political economy, one of the most impassioned opponents of the monetary system, attacks money in the various forms in which it appears as exclusive value in contrast to other commodities, as means of payment (with Boisguillebert, especially as taxes) and as hoard. (The specific being of value in money appears as the relative valuelessness, degradation of other commodities.)

The passages quoted from Boisguillebert's writings3 are taken from a collection of his works in the Eugène Daire edition: Economistes financiers du XVIIIe siècle, Paris, 1843.

(Therefore, Boisguillebert formulates here the law that the mass of the circulating medium is determined by the prices, and not vice versa.)

[^1]: "Since gold and silver are not and have never been wealth in themselves, and since they have only a relative value, and only to the extent that they can procure the necessities of life for which they serve merely as pledge and valuation, having them more or less is a matter of indifference, provided they can produce the same effect" (Le detail de la France, 1697, Part I, Ch. VII [Daire edition, p. 178]).

[^2]: The quantity of money does not affect the national wealth, "provided there is enough of it to maintain the prices determined by the commodities necessary for life" (I.e., Part II, Ch. XVIII, p. 209).

[^3]: That money is merely a form of commodity itself is made evident in wholesale trade, where the exchange occurs without the intervention of money, after the "merchandise is valuated"; "money is only the medium and the agency, whereas commodities that benefit life are the aim and purpose" (I.e., p. 210).

[^4]: Money must be only a means of circulation, and always mobile; it must never become hoard, something immobile; it must be "in continual movement, which is

[^5]: a In the manuscript, the direct quotations from Boisguillebert are given in French, and the exposition of his ideas, in German.— Ed.



In contrast to the finance for which money appears to be the sole object:

" The science of finance is nothing but a thorough knowledge of the interests of agriculture and of commerce" (I.e., Part III, Ch. VIII, p. 241).

Boisguillebert, in fact, turns his attention only to the material content of wealth, to enjoyment, to use value:

"True wealth [is] the complete enjoyment not only of the necessaries of life but also of all the superfluities and of all that can give pleasure to the senses" (Dissertation sur la nature des richesses, de l'argent et des tributs [Daire edition], p. 403).

"These metals" (gold and silver) "have been turned into an idol, and disregarding the goal and purpose they were intended to fulfil in commerce, i.e. to serve as pledge in exchange and reciprocal transfer, [B '-12] they were allowed to abandon this service almost entirely in order to be transformed into divinities to whom more goods, valuables and even human beings were sacrificed and continue to be sacrificed, than were ever sacrificed to the false divinities in blind antiquity which for so long were the whole cult and the whole religion for most peoples" (I.e., p. 395). "The misery of the peoples is due to the fact that the slave has been turned into a master or rather into a tyrant" (I.e.). This "usurpation" needs to be broken and "things restored to their natural state" (I.e.).

With the abstract greed for enrichment, "a great blow was dealt at once at the equivalence in which it" (money) "should be with all the other commodities so as to be ready to effect their exchange at any moment" (p. 399). "Thus the slave of commerce has become its master This facility which money offers for the commission of any crime makes it redouble its earnings in proportion to the hold corruption takes of hearts; and there is no doubt that almost all the infamies would be banished from a State if one could do likewise with the fatal metal" (p. 399).

The depreciation of commodities for their conversion into money (sale at below their value) is the cause of all poverty (see I.e., Ch. V). In this sense, he says:

He compares the financial art of making money with the

(Similarly, Pliny, Historia Naturalis, Book XXXIII, Ch. III.) By contrast: Money as world coin:

[^1]: "Money has become the executioner of all things" (I.e., p. 413).

[^2]: "alembic that evaporates a frightful quantity of goods and commodities in order to obtain this fatal extract" (p. 419).

[^3]: Through a depreciation of the precious metals "the commodities themselves will be restored to their just value" (I.e., p. 422). "Money declares war on the whole human race" (pp. 417-18).

[^4]: "Intercourse between nations has spread across the whole globe to such an extent that one could say all the world has virtually become a single city in which a





**[p. 451]**

"What is his country, what is his tribe? He is a rich man" (Athenaeus, Deipnosophistae, Book IV, 49).b

On the digging of gold in mines, Demetrius Phalereus says:

"Greed hopes to extract Pluto himself from the bowels of the earth" (I.e., VI, 23).

"But from money first springs avarice This grows by stages into a kind of madness, no longer avarice but a positive hunger for gold" (Pliny, Historia Naturalis, Book XXXIII, Ch. Ill, 14).c

"Money! Nothing worse in our lives, so current, rampant, so corrupting. Money—you demolish cities, root men from their homes, you train and twist good minds and set them on to the most atrocious schemes. No limit, you make them adept at every kind of outrage, every godless crime—money!"

(Sophocles, Antigone [295-30 l]).d

Money, as purely abstract wealth—in which every specific use value is extinguished, and hence also every individual relation between possessor and commodity—comes under the power of the individual likewise as an abstract person, relating to his individuality as totally alien and extraneous. At the same time, it gives him universal power as his private power, a contradiction depicted, FOR INSTANCE, by Shakespeare:

[^1]: [B -13] "Gold? glittering, precious gold?

[^2]: Thus much of this will make black, white;

[^3]: foul, fair; Wrong, right; base, noble; old, young; coward, valiant. Ha, you gods! why this? what this, you gods?

[^4]: why, this Will lug your priests and servants from your sides; Pluck stout men's pillows from below their

[^5]: heads: This yellow slave Will knit and break religions; bless the accurs'd;

[^6]: a Marx quotes in Italian.— Ed. b Here and below Marx quotes from Athenaeus in Greek.— Ed. c Marx quotes in Latin.— Ed. d Marx quotes in Greek. English translation by Robert Fagles (Sophocles, The Three Theban Plays, London, 1982, p. 73).— Ed.



