---
Volume: 29
Document_Title: "II. Circulation Process of Capital "
Page_Range: "537-539"
---

# II. Circulation Process of Capital 



**[p. 514]**

[8] 5) Wage labour and capital

II, 14 (II, 28, 29) (III, 13) (III, 14) (15, 16) (VII, 40 bottom and 41 top). Ill, 23.

Capital, COLLECTIVE FORCE, CIVILISATION. (VI, 9, 10 Wade) (VI, 11. Babbage).

Capital=advances VI, 29 bottom. Reproduction of the worker through the wages VI, 38. Self-transcending limits of the capitalist production VII, 2, 3. DISPOSABLE TIME VII, 3, 4. Labour itself transformed into social labour (ibid., 4). Owen (VII, 5, bottom).

Real economy. Saving of labour time. But not antagonistically (VII, 5).

Manifestation of the law of appropriation in the simple commodity circulation. Inversion of this law

(II, 8, 9, 10, 11, 12) (IV, 45) (50). VII, 44.

[9] II CIRCULATION PROCESS OF CAPITAL

Valorisation process of capital simultaneously its devaluation process (IV, 15, 16).

Contradictions (IV, 16, 17) (18). //This belongs in Section II: Competition of capitals.107//

Capital is the unity of production and valorisation as process (IV, 18) (19, 20).

Propaganda tendency of capital (IV, 18). Civilising tendency of capital (IV, 18, 19). Contradiction between production and valorisation (IV, 22) IV, 24, 25.

Transformation of commodity into money (IV, 40, 41) (VI, 8). Circulation of capital (V, 16, 17. VI, 14. Chalmers) (VI, 36) VII, 9. To Chalmers: Blake VII, 29. VII, 47.



**[p. 515]**

Turnover of capital VI, 19, 20. VII, 47, bottom. Costs of circulation (VI, 20) (21) (22) (VI, 23, 24, 25) VI, 37. Circulating capital3 VI, 20, 21. Fixed capital ibid. VI, 27. Transition to circulating and fixed capital as two particular kinds VII, 2.

Turnover (VI, 21, 22). The number of turnovers VI, 31-35. VII, 7. Time of circulation VI, 22, 23, 25. Commodity-, money-, and industrial capital (VI, 26).

Year as measure of the turnovers of capital (VI, 26, 27). Fixed capital. Circulating capital (VI, 27, 28, 29). VI, 39, 40, 41, 42-44. VII, 8 (bottom), 10, 11, 13, 14, 15.

Greater and lesser circulation VI, 37, 38, 39. Three-fold determination of circulation as a whole VI, 39. Fixed capital. Circulating capital. In both, the social determination of labour is transferred to capital (VII, 1) (VII, 6).

[11] Longer time of circulation=smaller number of acts of reproduction or smaller quantity of capital caught up in production process. Continuity [of production process] becomes necessary with development of fixed capital. Interruption [in this process] thereby becomes loss of the preposited value (VII, 2).

FIXED CAPITAL and DEMAND FOR LABOUR (VII, 28. Barton). Fixed capital VII, 2, 3. Relationship between fixed and circulating capital in society VII, 3. VII, 4. A higher degree than circulating capital I.e., 4.

Durability of fixed capital VII, 4. VII, 21, 22. Money, fixed and circulating capital VII, 6. Fixed and circulating capital in relation to the individual consumption (VII, 6, bottom, and 7).

Average turnover of total capital (in relation to its valorisation). Relationship between turnover of fixed and circulating capital. Continuity. Difference between interruptions in production for circulating capital and fixed capital. Time of reproduction of fixed capital becomes measuring unit of the ECONOMIC CYCLE. Phase of total reproduction (VII, 7).

Different return of circulating and fixed capital (VII, 8). [12] Fixed capital whose use value enters into circulation (VII, 9). Production of fixed capital and circulating capital (VII, 9, 10). Frais d'entretien" of fixed capital (VII, 11).

[^1]: a Maintenance costs.— Ed.



