---
Volume: 29
Document_Title: "[ IV.] Varia "
Page_Range: "539-541"
---

# [ IV.] Varia 



**[p. 516]**

Determination of the time of reproduction by the use value of the commodity (VII, 15).

[14] III

CAPITAL AND PROFIT

Rate of profit and surplus value (IV, 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9. VI, 10) (VI, 12, 13) (17, 18) (39) (43).

Capital and profit (VII, 15) (16) (17) (20, 21) (22) (40) (41). Growth of capital with an increased productive power so as to apply the same mass of labour (IV, 9-13).

Risk. Interest. Production costs VII, 8. Profit in equal measure on all parts of capital VII, 8.

Wages and profit, forms of production and therefore of distribution, etc. (VII, 19).

Interest and profit VII, 51, 52.

[16] [IV] VARIA

Definitions of capital: Capital, "merely an instrument of production" (II, 15) (capital conceived of as a thing ibid.) (capital, not simple relationship, but process. Ibid. II, 16). Capital and product (II, 18).

Productive and unproductive labour (II, 21, 22) (III, 14). Agriculture, landed property and capital (II, 23). Market (II, 24, 25).

Grounds for profit (III, 19, 20) III, 22, 23. Production costs (III, 20).

Not dépenses, but avances3 of capitalists (Storch VII, 50. Against the theory of savings ibid.).

Proudhon and interest, etc. (Ill, 20). His extra-economic origins of landed property (V, 3). SURPLUS VALUE (VI, 27) (Price (Richard) and Proudhon VII, 47, 48).

[^1]: a Costs, advances.— Ed.





**[p. 517]**

Malthus. Theory of value (VI, 3 sqq.) (VI, 12, 13). Smith's sacrifice of labour. Senior's sacrifice of abstinence (VI, 17) (18).

Smith's origin of profit (VI, 18). Opposed by Lauderdale VI, 43. Mc Culloch's origin of surplus value VI, 18. WAGES, part of worker's own product idem, VI, 19.

Wage labour and SLAVERY. Steuart VII, 25, 26. Idem: MACHINES I.e., 26.

Written in 1860 Printed according to the manu- script First published in: Karl Marx, Grundrisse der Kritik der politischen Oekonomie. Ap- Published in English for the first pendix. Moscow, 1941 time

