---
Volume: 8
Document_Title: "7. Cavaignac and the June Revolution "
Page_Range: "52-53"
---

# 7. Cavaignac and the June Revolution 



**[p. 23]**

[CAVAIGNAC AND THE JUNE REVOLUTION]

E. Girardin is pitiable in his apologia for the imperialistic cretin Louis Napoleon, the "little constable"38; he is likeable in his attacks on Cavaignac, the warrior hero of M. Marrast. Since November 7 he has been publishing in consecutive issues a philippic against the hero of the European bourgeoisie, which has fallen in love with his Arabian nightcap.39 Perfidious as this bourgeoisie is, it has sacrificed him to the Sipehsalar* Jellachich, who is now the lion of the European hucksters.

We give our readers in full the acte d'accusation made by La Presse. In contrast to all European newspapers of great or small format, we have conceived the June revolution in a way that history has confirmed.15 We insist on coming back from time to time to its chief factors and chief dramatis personae, since the June revolution is the centre around which the European revolution and counter-revolution revolve.0 The distance from the June revolution, as we stated at the time when it was taking place, marked the zenith of counter- revolution, which had to make its tour of Europe. The return to the June revolution is the real beginning of the European revolution. Therefore, back to Cavaignac, to the inventor of the state of siege.

[^1]: Written by Marx on November 13,1848 Printed according to the newspaper

[^2]: First published in the Neue Rheinische Published in English for the first Zeitung No. 142 (second edition), time November 14, 1848

[^3]: Supreme commander.—Ed.

[^4]: See Karl Marx, "The June Revolution" (present edition, Vol. 7, pp. 144- 49).— Ed.

[^5]: c See Karl Marx, "The Victory of the Counter-Revolution in Vienna" (present edition, Vol. 7, pp. 503-06).— Ed.



