---
Volume: 8
Document_Title: "9. Impeachment of the Government "
Page_Range: "54-58"
---

# 9. Impeachment of the Government 



**[p. 25]**

IMPEACHMENT OF THE GOVERNMENT41

The city of Brandenburg refuses to have anything to do with the Brandenburg Ministry and sends an address of thanks to the National Assembly. In its addresses the whole country recognises only the govern- ment of the National Assembly. The Ministry has committed a further act of high treason by defying the Habeas Corpus Act42 and proclaiming a state of siege without the assent of the National Assembly and by expelling the National Assembly itself from the shooting-gallery at the point of the bayonet.

The National Assembly has its seat in the people and not in the confines of this or that heap of stones. If it is driven out of Berlin it will meet elsewhere, in Breslau, Cologne, or any other place it thinks fit. It has declared this in the decision it adopted on the 13th.a

The Berliners scoff at the state of siege and will not allow themselves to be in any way restrained by it. Nobody is handing over his arms.

Armed men from various parts of the country are hurrying to the assistance of the National Assembly.

The guards refuse to obey orders. More and more soldiers are fraternising with the people.

Silesia and Thuringia are in full revolt.

We, however, appeal to you, citizens—send money to the democratic Central Committee in Berlin. But pay no taxes to the counter-revolutionary Government. The National Assembly has

[^1]: a This decision was adopted at the evening sitting of November 12, 1848.— Ed.





**[p. 26]**

declared that refusal to pay taxes is justified in law. It has not yet adopted a decision on this out of consideration for the officials. A starvation diet will make these officials realise the power of the citizenry and will make them also good citizens.

Starve the enemy and refuse to pay taxes! Nothing is sillier than to supply a traitorous government with the means to fight the nation, and the means of all means is money.

Written by Marx on November 15, 1848 Printed according to the newspaper

First published in the Neue Rheinische Zeitung No. 143 (special edition), November 15, 1848

TOittwo*, 6 m 15. ÇRoetmfcer.

£>ûâ miniftetium ifi in SCn Waöc* gufla^ berfcjft i£>ie (Stobt 33ranbenburg toi U nicfctft toiffen non bent Whti« fhrium üSranbenbura. unb fdbieft cine »anf'Hbreffe an We Scattonatoerfammlung.

» a d gan}e Sanb erfrnnt in feinen Slbreffen nur We Sie* gterung ber Stationatoerfammlung an.

£ a # &?tnifterium begebt neuen &ocf>t>errat6, inbem ce im GlegenfaÇe gu bem Habeas-Corpus-Act o&ne Genehmigung ber 9?ati9nalt>erfammluug ben Stelagerungejuftanb au«gef)>ro< dien unb bte 9tationatoerfammlung felbfl mit ®ajannetten au* bem <3cbu£enf>aufe vertrieben bat.

Sie 9?ationatoerfämmlung Cat ibren ©i$ im Sßolfe, ntc^t in bem Um- freie biefer ober jener (Steinhaufen. Vertreibt man fïe au3 SBcrltn, fo wirb fie in einem anbern Orte tagen, in 93re$lau, itöln ober wo e$ ibr gutbunft. «Sie bat in ibrer Sifcuna, vom 13. biefen 33efd?tu$ gefaßt.

2Die berliner moqutren ftefe über ben 33elagerung$}uftanb unb laffen fid) in feiner Sßetfc bun$> benfelben rinfefcrdnfen. Wtemanb liefert bie Steffen ab. 93on oerf$iebenen ®egenben finb ^Bewaffnete ber National *93erfamm> lung jur #ülfe geeilt.

©if ©arten pervetaern ten <6>t\)or(am. ZPtr XJolbaten frûterntfirm immer meljr mit bem Dolke.

S«# ätatofmb in &ef<$&

•Öeute SDîittruo* Den 15. November TOt'ttagè halb 1 Ut)r S B e r f a n t m l u n g ber £anbroebrmdnner unb fteferoiften aller Waffengattungen emftfcliefilttfc beren Offnere im (Stfer'fôen ©aale.

Special edition of the Neue Rheinische Zeitung with Marx's article "Impeachment

of the Government"

[^1]: 0rl)lefim unb Äljüringen finb in vollem 3uf*tanbe 2Bir aber, Surger, rufen eu* ju: ©cbitft ©elo bem bemofratifdjen CFentralauäfcbuftc nach. Berlin. 3 a ^ ( t öfl9'8en f"ne ©t'uern an Die contrereeolutionare SRegierung. Die National« 93er|ämmlung fytt erflärt. Daft bte Steueroermeigerung redjtlid) begrünet fei. ©ce M fie nod) niebt befibloffen auè 9?ûrffid>t fur bie, Seamten. Die $an«erfar wirb biefe Seamte bie SWadjt beé Bürgere fennen lehren, unb fie felbfl )u guten bürgern ntadjen.

[^2]: hungert Dtn geinb au« unb verweigert bie (Steuern ! SRidjtè thôri Atrr aie einer bodmer* ratyertfefeen ^Regierung Wtttel jutn Äampfe gegen lie Matten ju bieten unb bad SRittel aller SWittel iff — ®tlb-

[^3]: Der feront: *orff. %Mt 3. 3D. Dt«8, untre frttia Qrt IT.





