---
Volume: 8
Document_Title: "18. The City Council "
Page_Range: "74-75"
---

# 18. The City Council 

Cologne, November 20. The Cologne Municipal Council has sent a petition to Berlin in which it urgently begs the King3 to dismiss the Ministry in order to save the monarchy.b

The Cologne City Council, or Herr Dumont and Co., addresses itself to the King at a time when the entire Rhine Province is turning away from the King in order to turn towards the Constituent Assembly. Herr Dumont, or the City Council, wants to save the King, whereas the Rhine Province is thinking only of saving itself. As if the salvation of the King had any connection with the salvation of the Rhine Province! At a moment when the kings and emperors are trying to save themselves by means of martial law and bombard- ments, the City Council wants to save the King. Who has authorised the City Council to save the King and issue a petition which is a most servile product of Cologne good-for-nothings? Judging from previous relations between the King and the Cologne City Council, the latter is begging for nothing more than to be kicked.

If the City Council had paid more attention to the decision of the Berlin deputies0 than to the King's autocratic will and his salvation, it would long ago have ordered the Cologne city gates to be manned in order to prevent the levying of taxes and to emphasise the will of the Chamber. The Cologne City Council, therefore, must be dismissed without delay. All judicial and tax authorities that do not exert the utmost energy to hinder the levying of taxes must be treated as guilty of high treason.

If the city of Cologne does not dismiss its City Council and at once send two new deputies to Berlin in place of the two who ran away,d it deserves—the knout.

[^1]: Written by Marx on November 20, 1848 Printed according to the newspaper

[^2]: First published in the Neue Rheinische Published in English for the first Zeitung No. 148, November 21, 1848 time

[^3]: a Frederick William IV.—Ed.

[^4]: "Petition des Kölnes Gemeinderates", Kölnische Zeitung- No. 311 (second edition), November 19, 1848.— Ed.

[^5]: c See this volume, p. 36.— Ed. d The reference is to Haugh and Wittgenstein who left the Assembly — together with other Right-wing deputies—after hearing the King's order transferring its sitting from Berlin to Brandenburg.—Ed.



