---
Volume: 8
Document_Title: "24. State of Siege Every where "
Page_Range: "82-83"
---

# 24. State of Siege Every where 



**[p. 53]**

[STATE OF SIEGE EVERYWHERE]

Cologne, November 22. We predicted that the Cologne City Council would receive kicks in answer to its petition to the King.3 We were mistaken. It is true that the Municipal Council did receive kicks, although not from the King, but from Manteuffel-Brandenburg.64

Tant pis!b We said further that after the decision of the Frankfurt Parliament, it was the duty of the Left to withdraw from it.c

According to what we hear, not only the Left, but also the Left Centre has withdrawn in order to form a democratic Central Committee. Tant mieux!d

States of siege everywhere, such are the achievements of the March revolution. Düsseldorf in a state of siege! A town is besieged in order to be conquered. All Prussian towns are being gradually declared in a state of siege, in order to be reconquered. The whole of Prussia has to be reconquered because the whole of Prussia has become disloyal to Prussia. How is the state of siege put into effect? By disarming the citizens. How can a city like Cologne, which is already disarmed, be declared in a state of siege for a second time? By first of all being given back its arms. To put Cologne in a state of siege for a second time means putting weapons in its hands. Long live the state of siege!

[^1]: Written by Marx on November 22, 1848 Printed according to the newspaper

[^2]: First published in the Neue Rheinische Published in English for the first Zeitung No. 150 (special edition), time November 23, 1848

[^3]: a See this volume, p. 45.— Ed.

[^4]: So much the worse! — Ed. c See this volume, p. 52.— Ed.

[^5]: So much the better!—Ed.



