---
Volume: 8
Document_Title: "37. News "
Page_Range: "123-124"
---

# 37. News 



**[p. 94]**

NEWS

Cologne, November 28. In its issue of November 17 the Neue Rheinische Zeitung stated:

"And as for the Jews, who since the emancipation of their sect have everywhere put themselves, at least in the person of their eminent representatives, at the head of the counter-revolution—what awaits them? There has been no waiting for victory in order to throw them back into their ghetto." a

At the time, we quoted government decrees from Bromberg. Today we have a still more striking fact to report. The big "Three Crowns" masonic lodge in Berlin — it is well known that the Prince of Prussia is the supreme head of the Prussian freemasons, just as Frederick William IV is the supreme head of the Prussian religion — has put a stop to the activity of the Minerva lodge in Cologne. Why? Because it has Jews among its members. Let the Jews take note of this!

A circular of the Brandenburg Ministry to all administrative bodies, which we came upon by chance, calls upon them to carry out mass arrests of the leaders of the clubs.

We are assured from a trustworthy source that Cologne, Düsseldorf, Aachen etc. will be given imperial troops, in fact Austrians, as a Christmas present from our most gracious sovereign. Probably they will include Croats, Serezhans, Czechs, Raizes, Serbs etc.,112 so that "order and calm" will be established in the Rhine Province as in Vienna. By the way, people say that the Rhine Province borders not on Russia but on France. Let the most gracious sovereign take note of this!

[^1]: Written on November 28, 1848 Printed according to the newspaper

[^2]: First published in the Neue Rheinische Published in English for the first Zeitung No. 155, November 29, 1848 time

[^3]: See this volume, p. 32.— Ed.



