---
Volume: 8
Document_Title: "41. The Organ of Manteuffel and Johann. - The Rhine Province and the King of Prussia "
Page_Range: "128-130"
---

# 41. The Organ of Manteuffel and Johann. - The Rhine Province and the King of Prussia 



**[p. 99]**

THE ORGAN OF MANTEUFFEL AND JOHANN — THE RHINE PROVINCE AND THE KING OF PRUSSIA

Cologne. The Neue Preussische Zeitung confirms Manteuffel's state- ment which we have already published3 concerning the Frankfurt Central Authority and Assembly. Manteuffel's organ says:

"The proclamation of the Imperial Regent may be very well meant. We Prussians, however, must decisively reject it, the people no less than the Crown." c

Manteuffel's organ has guessed our inmost thoughts. The same official newspaper instructs us as follows about the validity of the Frankfurt decisions114:

We "Prussians"\V. In the great haggling over human beings in Vienna, we Rhinelanders had the good fortune to win an "Archduke" of the Lower Rhine, who has not fulfilled the conditions on which he became "Archduke".115 A "King of Prussia" exists for us only through the Berlin National Assembly, and since no Berlin National Assembly exists for our "Archduke" of the Lower Rhine, no "King of Prussia" exists for us. We fell to the lot of the Archduke of the Lower Rhine owing to the haggling over nations! As soon as we have got so

[^1]: " We Prussians have no other master than our King. And only what he approves in the Frankfurt decisions, only that will be binding for us, because He" (Prussian style!) "finds it good and for no other reason. "

[^2]: a See this volume, p. 65.— Ed.

[^3]: Archduke John of Austria. The reference is to the "Proklamation des Reichsverwesers an das deutsche Volk, den Konflikt zwischen der Krone und der Nationalversammlung in Preussen betreffend", November 21, 1848.— Ed.

[^4]: c Neue Preussische Zeitung No. 129, November 28, 1848.—Ed.

[^5]: 5-3780





**[p. 100]**

far that we no longer recognise the selling of human souls, we shall ask the "Archduke of the Lower Rhine" about his "title to ownership".

Written on November 29, 1848 Printed according to the newspaper

First published in the Neue Rheinische Published in English for the first Zeitung No. 156, November 30, 1848 time

