---
Volume: 8
Document_Title: "59. The Bourgeoisie and the Counter- Revolution "
Page_Range: "183-208"
---

# 59. The Bourgeoisie and the Counter- Revolution 



**[p. 154]**

THE BOURGEOISIE AND THE COUNTER-REVOLUTION1

[Neue Rheinische Zeitung No. 165, December 10, 1848]

Cologne, December 9. We have never concealed the fact that ours is not a legal basis, but a revolutionary basis. Now the Government for its part has abandoned the false pretence of a legal basis. It has taken its stand on a revolutionary basis, for the counter-revolutionary basis, too, is revolutionary.146

§ 6 of the law of April 6, 1848, lays down:

§ 13 of the law of April 8, 1848, reads:

The Government sends this Agreement Assembly to the devil, most autocratically imposes a soi-disant3 Constitution147 upon the country and grants itself the taxes which the representatives of the people had refused it.

The Camphausen epic, a sort of pompous legal Jobsiade,148 has been brought to an abrupt end by the Prussian Government. In retaliation the great Camphausen, the author of this epic, continues coolly to deliberate in Frankfurt as envoy of this same Prussian Government, and goes on scheming with the Bassermanns in the interests of this same Prussian Government. This Camphausen, who invented the theory of agreement in order to preserve the legal basis, that is in order first of all to cheat the revolution of the respect that is

[^1]: "The right to approve all laws as well as to determine the national budget and the right to grant taxes must in any case belong to the future representatives of the people."

[^2]: "The Assembly convened on the basis of this law is called upon to establish the future Constitution by agreement with the Crown and during the period of its existence to exercise the prerogatives of the former imperial estates, in particular regarding the granting of taxes."

[^3]: a Self-styled.— Ed.



©rgatt Her ^cuiofratic. ./* no. ftdln, *ompoj S«| ie. Dtpmtwr.

dritte Steuern nteinr!!!

ftpant- - ©er «Jriaatiuaatjalaat J •«lllaaeo. (Sortait)

(Oit Srrtaftai

['«irk.«« ' « n W n M f ) Brttfe U). ill |« Jkhntora.) «Hafw. (Ok Stafiianeioitttfftart ) «Klia. (Dit *M)ria>tta

• llri&i H***»atirm ) Citri*. (Otaabaa«. rinii brmat Taiifa Vforialra Btreia«).

i Ba Matl JBt. - Ott tt«M'

Ctfhriabifa V Zrapatabfa Kpaaita. - Vrai 93<*ia»mi S

«ffebaa. (»a* «Jalbaabala* labia« ant 1

i Vra»»*t. — ttmi4 yttlia M

i friftt«. ~ dbaiiiltia

Vtbotata).

( * * « •

..3-nmc ( *

t ta«lifd> «Mfftj. «aad Kflfi

Jaffa«*).

* Ä Ö I » , 15 D t j r « * « r (S»T(f(tiag.) Dit S t r t i i b a ' t i i g f t b t f t i f , »tlo)t bit im OTiaiftrriia t t i M n f i i i « R f g t m i M Éffaitgtf Boargrarfit fofett a!« «brriltfft* © « a b l a g t be« BC«hfa>r B contrat social proflamirte. Bar fri M«»tg« fiat faffe X f t o r i t ; (u » a r «itlatfr g'»aa)fr B aaf Mat S a « « t » I

fa>aft, fit ^»Hfrltt hiata Hiatablid, baf Mt Vt Efttt brt alita 6 t M H t t a t f i i K i ^ a l t ga) i(r ) • «fbat fltfttl aa* i l tbti fa bîrit btvtft Valtotr Um tig HB S0naà)t vtmaabtd ^ t l t a 9)ia>4 u t i « 9tiaif)rtia», îa bt« aaa|ta Uafaag Mt Vtaiat- d)tt wax iii 9»ira,t M|ït *ea bitfta â a ^ a btraifo)!. D i t tin^gta Jylbtitbatta V » pcni H^n Vairgtotfit i o 4 M « 9MT|, oit eft blatigra îbitawa btt v3it;)f T*t|t grjta ta« aabf •Mffïftt fiatttatial, faabta fi« aia)t ta Mt txmtt, ia Mt S i ttancratit aib ftlbfl ia bta g t i b a l t t m ai Oig i i t t n M T f g t f)tl- ftrtttffa ? Sic tiitigta «raftaa Urtagia^ti, m i l fia) bit laïalra Strtrrtt T brr Oairçtteifit aaff«>waagn, bit A t n t i i b t t i t | t — Mtta )abnajli4 ftratli « t a t t a ^ ù »ai ttarai fl Biabifa Wâe> 3'" I a 4 4 n b S t d M fréter ia a i g m t f t u r S f t f t btfifitntttt «jarte —' bit tiajijr B ftl Matiatta bicfti Qkauiibtriltc a«a> btr Dtäq- traodtfan, ibrt H(ti«ta>a(ifa>«raftta S«n«a§««»rtt aa M.« V»tf, •mrtca fît aio)t «agrftaaat sea M B vtrftmatra Xtaytaig Cp Tâfi* btitti aat ftra ia fto) jtjaagtat« Cietfian«atatia(«n ? Uab bit imftifa>t Beargtsifit bittr a»a> |B>ttft I| fallt*, baf b n altt 0 r a f bti V n j t t , btt eartaïaatir, btr ^tabalta, m ( ( r f i r « « - »•lift (frgrbrabrit » M trat fia) ftlbft uat bit Kn«ro>ït . i g t l i b t i gtafaût^igrn © i t j t t , btt 9ntgtoifit, tt#0TMR ftt V

<St M t flat. D i t »rnfifo)t Saargtatfit ttattt aat noo) tiat flifgabt, bit Hafjabt, fio) i « t J>mf4ifl bcaicw ju m a * « , tic ftèttibca Ha«t Q)iftt R t« bfffitigta, -Ru V* BBb Drtnaaa." »itbcr Vtrvifit Ota aab tir Jiafra »icbtt tia|Bbtin»ta, bit »âfct'Bb M l 2B£tiftari R« onlortn gt^aa^ta »attn. ( I l Fonnlt fia) aur »»A b a n « baabffa, bit f r o t u t t i a a l f a f l t B ifer« Ç)tn(*fft ans M T fit btbinata MH <mat|rrva(at<oa oaf tin OTiaimum }n btf4rân- tn. D i t Qaffta, »tla)t tit prra|tfo)t »Miflfoîfit ia i*rtm Sa Msft gtjta bit fraoalr @rft Dfd>«fl aat btrra Jtro« nntfi btt girma btt Self« ia ünfprao) \m at|mta S4 ajti«aa|t« fa|, feffoiiatîaaart At, "Pttfifrttbtti it., nafilta fit «M*t )trbr»a)'B »>«* f t Î M r a ciat< bri«6rtta 33e(M, ba* fît aîa)t mt^c f "

ttvafoa Wian fwviiiiute M af« K t v t â f t a t a t i o i t t t * r n ' f i f a ) t i B a i r g t a i f i t , al« S t r t i a b a i t r a t r f a m « l a « 9 ' iabtra fie btl XBttagaif Xatrt CBBaagbrt Vtät}ttvalatiea » t r s a t f .

6 i t » a 4 t t bt« (Sefqje Va« aagcfa)tbni. 6ie «artoaiitlt t« lent »at M » anaftfa)ca Sefft, taf t« fia) «it bar 2wr§t»ifie •to)t Mttiiaart, a « at**" ">' * « " » ' l" Ttval Blioattta, faabtrn baf rt rtva(«tinirt, baaut fié) bit treat au V Mt 9*arjntifit g t f t i t« feibff ttrriaaart! 6 a » a t M i » t o ) l « t i l t l be« r e w latiaaarra Ce Ur« »eraia)trt «ab btt S t « ) t « t a b t a btt feafma- rise« ttarrgearfif gtwaaaea.

Dtt Sta>t«bob.a! « l i a g t M e i « , l i b b«TO) i*a bit > r t 6 l i i f a ) t 3 t i t n S . - labta fa aiei gevlaiatrt, gefabelt, ge»i«awrt ttm „9tco)t«aebta," fe oft t r i „Sta)t«babf«" vttlerta, wtttrrgev Mnta, M B At«)!»- batt« bata)I4fl)ttl, gtjticft, »tn »ttlia MO) fraitfart, voit gtaaf fart «aa) Btifia j<''a)leitrrt, «trrigl, aatfgt Mbat, aa« eiar» tin faa)e« 9 > M a ia tiara gttàftltea Bobta. au« tintai gttàftltrr Sabcn im t i n » Daaielbtbta, — btfaaatlto) tin $aa»t»trtae«B te: f Q)a«fptt(mtti 3«tamotrar« -^ a«* tinea: Deppelbtbtn in tint bobtifeft ga Ott Bir verwa Bbt U, baf btt Xta)t«tebt R fia> \ät anftt «tfrt »it 9tc4t fo)litfi[ia) ia b » Botta Mr „ A e f a i f o ) t n 3 t t t • « 8 " Mtwaa MIt aat, bafj fit ta« ©ajibelrt» btt yttn|i' fa)» Bvirgrwfir mit Mm t)neaift>i>o Irtt M I *>m« ^ofrpt Da»»at, tiara aot^»rnbigt B Einfall btr prtnf(iffl)t B ffltltge- fa)id)tt mit tintt »i H(i»tlio>ta îSarotlt Mt . R â l i i f t b t a " 3 t i t i i 9 Mt»ro)ftl B föBocn BBB im Kto)llbo MB aur niid) btn » » M B ftba, aaf Mm bit „Söfniftgt 3eitaag" wä*fl. D t r 9 t t o ) t « b e b t a Bat »»ar bei » r t i f ifû)r » r o)r»bobra! Dtt 3 t t o ) t « b o t t B , aaf bttn f>4 n o * Mm Utan Mt »ititr Mt fltefta Debatte Haapbaafta, t a l wit Micrxtrflt (Acfpraff be« Strtiaigtrn Saab tag* aab bit 'Sritiabartrarrf ammlang Mwtgtn, ' *eaftit Btioa«gtftf »OB 1815, ober ba« ?aablag«gtftn *ea

[^1]: ben «bf«nti1tif B)cn etaat, gezwungen, fit) mit Mr »eargtotfu j« •erf UBbigtft, fio) «it ifre« alien 9ttaafra t« v c t t i « b a r r a . D i e f t » « * »itb M r Boatgroifif bt« S a d , bit Bmrrgt oifit »rib bet Iront t a * Self epferi. Uattr biefer Stbiag««g n)ir» bat f t M g t f o a btftgtrlia) «at tit Boargroifit fomglio) »crtta.

[^2]: ftao) bra V f i r j girbt t« t a t BOO) tiefe j a m 9teo)rc 6 « b i f i f i fia) a>ta)(t(ftüig a « Blilablritet btr Sr»»Iati»a. M r t attarda) «if - b t c i t c f l r T t c a o i t a t i f i f e r « r a i t t a a e * . Da« »at baa « c f e i a a i f t t r S t i t i « b « r « K « « t b c o r i r t l i t Oct- n k B)efl M«bfrr, »ela)e be« crffe Wtniftrria« M O ) tor 9l£ti'*fv»(atie« bilbttru, gefielt« ft«) ia ber »«Br, bit W e * gefe Ott Rtoac ait ifir« «febriifo)e« gittigc« J« betit«. *3it fo)»ef«/ tan in bra Çoo)g M«fft, fofàfig 1" f*>" • • • »itetfrrebe«*, » « i ) l t m rosfc« » » • » l i t « » • - • rtiarr « t o f a a i t aflaff'ab — »•« V m 3ta«uttf«a be« Pttfiaigle B gnabtag« — bit » l i f t , »ela)c bet t f r o « j« strfa>liigti btoftr, »it Um Stia)««« i t m e*ma« laati D » t « I « t l M (• W i t t » . ® ' t f M-ttite M b o ttnrilbi ( [ « i i b U v f o « I ' tttkniltti at« f Mfbntioacfti t l > a r t . D e r I T M C ftanii M T aftaaat i b t t fia> frib#, a Wt ( n w « § • * Oralnuu^ t n i M . Vi» fttam tw» i^f V I ^ I I « -bat Mt anbet* frrtata» kief« bmi^uttabt ?r»*rrt»rfa>afl, $* mi+tt boon« min« a nauvais jeu ni Crwarfug t t f m Zagt.

[^3]: D i t bal» «iftjt KII« A » « , bit f i t i»rt C t t l c a « M » t W f ^

[^4]: rmbt «Htotatrarit, krr 9 r b « > * a t * 3 « l e r t i l l U i » , > t f « 8*V»" aaf MWatitt Bt Dro 6irtit Brti)Va M — ' , i Wrtffict Uii l n # *

[^5]: M e IXi Ufj« b««tfci>c «ti<t>««riiut.

[^6]: Ok btiliai Warf*« flti«>tar«Mt 3 t aa( Ma * < — P t • > * « » f V „

[^7]: O k atttfa > a « t n * M » « " * " -

[^8]: Oit briliat htutfa V «oabtana« » a M U i M i • * a « l W r i « « : « a ) M t a * « «t • • « , aa BMttt it, «4 Cil »<ifl«*tm «aka a*a) l Uotia.

[^9]: Ott tt Uf* «ni Mt llria Xana M Oit M » • • • ! ( > « • « * t»Hh«: •a>*a tmtu b «a*, M »*ttt fit, ••* O u atrllaa Vf ««IN* »"j Hka.

[^10]: Oit l-.i H» •»•(«< Dttia Vataut Oit »»t jaai Jtaataft tat Ml'H" Oa M*»» bit 9r«at« a M Oaam, ae> D M xi«aa>t« ft Mtta * * * * # « -

[^11]: Oit btilift arart*. M4«atnwt, Oit Iti M • « * S u a »««ta: Oa it. «4 «a». • « « m 9Jaa MM>.a M|

[^12]: Ob b*iii«t taarisjt •tria Vawiw

[^13]: > gab?

[^14]: > g r a t a rit v* t * * » '

[^15]: t 93aargteifit mit t V i t ) t ( u a t r | t B g i , vtm ftarft« Mf Boatj. ira, ia ftta 6o)iiffa[ ttgtbrata Staate, flaab offratar M I g»o) tia tiabrrinj im ÏBrjt, ria riniigt* Qinbrraif, bal Salf — fur roitttu* itd motih»t*i xo\* fy>\>\>ti fogt. D a f S »If 1Kb bit » t b t l a t i a n !

[^16]: D i t X i b o I a t i b B » a t btr K t ô ) t « t i t « l t e « S o l l t « ; aif bit Sttttlttlit R j TÙnbftt t< ftiit BBgtftâBiaif B «afpr B*e. D i t Sic velitiai » a t Mr fitttjftl, t t i tt oaf bit «Jaargteifït gtiegt B |attt. Dira) bit Xtvolatiaa a>at bit *39ltgtatflt j a t fym\9}*H at I«B«t. Vtit t t n Zagt i^rtt $rnfe)aft wat btr Stffafltaj bit* ft« àBeo)ff(« BB^ttra Dta. D i t Co Brgttlfit maftt jt^ta bta 9B«a)fcl j » t a t t f t ti Bltata.

[^17]: fa^rt««B«fa)ai>, ttm » i t bit 0 » " f * « M '« • « t > « , b 3 « 8 ' M " ' ain)l ba«it ibt rid) abrx tart ^atmffta mit btt »raat a t t - f i a t a i t , faabrni bamil i^t fltgta tit f t t t t H f t r t 3attrtffta, bit 3Bttrtfft B M Soif« b BT*ftft D i t N t v a l a t i b B »at t n ftattfl brt Saïfrt gr$ti tit S o - tttbataay M t &nrjfoifw mit t t t Ärant. D i t mit Mt fltest fia) a t m a t a t t a U Saitgtaifu n i | l > alft p t a t e f t i t t a atata - b i t K t a . l B t . o i . Oa» ta« f t f * a t aattt bt» gtafri î a a » » a a [ f " . D i t Vtiif t t t i f i t i « ! » i r b r i i a ) t a a t t f o a t t . D i t Strliatt W « H M M I >

[^18]: SBi««. <si* (*'["'• 'a'- e*it«t fo)i« twt «»tt. tn "t.

[^19]: « I - 3 1 « - »« (»(«ti M 6 ( i | j t |a. A i t Btk«t* fit »rt Stîtf Mt aif a n Wft Bbt T t t » | i^rt# «Jat M« » f : Si« Nâd)tlicl>« 9^^w«d>« int S9«U««f msf)»- l>#*t »or S i » .

[^20]: f tavf »

[^21]: lia) àa«mt aab

[^22]: < »b- f*rtttni btt n à M i 3 Ü t . C a l l ! t>a(t! Daa) f ^ a t n a f : Otarfo)! Vtarfo)!

[^23]: f Ba« it f« tt BB, »a« » i t Itt M »abt U f t ? Bo>, " iff t t t |ti Vt t i « » f bc« Xagr«, btr »ir *t* * i t attta ftiatn ©«V«*- aiffta »at Sagta fttbt, iab bott I M p n r t t t o n i M bit fftigtabti fttntffaa Jta Mibmfltibtifféiftifiabt b r t V i mit |ifa)tfltt S a l a a. M bei e * t t « b t t m i bt« ©taabt«, aab raft«: ;iaa) bta «Jraab- JNftffi ! 3lia) bel Bribft- iab Batrmarttra ! . . .

[^24]: S i l b mb fi Ta)rtat if) btr ftrirg ta ftiat» t a i r a , aatt (*r#o V fia) iff t n Raaunt M« «•«tatca«. D r r Vttafé) ^ r t aif Z%in ( i ftia l i b rr ibtrfit M » i t ttat« W i d t bit t Raff« feiner O t t i t l * m t r i . D i t S n b e i , »it rr » i t W M i f û ) t T S « * * feûta 9ttbti. «tifa)e« | ( f « ) f a | t i , liant« i ^ flaffn* a aab tt f t i j l ft4, » a r a « birf « l e « grfa Va M . - .

[^25]: « 4 , » « n i « , » a n » » a t to) W t t m »Obe« I W t ï Uib a m a Mt bem ba« S t l b , «<|ei ba« » i t »ie 3a3b»aa M acktji »it<

[^26]: _ - • *-•-*- - - - ganbe«, tit wit wit gn»»ig«t . . ma), t« » a t t i i« %U 6 * M « »e« faa- »attn j« tic Bntntt bet trffta 93tabt be« atria)«. Brio)' fiat <3«laato«a)l frat «a* gtata n f r t t 9rabcr, (cgf« «iftte «4tee Mt%t\ S « V ! W t i a » i t j tenttrrt M - ta« *>#e<f)tfrfb Bbft be«

[^27]: D t t „Kta>ttfc«ht>" Vtata UM . . « ( . * , \»i UM ** e t ti Mti»a tbrea Öobta aitbt gtvonitra uab tit altt Ottfr Rta)aft ibtta Soota aia)t acrlerti batt, taf tit Startftoetutiai mir tia „(Srtigaii" fti, «Hiebt« bta „«aftbi" ja btt (eagft taflerftalb brt afttn pitupi* fo>ta Staat* aorbtititttta „Stiftaabigaa^" )»ifo)tn Mm ibteat aat t t i »onigtotfie gtgtbtn, brira Sttùtfnii ttt Staat ftlbf) ia fröptt« aflerb#a)fle B Qdaff» fo)on aafgtfprb O)" «B» nur M i brnt Viäri für Bia)t „ b t i a g t i o ) " ' " * ' " babt Ctr , ^ t o ) l « - b o b t a " btbtltttt mit tiat» Sotte, t o | tie Sauta/oifir naö) Mm W à t j mit t t t R r » « auf Mmftlbta Safte aatttbaa Mla vo Qt » i t « o t be» * * * ' ! . all ob gar feine S'oolattoa ftattgrfunvtn. «ab btr Stttinigte canbtag obac bit i Veaolatien Trin $\tl erreia)t »ittt. Det „9tca)t«babea" bebtitttt, baf t a 3tra)l«tittl M « »olle«, tit » t o o l u t i o n , ia btm .onirat so.ul ^ i f t p » » f gitraag «ab Koaigreifie aia)t uifiitt. D i t S a i i t j t o i f i « U f . h t e i » t e l a f p r i t b r a i « bet a l t p x t i f if-ftc« » e f e » g e - b a i g ) t r , b a m i t b i * S o i f f t i i t S n f p i ù a ) e a a « t t t i t » « i r i | , f û ) t n 9 t t e * [ i t i o « » e r t e i l e .

[^28]: <H MT*t M fid), baj «te i b e o f a g i f a ) t B C i r r t i a « btt «oar. geeiftt, i ) t t 3ett«aa«fo)ttibcr a. tgl., biffe 9ifa)a«igug M« feoitjcaiftatmffc« fir ta« cigtitlitbe 3«Uttffe bet Bomgtaifte «•«otben u b at« fela>t« fia) «a« a a t m tiabilbra ntnfttr«. 3m topfe ttae« » t i j f l t m a a a v t m o i M l l t [i«) tit W a f t btl Btto)!«- bobf«« ia tt«e »ttflia V 0«u>a B|.

[^29]: Da« «inifftrta« « a m p b a i f t n Valu ftiae »alflabt grloft, tic Safgabe bet S e t m i t t l a n g «nb M« U t b t r a a n g « . Hi bilbcte »«»lia) t i t S t r a i t t l a i g i»tfa)ti bet aaf M B Salfi.

[^30]: £«

[^31]: ® t f « t t i t i » t r t rtgfa» — bie tobtta mit ibtfi l l a f t a b u f B a a - tta rio)tt B f To> a«f - fenme« aaf »to) } • - SRarfa V Vtarfo)! . . . Ça, Otifler nttiatt Srfa)Iagt Br« , BM« »eilt ^r «oa mir ? UBft Ot 3?' ben ftanpf » N neacnt btgia Bt«? Rtpn am! flrbrt n a ! . . . Don), »a« ffb/ • * ! D , gtaflia), già|Itâ>: bit «tfebla- geaea fia* ja n»i«t Sribcf, mint »trflia)» Srftptr, »etfftltib- lio)t« Stnbtr! . . .

[^32]: «Jtat «ab fiatl! - t O M t ! - ftib ibt t l Ma« »irflia), tie in) béate t a Miase« trafttftfeta t « « p f erfa>(agea? Ç a , wu "fit .tt« ffanta Çâaptcr btiabea» fa)nrteln — 9Btb » i t , fte (tab ti, tt fiab »tine lri Wi«>a D r a M i , bit i « t Tfa Xagta — aa), f U eiftf« i« M« Baatpf fir f t t i b t t t , fit Sa Utf Ubt — Uab ia) ? — Uat to)? — io) folgtt M a darren Saamaabo: g e g e n j m b t . t , gege« Satet(a«b, g c g t a S a t t r f W t ! . . . glan)! t»igtt glna)! bitfta Jtomwaibe l i a Vrn Mraorft! fiapta »iift 3bt air, 3bt tbtatt B «rfa)l«geiei ? So Ut 3bt, b a | to) I M ) folgt i i bit ffaaatibt ffaifrrffa PI, a«f M i Sfir«)t)a>f M r «jrrtbtit? «brr bott f o a a t « fo)oa bit 6«Ibnte « a aia) ab^ t Blofe« — Qkacbt a»! . . Ça, »ie fie «Hafte, tie geliebte« Or« fa Vagntri . . . S t t U « r is) ftlgt u r e a Smbrrawf — Rtiae ïlblolang bit«) tic gtiaae M« » t t t t U a b « ! Dar Crlofi M (ac>t io) tarn) t t a Z o t fit'« Botcrlait ! ?. » .

[^33]: 3rber Wcafo) bat f e w Se«)tbeite lab feine ««rtatift - fo *«a) Cert » a t t $ . C m ©attp bat ale flacptatift, abet (ri Mt m t tea Bertbetl, baf bi« g«tt* t Maet cine mbtbaft Ü«Mrfifa)r •eftalt » i t i f a t a b o . C m Bortb a a f M «ia)t »ao Mtn, bnf • t r »rnign aad)fio)tig mit i f « «ab «M aabrrt b a t e ; » i t geffe* fen rt gt«M fctna», am label« if« i« ««fera tidam 3««Veefje, bean » i t go««e« ««« get« t u r n frtti(glia)e« »beib. e r f t t

[^34]: A page of the Neue Rheinische Zeitung containing Marx's article "The Bourgeoisie and the Counter-Revolution" and the slogan "No More Taxes!!!"







**[p. 157]**

due to it, at the same time invented the mines which were later to blow up the legal basis together with the theory of agreement.

This man introduced the indirect elections that produced an assembly to which, at a moment of sudden revolt, the Government could shout: Trop tard!149 He recalled the Prince of Prussia, the head of the counter-revolution, and did not disdain an official lie to turn the Prince's flight into a study trip.150 He let the old Prussian laws dealing with political crimes and the old courts continue to function. Under his government the old bureaucracy and the old army gained time to recover from their fright and to reconstitute themselves completely. All the leading personalities of the old regime were left untouched in their positions. Under Camphausen the camarilla carried on a war in Posen,151 while he himself carried on a war in Denmark. The Danish war was intended as an overflow for the superabundant patriotism of the German youth, against whom also after their return the police took the appropriate measures. This war was intended to give some popularity to General Wrangel and his notorious Guards regiments and to rehabilitate the Prussian soldiery in general. This purpose achieved, the sham war had to be ended at any price by a disgraceful armistice, which was once again agreed on at Frankfurt am Main by the same Camphausen with the German National Assembly. The outcome of the Danish war was the appointment of the "Commander- in-Chief of the two Marches"152 and the return to Berlin of the Guards regiments which had been driven out in March.

And the war which the Potsdam camarilla waged in Posen under the auspices of Camphausen!

The war in Posen was more than a war against the Prussian revolution. It was the fall of Vienna, the fall of Italy, the defeat of the heroes of June. It was the first decisive victory gained by the Russian Tsar over the European revolution. And all this was done under the auspices of the great Camphausen, the thinking friend of history,3 the knight of the great debate, the champion of agreement.

Under Camphausen and with his help the counter-revolution seized all important positions; it prepared an army ready for action while the Agreement Assembly debated. Under Hansemann-Pinto,153 the Minister of action, the old police force was fitted out with new uniforms, and the bourgeoisie waged a war — as bitter as it was petty — against the people. The conclusion from these premises was

[^1]: An ironical allusion to Allgemeine Geschichte vom Anfang der historischen Kenntniss bis auf unsere Zeiten, by Karl von Rotteck, a well-known work at the time. Its subtitle was: Für denkende Geschichtsfreunde (For Thinking Friends of History).—Ed.





**[p. 158]**

drawn under Brandenburg's rule. The only things needed for this were a moustache and a sword instead of a head.

When Camphausen resigned we exclaimed: He has sown reaction as interpreted by the bourgeoisie, he will reap reaction as interpreted by the aristocracy and absolutism.3

We have no doubt that His Excellency, the Prussian envoy Camphausen, at this moment considers that he himself is a feudal lord and will have come to a peaceable agreement with this "misunder- standing".

One should not, however, commit the error of ascribing initiatives of world-historic significance to such mediocrities as a Camphausen or a Hansemann. They were nothing but the mouthpieces of a class. Their language, their actions, were merely the official echo of the class which brought them to the forefront. They were simply the big bourgeoisie placed in the forefront.

The representatives of this class formed the liberal opposition in the blissfully deceased United Diet, which Camphausen resurrected for a moment.

The gentlemen of this liberal opposition have been reproached with having betrayed their principles after the March revolution. This is a fallacy.

The big landowners and capitalists, who were the only ones represented in the United Diet, in short the money-bags, became wealthier and more educated. With the development of bourgeois society in Prussia, in other words, with the development of industry, trade and agriculture, the old estate distinctions had, on the one hand, lost their material basis.

The aristocracy itself was largely bourgeoisified. Instead of dealing in loyalty, love and faith, it now dealt primarily in beetroot, liquor and wool. Its tournaments were held mainly on the wool market. On the other hand, the absolutist state, which in the course of development had lost its old social basis, became a restrictive fetter for the new bourgeois society with its changed mode of production and its changed requirements. The bourgeoisie had to claim its share of political power, if only by reason of its material interests. Only the bourgeoisie itself could secure legal fulfilment of its commercial and industrial requirements. It had to wrest the administration of these, its "most sacred interests", from the hands of an antiquated bureaucracy which was both ignorant and arrogant. It had to demand control over the national wealth, of which it considered itself the creator. Having deprived the bureaucracy of the monopoly

[^1]: a See present edition, Vol. 7, pp. 108.— Ed.





**[p. 159]**

of so-called education and conscious of the fact that it possessed a far superior knowledge of the real requirements of bourgeois society, the bourgeoisie had also the ambition to secure for itself a political status in keeping with its social status. To attain this aim it had to be able freely to debate its own interests and views and the actions of the Government. It called this "freedom of the press". The bourgeoisie had to be able to enter freely into associations. It called this "freedom of association". As a necessary consequence of free competition, it had likewise to demand religious liberty and so on. Before March 1848 the Prussian bourgeoisie was well on the way to realising all its aims.

The Prussian state was in financial difficulties. Its borrowing power was exhausted. This was the secret behind the convocation of the United Diet. Although the Government struggled against its fate and ungraciously dissolved the United Diet, lack of money and of credit facilities would inevitably have driven it gradually into the arms of the bourgeoisie. Those who are kings by the grace of God have always bartered their privileges for hard cash, as did the feudal barons. The first great act of this world-historic deal in all the Christian-Germanic states was the emancipation of the serfs; the second great act was the constitutional monarchy. "L'argent n'a pas de maître",3 but the maîtres cease to be maîtres as soon as they are demonetised.

And so the liberal opposition in the United Diet was nothing else than the opposition of the bourgeoisie to a political form that no longer corresponded to its interests and needs. In order to oppose the Court, the bourgeoisie had to court the people.

It may have really imagined that its opposition was for the people. Obviously, the rights and liberties which the bourgeoisie sought for itself could be demanded from the Government only under the slogan: popular rights and popular liberties.

This opposition, as we have said, was well on the way to its goal when the February storm broke.

Cologne, December 11. When the March deluge — a Biblical deluge in miniature — subsided, it left on the surface of Berlin no prodigies, no revolutionary giants, but traditional creatures, thickset bourgeois figures — the liberals of the United Diet, the representatives of the

[^1]: [Neue Rheinische Zeitung No. 169, December 15, 1848]

[^2]: "Money has no master."—Ed.





**[p. 160]**

conscious Prussian bourgeoisie. The main contingents for the new Ministries were supplied by the Rhine Province and Silesia, the provinces with the most advanced bourgeoisie. Behind them came a whole train of Rhenish lawyers. To the same extent that the bourgeoisie was pushed into the background by the feudal aristocracy, the Rhine Province and Silesia were replaced in the Ministries by the old Prussian provinces. The only link of the Brandenburg Ministry with the Rhine Province now is through a single Elberfeld Tory. Hansemann and von der Heydtl These two names represent for the Prussian bourgeoisie the whole difference between March and December 1848!

The Prussian bourgeoisie reached the highest positions in the state, not, however, by means of a peaceful deal with the Crown, as it had desired, but as the result of a revolution. It was supposed to defend, not its own interests, but those of the people—for a popular movement had prepared the way for the bourgeoisie — against the Crown, in other words, against itself. For the bourgeoisie regarded the Crown simply as a cloak provided by the grace of God, a cloak that was to conceal its own profane interests. The inviolability of its own interests and of the political forms corresponding to these interests, when translated into constitutiorial language, was supposed to read: inviolability of the Crown. Hence the enthusiasm of the German bourgeoisie and in particular of the Prussian bourgeoisie for the constitutional monarchy. Therefore, although the Prussian bourgeoisie welcomed the February revolution together with its repercussions in Germany because it had placed the helm of state in their hands, it also upset their plans, because their rule was thus bound by conditions which they neither wanted nor were able to fulfil.

The bourgeoisie did not raise a finger; they simply allowed the people to fight for them. Hence the rule that was transferred to them was not the rule of a general who has defeated his adversary, but the rule of a committee of public safety to which the victorious people entrusts the protection of its interests.

Camphausen was still clearly aware of this embarrassing situation, and the weakness of his Ministry was entirely due to this feeling and the circumstances that gave rise to it. Even the most shameless actions of his Government are therefore tinted by a sort of shamefaced blush. Open shamelessness and insolence were Han- semann's privilege. The red colouring is all that distinguishes these two painters one from the other.

The March revolution in Prussia should not be confused either with the English revolution of 1648 or with the French one of 1789.

refugees, a centralisation which cannot be harmed and which is therefore in a position to perform its functions. The deputy from Biela himself was of this opinion and spoke against transferring the duties of the Central Association to the Executive of the military association. But all are, of course, free to join the military association; they are only asked not to join it as associations, so that the association can never be harmed as such, but only individual persons, if perchance new persecutions should take place.

Having thus replied to each of the points mentioned in your letter, we refer you to the enclosed minutes for the further decisions of the Congress and ask you on behalf of the Congress to join the Union of German Associations founded hereby and to advise us as soon as possible of your having done so.

We appeal to you again: give way in secondary matters as others have given way and will give way in future, so as to save the main object; join the nucleus of the Union which has already been founded by several associations with much sacrifice in money and time, and which can only succeed if we all stand together, forget the past and no longer allow ourselves to be divided by minor differences of opinion!

Greetings and fraternal good wishes.

Berne, about December 25, 1848 Address: Herr N. Berger, Käfichgässlein No. 109, Bern

On behalf of the Congress, The Central Commission

[^1]: Written by Engels

[^2]: First published in Beiträge zur Geschich U der deutschen Arbeiterbewegung, Heft 4, 1960

[^3]: Printed according to the manu- script

[^4]: Published in English for the first time

[^5]: Julius Standau.—Ed.





**[p. 210]**

REFUTATION

The literary Lumpenproletariat of Herr Dumont, which accepts with the most touching passive resistance all the kicks bestowed on it by the Neue Rheinische Zeitung, is trying to revenge itself by denouncing the editors of the Neue Rheinische Zeitung to the police on account of articles which they have not written. Thus, according to the Kölnische Zeitung of December 25, Freiligrath is alleged to be the author of a report from Cologne in the Deutsche Schnellpost, published in New York, and for that reason is said to have participated in the cat's concert dedicated to the patrons of the Kölnische Zeitung on November 3. It seems that the laurels won by "Maltheser,,a prevent the editors of the Kölnische Zeitung from sleeping.

[^1]: Written on December 26, 1848 Printed according to the newspaper

[^2]: First published in the Neue Rheinische Published in English for the first Zeitung No. 179, December 27, 1848 time

[^3]: a See this volume, p. 191.—Ed.





**[p. 211]**

THE NEW "HOLY ALLIANCE"

Cologne, December 30. It is already generally known that some months ago a new "Holy Alliance" was concluded between Prussia, Austria and Russia.200 The treaty itself will very shortly be brought into the light of day and it will be possible for it to be made public. The soul of this alliance of the rulers "by the grace of God and the knout" is Russia. On the other hand, the whole of Russian policy and diplomacy, with few exceptions, is borne on the shoulders of Germans or German Russians. Indeed, wherever absolutism and counter-revolution are actively at work, Germans are always to be found, but nowhere more so than at the focal point of the permanent counter-revolution, Russian diplomacy. There, in the first place, is Count Nesselrode, a German Jew; then come Baron von Meyendorf, ambassador in Berlin, from Estonia, and his assistant, adjutant of the Tsar, Colonel Count Benkendorff, also from Estonia. Working in Austria is Count Medem, a Courlander, with several assistants, including a Herr von Fonton, all of them Germans. Baron von Brunnow, Russian ambassador in London, also a Courlander, acts as an intermediate and mediating link between—Metternich and Palmerston. Finally, in Frankfurt, Baron von Budberg, a Livonian, acts as Russian chargé d'affaires. These are a few examples. We could cite several dozen more, without mentioning the creatures of the Petersburg Tsara who occupy high and highest posts in Germany and at the same time are in high Russian pay.

The role played by the Austrian Archduchess Sophia, now the Dowager Empress, in the cause of the Holy Alliance and the enemies of the people, is so notorious as to need no description. Sophia

[^1]: Nicholas I.—Ed.





**[p. 212]**

herself, however, is in turn powerfully influenced by Grand Duchess Helena, wife of Grand Duke Michael and daughter of Prince Paul von Württemberg. Helena serves as the most intimate link between Nicholas and Sophia and the notorious Archduke Ludwig.

Moreover, already some months ago these persons agreed on the plan according to which the Austrian martial-law Emperor3 will marry the surviving daughter15 of the Grand-ducal married couple in order that the new "Holy Alliance" will be indissolubly welded together and Russia brought ever closer to its goal, the establishment in Germany of the most complete rule of the knout.

Written on December 30, 1848 Printed according to the newspaper

First published in the Neue Rheinische Published in English for the first Zeitung No. 183, December 31, 1848 time

[^1]: Franz Joseph.—Ed. Catherine.—Ed.





**[p. 213]**

THE REVOLUTIONARY MOVEMENT5

Cologne, December 31. Never was a revolutionary movement opened with such an edifying overture as the revolutionary movement of 1848. The Pope gave it the blessing of the Church, and Lamartine's aeolian harp vibrated with tender philanthropic tunes to the text of fraternité, the brotherhood of members of society and nations.

Driven out of Rome, the Pope is at present staying at Gaeta under the protection of the tigerish idiot Ferdinand; Italy's " iniciatore"203

conspires against Italy with Austria, Italy's traditional mortal enemy, whom in happier days he threatened to excommunicate. The recent French presidential elections have given statistical proof of the unpopularity of Lamartine, the traitor. There has been no event more philanthropic, humane, and weak than the February and March revolutions, nothing more brutal than the inevitable conse- quences of this humanity of weakness. The proofs are Italy, Poland, Germany, and, above all, those who were defeated in June.

But the defeat of the French workers in June was the defeat of the June victors themselves. Ledru-Rollin and the other men of the Mountain were ousted by the party of the National, the party of the bourgeois republicans; the party of the National was ousted by Thiers-Barrot, the dynastic opposition; these in turn would have had to make way for the legitimists 04 if the cycle of the three restorations had not come to an end, and if Louis Napoleon were something

[^1]: Welcome all ye myriad creatures! Brethren, take the kiss of love!3

[^2]: a Schiller, "An die Freude".—Ed.





**[p. 214]**

more than an empty ballot-box by means of which the French peasants announced their entry into the revolutionary social movement, and the French workers their condemnation of all leaders of the preceding periods—Thiers-Barrot, Lamartine and Cavaignac-Marrast. But let us note the fact that the inevitable consequence of the defeat of the revolutionary French working class was the defeat of the republican French bourgeoisie, to which it had just succumbed.

The defeat of the working class in France, the victory of the French bourgeoisie was at the same time the renewed fettering of the nationalities who had responded to the crowing of the Gallic cock with heroic attempts to liberate themselves. Prussian, Austrian and English Sbirri* once more plundered, ravished and murdered in Poland, Italy and Ireland. The defeat of the working class in France, the victory of the French bourgeoisie was at the same time the defeat of the middle classes in all European countries where the middle classes, united for the moment with the people, had responded to the crowing of the Gallic cock with sanguinary insurrections against feudalism. Naples, Vienna, Berlin! The defeat of the working class in France, the victory of the French bourgeoisie was at the same time a victory of East over West, the defeat of civilisation by barbarism. The suppression of the Rumanians by the Russians and their tools, the Turks, began in Wallachia205; Croats, Pandours, Czechs, Serezhans206

and similar rabble throttled German liberty in Vienna, and the Tsar is now omnipresent in Europe. The overthrow of the bourgeoisie in France, the triumph of the French working class, the emancipation of the working class in general, is therefore the rallying-cry of European liberation.

But England, the country that turns whole nations into its proletarians, that takes the whole world within its immense embrace, that has already once defrayed the cost of a European Restoration, the country in which class contradictions have reached their most acute and shameless form—England seems to be the rock against which the revolutionary waves break, the country where the new society is stifled even in the womb. England dominates the world market. A revolution of the economic relations in any country of the European continent, in the whole European continent without England, is a storm in a teacup. Industrial and commercial relations within each nation are governed by its intercourse with other nations, and depend on its relations with the world market. But the

[^1]: Policemen.—Ed.





**[p. 215]**

world market is dominated by England, and England is dominated by the bourgeoisie.

The liberation of Europe, whether brought about by the struggle of the oppressed nationalities for their independence or by overthrowing feudal absolutism, depends therefore on the successful uprising of the French working class. Every social upheaval in France, however, is bound to be thwarted by the English bourgeoisie, by Great Britain's industrial and commercial domination of the world. Every partial social reform in France or on the European continent as a whole, if designed to be lasting, is merely a pious wish. And only a world war can overthrow the old England, as only this can provide the Chartists, the party of the organised English workers, with the conditions for a successful rising against their gigantic oppressors. Only when the Chartists head the English Government will the social revolution pass from the sphere of Utopia to that of reality. But any European warm which England is involved is a world war, waged in Canada as in Italy, in East Indies as in Prussia, in Africa as on the Danube. A European war will be the first result of a successful workers' revolution in France. England will head the counter-revolutionary armies, just as it did during the Napoleonic period, but through the war itself it will be thrown to the head of the revolutionary movement and it will repay the debt it owes in regard to the revolution of the eighteenth century.

The table of contents for 1849 reads: Revolutionary rising of the French working class, world war.

[^1]: Written by Marx on December 31,1848 Printed according to the newspaper

[^2]: First published in the Neue Rheinische Zeitung No. 184, January 1, 1849





**[p. 216]**

SWISS-ITALIAN AFFAIRS

Berne, December 28. The Swiss troops have hardly been with- drawn from the Lombardy border and Radetzky's chicaneries are already beginning again. He has written to the federal representa- tives in Tessin saying there is a disturbing trade in weapons on the frontier, and the federal representatives have talked the Tessin Government into authorising several house searches in Mendrisio. A few muskets have been found and confiscated. It cannot be foreseen on what grounds this violation of the privacy of the home and seizure of foreign property will be justified. It is only surprising that the Tessin Government has lent itself to such practices.

appears however to be leading nowhere. It is not as if they had not found a sufficient number of stalwart Alpine lads who would give their skins for ready money and be happy to do Croat services in Ferdinand's army; on the contrary! But the whole business is foundering on the impossibility of getting from Switzerland to Naples.

According to the enlistment agreements,207 the recruits must be transported via Genoa, and the Turin Government refuses transit. It is now said that the recruits are to be brought to Trieste and embarked there. This news has caused great alarm among the recruits. They do not want to go to Austria. They are afraid of being put among real Croats and led against the Magyars, and they are now petitioning the Lucerne Government Council to insist on the Genoese route. Strange. As if it were not a matter of indifference to these henchmen of the counter-revolution whether they massacre Magyars or Messinese! But of course there is a big difference between Austrian paper money and Neapolitan full-weight gold ducats!

[^1]: The Neapolitan recruiting in Lucerne and the L/r-cantonsa

[^2]: a See this volume, p. 183.—Ed.





**[p. 1849]**

Incidentally, the Lucerne Government seems to imitate the Bernese Government in wanting to suspend the enlistment agree- ments till the Swiss merchants in Naples and Messina are indem- nified.208 At least, it has inquired of the Federal Council about the arrangements for compensation. So that leaves only the L/r-cantons, and these will not suffer any encroachment upon the right of every citizen to sell himself as long as the Federal Constitution allows it, i.e. as long as the present enlistment agreements have still to run. This right of self-sale is one of the finest and oldest privileges of the free c/r-Swiss, and if these brave "first-born sons of freedom" tried to defend their "five-hundred-year-old rights" against the new Federal Constitution, it was above all on account of this special right which the new Constitution has annulled. The military enlistment agree- ments are really a vital matter for the L/r-cantons. For five hundred years they have been the drainage channel for the superfluous population, and hence the best guarantee for the existing barbarous state of things. Annul the enlistment agreements, and you will unleash a real revolution in these so-called clean, i.e. in fact extremely unclean, democracies.

The younger sons of peasants, now setting off for Naples and Rome, will have to stay at home; they will find no occupation either in their own cantons or in the rest of Switzerland, which is already suffering enough from "over-population"; they will form a new class of peasant proletarians, who by their very existence must bring all the old relations of property, property acquirement and law of these pastoral races, established for a thousand years, into the utmost confusion. Where would these sterile mountain lands get the means to feed the paupers deposited there from all sides on the frontier by expulsion orders? The core of such a class of paupers already exists and threatens in an exceedingly disagreeable way this traditional patriarchalism. And even if—which is not to be expected—in the next few years the European revolution observes the same respect as hitherto towards Swiss neutrality, the article of the new Federal Constitution forbidding enlistments is preparing a revolutionary ferment which will eventually completely uproot the oldest and most firmly entrenched seat of reactionary barbarism in Europe. Like the monarchies, the reactionary republics are going under, dying of pecuniary consumption, of the "pale melancholy of financial need".

[^1]: Written by Engels on December 28, 1848 Printed according to the newspaper

[^2]: First published in the supplement to the Published in English for the first Neue Rheinische Zeitung No. 185, January 3, time





**[p. 218]**

A BOURGEOIS DOCUMENT

Cologne, January 4. In England, where the rule of the bourgeoisie has reached the greatest development, public charity too, as we know, has assumed the most noble and magnanimous forms. In English workhouses3—public institutions in which the surplus labour population is allowed to vegetate at the expense of bourgeois society—charity is cunningly combined with the revenge which the bourgeoisie wreaks on the wretches who are compelled to appeal to its charity. Not only do the poor devils receive the most wretched and meagre means of subsistence, hardly sufficient for the propagation of the species, their activity, too, is restricted to revolting, unproduc- tive, meaningless drudgery, such as work at the treadmill, which deadens both mind and body. These unfortunate people have committed the crime of having ceased to be an object of exploitation yielding a profit to the bourgeoisie—as is the case in ordinary life—and having become instead an object of expenditure for those born to derive benefit from them; like so many barrels of liquor which, left unsold in the warehouse, become an object of expendi- ture to the wine merchant. To bring home to them the full magnitude of their crime, they are deprived of everything that is granted to the lowest criminal—association with their wives and children, recreation, talk—everything. Even this " cruel charity" of the English bourgeoisie is due not to sentimental but to thoroughly practical and rational reasons. On the one hand, if all the paupers in Great Britain were suddenly thrown into the street, bourgeois order and commercial activity would suffer to an alarming extent. On the

[^1]: a Here and below this word is given in English in the original.—Ed.





**[p. 219]**

other hand, British industry has alternate periods of feverish over-production, when the demand for hands can hardly be satisfied, and the hands are nevertheless to be obtained as cheaply as possible, followed by periods of slack business, when production is far larger than consumption and it is difficult to find useful employment even at half pay for half the labour army. Is there a more ingenious device than the workhouse for maintaining a reserve army in readiness for favourable periods while converting them in these pious institutions during unfavourable commercial periods into machines devoid of will, resistance, claims and requirements?

The Prussian bourgeoisie differs favourably from the English bourgeoisie, since in contrast to British political arrogance reminis- cent of pagan Rome it displays Christian humility and meekness in the most servile reverence before throne, altar, army, bureaucracy and feudalism; instead of displaying the commercial energy which conquers whole continents, it engages in domestic retail trade of a Chinese type, and tries to confound the impetuous titanic spirit of inventiveness in industry by clinging staunchly and virtuously to the traditional semi-guild routine. But the Prussian bourgeoisie ap- proaches its British ideal in one respect—in its shameless maltreatment of the working class. That, as a body, it in general lags behind the British bourgeoisie, is due simply to the fact that, on the whole, as a national class, it has never achieved anything of importance and never will, because of its lack of courage, intelligence and energy. It does not exist on a national scale, it exists only in provincial, municipal, local, private forms, and in these forms it confronts the working class even more ruthlessly than the English bourgeoisie. Why is it that since the Restoration the peoples longed for Napoleon, whom they had just before chained to a lonely rock in the Mediterranean3? Because it is easier to endure the tyranny of a genius than that of an idiot. Thus the English worker can feel a certain national pride in face of the German worker, because the master who enslaves him enslaves the whole world, whereas the master of the German worker, the German bourgeois, is himself everybody's servant, and nothing is more galling and humiliating than to be the servant of a servant.

We publish here without any alterations the "Worker's Card', which proletarians engaged on municipal works have to sign in the good city of Cologne; this historical document shows the cynical attitude of our bourgeoisie towards the working class.

[^1]: a An allusion to Elba, the island to which Napoleon I was exiled during the Bourbon restoration in 1814.—Ed.





**[p. 220]**

WORKER'S CARD

§ 1. Every worker must strictly obey the instructions and orders of all municipal supervisors, who have been sworn in as police officers. Disobedience and insubordination will entail immediate dismissal.

§2. No worker is allowed to move from one section to another or to leave the building-site without the special permission of the supervisor.

§3. Workers purloining wheelbarrows, carts or other equipment from another section in order to use them in their work will be dismissed.

§4. Drunkenness, disturbance of the peace, and starting up squabbles, quarrels and fights entail immediate dismissal.—In appropriate cases moreover legal proceed- ings will be taken against the culprits.

§ 5. A worker arriving ten minutes late at his place of work will be given no work on that particular half day; if this should occur three times he may be dismissed altogether.

§6. If workers are dismissed at their own request or by way of punishment, they will receive their wages at the next regular pay-day in accordance with the work done.

§ 7. A worker's dismissal is noted in the Worker's Card.—Should the dismissal be by way of punishment, the worker, according to the circumstances, is barred from re-employment either at the same place of work or at all municipal works.

§ 8. The police are always to be informed when workers are dismissed by way of punishment and of the reasons for their dismissal.

§9. Should workers have any complaints to make against the building-site supervisor, these are to be lodged with the town clerk of works through an elected delegation of three workers. This officer will examine the cause of the complaint on the spot and give his decision.

Could the Russian edicts of the Autocrat of All the Russias to his subjects be couched in more Asiatic terms?

The municipal, and even "all municipal supervisors, who have been sworn in as police officers", must be "strictly obeyed". "Disobedience and insubordination will entail immediate dismissal." First of all, therefore, passive obedience. Then, according to §9, the workers have the right to complain to "the town clerk of works". The decisions of this pasha are irrevocable and directed, of course, against the workers, if only in the interests of the hierarchy. And once this decision has been taken and the municipal interdict laid upon the workers, woe to them, for they will then be placed under police surveillance. The last semblance of their civic freedom disappears,

[^1]: § 10. The working hours are from six thirty in the morning to twelve noon and from one o'clock in the afternoon till evening darkness sets in. (Wonderful style!)

[^2]: §11. The worker is employed on these conditions. §12. Payment is made on the building-site on Saturday afternoon.

[^3]: The sworn building-site supervisor, for the present [] whose instructions have to be obeyed.

[^4]: Assigned to section of and has etc. Signature of the building-site super- visor

[^5]: Cologne Signaturel of the worker or sign f





**[p. 221]**

for, according to §8, "the police are always to be informed when workers are dismissed by way of punishment and of the reasons for their dismissal".

But gentlemen, if you dismiss a worker, if you terminate a contract by which he gives his labour for your wages, what on earth has the police to do with this termination of a civil agreement? Is the municipal worker a convict? Have you denounced him to the police because he did not pay due deference to you, his hereditary, most wise and noble-minded masters? Would you not deride the citizen who denounced you to the police for having broken some delivery contract, or failed to pay a bill when it was due, or drunk too much on New Year's eve? Of course you would! But as regards the worker you are bound by no civil agreement, you lord it over him with the caprice of the lords by the grace of Godl The police must, on your behalf, keep a record of his conduct.

Under § 5, a worker arriving ten minutes late is punished with the loss of half a day's labour. What a punishment in comparison with the offence! You are centuries late, but the worker is not allowed to arrive ten minutes after half past six without losing half a working day.

Finally, in order that this patriarchal arbitrariness should not be in any way restricted and the worker be entirely dependent on your whim, you have left the mode of punishment, as far as possible, to the discretion of your uniformed servants. Dismissal and denuncia- tion to the police is, according to § 4, to be followed in "appropriate cases", that is in cases which you will be pleased to regard as appropriate, by "legal proceedings against the culprits". Under §5, the worker who arrives late for the third time, i.e. ten minutes after half past six, "may" be dismissed altogether. In case of dismissal by way of punishment, §7 states, "the worker, according to the circumstances, is barred from re-employment either at the same place of work or at all municipal works", and so on and so forth.

What scope for the whims of the annoyed bourgeois is given in this criminal code of our municipal Catos, these great men who grovel before Berlin!

This model law shows what sort of Charter our bourgeoisie, if it stood at the helm of state, would impose on the people.

[^1]: Written by Marx on January 4, 1849 Printed according to the newspaper

[^2]: First published in the Neue Rheinische Zeitung No. 187, January 5, 1849





**[p. 222]**

A NEW-YEAR GREETING

Cologne, January 8. That priests and precentors, vergers and organ-blowers, barbers and night-watchmen, field guards, grave- diggers etc. send us New-Year greetings, is a custom that is as old as it is ever recurrent, and one which leaves us cold.

The year 1849, however, is not content with the traditional. Its arrival has been marked by something unprecedented, a New-Year greeting from the King of Prussia.3

This royal New-Year message looks on the army "with pride" because it remained loyal

Previously people spoke of the March events, of "misunder- standings", and so forth. Now there is no longer need for disguise: the March "misunderstandings" are cast in our face as "revolt".

The royal New-Year greeting breathes on us the same spirit as that which emanates from the columns of the "Dame of the Cross".b Just as the former speaks of "revolt", so the latter speaks of inglorious "March criminals", of the criminal rabble which upset the tranquilli- ty of Court life in Berlin.

If we ask why the March "revolt" should be so particularly revolting, we are told in reply: "because it disturbed the peaceful development of liberal (!!) institutions etc."

[^1]: It is a New-Year wish addressed not to the Prussian people, nor "To my dear Berliners", but "To my army".210

[^2]: "when" (in March) "revolt disturbed the peaceful development of liberal institutions towards which I wished cautiously to lead My people".

[^3]: a Frederick William IV.—Ed.

[^4]: That is Kreuz-Zeitung (Neue Preussische Zeitung).—Ed.





**[p. 223]**

If you were not peacefully at rest in Friedrichshain,211 you March rebels, you would now have to be rewarded with "powder and shot" or penal servitude for life. By your wickedness did you not indeed disturb "the peaceful development of liberal institutions"? Does one need to be reminded of that royal Prussian development of "liberal institutions", of the most liberal development in the squandering of money, of the "peaceful" expansion of bigotry and royal Prussian Jesuitry, of the peaceful development of police and barrack rule, of spying, deception, hypocrisy, arrogance, and finally the most disgusting brutalisation of the people alongside of the most shameful corruption among the so-called upper classes? There is all the less need for such a reminder because we have only to look around, to stretch out our hands, in order to see that "disturbed development" again in full bloom and to refresh ourselves with a double edition of the above-mentioned "liberal institutions".

"My army," the royal message of greetings goes on to say, "has kept its old glory and won new glory."

Indeed it has! It has won so much glory that at most the Croats could lay claim to greater.

But where and how has it won it? In the first place:

The Prussian Note sent by Major Wildenbruch to the Danish Government212 is the basis on which the new Prussian glory has been erected. The entire conduct of the war conformed excellently to that Note, which assured the Danish Herr cousin3 that the Prussian Government was not at all in earnest, it was merely throwing out a bait to the republicans and throwing sand in the eyes of other people in order to gain time. And to gain time is to gain everything. Later agreement would be reached in the jolliest of ways.

Herr Wrangel, about whom public opinion was led astray for rather a long time, Herr Wrangel left Schleswig-Holstein secretly like a thief in the night. He travelled in civilian clothes in order not to be recognised. In Hamburg all the innkeepers declared that they could not give him shelter. They considered their houses, and the windows and doors in them, to be dearer to them than the laurels of the Prussian army, which were despised by the people although embodied in this illustrious gentleman. We should not forget either that the only success in this campaign of useless and senseless

[^1]: "It adorned its banners with new laurels when Germany required our weapons in Schleswig."

[^2]: a Frederick VII.—Ed.





**[p. 224]**

movements hither and thither, which was wholly reminiscent of the procedure of the old imperial courts of justice (see our issues at the time3), was a strategic mistake.

The only surprising thing about this campaign is the inexpressible cheek of the Danes, who mischievously hoaxed the Prussian army and completely cut off Prussia from the world market.

To complete the Prussian glory in this connection, one must include also the peace negotiations with Denmark and the Malmö armistice which resulted from them.213

If the Roman Emperor,b on sniffing a coin in the receipts from the public conveniences, could say: "Non olet" (it does not smell), the Prussian laurels won in Schleswig-Holstein, on the other hand, are marked in ineradicable characters: "Olet!" (it stinks!).

Secondly, "My army victoriously overcame hardships and dangers when it was necessary to combat insurrection in the Grand Duchy of Posen".

As far as the "victoriously overcome hardships" are concerned, they are as follows: Prussia, firstly, exploited the magnanimous illusion, fostered by smooth words from Berlin, of the Poles, who regarded the "Pomeranians" as German comrades-in-arms against Russia, and therefore calmly disbanded their army, let the Pomera- nians march in, and only reassembled their scattered military cadres when the Prussians most vilely maltreated them when they were defenceless. And as for the Prussian feats of heroism! The heroic deeds of the "glorious" Prussian army were accomplished not during the war, but after the war. When Mieroslawski was presented to the June victor, Cavaignac's first question was how the Prussians had managed to be defeated at Miloslaw. (We can prove this by eyewitnesses.) 3,000 Poles, hardly armed with scythes and pikes, struck twice and twice forced 20,000 Prussians to retreat, although the latter were well organised and liberally equipped with weapons.214 In its wild flight the Prussian cavalry itself threw the Prussian infantry into confusion. The Polish insurrection kept its hold on Miloslaw, after twice driving the counter-revolutionaries out of the city. Still more shameful than the Prussians' defeat at Miloslaw was their final victory at Wreschen, prepared for by a defeat.215 If an unarmed but Herculean opponent confronts a coward armed with pistols, the coward flees and fires his pistols from a respectable distance. That is how the Prussians behaved at Wreschen. They fled to

[^1]: 3 A reference to Engels' articles "The War Comedy" and "The Armistice with Denmark" (see present edition, Vol. 7, pp. 42-44 and 266-69).—Ed. Vespasian.—Ed.





**[p. 161]**

In 1648 the bourgeoisie was allied with the modern aristocracy against the monarchy, the feudal aristocracy and the established church.

In 1789 the bourgeoisie was allied with the people against the monarchy, the aristocracy and the established church.

The revolution of 1789 (at least in Europe) had as its prototype only the revolution of 1648; the revolution of 1648 only the revolt of the Netherlands against Spain.154 Both revolutions were a century in advance of their prototypes not only in time but also in content.

In both revolutions the bourgeoisie was the class that really headed the movement. The proletariat and the non-bourgeois strata of the middle class had either not yet any interests separate from those of the bourgeoisie or they did not yet constitute independent classes or class sub-divisions. Therefore, where they opposed the bourgeoisie, as they did in France in 1793 and 1794, they fought only for the attainment of the aims of the bourgeoisie, even if not in the manner of the bourgeoisie. All French terrorism was nothing but a plebeian wayoi dealing with the enemies of the bourgeoisie, absolutism, feudalism and philistinism.

The revolutions of 1648 and 1789 were not English and French revolutions, they were revolutions of a European type. They did not represent the victory of a particular class of society over the old political order; they proclaimed the political order of the new European society. The bourgeoisie was victorious in these revolutions, but the victory of the bourgeoisie was at that time the victory of a new social order, the victory of bourgeois ownership over feudal ownership, of nationality over provincialism, of competition over the guild, of the division of land over primogeniture, of the rule of the landowner over the domination of the owner by the land, of enlightenment over superstition, of the family over the family name, of industry over heroic idleness, of bourgeois law over medieval privileges. The revolution of 1648 was the victory3 of the seventeenth century over the sixteenth century; the revolution of 1789 was the victory of the eighteenth century over the seventeenth. These revolutions reflected the needs of the world at that time rather than the needs of those parts of the world where they occurred, that is England and France.

There has been nothing of all this in the Prussian March revolution. The February revolution actually abolished the constitutional monarchy and nominally abolished the rule of the bourgeoisie. The Prussian March revolution was intended to establish nominally a

[^1]: a In the Neue Rheinische Zeitung: "the revolution".— Ed.





**[p. 162]**

constitutional monarchy and to establish actually the rule of the bourgeoisie. Far from being a European revolution it was merely a stunted after-effect of a European revolution in a backward country. Instead of being ahead of its century, it was over half a century behind its time. From the very outset it was a secondary phenomenon, and it is well known that secondary diseases are harder to cure and at the same time cause more harm than the primary diseases do. It was not a question of establishing a new society, but of resurrecting in Berlin a society that had expired in Paris. The Prussian March revolution was not even a national, German revolution; from the outset it was a provincial Prussian revolution. All sorts of provincial uprisings—in Vienna, Cassel, Munich etc.—took place alongside it and contested its lead.

Whereas 1648 and 1789 gained boundless self-confidence from being at the apex of creation, it was the ambition of the Berlin revolution of 1848 to constitute an anachronism. Its light was like that of the stars which reaches us, the inhabitants of the Earth, only after the bodies from which it emanated have been extinct for a hundred thousand years. The March revolution in Prussia was, on a small scale—just as it was on a small scale in everything — such a star for Europe. Its light was that of the corpse of a society which had long ago decayed.

The German bourgeoisie developed so sluggishly, timidly and slowly that at the moment when it menacingly confronted feudalism and absolutism, it saw menacingly confronting it the proletariat and all sections of the middle class whose interests and ideas were related to those of the proletariat. The German bourgeoisie found not just one class behind it, but all Europe hostilely facing it. Unlike the French bourgeoisie of 1789, the Prussian bourgeoisie, when it confronted the monarchy and aristocracy, the representatives of the old society, was not a. class speaking for the whole of modern society. It had sunk to the level of a kind of social estate as clearly distinct from the Crown as it was from the people, with a strong bent to oppose both adversaries and irresolute towards each of them individually because it always saw both of them either in front of it or behind it. From the first it was inclined to betray the people and to compromise with the crowned representative of the old society, for it itself already belonged to the old society; it did not represent the interests of a new society against an old one, but renewed interests within an obsolete society. It stood at the helm of the revolution not because it had the people behind it but because the people drove it before them; it stood at the head not because it represented the initiative of a new social era but only because it represented the

