---
Volume: 8
Document_Title: "60. A New Ally of the Counter- Revolution "
Page_Range: "208-211"
---

# 60. A New Ally of the Counter- Revolution 



**[p. 163]**

rancour of an old one. A stratum of the old state that had failed to break through and was thrown up on the surface of the new state by the force of an earthquake; without faith in itself, without faith in the people, grumbling at those above, trembling before those below, egoistic towards both sides and aware of its egoism; revolutionary in relation to the conservatives and conservative in relation to the revolutionaries. It did not trust its own slogans, used phrases instead of ideas, it was intimidated by the world storm and exploited it for its own ends; it displayed no energy in any respect, but resorted to plagiarism in every respect, it was vulgar because unoriginal, and original in its vulgarity; haggling over its own desires, without initiative, without faith in itself, without faith in the people, without a world-historic mission, an abominable dotard finding himself condemned to lead and to mislead the first youthful impulses of a virile people so as to make them serve his own senile interests—sans eyes, sans ears, sans teeth, sans everything3—such was the Prussian bourgeoisie which found itself at the helm of the Prussian state after the March revolution.

[Neue Rheinische Zeitung No. 170, December 16, 1848]

Cologne, December 15. The theory of agreement, which the bourgeoisie, on attaining governmental power in the shape of the

Camphausen Ministry, immediately declared the "broadest" basis of the Prussian contrat social, was by no means an empty theory; on the contrary, it grew on the tree of "golden" life.

The sovereign by the grace of God was by no means subjected to the sovereignty of the people as a result of the March revolution. The Crown, the absolutist state, was merely compelled to come to an understanding with the bourgeoisie, to come to an agreement with its old rival.

The Crown is ready to sacrifice the aristocracy to the bourgeoisie, the bourgeoisie is ready to sacrifice the people to the Crown. Under these circumstances the monarchy becomes bourgeois and the bourgeoisie monarchical. / Only these two powers still exist since the March revolution. They use each other as a sort of lightning-conductor against the revolution. Always, of course, on the "broadest democratic basis".

Therein lay the secret of the theory of agreement. The oil and wool merchants155 who formed the first Ministry after the March revolution took pleasure in their role of protecting the

[^1]: a Cf. Shakespeare As You l Ake It, Act II, Scene 7.—Ed.

[^2]: 7-3780





**[p. 164]**

exposed Crown with their plebeian wings. They were highly delighted at having gained access to the Court and reluctantly driven by pure magnanimity to abandon their austere Roman pose, i.e. the Roman pose of the United Diet, to use the corpse of their former popularity to fill the chasm that threatened to engulf the throne. Minister Camphausen plumed himself on being the midwife of the constitutional throne. The worthy man was evidently deeply moved by himself, his own magnanimity. The Crown and its hangers-on reluctantly suffered this humiliating protection and made bonne mine

à mauvais jeu,3 hoping for better days to come.

The bourgeois gentilhomme*1 was easily taken in by a few honeyed words and curtsies from the partly disintegrated army, the bureaucracy that trembled for its positions and salaries, and the humiliated feudals, whose leader0 was engaged in a constitutional educational journey.

The Prussian bourgeoisie was nominally the ruler and did not for a moment doubt that the powers of the old state had placed themselves unreservedly at its disposal and had become devoted adjuncts of its own omnipotence.

Not only in the Ministry but throughout the monarchy the bourgeoisie was intoxicated with this delusion.

Did not the army, the bureaucracy and even the feudal lords act as willing and obedient accomplices in the only heroic deeds the Prussian bourgeoisie performed after the March revolution, namely, the often sanguinary machinations of the civic militia against the unarmed proletariat? Did not the subdued Regierungspräsidenten and penitent divisional generals listen with admiration to the stern patriarchal admonitions which the local councillors addressed to the people — the only efforts, the only heroic deeds of which these local councillors, the local representatives of the bourgeoisie (whose obtrusive servile vulgarity the Windischgrätzes, Jellachiches and Weldens afterwards repaid with kicks), were capable after the March revolution? Could the Prussian bourgeoisie have doubted after this that the former ill will of the army, bureaucracy and feudal aristocracy had been transformed into respectful loyalty to the bourgeoisie, the magnanimous victor who had put a curb both upon itself and upon anarchy?

[^1]: A good face on a bad garïie.—Ed. An ironical allusion to the German liberal leaders whom Marx compares with Jourdain, hero of Molière's comedy Le bourgeois gentilhomme.—Ed.

[^2]: c The reference is to the Prince of Prussia.—Ed.





**[p. 165]**

Clearly the Prussian bourgeoisie now had only one task — to settle itself comfortably in the saddle, get rid of the troublesome anarchists, restore "law and order" and retrieve the profit lost during the March storm. It was now merely a question of reducing to a minimum the costs of its rule and of the March revolution which had brought it about. The weapons which, in its struggle against the feudal society and the Crown, the Prussian bourgeoisie had been compelled to demand in the name of the people, such as the right of association and freedom of the press, were they not bound to be broken in the hands of a deluded people who no longer needed to use them to fight for the bourgeoisie and who revealed an alarming inclination to use them against the bourgeoisie?

The bourgeoisie was convinced that evidently only one obstacle stood in the way of its agreement with the Crown, in the way of a deal with the old state, which was resigned to its fate, and that obstacle was the people — puer robustus sed malitiosus,a as Hobbes says. The people and the revolution]

The revolution was the legal title of the people; the vehement claims of the people were based on the revolution. The revolution was the bill of exchange drawn by the people on the bourgeoisie. The bourgeoisie came to power through the revolution. The day it came to power was also the day this bill became due. The bourgeoisie had to protest the bill.

Revolution on the lips of the people meant: you, the bourgeois, are the Comité du salut public, the Committee of Public Safety, to whom we have entrusted the government not in order that you should come to an agreement with the Crown regarding your own interests but in order that you should implement our interests, the interests of the people, in face of the Crown.

Revolution was the people's protest against the agreement between the bourgeoisie and the Crown. The bourgeoisie that was making an agreement with the Crown had therefore to protest against the revolution.

And that was done under the great Camphausen. The March revolution was not recognised. The representative National Assembly at Berlin set itself up as the representative of the Prussian bourgeoisie, as the Agreement Assembly, by rejecting the motion recognising the March revolution.156

The Assembly sought to undo what had been done. It vociferously declared to the Prussian people that the people did not come to an agreement with the bourgeoisie in order to make a revolution against

[^1]: a A robust but malicious fellow (Thomas Hobbes, De cive, Preface).—Ed.

[^2]: 7*



