---
Volume: 8
Document_Title: "61. The Calumnies of the Neue Rheinische Zeitung "
Page_Range: "211-212"
---

# 61. The Calumnies of the Neue Rheinische Zeitung 



**[p. 166]**

the Crown, but that it was making a revolution in order that the Crown would come to an agreement with the bourgeoisie against the people! Thus was the legal title of the revolutionary people annulled and the legal basis secured for the conservative bourgeoisie.

The legal basis! Brüggemann, and through him the Kölnische Zeitung, have prated, fabled and moaned so much about the "legal basis", have so often lost and recovered, punctured and mended that "legal basis", tossed it from Berlin to Frankfurt and from Frankfurt to Berlin, narrowed and widened it, turned the simple basis into an inlaid floor and the inlaid floor into a false bottom (which, as we know, is a principal device of performing conjurors), and the false bottom into a bottomless trapdoor, so that in the end the legal basis has rightly turned for our readers into the basis of the Kölnische Zeitung; thus, they could confuse the shibboleth of the Prussian bourgeoisie with the private shibboleth of Herr Joseph Dumont, a necessary invention of Prussian world history with the arbitrary hobby-horse of the Kölnische Zeitung, and regard the legal basis simply as the basis on which the Kölnische Zeitung thrives.

The legal basis, namely, the Prussian legal basisl

The legal basis on which Camphausen, the knight of the great debate, the resurrected phantom of the United Diet and the Agreement Assembly, acted after the March revolution—is it the constitutional law of 1815 or the law of 1820 regarding the Provincial Diet, or the edict of 1847, or the electoral and agreement law of April 8, 1848 157?

It is none of these. "Legal basis" simply meant that the revolution had gained no ground and the old society had not lost its ground; that the March revolution was only an "occurrence" that gave the "impulse" for an "agreement" between the throne and the bourgeoisie, preparations for which had long been made within the old Prussian state, and the need for which the Crown itself had already announced in earlier royal decrees, but had not, prior to March, considered as "urgent". In short, the " legal basis" meant that after the March revolution the bourgeoisie wanted to negotiate with the Crown on the same footing as before the March events, as though no revolution had taken place and the United Diet had achieved its goal without a revolution. The "legal basis" meant that the legal title of the people, revolution, did not exist in the contrat social between the Government and the bourgeoisie. The bourgeoisie deduced its claims from the old Prussian legislation, in order that the people should not deduce any claims from the new Prussian revolution.

