---
Volume: 8
Document_Title: "62. Ursuline Convent. - Recruiting for the Grape- Shot King. - The ' Burghers' Commune'. - Commission on a General Customs Tariff "
Page_Range: "212-214"
---

# 62. Ursuline Convent. - Recruiting for the Grape- Shot King. - The " Burghers' Commune". - Commission on a General Customs Tariff 



**[p. 167]**

Naturally, the ideological cretins of the bourgeoisie, its journalists, and suchlike, had to pass off this embellishment of the bourgeois interests as the real interests of the bourgeoisie, and persuade themselves and others to believe this. The phrase about the legal basis acquired real substance in the mind of a Brüggemann.

The Camphausen Government fulfilled its task, the task of being an intermediate link and a transitional stage. It was the intermediate link between the bourgeoisie which had risen on the shoulders of the people and the bourgeoisie which no longer required the shoulders of the people; between the bourgeoisie which ap- parently represented the people in face of the Crown and the bourgeoisie which really represented the Crown in face of the people; between the bourgeoisie coming away from the revolution and the bourgeoisie which had come out as the core of the revo- lution.3

In keeping with its role, the Camphausen Government coyly and bashfully confined itself to passive resistance against the revolution.

Although it rejected the revolution in theory, in practice it resisted only its claims and tolerated only the re-establishment of the old political authorities.

The bourgeoisie in the meantime believed that it had reached the point where passive resistance had to turn into active offensive. The Camphausen Ministry resigned not because it had committed some blunder or other, but simply because it was the first Ministry following the March revolution, because it was the Ministry of the March revolution and by virtue of its origin it had to conceal that it represented the bourgeoisie under the guise of a dictatorship of the people. Its dubious origin and its ambiguous character still imposed on it certain conventions, restraints and considerations with regard to the sovereign people which were irksome to the bourgeoisie, and which a second Ministry originating directly from the Agreement Assembly would no longer have to reckon with.

Its resignation therefore puzzled the saloon-bar politicians. It was followed by the Hansemann Government, the Government of Action, as the bourgeoisie intended to proceed from the period when it passively betrayed the people to the Crown to the period of active subjugation of the people to its own rule exercised in agreement with the Crown. The Government of Action was the second Government after the March revolution; that was its whole secret.

[^1]: a This is evidently a misprint: is should read "the core of the counter- revolution".— Ed.





**[p. 168]**

[Neue Rheinische Zeitung No. 183, December 31, 1848]

Cologne, December 29.

"Gentlemen, business is business!"3

In these few words Hansemann epitomised the whole liberalism of the United Diet. This man was the required head of a government based on the Agreement Assembly, a government which was to turn passive resistance to the people into an active offensive on the people, the Government of Action.

No Prussian Government contained so many bourgeois names! Hansemann, Milde, Märker, Kühlwetter, Gierke! Even von Auers- wald, the sort of label acceptable at Court, belonged to the liberal aristocracy of the Königsberg opposition which paid homage to the bourgeoisie. Roth von Schreckenstein alone represented the old bureaucratic Prussian feudal nobility among this rabble. Roth von

Schreckenstein! The surviving title of a vanished novel about robbers and knights by the late Hildebrandt.h But Roth von Schreckenstein was merely the feudal setting for the bourgeois jewel. Roth von

Schreckenstein in a bourgeois government meant this, spelled out in capital letters: the Prussian feudalists, the army and bureaucracy are guided by the newly arisen star, the Prussian bourgeoisie. These powerful figures have placed themselves at its disposal, and the bourgeoisie has set them up in front of its throne, just as bears were placed in front of the rulers of the people on old heraldic emblems. Roth von Schreckenstein is merely intended to be the bear of the bourgeois Government.

On June 26 the Hansemann Government presented itself to the National Assembly. Its effective existence began only in July. The June revolution was the background of the Government of Action, just as the February revolution formed the background of the Government of Mediation.

The bloody victory of the Paris bourgeoisie over the proletarians of Paris was exploited against the people by the Prussian bourgeoisie, just as the bloody victory of the Croats at Vienna was exploited against the bourgeoisie by the Prussian Crown. The suffering of the Prussian bourgeoisie after the Austrian November was retribution for the suffering of the Prussian people after the French June. In their short-sighted narrow-mindedness the German philistines mistook

[^1]: A quotation from Hansemann's speech in the first United Diet on June 8, 1847.—Ed.

[^2]: The reference is to Hildebrandt's novel Kuno von Schreckenstein oder die weissagende Traumgestalt.—Ed.



