---
Volume: 8
Document_Title: "63. Address of the Central Commission of the Workers'Associations of Switzerland to the Executive of the March Association in Frankfurt am Main "
Page_Range: "214-216"
---

# 63. Address of the Central Commission of the Workers'Associations of Switzerland to the Executive of the March Association in Frankfurt am Main 



**[p. 169]**

themselves for the French bourgeoisie. They had overturned no throne, they had not abolished feudal society, still less its last vestiges, they did not have to uphold a society they themselves had created. After June, as after February, they believed, as they had since the beginning of the sixteenth century and during the eighteenth century, that they would be able in their traditional crafty money-making manner to pocket three-quarters of the profit produced by someone else's labour. They had no inkling that behind the French June lurked the Austrian November and behind the Austrian November, the Prussian December. They did not suspect that whereas in France the throne-shattering bourgeoisie was confronted by only one enemy, the proletariat, the Prussian bourgeoisie, grappling with the Crown, possessed only one ally — the people. Not as if these two groups had no hostile and contradictory interests, but because they were still welded together by the same interests in face of a third power which oppressed them both equally.

The Hansemann Government regarded itself as a government of the June revolution. In contrast to the "red robbers", the philistines in every Prussian town turned into "respectable republicans", without ceasing to be worthy royalists, and occasionally overlooking the fact that their "reds" wore white-and-blacka cockades.

In his speech from the throne on June 26, Hansemann gave short shrift to Camphausen's mysteriously nebulous "monarchy on the broadest democratic basis".

"Constitutional monarchy based on the two-chamber system and the joint exercise of legislative power by the two Chambers and the Crown"—that was the dry formula to which he reduced the portentous motto of his enthusiastic predecessor.

— such was the Government's programme, the programme of the Prussian bourgeoisie in office, whose classical representative is Hansemann.

In the United Diet Hansemann was the most bitter and the most cynical adversary of trust, for—"Gentlemen, business is business!"

Hansemann in office proclaimed the "restoration of the shaken trust" a

[^1]: "Modification of the most essential relationships that are incompatible with the new constitution, liberation of property from the fetters that hamper its most advantageous utilisation in a large part of the monarchy, reorganisation of the administration of justice, reform of fiscal legislation and particularly annulment of tax exemptions etc." and above all "strengthening of the power of the state which is necessary for safeguarding the freedom which has been won" (by the citizens) "against reaction" (i.e. using the freedom in the interests of the feudal aristocracy) "and anarchy" (i.e. using the freedom in the interests of the people) "and for restoring the shaken trust"

[^2]: a Black and white were the Prussian colours.—Ed.





**[p. 170]**

foremost necessity, for—this time he addressed the people as previously he had addressed the throne—for

"Gentlemen, business is business!"

Previously it was a question of the trust that gives money, this time of the trust that makes money; then it was a matter of feudal trust, the sincere trust in God, King and Fatherland, now it was bourgeois trust, trust in trade and commerce, in interest-bearing capital, in the solvency of one's commercial friends, that is, commercial trust; it is not a matter of faith, charity or hope, but of credit.

Hansemann's words, "restoration of the shaken trust", expressed the fixed idea of the Prussian bourgeoisie.

Credit depends on the confidence that the exploitation of wage labour by capital, of the proletariat by the bourgeoisie, of the petty bourgeois by the big bourgeois, will continue in the traditional manner. Hence any political stirring in the proletariat, whatever its nature, even if it takes place under the direct command of the bourgeoisie, shakes this trust, impairs credit. "Restoration of the shaken trust" when uttered by Hansemann signifies:

Suppression of every political stirring in the proletariat and in all social strata whose interests do not completely coincide with the interests of the class which believes itself to be standing at the helm of state.

Hansemann accordingly placed the "strengthening of the power of the state" side by side with the "restoration of the shaken trust". But he was mistaken as to the character of this "power of the state". He sought to strengthen the state power which served credit and bourgeois trust, but he strengthened the state power which demands trust and if necessary extorts this trust with the help of grape-shot, because it has no credit. He wanted to economise on the costs of bourgeois rule but instead burdened the bourgeoisie with the exorbitant millions which the restoration of Prussian feudal rule cost.

He told the workers very curtly that he had an excellent remedy for them. But before he could produce it the "shaken trust" must first of all be restored. To restore this trust the working class had to give up all political activity and interference in matters of state and revert to its former habits. If it followed his advice and trust were restored, this mysterious potent remedy would prove effective, if only because it would no longer be required or applicable, since in this case the malady itself — the subversion of the bourgeois law and order — would have been eliminated. And what need is there of medicine when there is no malady? But if the people obstinately stuck to their purpose, very well, then he would "strengthen the power of the state", the police, the army, the courts, the bureaucracy, and

