---
Volume: 8
Document_Title: "64. Dismissal of Drigalski "
Page_Range: "216-217"
---

# 64. Dismissal of Drigalski 



**[p. 171]**

would set his bears on them, for "trust" had become a "money matter", and:

"Gentlemen, business is business!"

Hansemann's programme, even though he may smile at this, was an honest programme, a well-intentioned programme.

He wanted to strengthen the power of the state not only against anarchy, that is against the people, he wanted to strengthen it also against reaction, that is against the Crown and feudal interests insofar as they attempted to assert themselves against the purse and the "most essential", that is the most modest, political claims of the bourgeoisie.

The very composition of the Government of Action was a protest against this "reaction".

It differed from all previous Prussian Ministries in that its real Prime Minister was the Minister of Finance. For centuries the Prussian state had carefully concealed the fact that the departments of war, internal and foreign affairs, church and school matters and even the royal household as well as faith, charity and hope depended on profane financial matters. The Government of Action placed this tiresome bourgeois truth uppermost by placing Herr Hansemann at its head, a man whose ministerial programme like his opposition programme was summarised in the words:

The monarchy in Prussia became a "money matter". Now let us pass from the programme of the Government of Action to its actions.

It really carried out its threat of "strengthening the power of the state" against "anarchy", that is against the working class and all sections of the middle class who did not stick to the programme of Herr Hansemann. It can even be said that, apart from increasing the tax on beet-sugar and spirits, this reaction against so-called anarchy, i.e. against the revolutionary movement, was the only serious action of this Government of Action.

Numerous lawsuits against the press based on Prussian Law or, where it did not exist, on the Code pénal, numerous arrests on the same "sufficient grounds" (Auerswald's formula), introduction of a system of constables in Berlin 158 at the rate of one constable per every two houses, police interference with the freedom of associa- tion, the use of soldiers against unruly citizens and of the civic militia against unruly proletarians, and the introduction, by way of deterrent, of a state of siege — all these events of Hansemann's

[^1]: "Gentlemen, business is business!"



