---
Volume: 8
Document_Title: "65. The Trial of Gottschalk and His Comrades "
Page_Range: "217-226"
---

# 65. The Trial of Gottschalk and His Comrades 



**[p. 172]**

Olympiad are still vividly remembered. There is no need to give details.

This aspect of the efforts of the Government of Action was summarised by Kühlwetter in the following words:

"A state that wants to be really free must have a really large police force as its executive arm",

to which Hansemann himself muttered one of his usual remarks:

"This will also greatly help to restore trust and revive the rather slack commercial activity." a

The Government of Action accordingly "strengthened" the old Prussian police force, the judiciary, the bureaucracy and the army, who, since they receive their pay from the bourgeoisie, also serve the bourgeoisie, as Hansemann thought. At any rate, they were "strengthened".

On the other hand, the mood of the proletariat and bourgeois democrats was expressed by one event. Because a few reactionaries maltreated some democrats in Charlottenburg, the people stormed the residence of the Prime Minister in Berlin.159 This shows how popular the Government of Action had become. The next day Hansemann tabled a law against riotous gatherings and public meetings. This shows how cunningly he intrigued against reaction.

Thus the actual, tangible, popular activity of the Government of Action was of a purely police character. In the eyes of the proletariat and the urban democrats this Ministry and the Agreement Assembly, whose majority was represented in the Ministry, and the Prussian bourgeoisie, the majority of whom constituted the majority in the Agreement Assembly, represented the old, refurbished police and bureaucratic state. To this was added resentment against the bourgeoisie, because it governed and in the civic militia had become an integral part of the police.

The "achievement of the March events", as the people saw it, was that the liberal gentlemen of the bourgeoisie, too, took police duties upon themselves. There was thus a double police force.

Not the actions of the Government of Action, but the drafts of its organic laws show clearly that it "strengthened' the "police"—the ultimate expression of the old state—and spurred it into action only in the interest of the bourgeoisie.

In the Bills relating to local government, juries, and the civic militia, introduced by the Hansemann Ministry, property in one form or

[^1]: Quotations from the speeches made by Kühlwetter and Hansemann in the Prussian National Assembly on August 9, 1848.—Ed.





**[p. 173]**

another always forms the demarcation line between the lawful and the unlawful. All these Bills contain the most servile concessions to royal power, for the bourgeois Ministry believed that royalty had become harmless to it and was its ally; but to compensate for that the ascendancy of capital over labour is all the more ruthlessly emphasised.

The civic militia law approved by the Agreement Assembly was directed against the bourgeoisie itself and had to provide a legal pretext for disarming it. According to the fancy of the bourgeoisie, however, it was to become valid only after the enactment of the local government regulation and the promulgation of the Constitution, that is after the consolidation of the rule of the bourgeoisie. The experience which the Prussian bourgeoisie has gained in connection with the civic militia law may contribute to its enlightenment and show it that for the time being all its actions that are meant to be directed against the people are only directed against itself.

As far as the people are concerned, the Hansemann Ministry is in practice epitomised by the old-Prussian police and in theory by the offensive Belgian differentiation between bourgeois and non- bourgeois.160

Now let us pass on to another section of the ministerial programme, to anarchy against reaction.

In this respect the Ministry has more pious wishes to show than real deeds.

Among the pious bourgeois wishes are the partition and sale of domains to private owners, the abandonment of banking to free competition, the conversion of the Seehandlung161 into a private institution etc.

It was unfortunate for the Government of Action that all its economic attacks against the feudal party took place under the aegis of a compulsory loan, and that in general its attempts at reformation were seen by the people merely as financial expedients devised to replenish the treasury of the strengthened "power of the state". Hansemann thus won the hatred of one party without winning the approval of the other. And it has to be admitted that he only ventured to attack feudal privileges in earnest when "money matters" closest to the Minister of Finance, when money matters as understood by the Ministry of Finance, became pressing. In this narrow sense he told the feudal lords:

Thus even his positively bourgeois efforts directed against the feudalists reveal the same police taint as his negative measures

[^1]: "Gentlemen, business is business!"





**[p. 174]**

designed to "revive commercial activity". For in the language of political economy the police is called exchequer. The increase in the beet-sugar and liquor duties which Hansemann passed through the National Assembly roused the indignation of the money-bags, standing with God for King and Fatherland, in Silesia, the Marches, Saxony, East and West Prussia etc. But while this measure angered the industrial landowners in the old Prussian provinces, it caused no less displeasure among the bourgeois distillers in the Rhine Province, who perceived that their conditions of competition compared with those of the old Prussian provinces had been made even more unfavourable. And to crown all, it angered the working class in the old provinces, for whom it only meant, and could only mean, a rise in the price of a prime necessity. This measure therefore merely amounted to replenishing the treasury of the "strengthened power of the state". This example suffices, since it is the only action against the feudalists actually taken by the Government of Action, the only Bill of this nature which really became law.

Hansemann's "Bills" abrogating all exemptions from graduated and land taxes,162 and his projected income tax caused the landowning votaries of "God, King and Fatherland" to respond as if bitten by a tarantula. They denounced him as a communist and even today the Prussian Dame of the Cross3 crosses herself three times at the mention of Hansemann's name. That name sounds to it like Fra Diavolo.b The repeal of all exemptions from the land tax, the only important measure to be introduced by a Prussian Minister during the glorious reign of the Agreement Assembly, failed because of the narrow-mindedness of the Left concerning principles. 'Hansemann himself had justified this narrow-mindedness. Was the Left to provide new financial resources for the Ministry of the " strengthened power of the state" before the Constitution had been completed and sworn to?

The bourgeois Ministry par excellence was so unlucky that its most radical measure had to be frustrated by the radical members of the Agreement Assembly. It was so barren that its whole crusade against feudalism merely resulted in a tax increase, which was equally odious to all classes, and the abortive outcome of its entire financial acumen was a compulsory loan: two measures, which ultimately only provided subsidies for the campaign of the counter-revolution against the bourgeoisie. But the feudal lords were convinced of the "nefarious" intentions of

[^1]: An allusion to the Neue Preussische Zeitung also known as the Kreuz-Zeitung.—Ed. Fra Diavolo—a sobriquet of Michèle Pezza, an Italian bandit; the title character of an opera by Auber.—Ed.





**[p. 175]**

the bourgeois Ministry. Thus even the financial struggle of the Prussian bourgeoisie against feudalism merely proved that owing to its unpopularity and impotence it was only able to collect money against itself and—Gentlemen, business is business!

Just as the bourgeois Ministry succeeded in equally offending the urban proletariat, the bourgeois democrats and the feudal lords, so did it manage to alienate and antagonise even the peasantry oppressed by feudalism, and in this it was eagerly supported by the Agreement Assembly. It should not be forgotten that during half of its existence this Assembly was appropriately represented by the Hansemann Ministry and that the bourgeois martyrs of today were yesterday the train-bearers of Hansemann.

During Hansemann's rule Patow introduced a Bill abolishing feudal obligations (see the criticism of it we published earlier3). It was a most wretched botchwork, the product of the helpless bourgeois desire to abolish feudal privileges, those "conditions that are incompatible with the new constitution", and of bourgeois fear of revolutionarily attacking any kind of property whatever. Wretched, timid and narrow-minded egoism blinded the Prussian bourgeoisie to such an extent that it repulsed the peasantry, its essential ally.

On June 3 deputy Hanow moved

Not until the end of September, that is four months later, under the Pfuel Government, did the Agreement Assembly pass a Bill designed to discontinue pending proceedings between landowners and peasants, after rejecting all liberal amendments and retaining the "reservation about the provisional establishment of current obliga- tions" and the "collection of disputed dues and arrears".163

In August, if we are not mistaken, the Agreement Assembly declared that Nenstiels motion that "labour services be abolished immediately" was not urgent.164 Could the peasants be expected to consider it an urgent matter for them 'to take up the cudgels for this Agreement Assembly which had thrown them back into con- ditions inferior to those they had actually won after the March events?

The French bourgeoisie began by emancipating the peasants. Together with the peasants it conquered Europe. The Prussian bourgeoisie was so preoccupied with its most narrow, immediate

[^1]: "that all pending proceedings which concern the settlement of landowner-peasant relations and the commutation of services be immediately discontinued at the request of one of the sides until the promulgation of a new law based on just principles".

[^2]: a See present edition, Vol. 7, pp. 117-18, 290-95 and 327-32.—Ed.





**[p. 176]**

interests that it foolishly threw away even this ally and turned it into a tool of the feudal counter-revolutionaries.

The official history of the dissolution of the bourgeois Ministry is well known.

Under its aegis, the "power of the state" was "strengthened" to such an extent and the popular energy so weakened that already on July 15 the Dioscuri Kühlwetter and Hansemann were obliged to issue a warning against reactionary machinations of civil servants, and especially Landräte, to all Regierungspräsidenten in the monarchy; that later an "assembly of the nobility and big landowners for the protection" of their privileges165 met in Berlin alongside the Agreement Assembly; and that finally, in opposition to the so-called Berlin National Assembly, a "diet of local communities for the protection of the threatened property rights of landowners", a body originating in the Middle Ages, was convoked in Upper Lusatia on September 4.

The energy expended by the Government and the so-called National Assembly against these increasingly menacing counter- revolutionary symptoms found adequate expression in paper admonitions. The bourgeois Ministry reserved bayonets, bullets, prisons and constables exclusively for the people "so as to restore the shaken trust and revive commercial activity".

The incidents at Schweidnitz, where the soldiery in fact murdered the bourgeoisie in the person of the civic militia, finally roused the National Assembly from its apathy. On August 9 it braced itself for a heroic deed, that of the Stein-Schultze army order, whose most drastic measure of coercion was an appeal to the tact of the Prus- sian officers.166 A measure of coercion indeed! Did not royalist honour forbid the officers to follow the dictates of bourgeois honour?

On September 7, a month after the Agreement Assembly had passed the Stein-Schultze army order, it once more decided that its decision was a real decision and should be carried out by the Ministers. Hansemann refused to do this and resigned on September 11, after appointing himself a bank director at a yearly salary of 6,000 talers, for—Gentlemen, business is business!

Finally, on September 25, the Agreement Assembly gratefully agreed to Pfuel's thoroughly watered-down formula of acceptance of the Stein-Schultze army order, which by that time Wrangel's parallel army order and the large number of troops concentrated around Berlin had turned into a bad joke.

A mere glance at these dates and the history of the Stein-Schultze army order suffices to show that the army order was not the real



**[p. 177]**

reason for Hansemann's resignation. Is it likely that Hansemann, who did not shy at recognising the revolution, should have shied at this paper proclamation? Are we to believe that Hansemann, who, whenever the portfolio slipped from his fingers, always picked it up again, has this time, in a fit of virtuous exasperation, left it on the ministerial benches to be hawked about? No, our Hansemann is no fanatic. Hansemann was simply duped, just as in general he was the representative of the duped bourgeoisie. He was allowed to believe that on no account would he be dropped by the Crown. He was made to lose his last semblance of popularity in order that the Crown should at last be able to sacrifice him to the rancour of the country junkers and get rid of this bourgeois tutelage. Moreover, the plan of campaign agreed upon with Russia and Austria required that the Ministry should be headed by a general appointed by the camarilla from outside the Agreement Assembly. The old "power of the state" had been sufficiently "strengthened" under the bourgeois Ministry to venture on this coup.

Pfuel was a disappointment. The victory of the Croats at Vienna made even a Brandenburg a useful tool.

Under the Brandenburg Ministry the Agreement Assembly was ignominiously dispersed, fooled, derided, humiliated and perse- cuted, and the people, at the decisive moment, remained indifferent. The defeat of the Assembly was the defeat of the Prussian bourgeoisie, of the constitutionalists, hence a victory for the democratic party, however dear it had to pay for that victory.

And the imposed Constitution? It had once been said that never would a "scrap of paper" be allowed to come between the King and his people.1 Now it is said: there shall be only a scrap of paper between the King and his people. The real Constitution of Prussia is the state of siege. The imposed French Constitution had only one article—the 14th, which invali- dated it.168 Every article of the imposed Prussian Constitution is an Article 14.

By means of this Constitution the Crown grants new privileges—that is upon itself.

It permits itself to dissolve the Chambers indefinitely. It permits Ministers in the interim to issue any desired law (even those affecting property and so forth). It permits deputies to impeach Ministers for such actions, but at the risk, under the state of siege, of being classed as "internal enemies". Finally, it permits itself, should the stock of the counter-revolution go up in the spring, to replace this nebulous "scrap of paper" by a Christian-Germanic Magna Charta169 organi- cally growing out of the distinctions of the medieval social estates, or



**[p. 178]**

to drop the constitutional game altogether. Even in the latter case the conservative bourgeois would fold their hands and pray:

" The Lord gave, and the Lord hath taken away; blessed be the name of the Lordr*

The history of the Prussian bourgeois class, like that of the German bourgeois class in general between March and December, shows that a purely bourgeois revolution and the establishment of bourgeois rule in the form of a constitutional monarchy is impossible in Germany, and that only a feudal absolutist counter-revolution or a social republican revolution is possible.

But that the viable section of the bourgeoisie is bound to awake again from its apathy is guaranteed above all by the staggering bill which the counter-revolution will present it with in the spring and, as our Hansemann so sensibly says:

"Gentlemen, business is business!"

Written by Marx on December 9, 11, 15 Printed according to the newspaper and 29, 1848

First published in the Neue Rheinische Zeitung Nos. 165, 169, 170 and 183, December 10, 15, 16 and 31, 1848

[^1]: a Job 1:21.—Ed.





**[p. 179]**

A NEW ALLY OF THE COUNTER-REVOLUTION

Cologne, December 11. The counter-revolution has acquired a new ally: the Swiss Federal Government.

Already five days ago we learned from a thoroughly trustworthy source that the recent rumours of an intended incursion of the German refugees into Baden, of arming at the frontier, and of a mythical battle near Lörrach between volunteer insurgents and imperial troops—that all these peculiar rumours were "agreed upon" between the ruling party of Furrer-Ochsenbein-Munzinger in the Swiss Federal Council and the German imperial authority in order to give the said party an excuse for taking measures against the refugees and thereby helping to establish a good agreement with the imperial power.3

We did not immediately communicate this news to our readers, because we could not unreservedly believe in such an intrigue. We waited for confirmation, and confirmation was not long in coming.

It was already noticeable that these rumours were not published by Baden newspapers which, being on the spot, should be the best and earliest informed, but by Frankfurt newspapers.

It was furthermore noticeable that the Frankfurter Journal was already informed from Berne on December 1 that the Federal Council had issued a circular on the question of the refugees and sent a commissioner, whereas the Berne newspapers, several of which (Verfassungs-Freund and Suisse) are in direct contact with members of the Federal Council, did not publish the news until December 3.

[^1]: a See this volume, pp. 116-17 and 141-42.— Ed.





**[p. 180]**

Now at last we have the circular to the cantonal authorities before us in the Suisse* and if previously we could still doubt the adhesion of Switzerland to the new Holy Alliance,170 now all doubts have been removed.

The circular begins with rumours of new armings of the political refugees and of an intended new incursion into the Baden area. These rumours, which all Switzerland and all Baden know to be false, serve as the grounds for the new extraordinary measures against the refugees. The decisions of the Federal Assembly about Tessin are mentioned only to justify the competence of the Federal Council to adopt these measures but not its obligation to do so; on the contrary the essential difference between the situation in Tessin and in the northern cantons is expressly recognised.

Then come the following instructions:

1) All refugees who took part in Struve's expedition,171 or who otherwise offer no personal guarantees of tranquil behaviour, are to be removed from the frontier cantons;

2) all refugees without distinction are to be kept under close supervision;

3) a list of all refugees coming under 1) is to be sent to the Federal Council and to all frontier cantons, and

4) possible exceptions to internment are to be left to the decision of the representative of the Confederation, Dr. Steiger, whose instructions in general are to be followed.

Then follows the demand for the "strict" fulfilment of these instructions, since otherwise, if it becomes necessary to call out troops, the costs will have to be borne by the frontier canton concerned.

The whole circular is drafted in harsh language, highly insulting to the refugees, and concludes with the words:

Now compare this bitter language with that of the Note of November 4b; bear in mind that the rumours on which the circular is based are notoriously false; that, as we have been informed from the frontier today, the representative of the Confederation, Dr. Steiger, has already completed his inspection in the Aargau canton, against which the imperial authority put forward most complaints, and has

[^1]: "Switzerland must not become an assembly area for foreign parties which so greatly misconceive their situation on neutral soil and so often trample under foot the interests of the country that hospitably receives them."

[^2]: * La Suisse No. 291, December 6, 1848.—Ed. Note of the Vorort Berne to the Imperial Government (see this volume, pp. 67-68 and 136).— Ed.



