---
Volume: 8
Document_Title: "66. The Prussian Counter- Revolution and the Prussian Judiciary "
Page_Range: "226-233"
---

# 66. The Prussian Counter- Revolution and the Prussian Judiciary 



**[p. 181]**

found that the refugees concerned were interned long ago and that he has no more to do there (he is already in Liestal); that the Note of November 4 already asserts and the Swiss press (e.g. Schweizer Bote, Basellandschaftliches Volksblatt, National-Zeitung etc.) long ago proved that all the frontier cantons fulfilled their duties long ago; bear in mind, finally, that after long uncertainty, after the most contradic- tory reports about the closing of the frontier, now for the last two or three days all our Swiss newspapers and letters have been unanimous in saying that absolutely no measures of coercion are being applied against Switzerland, and indeed that the order given to certain frontier posts for stricter supervision of the movement of people was revoked already 24 hours later; bear all this in mind and say whether the circumstances do not confirm in the minutest detail the report given by us above.

At any rate, it is well known that Herren Furrer, Ochsenbein, Munzinger etc. have long cherished a burning desire to put an end once for all to the "excesses of the refugees".

We congratulate Herr Schmerling on his new friends. We only wish that, if he too were to enter Switzerland as a refugee—which could very well happen before the three years' official duration of the present Federal Council expires—these friends of his will not consider him as one of those refugees who "offer no personal guarantees".

[^1]: Written on December 11, 1848 Printed according to the newspaper

[^2]: First published in the Neue Rheinische Published in English for the first Zeitung No. 166, December 12, 1848 time





**[p. 182]**

THE CALUMNIES OF THE NEUE RHEINISCHE ZEITUNG

Cologne, December 13. The article of the Neue Rheinische Zeitung of July 4,a on account of which the responsible publisher, Korff, the editor-in-chief, Marx, and the editor of the Neue Rheinische Zeitung, Engels, are to appear before the assizes on the 20th inst., concludes with the following words:

"Those are the actions of the Government of Action, the Govern- ment of the Left Centre, the Government of transition to an old aristocratic, old bureaucratic and old Prussian Government. As soon as Herr Hansemann has fulfilled his transitory function, he will be dismissed.

"The Berlin Left, however, must realise that the old regime is willing to let it keep its small parliamentary victories and large constitutional designs as long as the old regime in the meantime is able to seize all the really important positions. It can confidently recognise the revolution of March 19 inside the Chamber provided the revolution can be disarmed outside of it.

" Some fine day the Left may find that its parliamentary victory coincides with its real defeat. Perhaps German development needs such contrasts. The Government of Action recognises the revolution in principle in order to carry out the counter-revolution in practice."

Facts have proved to what extent the Neue Rheinische Zeitung has calumniated the Prussian Government and its henchmen.

[^1]: Written by Marx on December 13, 1848 Printed according to the newspaper

[^2]: First published in the Neue Rheinische Published in English for the first Zeitung No. 168, December 14, 1848 time

[^3]: a "Arrests" (see present edition, Vol. 7, pp. 177-79) quoted below.—Ed.





**[p. 183]**

URSULINE CONVENT.— RECRUITING FOR THE GRAPE-SHOT KING.—

THE "BURGHERS' COMMUNE".— COMMISSION ON A GENERAL CUSTOMS TARIFF

Berne, December 9. The last convent in the Berne canton, that of the Ursulines in Pruntrut in the Jura, is approaching its end. The Government Council [Regierungsrat]d has decided to propose to the Great Council the dissolution of this convent in fulfilment of the Diet's decision banning from Switzerland all orders affiliated to the Jesuits (to which the Ursulines belong).

After Radetzky had again allowed the Neapolitan-Swiss recruits through Lombardy, King Ferdinand likewise immediately suggested that recruiting should again be allowed in Switzerland. Lucerne and the Ur-cantons naturally hastened to permit recruitment; the Berne Government, for whom the enlistment agreements172 are anyway a thorn in the flesh, luckily found an excuse to continue prohibiting recruitment for the present. It states in particular that according to the enlistment agreement (which is a relic inherited from the revered regime of Herr Neuhaus), the recruits would be obliged to go via Genoa, a route which is still barred to them; and further, the Neapolitan Government would first have to indemnify the Swiss in Naples for the damage by looting etc., done on May 15.173 The god-fearing Beobachtet is of course fearfully shocked by this violation of inviolable Swiss loyalty, which moreover prevents a great number of fine young canton citizens from making a glorious career (!), jeopardises the future of the Berne soldiers in Naples, causes recruiting sergeants present in Berne to starve, and reduces the income of the publicans on whose premises the military bounty would be drunk away. These are the kind of arguments with which the reactionary Swiss press wages its war.

[^1]: a i.e. the Government of the canton.— Ed.

[^2]: Schweizerischer Beobachter.—Ed.





**[p. 184]**

The local conservative patricians have suffered a hard blow. For there is a so-called burghers' commune within the commune itself. This commune, the core of which is the patriciate, made sure, in spite of all the revolutions, that the former monastery estates and other state and town domains to which it is entitled as the former holder of sovereignty, should not be transferred with sovereignty to the state or the town respectively, but be kept by it in collective ownership. Only a small part of these highly valuable estates, on which the patricians still wax fat today, is to go to the town, but the "burghers" always refused to give it up. Now at last, through the choice of Berne as the federal capital and the consequent heavy city expenses, the burghers' commune has been forced to surrender its share to the town commune, the so-called residents' commune,174

and moreover to pledge a "substantial" contribution to the costs of the federal capital. The patricians declare Zion to be in danger, and they have good reason, for the federal capital threatens their purses very seriously.

The Federal Council has formed under the presidency of the head of the Trade and Customs Department, Herr Näff, a commission which is to prepare the abolition of canton duty and the creation of a Swiss customs tariff, and propose the necessary measures. Switzer- land will also get protective tariffs now, which will not, it is true, be high but will completely achieve their purpose owing to the advanced development of most branches of Swiss industry and to the low wages. England, Paris, Mühlhausen and Lyons will suffer most from these measures.

[^1]: Written by Engels on December 9, 1848 Printed according to the newspaper

[^2]: First published in the Neue Rheinische Published in English for the first Zeitung No. 168, December 14, 1848 time





**[p. 185]**

ADDRESS OF THE CENTRAL COMMISSION OF THE WORKERS' ASSOCIATIONS OF SWITZERLAND

TO THE EXECUTIVE OF THE MARCH ASSOCIATION

IN FRANKFURT AM MAIN175

To the Executive of the March Association in Frankfurt am Main

Citizens,

The German associations of Switzerland held a Congress here in Berne on the 9th, 10th and 11th of this month; they have joined together in a permanent union and appointed the Berne Association as the District Union.176

The undersigned Central Commission herewith informs you of the founding of the Union.

It also informs you that the Congress has decided to enter into correspondence with the March Association. A closer union with the latter is excluded by Article 1 of our common Rules, in which the Swiss associations explicitly declare themselves for a democratic social republic.177

The Congress has also instructed us to make known to you its decided disapproval of the measures taken by the German imperial authority against Switzerland. These measures, as unjust as they are ridiculous, not only serve to compromise Germany in the eyes of all Europe; for us German workers in Switzerland they have the particular disadvantage that they jeopardise our position materially and put us German democrats in a false position in relation to our friends, the democrats of Switzerland.

We hope that one of the delegates of the March Association will take the earliest opportunity to inform the so-called National Assembly3 of this official expression of opinion of the German workers in Switzerland.

[^1]: a The German National Assembly in Frankfurt.—Ed.





**[p. 186]**

In the meantime we look forward to your communications and letters.

Greetings and fraternal good wishes.

The Central Commission of the German Workers' Associations of Switzerland Berne, December 1848a

Written by Engels in mid-December 1848 Printed according to the manu- script

First published in Beiträge zur Geschichte Published in English for the first der deutschen Arbeiterbewegung, Heft 4, time 1960

[^1]: The back of the document bears the address: "To Herr Trützschler, deputy at Frankfurt am Main."—Ed.





**[p. 187]**

[DISMISSAL OF DRIGALSKI]

Cologne, December 17. The "citizen and communist" Drigalski,3

who introduced the censorship, abolished it again, and then threatened to suspend the local newspaper,6 has, we have just heard, been suspended himself. A pity, a great pity!

Postscript. Misfortune travels fast! Herr Spiegel, Regierungspräsi- dent, also bids us farewell. According to reports current all over the town, he has been dismissed.

[^1]: Written by Marx on December 17, 1848 Printed according to the newspaper

[^2]: First published in the supplement to the Published in English for the first Neue Rheinische Zeitung No. 172, December time 19, 1848

[^3]: See this volume, pp. 75-80.—Ed, The Neue Rheinische Zeitung.—Ed.



