---
Volume: 8
Document_Title: "68. Letter of the Central Commission of the Workers' Associations in Switzerland to the Association in Vivis "
Page_Range: "236-239"
---

# 68. Letter of the Central Commission of the Workers' Associations in Switzerland to the Association in Vivis 



**[p. 191]**

meeting of the Workers' Association in the Gürzenich Hall and "specially instructed them to observe what took place there". At the same general meeting there happened to be present "the book- binder Johann Maltheser", who, as the indictment states regretfully, " would be a chief witness, if he were not in the pay of the police authorities", that is to say, in other words, if he were not a paid police spy. Finally, there was present there, probably out of pure patriotic fanaticism, the 'candidate assessor von Groote", who gives Anneke's speech at the general meeting "in more detail than anyone else, since he wrote it down during the sitting itself.

It is clear that the Cologne authorities were expecting a crime to be committed on June 25 by Gottschalk and his comrades. All arrange- ments were made by the police to confirm the occurrence of this possible crime. And once the authorities "expect", they do not want to expect in vain.

"The reports" of the police inspectors and other minor assistants officially sent to confirm an expected crime

"gave occasion for the state authorities on July 2 to demand a judicial investigation against Gottschalk and Anneke on account of their inflammatory speeches delivered" (it should say expected) "at that public meeting. Their arrest and the seizure of their papers took place on July 3.

The real result of the investigation—we shall prove it tomorrow from the text of the indictment itself—is that the movement expected on June 25 was confined to a movement of the authorities—this echo of the Frankfurt movement; that Gottschalk and his comrades have had to atone for the deceived expectation of the authorities on June 25 by undergoing six months' close confinement during examination. Nothing is more dangerous than to deceive the state authority's expectations of earning a medal for saving the fatherland. No one likes to be disappointed in his expectations, least of all the state authority.

If the whole way in which the crime of June 25 was staged shows us the state authority as the sole creator of this crime drama, the text of the indictment enables us to admire the astute versatility by which it spun out the prologue over six months.

We quote word for word from Der Politische Tendenzprozess gegen Gottschalk und Konsorten, published by M. F. Anneke, Publishing House of the Neue Kölnische Zeitung.

[^1]: "On July 5, after a number of witnesses had been heard and more detailed information had become available, the investigation was extended to the whole previous activity of the leaders of the Workers' Association and thereby to several members of the latter, especially to the cooper Esser etc. The results of the investigation of the accused relate in part to their speeches in the Workers' Association, in part to their papers and the printed material spread by them".





**[p. 192]**

"After the investigation had gone on for about five to six weeks, it was declared closed by the Examining Magistrate Leuthaus, who had replaced Herr Geiger, the latter having been promoted to the post of Police Superintendent. Public Prosecutor Hecker, however, after looking through the dossiers, put forward new demands to which the examining magistrate agreed. After about 14 days, the preliminary investigation was closed for the second time. After Herr Hecker had made a fresh study of the dossiers at his leisure, he once more put forward a number of new demands. The examining magistrate did not want to accept them, nor did the Council Chamber. Herr Hecker appealed to the board of prosecuting magistrates and this instance laid down that some of the demands should be allowed, but others rejected. Among the latter, for example, was the demand that on the basis merely of a list of names of persons from all parts of Germany which was found in Anneke's portfolio, all these persons, some 30 or 40 in number, should be subjected to judicial investigation.

"After the investigation had been successfully spun out so far, and could not reasonably be still further extended, the Council Chamber on September 28 ordered the dossiers to be handed over to the board of prosecuting magistrates. The latter confirmed the indictment on October 10, and on October 28 the Prosecutor-General signed the bill of indictment.

"It was therefore luckily too late for this trial to come before the regular quarterly assizes, which had begun on October 9.

"After November 27 an extraordinary session of the assizes was fixed. It was intended that if possible this session also should be missed. The dossiers of the preliminary examination were sent to the Ministry of Justice with the request that the trial should be referred to another court of assizes. However, the Ministry of Justice found no sufficient grounds for this and towards the end of November the accused Gottschalk, Anneke and Esser were finally referred to the extraordinary assiz'es here on December 21."

During this long prologue, the first examining magistrate, Geiger, was promoted to acting Police Superintendent, and Public Prosecutor Hecker to Chief Public Prosecutor. Since Herr Hecker in this last capacity was moved from Cologne to Elberfeld shortly before the beginning of the extraordinary assizes, he will not appear before the jury at the same time as the accused.

[Neue Rheinische Zeitung Ko. 176, December 23, 1848] Cologne, December 22. On what day did the Gürzenich general meeting, which was convened to confirm an "expected" crime, take place? It was on June 25. This was the day of the definitive defeat of the June insurgents in Paris. On what day did the state authorities begin proceedings against Gottschalk and his comrades? It was on July 2, i.e. at the moment when the Prussian bourgeoisie and the Government allied with it at that time, carried away by their thirst for revenge, believed that the time had come to finish off their political opponents. On July 3, Gottschalk and his associates were arrested. On July 4, the present counter-revolutionary Ministry in the person of Ladenberg joined the Hansemann Ministry. On the same day, the Right wing in the Berlin Agreement Assembly ventured on a coup



**[p. 193]**

d'état by unceremoniously rejecting in the same sitting, after part of the Left wing had dispersed,183 a decision regarding Poland which had been adopted by a majority.

These facts are eloquent. We could prove by the testimony of witnesses that on July 3 a "certain" person declared: "The arrest of Gottschalk and his associates has made a favourable impression on the public." It suffices, however, to point to the issues of the Kölnische, the Deutsche, and the Karlsruher Zeitung of the dates mentioned to convince oneself that during those days it was not the "echo" of the imaginary "Frankfurt movement"', but rather the "echo" of "Cavaignac's movement" which resounded a thousandfold in Germany and, among other places, also in Cologne.

Our readers will recall: On June 25 the Cologne authorities "expected" a repercussion of the "Frankfurt movement" on the occasion of the general meeting of the Workers' Association in the Gürzenich Hall. They will recall further that the starting point for the judicial investigation against Gottschalk and his comrades was not any actual crime committed by Gottschalk etc. prior to June 25, but solely the expectation of the authorities that on June 25 at last some palpable crime would be committed.

The expectation in regard to June 25 was disappointed and suddenly June 25, 1848, is transformed into the year 1848. The accused are made responsible for the movement of the year 1848. Gottschalk, Anneke and Esser are charged with

That is to say, therefore, they are charged with having made a conspiracy, "or at any rate" with not having "made" any conspiracy. But then at any rate "to attempts at assassination and suchlike aims". That is to say, to attempts at assassination or something of the sort! How magnificent the juridical style is!

So it is stated in the board of prosecuting magistrates' decision for committal to trial.

In the conclusion of the indictment itself, mention of conspiracy is dropped and "in accordance with it" Gottschalk, Anneke and Esser are charged with

[^1]: "having in the course of the year 1848" (note the elasticity of this expression) "made a conspiracy in Cologne with the aim of changing and overthrowing the Government concerned and of fomenting a civil war by misleading the citizens into taking up arms against one another, or at any rate" (take note!), "or at any rate by speeches at public meetings, by printed material and posters, having incited to attempts at assassination and suchlike aims".

[^2]: "having in the course of the year 1848, by speeches at public meetings as well as by printed material, directly incited their fellow citizens to alteration of the Constitution by force, to armed rebellion against the royal power and to the arming of one part of the



