---
Volume: 8
Document_Title: "69. Refutation "
Page_Range: "239-240"
---

# 69. Refutation 



**[p. 194]**

citizens against another, without, however, these incitements having been success- ful—a crime envisaged in Article 102, in combination with Articles 87 and 91 of the Penal Code".

And why did the authorities in the course of the year 1848 not intervene before July 2?

Incidentally, for the gentlemen to be able to speak of an "alteration of the Constitution by force", they would in the first place have had to furnish proof that a Constitution existed. The Crown has proved the contrary by sending to the devil the Agreement Assembly. If the agreers had been more powerful than the Crown, they would perhaps have conducted the proof in the reverse direction.

As regards the incitement "to armed rebellion against the royal power and to the arming of one part of the citizens against another", the indictment tries to prove it:

1. by speeches of the accused in the course of the year 1848; 2. by unprinted; 3. by printed documents. Ad. 1. The speeches provide the indictment with the following corpus delicti*:

At the sitting of May 29, Esser finds that a "republic" is the "remedy for the suffering of the workers". An incitement to armed rebellion against the royal power! Gottschalk declares that "the reactionaries will bring about the republic". Some workers complain that they do not have enough "to keep body and soul together". Gottschalk replies to them: "You should learn to unite, to distinguish your friends from your disguised enemies, to make yourselves capable of looking after your own affairs."

An obvious incitement to armed rebellion against the royal power and to the arming of one part of the citizens against anotherl

The indictment sums up its proofs in the following words:

It is precisely because the accused calmed the masses instead of inciting them that they showed clearly their nefarious tendency

[^1]: "The witnesses who have been examined concerning these earlier meetings, both members and non-members, on the whole speak only in praise of Gottschalk and Anneke, especially the former. He is said to have always warned against excesses, and to have tried to calm rather than incite the masses. In doing so he indeed indicated the republic as the final goal of his efforts, which, however, was to be achieved not by a street riot but only by the majority of the people being won over to the view that there was no salvation except in a republic. As is clearly seen, by thus setting out to undermine gradually the foundations of the existing order, he was understandably often hard put to it to restrain the impatience of the vulgar crowd."

[^2]: Body of the crime.—Ed.



