---
Volume: 8
Document_Title: "70. The New ' Holy Alliance' "
Page_Range: "240-242"
---

# 70. The New " Holy Alliance" 



**[p. 195]**

gradually to undermine the foundations of the existing order, that is, in a legal way to make a use, objectionable to the authorities, of freedom of the press and the right of association. And that is what the indictment calls: "Incitement to armed rebellion against the royal power and to the arming of one part of the citizens against another" !!!

Finally comes the general meeting of June 25, which was "expected" by the authorities. In regard to it, the indictment says: "detailed testimonies are available". And what results from these detailed testimonies?—That Gottschalk made a report on the Frankfurt events; that the union of the three democratic associations in Cologne was discussed,184 and that Gottschalk delivered a "conclud- ing speech", which especially attracted the attention of Maltheser and the candidate assessor von Groote, and ended with the "point": "To go on waiting requires more courage than to strike at random. One must wait until the reaction takes a step which results in pressure for the proclamation of a republic." Obvious incitement to armed rebellion against the royal power and to the arming of one part of the citizens against another!!!

As far as Anneke is concerned, according to the indictment

" there is nothing more against him than that, in the debate on the union of the three associations" (the three democratic associations of Cologne), "he spoke very vigorously for this union, addressing the meeting also as republican citizens".

A speech in favour of the "union" of the three democratic associations of Cologne is obviously "incitement to the arming of one part of the citizens against another"!

And the mode of address as "republican citizens"! Herren Maltheser and von Groote might have felt themselves insulted by this mode of address. But does not General von Drigalski address himself and the citizens of Düsseldorf as "communist citizens"?

Looking at this net product of the "expected" general meeting of June 25, one can understand that the state authority had to take refuge in the course of the year 1848, and that is what it did by acquiring information about the movement in this year through the seizure of letters and printed documents; for example, it confiscated three issues of the Arbeiter-Zeitung which could be bought for four pfennigs a copy in any street.

From the letters, however, it became convinced of the "political fanaticism" prevailing in Germany in the year 1848. A letter of Professor Karl Henkel from Marburg to Gottschalk seemed to it particularly "fanatical". To punish him it denounced this letter to the Hesse Government and had the satisfaction that a judicial investigation would be instituted against him.

[^1]: 8-3780





**[p. 196]**

But the final result derived from the letters and printed documents is that in 1848 fanaticism of all kinds was at work in people's minds and on paper, and in general events took place which resembled as closely as one egg does another "armed rebellion against the royal power and the arming of one part of the citizens against another".

Gottschalk and his comrades, however, were busily occupied with all this, whereas the state authority only became aware -of the "repercussion" of this astonishing movement through confiscating the printed documents and letters of the accused!185

Written by Marx on December 21 and 22, Printed according to the newspaper 1848

First published in the Neue Rheinische Published in English for the first Zeitung Nos. 175 and 176, December 22 time and 23, 1848

