---
Volume: 8
Document_Title: "71. The Revolutionary Movement "
Page_Range: "242-245"
---

# 71. The Revolutionary Movement 



**[p. 197]**

THE PRUSSIAN COUNTER-REVOLUTION AND THE PRUSSIAN JUDICIARY186

Cologne. The chief result of the revolutionary movement of 1848 is not what the peoples won, but what they lost—the loss of their illusions.

June, November and December of 1848 are gigantic milestones on the path to the disenchantment and disintoxication of the minds of the European peoples.

High in the list of the last illusions which keep the German people in chains is its superstitious faith in the judiciary.

The prosaic north wind of the Prussian counter-revolution has blighted also this flower of the people's imagination, whose true Motherland is Italy—eternal Rome.

The actions and statements of the Rhenish Court of Appeal, of the Supreme Court of Berlin, and of the Courts of Appeal of Munster, Bromberg and Ratibor, against Esser, Waldeck, Temme, Kirchmann and Gierke prove once again that the French Convention is and remains the beacon for all revolutionary epochs. It inaugurated the revolution by means of a decree dismissing all officials. Judges, too, are nothing but officials, as the above-mentioned courts have testified before the whole of Europe. Turkish kadis and Chinese collegiums of mandarins can countersign without qualms the most recent decrees of those "high" courts against their colleagues.

Our readers already know the decrees of the Berlin Supreme Court and of the Ratibor Court of Appeal. Today we are concerned with the Münster Court of Appeal.187

[^1]: 8*





**[p. 198]**

First of all, however, a few words more about the Rhenish Court of Appeal, the summus pontifex3 of Rhenish jurisprudence, which has its seat in Berlin.

As is well known, the Rhenish jurists (with a few honourable exceptions) found nothing more urgent to do in the Prussian Agreement Assembly than to cure the Prussian Government of its old prejudice and old resentment. They proved to that Government in fact that their previous opposition merely signified as much as the opposition of the French parliament before 1789188—the obstinate and would-be liberal assertion of guild interests. Like the liberal members of the French National Assembly of 1789, so the liberal Rhenish jurists in the Prussian National Assembly of 1848 were the worthiest of the worthy in the army of servility. The Rhenish-Prussian prosecuting magistrates outdid the old-Prussian inquisitorial judges in "political fanaticism". The Rhenish jurists had, of course, to maintain their reputation also after the dissolution of the Agreement Assembly. Thought of the laurels of the old-Prussian Supreme Court prevented the Rhenish-Prussian Court of Appeal from sleeping. Its chief presiding judge Sethe sent to judge of the Supreme Court of Appeal Esser (not to be confused with the "well-meaning" Cologne "Essers"b) a letter similar to that of the presiding judge of the Supreme Court Mühler to judge of the Secret Supreme Court Waldeck189 But the Rhenish-Prussian court was able to go one better than the old-Prussian court. The presiding judge of the Rhenish Court of Appeal0 played a trump card against his competitors by committing the treacherous rudeness of informing the Berlin public of the letter to Herr Esser in the Deutsche Reform,0

before he had communicated it to Herr Esser himself. We are convinced that the entire Rhine Province will reply to Herr Sethe's letter by a monster address to our worthy veteran countryman, Herr Esser.

Not something is rotten in the "state of Denmark",6 but everything. Now for Münsterl Our readers have already heard of the protest of the Court of Appeal in Münster against the reappointment of its director Temme.

The matter can be summarised as follows: The Ministry of the counter-revolution had, directly or indirectly, insinuated to the Secret Supreme Court, the Rhenish Court of

[^1]: The supreme pontiff.—Ed. Esser I and Esser II.—Ed. c Sethe.—Ed.

[^2]: No. 56, December 21, 1848 (morning edition).—Ed. Shakespeare, Hamlet, Act I, Scene 4.—Ed.





**[p. 199]**

Appeal, and the Courts of Appeal in Bromberg, Ratibor and Münster, that the King* would view with extreme disfavour the return of

Waldeck, Esser, Gierke, Kirchmann and Temme to their high judicial posts, because they had continued to attend the Assembly in Berlin and had participated in the decision to refuse to pay taxes. So would those courts protest against it.

All the high courts (at the outset the Rhenish Court of Appeal vacillated; great artists achieve their successes not by being the first but by being the last to perform) accepted this suggestion and sent protests from and to Berlin. The Münster Court of Appeal was stupid enough to address directly to the King (the so-called constitutional King) a protest against Temme, which states word for word

"that by participation in the illegal sittings of a faction of the adjourned National Assembly he had put himself in open rebellion against His Majesty's Government and by taking part in voting in favour of the motion on refusing to pay taxes he had taken the path of revolution and tried to hurl the fire-brand of anarchy into the fatherland",

and which then continues:

"It is contrary to our sense of justice, to the demands of the public for integrity on the part of the director of a provincial collegium of magistrates, and to the responsibilities of the latter concerning the training of young law officers and his position in relation to the junior officials of courts, that after such events the aforesaid Temme should retain his official position in the collegium here. Therefore, Your Majesty, we feel compelled by our consciences most humbly to express the urgent desire to see ourselves freed from official relation to director Temme."

The address is signed by the whole collegium except for one member, a brother-in-law of Minister of Justice Rintelen.

On December 18, this Minister of Justice sent Herr Temme in Münster a copy of this address "for his decision", after Temme had already resumed his post here without opposition from the cowards.

During the morning of December 19, as the Düsseldorfer Zeitung reports, Temme appeared for the first time in a plenary sitting of the provincial Court of Appeal and took his seat as director beside deputy chief presiding judge von Olfers. As soon as the sitting began, he asked to speak and in brief said approximately the following:

[^1]: "He had received a rescript from the Minister of Justice with a copied enclosure. This enclosure contained a petition of the 'high collegium', to which he now had the honour to belong, protesting against his reinstatement in his post. The Minister of Justice had sent him this petition for his information and 'for him to take a

[^2]: a Frederick William IV.—Ed.

[^3]: Quoted from the Preussischer Staats-Anzeiger No. 229, December 19, 1848,—Ed.



