---
Volume: 8
Document_Title: "72. Swiss- Italian Affairs "
Page_Range: "245-247"
---

# 72. Swiss- Italian Affairs 



**[p. 200]**

decision accordingly'. The protest of the 'high collegium' was obviously based on his political activity; but of this as in general of his political views, he did not intend to speak here, for he did not have to defend them before the 'high collegium'. Further, as far as his 'decision' was concerned, he had already given effect to it by taking his seat here as director, and he could assure the 'high collegium' that he would not vacate it until judgment and law compelled him to do so. Moreover, he was not of the opinion that the collégial relationship should be upset by the diversity of political views; for his part at least that would be avoided as far as possible."3

The worthiest of the worthy were thunderstruck. They sat there dumb, motionless, like stone figures, as if a Medusa's head had been hurled into the collegium of mandarins.

The worthy Court of Appeal in Münster! In its professional zeal it has caused numerous people to be questioned and arrested because they wanted the decision of the National Assembly on the refusal to pay taxes to be carried out. By its statement about Herr Temme, which had even been addressed directly to the throne, the worthy provincial Court of Appeal has formed itself into—a party and pronounced a prejudiced opinion, and therefore it is impossible for it any longer to play the role of judge in relation to another party.

It will be recalled that the alleged coercion of the Prussian National Assembly by the Berlin mob was used as the pretext for the first coup d'état of the Brandenburg Ministry.190 In order not to exercise any coercion against the deputies, the Ministry continued the "wild chase"191 begun against them in Berlin, even after the deputies had returned to their homes!

Minister of Justice Rintelen states in his decree, which we reprint further below:

Most of the actions of Herr Rintelen and of the courts under his jurisdiction provide further proof that since the forcible dissolution of the National Assembly only one law continues to be valid in Prussia, the arbitrary will of the Berlin camarilla.

On March 29, 1844, the Prussian Government promulgated the notorious disciplinary law against the judges,b by which, through a mere decision of the Ministry, they could be deprived of their posts,

[^1]: "The illusion deliberately fostered by many persons, that the hitherto existing criminal laws, particularly those concerned with crimes against the state, are no longer valid since March of this year, has greatly contributed to increase anarchy and has perhaps also had a dangerous influence on individual courts."

[^2]: a Quoted from the report "Münster, vom 20. Dez." published in the Düsseldorfer Zeitung No. 336, December 23, 1848.—Ed.

[^3]: "Gesetz, betreffend das gerichtliche und Disziplinar-Strafverfahren gegen Beamten."—Ed.





**[p. 201]**

moved or pensioned off. The last United Diet19 abolished this law and restored the validity of the fundamental principle that judges could be dismissed, moved or pensioned off only by a lawfully delivered judgment.3 The imposed Constitution confirms this principle. Are not these laws being trampled under foot by the courts which, in accordance with the prescription of the Minister of Justice, Rintelen, want by moral compulsion to drive their politically compro- mised colleagues into giving up their posts? Are not these courts turning themselves into an officer corps which casts out any member whose political views do not suit its royal Prussian "honour"'}

And is there not also a law on the non-liability and inviolability of the people's representatives}

Hot air and empty sound! If the Prussian Constitution had not annulled itself already by its own articles and the manner of its origin, it would be annulled owing to the simple fact that its ultimate guarantor is the Supreme Court of Berlin. The Constitution is guaranteed by the responsibility of the Ministers, and the non-liability of the Ministers is guaranteed by the court that has been granted to them, which is no other than the Supreme Court in Berlin, the classical representative of which is Herr Mühler.

The most recent rescripts of the Supreme Court, therefore, are neither more nor less than the obvious cassation of the imposed Constitution.

In Austria, owing to the Government's direct threats to plunder the bank,193 which the Viennese people left untouched at the time of its greatest and most justified resentment against financial feudalism, the bourgeoisie realises that its betrayal of the proletariat surrendered precisely what this betrayal was intended to safeguard—bourgeois property. In Prussia, the bourgeoisie sees that, owing to its cowardly trust in the Government and its treacherous distrust of the people, the indispensable guarantee of bourgeois property—bourgeois administra- tion of justice—is threatened.

With the dependent state of the judiciary, the bourgeois administration of justice itself becomes dependent on the Govern- ment; that is to say, bourgeois law itself is replaced by the arbitrary action of officials. La bourgeoisie sera punie, par où elle a péché—the bourgeoisie will be punished by that in which it has sinned—by the Government. That the servile statements of the highest Prussian courts are only the first symptoms of the approaching absolutist

[^1]: The reference is to the "Verordnung über einige Grundlagen der künftigen Preussischen Verfassung".—Ed.



