---
Volume: 8
Document_Title: "88. The Situation in Paris "
Page_Range: "313-315"
---

# 88. The Situation in Paris 



**[p. 284]**

[THE SITUATION IN PARIS]

Cologne, January 30. When yesterday morning we announced in a special edition the imminent outbreak of a storm in Paris, wailers267

among the primary electors to the First Chamber wrote under our fly-sheet: It's a lie! It's no use intimidating us! and other such philistine strong expressions.

These miserable people regarded our special edition as a mere electoral manoeuvre, as if the First Chamber and the Second Chamber too, and the entire Prussian movement into the bargain, could induce us to falsify the history of the European revolution!

Stupp is an elector to the First Chamber! The rentier von Wittgenstein is an elector to the First Chamber! Chancellor von Groote is an elector to the First Chamber! And yet the revolutionary monster in Paris is capable of roaring afresh! Quelle horreur!

In our issue today, we said, inter alia, on the Paris situation: "The danger of a popular uprising has been removed for the time being by the vote of the Chamber against dealing with the prohibition of the clubs as a matter of urgency, i.e. against prohibition of the clubs in general. But a new danger is emerging: the danger of a coup

d'état If the Ministry wants to defy the vote of the Assembly, then there is nothing left for it except — a coup d'état. Dissolution of the National Assembly and preparation for the restoration of the monarchy by military force, that is what lurks behind the fear of the National of the Ministry continuing in office That a coup d'état is becoming ever more imminent, is proved by the incidents involving

Changarnier and the officers of the mobile guard The situation seems to become more complicated; in fact, however, it is becoming very simple, as simple as it always is on the eve of a revolution. The



**[p. 285]**

conflict between the Assembly and the President together with his Ministers has reached breaking point Restoration of the monarchy or — a red republic, this is now the only alternative in France The decent republic is falling to pieces, and after it — even if there are first of all some small intermezzi—the only possibility is the red republic." a

In the special edition we announced the crisis for the 29th. The reports of the 29th from Paris printed below will show our readers how accurate our reports were and the striking correctness of our description today of the French situation.268

Written on January 30, 1849 Printed according to the newspaper

First published in the special supplement Published in English for the first to the Neue Rheinische Zeitung No. 209, time January 31, 1849

[^1]: a See this volume, pp. 281-83.— Ed.



