---
Volume: 8
Document_Title: "107. The Vienna Correspondent of the Kölnische Zeitung "
Page_Range: "423-425"
---

# 107. The Vienna Correspondent of the Kölnische Zeitung 



**[p. 394]**

THE VIENNA CORRESPONDENT OF THE KÖLNISCHE ZEITUNG

Cologne, February 17. One riddle less in world history! Herr Schwanbeck, editor of the Kölnische Zeitung who writes under the sign A , and at the same time writes reports for that paper from Vienna under the sign^ Q, has, as is well known, continued as long as possible under both trade marks to slander the Magyars, accusing them of cowardice and villainy, and has not merely defeated but repeatedly annihilated them, and acclaimed in dithyrambs the entry of the combined army with its courts martial into the various towns and comitats of Hungary.

Herr Schwanbeck himself now solves the riddle; like Achilles, only our Schwanbeck himself can heal the wounds he has caused.

And what is the solution of the riddle?—It is fear of Weiden. Hence the vilification of the Viennese and Magyars, the miserable lies about the military successes of the Austrians, the crawling and ogling in relation to the Croats and Pandours.333

For, says the famous Schwanbeck, for, he says:

Out of respect for Weiden, readers of the Kölnische Zeitung have for two months had to be lied to and deceived by the Vienna reports about the war in Hungary under the sign of A A.

[^1]: "Up to now, in fact, anyone who dared to doubt the victorious advance of the imperial army at all points of the monarchy was formally belied by Governor Baron Weiden and awarded the honorary title of malicious scoundrel" (Kölnische Zeitung No. 40).a

[^2]: Published on February 16, 1849.—Ed.



Goethe said of Pustkuchen:

"If even whales have lice, then I must have mine too." 3

Kossuth can say the same of Schwanbeck.

Written by Engels on February 17,1849 Printed according to the newspaper

First published in the Neue Rheinische Published in English for the first Zeitung No. 225, February 18, 1849 time

[^1]: a Goethe, "Zahme Xenien" V.— Ed.



