---
Volume: 8
Document_Title: "1. Karl Marx. Prohibition of a Torchlight Procession for Gott- schalk. Note "
Page_Range: "512-513"
---

# 1. Karl Marx. Prohibition of a Torchlight Procession for Gott- schalk. Note 



**[p. 1934]**

Karl Marx

[PROHIBITION OF A TORCHLIGHT PROCESSION FOR GOTTSCHALK]

At 10 o'clock on Friday (December 23) a deputation from the Workers' Association went to see Geiger, the Police Superintendent, to get permission to hold a torchlight procession for Gottschalk. Geiger stated that he could not permit this as "it was not allowed". A second deputation then went to see Commandant Engels.

He asked for the names of those who wished to see him. Beckhaus- en and another man came in and explained that they had come from police headquarters and that permission to hold the torchlight procession had been refused there. They now wished to request him.

Engels was already prepared. No names had yet been mentioned, nothing had yet been said about for whom and for what purpose the torchlight procession was to be held; he interrupted:

He also refused "under any circumstances" to allow a song with accom paniment.

[^1]: "The authorities had the men arrested and so on; it is true that they have been acquitted by the jury; but because they once had them arrested the authorities cannot now allow the torchlight procession to take place."

[^2]: Written by Marx in December 1848 Printed according to the manu-

[^3]: First published in the book: W. Kühn, Der P junge Hermann Becker, Bd. I, Dortmund, Published in English for the first time

[^4]: i?-2>780



