---
Volume: 8
Document_Title: "6. A Deputation to Chief Public Prosecutor Zweiffel "
Page_Range: "530-532"
---

# 6. A Deputation to Chief Public Prosecutor Zweiffel 



**[p. 501]**

A DEPUTATION TO CHIEF PUBLIC PROSECUTOR ZWEIFFEL

Cologne, November 22. Yesterday Herren Karl Marx, Karl Schapper and Schneider II were to appear before the examining magistrate on account of the appeal in the name of the Rhenish District Committee of Democrats (No. 147 of the Neue Rheinische Zeitung).* It was generally said that there was to be an immediate arrest of those summonsed. However unlikely this appeared to many well versed in the law, the People's Committee384

nevertheless took the occasion to obtain assurance on this point by sending a deputation to Chief Public Prosecutor Zweiffel. The latter stated as expected that no warrant for the arrest of the summonsed had been applied for and that such a warrant could only possibly be issued if the appeal were to lead to rebellion; because in that case the offence of the summonsed under Articles 209 and 217385 (which at present could only be tried in a police court) would become a crime.

Incidentally, contrary to the view of the Chief Public Prosecutor that according to the point of law mentioned the summons should have been issued, the deputation expressed the view that at this time, when the National Assembly exists in Berlin as the only legitimate authority in Prussia, steps must immediately be taken above all against those officials and authorities who violently oppose the

[^1]: See this volume, p. 41.— Ed.





**[p. 502]**

decisions of the National Assembly or invite such opposition, as happened recendy in the case of Oberpräsident Eichmann in Coblenz.3

First published in the Neue Rheinische Printed according to the newspaper Zeitung No. 150, November 23, 1848 , , , , Published in English for the first time

[^1]: See this volume, p. 37.— Ed.



