---
Volume: 8
Document_Title: "9. Mandate of the Lausanne Workers' Association for Frederick Engels "
Page_Range: "534-538"
---

# 9. Mandate of the Lausanne Workers' Association for Frederick Engels 



**[p. 505]**

[MANDATE OF THE LAUSANNE WORKERS' ASSOCIATION FOR FREDERICK ENGELS]

Brother,

Because of the impossibility of sending a delegate we have elected you to represent us at the Workers' Congress in Berne388; as an old fighter for the proletariat you will certainly not fail in your task here either, although you will have to deal in this case not with bourgeois and other sordid souls, for it is only proletarians whom you will have to act with and for; accordingly, we tell you briefly our wishes regarding a central association.

1) The purpose of the united associations must be:

a. Foundation of a central association and a central treasury. b. Social and political education of the workers. c. To establish contact with the German Workers' Committee in Leipzig,389 in order chiefly to strengthen the links between the workers. 2) The duty of the elected central association must be:

a. To establish contact with the Workers' Committee in Leipzig. b. To facilitate correspondence, mainly to distribute the paper ( Verbrüderung) issued by the Central Committee. c. To administer the central treasury and to render its accounts every six months. d. Immediately to inform the fraternal associations of all important events. 3) Duties of the fraternal associations to each other and to the central association: a. Every member pays a contribution of at most 1 batza per month, while the exchange of letters is always conducted not pre-paid by either side.

[^1]: A Swiss coin, equal to 30-32 pfennigs.— Ed.





**[p. 506]**

b. Every branch association must issue cards to its members. c. Every member holding a card has free entry into every association, but the card must be signed by the president of the last association of which he was a member. Concerning our choice: As before we think that the Berne Association is the most suitable one.In case our last circular should be discussed: it was purely the consequence of the fact that already this summer we had nominated the Berne Association to be the Central Association, but since we had no information at all on the state of affairs, we called a meeting here which decided on the above circular. We have rejected the contribution of V2 batz per week because it would lead to a reduction in the number of members and thus the income would not be much higher.

In the name of the forty-one members of the Association

Greetings and handshake

G. Schneeberger

Bangert Chr. Haaf Lausanne, 8.12.1848

[^1]: First published in: Marx/Engels, Gesamt- Printed according to the manu- ausgabe, Abt. 1, Bd. 7, 1935 script

[^2]: Published in English for the first time



> « 4 « « ^ M » inn » H » , /£*,, JL> »^ A* *****

/.0~* J*e*~A« &t~r~r 4 '*£ M*. £~*~~* -f-^JXt**. *4~^*

[^1]: A page of the minutes of the Congress of German Workers' Associations in Switzerland, at which Engels was the secretary





