---
Volume: 8
Document_Title: "10. Communication Concerning Orders for the Neue Rheinische Zeitung for the First Quarter of 1849 "
Page_Range: "538-540"
---

# 10. Communication Concerning Orders for the Neue Rheinische Zeitung for the First Quarter of 1849 



**[p. 509]**

[COMMUNICATION CONCERNING ORDERS

FOR THE NEUE RHEINISCHE ZEITUNG FOR THE FIRST QUARTER OF 1849]

Orders for the Neue Rheinische Zeitung for the next quarter, January to March 1849, should be placed as soon as possible, namely in Cologne at the Dispatch Department of the paper (at 17 Hutmacher); outside Cologne, at any post-office in Germany.

By the abolition of the stamp duty the price of the subscription is reduced and from now on this is for Cologne only 1 taler 7 silver groschen 6 pfennigs; at all Prussian post-offices, postage included, only 1 taler 17 silver groschen per quarter; for subscribers in other parts of Germany a proportional amount for postage is added.

The editorial board remains unchanged.

The previous months' issues of the Neue Rheinische Zeitung are its programme. Through its personal connections with the heads of the democratic party in England, France, Italy, Belgium and North America the editorial board is able to reflect the political and social movement abroad more correctly and clearly for its readers than any other paper. In this respect the Neue Rheinische Zeitung is the organ not only of German, but of European democracy.

[^1]: For France, subscriptions will be accepted by M. G. A. Alexandre, 28 Brandgasse, Strassburg, and at 23 rue Notre Dame de Nazareth, Paris, and by the Royal Chief Post-Office in Aachen; for England by Messrs. /. J. Ewer &Co., 72 Newgate Street, London; for Belgium and Holland by the respective royal post-offices and the post-office in Liege?

[^2]: a In issues Nos. 176-95 of the Neue Rheinische Zeitung this passage reads as follows: "For France, subscriptions will be accepted by the Royal Chief Post-Office in Aachen; for Holland by the royal post-offices and for Great Britain by the Belgian royal post-office in Ostend."—Ed.





**[p. 510]**

Advertisements: A brevier line of column width (4 columns per page) or the equivalent space: i silver groschen 6 pfennigs.

Advertisements of all kinds obtain very wide circulation through the many connections of our paper.

The Responsible Publishers of the Neue Rheinische Zeitung

Published in the Neue Rheinische Printed according to the newspaper Zeitung Nos. 172-95, December 19, 1848- , , . , , . ^ ,- , , , r- January 14 1849 Published in English for the first time

