---
Volume: 8
Document_Title: "23. Letter of the Cologne Commandant Colonel Engels to the Oberpräsident of the Rhine Province "
Page_Range: "556-558"
---

# 23. Letter of the Cologne Commandant Colonel Engels to the Oberpräsident of the Rhine Province 



**[p. 527]**

LETTER OF THE COLOGNE COMMANDANT

COLONEL ENGELS TO THE OBERPRÄSIDENT OF THE RHINE PROVINCE

To Your Excellency the Oberpräsident of the Rhine Province Herr Eichmann

The editor of the Rheinische Zeitung, Herr Marx (!), is becoming increasingly more audacious now that he has been acquitted by the jury, and it seems to me high time that this man was deported, as one certainly does not have to put up with an alien who is no more than tolerated in our midst, befouling everything with his poisonous tongue, especially as our own home-grown vermin are doing that quite adequately.

This morning I again demanded his deportation from Police Superintendent Geiger. He asked me to submit my request in writing, which I did, and it ran as follows:

"About nine months ago (!) the Commandant's Department was obliged to refuse Marx, the editor of the Neue Rheinische Zeitung, permission to be accepted as a citizen of Cologne and to become a naturalised Prussian402 on weighty and adequate grounds. This man's behaviour has since then been such that it seems to me highly dangerous to continue to tolerate him here any longer. He takes the liberty to insult in any way he thinks fit our Constitution, our King3

and the highest government officials in his increasingly popular paper, constantly seeking to promote even greater feelings of discontent and indirectly calling upon the people to revolt. The Commandant's Department therefore demands, in the interest of the security of the fortress of Cologne, that the Police Department order the deportation of Marx, whose presence has been tolerated hitherto."

[^1]: a Krederick William IV.—Ed.





**[p. 528]**

I remain, with the deepest respect,

Your Excellency's most obedient servant

Engels, Colonel Cologne, February 17, 1849

First published in the Zeitschrift für Printed according to the journal Geschichtswissenschaft No. 5, 1969

Published in English for the first time

