---
Volume: 49
Document_Title: "6. Engel s to Wilhelm Liebknecht. 10 August "
Page_Range: "44-48"
---

# 6. Engel s to Wilhelm Liebknecht. 10 August 



**[p. 6]**

ENGELS TO WILHELM LIEBKNECHT

IN LEIPZIG

London, 10 August 1890

Dear Liebknecht,

I am still held up here because my house is in the process of chang- ing owners. So far as I can see, we shall not be leaving until Thurs- day, when we shall probably go to Folkestone. I shall leave our ad- dress at the OFFICE* here in Kentish Town and shall also send it to you in Leipzig. I hope that, as soon as you arrive, you will come and join us at the seaside. As you write and say that you cannot come before the 15th of this month, I would venture to suppose that you won't be able to get away immediately after the 15th either— to judge by recent de- lays, at any rate. So if you were to come on about 1 September or soon after, you would still be able to spend some time with us, and then return to London in our company (about 11 September), where you would be assured of a place to stay with us.

During our absence the house is being decorated; this year the car- pets have got to be taken up, and there is also the papering and white- washing to be done. Moreover, owing to some unfortunate expe- riences in punctoh of expenditure, I shall be obliged while we're away to put the housemaid on BOARD WAGES, i. e. give her so much a week in return for which she has to keep herself—an arrangement that is awkward, in that it precludes, not only hospitality, but also to some extent the very possibility of my spending a night in the house during that particular period. So if you were to arrive earlier, it would prob- ably mean your accepting Motteler's invitation. However, I dare say you will be able to fall in with the above suggestions.

has its weaker sides, the weakest, and one which to my mind pro- vides quite unnecessary occasion for perpetual recrimination, being the proposal that the Executive should itself— albeit with the consent of the parliamentary group — determine its own rates of pay. I have to- day received the Sächsische Arbeiter-Zeitung in which the literary gents

[^1]: At all events I hope to see you before the congress. Your draft ' 7

[^2]: * editorial office of the Sozialdemokrat - '' in the matter





**[p. 14]**

criticise the draft. Much of their criticism is utterly puerile, but they have instinctively smelt out isolated weaknesses. For instance, that every constituency may send up to 3 representatives. Any old Bahl- mann or Höchberg, provided he is prepared to stake his money on it, could thus send 3 representatives from a constituency in which we had polled barely a thousand votes. Needless to say, money as regula- tor of the number of delegates sent will, generally speaking, play only an indirect role. However, I think it unwise that the proportion of delegates to the number of party comrades they represent should be made to depend on that alone.

Again, according to § 2 — to go by the wording — any three nonenti- ties may combine to expel you from the party until such time as you are rehabilitated by the party Executive. The party conference, on the other hand, may not expel anyone but only act as a court of ap- peal.

In any active party having parliamentary representatives, the parlia- mentary group is a power of great importance. It has that power, whether or not it is expressly recognised in the rules. It may therefore be asked whether it is wise that the rules should accord it the addi- tional status whereby it has absolute authority over the Executive, as is done in §§ 15-18. Supervision of the Executive, ALL RIGHT, but maybe it would be preferable for an indictment to come up before an independent committee which would be responsible for the verdict.

During the past 3 years your party has seen a massive increase of one million. The existence of the Anti-Socialist Law ' ' has meant that these new recruits have not had sufficient opportunity for reading or for agitation to place them on a par with the older party members. Many of them have only the good will and good intentions with which the road to hell is notoriously paved. It would be a miracle if they were not burning with zeal like all neophytes. Thus they consti- tute material that positively invites appropriation and exploitation by the thrustful literati and academics who oppose you. As, indeed, has transpired in, for instance, Magdeburg. Herein lies a danger which should not be underestimated. Obviously at this congress, you will easi- ly be able to cope with it. But you must take care that no seeds oïfu- ture difficulties are sown. Do not make martyrs unnecessarily, show

Soiialticm Blmitifdir 6ibli>tl>ct

Das

f Nctte «Ktori Rfte bntf A« «««««be.

Mit (tat« mm Inatrt »it Itielrit fi|t!i.

German Cooperative P a b l i s h i n g Co.

[^1]: ****** "d^-t&Hti

[^2]: 114 Kentish Town Ro»d XW 1890.

[^3]: Title page of the fourth German edition

[^4]: of the Manifesto of the Communist Party with Engels' dedication to Laura Lafargue





