---
Volume: 49
Document_Title: "8. Engel s to Otto von Boenigk. 21 August "
Page_Range: "49-51"
---

# 8. Engel s to Otto von Boenigk. 21 August 



**[p. 18]**

Your

F. E.

First published in: Marx and Engels, Printed according to the original Works, First Russian Edition, Vol. Published in English for the first XXVIII, Moscow, 1940 t- „

ENGELS TO OTTO VON BOENIGK 18

IN BRESLAU8

Folkestone near Dover, 21 August 1890

Otto von Boenigk, Esq., Breslau

Dear Sir,

Ad I. So-called 'socialist society' is not, in my view, to be regarded as something that remains crystallised for all time, but rather as being in process of constant change and transformation like all other social conditions. The crucial difference between that society and condi- tions today consists, of course, in the organisation of production on the basis of common ownership, initially by the nation, of all means of production. I see absolutely no difficulty in carrying out this revolu- tion over a period, i. e. gradually. The fact that our working men are up to it is borne out by their many productive and distributive asso- ciations which, wherever they have not been deliberately wrecked by

[^1]: I can only reply to your inquiries ' 9 briefly and in general terms, for otherwise I should have to write a dissertation on the first one.

[^2]: a Wroclaw





**[p. 19]**

the police, are managed no worse and far more honestly than the joint-stock companies of the middle classes. I fail to see how you can talk of inadequate education among the masses in Germany, now that our workers have given such striking proof of political maturity in their victorious struggle against the Anti-Socialist Law. ' l The ar- rogant, pontifical presumption of our so-called educated men seems to me a far greater obstacle. Admittedly we are still short of techni- cians, agronomists, engineers, chemists, architects, etc., but if the worst comes to the worst we can buy them, just as the capitalists do, and if a stern example is made of a traitor or two — of whom there will assuredly be some in such company—, they will find it in their interest to cease robbing us. But apart from specialists like these, among whom I also count school-teachers, we shall manage very well without the rest of the 'educated' men; e. g. the present heavy influx of literati and students into the party will be attended by all manner of mischief unless those gentry are kept within bounds.

With proper technical management there would be no difficulty in leasing the large Junker estates east of the Elbe to the present day la- bourers and/or farm servants for communal cultivation. If there are excesses, it will be the Junkers' own fault, since it was they who, heed- less of all existing educational legislation, were the cause of the peo- ple's becoming so brutalised.

The biggest obstacle is presented by the small farmers and the im- portunate, educated smart-Alecks whose superior knowledge of a subject is always in inverse proportion to their understanding of it.

Assuming, therefore, that we have an adequate number of support- ers among the masses, the socialisation of large-scale industry and of the farms on the big estates can be carried out very quickly, once we have gained political supremacy. The rest will soon follow at a faster or slower pace. And when the large sources of production are ours, we shall be masters of the situation.

You speak of the absence of a uniform opinion. This does exist-— but it is to be found among the educated men who come from aristo- cratic and bourgeois circles and who have absolutely no idea of how much they still have to learn from the working man.

Ad II. Mrs Marx was the daughter of Regierungsrat von Westpha-

