---
Volume: 49
Document_Title: "10. Engel s to Paul Lafargue. 27 August "
Page_Range: "52-54"
---

# 10. Engel s to Paul Lafargue. 27 August 



**[p. 21]**

Printed according to the original

Published in English for the first time

ENGELS TO PAUL LAFARGUE 2 0

AT LE PERREUX

Bellevue Hotel, Folkestone, 27 August 1890

My dear Lafargue,

Yes, we're at the SEASIDE and what's more, until your letter of the 4th inst. reached me, no one had suggested my going to Le Per- reux, which, by the way, I should have done with much pleasure had it not been for the perfectly good reasons which I mentioned to Laura and which she evidently found acceptable at the time. We have been here for the past fortnight in a small PUBLIC HOUSE; the land- lady, a most handsome woman, looks after us very well, but the place is a long way from the sea and not FIRST CLASS. We have our fourth bed in the parlour.

As I am somewhat uncertain about my balance at the bank, being unable to compare my books, I can only send you a cheque for ten pounds, which I enclose.

There has been a students' revolt in the German party. ' 3 During 2 or 3 years a crowd of students, literati and other young déclassé bourgeois invaded the party, arriving just in time to take most of the editorial posts in the new papers that were then proliferating. In their usual fashion they regarded their bourgeois universities as socialist Saint-Cyrs 2 ' entitling them to enter the party in the rank of officer, if

First published abridged in Briefe und Auszüge aus Briefen von Joh. Phil. Becker, Jos. Dietzgen, Friedrich Engels, Karl Marx u.A. an F.A. Sorge und Andere, Stuttgart,

1906 and in full in: Marx and Engels, Works, First Russian Edition, Vol. XXVIII, Moscow, 1940

10

[^1]: * See this volume, p. 5.





**[p. 22]**

These worthies, whose impotence is equalled only by their arro- gance, found support in the new recruits to the party in Berlin — a peculiar Berlinism, combining impudence, cowardice, rodomontade and GIFT OF THE GAB, would seem to have temporarily come to the sur- face. The young university gents now had a chorus.

They attacked the deputiesa for no reason at all and no one could explain this sudden recrudescence. The truth is that the deputies, or most of them, didn't take sufficient notice of the little wretches. Admit- tedly Liebknecht conducted the polemic on behalf of the deputies and the Central Committee with a rare lack of finesse. But then along came Bebel, their main target, who, at two meetings in Dresden and Magdeburg, proceeded to demolish two of their newspapers.b The Berlin meeting was guarded by the police who surreptitiously egged on the opposition or else got others to do so.22 But it's all over never- theless and the congress ' 2 is unlikely to have to concern itself further with the matter. This little stunt has done us good inasmuch as it has demonstrated the impossibility of allotting a LEADERS' role to the Berli- ners. All very well, perhaps, if they'd been Parisians—but we have had enough and more of your Parisians.

The revelations about Boulanger in Figaro 23 must be astounding. Could you let me have them? It is sad for the 247,000 or, rather 274,000 nincompoops, who in January 1889 allowed themselves to be taken in by that bogus panjandrum.24

In Kovalevsky's bookc there is an important bit in which he assigns a place between the matriarchate and the mark (or mir6) community to the patriarchal family group of the kind that existed in France

(Franche-Comté and Nivernais) up till 1789 and still exists today amongst the Serbs and Bulgars under the name of £ddruga. He tells me that in Russia this is the generally accepted view. If the thing were to be confirmed, it would clear up a number of difficulties in Tacitus et al., while at the same time raising others. The chief fault of Kova-

[^1]: a of the Social-Democratic group in the German Reichstag - b Sächsische Arbeiter-Leitung and Volksstimme-1 M. Kovalcvsky, Tableau des origines et de l'évolution de la famil- le et de la propriété. -'' rural community in Russia ('luip-b')



