---
Volume: 49
Document_Title: "13. Engel s to Paul Lafargue. 19 September "
Page_Range: "59-62"
---

# 13. Engel s to Paul Lafargue. 19 September 



**[p. 13]**

ENGELS TO PAUL LAFARGUE

AT LE PERREUX

London, 19 September 1890

My dear Lafargue,

Thank you for your good news.32 If that's how things are, it would be truly idiotic of us not to do everything in our power to attend a congress where the very fact of our presence would give us the up- per hand.

So far as we are concerned, the following conditions are vital: 1 ) Convocation of the joint congress by the mandatories, and on the strength of the mandates, of the two 1889 congresses.26 The Bel- gians and the Swiss would either sign one convocation only, or else the Belgians and the Swiss would convene on the strength of our man- date, and only the Belgians on the strength of the other mandate. This ought to be laid down in advance, as also the text of the convo- cation.

2) The absolute sovereignty of the congress, for which no preced- ing congress would have force of law.— Nor would it be bound in any respect whatever by any committee, whether nominated by one of the earlier congresses, or as the result of negotiations over a merger. It will establish its own rules and agenda and will alone determine the manner in which the verification of credentials is to be carried out.

3) The manner and the proportions in which the various associa- tions are to be represented at the congress to be laid down in advance.

4) An international committee, appointed as soon as a merger has been decided upon, will prepare draft rules and agenda on which the congress will pronounce.

Ad 2): The complete freedom of the congress is vital to ourselves because, once in a position to haggle over the agenda, rules, etc., the Possibilists and the Belgians would diddle us; our negotiators have al- ways been more naïve than theirs and the consequence would be an unending discussion of which everyone would lose the thread, thus



**[p. 29]**

Now, if you Frenchmen would amend, complete and fill out the de- tails of the above draft, you would be doing a worthwhile job.

This was the gist of my letter to Bonnier,a though I can assure you that I never try to settle anything with him. My chief aim in writing to him was to make the idea of a merger acceptable to you all; now I have had your letter the whole discussion has become otiose.

I therefore wrote at once to Bebel, suggesting that the question be discussed at an informal international gathering at Halle.33 If, to- gether with the official representatives of some of the smaller national- ities, we should then succeed in laying the foundations of a merger, it might be possible to approach the Belgians about it.28 In fact, I asked Bebel to arrange, if possible, for a Belgian — preferably from Ghent — to be present.

Meanwhile I await your news on the opinion of Guesde, Deville, etc., and also the Blanquists.

The Idée nouvelle has sent me a list of subscriptions — what shall I do?

A Monsieur Ch. Caron, 8 rue du Croissant (thus evidently from the Idée nouvelle), has sent me a prospectus for the republication of so- cialist brochures and asks me for permission to publish my writings as well as those of Marx. Judging by these efforts, one might say that the French and particularly the Parisians are on the point of performing a miracle. But has this gentleman the wherewithal to publish even a single brochure? Please let me know, for I must reply within 4-5 days.b

Sonnenschein has sent me his account: £5.4 — of which 1/5 for Laura = £l.-.9, 1/5 for the children," 1/5 for Tussy and 2/5 for the translators.d Here is the cheque for Laura. Meissner's account will

[^1]: * F. Engels, 'The International Workers' Congress of 1891'.-b See next letter.- 1 Longuet's children - d Samuel Moore and Edward Aveling





**[p. 30]**

The Boulangist revelations could not be more edifying. Congratu- late yourself on having been able to resist when the Boulangists tempt- ed you. But what idea does that give you of the political capacity of the Parisian public! To have been duped, what am I saying, freneti- cally egged on by this simple ne'er-do-well who gives his word as a soldier to the royalists provided that they pay him the expenses of his good fortunes! Pfui Teufel!b Fortunately the province is there to make amends for Parisian foolishness. It's incredible!34

Hyndman celebrates the immortal Joffrin in Justice, and says that it is him and the Possibilists who have crushed Boulanger and saved the republic.35 He ought to know that the case of the Possibilists is too desperate in Paris to come and lie so impudently.

Give Laura a kiss from Nim, myself and Schorlemmer who arrived the day before yesterday.

Yours ever,

F E .

Will send you the last number of the Sozialdemokrat in a day or two. Ede Bernstein is staying here to send reports on England, partic- ularly to the Neue Zjiit. Fischer is going to Berlin to join the Vorwärts,"1

and will get a seat in the Reichstag as soon as occasion arises. Tauscher is going to Stuttgart. As for the great Julius Motteler, no one yet knows what is to be done with him. He is the party's greatest incubus — in his own eyes an unrecognised genius, in those of every- body else ineptitude personified.

See if you can arrange for Guesde and Vaillant to go to Halled; Guesde will have to take Bonnier as interpreter.

[^1]: First published in: Marx and Engels, Printed according to the original Works, Second Russian Edition, Vol. 37, Moscow, 1965 Translated from the French

[^2]: Published in English for the first time

[^3]: " of the first volume of Capital - b Hang it all! - c Berliner Volksblatt -d to the con- gress of the German Social-Democratic Party



