---
Volume: 49
Document_Title: "14. Engel s to Charles Caron. 20 September — "
Page_Range: "62-63"
---

# 14. Engel s to Charles Caron. 20 September — 



**[p. 14]**

ENGELS TO CHARLES CARON

IN PARIS

[Draftl

[London, 20 September 1890]

Dear Citizen,

In reply to your letter of the 17th,36 I cannot give you the au- thorisation you ask for until I receive clarification on a number of points."

In the first place it seems to me that, if any pamphlets are to be reis- sued, they should appear as complete and separate pamphlets and not in the form of a revue, each number of which would contain a mixed assortment of disconnected fragments of works that would, as often as not, contradict one another. Hence I should like, first of all, to be in a position to weigh up the reasons that have led you to prefer this lat- ter form.

Again, is it not the intention of the Workers' Party to republish a large part of these same works in its Bibliothèque socialiste? If so, the party undertaking ought to take precedence over the private undertaking.

Lastly, you have yourself a pretty expensive task. It would take you from 4 to 6 months merely to complete the publication of the six pam- phlets advertised b as commencing in your first number. Were the re- vue to cease appearing for want of funds midway through the publi- cation of a work I had authorised you to reprint, a heavy responsibil- ity would fall on my shoulders.

So have you the necessary funds? There are, in addition, further points to be considered. So as to settle the matter I would ask you to get in touch with Citi- zen Lafargue, to whom I have sent a copy of this letter.

I should be obliged if you would refer to me in future before using

[^1]: a See previous letter. - b Engels has in mind the advertisement of L'Œuvre Socialiste. Revue politique el littéraire, enclosed in Charles Caron's letter of 17 September 1890.



