---
Volume: 49
Document_Title: "16. Engel s to Joseph Bloch. 21- 22 September "
Page_Range: "64-68"
---

# 16. Engel s to Joseph Bloch. 21- 22 September 



**[p. 33]**

Herewith cheque for £20.

Yours ever,

F.E.

First published in: Marx and Engels, Printed according to the original Works, Second Russian Edition, Vol. 37, M , n c l- translated from the French oscow, 1965

Published in English for the first time

16

ENGELS TO JOSEPH BLOCH 40

IN KÖNIGSBERG

London, 21 [-22] September 1890

Dear Sir,

Your letter of the 3rd of this month was forwarded to me in Folke- stone; but since I did not have the book in question b with me I was not able to reply to it. After arriving home on the 12th, I found such an accumulation of urgent work awaiting me that I have been unable until today to get round to writing you a line or two. This, merely by way of explanation for the delay which I trust you will be good enough to excuse.41

Ad I. First, on p. 19 of the Origin you will see that the process of growth of the punaluan family is shown as taking place so gradually that even in this century there have been marriages between brothers and sisters (born of one mother) in the Hawaian royal family. And throughout antiquity we find examples of intermarriage between sib- lings, e.g. amongst the Ptolemaeans. Here, however,— secondly — we must distinguish between siblings by the same mother and siblings merely by the same father, 'aÔ£À,<poç, 'a Se X,(pf|c derive from Se^tpûç uterus, and hence originally denoted only siblings by the same mother. And

[^1]: a 15 September-b F. Engels, The Origin of the Family, Private Property and the State (see present edition, Vol. 26).- c brother, sister





**[p. 34]**

According to Wachsmuth's Hellenische Alterthümer * there is, among the Greeks of the Heroic Period,

'no trace of reservations regarding unduly close kinship between married partners, aside from relations between parent and child' (III, p. 157). 'In Crete, marriage to a full sister was not considered an offence' (ibid., p. 170).

This last from Strabo, Book X b; however, I cannot find the pas- sage at this moment because of the absence of proper chapter divi- sions.— Full sisters — failing proof to the contrary — I assume to be sisters by the same father.

Ad II. I would qualify the first of your main propositions as follows: According to the materialist view of history, the determining factor in history is, in the final analysis, the production and reproduction of actual life. More than that was never maintained either by Marx or my- self. Now if someone distorts this by declaring the economic moment to be the only determining factor, he changes that proposition into a mean- ingless, abstract, ridiculous piece of jargon. The economic situation is the basis, but the various factors of the superstructure — political forms of the class struggle and its consequences, namely constitutions set up by the ruling class after a victorious battle, etc., forms of law and, the reflections of all these real struggles in the minds of the parti- cipants, i. e. political, philosophical and legal theories, religious views and the expansion of the same into dogmatic systems — all these fac- tors also have a bearing on the course of the historical struggles of

[^1]: " W. YVachsmuth, Hellenische Alterthumskunde aus dem Geschichtspunkte des Staates. - b Strabo, Geographica.





**[p. 35]**

We make our history ourselves but, in the first place, under very definite premises and conditions. Of these, the economic are ulti- mately decisive. But the political, etc., and even the traditions still lin- gering in people's minds, play some, if not a decisive, role. The Prus- sian state itself owes its origin and development to historical and, in the final analysis, economic circumstances. It could, however, hardly be maintained without pedantry that what caused Brandenburg, of all the many small principalities of North Germany, to become a great power, the embodiment of the economic, linguistic and — since the Reformation — also the religious, differences between North and South, was economic necessity irrespective of any other factors (above all its involvement, through its possession of Prussia, in Poland and hence in international political relations — which like- wise played a decisive role in the formation of the Austrian dynasty). Without making oneself a laughing-stock, it would scarcely be possible to provide an economic explanation for the existence of every small German principality, past and present, or for the origin of the High German sound shift whereby the geographical partition formed by the mountains from the Sudetes to the Taunus became a veritable rift running right across Germany.

In the second place, however, history is made in such a way that the ultimate result is invariably produced by the clash of many indi- vidual wills of which each in turn has been made what it is by a wide variety of living conditions; there are thus innumerable conflicting forces, an infinite number of parallelograms of forces, productive of one result — the historical event which itself may be seen as the product of a power operating unconsciously and involuntarily as a whole. For what each individual wants is obstructed by every other individual and the outcome is something that no one wanted. Thus, the course of history up till now has been like a natural process and has, indeed, been subject to much the same laws of motion. But the fact that individual wills — each of which wants what it is driv-



**[p. 36]**

Another thing I would ask you to do is to study this theory in the original source books and not at second-hand; it is really far easier. While Marx wrote hardly anything in which it did not play some role, The Eighteenth Brumaire of Louis Bonaparte is a quite outstanding example of its application. There are also many allusions to the theory in Capital. I might further draw your attention to my works, Herr Eugen Dühring's Revolution in Science and Ludwig Feuerbach and the End of Classical German Philosophy in which the account I give of historical materialism is, so far as I know, the most exhaustive in existence.

If some younger writers attribute more importance to the eco- nomic aspect than is its due, Marx and I are to some extent to blame. We had to stress this leading principle in the face of opponents who denied it, and we did not always have the time, space or opportunity to do justice to the other factors that interacted upon each other. But it was a different matter when it came to depicting a section of his- tory, i. e. to applying the theory in practice, and here there was no possibility of error. Unfortunately people all too frequently believe they have mastered a new theory and can do just what they like with it as soon as they have grasped — not always correctly — its main propositions. Nor can I exempt from this reproach many of the more recent 'Marxists' who have, indeed, been responsible for some pretty peculiar stuff.

Ad I, I yesterday discovered (I am writing this on 22 September) in Schoemann's Griechische Alterthümer, Berlin, 1855, I, p. 52, the follow- ing vital passage which fully substantiates what I have said above. It runs:

[^1]: 'It is known, however, that marriage between half-brothers and sisters born of dif- ferent mothers was not subsequently regarded as incest in Greece.'



