---
Volume: 49
Document_Title: "22. Engel s to Paul Lafargue. 25 September "
Page_Range: "73-75"
---

# 22. Engel s to Paul Lafargue. 25 September 



**[p. 42]**

Bebel and Liebknecht have now both removed to Berlin. In case urgent communication with them might become necessary, I give you Bebel's address, the only one I have: A. B. Grossgörschenstraße, 22a, Berlin.

Fine scoundrels in Berlin amongst the nobility — one shot himself while quarreling with a rat du ballet," another for debt and swin- dling, a third in prison for everlasting rows and delirium tremens, a chief officer — Major — of the Unteroffiziersschuleb at Potsdam shot himself and even the Kreuzzeitung' telling the nobility that th'ey are close upon the deluge which they expect only 'après nous'l 45 Could not be better!

Ever yours

F. Engels

First published, in the language of the Reproduced from the original original (English), in: F. Engels, P. et L. Lafargue, Correspondance, t. II, Paris, 1956

22

London, 25 September 1890

My dear Lafargue,

Bebel has written to say that he is in agreement with us as regards Belgium/ I have now suggested that he send out invitations to a pre- liminary congress 'to discuss means of preventing a repetition in 1891 of what happened in 1889, namely two rival and independent work- ing men's congresses'; to invite everyone, Belgians, Swiss, the two Danish parties,46 Swedes, Italians (have you any addresses?), Span-

[^1]: ENGELS TO PAUL LAFARGUE 2 5

[^2]: AT LE PERREUX

[^3]: a ballet dancer - b subalterns' school - c Neue Preussische Leitung - A See this volume, pp. 28-29.





**[p. 43]**

iards and English (the PARLIAMENTARY COMMITTEE,4 7 the EIGHT HOURS LEA- GUE,48 the SOCIAL DEMOCRATIC Federation 29 and the SOCIALIST LEAGUE 4 9).

As to your resolution to insist on the sovereignty of the congress in respect of only 3 questions, to wit verification of mandates, drawing up of the agenda, and method of voting, it seems to me that you are treading on distinctly dangerous ground. It means that, so far as all other questions are concerned, you accept the resolutions passed by former Possibilist congresses and that, when each case crops up, you call for a fresh debate in order to get rid of these obstacles. It means that you recognise the series of Belgian-Possibilist congresses, includ- ing the London caricature of 1888,50 as the working men's only gen- uine means of international representation and that you debase ours of 1889 51 to the status of an act of rebellion as groundless as it was fruitless.

So consider what you would be doing. You intend to propose, with no reservations other than those cited above, that there should be one man, one vote. And at the last Possibilist congress,52 three delegates from each association were admitted. True, those three were allowed only one vote, but unless all the congress's time is to be wasted on roll- calls, how can this be verified? Whoever is going to stop the Belgians' sending three delegates from each of their little associations and lord- ing it over the congress by courtesy of your own proposal? And how many times will you be able to extract a roll-call from a vociferously impatient congress?

It seems to me that you have been carried away by the Possibilist debacle.53 Don't forget that from now until September 1891, when the congress will probably be held, many things can happen. Why abandon the important positions we hold today? Between now and then we may be in dire need of them. Remember that there are Possi- bilists pretty well everywhere, not least in Belgium.

I haven't had your paper." Has it in fact come out?

Regards,

F. E.

[^1]: First published in: F. Engels, P. et Printed according to the original L. Lafargue, Correspondance, t. II, Paris, „ , , . , „ , .„.„ translated from the trench 19oo

[^2]: J Le Socialiste



