---
Volume: 49
Document_Title: "24. Engel s to Friedrich Adolph Sorge. 27 September "
Page_Range: "76-79"
---

# 24. Engel s to Friedrich Adolph Sorge. 27 September 



**[p. 45]**

First published, in the language of the orig- Reproduced from the original inal (English), in: F. Engels, P. et L. La- fargue, Correspondance, t. II, Paris, 1956

24

ENGELS TO FRIEDRICH ADOLPH SORGE

IN HOBOKEN

London, 27 September 1890

Dear Sorge,

Both your letters of the 10th of this month have arrived. Today I am enclosing some copies of the last issue of the Sozialde- mokrat with the usual newspapers. You might care to have some extra copies of this historic issue.

Your information about Schewitsch is probably correct.2 When he passed through London, he ran into Tussy at a meeting and told her he had heard that I had expressed myself in very malicious terms about him, which was why he preferred not to call on me. I lay this at the door of the noble Jonas — though it may also have been due to the prickings of an uneasy conscience. It's the same old story as with so many Russians — une jeunesse orageuse et une vieillesse blasée* as one of them has put it.

Grunzig is a belletrist. And the rebellious little undergraduates in Germany are also belletrists (more triste than bellec) who are out to revolutionise the whole of literature. This explains the whole business of the Volkszeitung article,55 for the MUTUAL ASSURANCE CO. run by these gents also comprises Grunzig. Come to that, if a chap's called Grun- zig or Greulichd he'd do best to vanish without trace.

[^1]: " In two letters of 10 September 1890 Sorge informed Engels that Schewitsch had moved to Riga after the pardon by the Tsar. - b a stormy youth and a blasé old age -c

[^2]: more sad than beautiful-A Grunzig resembles grunzen (grunt), Greulich — greuel (horrid, dreadful).





**[p. 46]**

Much will now be clarified by the congresses — Lille, 9 October, French parti ouvrier*38 (ours); Calais, 13 October, ditto trades un- ions 56; Halle, 12 October will be the most important.12 I shall now tell you what is going on [for your own information — nothing what- ever must get into the press about it):

The Brussels chaps, entrusted by the Possibilists with the convoca- tion of their congress in Belgium,26 invited the Liverpool TRADES UNION congress,27 who accepted with alacrity. In this way the English are committed and we have been placed in something of a predicament. After consulting the people over here, therefore, I asked first the French and then the Germansb to pave the way for the amalgama- tion of both the 1891 congresses, always supposing it is possible to ob- tain acceptable terms, namely, sovereign powers for the congress — which the Possibilists refused to concede to us last time—, the convo- cation to be the responsibility of both mandatories of both the 1889 congresses, the procedure for the sending of delegates to be deter- mined beforehand, and a few other details. The French and Germans have agreed. Since a number of representatives of foreign parties will in any case be going to Halle, I proposed that a preparatory confer- ence be held there with a view to settling the preliminaries.28 This, too, is well in hand. Well, I suppose that every kind of asininity will nevertheless be perpetrated there; Tussy will probably be present and put a stop to some of them but the chaps are so GUSHING in interna- tional affairs, just when this attitude is least called for, that things may take a different course from the one I have set them on. At any rate I don't rule that out. But nevertheless I think it will turn out all right.

For a start, by holding our own congress in 1889,5 ' we showed the smaller nations (the Belgians, Dutch, etc.) that we were not prepared to let them have it all their own way, and next time they'll mind their p's and q's.

Secondly, the Possibilists would appear to be in a state of complete disintegration.53 Brousse, who controls the clique of Possibilist mu-

[^1]: a Workers' Party- b See this volume, pp. 28-29 and 40.





**[p. 47]**

nicipal councillors and, through them, the Labour Exchanges,57 is openly at war with Allemane who controls the Paris trades unions and, more significantly still, is for peace with our people. Aliens ne wants to get into the Chamber in place of Joffrin, now defunct; Brousse wants Lavy or Gély to get in. They are so much at daggers drawn that Brousse did not dare to appear at Joffrin's funeral where Allemane acted as master of ceremonies. They have also had a row with their few supporters in the provinces. And finally their coming out in opposition to the May Day demonstration58 did them enormous harm in the eyes of the Belgians and Dutch. Brousse and Allemane are also warring quite publicly in their papers.11

So favourable are the circumstances—aside from the enormous moral invigoration derived by the Germans from their electoral vic- tory b and its consequences, namely the overthrow of Bismarck and of the Anti-Socialist Law,1 ' and which is directly responsible for mak- ing them the paramount party in Europe — that even with faulty tactics we can hope for victory. Either we shall succeed in obtaining fusion on a rational basis, in which case the congress will be dominat- ed by the German and French Marxists, or the Possibilists and the few who support them will be so manifestly put in the wrong that the English (the new TRADES UNIONS) will desert them; for in that case we should again be able to conduct in this country a campaign as in the spring of 1889, and with even better success.

I am very glad that you intend to write for the Neue Zeit. If you find the conditions of payment unsatisfactory — needless to say, you must be paid at American rates — don't hesitate to tell them what you want, and refer the chaps to me. The Neue Zeit could become an organ of great importance. Bernstein will write from this country, Lafargue from Paris, and Bebel will do the weekly survey on Germany; that he can make a brilliant job of it has already been demonstrated in the Vienna Arbeiter-Zeitung. I never formed a definite opinion about events in Germany until I read Bebel's articles on them. The lucid, objective way in which he presented the facts without allowing him- self to be swayed by his own preferences was unsurpassed.

The Sozialdemokrat leaves a very big gap. However, before two years are out we shall be quarrelling openly with little Willie' and then we may see some fun.

[^1]: " Le Prolétariat and Le Parti ouvrier - h to the German Reichstag on 20 February 1890- '• William II



