---
Volume: 49
Document_Title: "25. Engel s to Friedrich Adolph Sorge. 4 October "
Page_Range: "79-80"
---

# 25. Engel s to Friedrich Adolph Sorge. 4 October 



**[p. 48]**

time

Your

F.E.

I expect to get the 4th edition of Capital, Vol. I shortly, whereupon you shall instantly have a copy. The preface" might provide matter for the Volkszeitung.

First published abridged in Briefe und Printed according to the original Auszüge aus Briefen von Joh. Phil. Becker, „ , , . , , • ^ ,-i r , r- ~r T\- , r • J • L F i v i ut Published in English for the first Jos. uietzgen, Friedrich Engels, Karl Marx . ° u. A. an F.A. Sorge und Andere, Stuttgart,

1906 and in full in: Marx and Engels, Works, First Russian Edition, Vol. XXVIII, Moscow, 1940

25

ENGELS TO FRIEDRICH ADOLPH SORGE

[London,] 4 October 1890

In my last letter I forgot to mention the circumstance that I had given the Romm couple a letter of introduction to you, and you may have thought this improper.b It was sheer forgetfulness on my part. The Romms — I do not know him personally — frequented the best party circles in Berlin where they enjoyed everyone's confidence, and will in any case be able to tell you a great deal that is of interest about conditions there. As I have said, she is the sister-in-law of Ede Bern- stein who, as editor of the Sozialdemokrat, has proved to be one of the best of the younger generation, and her literary work in introducing progressive Russian literature to the Germans deserves great praise.— They will have told you all about the personal side — the hows, whys and wherefores of their coming to America.

[^1]: IN HOBOKEN

[^2]: a F. Engels, 'Preface to the 4th German Edition of Capital, Vol. I'. - b The letter of introduction has not been found.



