---
Volume: 49
Document_Title: "27. Engel s to Wilhelm Liebknecht. 7 October "
Page_Range: "81-82"
---

# 27. Engel s to Wilhelm Liebknecht. 7 October 



**[p. 50]**

and if I get No. 1 immediately I shall be able to send it off next Friday. Dietz can deduct it from my fee. Many regards — also from Jollymeier.a

Your

F.E.

First published in Aus der Frühzeit des Printed according to the original Marxismus. Engels Briefwechsel mit Kautsky, p r 1935 Published in English for the first time

27

ENGELS TO WILHELM LIEBKNECHT

IN BERLIN

L[ondon,] 7 October 1890

Dear Liebknecht,

Volksblatt'' 1-4, and 7 copies of 5,c received with thanks, also your letter.

I would gladly contribute to the Volksblatt if time permits and opportunity arises. But just now I shall have to desist from all journal- istic activity for a while until I have at last completed the third vol- ume.d

As in the case of the Neue £eit and other papers, I have to lay down two conditions: 1. that in articles signed by me, nothing be altered without my consent, 2. that fees, IF ANY, are paid into the party funds as my contribution.

The first thing to be eliminated from the Volksblatt is the deadly boring tone which has now pervaded it. The Hamburger Echo is a cos- mopolitan paper by comparison, though the leading articles may be dry; otherwise its tone is urbane and smacks of a big city. The

Volksblatt, on the other hand, is largely written as though in

[^1]: a Schorlemmer's jocular name- b Berliner Volksblatt - c with Engels' article 'Reply to Mr Paul Ernst' -d of Capital



