---
Volume: 49
Document_Title: "28. Engel s to Friedrich Adolph Sorge. 18 October "
Page_Range: "82-83"
---

# 28. Engel s to Friedrich Adolph Sorge. 18 October 



**[p. 51]**

a dream and Lenchen maintains that the Sankt Johann-Saarbrücker Lei- tung is more interesting. This impression of somnolence is what has al- ways struck us about the paper. Them Berliners prides themselves on their wit, does they? Cor lummy!! So put a bit of life into the thing, otherwise our Political Advertiser will be competing altogether too unfairly against its Prusso-German counterpart3 — and we can't af- ter all take that for our model.

Besides the papers in question, I am sending you a Daily Chronicle containing the true story of the recent GAS SCARES when one or two offi- cious generals wanted to send 700 troops to Becton (east of the EAST END, on the Thames).60 This will show you what kind of paper it is.

I am glad that you should both be settling down so quickly in Ber- lin.

Tussy and Guesde will probably be coming from Lille to join you.

Your

F. E.

Warm regards to your wife and children.

28

ENGELS TO FRIEDRICH ADOLPH SORGE

[London,] 18 October 1890

Dear Sorge,

The Kalenderh has arrived — Lenchen sends her thanks! Have today sent you a whole parcel of odds and ends — relating to the congresses. The Possibilists are done for; Allemane, Clément, Faulet, etc., and the majority of the Paris workers have expelled

[^1]: First published in: Marx and Engels, Printed according to the original Works, First Russian Edition, Vol. XXVIII, Moscow, 1940 Published in English for the first time

[^2]: IN HOBOKEN

[^3]: '' Deutscher Reichs-Anzeiger und Königlich Preußischer Staats-Anzeiger -h Pionier, lllustrir- ier Volks-Kalender



