---
Volume: 49
Document_Title: "29. Engels to Laura Lafargue. 19 October "
Page_Range: "83-86"
---

# 29. Engels to Laura Lafargue. 19 October 



**[p. 52]**

Brousse from the party and he, in turn, has expelled them. Hence a split.53 All that remains to Brousse are the leaders who are depend- ent on him (because of documents about the dirty tricks perpetrated by each of them), i. e. the municipal councillors and the paid officials of the bourse du travail,a and — Mr Hyndman who, to my intense glee, declared his solidarity with Brousse in the last number of Justice}1

At all events, both factions are now ruined and in process of total dis- integration, a process we must hope will not be disturbed by interven- tion from our people. Our congresses, on the other hand, went off splendidly. First Lille — the French 'Marxists' as a party,38 then Ca- lais— the TRADES UNIONS, under their direction56; then Halle, the crowning of the whole. ' 2 Tussy was at Lille and Halle, Aveling at Lille and Calais. I have not yet heard how the international negotiations went at Halle.28 At all events, throughout this week we have been second to none in the eyes of the world's press. Best wishes

Your

F. E.

29

London, 19 October 1890

My dear Löhr,

At last! This week I have been, if not busy, at all events 'occupied' and 'engaged' over head and ears. I have sorted about 4 cubic feet of old letters of Mohr's (that is to say addressed mostly to him) of the

[^1]: First published in Briefe und Auszüge aus Briefen von Joh. Phil. Becker, Jos. Dietzgen, Friedrich Engels, Karl Marx u. A. an F.A. Sorge und Andere, Stuttgart, 1906

[^2]: ENGELS TO LAURA LAFARGUE 6 '

[^3]: AT LE FERREUX

[^4]: a Labour Exchange - '' 'The Split in France', Justice, No. 353, 18 October 1890.

[^5]: Printed according to the original

[^6]: Published in English for the first time





**[p. 53]**

period 1836-64. All higgledy-piggledy in a big basket, which perhaps you may remember. Dusting, straightening, sorting — it took more than a week to put them into rough order. During all that time my room upset, covered with paperassesa in various degrees of order and disorder, so that I could neither go out nor do any other kind of work. That was No. 1. Then came the congresses62 with — not work, but loss of time for me by callers, etc. And finally, Nim has been quite out of sorts all this week, went to bed on her own accord on Thursday morning and actually sent for the Doctor,— who however told her there was no reason for her to stick in bed, she might sit up at least a few hours which she does. He cannot as yet exactly make out what it is, there are symptoms (jaundice) of liver complaint, she has no appe- tite and is weak. However since last night she is better and in better spirits, and I hope will be well in a few days.

I hope Paul has got rid of his intimate friend inside. If he has not, it's his own fault, a dose of felix mas or cousso will soon put an end to that nuisance. It will poison the brute and do him no harm.

Our congresses have come off gloriously and when we compare them with the Possibilists,53 they come out in still bolder relief. That nui- sance now will soon put a stop to itself. Only I hope that our friends will give them every inch of rope they may require and not interfere in the least by approaches or otherwise. Il faut qu'ils cuisent dans leur propre jus}1 Any attempt on our side to meddle with them would only arrest for a time the process of disintegration and pourriture? The masses are sure to come round to us by and by. And the longer we al- low the leaders to kill each other, the less of them shall we have to take over on the day of reunion. If Liebknecht had not been in such a hurry with regard to the Lassalleans coming over to us, he would not have had to take over Hasselmann and others who had to be kicked out six months afterwards.63 And now in France, as then in Germany, the whole lot of the leaders are rotten to the core.

To my great surprise and relief in last Justice Hyndman declares for Broussed! What a piece of good luck. I was beginning to be afraid I might get into a position where Hyndman would have to be taken on again as at least passively a friend, whereas I like him 10,000 times better as an enemy.

[^1]: a wretched scraps of paper -b Let them stew in their own juice.-c decay-*1 'The Split in France', Justice, No. 353, 18 October 1890.





**[p. 54]**

Paul now may be right: the Possibilists may abstain again from their own Congress.64 The date and place appear to have been fixed at Halle 2 8: Brussels, 16 August 1891. This is all I know. To-morrow I shall hear it all from Tussy who left Halle yesterday, her return ticket to Cologne expiring on that day.65

I am glad Fischer has been put on the Parteivorstand.* You have seen him here. He is very intelligent, very active, revolutionary, absolute- ly anti-philistine, and more international in his ways and manners than most Germans. Tussy writes that after the Lille Congress,38 the German Reichstag men, a great portion of them, at least, made a rather philistine impression upon her. I fully expected that. As our M. P. s are not paid, we cannot get always the best men, but must ac- cept from those in a relatively bourgeois position the least bad. There- fore our masses are far better than the fraction. The latter may congrat- ulate themselves that they had such asses and shady fellows (many of them probably mouchardsb) for an opposition.66 If they should rebel against Bebel, Singer and Fischer, they will have to be acted against — but I am sure Bebel will always be strong enough to cow them.

Paul est bien naïf avec ses questions sur Bebel et le 'Gil Blas'. Il con- naît Bebel et il connaît le 'Gil Blas'; est-ce qu'il ne se connaîtrait plus soi-même?c At any rate I shall send the 'Gil Bias' fortement soulignéd

to Bebel and tell him to disown. Such impudent lying exceeds all measure, even for Gil Bias.67

Tussy is quite in love with the Lille delegates, and indeed they seem to have been a regular élite, and shown the very qualities which it has been the fashion of late in France to cry down because the Germans showed them to a higher degree, though up to 1870 it had been the regular thing to claim discipline, esprit d'organisation et action combinée as des qualités tout ce qu'il y a de plus françaises? I was very much inter- ested in Paul's account of these delegates68 and shall take care that it gets into the English and German Press. The great advantage of the French is that they are bred and born in a revolutionary medium. Both English and Germans lack that advantage and are moreover brought up in the religion of the bourgeoisie — protestantism. That

[^1]: a Party Executive-b police spies-0 Paul is very naive with his questions about Bebel and Gil Bias. He knows Bebel and also Gil Bias; is it that he does not know himself better? -d specially underlined -c this spirit of organisation and collective action as the qualities which are French to the extreme



