---
Volume: 49
Document_Title: "30. Engel s to Eduard Bernstein. 20 October "
Page_Range: "86-87"
---

# 30. Engel s to Eduard Bernstein. 20 October 



**[p. 55]**

gives to their habits, manners and customs a spiessbiirgerlichen An- strich* which they have to shake off by going abroad, especially to France. Look at the redaction of the Lille and the Halle resolutions!

That is the great progress: we cannot now do without any one of the three. Only the Belgians and the Swiss we could very well spare.

Love from Nim and yours affectionately

F.E.

As Paul has said so much in the Neue £eith about the fleets construct- ed by Mohr for you girls when you were children, I enclose him the, probably, last specimen extant of Mohr's naval architecture.

First published, in German, in Einheit, Reproduced from the original Nr. 11, Berlin, 1955

30

[London,] 20 October [1890]

Tussy arrived home yesterday morning. Adlerd had told her that Louise Kautsky had come back from Berchtesgaden in the best of spi- rits, was looking 10 years younger and proving a tremendous success. Tussy was very full of the congress 12; the masses, she said, were first- rate but the parliamentary group for the most part still philistine — Bebel had been greatly alarmed upon hearing of the electoral victo- ries of certain of their number and had at once written to say that, while the damage had already been done, it must not be allowed to

[^1]: ENGELS TO EDUARD BERNSTEIN0

[^2]: IN LONDON

[^3]: * philistine tinge-'' P. Lafargue, 'Karl Marx. Persönliche Erinnerungen', Die Neue Zeit, 9. Jg. 1890/91, 1. Bd., Nr. 1-2.-' This letter is a postscript to Eleanor Marx- Aveling's letter to Engels of 16 October 1890 from Halle, which he sent to Bernstein.-

[^4]: d Victor Adler



