---
Volume: 49
Document_Title: "31. Engel s to Wilhelm Liebknecht. 25 October "
Page_Range: "87-88"
---

# 31. Engel s to Wilhelm Liebknecht. 25 October 



**[p. 14]**

happen again. Provided this gang follows Bebel's lead, things will still be all right.

Your

F.E.

I am sending what remains of the reports, amongst them a Ham- burg paper, as I don't know whether you have already got the Berlin report about the 14th of October.3

First published in: Marx and Engels, Printed according to the original Works, Second Russian Edition, Vol. 37, . Moscow, 1965 Publ.shed in English for the first time

31

ENGELS T O W I L H E L M L I E B K N E C H T 6 9

IN BERLIN

L[ondon,] 25 October 1890

I am sending you, addressed to your office, today's Justice contain- ing an article by A. S. Headingley (alias Adolphe Smith), in which the lot of you, and yourself in particular, are branded Possibilists.b

The writer is an Englishman born in Paris, literatus vulgarissimus, who was in Paris at the time of the Commune and afterwards came to this country with a MOVING PANORAMA of Paris and the Commune; as a speculation this was a total flop, something for which he never for- gave us, for he had believed that the General Council of the Interna- tional would drum up a nightly audience for him. He therefore be- came an intimate of the branche française10 in which all the mouchards" and scoundrels — Vésinier, Caria, etc.,— foregathered to hatch plots and, with the help of French fonds secrets, published newspapers in which to attack the General Council — des calomnies ordurières? For the past eight years or so he has been Brousse's principal agent here and the intermediary between him, the SOCIAL DEMOCRATIC Federation

[^1]: a 'Der Partei - Kongreß', Berliner Volksblatt, No. 239, October 1890.- b A. S. Headingley, 'French and German Possibilists', Justice, No. 354, 25 October 1890.-c police spies-d filthy calumnies



