---
Volume: 49
Document_Title: "33. Engel s to Paul Lafargue. 2 November "
Page_Range: "96-98"
---

# 33. Engel s to Paul Lafargue. 2 November 



**[p. 65]**

Many thanks for your anticipatory congratulations on my 70th birthday which is still a month ahead. So far I am still very well ex- cept that I still have to spare my eyes and am not allowed to write by gaslight. Let's hope I remain so.

Now I must close. With warm regards,

Yours,

F. Engels

First published in full in Sozialistische Printed according to the original Monatshefte, Nr. 20-21, Berlin, 1920

Published in English in full for the first time

33

ENGELS TO PAUL LAFARGUE25

AT LE PERREUX

London, 2 November 1890

My dear Lafargue,

Poor Nim is very ill. For some time past it would seem that there has been a recurrence of menstruation, and three weeks ago she suf- fered an appreciable loss of blood. Dr Read, whom we consulted, thought her complexion very sallow, although he found no trace of bile in her urine — which led him to suspect the possibility of an ute- rine tumour, but he didn't examine her manually. She then began to feel pains in the left groin when her faeces passed through the colon towards the sigmoid flexure — these subsided again and I thought she was on the road to recovery until she began to suffer intense pain in her left foot. During all this time a total lack of appetite, severe thirst (she has been living on milk and beef-tea, no solid food). The pain in the left foot culminated in a thrombosis in a vein of the calf. It ap- peared to be taking its natural course, the pain diminished and this morning she woke up after a good night, somewhat refreshed in ap- pearance, if not actually cheerful. However between 11 and midday



**[p. 66]**

a change came over her and Read found she had a temperature of 104°F.= 40°C, although the thermometer had been in her mouth for only a minute and a half. She has fallen, as it were, half asleep, her mental faculties are impaired and her pulse is rapid and feverish, con- sistent with her temperature. In fact Read suspects that, given the cachectic state of her blood (more or less indicated by the previous symptoms), the coagulated blood is decomposing and poisoning the live blood. He hopes to return here this afternoon with Heath of the Gower Street Hospital for a consultation.

That's all I can tell you just now. If Heath turns up, I shall let you know the result.

Give Laura a kiss from me.

Yours ever,

F.E.

Consultation with a Mr Packard, the only man who could be found. He thinks there has been a diffuse suppuration in the foot causing septicaemia. The method of fomentation has been changed and 4 grains = 4/15 gramme of quinine administered. The uterus was examined after a fashion, but at this stage nothing has been discov- ered save for a small slightly suspect spot by the orifice, to which, how- ever, no importance is attached 'so FAR'. Naturally there is always the possibility of an embolism and with it the possibility of further com- plications, pulmonary and otherwise. But the chap takes a more 'HOPE- FUL' view of the case than Read does.

If there is any change I shall write again tomorrow.

[^1]: First published in: F. Engels, P. et Printed according to the original L. Eafargue, Correspondance, t. II, Paris,

[^2]: iq^p Translated from the French



