---
Volume: 49
Document_Title: "37. Engel s to Adolf Riefer. 12 November "
Page_Range: "100-102"
---

# 37. Engel s to Adolf Riefer. 12 November 



**[p. 69]**

I should most certainly be compelled to have recourse to someone who was not a member of our party So all you would have to do is supervise things, and the rest of the time you'd be free to do anything you liked

In that case we could talk over the whole matter here and either re- main together as good friends or part company as good friends. Well, it's for you to decide. Think the matter over, discuss it with Adler.a If, as I fear, this day-dream of mine cannot be realised, or if you should think that the drawbacks and vexations would, so far as you are con- cerned, outweigh the advantages and pleasures, then let me know without beating about the bush. I am far too fond of you to want you to make sacrifices for my sake And for that very reason I would beg you not to make any such sacrifice and would request Adler through you to advise you against so doing. You are young and have a splen- did future in store. In three weeks' time I shall be seventy and have only a short while left to live. A young and hopeful existence ought not to be sacrificed to those few remaining years. For after all, I am still strong enough to make shift for myself

With undying love

London, 12 November 1890 122 Regent's Park Road, N. W.

To Mr Adolf Riefer in Saarburg, Lorraine

I write today to inform you of the sad news that your aunt, Miss Helene Demuth, my friend of many years who had lived in my house for the last seven, passed away peacefully and without pain on the 4th

[^1]: First published in: G. Mayer, Friedrich Printed according to the book Engels. Eine Biographie, Bd. 2, Haag, 1934

[^2]: Published in English for the first time 37

[^3]: ENGELS TO ADOLF RIEFER 8 3

[^4]: IN SAARBURG, LORRAINE

[^5]: a Victor Adler





**[p. 70]**

of this month after a short illness. We had been friends since 1845 and when, after the death of my friend Karl Marx, she did me the honour and pleasure of taking charge of my household, it marked for me the beginning of many years of calm and contentment, indeed, of domes- tic happiness such as had not been vouchsafed me since the death of my wife in 1878. But all that has now gone and gone for ever. We laid her to rest on Friday, 7 November in the same grave as that in which Marx and Mrs Marx are buried. Together with myself and Marx's daughters, thousands of friends from every nation mourn her loss, in the prairies of America as in the political prisons of Siberia and in all the countries of Europe.

The deceased made a will in which she named as her sole heir Fre- derick Lewis, the son of a deceased friend, whom she had adopted when he was still quite small and whom she gradually brought up to be a good and industrious mechanic. The latter, out of gratitude and with her permission, assumed the name Demuth a long time ago and he is also so named in the will. This is in the hands of the solicitor who attended to the legal formalities and who has, in addition, declared it to be fully valid, so that towards the end of this week it will be my duty to hand over the entire estate to the heir. After deduction of all expenses it will amount in money to about forty pounds sterling, on top of which there are clothes etc. of comparatively little value. Should you or any other relatives wish to have a small memento, per- haps you would be so good as to inform me, whereupon I shall lose no time in attending to the matter.

Enclosed in translation is a copy of the will.

Yours very truly,

Fr. Engels Copy of the will

* I Helen Demuth of 122 Regent's Park Road declare this to be my last will. I leave all my monies, effects and other property to Fre- derick Lewis Demuth of 25 Gransden Avenue, London Lane, Hack- ney, E., and being too weak bodily to affix my name have affixed here- to my mark in the presence of the undersigned witnesses. At 122

