---
Volume: 49
Document_Title: "39. Engel s to Victor Adler. 17 November "
Page_Range: "103-104"
---

# 39. Engel s to Victor Adler. 17 November 



**[p. 72]**

Should Louise have already left, please keep the money at our dis- posal until further notice.

Your

F. Engels

Aveling has just come back — it's altogether too late, since orders are not issued after 4 o'clock on Saturdays!! So we shall send it on Monday.

First published in Victor Adlers Aufsätze, Reden und Briefe. Erstes Heft: Victor Adler und Friedrich Engels, Wien, 1922

39

ENGELS T O V I C T O R ADLER

London, 17 November 1890

Dear Adler,

You will have had my letter written on Saturday.11 Meanwhile the Avelings have had a telegram from Louise (last night at about 11

o'clock): 'THUSDAY MORNING VICTORIA.' Well, this might mean THURSDAY, but also TUESDAY. That is the least of our problems however. We know nothing whatever about the latest routes for through express trains from Vienna, but only that it's possible to come via Calais, Ostend or Flushing. On the journey via Calais or Ostend the trains arrive at about 5 a. m., and via Flushing at about 8 a. m. I therefore tele- graphed you (being uncertain whether or not Louise had already left) shortly before four o'clock: 'Is Louise travelling via Flushing, Os- tend or Calais, reply paid (12 words).' This is to explain what has happened, which might otherwise strike you as puzzling and odd.

Since Louise has now definitely announced her arrival here, no

Printed according to the book

Published in English for the first time

[^1]: IN VIENNA

[^2]: a See previous letter.



