---
Volume: 49
Document_Title: "40. Engel s to Friedrich Adolph Sorge. 26 November "
Page_Range: "104-107"
---

# 40. Engel s to Friedrich Adolph Sorge. 26 November 



**[p. 73]**

purpose would be served by sending another ten pounds per money order and this has consequently not been done.

Your

F. Engels

First published in Victor Adlers Aufsätze, p r i n t e d a c c o r d i n g t 0 t h e b o o k Reden und Briefe. Erstes Heft: Victor Adler und Friedrich Engels, Wien, 1922 Published in English for the first time

40

ENGELS TO FRIEDRICH ADOLPH SORGE

IN HOBOKEN

London, 26 November 1890

Dear Sorge,

Louise Kautsky — the one who's divorced, not No. II — has come to live with me for a time and, with her, a little sunshine has returned. She is a quite marvellous woman and Kautsky must have been out of his senses when he divorced her.

Good wishes for my 70th birthday the day after tomorrow are al- ready coming in and now Singer, Bebel and Liebknecht have an- nounced their intention of visiting me. I wish the business was all over; I'm far from being in a birthday mood, and on top of that there's all the unnecessary FUSS which I cannot abide even at the best of times. And after all, I am, to a large extent, simply the chap who is reaping what Marx has sown in the way of fame.

[^1]: Since the time I informed you of the death of my good Lenchen,a

[^2]: The Halle Congress ' 2 went off brilliantly. Tussy was there and was quite delighted with the delegates but not so much with the par- liamentary group, b which includes a fair number of philistines. But steps have been taken to ensure that this shouldn't happen again at the next elections. Meanwhile the chaps in the Reichstag are observ-

[^3]: " See this volume, p. 67. -b the Social-Democratic group in the German Reichstag





**[p. 74]**

ing better discipline than might have been hoped, and are keeping their mouths shut, otherwise they'd have been bound to make fools of themselves.

Our campaign for a joint congress in 1891 was wholly successful. You will have read about the resolutions passed at the international conference at H a l l e 2 8 — a congress to be held in Brussels, on the understanding that the congress has full sovereignty. That is all we wanted, and the Belgian Anseele himself proposed that the Swiss and the Belgians, the mandatories of both the 1889 congresses,26 should jointly send out the convocation. Since, moreover, the Possibilists are hopelessly divided amongst themselves and openly engaged in inter- necine strife,53 and since the collapse of Parisian Boulangism will mean that the socialist elements by whom it was previously favoured will accrue to us and not to the Possibilists, we shall, so to speak, WALK

OVER THE COURSE. Hyndman has had the abysmal stupidity to join forces with the noble Brousse against Allemane,a which again will do him an enormous amount of harm.

The Germans would certainly be glad to get in touch with the AMERICAN FEDERATION OF LABOR 8 4 ; I shall talk to the chaps over here and bring influence to bear on Fischer who's a member of the Party Exec- utive. Fischer is one of our best men, highly intelligent, can read French and English, and is acquainted with the movement in both countries. He will counterbalance the one-sided influence exerted by Liebknecht in international affairs.

You have made an excellent début in the Neue J?eit B5; just carry on as you are and you will soon get into the way of writing again. The fee is about twice what is paid to contributors over here (5 marks a page); once you've got back into your stride and are able to work faster, it won't seem so small to you. I'd like to see further evidence in support of what Schlüter told you. That I and others are paid 5 marks a page by the Neue ^eit, and that this is the customary fee in Germany, is a fact. I have myself written and told Kautsky b that you must be offered more. Schlüter is apt to trot out remarks without really think- ing what he's saying. By American standards, of course, S 2 a page isn't much and, if you think you ought to be paid American rates, you are quite right to ask for them. But Kautsky, who is certainly doing all he can for you, is also obliged to consider Dietz, who is paymaster,

[^1]: a Engels has in mind the editorial 'The Split in France' in Justice, No. 353, 18 October 1890.-b See this volume, p. 5.





**[p. 75]**

and I wouldn't like it if such considerations were to be responsible for one of the Volkszeitung or Sozialist people gaining admission to the Neue £eit. Think the matter over again and, if you are intent on get- ting a rise, write and tell me and I'll approach Kautsky about it; that would leave all doors open.

Rosenberg & Co. had already pronounced a boycott against me and if the Nationalists now do the same,86 it only serves me right. Why can't I give up the class struggle? In this country Marx and I are suffering just the same fate at the hands of the Fabians 8 7 who also wish to see the emancipation of the workers brought about by the 'heddicated'.a

I shall save up the articles about George in the Labor Standard^ and read them at my leisure, of which I have so far had none.8 8 You have no idea of the mass of papers, pamphlets, etc., that people send me.

Volume One of Capital has been brought out in Polish by Kaspro- wicz of Leipzig and has been sent me from Warsaw.0

Your

F. Engels

[^1]: Published in English for the first time

[^2]: First published abridged in Briefe und Printed according to the original Auszüge aus Briefen von Joh. Phil. Becker, Jos. Dietzgen, Friedrich Engels, Karl Marx u. A. an F.A. Sorge und Andere, Stuttgart,

[^3]: 1906 and in full in: Marx and Engels, Works, First Russian Edition, Vol. XXVIII, Moscow, 1940

[^4]: a In the original: jebildeten (Berlin dialect). - ka ekonomii politycznej. Tom I.

[^5]: b Paterson Lahor Standard - c Kapital. Kryly-



