---
Volume: 49
Document_Title: "41. Engel s to Laura Lafargue. 1 December "
Page_Range: "107-108"
---

# 41. Engel s to Laura Lafargue. 1 December 



**[p. 41]**

ENGELS TO LAURA LAFARGUE

AT LE PERREUX

London, 1 December 1890

My dear Laura,

Enfin! a I have got that 70th birthday behind me. On Thursday Be- bel, Liebknecht, and Singer arrived. On Friday letters and telegrams en masse, the latter from Berlin (3), Vienna (3), Paris (Roumanian students and Frankel), Berne [Russische Sozialdemokraten), Leipzig Stadt und Land,b Bochum [Klassenbewusste Bergleute11—miners), Stuttgart [Sozialdemokraten, Württemberg's), Fürth, Höchst (Paulis), London [Arbeiterverein^,99 Hamburg. The fraction" sent me a splen- did album with their 35 portraits, Dietz a book of photos of some ex- cellent Munich pictures, the Solingers a knife with inscription, etc., etc. Enfin j'étais écrasé? Well, in the evening we had the whole lot here, embellished by and bye by little Oswald and four delegates from the Arbeiterverein (one of whom speechless drunk) and we kept it up till half past three in the morning and drank, besides claret, 16 bottles of champaign — the morning we had had 12 dozen oysters. So you see I did my best to show that I was still alive and kicking.

But it's a good job. One can celebrate one's 70th birthday only once. It will take me a devil of a time to reply to all those letters — even those I must reply to personally. That is the prose following upon the poetry of life, and to break my fall I begin by writing the only one I can write with true pleasure — this one to you.

Louise Kautsky came on the Tuesday after you left and has since then made me extremely comfortable. As to the future, we have not yet talked about it. I want her to see how things will settle down be- fore asking her to come to a definite resolution. We are getting on very well with Pumps; my lecture and a few hints, repeated later on, that her position in my house depends very much upon her own be- haviour, seem to have had some effect. We'll hope it may last.

Bebel looks rather delicate and a deal older than when I last saw him. Singer too is getting gray, and of course Liebknecht too, though

[^1]: a At last!-h town and country-0 class-conscious miners-d workers' society-' the So- cial-Democratic group in the German Reichstag-r In a word, I was overwhelmed.



