---
Volume: 49
Document_Title: "42. Engel s to Ferdinand Domela Nieuwenhuis. 3 December "
Page_Range: "108-112"
---

# 42. Engel s to Ferdinand Domela Nieuwenhuis. 3 December 



**[p. 77]**

he looks fat and content de lui-même*; he complains awfully about the few capacities among the younger generation, and the impossibility consequently of getting good men for his paper,b but otherwise he is very well satisfied with things in general and the Berliners in particu- lar. To-morrow the Reichstag opens, and we had the greatest trouble to keep Singer and Bebel here to meet Burns, Cunninghame- Graham, Thorne and others at Tussy's. And now we have kept them here, a damnable fog is setting in (2 p. m.) which even prevents me from writing and may, if not dispersed in time, nullify the whole in- tended international conference.90

Interrupted by fog — forbidden to write by the gaslight — donc,c con- clusion.

Ever yours,

F. Engels Dites à Même que mon nase se porte parfaitement à l'extérieur mais qu'à l'in- térieur il y a un rhume de cerveau.6.

First published, in the language of the Reproduced from the original original (English), in: F. Engels, P. et L. Lafargue, Correspondance, t. II, Paris, 1956

42

London, 3 December 1890

Dear Comrade,

My warmest thanks for the good wishes you sent me on my seven- tieth birthday, now happily surmounted. I welcome these as tendered both in your own name and in that of the Dutch Labour Party 9 2

and wish the latter the best possible progress and you yourself the health and strength that will enable you to fulfil the important role that has fallen to you. And I would request you to act as interpreter

[^1]: ENGELS TO FERDINAND DOMELA NIEUWENHUIS 9 1

[^2]: IN THE HAGUE

[^3]: " pleased with himself - b Berliner Volksblatt - c therefore - d Tell Même that out- wardly my nose looks perfect, but there's a cold inside.





**[p. 78]**

in conveying these my thanks and good wishes to the comrades over there."

As regards your query about buying your son out of military ser- vice there would, I think, be nothing improper about this in princi- ple. It is — generally speaking—just as permissible for us to make use of the advantages conceded by the present-day state to the privileged members of society, as it is for us to make use of the productsb of oth- ers, to live indirectly on the exploitation of others, as indeed we must in so far as we are not ourselves economically productive. If the la- bour party benefits as a result, I would even regard it as a duty. Moreover, the class from which remplaçants^ are recruited is not, as a rule, the working class proper, but that stratum which already over- laps to a large extent with the lumpenproletariat. And if one of the latter sells himself into the army for a few years, it does at least mean that an unemployed man has found himself a berth.

What calls for particular consideration, however, is the impression such a course of action on your part might make on your party com- rades and, further, on the vast mass of workers who still remain out- side the party — whether the matter would be one of indifference to working-class opinion or whether it would stir it up against Social- Democracy. That is a point that can only be determined on the spot by someone with a thorough knowledge of the circumstances, and I shall therefore refrain from voicing an opinion on it.

I am equally unfamiliar with the situation of the common soldier in the Dutch army, and upon that a great deal depends. In Germany it is our chaps who go to make the best soldiers.

Cordial regards from

Yours,

F. Engels After your Bielefeld experience, you will not, I suppose, be in any particular hurry to return to the Holy German Empire of the Prus- sian Nation!d

[^1]: First published, in Russian, in Istorik- Printed according to the original marfcisl, No. 6 (40), Moscow, 1934

[^2]: Published in English for the first time

[^3]: a This paragraph is missing from the draft. - b The draft contains the words 'of the la- bour'.-' replacements - '' This sentence is missing from the draft.



i^r JHP

[^1]: Helene Demuth



2*. /

mit? ivi» ?«•« l9fi«t V*;S'<.-û-(i Hl.-IVtt s Utiji'fa Sirff, îitn P a r t e i t a g ungarländischen Sozialdemokratie

als Gast beizuwohnen.

Seit: 7. und 8, Dczrraber 1890. Ort: Endap:st, alte bürjerl. Schhssatâtte, VIL Schiesatitte-Plat*.

[^1]: '•Oiiîap-'jt, t%. fîoivmfvt i>\-v.

[^2]: Die Redaktion der „Ärbeiter-Woche Bchronik," Budapest. Die Redaktion der „Hépsian", Budapest

[^3]: To the Congress of the Hungarian Social-Democrats. Invitation sent to Engels.9'



