---
Volume: 49
Document_Title: "45. Engels to Edouard Vaillant. 5 December "
Page_Range: "113-115"
---

# 45. Engels to Edouard Vaillant. 5 December 



**[p. 82]**

I can seldom permit myself, and your beautiful pipes stand on the chimney piece and

seem to say as they look at me: 'What, old chap, have they done to thee?'

Warmest regards to your mother, your brothers and sisters and their families, and to all party comrades from

Your old friend

F. Engels

First published in: Marx and Engels, Printed according to the original Works, First Russian Edition, Vol. „ , ,. , , . T, ,., ,. , ,- XXVIII, Moscow, 1940 Published in English for the first time

45

London, 5 December 1890 122 Regent's Park Road, N.W.

Dear Citizen Vaillant,

Very many thanks for your letter of the 28th ult. and your good wishes. On that day I was overwhelmed with honours by socialists of all countries. Fate has decreed that, in my capacity as survivor, I should glean the honours due to the works of my deceased contem- poraries, above all those of Marx. Believe me, I harbour no illusions whatever about that, or about the tiny portion of all this homage that falls to me by right.

I am also grateful for the sympathy you express concerning the death of dear Helene, thanks to whose care I was able to work in peace for seven years. For me it is a very sad loss. But we are still right in the midst of the struggle and, with the enemy before us, looking back too

[^1]: ENGELS TO EDOUARD VAILLANT25

[^2]: IN PARIS





**[p. 83]**

often is forbidden. If I'm not mistaken the battle is approaching a crisis. In your country the collapse of Boulangism has, on the one hand, rid the opportunist government,94 corrupted and corrupting, of all those enemies who might be immediately dangerous, and has reopened the market in which France is sold to the sharks of the Stock Exchange. On the other, however, that collapse has released elements of the revolutionary opposition who had gone astray and who, having regrouped — after the removal of the chief traitors—, should again take the field reunited in one way or another with the mass of revolu- tionaries who have remained faithful to their traditions. After the farce, the tragedy.

In Germany the rapid advance of the Socialist Party should quickly dispel young William's1* illusions about the power of attraction he fondly imagines he exercises on the working class. That, too, should lead to a crisis; and the longer it is delayed, the more severe it will be.

Accordingly, in four or five years time at the most, we shall have the crisis which will, I trust, lead to victory. And I hope I shall live to see Üi SLtßn de siècleh\

Please remember me kindly to Mrs Vaillant and your mother.

Yours affectionately,

F. Engels

[^1]: First published in: F. Engles, P. et Printed according to the original

[^2]: L. Lafargue, Correspondance, t. II, Paris, T r a n s l a t e d from t h e F r e n c h 1956

[^3]: " William IPs - '' end of the century



