---
Volume: 49
Document_Title: "51. Engels to Karl Kautsky. 13 December "
Page_Range: "121-122"
---

# 51. Engels to Karl Kautsky. 13 December 



**[p. 51]**

ENGELS TO KARL KAUTSKY 9 8

IN STUTTGART

London, 13 December 1890

Dear Kautsky,

Very many thanks for your two letters9 9 and for the article de- voted to mea which was, alas, all too flattering. I got through my birth- day all right and, even though the outside air was clear of fog, my head wasn't when I went to bed at half past three in the morning. I fared almost as you did at my birthday in 1883, when the tippling took place round my sick-bed.

I enclose herewith a preliminary piece about Brentano and would be obliged if you could contrive to get it into the next number of the Neue Zjeit, should this be feasible. I'll give the man something to re- member me by. He'd like to keep Gladstone's letters up his sleeve un- til I have answered, but we'll soon put a stop to that.96

You will also shortly be getting a contribution from Marx's unpub- lished work, something quite new and extremely topical and to the point.b It has already been copied out but I shall have to look it over first and possibly write a few lines by way of an introduction. But please tell no one else about it yet; my hands are completely full, what with correspondence and replying to the many letters I get, and I can't say exactly when.

[^1]: I cannot possibly entrust the remaining fascicles of Marx's Volume {y loo t o m e p O S t o r a n y o m e r intermediary. So when you've had the 2nd fascicle you won't be getting any more for a while. This is also be- cause, in the later fascicles, there are all sorts of divagations and long deleted passages which may not have to be copied out and, since this will entail constant discussion, the work could only be done over here. Later on, if you come back to this country again, and I have been able to familiarise myself a bit more with the ms., we shall see what

[^2]: 0 [K. Kautsky,] 'Friedrich Engels. Zu seinem siebzigsten Geburtstag', Die Neue £eit, 9. Jg. 1890/91, 1. Bd., Nr. 8.- b Critique of the Gotha Programme



