---
Volume: 49
Document_Title: "52. Engels to Laura Lafargue. 17 December "
Page_Range: "122-124"
---

# 52. Engels to Laura Lafargue. 17 December 



**[p. 91]**

can be done. Needless to say, you are to finish what you have already got.

I should be obliged if you would send me another 6 copies of the 8th issuea; that will, I think, suffice.

Now, however, I must close; herewith a note to Dietz, which kindly pass on to him.

Your old friend

F. Engels

First published in full in Aus der Frühzeit des Printed according to the original Marxismus, Engels Briefwechsel mit Kautsky, , , , , . , , • ^ •• • r • <• p ,qr,r Published in English ' for the nrst time

52

ENGELS TO LAURA LAFARGUE

London, 17 December 1890

My dear Laura,

Two pieces of good news. First. Your usual box of puddings, cake and sweets, for Même and brothers, has been sent off yesterday as usual and hope will reach by Friday15 at latest. Otherwise please apply to the Bureau des Expédi- tions Grande Vitesse, Gare du Nord, or at 23 Rue Dunkerque, P. Bi- geault or 18 Rue Bergère, chez E. D'Odiardi.

Second. Louise Kautsky remains here for good. So my troubles are settled. She seems to like it better after all than setting other people's children into this world.0 And we get on capitally. She superintends the house and does my secretary's work which saves my eyes and enables me to make it worth her while to give up her profession, at least for the present. She wishes me to send you her kindest regards.

Padlewski deserves a monument and a life pension. Not so much

[^1]: AT LE PERREUX

[^2]: a of Die Neue £eit containing Engels' Outlines of a Critique of Political Economy - b 19 Decem- ber - c Louise Kautsky studied obstetrics in Vienna.





**[p. 92]**

But it's genuine Parisian. Argument and reason is no use against this chauvinistic enthusiasm for the Czar's b alliance. All at once a fact occurs, which lightens up the mental darkness like a flash of lightning. Now they see that they are making themselves accomplices of this Russian official infamy, and that, if they themselves have not the courage to get out of it, a Pole has, and can they assist in sending that Pole over to bourgeois 'justice'? The enthusiasm for the Czar is at once transferred to the Poles and Nihilists, and the Czar is in for it, for his trouble and his money spent.

All the same, the effect would hardly have been so great if our peo- ple had not so constantly and determinedly attacked the Czar.

Anyhow, je m'en réjouis.' Pumps has all at once come round. Louise and I coaxed her a bit. After the talking to I had given her, Percy gave her another, and now she is friendliness all over, not only with Louise, but also Annie. Well, I hope it will last, and if it does not, it will be her own fault and then I shall be in a clear position and act accordingly. This time I can be master and I shall.

[^1]: How is Paul's affair with Levraut getting on? " , 2

[^2]: Fortin writes to say that he and Paul wished to publish the 18 Bru- maire in the Socialiste but required my consent. That of course I gave him with pleasure.— He also said the Revue Socialiste wanted the same and also the Misère de la philosophie for republication. I said as to that, Marx would never forgive me if I entrusted any ms. of his to the hands of such people who were capable of making all sorts of changes in it; as to the Misère, after all the disappointments I had with that, 1 0 3 I should consent to its republication in book-form only, and only after having full guarantees for the execution of the promise.

[^3]: What Paul writes about the part of the Rothschilds in the Krach d

[^4]: Baring seems not without foundation.104 The Barings are rich enough to pay all losses and have plenty left. So that the guarantors will be perfectly safe. But the Barings cannot remain a first rate firm

[^5]: " guttersnipe, hooligan - '' Alexander Ill's - ' I am glad. - d row



