---
Volume: 49
Document_Title: "53. Engel s to Wilhelm Liebknecht. 18 December "
Page_Range: "124-126"
---

# 53. Engel s to Wilhelm Liebknecht. 18 December 



**[p. 93]**

I am afraid this will be the last long letter you will have for some time. I am so overworked that correspondence will have to be con- fined to the necessary minimum. I have an urgent quarrel with Brentano on my hands (preface, 4th edition of Capital96) and those sort of things I cannot dictate.

Love to Même.

Ever yours,

F. Engels

Bien des choses à Paul.0

53

ENGELS TO WILHELM LIEBKNECHT

London, 18 December 1890

Dear Liebknecht,

You guessed the names aright.

I fail to see what point there would be in publishing this muddled correspondence, the Hegelian language of which would today be in-

[^1]: First published, in the language of the Reproduced from the original original (English), in: F. Engels, P. et L. Lafargue, Correspondance, t. II, Paris, 1956

[^2]: IN BERLIN

[^3]: a simpletons - b paid in cash - c Best regards to Paul.





**[p. 94]**

Against this I would protest here and now as, indeed, I shall con- tinue to do.

I would gladly agree to the publication in pamphlet form of such individual pieces by Marx as are comprehensible today without notes or a commentary, but to their publication only, without notes or a com- mentary of any description. Should the plan you propose here be put into effect, however, I shall intervene forthwith.

I cannot write a preface. The most I could say about the corres- pondence is that Marx told me more than once that his part of it had been tinkered with by Ruge who had inserted all manner of nonsense.

If only you people would leave off pestering me so that I had time to finish the 3rd volume/ I could myself do something worthwhile along those lines. I have already told you that the time is past when I can do work to order for you. I shall take on absolutely nothing further, even though it may amount to no more than 3 lines, until I have dealt with the mountain of stuff I have already undertaken to do.

When a chap can only write by daylight and, what's more, at most 3, and quite often only 2, hours a day and with constant interruptions into the bargain, you will understand that every superfluous letter robs him of his most precious time. Besides which, there has been virtually no daylight for the past 12 days.

So will you at long last be kind enough to let me work in peace? Despite a lengthy search I cannot immediately put my finger on the passage in Sybel.b It is so cunningly concealed that leafing through the book is no good. However, it would do you no harm, in view of your preoccupation with Bismarck, to go through this import- ant source yourself, in which case you would yourself find the passage in the 4th or 5th volume.106

[^1]: a of Capital - b H. von Sybel, Die Begründung des Deutschen Reiches durch Wilhelm I, vols I-V.



