---
Volume: 49
Document_Title: "54. Engels to Friedrich Adolph Sorge. 20 December "
Page_Range: "126-127"
---

# 54. Engels to Friedrich Adolph Sorge. 20 December 



**[p. 95]**

Your

F. E.

Today I have had another reminder from Dietz about the new edi- tion of the Origin.3 How can I possibly manage if I don't get a mo- ment's peace?

First published in: Marx and Engels, Printed according to the original Works, First Russian Edition, Vol. .. . XXVIII, Moscow, 1940 Pubhshed m English for the first time

54

ENGELS TO FRIEDRICH ADOLPH SORGE

IN HOBOKEN

[London,] 20 December 1890

Dear Sorge,

Have had your letters up to the 9th of this month. Use my letters as you think fit.107 I am glad that you consulted Schlüter about the question of the feeb and that all is now settled. As things go in Ger- many, what they offer is very respectable. Schoenlank, by the way, who wrote and told you this, is a most depraved fellow who in fact does not hesitate to seize on any and every opportunity to extort money from the party. Of this he again gave proof at the Halle Congress. ' 2

Louise Kautsky has decided to stay with me for good. I am, of course, absolutely delighted and deeply grateful to the sweet child. She is giving up a great deal for my sake, but luckily I am in a posi- tion to offer her in return much that would not be available to her in Vienna. Besides keeping house for me, she does a fair amount of secre-

[^1]: I am greatly overworked, hence just a postcard today. I have taken on Mr Brentano who must now be disabled 'good and proper'.96

[^2]: a F. Engels, The Origin of the Family, Private Property and the State. -b See this volume, p. 74.



