---
Volume: 49
Document_Title: "56. Engels to G. Blume. 27 December "
Page_Range: "130-131"
---

# 56. Engels to G. Blume. 27 December 



**[p. i]**

With warm regards.

Your old friend

F. Engels

Thank you also for the Bataille article. ' ' 2 Louise Kautsky, who is here and will be staying here, sends you her warm regards.

First published, in Hungarian, in Népszava, Printed according to the newspaper No. 130, Budapest, 3 June 1906 , , r , TT translated trom the Hungarian Published in English for the first time

56

ENGELS TO G. BLUME ' 1 3

London, 27 December 1890

Dear Comrade,

Mr Stinzleih has passed on to me the kind greetings conveyed by you on behalf of the delegates to the Congress, the representatives of 596,000 German working men. There is no need for me to tell you in so many words how glad I was to be remembered at that Congress. Unfortunately I am unable to thank those concerned, who will by now have dispersed to all parts of Germany, and can do no more than express my sincere thanks to you, Mr Chairman, while giving you my firm assurance that, so long as it remains in my power, I shall per- severe in the struggle for the emancipation of the working class.

Yours very sincerely,

F. Engels

[^1]: IN HAMBURG

[^2]: First published as a supplement to Begrün- Printed according to the photocopy dung der Beschlüsse des vom 8. bis 11. 12. in Ber- of the supplement lin abgehaltenen Hilfskassenkongresses, H a m - „ , , . , , • „ ,-i <- *- , * q ] Published in English for the first U r g' time



