---
Volume: 49
Document_Title: "57. Engels to Georg Schumacher. December "
Page_Range: "131-132"
---

# 57. Engels to Georg Schumacher. December 



**[p. 57]**

ENGELS TO GEORG SCHUMACHER ' 1 4

IN SOLINGEN

[London, December 1890]

My dear Schumacher,

Since you will now be at home, I am taking the opportunity of asking you to convey my warmest thanks to my friends in Solingen for the beautiful present they gave me on my 70th birthday. But at the same time, I wish to thank you, too, for your contribution to the parliamentary group's" magnificent present.

As a boy, whenever I saw a knife like this, I would gaze at it ad- miringly and envy the owner of a tool so suited to all manner of uses. Now, in my old age, one such has come into my possession, and in such a fashion to boot, and with so honourable an inscription.

As you know, since 1849 my attachment to Solingen has been of a very special kind, since the time, that is, when I, along with the So- lingen volunteers, marched to Elberfeld where, confronted by a re- actionary civic militia, unorganised Elberfelders and a highly reac- tionary security committee, I could not have remained unscathed for three days if it had not been for the Solingeners who, almost alone amongst those taking part, represented the revolutionary ele- ment. ' ' 5 And, since I am anxious that those ties attaching me to So- lingen should not be allowed to slacken or break, it is a very special pleasure to note that in Solingen I, too, am still remembered.

With warm regards to you and to all the members of the party from your old friend,

F. Engels

[^1]: First published in Rheinische Zeitmg> Printed according to the newspaper Nr. 47, Köln, 24. Februar 1906

[^2]: Published in English for the first time

[^3]: a the Social - Democratic group in the German Reichstag



