---
Volume: 49
Document_Title: "60. Engels to Pasquale Martignetti. 9 January "
Page_Range: "135-137"
---

# 60. Engels to Pasquale Martignetti. 9 January 



**[p. 104]**

Over here it's still freezing hard. Poor Schorlemmer has a cold and is temporarily deaf; he was unable to come for Christmas. Sam Moore is seriously ill in Asaba and I am anxiously awaiting further news.

Your

F. Engels

Regards to Tauscher.

First published in full in Aus der Frühzeit des Printed according to the original Marxismus. Engels Briefwechsel mit Kautsky, , , , , - , , . ^ • • i r- , r T> i n o c Published in English tor the iirst Prag, 1935 . &

ö time

60

ENGELS TO PASQJJALE MARTIGNETTI

London, 9 January 1891

Dear Friend,

Your sister's misfortune has aroused my heartfelt sympathy. And I can imagine what an indescribable state of agitation it has put you into. But don't lose your head. What good would it do your sister if you were to kill the dirty dog? He would bear with him to the grave the satisfaction of having ruined not one family but two. I know that in societies such as those of southern Italy, where a good many memo- ries from the time of the gens still live on, a brother is regarded as the natural protector and avenger of his sister. But this brother is also married, he has a wife and children, he has obligations towards them, and in today's society those obligations take precedence over every- thing else. In my view, therefore, you owe it to your family to refrain from any action that would inevitably condemn you to lifelong sep- aration from them.

[^1]: IN BENEVENTO





**[p. 105]**

But if you believe you must take your revenge, there is, after all, yet another way in which you can brand the seducer in the eyes of the public with the mark of disgrace.

Over here the brother would give the scoundrel a public thrashing. In France or Germany a publicly administered box on the ears would suffice.

In Austrian Poland (Leopola) a journalist had sold himself to the Russians. Some young Poles laid hold of him on the public prome- nade, placed him over a bench and gave him 25 of the best.

You in Italy will also have ways of publicly branding a scoundrel like this and of exposing him to universal scorn without taking his life or causing him permanent physical damage.

As I have said, far be it from me to advise you about this matter. But if you are firmly convinced that some sort of vengeance must be done, then it had best be vengeance affecting the seducer's honour rather than any other kind.

With warm regards,

Yours,

F. Engels

Very many thanks for your good wishes on my 70th birthday.

[^1]: First published, in the language of the Printed according to the original original (German), in La corrispondenza _ . .. , , . „ ,. , . . ,. . . . . r , .. ,• • ,„.„ , ™. Published in Lnehsh tor the first at Marx e Engels con italiani. lmo-la Uj, . ° Milano, 1964 t i m e

[^2]: Lvov



