---
Volume: 49
Document_Title: "62. Engels to Karl Kautsky. 15 January "
Page_Range: "138-140"
---

# 62. Engels to Karl Kautsky. 15 January 



**[p. 62]**

ENGELS TO KARL KAUTSKY 9 8

IN STUTTGART

London, 15 January 1891

Dear Baron,

You will see from the accompanying corrected proofsa that I am not inhuman and have even gone so far as to inject some soothing morphine and bromide into the introduction,b which no doubt will have a sufficiently anodyne effect on the melancholy mood of our friend Dietz. I shall only write to Bebel today.120 I didn't mention the matter to him before since I had no desire to place him in a false position vis-à-vis Liebknecht. He would have been honour bound to speak to the latter about it and Liebknecht, who has made extracts from the ms., as is evident from his speech on the programme at Halle,121 would have raised heaven and earth to prevent its being published.

If the passage 'to attend to his religious as well as his bodily [needs]'0 cannot very well stand, delete the five words underlined and insert dots. The allusion will then gain in subtlety and still be suf- ficiently comprehensible. In which case it will not, I trust, give rise to misgivings.

For the rest I have obliged you and Dietz by doing everything you wanted and more, as you will see.

The Mendelsons have arrived here from Paris. On his release the magistrate forbade him to leave France. The Minister, Constans, on the other hand, enjoined him to leave voluntarily, failing which he would be expelled.122 Constans entrusted Labruyère, who is notoriously hand in glove with the police, with the task of spiriting Padlewski away. Had Padlewski appeared before a jury, the intrigues with the

[^1]: a K. Marx, Critique of the Gotha Programme. -b Preface to Karl Marx's Critique of the Gotha Programme. -c While preparing the ms. for the press Engels for reasons of censor- ship replaced the word Notdurft used by Marx by the word Bedürfnisse and put it in the square brackets (cf. present edition, Vol. 24, p. 98).





**[p. 108]**

The Mendelsons arrived here without any addresses and fell into the hands of Smith Headingley and Hyndman who took them to a meeting,123 etc. Finally they came to my house and I gave them Ede's address; on my paying them a formal return visit for diplomatic reasons, who should come in at the door but Mr Smith Headingley. This gave me an opportunity to treat him with icy disdain in front of the Poles, which seemed to have the desired effect. They were here on Sunday/ and today they, the Edes and Avelings are coming to dine at my house. This will doubtless frustrate the intrigues set in train in the interests of Brousse, Hyndman & Co. Pity you won't be there. We start off with oysters.

Your

F.E.

[^1]: First published in full in Aus der Frühzeit des Marxismus. Engels Briefwechsel mit Kautsky, Prag, 1935

[^2]: Printed according to the original

[^3]: Published in English for the first time

[^4]: a police spies - b See this volume, pp. 123, 129. - c 11 January



