---
Volume: 49
Document_Title: "63. Engel s to Friedrich Adolph Sorge. 17 January "
Page_Range: "140-141"
---

# 63. Engel s to Friedrich Adolph Sorge. 17 January 



**[p. 63]**

ENGELS TO FRIEDRICH ADOLPH SORGE

IN HOBOKEN

[London,] 17 January 1891

Dear Sorge,

Herewith the 4th edition of Capital* (registered) and a parcel of newspapers. As Sam Moore is doubtless already on his way back to Europe from the Niger—6 months' furlough every 2 years—various things he has been getting hitherto will now become available for you, viz. the Berliner Volks-Tribüne, which was set on a pretty good course by little Conrad Schmidt and has not as yet been ruined by Paul Ernst, and the Cri du Travailleur which reprints the main items from Le Socialiste. Also a Vorwärts12* with our revelations about Mr Reuß.

Constant snow and ice since 25 November. The water pipes under the street have been frozen for the past 5 days and we're having no end of trouble over our water. No. 17 of the Neue Zjit will contain a bombshell, to wit Marx's critique of the draft programme of 1875.b

You'll be delighted, but it will cause rage and indignation among a good many people in Germany.

Regards to your wifec and to the Schlüters and Romms when you see them.

Your

F.E.

[^1]: First published in Briefe und Auszüge aus Briefen von Joh. Phil. Becker, Jos. Dietzgen, Friedrich Engels, Karl Marx u. A. an F.A. Sorge und Andere, Stuttgart, 1906

[^2]: Printed according to the original

[^3]: Published in English for the first time

[^4]: " the fourth German edition of the first volume of Capital - b K. Marx, Critique of the Gotha Programme. It was published in Die Neue £eit, No. 18 and not No. 17 as had been planned.-0 Katharina Sorge



