---
Volume: 49
Document_Title: "64. Engel s to Stanislaw Mendelson. 18 January "
Page_Range: "141-143"
---

# 64. Engel s to Stanislaw Mendelson. 18 January 



**[p. 64]**

ENGELS TO STANISLAW MENDELSON

IN LONDON

[London,] Sunday, 18 January 1891

Dear Citizen Mendelson,

After my conversation with Mrs Mendelson yesterday evening I discovered an article in the Paris Socialiste ' 2 5 on the strength of which you could, I believe, write a letter to the English press regarding the matter Mrs Mendelson and Citizen Jodko spoke to me about.

I have discussed the matter with Aveling and his wife.a They will be dropping in on you tomorrow morning. If you and Aveling would then care to fix a time for the two of you to do me the pleasure of call- ing here, we could compose a letter and arrange for it to appear in the press.126

My compliments to Mrs Mendelson and Citizen Jodko.

Yours very sincerely,

F. Engels

[^1]: First published in: Marx and Engels, Printed according to the original Works, First Russian Edition, Vol. „ , , _ _ , XXVIII, Moscow, 1940 Translated from the French

[^2]: Published in English for the first time

[^3]: a Eleanor Marx-Aveling





**[p. 65]**

ENGELS TO CARL SCHORLEMMER 128

IN MANCHESTER

London, 27 January 1891

Dear Jollymeier,

In my dictionary of modern Greek I find:

Xoon Jtâpôa, f| bombarde, canon A.ouu7capoapr|<;, bombardier A.oun7tapôâpco, bombarder, etc.

The heavy gun reached the Byzantines from Italy and the earliest generic name for a gun of this kind is bombarda. Since the modern Greek ß = the Italian v, b is denoted by \IK (ujcdy Ka, banc pour s:'asseoir,a

HJtaÇâpi, bazar, marché pub lieb). So as to avoid having this dreadful combination twice, the first b appears here as ß.

According to the above, therefore, the fact that Xouurcapooc means bronze used for cannon cannot present any difficulties.

I trust you received Louise's letter and are feeling better. Some- thing to cheer you up will be going off per book post. Regards from Louise and

Your

F.E.

[^1]: First published in Einheit, Nr. 7, Berlin, Printed according to the original 1958

[^2]: Published in English for the first time

[^3]: a bench - b market



