---
Volume: 49
Document_Title: "67. Engel s to Hermann Schlüter. 29 January "
Page_Range: "144-146"
---

# 67. Engel s to Hermann Schlüter. 29 January 



**[p. 67]**

ENGELS TO HERMANN SCHLÜTER 130

IN HOBOKEN

London, 29 January 1891

Dear Schlüter,

At last I can get round to answering your letter of 19 November. Many thanks for your and your wife'sa kind wishes.b I wish you had been there. We tippled until half past three in the morning and, be- sides claret, downed 16 bottles of sparkling wine.

Unfortunately I cannot take advantage of Sorge's invitation.108

I have put down so many roots here in Europe and have such a vast amount to do that I could never consider withdrawing to America unless absolutely compelled to do so. Moreover, now that Louise Kautsky is here, my domestic affairs are again in perfect order.

Many thanks for the Kalender.131

Some of the articles in the Cyclopaediac are by Marx and some by me, all, or nearly all, being devoted to military subjects — biographies of military commanders, articles on ARTILLERY, CAVALRY, FORTIFICATION, etc. Pure hack-work, no more; may be safely consigned to obli- vion.1 32

That the Socialist Labor Party I 3 3 over there is going to rack and ruin I can see plainly enough from its fraternisation with the Nation- alists 86 compared with whom our native Fabians 87 —likewise mid- dle-class— are positively radical. I should have thought it scarcely possible that, by mating with the Nationalist, the Sozialist could have engendered further tedium. Sorge sends me the Nationalist but, try as I may, I cannot find anyone who is prepared to read it.

Another thing I don't understand is the row with Gompers.134 So far as I know, his Federation84 is an association of TRADES UNIONS and nothing but TRADES UNIONS. Thus die chaps are formally entitled to turn away anyone who comes as representative of a working men's asso- ciation that is not a TRADES UNION, or to turn away the delegates of a so- ciety to which such associations are admitted. Whether it was advis- able from the point of view ofpropaganda to court a rebuff of this kind,

[^1]: a Anna Schliiter's - b on Engels' 70th birthday -c The New American Cyclopaedia (for articles by Marx and Engels see present edition, Vol. 18)





**[p. 114]**

However, bearing in mind next international congress in Brus- sels, ' 3 5 I should have thought it might have been a good thing to keep in with Gompers who has at least got more working men behind him than the Socialist Labor Party, and thus ensure as large a representa- tion as possible — including his people — from America. For while there the chaps would, after all, see much that would shake their faith in their blinkered TRADES UNION standpoint — and, quite apart from that, where do you propose to find a RECRUITING-GROUND if not amongst the TRADES UNIONS?

Many thanks for the stuff about silver.136 If you can find me any- thing containing notes on current silver production in the UNITED STATES, I should be grateful. The bimetal currency 137 idiots in Europe are nothing but the DUPES of the American silver producers and are per- fectly prepared to pull the latter's chestnuts out of the fire for them. Vainly, alas,— nothing will come of this shady affair. See my note on precious metals in the 4th edition of Capital.138

Do please let me have further details about the speech by Marx on protective tariffs which you mention.139 All I can remember is that, when the discussion began to flag at the German Workers' Society in Brussels,140 Marx and I arranged between ourselves to conduct a mock debate in which he advocated free trade and I protective ta- riffs; I can still see the chaps' astonished expressions when they sud- denly saw us go at it hammer and tongs. The speech might have been printed in the Deutsche-Brüsseler-Zeitung. I cannot remember any other.

It's unlikely that you will be able to return to Germany within the next few years. True, Tauscher has been released, but only because nothing could be proved against him. On the other hand, it trans- pired on the same occasion that hitherto the statute of limitations has been regularly suspended so far as you people are concerned.

Cordial regards to yourself and your wife from Louise Kautsky and

Your

F. Engels

