---
Volume: 49
Document_Title: "68. Engels to Paul Lafargue. 31 January "
Page_Range: "146-149"
---

# 68. Engels to Paul Lafargue. 31 January 



**[p. 115]**

Motteier is still here, winding up the business at 114 Kentish Town Roada; how he will manage when the house is vacated on 25 March and he can only carry on with this job at home, I do not know. But he absolutely refuses to go back to Switzerland although we know it to be perfectly feasible. Ede is doing well; he works like a Trojan and is writing some very good stuff for the Neue %eit.

First published abridged in Briefe und Printed according to the original Auszüge aus Briefen von Joh. Phil. Becker, Jos. Dietzgen, Friedrich Engels, Karl Marx u. A. an F.A. Sorge und Andere, Stuttgart,

1906 and in full in: Marx and Engels, Works, First Russian Edition, Vol. XXVIII, Moscow, 1940

68

ENGELS TO PAUL LAFARGUE 141

AT LE PERREUX

My dear Lafargue,

Like nine-tenths of the news published in Paris about Germany, the item that has alarmed you I42 is nothing more than a canard.

The leading committee of the German party has not budged in re- gard to 1 May. The parliamentary faction (the socialist members of the Reichstag) has resolved (with one dissenting vote) that in Germany (but not elsewhere) it'would be desirable to hold the celebrations on Sunday 3 May and not on 1 May.143 That is all. Since the Party Rules do not confer any official function on the 'faction', it is simply the expression of a desire which, however, will probably meet with gen- eral approval.

As to the idea of suggesting to other nationalities that they make a similar change in the date of the demonstration, our newspapers say

[^1]: London, 31 January b 1891

[^2]: a the premises of the Sozialdemokrat editorial office in 1888-90 - b 30 January in the ori- ginal





**[p. 116]**

You and Bonnier, whose long letter on the subject I have in my pocket,145 may say whatever you like. The English will probably do the same as the Germans and hold their celebrations on Sunday. As regards the Germans, they are virtually bound to act in this way. Last year you thought their conduct 'weak'. Well now, in Hamburg, the city where we are best organised and in greater strength relative to the rest of the population, and where we have the strongest finances (both party and trades unions)—in Hamburg they generally celeb- rate 1 May under the noses of the employers. But business being pretty bad, the latter took advantage of the one day's cessation to close their workshops and declare that they would reopen only to those work- men who left their unions and promised not to unionise in future. The struggle continued throughout the summer and into the autumn. Eventually the employers abandoned their demands; however our trades union organisation in Hamburg has been badly shaken, the coffers have been emptied, as indeed elsewhere, as a result of funds disbursed for the LOCKOUTS, and nobody has the slightest desire to re- peat the performance this spring, conditions in industry having worsened still further.

It's all very well for you to talk of irresolution and weakness. You are in a republic and the bourgeois republicans, in order to defeat the royalists, have been obliged to accord you the political rights that we are far from possessing in Germany. Moreover, divided as you have been hitherto, with the Broussists in the tow of the government, ' 4 6

you are not particularly dangerous; on the contrary, Constans likes to see you 'demonstrate' and put the wind up the radicals.147 In Ger- many our people are a real force, between one and a half and two million electors, the only disciplined and growing party. If the gov- ernment wants the socialists to hold demonstrations, that is because it wants to get them involved in a riot when it would crush them and have done with them for the next ten years. For the German socialists their best form of demonstration is their very existence and their slow, steady, ineluctable advance. We are still a long way from being able to sustain an open struggle and it is our duty vis-à-vis the whole of

[^1]: a Frieda Bebel





**[p. 1959]**

Needless to say, it would be very nice to see all socialist workmen in both worlds abstain from work on the same day, 1 May. But it would not be a simultaneous, uniform abstention. You in Paris would ab- stain from, say, 8 in the morning to 8 in the evening; when the New Yorkers began at 8, it would be 1 in the afternoon in Paris, while the Californians would begin 3 hours later. Last year the demonstration lost nothing by being spread over 2 days and this year it would lose even less. The Austrians are in an altogether different situation; regu- lar agitation and organisation have been made so difficult that a 1 day cessation is their sole means of demonstrating, a procedure ad- mirably developed by Adler.148

So console yourselves. The movement won't suffer as a result of this lack of 'unity'; and such purely formal unity is not worth the price we should have to pay for it in Germany and also perhaps in England.

Your behaviour towards the anti-Broussists53 strikes me as unex- ceptional. Making a compact of practical co-operation, setting aside for the moment any attempt at a merger, trusting to the passage of time and, ultimately, to the International Congress — there could be no better way of exploiting the situation in which you find yourselves. It is what Marx suggested to Liebknecht at the time of the merger with the Lassalleans,63 but our friend was in too much of a hurry.

Guesde has played a nice trick on him in his articles for the Vor- wärts. 149 Liebknecht has always championed the bourgeois republic in order to annoy the Prussians; in his view Constans, Rouvier, etc., were virtually faultless. And along comes Guesde to shatter that illu- sion! Delightful and also good for Germany.

Give Laura a kiss from me. My congratulations to Doctor Z. on the article on the Toulon affair.150 Louise is particularly grateful for it. She has happy memories of you and Laura.

Yours ever,

F.E.

[^1]: First published in: F. Engels, P. et Printed according to the original L. Lafargue, Correspondante, t. Ill, Paris, Translated from the French



