---
Volume: 49
Document_Title: "73. Engel s to Friedrich Adolph Sorge. 11 February "
Page_Range: "156-160"
---

# 73. Engel s to Friedrich Adolph Sorge. 11 February 



**[p. 125]**

Yours ever,

F.E.

First published in: F. Engels, P. et Printed according to the original L. Lafarguc, Correspondance, t. Ill, Paris,

,qrq ' Translated from the French 73

ENGELS TO FRIEDRICH ADOLPH SORGE 160

IN HOBOKEN

London, 11 February 1891

Dear Sorge,

Letter of 16 January received. I am delighted to hear that you propose to do away with the Nation- alist. Over here I can find no one, not a solitary soul, who is pre- pared to read it, and I myself have not got the time to scrutinise the sagacious lucubrations of all the various RESPECTABLE panjandrums. I would have suggested such a course long since had I not thought that, if a chap like you sent me the thing, there was bound to be some- thing in it some time.

The photograph is in the offing. Heinrich Scheu wishes to do a wood-cut of me, for which reason I recently had to position myself before the lens again.b Of the seven pictures, one will presumably turn out well.

I trust your wife' will have completely recovered by the time you get this; also you yourself.

I cannot tell you anything about the AMERICAN EDITION OF Capital, since I have never seen it and do not know what it contains. That the people over there can pirate our stuff, we are aware. That they do so

[^1]: a Helene Demuth's, see also this volume, pp. 219-20.-b See this volume, p. 112.- c Katharina Sorge





**[p. 126]**

By now you will presumably have had the fourth ed.a

You will have read Marx's article11 in the Neue /jsit. To begin with it aroused great wrath in the socialist powers-that-be in Germany but now they appear to be simmering down a bit. In the party itself, on the other hand, there was great rejoicing, except among the old Las- salleans. The Berlin correspondent of the Vienna Arbeiter-Leitung, which you will get by the next post, actually thanks me for the service I have rendered the party 161 (I believe it's Adolf Braun, Victor Ad- ler's brother-in-law and Liebknecht's deputy editor on the Vorwärts). Liebknecht, of course, is furious, since all the criticism was aimed spe- cifically at him and he was the progenitor, together with that bugger Hasselmann, of the rotten programme.63 I can comprehend the ini- tial dismay felt by the chaps, who have hitherto insisted that 'com- rades' should approach them only with the utmost delicacy, on find- ing themselves being handled thus sans façon," and their programme unmasked as pure rubbish. According to what I hear from K. Kaut- sky who has behaved very courageously throughout this affair, the parliamentary group intends to issue an edict ' 6 2 to the effect that publication took place without their knowledge and is deplored by them. They're welcome to that gratification. However, it may come to nothing if the party increasingly voices its assent and the fuss about 'placing a weapon against ourselves in the hands of our foes' is found to be without substance.

In the meantime I am being boycotted by the gentlemen, which suits me very well as it saves me quite a deal of time. Not that it's li- kely to last for long.

[^1]: After Bradlaugh's death, Aveling was invited to stand in North- ampton and by none other than the local BRANCH OF THE SOCIAL DEMO- CRATIC FEDERATION,29 i. e. nominally Hyndman's people. Because of the leap forward made by the movement generally in the past 18 months, the FEDERATION has acquired a large following. These people are glad to leave foreign policy (plotting with the Possibilists,3 etc.), which is quite outside their ken, to Hyndman & Co., but are completely un- aware of the said gentry's previous plotting and intriguing at home, and would certainly deny all responsibility for the same; — IN FACT, it

[^2]: a of the first volume of Capital -b Critique of the Gotha Programme -c rudely





**[p. 127]**

The young man I recommended to youa will already have come to see you. The Romms, by the by, know him personally, something of which I was unaware at the time.

The French are very angry because this year the Germans intend to celebrate May Day on the 3rd of May, and not the 1st. It's all non- sense; by celebrating on 1 May last year, the Hamburg chaps in- volved themselves in a LOCKOUT1" (for which, having no contracts, the manufacturers yearn); it cost the workers there 100,000 marks — not counting outside contributions — broke the backs of their TRADES UNIONS, which were the best organised, and crippled them for a long time to come. In Germany today there is chronic overproduction in all branches of industry and, since a general celebration throughout Germany could not be held on 1 May without breach of contract and would thus bring about a general LOCKOUT, use up all our funds, dis- rupt all our TRADES UNIONS and engender discouragement rather than enthusiasm, it would be madness. However, at the Paris Con- gress, our people evinced such enthusiasm for the 1st of May,51 that this now looks like a retreat. And again the parliamentary group's proclamation is a deplorably feeble affair.163

[^1]: a Stanislaw Padlewski-'1 See this volume, pp. 116 and 122-23.





**[p. 128]**

BOSSED by Tussy, the GASWORKERS AND GENERAL LABOURERS,164 Tussy is going to do all she can to avoid providing them with the pretext of breach of contract and will propose 3 May as being a Sunday. The

GASWORKERS are now the most powerful organisation in Ireland and, in the next elections, are going to put up their own candidates regard- less of Parnell or M'Carthy. Parnel Ps demonstrative friendliness to- wards working men is the result of a meeting he had with these self- same GASWORKERS who didn't hesitate to give him a piece of their mind. Even Michael Davitt, who used to call for independent Irish

TRADES UNIONS, now knows better: The constitution they have got al- lows them HOME-RULE with no strings attached. It is to them that credit is due for having, for the first time, got the labour movement in Ire- land going. Many of their BRANCHES consist of AGRICULTURAL LABOURERS.

Kindest regards to your wife,

Your

F.E.

[^1]: First published abridged in Briefe und Auszüge aus Briefen von Joh. Phil. Becker, Jos. Dietzgen, Friedrich Engels, Karl Marx u. A. an F. A. Sorge und Andere, Stuttgart,

[^2]: 1906 and in full in: Marx and Engels, Works, First Russian Edition, Vol. XXVIII, Moscow, 1940

[^3]: Printed according to the original

[^4]: Published in English in full for the first time



