---
Volume: 49
Document_Title: "77. Engels to Karl Kautsky. 23 February "
Page_Range: "164-167"
---

# 77. Engels to Karl Kautsky. 23 February 



**[p. 77]**

ENGELS TO KARL KAUTSKY " 2

IN STUTTGART

London, 23 February 1891

Dear Kautsky,

You will have got my hasty congratulations of the day before yes- terday.'1 So let us now return to the matter in hand, namely Marx's letter.'1

The fear that it would place a weapon in the hands of our op- ponents was unfounded. Malicious insinuations are, of course, made about anything and everything, but by and large the impression gained by our opponents was nevertheless one of utter stupefaction at this ruthless self-criticism, stupefaction combined with the feeling that a party must be possessed of great inner strength if it could treat itself to that sort ofthing. This much is apparent from the opposition news- papers I have been getting from you (very many thanks) and else- where. And I frankly admit that this was what I had in mind when I published the document. That it was bound at first to give grave of- fence in certain quarters I was aware, but it couldn't be helped and in my view this consideration was more than outweighed by its factual content. And I knew that the party was amply strong enough to stand it and I reckoned that today it would even tolerate the forth- right language used 15 years ago, that it would point with justifi- able pride to this test of its strength and say: Show us another party that would dare do the same. In the meantime this has been left to the Saxon and the Vienna Arbeiter-Leitung and the Züricher Post.'73

To have assumed, in No. 21 of the Neue £eit, responsibility for its publication is most courageous of you, ' 7 ' but don't forget that it was I, after all, who first instigated the thing and, in addition, presented you, as it were, with Hobson's choice. Accordingly I consider the main responsibility to be mine. As to details, one can of course always

[^1]: See this volume, pp. 131 -32. - '' K. Marx, Critique of the Gotha Programme.





**[p. 134]**

You mention that Bebel has written to you saying that Marx's treatment of Lassalle has caused bad blood amongst the old Lassal- leans. That may be. Those people don't, of course, know the true story and nobody seems to have done anything to enlighten them on the subject. If they don't know that Lassalle's reputation as a great man is solely attributable to the fact that for years Marx allowed him to flaunt as his own the fruits of Marx's research and, what's more, to distort them because of his inadequate grounding in political econ- omy, that is no fault of mine. But I am Marx's literary executor and as such I also have my obligations.

For the past 26 years Lassalle has been part of history. If, while the Exceptional Law ' ' was in force, he has been exempt from historical criticism, it is now high time that such criticism came into its own and that light be thrown on Lassalle's position in regard to Marx. The leg- end which veils the true image of Lassalle and deifies him cannot, af- ter all, become an article of faith for the party. However highly one may rate Lassalle's services on behalf of the movement, his historical role inside it remains an equivocal one. Everywhere Lassalle the so- cialist goes hand in hand with Lassalle the demagogue. In Lassalle the agitator and organiser, the Lassalle who conducted the Hatzfeldt lawsuit ' 7 4 is everywhere apparent: the same cynicism in the choice of methods, the same predilection for consorting with corrupt and shady people who may be used simply as tools and then be discarded. Up till 1862 a specifically Prussian vulgar democrat in practice with marked Bonapartist tendencies (I have just been looking through his letters to Marx), he made a sudden volte-face for purely personal rea-

[^1]: a compliant





**[p. 135]**

That voices should have been raised in the parliamentary group demanding that the Neue ^eit be subject to censorship is truly delect- able. Is the spectre of the parliamentary group's dictatorship at the time of the Anti-Socialist Law (a dictatorship that was, of course, es- sential and excellently managed) still at large or is it a harking back to the sometime close-knit organisation of von Schweitzer? After the liberation of German socialist science from Bismarck's Anti-Socialist Law, what more brilliant idea than to subject it to a new Anti- Socialist Law to be thought up and implemented by the officials of the Social-Democratic Party. However, we've taken care that they don't get too big for their boots.

I have lost no sleep over the Vorwärts article. ' 6 2 I shall await Lieb- knecht's account of the affair and then reply to both in as amicable tones as possible. There are only a few inaccuracies to put right in the Vorwärts article (e. g. that we hadn't wanted unification, that events had given Marx the lie, etc.) and some obvious points to con- firm. I intend that this reply should conclude the debate so far as I am concerned, provided I am not compelled to resume it as a result of fresh attacks or inaccurate statements.

