---
Volume: 49
Document_Title: "83. Engels to Filippo Turati. 7 March "
Page_Range: "174-175"
---

# 83. Engels to Filippo Turati. 7 March 



**[p. 143]**

prospects are brighter. I am anxious to see the translation of the Com- munist Manifesto.

Warm regards from

Your

F.E.

First published in the language of the Printed according to the original original (German), in La corrispondenza , ,. , , . , . , r ; -, ;• • IOAO rmr Published in hnelish lor the hrsl di Marx e Engels con itahani. 1848-1895, . s

Milano, 1964 t l m e

83

ENGELS TO FILIPPO TURATI

IN MILAN

London, 7 March 1891

122 Regent's Park Road, N. W.

Dear Sir,

Very many thanks for your kind letter of 23 February,18' the 3 numbers of the Critica Sociale and your offer to send it to me regular- ly in future. As former Secretary for Italy on the General Council of the International I naturally take a great interest in the progress of the socialist movement in your country and particularly in Lom- bardy where, as a young man, I spent three months,188 of which I still retain happy memories.

I should like to thank you equally for the good wishes you were kind enough to send me on the occasion of the publication of the arti- cle by Marx" in the Neue £eit. In publishing it I was merely carrying out my duty to the memory of Marx on the one hand and to the Ger- man party on the other.

You are quite right when you wonder whether I shall have time to contribute either to your revue or to the socialist library you are about to publish. Indeed the preparation of new editions of Marx's

[^1]: * Critique of the Gotha Programme



