---
Volume: 49
Document_Title: "85. Engel s to Karl Kautsky. 17 March "
Page_Range: "176-178"
---

# 85. Engel s to Karl Kautsky. 17 March 



**[p. 85]**

ENGELS TO KARL KAUTSKY , 9 1

IN STUTTGART

London, 17 March 1891

Dear Kautsky,

Thank you for your letter of the 9th.— The 6 Dahn fascicles'' went off to you yesterday by parcel post. I should have been hard at work on the Origin b if Fischer hadn't come up with a demand for a new edi- tion of 10,000 copies of 1. The Civil War in France? 2. Marx, Wage La- bour and Capital? 3. Entwicklung des Sozialismus, etc.c So I had to write an introduction to the Civil War, which went off on Saturday,1

and at the same time thoroughly revise the thing and append thereto the General Council's 2 addresses on the Franco-Prussian War; fortu- nately Louise undertook to translate the latter. Nevertheless it has consumed a great deal of time. For Wage Labour and Capital was writ- ten in pre-surplus value terminology which cannot possibly be al- lowed to stand today in a propaganda piece running to 10,000 copies. So I shall have to translate it into present-day language and preface it with an apology. Finally, the Socialism also needs to be revised and, if possible, a little more popularised — 10,000 copies is no trifling mat- ter -, so how can I find time for anything else? And of all times I ought not to withdraw from the field, leaving it free for Lassallean pamphlets. But as soon as I have rid myself of this task, I shall tackle the Origin. I have pretty well completed the preliminary studies. And now along comes a Frenchman, H. Rave, who wishes to translate the thing - he has translated Bebel's Fraus — not all that marvellous- ly— and wants me if possible to send him revises or clean proof- sheets. But the matter has not yet been agreed.

[^1]: " F. Dahn, Urgeschichte der germanischen und romanischen Völker, vols 1-4.-'' F. Engels,

[^2]: The Origin of the Family, Private Properly and the State.-' the third German edition - d the separate German edition of 1891-' the fourth German edition of Socialism: Utopian and Scientific - ' 14 March - K A. Bebel, Die Frau in der Vergangenheit, Gegenwart und Zukunft and La Femme dans le passé, le présent & l'avenir.





**[p. 146]**

The Anti-Brentanoa96 is being [publishedb by Meissner, 4'/2 sheets — I am getting him to print all documents, including Sedley Taylor and my preface to the 4th edition.0 Printing almost complete.

Apropos, has the Neue £eit had a review copy of the [Capital) 4th edition? If not, write and let me know at once (postcard) — I had made a particular point of this. If it has I should be glad if you would publish a brief notice in which, in connection with my preface,d you might al- so make a discreet allusion to Brentano.

For want of time I have not been able to have my introduction to the Civil War—about 9 or 10 pages of the Neue %eit — copied out for you; this house is a hive of activity; Annie is getting married and Louise is having to see about a new girl, etc., added to which there have been the promptings of the Berliners. But I have asked Fischer to send me 3 clean proof-sheets; alternatively, if the revise turns out well I shall send it to you so that you may use it beforehand should you wish. If, for one reason or another, it doesn't suit you, nothing will have been lost.

Not a word from Auguste— there's no hurry. Sorge thinks I should take no notice of the mighty Vorwärts article.193 What do you think? I am beginning to incline towards his view.

The bit in my letter to you about responsibilityf was solely for Au- gust's consumption; if I had thought it would hurt your feelings in any way, I would have omitted it — such a thing had never even crossed my mind. And I certainly wasn't thinking of your note ' " o n the par- liamentary group's ukase.162 I simply regarded it as my duty, in the event of your forwarding the letter to the Berliners, to relieve you of as much responsibility as possible in their eyes and to take it upon myself. Voilà tout.%

Thank you for the Volkszeitungh and Critica Sociale. The first was sent me by Sorge, the second by Turati (at the behest ofthat braggart Loria); he now sends it regularly. Since then a still more forceful arti- cle, inspired by Sorge, and written by Schlüter, has appeared in the

[^1]: Volkszeitung.194

[^2]: a F. Engels, In the Case of Brentano Versus Marx. - h Manuscript damaged. - c of the first volume of Capital - d to the first volume of Capital - c August Bebel - ' See this volume, p. 133. - g That's all. - h Mew Yorker Volkszeitung



