---
Volume: 49
Document_Title: "86. Engel s to Friedrich Adolph Sorge. 21 March "
Page_Range: "178-180"
---

# 86. Engel s to Friedrich Adolph Sorge. 21 March 



**[p. 147]**

I too am coming increasingly to believe that the affair has aroused no indignation whatever in the party as such and that, for one reason or another, it has only hurt the feelings of the gentry in Berlin. And even the latter seem to have realised that the provocations in the Vor- wärts proved abortive as soon as they were uttered and produced no effect at all — tombés à plat* as the French say. Otherwise I should have certainly had word from them.

Your complaints about the Vorwärts (since when has the thing ac- quired the masculine gender?) find a sympathetic echo over here. Never has such a paper been seen before. I can only wonder how long people will stand for it.

Percy and his family are shortly going to Ryde, Isle of Wight, where Percy is to set up and manage an agency for his brothers.

Kindest regards from

Your

F.E.

First published in Aus der Frühzeit des Printed according to the original

Marxismus. Engels Briefwechsel mit Kautsky, Published in English in full for the Pra§> 1 9 3 5 first time

86

ENGELS TO FRIEDRICH ADOLPH SORGE

London, 21 March 1891

Dear Sorge,

Have shown your letter re Miss Anna b to our friends and promptly complied with your instructions. Enclosed you will find a brief note to the same in which she is hauled over the coals and notified that the letters she has written hitherto, with their repeated requests for money, have fallen on stony ground. I have been asked to tell you

[^1]: IN HOBOKEN

[^2]: " fell flat - b Stanislaw Padlewski





**[p. 148]**

In the meantime you will also have had my letter" with a money order for ten pounds and will, under the circumstances, have been able to put it to good use. Between ourselves, I believe that, should need arise, I could again raise a like amount, but that would prob- ably be that. I have also been asked to request you people to be strict in regard to money matters so that the person concerned may finally realise that this idling can't go on for ever.

Besides the Vienna Arbeiter-Leitung I am also sending you today a Volks-Tribüne and Figaro (Paris MEETING), and an Italian translation of the Manifesto}3 The People's Press and Commonweal have both gone phut.

I am having to arrange for new editions and/or new introductions to 1. The Civil War in France,' 2. Marx's Wage Labour and Capitald

and 3. Entwicklung des Sozialismuse; the German party is to bring them out in editions of 10,000 copies.

My reply to Brentano'96 will be published by Meissner in about 8 or 10 days' time. You shall have it straight away.

Then I have a new edition of The Origin of the Family, etc? to see to

[^1]: I do not yet know whether or not I shall reply to the Vorwärts arti- cle, ' 6 2 but I am beginning to incline towards your view. ' 9 3 There are a few points I really ought to touch on; however, it might be possible to do so in some other way.

[^2]: a See this volume, pp. 137-39.-b // Manifesto del Partita Comunista 1847, Milan, 1891.-° the third German edition-d the first separate German edition-' the fourth German edition of Socialism: Utopian and Scientific-1 F. Engels, In the Case of Brentano

[^3]: Versus Marx. -s the fourth German edition of The Origin of the Family, Private Property and the State



