---
Volume: 49
Document_Title: "87. Engel s to Hermann Schlüter. 21 March "
Page_Range: "180-182"
---

# 87. Engel s to Hermann Schlüter. 21 March 



**[p. 149]**

(5,000 sold!), after which, however, I shall apply myself inexorably and unremittingly to Volume III."

Sam Moore arrived in Liverpool the day before yesterday and will probably be here in about a week's time. At Christmas he caught some horrible disease from which, however, he has completely recov- ered.

I trust your wifeb is her old self once more. Warmest regards to her and to you.

Yoi

F.E.

First published abridged in Briefe und Auszüge aus Briefen von Joh. Phil. Becker, Jos. Dietzgen, Friedrich Engels, Karl Marx u. A. an F.A. Sorge und Andere, Stuttgart,

1906 and in full in: Marx and Engels, Works, First Russian Edition, Vol. XXVIII, Moscow, 1940

Printed according to the original

Published in English for the first time

87

ENGELS TO HERMANN SCHLÜTER

London, 21 March 1891

Dear Schlüter,

Likewise many thanks for the books on silver and MINERAL RESOURCES. The one on silver and gold for 1890 will also be of interest to me when it appears. But more important to me than anything else, following last year's census, would be the Compendium of the (eleventh) Census

[^1]: IN HOBOKEN

[^2]: Your letter of the 10th arrived day before yesterday.0 Many thanks' for the information about conditions out there, ' 9 5 which is all the more welcome in that, journalistic methods being what they are in America, one knows that one cannot believe the papers and is, as a result, completely at sea.

[^3]: a of Capital - b Katharina Sorge-c 19 March





**[p. 150]**

1890 when this comes out; I inherited from Marx the COMPENDIUM of the 10th CENSUS 1880 in 2 volumes, but it wasn't published until 1883 a; not that that matters — this time it's unlikely to take so long.

I have no recollection at all of Marx's second speech, nor can I imagine what it might be.139 If the few pages seem worth bothering about, it might be best if you were to print them in the Volkszeitung0

and let me have a few copies.

You are quite right; Marx's critique of the programmer will achieve its object all right, and it was with this in mind that I published it. It seems, however, that the rage it has aroused in 'influential cir- cles' in the party is terrible to behold; save for Fischer, who was pleased about the thing, no one has written to me — something, I'm glad to say, I can quite well put up with.

If your wifed should come to Europe, we shall, I trust, have a chance to see her here in London, when she may convince herself that we are still going strong.

The Roshers are shortly moving to the Isle of Wight where Percy is to manage an agency for his brothers. They left their house the day before yesterday and for the time being are staying with his parents, a few doors away from me.

You would oblige me by forwarding the enclosed to Sorge straight away.

Predictably, Juliuse has not yet completed the removal from 114 Kentish Town Road r (due on the 25th); they have taken it on for another six weeks. Ede is busy writing for the Vorwärts and the Neue ï(eit and is coming on tremendously. The Avelings are doing well; now that The People's Press has gone phut, you ought to read The Daily Chronicle; though the paper is UNIONIST LIBERAL and as such an ally of the TORIES, it provides the best news concerning the labour move- ment over here, and is prepared to accept all reports. The Eight Hours movement is going splendidly (cf. Ede's articles in the Vorwärts g

and ditto in the Neue £eit) .h The TRADES COUNCIL ' 9 6 has given way; this time the demonstration is going to be enormous and, what's more, of

[^1]: a Engels has in mind two censuses: Department of the Interior, Census Office. Compendium of the Tenth Census (June 1, 1880), Parts I-II, Washington, 1883 and Department of the Interior, Census Office. Compendium of the Eleventh Census: 1890, Parts I-III, Washington, D.C., 1892-1897. - b Mew Yorker Volkszeitung-' K. Marx, Critique of the Gotha Program- me.-6 Anna Schlüter-0 Julius Motteler-1 the premises of the Sozialdemokrat office -

[^2]: 8 E. Bernstein, 'Arbeiterschutz-Gesetz-Reformen in England', Vorwärts, Nos. 56, 64 and 67; 7, 17 and 20 March 1891.-h E. Bernstein, 'Briefe aus England', Die Neue Zeit, 9. Jg. 1890/91, 2. Bd., Nr. 25.



