---
Volume: 49
Document_Title: "88. Engels to Max Oppenheim. 24 March "
Page_Range: "182-185"
---

# 88. Engels to Max Oppenheim. 24 March 



**[p. 151]**

one mind. For the English, the LEGAL 8 HOURS AGITATION is the gateway to the socialist movement; once they have swallowed the 8 hours BILL for everyone, including men (and they are well on the way to doing so), they will stick at nothing—they'll have broken with the old middle- class FREE-TRADE viewpoint.

Warm regards to your wife and yourself from Louise and

Your

F.E.

First published in: Marx and Engels, Works, First Russian Edition, Vol. XXVIII, Moscow, 1940

88

ENGELS TO MAX OPPENHEIM 197

IN DRESDEN

London, 24 March 1891

122 Regent's Park Road, N.W.

Dear Mr Oppenheim,

First of all I must crave your forgiveness for not having answered your esteemed letter of 26 November until now — almost four months later to the day! But if you knew what an unending mass of work and correspondence of all kinds I have had during that time and that, moreover, I am not allowed to wield my pen for more than 3 hours daily because of my weak eyes — and by daylight at that!—you would, I am sure, excuse me.

My heartfelt thanks then for your kind good wishes which would appear to be coming true in as much as I am on the whole very well, all things considered, and everyone alleges that I do not look my age. Let us hope that I so continue.

You further touch on a few difficult themes which cannot be dealt with anything like exhaustively in a short letter. Certainly, it would spell progress if workers' unions could negotiate wage settlements

Printed according to the original

Published in English for the first time



**[p. 152]**

with the entrepreneurs direct and on everyone's behalf. Indeed, here in England this has been the aim for the past 50 years, though the cap- italists know too well where their interests lie to swallow the bait save under duress. That aim was achieved in the big DOCK STRIKE of 1889 198 as it has been sporadically both before and since; but at the first opportunity the masters emancipate themselves from this, the unions' 'intolerable tyranny', and declare it inadmissible for such third parties, interlopers, to meddle in the patriarchal relations be- tween them and their working men. It's the old story — when busi- ness is good, demand compels the masters to be accommodating, when it is bad, they exploit the excessive supply of labour to contest all these concessions again. On the whole, however, the resistance of the workers increases as they become better organised,— so much so, in fact, that the general situation — on average — improves slightly and no crisis can lastingly drag the workers down to or below zero, the nadir of the previous crisis. But it would be difficult to say what would happen if at any time we were to experience a prolonged, chronic, gen- eral industrial crisis of 5 or 6 years' duration.

The employment of surplus workers by the state or the municipali- ties and the nationalisation of the trade in foodstuffs are matters which, in my view, need to be seen in a wider context than occurs in your letter. It is not the trade alone, but also the production of all food- stuffs a country can itself supply, that must be taken into account here. For how else do you propose to employ the surplus workers? If they are surplus, it is precisely because there is no market for their products. This, however, brings us to the expropriation of the land- owners, i. e. considerably further than the present German or Aus- trian state would be prepared to go. Nor, for that matter, is it the kind of task we could entrust to either of them. How it would be done and what the result would be if Junkers were ordered to expropriate Junkers may be seen here in England where, despite all the medieval trappings, the general run of political life is far more modern than on either side of the Erzgebirge. Therein precisely lies the rub; for, so long as the propertied classes remain at the helm, nationalisation never abolishes exploitation but merely changes its form — in the French, American or Swiss republics no less than in monarchist Cen- tral, and despotic Eastern, Europe. And to dislodge the propertied classes from the helm we first need a revolution in the minds of the working masses — as, indeed, is now taking place, if relatively slowly; and in order to bring this about, we need an even more rapid révolu-



**[p. 153]**

tion in production methods, more machinery, more displacement of labour, the ruin of more peasants and petty bourgeois, more tangible evidence on a vaster scale of the inevitable results of modern large- scale industry.

The more quickly and irrevocably this economic revolution takes place, the more imperative will measures impose themselves which, apparently intended to cure evils that have suddenly assumed vast and intolerable proportions, will eventually result in undermining the foundations of the existing mode of production; and the more rapidly, too, will the working masses obtain a hearing thanks to universal suffrage. What those initial measures will be must depend on local conditions at the time, nor can anything of a general nature be said about them beforehand. But as I see it, steps of a truly liberating na- ture will not be possible until the economic revolution has made the great majority of the workers alive to their situation and thus paved the way for their political rule. The other classes can only patch up or palliate. And this process of clarifying the workers' minds is daily gain- ing momentum and in 5 or 10 years' time the various parliaments will look very different from what they do today.

Work on Volume IIP will begin as soon as the confounded little ancillary jobs and the endless correspondence with people here, there and everywhere leave time enough. Then, however, I shall rebel, shut up shop and refuse to be disturbed. I hope to get it finished this year; I am itching to do it and have got to get it over and done with.

Shall you be visiting England again? Tussy is very well and cheer- ful, very happily married and has grown quite plump.

Yours sincerely,

F. Engels

[^1]: First published in full in: Marx and Engels, Printed according to the original Works. First Russian Edition, Vol. _ , ,. , , . _ . . . . r ,, r •.,i„,,x T . . ,„.„ Published in English in lull tor the XXVIII, Moscow, 1940 _ . s

[^2]: first time

[^3]: a of Capital



