---
Volume: 49
Document_Title: "89. Engels to Laura Lafargue. 30 March "
Page_Range: "185-187"
---

# 89. Engels to Laura Lafargue. 30 March 



**[p. 89]**

ENGELS TO LAURA LAFARGUE

AT LE PERREUX

London, 30 March 1891

My dear Laura,

Very many thanks for your kind offer to revise Rave ' " qui en sera ravi" — but I am afraid you will not be ravie. b I have made him do me a sample — two passages from the last chapter, pp. 121 and 140, ' 9 0 — which I have looked over and now submit to you with my notes and suggested alterations. Please look it over and then decide for yourself, whether you will undertake the job. Like all professional translators he is the slave of his original and forgets that a phrase to be done from French into German and vice versa, has to be turned topsy- turvy. Moreover he does not understand the synonymic nuance ex- pressed by many German words; he knows what genus it belongs to, but not what species, much less what variety. But that, I am afraid, most translators will fail in.

I shall write to Rave that I have sent the manuscript to Monsieur Lafargue (whom he suggests as revisor) and that I cannot give him a definite answer until I hear from him. As he mentioned Paul, I thought it best not to mixyou up with the matter at the present stage.

Jollymeier is coming to-night at last. At Christmas he had a cold and seems to have kept it until now. He intended coming last Thurs- day0 but his cold got worse, and as the weather was bad, delayed from day to day. Yesterday it was nice and warm, but he did not turn up, today at last he writes announcing his arrival to-night aber sich- er. d His deafness seems to bother him awfully.

Sam arrived at Liverpool last Thursday week, and is with his par- ents at Bumford, will be here about end of this or beginning of next week. Had himself thoroughly examined on arrival by Gumpert who reports him perfectly sound, with only a small enlargement of the spleen, which is expected to be soon curable.

Pumps and Percy are now staying at the old Roshers', they have giv- en up their house and stored the furniture until their removal to

[^1]: a who will be delighted - b delighted - c 26 March - d for sure





**[p. 155]**

Ryde, Isle of Wight, whither Percy will go this week with his brothers to make the commercial arrangements for the new agency for Rosh- ers' cement, artificial stone, and builders' and gardeners' materials generally. After that, he will take Pumps to select a house and then the transfer will take place. I do hope Percy will at last learn how to earn his own living, it's a pretty penny they have cost me and the worst of it is there is no return in the shape of benefit to the party. Of course I shall have to go on subsidising for a year or two until the new business can be expected to begin paying.

Annie has left us and is going to be married this week. We have taken two girls as I want Louise to help me in my work and not waste her time in the kitchen. The devil's trouble it was to get girls but I believe we have been lucky — so far — that is the first week — we are satisfied. They are two girls who have been together and prefer to be again at one and the same place.

The May demonstration will be a severe letting down to the Social Democratic Federation29 and Hyndman. Their over-cleverness, in trying to play off the Trades Council196 against the Legal Eight Hours League, 20° has landed them between two stools. They quite forgot that this year the Trades Council has a quite different majority to that of last year. They wanted again two platforms for themselves, but will not get them, as they are represented neither on the Trades Council nor on the Legal 8 Hours Committee (they sent three dele- gates but these soon stayed away and their names were consequently struck off the roll). Moreover, Edward, in return for the slanderous attacks of Hyndman, 179 now takes the offensive and will have the matter brought before the East End branch of the Social Democratic Federation. Indeed, Hyndman seems already to show the white feather.

Bernstein says he saw in La Justice that on the 1 May Committee in Paris the Broussists 3 applied for admission, that the Blanquists and Allemanists 5 3 were against, but that on Guesde's motion they were admitted by a majority of 5. Can you give me any details? as contra- diction or confirmation? 201 I hear nothing at all about Brousse and Co. now, are they merely lying in wait, or are they so completely down that they dare not stir? I should like to be well au courant of these matters, as the Brussels Congress135 will very likely bring about a change in the relations of the Social Democratic Federation and the Possibilists with the Germans. If these two sets of intriguers go to Brussels and thereby publicly renounce their pretensions of being the

