---
Volume: 49
Document_Title: "91. Engel s to August Bebel. Beginning of April "
Page_Range: "188-189"
---

# 91. Engel s to August Bebel. Beginning of April 



**[p. 157]**

here — other than to inform you of the above and to advise Wrôblew- ski of your address. Please, therefore, come to an understanding with him direct.

I trust you have almost finished moving house. I know only too well how disagreeable these things are. Mrs Mendelson, to whom kindly remember me, must have had quite enough of it.

Yours ever,

F. E.

Mrs Kautsky sends her regards both to you and to Mrs Mendelson.

First published in: Marx and Engels, Printed according to the original Works, Second Russian Edition, Vol. 38, Moscow, 1965 Translated from the French

Published in English for the first time

91

ENGELS TO AUGUST BEBEL

[London, beginning of April 1891]

Dear Bebel,

I shall not get round today to answering your letter of the 30th — that will be done shortlya as soon as the present mass of work allows me a free moment; instead I wish to send you and your wifeb my heartiest congratulations on your silver wedding. I trust that the two of you will still be there to celebrate your golden wedding on 6 April 1916 and, come that day, will drain a glass in memory of the old boy now writing these words, who by then will have long since gone up in smoke and ashes.

One thing I can tell you: there are few people alive today whom I could congratulate with the same sincerity and warmth on the occa-

[^1]: IN BERLIN

[^2]: [Draft]

[^3]: a See this volume, pp. 175-84. -h Julie Bebel



