---
Volume: 49
Document_Title: "93. Engel s to Pasquale Martignetti. 2 April "
Page_Range: "190-191"
---

# 93. Engel s to Pasquale Martignetti. 2 April 



**[p. 159]**

soon I shall send you — enfin,a I'd better do it straight away— I shall send you the master proof corrected by me so that you'll at least be able to see what the thing is like in the raw.

No doubt you will have got the introduction to the Civil War; it went off a few days ago. Perhaps you would be so good as to write the introductory note. 206

Everything has been straightened out with Lafargue. I pointed out to him1' that his arguments from Ricardo and A. Smith had been anticipated long before in the Critique ' and my preface to the 2nd vo- lume, d whereupon he seems to have promptly calmed down. 168

Schorlemmer is here and sends you his best wishes. It's now time for our meal and Aveling is coming — he is a grass widower, as Tussy is in Norwich drumming up support — so adieu.

Your

F.E.

First published in Aus der Frühzeit des Printed according to the original Marxismus. Engels Briefwechsel mit Kautsky, Prag, 1935 Published in English for the first time

93

ENGELS TO PASQUALE MARTIGNETTI

London, 2 April 1891

Dear Friend,

It will be perfectly acceptable to me if Fantuzzi publishes the Socia- lismo utopistico,c though I shall write and tell him r not to inflict on me prefaces by unknown quantities à la Gori. 207 The biographical sketch from Lo Sviluppo can also be used.208 I have just had my

[^1]: IN BENEVENTO

[^2]: " in short - b See this volume, pp. 140-42.-r K. Marx, A Contribution to the Critique of Political Economy.-'1 of Capital-'' the Italian edition of Engels' Socialism: Utopian and Scientific - ' See next letter.



