---
Volume: 49
Document_Title: "94. Engels to Romualdo Fantuzzi. 2 April "
Page_Range: "191-192"
---

# 94. Engels to Romualdo Fantuzzi. 2 April 



**[p. 160]**

So as to assist you in your English studies I have sent you the Eng- lish edition of the Communist Manifesto a and shall get hold of a copy of the English edition of Capitalh for you. Just now there is no English socialist periodical worth reading. From time to time, however, I shall send you a copy of a — if possible interesting — bourgeois newspaper for you to study. With an English grammar and a diction- ary you will then make good progress. Admittedly you won't learn the pronunciation unless you have a good teacher. However the lan- guage is very easy, since it has virtually no grammar.

If you would like to have a copy of the Manifesto in German, let me know by postcard.

With most cordial regards,

Yours,

F. Engels

First published, in the language of the Printed according to the original original (German), in La corrispondenza T> , .• . . • T, I- • r , r- ,• l A c i •. r • iota tone Published in English lor the first di Marx e Engels con itaham. 1848-1895, t.__ 6

94

[London,] 2 April [1891]

I shall be glad to give you permission to reprint and republish the Italian translation (by P. Martignetti) of my Socialism: Utopian and Scientific provided that it is published not later than 3 months from to-

[^1]: Milano, 1964

[^2]: time

[^3]: ENGELS TO ROMUALDO FANTUZZI 2 0 9

[^4]: IN MILAN

[^5]: [Draft]

[^6]: a K. Marx and F. Engels, Manifesto of the Communist Party. Authorized English transla- tion. Edited and annotated by Frederick Engels. London, 1888.-b K. Marx, Capital: a critical analysis of capitalist production. Translated from the third German edition by Samuel Moore and Edward Aveling and edited by Frederick Engels, Vol. I, London, 1887.



