---
Volume: 49
Document_Title: "96. Engel s to Karl Kautsky. 7 April "
Page_Range: "194-196"
---

# 96. Engel s to Karl Kautsky. 7 April 



**[p. 163]**

you must set one lot off against the other and gradually attract the masses. Besides, there are divergencies of principle which entitle you to refuse a merger pure and simple.

Where on earth in the Socialiste is the letter from Rouen of which you speak? I have searched through every number from 11 February to 1 April and found nothing.2 ' 3

Louise and Schorlemmer send their best wishes to you and Laura, as does

Yours,

F.E.

Schorlemmer has nearly recovered from his cold, though he looks somewhat tired.

We expect you next week so that Sam can retail to you all manner of things about your Negro relations.

First published in: F. Engels, P. et L. Printed according to the original Lafargue, Correspondance, t. Ill, Paris, translated from the rrench 1959

96

ENGELS TO KARL KAUTSKY

London, 7 April 1891

Dear Kautsky,

Your letter has just arrived. Pity you weren't able to induce Schmidt2 ' 4 to join you there; he'd have been just the man for you. Meissner writes to say that he has only now sent off the review copies of the 4th edition" along with the Anti-Brentanob 96 and that both have gone to the Neue %_eit. So you can begin forthwith; at all events you should have both of them before your article is printed.215 If not, write to O. Meissner, citing me and this communication.

An Alsatian, Henri Rave, presently in jug, who translated Bebel's

[^1]: IN STUTTGART

[^2]: " of the first volume of Capital - b F. Engels, In the Case of Brentano Versus Marx.





**[p. 164]**

Frau* and is now translating my Originh under Laura Lafargue's supervision, wants to know whether your Thomas Morusc is worth translating. I have recommended the book to him but at the same time written to say that I would ask you to send him a copy so he can make up his own mind about it. Address: H. Rave, détenu à la prison, d

Poitiers (Vienne, France).

Just now the French are fully occupied with their own affairs, namely May Day and the attendant negotiations with the Possibi- lists of both Allemanist53 and Broussist3 persuasion — in which our own chaps are acting as arbitrators!! — etc., and also with their Socia- liste, which explains why Paul Lafargue has done no work for the Neue %eit. 2 ' 6 Odd that the French should be adopting exactly the same policy towards the crumbling ranks of the Possibilists as that recommended by Marx in his accompanying letter of 1875 for adop- tion towards the Lassalleans.63 And, indeed, they have done so suc- cessfully up till now — a success that will doubtless be sealed by the Brussels Congress. 135

Many regards.

Your

F.E.

[^1]: First published in Aus der Frühzeit des Marx- Printed according to the original

[^2]: ismus. Engels Briefwechsel mit Kautsky, Published in English for the first Pra S> 1 9 3 5 time

[^3]: a A. Bebel, Die Frau in der Vergangenheil, Gegenwart und Zukunft and La Femme dans le passé, le présent & l'avenir. Traduction française par Henri Rave. Paris, 1891. - b F. Engels, L'Origine de la famille, de la propriété privée et de l'état. Traduction française par Henri Rave. Paris, 1893. - ' K. Kautsky, Thomas More und seine Utopie. - d kept in prison



