---
Volume: 49
Document_Title: "100. Engel s to Heinrich Scheu. 10 April "
Page_Range: "201-202"
---

# 100. Engel s to Heinrich Scheu. 10 April 



**[p. 100]**

ENGELS TO HEINRICH SCHEU

IN LONDON

London, 10 April 1891

122 Regent's Park Road, N.W.

Dear Mr Scheu,

Thanks to the diligence of Mrs Kautsky who over the past weeks has sorted out a whole pile of Marx's letters, I am today able to send you 2 signatures of Marx's.221

The one at the foot of the English draft of the letter is the clearest. On the other hand you might perhaps consider reproducing the four lines in the German draft from T need, etc' to 'available' including all deletions and alterations so as to give an example of his handwrit- ing (and at the same time of the way in which he worked). At any rate I can't supply you with anything better, that is to say without corrections and, as it were, tailored to your requirements. This I leave to you, as also to whether you include the words 'Yours very truly' and 'Dear Sir' and/or the date.

I should be grateful if you would return the letters. It will always be a pleasure to see you here. In any case I should like to see you again before you start on my new portrait, for a pe- culiar snag has cropped up as regards the photographs by Deben- ham, and this in the quite literal sense.

With best wishes from Mrs Kautsky and

Yours respectfully,

F. Engels

[^1]: First published in: Marx and Engels, Printed according to the original Works, Second Russian Edition, Vol. 38, „ , ,. , , • „ ,• , r ., r . , , ,„,_r rubhshed in Enelish lor the hrst Moscow, 1965 . B

[^2]: time



