---
Volume: 49
Document_Title: "102. Engel s to Karl Kautsky. 30 April "
Page_Range: "203-206"
---

# 102. Engel s to Karl Kautsky. 30 April 



**[p. 172]**

take nothing on and, what's more, shall actually have to cut down on much of my correspondence.

With best wishes from myself and also from Louise Kautsky.

Your

F. Engels

First published, in Hungarian, in Népszava, Printed according to the newspaper No. 130, Budapest, 3 June 1906

Translated from the Hungarian

Published in English for the first time

102

ENGELS T O KARL KAUTSKY

IN STUTTGART

London, 30 April 1891

Dear Baron,

I have before me your letters of the 5th and 25th. Ad vocema Brenta- noh96—Herkner, to whom I sent a copy, has replied to the ef- fect that, while the allegation of deliberate falsification could not be substantiated, Marx had nevertheless, if no doubt unintentionally, used quotations in Capital of such a kind that no clear idea could be obtained of Gladstone's real views, etc.— on the whole, everything you'd expect of so 'ardent' a disciple of Brentano's.

You will have got my postcard about Rave.0 Laura Lafargue is go- ing to read over and correct his translation of the Origin,0 otherwise I could hardly have entrusted him with the thing. He will probably take some time over your Moruse which he wishes to translate; he spoke of having to do 'more rewarding, i. e. better paid' work.

I cannot begrudge Schmidt the lectureship — something he and his parents have dreamed of for years. And in present-day Switzerland

[^1]: a As regards - b F. Engels, In the Case of Brentano Versus Marx. -c See this volume, pp. 163-64.-d F. Engels, L'Origine de la famille, de la propriété privée et de l'état. Tra- duction française par Henri Rave.- e K. Kautsky, Thomas More und seine Utopie.





**[p. 173]**

If Liebknecht were to leave Berlin for Leipzig many people besides yourself would be instantly overjoyed. But I don't believe it will hap- pen. It would mean his abdicating. In Leipzig — what historical iro- ny!— he would be the Social-Democratic Bismarck of Friedrichsruh" which would eventually lead to a rumpus. Whether things will go on much longer without there being one is in any case questionable.

The Peruvian affair interests me very much; I should be glad if you could send me the Ausland articles.224 But tell me when you have got to have them back, and I can regulate my reading accordingly.

I wrote to Rave about your Morus as follows225: 'Le "Thomas Morus" de Kautsky contient un aperçu généralement juste, et sous beaucoup d'aspects original, de la période de la renaissance dans les pays de réforme protestante, et surtout l'Angleterre. C'est de cet aperçu géné- ral des conditions historiques de la période que se dégage la personnalité de T. More, comme enfant de son temps. La renaissance italienne et française, par conséquent, ne figurent dans le livre qu'à l'arrière-plan. J'écrirai à Kautsky un de ces jours, et je le prierai de vous envoyer son livre, je crois que vous trouverez, qu'il vaut bien la peine d'être traduit.'b

I have no recollection whatever of Marx's Geneva memoran- dum.226 We are now engaged in sorting out the old letters and news- papers and I shall see if I can find it. But just now I haven't got much time to look, let alone do notes, etc., on it. I have got to make sure of getting back to Volume III' and have firmly resolved to be ruthless about refusing any more work — were it only 3 lines — unless of the ut- most urgency, and likewise to restrict my correspondence to bare essen- tials, until I have done with Volume III. First, of course, there's the Origind which I shall, I think, get round to next week. Meanwhile Louise will search for the Geneva document. However, it may take

[^1]: a Bismarck's estate where he lived after his resignation. - b 'Kautsky's Thomas Morus contains a survey, by and large correct and in many respects original, of the Renais- sance period in the countries of the Protestant Reformation, notably England. It is from that general survey of the historical conditions of the period that T. More's perso- nality emerges as the child of his times. In this book, therefore, the Italian and French Renaissance figures only in the background. One of these days I shall write to Kautsky and ask him to send you his book. I believe you will find it well worth translating.' - c of Capital-d the fourth German edition of The Origin of the Family, Private Property and the Slate





**[p. 174]**

As you will have seen, the Vorwärts has altered course somewhat227

in regard to the miners' strike.228 Liebknecht is hopeless in such mat- ters. The man has only two colours on his palette, black and white, with no nuances in between, so what can one do? Our chaps in Berlin see everything solely from their own standpoint. Thus they sometimes forget that, unlike the party veterans, the miners cannot be expected to have the kind of discipline that would have been drilled into them by the Anti-Socialist Law ' ' ; they also forget that every new group of workers accrues to us as the result of injudicious and necessarily unsuc- cessful wild-cat strikes which, however, are inevitable in the circum- stances. I shall write to Bebel about this. " You can't just enjoy what is pleasing in a movement; you also have to put up with its momentary unpleasantnesses. Come to that, the strict discipline of a sect cannot be maintained in the case of a big party, nor is this altogether a bad thing.

As for Lafargue, don't let yourself be confused. Lafargue is a bit of an enfant gâte h and is enamoured of his prehistoric theories which do not by any means always hold water. Hence his Adam and Eve ' are dear to his heart and seem to him far more important than Zola, for whom he's just the right sort of chap.229 And the delay over the paradisal Platonists—who only learnt what's what when chucked out by old Jahweh — coming as it does so hard on the heels of the af- fair of his other, economic, article,168 is to him a personal affront. Now, all of a sudden, he expects the JVeue £eit to carry nothing but Adam and Eve articles, as though it had been in the habit of doing so before. Now he looks for a contrast, which is non-existent, between the old and the new Neue £eit, and behaves as though the paper had never before contained any articles d'actualité.'1 I find the JVeue ^eit far better than it used to be — no one, surely, can expect me to read the serials; it has at last succeeded in getting Schippel to write really good articles that are a pleasure to read. That a weekly must give more space than a monthly to actualités goes without saying. If you could find a niche for Adam and Eve before too long, then all would be well.

The American militia system is in practice nothing but a kind of na-

[^1]: " See this volume, pp. 182-83. -1' spoilt child-' P. Lafargue, 'Der Mythus von Adam und Eva. Ein Beitrag zur vergleichenden Mythologie', Die JVeue £eil, 9. Jg. 1890/91, 2. Bd., Nr. 34, 35. -d topical articles



