---
Volume: 49
Document_Title: "104. Engel s to Laura Lafargue. 4 May "
Page_Range: "216-221"
---

# 104. Engel s to Laura Lafargue. 4 May 



**[p. 104]**

ENGELS TO LAURA LAFARGUE

AT LE PERREUX

London, 4 May 1891

My dear Löhr,

Yesterday was glorious, both as to weather and demonstration. Louise, Sam Moore and I went there at 2,240 the platforms extended in an immense arc across the Park,3 the procession began to march in at 2.30 and had not done by 4.15, indeed fresh processions came in up to 5 o'clock. I was on Edward's platform with Sam, Louise on Tus- sy's. The crowd was immense, about the same or more even than last year.

Now a little gossip about the history of the affair. It has been al- most exclusively Edward's and Tussy's work, and they had to fight it through from beginning to end. There was of course a deal of friction, but the Trades' Congress last September at Liverpool27 and the changed majority (in favour of legal 8 hours) had considerably smoothed the way. Shipton was awfully polite to Edward, but ob- structive in many small matters, and threatened to throw up every- thing if his right (divine?) to be Marshal in command of the procession should be ever questioned. Well, they let him, it will probably be the last time he will appear hoch zu Ross.h

The principal thing was that the resolution was passed in the form proposed by our people, and that they carried in the joint committee (5 from the Trades Council,196 5 from the Demonstration Com- mittee).

Now for the fun — the Social Democratic Federation.29 At first they sent 3 delegates to the Demonstration Committee where Edward was Chairman. But after a few meetings they remained absent, and were struck off the rolls. Then the Social Democratic Federation ap- plied to the Trades Council for 2 platforms for themselves, as they had last year. But Shipton himself suggested to the Joint Committee that this would never do, and it was rejected, as in the same way every Trades Union might have asked for 2 platforms. Then the So- cial Democratic Federation announced in their Moniteur' that they

[^1]: a Hyde Park - '' on horseback - ' official newspaper





**[p. 186]**

Unfortunately they had to join our procession from the Embankment in order to get into the Park in an orderly and showy manner, and once there, marched off about 100 yards and held there their prom- ised meetings — without proper platforms, we had big carts, they only chairs. They were just near enough to reckon upon some stragglers from our overflow, and just far enough to show how few of them they were able to attract.

The decisive thing had been, for them, the resolution of the Demonstration Committee: that every association affiliated to them should pay 5/- for every branch towards general expenses. Thus, the Social Democratic Federation would have had either to pay 5/- for the many bogus branches they exhibit in their Moniteur, or else own they were bogus. And that decided their final retreat.

They have been made to feel their real position, and that is: the same position which the Germans of the Socialistic Labor Party in America133 hold there, that of a sect. And that is their position, though they are real live Englishmen. It is very characteristic of the Anglo-Saxon race and their peculiar mode of development, that both here and in America the people who, more or less, have the correct theory as to the dogmatic side of it, become a mere sect because they can- not conceive that living theory of action, of working with the working class at every possible stage of its development, otherwise than as a collection of dogmas to be learnt by heart and recited like a con- jurer's formula or a Catholic prayer. Thus the real movement is going on outside the sect, and leaving it more and more. The Canning Town Branch of the Federation sticks to Edward and Tussy in spite of Hyndman and marches with our people, and that is their strongest branch. Since the Dockstrike ' 9 8 the Social Democratic Federation had for a time profited by the general socialist revival, but that is over now, they are fast for cash for their new Hall in the Strand, and the decline has set in again. And as their friends and allies the Possibi- lists 3 are eating each other up as fast as they can, they cannot even brag with their grand foreign connexions.

Sam Moore was very much struck with the immense progress made here during the 2 years of his absence. He, by the bye, is very well, likes the climate and easy life amazingly and will, I am almost sure, be homesick for Africa after a while.

[^1]: a 'Eight Hours' Demonstration, Sunday May 3rd, 1891', Justice, No. 381, 2 May 1891.



I mimmmm m ^i^ gejal Jigkt jours flcmonsfratiffit

<+• Hyfc Part, Mijr %H, 1891 **

i m i w m c i « F S t S 3 8 * TIOXZ3DT «

^T<imii JVP.. J C V & 2&^ Jtejwr npnu$mt4d-Jaffa. .Jt A^l Ll

JPMform JW.

Qcoirat SKOTOM

[^1]: EDWARD A V I U M

[^2]: Engels' press ticket to the platform in Hyde Park during the demonstration on 3 May 1891







**[p. 189]**

It's no use crying over spilt milk, but I cannot help thinking that our friends made a slight mistake, thanks to the usual French inclina- tion of miscalculating the strength of the relative forces. A very heroic disposition sometimes, 'mais ce n'est pas la guerre'.c 2 4 ' After all we in- tended to work as usual with the Blanquists, and they were not bound by the resolutions of Calais and Lille.239 These resolutions could only bind our people; the Blanquists too might have passed resolutions as to the 1st of May and then said they were bound by them. Why then determine beforehand by our own selves and without our only allies, how the demonstration was to be arranged in Paris where we are in an, at present, decided minority? Why thus froisser4 our only allies? Froisser them still more by the plan of delegations to the mairies^ and summonses to all the élusr to meet the delegates there? a plan which on the face of it they were sure to repudiate? I am not at all aston- ished that they fell into the arms of the Allemanists 53 after this. At least that is the view I came to from the information I possess, there may be another side to the case but I do not know it.

We have very little news from Germany to-day. Hamburg had a splendid procession, 80,000 according to Daily Telegraph. From Berlin very little news; the Havas of Berlin, Wolff, has orders from Government to suppress everything, and the London correspondents are all under the influence of the Freisinnigen,242 and do exactly the same.

the Maikrauth of which Percy had sent us from Ryde. We put in 4 bot- tles Moselle, 2 claret, 1 Champagne, and finished it — we, Bernsteins and the Tussy's.' Late in the evening Cunninghame Graham came in and actually had two or three glasses of it — he seems to have left his teetotalism at Tangiers. There is a slight but rather agreeable Kater,J

kept in proper bounds this morning by a bottle of Pilsener.

[^1]: When we came home last night, we wound up with a Maibowleg

[^2]: " 'Eight Hours Day.—Demonstration in Hyde Park.—Enormous Gathering', The Daily Chronicle, No. 9092, 4 May 1891.-b 1 May-' but this is not war- d offend-0 town halls-' municipal councillors-" punch- h woodruff (a plant used for making punch)-1 Eleanor and Edward Aveling-' hangover



