---
Volume: 49
Document_Title: "107. Engel s to Franz Mehring. 5 June "
Page_Range: "226-227"
---

# 107. Engel s to Franz Mehring. 5 June 



**[p. 195]**

Elôah = the Arabic Allah both etymologically and lexically. The 'a' (patâchfurtivum)a is obligatory in Hebrew if the end of the word has an 'o' or 'u' before 'h' or 'ch' [rûàch Elohîm, the Spirit of Elohim in the 2nd verse of the 1st chapter of Genesis). In the plural Elôhîm the 'ä' disappears.

I am sending you The Workman's Times, a non-political working- class paper which calls for the formation of a working men's party<\\ The best of the working men's or so-called working men's papers over here. As regards facts it is admirable. The paper was founded by York- shire and Lancashire workmen and originally appeared in Hud- dersfield before being transplanted to London.

Give Laura a kiss from me. LOUISE SENDS HER KINDEST REGARDS.

Yours ever,

F.E.

First published in: F. Engels, P. et L. Lafargue, Correspondance, t. Ill, Paris, 1959

Printed according to the original

107

London, 5 June 1891

Kapital und Presse11 received with thanks. I wish it every success. I didn't know your address, hence belated reply.

[^1]: First published in: Marx and Engels, Works, First Russian Edition, Vol. XXVIII, Moscow, 1940

[^2]: Translated from the French

[^3]: Printed according to the original

[^4]: Published in English for the first time

[^5]: ENGELS TO FRANZ MEHRING b

[^6]: IN BERLIN

[^7]: * The original has 'furtirena'.-1' Engels wrote this note on his visiting card.- 0 F. Mehring, Kapital und Presse. Ein Machspiel zum Falle Lindau.



