---
Volume: 49
Document_Title: "108. Engel s to Friedrich Adolph Sorge. 10 June "
Page_Range: "227-229"
---

# 108. Engel s to Friedrich Adolph Sorge. 10 June 



**[p. 108]**

ENGELS TO FRIEDRICH ADOLPH SORGE 2 5 2

IN HOBOKEN

London, 10 June 1891

Dear Sorge,

I am up to the eyes in the new edition of the Origin of the Family, etc.'1; it has been necessary to go through all the relevant literature of the past 8 years and its quintessence must now be worked into the book, which is no joke, especially in view of the many interruptions. However the worst is behind me and I shall at last be able to get back to Volume III.b I have had to cut down on the whole of my corre- spondence, otherwise I should make no progress at all.

In Berlin — strictly between ourselves, for Schlüter must not know that it is / who have given you the information; he cannot always keep his mouth shut and if you tell him, he's sure to know that it comes from me — in Berlin, then, the chaps have finally come round to the view that Liebknecht is a windbag and nothing more. Earlier on the position was such that they had to give him the post of editor of the Vorwärts and at the same time make him an honorary member of the Executive. I had long been aware that this was bound to bring matters to a head; it was inevitable. They now find that he is editing the paper out of existence, for in the first place he does nothing him- self and, in the second, he is standing in the way of others who could do something. So it's scandalous that he should allow his son-in-law Geiser to write botched leading articles for it, articles of such dreary arrogance and tedious ineffectiveness as to be beyond the capabilities of anyone save their author — and this is the Geiser who, morally speaking, was chucked out of the party at St Gallen.253 For the mo- ment there's no telling how the affair will end. They have offered Liebknecht another position in which he would act both as a popular

[^1]: a the fourth German edition of The Origin of the Family, Private Properly and the State. - b of Capital





**[p. 197]**

speaker and in his earlier capacity of journalistic franc-tireur, but this he construes as a dismissal. Now they don't know how to set about pensioning him off in a decent manner, and to do so in such a way that he will accept — for that is what it really boils down to. The oddest part of all is that while the Anti-Socialist Law ' ' was in force, precluding the outbreak of this conflict, Liebknecht hardly changed at all, or at most continued along a course upon which he had long since embarked, and that the chaps now find that, upon his transfer to Berlin from his Borsdorf retreat, he no longer bears the slightest re- semblance to the Liebknecht of old — in other words Liebknecht as they had imagined him. The real point is that the others have pro- gressed and now suddenly notice the difference; they imagine that it is they who have remained as they were, which is by no means the case.

Now for something else. Stanislawa writes to tell me that Anna b

has approached Paris for money and has actually got some, or will be doing so; these attempts at extortion are really a bit thick, he says, and suggests we write to America lest there should be further useless expenditure over there on the young madame's behalf. Accordingly he has already written to you and asks me to do the same. He de- scribes her, Anna's, way of going about things as downright blackmail.

Today we have at last had a semblance of summer; the vegetation is a whole month behind and in that respect the spring is not yet properly over, though otherwise we've seen no sign of it.

Thank you for the pirated American edition. Schlüter has told me some curious things about it.254 Please thank him for his very de- tailed letter which I cannot unfortunately reply to just now.

Over here the movement is making fine progress. The UNION of GASWORKERS and GENERAL LABOURERS 164 is gradually coming to the fore, thanks above all to Tussy. The movement is advancing English- fashion, systematically, slowly but surely, and it is an odd, if highly significant phenomenon that both here and in America the people who make themselves out to be orthodox Marxists and have changed the concept of our movement into a rigid dogma to be learned by rote — that these people should figure both here and over there as a mere sect. But what is even more significant is the fact that whereas in Amer-

[^1]: Stanislaw Mendelson-b Stanislaw Padlewski



