---
Volume: 49
Document_Title: "109. Engel s to Karl Kautsky. 13 June "
Page_Range: "229-232"
---

# 109. Engel s to Karl Kautsky. 13 June 



**[p. 198]**

Regard from her, Louise and your old friend to you, your wifea

and Schlüter,

F.E.

Tussy has just told me that at Whitsuntide — when she was on the point of leaving for the GASWORKERS' congress in Dublin 247 —she too received a letter from Anna similar to the one sent to the Paris people.

N o NOTICE TAKEN, of COUr SC

Printed according to the original

Published in English in full for the first time

109

London, 13 June 1891

Dear Kautsky,

Article on Peru 224 received with thanks. Perhaps you would allow me to keep it here until I have completed the new edition11 of the Ori- gin. In another article on Negro customs in East Africac I came across a note to the effect that out there a woman's clitoris is cut off before marriage; Sam Moore wrote and told me that this peculiar custom is observed along the River Niger for a distance of more than a hundred miles, though not in his locality where he has satisfied himself as to the presence of the said organ.

First published in Briefe und Auszüge aus Briefen von Joh. Phil, Becker, Jos. Dietzgen, Friedrich Engels, Karl Marx u. A. an F.A. Sorge und Andere, Stuttgart, 1906

[^1]: ENGELS TO KARL KAUTSKY 2 5 5

[^2]: IN STUTTGART

[^3]: a Katharina Sorge - b the fourth German edition -c A. Fleischmann,'Rechtszustände in Ost-Afrika', Das Ausland, Nos. 42, 43; 20 and 27 October 1890.





**[p. 199]**

The introductiona to the new edition of the Origin is ready and I shall send it off to you next week in case you might wish to use it be- forehand for the Neue £eit. If so, please let me have the proofs — in fact, three lots—, the third will go to Rave for the French translation which is finished so far as the old edition goes. Incidentally, Rave doesn't know enough German, Strasbourger though he may be. He has made atrocious howlers, thereby involving Laura Lafargue in a colossal amount of work. I'm only surprised that she took it on at all. h

So you can inform Dietz that he won't have to wait much longer. But he might let me know the number of the new edition. The chaps have gone ahead so fast with the 5,000 copies printed in Zurich that I no longer have the slightest idea where I am. Is this the 2nd, 3rd, 4th or which edition?

The fee for Marx's article1 received with thanks and already dis- tributed. With regard to the payment for the new edition of the Pover- ty of Philosophy (and similarly for the first edition as well—for which we asked nothing at the time), perhaps you would be so good as to make provisional arrangements with Dietz. If, having done so, you then tell me what percentage of the total fee for the new edition ought to be allocated to yourselves, i.e. to you and Ede, and what percent- age to Marx's heirs, I shall be able to form a better opinion. But the pair of you mustn't lose by it.

A stop ought to be put to Grillenberger's machinations, or at any rate he should be made to pay the fees. If he publishes Marx's speech on free trade d in your joint translation, you and Ede, not to mention Clara Zetkin, must protest and I should then do the same on behalf of the heirs— as a matter of principle. As regards the Origin, I have been much delayed through having had to consult all the relevant literature. There is no bigger mutual assurance society than the specialists in prehistory. They're a bunch of scoundrels who indulge in camaraderie and cliquish boycotting on an international scale made possible by their relatively small num- bers. Now, however, a new element has entered upon the scene in the

[^1]: ' The reference is to the preface to the fourth German edition of The Origin of the Fa- mily, Private Property and the State published in Die Neue Zeil, 9. Jg. 1890/91, 2. Bd., Nr. 41 under the title 'Zur Urgeschichte der Familie (Bachofen, Mc Lennan, Morgan)' be- fore the publication of the book. See also this volume, pp. 201, 204, 215-16, 232- 33.- b See this volume, pp. 141, 144.-c Critique of the Gotha Programme -d K. Marx, 'Speech on the Question of Free Trade' (see present edition, Vol. 6, pp. 450-65).





**[p. 200]**

Yesterday Ede showed me Bebel's letter to you. You gave Simon his deserts.25s Things never turn out particularly well if one aims at 'moderation'; a punch, however, hits home. Odd the way this chap behaves as though 100% of medical men were on his side instead of perhaps 1%.

Your 'Emancipation of the 4th Volumea' is nothing by compari- son with the 'liberation from feudal seats1'' they inflicted on me in the Berlin edition of the Entwicklung des Sozialismus.c Imagine what the evolution of socialism would look like had it happened d in Berlin!

Just let the chaps get on with their programme.257 Bebel will make sure all right that none of the old Liebknechtian vulgar democratic and vulgar socialist catchwords find their way into it. It's quite a good thing that the people in Berlin should first discuss the subject amongst themselves; what they suggest can only be an improvement on the old programme and will still be open to discussion. The disen- chantment of our friends who, after a 13 years' interval, are now ob- liged to meet Liebknecht face to face again and work with him, is really too comical. While the Anti-Socialist Law ' ' was in force, he remained ensconced in Borsdorf, concerning himself with nothing save his correspondence. Now, 13 years later, the chaps find him com- pletely changed. On the contrary, he has remained as he was; it is they who have progressed and are now aware that a great chasm exists. Now nothing happens without there being a rumpus, now they find that Liebknecht is editing the paperc out of existence. He did no bet- ter by the Volksstaat, etc., but then he was helped by the others to keep the paper afloat; now they have other things to do and now they have a Liebknechtian paper tout pur,r i. e. Liebknecht and family!

Lafargue's interpretation of the Bible is very pretty — callow but original, marking the final break with the now outmoded, German- rationalist philological method. As a beginning it's all one could ask for.g

The OMNIBUS STRIKE has been won!258 At any rate on the main issue. London without omnibuses was and is an odd sort of place. Ede

[^1]: a Band (volume); misprint for Stand (estate).-b Sessel (seat); misprint for Fessel

[^2]: (bonds or shackles).-0 Socialism: Utopian and Scientific-"1 In the original: vorjefalien (Berlin dialect).-e Vorwärts-' pure and simple - s P. Lafargue, 'Der Mythus von Adam und Eva. Ein Beitrag zur vergleichenden Mythologie', Die Neue £«i, 9. Jg. 1890/91, 2. Bd., Nr. 34, 35.



