---
Volume: 49
Document_Title: "111. Engel s to Karl Kautsky. 16 June . "
Page_Range: "235-236"
---

# 111. Engel s to Karl Kautsky. 16 June . 



**[p. 204]**

wärts, I am determined to have it out, and to use their own Lassalle- veneration as the peg whereupon to hang a criticism of the man.

Sam Moore suffers off and on from African fever here — has gone into the country. Very little news from Jollymeier. Salut à Paul.

Grüsse von Louise.

Dein alter"

F.E.

First published, in the language of the Reproduced from the original original (English), in: F. Engels, P. et L. Lafargue, Correspondance, t. Ill, Paris, 1959

111

ENGELS TO KARL KAUTSKY

IN STUTTGART

London, 16 June 1891

Dear Baron,

Herewith the ms.— I leave it entirely to you whether you print the whole of it or start on p. 2 below the line where the essay proper be- gins. For title one could put: On the Early History of the Family: Bac- hofen, Mc Lennan, Morgan. By F. E., or something of the sort, followed by the note: introduction to the x-th edition of the Origin, etc. b

As the ms. ended up by being highly illegible, thanks to numerous interruptions, I do beg you to send me a proof— and, as already men- tioned, an extra copy for Rave who is all agog to get it.

The revision of the book itself is going ahead as quickly as my other correspondence permits. I'm itching to get on with it.

I almost wish that the Berliners would turn down Ede's introduc- tion to the Lassallec so that he can deal with the matter more tho- roughly and with greater freedom in the Neue %eit. How little is known in Germany of the real Lassalle is apparent from the case of Ede himself. Lassalle's letters to Marx, however innocuous they may

[^1]: a Regards from Louise, Your old friend -'' See this volume, pp. 199,201,215-16,232- 33.- r See previous letter.



