---
Volume: 49
Document_Title: "112. Engel s to Pasquale Martignetti. 19 June "
Page_Range: "236-237"
---

# 112. Engel s to Pasquale Martignetti. 19 June 



**[p. 205]**

seem to many people, as also the need to contemplate the man in the round, have thrown quite a new light on him so far as he, Ede, is con- cerned. But what the Berliners want more than anything else is peace in the party and that is hardly compatible with freedom to criticise. This is doubly disagreeable for them as they are at loggerheads with the Soldiera and as yet can see no way out of it. But in that case they ought to dispense with new editions of Lassalle. Enfin,b everything will doubtless get back on an even keel again.

Your

F.E.

First published in Aus der Frühzeit des Printed according to the original Marxismus. Engels Briefwechsel mit Kautsky, *, , ,. , • • ^ Prap l Q ^ Published in English for the first time

112

ENGELS TO PASQUALE MARTIGNETTI

London, 19 June 1891

Dear Friend,

Today I am sending you

1. registered, your manuscript of the translation of Wage Labour and Capital,c

2. corrected proofs of the new edition0 separately by book post, 3. Labriola's letter enclosed herewith. I'm busy revising the new edition of the Origin of the Family, etc.' which will have numerous additions.

A new, complete edition of Wage Labour and Capital will follow as

[^1]: IN BERGAMO

[^2]: * Wilhelm Liebknecht - b Still - r K. Marx, Capitale e salaria colla biografia dell'- autore e con una introduzione di F. Engels. Prima traduzione italiana di P. Martignet- ti. -d K. Marx, Lohnarbeit und Kapital. Separat - Abdruck aus der Neuen Rheinischen Zei- tung vom Jahre 1849. Mit einer Einleitung von Friedrich Engels. - c the fourth German edition of The Origin of the Family, Private Property and the State.



