---
Volume: 49
Document_Title: "113. Engel s to Victor Adler. 26 June "
Page_Range: "237-238"
---

# 113. Engel s to Victor Adler. 26 June 



**[p. 206]**

I trust you are getting on all right in Bergamo; I'e una bella città, la conossi — I'ha appresi di parla '/ Meneghin, lu?"

Saludi

F. Engels

First published in: Marx and Engels, Printed according to the original Works, Second Russian Edition, Vol. 38, „ , , . , , - ^ ,• i r , r ,.. .„„- Published in English lor the first Moscow, 1965 . &

time

113

ENGELS TO VICTOR ADLER 2 6 1

IN VIENNA

[Draft]

[London, 26 June 1891]

Dear Adler,

I would request you to pass on to the conveners of the Austrian So- cial-Democratic Party's Second Congress my sincere thanks for their kind invitation to this your party congress and to convey to them my regrets at being unable to attend in person as also my best wishes for a successful outcome to the proceedings.

Since Hainfeld, when the Austrian Workers' Party came into its own again, you have made immense progress. That is the best guar- antee that your Second Party Congress will be the point of departure for even more significant triumphs.

How invincible is our party's inner strength is evident not only from the rapid succession of external victories, not only from the fact that last year in Germany, just as this year in Austria, it overcame the state of emergency. 262 This, its strength, is even more evident in the party's ability in every country to surmount obstacles and accomplish things in the face of which the other parties, who are recruited from

[^1]: a It's a beautiful town, I know it—have you learnt how to talk like the Milanese?



