---
Volume: 49
Document_Title: "115. Engel s to Karl Kautsky. 29 June "
Page_Range: "240-243"
---

# 115. Engel s to Karl Kautsky. 29 June 



**[p. 209]**

mille can do very much other than appoint a guardian. Tussy must have written to Laura.

We have old Harney here. He has spent a month in Ventnor where he got rid of his chronic bronchitis but had a recurrence of rheumatic gout. We brought him here yesterday in a cab. He is full of aches and woes, poor devil, but perks up whenever the aches subside. He will be returning to Richmond in a day or so.

Pumps has a small but pretty house with a garden FRONT AND BACK, heaps of fruit of every kind, vegetables, even potatoes; greenhouse with vines laden with grapes, etc. It is splendid for the children, but will Percy manage to do any business? His brothers don't appear to be in any hurry to back him up with the necessary materials. Anyway we shall see.

Pumps, Percy and Harney send their best wishes to you and Laura as do I.

Yours ever,

F.E.

First published, in English, in Labour Printed according to the original Monthly, No. 9, London, 1955 „ , , . , „ 1 ranslated from the r rcnch

115

[Ryde, 29 June 1891]

Dear Kautsky,

than I was landed with the party programme, which had to be attend- ed to. 269 I meant at first to try rewriting the preamble in rather more succinct form but want of time prevented my doing so, besides which I thought it more important to point out the shortcomings,

[^1]: ENGELS TO KARL KAUTSKY 2 6 7

[^2]: IN STUTTGART

[^3]: I have come down here to take refuge with Pumps for a few days 264 having been inundated with an intolerable amount of work. No sooner had I become happily engrossed in group marriage268





**[p. 210]**

some avoidable, others not, of the political part, as this would provide me with an opportunity to lash out at the conciliatory opportunism of the Vorwärts and the clean-devout-joyous-freea 'ingrowing' of the old canker 'into socialist society'. I have since heard of your proposal that there should be a new preamble; so much the better.

The party is going to print Lassalle's letters to Marx and myself, annotated by me 2 6 0 (thus precluding all censorship by the party). I can attend to this in the autumn, alongside Volume III. b (This be- tween ourselves.)

I have taken refuge here in order to finish off part of my corre- spondence; on Thursdayc I go home, when work on group marriage will be resumed. I was getting along so nicely — confound these inter- ruptions!

Poverty of Philosophy — the position is that Dietz is to buy himself out for 450 marks, whereupon negotiations will be restricted to the four of us, so all is well and we shall be able to sort things out all right. But there can be no question of you two refusing to take any remu- neration for the 2nd edition.

Dietz's plan for a volume of Marx's minor works won't do. Long ago Liebknecht cherished a pet project of this sort; it was to be put into effect by his latest protégé, Paul Ernst, who was also to publish other things of Marx's and, IN FACT, to be sent to me for a few months so that I could help him in this. The idea was for the thing to be pub- lished by the Berlin bookseller under the party's imprint — i.e. an edition of Marx alongside an edition of Lassalle. I turned this down categorically, which means that I can do no less where Dietz is con- cerned. I have permitted the party to publish a few minor things of Marx's in pamphlet form and as individual items, without notes or preface. Nor can I go any further than that. I cannot allow them to steal a march on me by bringing out in this piecemeal fashion the complete edition to whose ultimate publication / am committed.

Nor, for that matter, can I now contemplate a new edition of the Condition, etc.,d not, at any rate, until Volume III is completed. I am perfectly prepared to negotiate this with Dietz in due course, but the chaps have simply got to realise that I can take on absolutely nothing more until Volume III has gone to press. While it is in printing, ar- rangements can be made for something else. But until then I shall re- sist all incitements and pet projects, whether they emanate from

[^1]: a A catchword used by German gymnasts. - b of Capital-' 2July- d ¥. Engeh, The Con- dition of the Working-Class in England.





**[p. 211]**

Vollmar's speech 27° with its quite unnecessary concessions to the present Establishment and its still more unnecessary, and, what's more, unauthorised assurances that Social-Democrats would play their part if the Fatherland were attacked — i.e. would help defend the annexation of Alsace-Lorraine — has caused unmitigated glee amongst our opponents over here and in France. If it is allowed to pass, our chaps will have to pay very dearly for it in Brussels. ' 3 5 The Possibilists 3 and the Hyndmen are quarrying it for notes, after their usual fashion, nor can we over here do anything about it in the ab- sence of an authentic statement denying Vollmar the right to speak in the name of the party. 2 7 ' Now, as Hyndman's man of straw, Bax has recently written on the subject in Justice; I haven't seen it yet. 272

The meeting of women in labour in Hyde Park 273 has caused con- siderable merriment here and in London — the English version even more than the German because of the play on words in DEMANDING A RERave's address is Faubourg Rochereuil, Poitiers, France. Pumps now lives down here; Percy has taken on an agency for his brothers. Their little house, The Firs, is in Brading Road, exactly one English mile outside the town. It's small but pretty and has a garden [with]a vegetables and fruit. Old Harney spent four weeks at Vent- nor where he had a recurrence of gout and rheumatism. We fetched him over here on Saturday; he will probably travel back with me on Thursday and return to his headquarters in Richmond. He is terribly lame and out of sorts.

Schorlemmer will probably soon be with us. As you know, he's a very uncommunicative correspondent. While over here, Sam Moore has suffered from African malarial fever but is now better again. In August or September he will be returning to the Niger. In his heart of hearts, I believe, he yearns after the beautiful climate — despite the bouts of fever which recur with menstrual regularity.

[^1]: DUCTION OF THE HOURS o E LABOUR which, more specifically, can mean travail: A WOMAN IN LABOUR.

[^2]: a Manuscript damaged.



