---
Volume: 49
Document_Title: "116. Engel s to Conrad Schmidt. 1 July "
Page_Range: "243-246"
---

# 116. Engel s to Conrad Schmidt. 1 July 



**[p. 212]**

Your

F.E.

First published in Aus der Frühzeit des Printed according to the original Marxismus. Engels Briefwechsel mit Kautsky, T. i •• • i • TI I- • • ,- n <• • p . „ „ . rubhshed in hnglish in lull lor the first time

116

ENGELS TO CONRAD SCHMIDT 2 6 7

IN ZURICH

Ryde, Isle of Wight, l July 1891

Dear Schmidt,

I have taken refuge here for a few days. 264 Pumps is now living in this place where her husband has taken on an agency and, since my work had become altogether too much for me, I have come to stay with her for a few days if only to get a breath of fresh air and to deal with the most pressing correspondence. Tomorrow I go back to Lon- don again.

I have before me your two letters of 5 March and 18 June. You would be well-advised not to finish your work on the credit system and the money market until Volume III a comes out; in it you will find much that is new on these topics and still more that yet remains to be explored — new solutions, that is, and new tasks. As soon as my sum- mer holiday is over, I shall set to work unremittingly on Volume III.— Your second project — the transitional stages on the way to a communist society — is worth thinking about, but my advice to you is nonum prematur in annum b; it's the most difficult subject on earth be- cause conditions are constantly changing. For instance, every new

[^1]: of Capital-b Let it be kept quiet till the ninth year (Horace, Ars Poelica, 388).





**[p. 213]**

trust causes them to change while the vantage points never remain the same from one decade to the next.

Your latest academic adventures in Zurich are exceedingly funny. 274 These gentlemen are everywhere alike. Well, I hope you will eventually succeed, to the mortification of the whole of that clique, and thus at long last be left in peace.

I found Barth's booka a great disappointment, having expected something a bit less superficial and makeshift. A man who assesses every philosopher, not in accordance with what is enduring and progressive in his work, but in accordance with what is of necessity transitory and reactionary, in accordance with the system, would have done better to hold his peace. For according to him the history of phi- losophy is nothing but a 'heap of rubble', the detritus of exploded sys- tems. Old Hegel stands head and shoulders above this, his supposed critic! And then he believes himself to be criticising Hegel if here and there he succeeds in detecting one of the false starts which Hegel, like any other systematic philosopher, is bound to make in hammering out a system for himself. What a colossal discovery — that Hegel occa- sionally rolls into one what are contrary and contradictory opposites! I could put him on the track of some far better wheezes if only I could be bothered. The man's what we in the Rhineland call a Korinthen- sckeisserb; he reduces everything to insignificance and until he gets out ofthat habit he will, to use Hegel's words, 'come to nothing, from nothing, through nothing'.'

His critique of Marx is truly comical! First he concocts a material- istic theory of history such as, in his opinion, Marx ought to have had, only to discover that Marx's writings say something quite different. From this, however, he does not deduce that he, Barth, has put a wrong construction upon Marx — far from it; but that, on the con- trary, Marx contradicts himself and is incapable of applying his own theory! 'Oh, if only these people could read Y as Marx used to exclaim when confronted by criticism of this kind.

I have not got the book here; if I had time I could point out to you hundreds more absurdities of the same nature. It is a pity, for one can see that the man might be capable of something if he were not in such a hurry to pass judgment. Let us hope he will soon write something

[^1]: " P. Barth, Die Geschichlsphilosophie Hegel's und der Hegelianer bis auf Marx und Hart- mann. -b i.e. someone who trivialises everything -c G. W. F. Hegel, Wissenschaft der Logik, Th. I, Abt. 2. In: Werke, Bd. IV, Berlin, 1841, S. 15, 75, 146.





**[p. 214]**

upon which more attacks will be launched; a really sound drubbing would do him good.

As for me, I am very well — better than this time last year and shall, I think, be quite fit again after a bit of a holiday. If only one could work with fewer interruptions! 2 or 3 months ago I set to work on the new edition of the Origin of the Family, etc.a and should have finished it in a fortnight had it not been for the arrival of the new draft pro- gramme which they wanted me to criticise,269 on top of which all sorts of little ineptitudes were perpetrated on the- Continent, thus making it more difficult for us here in England — where the material is good but needs careful handling — to pave the way for the Brussels Con- gress, 135 etc. All this tends to throw me off course again and to dis- tract me, and yet the thing must not only be almost entirely revised and brought up to date, but must also he finished if I am to get down to Volume III. WELL, since it's got to be managed somehow, managed it will be.

You'd almost think yourself in Prussia here. On Sunday b we en- countered 4 or 5 sailors from the Stosch, splendid fellows, very well able to stand comparison with the English MANOF-WARS MEN; this morn- ing, constant rumbling of guns and explosions of shells from the gun- nery practice at the Portsmouth forts.

Many kind regards from Pumps, Percy and

Your old friend

F. Engels

[^1]: First published in Sozialistische Monatshefte, Printed according to the original Nr. 22, Berlin, 1920

[^2]: Published in English in full for the first time

[^3]: a the fourth German edition of The Origin of the Family, Private Property and the State - b 28 June



