---
Volume: 49
Document_Title: "120. Engel s to Laura Lafargue. 20 July ' "
Page_Range: "251-253"
---

# 120. Engel s to Laura Lafargue. 20 July ' 



**[p. 220]**

be made, I incline to Tussy's proposal to put nothing but the name. Then the inscription would run

In memory of Jenny Marx

and of Karl Marx

and of Harry Longuet

also of Helen Demuth Born January 1st 1823, Died November 4th 1890 What do you think?

First published, in the language of the Reproduced from the original original (English), in F. Engels, P. et L. Lafargue, Correspondance, t. Ill, Paris, 1959

120

ENGELS TO LAURA LAFARGUE

London, 20 July 1891

My dear Laura,

The Culine business is very bad indeed—worthy of the fellow's name282—but what's to be done? With such a weapon in Constans' hands, we can only hold our tongues.

Louise went on Wednesdaya and Jollymeier came on Saturday, but he is getting more and more Tristymeier, you have to work very hard to get a smile out of him now. Anyhow I'll try my best.

Paul asks me to send you a cheque, so enclosed £20; please let me know the receipt. I send it off quick because Jollymeier is still out at

[^1]: AT LE PERREUX

[^2]: a 15 July





**[p. 1959]**

his walk, so if I close this letter all of a sudden, you will know the rea- son why.

We are preparing a tour at sea, but have not made up our plans yet, and I have not yet finished my ms.a—but am at the last addition as far as I can see. Hope to have done by Wednesday b at latest.

Paul thinks Tussy is troubling herself more than necessary about Brussels 135—I don't think so. Everything may go well, and probably will go well if everybody comes up to the scratch, but I have too much experience of such congresses, not to know how easily every- thing can go wrong. The Belgians have convoked for the 18th Au- gust281 Tuesday, instead of Sunday 16th—if our people come on the 18th and the (Possibilists) Broussists and Hyndmanites on the 16th, they can play ducks and drakes with everything. Tussy has written yesterday to Volders but these fellows never even reply! As to what the English will do, that's mere toss-up; from Germany almost cer- tainly Vollmar will come and intrigue; what the small countries are you know: not to be trusted across the road. And one mistake on our part, one neglected opportunity, may cause us unnecessary but un- avoidable work for years to come.

And then there is that irrepressible Bonnier who point-blank inform- ed me that Guesde and he were going to go in for a restoration of the old International with a Central Council. I told him point-blank that that was putting everything in the hands of the Belgians (the only possible Central Council) knowing what sort of people they were; it was ruining every chance of the movement here in England for a couple of years by a foolish attempt to precipitate matters not ripe for action; and in fact the best means of setting French, English and Germans at loggerheads one with the other. He seemed abashed, but who can guess what he and Guesde may do in their enthusiasm?

Viele Grüsse von Jollymeier und

F.E.

[^1]: Deinem alten1

[^2]: First published, in the language of the Rcprodueed from the original original (English), in: F. Engels, P. et L. Lafargue, Correspondance, t. Ill, Paris,

[^3]: cl the fourth German edition of The Origin of the Family, Private Property and the Slate- '' 22 July- 1 Best greetings from Jollymeier and your old friend



