---
Volume: 49
Document_Title: "121. Engel s to Victor Adler. 22 July "
Page_Range: "253-254"
---

# 121. Engel s to Victor Adler. 22 July 



**[p. 121]**

ENGELS TO VICTOR ADLER

IN VIENNA

London, 22 July 1891

Dear Adler,

In order to give the Austrians more than an academic token of my sympathy, I have told Dietz to credit you—to use an Austrian expres- sion3—with half the fees for the new editionb of the Origin of the Fa- mily, etc. for your party funds. Let us hope no drastic diarrhetic will be required to bring this about. When you will get it and how much you will get at a time (it may be paid by instalments), I cannot say. For every 1,000 copies printed he pays 50 marks, of which you will get 25.

When you enter this on your printed receipts, I should like you to put 'from F. E. in London, such and such a sum', without any further particulars.

Just one more thing: Louise has agreed, should you be able to pro- cure her a mandate, which should surely not be difficult, to accom- pany you to the general mounting of the guard in Brussels.155 But this was on the tacit understanding that she would bring you and Be- bel or you, at any rate, back to London with her for a few days. And I hope she will succeed in doing so. I shall have returned here by then and shall eagerly await your advent. For in that case, who knows what you mightn't be able to persuade me to do next year? So not too much head-scratching—and bring your wifec with you!

Your old friend

F. Engels

[^1]: First published in Victor Adlers Aufsätze, Printed according to the book Reden und Briefe. Erstes Heft: Victor Adler , ,. , . , „ . , . , _ , ,„„_ Published in hnghsh lor the hrst und Friedrich Engels, Wien, 1922

[^2]: time a Engels uses the word 'abfiihreri which can also mean 'purge'- b the fourth German edition-' Emma Adler



