---
Volume: 49
Document_Title: "122. Engels to Emma Adler. 22 July "
Page_Range: "254-255"
---

# 122. Engels to Emma Adler. 22 July 



**[p. 122]**

ENGELS TO EMMA ADLER

IN VIENNA

London, 22 July 1891

Dear Mrs Adler,

This year, alas, nothing is likely to come of the trip to the Conti- nent which I should dearly like to make, if only to come and see you at Lunz and convince you that I can indeed eat Austrian food, and with very good appetite, as Louise can testify; she never dresses a sal- ad for me save after the Viennese fashion. But if I don't come and see you, there is, after all, another alternative. Perhaps you will accom- pany Victor to Brussels,135 in which case we could make one an- other's acquaintance just as well here in London. Brussels is but a stone's throw from here, so what do you think? If, however, you should not go to Brussels, could you not authorise your husband to spend a few days over here to recuperate from the wear and tear of the world con- gress? That sort ofthing is a tremendous strain, and spending a few days in London after it would greatly benefit his health.

The African Chief Justice, Sam Moore, has just arrived, and I must stop—do please come. Louise is sure to coax you into it—but if you cannot, then send your deputy.

Kisses to your dear children about whom Louise has told me so much.

Very sincerely yours,

F. Engels

[^1]: First published in Victor Adlers Aufsätze, Reden und Briefe. Erstes Heft: Victor Adler und Friedrich Engels, Wien, 1922

[^2]: Printed according to the book

[^3]: Published in English for the first time



