---
Volume: 49
Document_Title: "123. Engel s to Friedrich Adolph Sorge. 9- 11 August "
Page_Range: "255-258"
---

# 123. Engel s to Friedrich Adolph Sorge. 9- 11 August 



**[p. 123]**

ENGELS T O FRIEDRICH ADOLPH SORGE 160

IN MOUNT DESERT

Ryde, Isle of Wight, 9 August 1891

Dear Sorge,

Your two letters of 14 and 20 July have been forwarded to me here. I and Schorlemmer have been spending the past two weeks here with Pumps 264 whose husband is the agent here for his brothers. Shall be going home in about a week.

Am very grateful for the information re the Journal of the Knights of Labor—I have such a mass of newspapers to go through that, without such advice, I should often find it very difficult to get my bearings. Also re Gompers and Sanial283—most important, this, since I might run into them in London.

Annaa will have to look to her own future; this nonsense is really too much.

The Possibilist-Hyndmanian racket will probably take a hard knock at the Brussels Congress.135 The split in the ranks of the Paris Possibilists 3 has completely cut the ground from under Brousse's feet. In the provinces they count for nothing while in Paris the majority support Allemane against Brousse.53 This has resulted in the Possibi- lists of both complexions losing control of their last great vantage point, the bourse du travail.51 Or so the Socialiste of 24 July says.284

The Brussels chaps who are, in their heart of hearts, themselves Possi- bilists and have stood by the latter as long as they could, have made a complete volte face281; they aim at becoming the General Council of a new International and are paying court to the all-transcendent 'Marxists'; hence the comical lamentations of the 'friends' they have left in the lurch in Paris and London. I fear, I fear that Mr Hyndman will cease to be our official 'enemy' and will try and make out that he

[^1]: a Stanislaw Padlewski





**[p. 225]**

is our 'friend'. T h a t would be a bad thing; we haven't got the time to keep a constant eye on a schemer like him.

Tussy, Aveling, Thorne and other members of the GASWORKERS, 1 6 4

Sanders (John Burns' secretary) and sundry others of our English supporters are going to Brussels. How things stand as regards the old

TRADES UNIONS, I do not know.

T h e DOCKERS are going to pot. Though the success of their STRIKE was due solely and entirely to the £30,000, contributed in a fit of mis- guided enthusiasm by Australia, they imagine it was their own do- ing. 1 9 8 Hence they are making one mistake after another, the most recent being to close their lists and refuse to accept any more mem- bers, i. e. breed their own SCABS. Then they rejected a merger with the

GASWORKERS. M a n y are DOCKERS in summer and GASWORKERS in winter. Having regard to these alternating occupations, the GASWORKERS pro- posed that a member's TICKET for one UNION should be valid for both— nothing doing! So far the GASWORKERS have nevertheless continued to honour the DOCKERS' TICKET—but how long they will do so is hard to say. Again, the DOCKERS are protesting vociferously against the immig- ration of FOREIGN PAUPERS (Russian Jews). Of their leaders, T o m Mann is a good chap but unbelievably weak, while his nomination as a member of the ROYAL. COMMISSION ON LABOUR has all but turned his head; Ben Tillett is an ambitious intriguer, no funds are available, membership is rapidly dwindling, discipline gone by the board.

A week ago someone wrote to me from St Petersburg saying: ' W E ARE ON THE EVE or A FAMINE.'a This was substantiated yesterday by the ban- ning of the export of grain from Russia. In the first place, this will en- sure us a year's peace; with famine in the land, the Tsar may well rat- tle his sabre, but he won't unsheathe it. But if, as seems probable, Gladstone comes to power here next year, an attempt will be made to persuade England and France to consent to the closing of the Darda- nelles to all fleets, even in time of war, i. e. prevent the Sultan from obtaining assistance against Russia. So that's the next item on the oriental agenda.

In the second place, however, the Russian ban on the export of grain means extending the famine to rye-eating Germany; only Russia can make good Germany's colossal deficit in rye. But this would mean the complete collapse of Germany's grain tariff policy, which in turn would mean a whole series of political convulsions. For instance, the landed

[^1]: See this volume, p. 230.





**[p. 226]**

aristocracy cannot forego its protective tariffs without also undermin- ing the industrial tariffs of the middle classes. The protectionist par- ties will lose credit and the whole situation be totally altered. And our party will grow tremendously — the failure of this har- vest will put us five years ahead of schedule, quite apart from the fact that it will prevent a war which would claim a hundred times more lives.

These two aspects will, in my opinion, temporarily dominate Euro- pean politics, and if Schlüter would care to draw attention to this in the Volkszeitung? it would be very useful. As soon as the Congress135

is over, I shall also bring it up in the European press. Only I cannot, of course, be responsible for what others in Germany will make of the information I have supplied.

I am glad that Mount Desert is, as always, doing you good. I, too, am feeling the benefit of the sea air — only here in Europe the weather is so uncertain that one can't really plan anything. Schor- lemmer sends his regards. I won't finish this letter off yet as there may be something more to tell you tomorrow.

II August. The ban on the export of grain from Russia is not yet official but is almost a certainty; we may expect an official proclama- tion.

In East Prussia there have been 2 parliamentary elections — we gained an enormous number of votes. So we have at last opened up the rural areas — cela marcheh\285 With the help of the price rise we may well see something happen there by 1900, unless we kick the bucket first.

Louise Kautsky is in Vienna, will be going to Brussels with a Vien- nese mandate, and will bring Adler back to London with her and also perhaps Bebel; I have written to him in Switzerland but have not yet had a reply.

Tussy's report to the Brussels Congress on behalf of the GASWORKERS and others is very good 286; I shall send it you. Tussy is going to Brus- sels with a mandate from the Dublin Congress 247 of the GASWORKERS and GENERAL LABOURERS and will thus be representing 100,000 men.

[^1]: a JVew Yorker Volkszeitung -b Things have got going.



