---
Volume: 49
Document_Title: "124. Engel s to Laura Lafargue. 17 August "
Page_Range: "258-261"
---

# 124. Engel s to Laura Lafargue. 17 August 



**[p. 227]**

, Your old friend

F.E.

First published abridged in Briefe und Printed according to the original Auszüge aus Briefen von loh. Phil. Becker, , , . . -, n - , C J J . 1 7 / f / i , f Published in English in lull lor the Joj. Uietzgen, Friedrich Engels, Karl Marx . ° u. A. an F. A. Sorge und Andere, Stuttgart,

1906 and in full in: Marx and Engels, Works, First Russian Edition, Vol. XXVIII, Moscow, 1940

124

ENGELS TO LAURA LAFARGUE

AT LE PERREUX

Ryde, 17 August 1891 The Firs, Brading Road

My dear Laura,

We are still here, Schorlemmer and I, awaiting fine weather which is very slow to come; now and then we have had a fine day and could venture on an excursion but on the whole we had our enterprising spirits damped by the glorious uncertainty which is common to the law and the climate of England; not a few times, too, damped and even wetted by but too certain rain. Anyhow we may thank our stars that our plan[s] of circumnavigating this island (not Wight, which we have twice sailed round but Great Britain) were nipped in the bud, for we should have caught it and well too. So we are here admiring the British Fleet which is moored opposite us and awaiting the French which is to come up the day after tomorrow.

So poor Paul has entered upon his term of Ste Pélagie 287 — I hope he'll keep his spirits up! It's a long bout of enforced rest, but then France c'est l'imprévu b and nobody knows what will turn up within

[^1]: 1 Katharina Sorge - b is unpredictable





**[p. 228]**

Our Russian friend a wrote to me about 3 weeks ago: 'We are on the eve of a famine', and indeed that prophecy has been but too soon fulfilled. While the French Chauvins and Russian pan-Slavists frater- nise and hurrah at each other,288 this fact nullifies all their demon- strations. With a famine at home, the Czar cannot fight. The utmost he will do is to use the present mood of the French bourgeois for his own ends, by blustering and threatening, but he will not strike a blow, and if the French bourgeois should go too far, he will leave them to shift for themselves. What the Russian government aims at, at present, is the closing of the Dardanelles in time of war to all navies. That he will get the French to subscribe to, and then, when Glad- stone comes in here, as is hoped, at next general election, the grand old Russophile is to be coaxed into agreeing to it too. With the two great naval powers bound hand and foot by such an agreement, the Czar is master of Constantinople which he can surprise any day, and the Sultan is but the Czar's care-taker on the Bosporus. That is the plan, to which the bourgeois republic at Paris is to act the part of cat's-paw, and when it has done its duty as such, it may go to the de- vil for aught the Czar cares. That is the reason why the Czar submit- ted to listen to the Marseillaise and to humour the representatives of a Republic.

Anyhow, peace is assured — unless some people turn crazy — for this and the greater part of next year. That is the principal effect of the famine in Russia.

But there are others. There will be internal commotions in Russia, and they may lead to a change; it is even likely they will cause some change, bring about some movement in that pool of stagnation; but it may be, that this is not only le commencement de la fin mais la fin elle-même.,''

In Germany the failure of the crop seems certain too, and there the present and still rising famine prices will bring about the breakdown

[^1]: " N. F. Danielson, see this volume, p. 230. - b the beginning of the end, but the end it- self





**[p. 229]**

According to The Standard of to-day,289 neither Hyndman nor Brousse had turned up, and Allemane was to take charge of the Possi- bilists.3 So as far as that class of opposition is concerned, it looks like a walk-over for our people. That question once disposed of, there will remain but little real work for the Congress; unless the various velle- ities of a restoration of the 'International' venture to come out.a I hope they will not, for that would cause new splits and throw us back, here in England at least, for years to come. The thing is an absurdity in every respect, especially so long as neither in France nor in England there is one strong and united party. If that were the case, and both united heart and soul with the Germans, then the end would be ob- tained without any formal union, the moral effect of the three great western nations acting together would suffice. But so long as that can- not be, all attempts at restoring an International would bring one of the petty nations, probably the Belgians, into an undeserved promi- nency and end in quarrels. The fact is, the movement is too great, too vast to be confined by such hampering bonds. Still, there is a hanker- ing after this restoration and Bonnier was full of it last time I saw him. Certainly he looked rather perplexed when I told him my objections and had not a word to say — but will that stop him and his friends in Brussels?

On Thursday b I expect to be back in London; Adler will come from Brussels for a few days, perhaps also Bebel. As soon as I am in- formed about the Brussels proceedings I shall send you a letter for Paul, in the meantime kind regards to both of you from Schorlem- mer, the Pumpses and

Yours ever,

F. Engels

[^1]: See this volume, p. 221. - b 20 August



