---
Volume: 49
Document_Title: "125. Engels to Nikolai Danielson. 2 September "
Page_Range: "261-262"
---

# 125. Engels to Nikolai Danielson. 2 September 



**[p. 230]**

Had letter from Tussy from Brussels, but written before Sunday's meeting.135 Shall not know anything of what happened by the time this has to be posted. 18th August, 11 in the morning.

First published, in the language of the Reproduced from the original original (English), in: F. Engels, P. et I.. Lafargue, Correspondance, t. Ill, Paris, 1959

125

ENGELS TO NIKOLAI DANIELSON

IN ST PETERSBURG

London, 2 September 1891

My dear Sir,

Your prophecy about the famine has but too soon been verified, and we here in England, too, will have to suffer severely. The crop seemed excellent on the whole, when about 10 days ago terrible weather set in—just as corn cutting began in the South of Eng- land— and played terrible havoc with both cut and uncut corn, 20 to 30 per cent of the crop are said to be severely damaged if not ruined. There is but one advantage connected with this calamity: it will render a war impossible for some 20 months to come, and that, in the present state of universal armament and mutual distrust, is a blessing.

Allow me to return, on another occasion, to your very interesting communication of 1 May.291 Today I am on the eve of a journey and my principal object is to request you in future to address all your let- ters to

Mrs Kautsky, 122 Regent's Park Road, N. W. London. The letters will be handed to me unopened, so there is no necessity for a second cover [enveloppe). The fact is I shall be so often absent from London264 that I am afraid letters addressed in the usual way might

[^1]: Today I return to you six more letters which include everything to end of 1878 — remainder will follow.290



