---
Volume: 49
Document_Title: "126. Engels to Friedrich Adolp h Sorge. 2 September "
Page_Range: "262-265"
---

# 126. Engels to Friedrich Adolp h Sorge. 2 September 



**[p. 231]**

My health is on the whole excellent; but I require once a year a hol- iday of about eight weeks and a considerable change of air. A sea voyage is always the best remedy for me. If I keep as well as I expect to be in a month, I shall set at once about the 3rd volume,3 it must be finished. But I better not make any promises as to time.

Very truly yours,

P.W. Rosherb

First published, in Russian, in Minuvshiye Reproduced from the original gody, No. 2, St Petersburg, 1908

Published in English for the first time

126

ENGELS TO FRIEDRICH ADOLPH SORGE 16°

London, 2 September 1891

Dear Sorge,

I have shown your letter about Mrs Schlüter0 to Louise Kautsky who may be relied on implicitly and is acquainted with the circum- stances. She takes the view that Mrs Schlüter has simply fired a warn- ing shot and that she'll come back to him all right, providing Schlüter refuses to be intimidated. Nor does she believe that a third party would be required to nudge her into a decision of this kind. She did the same thing several times in Zurich — or something like it. Admit- tedly Schlüter's repeated infidelities have given her cause to rebel, but she regularly forgives him and the only people to suffer are those who take her wrath and her fulminations seriously. Louise is the last person to side with Schlüter in this affair or even excuse him — she and all of us know exactly what to expect of him in this respect — his

[^1]: IN HOBOKEN

[^2]: " of Capital -b Engels' conspiratorial pseudonym - ' Anna Schlüter





**[p. 232]**

The Bernsteins return from Eastbourne today. Sanial and Mac Vey are here and will be calling on me tomorrow. I was in Ryde264

for a month staying with Pumps and accompanied by Schorlemmer who, however, is now back in Manchester. Every time he has a cold he goes extremely deaf and is no good for anything; otherwise there's nothing wrong with him. I am keeping well but shall have to get out and about a bit more if I am to bring myself fully up to the mark again. Adler from Vienna and also Bebel were here for 3 days, very cheerful and satisfied with the Congress.135

I have sent you a pile of documents as well as the Weekly Dispatch containing the interview Mother Crawford had with Liebknecht in Paris.292 That interview will cause a rumpus; at any rate Liebknecht talked a great deal of nonsence. From all I hear he has-grown quite thin! He looks rotten and is apparently at loggerheads with everyone; in Brussels he kept himself quite apart from the Germans and Au- strians. Again, the best of our chaps are amazed at the disagreement that exists between him and the vast majority of the party on vir- tually every point. His editing of the Vorwärts has been quite deplor- able, he has done nothing himself, has got Geiser to write leading ar- ticles for it, and has propounded the most peculiar views, in short there's the making of a catastrophe here and it may come all the sooner as a result of that interview.

The old dispute with the Broussists,3 etc., has fizzled out; the Broussists were not represented at all in Brussels, nor did Hyndman dare go, while the people he did send squabbled and made asses of themselves; he now seeks a prop in Nieuwenhuis who has gone off his head, but that won't get him anywhere. In matters of principle as of tactics the Marxists have been victorious all along the line; the intri- guing will still go on behind the scenes and their attacks on me, the Avelings, etc., in Justice will, I trust, continue as before, but there is no longer any public opposition to us as a whole.

The Volks- Tribune's account of the Congress is the most detailed." I have already read 6 proof-sheets of the new edition of the Origin of

[^1]: " 'Internationaler sozialistischer Arbeiter-Kongreß', Berliner Volks-Tribüne, supple- ments, Nos. 34, 35; 22 and 29 August 1891.





**[p. 233]**

the Family, etc.* Besides the new introduction, there will be many ad- ditions in Chapter 2 b ('Family') and also a few later on.

The Brussels Congress ' 3 5 has again ratified the Hague resolu- tions 2 9 3 in that it too has thrown out the anarchists. That ought to be emphasised in the press over there. O n the other hand it has left the door wide open to the English TRADES UNIONS and no doubt the better ones among them will walk in through it before long. These are the two most important resolutions. It's delicious that the English should now be the most reactionary of all, and that for their sake things have to be toned down! But we can afford to do so, for it is now merely a question of months, or at most a year or two, before they come round. True, the next TRADES UNIONS Congress will try to overturn the

LEGAL EIGHT HOURS resolution passed at Liverpool2 7 but even if this succeeds — with the help of the textile workers who swear by 10 hours — it will only add more fuel to the flames. Things are mov- ing— there's nothing more for us to do.

Kind regards to your wife.'

Your

F.E.

[^1]: First published abridged in Briefe und Auszüge aus Briefen von Jvh. Phil. Becker, Jos. Dielzgen, Friedrich Engels, Karl Marx u.A. an F.A.Sorge und Andere, Stuttgart, 1906 and in full in: Marx and Engels, Works, First Russian Edition, Vol. XXVIII, Moscow, 1940

[^2]: Printed according to the original

[^3]: Published in English in full for the first time

[^4]: " the fourth German edition. See also this volume, pp. 199, 201, 204, 215- 16. -b Chapter 3 in the manuscript-1 Katharina Sorge



