---
Volume: 49
Document_Title: "128. Engel s to Friedrich Adolph Sorge. 14 September "
Page_Range: "268-270"
---

# 128. Engel s to Friedrich Adolph Sorge. 14 September 



**[p. 128]**

ENGELS TO FRIEDRICH ADOLPH SORGE 2 6 7

IN HOBOKEN

Helensburgh, Scotland, 14 September 1891

Dear Sorge,

I'm up here on a lightning tour264 with Pumps and Louise Kaut- sky; the past week has been spent either in the Highlands or on the water and it has done me a power of good. We shall be home a week from now.

There's nothing one can do about the Schlüters. He can't help chasing after this petticoat or that and shea can't help burying the hatchet and forgiving him the moment she feels she has taken things as far as she dares. But if this time she nevertheless remains in Germa- ny— which I'm inclined to doubt—, it will be because people there have talked her into it.

Mr Ferdinand Gilles, a scoundrelly man of letters, who was made to come over to us from the Party of Progress,2 9 6 though we in Ger- many didn't want him, has joined forces in London with Hyndman & Co. and actually has a party all of his own in the Communist So- ciety.89 The man has been denounced to us as a police spy by a reli- able source whose identity, however, cannot be divulged, which also explains his otherwise inexplicable source of funds (he contributes £ 6 a year to a school founded over here by Louise Michel). At the Brus- sels Congress ' 3 5 the fellow tried to gain currency among the Ger- mans for the lies about Aveling being disseminated on the sly by Hyndman, Mother Besant, her lover Herbert Burrows and others to the effect that when Aveling married Tussy he had abandoned a wife and three children in a state of utter destitution and that his father- in-law was intent on beating his brains out. (Well, Aveling and his wife parted by mutual consent 8 years ago, she took back her fortune which brings her in over £500 a year, there were never any children and her father had died long before.) Since this fell flat, he sought to find a receptacle for these lies among the correspondents of the bour- geois newspapers and that, of course, proved successful. The entire press

[^1]: a Anna Schlüter





**[p. 238]**

Aveling at once advised Liebknecht of the facts of the case for pub- lication in the Vorwärts*297 and so the affair will no doubt also be dis- cussed in America.

Of the American delegates, those I saw were Mac Vey and Abraham Cahan, the apostle of the Jews; both of them pleased me much.

The Congress has proved a brilliant success for us ALTER ALL — the Broussists 3 stayed right away while Hyndman's chaps withdrew their opposition. And, best of all, the anarchists have been shown the door, just as they were at the Hague Congress.293 The new, incomparably larger and avowedly Marxist International is beginning again at the precise spot where its predecessor left off.

The TRADES UNION Congress in Newcastle has also been a great vic- tory.298 The old UNIONS with the textile workers at their head, to- gether with the entire reactionary party that exists among the work- ers, had mustered all their forces in order to overturn the eight hours resolution of 1890. They failed, having secured no more than one in- significant, fleeting concession. That is crucial. There is still much confusion, but there's no stopping things now and the bourgeois pa- pers fully recognise the defeat of the bourgeois labour party, recognise it with dismay and a wailing and gnashing of teeth. The Scottish libe- rals in particular, the most intelligent and most classical bourgeois in

[^1]: a E. Aveling, 'In der Rheinisch-Westfälischen Leitung vom 22. Aug. findet sich ein Ar- tikel' and 'Der Urheber der über mich in der Deutschen Presse', Vorwärts, Nos. 211 and 212; 10 and 11 September 1891; see also this volume, pp. 248, 251, 252-53.



