---
Volume: 49
Document_Title: "129. Engel s to Karl Kautsky. 28 September "
Page_Range: "270-273"
---

# 129. Engel s to Karl Kautsky. 28 September 



**[p. 239]**

the Empire, are unanimous in their lamentations over this great mis- fortune and the incorrigible perversity of the working man. Warm regards to you and your wife.a

Your

F.E.

First published abridged in Briefe und Auszüge aus Briefen von Joh. Phil. Becker, Jos. Dietzgen, Friedrich Engels, Karl Marx u. A. an F.A. Sorge und Andere, Stuttgart,

1906 and in full in: Marx and Engels, Works, First Russian Edition, Vol. XXVIII, Moscow, 1940

Printed according to the original

Published in English in full for the first time

129

ENGELS TO KARL KAUTSKY

London, 28 September 1891

Dear Kautsky,

I was on the point of writing to you about the programme when your letter arrived.

Your draft programme is far better than the official one and I note with pleasure that Bebel will propose it be accepted. I shall back him up there. You have avoided the only fault of your first draft — length — and have outdone the official one in brevity. However I should like to make the following suggestions299:

Section 1, pp. 785/86 of the Neue £eit, para. 2, line 3: Growth of the product of human labour rather than yield. Marx has pointed out how ambiguous is the word yield' which can mean not only the product itself but also its value, or even the total price that happens to be real- ised.

Further: Private ownership of the means of production throughout. What is meant, of course, are the social means of production in their

[^1]: IN STUTTGART

[^2]: " Katharina Sorge





**[p. 240]**

entirety or again those of one distinct working individual, peasant or artisan — in all these cases they are quite distinct and hence require the article. Omission of the article leaves one in doubt about the meaning, or so it seems to me, at any rate.

Section 2, Neue %eit, p. 788, para. 1 has been edited somewhat inad- equately. 'Which suffers under today's conditions' is much too weak. It would have been better to say that the ruling classes are also being intellectually and morally crippled by the class contradiction, more so indeed than the class that is oppressed. You could edit it into shape, provided you agree. The concluding sentence to the effect that the proletariat is the only class whose interests, etc., are pressing is also weak. I should prefer 'whose liberation is impossible without the socialisation of the means of production', or something of the sort.

Para. 2. 'Without political rights they cannot embark on their economic struggles'—or establish their organisation as a militant class (what they need for their economic struggles and their organisation as a militant class is a measure of political freedom and equal rights that will grow with their successes?) — the remainder as in text.

Unfortunately I have no time for more than these brief suggestions as I'm inundated with jobs of every description.

In your first article you, too, dabble a bit in 'Utopia'. When and in what country did the things happen which you describe between p. 726 ('this metamorphosis was coincident with another') and p. 730? It seems to me that for the sake of convenience you dished up a grand pot-pourri of the times and places of various schools of thought. But there's nothing wrong in that; the great majority of your readers won't notice and each can take from it whatever suits his own parti- cular book.

Thank you for the newspapers. It's a good thing that the party is strong enough to allow Liebknecht's speeches to pass, yet suffer no harm; as regards the paper," which is more important, there will of course be a change before long. I must confess that the old man amazes me by the extent to which he has lagged behind. However we are now a power and as such are perfectly well able to lug along with us an heirloom of this kind and accord him the satisfaction of believing he has settled everything the moment he invents a formula that sets his mind at rest over whatever matter has happened to crop up.

[^1]: I haven't yet managed to read Ede's article.299

[^2]: ' Vorwärts





**[p. 241]**

Mr J. Wolf has also sent me concoction.'1 I have consigned it to my bookcase unread and there it will have to remain until I reach the preface to Volume III.'1 The letter you posted in Neumünster has now reached me. It reads:

'Zurich, 20 September 1891. Dear Sir, In the latest number of Conrad's Jahrbücher für Nationalökonomie und Statistik, a Jew from Brno by the name of Wolf, who teaches at the Polytechnic here, has the cheek to accuse you of having misconstrued Marx's theory of value and hence of intending to suppress Volume III. Shall you give him a box on the ears? An Admirer.'

Hardly that, but I shall have to take a look at the rubbish never- theless.

I wrote at once telling Schmidt that, while his solution was not the Marxian one, the book ' contains such excellent stuff in other respects that I thought it the most important thing to have been done in the field of political economy since Marx's death.300 Now, however, as soon as I have attended to current business, I shall apply myself re- lentlessly to Volume III and everything else will be cast aside.

C. Schmidt was in Berlin and, during the holidays, made a very good job of editing the Vorwärts; no doubt he will now take up the lec- tureship in Zurich secured for him by Stössel in defiance of the profes- sors.

You are right to go to the Congress.301 The chaps will have a great deal of fault to find with the Neue £eit, but that can't be helped. You should listen to everything, be as sparing as possible with your an- swers and afterwards go your own way. So long as Bebel is in charge there's no doubt that everything will get back onto an even keel again.

We over here will put the Gillesiadd to thoroughly good use. Hynd- man & Co., who have seen the whole of their ambitious international intrigue with the Possibilists3 come to grief in so lamentable a fash- ion, are furious, of course, and are at the back of the whole affair. Ob- viously we could want nothing better than that they should identify themselves with Gilles, though unfortunately they are already turn-

[^1]: " J. Wolf, 'Das Rätsel der Durchschnittsprofitrate bei Marx'. Jahrbücher für National- ökonomie und Statistik, 2. Bd., 3. Folge.-1' of Capital-' C. Schmidt, Die Durchschnittspro- ßlrale auf Grundlage des Marx'sehen Wertgesetzes.-* See this volume, pp. 237-38.



