---
Volume: 49
Document_Title: "130. Engel s to August Bebel. 29 September and 1 October "
Page_Range: "273-281"
---

# 130. Engel s to August Bebel. 29 September and 1 October 



**[p. 242]**

Your

F.E.

First published in Aus der Frühzeit des Printed according to the original Marxismus. Engels Briefwechsel mit Kautsky, , , , . Ti mot Published in English for the first Prag, 1935 . s

time

130

ENGELS TO AUGUST BEBEL267

IN BERLIN

London, 29 September 1891

Dear August,

We all of us very much liked your Russian article in the Vor- wärts302; it should prove very effective. A point on which you and I are agreed is that there is an imminent threat of war, and this specifically from Russia; also that, if it materialises, everything possi- ble should be done, especially by us and in our own interests, to crush Russia. Where we differ is in contending, you that the Russians want war, and I that all they want is to threaten without any definite in- tention of attacking, while at the same time being fully aware that things might nevertheless eventually get to that stage.

I have for years studied the methods and habits of Russian diplo- mats past and present and know that war, inasmuch as it is invari- ably unsolicited by the aforesaid diplomats, invariably spells a diplo- matic defeat. For in the first place, victories obtained by diplomatic intimidation are cheaper and safer and, in the second, every new war merely goes to prove how relatively weak the Russian army is when it comes to conquest. So enormously do the military in Russia overrate their preparedness for war that, even after discounting 30% of their claims, the diplomats still pitch the army's efficiency too high. Of all



**[p. 243]**

If Gladstone comes to the helm over here, the Russian diplomats will be in a position more favourable than they could hope to achieve for decades to come. France an active ally, England a benevolent neutral — that's plenty to be going on with. That the Russians will make war-like gestures, I am in no doubt. But if they go to war it will not be intentionally.

There is no doubt whatever that the loan is a potential war loan. But that is merely a sign that the gentlemen are preparing themselves for any eventuality. As I see it, all the other signs you adduce — the ban on the export of rye, landing exercises in the Black Sea, etc.,— only go to prove the same thing. I would hazard a guess that, when it comes to the point, Europe, and the Triple Alliance in particular,303

will be more afraid of a war than unassailable Russia will have need of one; whereupon Russia will be one up in the East while the French chauvinists will be the dupes.

You suggest that Russia is bound to attack because of difficulties at home. I do not think so — not, at any rate, in the sense in which you presumably understand it. In Russia three classes suffer — the land- owning aristocracy, the peasantry, the emergent proletariat. The lat- ter is still, and the first is already, too weak for revolution, while all the peasantry could achieve would be local insurrections which would be fruitless unless given the necessary cohesion and moral sup- port by a successful insurrection in urban centres. The new bourgeoi- sie, on the other hand, is flourishing as nowhere else; it is gradually moving towards the point at which it will inevitably clash with bu- reaucracy, but this may not be reached for years. The Russian bour- geoisie originated from farmers connected with vodka production and from army contractors plundering the state and is what it is be- cause of the state — protective tariffs, subsidies, robbing of the state, licence and state protection for the most oppressive exploitation of la- bour. So things would have to get pretty bad before these people, whose turpitude far exceeds that of our own bourgeoisie, would undermine the rule of the Tsar.

If consideration for this particular bourgeoisie is conducive to war, it is only because it has translated pan-Slavism into materialist terms or, rather, has discovered the latter's material basis — the expansion of the home market by means of annexation. Hence the Slavophil fa-



**[p. 244]**

But that's beside the point. We both of us recognise the danger of war and, despite the famine in Russia, which you decidedly under- rate, the reins may slip from the hands of the rulers, an eventuality for which we too must be prepared. I shall see what can be done in France; while it may be necessary to draw our people's attention to certain points, this should be done by the French themselves. Our peo- ple have got to realise that a war against Germany in alliance with Russia would first and foremost be a war against the strongest and most efficient socialist party in Europe, and that we should have no option but to fight with all our might against any assailant who went to Russia's aid. For either we should succumb, and that would put paid to the socialist movement in Europe for the next 20 years, or we should ourselves come to the helm and then the words of the Marseil- laise,

would apply to the French. In neither case would the present regime in Germany survive a war; its defence would require too strenuous an effort and means that were too revolutionary.

[^1]: 'Quoi, ces cohortes étrangères feraient la loi dans nos foyers?'1'

[^2]: * provincial assemblies-1' What, shall these foreign cohorts lay down the law in our own homes?





**[p. 245]**

You are right; if war comes we must call for the general arming of the population. But in co-ordination with the organisation already in existence and/or prepared for war. That would mean the embodi- ment of hitherto untrained men in the Ersatzreserve304 and Landsturm305

and, above all, the immediate introduction of a rough-and-ready training programme in addition to the arming of the population and its embodi- ment into permanent cadres.

The address to the French would have to assume a somewhat differ- ent form.306 The Russian diplomats are not so stupid as to provoke war before the whole of Europe. On the contrary, things will be so ar- ranged as to make either France or one of the Triple Alliance coun- tries appear to be the offending party. The Russians always have do- zens of such casus belli up their sleeves; what the exact answer to this should be depends on the pretext adduced for war. Whatever the case, we shall have to declare that since 1871 we have always been ready to come to a peaceable understanding with France, that as soon as our party comes to power it will not be able to exercise that power unless Alsace-Lorraine is free to decide its own future but that, should war be forced upon us, notably a war in alliance with Russia, we should regard it as an attack upon our existence and should have to defend ourselves with all available means and make use of all avail- able positions — i. e. including Metz and Strasbourg.

As for the actual conduct of the war, there are two aspects which are of prime importance: Russia is weak in attack but enormously strong in defence, a thrust into the heartland is impossible. France is strong in attack but, after one or two defeats, is rendered impotent and incapable of attacking. Since I have no great opinion of Au- strians as generals or of Italians as soldiers, our army will have to lead and sustain the main thrust. Containment of the Russians, defeat of the French, such must be the opening gambits in a war. Once the French offensive has been scotched, but hardly any sooner, a start can be made on the conquest of Poland up to the Dvina and the Dnieper. This must be effected by revolutionary means and, if necessary, by conceding to Poland, as ultimately constituted, part of Prussian Po- land and the whole of Galicia. If all goes well, a volte-face may be ex- pected in France. This should be our cue for insisting that Metz and Lorraine at any rate be accorded the French as a peace-offering.

But things probably won't go as smoothly as all that. The French won't simply let themselves be defeated. Their army is very good and better armed than ours nor, considering the kind of performance our



**[p. 246]**

generals put up, does it look to me as though very much is to be ex- pected from that quarter. The French have shown this summer that they have learnt how to mobilise. Likewise that they have enough officers for the first field army, which is stronger than ours. Not until more troops move into the line will our numerical superior- ity in officers make itself felt. Moreover, the direct route between Ber- lin and Paris is heavily defended on both sides by fortifications. In short, and taking the most favourable view, it will probably turn out to be a campaign of changing fortunes in which both sides will conti- nually bring in new reinforcements until one side is exhausted — or England actively intervenes, being able in the circumstances then ob- taining to starve out the side, whether France or Germany, which it de- cides to oppose, and to compel it to sue for peace simply by cutting off its supply of corn. What happens meanwhile on the Russian border will depend largely on how the Austrians conduct the war, and is therefore unpredictable.

This much is, I believe, certain — if we are beaten, chauvinism and retaliatory warfare will flourish unchecked in Europe for years to come. If we are victorious, our party will take the helm. The victory of Germany, therefore, will be the victory of the revolution and, if war comes, we must not only desire that victory but promote it with all available means.

Ede's article307 was intended as a reply to Vollmar270 and, as such, would have been altogether appropriate. Instead, our good Ede dilly-dallied for so long that it appeared as a reply to the Kronstadt fra- ternisation'288 for which, of course, it was totally unsuitable, since the emphasis should have been laid on wholly different aspects. What certainly ought to have been said was that if France, as opposed to Germany, is the formal representative of revolution, Germany, by rea- son of its workers' party, is the material leader of revolution and that this would necessarily emerge in a war in which we — and with us the revolution — would either be suppressed or else come to the helm.

Apropos, I hear that you intend to put forward K. Kautsky's dec- laration of principles as your programme at the party congress. I too regard it in its present version (Neue £eit, No. 51) as a great improve- ment on our draft. My only recommendation was that he should make a few alterations in the passage on p. 788.a He has obviously giv- en the thing a great deal of thought and to good purpose. I have not

[^1]: a See previous letter.





**[p. 247]**

yet been able to read Ede's article concerning individual de- mands.299 About Leibfried-Cuno308 anon, in my next. Regards from Louise and

Your

F.E.

1 October

I had meant to send off the above today, when your letter of the 29th turned up. I trust you read in the original the article by me which appeared in the Socialiste, for the rendering in the Vorwärts is atrocious and in places sheer nonsense." Where the devil does Lieb- knecht unearth such appalling translators? — It is clear that the time is at hand when we shall be in the majority in Germany, or at any rate the only party strong enough to take the helm—provided peace continues. And for that very reason I would be reluctant to see this pro- cess of development interrupted by a crisis which might, it is true, curtail it by 2 or 3 years but which might equally well prolong it by 10 or even 20.

As regards my remarks concerning the undue consideration shown by you for your opponents' opinions, you alone are to blame; in your letter6 you say of Ede's note 3 0 9: 'For our opponents attack the work simply for being couched in tendentiously anti-Lassallean terms.' This regularly reiterated argument about your opponents cannot but end by invit- ing the interpretation that those opponents can play ducks and drakes with us. Come to that, Marx and I used to say as long ago as 1848: 'What blunder of ours can have earned us our opponents' praise?' i. e. just as you do.

Whatever happens, you must keep Geiser away from the Vorwärts. After all, at St Gallen the man was the object of a formal vote of no confidence 2 5 3 so surely he cannot be allowed to take part in the edit- ing! Bios, too, is an alarmist and, what's more, a bore.— As regards the sixth leading article Liebknecht is to write, there's no need to worry your heads about it310; I'll wager that in 3 weeks' time he'll

[^1]: a F. Engels, 'Le congrès de Bruxelles. La situation de l'Europe', Le Socialiste, No. 51, 12 September 1891 and 'Über den Brüsseler Kongreß und die Lage in Europa. (Aus ei- nem Brief an Paul Lafargue)', Vorwärts, No. 216, 16 September 1891 (see this volume, pp. 234-36 and also present edition, Vol. 27.)-b of 12 September 1891





**[p. 248]**

have lost all enthusiasm for leading articles and will say, as he did in Leipzig in 1866, that anyone who supposes this to be the right time for writing leading articles cannot have a proper understanding of the times.

The Vienna Arbeiterinnenblatt'' will doubtless be a thorn in the flesh of your women's paper ladies. The latter are all still very much 'be- schacked'b and would like to have something specifically women's movementish and not confined to one feminine aspect of the labour movement. However, the latter standpoint is put forward with tremendous vigour in the Vienna journal and, if the women at home are as promising as you say, all this separate women's rights busi- ness— bourgeois trifling, no more, will soon be pushed into the background. If the present spokeswomen are elbowed out by mem- bers of their own sex, no matter; but the Vienna paper must be given the credit for being the first of all women's papers to adopt and advo- cate this standpoint.

In failing to accept Aveling's anti-Gilles statement you have again proved that inside every German there lurks a bureaucrat who pops out the moment he holds some petty official post. Aveling considered it incompatible with his honour for Gilles' claim that he had likewise given him, Aveling, a licking, to go unchallenged in the German press. Aveling got Louise to attest the facts and they both of them put their names to the document. In any other country the reaction would have been: 'This is a matter in which those concerned must themselves know what they ought to do; I, the editor, though I may disapprove of their conduct, am bound to recognise their right to plead their own cause as they think fit.' With you, however, the edito- rial department sets itself up as censor, lays claim to complete infalli- bility, and forbids them to conduct their own case. The editorial de- partment has a right to believe that il has finished and done with Gil- les and need not for its part allude to him again, but if Aveling and Louise come forward in their own names, it ought not to use this view as a pretext for muzzling a friend. Incidentally, I do not in the least share your reservations — indeed it was I who drafted Louise's state- ment.1

Gilles at once proceeded to publish the enclosed leaflet. You will be getting Aveling's reply in a day or two. The business with Bradlaugh

[^1]: a Arbeiterinnen-Teilung (sec also this volume, p. 252).-b derived from the name of Ger- trud Guillaume-Schack-' See this volume, pp. 237-38, 251, 252.





**[p. 249]**

was a stupendous blunder of Aveling's, but he was the innocent party. At the time Aveling was, so far as money matters and political negotiations were concerned, a thoroughly naïve, inexperienced and incredibly foolish young poet. Bradlaugh was aware of this and ex- ploited him most outrageously; they started a Natural Science School and laboratory, the business side of which was managed by Brad- laugh while Aveling had to bear not only the brunt of the work but, towards the end, also the financial responsibility. When Aveling be- came a socialist and married Tussy, Bradlaugh falsely accused him of having engaged in dubious money transactions — Aveling was mon- strously hoodwinked but altogether innocent—just unbelievably stu- pid. And when Bradlaugh published his circular letter, Aveling was stupid enough to keep silent and even by degrees repay Bradlaugh, by whom, for good measure, he had been cheated, something in the region of £ 200. It is now an old story, Bradlaugh is dead and, since he took care not to formulate any definite charges, there is nothing for it but for Aveling to make the circumstances known whenever the op- portunity arises. As will happen the moment Mr Hyndman, who was originally responsible for raking up this tittle-tattle again, accepts Av- eling's challenge to confront him in public.— The story of the Chi- cago telegram is also pure moonshine and again emanates from Hyndman. Our aim is to catch out the latter, for Gilles is simply his mouthpiece.

Many regards from Louise and myself to your wifea and yourself.

Your

F. E.

[^1]: First published abridged in: F. Engels, Politisches Vermächtnis. Ans unveröffentlichten Briefen, Berlin, 1920 and in full in: Marx and Engels, Works, First Russian Edition, Vol. XXVIII, Moscow, 1940

[^2]: Printed according to the original

[^3]: Published in English in full for the first time

[^4]: * Julie Bebel



