---
Volume: 49
Document_Title: "131. Engel s to Friedrich Adolph Sorge. 30 September "
Page_Range: "281-282"
---

# 131. Engel s to Friedrich Adolph Sorge. 30 September 



**[p. 131]**

ENGELS TO FRIEDRICH ADOLPH SORGE 160

IN HOBOKEN

London, 30 September 1891

Dear Sorge,

I spent a fortnight in Scotland and Ireland with Pumps and Louise Kautsky264 after which I attended to the proofs of the new edition3

of the Origin of the Family; now I am dealing with arrears of corres- pondence, and shall then finish off Volume III.b

Meanwhile I enclose a business communication for Mother Wisch- newetzky which you will, I trust, be able to pass on to her. Except by way of business I don't, of course, want to have anything to do with her.

I am sorry to see from your letter of the 15th that you are plagued with the gout. That being so, it's certainly a good thing that you should be eating less nitrogenous food and taking more physical exer- cise.

The Brussels Congress ' 3 5 did in fact go off better than you sup- pose. The only one of the Germans to behave boorishly was Lieb- knecht, but he had been most grossly provoked by Nieuwenhuis in the rudest, clerico-jesuitical way. Louise, who represented the work- ing women of Vienna, says that Nieuwenhuis' base attacks and insi- nuations were utterly outrageous.

The TRADES UNION Congress was also a success.298 The 'old' unions did everything in their power to get the Liverpudlian 2 ' eight hours resolution overturned and their failure to do more than whittle away a small fragment of it is of itself a defeat for them and their mid- dle-class allies. You ought to have seen the liberal papers, in particu- lar the Scottish ones, and the way they wrung their hands over the aber- rations of the English working man and his lapse into socialism.

The People is quite impossible. It's ages since I have seen such a silly hotchpotch of a paper. Who has translated my Entwick- lung c? 3 ' ' Jonas?

[^1]: a the fourth German edition-b of Capital-' F. Engels, Socialism: Utopian and Scientif- ic.



