---
Volume: 49
Document_Title: "132. Engel s to Laura Lafargue. 2 October "
Page_Range: "282-284"
---

# 132. Engel s to Laura Lafargue. 2 October 



**[p. 251]**

I'll send the necessary to the Socialiste and report back to you la- ter.

Lafargue has been put up as candidate in Lille and is thus entitled to spend the 5 weeks of the période électorale out of prison and to en- gage in propaganda. He is unlikely to get in but, come the general election, he is sure of being returned in the Département du Nord.312

Abetted by Hyndman, Gilles continues his attempts to besmear Aveling — not a bad thing on the whole, firstly because he's such a colossal blackguard and secondly because we shall succeed increas- ingly in getting Hyndman out into the open." More news of all sorts by the next post.

Warm regards to your wifeb and yourself.

Your

F. E.

First published abridged in Briefe und Auszüge aus Briefen von Joh. Phil. Becker, Jos. Dietzgen, Friedrich Engels, Karl Marx u. A. an F.A.Sorge und Andere, Stuttgart, 1906 and in full in: Marx and Engels, Works, First Russian Edition, Vol. XXVIII, Moscow, 1940

132

ENGELS TO LAURA LAFARGUE

London, 2 October 1891

My dear Laura,

Today I sent to you and to Rave the sheets 7 to 12 (end) of Ur- sprung'' with the alterations marked in red. I hope this will be the end of your trouble ' " for which I do not know how to thank you. May the effect be such as to reward you to some extent for your work.

Printed according to the original

Published in English in full for the first time

[^1]: AT LE PERREUX

[^2]: a See this volume, pp. 237-38, 248-49, 252.-b Katharina Sorge-r the fourth German edition of The Origin of the Family, Private Property and the State





**[p. 252]**

I hope Paul is out by this time, the furlough will be very useful to him and to the cause, 'le Nord' is hot and ought to be forged while it is so. ^

Boulanger was so dead that he evidently could no longer bear life. He died as he lived — en homme entretenu.'" The loss of his beloved M-me de Bonnemain he might have borne, but the loss of her for- tune (which the English papers say was not left to him) — ah, c'était autre choseh\

Nobody will be more glad of this comical event than Rochefort, le brav' général had gradually become a veritable nightmare for him.

Now, my dear Laura, what in the name of all that used to be sa- cred am I to write to that Almanachc where, if the advertisements speak true, there is to be more than a Sammelsuriumd of men, princip- les and things? The progress of socialism in Germany, why that's a book! And other interesting subjects? the most interesting and most important are such that in the mouth of a foreigner they would appear an insult to French readers. Besides you leave me in ignorance of when the thing is wanted, and how much space it is expected to occu- py. 3 ' 3 However I am fully occupied with work, urgent work so far and could not have written a scratch. So there is no time lost.

Gilles continues issuing flysheets against Edward. More in a day or two. We are trying to bring the slanders home to Hyndman who is us-

[^1]: Last Monday e Percy brought the children over and since then we have had the whole family here. Lily has had a fall and hurt her back a little, so she is going to have a support made as a matter of precau- tion, and that will last a few days yet. Percy is leaving today.

[^2]: Louise's Hyaena-paper 3 1 4 will not appear before 15th instant, your, Tussy's and Louise's articles will create a sensation among the women's rights women in Germany and Austria, as the real question has never been put and answered so plainly as you three do it. And both Louise and Tussy tell me they have heiligen Schrecken vor den deutsch- en [Berliner) Frauenrechtsweibern..' But the reign of these is not to last much longer. Bebel writes quite enthusiastically about the ardour with which the working women in Germany now rush into the move- ment, and if that is the case, the antiquated semi-bourgeois women's rights ânessess will soon be ordered to the rear.

[^3]: " souteneur-1' that's another matter-1 Almanach du Parti Ouvrier-d conglomeration -' 28 September-' sacred awe of the German (Berlin) women's rights women -g asses



