---
Volume: 49
Document_Title: "133. Engels to August Bebel. 6 October "
Page_Range: "284-286"
---

# 133. Engels to August Bebel. 6 October 



**[p. 253]**

ing Gilles as his tool — and who we hope will not be able to wash off the dirt which the dirty Gilles has spattered involuntarily on the man who uses such a tool."

Love from Pumps and Louise and the children.

Ever yours,

F. E.

[From Louise Kautsky, in German]

My dear Laura,

Sincere thanks for your letter. As the Generalb has told you, our 'epoch-making' paper will not be coming out until 15/X, probably due to Victor's Bohemian court pro- ceedings. When will I get some more? since I assume that you, dear Laura, having begun with A, will also say B. Anything will be welcome to us. With warm greetings to yourself and the M. P. for Lille.0

Yours,

Louise

First published, in the language of the Reproduced from the original original (English), in: F. Engels, P. et L. Lafargue, Correspondance, t. Ill, Paris, 1959

133

ENGELS TO AUGUST BEBEL

London, 6 October 1891

Dear August,

But now I think you would be well-advised to stop bombarding poor Ede with letters about Lassalle 178; he is becoming tremendously irritable because of them and so confused over what you people, on the one hand, are demanding and what he, on the other, considers to be his duty, that this sort of thing can only make matters worse and he'll end up by producing nothing but contradictory material. You are as much to blame as Ede for the fact that the note309 is in it at all, and to

[^1]: IN BERLIN

[^2]: Herewidi what you need in regard to the Cuno-Leibfried case.308

[^3]: a See this volume, pp. 237-38, 248-49, 251.- b Engels'jocular name.-c Paul Lafargue





**[p. 254]**

condemn this excellent work in its entirety because of one wretched note is surely not right. I told him not to let this deflect him from his purpose, but to continue wearing the velvet glove over the iron fist and I also said that you would be grateful to him in the long run for having criticised Lassalle in this way. For it's clear to me that were you to re-read Lassalle's stuff now, you yourselves would be surprised at what it contains and at the faith in the false hero which, out of cour- tesy, you forced yourselves to profess when consorting with the Las- salleans at the time of the Anti-Socialist Law.11 I'm positive that you, as also a whole lot of chaps who still cling to the Lassallean tradi- tion, no longer have any knowledge whatever of what the man said and wrote (indeed, said and wrote for the most part against his better judgment). And hence the new edition of Lassalle will have a tho- roughly beneficial effect on you people as well, provided only that you read the works of the prophet's critic.

Lafargue is not yet out of prison, but if the government doesn't re- lease him during election time, he will probably be elected in Lille.312 The prospects are rosy; Delory would have got in all right at the last election had not the by now routed Boulangists collared a whole mass of working men's votes.

In Paris there could easily be a government crisis. Rouvier is a shady individual, more so than is tolerable and, now that Boulanger has met his end, Constans is no longer needed and is detested by Car- not because he wants to step into the latter's shoes. Freycinet & Co. also want to get rid of Rouvier and Constans arid so it may easily come to a split when the Chamber assembles on the 15th.

I'm glad to see that Dietz has paid you my fee. Louise asks me to tell you that the photographs have arrived; very many thanks from us all; she has taken one of the two identical ones and I the profile.

Your

F. E.

[^1]: Warm regards to your wifea and yourself from Louise and

[^2]: First published in: Marx and Engels, Works, First Russian Edition, Vol. XXVIII, Moscow, 1940

[^3]: Printed according to the original

[^4]: Published in English for the first time

[^5]: Julie Bebel



