---
Volume: 49
Document_Title: "134. Engels to Paul Lafargue. 13 October "
Page_Range: "286-287"
---

# 134. Engels to Paul Lafargue. 13 October 



**[p. 134]**

ENGELS TO PAUL LAFARGUE 141

AT LE PERREUX

London, 13 October 1891

My dear Lafargue,

Why didn't you ask me for the cheque as soon as you needed it? Why expose Laura to such humiliations when you know that one word from you — or from her — would be enough to put a stop to them?

That dear man Constans would seem to be intent on making you deputy for Lille whatever the cost — so much the better, let's hope he pulls it off. If all you have for opponent is an Opportunist, you should have every chance of success. It is of the utmost importance that we should have you in the Chamber—the other socialist deputies don't seem to be UP TO SNUFF, they're feeble, feeble, feeble!

I have a long letter to write to Bebelc today on the subject of the Erfurt Congress301; there are several very important questions to dis- cuss. That's why I must cut this letter short. Keep smiling, try always to poke fun at your opponents, PUT YOUR TRUST IN THE HISTORICAL LUCK OF

F.E.

[^1]: Constans will undoubtedly do his best to upset your plans — but in that case he will be working for you, just as Bismarck in Germany worked for us. For in my country it's not the socialists who work for the King of Prussiaa; rather it's the King of Prussiab who works for the socialists. And it may well be that the fury aroused in Constans' breast by the boos and catcalls at Marseilles 3 ' 5 will prove a powerful level in getting you elected. 'Above all, don't be too zealous,'316 Mr Constans!!

[^2]: THE PARTY, AND KEEP YOUR POWDER DRY.

[^3]: a i.e. for nothing-b William II- c See next letter.



