---
Volume: 49
Document_Title: "135. Engels to August Bebel. 13 October "
Page_Range: "287-291"
---

# 135. Engels to August Bebel. 13 October 



**[p. 256]**

Printed according to the original

Translated from the French

Published in English for the first time

135

ENGELS TO AUGUST BEBEL

IN BERLIN

London, 13 October 1891

Dear August,

All I have time for today is to send you a reply about the Russians and in fact this is the only item of importance; the other business is over and done with.317

As to the likelihood of war breaking out early next year, there are in Russia three important currents. First you have the diplomats. Of the latter I have said all along that they look for victories without the expense or risk of war, but for that very reason see to it that everything is placed on a warlike footing in order that Russia's enormously fa- vourable defensive position may be exploited to the full. This hap- pens every time. They can then put forward outrageous demands and stick to them up to the last minute and then, without a shot being fired, extract the maximum profit from the enemy — who has more to lose — by playing upon his fear of war. Alongside the diplomats, how- ever, you have the soldiers who, despite their numerous mishaps on the field of battle, are exceedingly cock-a-hoop and full of bluster— more so than anywhere else. They want to let fly. And, thirdly, you

First published in: F. Engels, P. et L. Lafargue, Correspondance, t. Ill, Paris, 1959

[^1]: a Lilian Rosher





**[p. 257]**

This point is not as academic as it seems. For it will assume the ut- most importance the moment the government estimates are present- ed to the Reichstag. If we are positive that there'll be a bust up early next year, we can hardly be opposed to these estimates in principle. And that would be a pretty disastrous state of affairs so far as we are concerned. For the arse-crawling parties would all be overjoyed that they should have been proved right and that we should now have to spurn our policy of the past twenty years. And so impromptu a change of course would also cause enormous friction within the party. And internationally as well.

On the other hand there may nevertheless be a war in the spring. What then should our attitude to the estimates be?

In my view there can only be one attitude: 1. There's no longer time in which to change our weapons. If peace prevails until new can- non and a rifle of even smaller calibre are introduced, peace will in any case presumably continue to prevail. So these objections don't



**[p. 258]**

Should the threat of war increase, we can then tell the government that we should be prepared, if enabled to do so by decent treatment, to support them against a foreign enemy, provided they prosecuted the war ruthlessly and with all available means, including revolution- ary ones. Should Germany be attacked from the east and west, all means of defence would be justified. It is a question not only of the nation's existence but also, in our own case, of asserting the position and the future prospects for which we have fought. The more revolu- tionary the prosecution of the war, the more it will be waged in accor- dance with our ideas. And it might happen that, in contrast to the cow- ardice of the bourgeoisie and Junkers, who want to save their prop- erty, we should turn out to be the only truly vigorous war party. Of course it might also happen that we should have to take the helm and do a 1794 in order to chuck out the Russians and their allies.

I must close so as to get this letter registered (cannot be done after 5 o'clock). From past experience I felt pretty sure that the first field army would be surreptitiously receiving substantial rein- forcements but we are glad to have authentic confirmation of this



**[p. 259]**

point. So far as the Austrians are concerned, the men are absolutely first-rate, the junior officers possess pluck but vary greatly in the mat- ter of battle-training, while the senior ranks are utterly unpredict- able. A man can rise to the top there on the strength of his services as pimp to Francis Joseph.

I shall get something done for the French on the question of the war,313 but it will be damned difficult not to do more harm than good; the chaps are so touchy.

Constans is doing all he can to promote Lafargue's candidature 3 ' 2

by resorting to some typical Prussian chicanery; that is no good in France.

But how will things work out with the present war policy and with Liebknecht at the Foreign Office? His foreign policy — Parnell, Gari- baldi festival in Nice, etc.— is beneath contempt.318 What with his adoration of the 'Republic', there's the prospect of a nice old rumpus before long.

If you are so certain that war will break out in the spring, it seems to me that you ought at least to discuss the matter behind the scenes when you hold your party congress.301

Regards from Louise and

Your

F. E.

[^1]: First published in: Marx and Engels, Works, First Russian Edition, Vol. XXVIII, Moscow, 1940

[^2]: Printed according to the original

[^3]: Published in English for the first time



