---
Volume: 49
Document_Title: "136. Engels to Laura Lafargue. 13 October "
Page_Range: "291-292"
---

# 136. Engels to Laura Lafargue. 13 October 



**[p. 136]**

ENGELS TO LAURA LAFARGUE

AT LE PERREUX

London, 13 October 1891

My dear Laura,

Herewith the cheque £20 — to turn your landlady out of your do- micile.

Now as to your Almanack.* I am writing you an article 3 ' 3 but as it will have a practical turn toward the end of it, I can hardly send it off, or give it its final shape, until a short time before publication. There- fore I must know when your Almanach is to appear. Otherwise the thing may turn stale, or even be completely upset by events. It won't be more than 2 or 3 pages, 4 at outside, so there will be no necessity to send it early — as far as technical matters are in question. But you will see that it is impossible to write un article d'actualité unless it be print- ed and published at once. So please let me know and I shall gladly do my best to oblige nos amis de là-bas.b

Thanks for the papers. That Action de Lyonc seems a splendid speci- men of the present state of fusion and confusion amongst the French socialists, out of the midst of which arises, erect, unavoidable, zudring- lich, unausstehlich? the everlasting Adrien Veber, basking in his own conceit, in which he is hardly second to his worthy master Benoît Malon.319 How does this new harmony of all the disharmonies work? I see in the Secrétariat du travail320 there are all sorts, Possibilists A 5 3

and B,3 aside of our people and a lot of others, and so far they seem to have respected each other's carcasses without coming to blows. I cannot imagine how it is done and what may be the upshot of it.

How much was the fine inflicted on Paul? 2 7 5 I cannot find it in the Socialiste and have not any other paper ready at hand — and what chances have you to evade it?

[^1]: a Almanack du Parti Ouvrier-h our friends over there-0 L'Action-6 impertinent, into- lerable



