---
Volume: 49
Document_Title: "137. Engels to Karl Kautsky. 14 October "
Page_Range: "292-294"
---

# 137. Engels to Karl Kautsky. 14 October 



**[p. 261]**

Love from Louise, Pumps, the children and your old ever thirsty (going to have a bear with Pumps)

F. Engels

First published, in the language of the Reproduced from the original original (English), in: F. Engels, P. et L. Laf'argue, Correspondance, t. Ill, Paris, 1959

137

ENGELS TO KARL KAUTSKY 3 2 1

IN STUTTGART

London, 14 October 1891

Dear Kautsky,

On reading your draft as published in the Vorwärts?22 I find to my great surprise 'one reactionary mass' cropping up all of a sudden. I am writing to you about it immediately though I very much fear that this will come too late. By striking a shrill, discordant note, this propagandist phrase utterly destroys the harmony of the concise, ri- gorously formulated scientific propositions. For it is a propagandist phrase and an excessively biassed one at that and hence — in its apo- dictically absolute form where alone it sounds effective — utterly false.

False because it presents an in itself correct historical tendency as a fait accompli. The moment the socialist revolution comes, all the other parties will appear as a reactionary mass by comparison with ourselves. Maybe that is what thay are already, being no longer capa- ble of progressive action of any kind, although this is not necessarily the case. But at this moment we cannot say as much, not with the assur- ance with which we put forward the other propositions in our pro- gramme. Even in Germany circumstances may arise in which the parties of the Left, deplorable though they are, will be compelled to clear up part of the vast quantity of anti-bourgeois, bureaucratic and feudal rubbish that still remains there. In which case they could hardly be described as one reactionary mass.



**[p. 262]**

Until we are strong enough to seize power ourselves and put our principles into practice there cannot, strictly speaking, be any ques- tion of one reactionary mass by comparison with ourselves. Otherwise the entire nation would be divided into a reactionary majority and an impotent minority.

Take the chaps who dismantled the system of small states in Ger- many, who provided the bourgeoisie with elbow-room in which to carry out its industrial revolution, who introduced a unified transport system — both for things and for persons—, thereby inevitably ac- cording greater freedom of movement to ourselves — were their ac- tions those of a 'reactionary mass'?

Take the French bourgeois Republicans who between 1871 and '78 put paid once and for all to the monarchy and the rule of the clergy, who secured freedom of the press, of association and of assembly to an extent hitherto unknown in France in non-revolutionary times, who introduced compulsory schooling and standardised education, raising it to a level that might well serve as an example to us in Germany — were their measures those of a reactionary mass?

Take the Englishmen of the two official parties who have vastly ex- tended the suffrage and brought about a fivefold increase in the num- ber of voters, who have evened out the size of constituencies and in- troduced compulsory and improved schooling, who at every session still vote not only for bourgeois reforms but also for one concession af- ter another in favour of the working man — their progress may be slow and sluggish but nobody can condemn them out of hand as 'one reactionary mass'.

In short we have no right to present a tendency in gradual process of realisation as an already accomplished fact, the less so in that in England, for example, such a tendency will never quite get to the point of becoming a fact. Come the revolution over here, the bourgeoisie would still be prepared to introduce all sorts of minor reforms, though by then it would be quite pointless to insist on minor reforms in a sys- tem that was in the process of being overthrown.

Under certain circumstances the use in propaganda of Lassalle's phrase is justified, though in our case it has in fact been misused to an enormous extent, e.g. in the Vorwärts ever since 1 October 1890. But it should not be included in the programme where it would be utterly false and misleading. It would look like Bethmann the banker's wife on the balcony someone proposed to build onto his house for him. 'If you

