---
Volume: 49
Document_Title: "138. Engels to Laura Lafargue. 22 October "
Page_Range: "294-295"
---

# 138. Engels to Laura Lafargue. 22 October 



**[p. 263]**

build me a balcony,' he said, 'my wife will go and sit there and muck up me whole façade!'

I can't comment on any other alterations in the Vorwärts version as I've mislaid the paper and this letter must go off.

The party congress301 began on an illustrious date. The 14th of October is the anniversary of the battles of Jena and Auerstedt when the old, pre-revolutionary Prussia collapsed. Let's hope that the 14th of October 1891 will usher in for Prussianised Germany the 'do- mestic Jena predicted by Marx!323

Your

F. Engels

First published abridged in Die Neue £eit, Printed according to the original Bd. I, Nr. 19, 1916-17 and in full in Aus der Frühzeit des Marxismus. Engels Briefwechsel mit Kautsky, Prag, 1935

138

ENGELS TO LAURA LAFARGUE

London, 22 October 1891

My dear Laura,

Herewith my article.313 Please look it over and say what you think of it. If you think that it won't do, or not without essential alterations, please say so. If you think it will do, let it be judged by others, quant au fond. Le fond" once agreed upon, please tell me where that particular lady la langue française wants alterations. I could not, in a matter of this sort, where I should be held answerable for every word pub- lished, allow the Frenchies to make changes without seeing them my- self first. If only formal changes are required, will you send me the

[^1]: AT LE PERREUX

[^2]: a as far as the substance is concerned. The substance



