---
Volume: 49
Document_Title: "139. Engel s to Friedrich Adolph Sorge. 24 October "
Page_Range: "295-298"
---

# 139. Engel s to Friedrich Adolph Sorge. 24 October 



**[p. 264]**

manuscript back with your proposed changes and then we can settle. Kind regards to our prisoner.a

In great haste — Postschlüsse

Love from Louise and yours

ever F.E.

First published, in the language of the Reproduced from the original original (English), in: F. Engels, P. et L. Lafargue, Correspondance, t. Ill, Paris, 1959

139

ENGELS T O F R I E D R I C H A D O L P H S O R G E 2 6 7

IN HOBOKEN

London, 24 October 1891

Dear Sorge,

I have in front of me your letters of 15 September and 2 and 9 Oc- tober.

As regards Barondess' decamping (presumably with the funds?), perhaps you could send me some further details just in case the little man turns up here.

For heaven's sake do me a kindness and stop supplying me regular- ly with any American monthlies. I am dying to be able to read a book again; despite the fact that I can only take a proper look at ' /3 of the newspapers that arrive here, they swallow up all my time — but the movement is now so huge and one must, after all, re- main au courant cl O n the other hand, please send med

[^1]: That the movement is again in the doldrums over there I can readi- ly believe. With you people it's one long succession of great UPS AND DOWNS. But with each UP you ultimately gain ground so that in the end it represents an advance. Thus the tremendous onward surge achieved by the KNIGHTS OF LABOR 3 2 4 and by the wave of STRIKES between

[^2]: * Paul Lafargue - b time for the post - c informed - d Engels did not finish this sentence. See this volume, p. 277.





**[p. 265]**

1886 and 1888 did on the whole, and despite all setbacks, spell ad- vancement for us. For, after all, the masses are stirring in a way they have never done before. Next time even more ground will be gained. But none the less the standard of living of the NATIVE AMERICAN WORKING- MAN is notably higher even than that of his English counterpart and this alone is enough to put him out of the running for some time to come. Again, there is the competition from immigrants and other fac- tors besides. When the time comes over there, things will move with tremendous speed and dynamism, but that may not be for some while yet. Miracles never happen. And, in addition, there's the unfortunate business of your supercilious Germans who, wishing to double the role of schoolmaster with that of commanding officer, discourage the natives from learning even the best they have to offer.

I shall send the money to the Socialiste as soon as I know who it's for; Lafargue is in jug, as you know; I have not yet had an answer.

The Entwicklung des Sozialismus* translated by Aveling and edit- ed by me, is to appear over here in English (in Sonnenschein's Social Series); this authorised translation will pretty well neutralise the pirat- ed American edition 3 ' ' which has been done into quite execrable English. And the thing isn't even complete — what they found too difficult they simply left out.

Needless to say, Mother Wischnewetzky gladly consented to Son- nenschein's publishing the Condition, etc.h in her translation. The fee, however, is to go to Mrs Foster-Amery. Cela m'est bien égal.0 For the rest, she seems really pleased to have been able to establish contact again and tells me what a rotten time they are having, etc., etc.

I should like to have Bakunin's biography 325; from it one could get some idea of how present-day anarchist tradition depicts that Mes- siah.

Letter of the 12th of this month now also received. Thanks. In Erfurt everything went off very well.30 ' I shall send you the offi- cial record as soon as it comes out; Bebel says that the reports of the speeches are very garbled. The insolent Berliners of the opposition, instead of acting as prosecutors, immediately became the accused, be- haved with abysmal cowardice and will now have to get along outside the party if they propose to do anything. There are quite undeniably

[^1]: " F. Engels, Socialism: Utopian and Scientific. -h F. Engels, The Condition of the Working- Clan in England in 1844. Translated by Florence Kelley-Wischnewetzky. Eondon: Swan Sonnenschein and C°, 1892.-c It's all the same to me.





**[p. 266]**

police elements in their midst, while some are also covert anarchists who are out to surreptitiously convert our chaps; along with these are the jackasses, swollen-headed students and failed candidates, would-be bigwigs of all descriptions.^Barely 200 of them all told.— Mr Vollmar likewise had to eat humble pie; the latter is far more dangerous than the former, being more cunning and tenacious as well as vain to the point of folly, and intent at all costs on playing a role. Bebel put up an excellent performance, as did Singer, Auer and Fischer (used to be on the Sozialdemokrat here, a really sterling chap, aside from being the bluntest of blunt Bavarians). To Liebknecht fell the bitter task of hav- ing to recommend Kautsky's draft programme which, with Bebel's and my support,3 was accepted as the basis of the new programme's theoretical section. We have had the satisfaction of seeing Marx's cri- tique b win all along the line. Even the last traces of Lassalleanism have been eliminated. With the exception of a few poorly written bits (though it's only the way they're put that is feeble and commonplace), there is nothing to complain of in the programme or not, at any rate, after a. first reading.

You will have seen that Lafargue is standing in Lille, and will hear the result of tomorrow's election1 long before you get this letter. If he isn't elected, he will be sure of a seat in the Departement du Nord at the coming general election.326

The threat of war looms larger despite the famine in Russia. The Russians want to make prompt and thorough use of the diplomatic possibilities presented by the new French alliance288 and, although I am convinced that the Russian diplomats do not "want war and that the famine would make it seem an absurdity, the military and pan- Slav currents of opinion (the latter being now supported by the very powerful industrial bourgeoisie with an eye to expanding markets) may nevertheless prevail, while in Vienna, Berlin or Paris there might also be blunders which would lead to a war. Bebel and I have been corresponding about this and are of the opinion that if the Russians start a war against us, German socialists should lash out à outrance A

at the Russians and their allies, whoever they may be.e If Germany is crushed, so shall we be, while at best the struggle will be so intense that only revolutionary means will enable Germany to hold its own, and hence there is every likelihood that we may be forced to take the

[^1]: a See this volume, pp. 239 and 246-47.-'' K. Marx, Critique of the Gotha Programme.- ' See this volume, p. 269.-d with all their strength-1' See this volume, pp. 242-47 and 256-59.



