---
Volume: 49
Document_Title: "140. Engels to August Bebel. 24 and 26 October "
Page_Range: "298-304"
---

# 140. Engels to August Bebel. 24 and 26 October 



**[p. 267]**

helm and play at 1793. Bebel made a speech to that effect in Berlin which attracted a great deal of attention in the French press.327

I shall try and make all this clear to the French in their own lan- guage,3 ' 3 which won't be easy. But though I should regard it as a great misfortune if there were to be a war and it were to bring us to power prematurely, we have got to be prepared for that eventuality and I am glad that in this I have Bebel on my side, for he is by far the most efficient of our chaps.

Next week I start on Volume III." Warm regards to your wife b and to you yourself.

Your

F.E.

First published abridged in Briefe und Auszüge aus Briefen von Joh. Phil. Becker, Jos. Dietzgen, Friedrich Engels, Karl Marx u. A. an F. A. Sorge und Andere, Stuttgart,

1906 and in full in: Marx and Engels, Works, First Russian Edition, Vol. XXVIII, Moscow, 1940

Printed according to the original

Published in English in full for the first time

140

London, 24 October 1891

Dear Bebel,

Many thanks for the postcards and packages without which it would have been difficult for us to follow the course of events in Er- furt.301 Things really went off quite capitally — you, Auer, Singer and Fischer covered yourselves with glory, and the wretchedness of the opposition was the only thing you had to complain of, it being no pleasure to do battle with such small fry. At all events the gentlemen will now have to show what they are capable of outside the party,

[^1]: ENGELS TO AUGUST BEBEL 267

[^2]: IN BERLIN

[^3]: " of Capital - b Katharina Sorge





**[p. 268]**

where they are innocuous, and the better elements amongst the youthful rowdies will now be accorded time for reflection. The fact that Mr von Vollmar has seen fit to reject the new course in the arms of Caprivi, if without 'personal spite',328 may provide temporary al- leviation, but you are very far from being quit of the chap, and the more tense the situation becomes, the closer a watch you will have to keep upon him. However, every big party has one intriguer-in-chief and if you were to get rid of this one, another would take his place.

We were pleased that there should have been so much merriment on your side, and it made us laugh a lot — the sorry opposition and the worthy Vollmar are almost enough to send one to sleep.

On the first reading the programme makes an excellent impression, with the exception of a few weak spots to which I had already drawn K. Kautsky's attention earlier on.a It must have been a bitter pill for Liebknecht to swallow when he had to give an account of the new programme from which the last traces, not only of Lassallean- ism, but also of his much-beloved People's Party 1 5 4 slogans had been eliminated. Indeed the speech — which, if the account in the

Vorwärts is to be believed, he himself drafted — provides painful evi- dence of this. And then he suffered a further blow in the shape of Ku- nert's motion 3 2 9 on his son-in-law.b I hope Liebknecht may find a gently inclined plane down which he may slowly glide into retire- ment— he is remarkably outmoded in the party.

Monday, 26 October.— In the meantime another letter arrived from you this morning.330 That Fischer had made enemies I am ready to believe, for it's something I know from my own experience. In my younger days I was just as inclined to be uppish at the wrong time and in the wrong place as he is, and in the same way I seldom detect a failing in the younger generation which I myself did not possess to a greater or lesser degree. It gradually wears off, provided one occa- sionally gets a slap in the eye which one has to admit is deserved.

I don't know whether you will in future be able to avoid settling such matters in public. I think it's better that you should, despite mi- nor disadvantages and much personal unpleasantness. But there's no doubt that, unless your central organ0 changes, you would be well- advised to hand it over entirely to the Berlin party and to acquire

[^1]: a See this volume, pp. 239-41.-b Bruno Geiser-c Vorwärts





**[p. 269]**

a national weekly advertiser which, however, should and would have to be properly edited.

It was most sensible to expend the 400 marks on Lafargue's elec- tion. This will come in very handy for the second ballot. Since unions and party are distinct in your case, it is perfectly all right if French and other STRIKES receive support direct from the trades unions in Ger- many, leaving the party funds free for political purposes. This being so, however, you should see to it that the unions do something for the glassworkers.33 ' Quite a lot has been done for them from over here.

Lafargue is in a good position. He obtained 5,005 votes, the Oppor- tunist and government candidate Dépasse 2,928, the second Oppor- tunist Bere (Beer or Bear, as you choose) 1,246, and the Radical Roche 2,272. The latter is stepping down in favour of Lafargue. That means that Dépasse, his real competitor in the second ballot, could only get in if all Roche's voters were to abstain and if he were to poll, say, another 1,000 votes amongst the reserve of abstainers in the mon- archist camp, or if 3,000 or more votes from that reserve were to more than outweigh the 5,005 + 2,272. I don't know how many registered electors there are and therefore am unable to judge; at all events the position is better than we had dared to hope.

Gilles is doing well for himself. The fellow must be living in clover at police expense. He has bought nearly everyone in the Communist Society 89 by lending them money and they durst not chuck him out. Since the fellow claims that, as a member of that society, he is ipse facto a member of the German party, it may be asked whether you people are prepared to put up with this particular 'comrade'. The funds avail- able to him for his loans and his circulars — that sort ofthing costs a pretty penny over here— can only emanate from the Embassy.

I have not yet seen anything about the Magdeburg meeting 332 ei- ther in the Vorwärts or in the Echo.'' That the Vorwärts should suppress the opposition meeting in Berlin 3 3 3 was only to be expected in view of its previous practice. But it's abysmally stupid.

I am sending you an article by the great Paul Brousse from which you will see how that chief of all quarrel-pickers, mischief-mongers and authoritarians, now that he's been thoroughly trounced and re- duced to a cipher, is holding forth to you people, whom he has corn- batted for years as his arch-enemies on the Continent, about peace and federation.

[^1]: a Hamburger Echo





**[p. 270]**

Herewith a few cuttings about the Russian famine which is spread- ing even farther west than I thought. Such things are to be found daily in the British press. The position is indeed a serious one and still more troops, or so Mendelson assured me yesterday, are being sent to the west simply in order that they may be fed. It would be madness for the Russians to go to war, but militarist parties always are mad and the Russian bourgeoisie is blinkered, stupid, ignorant, chauvinist and grasping in the extreme. If war there must be, then the sooner the better, for in that case the Russians would be treated to a rude awakening.

Since I thought it necessary to let the French know exactly what our position would be in case of war — a damned difficult task, mind you — I have written an article in French and sent it to Laura.313

Today she writes to say that both she and Paul are absolutely delight- ed with the article and that it was exactly what was wanted for the French, etc. If Guesde is also ofthat opinion — he is still at Lille where he is doing duty for Lafargue with the electors — the article will be published. It was originally intended for the French socialist almanaca but may (I think will) be too strong for that paper's motley crew, in which case it will probably appear in the Socialiste which I trust you see. What I tell the chaps is this: We are virtually certain of coming to the helm within 10 years; we can neither seize power nor retain it without making good the wrongs done to other nationalities by our predecessors by 1. openly paving the way for the restoration of Poland and 2. putting the people of northern Silesia and Alsace- Lorraine in a position to decide freely where their allegiance lies. Be- tween a socialist France and a socialist Germany, I go on, there is no such thing as an Alsace-Lorraine question. Hence there could be no grounds whatever for going to war over Alsace-Lorraine. But if the French bourgeois should begin such a war notwithstanding, and if to that end they should place themselves in the service of the Russian Tsar who, indeed, is the enemy of the middle classes throughout western Europe, this would represent a repudiation of France's revo- lutionary mission. We German socialists, on the other hand, who would come to power in 10 years' time provided peace is preserved, would be duty bound to assert the position acquired by us in the vanguard of the labour movement, not only against the internal, but also against the external, foe. If Russia were to win, we should be

[^1]: 3 Almanach du Parti Ouvrier





**[p. 271]**

Quoi ces cohortes étrangères Feraient la loi dans nos foyers?" {Marseillaise)

That is the gist of the thing. As soon as the text has been finally de- cided on (I naturally anticipate that one or two minor amendments will be suggested) and printing has begun, I shall translate the article into German and we shall see what can be done with it. I'm not sure whether the conditions governing your press are such as to permit its publication in Germany; maybe if you qualified it a bit it might do — it'll be managed somehow. My articles are not in any case binding on the party, which is a great piece of luck for both of us, although Lieb- knecht supposes I regard it as a personal misfortune though this would never have occurred to me.

The reports quote you as saying that I had prognosticated the col- lapse of bourgeois society in 1898. There must have been a little mis- take somewhere. All I said was that by '98 we might possibly have come to the helm. Should this not happen, bourgeois society might continue to potter along as it is for a bit, until such time as an impulse from without causes the whole rotten structure to come crashing down. In still air a dilapidated old wreck of that sort can survive for a couple of decades even when it is to all intents and purposes de- funct. So I should have been exceedingly careful about making pre- dictions of this nature. On the other hand, the possibility of our com- ing to power is merely a calculation of probability in accordance with mathematical laws.

Nevertheless, I hope that peace will prevail. Our position is such that we have no need to take a gamble — and war would compel us

[^1]: a What, shall these foreign cohorts lay down the law in our own homes?





**[p. 272]**

to do so. And again, ten years from now we shall be far better pre- pared. Voici pourquoi.'1

If we are to take over and operate the means of production, we need people who are technically trained and plenty of them. These we have not got, and have even been pretty glad hitherto to have been largely spared the company of the 'educated'. Now things have changed. Now we are strong enough to absorb and digest any quan- tity of educated riff-raff and I would predict that in the next 8 or 10 years we shall recruit enough young technicians, doctors, jurists and schoolmasters for the factories and large estates to be managed for the nation by party members. In which case our accession to power will take place quite naturally and will run a — relatively — smooth course. If, on the other hand, we come to the helm prematurely and as a result of war, the technicians will be our principal opponents and will deceive and betray us at every turn; we should have to inaugu- rate a reign of terror against them and would lose out all the same. This is what always happened to the French revolutionaries, if on a smaller scale; even in everyday administration they had to leave the subordinate, really operative, posts to their former reactionary in- cumbents— men who hampered and paralysed everything. I there- fore hope and pray that this splendid, unerring progress of ours, evolving with the impassivity and inexorability of a natural process, will continue along its appointed course.

Warm regards to your wifeb and yourself.

Your

F.E.

[^1]: First published in: Marx and Engels, Works, First Russian Edition, Vol. XXVIII, Moscow, 1940

[^2]: Printed according to the original

[^3]: Published in English in full for the first time

[^4]: a That is why. - h Julie Bebel



