---
Volume: 49
Document_Title: "142. Engels to Laura Lafargue. 27 October "
Page_Range: "306-308"
---

# 142. Engels to Laura Lafargue. 27 October 



**[p. 275]**

Printed according to the original

Published in English for the first time

142

ENGELS TO LAURA LAFARGUE

AT LE PERREUX

London, 27 October 1891

Mein liebesa Löhr,

Das ist ja ein ganz famoses Resultat^ Paul heading the Poll — pretty Poll —you see enthusiasm makes me half mad and drives me into Pantomime puns, but when I came to 'pretty Poll' and remembered your name was Kakadou, that brought me to a dead stop, I might be accused of blasphemy and what not! Au, au, sagt der Jud' in Berlin, wenn der christliche Germane auch einmal versucht einen Witz zu machen.1

Well, if I only knew le nombre des électeurs inscrits,A I should make a shrewd guess. The Défense de Lille bragged with 6,000 monarchist and clerical votes, that I doubt very much, and so think Paul almost safe. We drank success to him last Sunday in 1868 Port, and I am sure at least the 5 votes over the 5,000 are due to our efforts. Never mind, next Sunday week we'll try another and more successful sort and that is sure to smash up all his opponents. What a fine country France is to be locked up! You attack the government, the government makes you M. P. (Pélagie) but Pélagie makes you M. P. (Parliament).335 In Germany it's the other way about. You get elected into Parliament and then you may well write behind you name M. P. because that means Member of Plötzensee — the new monster prison near Berlin.

First published in Aus der Frühzeil des Marxismus. Engels Briefwechsel mit Kaulsky, Prag, 1935

[^1]: '' Mydcar- 1' The result is absolutely splendid.-l Oh, oh, says the Jew in Berlin, if the German Christian ventures as much as once to make a joke.- d the number of regis- tered electors





**[p. 276]**

Old Sorge who does not want to have the Socialiste without paying for it asks me to send 10s. for his subscription. I send a postal order, they sell readily in Vienna, as Louise tells me, so no doubt they will be legal tender in Paris.

Post mark:

I.

525, 490, 10/- Regent's Park Road 38 24 September 91

Things in Erfurt went very well.301 The execution of the insolent young student and commis-voyageur lot was very necessary. They will soon disappear now, and the next lot of the same sort will be less cheeky.

But now it's post-time and dinner-time too. Give Paul a hearty cheer in our name when you come into Pélagie, and take a hearty embrace yourself from Louise and

Your old incorrigible

General

[^1]: First published, in the language of the original (English), in: F. Engels, P. et L. Lafargue, Correspondance, t. Ill, Paris, 1959

[^2]: Reproduced from the original

[^3]: d enough of stupidities - b mixed up - ' Almanack du Parti Ouvrier



