---
Volume: 49
Document_Title: "143. Engel s to Friedrich Adolph Sorge. 29 October "
Page_Range: "308-309"
---

# 143. Engel s to Friedrich Adolph Sorge. 29 October 



**[p. 143]**

ENGELS TO FRIEDRICH ADOLPH SORGE

TN HOBOKEN

[London,] 29 October 1891

I was interrupted when on the point of asking you in my letter of Saturday 24 October3 if you would from time to time send me a wo- men's paper or magazine — from the bourgeois female's movement, needless to say. For the good of the working women's movement in Ger- many, Austria and over here, Louise is obliged to pay some slight heed to this stuff, too, and hence would very much like to take an occa- sional look at what these little ladies are up to in America.— Lafargue's prospects are rosy: 5,005 votes. Dépasse, Opportunist, 2,928; Bère (read Beer), also Opportunist, 1,246; Roche, Radical, 2,272. The latter stepped down in favour of Lafargue who has the support of the extreme Radicals in the Chamber.336 — In Germany the party congress takes pride of place over everything.301 The few intriguers who were chucked out will attract no one save a number of stuck-up little students — GOOD RIDDANCE!

Your

F.E.

[^1]: Regards to your wife.b

[^2]: First published in Briefe und Auszüge aus Briefen von Joh. Phil. Becker, Jos. Dietzgen, Friedrich Engels, Karl Marx u. A. an F.A. Sorge und Andere, Stuttgart, 1906

[^3]: Printed according to the original

[^4]: Published in English for the first time

[^5]: Sec this volume, p. 264. - '' Katharina Sorge



