---
Volume: 49
Document_Title: "144. Engels to Nikolai Danielson. 29- 31 October "
Page_Range: "309-312"
---

# 144. Engels to Nikolai Danielson. 29- 31 October 



**[p. 144]**

ENGELS TO NIKOLAI DANIELSON 3 3 7

IN ST PETERSBURG

[London,] 29-31 October 1891

Dear Sir,

When your letter of 21 September arrived I was travelling in Scot- land and Ireland 264; only today I find time and leisure to reply to it.

Your letter of 20 January was indeed lost, which I regret doubly, first because the interesting information it contained was kept from me for so long, and second because it put you to the trouble of work- ing it out again for me. Many thanks!

The '^üchtung von Millionären'/ as Bismarck puts it, seems indeed to go on in your country with giant steps. Such profits as your official statistics show, are unheard of nowadays in English, French or Ger- man textile manufactories. 10, 15, at the outside 20%, average pro- fits, and 25-30% in very very exceptional years of prosperity, are con- sidered good. I was only in the childhood of modern industry that es- tablishments with the very latest and best machinery, producing their goods with considerably less labour than was at the time socially nec- essary, were able to secure such rates of profit. At present, such pro- fits are made only on lucky speculative undertakings with new inven- tions, that is to say on one undertaking out of a hundred, the rest mostly being dead failures.

The only country where similar, or approximatively similar profits are nowadays possible in staple industries, is the United States, America. There the protective tariff after the civil war, and now the Mackinley tariff,338 have had similar results, and the profits must be, and are, enormous. The fact that this state of things depends entirely on tariff legislation, which may be altered from one day to another, is sufficient to prevent any large investment oïforeign capital (large, in proportion to the quantity of domestic capital invested) in these in- dustries, and thus to keep out the principal source of competition and lowering of profits.

Your description of the changes produced by this extension of mod-

[^1]: " rearing of millionaires





**[p. 279]**

With you, there is the resistance of the o6yu,mah to be overcome (al- though I should say that that must be giving way considerably in the constant struggle with modern Capitalism), there is the resource of farming land from the large proprietors which you describe in your letter of May l'st2 9 ' — a means of securing surplus value to the prop- rietor but also of continuing a lingering existence to the peasant as a peasant] and the kulaki,c too, as far as I can see, on the whole prefer keeping the peasant in their clutches as a sujet à exploitation? to ruin- ing him once for all and getting his land transferred to them. So that it strikes me, the Russian peasant, where he is not wanted as a work- man for the factory or the town, will also die hard, will take a deal of killing before he does die.

The enormous profits secured by the youthful bourgeoisie in Rus- sia, and the dependence of these profits on a good crop (harvest) so well exposed by you, explain many things otherwise obscure. Thus what should I make out of this morning's statement in the Odessa correspondence of a London paper: the Russian commercial classes seem to be possessed of the one idea, that war is the only real panacea for the ever increasing depression and distrust from which all Russian industries are now suffering — what should I make of it and how ex- plain it but for this coplete dependence of a tariff-made industry on

[^1]: '' creation of domestic market-b commune (Russ.)-' rich peasants in Russia - '' object of exploitation





**[p. 280]**

Very interesting are your notes on the apparent contradiction that, with you, a good harvest does not necessarily mean a lowering of the price of corn. When we study the real economical relations in var- ious countries and at various stages of civilization, how singularly erroneous and deficient appear the rationalistic generalizations of the 18th century — good old Adam Smith who took the conditions of Edinburgh and the Lothians as the normal ones of the universe! Well, Pushkin already knew that

H noieiuy He Hyxaio 30AOTa ciwy, Koiyta npoc TOft npo.Ay KTB HM-LCTT». OTCLJT. no HHTb ero He Mon> H 3e MAH OT/ia Ba Ab Bb 3a Aorb.a

Yours very sincerely,

Next Monday I begin again with Volume III ' — and hope not to discontinue until complete.

This letter has been delayed until today 31 October in consequence of interruption.

[^1]: P.W. Rosherb

[^2]: First published, in Russian, in Minuvshiye Reproduced from the original gody, No. 2, St Petersburg, 1908

[^3]: * and why/it needs no gold if a supply/of simple product supplements it./His father failed to understand/and took a mortgage on his land. (A. Pushkin, Eugene Onegin, Ch. !.)-'' Engels' conspiratorial pseudonym-' of Capital



