---
Volume: 49
Document_Title: "146. Engel s to Conrad Schmidt. 1 November "
Page_Range: "316-319"
---

# 146. Engel s to Conrad Schmidt. 1 November 



**[p. 285]**

Anyway things are going ahead in Germany and before long the same thing will happen in France. We shall, perhaps, avoid a war and, since we are slow and methodical, that may give the French a chance to overtake us again by pulling off some mighty coup. It au- gurs well for the fin de siècle' and could put 1793 in the shade.

What idiots your bourgeois and the Russians are! In a war, En- gland with her fleet and her command of the sea would hold the bal- ance — which is why those gentry are impelling her into the arms of the Germans by teasing her on the subject of Egypt346!

Love to Laura — the Viennese women's paper3 hasn't appeared yet — for want of money, no doubt.

Yours ever,

F.E.

First published, in Russian, in Voprosy istorii Printed according to the original KPSS, No. 7, Moscow, 1965 , , „ , „ 1 ranslated trom the r rencn

Published in English for the first time

146

London, 1 November 1891

Dear Schmidt,

First of all, my congratulations on your engagement and, I hope, very imminent marriage. Let me know what the fateful day is to be so that we may drink to the health of yourself and your young bride, as we shall meanwhile be doing at lunchtime today with a glass of port.

May I also congratulate you on the agreement with Guttentag; it's a worthwhile undertaking but you will have to devote a good deal of time to it.347 Next week I shall be tackling Volume III b (which part-

[^1]: ENGELS TO CONRAD SCHMIDT 2 6 7

[^2]: IN ZURICH

[^3]: a Arbeiterinnen-Leitung - b of Capital





**[p. 286]**

You cannot, of course, do without Hegel and he's another chap whom it will take you time to digest. The short paper on logic in the Encyklopädie would be quite good to start off with, but the edition you should have is that in Volume 6 of the Werke — not Rosenkranz's separate edition (1845)—since the former contains far more expla- natory notes from the lectures, even if that idiot Henning himself fre- quently fails to understand the latter.

In the introduction, in §26, etc., you have first the critique of Wolfs version of Leibniz (metaphysics in the historical sense), then that of the English and French empiricists in §37, etc., then that of Kant, §40 et seqq. and, finally, that ofjacobi's mysticism, §61.— In the first section (Being), you ought not to linger too long over being and nothing—the last paragraphs on quality followed by quantity and measure are much nicer, but the theory of essence constitutes the main section: the dissolution of abstract opposites into their insub- stantiality when, as soon as one tries to grasp one aspect alone, it changes imperceptibly into the other, etc. At the same time you can always clarify things by means of concrete examples. E. g. you, as a fi- ancé, and your affianced yourselves present an outstanding example of the indivisibility of identity and difference. It is quite impossible to ascertain whether sexual love is the pleasure derived from identity in difference or that derived from difference in identity. Remove the dif- ference (in this case of sex) or the identity (the humanity of both), and what remains? I remember how tormented I used to be at first by this indivisibility of identity and difference, though we cannot take one step without stumbling over it.

On no account, however, should you read Hegel as Mr Barth has read him, namely so as to discover the paralogisms and shabby expe- dients that served him as tools for constructing his system. That is a schoolroom exercise, nothing more. What is far more important is to discover the truth and the genius beneath the falsity of the form and the factitious context. For instance, the transitions from one cate- gory or opposite to another are almost always arbitrary — and are often achieved by means of a.joke, as in §120, when positive and nega-



**[p. 287]**

tive 'fall to the ground' so that Hegel may proceed to the category 'ground'. To rack one's brains over this is a waste of time.

Since, in Hegel, each category represents a stage in the history of philosophy (as, indeed, he usually indicates), you would be well- advised to read the Vorlesungen über Geschichte der Philosophie — one of his most brilliant works—by way of comparison. For recreation I would commend the Ästhetik. Once you have gained some familiar- ity with it you will be amazed.

The inversion of Hegel's dialectics is based on the assumption that it is the 'self-development of the idea' of which, therefore, the dialectic of facts is only the image, while the dialectic in our minds is but the reflection of the actual development taking place in the natural world and human history in obedience to dialectical forms.

You should try comparing the Marxian progression from commod- ity to capital with the Hegelian from being to essence; this would give you quite a good parallel — on the one hand, the concrete dev- elopment which follows from the facts, on the other, the abstract con- struction, in which extremely brilliant ideas and, in certain cases, very just transformations such as that of quality into quantity and vice versa, are elaborated to produce what appears to be the self- development of one notion out of another, of which, indeed, it would be possible to concoct a dozen of the same kind.

The noble Wolf has sent me his opusa in the form of an off-print. But, although asked by an anonymous 'admirer'b whether I intend to 'box the fellow's ears', I haven't looked at it yet. An academic ofthat sort can wait.

The party congress went off very well.301 The amount of attention devoted to the 'opposition' did no harm; though it may have amused the philistines it undoubtedly had a very salutary effect upon the party.

[^1]: Bebel and Adler spent a few days over here after the Brussels Con- gress,135 when we were all very jolly. Bernstein's excellent introduc- tion to Lassalle is coming out in English.334

[^2]: " J. Wolf, 'Das Rätsel der Durchschnittsprofitratc bei Marx', Jahrbücher für National- ökonomie und Statistik, 2. Bd., 3. Folge.-b See this volume, p. 241.



