---
Volume: 49
Document_Title: "147. Engel s to Laura Lafargue. 9 November . . "
Page_Range: "319-322"
---

# 147. Engel s to Laura Lafargue. 9 November . . 



**[p. 288]**

Well, I hope that a whole lot of students, both male and female, will attend your first course of lectures. Kindest regards.

Yours,

F. Engels Mrs Kautsky sends you and likewise your fiancée her most sincere congratulations.

First published in Sozialistische Monatshefte, Printed according to the original Nr. 22-23, Berlin, 1920

Published in English in full for the first time

147

ENGELS TO LAURA LAFARGUE

AT LE PERREUX

London, 9 November 1891

My dear Laura,

Victoire! Though hidden in one of its most desolate corners, amongst the paragraphs that help to make up columns, The Daily News did inform us that Paul had beaten Dépasse (who now would do well to change the a of his name, source of so many calembours, into i) by 1,400 or thereabouts/ So the two toasts, in Port and Claret, of- fered up yesterday by us, were not without effect. Well, that's so much gained. And what is worth more than the victory itself almost, is the way in which it was won and which turns a common by- election into a great political action, a cause of incalculable effects. Paul may well back his Constans against the roi de Prusse b as an invo- luntary promoter of Socialism; but the real likeness lies between Con- stans and Bismarck, as it laid between Bismarck and Louis Bonapar- te— they all partake of that short-sighted cleverness and Dumm- schlauheit0 of the ordinary merchant and speculator who aims at one

[^1]: a See this volume, p. 269. - b William I - c low cunning





**[p. 289]**

thing, and by miscalculating causes and effects, arrives at effecting the very opposite.

Anyhow Constans' stupidity has resulted not only in Paul's elec- tion, which gives a tremendous élan to Socialism all over France, but also in loosening the coalition for the maintenance of the ministry which was formed against Boulangism at the Rue Cadet.223 I don't think the mass of the Clémencist Radicals will as yet fall away from the ministry, they are held too tightly. But the old feeling of security does no longer exist since the Roche-debate.3 i S And some, the more consistent elements like Millerand, can hardly keep within the minis- terial alliance. That, and the personal ambitions and intrigues within the ministry will be sufficient to bring on a change — and every change loosens the bonds between the Czar" and French Chauvinists, and thus is in favour of peace. By the bye, what an irony of history that the Russian government, after having spent millions on Boulanger, must now spend fresh millions on the very people who upset Boulan- ger!

It was a nice exciting time and I have to thank you very much for enabling me to follow all the péripéties of it in the Paris press. What a miserable helpless political ass that Ranc has become. Il doit être en train de s'enrichir, celui-là!h

I have sent a few lines of humorous congratulations to Paul direct, so that M. le directeur de la prison might have the perusal of them.153

If he should confiscate them I will send you a copy. But I hope and trust there will be more respect shown to M. le député.

I am anxious to see what Constans and the Chambre will do now. If they try to keep Paul in Ste-Pélagie, it will be all the worse for them.

It strikes me Mother Crawford is not far wrong in saying the strength of the present ministry is its having brought about outward signs of the French and Russian entente; and that this makes the Radi- cals 147 fear a dissolution.1 But if, as is probable, internal dissensions break up the ministry, taking advantage of another such doubtful vic- tory as that on Saturday week,d then everything changes. First, the Russian entente becomes very vapoury as soon as the instability of gov- ernments is evidenced again, and secondly, if the Cabinet splits up,

[^1]: a Alexander III- 1' He must be getting rich now, that man.-' Engels has in mind E. Crawford's'The French Ministry'in The Daily News, 9 November 1891.-'' 31 October





**[p. 290]**

I have looked at the Justice of Clemenceau lately again more often, and it strikes me that at the bottom of the antiboulangist Alliance must have been the idea that there was only one way of taking the wind out of the sails of any present or future Boulanger, and that is: to close with Russia at any price and then hasten on the guerre de re- vanche.* That is the only conclusion I can draw from the tone of the Justice: soyons plus patriotes que Boulanger! b And no doubt that plan would suit them all: settle the account with Germany, raise France again to a position of supremacy (which Russia might allow them to show of, provided France gave her the reality) and then, but not be- fore, settle our internal republican party quarrels. Unless that is the fact, I cannot make out either the language or the action of the Radi- cals. They may be fools, but there is a limit to all folly, outside the madhouse at least.

Louise is going to write a few lines, so I close with love

Ever yours,

F.E.

[^1]: My dear Laura,

[^2]: I am very proud that my definition of the letters M. P.335 turned out right at last though you have been right before and are right as long as the things last. The notice about M. P. (in your sense) election was underneath a paragraph 'The murder of a wealthy widow'; General found it out, as I did not know, that the election of a Social- ist ranges itself under the impression of a bourgeois0

[^3]: First published, in the language of the original (English), in: F. Engels, P. et L. Lafargue, Correspondance, t. Ill, Paris, 1959

[^4]: Reproduced from the original

[^5]: 1 retaliatory war- b let us be greater patriots than Boulanger! -c The end is missing.



