---
Volume: 49
Document_Title: "149. Engel s to Oscar Heidfeld. 12 November "
Page_Range: "327-328"
---

# 149. Engel s to Oscar Heidfeld. 12 November 



**[p. 296]**

are busily disposing of other funds and shares so as to be able to make a fresh payment to the Russians on the 20th of this month in Paris.2

First published in: Marx and Engels, Printed according to the original Works, First Russian Edition, Vol. XXVIII, Moscow, 1940 Published in English for the first time

149

ENGELS TO OSCAR HEIDFELD 3 5 5

IN LIVERPOOL

[Draft]

[London,] 12 November 1891

Dear Sir,

I still hold the documents mentioned in your letter356 but they are of no value whatever now, the policy having lapsed long since through Mr Dronke's failing to pay the premiums as he ought to have done. The very first premium due in November 1877 I did pay ex- pecting to be repaid by him, but when I applied for the money he never replied, nor have I been able ever since to make out his address, though my Manchester solicitors took every trouble to find him out. Under these circumstances, and in view of the almost certainty that the gradual payment with interest on the same and on the original loan would eat up more than any possible return for the policy, there was nothing left to me but to let the policy drop.

[^1]: From what you tell me I must conclude that the same result would have been arrived at had he not pledged the policy.b

[^2]: First published in: Marx and Engels, Printed according to the original Works, Second Russian Edition, Vol. 37, „ , ,, , , . _, ,. , . , _ ,„„. Published in English tor the hrst Moscow, 1965 . ö

[^3]: time

[^4]: a The postscript was written by Engels in the margin. - b The beginning and end of the letter are missing.



