---
Volume: 49
Document_Title: "150. Engel s to Friedrich Adolph Sorge. 14 November "
Page_Range: "328-330"
---

# 150. Engel s to Friedrich Adolph Sorge. 14 November 



**[p. 150]**

ENGELS TO FRIEDRICH ADOLPH SORGE

IN HOBOKEN

London, 14 November 1891

Dear Sorge,

A line or two in great haste before the last post goes. You will have heard by cablegram about Lafargue's victory.330 It was brought about by M. Constans, who is as stupidly cunning and doltish as Bis- marck, if not more so. 1. In a scandalously biassed trial he blamed Lafargue for the government's fusillade at Fourmies2 4 3 and got him sentenced to a year's imprisonment. 2. Having thus made Lafargue enormously popular in the Département du Nord, and after the latter had been put up for the first seat to become vacant at Lille, Constans kept him in prison, contrary to the precedent established 22 years earlier by the Empire itself, instead of releasing him for the period of the election; 3. when, in the first ballot, Lafargue polled 5.005 votes, i. e. only 780 fewer than were needed for an absolute majority, Constans still did not release him, despite being severely rapped over the knuckles by the Chamber. Since the Radical candidate,147 Roche, who had polled 2,274 votes, then proceeded to step down in favour of Lafargue, Lafargue's victory was assured.

But the best thing about it is that that idiot Constans further suc- ceeded in making Lafargue's election into an événement* thereby se- riously endangering his own position. For on 31 October, when a de- mand for Lafargue's release was made in the Chamber by Millerand, the proposal to go over to the order of the day was carried by 240 votes against the Radicals' 160. But only because 170 Monarchists did not vote. This was the first time the Radicals had voted against the government since the Boulangiade, thus demonstrating that the government can be top- pled at any moment by the combined votes of the Radicals and Monevent

But now that the Cabinet is torn by dissension and Freycinet would rather obtain his majority through the Radicals, whereas Constans would rather do so through the Monarchists and against the Radicals, now that Constans has incurred the odium of the workers by his ac- tions since May Day and his friend Rouvier is the most notorious and corrupt man in the Ministry, while Carnot, for his part, finds Con- stans intolerable because the latter is trying to succeed him, Carnot, as President of the Republic, all these parliamentary fluctuations as- sume significance. For the recurrence of ministerial instability in France is another guarantee of peace, since the Tsar would be chary of going to war arm-in-arm with a French government that is liable to topple any day.

Again, these symptoms are significant so far as France's domestic situation is concerned. A large number of Radicals — Millerand, Ho- velacque, Moreau, etc.— realise that they simply can't do without the workers and that the government's duplicity in introducing into the Chamber bills ostensibly favourable to labour while ensuring that these are thrown out by the Senate, is something that just won't do. But if Lafargue should now get in and the small 7 or 8 strong socialist group — all of them small fry and incapable of any initiative — thus obtain a leader, things might soon begin to change. Only on condition, however, that Paul himself doesn't allow his eighth or twelfth part of negro blood to run away with him.

What will happen about the Vorwärts I cannot say. It has im-

[^1]: In Germany everything is going swimmingly. In Munich 344 itself Vollmar suffered an even more decisive defeat than at Erfurt.301 The opposition ' 3 is virtually non-existent, and will soon be completely under the wing of the police. Any newspaper reports to the contrary, particularly such as are cabled to you, are false—I have seen some prime examples of this.



