---
Volume: 49
Document_Title: "151. Engel s to Friedrich Adolph Sorge. 21 November "
Page_Range: "330-332"
---

# 151. Engel s to Friedrich Adolph Sorge. 21 November 



**[p. 299]**

proved, but Hirsch isn't going to join it. Not that I really regard this as a misfortune.

Regards to your wife.a

Your

F.E.

First published abridged in Briefe und Auszüge aus Briefen von Jon. Phil. Becker, Jos. Dietzgen, Friedrich Engels, Karl Marx u. A. an F. A. Sorge und Andere, Stuttgart,

1906 and in full in: Marx and Engels, Works, First Russian Edition, Vol. XXVIII, Moscow, 1940

151

ENGELS TO FRIEDRICH ADOLPH SORGE 3 5 7

London, 21 November 1891

Dear Sorge,

Have had your' letter of 6 and postcard of 8 November. When Adler and Bebel came over here from Brussels, the former promised me that he would send you the Vienna Arbeiter-Leitung regu- larly, and the Viennese stand by their word. Now that the Austrian movement is growing in importance, I am having to keep copies of the paper myself.

Der arme Teufel caused much merriment over here. Adler took the first Adolfinade with him and I sent the second to Bebel.

It goes without saying that you should publish Marx's letters to yourself if you want to, without asking me or anyone else. As soon as your articles on the American labour movement are complete, you ought to bring them out — booklet form358 — in Dietz's Internation- ale Bibliothek, say — so that they can be kept permanently together.

Printed according to the original

Published in English for the first time

[^1]: IN HOBOKEN

[^2]: a Katharina Sorge





**[p. 300]**

If you like, I could do what is necessary to set the ball rolling with Dietz. He will, of course, have to pay for the things again.

Bakunin's biography325 received with thanks — haven't looked at it yet.

In one of my lettersa I asked you not to send me any middle-class American reviews — I can get all the good ones over here (from Mu- die's) if there's anything in them — and Tussy keeps her eyes open. On the other hand I was about to add a request when I was interrupt- ed and thus sent off the letter as it stood; namely, that you send me from time to time individual numbers of some women's rights or- gan— any old one. Louise looks at such stuff from time to time in order to keep herself—and hence also me — more or less informed about that racket.

In Berlin and other cities more victories in the municipal elec- tions— in Berlin the number of votes has trebled.359

The Jungen301 have formed an association333 and are bringing out a rag, Der Sozialist—impertinent and silly. Nothing but tittle-tattle and lies. True, they would be easier to combat if Liebknecht didn't make so many blunders and edit the Vorwärts so deplorably.

and a really splendid chap, was elected, etc., etc.

Your

F. Engels

[^1]: So Mrs Schlüter intends to come back after all! Just as we thought. In this country, too, we have scored sundry litde victories in the municipal elections; in West Ham (it's called WEST BECAUSE EAST OF THE

[^2]: EAST END), Will Thorne, secretary of the Gasworkers Union164

[^3]: Warm regards to your wifeb and yourself from

[^4]: First published abridged in Briefe und Printed according to the original Auszüge aus Briefen von Joh. Phil. Becker, Jos. Dietzgen, Friedrich Engels, Karl Marx u. A. an F.A. Sorge und Andere, Stuttgart,

[^5]: 1906 and in full in: Marx and Engels, Works, First Russian Edition, Vol. XXVIII, Moscow, 1940

[^6]: a See this volume, p. 264.-b Katharina Sorge



