---
Volume: 49
Document_Title: "153. Engel s to Laura Lafargue. 27 November "
Page_Range: "335-337"
---

# 153. Engel s to Laura Lafargue. 27 November 



**[p. 153]**

ENGELS TO LAURA LAFARGUE

AT LE PERREUX

London, 27 November 1891

My dear Laura,

You need not be afraid that it ever entered my mind to think Paul capable of a wilfully mean and dishonorable action. That is entirely out of the question. But the man may be the very soul of honour, and yet commit an et our de rie? the consequences of which may be incal- culable. And my letters contain no charge against Paul except the ex- pression of the possibility that he may have been led into such an étour- derie, and, besides, the attempt, supposing that to be the case, to help him out of it as much as lay in my power. To do which, it was abso- lutely necessary to make clear to him the full portéeh of the words put into his mouth.

Now you yourself admit that it is just possible he may have been led to commit such a blunder.

To recall the facts. On Monday eveningc The Evening Standard con- tains the Reuter360 which showed to me the necessity of immediate ac- tion, 1) to obtain authentic information, 2) to prevent further blun- ders, in case one had been committed. Hence my letter to you 153

which I hope you will, on re-reading, find less unjustifiable than when you had read it first. Well, the same night, or next morning at latest, I receive from you 1 ) the enclosed cutting from a paper not named — from which report Reuter had evidently abridged, 2) an In- transigeant 25. Novembre where under the heading: 'Le cit. Lafargue à Bordeaux', it is equally stated that on 22 November Paul, before a meeting of cinq ou six cents personnes dans la salle des Chats, said qu'à différentes reprises il avait (en 1870) remis à M. Ranc, alors directeur de la Sûreté générale, divers plans et documents importants sur la situation des armées allemandes qui lui avaient été communiqués par des socialistes allemands et qui au- raient pu changer la face des chosesd etc. etc.

[^1]: a error-b meaning-0 23 November-d ..Jive or six hundred people in the Chats hall, said that he (in 1870) provided M. Ranc, the then chief of the Secret Police, with diffe- rent plans and important documents pertaining to dislocations of the German armies



From that I was forced to conclude thatjyo« knew the contents of these two reports, and that the very fact of your sending them to me without a word of comment, implied a tacit acknowledgement that they were in substance correct. On that conclusion, and moreover remem- bering certain expressions in the Lille speech, equally sent by you, and which expressions I considered at least uncalled for, I could not act otherwise than write to Paul my letter of Wednesday 25th.153

Now of course I see that you had never read a report of Paul's speech, and that my letters to you and to Paul gave you the first inti- mation of what had been put into his mouth. But now you will also see that this is a matter which must be attended to; that the statement about the action of some German socialists during the war of 1870/71—whether substantially true or substantially false—ought never under any circumstances to have been made, if it was made, and ought to be clearly and unmistakably disavowed, at once, if it was not made; that so long as this report is not completely and absolutely dis- posed of, it will be absurd to expect our German friends to place any confidence in our French friends; and that the government and bour- geois in Germany will at once exploit this report against our German party in a way which is absolutely incalculable; if it leads to nothing more than a renewal of the old Socialist law, ' ' it will be lucky!

So if Paul has been slandered, if he is prepared to declare publicly that he never said a word implying in any way the assertion that Ger- man socialists, either in or out of Germany, provided him with military statements, plans, news or anything of the kind for the use of the French government during the war 1870/71—then let him send me that declaration at once and in a registered letter. But it must be plain, without reservation or qualification of any kind, or it will be useless and may turn out worse than useless.

If that plain declaration cannot, for one reason or another, be made, then I see no other way out of the mess but that you and Paul come over here at once and discuss by word of mouth such matters as will evidently be fitted for that mode of settlement alone. Your pres- ence will be almost as necessary as his, to moderate our hot heads and to give us the views of your cool head on the situation in France; and also to help us in finding 'the way out' by your feminine sagacity and souplesse,* in cases where we male clumsy stick-in-the-muds are left in

[^1]: which he received from the German socialists and which could have changed the course of events. " pliancy



