---
Volume: 49
Document_Title: "154. Engels to August Bebel. 1 December . .' "
Page_Range: "337-342"
---

# 154. Engels to August Bebel. 1 December . .' 



**[p. 306]**

the dark. You see I am anxious as anxious can be, to keep Paul out of the difficulty if he has got himself into one; but the very first thing is to prevent the commission of fresh mistakes in case one has already been committed. Tomorrow his election 330 will be settled, on Mon- day at latest I shall have the first reports from Germany on the effect of this thunderbolt from a clear sky, so if you come on Sunday, to be here in the evening, we might succeed in dispersing at least the worst of the clouds on Monday. A telegram 'Coming to-night' would be agreeable, as we receive no letters on Sunday. And under all and any circumstances I do hope Paul will not take any public steps in a matter deeply concerning other people without first consulting these people, the slightest blunder might be fatal to himself, and he will see, I hope too, that this is no joking matter and must be got out of the world as soon as possible.

Ever yours affectionately,

F.E.

First published, in the language of the Reproduced from the original original (English), in: F. Engels, P. et L. Lafargue, Correspondance, t. Ill, Paris, 1959

154

ENGELS TO AUGUST BEBEL

London, 1 December 1891

Dear August,

At last, after three exuberant days, my birthday mood may per- haps have subsided sufficiently for me to write a moderately rational letter again. First, then, the Lafargue affair has been settled. I have today heard from Laura—Lafargue has gone to Lyons,362 having only been in Paris for a couple of hours on Saturday to attend to his scrutiny — who says:

[^1]: IN BERLIN

[^2]: 'Paul authorises me to say, 1. that he confirms his letter to you' (see below); 2. 'that the meeting at which he spoke in Bordeaux was private',— a closed meeting for mem- bers of the Workers' Party—'that no reporters had been^admitted and no official re-





**[p. 307]**

cord exists; 3. the incriminating statements are the invention of a reporter brodant sur le texte a"un article publié par Ranc1 (embroidering on the text of an article by Ranc); 4. 'the words used by Paul were as follows: "If I insisted upon the war being continued, this was because the information at my disposal led me to believe that Ger- many was not in a position to hold out for very much longer." '

She adds:

'There was no question of plans obtained by Germans or through their agency; in general Paul declares that, throughout the war, he received no communications of any kind from Germany. And Paul also says that he subscribes to your demands, and not only subscribes to them but challenges any refutation of his above statement.'

(Le Perreux, 28 November; only reached me today.) 363

In his letter to me (Lyons, 26 November), Lafargue says that the purport of his speech had been such and such, that in 1870 the Inter- national in all countries had considered it its duty to prevent the crushing of the French Republic by Bismarck's troops, and that while the other Internationals had fought under Garibaldi, the Germans had protested against the continuation of the war and the rape of Al- sace-Lorraine.

My demands to which he subscribes were for the repudiation, without reservation or qualification, of the statements ascribed to him and of their purport. These you now have and may use as you think fit.

So that's one weight off my mind, I'm glad to say. Thanks to the colossal stupidity of our enemies, they have lost this opportunity for a scandal, and now it is gone for ever. Should anything be brought up now, you will be forearmed and your assailants will look foolish in the extreme. But while the uncertainty lasted we over here were in a muck sweat, I can tell you, for fear that some reptile364 or other should get his fangs into the thing before we knew what answer to make and how to give him the lie. But what idiots they are! As Tussy said only last Sunday, if we had got hold of some information like that about our enemies, what wouldn't we have done with it!

I missed the incident at Potsdam involving William II; what was it 3 6 5? The affair would certainly seem to be assuming a growing pace, and every such straw in the wind is.of interest. According to the papers over here, your Emperor intends to relinquish all the hono- rary colonelships he holds in the Russian army because of the impo- lite way in which Alexander travelled across his domains.354 I should say that the Russians are trying to inveigle him into untimely esca- pades so that he may appear to be a disturber of the peace whilst they, who are pretty well unassailable, can afford to play for the highest stakes and allow him to purchase peace at the price of further conces-



**[p. 308]**

sions. That they really intend war seems to me impossible. The failure of the French loan 302—instead of £20 million a bare £12; famine of unprecedented dimensions and intensity; the winter crops virtually destroyed by lack of seed and unfavourable weather; the wholesale death or slaughter of cattle and horses in the most fertile regions for lack of fodder, so that agriculture will be paralysed for years to come—all these are things which, in a semi-barbarous country like Russia, will deprive the army of any prospect of successful action. But despite all this> the Russians are not deterred from behaving politi- cally as though they were deliberately heading for war; this they can permit themselves because of their strategic position and their exper- tise in betraying their friends. Of course, their little plan may always go awry — hence mobilisation and troop concentrations on a massive scale which, if things go off peacefully, can also serve as an instrument of diplomatic pressure.

Wonderful. France and Russia are confronting the Triple Alli- ance,303 based 'on the existing status quo', with a Dual Alliance 288

which has 'a far loftier principle, namely the maintenance of the trea- ties!' Or so the papers say. Thus France, wishing to break the Treaty of Frankfurt, declares itself desirous of supporting it with the help of Russia, while Russia, which customarily breaks all treaties, enters into alliance with this self-same France because of the latter's stead- fast demeanour. How stupid men such as these must consider the pub- lic to whom they address themselves.

Your budget speech was brilliant366—to judge by the Vorwärts. Do let us have the stenographic report. The allusion to our soldiers could not have been more apt. Why keep one's mouth shut about things our enemies know as well as we do?

The fact that Carl Hirsch isn't coming is not, to my mind, a disas- ter.3 I didn't like to say anything once matters had been settled, but over here I at once remarked that it wouldn't work out. Hirsch is not only pig-headed but also embittered without reason, believing as he does that he was unfairly excluded from the editorship of the Sozial- demokrat; in fact, I believe that his resentment was directed more against Marx and myself than against you people.367 For, as you will remember, what he wanted was that we should press him to accept, which had never ever crossed our minds. At all events he thereupon ceased to play any active role and has since accumulated such a mass

[^1]: a See this volume, p. 299.





**[p. 309]**

of grievances and crotchets that, if for no other reason, it might, I think, be better were he to void his costiveness elsewhere, after which he will gradually return to a more normal frame of mind and thus again become capable of doing something worthwhile. But I feel sure that Liebknecht and he would not have endured six weeks of each other's company without falling out. Schoenlank, too, has cer- tain bees in his bonnet; so far as I can judge he hasn't nearly enough guts to put up the necessary resistance and will soon chalk up so many sins of omission as to make his chief editor his chief in real earnest. Well, we shall have to wait and see how things go — they can't get very much worse.

You are always comparing the situation in Germany with that of 1787-88; it is far more like that of 1847 in France and the scandals which brought about the downfall of Louis Philippe: Teste, the venal minister, the duc de Praslin, who murdered his wife, an equerry to the king who was caught cheating at cards in the Tuileries, or Fould who paid bribes in high places to get into the Légion D'Honneur, etc., etc. What's odd is the way people in Germany carry on about a bank crisis; for the few tin-pot firms that have gone to the wall are quite outside international trade as such — money brokers to civil servants, officers, landed aristocracy, petty bourgeoisie — to everyone in fact except wholesalers. If Anhalt & Wagener, Diskonto-Kommandit, Deutsche Bank, etc., were to put up their shutters, then it might be permissible to speak of a bank crisis. But even so, things aren't so dusty and, if the cloak falls, the Duke will soon come tumbling after.a

What you tell me about the kind of 'comrades' who are now pre- senting themselves is most interesting and also significant so far as the situation is concerned.368 They have noticed that we are, to use a rep- tilian expression, becoming a 'factor' in the state and, since the Jews have more intelligence than the other bourgeois, they are the first to notice this — especially under the impulsion of anti-Semitism — and the first to come over to us. We can only be glad of the fact but, pre- cisely became these chaps are brighter and have, as it were, been thrown back on and schooled in careerism by centuries of oppression, one has to be rather more on the qui vive.

Please will you convey my best thanks to the parliamentary group for their kind telegram of the 28th.369 As soon as I get the photo-

[^1]: a Paraphrased from Schiller's Die Verschwörung des Fiesco zu Genua.





**[p. 310]**

graphs I shall endeavour to pay back in kind all the testimonies of friendship I have received.

Ede tells me you had suggested that he should spend more time at the Society.89 I am firmly convinced that every minute he spends there would not only be completely wasted but would also discredit the party. He would have to consort with Gilles there and that is completely out of the question. But what he ought to do is frequent the English, get to know the chaps personally and enlighten them about things in Germany by conversing with them; as it is, he sits at home and forms an opinion of local affairs from the accounts he reads in one or at most two newspapers, there being no coffee houses or read- ing-rooms in his district.

Finally, let me assure you — as expressly requested — that Louise has executed her commission with a dignity worthy of a president of the Reichstag — at the very least; she had no opportunity for making bad jokes since I invariably forestalled her with some of my own. In other respects we were, however, exceedingly merry during the time in question, not least on account of your ostensible admirer370 who, on the last page, revealed himself to be a 'Junger'301 desirous of plac- ing you on the shelf. The fellow is really priceless, with his ultra-High German.

Your

F.E.

[^1]: Warm regards to Mrs Juliea and yourself from Louise and

[^2]: First published in: Marx and Engels,

[^3]: Works, First Russian Edition, Vol. XXVIII, Moscow, 1940

[^4]: Printed according to the original

[^5]: Published in English for the first time

[^6]: Julie Bebel



