---
Volume: 49
Document_Title: "155. Engels to Laura Lafargue. / December "
Page_Range: "342-343"
---

# 155. Engels to Laura Lafargue. / December 



**[p. 155]**

ENGELS TO LAURA LAFARGUE

AT LE PERREUX

London, 1 December 1891

My dear Laura,

Your letter of the 28th, postmark Le Perreux 30th, arrived today and took an awful weight off my mind.a I have at once sent a transla- tion to Bebel and authorized him to use it whenever necessary.b

Fortunately the stupidity of our enemies in Germany has been so colossal that they have, so far at least, seemingly overlooked the whole affair. What I was most afraid of, was that they should raise a storm in Germany before we had been able to ascertain the facts and to be armed with the materials for a crushing reply. Hesitation on the part of the German leaders, or random assertions that might be contradicted, would have been equally dangerous. Now the first danger is over, and although it is quite on the cards that the German Embassy in Paris may have sent reports which in consequence of the usual bureaucratic delays get into the press a week too late, we have a strong position and can meet the charge if it should come.

Still for that purpose it would be important to have Ranc's article. If it was possible to broderc such stuff upon it, it must form a peculiar canvas, and not only the false report of Paul's speech,360 but also Ranc's words may be quoted; and we ought to know what they are. Paul merely wrote, Ranc had written in his favour with regard to Bordeaux 1870. Could you procure us the number, and if not, at least say what paper it appeared in, that we may try to hunt it up here?

Now as to other matters.

1 ) Some time ago I sent you 10s. for account of Sorge for the Socia- liste; please say whether you have received it, you know how particu- lar old Sorge is.

I sent rather more than 3 weeks ago? I sent a lot of copies to the Con- tinent and not one has been acknowledged. As the English Post sim-

[^1]: 2) Have you received the copy of 4th edition Ursprung der Familie d

[^2]: a See this volume, pp. 306-07.-b Ibid., p. 307. - c embroider-d The Origin of the Fa- mily, Private Property and the State



