---
Volume: 49
Document_Title: "156. Engels to Natalie Liebknecht. 2 December "
Page_Range: "343-345"
---

# 156. Engels to Natalie Liebknecht. 2 December 



**[p. 312]**

ply confiscates book-post matter for abroad if a half-penny is short on the postage, I begin to feel rather anxious.

3) Tussy is bothered to death by Greenwood, the secretary of the glass-workers who has sent a lot of money for the French glass- workers on strike and cannot get a single acknowledgment of receipt. He says in a letter to Tussy November 28th that he has sent to Paul same day £49 for that purpose — will you please do your best to get Paul to acknowledge all sums sent through him and also to get Pierre Morrier of Lyons who has had several sums, to do the same? The Castleford Glass Bottle Makers have behaved very well to their French comrades, and the least these latter can do is to acknowledge receipt, so as to enable the senders to account for the money to their constituents. Unless this simple act is complied with, it will be doubt- ful whether the English Trades Unions will not get tired of support- ing Continental strikes, and certainly nobody could blame them.

Bebel's speech on the budget was very good.366 As soon as I get a pretty full report I shall send it you.

Last night a letter from Sam Moore; had arrived at Lagos in the Niger delta, and would be back in the arms of his black wife in about a week or ten days.

Yours ever,

F. Engels

156

London, 2 December 1891

Dear Mrs Liebknecht,

Please accept my sincere thanks for your kind good wishes on yet another birthday372; they have, for the present at any rate, been

[^1]: First published, in the language of the Reproduced from the original original (English), in: F. Engels, P. et L. Lafargue, Correspondance, t. Ill, Paris, 1959

[^2]: ENGELS TO NATALIE LIEBKNECHT 3 7 1

[^3]: IN BERLIN





**[p. 313]**

pretty well granted, as I'm in the happy state of being physically fit and mentally alert and I trust this will so continue. We spent an ex- ceedingly cheerful day and good wishes poured in from all sides; even Mr and Mrs Motteler paid us a visit while we were sitting down to our morning glass of beer. In the evening, however, we went to Tus- sy's where the Bernsteins were also present, and by doing so we frus- trated a serenade which had been planned for me by the choir of the Workers' Society.89 As I did not hear about this until Saturday morning, I was unfortunately not able to warn the gentlemen soon- er.373 All in all I was not sorry that it turned out as it did; I have a deep-rooted aversion to such demonstrations which are impossible to get out of if one's occupation is that of agitator, popular speaker or member of parliament. However I have been lucky enough to avoid them up till now and intend to do so in future.

Otherwise there's nothing particularly new to report; Tussy enjoys the not wholly unjustified reputation of being in charge of the Union of Gasworkers and General Labourers 164 and the week before last she was away for eight days on a propaganda trip to Northern Ire- land. But they are in fact quite splendid chaps, these gasworkers, and their union is far more progressive than any of the others. Moreover they're so conversant with agitation 'in conformity with the law' that eighteen months ago in Leeds they fought and won two regular bat- tles, first with the police and then with the police and dragoons, and forced the city council, the owners of the gasworks, to capitulate.374

As an old soldier I'll say this for Will Thome, General Secretary of the union, who was in command during these battles — I could not find the slightest fault either in his strategic or in his tactical disposi- tions.

For the rest, we are leading a somewhat quieter life than at the time when the Sozialdemokrat was functioning. Apart from the Ave- lings and Bernsteins, we see only few people; the Mottelers seldom go out, the Mendelsons are busy with their Polish club on Sunday eve- nings and, since March of this year, Pumps and her family have been living in Ryde on the Isle of Wight where her husband runs an agency business. I go down to see them occasionally and in July spent a month there, accompanied by Schorlemmer 2 6 4 just at the time when the French fleet was in. So far as one can judge from their exter- nal appearance, their ironclads, which are of the latest design, are far superior to those of the British. Pumps leads a delightful existence in a little house some 20 minutes' walk from the town and right out in

