---
Volume: 49
Document_Title: "157. Engels to Karl Kautsky. 3 December "
Page_Range: "345-348"
---

# 157. Engels to Karl Kautsky. 3 December 



**[p. 314]**

the country, which is obviously an enormous advantage so far as the children are concerned. She is very fond of the life down there and if, as we hope, her husband does well, they will all benefit from having ex- changed the air of London for that of the sea. The Isle of Wight is very pretty, indeed beautiful in parts; you can sail right round it in a steamer in seven hours, a very nice trip during which the tyro runs the risk of being seasick for about 2l/2 hours.

Will you please give Liebknecht the enclosed notes and convey to him, as well as to your son,a my sincere thanks for their good wishes.

I trust that Berlin will continue to please you and that your health will permit you to enjoy the amenities of the 'imperial capital' in all its aspects. Meanwhile perhaps you will remember kindly

Yours sincerely,

F. Engels

Louise also sends her best wishes to you, Liebknecht and family.

First published in: Marx and Engels, Printed according to the original Works, First Russian Edition, Vol. _ , ,. , , . „ ,. , • r ., r ,

V V , , I T I A» ,„.„ Published in hnehsh in lull tor the XXVIII, Moscow, 1940 _ . &

157

London, 3 December 1891

Dear Kautsky,

Your letter of 30 October has long been awaiting an answer; the blame for this must be placed upon Volume I I I b which I am once again sweating away at. I have just got to the most difficult part, i. e. the last chapters (six to eight or thereabouts) on money capital, banks, credit, etc., and, once having started, I shall have to keep at it

[^1]: hrst time

[^2]: ENGELS TO KARL KAUTSKY 177

[^3]: IN STUTTGART

[^4]: a Theodor Liebknecht-1" of Capital





**[p. 315]**

without a break and work through the relevant literature again, in short make myself completely au fait, if only so that I may — as is probable — eventually leave most of it as it stands, yet at the same time feel quite sure that I have committed no blunders either in the positive or the negative sense.

Very many thanks for the reports on Erfurt30 ' ; they were of value to me in many respects, the discussions of the programme committee being of particular interest. You describe the Executive's draft as his, Liebknecht's. Bebel sent me all the material relative to the genesis of this draft269 from which it is evident that at each stage a fair portion of Liebknecht's initial work had been dropped and replaced with Be- bel's propositions until in the end little or nothing remained. What did remain, however, was a lack of coherence, of rigour in the co- ordination of individual propositions, both being attributable to the consideration paid to Liebknecht's work. That was what gave your draft299 the advantage, as everyone was bound to acknowledge at first glance, and it was that, too, along with Bebel's public admission of the fact, which immediately convinced the others.

The recent investigations, which have rendered obsolete Marx's chapter on the historical trend of capitalist accumulation,375 are in any case the work of Geiser who is of course regarded in Breslaua as a genuine scientific authority. However it is also possible that in his embarrassment Liebknecht said (for he was obviously unaware that these propositions had been taken from Capital) the first 'bit of non- sense', as he would put it, that came into his head.

At any rate the theoretical part of the programme is now perfectly presentable; the main thing is that it should contain nothing that is theoretically controversial and in the main this aim has been achieved. The practical demands contain all kinds of snags; many of them seem philistine — if applied to conditions today — but now that we occupy a position of power we can reply quite rightly that they will certainly not be implemented until we come to the helm and that they will then assume quite a different character. As, for instance, free legal advice. A six hours' working day up till the age of 18 obviously ought to have gone in — as also the banning of night work for women and of any sort of work at the very least one month before and 6 weeks after a confinement.

I'm sorry for Liebknecht. For he had to sing the praises of the new

[^1]: Wroclaw





**[p. 316]**

programme although it was perfectly plain to everyone that he had had no part in it whatever. But he took on the job of his own accord, so what can one do about it?

What you say about Tölcke's speech is new to me and most interest- ing.376 Ede's work' 7 8 goaded the Old Lassalleans into a state of great activity at a time when Marx's letter a had already roused them from the complacency induced by the obligatory deification of Las- salle. Even Jacob Audorf, the discoverer of the path of boldness along which we were led by Baron Izzy 377 (as Marx used to call the chap), has been letting forth indignant battle cries amidst the Sunday chit- chat of the Hamburger Echo.h But they no longer count for anything. Incidentally, Ede got much more upset than he needed to over Be- bel's, etc., criticism. Bebel was most reasonable, merely demanding that, so far as the form was concerned, his procedure should be such as not, at the very outset, to frighten off those readers with a tradition of Lassalle worship or to give the Old Lassalleans any justified grounds for complaint. To this was added the unfortunate circumstance that Ede had inserted a note that was admittedly quite uncalled for (be- cause he turned it into a piece of tittle-tattle by using 'probably') about syphilis 309 and the worthy censors in Berlin did not spot this note until it was too late. The fact that they had made a hash of the business caused them, of course, to fly momentarily into a mighty Achillean rage whereupon Ede, of course, had to atone, not only for his own lapse but even more for theirs, by receiving a number of indignant let- ters. Naturally I have backed him up as best as I could throughout the whole affair.

The opposition press lives on the antithesis of the national Lassalle and the unpatriotic Social-Democrats. So they'll take care not to lay their hands on a book in which the legend of the nationalist Lassalle is so thoroughly demolished.

Ede's work is really very good and gave me great pleasure; it will elicit the major response it deserves in Germany — in the course of time — and, on completion of this edition, ought to be printed sepa- rately and/or expanded by Ede and divested of its special purpose. By then things will have progressed far enough for this to be perfectly feasible. In this country, too, it will have a good effect, for over here your socialistically inclined bourgeois is also seeking to oppose Marx by making a legend out of Lassalle.

[^1]: a K. Marx, Critique of the Gotha Programme. - b Q. Audorf,] 'Zum Parteikongresse', Ham- burger Echo, No. 245, 1st Supplement, 18 October 1891.



