---
Volume: 49
Document_Title: "158. Engels to Paul Lafargue. 3 December "
Page_Range: "348-350"
---

# 158. Engels to Paul Lafargue. 3 December 



**[p. 317]**

I shall take another look at the letter Labriola wrote to Tussy. My impression is that it would be better not to print it. Labriola is very dissatisfied with the way things are going in Italy and I'm not sure that it may not have something to do with his disappointment over the fact that AM joining the movement did not immediately revive and revolutionise it. So far as I recall, the letter was of the kind that might have elicited dozens of replies. Some strange things are certainly go- ing on there.

You will regret Lafargue's translation from Pélagie a to the Cham- ber. It will deprive you of many a nice article.

Addio.

Your

F.E.

Plekhanov's articles are excellent.b

First published in Aus der Frühzeit des Printed according to the original Marxismus. Engels Briefwechsel mit Kautsky, Prae 1935 Published in English in full for the first time

158

London, 3 December 1891

My dear Lafargue,

After your formal repudiation of all those passages in the Bordeaux reportc of which I had a right to complain, it only remains for me to take back all the wounding words I may have used about you and outright to ask your forgiveness.

As my only excuse I shall describe for your benefit the situation in

[^1]: ENGELS TO PAUL LAFARGUE 141

[^2]: AT LE PERREUX

[^3]: a See this volume, pp. 297-98.-b G. W. Plechanow, 'Zu Hegel's sechzigstem Tode- stag', Die Neue Zeil, 10. Jg. 1891/92, 1. Bd., Nr. 7-9.- c See this volume, pp. 306-07.





**[p. 318]**

which I found myself. One eveninga The Evening Standard arrived with the Reuters report you know about 3 6 0; the next evening a bundle of newspapers from Laura, amongst them the Intransigeant with the re- port in question; then a cutting from yet another paper with the same report. All three versions were in agreement on the main point. So what conclusion could I have come to other than that Laura had read those reports and that, if she had sent them to me without a word of comment, they were to all intents and purposes accurate. Hence Paul must have said something of the sort.

Again, it contained things — whether true or not — which could only have been said by you or by Ranc. If said by Ranc, you would certainly not have hesitated to advise me of a fact that could have the gravest repercussions on the situation of the German socialists — well then?

Just so. For our friends in Germany it would mean at best the re- introduction of the Anti-Socialist Law,1 ' frenziedly acclaimed by all the Chauvins in our ruling classes, the suppression of our newspapers and meetings, of all our literature and, in the event of war, the arrest of all the LEADERS at the very time when we would have most need of them to take advantage of the impending revolutionary moment. It would also mean the implantation of an element of discord, of mis- trust, between French and German working men at the very moment when unity was more necessary than ever.

Thanks to the stupidity of our enemies, these accounts have not yet been cited in the German press. But the Embassy will undoubtedly have made use of them in its reports. And although your disavowal, which was at once passed on to Berlin,h has lifted a terrible weight from my mind, fhere is always the danger that the German govern- ment will keep this accusation up its sleeve so as to imprison our best men at the outbreak of war and annihilate them with an accusation that would be doubly appalling at a time when chauvinist passions were running riot. So your disavowal would go only halfway towards protecting them and this is why.

You say that the reporter embroidered the article by Ranc. But that embroidery, such as it is, would not have been possible had not Ranc at least sketched out the design on the canvas. I haven't set eyes on that canvas. So please be so kind as to send me either the article it- self or at least a copy of the relevant passages; or else let me know the

[^1]: " 23 November-1' See this volume, pp. 301-02.



