---
Volume: 49
Document_Title: "161. Engels to Karl Kautsky. 27 December "
Page_Range: "353-356"
---

# 161. Engels to Karl Kautsky. 27 December 



**[p. 161]**

ENGELS TO KARL KAUTSKY ' "

IN STUTTGART

London, 27 December 1891

Dear Baron,

A line or two in haste. I have fallen very far behind with everything as a result of a five-day fog which (abetted by tippling) has again af- fected my eyes somewhat and, on top of that, the following extras:

1. Proof correction of the English CONDITION OF THE WORKING-CLASS* of which so far 6 sheets remain unread.

2. Revision of Aveling's translation of Entwicklung des Sozialis- mus^ which has got to be done properly; since I live in the place of publication I shall ineluctably be held responsible for every slip.

3. The colossal amount of correspondence, swollen by the festive season.

Not to mention a working day greatly curtailed by having to spare my eyes.

You will understand that, since work on Volume III e must be re- sumed as soon as possible and thereafter continued without interruption until finished, I shall only be able to run through your ms.379 very cursorily, but what can be done I shall gladly do.

The new things about exchange value and value in the third edi- tion of Capital6 derive from handwritten addenda of Marx's, of which unfortunately there are very few, while such as there are were elaborated in the very difficult circumstances of illness. Marx spent a long time searching for the mot juste and made a lot of corrections.

[^1]: So far as Fireman380 is concerned, it is certainly quite plausible that, if ^- = V2 = V3 = V4 = '/si etc-> occurs in practice, then one fraction or another should correspond to the proportion whereby profit and sur- plus value coincide (crudely speaking, for it is also subject to all man- ner of reservations). However, the chap is nevertheless to be commend-

[^2]: 2 F. Engels, The Condition of the Working-Class in England in 1844. -b F. Engels, Socia- lism: Utopian and Scientific.-' of Capital-d K. Marx, Das Kapital. Kritik der politi- schen Oekonomie. Erster Band. Buch I: Der Produktionsprocess des Kapitals. Dritte vermehrte Auflage, Hamburg, 1883.





**[p. 323]**

ed for having lighted on this idea. If he is agreeable, please send me his paper. It will, indeed, have to remain closeted in my desk until such time as I write the preface to Volume 111,a at which point, provid- ed it is really worth the trouble, I shall be able to accord it a place alongside other attempted solutions. I can do no more and with that Schmidt, too, was content. 3 8 1 If he doesn't like it, let him publish his paper and see what happens.

That poor R. Meyer should be reduced to taking refuge with us is almost tragic. POORDKVIL, in addition to bad luck and diabetes, he has found out just what his conservative friends, wherever they may be, are like. 3 8 2

Having boxed Gilles' ears, Aveling is in even less of a position to re- ply to his flysheets. Gilles doesn't of course publish that kind of filth in the press over here, and no one could expect Aveling to sue him for LI- BEL and spend several hundred pounds on bringing a law-suit only to see Gilles vanish into thin air on the eve of the proceedings. Labou- chère, when accused of LIBEL, was asked by defending counsel: 'HAVE YOU

EVER BROUGHT AN ACTION TOR LIBEL?' 'No,' came the reply, T NEVER WAS SUCH A FOOL.' Whereat judge and lawyers alike pronounced him one of the leading authorities ON THE LAW OF LIBEL.

The Berliners, or Liebknecht at any rate, have made fools of us over the compositors' strike. 3 8 3 M r Döblin, who came over here on behalf of the compositors, bearing letters of introduction from Lieb- knecht to everyone you can think of save Ede and myself, has not only ignored the German party over here, but has treated it de haut en bash

and denigrated it, at any rate in a negative sense. At Burns' he said the party had done nothing whatever for them, whereas it had in fact donat- ed 20,000 marks. And when Sanders who was there asked him whether the entire party press hadn't backed them up, he was forced to admit that it had. And then Liebknecht writes ' 5 3 asking me to do everything I can for the compositors, but omitting to tell me what he and the party have done and not so much as mentioning the fact that one of the chaps' representatives is over here. In the circumstances I could not, of course, do anything — after all, it was only through the English press that I learnt what was afoot and I wasn't a fool as to impose myself on a man who had carefully shunned the party and dealt with the TRADES COUNCIL 1 9 6 direct. This, as you can imagine, was grist to the Hyndman-Gilles mill—'Now you can see,' they say,

[^1]: a In the ms: of the third edition- b with contempt





**[p. 324]**

'that there's nothing whatever behind the much vaunted German party. Even the workers don't want to have anything to do with it and say it's no good.' And only this week we see the fruits thereof in the Justice in which Gilles publicly sides with the Independents."333

A piece of good luck, as it happens, for it means that Hyndman will compromise himself and put his foot in it just as he did of yore with Brousse & Co.

The German bosses will be fools if they don't now introduce linotype machines which are increasingly being used by all the big newspapers both here and in New York.

Burns was horrified to learn that the compositors are given 21 M a week strike pay whereas here it's never more than 10 or 15sh. at the outside.

When the compositors sent someone over here, our Berlin chaps should either have insisted that he act in concert with Ede, the Ger- man party's representative here, or else have refused to co-operate. The party is no longer under any compulsion to throw itself at the heads of these aristocrats of the working class.

Last Sunday b Ede was burgled and lost £10, as you may already have heard. His nerves are in a very bad state and he needs rest and fresh air.

Thanks for your good wishes. Our entire household, including Tid- lums, wish you and your wifec and your sond the best of health and happiness in the coming year. Tidlums has grown into a large, majes- tic tomcat, the sultan of all the female cats in Regent's Park Road and the terror of all competitors and rivals.

Your

F. Engels

[^1]: First published in Aus der Frühzeil des Marxismus. Engels Briefwechsel mit Kautsky, Prag, 1935

[^2]: Printed according to the original

[^3]: Published in English in full for the first time

[^4]: 2 F. Gilles, 'The Independent Socialists in Germany', Justice, No. 415, 26 December 1891.-b 20 December-0 Luise Kautsky, née Ronsperger-d Felix Kautsky



