---
Volume: 49
Document_Title: "164. Engel s to Friedrich Adolph Sorge. 6 January "
Page_Range: "357-361"
---

# 164. Engel s to Friedrich Adolph Sorge. 6 January 



**[p. 326]**

1892

163

ENGELS TO THE LIEBKNECHT FAMILY 3 8 5

IN BERLIN

[London, 1 January 1892]

A Happy New Year. „ „ , r „ , ^- n t. Engels, L. Kautsky, Gine Bernstein,

Eug. Oswald, Tussy, Edward? Ede.

First published in: Marx and Engels, Printed according to the original Works, Second Russian Edition, Vol. 38, Moscow 1965 Published in English for the first time

164

London, 6 January 1892

Dear Sorge,

I hope you received our New Year's greetings card. Today I shall reply to your letters of 20 and 23 November and 9 December.

I have happily survived my 71st birthday and am, all in all, health- ier and stronger than 5 or 6 years since. If I go on till 1900 — though I don't know whether this would be a blessing or the re- verse— I shall, I hope, still witness all manner of things. In America

[^1]: ENGELS TO FRIEDRICH ADOLPH SORGE 3 8 6

[^2]: IN HOBOKEN

[^3]: Aveling





**[p. 327]**

you've got a movement which progresses by UPS AND DOWNS, frequently disappoints, and is therefore readily conducive to a mood of pessi- mism. If I incline to the opposite extreme, it is through having here, before my very eyes, a European movement which is on the whole making gigantic strides and has at its core the German movement, steadily forging ahead with the inexorability of a natural force. I have written something on the subjecta for the French almanac and shall send it you as soon as I get another copy.

War with Russia has fortunately been delayed by another 3 or 4 years, provided nothing idiotic is done anywhere. Since a peaceful course of development in Germany promises victory for us under the most favourable circumstances — somewhat later perhaps, but all the more surely for that — there is no reason for us to stake our all on a gamble, as we would have to do should there be such a war.

I do not believe there is as yet room for a third party in America. In that vast area the disparity of interests, even in the same section of one class, is so great that completely different sections and interests are represented according to locality in each of the two big parties and that, to a very great extent, virtually every separate stratum of the propertied class has its representatives in each of the two parties, al- though nowadays big industrialists constitute the bulk of the Republi- cans as do the big Southern landowners that of the Democrats. The apparent fortuitousness of this amalgam is a first-rate breeding- ground for corruption and the exploitation of the state which thrive so wonderfully over there. Only when the land — the public lands — is entirely in the hands of speculators, i. e. when settlement has be- come increasingly difficult and/or subject to fraud, only then, or so it seems to me, will the time have come for a third party, provided, that is, things develop peacefully. Speculation is based on the land and the mania as also opportunity for speculation in America are the chief means whereby the native-born workers are kept in thrall to the bourgeoisie. Only when there is a race of native-born workers with nothing more to expect from speculation, shall we have firm ground be- neath our feet in America. But then, who can expect things to devel- op peacefully in America? There you have sudden economic ad- vances like the political ones in France — where they admittedly also have the same momentary set-backs.

[^1]: " F. Engels, 'Le Socialisme en Allemagne', Almanach du Parti ouvrier pour 1892, Lille,

[^2]: 1892.



It seems improbable that the small farmers and the lower middle classes, consisting as these do of ail-too rapidly changing elements, will ever succeed in forming a strong party; furthermore the farmer is often a migrant who cultivates 2, 3 or 4 farms in succession in various states and territories387; in both cases immigration and bankruptcy promote a steady turn-over of individuals, while economic depen- dence on creditors is yet another impediment to independence. On the other hand, however, they provide a first-rate element for politicians who make capital out of their discontent and then proceed to sell them to one of the big parties.

The 'doggedness' of the YANKEES who are actually resurrecting GREENBACK HUMBUG again 3 8 8 is a consequence of their theoretical back- wardness and their Anglo-Saxon contempt for all theory. By way of retribution they are inflicted with a superstitious belief in any kind of philosophical and economic nonsense, and indulge in religious sec- tarianism and economically idiotic experiments, the benefit of which, however, is reaped by sundry bourgeois cliques.

Louise asks that you should send her nothing but the Woman's Jour- nal (Boston) and this only up till 31 March unless otherwise advised by us. She needs it for the Vienna Arbeiterinnen-Leitung (of which she, Laura and Tussy are the mainstays) and says it wouldn't occur to her to impose the foolish chit-chat of the American SWELL MOB LADIES on her working women. Thanks to your kindness in sending her the things, she is once more au courant and able to see that the said ladies are still as snotty and narrow-minded as ever they were and only wants to give this one paper a month or two's trial. In the meantime she thanks you most sincerely for your good offices.

At his first appearance in the Chamber Lafargue allowed himself to be somewhat flummoxed by the interjections and general up- roar.378 But he'll soon make up for it. The French always improve when engaged in hand-to-hand fighting.

The position as regards Gompers is this. He wrote, sending me de- tailed PAPERS concerning his association.389 I was away a great deal at the time — during the summer264—besides being tremendously busy, nor had I any clear idea of what was afoot and supposed that Iliacos extra peccatur muros et intra.a Then I heard that Gompers was going to Brussels and might come here, so I thought things could be settled by word of mouth. Later, when he didn't turn up, I put offdo-

[^1]: a Sins were committed within as without the walls of Troy (Horace, Epistles, I, 2, 16).





**[p. 329]**

ing anything. But I shall look out the papers and then reply to him; I thanked him for the list.

The other day I wrote to K. Kautsky153 asking him to inquire from Dietz about the publication of your articles in book form358

and am still awaiting a reply. More haste less speed, as they say in Germany, especially in Stuckert" on the Neckar's banks.

Blatchford has left The Workman's Times, which is a great relief. For that matter the paper evinces the defects that will always be insepar- able from any such private undertaking in this country so long as it isn't backed by a party strong enough to control it.

I have now got to 1. read the proofs of the new edition of the CONDITION OF THE WORKING-CLASS IN ENGLAND 1844, 2. go over Aveling's transla- tion of the Entwicklung des Sozialismus^ 3. attend to a few other odd- ments 3 9 0 and then 4. get down to Volume III e again, having now the most difficult chapters ahead of me. However, I think I shall manage if I vigorously exclude everything extraneous. What will then remain to be done will not, I believe, present any but formal dif- ficulties.

Your

F. Engels

[^1]: Warm regards to your wifed and yourself from L. Kautsky and

[^2]: First published abridged in Briefe und Printed according to the original Auszüge aus Briefen von Joh. Phil. Becker, Jos. Dietzgen, Friedrich Engels, Karl Marx

[^3]: u. A. an F.A. Sorge und Andere, Stuttgart,

[^4]: 1906 and in full in: Marx and Engels, Works, First Russian Edition, Vol. XXIX, Moscow, 1946

[^5]: a Stuttgart-6 F.Engels, Socialism: Utopian and Scientific.-c of Capital-'' Katharina Sorge



