---
Volume: 49
Document_Title: "165. Engels to Laura Lafargue. 6 January "
Page_Range: "361-363"
---

# 165. Engels to Laura Lafargue. 6 January 



**[p. 165]**

ENGELS T O LAURA LAFARGUE

AT LE PERREUX

London, 6 January 1892

My dear Laura,

The pears have arrived in very good condition, the few that were urgently in want of being devoured, have been at once attended to, and the rest is being gradually, thankfully and pleasurably con- sumed. That the old Fry's Cocoa box should return to us with such agreeable contents, and as they say of expired directors in joint-stock companies, 'offer itself for re-election' next Christmas, was a pleasant surprise indeed.

Paul wants to know about the constitution of the Board of Health.391 I will try to find it out, but am afraid I shall have to ask Tussy or Edward to hunt it up at the British Museum. If I only knew the year when the Board of Health was instituted, I might get the original Act of Parliament — if Sam was here, we should have it in a jiffy.

Your intermittent husband seems to be indeed seized with the fever of the wandering Jew — perhaps he wants to supersede him by the wandering Nigger392? Anyhow the proposition about separation of Church and State in the sense of the Commune 378 was the best thing he could do, it stops their mouths at once. Especially now when the French Clergy begin to face the eventuality and try to make it out that they ought to be, in that case, disestablished as the Church of Ireland was,393 that is to say not only keep all their property, but have the salaries capitalised and bought off in a lump sum — les milliards de l'Eglise! après ceux de M. Bismarckla 3 9 4 The priests are too much in a hurry for to pronounce this is to make it impossible. If the thing was kept quiet, and sprung upon the people all at once in the shape of a government proposition, the surprise might pass, and the Radicals 147 would only be too glad to swallow it — but to have it discussed in public beforehand, is to ensure its failure. The French Republic, with its revolutionary principles of civil law, cannot buy off

[^1]: * the thousands of millions of the Church! After those of Mr Bismarck!





**[p. 331]**

the Church in the way the English semi-feudal monarchy did. Here the system developed by Lassalle in Vol. 1st of his System der erworbenen Rechte^1'6 is alone applicable, as it was exclusively applied by the Great Revolution. See Bernstein's Introduction to Lassalle's Works,11 B if you have not got it I'll try to get it. It is Lassalle's only juridical Leistung* and not a great one, but quite correct juridically. We ought to start it in France, and then set Longuet to work the Radi- cals in that sense.

I have to interrupt again. Old Harney is laid up with bronchitis in Richmond — same complaint which last spring brought him to the grave's edge. I must go and see him, but hope to be back in time to finish that letter. I am crushed with work, there are 1) proof-sheets and new preface of new English edition of Lage der arbeitenden Klassen in England'" 2) revision of Edward's translation of Entwicklung des So- cialisms— with another new preface, 3) German translation of my articlel in the Almanach before anybody else seizes upon it, 4) a lot of letters to answer. And then possibly I may return to Vol. III d where just the very difficultest chapters of all await me.

4.30 p. m. Just returned from Richmond where I found old Harney much better — hope it will last.

I suppose you have got Louise's Arbeiterinnen-Leitung with the Vienna Arbeiter-Leitung direct from Vienna. Your article reads uncom- monly well, Tussy's article will be in next number,314 and as the pa- per is by its nature insatiable, I can only say that all further contribu- tions will be thankfully received, in the meantime I send you Louise's thanks which like all thanks are double-edged, viz. 1) thanks for fa- vours received, 2) 'a sense of favours to come', as the bourgeois said.

Poor Adler is sadly overworked, and moreover, the momentary rest he gets, he only gets as the nurse of his wifel who is seriously ill — they are at Salô, Lago di Garda, for the present. And as Victor is responsi- ble for the filling of the paper, you do an indirect kindness to him and the Austrian party by helping to fill the women's paper with good matter; the bourgeoises émancipées would only be too glad of an oppor- tunity of deposing their crotchets and nostrums in the working wom- en's organ.

[^1]: '' achievement-1' The Condition of the VVorking-Cluss in England-' F. Engels, 'Der So- zialismus in Deutschland'.-1' of Capital-' Emma Adler



