---
Volume: 49
Document_Title: "167. Engels to Karl Kautsky. 26 January "
Page_Range: "365-367"
---

# 167. Engels to Karl Kautsky. 26 January 



**[p. 334]**

I hope your animal family is going on all right — we have the in- fluenza all round us, but so far our two servants here have only got a touch of it, Louise suffers from what my poor wifec used to call 'pains all over' (general muscular rheumatism) and I am not yet caught.

Ever yours,

F. Engels

First published in: Marx and Engels, Reproduced from the original Works, Second Russian Edition, Vol. 38, , . „ ,. , y, .QJ-- Published in English tor the hrst time

167

ENGELS TO KARL KAUTSKY

London, 26 January 1892

Dear Baron,

without delay and look over the English translation of the Entwick- lungs, which I cannot refuse to do since it is I, after all, who will be held responsible for anything of that kind that appears in London; so I can take on absolutely nothing else whatever.

If the Berliners should object to anything in my article, I would ask you to substitute dots. There can be no question of toning things down

[^1]: IN STUTTGART

[^2]: Proofs of the article d promptly returned yesterday. I cannot attend to those of the Anti-Proudhone as I have got to tackle Volume III r

[^3]: a Die Gleichheit -h these charming French ladies -c Lizzy Burns -d F. Engels, 'Der So- zialismus in Deutschland'.-' K. Marx, The Poverty of Philosophy. Answer to the 'Philo- sophy of Poverty' by M. Proudhon.-1 of Capital-' F. Engels, Socialism: Utopian and Scien- tific.





**[p. 335]**

because the French original is generally accessible and I might be ac- cused offalsifying the text. I should be grateful if you would send me the proofs of the Poverty — for I've got to take another look at the prefacea in any case.

I have written and told Dietz,153 by whom I've been saddled with a draft for an address to Bebel on the 25th anniversary of his entry into Parliament,153 that in future all my fees are to be sent to Ad- ler. As it is, the Berliners get the lion's share, since I can't deprive them of those accruing from what is published by the Vorwärts pub- lishers. So it's only fair.

Well, the happy result of Julius'b underground activities was to get Gilles evicted from the Society89 by 48 votes to 21, at 3 o'clock on Sunday morning.0 He (Julius) conducted the campaign most ably and called in here on Sunday evening; he was full of beans and gave us a delightfully humorous account of his negotiations with the So- ciety members whom he conjured up to the life. It was the same old story. At first the dullards thought they were only 7 strong, a figure which, on further investigation, turned out to be more like 50 — good men, if sluggardly—but once they'd been got together and galvanised into action, Gilles was done for. It's a matter of some significance be- cause, in the eyes of the English, it has knocked the ground from under his feet; Hyndman is the only one who now has him hanging at his coat-tails, nor will he be able to shake him off.

Hyndman has also suffered some severe defeats. See the account in last week's Workman's Times of the delegates' negotiations at the SO- CIAL DEMOCRATIC FEDERATION 29 HALL, Strand, concerning the FREE SPEECH MEETING at the World's End, Chelsea. On that occasion he was hard pressed by Shaw, Burns and Tussy. Burns said that, if it came to the point, he hoped it would not be necessary to go and look for speakers in the LAVATORIES (as for Hyndman in Trafalgar Square 3 9 7), etc. Hyndman, he went on, could have saved the day if, instead of the un- tenable World's End (300 men constitute an OBSTRUCTION OF TRAFFIC, whereupon the police have got to intervene), he had stuck to Sloane Square which he had relinquished on being fined one SHILLING. The GASWORKERS said they would attend if there was any prospect of a fight, and would provide speakers if Hyndman would preside.396 In short, his cowardice was at long last brought home to him. On Sunday he

[^1]: a F. Engels, 'Marx and Rodbertus. Preface to the First German Edition of The Poverty of Philosophy by Karl Marx'.- b Julius Motteler-c 24 January



