---
Volume: 49
Document_Title: "168. Engels to Karl Kautsky. 28 January "
Page_Range: "367-368"
---

# 168. Engels to Karl Kautsky. 28 January 



**[p. 336]**

FEDERATION was solely dependent on subsidies from MIDDLE- CLASS PEOPLE, ESPECIALLY H y n d m a n and Hunter Watts. T h e jackass has got so in- volved in his own intrigues that things may go badly for him. T h e real nub of the matter, as he himself had privately said, was this: if the squabbling over the World's End RIGHT or MEETING could be kept going until the dissolution of Parliament, it would ensure his being retur- ned in Chelsea (for which he is standing).

Many regards and my congratulations on the birth of your second son.a But surely it is now time you slowed down the tempo a bit? We are glad to hear that mother b and child are doing well. Over here in- fluenza is still on the rampage; Percy had it, and pneumonia imme- diately afterwards; I anxiously await news of Pumps. Louise also had a touch of it, likewise Aveling.

Well, once again warm regards from Louise and

Your

General

168

E N G E L S T O K A R L K A U T S K Y

London, 28 January 1892

Dear Baron,

[^1]: First published in Aus der Frühzeit des Printed according to the original Marxismus. Engels Briefwechsel mit Kautsky, T. , ,. , , • ^ i i r . r p lqqe; Published in bnglish lor the tirst time

[^2]: IN STUTTGART

[^3]: Your omission of Bebel and Liebknecht ALL RIGHT. 3 9 8 It makes no difference at all to the thing.

[^4]: a Karl- b Luise Kautsky (née Ronsperger)



