---
Volume: 49
Document_Title: "169. Engels to Florence Kelley- Wischnewetzky. 28 January "
Page_Range: "368-370"
---

# 169. Engels to Florence Kelley- Wischnewetzky. 28 January 



**[p. 337]**

Six Centuries, etc.399 would probably be worth translating, more so at any rate than the same author's Economic Interpretation of History, most of which he undoubtedly cribbed from Capital; it is somewhat pedantically written although it does contain individual insights. In Six Centuries there is much that is unknown in Germany—genuine material but a number of false interpretations, as is inevitable with a bourgeois. But I should have thought you'd have found writing works of your own pleasanter and more necessary than translating.

Kindest regards from

Your

General

First published in Aus der Frühzeil des Printed according to the original Marxismus. Engels Briefwechsel mit Kaulsky, Prae 1935 Published in English for the first time

169

ENGELS TO FLORENCE KELLEY-WISCHNEWETZKY

London, 28 January [18]92

Dear Mrs Wischnewetzky,

1 ) The following is an abstract of my agreement with Swan Son- nenschein and Co.

a) we (that is I in yours and Mrs Aveling's name) transfer to them the English copyright of the Condition* etc.;

b) that they produce it in one volume in their Social Science Se- ries;

d) the same for stereotype plates and copies sold for colonies;

[^1]: IN NEW YORK

[^2]: c) that they pay us (i. e. you through me) 12'/2% o n fun price (2s. 6d. per copy), 13 copies to be reckoned for 12;

[^3]: F. Engels, The Condition of the Working-Class in England in 1844.





**[p. 338]**

f) that we do not suffer from bad debts contracted by them; g) that accounts be made up as on 30th June each year and settled within 3 months;

h) that we get 12 free copies.

2) The book is now printed, out of the appendix.a I have made a new preface for the British reader.1' I have suppressed the preface of the American edition. On reading the proofs I have changed a few expressions, chiefly technical terms and evident misprints or slips of the press. As soon as I get our copies I shall send you six of them.

I had another tussle with Sonnenschein, but again had the best of him. On reading proof of title page, I found that he had struck out your name on the front and put it on the back in small print! Of course I at once protested, and asked Dr Aveling to see him about this, as I could not submit to have the translator, and the party whose simple agent I was in this matter, thus insulted. Of course the man gave in, but it seems impossible to do business with him without having to fight such little tricks. And all this on account of that unpronounceable Russian name which he fears might injure the sale of the book, as its bearer surely cannot be expected to know English!

3) I shall account and remit proceeds to you as soon as received every year.

4) Of course this arrangement with Swan Sonnenschein and Co. puts an end to the agency, for this book, of Reeves. I have, through the kindness of Dr Aveling who lives close to Reeves' shop, after a deal of trouble managed to get an account out of him, it amounts to about £5, and also part of the money; there are £4 to be paid yet, but the fellow has caught the influenza just in time to excuse delay, so that I do not expect to get it before next week—^ if then, for it is easier to get the truth out of a statesman than a farthing of cash

[^1]: a F. Engels, Appendix [to The Condition of the Working Class in England in 1844 (1887)].- b F. Engels, 'Preface to the 1892 English Edition of The Condition of the Working-Class in England in 1844'.



