---
Volume: 49
Document_Title: "172. Engels to Karl Kautsky. 1 February "
Page_Range: "373-374"
---

# 172. Engels to Karl Kautsky. 1 February 



**[p. 172]**

ENGELS TO KARL KAUTSKY

IN STUTTGART

London, 1 February 1892

Dear Baron,

Herewith Labriola's letter to Tussy; I don't believe that you could pull off publishing it without creating bad blood amongst divers per- sons in Italy, and in the end it would be the German party that would have to suffer for it, in as much as the latter would be held responsible for taking sides with or against those people who felt affronted by the article. For in Italy things are in such a mess that all kinds of people are sure to feel affronted, whether rightly or wrongly, as indeed I have written and told Labriola. ' 5 3 And those people would then be driven into the arms of the Possibilists,3 Hyndmanists, Fabians 87 and God knows what other dogs-in-the-manger.

I have written and told Labriola that I thought it better not to publish but would leave the matter entirely in your hands and that you two should sort it out between you. At all events, Tussy wants to have the letter back.

It recently occurred to me that an account of Luther based on his actions and writings is urgently called for. In the first place a rectifi- cation not only of the Protestant legend, but also of the blinkered Catholic attack upon it by Janssen (who is now doing so well in Ger- many) would certainly not come amiss just now, and there is a dis- tinct need for a demonstration, from our standpoint, of the extent to which the Reformation was a bourgeois movement. Also of particular importance would be a parallel between Luther before and Luther af- ter Karlstad, the Anabaptists and the Peasant War,400 on the one hand and, on the other, the bourgeoisie before 1848 and after that year. Likewise a detailed demonstration of how this transformation came about in Luther's case. There's still something to be accom- plished in this field, and without any need for undue study; also it's something for which you are particularly fitted as a result of your

