---
Volume: 49
Document_Title: "174. Engels to Laura Lafargue. 3 February "
Page_Range: "378-380"
---

# 174. Engels to Laura Lafargue. 3 February 



**[p. 347]**

First published in: Marx and Engels, Printed according to the original Works, First Russian Edition, Vol. XXIX, „ , , . , , „ , . M l n . c Published in English for the first oscow, 194b . s

time 174

ENGELS TO LAURA LAFARGUE

AT LE PERREUX

London, 3 February 1892

My dear Laura,

Can you get me from the Intransigeant the London address of Roche- fort? Wrôblewski all of a sudden sends me a letter for that distin- guished foreigner and supposes I know his address, but I will be hanged if I know anybody who can procure it me here — everybo- dy advises me to write to Paris as the shortest and safest way to get it — so I suppose I must follow their advice and submit the case to you, especially as I have a slight suspicion that the poor devil of Wrôb- lewski applies to Rochefort for cash, and would not have it said for the world that I was the cause of delaying even for one hour the — undoubt- edly negative — answer he is sure (if any) to get from le grand boulevardier.

Here we have suffered from influenza right and left— I have been spared so far, but Louise and my servant have had a touch. Percy has had a pretty severe attack followed by pneumonia and is not yet on his legs again, Bernstein has been down, and E. Aveling is not quite himself. Our street and neighbourhood has suffered severely, cases right and left.

The latest scandal: all over London goes the rumour that the Duke of Clarence on his death had called his mother" and told her that 'May' b was in the family way by him. If true it is the only action

[^1]: a Princess Alexandra -h Princess Victoria - Mary von Teck





**[p. 1959]**

Paul's migrations are very interesting,392 but won't he soon get tired of it? It's very useful and very good work, but if he carries it on till May 1st, he will lose a deal of weight and come back, may be, to his parliamentary duties with the 'lean and hungry look', which, as a Cassius,406 might become him in the eyes of the épicier}^ At all events he has silenced the Brousses3 and other Neidkämme Ie who came down upon him for a slip of the tongue or two in his first speech.378

The statistics about Notre Dame de la fabrique etc. are the best reply.

My article"1 from the Almanack has come out in Italian in the Cri- tica Sociale di Milano and will appear in German in the Neue %eit next No. with additions. Bebel has sent me some Alsatian papers with re- ports of his speech in Mülhausen,407 one in French, I want to send it to you if I can find it (Louise says she forwarded it to you),1' to show you what horrid French these 'patriots' of the Industriel Alsacien do per- petrate.

An awful row will be caused by the publication of the order of Prince George of Saxony to the 12th German (Saxon) Army Corps in yesterday's Vorwärts.405 That shows how far our connexions in the army reach, and Williamf will be awfully vexed. It is sure to cause a deal of sensation in France, and if you can forward me Paris papers with comments on it, to be forwarded to Bebel and to be used in the Reichstag, it will be very very useful.

In great haste — kind regards from Louise and

ever yours,

F. E.

[^1]: First published, in the language of the Reproduced from the original original (English), in: F. Engels, P. et L. Lafargue, Correspondance, t. Ill, Paris,

[^2]: " Victoria-1' grocer-' grudger-'1 F. Engels, 'Le Socialisme en Allemagne'.-'' The words in brackets were inserted by Engels later.-1 William II



