---
Volume: 49
Document_Title: "177. Engels to Filippo Turati. 6 February "
Page_Range: "385-386"
---

# 177. Engels to Filippo Turati. 6 February 



**[p. 354]**

With love to you all in Upper and Lower Barmen.

Your old

Friedrich

First published in Deutsche Revue, Jg. 46, Printed according to the original Bd. Ill, Stuttgart-Leipzig, 1921

Published in English for the first time

177

ENGELS TO FILIPPO TURATI

IN MILAN

London, 6 February 1892

122 Regent's Park Road, N.W.

Dear Sir,

Se io lo conosco,* the illustrious Bovio?409 Ma dopo molti anni, dopo la vecchia Internationale,h when I encountered his articles at every turn in Italian socialist literature. At the time, I used to read them, and the more I read the less clear they became — ho capi nagott.c To use his own words, non ricordo tempo più confusionario.d To make things worse, in the end I did not know which of the two of us, he or I, was the confusionario.e However, on the whole, he is a good fellow, a ped- ant, it is true, but a generous and amiable one (which is never the case with our German pedants) and, as you say, a Victor Hugo type, a grandiose character, a man of broad views, who reconciles you with his personality, even if you fight the party which he supports. I quite understand that he should be idolised by your youth. If I were young,

[^1]: a Do I know him- b I do, I have known him for many years, ever since the old Inter- national-0 indeed, I couldn't make tail or head of them- d I cannot remember a time more muddleheaded.-e muddleheaded



