---
Volume: 49
Document_Title: "182. Engels to Victor Adler. 19 February "
Page_Range: "390-393"
---

# 182. Engels to Victor Adler. 19 February 



**[p. 182]**

ENGELS TO VICTOR ADLER

IN VIENNA

London, 19 February 1892

Dear Victor,

I was on the point of replying the other day to the letter you wrote me from Salo, when I was badly balked. Owing to the publisher's3

malice, stupidity, or both, Aveling's translation of my Entwicklung des Sozialismus,h which I was supposed to revise while still in manuscript form, had already been set up and came to me in complete, made-up, paginated proof. In view of the law in this country which delivers up the author to the publisher bound hand and foot, I ran the risk of the thing coming before the public as it stood and thus of incurring dis- credit, for the ms. was only a rough draft. So everything else had to be left undone until the thing had been revised and the publisher per- suaded by devious means to reconcile himself to the expenses for which he himself was to blame. Well, the worst is now over, and the first person to be sent a reply will be you.

We were overjoyed to learn that your wifec is better and that her recovery may be confidently anticipated. You have enough work, tri- als and tribulations as it is, and the Austrian movement is in far too great need of every ounce of your strength for us not to have given a sigh of relief on hearing that the worst of your worries was over, in this respect at any rate. But you will, I hope, permit us to rejoice, not only as party members but also as your personal friends, at the pros- pect that, having made a complete recovery, your wife will shortly be restored to you and that so fine a woman as your Emma is not to suf- fer the terrible fate which for a moment seemed to hang over her.

But if in the circumstances you succumbed to a mood which you yourself describe as dejected, it is only too understandable. Mean- while circumstances have, it seems, helped you Austrians out of the deadlock which you had feared, and with good reason. The proposed haphazard reconstruction of Greater Vienna provided you with an opportunity upon which you, with your habitual flair, instantly seized and duly exploited in accordance with the model originally

[^1]: a Swan Sonnenschein-13 Socialism: Utopian and Scientific-1 Emma Adler





**[p. 360]**

You will eventually get your daily paper, but it must in the main be your own creation. Considering the nature of your press laws, the step from weekly to daily would seem to me a very big one for which long, robust legs are required, and one which would also make you more vulnerable than ever to a government intent on ruining you by means of fines and legal costs. This is fresh proof of your government's cunning—always greater in small matters. The Prussians are too stupid for that sort of thing, relying as they do on brute force, while your pol- iticians are stupid only when it comes to doing anything big. Person- ally, I rather doubt whether, in view of the fines you would incur, you would be able to keep a daily going for as much as six months and, were it to collapse, the defeat would be hard to get over.

But in order to do my bit for the Austrians, and since all my fees from stuff issued by the Vorwärts Publishers find their way willy-nilly into German party funds, I have decided that all fees from the stuff published by Dietz should go to you people and have instructed him ac- cordingly. ' 5 3



**[p. 361]**

For the rest, affairs are taking a critical turn. In the German Reichstag a considerable crisis is brewing. Little Willie,3 it seems, wishes for once to put his regis voluntas 4 ' 3 to the test and is actually driving the deplorable members of the National Liberal Party 4 ' 4 into the arms of the opposition; already there are signs of conflict. In addition, there is a ministerial crisis in France which is of great importance to us because Constans is rabidly anti-working class and his fall will bring about a number of changes in domestic affairs; also because the recurrence of instability in French government circles is very unwel- come to the Russian alliance which is in any case on its last legs.

Louise sends you the enclosed. She has spent the whole day disen- gaging oxygen — on paper; she is studying chemistry under circum- stances aggravated by the English textbooks and the absence of expe- riments"

[^1]: The enclosed appeared in the Critica Sociale}1

[^2]: First published, in part, in Arbeiter-Leitung, Nr. 327, Wien, 28. November 1920 and in full in Victor Adlers Aufsätze, Reden und Briefe. Erstes Heft: Victor Adler und Friedrich Engels, Wien, 1922

[^3]: " William I I - b F. Engels, 'Reply to the Honourable Giovanni Bovio'.-c The end of the letter is missing.

[^4]: Printed according to the book

[^5]: Published in English for the first time



