---
Volume: 49
Document_Title: "183. Engels to August Bebel. 19 February "
Page_Range: "393-397"
---

# 183. Engels to August Bebel. 19 February 



**[p. 183]**

ENGELS TO AUGUST BEBEL415

IN BERLIN

London, 19 February 1892

Dear August,

First of all, my heartfelt congratulations on your birthday and MANY HAPPY RETURNS OF THE DAY, as they say over here; likewise on your 25th anniversary in Parliament and/or your silver wedding with parlia- mentarianism, which falls due very shortly.416 Well, you could hardly have chosen a better time to show the chaps what an asset you are to them, and it gave us over here a great deal of pleasure.

Things are really coming to a head in Germany, indeed must have gone pretty far if the National Liberals4 ! 4 repeatedly evince strong oppositional tendencies and Richter can dream of a German 'great Liberal Party'.4 ' 7 A capitalist society which has not yet subordinated the state to itself formally which has left real government in the hands of an hereditary, monarchical-bureaucratic-junker caste and must rest content if, by and large, its own interests nevertheless ultimately prevail — such a society, as situated in Germany, fluctuates between two tendencies — firstly the alliance of all official and propertied so- cial classes against the proletariat; this tendency ultimately leads to the formation of the 'one reactionary mass'322 and, if things go smoothly, will ultimately retain the upper hand. Secondly there is a tendency which is for ever reviving the old conflict, cravenly left un- resolved, between the monarchy with its absolutist throw-backs, the landed aristocracy and the bureaucracy, which deems itself above all party, and, in opposition to all these, the industrial bourgeoisie whose material interests are impinged upon daily and hourly by the above outmoded elements. Which of these two tendencies will momentarily prevail will be determined by personal, local, etc., contingencies. Just now in Germany, the second would seem to be gaining the ascend- ancy, in which case the industrial magnates à la Stumm and the share- holders of industrial concerns will, of course, mainly side with out- moded reaction. However, this pale reflection of the old conflict of 1848, now resuscitated for the umpteenth time, can become serious only if the government and the landed aristocracy, presuming on



**[p. 363]**

One of its characteristic features is the time-honoured practice of belabouring the load in place of (or rather along with) the donkey. They belabour Social-Democracy but at the same time bring down a shower of blows on the bourgeoisie, politically at first, by attacking the liberal principles it has ostentatiously flaunted for the past 60 years and its direct if négligeable share in the administration; and la- ter, if all goes well, also economically, by sacrificing its interests to those of landed property.

So a strong swing to the Right would now appear to be in progress, having for pretext the necessity of keeping back our advance. In what way can it affect us?

1. Anti-Socialist Law 1 1? We overcame that and to do so now, when we are morally 100% and materially at least 50% stronger than on 1 October 1890,a would be child's play. Nor would it be very likely to secure a majority.

3. Restriction of the suffrage and of the secret ballot? Completely out of the question so far as the Centre is concerned; the Clericals aren't so stupid as to cut their own throats. And without the Centre they would again be short of some 60 or 70 votes.

4. Coups d'état? No good because of the princes. Any infringement of the Constitution would threaten the Empire with dissolution, and release individual princes from all obligations thereto. And even if they could all be won over in such a case (which would never happen), the assent of their immediate heirs — most of them minors! — would

[^1]: 2. Reactionary amendments to the laws against the press, associa- tion and assembly? Would be unacceptable to the Centre + ' 8 and im- possible without it. To form a majority with 93 Conservatives of both factions 4 ' 9 and 42 National Liberals would require 66 men of the Centre. If they went over, that would be the end of the Centre — a not unsatisfactory result. That and the colossal fury such retrograde measures would evoke in the people would more than compensate for the coercion we should have to endure.

[^2]: a The Anti - Socialist Law was valid until 1 October 1890.





**[p. 364]**

5. Thus the only remaining possibility would seem to lie in increas- ingly rigorous administrative, police and legal measures, as foresha- dowed in the outrageous sentence passed on Peus.420 But we shall survive them and will soon learn to organise ourselves accordingly. They might even go one better and declare an ordinary state of emer- gency, but this would constitute a hazard only in the first few weeks; later on it would automatically fall into desuetude, quite apart from the fact that it could only be proclaimed for this or that part of the Empire; moreover the bourgeois would also tire of it, and thus per- haps be driven still further into opposition.

So unless our Prussian masters hit on other inventions of quite a new and brilliant kind — as it were intellectual and moral machine guns and Maxims — they may be able to harass us, but will always do us more good than harm. A bit of undisguised Junker rule would do no harm! But I'm rather afraid our chaps may not have enough back- bone; ambitions and to spare but insufficient staying-power, for the spirit is willing but the flesh is weak. The sad thing about Germany is that both sides, Junkers no less than bourgeoisie, are so deplorably su- pine.

Last night I read with real delight the anti-Stumm speech you made on Friday 12 February4 2 ' ; it was a splendid piece of improvi- sation and one can see how successful it was. I also look forward im- mensely to reading the military speech which came today.422

We were very pleased by your announcement that you would be here round about the 10th or 11th of April — everything is ready for you and, should Schorlemmer turn up, we can accommodate him as well; that has been seen to. You are pretty sure to be given lobster mayonnaise again after the letter Louise got from you today; I had al- ready hatched a little plan of my own to that end, though this will presumably no longer be needed. But /shall assume responsibility for the oysters and likewise for the choice of drinks. Luckily Louise revels in these two delicacies just as much as you and I do and, on such a basis, agreement can always be reached. That she is a witch she is herself aware and is not a little proud of the fact for, or so she says, in Vienna all witches are attractive. And, between you and me, I don't believe that, were she not a witch, you and I would get on so well with her.

Now as regards Otto Wigand, I can only repeat that, until the



**[p. 365]**

It's a real joy to know that things are livening up again. Who can tell whether, with passions running so high, your Reichstag and the French Chamber won't both be dissolved? And what could be better for us? What I fail to understand, however, is that now, when really decisive battles are being fought in the Reichstag, Liebknecht should remain squatting in his Dresden froggery.b I myself would be willing to sacrifice ten Saxon mandates for the right to say a word in the Reichstag just now.

Anyway, who can tell whether we aren't both being accused in more timorous party circles of having spoken out of turn and con- jured up the threat of reactionary measures? That my article in the

Neue ^eitc found its mark is evident from the obstinate silence of the bourgeois and ministerial press which otherwise is so ready to attack anything like that. It has since appeared in Italian, Polish and Ro- manian and in Italy has involved me in a polemic with that benign old jackass Bovio.d

[^1]: Unfortunately I shall not be able to reply to Mrs Julie'se kind letter

[^2]: a See this volume, pp. 345-46. - b in the Saxon Landtag -c F. Engels, 'Socialism in Ger- many'.-d See this volume, p. 354.-c Bebel



