---
Volume: 49
Document_Title: "185. Engels to Karl Kautsky. 5 March "
Page_Range: "398-400"
---

# 185. Engels to Karl Kautsky. 5 March 



**[p. 367]**

I am glad of the news about the 'Daily'a and this time it may turn out a success, if our friends take the proper precautions not to be turned out again the very moment the paper begins to pay.423 But things are better now, there is a power behind them now and that makes a difference — only they ought to take care to secure their posi- tion in the paper for all that.

I should be glad if Paul would let me know something of the posi- tion of the various socialist and ' Auch-Sozialisterib groups in the Chamber—the Blanquists, Possibilists,3 Millerand lot,336 and the ex-Boulangists. I see in yesterday's Intransigeant that Paul and Ferroul attended a meeting composed chiefly of the Blanquist Boulangists, and, if he works together with them, it's 100 to 1 that Hyndman will attack them in Justice, and anyhow the subject is sure to be discussed here and interpellations to come to me — so I ought to be prepared!

In my next you will also very probably receive a dunning letter from Louise for more contributions to the Arbeiterinnen-Leitung.

Love to all your numerous family

Ever yours,

F.E.

185

ENGELS TO KARL KAUTSKY

London, 5 March 1892

Dear Baron,

Your ms.379 goes off by registered mail today. I have only been able to read the first 16 pages. If I were you I should omit the better part

[^1]: First published, in the language of the Reproduced from the original original (English), in: F. Engels, P. et L. Lafargue, Correspondance, t. Ill, Paris, 1959

[^2]: IN STUTTGART

[^3]: 3 Le Socialiste - b 'partly socialist'





**[p. 368]**

Ten copies of Neue Zjiit containing my article b received with thanks. Simply amend the name Hodgskin and the figure 1824 in the next edition, and include a note saying that in the original these read such and such, obviously a slip of the pen or printer's error.42*

Menger is a jackass and will so remain. His critique of bourgeois lawc is throughout nothing but a vindication of the 'police state' as opposed to the 'constitutional state'. True, the law, especially bour- geois law, is stricter and more rigorous than police despotism which may sometimes appear humane precisely because it is despotic. If I had the time, I should soon put paid to this empty talk which is possible only in backward countries such as Germany and Austria.

I am glad you are agreeable to the Luther idea.d There's no rush. Cunow's letter returned with thanks. I look forward to seeing the ideas he has worked out about class.425 He has made some very nice discoveries about the Peruvian gens. He had sent me the stuff and I thanked him for it.

You will also be getting the Peruvian community system 22i — I have just looked at it.

I don't think you are in any danger for the time being. So change- able and multifarious are the cravings in Berlin that none could really be satisfied; now all at once it's the liberal bourgeois who's the bête noire. Liberalism is at the root of all socialism, so if one is to act radi- cally one has got to smash liberalism, whereupon socialism will au- tomatically wither away. For the present we may observe this excep- tionally cunning manoeuvre with quiet amusement. Once the liberal philistines have been driven wild — and they are, it seems, really be- ing whipped into a fury willy-nilly — then there'll be no more false

[^1]: a of Capital - b 'Der Sozialismus in Deutschland' - ' A. Menger, Das bürgerliche Reckt und die besitzlosen Volksklassen. - d See this volume, pp. 342-43.



