---
Volume: 49
Document_Title: "186. Engel s to Friedrich Adolph Sorge. 5 March "
Page_Range: "400-403"
---

# 186. Engel s to Friedrich Adolph Sorge. 5 March 



**[p. 369]**

When the street rioting began in Berlin427 I was somewhat con- cerned lest it result in the ardently desired fusillade, but when the row- dies cheered young William,3 thereby placating him, I knew that all was well — but just let the Kölner Leitung be locked u p 4 2 8 along with Peus,420 and we may well see some fun.

So in my view, in so far as there is any danger, it is primarily con- fined to Prussia, and the greater it becomes there, the better off you people in the small states will be.

Now I have got to write to Sorge b—the American mail goes to- day— so FAREWELL. Aveling, who has just come in, sends his best wishes. Regards from one household to the other.

Your

F.E.

First published in Aus der Frühzeit des Printed according to the original Marxismus. Engels Briefwechsel mit Kautsky, _ , ,. , , . „ ,., „ P IQQC; Published in English for the first r a*' time

186

London, 5 March 1892

Dear Sorge,

Have received your letters of 15, 22 and 29 January and postcards of 2, 4 and 13 February. Also the newspapers re Anna.0 The latter has evidently succumbed to that fashionable complaint, megalomania. It's strange; these sort of people, the Hartmanns et al, are fit for one

[^1]: ENGELS TO FRIEDRICH ADOLPH SORGE 3 5 7

[^2]: IN HOBOKEN

[^3]: William II - b See next letter.-0 Stanislaw Padlewski





**[p. 370]**

Though I haven't alas had time to read your last article in the Neue Zeit* I must get round to doing so since it's only with your help that I can follow developments in America without going astray.

I am terribly overburdened with all kinds of tasks and tiresome odds and ends. You ought to see the mass of German, French, Italian, Spanish, Polish, Russian, Danish, American, English and, now and again, Romanian newspapers I get and must at any rate glance at if I am to keep au courant with the movement. Not to mention genuine tasks which swallow up the rest of my time. And the correspondence! I've got backlog enough to last me a week. And then I'm supposed to complete Volume 111.c It's appalling. But it will be managed some- how. Only you people must be patient if I sometimes allow my corres- pondence to lapse.

In France things are going very well. Lafargue is using his expense allowance and his free railway pass to travel all over the place, from Lille to Toulouse, agitating and this with brilliant success. All the other socialist factions have been pushed into the background by ours and even in Paris the Possibilists 3 are continuing to beat a retreat, thanks to their internal squabbles and to vigorous action on the part of our own people. They again have in mind a daily journal as party organ, and this would now stand a better chance.423 It's capital that Constans should have been sacked from the Ministry of the Interior; the chap was determined to provoke fusillades, by violence, and we can do without them. Since our May Day demonstration coincides with the municipal elections throughout France,429 shooting is a lux- ury no minister could permit himself unless, like Constans, he was banking on a nine days' wonder.

Here the bickering continues as before, but nevertheless the cause is making headway in true Anglo-Saxon fashion, slowly but surely. Everything always subsides into small individual battles which can- not be assessed until actually resolved. At the moment these concern the May Day celebrations. On the one side our people, on the other, in opposition to us, the TRADES COUNCIL ' 96 (the stuffier TRADES UNIONS) and the SOCIAL DEMOCRATIC FEDERATION 29; the two enemies of yesteryear have been forced to club together against us, which is in itself a vic-

[^1]: " In the original: nix mehr z.e wolle (South - German dialect) - b F. A. Sorge, 'Das Pro- gramm der Geldreformer in den Vereinigten Staaten'.-' of Capital





**[p. 371]**

And now for Germany. Things are going so swimmingly there that we couldn't wish for anything better, although we shall no doubt ex- perience some pretty hard knocks in the near future. From the outset Little Willie3 has been a prime example of a 'last of the line' with a singular aptitude for ruining the dynasty and monarchy. But now his madness has taken on an acute form and his megalomania is such that he can neither sleep nor hold his tongue. As luck would have it, the regis voluntas which, at the drop of a hat, would become suprema lex,*13 is directed against us one day and the Liberals the next, and now he has actually discovered that it's the Liberals, whose progeny we are, that are the source of all evil — he's been taught as much by his clerical friends. And now he's prosecuting the Kölnische Leitung for lèse-majesté428 and will not rest content until he has hounded your tame German philistine into the opposition. What more could we ask? A month ago, when Stumm's speech was heard in the Reichs- tag,42 ' it was still possible to envisage the re-introduction of the Anti- Socialist Law but that is no longer the case, for William is more in- censed by the opposition of the bourgeoisie to his bill for the clericali- sation of primary schools43 ' than by all the Social-Democrats put to- gether, and would sooner leave us alone than make any concessions to the other fellows. In both chambers it is, in fact, from the bourgeois parties that he encounters most opposition, not from our 35 members in the Reichstag; in the Prussian chamber we have no seats at all. Nevertheless, we, too, may run into some heavy weather — yet what could be better than for the Crown to place itself in an impossible po- sition vis-à-vis the middle classes and the workers at one and the same time? The ministers are all second-rate or third-rate men, Caprivi is a staunch lout but unequal to his task, nor does Miquel grow any the wiser for his perpetual cheese-paring. In short, at this rate a crisis may be in the offing. In Prussia and in the Prusso-German Empire people cannot as in Bavaria afford to go on for years putting up with a demented monarch13 and I shouldn't be surprised if, some time soon, they didn't erect a special madhouse for Little Willie. And then there'd be a Regency, which is exactly what we've been needing.

[^1]: a William II -b Ludwig II



