---
Volume: 49
Document_Title: "187. Engels to August Bebel. 8 March "
Page_Range: "403-408"
---

# 187. Engels to August Bebel. 8 March 



**[p. 372]**

Warm regards from Aveling, who happens to be here just now — Tussy is off agitating in Plymouth. Louise will enclose a short note. Warm regards to your wife,c and look after yourselves.

Your

F.E.

First published abridged in Briefe und Printed according to the original Auszüge aus Briefen von Joh. Phil. Becker, Jos. Dietzgen, Friedrich Engels, Karl Marx u. A. an F.A. Sorge und Andere, Stuttgart,

1906 and in full in: Marx and Engels, Works, First Russian Edition, Vol. XXIX, Moscow, 1946

187

ENGELS TO AUGUST BEBEL432

London, 8 March 1892

Dear August,

Considering how petty those philistines are, little else was to be ex-

[^1]: IN BERLIN

[^2]: We were all very glad to hear that your parliamentary anniversary was such a jolly occasion.4 ' 6 So far as the address is concerned, I did, as requested, certainly send offa draft ' 5 3 which — since I had to take account of the wishes, specific but unknown to me, of a parliamentary group most of whose 35 members were likewise personally unknown to me — seemed to me distinctly flat nor, till that moment, had I heard anything about either it or its fate. The French wrote one for you, published in today's Socialiste, in which they could let themselves go a bit more.433

[^3]: So Liebknecht has been chucked out of the Dresden froggery.434

[^4]: a high politics-b 'Der Sozialismus in Deutschland'-0 Katharina Sorge





**[p. 373]**

I am glad that the rumpuses in Berlin are over and that our people have held themselves so strictly aloof.427 There might very well have been a bit of shooting and that would have sufficed to make things awkward for us in all kinds of ways. Had there been shooting in Ber- lin, the National Liberals 4 ' 4 would have been quite capable of en- thusiastically supporting the Elementary School Bill431 while the hitherto indeterminate anger of certain people would finally have been directed against ourselves. The one reactionary mass,322 which is looming larger every day, is not much use to us as yet; so long as we cannot actively make history ourselves, our interests demand that his- torical developments should not stand still, and to that end it is neces- sary that the bourgeois parties remain at loggerheads. And here the present regime is invaluable in that it provides that very situation for us. But if the shooting starts too soon, i. e. before the old parties have become more closely locked in combat, it might drive them to seek a reconciliation with each other and to form a united front against us. It will happen some time, as surely as eggs is eggs and, if it happens when we are, say, twice as strong as at present, it will no longer mat- ter very much. Though even were it to happen now, the exercise of personal power would undoubtedly see to it that the opponents fell out with each other again. But it's better to be on the safe side. Things are going so famously now that we can only hope they'll be allowed to proceed without interruption.

However, unemployment might well get worse next year. For pro- tectionism has had exactly the same effect as free trade — the flooding of individual national markets and this almost everywhere, though it's not so bad over here as where you are. But in this country where we have come through two or three insidious little crises since 1867, we would at last seem to be heading for another acute one. The enormous cotton crops of the past 2 or 3 years (up to 9 million or more bales a year) have depressed prices to the same extent as in the worst days of the 1846 crisis, and are thus exerting tremendous pres- sure on production which means that the manufacturers here are hav- ing to overproduce because of overproduction by the American planters! At the same time they are steadily losing money because the falling price of raw materials invariably means that their product,



**[p. 374]**

Yesterday's Standard carried a telegram from St Petersburg according to which, after William's b speech in the Brandenburg Landtag, one of the gentlemen pointed out that the 'glory' to which he had alluded was opposed by, inter alia, Russia. Whereat William replied: 'I SHALL PULVERIZE RUSSIA', or words to that effect. Shuvalov, it seems, got to hear of this and, having assured himself of the authenticity of the report, passed it on to his Emperor. Whereupon Alexander promptly sought occasion to reprimand Schweinitz, instructing him to tell his Empe- ror that 'should he again feel the urge to pulverise Russia, I shall have the pleasure of sending half a million soldiers across his borders'.

On Saturday0 Russia won a victory here in London which, how- ever, will no longer be of any use to it. In the County Council elec- tions (in London what is known elsewhere as a municipal council is called County Council) the Liberals scored a resounding victory and

[^1]: a willy - nilly - b William II -c 5 March





**[p. 375]**

For the rest, and so far as this country is concerned, the Liberal vic- tory is not a bad thing. The Conservatives aren't up to much unless they have at their head a chap like Disraeli capable of leading the whole party by the nose and getting it to do the opposite of what it actually intended. The present leaders are nothing but fools and coxcombs who allow the local party leaders, i. e. the stupidest men on earth, to dictate what their programme should be. Moreover 6 years in office have exhausted and staled them. So there has got to be a change and that is what the whole of this farce ultimately boils down to.

Ede tells me he has had a letter from Mehring saying that neither the Neue £eit nor the Vorwärts nor any other party newspaper has taken the slightest notice of his anti-Richter""; he considers this inexcus- able, feels inclined to give up politics altogether, etc. I can see that, to an author accustomed to literary pretentiousness — this is not to im- ply any blame, for in the bourgeois press, even at its most literary, that sort of thing is not only the rule but a sine qua non — I can see, then, that to a man like this, who has grown up in the non- Social-Democratic press, these Social-Democratic customs could be highly objectionable. But then we should all of us have to raise our voices in complaint, for the same thing is done to you and me and all the rest. None the less, and however unpleasant it may sometimes be for the individual, I consider this haughty indifference on the part of our press to be one of its greatest merits. Mehring's stuff will be bought and read even if the Vorwärts doesn't puff and it is better not to boost anything than to boost the masses of party trash which, worse luck, are also launched upon the world. And if any one thing were

[^1]: a F. Mehring, Herr Eugen Richters Bilder aus der Gegenwart. Eine Entgegnung von Franz Mehring.





**[p. 376]**

But there is one thing your chaps might do — come to an equitable arrangement with Mehring's publisher as regards regular and fre- quent advertising. That, however, is another example of the total lack of business sense which is congenital to our newspapermen.

I recently got hold of a copy of the 3rd edition of Mehring's Deut- sche Socialdemokratie and took a look at the historical part. I should say that, in Kapital und Presse, he skates rather lightly over this inci- dent.435 But it's all one to us and we've got nothing to reproach him with; whether he's got anything to reproach himself with is his own af- fair and no concern of ours. In his place / should have admitted my change of heart quite openly, since there's nothing whatever for him to be ashamed of and it would have saved him a great deal of time, vexation and strife. It would, by the by, be absurd for him seriously to consider withdrawing from politics since he would thereby only be doing the ruling powers and the bourgeoisie a service; his leaders in the Neue %eit are indeed really first-rate and we eagerly await the appear- ance of each one. Such verve should not be allowed to wither away or be wasted on rotten belletrists.

We all liked Siegel very much. He is yet another of those German working men whom one would be proud to be seen with in any com- pany. The fact that he left in order to escape quite exceptionally ri- gorous and systematic persecution is in no way reprehensible. It's just because they are only now entering the movement that the miners are being persecuted with especial rigour, nor can the victims in any way rely on the support of their fellow workers — and for the same reason solidarity has not yet gained general recognition. Cunninghame- Graham and Keir Hardie have procured work for him in Scotland and his family is following him there. The company he is working for are advancing him the money and deducting it from his wages. Now, it's not going to be easy for him to repay this. I have given him five pounds for the journey to Scotland and to help him settle in, but can- not well do more. Would it not be appropriate for you people to grant him a subsidy of, say, 100 or 150 marks? I have read the letters Schro- der wrote him and there seems small likelihood of his getting any- thing from that quarter.436 Think the matter over.

From the enclosed chit from the Witch's kitchen you will see that

