---
Volume: 49
Document_Title: "189. Engels to Laura Lafargue. 14 March "
Page_Range: "410-413"
---

# 189. Engels to Laura Lafargue. 14 March 



**[p. 379]**

Yours sincerely,

F. Engels

First published in: Marx and Engels, Printed according to the original Works, First Russian Edition, Vol. XXIX, „ ,,. , , . ~ ,- , • r „ r , Moscow, 1946 Published in English in full for the first time

189

ENGELS TO LAURA LAFARGUE

AT LE PERREUX

London, 14 March 1892

My dear Laura,

I have a whole heap of your letters before me, such a heap that I hardly dare look at it without being ashamed of myself—but you have no idea how I have been worked, interrupted, tracassé, embêté* etc. etc. by all sorts of people. My best working time—January to April — has been frittered away and I have not had a moment to even look at the 3rd volumeb which I was determined to advance a good bit — and over the critical point — by Easter. All vanity of va- nities. Now, my time up to a week after Easter is already engaged (by 10 April I shall have Bebel here for a fortnight or so, before that time I must go to Ryde to see Pumps who has had a sore time of it, Percy had 1) influenza, 2) pneumonia and 3) and last is now laid up with pleurisy) and it will cost a damned effort of energy and a determina- tion to reply to no letters whatever and do no work for no matter whom if I want to use May and June for the 3rd volume.

But damn all this, you don't want to hear my grumbling. I am glad there are prospects of a daily paper for Paris,423 that will make up for many a mishap in other parts of the world. Though mishaps to our party are getting few and far between, unless we provoke them our- selves. We have such capital allies. Young Williamc brags about his

[^1]: a harassed, annoyed-1" of Capital-0 William II





**[p. 380]**

world, that they must turn out to the greaftest] glory of the Prussian monarchy in general and young William in particular. But the poor boy does not see that all the time he is a better ally to us than God ever was or will be to him; and even if he was to see it, he could not help it, it's the nature of the beast!

My article b of the Almanachc and Neue Zjeit has now been translat- ed into Italian (Critica Sociale — got me into a row with that confusio- nario l'illustre A Bovioc), Roumanian (Revista Socialä438) Polish (Przedswit) and English (New York People).

We have just come back (3.30 p. m.) from Highgate, the cemetery is in a disgusting state of soft clay, we had half a hundredweight stick- ing to each foot. On the gr[ave] Tussy (I suppose) had planted a small cypress, and one of the old crocus bulbs has come out in flow- er. The sprig of ivy which Motteler had brought from Ulrich von Hutten's grave on Ufnau Island in the Lake of Zürich, and which we planted after poor Nimmy's burial, having trained it on our balcony, had already been robbed of its best part last summer, but what is left, now grows well and is rooted deeply in the soil, so that no further de- secration is possible.

Here we are also busy about the 1st of May. It is a beautiful play of intrigues woven and cut to pieces and woven afresh, Penelopean fash- ion. The 8 Hours Committee200 (Edward, Tussy and their friends) tried to be first in the field but the Trades Council,196 that reaction- ary rel[ict of the] Old Trades Unions, was o[ut befor]e them. Now the Trades Council and the S. D. F.29 are for the [nonce] friends, as against all the rest; at present they do not compete one with the other, and have common interests in putting down all 'outsiders'. So when the 8 Hours Committee proposed to act with the Trades Council, in the same way as last year, they got a complete rebuff. But then the 8 Hours Committee secured the Park ' for themselves, before the Trades Council had thought of it, and then again offered co-operation with the Trades Council which was again haughtily declined. Then both bodies addressed the Metropolitan Radical Federation (of Radical clubs 430) to co-operate with them; and the M. R. F. decided to medi- ate, but under all circumstances to act with the'8 Hours Committee to whom the whole movement from the origin was due. So that the

[^1]: a Manuscript damaged.- b 'Socialism in Germany'-' Almanach du Parti Ouvrier - cl notorious muddlehead-c See this volume, p. 354.-' Hyde Park (see also this vol- ume, pp. 370-71.)





**[p. 381]**

Hyndman gets more foolish every day. His blind hatred of the Ger- mans makes him support the Berlin ' Unabhängige'a 3 3 3 and keep as his German chief of staff that outrageous scamp Gilles who is evi- dently in the pay of the German Embassy and has been, with a lot of malcontents, turned out of the German Communist Club here (our old ' Verein' b 8 9 ). So that he has now lost even the little foreign sup- port he had; in Germany they used to have some little regard to his position as leader of at least a section of English socialists, but he has forfeited that; in France his friends Brousse and Co. are so down, that even Hyndman himself had to protest against their 'hygienic' prog- ramme for their next congress.439 One does long for a good strong breath of revolutionary air to sweep away all these pettifogging Jam- merkerle0— but it is coming, slowly, slowly as everything does come among these 'verdammten6 Schleswig-Holsteiners' (as Marx called the English) but when it comes it is safe.

I intended to enclose a line to Pau[l. I ha]d a letter from him from Marseilles—but it's getting dinner-time, and I am afraid of being stopped in the midst of it. I am afraid their new alliance with Granger and Co. will not turn out to their satisfaction. First of all, these men have shown that they are absolutely un [reliable] when they passed over to Boulanger, and we can only expect being betrayed by them on the first occasion. Secondly, Paul says we must reap where Boulan- ger has sown. Exactly so, but reap the masses and discard the leaders, as the plan was with the Possibilists3; but these leaders have no masses behind them, and are themselves highly undesirable bedfellows. Thirdly, they have crept into the Chambre under false pretences and are sure to be kicked out next election, so that it seems to me our friends are leaning upon an already broken reed. And as to foreign pol- icy, fourthly, these men are pledged Chauvinists — otherwise they could not have got elected — and if Paul and friends form a party with them, they may be outvoted, kicked out, or driven to a split on the first occasion. I hope I may be wrong, but I am afraid I am not. The passage to Boulanger of these fellows was an unpardonable trea-

[^1]: a Independents - b Society-0 miserable people -â damned



