---
Volume: 49
Document_Title: "191. Engels to August Bebel. 16 March "
Page_Range: "417-419"
---

# 191. Engels to August Bebel. 16 March 



**[p. 191]**

E N G E L S T O A U G U S T BEBEL

IN BERLIN

London, 16 March 1892

Dear August,

Today I have a request, namely that you send me the stenographic report of the session at which our chaps spoke about Alsace-Lorraine and Singer apparently made a statement on the same subject on be- half of the parliamentary group. 4 4 5 I'm sure to be questioned about it and should therefore like to be in possession of the precise facts.

Over here the usual struggle a has begun again in regard to M a y Day, but so far the outlook is favourable. What I am about to tell you must not appear in the ' Vorwärts', for Gilles will interpret and manipulate it in his own way for Hyndman's benefit — i.e. in order to sing the praises of the Independents 3 3 3 and malign the parliamentary group and, since the struggle has still to be decided, anything that might be published could be used against us.

TRADES COUNCIL to act in concert with them, as happened last year, but was rejected with contumely. At the same time it approached the

[^1]: Well, the original 'LEGAL 8 HOURS COMMITTEE', 2 0 0 presided over by Aveling, and the TRADES COUNCIL 1 9 6 under Shipton (presently allied with H y n d m a n and the SOCIAL DEMOCRATIC FEDERATION 2 9) tackled the matter almost simultaneously. T h e 8 HOURS COMMITTEE invited the

[^2]: METROPOLITAN RADICAL FEDERATION (comprising more than 50 radically 'labour' and partly socialist clubs), 4 3 0 whereupon the latter was ap- proached by the TRADES COUNCIL. In the meantime Aveling had played the same trick on the TRADES COUNCIL as they had played on him 2 years before 4 4 6 and secured first right to the Park.b Having as- sured itself of the Park, the 8 HOURS COMMITTEE actually made a further approach to the TRADES COUNCIL but was again rejected with contumely. Immediately afterwards, however, the METROPOLITAN RAD-

[^3]: ICAL FEDERATION, which on several occasions had also been treated by the TRADES COUNCIL in a high-handed way (last year the TRADES COUN-

[^4]: CIL admitted only TRADES UNION people, not club speakers, to the plat-

[^5]: a See this volume, pp. 370-71 and 380-81.-b Hyde Park





**[p. 387]**

I have now read Mehring's 'Lessing-Legende' in the Neue Zjeit and derived much pleasure from it. It is a really excellent work. There is much that I should have accounted for differently or toned down a bit, but all in all he has hit the nail on the head. It is truly a pleasure to see that the materialist view of history, which for the past 20 years has — as a rule — had to pay the price of being used as vainglorious rhetoric in the writings of our younger party members, is at last be- ginning to be put to the use for which it was originally intended, i. e. as a guide for the student of history. Kautsky and Ede have produced some very nice stuff in this line but Mehring has made a much closer study of his special subject, namely Prussia's small segment of Ger- man history, and generally takes a less blinkered view; above all he expresses himself more positively and precisely. I hope the work will be published on its own as soon as it has finished appearing in the Neue Zjit. Never, to my knowledge, has the citadel of the Prussian legend been besieged so well and so forthrightly: for Lessing read old Fritz.b And it is vitally necessary to demolish the Prussian legend be- fore Prussia is able to vanish into Germany. As regards the precondi- tions for Prussia east of the Elbe in German as well as in European and world history, I should sometimes have expressed myself differently but these are things which in fact Mehring merely touched upon.

But now I must go and eat so that the Witch can get on with her

" 13 March-b Frederick II

