---
Volume: 49
Document_Title: "194. Engels to Pasquale Martignetti. 30 March "
Page_Range: "422-423"
---

# 194. Engels to Pasquale Martignetti. 30 March 



**[p. 194]**

ENGELS TO PASQUALE MARTIGNETTI

IN BENEVENTO

London, 30 March 1892

Dear Friend,

I can no longer lay my hands on the issue of Lotta* you mentioned in your postcard of the 26th, but in any case it would in my view be a mistake and an offence against the best interests of the party were a socialist to give the first subaltern who came along the opportunity of killing him.453 By employing what for them would be the perfectly safe method of duelling with a socialist, it would be an easy matter for young officers to gain not only a great reputation for dash, but also rapid promotion, and, what's more, make away with our best people. We ought not to let ourselves in for that kind of thing.

Circumstances might arise in which even our own people might find that a duel was unavoidable; a French or Italian deputy might be forced to engage in a political duel should the refusal of a challenge be more injurious to the party than its acceptance, especially if it was our own deputy who was responsible for the affront. But to agree to a duel or even provoke one except in cases of dire necessity is, to my mind, absurd.

I am sending you the English translation of my Die Lage der arbeiten- den Klasse in England which has just come out. I trust it will be of use to you in your English studies.

Yours ever,

F. Engels

[^1]: First published, in Italian, in Mefistofele, Benevento, 29 aprile 1892

[^2]: Printed according to the original

[^3]: Published in English for the first time

[^4]: * Lotta di classe



