---
Volume: 49
Document_Title: "195. Engels to Hermann Schlüter. 30 March "
Page_Range: "423-425"
---

# 195. Engels to Hermann Schlüter. 30 March 



**[p. 195]**

ENGELS TO HERMANN SCHLÜTER 2 6 7

IN NEW YORK

London, 30 March 1892

Dear Schlüter,

First of all I must thank you for the letter you sent me last year,454

which provided me with so much valuable information. Unfortunate- ly I cannot repay you in the same coin. By and large enough can be learned about the general political situation in Europe from a care- fully selected reading of the newspapers and in order to allow time for my work it behoves me to keep myself out of the internal affairs of in- dividual socialist parties as much as possible, otherwise I should never get anything done. I cannot therefore give you any information about the sequence of events inside the parties in the various countries in so far as these take the form of squabbles amongst the leaders, as is usually the case, for even the little that I do know about it has as often as not been told me only on condition that I keep my mouth shut.

Had I known that the Figaro article4 5 5 would have interested you people over there, I should have let you have it, for I was sent one by Lafargue. It has long since gone astray, departed into limbo, so I shall write to Paris but hardly imagine I shall be able to unearth another copy or get any real information out of Lafargue who has doubtless long since forgotten about it. Since his election he has been travelling indefatigably all over France on his free ticket, agitating and propagating (I don't mean the race) evidently with great success. May Day — since it coincides with the municipal elections429 to be held throughout France except Paris — will on this occassion be a highly critical day for the French; they are spurred on by the ambi- tion to emulate the Germans.

It seems to me that in America your great stumbling-block consists in the exceptional position of the native-born working man. Before 1848 one cannot speak of an established, native-born working class except by way of an exception; the few who constituted its beginnings in the cities of the east could always hope to become farmers or bour-



**[p. 393]**

THERE WILL BE PLENTY MORE, AND MORE THAN WE WANT, OF THESE DAMNED DUTCHMEN,3 IRISHMEN, ITALIANS, JEWS AND HUNGARIANS — and in addition, standing in the background, you have JOHN CHINAMAN who far outdoes them all in his ability to live on next to nothing.

In such a country repeated endeavours followed by no less certain set-backs are inevitable. Except that the endeavours grow more and more strenuous and the repulses less and less crippling, so that on the whole the cause nevertheless advances. But one thing I regard as cer- tain, namely that the purely bourgeois basis without any pre- bourgeois humbug behind it, and the correspondingly colossal vigour of a development which manifests itself despite the insane lengths to which the present system of protective tariffs has been taken,338

will one day bring about a change that will astonish the whole world. Once the Americans get going it will be with a vigour and ferocity that will make us in Europe look like babes in arms by comparison.

With kindest regards.

Your

F. Engels

[^1]: a This is how Germans were called in the USA.



