---
Volume: 49
Document_Title: "196. Engel s to Laura Lafargue. 4 April "
Page_Range: "425-427"
---

# 196. Engel s to Laura Lafargue. 4 April 



**[p. 394]**

Dear Schlüter,

A woman does not usually lift a finger and hence only becomes affable when she wants something. What I should now like to have is some authentic information on the bourgeois women's movement in America, i.e. their relative privileges and voting rights in the various states as regards not only school or municipal elections but also po- litical suffrage, etc. I, or rather the General on my behalf, gets through Sorge the 2 most prominent women's rights papers, Woman's Journal and Woman's Tribune. But I need more, I need a brief, concise but historically complete account of the struggle to attain women's civil rights, not the dreadful, dreary catchphrases of the female pio- neers of women's civil rights. The book which youa

First published in Briefe und Auszüge aus Printed according to the original Briefen von Joh. Phil. Becker, Jos. Dietzgen, Friedrich Engels, Karl Marx u. A. an Published in Enghsh in full for the F. A. Sorge und Andere, Stuttgart, 1906 first t i m e

196

ENGELS TO LAURA LAFARGUE

London, 4 April 1892

My dear Laura,

Today but two words to ask you to look after the Eclair.— On Fri- day b morning all of a sudden Emile Massard came down upon me with a demand for an interview for that iridescent paper. As he prom- ised to submit the ms. to my correction, and as I thought to be thereby able to put a flea in the ear of the Parisian gogo,c I consented. Yesterday I looked over the ms. and almost entirely recast it. Would you be good enough to send me about 4-6 copies of the paper as soon as it appears? If correct I shall want them for various regions, if incor- rect, I shall at once protest against the breach of faith.456

[^1]: AT LE PERREUX

[^2]: a The end of the letter is missing. - b 1 April - c juggins





**[p. 395]**

I was in Ryde for a week,457 has done me good. Pumps and the children are well, Percy has had influenza, pneumonia, pleurisy, inflamed throat, etc., one after the other and is only just recov- ering.

I am busy with an infernal preface" for the never-to-be-satisfied Swan Sonnenschein and Co. and that, as it will be long, will take me all week. As soon as finished you get a long letter.

Salut to the travelling parlamentarian b who is not only a peripa- tetic grass widower but also a grasshopper, and love from Louise and yours

everlasting old

General

Next week we expect Bebel here unless stopped by ill health — he seems a deal out of sorts by overwork and overexcitement.

[^1]: First published, in the language of the Reproduced from the original original (English), in: F. Engels, P. et L. Lafargue, Correspondance, t. Ill, Paris, 1959

[^2]: * F. Engels, 'Introduction to the English Edition (1892) of Socialism: Utopian and Scien- tific'.-*' Paul Lafargue



