---
Volume: 49
Document_Title: "200. Engel s to Karl Kautsky. 20 April "
Page_Range: "433-435"
---

# 200. Engel s to Karl Kautsky. 20 April 



**[p. 402]**

Ever yours,

F. Engels

Love from Louise. How about a delegate or two to May 1st here? The Possibilists will have two men here (see Chronicle we sent you with Adolph Smith's letter to Shipton 4 6 3). Edward wrote to you about it, if you cannot send a man, try to delegate Bonnier from the Conseil National of the Party and to send a letter. Don't allow the Possibilists to walk over the course as the representatives of France. But let it be done of- ficially.*6*

First published, in Russian, in htorichesky Reproduced from the original arkhiv, No. 2, Moscow, 1956

200

E N G E L S T O K A R L K A U T S K Y

London, 20 April 1892

Dear Baron,

Needless to say you will be getting the introduction to the English version of Sozialismus* etc.— in German of course; it's got to come out and where else could I get anything as long as this published except in the Neue £eit? It went off yesterday and so, until the proofs arrive, I shall be hors de combat. It's so infernally long because I've made it the vehicle for all sorts of old grudges against the English bourgeoisie and look forward to seeing what the British philistine has to say about it.

We over here are at last clear about what is to happen on May

[^1]: IN STUTTGART

[^2]: Day — or rather the reverse of clear. T h e TRADES COUNCIL 1 9 6 and the

[^3]: SOCIAL DEMOCRATIC FEDERATION 2 9 have done their utmost to ensure

[^4]: a F. Engels, 'Introduction to the English Edition (1892) of Socialism: Utopian and Scien- tific'.





**[p. 403]**

Now the eight-hour day advocated by the majority on the TRADES COUNCIL merely implies payment of the ordinary wage for 8 hours, any work over and above this being payable as overtime at one and a half times or twice the ordinary rate; thus the eight hour day advocated by these people is quite different from our own, which means that in the course of this year, after M a y Day, the conflict will flare up in real earnest and be fought out anew. Such is the issue that will at long last receive an airing over here. So don't allow yourself to be hoodwinked by anything anyone from the Vorwärts, etc., may say about M a y Day here; from our point of view the whole thing's a swindle; it's an eight hour day IN A PICKWICKIAN SENSE, as is bound to come out in the long run, whereupon the equivocal situation from which both the SOCIAL

[^1]: FEDERATION only has two.

[^2]: a Hyde Park



