---
Volume: 49
Document_Title: "201. Engels to Pasquale Martignetti: 21 April "
Page_Range: "435-437"
---

# 201. Engels to Pasquale Martignetti: 21 April 



**[p. 404]**

You should make use of The Workman's Times only for its factual material. T h e editor" is a provincial who is relapsing into belletrism, is anxious to keep in with everyone and both talks and accepts a great deal of bosh. But the reports are all done by working men, STUPID though the 'ERRAND BOY' and his mother, the 'MARXIAN' (an out- and-out duffer), and the 'PROLETARIAN', etc., may be.*

Mother Wischnewetzky has had to suffer all manner of rough treatment at her husband's hands, has got divorced, calls herself Mrs Kelley again and lives in Chicago with her 3 children of whom she is the legal custodian.

I wonder very much what results our Frenchmen will obtain in the municipal elections on 1 May. 4 2 9 It will be the first time they have been really put to the test.

Regards from one household to the other.

Your

F.E.

First published in Aus der Frühzeit des Printed according to the original Marxismus. Engels Briefwechsel mit Kautsky, „ , ,. , , . „ . . . ,. p ,„„- Published in English lor the first time

201

E N G E L S T O P A S Q U A L E M A R T I G N E T T I

London, 21 April 1892

Dear Friend,

I am sorry that I cannot send you a German copy of the Condition of the Working Class.h T h e book has not been in the book-

[^1]: IN BENEVENTO

[^2]: * The Workman's Times has amalgamated with the former Trade Unionist and Nash, of whom you know, has become one of its editors. Thus the influence of Toynbee Hall,465 of which you also know, has gained a footing there.

[^3]: Joseph Burgess -b F. Engels, The Condition of the Working-Class in England in 1844.





**[p. 405]**

I am pleased to see from your translation of the English preface in the Critica Sociale*66 that your English has progressed by leaps and bounds. However, I wouldn't advise you to translate the book from the English text; the translation is very clumsy and full of Ameri- canisms, not all of which I have been able to eliminate.

Once you have got to the stage of being able to translate English rapidly and without a dictionary, let's hope that Labriola, Turati or some other friend will succeed in finding literary work for you so that you may at last get away from the poverty and isolation of Be- nevento. If only you could leave it and go to Rome or Milan, you would undoubtedly find something fairly quickly.

My preface was not at all easy to translate, containing as it did a number of expressions for which no definition, at any rate in the sense used by me, is to be found in the dictionary.

I cannot thank you enough for the assiduity with which you translate my works, thereby rendering a great service, not only to myself, but also to international relations between Italian and Ger- man socialists. You will shortly be getting something else from me, namely the English edition of Die Entwicklung des Sozialismus11 with a long new introduction which is to appear in German in the Neue Zeit/61

From the outset Fantuzzi seemed a sham to me. You would, I think, be well-advised to ask him to return the mss and corrected proofs,467 for who knows whether he has any intention of printing anything else.

Very sincerely yours,

F. Engels

[^1]: First published, in the language of the original (German), in La corrispondenza di Marx e Engels con italiani. 1848-1895, Milano, 1964

[^2]: Printed according to the original

[^3]: Published in English for the first time

[^4]: * F. Engels, Socialism: Utopian and Scientific.



