---
Volume: 49
Document_Title: "202. Engel s to Johann Heinrich Wilhelm Dietz. 23 April "
Page_Range: "437-438"
---

# 202. Engel s to Johann Heinrich Wilhelm Dietz. 23 April 



**[p. 202]**

ENGELS TO JOHANN HEINRICH WILHELM DIETZ 4 6 8

IN STUTTGART

London, 23 April 1892

Dear Mr Dietz,

Herewith a brief note in case you should wish to place the same before O. Wigand.a

Once the preliminaries have been settled, printing could begin, providing you agree that the book should appear, not only unal- tered, but also without any addition save for a new preface and at most an occasional note. In that case you could send me the proofs in galley form and I should insert the annotations (footnotes) that were required.

Since the English edition has just come out, I have been able to satisfy myself that nothing more than this is required. A series of notes or an appendix such as would bring the book up to date would dou- ble its size, demand a year's study (which I cannot afford) and thus delay publication indefinitely. Moreover, Capital, Volume I, does the job perfectly adequately. Today the book is an historical docu- ment describing a certain stage of development and that is enough, the more so since in Germany we have reached much the same sort of stage today. Anything that needs to be said about this will be said in the preface.

Have you got a copy from which it can be printed? The English edition (i. e. the one newly published over here, a re- print of the American edition) has now come out.

Awaiting your esteemed reply, I remain, yours most cordially

F. Engels

[^1]: First published in: Marx and Engels, Works, First Russian Edition, Vol. XXIX, Moscow, 1946

[^2]: Printed according to the original

[^3]: Published in English for the first time

[^4]: a See next letter.



