---
Volume: 49
Document_Title: "205. Engel s to Nikolai Petersen. 3 May "
Page_Range: "439-441"
---

# 205. Engel s to Nikolai Petersen. 3 May 



**[p. 204]**

ENGELS TO JOHANN HEINRICH WILHELM DIETZ 4 7 0

IN STUTTGART

London, 27 Aprila 1892

Dear Mr Dietz,

I agree to the terms proposed in your esteemed favour of yester- day's date and shall later be sending you instructions regarding the amount of the fee.

If I understand you aright, we are also agreed that, while the book is to be published as it stands, I am to write 1. a new preface and 2. a brief footnote here and there as required to make the book intelli- gible, not bring it up to date.

This does not require express confirmation, provided my assump- tion is correct.

I have kept a reserve copy for printing purposes and am sending you this by registered book post.

With cordial regards,

Yours faithfully,

F. Engels

205

ENGELS TO NIKOLAI PETERSEN

[London, 3 May 1892]

Dear Mr Petersen,

I understand that it is possible even in prison for you to receive let- ters, and so I could not refrain from expressing to you my genuine

[^1]: First published in: Marx and Engels, Printed according to the original Works, First Russian Edition, Vol. XXIX, - , ,„.,- Published in English lor the lirst Moscow, 194b ö

[^2]: time

[^3]: [IN COPENHAGEN"!

[^4]: a 26 April in the ms.





**[p. 409]**

Many thanks also for sending me Arbejderen. As I only rarely see So- cial-Demokraten, your paper has been my sole source of information as far as the situation in Denmark is concerned, and that has made it even more welcome to me.

The May Day festival went off well. I wish that you had been able to see the 600,000 people who were in Hyde Park the day before yes- terday.471 Every year the May Day parade becomes more im- pressive, showing that the time is fast approaching when we shall be strong enough to let things come to a decisive battle.

And now farewell. I hope that you are no worse off than German comrades usually are on similar occasions, so that it is at least bear- able. It can scarcely be as bad as in England and America, or as good as in Paris in Sainte Pélagie. In any case we all hope that you will leave prison with your health unimpaired and that you will be fit enough to be with us on the next May Day.

With best wishes from Mrs Kautsky and me myself,

Yours, as ever,

F. Engels

[^1]: First published, in Danish, in Arbejderen, Printed according to the newspaper No. 28, Copenhagen, 1892

[^2]: Translated from the Danish

[^3]: Published in English for the first time



