---
Volume: 49
Document_Title: "207. Engel s to Laura Lafargue. 5 May "
Page_Range: "442-443"
---

# 207. Engel s to Laura Lafargue. 5 May 



**[p. 207]**

ENGELS TO LAURA LAFARGUE

AT LE PERREUX

London, 5 May 1892

My dear Laura,

A few lines in a hurry. What was intended as a defeat for us here, has ended in a veritable triumph.47 ' We had only two platforms on Sunday," but they were the only ones that drew, both public and press. You will have seen our involuntary caricatures in the Daily Graphic I sent you.472 Platform No. 14, the international platform, was the great success of the day. By a conspicuous piece of good luck, Roussel of the Bourse du travailh 57 was, it seems, sent out of the way of Prudent Dervillers and Argyriades by them and Adolphe Smith and came on our platform, so that we had two Frenchmen,' two Russians/ a German, Bernstein, an Austrian, Louise, a Pole, Mendelson and a Jew/ besides la Espanola Mrs C. Graham and the Britishers/

The demonstration itself was immense, even compared with the two previous ones, and showed that things are moving here, though they move in that peculiar roundabout way in which the English de- light.

In the evening we had the Mendelsons, Bernsteins, Tussy and Ed- ward of course, and Bonnier brought Roussel, we were very jolly, had a Maibowle, and fat Roussel was effusively delighted, while Argyria- des and Co. owned next morning to him, they had been bored to death in the company where they had, or rather had been, moved (sans calembourg!)

I am very anxiously awaiting the Socialiste to learn something about our electoral successes on May 1st in France,429 the papers you sent me do not contain anything to go by, and surely if we had not secured majorities, we must have got in at least some minorities.

Anyhow I am glad the thing passed off quietly everywhere. The

[^1]: a 1 May - '' Labour Stock-Exchange - l Paul Lafargue and Ferdinand Roussel - d Felix Volkhovsky and Sergei Stepnyak-Kravchinsky - c Shajer - ' Edward Aveling, Eleanor Marx-Aveling, William Morris, Thomas Mann, Peter Curran and others - s this is not a pun



