---
Volume: 49
Document_Title: "208. Engel s to August Bebel. 7 May "
Page_Range: "443-445"
---

# 208. Engel s to August Bebel. 7 May 



**[p. 412]**

Thanks for the papers — Dinner Bell! I have Pumps, Percy and family here, so cannot write much, must take them out to see some of the sights they have missed so long in the Isle of Wight. They send their kindest regards to you and Paul. Ditto from Louise.

Ever yours,

F. Engels

First published, in the language of the Reproduced from the original original (English), in: F. Engels, P. and L. Lafargue, Correspondance, t. Ill, Paris 1959

208

ENGELS TO AUGUST BEBEL

London, 7 May 1892

Dear August,

Let's hope you instil so much confidence into Paulus b while afloat that he will regard the crossing via Ostend as a trial trip for the crossing to Chicago.474 For if he plucks up enough courage, he could go straight on to Chicago by water all the way—from Liverpool to Montreal on the St Lawrence and thence through the Great Lakes, after which he would for ever be immune; for on the big, inland lakes even the most seasoned old salts are sea-sick and, when the four of us survived a storm on Lake Erie without being affected in that way,443 we were regarded as prodigies by the entire company.

But if you imagine I now intend to reply to your three letters in de- tail and in writing, you are mistaken. Louise has just come back from

[^1]: IN BERLIN

[^2]: So we can expect to see you here on Saturday/ a week today.473

[^3]: 14 May-1' Paul Singer





**[p. 413]**

You will be meeting Mendelson and his wifea who were here last Sunday and will also be able to go and converse with them at their house.

The fact that we had good weather for May Day and you did not, serves you right. You should have been over here and then you'd have been able to see what it looks like when 600,000 people fore- gather in one place 47 '; it was really tremendous; and an impression like that leaves one in no state to sustain even such criticism as is called for by the deplorable scheming and squabbling before the event, and yet sustain it one must.

When you come over here, your doctor's orders will safeguard you against any sort of public speechifying, always assuming that you yourself abide by the said orders. You know how it is — anyone who lets himself be talked round on just one occasion, is lost for good and all.

Laura Lafargue writes to say that, while our chaps have so far been victorious in the French municipal elections429 at a number of places, the real results, because of the second ballot, won't be known until next week. So far I haven't seen much about it in the press.

Cordial regards from Louise.

Your

F.E.

[^1]: Well, mind you bring with you a pair of good horny hands; we have already written to the BOARD OF WORKS, instructing them to put at our disposal sufficient ancient trees in the parks of London to en- able you to uproot at least one a day for your breakfast.475

[^2]: First published in: Marx and Engels, Works, First Russian Edition, Vol. XXIX, Moscow, 1946

[^3]: Printed according to the original

[^4]: Published in English for the first time

[^5]: a Maria Mendelson



