---
Volume: 49
Document_Title: "211. Engel s to Karl Kautsky. 17 May "
Page_Range: "447-449"
---

# 211. Engel s to Karl Kautsky. 17 May 



**[p. 211]**

ENGELS TO KARL KAUTSKY

IN STUTTGART

London, 17 May 1892

Dear Kautsky,

You will have got the postcard about Werner-Weiler.477 Meyer told me directly after the Edinburgh Congress 4 7 8 that he had spotted Weiler there.

To apply that epithet to me was really very silly.479 You would be doing a kindness to me and certainly to others as well, if you pointed out to him, at any rate for his future guidance, that he must accustom himself to our less grandiose terminology, failing which you will have to correct his stuff accordingly.

Hirsch is in Frankfurt all right and Meyer is in his debt since at Meyer's request he used to shout out at appropriate moments the ad- monition: 'Mr Meyer, you ought not to drink so much.' It was the funniest bosom friendship between a Jew — and what an archetypal Jew! — and an anti-Semite I have ever known. It still makes me laugh, just writing about it.

Now as to the business of Louise, I should, if I were you, let the matter rest.480 That she bears your name is the result of your own voluntary action. That you are no longer together is likewise the result of your own initiative. That there is a possibility of mistaken identity is again entirely your own doing. She is now using the only name she is entitled to bear under Austrian law and I can see absolutely no rea- son why she should evade that necessity.

Let me be perfectly frank with you. All of us here, not least myself, have grown very fond of Louise, as was already the case when you were over here together. When the business of the divorce began, she behaved from beginning to end with a magnanimity we could not ad- mire too greatly and, since arriving in this country, she has become so dear to me that I regard her just as I do Pumps, Tussy or Laura, just as though she were my own child. When you were here, she showed you that she bore you no grudge whatsoever. But enough is enough.



**[p. 417]**

Mistaken identity has also occurred on the other side, but she merely laughed about it. And supposing she did oblige you, what would be the result? Louise Kautsky and Lwise Kautsky would be joined on the stage by yet a third Louise Strasser-Kautsky whereupon the com- edy of errors would degenerate into pure farce. It would be of no help to you, while she would have to go into long explanations with all and sundry about the how, the who, the when and the wherefore.

So as I have said, let sleeping dogs lie. Your having parted is really quite a good thing and Louise is perfectly content with this state of af- fairs. But no one will ever be able to undo what you have done and it is you, after all, who must bear the consequences. And this particular consequence is really not so trying as to warrant any sort of fuss being made about it.

Tussy is of the same opinion and August, to whom I have shown both your letter and the foregoing,473 is fully in agreement with it.

So don't worry, the whole thing will automatically right itself.

Your old friend,

F. Engels

[^1]: First published in Aus der Frühzeit des Printed according to the original Marxismus. Engels Briefwechsel mit Kautsky, p 1935 Published in English for the first time



