---
Volume: 49
Document_Title: "213. Engel s to Victor Adler. 19 May "
Page_Range: "450-454"
---

# 213. Engel s to Victor Adler. 19 May 



**[p. 419]**

Yours,

F. Engels

My niece Mrs Rosher, known as Pumps, is also here and sends her best wishes to you all.

First published in: Marx and Engels, Printed according to the original Works, First Russian Edition, Vol. XXIX, „ , , . , , . „ , . , , , ,- *, ]Q4fi Published in English lor the hrst time

213

ENGELS TO VICTOR ADLER

London, 19 May 1892

Dear Victor,

I have reached an understanding with Dietz and he with Wigand in regard to a new edition of the Condition of the Working-Class in En- gland, the initial benefit of which will be a fee of 1,000 marks. Dietz promises to pay lj2 in the autumn and '/2 in the New Year of 1893 but August, who is over here, believes we can get at least part of it out of him even sooner. Also an additional fee of some sort for .Neue £eit ar- ticles. Now I should like to pass this on to you Austrians but would take the liberty of making a few stipulations regarding its use; these I have discussed with August who agrees to them.

For even though I may be unfamiliar with the details, I know well enough for practical purposes that your activities on behalf of the Au- strian party are being continually hampered by the inability of that self-same party to secure for you the material position that would per- mit you to devote all your time and energy to the cause. I also know

[^1]: IN VIENNA





**[p. 420]**

I trust you will do me the pleasure of accepting my proposal. I know from my own experience, even though that was long ago, how greatly one's ability to work, will to work and time for work is restrict- ed by the economic struggle for existence and we threea here are all of the opinion that you can do the Austrian party no greater service than to fall in with this little scheme.

Your May Day celebrations made a very good impression over here, the more so since Paris did not in fact participate this year as a result of the squabbles going on there. However Lafargue writes to say that in 22 places (the biggest being Roubaix and Marseilles where we got everyone home) we gained a majority on the city council — four hundred seats in the first ballot and a further 200 in the second.429

The effect this has had can be gathered from the Orleanist Soleil which I am sending you.

Many regards, then, from

Your

F. Engels

[^1]: First published in Victor Adlers Aufsätze, Reden und Briefe. Erstes Heft: Victor Adler und Friedrich Engels, Wien, 1922

[^2]: Printed according to the book

[^3]: Published in English for the first time

[^4]: * Frederick Engels, August Bebel and Paul Singer



Bjhri» pou K-ii Unlcrjctiji Ktcn tinplabcii, 6cm lj O)iolkiiiülirnlifd)rii |hrtrikiii$tr|

al» (ftajl

tvi;un<olmcit, nxli)« am .">., (i„ 7. uti S B„ «Pffitudl J U * !t. 3ani IRH2 im â«»lt

Dit $*fannntttftittft jjj d1,j <£nt HÎ> bti $ 2 bes PMrfümmi«was*Kfefte:s ein&*nife H anfc ift fcmim te JCWrftt mr ft«« Porton Umj »Iffrt t u m grf Mtut." H.:.r[trj>jniij »crlrlfw« l# unjiatt Mt

3m ntai |«9I.

[^1]: We 4Mmifir: #»MM!* Biforf, »Ami, ^«Ijnan «rfrl, «raj, f*i*r*4 #mli M|. Krai»; Ant.» W.inh.f.M. tcmbcra; frrtlmmk {ti|ntr, IPiftt; Jo Nann {lolrjfl, rfitn

[^2]: T o the Congress of the Austrian Social-Democratic Party. Invitation sent to Engels. 1892





