---
Volume: 49
Document_Title: "216. Engel s to Paul and Laura Lafargue. 27 May "
Page_Range: "457-459"
---

# 216. Engel s to Paul and Laura Lafargue. 27 May 

I hasten to inform you of this by the first post. I shall also write to Gumpert asking for further reports and, each time I get one, shall at once tell you what it says. Unfortunately the outlook is now very de- pressing and, since Gumpert is a highly skilled and, especially in diag- nosis, highly experienced doctor, I fear we must be prepared for the worst. What will your poor old mother say, now that yet another of her sons is mortally ill?482

With warm regards,

Yours,

F. Engels

216

ENGELS TO PAUL AND LAURA LAFARGUE

London, 27 May 1892

My dear Lafargue,

I congratulate you on your success. With your daily now under way 4 2 3 (unless you get thrown out again, which would be jour fault

[^1]: First published in: Marx and Engels, Printed according to the original Works, First Russian Edition, Vol. XXIX, Moscow 1946 Published in English for the first time

[^2]: AT LE PERREUX



Bebel and Singer are here.473 This morning I had a talk with Be- bel on the subject of a German correspondent, lîyou haven't yet written to Berlin about this matter, we would ask you not to do so for the mo- ment, but in the meantime to let us know what kind of information you require—reports on the situation in general and on that of the Party in particular?

As for me, I can only say that if you could get Bebel to act as your correspondent you would have reports of the utmost value. At the time of the Anti-Socialist Law ' ' Bebel wrote a weekly report for Ad- ler's Arbeiter-Leitung in Vienna. Those reports were such that, before forming a definite opinion on an important fact or an important mat- ter affecting Germany at that time, I would always try to read what Bebel had to say in his articles. It was clear, concise, TO THE POINT and always accurate.

Bebel would write in German and Laura would, I trust, translate. You would have facts, whereas all you would get out of Liebknecht would be hot air. And Liebknecht would pride himself on writing to you in French. You would correct his style and he would tell you that you had mangled his facts and ideas.

I shall write to Rave as soon as I have received and read Roy's translation. It's a ticklish matter and I shouldn't like Laura's work to be wasted. What I have read of it is decidedly better than Roy's translation.483 And then there's the question of a publisher! Has he got one? As for Rave's promises, which he hasn't kept, he excuses himself on the grounds that he has been held up by the additions to the fourth edition. Anyway it's a pretty unpleasant business, which I can't really fathom at this moment. However we shall see.

*Now my dear Löhr a few words with you. In that new daily pa- per you are an absolutely necessary factor. If the thing is to be supe- rior to the usual run of Parisian dailies, there must be somebody who follows closely from day to day, and reports on, from time to time, the English and German movement. And you are the only person in toute la belle France" who can do this. I have no doubt that you are per- fectly ready to undertake this work, which fortunately can be done

[^1]: a the whole fair country of France



