---
Volume: 49
Document_Title: "217. Engel s to August Siegel. 28 May "
Page_Range: "459-461"
---

# 217. Engel s to August Siegel. 28 May 



**[p. 428]**

Bebel and Louise send their kindest regards.

Ever yours,*

F E .

First published in: F. Engels, P. et Published according to the original L. Lafargue, Correspondance, t. Ill, Paris,

iqsq Translated from the French

217

ENGELS TO AUGUST SIEGEL

London, 28 May 1892

122 Regent's Park Road, N. W.

Dear Comrade,

Mrs Aveling got back safe and sound on Saturday when we were glad to hear that the business had been settled so quickly and satisfac- torily. Naturally it was not your fault that the colliery MANAGER should have duped you, but let that serve as a warning never to reach a final settlement with the colliery management without having first consult- ed the Scottish miners and us down here. In this country the Ger-

[^1]: IN MUIRKIRK

[^2]: a editorial staff-'' editress of the daily Socialiste





**[p. 429]**

It was fortunate that we had two Reichstag deputies and members of the Party Executive over here at that particular moment,473 as they were able to intervence at once and advance the necessary funds. Otherwise the affair might have ended unpleasantly and brought great discredit on German workers throughout this country.

Mrs Aveling will also have told you that people in Germany are saying Schröder induced you to leave by citing all kinds of inaccurate reports and that as a result you threw away an excellent position, al- though the danger was not nearly so great as people would have you believe. I must say that I had suspected as much all along and should be very happy were a man like you not to be entirely lost to the Ger- man miners' movement. After all, you would be pretty sure of a Reichstag mandate and if, in course of time, you were to return and then, after a month or two in jug, do your best to keep the German miners on the right lines, it could only be to our advantage.

You will be getting some newspapers shortly.

