---
Volume: 49
Document_Title: "219. Engel s to Ludwig Schorlemmer. 28 May "
Page_Range: "462-463"
---

# 219. Engel s to Ludwig Schorlemmer. 28 May 



**[p. 431]**

Yours truly

First published in: Marx and Engels, Reproduced from the original

Works, First Russian Edition, Vol. XXIX, Published in English for the first Moscow, 1946 time

219

ENGELS TO LUDWIG SCHORLEMMER

IN DARMSTADT

London, 28 May 1892

Dear Mr Schorlemmer,

I am not, alas, in a position to give you any better news today. Not only has Carl's" debility, both physical and mental, not diminished; it has actually increased, for which reason Gumpert has called in another physician, Dr Julius Dreschfeld of Mannheim, who is profes- sor of medicine at Owens College 487 and is a great personal friend of Carl's. Unfortunately the opinion of this distinguished medical man is exactly the same as Gumpert's, namely that Carl's strength is gra- dually failing and that there is probably very little hope of his recov- ery. Since last Saturday Gumpert has kept him wholly confined to bed and has engaged a hospital nurse for him with whose work he de- clares himself completely satisfied. I myself propose, unless called be- fore by Gumpert, to travel down to Manchester next Wednesday or Thursday 4 8 5 when, having seen for myself how things are, I should have more to tell you. But if Gumpert sends for me before then, I shall, of course, go down at once.

Bebel is still here and will be returning home with Singer in the middle of next week.473 While here he has rallied very well, as was indeed essential for he was in fact very much run down. However, the doctor has forbidden him to speak in public for the next few months.

[^1]: a Carl Schorlemmer



