---
Volume: 49
Document_Title: "220. Engel s to Ludwig Schorlemmer. 5 June "
Page_Range: "463-465"
---

# 220. Engel s to Ludwig Schorlemmer. 5 June 



**[p. 432]**

In about three weeks' time our chaps in Paris will have a big daily that will be able to bear comparison with the best newspapers; it is to be under the control of Guesde and Lafargue.423

Mrs Kautsky joins me in sending kind regards to your mother and to the rest of the family.

Yours,

F. Engels

Carl has made his will in which he leaves everything to his mother. Should you receive inquiries from England regarding Carl's manus- cripts, I would most strongly advise you to make no promises of any kind before finding out what is involved from Dr Gumpert, myself or someone else whom you know well.

First published in: Marx and Engels, Printed according to the original Works, First Russian Edition, Vol. XXIX, Moscow 1946 Published in English for the first time

220

ENGELS TO LUDWIG SCHORLEMMER

London, 5 June 1892

Dear Mr Schorlemmer,

I arrived back from Manchester yesterday evening485 and am sorry to say that I cannot give you any better news of Carl.3 He is in bed and very apathetic, wants peace and quiet, but otherwise suffers no pain at all; he is not quite clear in the head and his memory often fails him, besides which he frequently misunderstands what is being said to him. I visited him six times, never for longer than five or ten minutes which is about as much as he can stand.

[^1]: IN DARMSTADT

[^2]: a Carl Schorlemmer





**[p. 433]**

I have made sure that he is well looked after. The hospital nurse obtained for him by Gumpert appears to know her business properly and to be taking great care of him, quite unlike the London nurses, my experience of whom has not been exactly happy. Also the owners of the house where he has been living for the past fourteen years are doing everything that lies within their power. The landlord showed me his fairly voluminous mss and promised me faithfully that he would hand them over to Carl's executorsa and to no one else. I spoke to one of these two executors, a chemist and an old friend of ours, ' and told him what I thought should be done first—at the very out- set to safeguard the manuscripts and the interests of the heirs thereto; he was in full accord with me, so that in that respect my mind is at rest. Since there are people about who would not be averse to pluming themselves with Carl's feathers and have, indeed, already made some attempt in that direction, I thought I ought to do all I could to frustrate them. More about this anon.

Should you or any other member of your family wish to set your minds at rest by coming over here and seeing with your own eyes how Carl is faring, Dr Gumpert would gladly do anything to make mat- ters easier for you in Manchester, as I would here.

We have discovered that a niece of yours from Bordeaux is here in London, but have been unable to get her address out of Carl; would

[^1]: Philipp Klepsch and Ludwig Sicbold-1' Ludwig Siebold



