---
Volume: 49
Document_Title: "221. Engel s to Laura Lafargue. 9 June "
Page_Range: "465-467"
---

# 221. Engel s to Laura Lafargue. 9 June 



**[p. 434]**

I would also ask you to be so kind as to write at once (in German) to Dr Gumpert, whose address I give below, to say whether a tele- gram addressed to Ludwig Schorlemmer, Darmstadt, would reach you or whether a more detailed address is necessary and, if so, what it is.

With kind regards to your mother and to your whole family, I re- main,

Yours very sincerely,

F. Engels

Dr Gumpert, 203 High Street, Oxford Road, Manchester, England

Bebel and Singer went back to Germany on Wednesday.'1

Mrs Kautsky likewise sends her most cordial regards.

First published in: Marx and Engels, Printed according to the original Works, First Russian Edition, Vol. XXIX, Moscow, 1946 Published in English for the first time

221

ENGELS TO LAURA LAFARGUE

London, 9 June 1892

My dear Löhr,

Your silence and Paul's is ominous—no news of any agreement signed on June 1 st—are your intelligent capitalists after all recalcit- rant? In the meantime Bax who is editor of Justice for 2 months, heard of your paper 4 2 3 at Mottelers, where he met Bebel, Singer and our

[^1]: AT LE PERREUX

[^2]: a 1 June





**[p. 435]**

Well, I am likely to wait until I get news from you, fortunately the weather is so hot, that waiting is not so very difficult, and rather less so than any more active proceeding—in the meantime I am in the agreeable position to hand you a little cash viz. £2.18.4, one third of £8.15.- proceeds of 180 Marks sent by Dietz as share of honorarium, for Marx's heirs, of the German edition of the Misere de la Philo- sophie. The translators3 have all at once come to the consciousness that, for the first edition of that work, Mohr's heirs were not paid anything, so I was called upon to say what they were to have for both editions now on the coming out of the 2nd edition. After some corres- pondence we agreed that of the 300 Marks paid for the second, the two translators were to have 2/5 =120 M. and the heirs 180 Marks = 3/5, which I believe is fair enough.b So herewith your cheque.

Tussy is in Plymouth for Gas Workers Annual Conference,489 and Edward goes from there to Aberdeen, on an invitation to preach.490

I was in Manchester last week.485 Poor Schorlemmer is dying. You know how changed he has been since that fall on boards the Flushing steamer which prevented his coming to Paris with Nimmy and Pumps. For the last two Christmases he could not come here. Even Easter he stopped at home and at last sent a letter: don't write, as I cannot reply! Then I wrote to Gumpert and learnt that he was getting weaker and that percussion brought out a dullness over the upper third of the right lung which, all other possibilities being exclud- ed by the other symptoms, indicated the formation of a tumour. This diagnosis has turned out only too correct. Partial paralysis, oe- dema and low temperature of the right arm have set in in conse- quence of the pressure of the tumour on the vena cava and the plexus brachialis, while the left arm is relatively and the lower extremities perfectly free from these symptoms. His brain, too, is not quite clear, and sometimes very confused. At the same time he suffers no pain, hardly any uneasiness, and is gradually getting weaker. Gumpert thinks he may last some weeks yet, but may go off quite suddenly if any complication arises. It was impossible to converse with him more than 5-8 minutes, he wants rest, peace and quietness, and does not

[^1]: '' Eduard Bernstein and Karl Kautsky-1' See this volume, pp. 199 and 273.



