---
Volume: 49
Document_Title: "222. Engel s to Karl Kautsky. 11 June "
Page_Range: "467-470"
---

# 222. Engel s to Karl Kautsky. 11 June 



**[p. 436]**

Well, my dear girl, do give us news, even if they are not exactly what you would like them to be, we want to know what is going on.

Vaillant called here on Monday morning, but evaded all further invitations or occasions for meeting me, I whall try to find out what brought him here.

We had Bebel and Singer here for a fortnight, and were very jol- ly.473 You will have received the Pall Mall interview we sent you.491

We also send you the Elend der Philosophie,'1 2nd edition. Love from Louise, who would be thankful for an article,

and yours affectionately

F. Engels

Ditto to M. le députée

First published, in the language of the Reproduced from the original original (English), in: F. Engels, P. et L. Lafargue, Correspondance, t. Ill, Paris, 1959

222

ENGELS TO KARL KAUTSKY

London, 11 June 1892

Dear Baron,

I went down to Manchester that same day. I had already heard from Gumpert, who is treating him, that he was confined to bed, was quite apathetic and was probably suffering from a carcinogenic tumour of

[^1]: IN STUTTGART

[^2]: I would have written to you about Schorlemmer before now had I not wished to go and see for myself first. This I did only last week485, after August and Paul had left for home on Wednesday,0

[^3]: 2 Poverty of Philosophy-h Paul Lafargue-c 1 June





**[p. 437]**

So that's another of our best chaps on the way out. He had not been his old self for four years or more, and had increasingly lost interest in anything not immediately connected with his work, the mere pursuit of which cost him considerable labour. Moreover, he was often testy because of increasing deafness and a susceptibility to the draughts and chills by which that deafness was instantly aggravat- ed. Last year I made one more attempt to induce him to take a sea trip to Scotland and Ireland, but before twenty-four hours were out he was laid low by relatively minor adversities and we had to aban- don the project. The tumour of the lung, now plainly distinguishable, explains much of this, and likewise his debility after the bout of in- fluenza last March, which marked the beginning of his final illness.

My translation of the introduction to the English version of SOCIAL- ISM.- UTOPIA.*,' A.YD SCIENTIFIC is now finished; as soon as the book comes out (and why it isn't already out I cannot think), I shall send you the in- troduction for the Neue £eit.462 In the meantime I am sending you the Italian translation of the same book in the second edition pub- lished in Milan.

[^1]: This country is swarming with congresses. On Thursdayb Tussy and Aveling returned from the Gasworkers' Congress in Ply- mouth 489 where they couldn't have set a better example to the TRADE

[^2]: ' 'left' in the ms. -b 9 June



We've also got the miners over here.492 The day before yesterday the Germans, including a cesky towaryl,0 came to call on me. It was particularly unfortunate that Tussy shouldn't have been here to interpret and advise; I need tell you no more than that the chaps had fallen into the clutches of Julius/, who failed to understand anything that went on either in English or in French and, though unacquaint- ed with conditions and people over here, had to pretend he under- stood everything and was acquainted with everyone, thus isolating the chaps almost completely. On top of that, they had with them an Anglicised German who cannot speak either language and is hand in glove with the old TRADES UNIONS. Fortunately the Avelings were pre- sent on the last and most important day. The ignominy of the English is plain for all to see: The Continentals are demanding 8 hours for everyone employed in the mines, the English ask it only for those work- ing underground! That has now been established and the vainglory of the English about their superior TRADES UNION ORGANISATION has been punctured by themselves.

Kindest regards from

Your

General

[^1]: First published in Aus der Frühzeit des Printed according to the original Marxismus. Engels Briefwechsel mit Kautsky, Prag 1935 Published in English for the first time

[^2]: ° no-1' place-c Czech comrade-d Julius Motteler



