---
Volume: 49
Document_Title: "224. Engel s to Nikolai Danielson. 18 June "
Page_Range: "471-476"
---

# 224. Engel s to Nikolai Danielson. 18 June 



**[p. 224]**

ENGELS TO NIKOLAI DANIELSON 4 9 3

IN ST PETERSBURG

London, 18 June 1892

My dear Sir,

I have to thank you for your very interesting letters of 24 March, 30 April and 18 May,494 and to ask your pardon for not replying to them sooner. But I have been extremely busy, so much so that I have not been able to devote one moment to III volume"—next week however I hope to return to it.

I believe that in reality we both agree perfectly as to the facts, and the bearing of these facts, which constitute the present economic con- dition of your country. Only you seem to have taken sundry ironical expressions of my last letter1' as if they were seriously meant— especially what I said about sundry things serving in the end the cause of human progress. There is in reality no fact within history which does not serve human progress in one way or another, but it is after all an awfully round-about way. And so it may be with the pre- sent economic transformation of your country.

The fact I especially wanted to lay stress upon, is that the Heypo- j Kaft,' to use the official expression, of last year, is not an isolated and accidental occurrence, but a necessary consequence of the whole de- velopment since the close of the Crimean War, that it is a result of the passage from communal agriculture and domestic patriarchal indus- try to modern industry; and that it seems to me that this transforma- tion must in the long run endanger the existence of the agricultural o6tu,HHad and introduce the capitalist system in agriculture too.

I conclude from your letters that, as to these facts themselves, you are agreed with me; as to the question whether we like them or not, that is another thing, and whether we do like them or not, the facts will continue to exist all the same. The more we leave our likings and dislikings out of the question, the better we shall be able to judge of the facts themselves and of their consequences.

There can be no doubt, but that the present sudden growth of modern 'grosse Industrie' '' in Russia has been caused by artificial

[^1]: " of Capital-'' See this volume, pp. 382-85.-' crop failure (Russ.)-d commune (Russ.)-' big industry





**[p. 441]**





**[p. 442]**

All governments, be they ever so absolute, are en dernier lieua but the executors of the economic necessities of the national situation. They may do this in various ways, good, bad and indifferent; they may accelerate or retard the economic development and its political and juridical consequences, but in the long run they must follow it. Whether the means by which the industrial revolution has been car- ried out in Russia, have been the best for the purpose, is a question by itself which it would lead too far to discuss. For my purpose it is suffi- cient if I can prove that this industrial revolution, in itself, was un- avoidable.

What you say about the necessary accompaniments of such tre- mendous economic changes, is quite correct, but it applies more or less to all countries that have gone or are going through the same pro- cess. Exhaustion of the soil—vide America; deforestation—vide Eng- land, France, and at the present moment Germany and America; change of climate, drying-up of rivers is probably greater in Russia than anywhere else on account of the level nature of the country that supplies these enormous rivers with water, and the absence of an Al- pine snow-reservoir such as feeds the Rhine, Danube, Rhône and Po. The destruction of the old conditions of agriculture, the gradual transition to capitalistic farming on large farms, are processes which are completed in England and East Germany and now proceeding everywhere else. And it seems to me evident that la grande industrie en Russie tuera la commune agricole^ unless other great changes occur

[^1]: " in the end- b Russian big industry will do away with the agricultural commune





**[p. 443]**

which may preserve the ooiyiraa/ The question is, will there be time for such a change in public opinion in Russia, as will make it possible, to graft modern industry and modern agriculture upon the o6uj HHa and at the same time to modify the latter in such a way that it may become a fit and proper instrument for the organization of this mod- ern production and for the transformation of such production from a capitalistic to a socialised form? You will admit that to even think of carrying out such a change, a tremendous progress has first to be made by the public opinion of your country. Will there be time to ef- fect this, before capitalistic production, aided by the effects of the pre- sent crisis, undermines the oöuj HHa too deeply? I have no doubt whatever that in a good many districts the o6njn Ha has recovered from the blow it received in 1861 (as described by V. V. 4 9 5). But will it be able to resist the incessant blows dealt to it by the industrial transformation, by rampant capitalism, by the destruction of domes- tic industry, by the absence of communal rights of pasture and woods, by the transformation of the peasants' Naturalwirtschaft into Geld- wirtschaft,1 by the growing wealth and power of Ky Aa KHd and MHpoe I have to thank you too for the books you were kind enough to send me, especially Kablukov and Karyshev.' At the present moment I am so overworked that I have not been able, for 6 months, to read through one single book in any language; I keep your books for my time of rest in August. What you say about Kablukov seems to me perfectly correct,496 as far as I can follow it without reading the book itself. The agricultural labourer who has no land of his own, no hired land, finds employment for only a portion of the year, and if he is paid for this work only, must starve the whole unemployed time, unless he has other kinds of work to do during that time, but modern capitalist production takes every chance of such work from him. This difficulty is got over, as far as possible, in the following way in Western and Central Europe: 1) the farming capitalist or landowner keeps a por- tion of the labourers, all the year round, on his farm and feeds them as much as possible with its products, so as to spend but little actual money. This is done to a great extent in North East Germany, in a lesser degree here in England, where however the climate admits of

[^1]: '' commune (Russ.)-b subsistence economy-' money economy-'1 kulaks (Russ.) - 0 bloodsuckers (Russ.) -' H. [A.] KaÔAy KOB-b, Bonpocb opaôouuxb eb cejib CKOMb xo3HÜcmei>; H. [A.J Kapbiiue BT,, Kpecmb RHCKi A en^Haeinb Hun apettàu.





**[p. 444]**

This letter is already getting too long for me to enter into the de- tails of yours of 18th May, but it seems to me that there too your facts prove the ruin of the peasantry and with that, also, at least for a time, the exhaustion of the soil. I quite agree with you that both these things are now proceeding with increasing rapidity. If the present sys- tem continues the end must be the ruin of both no Meiij HKH b and My-

>KHKH,C and the rise of a new class of bourgeois landed proprietors. But there is another side to the question which I am afraid Becmnu Kb ®u Ha HC06bd does not engross upon. That is the state of the public fi- nances. The last loan in Paris (1891) was to bring 20 millions £ st. They were oversubscribed several times, but the report goes here that in reality only 12 millions were paid up, and 8 millions never reached the Petersburg exchequer.302 If that happened in France after Cron- stadt,288 what is to happen when the next loan has to be negotiated? And can that new loan be long delayed after the tremendous sacri- fices that were forced on the treasury by the Heypoxaöe? Vyshnegradsky serait-il Calonne, et y aurait-il un Necker après lui?r

Very sincerely yours,

[^1]: P.W. Rosherg

[^2]: First published, in Russian, in Minuvshiye Reproduced from the original gody, No. 2, St Petersburg, 1908 „ , ,. , . Published m English in full for the first time

[^3]: a See present edition, Vol. 35.- b landowners (Russ.)-C peasants -d Financial Courier- c crop failure (Russ.) -' Will Vyshnegradsky prove to be Calonne, and will there be a Necker after him? -R Engels' conspiratorial pseudonym



