---
Volume: 49
Document_Title: "226. Engel s to August Bebel. 20 June - "
Page_Range: "479-482"
---

# 226. Engel s to August Bebel. 20 June - 



**[p. 226]**

ENGELS TO AUGUST BEBEL501

IN BERLIN

London, 20 June 1892

Dear August,

Herewith the Judenßintenb02 under sealed cover, for if sent by book post they might well be confiscated.

Schorlemmer is still so-so. I found him weak, apathetic, his facul- ties slightly clouded, but not otherwise in pain. Gumpert writes to say that the lung tumour is growing slowly but surely, with (due to pres- sure on the big arteries which should carry back the blood from the upper part of the body to the heart) a concomitant disturbance of cerebral activity; also apathy and loss of memory. He is still taking sufficient nourishment, however, so that, barring accidents, things might go on as they are for some little while.

The fact that Warken is still holding his own in the Saar ought not to surprise you in view of the fact that Schröder is able to hold his own in the Ruhr. I wrote a line or two to Siegel telling him what Bunte had said to you about his flight.3 Siegel sent that letter to Schröder along with a wholly guileless letter of his own saying that Bunte had been caught embezzling money, and Schröder gave me both of them — Siegel's and my own — to read. Whether it's true about Bunte I don't know. At all events you can see that Schröder is still firmly in the saddle. In the case of so young a movement as that of the miners, one ought always to consider carefully whether it wouldn't be better to give untried johnnies like Schröder and Warken enough rope to hang themselves, or at any rate enough to provide us with de- finite, tangible evidence against them. And there's really nothing new in that, for wherever the movement arises anew the first leaders to push their way to the fore are more often than not place-seekers and blackguards.

Bax is now editor of Justice and will remain so until the end of July; and it is now a decent paper; yesterday it gave a decent mention to Aveling's speeches in Aberdeen,490 while internecine strife (i. e. indi- rectly Hyndman himself) was condemned.503 Indeed, yesterday Bax

[^1]: ' See this volume, p. 429.





**[p. 449]**

isn't getting anything like its share in the general growth of the move- ment over here — a share which would entitle it to take over the lea- dership; nor is it succeeding in its rivalry with the FABIANS 8 7—on the contrary, it has been left in the lurch, and will continue to be so left, by its foreign allies Brousse and Gilles. In short, he might well deem it advisable to turn elsewhere and seek a rapprochement with us. That would be very far from pleasant for, as I have told anybody who was prepared to listen, I would far sooner have Hyndman for an enemy (when he is virtually powerless) than for a friend (when one has to keep a constant and very time-consuming watch on him). Another thing that may have impelled him to adopt this course is the total loss of any electoral prospects in Chelsea from which he proposed to oust Sir Charles Dilke but where Quelch, the test candidate put forward by Hyndman in the COUNTY COUNCIL elections,412 polled only 153 vo- tes, since which time he has abandoned all hope. At all events Hynd- man will find it difficult in August to resume the old attitude so pub- licly disavowed by Bax in the self-same paper, nor could or should he do so if he wishes to compete successfully with the FABIANS. Well, we shall see.

Over here we are already in the thick of the electoral fray 504 and the TORIES and Liberal Unionists 505 are proferring an abundance of money so as to provide Labour candidates with cash and thereby enable them to steal votes from the Liberals. Champion, one of the TO- RIES' chief agents in this respect, offered Aveling the means to contest Labouchère's seat in Northampton but needless to say Aveling re- fused. These financial blandishments have put the Labour leaders into a state of tremendous excitation and such of the good fellows as think they can get something out of it are tussling with their consciences in an attempt to convince the latter that there is after all some honest way of accepting TORY money without blushing, though admittedly the blushing is mainly due to the fear of eventually doing themselves more harm than good. Knowing the extent to which all political life over here is riddled with parliamentary corruption, one can only wonder that the chaps should feel even this modicum of shame.

Well, I wish I could drop Mrs Julie,b honorary bookkeeper,506

a couple of lines to thank her for her last letters which have, alas, not yet had an answer, but I am up to my eyes in work. I have two more long and somewhat ticklish letters to write after which I intend at long last to get down to Volume III. c Hence I have got to put on one side all the correspondence that merely gives me pleasure and devote myself solely to business matters. So be my advocate with your wife and don't let her be too angry with me. I shall make vp for it, if possi- ble before I come to Berlin, but otherwise when I get there; I look for- ward so much to meeting her and know in advance that we shall get on very well. So warm regards to her and yourself from both of us.

Your old

General

[^1]: First published in: Marx and Engels, Works, First Russian Edition, Vol. XXIX, Moscow, 1946

[^2]: Printed according to the original

[^3]: Published in English in full for the first time

[^4]: a A personage from Ludvig Anzcngruber's comedy G'wissenswurm. -h Julie Bebel- ' of Capital



