---
Volume: 49
Document_Title: "232. Engels to August Bebel. 5 July "
Page_Range: "490-492"
---

# 232. Engels to August Bebel. 5 July 



**[p. 232]**

ENGELS TO AUGUST BEBEL501

IN BERLIN

London, 5 July 1892

Dear August,

You forbid me to write to you,5 ' ° i. e. I am to give up the only cor- respondence I always find enjoyable and, instead, hammer away at the letters which bore me. But I'm not going to do it simply to oblige you.

And even if I were so docile, the Vorwärts' colossal howlers 5 ' ' about the elections over here 5 0 4 would make me fly off the handle. To say nothing about it would be really too deplorable. For the

Vorwärts has now actually succeeded in transforming South Paddington into a rural district of London — South Paddington which is situated right in the middle of the town, slightly to the north of Hyde Park and west of Regent's Park, and in which the only rural districts are a couple of green SQUARES — about as rural as the Dönhoffplatza!

The England of the Vorwärts exists only in the imagination of the writer. The view that the TORIES of today are more favourable to the workers than are the Liberals is the reverse of the truth. On the con- trary, all the Manchesterian prejudices 5 ' 2 of the Liberals of 1850 are today articles of faith only to the TORIES, while the Liberals know very well that if they are to survive as a party they must capture the La- bour vote. Because they are jackasses, the TORIES can, from time to time, be induced by an outstanding man such as Disraeli to carry out a bold coup of which the Liberals would not be capable; but in the absence of an outstanding man it's the jackasses among them who rule the roost, as at present. The TORIES are no longer simply the tail of the big landowners, as they were up till 1850, for between 1855 and 1870 the sons of the Cobdens, Brights, etc., of the upper middle classes and the Anti-Corn LAW men,5 ' 3 have one and all gone over to the TORY camp, and the strength of the Liberals now lies in the dis-

[^1]: " a square in the centre of Berlin





**[p. 460]**

Hence the need the Liberals face of making apparent or real con- cessions— primarily the former—to the workers. And nevertheless they are too stupid to know where to begin, many of them being, after all, still too hidebound by their antecedents.

So far the elections have proceeded as if in response to our orders. The Liberals are obtaining a slender majority and in many places are actually losing votes by comparison with the last election; thus there has so far been no sign of the great Liberal wave that was to sweep across England. Today is a very important day and the results will probably be decisive; should the Liberals score a brilliant victory to- day, the vacillating philistine — by no means a rare animal — will be driven over onto their side and that will give them the upper hand. What we need is a moderate Liberal majority (including the Irish) so that Gladstone is dependent on the Irish over here — otherwise, if able to exist without them, he is sure to do the dirty on them.

But it's capital that Keir Hardie, the Labour candidate in West Ham in the East End of London,— one of the few who did not take any money from the Liberals and did not therefore place himself under an obligation to them — should so far be the only one to have turned a Conservative majority of over 300 in the last election into an anti-Conservative majority of 1,200. Excellent, too, that elsewhere — in Aberdeen, etc.— the Labour candidates who stood against Liberals and Conservatives should have obtained anything up to a thousand votes. The Independent Labour Party is casting its shadow before it.515

There are three kinds of Labour candidate here:

1. Those who were paid by the TORIES to filch Liberal votes. Nearly all of these will fail and know it.

2. Those who take Liberal money and are bound to serve the Libe- rals. These are mostly put up in places where there is no prospect of their getting in, and amongst their number there are also men who, like the miners' candidates, are Liberals by nature.

3. The genuine Labour candidates, who are acting off their own bat and do not ask themselves whether they are standing against Li- berals or TORIES. Of these, the Liberals accept the ones they have

