---
Volume: 49
Document_Title: "237. Engels to Laura Lafargue. 7 July "
Page_Range: "500-503"
---

# 237. Engels to Laura Lafargue. 7 July 



**[p. 469]**

By a splendid quirk of history, both of the two old parties have now got to appeal to Labour and make concessions to Labour if they want to retain or take the helm, and at the same time each of them senses that by so doing they are giving a leg up to their own successors. And yet they can't help it! What is our little jest compared with the colos- sal jest now emerging from the turn history is taking?

Many regards from Louise and myself to Mrs Juliea and yourself.

Your

F.E.

If you write to Shaw you might recommend Conrad Schmidt's ar- ticle in the Neue Z,eitb as a refutation of their 'AUSTRIAN THEORY OF VAFirst published in: Marx and Engels, Printed according to the original Works, First Russian Edition, Vol. XXIX. „ , , . , , . ,, .• . ,- », ,q. f i Published in English for the hrst time

237

ENGELS TO LAURA LAFARGUE

London, 7 July 1892

My dear Laura,

[^1]: AT LE PERREUX

[^2]: I went at once to Manchester507 on the telegram of Schorlemmer's death, on Friday last week 1st July we buried him and on Saturday I returned. The last weeks of his life he remained in the same half- conscious and very oblivious, but absolutely painless state in which I had found him when there in the beginning of June, 4 8 5 and on Monday morning 27th June 0 he expired quietly and without any

[^3]: a Julie Bebel-b C. Schmidt, 'Die psychologische Richtung in der neueren National- ökonomie', Die Neue Zeit, 10 Jg. 1891/92, 2. Bd., Nr. 40, 4 1 . - f In the original '29 June', which is a slip of the pen.





**[p. 470]**

Gumpert had got him in May already to make a will, he left every- thing to his mother. The manuscripts he left may cause some trouble. The most interesting one is on the history of chemistry, 1) Ancients, 2) Alchemy, 3)Jatrochemistry,523 up to the 17th century; a fragment of the 3rd part not completed, but still full of new views and discoveries. Then a lot of work on organic chemistry. But as he has two works in the press at the same time: 1) his own organic chemistry, 2) his and Roscoe's big book'1; — it will be pretty hard to distinguish which be- longs to which. One of his executors is a chemist (Siebold) but hardly knows enough about the theory of the science to distinguish. And Roscoe's red-hot after the ms., as he knows too well that he cannot finish the book. I have told the executors in my opinion they might let Roscoe have what belongs to the Roscoe-Schorlemmer book on bind- ing himself to let the heirs participate in the profits of the pending vo- lume (German and English) in the same way as Schorlemmer himself would have done. As Roscoe was elected yesterday for Manchester, he will no doubt pounce upon the executors at once, so I wrote them yesterday giving a full account of what I considered ought to be done in the matter.

A short notice I wrote in the Vorwärts*' I send you today. Here we are in the midst of the elections.504 They go remarkably well for us — under the circumstances. First, the immense Liberal Wave which was to carry Gladstone triumphantly to power, is all bosh. He will probably get a small majority, and it is not even certain whether there will be a majority for anybody. This will make both offi- cial parties dependent, for the next election, which may come very soon, upon the working men. Secondly the new working-class move-

[^1]: C. Schorlemmer, The Rise and Development of Organic Chemistry; H.E. Roscoc and C. Schorlcmmer, Ausführliches Lehrbuch der Chemie, Bd. I-V; H. E. Roscoc and C. Schorlemmer, A Treatise on Chemistry. -'' F'. Engels, 'Carl Schorlemmer', Vorwärts, No. 153, 3 July 1892.





**[p. 1959]**

but deeply engaged and mortgaged to new Unionism520) beat both a Liberal and a Tory! These are the only éclatant victories in the whole election and all gained by working men: in two cases the Libe- rals dared not oppose one of their own, and in the third when they did, they were battus à plate couture? And third: wherever a working man's candidature had been well selected and prepared, it either consider- ably diminished the Liberal majority, so as to warn them to be more careful and not to risk losing the seat next time, or it made the Liberals lose the seat. Thus in 2 divisions of Glasgow, Cunninghame-Graham was beaten, but so was his Liberal competitor. Thus in Salford, Hall, an S. D.F.29 man, but said to be good, had only 554 votes, but these de- prived the Liberal of his seat. And thus, 3 Liberal seats lost merely be- cause they would thrust bourgeois members upon working-class con- stituencies.

The election has done already what I maintained was all we had a right to expect from it: give fair and unmistakable warning to the Liberals that the Independent Working Men's Party 5 ' 5 was approaching, that it cast its shadow before it, and that this was to be the last general election carried on between two parties only, the Ins and the Outs. And therefore I am quite satisfied, especially so, as we shall get a par- liament with which no stable government is possible.

From your silence I conclude that Bonnier is right when he writes to Tussy [:] le journal pend toujours à unfile23 Let us hope the filg

will not snap but on the contrary grow into a rope and even a hawser.

Ever yours

F. Engels

[^1]: Love from Louise. Prosperity and eloquence to M. le député.h

[^2]: First published, in the language of the Reproduced from the original original (English), in: F. Engels, P. et L. Lafargue, Correspondance, t. Ill, Paris,

[^3]: " 4 July- b Georges Banes -c O.W. Morgan-*1 careerist-0 beaten hollow-' The pa- per is in a perilous state.-8 thread-h Paul Lafargue



