---
Volume: 49
Document_Title: "239. Engels to Hermann Engels. 12 July "
Page_Range: "504-505"
---

# 239. Engels to Hermann Engels. 12 July 



**[p. 473]**

First published in: Marx and Engels, Printed according to the original Works, First Russian Edition, Vol. XXIX, Moscow, 1946 Translated from the French

Published in English for the first time

239

ENGELS TO HERMANN ENGELS

IN BARMEN

London, 12 July 1892

Dear Hermann,

Thank you very much for your letter of 23 June. The Schaafhau- sen dividend has been debited to you—many thanks.b I hope you enjoy your Italian trip; I shall probably go there myself some time.

Todayl am just writing to ask which of you is going to be in En- gelskirchen on or about the 10th or 12th August, and whether you could do with me there for a couple of days round about that time. I shall probably be paying another visit to the Continent then and, although unlikely to take in Barmen, should like for once to get another breath of Engelskirchen air. I'd be glad if you wouldn't men- tion this unless you have to or else certain people might expect me to go to Barmen as well, and that might not fit in with my other plans.

For the rest, all is well with me but I too am beginning to feel the need for relaxation. That's the trouble with London; in July it be- comes sultry and unbearable and one longs to get right away from it.

[^1]: a In the original there follows a phrase 'I spoke to the French proletariat', which is crossed out. - '' See this volume, pp. 339 and 352.



