---
Volume: 49
Document_Title: "240. Engels to Eduard Bernstein. 14 July "
Page_Range: "505-507"
---

# 240. Engels to Eduard Bernstein. 14 July 



**[p. 474]**

Love to Emma" and your children and grandchildren.

Your

Friedrich

First published in Deutsche Revue, Jg. 46, Printed according to the original Bd. Ill, Stuttgart-Leipzig, 1921 „ , , - , , - ^ ,• , r- & K & Published in English for the first

time

240

ENGELS TO EDUARD BERNSTEIN

IN ZURICH

London, 14 July 1892

Dear Ede,

Your and Gine's postcard of 24 June 1892 (I reproduce the post- mark for want of any other date) and letter of 2 July have reached me safely. I feel sure that the prospects for your harvest have in the meantime improved to such an extent that you are now worth, not 50 raps but 1 franc, and, since the value of money — whether paid or not — does after all represent + b physical labour, I am equally sure that your health can only benefit from your haymaking. But why you sweat physically in the heat of the afternoon and mentally in the cool of the morning is not very clear unless it's a slimming cure you are af- ter and of that, after all, you have no need. However, you are now in Zurich, so that all these comments will arrive after the event and your haymaking will presumably have given way to nutrimentum Spiritus0

(to stick to old Fritz'sd Latin) in the museum or the Tonhalle or whatever the places are called there. But you should take spriritus in the form vini aut cerevisiae" rather than in that of more abstract spir- itous material, otherwise it won't be a real summer holiday. As for what's happening in the English elections,504 the Vorwärts is in any case far better informed than the two of us put together/

[^1]: a Emma Engels-b more or less-c spiritual nourishment -d Frederick II- c of wine or beer-r See this volume, pp. 459-60 and 464.





**[p. 475]**

Typical characteristics of the elections are: 1. A complete lack of enthusiasm for HOME RULE in England.

2. T h e granting of suffrage to working men has driven vast num- bers of petty bourgeois into the Conservative camp, at any rate in the larger cities. Your petty bourgeois is beginning to be afraid of the workers, or at any rate does not want to be mistaken for one of them; CONSERVATIVE IS RESPECTABLE and hence he votes against Gladstone.

3. T h e strength of the Liberal Party lies in the middle and lower middle classes of the smaller towns and COUNTIES where the pressure exerted by the semi-feudal landowners and the High C h u r c h 5 2 7

clergy is still a force to be reckoned with. In the larger cities even the DISSENTERS, traditional mainstay of the Liberal Party, are beginning to vacillate — cf. for instance Birmingham.

4. Now that the two bourgeois parties are on an almost exactly equal footing (today of 3,300,000 votes cast, the opposition's majori- ty over the government amounts in all to no more than about 76,000), it is Labour which is beginning to call the tune. And only in the elec- tion of Labour candidates — Keir Hardie, Burns, Wilson and oth- ers— was there any show of enthusiasm. Even before the elections' I had said that these would be the last to be fought out between the two official parties, but that they would give the Liberals a foretaste of

[^1]: :1 See this volume, pp. 448-49- '' district of London- ' See this volume, p. 463.



