---
Volume: 49
Document_Title: "241. Engels to Paul Lafargue. 22 July "
Page_Range: "507-510"
---

# 241. Engels to Paul Lafargue. 22 July 



**[p. 476]**

5. The new Parliament is a provisional one. Gladstone will not get a majority without the support of the Irish and Labour members, which means an early dissolution. So much the better.

Apropos. Tussy intends to send the Neue £eit an article on the elec- tions a in which, however, only such internal matters will be discussed as could be known to someone over here, and then not to all and sun- dry. So don't let it deter you from writing in the Neue Ze^ about the general results as you see them. Her information, on the other hand, consists of specific facts relating to the skulduggery of the various par- ties, something quite different to what you will be writing.

Warm regards from Louise and myself to both of you.

Your

F.E.

First published in: Marx and Engels, Printed according to the original Works, First Russian Edition, Vol. XXIX, Moscow 1946 Published in English for the first time

241

London, 22 July 1892

My dear Lafargue,

Let's hope that this time the Battle of Eylau will not, like its prede- cessor, be a DRAWN BATTLE 5 2 8 and that whatever Mr Weinschenk decants for you will be wine of a respectable sort.b I begin to understand

[^1]: ENGELS TO PAUL LAFARGUE 141

[^2]: AT LE PERREUX

[^3]: " E. Aveling and E. Marx-Aveling, 'Die Wahlen in Großbritannien', Die Neue £eit, 10. Jg. 1891/92, 2. Bd., Nr. 45. - b A pun in the original: verser means 'to decant' and 'to invest capital', Weinschenk is a surname and also means 'vintner'.





**[p. 477]**

At all events, it's not a symptom to be overlooked if these gentle- men are now of the opinion that a socialist newspaper is a sound in- vestment. We're quoted on the Stock Exchange! That really is a sign of progress.

I believe Millerand is right in advising you to deposit 25 or, better still, 50 thousand fr. in your name at a good bank. That is the only guarantee, but take care that the bank places it to your credit without any conditions. They should send you a formal letter, stating that the sum of has been placed to your credit and that you are at liberty to dispose of it whenever you wish. Moreover, in the contract with you and Guesde, Weinschenk should authorise you to withdraw this sum in the event of his breaking the contract. For otherwise the private contract between him and the two of you would not be binding on the com- pany to be floated — unless the latter had expressly accepted it. But these are legal niceties and Millerand will doubtless advise you prop- erly.

As regards the cholera, it is virtually certain to arrive here. Mean- while it is completing the work of peace begun in 1891 by the famine in Russia.b What is beyond my comprehension is the stupidity of your French bourgeois who evidently believes that Russia is a power capa- ble of doing anything whatever for France. If he had only a modi- cum of common sense he would see that at this moment the alliance with France is absolutely indispensible to Russia and that whatever France wanted, Russia would have to concede. But in all western countries the attitude of our official politicians to Russia is stupid beyond belief. France, in the shape of her army, has all the safeguards she needs. I have been reading an article by an English officer, not one of your generals of the old school, who owe their promotion to their ignorance, but a colonel who knows his business and who speaks of the French army with an envy that is genuinely felt — he is envious because he knows that the advantages it enjoys are impracticable in England by reason of the fundamental difference between the two mil-

[^1]: " Paris-1' See this volume, pp. 242, 343-44 and 374-75.





**[p. 478]**

have made better soldiers than might have been expected, that real discipline is excellent and based on the good will of all, that military training is confined to things which are really necessary in war, but that within those limits such training is perfectly adequate, and that all superfluous parades are rigidly eschewed. In short, if you except the better training received by the French, it is a description of the Prus- sian army as reorganised after 1807 under Scharnhorst and that's the greatest compliment one could pay the French army. I'm beginning to believe that battalion for battalion it's just as good as the German army, if not better. The Germans' superiority lies in the large number of officers on the reserve, the superiority of the French in the good re- lationship between the men and their officers. In our case the men are shamefully ill treated.

You are right. Next week I am off to Ryde.530 Louise departs next Sunday for Vienna and I shall probably depart on Wednesday." So if you write after Tuesday, the address is: The Firs, Brading Road, Ryde.

I trust Laura is well; we haven't heard a word from her.531 Since distance precludes my giving her a kiss, give her a kiss on my behalf.

F. E.

[^1]: My regards, Mr Wandering Jew, 3 9 2

[^2]: First published in: F. Engels, P. et Printed according to the original L. Lafargue, Correspondance, t. Ill, Paris,

[^3]: into Translated from the French

[^4]: a 27 July



