---
Volume: 49
Document_Title: "242. Engels to August Bebel. 23 July "
Page_Range: "510-512"
---

# 242. Engels to August Bebel. 23 July 



**[p. 242]**

ENGELS TO AUGUST BEBEL

IN BERLIN

London, 23 July 1892

Dear August,

With your usual perspicacity you rightly guessed that I would be sending you this letter via the Witch. So to begin with let me thank you for the Imperial and Royal Railway Timetable and assure you that I shall set my 'new course' by the above right royal document. I have already fathomed a few of the mysterious signs and wonders to be found therein and within the next fortnight hope to get to the bot- tom of them all, thereby ensuring that I don't find myself stuck any- where.

Well, my plans are as follows: Next Wednesdaya I go to Pumps in Ryde 53° whither all letters will be forwarded. Shall stay there until about 10-15 August, depending on circumstances, for I am awaiting a letter from Barmen,b the contents of which will determine the day of departure. I shan't go to Barmen, as I have so many nephews and nieces there that duty visits alone would take more than a fortnight. But I want to spend a few days in Engelskirchen where my brothers go in turn for the summer holidays. Thence, on or about the 18th or 19th, to Zurich where I must pay a visit I have been promising for years to my cousin Mrs Beust and family. I shall let you know as soon as I arrive and shall then go on to St Gallen on the 24th or 25th. If you fetch me, so much the better. We would then set out for Stuckert0

on the Neckar's banks, pick up Uncle Georg and carry on to Munich and — via the Alps if possible — to Vienna, etc. She will be able to tell you the rest by word of mouth (I don't mean Mrs Beust who is the grammatical subject but the Witch who is in any case a most un- grammatical one).

According to Tussy, the elections 504 here in the East End of Lon- don have aroused wild enthusiasm. The workers have at last realised that they are capable of something if only they have the will. The Liberal spell has been broken and, what's more, correspondents from

[^1]: a 27 July- b Sec this volume, p. 473.- c Stuttgart





**[p. 480]**

The Vollmariad provides further proof that the man has com- pletely lost touch with the Party.532 A break with him is bound to come, probably this year or next; he seems intent on ramming state so- cialist inanities down the Party's throat. But since he is an artful in- triguer and since I have had wide experience of campaigning against people of this sort — Marx and I often made tactical blunders when confronted by this kind and had to pay dearly for it—I shall now take the liberty of offering you a few tips.

What these people are mainly after is to put us formally in the wrong and that we must prevent. Otherwise they'll keep harping on this side-issue in order to obscure the main issue of whose weakness they are aware. So be careful what you say both in public and in pri- vate. You will have noticed how cleverly the fellow made use of your remark about Liebknecht533 so as to foment trouble between him (Liebknecht) and yourself—after all he is perfectly well aware of your attitude to one another! — and thus place you in a quandary.

Secondly, since it is important to them to obscure the main issue, you must avoid giving them any cause to do so; any side-issue they may raise should be dealt with as briefly and conclusively as possible so that it is disposed of once and for all. As for yourself] however, you must if at all possible ignore all side-issues or red herrings that may arise, whatever the temptations. Otherwise the debate will range ever wider and the original bone of contention will gradually disappear from view. In which case there will no longer be any chance of a decisive victory. So far as the intriguers are concerned, that might be success enough, but for us, at any rate, it would be a moral defeat.

Thirdly, it follows from 1. and 2. that, when confronted by such people, purely defensive tactics are best until such time as they land themselves in a real predicament—then you open up with short, devastating artillery bombardment before going in with the bayonet for the coup de grâce. Here, as nowhere else, it is a matter of husban- ding one's ammunition and reserves until the last moment.

Every time we departed from these rules when fighting the Baku- ninists, Proudhonists, German academics and other such riff-raff, we

