---
Volume: 49
Document_Title: "243. Engels to Regina Bernstein. 25 July "
Page_Range: "512-514"
---

# 243. Engels to Regina Bernstein. 25 July 



**[p. 481]**

Well, warm regards to yourself and Mrs Juliea from

Your

General

Siegel's last letter is enclosed at his request.

First published in Bolshevik, No. 14, Mos- Printed according to the original cow 1935

Published in English for the first time

243

ENGELS TO REGINA BERNSTEIN

IN ZURICH

London, 25 July 1892

Dear Gine,

We were delighted to get your and Ede's letter and showed it to Tussy yesterday. From the picture the château h has the appearance of a really splendid little castle; a garden restaurant for some 500 people and, next to a couple of giant poplars, a few mysterious trees that look like unassuming palms; on the slope below the vines whence comes the sour wine.1 Still, one gets used to that too and in any case it's bet- ter than London ALE, while the air up there must be a lot better than in Highgate. I'm glad it's doing Ede good and that you can hope to' bring him back with his nerves functioning in such a way that he is no longer conscious of them.

Here too the summer holidays have started. Louise left for Cologne yesterday afternoon and by now — 5 p.m.— will doubtless be very close to Berlin. The day after tomorrow I set off for a fortnight's stay with Pumps,530 after which I shall pay another visit to the dear fa- therland about the time you will be preparing to leave; indeed it is not

[^1]: "Julie Bebel-1' In the original: Schlossli (Swiss dialect).-1 In the original: sure Wi chiimml (Swiss dialect).





**[p. 482]**

Tell Ede that Louise was so overwhelmed on hearing that he had said Massel and Broche* three times on her behalf that I had to ad- minister a potent draught of cognac before she set off on her journey to help her recover from the shock.

What follows next is for Ede. Namely, in the first place, Tussy's and Edward's articleb was ready by Sunday (a week ago yesterday) and was sent off to Stuckert."

Secondly, our successes in the elections504 have now been gen- erally acknowledged over here. The present situation is that, in view of the marked preponderance of the Radical wing in his party, Glad- stone must largely rejuvenate his cabinet if it is to survive;

further, that his HOME RULE BILL will at once be thrown out by the Upper House;

but that to be able to dissolve with any certainty of success, he must at the same time introduce ONE MAN ONE VOTE by drawing up a sensible electoral register which will ensure the workers do in fact get what was promised them on paper in general terms in 1867 and 1884 but was subsequently retracted in matters of detail,519 i.e. a 1-ly million increase in the Labour electorate — and perhaps a SECOND BALand that not until this has gone through will he dissolve. So it is a splendid situation so far as we are concerned. Many regards to Ede and you yourself,

Yours

General

[^1]: LOT;

[^2]: First published, in Russian, in Marx- Printed according to the original Engels Archives, Book I, Moscow, 1924 ' ' Published in English for the first time

[^3]: " good fortune and blessings-1' E. Aveling and E. Marx-Aveling, 'Die Wahlen in Großbritannien', Die Neue Zeil, 10. Jg. 1891/92, 2. Bd., Nr. 45.-' Stuttgart



