---
Volume: 49
Document_Title: "244. Engels to Pasquale Martignetti. 25 July "
Page_Range: "514-515"
---

# 244. Engels to Pasquale Martignetti. 25 July 



**[p. 244]**

ENGELS TO PASQUALE MARTIGNETTI

IN BENEVENTO

London, 25 July 1892

Dear Friend,

I have not replied to your letter of 13 May sooner because I wished to include with my reply a material token of my sympathy. At the time, however, I myself was short of funds and it is only now that I find myself in a position to send you the enclosed money-order for three pounds sterling. I know only too well that your troubles all de- rive from the struggle for existence and I'm only sorry that I cannot do more to make that struggle easier for you.

Meanwhile I'm glad to learn from your letter of 1 July that your health is improving and that there is no longer any fear of the neuras- thenia that was threatening to take hold. I hope the improvement will continue, so that you will soon be able to look round for remu- nerative employment again.

I shall ask Aveling tomorrow about the Students' Marx; he is un- likely to raise any objections.534

You will have heard that in the elections504 here we scored posi- tive triumphs over both the old parties and that even where we lost we gave the Liberals a taste of our power. The movement is gaining more and more ground, thanks in particular to the resolution regard- ing eight hours demonstrations adopted by the Paris Congress.5 ' The First of May has 'fait merveille',* immeasurably more so than did the Chassepots at Mentana,535 which have long since been consigned to the scrapheap.

With sincere regards,

Yours,

F. Engels

[^1]: First published, in the language of the original (German), in La corrispondenza di Marx e Engels con italiani. 1848-1895, Milano, 1964

[^2]: Printed according to the original

[^3]: Published in English for the first time

[^4]: a worked marvels



