---
Volume: 49
Document_Title: "247. Engels to Ludwig Schorlemmer. 28 July "
Page_Range: "518-520"
---

# 247. Engels to Ludwig Schorlemmer. 28 July 



**[p. 487]**

F.E.

The Firs, Brading Road, Ryde

Louise left on Sunday" for Austria.

Ever yours,

F. Engels

First published in: Marx and Engels, Reproduced from the original Works, Second Russian Edition, Vol. 38, Moscow 1965 Published in English for the first time

247

ENGELS TO LUDWIG SCHORLEMMER

IN DARMSTADT

Ryde, Isle of Wight, 28 July 1892 The Firs, Brading Road

My dear Schorlemmer,

I had hardly expected that my forebodings about your mother would be realised so soon. But the blow she suffered from Carl's1' death must nevertheless have been too much for the old lady, ailing and debilitated as she was; on the other hand she was certainly still too mentally alert for the news to have been concealed from her. So one family misfortune has been followed by another and we can only hope that this will be the last. I can sympathise only too well with you in your loss, for eighteen years ago I too lost my mother,' who was then 77, and I know what a peculiar bond is formed among the mem- bers of a large family by the maternal home and how irreplaceable this is, however united the children may be. The maternal home keeps the whole of that same younger generation together as one

[^1]: a 24 July-1' Carl Schorlemmer-' Elisabeth Franziska Engels





**[p. 488]**

Please convey my sincere condolences to your brothers and their families.

To you yourself I send my wishes for your daughter's speedy and complete recovery.

I arrived here yesterday to spend ten days or so with my niece.530 She also knew your mother and would like to add a line or two.

Yours very sincerely,

F. Engels

[From Mary Ellen Rosher]

I cannot let this letter from my uncle go off without sending to you and all your family my condolences on the death of your dear mother. With warm regards to you all from

[^1]: Yours,

[^2]: Ellen Rosher

[^3]: First published in: Marx and Engels, Works, First Russian Edition, Vol. XXIX, Moscow, 1946

[^4]: Printed according to the original

[^5]: Published in English for the first time



