---
Volume: 49
Document_Title: "251. Engels to Karl Kautsky. 12 August "
Page_Range: "524-526"
---

# 251. Engels to Karl Kautsky. 12 August 



**[p. 251]**

ENGELS TO KARL KAUTSKY 5 0 1

IN STUTTGART

Ryde, 12 August 1892 The Firs, Brading Road

Dear Baron,

Herewith the proofs, returned with thanks.537

August will already have told you that my trip to Germany has fall- en through. The after-effects of the old trouble, which laid me up 9 years ago when you came to visit me on my birthday, have once more asserted themselves and at just the wrong time so that I have got to lie here on the sofa instead of tippling with you. Luckily I can breathe good sea air here — the house is right out in the country, high up, with a view of the sea — and this, together with rest and absti- nence from alcohol will no doubt set me on my legs again within 3 or 4 weeks. But it's a pity it should have happened just now. Well, to postpone isn't to put off" indefinitely.

Thank you for your booka — unfortunately I have so far been pre- vented from reading it by the upsets of the past few days.

didn't go in.538 I saw these in ms. after the event and they are vir- tually indispensable if you are to have a complete picture of the elec- tions. The total collapse of the SOCIAL DEMOCRATIC FEDERATION the mo- ment it was really put to the test was significant in view of the boast- ing which that 'one and only' Social-Democratic organisation and One True Church has for years indulged in. I don't know whether you saw Bax in Zurich, but he's a very indifferent authority on the SO- CIAL DEMOCRATIC FEDERATION. He edited Justice for 6 weeks and got rid of all its many vulgarisms but was wholly incapable (for otherwise he would surely have done so) of giving the paper a character that was anything but sectarian. For the SOCIAL DEMOCRATIC FEDERATION is in fact a sect pure and simple. It has ossified Marxism into a hard and fast dogma and, by repudiating any labour movement that isn't

[^1]: A pity that the bits in Tussy's article about the SOCIAL DEMOCRATIC FE- DERATION29 and the FABIANS,87 and also about Taylor's candidature,15

[^2]: a K. Kautsky, Das Erfurter Programm in seinem grundsätzlichen Theil erläutert. -'' See this volume, pp. 497 and 515.





**[p. 494]**

The FABIANS have become a real stumbling-block, tailing along behind the big Liberal Party on the pretext, so they say, of imposing their candidates upon it. They may pull this off for a time in the case of the COUNTY COUNCIL, 4 1 2 where they can dabble in Possibilist pro- grammes of municipal reform, 5 3 9 but even there the pious sham will pass muster only until such time as it is rumbled by the middle classes. In the case of parliamentary elections none of this applies, for here the Liberals will give the FABIANS, like all other self-styled Labour candi- dates, only such constituencies as are hopeless. If one wants to impose Labour candidates upon the Liberals, it must be done after the man- ner of Burns and Keir Hardie, by holding a pistol to their heads, and not after the manner of the FABIANS, by sucking up to them under false pretences. Fortunately the call for an INDEPENDENT LABOUR PARTY is now already so loud and so general that even the bland inducements of Fabian cajolery and Fabian cash will eventually be overcome.

Burgess, the Workman's Times man, now proposes to found an INDEPENDENT LABOUR PARTY himself— yet another competitor for the other two b! Burgess is a vain, ambitious johnny, hitherto most unreliable. Whether and to what extent he will make out remains to be seen. At all events his present action is a straw in the wind.

A very good bit of news: So proud were the factory workers of the North of their old TEN HOURS BILL that it was largely they who opposed the eight hour day (cf. Newcastle TRADES UNION Congress 2 9 8 ) . This is now changing; the masses are gradually being converted to 8 hours while the leaders with their 10 hours are beginning to find themselves

[^1]: * The Manifesto of the Communist Party -b the Social Democratic Federation and the Fabian Society



