---
Volume: 49
Document_Title: "252. Engels to August Bebel. 14 August "
Page_Range: "526-529"
---

# 252. Engels to August Bebel. 14 August 



**[p. 495]**

out on a limb. This will no doubt be more or less in evidence at this year's TRADES UNION congress.540

The Avelings have gone to Norway. Just before they left, Tussy got a letter from Greulich in which the latter requested her on behalf of the Zurich International Congress Committee 54 ' to oblige them with an English draft of the invitation to the English TRADES UNION Con- gress, and to translate all their other stuff into English. So Mr Seidel's machinations, aimed at getting the Confounded Marxists cold- shouldered on that occasion (which could only have led to the instal- lation of Mr Adolphe Smith Headingley), would seem to have been happily nipped in the bud.

Pumps and Percy send their kindest regards.

Your

F. E.

First published in Aus der Frühzeit des Printed according to the original Marxismus. Engels Briefwechsel mit Kautsky, _ . ,. , , . _ . . . . r . , „ „ , „ n r Published in English in lull lor the Prag, 1935

252

ENGELS TO AUGUST BEBEL

Ryde, 14 August 1892 The Firs, Brading Road

Dear August,

I share your hope that by the beginning of September I shall have so far recovered as to be able to travel at least as far as Berlin. Should this be the case, I shall without fail pay a flying visit to Berlin — my sole destination in fact, for by then the Engelskirchen folk will have dispersed to the four winds.

The only question is whether it is going to be possible. And ofthat I cannot as yet give you any idea. I know from experience that in

[^1]: first time

[^2]: IN BERLIN





**[p. 496]**

On top of that I am, after all, 5 or 6 years older than I was at the time of the last bout, and have undeniably allowed more alcohol to pass through the inner man this year than I normally do in three. So I shall have to resign myself to a somewhat longer cure, even if the inflammatory symptoms have not resulted in any organic changes in the shape of adhesions or lesions or scarring.

At all events it will not be until very late in the day that I shall be able to tell from observations what the position is. You must keep me properly informed of the addresses at which my letters and, if needs be, telegrams, can reach you, especially in the case of Vienna, and how long you propose to stay there, so that Louise doesn't leave for London at the same time as I for Berlin.

Last Monday * and Tuesday I was in London where I saw the Ave- lings and put my house in order. Thus the cure was interrupted until Wednesday. Now I am lying absolutely still and, of course, feel corre- spondingly better. I hope in a week's time to be able with impunity to allow myself at least a modicum of exercise. I shall let you have a bulletin as soon as there is anything to report.

Needless to say, I shall now have to observe 'sobriety and modera- tion' in regard to alcohol. I had indeed been surprised at my con- tinued ability to tolerate the stuff so well, and had grown overconfi- dent as a result. Well, we must hope that the consequences do not persist too long. I must revert to my former principle of abstaining for a fortnight or a month every so often. Not that I regard abstain- ing from drink as any more of a hardship than refraining from smok- ing, provided there is good reason for it.

One good piece of news: Mr Seidel's intrigues, aimed at prevent- ing the accursed Marxists from having any say in the preparations for the Zurich Congress,541 would seem definitely to have misfired.

Greulich wrote to Tussy on behalf of the Zurich Committee re-

[^1]: I have not had an answer from Louise to the letter I wrote to her a week ago today. ' 5 3 The Sunday postal arrangements over here are abominable.

[^2]: a 8 August





**[p. 497]**

UNION Congress540 and also to do their English translations. The letter arrived when the Avelings were on the point of leaving for Norway and Tussy, of course, immediately drafted the invitation, and gene- rally placed herself at the committee's disposal; she sent me Greulich's letter when she was actually on board the steamer.

And now for another: a period of slack trade and the manufac- turers' threats to knock 10 per cent off wages has suddenly cured the Lancashire cotton operatives of their enthusiasm for 10 hours and opened their eyes to the advantages of the 8 hour day. Even the lead- ers are already said to have switched horses. Thus the 8 hour day has triumphed in England. The resistance of those factory hands who enjoyed the protection of the 10 hour day was the principal weapon in the bourgeois arsenal. They'll lose it, come the September congress.540

K. Kautsky did not make use of the enclosed passages from the Avelings' article in the Neue Zeit.538 When he wrote, he said this had had to be done for technical reasons; may be, but again it may have had something to do with Ede's comical respect for the FABIANS 87 and Bax's (he's in Zurich) interest in the SOCIAL DEMOCRATIC FEDERATION.29

At all events, you'll find the passages interesting and they form an es- sential part of the overall picture.

You might get the Vorwärts to print the following questions:

1. Is it true that the 'Independents' in London, i.e. those who were thrown out of the Communist Workers' Educational Society,89

have founded a club and rented Grafton Hall, a large building in Fitzroy Square, for the purpose?

2. That to help raise the considerable sum required for this, Mr Baginski, who earns at most £3 a week, made a contribution of £500 sterling = 10,000 marks?

3. That Mr Hochgürtel, likewise a working man, contributed another £500 and that, to the question as to where he had got the money, he returned the strange reply that he had divorced his wife, and thus obtained her money?

4. That the brewer who supplies beer to the club advanced an- other £1,200?

